
Retail Security and Loss Prevention

This page intentionally left blank

Retail Security and Loss
Prevention
Second Edition
Read Hayes, PhD, CPP

© Read Hayes 2007
All rights reserved. No reproduction, copy or transmission of this 
publication may be made without written permission.
No paragraph of this publication may be reproduced, copied or transmitted 
save with written permission or in accordance with the provisions of the 
Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, or under the terms of any licence 
permitting limited copying issued by the Copyright Licensing Agency, 90 
Tottenham Court Road, London W1T 4LP.
Any person who does any unauthorised act in relation to this publication 
may be liable to criminal prosecution and civil claims for damages.
The author has asserted his right to be identified as the author
of this work in accordance with the Copyright, Designs and Patents
Act 1988.
First published 2007 by
PALGRAVE MACMILLAN
Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire RG21 6XS and
175 Fifth Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10010
Companies and representatives throughout the world
PALGRAVE MACMILLAN is the global academic imprint of the Palgrave 
Macmillan division of St. Martin’s Press, LLC and of Palgrave Macmillan Ltd.
Macmillan® is a registered trademark in the United States, United Kingdom 
and other countries. Palgrave is a registered trademark in the European 
Union and other countries.
ISBN-13: 978–0–230–00681–2
hardback
ISBN-10: 0–230–00681–7
hardback
This book is printed on paper suitable for recycling and made from fully 
managed and sustained forest sources. Logging, pulping and manufacturing processes
are expected to conform to the environmental regulations of the country of origin.
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Hayes, Read.
Retail security and loss prevention / Read Hayes. –2nd ed.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN-13: 978–0–230–00681–2
ISBN-10: 0–230–00681–7
1. Retail trade–Security measures–United States. 2. Inventory shortages–Prevention.
3. Shoplifting. I. Title.
HF5429.27.H39 2007
658.4’73–dc22
2006050501
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
16
15
14
13
12
11
10
09
08
07
Printed and bound in Great Britain by
Antony Rowe Ltd, Chippenham and Eastbourne

Contents
List of Figures
x
Preface
xii
Acknowledgments
xiv
Introduction
xv
PART 1
RETAIL RISKS: PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS
1
Chapter 1
Employee Deviance
3
Employee error and waste
4
Merchandise theft
4
Under-ringing
4
Removal of trash
5
Controlling merchandise theft
5
Cash theft
8
Proprietary information
14
Investigating employee theft
14
Questions
16
Chapter 2
Managing Employee Honesty
17
Pre-employment screening
19
Access/procedural controls and audits
21
Store/company atmosphere
23
Questions
24
Chapter 3
Vendor Theft and Error
25
Risks
25
Questions
28
Chapter 4
Controlling Cargo Theft and Supply 
Chain Loss
29
Shipping
29
Staging
30
Loading
31
Transporting
31
Receiving
32
Questions
32
v

vi
Contents
Chapter 5
Shoplifting
33
Professional or convert to cash shoplifters
33
Self-use, amateur, or opportunist shoplifters
36
Planning for prevention
38
People
41
Programs and procedures
47
Loss control policies
48
Loss control procedures
49
Identify and prioritize loss risks
52
Summary
56
Handling the shoplifter
64
Summary
77
Questions
79
Chapter 6
Point-of-Sale Risks
81
Bad checks
81
Credit card fraud
84
Counterfeit currency
87
Currency switch
89
Container switch
89
Price switch
90
Refund fraud
90
Quick-change schemes
91
Questions 
93
Chapter 7
Miscellaneous Risks
94
Robbery 
95
Burglary
97
Bomb threats
100
Coupon fraud
103
Crime and data loss
106
Natural and civil disasters
107
Civil liability and litigation
108
Questions 
112
PART II
IDENTIFYING AND PRIORTIZING RISKS
113
Chapter 8
Security Surveys
115
Why theft, why me?
115
Using theory to take action
117
CPTED
117
War of maneuver versus a war of attrition
123

Contents
vii
Multi-level marketing
124
Delivery in the zones
127
Discussion
130
Historical data
131
Assets to be protected
133
Flow charting
134
Summary
135
Questions 
136
Chapter 9
Data Analysis
137
Possible and probable financial loss
138
Assigning financial impact rates
139
Probability of incident occurrence and causal probing
140
Examining data
141
Assigning loss incident probability rate
142
Prioritizing risks
143
Questions 
143
PART III
DESIGNING AND IMPLEMENTING 
PREVENTION PROGRAMS
145
Chapter 10
Loss Prevention Program Design
147
Basic program focus
147
Risk control countermeasures
150
Protection program designs
153
The protection plan
155
Questions 
156
Chapter 11
People
157
In-house employees
157
Outside personnel
163
Loss control consultants
163
Summary
165
Questions
165
Chapter 12
Programs
166
Loss control policies
166
Loss control procedures
167
Protection programs
169
Policy and procedure manuals
173
Training employees
173
Follow-up
174
Questions
175

Chapter 13
Asset Protection Systems
176
Access control systems
176
Lighting
178
Alarms
179
Other LP systems
186
Questions
189
Chapter 14
Selecting Protection Equipment and Services
190
Specifications
190
Bids
192
Testing
193
Negotiating the contract
194
Questions
195
Chapter 15
Sample Protection Program
196
Where to begin
196
How to prepare a loss control plan
197
Questions
201
Chapter 16
Implementing the Program
210
Justification of the control program: making the 
business case
210
Teamwork
213
PART IV
TESTING AND FOLLOW-UP OF THE LOSS 
CONTROL PROGRAMS
215
Chapter 17
Auditing and Follow-Up
217
Inspections
218
Effectiveness analysis
219
Data collection
219
Inspection/audit reports
219
Chapter 18
Inventories
220
Retail method of inventory
220
The inventory process
221
Inventory tips
222
Chapter 19
The Future
224
Industry trends
224
Summary
226
viii
Contents

Appendix 1
Sample Conflict of Interest Policy
227
Appendix 2
How-To Manual for Shoplifters
229
Appendix 3
Civil Recovery Laws
235
Appendix 4
Abbreviated Retail Security Survey (Sample)
240
Appendix 5
Sample Completed Store Audit Report
243
Appendix 6
Sample Consulting Proposal
254
Appendix 7
Recommended Control Procedures (Sample)
257
Appendix 8
Standard Operating Procedures (Sample 
Employee Investigation Policy)
261
Appendix 9
Training Program Checklist (Sample)
263
Appendix 10 Sample Loss Control Plan
268
Appendix 11 Sample Loss Prevention Inspection/Audit Report
273
Appendix 12 Model Civil Recovery Statute 
276
Appendix 13 Model Retail Theft Statute
277
Notes
281
Index
283
Contents
ix

x
List of Figures
I.1
An integrated loss control program
xvi
1.1
Sample restitution agreement and promissory note
15
5.1
Shoplifter classification matrix
34
5.2
Partial list of factors impacting effectiveness of 
procedural and/or technological controls
42
5.3
Example of defense in depth
43
5.4
Loss prevention training institute (LPTI)/Basic course (Level 1)
45
5.5
The focused employee awareness system
53
5.6
Article surveillance operating characteristics
60
5.7
Handling the shoplifter: A phased approach
65
5.8
Shoplifting apprehension
71
5.9
Approach
71
5.10
Sample Incident Report
74
5.11
Incident Data
75
5.12
Criminal and civil process
78
7.1 
Sample bomb threat instructions
100
7.2 
Bomb threat checklist for telephone operators
102
8.1
Routine activities theory
115
8.2
Offender’s behavior space and crime events
116
8.3
Theft triangle: Offender considerations
116
8.4
Sixteen situational crime prevention techniques
118
8.5
Project road map or action process
122
8.6
Situational asset protection analysis
123
8.7
Prevention messages and mediums
125
8.8
Zones of influence
127
8.9
Prevention marketing model
130
8.10
Merchandise processing cycle for distribution centers
134
9.1
A scale of evidentiary strength for cause and effect
138
10.1
Sample risk management decision matrix
147
10.2
Simplified threat model
152
10.3
Physical security layering
155
10.4
Personnel security layering
156
11.1
Loss prevention department organization
161
13.1
Electronic article surveillance operating characteristics
184
14.1
Accountability control
191
14.2
Vendor bid analysis matrix
193
A3.1
Civil and criminal action for theft
239

A5.1
Loss prevention inspection report
243
A5.2
Voids
245
A5.3
Void profile chart
246
A5.4
Customer service desk
247
A5.5
Refund profile
248
A5.6
Register operation
249
A5.7
Sales floor
250
A5.8
Receiving/stockroom area
251
A5.9
Physical security
252
List of Figures
xi

xii
Preface
Retail theft is as old as retail. Some historical records indicate theft incidents
as early as 627 AD, though the earliest documented account of shoplifting
activity was recorded in 1597. In 1698 an Act of Parliament defined shoplift-
ing as “the crime of stealing goods privately out of shops” and dictated
death for violators. Indeed, several accounts describe shoplifters who were
hanged for their crimes. Despite this harsh punishment, by 1726 shoplifting
was so prevalent in London that merchants asked the government for help
in apprehending the thieves and established a reward system for those citi-
zens who turned shoplifters over to the authorities. 
The rise of widespread shoplifting as we know it today did not develop
until the late 1800s. Around that time, retailer Frank Woolworth made a
simple decision that ultimately changed the face of American retailing: he
displayed items outside  a glass case. Mr. Woolworth predicated this inno-
vation on the honor system - a fact that, today, shoppers and thieves alike
take for granted. Woolworth’s groundbreaking marketing decision led to
a boom in sales: customers felt empowered, labor costs dropped, and prof-
its soared. This “self-service” system soon spread from 5-and-10 stores like
Woolworth’s to grocery stores and others, eventually taking over the
entire retail sector. Of course, such an easy-access approach fueled
shoplifting. 
Through the years, both retail industry and retail theft have experienced
tremendous growth in size and complexity. Because of the details involved
in managing a successful retail operation, there is an urgent need for busi-
nesspeople to not only understand business and economics, but also under-
stand how retail loss occurs and how to prevent and control it.
Retail theft receives the most attention during the winter holidays,
largely because it provides the media with ready-made, interesting stories.
However, even with this increased exposure, shoplifting is often overlooked
as a primary cause of retail revenue loss. The retail industry suffers billions
of dollars in loss annually to dishonest employees, vendors, and customers.
Many retailers are aware of the loss threats their stores face and are famil-
iar with effective methods and systems available for controlling those
threats. However, to be effective in controlling losses, retail security activi-
ties should be proactive, not reactive. This book provides retailers with
state-of-the-art information to assist them in establishing and managing an
effective loss prevention operation. It helps retailers step through the
process of determining and prioritizing risks, and design and implement a
thorough, cost-effective shrinkage control plan. This book also identifies

loss threats, indicates how to best determine and prioritize those threats,
and recommends proven programs and technologies that reduce theft
vulnerability.
The appendices will also assist the retailer in finding further sources of
information and locating distributors of quality services and equipment.
Preface
xiii

Acknowledgments
I’d like to thank all those I’ve worked with in many capacities in law
enforcement, loss prevention, and academia. I continue to learn every day
from those causing and those fighting retail crime and loss. I’d like to thank
my family and friends for their patience and support. Retail Security and Loss
Prevention was a true team effort and I am grateful to every one of you.
xiv

Introduction
In a time of decreased budgets and increased retail competition, retailers are
looking for new ways to boost profits by increasing revenues and cutting
costs. Shrinkage (or retail inventory loss) is a tremendous deficit that few
business people are willing to overlook. Many merchants have either
ignored serious loss control efforts or in some rare cases “played games” with
price markups and inventory procedures to hide shrinkage problems. But
today’s most successful retailers are taking a more comprehensive approach:
identifying the most prevalent and costly loss areas, and implementing cost-
effective programs to reduce loss. Well-researched, designed, and executed
asset protection programs reduce errors and crime events, leading to safer
and more successful operations.
All too often retailers make impulsive decisions to rectify business prob-
lems without fully examining the cause of the problem or the best solutions.
When faced with a shrinkage problem, retailers should determine where
they are experiencing their greatest financial loss and then install sound
field-tested countermeasures to prevent loss. 
I recommend a four-phase, integrated loss control program to control and
prevent loss. During Phase I, the retailer, or a qualified consultant, conducts
a comprehensive security survey. During Phase II, the retailer analyzes the
data collected during the survey to determine risk and trends, and then pri-
oritizes these risks to focus countermeasures. During Phase III, the retailer
designs and implements and a loss control program. During Phase IV, the
program is continuously tested and adjusted as needed. Figure I-1 depicts
the primary tasks associated with defining, designing, implementing, and
maintaining an effective loss control program.
No retailer should take the problem of retail shrinkage lightly. Lack of a
solid, consistent loss control program often leads to staggering financial
losses and can make violence more likely. A commitment to loss prevention
must be made at the top of the organization and be positively reinforced
throughout the organization every day. In this way, your business will expe-
rience an increase in profits due to an effective loss prevention program.
xv

xvi
Introduction
Figure I.1
An integrated loss control program

Part I Retail Risks: 
Problems and Solutions

This page intentionally left blank

3
1
Employee Deviance
Our employees can be our greatest asset, and unfortunately, our worst
enemy.
Retail security studies indicate the same thing year in and year out: employ-
ees account for much if not most of store losses. This is not the case for every
store or chain. But it is for many. Our employees have the best access to ALL
assets. They know where cash is stashed, and they often are able to learn pass-
words, alarm codes, and combinations. They may even have copies of store
keys. Store associates often believe they are able to accurately assess their risk
of being caught if they steal. Staffers usually know about the presence or
absence of security procedures and systems.
Even more importantly, employees know when alert, caring managers and
staff work – as well as when naïve or apathetic associates are in charge. Dishon-
est employees can be motivated to steal by watching their leaders and peers
break the rules; or because they feel abused or overlooked.
Employee theft and error account for the majority of retail loss. A recent
survey by Ernst and Young showed that the average theft per dishonest
employee amounted to $890.1 This figure is extremely high when compared
to the average loss of $57 per shoplifting incident. This survey indicates that
loss from dishonest employees is 15 times greater than the loss caused by
shoplifters.2 Employees steal in a variety of ways, but the result is always the
same: loss of profits and low morale. Employee theft can even lead to the
loss of an entire business.
Each type of retail operation has its own unique risk areas. Drug stores
carry controlled substances (prescription drugs) that must be carefully
guarded. Grocers experience both employee and customer “grazing” (or eat-
ing of merchandise) on a regular basis. Fraudulent returns occur frequently
in grocery operations. Also, grocery “baggers” are in an excellent position to
carry merchandise to their vehicles or to those of accomplices. Cosmetics,
clothes, tools auto parts, etc. are all easily worn or concealed and removed
unlawfully by company employees. Employees have also been known to
damage merchandise intentionally and mark it “out-of-stock.”

The methods employees use to steal company profits have been broken
down into three categories – merchandise theft, cash theft, and miscellaneous
business abuse. Retailers should realize many types of internal theft, such as
under-ringing sales or giving away free merchandise, don’t generally show up
as cash shortages; instead, they impact physical inventory. This loss is often
times attributed to shoplifting.
Retailers should document all reported theft and abuse incidents. These data
are useful for employee management as well as to determine the most com-
mon methods of losses. Once problems are identified and prioritized, detection
and prevention efforts can be focused to eliminate or control theft incidents.
Employee error and waste
Before discussing types of employee theft, it is important to address employee
error and waste. Employee deviance includes malfeasance, misfeasance, and
nonfeasance. Aberrant employee actions range from harmful behaviors like
tardiness and chronic absence to errors resulting from inattention to detail to
interpersonal behaviors like rudeness, threats, and attacks to theft and fraud.
When employees are poorly trained or motivated, costly errors and actions
can result. However, the enforcement of specific store policies can reduce
employee error and waste. At the vendor delivery point, ensure piece counts
are carefully made to verify the quantity of incoming merchandise. Ensure
that merchandise is properly priced and distributed. Also, motivate register
clerks to remain alert; this will minimize the mis-ringing of items. The best
defense against “paperwork” shrink due to employee error and waste is thor-
ough effective training, supervision, and discipline. Retail management should
not tolerate an ill-conceived or poorly executed training program.
Merchandise theft
There are many types of merchandise theft-store and distribution employees
may conceal, take, or wear company merchandise home on a regular basis. They
may also hand off merchandise to friends or family members, a practice called
sweethearting or sliding. In malls or shopping centers, employees are known to
trade with clerks from adjacent stores or warehouses; allowing them to take
merchandise in exchange for the same privilege in their store. A discussion of
every method of merchandise theft is beyond the scope of this book. However,
some common theft methods are discussed in the following paragraphs.
Under-ringing
When an employee under rings a purchase, he or she allows an accomplice
to purchase something for a reduced price. $10 items, for example, are rung
up as 10 cents. Managers should be alert to any clerk who acts too familiar
4
Retail Security and Loss Prevention

with a customer, while quickly glancing around. A computer-generated or
hand-written report on price variances is an excellent tool for detecting this
problem. This report should indicate the current price of a purchased item
versus the priced paid for the item. If a pattern of this type of transaction is
evident, it may indicate system error, poor training, poor employee aptitude
or attitude, or theft. Managers and loss prevention (LP) specialists should
also note if registers equipped with price “wands” or bar code readers are
being bypassed and items are being hand-keyed into the register, as this may
also indicate under-ringing of merchandise.
Removal of trash
Another common method employees use to steal merchandise involves plac-
ing items in plastic garbage bags or boxes and removing them from the store.
This practice is easily remedied, as clear trash bags will reveal any illegitimate
contents. However, management should supervise all trash removal. Ensure
the employee tears open the bag and allows the contents to fall into the dump-
ster. Many store managers have been surprised by the sight of jogging suits,
DVDs, auto parts, etc. falling from trash bags. Also, never give employees store
keys or alarm codes to remove trash or boxes on their own.
Controlling merchandise theft
Consider placing disposable or one-way Electronic Article Surveillance (EAS)
tags in certain items to deter theft. EAS tags can deter some offenders, particu-
larly if they are hidden in pockets or under the removable soles of shoes, for
example. Hidden EAS tags may also function in warehouse situations.
Never allow employees to bring their purses or packages onto the selling
floor. Only clear plastic purses with essential personal items should be allowed
in work areas.
Store high-priced and very high-loss overstock items in separate, locked
and monitored security cages for better protection, and maintain a log that
documents access to the area.
Consider using closed-circuit television (CCTV) and/or roaming security
agents in both store and distribution facilities to assist in detection and
deterrence of employee theft.
Offer store discounts to employees and their relatives. This can facilitate
legitimate purchasing.
Control allocation of price guns and check prices on employee purchases
to discourage the unauthorized marking down of items by employees and
customers. Check employee purchases.
This procedure is simple and requires all purchases made by an employee
be kept in a central location. These checks should be done on a random basis.
Record each purchase made by an employee or family member.
Employee Deviance
5

Authorize and verify all shipments by an employee who is not responsi-
ble for controlling inventories.
Require all employees to enter and leave the work place through a desig-
nated employee entrance that is monitored by a security guard or man-
agement personnel.
Provide a coatroom for overcoats and unusually large packages. Post a sign
at this entrance warning employees that pilferage is a crime and those
caught will be prosecuted.
Lock roll-up receiving doors at the bottom, not at their pull chains, since
many employees use dollies to hoist the doors open and then slide mer-
chandise through the gap.
Secure all doors not used for regular customer traffic per local fire regula-
tions and install panic alarms.
Ensure a manager observes and documents all freight deliveries made at
either the distribution facility or the store.
Restrict access to supply areas and ensure these areas are monitored by a
security guard.
Ensure employees who enter the supply area are accompanied by a ware-
house employee, and that they complete a sign-in sheet recording name,
time of entrance and departure, and merchandise removed.
Keep customer returns and damaged items in a secure area.
Keep stockroom merchandise in neat stacks, not disorderly piles, so it is
easy to spot missing items. Bad housekeeping is a quick tip-off to possible
employee theft.
Restrict personal or unnecessary employee use of office equipment, com-
pany gas pumps, telephone, postage meters, and other facilities designed
for company use.
Escort guests and employees of other companies to their appointments.
Rotate employees of one department to a different department to take
inventory. Ensure that inventory is supervised by a member of management.
Keep merchandise in neat, orderly displays and never stack high-loss
items near doors or operable windows.
Clearly and permanently mark company equipment with the company’s
name.
Ensure that tools are inventoried and locked up by a supervisor at the end
of each workday.
6
Retail Security and Loss Prevention

Be suspicious of company equipment or merchandise that appears out of
place. Encourage employees to report out-of-place items to management.
Ensure that security or management personnel periodically inspect rubbish
piles and garbage containers for concealed items.
Inventory high-priced merchandise on processing lines in distribution
facilities and keep it in secured areas.
Assure employees that the identity of anyone who reports dishonesty on
the part of other employees will be held in confidence.
Install telephone hotlines or offer rewards for theft information.
Establish a toll-free, 24-hour hotline to better facilitate company employ-
ees reporting theft, fraud, substance abuse, or sexual harassment in the
workplace. Companies may use an outside service or set up an in-house
hotline operation. Management should be aware, however, that many
honest employees may be unwilling to “snitch.”
Peer Reporting
Many experts estimate that 40% to 50% of retail losses are attributable to
employee theft. As a result, loss prevention efforts have begun to focus on
ways of reducing theft by employees. Many different techniques, such as
electronic monitoring, education programs and fraud assessment ques-
tioning, are being used to reduce employee theft.
One of the most effective techniques is to have employees monitor and
report suspicious, illegal or unethical behavior of other employees.
Employees are more likely to be aware of activities that might otherwise
be difficult to detect, and employees can detect dishonest or suspicious
activities by other employees more quickly than financial audits or exit
interviews.
Employee monitoring may be among the most cost-effective ways 
of reducing shrinkage. Techniques may include telephone hotlines,
incentive and award systems, and the creation of an environment that
expects employees to monitor and report the illegal or suspicious 
activities of other employees. Employees are more likely to report on 
others when in an environment where theft is clearly not an acceptable
behavior.
Successful reporting programs, therefore, must provide the mechanisms,
incentives, and environment to encourage employees to report theft or
inappropriate behaviors by other employees.
Employee Deviance
7

Cash theft
Unfortunately, cash theft by dishonest employees is a common problem. Retail
firms are particularly vulnerable to cash theft, since many employees have
access to cash registers and counting rooms, and routinely make cash deposits.
When customers purchase items with cash, that money goes into a cash
register. Therefore, the first place to look for cash theft is at the point of sale.
Some employees’ void legitimate sales transactions (and pocket the cash) to
ensure that the register isn’t “short” money at the end of the day. Clerks will
also take cash from a customer and fail to ring up the sale. In many cases,
the dishonest employee keeps a written record of the amount of cash they
have accumulated and sets that money to the side of the cash drawer. If the
employee is “spooked” or unable to retrieve this cash from the register, a
cash overage results. This also occurs when an employee fails to subtract
sales tax or odd change collected.
Refund fraud
In today’s hassle-free customer service environment, retailers are inevitably
vulnerable to refund fraud. Customers expect be able to exchange or return
merchandise with relative ease, but nefarious employees can easily take
advantage of lax refund policies. The challenge, then, is to keep legitimate
customers happy while also preventing fraud. Some refund policies can pro-
vide a happy medium between “no refunds” and “anything goes.” When
employees decide they need cash immediately and don’t want to “till-tap”
or void a transaction, the easiest thing to do is pull out a refund slip, or use
the POS system, pick a name and address from a phone book, and using that
identity, record the amount of cash they desire as refund, on a slip they then
sign and date. The slip is then substituted for cash.
Some refund fraud countermeasures include numbering refund slips and
logging them out as needed. Therefore, a member of management should
always authorize refunds greater than $100. Customers should sign the refund
slip, along with the issuing clerk and the employee who returns the merchan-
dise to the sales floor. Management personnel should randomly call customers
who return merchandise and inquire of the transaction was handled to their
satisfaction. This is not only a positive customer service strategy, but may
expose a dishonest employee if a customer claims to have never been in the
store. On the other hand, managers should always pass along positive cus-
tomer comments to store employees – preferably in a group meeting. This
serves to recognize the courteous employee, while at the same time rein-
forcing to staff that management is checking refunds and returns.
Layaway fraud
Many stores have layaway plans; this is another customer service tactic that
dishonest employees can steal from. The three most common methods to
8
Retail Security and Loss Prevention

steal via layaways involve voiding a layaway payment, canceling a layaway
transaction, and forfeiting a layaway deposit. To prevent employees from
fraudulently forfeiting a layaway deposit, management should authorize all
deposit transactions. Similarly, a manager’s authorization should also be
required to prevent fraudulent layaway cancellations or payment voids.
Embezzlement and employee fraud
Retail embezzlement can occur at any level of the organization. The term
“embezzle” refers to the stealing of company money by someone in a posi-
tion of trust. Cash register theft is one form of embezzlement. Others
include bank deposit rolling, check kiting, lapping, payroll fraud, travel and
expense account fraud, as well as vendor kickbacks and collusion, which will
be further discussed in Chapter 4.
Bank deposit rolling
Rolled bank deposits usually occur in stores where employees make up the
daily sales receipts for deposit. In this type of embezzlement, the employee
steals all or part of the day’s deposit, making up for the stolen cash with
monies from future deposits. This type of crime is not very common. It can
easily be prevented by having two separate employees verify each day’s
deposit on a rotating basis.
Check kiting
Employees authorized to write checks or make deposits in two or more bank
accounts may attempt to “kite” (or float) funds between a legitimate account
and one set up by the employee or accomplice. Once a check from the com-
pany is deposited into an employee account, the employee makes a withdrawal
of cash in that amount from their account. Before the original check clears the
company account, the employee deposits a check from their account into
the company’s to cover the original account. This cycle continues until the
kite “breaks” when either the company or one of the banks refuses to honor
the checks.
Lapping
In lapping schemes, dishonest employees keep part of the payments made
on accounts received. This method is similar to deposit rolling, because parts
of other payments are skimmed to cover the loss. Account records and state-
ments are altered by the employee. This type of crime can go undetected for
years. To avoid this type of theft, a member of management should be verify
and approve all bank deposits.
Payroll fraud
Payroll fraud usually occurs when an employee (with the access and author-
ity to add employees to payroll roster) adds fictitious names to the rosters.
Employee Deviance
9

Paychecks are then issued either to the dishonest employee or an accom-
plice. To avoid this, retailers should divide payroll functions between at least
three people who prepare, verify, and distribute the payroll.
Travel and expense account fraud
With today’s employees traveling more and more for business, expense
reports and accounts have become prime targets for fraud. Employees typi-
cally list personal expenses such as meals and telephone calls on reports, and
then submit them for reimbursement. To avoid fraud, companies should
employ and publicize firm policies regarding legitimate expenses. Appropriate
supervisors should then verify and authorize all submitted expense reports.
Controlling cash theft
Other measures retailers can use to control theft of cash by employees are:
Ensure that names on payroll rosters are authorized, in writing, by a desig-
nated company official.
To prevent non-registered sales, enlist customer assistance. Post signs by
each cash register announcing that, “Any customer who does not receive
a sales receipt is entitled to a cash bonus.”
Hire “outside shoppers”, and provide them with funds to make purchases
in the store. They can provide valuable information on whether sales-
people are courteous, proficient, and properly reporting sales.
Designate a responsible company official, who is not on the accounting
department’s staff, to receive and investigate customer complaints.
Bond key employees for theft.
Establish a good audit program that establishes and maintains a working
climate of accountability in which accurate records are kept and regularly
audited. (Audit programs are discussed in greater detail later in the book.)
The Small Business Association (SBA) also recommends the following 
procedures:
Carefully check prospective employees’ backgrounds, particularly those
to be given fiduciary responsibilities. This check should include oral and
written contacts with previous employers, credit bureaus, and personal
references. Make sure that an employee who will handle funds is ade-
quately bonded.
Ensure that a member of senior management supervises the accounting
employee who opens and records receipt of checks, cash payments, and
money orders.
10
Retail Security and Loss Prevention

Ensure that a manager prepares bank deposits daily. Return duplicate
deposits slips, stamped “RECEIVED” by the bank, to the accounting
department.
Ensure that senior management (as well as the person who draws or signs
the checks) approves all payments.
Ensure senior management examines all invoices and supporting data
before signing checks. Verify the receipt and reasonable price of all mer-
chandise. In many false purchase schemes, the embezzler will neglect to
complete receiving forms or other records purporting to show receipt of
merchandise.
Mark all paid invoices as “CANCELED” and file them in a secure area to
prevent double payment. Dishonest accounting department employees
have been known to make out and receive approval on duplicate checks
for the same invoice. The second check may be embezzled by the
employee or by an accomplice at the company issuing the invoice.
Periodically inspect prenumbered checkbooks and other prenumbered
forms to ensure that checks of forms from the back of middle of the
books have not been removed for use in a fraudulent scheme. Place
authorized spending limits on employees.
Do not permit employees responsible for making sales or assigning proj-
ects to outside suppliers to process transactions affecting their own
accounts.
Ensure that an employee who does not draw or sign checks reconciles
bank statements and canceled checks. Ensure management examines
canceled checks and endorsements for unusual features (see Chapter 7).
Payroll should be prepared by one person, verified by another, and dis-
tributed by others not involved with the payroll preparation or time slip
approval.
Miscellaneous business abuse
The third major category of internal theft risk is miscellaneous. This includes
abuses such as unethical conduct, time theft, and drug abuse.
In the U.S., business ethics are under increased scrutiny as more well-
known government and private enterprises face criminal indictment. In a
retail business, most key employees are in a position to accept a bribe or kick
back from a product or service vendor. Merchandise buyers, purchasing
agents, traffic managers, in-house agents, new store and distribution center
real estate locators, and in-house construction supervisors are just some of
the individuals in a position to recommend or authorize agreements with
outside vendors.
Employee Deviance
11

Retailers can reduce their vulnerability to this type of crime by taking
some the following actions:
Require competitive bidding for business.
Separate receiving operations from purchasing operations so buyers can-
not accept short deliveries in return for kickbacks.
Ensure an executive from outside the purchasing department reviews bids
and inspects incoming goods.
Require that employees, particularly those in purchasing, file monthly
reports on received gifts and gratuities. Set a limit on the value of gifts
that may be accepted.
Insist that gifts be sent to the office, not to the employees’ homes.
Inform vendors of acceptable gift-giving practices.
When a supplier other than the low bidder is selected, insist that the reason
be documented and sent to top management for review and approval.
Rotate the assignment of purchasing agents and suppliers.
Instruct employees to report any demands for payoffs made by customers
or vendors.
Make estimates of reasonable costs for products and services, so that pos-
sible kickback costs can be identified.
Develop policies that ensure maintenance of a professional distance
between management and union officials.
Institute procedures that alert management when payments of commis-
sions by vendors to employees are not documented by the usual paper-
work. Commissions not in line with recognized trade practices or made
through banks not usually used, may indicate unethical behavior.
An employee or official of a company or government organization involved
in a bribery, kickback, or payoff scheme may have violated any of a number
of local, state, or federal laws. If you suspect that one of your employees is
either receiving or giving bribes or kickbacks in dealings with another non-
government firm, do not confront the suspect immediately. Instead, discuss
your suspicions with your company attorneys to determine what action
should be undertaken. It is essential that your business stay within the law.
Therefore, do not attempt an investigation on your own. Remember, it is not
necessary that a bribe, kickback, or payoff actually be received in order for a
crime to have been committed. Under most existing legislation, the mere offer-
ing, conferring, or agreeing to confer a benefit is considered an offense.
12
Retail Security and Loss Prevention

Another form of miscellaneous abuse is time theft. Time theft occurs when
an employee clocks in for another employee who is late or absent, calls in
sick for a paid day off, leaves early, takes long breaks, or uses the company’s
time to conduct an outside business. Positive leadership practices by super-
visors, including good discipline, two-way communication, and good morale
all help control time abuse.
In an effort to make company employees or associates feel like they 
are a part of their company, many retailers offer employee discounts on
store merchandise. The discount is usually averages around 10% on low-
margin items and 20% on others. Employee discount programs are a boost
to employee morale. The company’s discount policy should be in written
form and monitored by store managers. Unfortunately, discount policy 
violations are now the most common form of internal theft. Abuse often
involves extending the employee discount to individuals not author-
ized to receive it. Some dishonest employees purchase items with their 
discount and have an accomplice return the items for the higher regular
price.
Stores that have discount programs report that they average between .25%
and 1.10% of gross annual sales in employee purchases. This percentage varies
with the size of the company and the type of merchandise sold. If a chain
has a store that greatly exceeds or doesn’t meet the established, average per-
centage of gross sales in employee purchases, employees may be abusing the
privilege or just outright stealing the merchandise.
Employee pilferage of company supplies and equipment is also a form of
theft. Tools, office equipment, and supplies disappear from businesses at an
alarming rate. This type of theft may occur sporadically or in an organized
manner. All employees should be made aware of the company policy regard-
ing “using” company assets for personal endeavors. Management should
inventory and permanently mark valuable items, and secure sensitive areas
to help control this type of loss.
Another significant method of employee theft involves filing false workers’
compensation claims. This practice may be replacing unemployment claims
as a desirable source of income. Management should investigate all workmen’s
compensation claims to determine if abuse is occurring.
Unsupervised work crews, laid-off employees, and others such as disgrun-
tled union members may inflict damage on the retailer in the form of van-
dalism or sabotage. Distribution of company assets and work stoppage are
examples of this type of risk. Supervisors should keep the lines of commu-
nication open in an effort to determine if morale problems exist. They
should also debrief terminated or laid-off employees prior to departure and
deny them access to sensitive areas.
Every business is vulnerable to theft via cleaning crews. Therefore, it is
essential to supervise in-house or contract cleaning personnel. Random checks
of tool boxes, cans of wax, vacuum cleaner bags, and trash is a must.
Employee Deviance
13

In today’s society, alcohol and drug abuse constitute tremendous threats
to the safety and security of any organization. Drug-addicted or alcoholic
employees can cause accidents and increased theft activity in the workplace.
Employers should screen applicants to keep individuals with untreated addic-
tive or criminal tendencies from entering the company workforce. Train
supervisors to detect and refer problem employees to Employee Assistance
Programs (EAP’s). Retailers face liability if dependent employees go untreated
and severe losses, injuries, or even death occurs. Consultation with govern-
ment or private experts regarding an effective EAP is recommended. Some
retail businesses are placing undercover agents in their operation to discover
the source of suspected theft or substance abuse activity.
Proprietary information
All retail operations possess proprietary (or sensitive) information. This can
include corporate expansion goals or locations, sales figures, and customer
mailing lists. All proprietary information may be confidential, but all confi-
dential information may not be proprietary. Personnel and training files 
are confidential, but are not considered proprietary. Retailers must ensure that
confidential information is carefully guarded. There is a difference in the
civil and criminal rights afforded to retailers depending on the type of infor-
mation being protected. Trade secrets may be subject to greater protection
under federal law if it can benefit and that the company makes reasonable
efforts to maintain its secrecy. An employees can seriously undermine a com-
pany if he or she divulges trade secrets – either intentionally or not. A mini-
mal proprietary information security plan should include the following:
1. Restrict non-employee access to areas containing confidential information.
2. Use warning signs and instructions to alert employees to the sensitivity
of certain things or places.
3. Inform employees and visitors of the confidentiality of certain areas or
information.
4. Store sensitive documents separately in containers for which special secu-
rity precautions are taken.
5. Impose area controls within a facility among different classes of employees
with respect to certain information or operations.
6. Instruct employees and suppliers not to disclose information entrusted 
to them to other employees unless such employees present a legitimate
“need to know.”
Investigating employee theft
Management can uncover employee pilferage or embezzlement in a variety of
ways, but some of the most common are: spot audits, follow-up investigations
14
Retail Security and Loss Prevention

resulting from inventory shortages, gross margin problems, price variances,
and when an accomplice or witness tips off management.
LP personnel or trained consultants should vigorously investigate all accu-
sations and indications of theft activity. The goals of any investigation are
to substantiate the accusation or clear the suspect, discover the extent of the
damage or loss and employee involvement, recover lost assets (see Figure 1.1
for a sample restitution agreement), and determine the circumstances that 
initially led to the incident. A retail investigator should be a neutral, third party
and enter the investigation with an open mind. The normal investigative 
routine is to first gather evidence of wrongdoing through review of docu-
mentation and/or surveillance activities. Next, the investigator should create
a list of suspects, narrow it down, and conduct preliminary interviews. Once
the theft is discovered, the investigator should determine whether enough
Employee Deviance
15
Figure 1.1
Sample restitution agreement and promissory note

evidence is present to take action (such as termination, criminal prosecu-
tion, or civil action). Conversely, a lack of evidence might mean the inves-
tigation should be dropped. Investigators should work closely with Human
Resources, Personnel, and store operations at this point; the resulting coop-
eration and interdisciplinary expertise will surely benefit the investigation.
It is also important to remember that investigations handled without pro-
fessionalism or confidentiality can face serious liabilities, so all implicated
employees must be presumed innocent until proven otherwise. Thorough
investigations should be conducted in an environment that stresses employee
rights. Investigators should keep in mind that union activity is not to be
investigated by the retailer. Only violations of the law or company policy are
to be investigated.
Questions
What are three ways you can contribute to the prevention of employee mer-
chandise theft?
How can a retailer affect employee behavior so as to deter theft?
What are some strategies for limiting the risk of proprietary information theft?
What is embezzlement?
If you suspect someone is giving or receiving kickbacks or bribes, what should
you do?
16
Retail Security and Loss Prevention

17
2
Managing Employee Honesty
It is helpful to have some insight into the reasons why employees steal from
their employers. First of all, there is no typical, dishonest employee. Anyone
that has access to company assets may decide to steal them. However, certain
traits may indicate potential problems. Numerous studies have contributed
to a determination of which social psychological theories best explain an
employee’s theft activity. The majority of these studies have been conducted
since 1980 and the results are similar. Terris and Jones reviewed 24 studies
that include psychological predictors and identified 11 significant ones.
Employee theft is more common among those who
1. hold a variety of theft-tolerant attitudes
2. are more tolerant of violence and aggression
3. are more accepting of illicit drug use
4. experience higher levels of stress or burnout
5. are more dissatisfied at work
6. believe their crimes are less likely to be detected by management
7. believe management would be more lenient with punishment
8. are aware of more co-worker theft
9. have less impulse control
10. are more tolerant of crimes by insiders
11. are more likely to endorse certain altruistic values1
Overall, Jones concludes that the best, single psychological predictor is
employees’ attitudes towards theft. He summarizes the literature researched
by stating that the “typical” employee thief
1. is more tempted to steal
2. engages in many of the common rationalizations for theft
3. would punish thieves less
4. often thinks about theft-related activities
5. attributes more theft to others

6. shows more interthief loyalty
7. feels more vulnerable to peer pressure to steal compared to an honest
employee
In the late seventies, a major study on the sociological cases of employee
theft revealed some notable relationships. Employee theft was significantly
higher among employees who were
•
young
•
male
•
Caucasian
•
never married
•
living in high-income households, but contributing less than 20 percent
of the total income
•
concerned about their financial and educational/career situations
In addition, employee theft was significantly higher among employees with
•
lower-paying jobs
•
lower-job status
•
jobs providing easiest access to merchandise and money (i.e., sales clerks,
cashiers, and managers)
•
more numerous and frequent social interactions with co-employees
Regarding job satisfaction, employee theft was significantly higher among
employees who were
•
dissatisfied with their immediate supervisors
•
dissatisfied with the organization for which they work
•
dissatisfied with opportunities for promotion
•
dissatisfied with the day-to-day workload
Employee theft was also significantly higher among employees who believed
that
•
they would not get caught if they stole something
•
their employers were unaware of employee theft
•
no one would care if certain things were stolen
•
management and co-workers would not react to theft as a very serious
problem
Based on the data collected during this, and other, studies, a combination
of the following three factors tends to result in employee theft:
I
Rationalization
A. Employees convince themselves that dishonest is a form of 
compensation
18
Retail Security and Loss Prevention

B. Anger (e.g., supervisor, co-workers, company)
C. Big company (cash/merchandise won’t be missed)
II
Need/Desire
A. Specific needs (e.g., low salary/high bills)
B. Outside pressure (e.g., desire for prestige)
C. Overwhelming desire for money or specific merchandise
III Opportunity
A. Presented with situation in which employee perceives little chance of
being caught
1. Exact change left by customer
2. Receiving doors unlocked/unsupervised
3. Poor loss prevention practices by management
B. Internal/external help
Therefore, retailers are most benefited by a three-tiered prevention program
designed to control losses caused by dishonest employees. Then retail execu-
tive may choose to use all or part of this plan: Pre-employment Screening,
Access/Procedural Controls and Audits, and Store/Company Atmosphere.
Pre-employment screening
To prevent losses due to employee theft, the logical place to start theft pre-
vention is during potential employee interviews. Screen individuals before
they enter the organization and identify those who are likely to steal. There
are seven common methods, used by today’s businesses to screen employee
applicants.
1. Application Screening – The employment application, which conforms to
current legal standards, should be completely filled out. Follow-up on
any gaps in employment or questionable responses.
2. Personal and Professional Reference Checks – Individuals listed by the appli-
cant as references should be contacted and questioned about the subject
in a positive manner. The reference should be asked to give the name and
phone number of other acquaintances for further reference.
3. Employment and Education Verification – Jobs and education listed by the
prospective employee should be checked. A rule of thumb in checking
past employment history is to go back 3 to 5 years. If the job for which the
individual is applying requires a certain level of education, the applicant
must sign an authorization for allowing colleges and schools to release
transcripts.
4. Integrity Interview/Scenarios – There appears to be some merit in the practice
of giving each applicant at least two interviews, preferably by two different
Managing Employee Honesty
19

20
Retail Security and Loss Prevention
interviewers. The interviewer should ask open-ended questions to allow the
subjects to display their thoughts and ideas. There are courses and books
available that demonstrate techniques to determine if a subject is being
truthful or deceptive. Some retailers, after gaining legal validation, put
applicants in a simulated work or decision-making situation and observe
how they perform. This practice also gives applicants a feeling for the job
for which they are applying.
5. Written Honesty/Aptitude Tests/Surveys – With the loss of the polygraph as
a screening tool, many states allow the use of “pencil-and-paper” tests/
surveys to determine honesty. Some tests exist that rely on a great deal of
empirical research data to predict future behavior, based on past behavior
or tolerance of deviance.
6. Handwriting or Graphoanalysis – Empirical data for handwriting analyses
do exist and are used to confirm personality traits based on handwriting
samples. The use of handwriting analysis as a screening tool is widespread
in Europe and is being used more frequently by U.S. firms.
7. Background Checks – Many retailers use in-house personnel or outside
companies to check the criminal conviction and credit history of appli-
cants for positions that require this type of information. Workers’ com-
pensation claims and driving records are also frequently checked. Books
and software programs are available to assist retailers in these types of
checks.
Know Your Staff
It’s not all about theft.
Employee dishonesty involves a lot more than stealing – it’s any on-the-job
behavior that harms the business or its people. Workplace deviance ranges
from production deviance (tardiness and work slowdowns), to property
deviance (theft and sabotage), to aggressive deviance (harassment or vio-
lence). Successful retailers addressing these problems with an integrated
process, and one of the most important parts of that process is pre-
employment screening. No one can predict what another person will due
in a particular situation, but knowing what a person did previously can
help. In fact past behavior is the best indicator of future actions. That’s
what background screening can do.
Background checks provide a way to find out how applicants may act
in your store since others have had to deal with them, and if there were
positive or negative issues those might have been documented. On going
driving violations, criminal convictions, multiple work comp filings, and
no evidence of a claimed degree or professional license can all signal risky
behaviors are not a problem for a job seeker (keep in mind that some
deviants are not caught or reported). Likewise, references and database

searches may reveal just the opposite. It is important to call work and per-
sonal references, to ask for some indication that they would re-employ
the person, and for any others they can refer you to for further informa-
tion. You can conduct background checks yourself by using sources listed
in screening guidebooks, or by using screening companies.
Hard work and integrity is key to your store’s performance. Keeping 
in mind your desire for honest, agreeable, and hard working staffers, your
screening program should look for indicators of all three. Currently avail-
able screening tools include paper and pencil testing, criminal, workplace,
driving, and educational checking, and structured interviewing. A combi-
nation of all three methods is recommended in order to gain a more com-
plete picture, and to provide ample support for your decisions.
Access/procedural controls and audits
The next part of the plan to control employee theft is to establish workable
controls and, once implemented, to follow-up on their relevance and effec-
tiveness. When designing control procedures, operation (or “real world”)
employee activities and customer service must be considered so as to not
unnecessarily impede the normal flow of business. Cumbersome procedures
drive off good customers and are quickly abandoned by company employees.
Merchandise control
Retailers and LP professionals and more effectively maintain merchandise
control by adhering to the following seven suggestions:
1. Electronic Article Surveillance (EAS) – Electronic and dye tags attached to or
concealed inside high-loss merchandise may deter shoplifting by cus-
tomers as well as some employees.
2. Spot Audits/Counts – Unannounced store audits or selected merchandise
piece counts help detect and deter employee pilferage by putting employees
on notice that management closely tracks their assets.
3. Purse/Package Checks – A policy allowing management or security to check
employee purses or packages when exiting the store or distribution center
can be implemented. If used, this policy must be made clear to all emp-
loyees and must be applied consistently.
4. Trash Removal/Cleaning Crew – Ensure that all removal of trash and con-
tainers by in-house, contract, and vendor employees is observed.
5. Receiving/Pick-up Policy – Keep receiving doors secured when not in use and
monitor all receiving and customer pick-up activity.
6. Damaged and Return-to-Vendor Merchandise – Log all merchandise slated for
destruction, return-to-vendor, or donation to charity and secure it in a wire
Managing Employee Honesty
21

enclosure until it is disposed of to avoid employee pilferage or fraudulent
refund schemes.
7. Employee Discount and Purchase Control – Log and sign all employee pur-
chases. In order to receive a discount, employees and their immediate
family members should present a valid company identification card.
Cash controls
Retailers can more effectively maintain cash control by adhering to the fol-
lowing seven suggestions:
1. Register Accountability – Don’t assign too many employees to one register,
simultaneously, if at all possible. Have all employees log their employee
number into each transaction. These two policies reduce cash overages and
shortages, and help to quickly determine who may be responsible for miss-
ing cash.
2. Journal Tape Review – Randomly check journal tapes and ledger sheets from
point-of-sale terminals and cash registers to check for errors or question-
able practices. Training deficiencies and skill or integrity problems may be
detected as well.
3. Post-Void Authorization and Follow-up – When clerks void transactions, or
parts of transactions, verify this activity as soon as possible. Check to see
whether the purchases were rung in, again, correctly. If a customer decided
not to purchase the items, find out where the clerk put them. Also, track
post-voids for trends, such as reasons for the void and clerk employee
number.
4. Cash Refund Authorization and Follow-up – Have customers supply their
name, address, and phone number, as well as sign a refund slip, for a cash
refund. Use three-part forms that are numerically issued and logged. Give
one copy to the customer, attach one copy to the returned merchandise,
and send one copy to the cash office. When the merchandise is returned
to the sales floor, have the clerk returning the item sign under the issu-
ing clerk’s signature. If the transaction is over a certain predetermined
amount, have management personally authorize the transaction.
5. Tracking Cash Variances – Post all cash overages and shortages so that trends
can be determined. If there are no patterns, a “shotgun” shortage exists, and
somebody, such as management or head clerks with access to all registers,
may be responsible.
6. Tracking Price Variances – An automated price look-up system enhances any
operation. In any case, a manual or automated system that tracks trans-
actions that were rung up for less than the purchase price is recommended.
A clear pattern of low or high price ring-ups may indicate intentional
under-ringing or manipulation.
7. Deposit Verification – Teach cash office personnel the proper way to count
money. Using a calculator with a non-add key, count the deposit once and
22
Retail Security and Loss Prevention

total by denominations. Put this information on the adding machine tape,
along with the date. Have the clerk recount the deposit in the same man-
ner and compare the total with the previous total documented on the tape.
If the totals are the same, have the clerk initial and date the tape. Ensure
that management repeats this process then staple the tapes to a copy of
the deposit receipt and save them for recordkeeping purposes.
Audits
Conduct audits of cash and merchandise-handling procedures randomly to
determine if proper controls are in place and being followed, and to deter-
mine if and where problems exist. Audits are discussed in detail in Chapter 17.
Store/company atmosphere
Corporate executives and supervisors at all levels should display a knowl-
edgeable, concerned attitude toward the protection of company assets,
including the well-being of all employees. Employees should clearly know
their supervisors care about them and their customers. However, the “country-
club” atmosphere that exists in some operations must be balanced by fair,
consistent discipline. Employees should know that management will not
tolerate theft and will vigorously investigate all incidents. Code of conduct
booklets can be issued to staff and reinforced with store and distribution level
employee asset protection committees and manager enforcement.
Across the board policy – Termination/prosecution/civil action
Retailers should make all employees aware of the corporate behavior standards
and of the benefits that result from upholding those standards. Confidential
phone and email reporting hotlines and periodic surveys can help deter
deviance while raising detection and cation risk for offenders. Employees
must also understand theft or violation of company policy, at any level, will
be met with a fair hearing; swift, consistent, and serious sanctions; as well as
possible termination, criminal prosecution, and civil action.
Employee awareness – Training and reinforcement
All employees, from the CEO down through the organization, should be made
aware of the security risks that exist within the company, the actions they
can take to reduce and/or report loss incidents, and the potential rewards for
doing so. Chapter 12 discusses loss prevention awareness training programs
designed to accomplish these goals.
Communication
When employees feel unable to communicate their concerns, ideas, and prob-
lems to upper management, morale may plunge and theft and error may
Managing Employee Honesty
23

increase. Supervisors at all levels should be taught to communicate effec-
tively with their staff – and be rewarded for doing so. The CEO should have
an open line of communication to all employees. A confidential written-
suggestion format often works well in accomplishing this goal.
Questions
What activities, other than stealing, comprise employee theft?
What is the single best predictor of whether or not an employee might steal?
Name three methods of pre-employment screening.
Describe two ways retailer can contribute to an atmosphere of honesty in
stores.
Which three factors, when combined, usually result in employee theft?
24
Retail Security and Loss Prevention

25
3
Vendor Theft and Error
Retail losses are the result of errors, omissions and intentional deviant 
acts. Further, losses start in the supply chain (manufacturer, wholesaler, ship-
ping, etc.). Merchandise vendor theft and error can cause retailers hundreds
of thousands of dollars in lost revenues. Retailers usually purchase their mer-
chandise from specific vendors. These vendors then ship merchandise directly
(or through a distributor) to the retailer. In the case of grocery operations for
example, vendors may deliver large quantities of products to a store through
a delivery person, who also stocks and displays these items. Vendors, like all
businesses, are prone to error and, in some instances, dishonesty. This chapter
describes some of the risks vendor theft and error pose, and recommends
preventive measures that address them.
Risks
Retailers often overlook vendor theft and error when designing loss control
programs. However, it is a real problem that requires focused attention. And the
first step in controlling it is to ensure receiving supervisors inform Accounts
Payable of any discrepancies in shipping, such as damaged goods or detected
shortages.
Vendor employees, from the CEO down to the packing clerks, may acci-
dently or intentionally compromise the quantity or quality of items they send
to the retailer. To combat this practice, ensure receiving personnel open mer-
chandise and verify proper quality and piece counts. Depending on the vol-
ume of the shipments, check all merchandise containers. If the shipment is
large, perform random spot checks.
Many operations frequently overpay freight charges. Before authorizing
invoice payment, verify the shipment’s freight rates, weights, and classifica-
tions. Weigh all incoming shipments. To eliminate payment duplication of
freight invoices, attach the bill or vendor invoice to the receiving document,
and stamp the document as “PAID.” If applicable, have the receiver run a
computer check for duplicate freight invoice numbers. Have the receiver

check for altered shipping terms, merchandise shipped by a more expensive
route or mode, requests for back order payment when merchandise was to
be shipped in one delivery, and merchandise shipped by the wrong carrier.
When merchandise returns to the vendor are a result of vendor error, all
incoming and outgoing freight charges should be paid by the vendor.
After all paperwork reaches the Accounts Payable Department, there are cer-
tain steps Accounts Payable personnel can take to detect vendor error or fraud:
Compare invoices to corresponding purchase orders, checking for unautho-
rized charges, such as insurance or packing costs.
Check for invoices with prices that exceed purchase order amounts. Be aware
that vendor-issued credit memos can exceed charge-backs. If so, adjustments
should be made to open credit memos on vendor statements.
When charge-backs and returns-to-vendor are required, proper credit is
given. The credited charge-back cost (or percentage of cost) must be the same
as the original invoice cost; the vendor should pay the outgoing freight. Also,
ensure that a vendor is not accidentally paid, instead of deducted, for returns
and charge-backs.
Another risk in dealing with vendors involves delivery personnel. Delivery
persons, whether in-house or vendor-based, are in a position to commit var-
ious types of fraud and theft. These route drivers may be shoplifting, eating
(grazing), wearing store merchandise, or making “honest” mistakes. If dis-
covered, these can appear to be unintentional errors, made by the deliverer
or the manufacturer. However, these are actually fraud schemes. Examples
include
•
walking the same cases of merchandise by the store receiver more than
once for delivery credit
•
invoice math errors that charge billed customers more than cash cus-
tomers and keeping the cash receipts
•
delivering damaged items mixed in with first-quality goods
•
substituting less expensive, lesser quality, or counterfeit merchandise for
ordered items
•
delivery partially filled or empty sealed cartons along with the full cases
•
giving less credit for returned merchandise than should be given
•
multiplication errors when charging the retailer for items.
For example, the driver may charge a six-pack price for beer or soft drinks
and multiply this price by 24, for the 24 individual cans in the case, rather
than the four six-packs in the case.
In many cases, buyers negotiate cash discounts, volume rebates, or an
advertising allowance when placing a purchase order. They may also be eli-
gible for new store discounts or early-buy discounts. A designated merchan-
dise retriever should verify all deliveries to ensure agreed-upon discounts
26
Retail Security and Loss Prevention

have been included. Communication between the buying staff, accounts
payable and receiving, and marketing personnel is critical. Buyers should
check that purchase orders are written correctly and that discounts, delivery
and cancellation dates, and shipping requirements are all clearly indicated.
Another prevention technique is the appointment of a designated receiver.
Periodically “test” this person to detect evidence of collusion. Schedule all
deliveries so that the receiver is not overwhelmed by simultaneous ship-
ments. Computerized receiving systems are helpful in eliminating some of
the previously mentioned risks (such as detecting invoice discrepancies) but
should not be considered the ultimate prevention technique. Receivers should
not allow friendships or embarrassment interfere with their job, and scrutiny
of incoming merchandise. All merchandise should be channeled through
the receiver.
Other delivery control procedures include:
Schedule receiving – by limiting direct store deliveries to certain days and/
or hours, confusion is minimized and retailers can ensure that experienced
receiving personnel are scheduled during this time.
Train receivers – while merchandise receiving is not considered the most
desirable job in the company, it is imperative that competent employees be
identified and trained to properly count and secure deliveries.
Avoid front door deliveries – if possible, deny delivery personnel access to other
store merchandise. This practice also eliminates the possibility of injury to
customers entering by the same entrance.
Receiving merchandise – receive merchandise away from trash-disposal areas and
customer or employee parking areas. This practice discourages pilferage and
concealment of store goods.
Comparing – compare piece counts with the invoice, not the packing slip. It
is common for receivers to refer to a vendor-generated packing slip, instead of
the company’s invoice, for an accurate piece count.
Separate buying functions from receiving functions – merchandise buyers should
not be responsible for verifying shipments or handling the receiving copy of
the purchase order. This practice helps to avoid fraudulent collusion between
vendor and buyers.
Audit purchase orders – periodically audit purchase orders to verify delivery
addresses. This practice detects whether or not employees are having mer-
chandise delivered to their residence or another warehouse.
As with all good prevention programs, vendor fraud and error control
should include tests of controls. Select vendors, on a rotating basis, and check
delivery and billing procedures. Count on-hand merchandise in the vendor’s
Vendor Theft and Error
27

display area and the purchase order pulled for the upcoming delivery. Allow
the delivery person and receiver to go through their regular routine. How-
ever, as the driver is leaving, ask him or her to accompany a manager to
ensure returns are properly credited and delivered items are the quality and
quantity ordered. These checks communicate to employees and vendors alike
that the store is serous about shortage control.
Questions
Name three ways drivers steal.
How do you test to see if a designated receiver is in collusion with drivers?
Retailers commonly overlook theft and error caused by _______.
Name three pieces of information that buyers should include when creating
purchase orders.
How can retailers show employees they are serious about shortage control?
28
Retail Security and Loss Prevention

29
4
Controlling Cargo Theft and 
Supply Chain Loss
During shipping and receiving, merchandise is exceptionally vulnerable to
employee or driver pilferage. According to the American Trucking Association
estimates, dishonest employees account for as much as 70 percent of all cargo
losses. Between $1 billion and $3 billion is lost annually in the transport
phase.1 Thieves may be customers working in collusion with employees or
highway robbers, workers employed by the shipping company, or truck 
drivers. Most theft occurs not in transit, but in freight handling areas.
Disaster Management
In today’s uncertain times, a thorough and well-tested disaster manage-
ment plan is a must for retailers. It begins with an analysis of the types
and frequencies of disasters affecting supply chains. These supply chains
are often very vulnerable, especially in the face of ominous threats such as
terrorism and biowarfare. 
An effective framework for disaster management involves five stages:
Planning, Mitigation, Detection, Response and finally Recovery. A thor-
ough Disaster Management Program goes on to include specific templates
and resources detailing what employees must do in each of these stages.
Technology is a great tool for developing and disseminating a Disaster
Management Plan. Several software packages support the disaster manage-
ment process. 
Shipping
The first step in controlling cargo theft is to ensure that shipping and receiv-
ing take place in different areas. This helps to eliminate confusion as to
whether merchandise is coming or going. Such confusion can lead to mis-
takes or be used to conceal intentional theft. 

The shipping process normally begins when an authorized manager
approves merchandise shipment either from vendor to retailer or from dis-
tribution center to individual store. An unauthorized shipment begins in the
same way. However, in this case, no legitimate order has been placed and the
merchandise may be shipped to a drop-off point the dishonest employee has
selected. The employee then covers up, destroys, or alters invoices and ship-
ping instructions. In fraudulent over-shipments, excess goods are shipped
and subsequently sold by an accomplice at the receiving end.
Predictably, companies that do not investigate or require the return of over
shipped merchandise suffer more of these problems. A strictly controlled order-
ing and invoicing system is critical to reducing the risk of unauthorized ship-
ments. Make sure to number vendor invoices and limit access to the secured
copies to authorized accounting personnel. Also, number products, either indi-
vidually or in crates, in a manner that corresponds to the products recorded
on sales tickets, shipping instructions, and invoices. Auditing and accounting
departments can then cross-reference these numbers against inventory records.
Staging
The process of assembling and packaging merchandise for transit is called
staging. The staging area can easily become crime-prone if management fails
to control employee and customer access, arrange products in an organized
manner, and follow sound inventory control procedures. A disorderly stag-
ing area attracts dishonest employees and customers, who take advantage of
the chaos by walking off with merchandise or concealing it for later removal.
Proper planning and organization can drastically reduce theft during the
staging process. Always assemble and package goods in an area specifically
assigned for that purpose, like a warehouse or packing plant. Never assign
staging to a loading dock or other location where employees and customers
can easily see and access merchandise. Limit access to the staging area to
assigned employees and ensure that the area is guarded by a manager or secu-
rity officer. Require inventory control throughout the staging process. An
effective inventory control system incorporates the following:
1. Give sales or “picking” tickets to an employee who is solely responsible
for pulling the merchandise from stock.
2. Ensure that employee writes the product registration or inventory num-
ber on the sales ticket. Some warehouses attach a removal inventory con-
trol number to every item.
3. When the item is pulled from stock, ensure that the number is removed
from the item and attached to the sales ticket.
4. When the order has been filled, have the employee initial the sales ticket
and pass it on to another employee who checks the merchandise against
the sales ticket, initials the sales ticket, and packages the merchandise.
30
Retail Security and Loss Prevention

5. Have that employee pass the sales ticket to the accounting department,
which records the inventory control numbers in an inventory register.
It is a good idea to rotate the assignment of employees involved in the
assembly and packaging process on a regular basis. Also, be sure to randomly
check all shipments and verify the proper fulfillment of orders.
Loading
Following staging, merchandise is loaded onto trucks for transit. In poorly
controlled operations, this process provides yet another theft opportunity for
dishonest employees and customers, who congregate in the area, concealing
and removing cargo in waiting vehicles. Another common loading dock crime
is short-packaging. Employees divert a truck driver’s attention long enough to
slip packages away from the shipment. The driver then signs the delivery
receipt, acknowledging that he has verified the shipment count. Drivers do
not usually realize that they have been shortchanged until much later, at a
point when he or she is personally responsible for shortages.
The precautions to take in the loading area are similar to those recom-
mended for the staging area. Limit access to the loading area to authorized
personnel and vehicles. Assign one employee the responsibility of oversee-
ing each transaction or shipment. Have that employee initial the delivery
receipt, and verify that the correct merchandise has left the loading dock. If
possible, delegate the oversight of physical merchandise transfer to one
employee, and transaction accuracy to another (preferably a member of
management). Again, be sure to periodically rotate employee assignments.
Also, require that drivers (or whoever picks up merchandise) examine ship-
ments and sign delivery receipts.
Transporting
During the next stage in the cargo process, drivers transport merchandise via
truck or tractor-trailer to the point of delivery. At this point, dishonest activ-
ity includes direct theft from delivery vehicles; the driver’s removal of small,
costly items from a shipment; or pre-planned robbery of the entire truck
contents. 
Before the truck leaves your facility, take these simple precautions to min-
imize the risks of cargo theft. List the truck’s entire contents on a manifest.
Provide copies to the dispatcher, the delivery company (if different), the receiv-
ing store, and the driver. Once the items are loaded and in transit, employ the
following recommendations:
•
Keep merchandise locked and sealed with a high-quality, numbered seal at
all times.
Controlling Cargo Theft and Supply Chain Loss
31

•
Avoid flatbed trucks, which make merchandise too visible and accessible.
•
Lock loaded vehicles that are parked overnight so delivery doors cannot
be opened. Attach a fifth-wheel lock to the trailer hook-up to prevent
unauthorized trucks from hauling the trailer. 
•
Ensure that parking areas are well-lit and, where possible, guarded. Some
large truck stops provide protected areas for a reasonable fee.
•
Avoid parking loaded delivery vehicles in high-risk areas, such as inner
cities.
•
Install alarms in delivery vehicles, particularly in those that must park
overnight when full of merchandise.
•
Whenever possible, coordinate schedules so shipments are made without
overnight stops. 
•
Arrange a truck convoy when shipments require multiple vehicles, or
when several vehicles are traveling in the same direction.
•
Have security agents follow particularly valuable or risky shipments.
•
Place radio and telephone communication devices in delivery vehicles to
facilitate emergency calls.
•
Mark the company’s name and address on all sides of the delivery vehicle
for easy police identification if stolen.
Receiving
Once merchandise reaches the store, require that employees document a
thorough piece count. Some retailers list all items on manifests, while others
list only numbered cartons. In either case, reconcile the shipment and report
both overages and shortages. Periodically ask security officers in central dis-
tribution centers (DCs) to intentionally overstock store shipments. This will
allow you to determine if personnel are reconciling and reporting variances. 
Interstore merchandise transfers also present problems in real and “paper”
shortages. To avoid these, have the central accounting office cross-reference
both sending and destination store paperwork to be sure that all charged mer-
chandise is actually received. Any discrepancies should be resolved within
48 hours.
Questions
What percent of cargo losses can be attributed to cargo loss?
How should over shipped or unauthorized shipments be handled?
What types of crime are prevalent in loading dock areas?
Name three precautions you should take when merchandise is in transit,
loaded on trucks.
How can you avoid “paper” shortages during the receiving stage?
32
Retail Security and Loss Prevention

33
5
Shoplifting
Shoplifting control is critical for all retailers. Dishonest customers must be dis-
rupted and deterred. The first step in the process is understanding the threat
itself. Different types of shoplifters present different challenges. Academics,
law enforcement officials, and LP personnel have been differentiating and
labeling types of shoplifters for decades, if not centuries. Groupings, or typolo-
gies, are based on perception and probably no one is much more accurate
than another. For the purpose of this book, I have chosen to classify shoplifters
into two broad categories, Professional or convert to cash, and Amateur/
Opportunist/self-use, with corresponding subcategories. The reasoning is, by
examining the motives behind a theft or thefts, the methods employed and
the merchandise generally taken, individuals stealing from stores can be gen-
erally categorized. Theft motives do not denote skill level. And some academ-
ics prefer referring to expert and novice shoplifters as a further classification.
Many criminal networks, just like any group, actually have hierarchies. In
other words, the degree of planning, sophistication, skill, and financial gain
realized vary widely. Keep in mind though shoplifters cannot be readily classi-
fied. The difference between one type and another is not a clear one. In fact,
individual shoplifters may cross from one type to another as their motives and
methods change. The point is to look for ways to reduce the negative impact
any type of shoplifter has on your business. Understanding who is stealing
from you, why, and how is an important first step (see Figure 5.1).
Professional or convert to cash shoplifters
Many retail theft experts agree that individuals who steal from retailers in
order to derive all or part of their pay are in the minority. But the percent-
ages of annual theft dollars lost to professional versus amateur shoplifters
have yet to be proven scientifically. Stores that carry items with a high resale
potential (i.e., athletic apparel, cigarettes, razor blades, power tools, meat,
etc.), stores that appear vulnerable, and those with very liberal cash refund
policies are the most desirable for professional shoplifters.

34
Retail Security and Loss Prevention
Figure 5.1
Shoplifter classification matrix

Professionals shoplifters can be broken into at least three subgroups based
on motives, methods, merchandise pilfered, financial impact per “hit” or
theft incident, and the potential for violence. Gypsies and other diversion
groups can also fit into the professional category.
True pro: Like all professionals, the true pro steals to live on the proceeds
gained from selling stolen goods to a fence, online or flea market or return-
ing them back to the retailer for cash refund. The true pro usually derives
much of their income from shoplifting. Many do very well, some reportedly
making over $100,000 a year, tax-free. True professionals are considered
good actors and dress and behave for the most part like legitimate shoppers.
They may work by themselves, but prefer to work in teams of 2–6 people in
order to create low-key diversions and scout for store detectives and non-
security employees. Large purses, foil-lined purses or shopping bags, elastic
girdles, and socks are the preferred receptacles for concealing stolen items.
True pros steal merchandise they know can be readily converted to cash.
Fences often place buy orders to be filled down to sizes, brands, and colors,
etc. For simple steal and refund schemes, high-dollar items are the key. Often
times, the true pro will not even leave a store with the stolen goods. They
simply pick up desirable goods and approach the customer service desk ask-
ing for a refund, credit or exchange. If a receipt is actually required, some
professionals produce counterfeit receipts. True pros may blend in very well
with other customers and may even make legitimate purchases from time to
time. If they are somehow caught, they cab be very adept at convincing retail-
ers of their innocence or readily explained lapse in judgment. Stores fre-
quently visited by true pros may experience heavy dollar losses. The dollar
amount stolen per incident can be very high ($100–2000).
Hardcore pro: This individual derives much of their income from crime of
all types. Drug sales, burglary, robbery, bad checks, vehicle theft, shoplifting,
and even prostitution are common activities. Shoplifting, because of ready
markets, is a very attractive source of ready cash. Cigarettes, fragrances, ath-
letic apparel, auto parts, tools, consumer products, and high demand music,
video, and game disks are examples of frequently targeted merchandise.
Hardcore pros are more likely to have a criminal record, sometimes exten-
sive, and therefore the potential for violence may be high. In addition to
possibly carrying weapons such as straight razors, knives or guns, hard cores
use many of the shoplifting tools mentioned above including the old
standby hollow gift-wrapped boxes with a spring-trap door. They also will
carry plastic garbage bags in their pockets which they pull out and fill with
items. Items are also stuffed into their elastic girdles and pantyhose (males
included). Another popular method employed is known as the hit-and-run,
hit-and-get, or smash-and-grab. In this scenario they generally fill their
hands or bags with merchandise and jog to a waiting getaway vehicle 
Shoplifting
35

(with its license plate removed or covered). Sometimes they actually drive
the vehicle through the front doors or windows, fill-up and flee.
Casual pro: This type of shoplifter may actually be an amateur in transition
to the professional ranks as they begin to live on their earnings. The meth-
ods they use and their potential for violence also mirror those of other types
of professionals. All three types of professional shoplifters combined may
make up a larger percentage of all shoplifters than earlier believed. Certainly
the dollars lost to these individuals are significant.
Another aspect of professional shoplifting that is important is the commu-
nication networks that evolve. Techniques for spotting security, stores that are
easy targets and new ways of stealing are spread throughout communities and
states. Communication between shoplifters is often much better than between
retailers. Even between different stores within a single chain.
Self-use, amateur, or opportunist shoplifters
Numerically, individuals who steal for reasons other than financial gain (pay)
far outweigh those who do. Any customer (almost) at any time may steal mer-
chandise from a retailer if they are struck with some perceived motive and per-
ceived opportunity. This fact makes shoplifting control very, very difficult.
Spotting anyone at anytime is quite a challenge. Figure 5.1 also illustrates the
subcategories listed under the amateur heading. The dollars lost per theft inci-
dent, when compared with professional shoplifters, are generally low.
Primary household shopper (housewife, etc.): This type of shoplifter 
normally steals items not on the household budget and may be male or
female. This offender may occasionally or habitually steal items they prob-
ably cannot afford. Cosmetics, costume jewelry, fancy apparel, deli-meats, and
Christmas gifts are some of the most frequently pilfered items. The Primary
Household Shopper (PHS) also tends to switch price labels or merchandise
containers, again, to reduce the impact on their household spending. The most
common way this type of shoplifter steals is by simply concealing items in
a bag, pocket, or purse. They will also wear or eat unpaid for merchandise.
The negative financial impact the PHS causes per incident is generally low.
Like all self-use or amateur shoplifters, the potential for violence varies with
the individual. Most, when apprehended, do not use force to resist but may
be very emotional. Their reactions range from argumentative to remorse.
Impulsive or opportunistic shoplifter: Just about every retailer has appre-
hended a customer for a theft resulting from a momentary lapse in judg-
ment. This scenario best describes the opportunistic shoplifter, the largest
group of shoplifters. This group is actually demographically your customer
36
Retail Security and Loss Prevention

base, an individual who suddenly (or not so suddenly) perceives a need to
possess something and the opportunity to take it without payment. This
may occur once in an individual’s lifetime. It may also occur repeatedly, or,
hopefully, never. A recent emotional event, impatience at waiting in a
checkout line, reluctance at having an embarrassing item such as condoms
rung up, or the sudden desire to possess a certain item and no way to pay
for it may trigger an impulsive theft. These items are normally concealed in
a pocket, bag, or purse. The dollar amount of individual theft incidents is usu-
ally low, but the year-end total may be staggering. This type of shoplifting
may well pose the greatest challenge for the merchant. They must try and
prevent impulsive theft acts with good customer service and often technol-
ogy such as article surveillance, cabling, and merchandise alarms. Like other
amateurs, their reactions to apprehension are unpredictable.
Juvenile shoplifters: Certain types of stores experience a significant amount
of loss caused by persons under the age of 18. Age appears to be an impor-
tant way of distinguishing between what motivates a young person to steal.
As a general rule, children under the age of eight are presumed to be unable
to form criminal intent. Obviously every child is different. But juveniles,
regardless of their specific age, who are not yet capable of comprehending
the ramification of dishonest activity must be considered separately from
children who can. Very young children simply grab items they want and
must be supervised by an adult. Juveniles who are capable of forming crim-
inal intent may be motivated by peer pressure to actually steal or more fre-
quently to possess a particular item they cannot afford. Minors of all
socio-economic backgrounds are susceptible. Examples of frequently stolen
merchandise include: costume jewelry, auto parts, compact discs or cassette
tapes, cosmetics, or name-brand apparel. Their potential for violence again
depends on the individuals involved in stealing and apprehending. The
financial loss per incident is generally low to moderate.
Psychological: Kleptomania is both rare and misunderstood. How much or
frequently someone steals is less important than what is taken, the eventual
use of stolen items, where the theft occurs, and finally, the capacity of the
subject to recall his or her acts. The theft of apparel, obviously the wrong
size (and not for resale or for someone else), or the theft of a piece of jew-
elry from a friend combined with no recollection of the incident may indi-
cate kleptomania. The per incident and annual financial impact of this type
of shoplifter is believed to be relatively minor. Likewise, the potential for
violence is considered very low.
Again, it is difficult at best to classify shoplifters into neat categories. But by
examining motives, methods, and merchandise, shoplifters can be better con-
trolled. It is an important part of the problem diagnosis stage to understand
Shoplifting
37

the type of threat you are experiencing. Different types of shoplifters recog-
nize and respond differently to protection efforts.
Planning for prevention
Preventing shoplifting in your stores involves the implementation of focused
countermeasures. These countermeasures can take many forms. For the pur-
poses of this book, they are broken down into People, Policies, Programs, and
Systems.
Loss control countermeasures
Retail organizations exist to make a profit. Therefore, when designing risk
control countermeasures, the security specialist should keep several factors
in mind.
Cost-effectiveness: Any loss control program (or part of the program) should
prove cost-effective over a prescribed period of time. The total cost of security
must be kept to the minimal amount required to control losses. Most retailers
express their cost to control shrinkage as a percentage of sales. According to
the 2006 National Retail Security Survey, the average is 47 of annual sales at
retail.
The cost of control can range from almost nothing (loss control procedures)
to moderate cost (employee awareness training programs), to higher cost
(placing EAS systems in distribution centers and all stores). All of these pro-
grams may be cost justified based on the threats a retailer faces, but the pro-
tection specialist should think in terms of least-cost techniques and sound
management principles before recommending sophisticated security hard-
ware be used. These may well come later, particularly for high-loss retailers
in high-risk locations.
Redundancy: The goal of anti-theft measures is to deter criminals. Many
times this means deploying a series of cues. Since nervous, amateur, or
impaired offenders may miss some cues, it is recommended that counter-
measures be put out in depth. The company employee responsible for loss
control should keep in mind systems designed to protect very high-risk
assets should have back-up security systems in case of primary system fail-
ure. For example, perimeter and internal alarm systems should be separated
in case one system fails. Protection fails because likely offenders do not see,
recognize, or respect security measures.
Teamwork: While planning the loss control program, security specialists
should take into account the fact that there may be policies, personnel, 
and equipment inside and outside of their control that must be altered or
eliminated. When possible, these factors must be identified and made a part
38
Retail Security and Loss Prevention

of the action plan and budgeting process. Senior management must be made
aware of the situation, and a teamwork approach taken to resolve these issues.
Working relationships between the loss control department and other depart-
ments must not be hindered.
Both security and management executives should be sensitive to each
other’s goals. Total access to items enhances the tendency to buy them.
However, this practice also creates product vulnerability. Many retailers start
off with a few control procedures and practices, and move toward more con-
trol as losses continue to mount with hot products and locations. It is possi-
ble to work together to accomplish the ultimate goal of increased profitability.
Customer convenience and perception: Whether perceptible or not, the
experience of interior space will alter human behavior, and affect decision-
making. Store planners use store layout and fixture strategies to induce cus-
tomers to buy more of their merchandise. They will place similar products
beside one another, like razors and shaving cream, in order to boost add-on
purchasing. Also, the smart retailer strives to make their customers’ shop-
ping experience a convenient, safe, and pleasant one. As the LP program is
designed, the LP specialist should collaborate with store operations and mer-
chandising to balance opportunities and constraints in configuring security
design elements, creating an environment and program that will defend
against loss. The principles of crime prevention through environmental
design (CPTED) are especially helpful in this goal – site selection, layering
defenses, access control, surveillance, boundary definition will all contribute
to a safe store that decreases crime opportunities and enables employees to
monitor activity.
The appearance of security practices and equipment should also be con-
sidered during the LP program-planning phase. Customer perceptions of
security measures will vary. A few customers will find them reassuring, though
many will never notice them, and a few may consider them offensive, and
still others will be deterred from committing theft because of the practice or
equipment.
Bar coding is an example of a system that decreases the time a customer
spends at the cash register, while enhancing inventory control.
Deterrence: Loss control programs can create one or more outcomes – crime
prevention, disruption, control, detection, investigation, and recovery.
Programs and systems are primarily designed to deter people from stealing
not detect them, although most good prevention systems or programs will do
both. In order to effectively deter some people from stealing, research iden-
tifies four critical factors:
1. Certainty: The higher the certainty that if an individual steals from 
a particular retailer, there exists a high probability of detection and 
Shoplifting
39

apprehension, the more likely most people considering theft will be
deterred. Also this concept may include the certainty that if merchandise is
stolen, it will be rendered useless (benefit denial). New fluid and mechani-
cal tags, when tampered with, stain or break pilfered items for this purpose.
This factor also includes the certainty of punishment.
2. Severity: If caught, the possibility of severe punishment may have some
deterrent effect on certain individuals. However, certainty of capture and
punishment seems to play a larger role than the severity of threatened
punishment.
3. Celerity: The swiftness of both detection and punishment also appears to
help determine the level of deterrence. The quicker someone is caught
and subsequently punished, the better the deterrence realized.
4. Communication: All three of the above factors must not only be maxi-
mized, but clearly communicated to those we wish to deter. In the case
of shoplifting, the retailer must strive to spread the word: “If you steal
from me, you will be caught and quickly punished.”
Labor requirements: Loss control procedures or programs may require an
increase in the labor force or may divert employees’ attention from primary
work functions to loss prevention. These factors must be considered and
planned for. Many protective processes actually reduce labor intensity by
simplifying procedures or by assuming functions formally handled by
employees or outside contract agencies. EAS and intelligent CCTV recording
systems take over some functions that may have been previously provided
by security personnel. They also allow more freedom of display.
Time sensitivity of countermeasures: Many procedures or security systems
become obsolete annually or even monthly because of new technology,
sociological changes, or new court rulings. Therefore, retailers should con-
sider countermeasures timeliness as a part of their program design. A retailer
should not, however, wait indefinitely before implementing needed policies
and equipment.
Testing: A thorough diagnosis of the shoplifting problem leads to focus. The
next step is to field test prescribed solutions. The effectiveness of counter-
measures should be determined by sales and loss rate changes, video ana-
lytics, and offender interviews. The viability and persistence of protective
measures can be gauged by observing and interviewing store employees.
Program manageability: Another factor to be considered during the design
phase, is the ability of executives in charge of the security function and their
staffs to effectively manage the LP program. Before attempting to implement
a costly, sophisticated program, the personnel involved should be carefully
selected and trained. Individuals in supervisory roles must have demonstrated
40
Retail Security and Loss Prevention

technical proficiency and leadership qualities, or the best-designed program
in the world is doomed to minimal effectiveness.
No guarantees: Retailers at all levels should realize that there is no such thing
as an infallible security system. Remember, there are no “silver bullets”!
Incidents will occur and losses will take place (see Figure 5.2). The key is to
prepare for and attempt to reduce adverse incidents, and reduce the nega-
tive effects of previously uncontrolled losses.
Defense in depth: The most effective way to minimize shoplifting loss is 
to lay countermeasures in depth (see Figure 5.3). By placing several physical
and psychological barriers between the threat (our customer) and the asset
(our merchandise) we are able to accumulate delay time. In other words, by
slowing a would-be thief down, the probability of their being discouraged or
detected in-creases rapidly with time.
People
The use of people to control losses is perhaps the most important LP method.
All employees of any retail organization are responsible for controlling profit-
draining loss. However, senior management generally designates one individ-
ual to be responsible for the administration of a loss control program. This
individual may handle security duties in addition to other responsibilities or
as their primary responsibility. Additional full or part-time individuals, whose
main function is security, may be employed by the retailer, or may be provided
by an outside contract agency.
In-house employees
This section provides insight into the most common LP positions held in
retail operations of various sizes and their role in loss control. For the pur-
pose of this book, titles or specific job positions will be used interchange-
ably, since there are many common names for each position.
Vice president/director of asset protection or LP: Every group needs a leader. For
the asset protection department, the director (or the vice president) is
responsible for implementing and managing company loss control func-
tions in larger retail companies. This individual normally reports to the CEO
or high-level vice president to ensure that top decision-makers are kept
abreast of loss control efforts. This reporting level is also important in main-
taining company-wide credibility for the loss control department and its
efforts. Loss control must be viewed as a priority issue by all company
employees.
Building on experience and education, the department leader sets loss
control goals that support the overall corporate goals, and designs the LP
Shoplifting
41

42
Retail Security and Loss Prevention
Figure 5.2
Partial list of factors impacting effectiveness of procedural and/or technological controls

Shoplifting
43
Figure 5.3
Example of defense in depth

program to accomplish these goals. In larger chains, subordinate managers
implement and run the LP program, and the director acts as advisor and
counselor to these subordinates to ensure and enhance the effectiveness of
the program and the managers’ efforts and abilities. To accomplish this, the
director stays abreast of new control techniques and technologies by attend-
ing conferences, reading security journals and books, and exchanging ideas
with peers (networking).
The primary role of the loss control director is to provide the direction and
resources needed for cost-effective security.
Shortage control committees: In an effort to get key company executives
involved in reducing shrinkage, committees are formed at store and corporate
levels to study the problems the company is experiencing, and to ensure that
loss control procedures are implemented, measured, adjusted, and followed.
LP staff: Depending on the size and type of retailer, the security staff can
consist of one employee or hundreds. The staff may include a variety of per-
sonnel who have different responsibilities.
Plainclothes agents: Many retail operations carefully select and employ some
type of in-house loss control specialists. Plainclothes agents can be effective at
curbing losses from shoplifters. It is very important that individuals chosen
for plainclothes agent positions be carefully selected and thoroughly trained.
Each retail operation should have a complete training course set up for all
personnel who are authorized or expected to detect and detain shoplifting
suspects (see Figure 5.4). Different retail organizations have different titles
for store detectives: retail protection specialist, agent, operative, and detec-
tive are the most common. It is important to provide quality, documented
training; ongoing direction and leadership; competitive salary and benefits;
a suitable title; and senior management support of loss control personnel.
This allows the retailer to attract and retain the high-quality personnel
needed to implement and run an effective LP program.
Uniformed guard: Some chains use guards who wear blazers or uniforms and
station them at the front of the store or allow them to patrol in “figure eight”
patterns in order to deter theft and refer to customers. It is recommended that
guards be part of a LP program in some very high-loss situations, but not be
considered a prime theft deterrent.
Fitting room attendant or store monitor: Courteous, alert individuals should be
assigned as fitting room attendants/store monitors whenever possible. Store
monitors can promote goodwill for the company while deterring theft.
Usually, monitors report to the store manager, although they can also be
trained and motivated by LP personnel.
44
Retail Security and Loss Prevention

Shoplifting
45
Figure 5.4
Loss prevention training institute (LPTI)/Basic course (Level 1)

Outsourced personnel
Guards or plainclothes agents: Non-employee personnel may be used to
monitor specific locations during emergency situations such as power fail-
ure and special events (i.e., new store opening, large sale, celebrity visit), or
used on a routine basis as a form of robbery theft deterrent. The retailer
should verify all training claimed by the guard company or police agency
and scrutinize the personnel sent. Ground rules must be established as far as
detention of theft suspects and patrol procedures, since many contract secu-
rity personnel are not qualified to detect and apprehend shoplifters or dis-
honest employees.
Retailers should ask for and contact retail client references of any outside
agency offering security personnel before securing their services. A contract
should also be drawn up and thoroughly re-viewed by the retailer’s corpo-
rate legal counsel before starting the service.
Non-security employees
As previously stated, all employees of the company should be trained to pre-
vent theft and waste. These employees are the key to low shrinkage.
Senior management: The front line of any retail operation provides leadership
and direction to the company in terms of what is to be done and how it
should be done. Senior management also secures competent LP executives,
vets loss control strategies for soundness, and provides financial and man-
power resources. The primary LP role of senior management is to approve,
endorse, and adhere to the security program. An endorsement and follow-
up inspections and questioning by senior management legitimizes the per-
sonnel, procedures, and systems used to reduce shrink-age, and ensures that
asset protection remains a significant priority in the company.
Senior management can also infuse a sense of responsibility for shrinkage
in subordinate managers by holding them accountable for their annual shrink-
age and by reflecting shrinkage results on annual performance reviews, which
also triggers incentive bonuses. But remember, it is difficult to hold anyone
accountable for shrinkage levels in their area of responsibility if a company’s
inventory counts are sporadic or poorly conducted, or if store managers have
not been trained in loss prevention. Sound management that pays attention
to detail and motivates employees can simultaneously increase sales while
reducing losses.
Regional/district operations manager: In medium to large size retail chains, this
individual implements corporate procedural and merchandising policies in
the field, as well as supervises store managers. District managers influence the
priorities of their store managers. For example, if clean floors and realigned
display fixtures are stressed by the district manager during a store visit, these
elements become a priority, sometimes at the expense of other operations.
Therefore, district managers can help control shrinkage by continually
46
Retail Security and Loss Prevention

stressing the need for LP measures at the store level as well as supporting
their counterparts (the loss control district managers) in their activities.
District-level operations, and loss control and human resource representa-
tives can form a triad by keeping each other informed of their activities and
presenting an organized, unified front. This team approach helps ensure all
company priorities are addressed and objectives are achieved.
Store manager: Store managers set the tone of operation in their stores. What-
ever store managers stress, praise, and hold accountable to become impor-
tant to their employees. If an employee detects a price switch, for example,
the manager should compliment the individual. Loss control specialists
assigned to stores must work in concert with all store employees. The store
manager and loss control specialist on duty should check in with each other
periodically and compliment the actions of one another. Safety and security
are at stake and those issues far outweigh any petty differences that may
exist. Store managers are responsible for their stores and their actions should
be respected. Similarly store managers should foster a mutual professional
respect between LP and store operations personnel as both of these sources
play an important part in boosting company profitability.
Store managers often receive bonuses based on quarterly results of their
efforts. Profitability and shrinkage figures should be part of the requirement
to receive an incentive bonus. If the store has tremendous sales figures but
horrendous shrinkage, the company may not be making a profit. The shrink-
age goals that are set must be achievable and store managers must be able to
honestly and incrementally reduce their shrinkage or the concept of reward
has little value.
Store/DC employees: While store detectives are the security department’s first
line of defense against shoplifting, store and DC employees are the company’s
first line of defense against theft and waste. As a group, store employees play
the largest role of all in day-to-day control of losses. These individuals must
be trained to recognize and report loss situations and rewarded by their super-
visors. Store and DC staff should coordinate their efforts to increase supply
chain efficiency while reducing errors and theft losses.
Miscellaneous company employees: Regardless of the size of the corporation, all
employees from buyers to corporate office staff should be made aware of loss
threats that exist within their span of control and be told what they can do
to deter these threats. However, store managers and their associates are
the key to shoplifting control.
Programs and procedures
This section highlights some programs retailers can implement as part of
their loss control plan. As with personnel and systems approaches to loss
Shoplifting
47

control, programs must be selected on a priority basis and tailored to the
specific needs of each retail organization.
Retailers should realize that their employees need direction and guidance.
Standard operating procedures provide their managers, who are often isolated
and thousands of miles from their supervisors, with a handy reference to
guide their actions. The difference in having well-planned procedures versus
being unprepared could impact the future of the business.
Programs designed to control losses can be categorized as policies, proce-
dures, training, and follow-up.
Loss control policies
Retailers can study loss control policies that have proven successful in other
retail chains and design a similar policy based on the particular circum-
stances of their operation. These policies should have specific objectives,
such as to control access, require supervisory verification of certain trans-
actions, to raise risk of detection require that shoplifters be prosecuted, etc.
A policy tells employees where the company stands on specific issues and
what the company will do if the policy is disregarded. All policies should be
fair, consistent, and documented. Assemble a policy manual and distribute
copies to all stores and department heads. Review and update these policies
periodically.
Examples of recommended policies
Non-disclosure of proprietary information – the information that is not to be
disclosed to anyone, unless specifically authorized.
Conflict-of-interest statements – the company’s positions on outside employ-
ment and business with vendors.
Alcohol and substance abuse – a policy for screening, detecting and treating
employees with abuse problems.
Expense accounts – accepted business expenses and established expenditure
limits.
Contact with the press – restrictions on making public statements regarding
company activities.
Ethics – accepted and unaccepted ethical behavior.
Employee pre-employment screening – established criteria the applicant must
meet prior to being hired by position.
Apprehension, detention, and disposition of dishonest employees and shoplifters –
the company’s stance on the detection and handling of theft suspects,
including criminal prosecution, termination of employment, and civil
action.
Evacuation of premises – criteria that must be met prior to ordering an evac-
uation of the premises and those individuals authorized to order such
actions.
48
Retail Security and Loss Prevention

Auditing payables – importance of periodic audits of accounts payable 
activity.
Loss control procedures
Security procedures build on the stated company policies by telling employ-
ees how to carry out the policies. Like policies, procedures should be researched
and tested before chain-wide implementation. They also should be included
in the Operating Procedures Manual along with their corresponding poli-
cies. Some of the more common loss control procedures are discussed in the
following pages.
Procedural controls
Procedural controls for cash handling, merchandise handling, paperwork rout-
ing, and safety are designed to limit risks by limiting access or vulnerability.
Merchandise controls
Reduce loss of merchandise at distribution centers and stores. Distribution
center controls include separating, receiving, and shipping areas, verifying
purchase orders, separating items, hanging items, EAS tagging, store distri-
bution assignment, protective packaging, and secure shipment of high-risk
items. Store controls include receiving, individual item or carton count vari-
ances, processing, display techniques, fast-track shelf stocking, secure storage
of high-loss or high-risk items, protection from elements, return-to-vendor
procedures, damaged merchandise log-in and disposal, clerk check-out of
merchandise or containers, and employee package checks.
Situational or information procedures
These procedures provide guidance to employees at all levels and includes
the following:
Shoplifting
This procedure dictates the criteria an employee needs to satisfy in order to
detain a shoplifting suspect and explains the steps to follow in processing
the case. To help avoid costly legal claims, this policy and procedure should
be well-designed, and employees should be thoroughly trained in following
this procedure.
Protection programs
Programs designed to control losses are an extension of established policies
and procedures. For the purpose of this book, programs are broken down
into three categories based on the objective of the program – deterrence,
detection, and recovery.
Shoplifting
49

Deterrence programs
Deterrence programs are primarily designed to prevent theft by discouraging
criminal activity, making theft less profitable, and more difficult and risky.
New store/site selection
The place to start when designing a loss control program is the site of a new
store or other facility. Whether the new location is to be built from the
ground up or remodeled from an existing structure, the security of company
assets must be considered from the start of the planning cycle. Many factors
are considered when new store sites are being evaluated include
•
Demographics (i.e., number of target customers in the area)
•
Visibility of the location
•
Accessibility of the site
•
“Anchor” or other stores in the same center if the site is located in malls
or strip centers
•
Available support services
•
Expenses per square foot
•
Available advertising support
•
Area crime patterns
Crime potential based on crime levels and accessibility to the store site is the
primary concern of the LP specialist when evaluating a new site. A security
employee should conduct a survey of the area and gather input from other
area merchants and law enforcement agencies regarding past and projected
criminal activity in the proposed site area. Services such as Cap Index pro-
vide formulaic crime indexes that might help predict crime risk. The likeli-
hood of crime in the area may not cause a particular site to be abandoned,
but the information allows the company to plan and budget for appropriate
asset protection efforts.
Store environmental design
Just as stores are laid out to positively influence the customer’s buying
behavior, display fixtures and walls can be designed to discourage pilferage
and theft by creating physical and psychological barriers, and surveillance
opportunities.
The environmental design and physical layout of individual stores can
impact the behavior of the retail shopper. Markin and co-workers noted,
The retail store is a bundle of cues, messages and suggestions which com-
municate to shoppers. The retail store is not an exact parallel to the skin-
ner box, but it does create mood, activate intentions, and generally affect
customer reactions.1
50
Retail Security and Loss Prevention

Environmental cues that say “do not steal,” “we see you”, or “buy this” are
not necessarily mutually exclusive. Store planners can place interior walls
and merchandise display fixtures in patterns that can accomplish the dual
goals of increased merchandise visibility and protection. The goal of the
environmental design concept is to minimize the opportunity to commit a
crime in two ways. The first technique involves blocking access to specific
areas or merchandise with physical barriers, such as cash registers, walls, dis-
play fixtures, locked doors, and merchandise tie-downs. Psychological barri-
ers, such as “Employees Only” signs, also serve to discourage unauthorized
personnel from entering into sensitive areas.
The second design technique, surveillance opportunity, opens up displays
of high-risk merchandise to better observation by store employees and/or
larger groups of customers. For example, by removing the large signs or 
6-foot high merchandise fixtures from blocking the view of employees at
POS locations, the chances of a potential shoplifter being spotted or deterred
increase. Also, channeling the flow of customers near potential crime areas
that have walkways is a form of a surveillance opportunity design tech-
nique. Other examples of crime control using environmental design include
the following:
•
Eliminate blind spots by rearranging racks or by installing CCTV, domes,
or mirrors.
•
Place high-risk merchandise displays near employee work areas and away
from exits.
•
Keep aisles containing tall merchandise fixtures straight and wide enough
to allow full observation.
•
Use focused lighting to highlight problem areas.
•
Fit emergency exits with audible-sounding, observable, panic alarms to
discourage shoplifters from using them as covert exit points.
•
Limit the number of customer exits and entrances and control them by
fire marshal approved turnstiles, protect them by EAS sensors, and mon-
itor them by POS stations whenever possible.
•
Install covert surveillance areas in walls, ceilings, or pillars where store per-
sonnel are able to survey the sales floor and use two-way mirrors, false air-
conditioning vents and peepholes. Design receiving and stockroom areas
to eliminate hiding places and provide clear observation of the work area
to prevent dishonest activity.
•
Ensure the exterior of the building and parking areas are well-lighted,
fenced-off from potential problem areas (such as teen hang-outs, liquor
stores, and bars), and readily observable from inside the store.
Control procedures
As mentioned earlier, control procedures may be considered a program. This
type of program may, in fact, be one of the least expensive, since there is
Shoplifting
51

generally no capital requirement. This format reinforces the fact that loss
prevention should be practiced every day.
Employee awareness
The message employees need to hear may change slightly, but the intended
call to action remains consistent: Recognize and report causes of loss. In order
to get the majority of company employees on the team, and keep them there,
design the awareness activity as a system, not a program (see Figure 5.5).
Identify and prioritize loss risks
Many companies roll out their awareness campaign somewhere between
steps 3 and 4 of our system. Mass produced, clip-art posters are slapped up in
break rooms, slogans are printed on coffee mugs and groups of employees
“celebrate” their awareness of shrinkage in small meetings company-wide.
All of these practices are acceptable, in fact recommended. However, the
most important part of the program – step 1 – is missing. Time, energy, and
expense can be more efficiently expended if the shrink reduction program is
focused on the company’s high-priority problems initially. Every company,
and every store or department within a company, has its own set of prob-
lems. The primary security decision maker in each company must take a step
back and view the retail operation as a continuum. It is at this point that cer-
tain questions are posed: Where are we losing our cash, our information, our
merchandise (assets to be protected)? Is most of it lost from the distribution
center, in transport, from the stores (vulnerabilities)? Who’s causing our
losses: employees, customers, vendors (identify the threats)? How well is our
current protection program working (state of current security)?
Observe and interview employees, review past incident reports and con-
duct audits. Areas of the company creating the most significant financial
losses will be determined. As a general rule, approximately 20 percent of your
stores, 20 percent of employees, 20 percent of the merchandise mix, etc., will
present 80 percent of corporate losses. The analysis of a thorough vulnera-
bility survey should reveal high-priority loss areas. These are the targets of
our focused awareness system.
Put it together
The message to be delivered to targeted employees and how to best deliver it
are the objectives of this phase. All employees must know how to recognize
and report causes of loss. Printed material, video training kits, public address
messages, and employee meetings are examples of the mediums available.
As the program is built and costed, delivery schedules and all involved
personnel must be identified. Those involved may include non-security per-
sonnel such as managers as well as outside vendors if they are selected to help
design and/or deliver at least part of the shortage control message. The key is
52
Retail Security and Loss Prevention

Shoplifting
53
Figure 5.5
The focused employee awareness system

to take the time to put together a total system and clearly identify what roles
are to be played and when. Nobody should be surprised later by actual costs
or the expectation of their personal involvement. Be realistic. Do not under-
estimate the amount of time and effort required to implement and manage
an effective awareness program.
Commitment starts at the top
Senior management must be thoroughly briefed and involved. Nothing
adds credibility to LP awareness faster than a sincere plea from the CEO.
Periodic interest on the part of these same executives throughout the year
help keep it going. It is these same executives that must also approve the
program’s funding. They deserve a brief, but complete, explanation.
Spread the word
Most agree, employees must be given the message. What the message is was
decided in Step 2. Now we must execute the training plan.
Interactive workshops of varying length are recommended. All attendees at
these seminars should be encouraged to provide their thoughts and ask ques-
tions. Involvement insures greater retention and commitment. The duration
of individual meetings may depend (and should) on the work flow in stores
and distribution centers. Efficiency is today’s business byword. Extra hours,
taken away from normal duties, to attend workshops on any topic are rare,
almost a luxury. Forty-five minutes is the average duration of most work-
shops. Owing to short time frames, limit topics discussed (i.e., employee
theft, safety, shoplifting detection and reaction, etc.) to one per meeting.
If possible, include 10 minute video presentations in each workshop given.
The professional quality of videos tends to grab the attention of attendees.
In order to hold their attention, videos should be fast-paced, well written,
and realistically acted. Bad or slow moving productions have minimal effect.
They may even reduce company credibility if they are too bad!
Another very important component of this phase is consistency. All trainers
should themselves be trained and then observed during a mock presenta-
tion. Remember, any workshop should educate and entertain. Good material
poorly presented has limited impact. Good trainers increase the positive effect
and ultimately the success of the program.
Repeat and reinforce
Employee awareness is or should be a self-perpetuating process. Training work-
shops should continue. Employee turnover is a fact of retail and requires extra
effort to be considered the norm. Because sales events such as back-to-school,
summer vacation, and winter holidays drive store staffing levels, printed mate-
rials such as: posters, brochures, paycheck stuffers, etc., keep the LP message
before current employees. These messages include new and expanded infor-
mation in addition to initial workshop material. The point is to insure that
54
Retail Security and Loss Prevention

employees see (and understand) the security message. Remember, loss pre-
vention is “competing” with messages from sales, operations and human
resources, just to name a few.
Just as workshops and videos should clearly and professionally deliver infor-
mation, so should reinforcement material. Make it look good. Presentation
is a key to marketing any medium.
Call to action
Understanding loss problems is important. So is understanding how to rec-
ognize problems. But the point is to get our target audience (employees) to act.
Clean up spilled water that could cause a customer to fall, report an employee
giving away merchandise to friends, or call for a price check when it appears
a price sticker has been tampered with. If at least some of our employees are
deterring potential losses, company-wide, consistently, we have won the bat-
tle. Shrinkage levels will come down.
This phase of the awareness system strives to elicit the desired response
from employees (action or reaction). Some companies use hotlines, others
mail-in cards. The goal is two-way communication. Employees talking to
supervisors, up and down the chain of command. Data released from the
National Retail Security Survey indicates most retailers now use some form
of employee hotline for this reason.
Because a manager may become involved in inappropriate behavior or 
an employee wishing to report a major problem may have committed some
“minor” policy violation (such as giving an unauthorized employee dis-
count), some form of anonymous reporting should be provided. All employ-
ees must know how to access these reporting programs. Wallet cards, stickers,
and posters give reporting instructions a high profile. High-profile messages
also work as a deterrent to the employee population as a whole. Anyone, at
any given time, may exercise their concern and report a problem.
It is your job yes, but thanks
Corporate executives receive bonuses for achieving goals. Workers in coun-
tries struggling to cast off the yoke of communism never did. And shrinkage
goals can be met if all employees make it a priority. The carrot-and-stick
approach appears to be the best way to reach desired goals. The initial sur-
vey (Phase 1) focused the awareness program; the second phase saw the pro-
gram developed; and steps three through five put it in motion. Phase six
insures that people take it seriously. They will know the company is serious
about loss reduction when goals are backed up with an appropriate reward.
When employees are recognized for inspired efforts as well as results, they
will continue to perform. Loss control must remain a priority. It does not
take long before many programs begin to fizzle. Employees and security pro-
gram managers tire of just being excited about loss prevention. To sustain
program success, recognize and reward employees.
Shoplifting
55

Store managers should acknowledge desired LP behavior both directly 
to the involved employee, and to that employee’s peers (one exception is
the confidential reporting of deviance on the part of a fellow employee).
Newsletters, store meetings, and special ribbons for a name badge are all
excellent ways to highlight team players publicly.
Reward can also take different forms. Some companies give cash awards or
gift certificates. Both can by very expensive, but very effective. Several com-
panies have decided NOT to give cash, gift certificates, or their own store
merchandise. If one employee was rewarded for acting to prevent loss and
was given a substantial reward, another person who felt likewise entitled, yet
slighted, may simply take something from the store to make up for it.
These companies use a system that allows them to issue bonus points.
Employees can accumulate points during a calendar year that must be
redeemed by March 31st of the following year. These points are applied to
items in a prize catalog, much like a sales incentive program. A simple two-
part form is completed by an authorized manager or LP staff member. 
The number of points awarded is based on whether the employee assisted in
a recovery, deterrence, or actual apprehension. The employee is issued a check
for those bonus points which can be saved or redeemed at will. The average
award totals just $7.00. For less than $10, these companies achieve as much
impact as $100 in cash. However, any reward system is better than no reward
system. Companies should look at a variety of reward options.
Again, the point is to keep the majority of employees on board watching,
reacting, and reporting problems. Keeping profit draining losses to a bare
minimum.
Check it and fix it
Like any program, the focused awareness system should be periodically
audited. Program managers and targeted employees should be asked for their
perceptions. Are they more aware of loss causes and solutions now than
before? Is the program operating as designed? Are problems being reported?
Also, reported incident trends, shrinkage levels, and dollars recovered
should be compared to previous years. Conclusions should not be jumped
to! Any program needs to be given a chance. By the same token, just having
a program, any program, is not the goal. Reduced loss is the goal. An annual
objective review should clearly indicate where changes are best made.
Summary
Employee awareness programs are vital to reducing loss in any type of com-
pany. To be most effective, however, they should address the most significant
problems first. To gain the most bang for the buck, the message and how it
is presented should be clear and consistent. Professional programs, whether
designed and presented in-house or partially or completely outsourced are
56
Retail Security and Loss Prevention

financially possible for any company. Amateur productions are fine if they
do not come off as such.
Public awareness campaigns
In many states, retailers band together to form retail associations to further
their common interests. One program often promoted by these associations
is a public awareness campaign aimed at making the negative result of a
shoplifting arrest a high-visibility issue. Local law enforcement agencies also
contribute to this effort by holding discussions with local groups, such as
school children in all grades.
Shoplifter education programs
Many businesses and communities are utilizing shoplifter education pro-
grams. These courses are either self-study or group sessions that criminal
court systems refer first time offenders to. By making shoplifters aware of the
varied consequences of their theft, these courses attempt to reduce the like-
lihood an offender will repeat their crime. Ongoing research is being con-
ducted to determine the long term effectiveness of diversion programs.
Detection programs
Detection programs are implemented to detect theft, indications of theft, or
vulnerabilities to theft. Prominent examples of this type of program include
exception reports, auditing, and store agent patrol.
Store agent patrol
By using plainclothes LP specialists to supplement technology, retailers will
detect shoplifters who previously went unnoticed. The use of store detec-
tives is generally considered a reactive measure, but may actually be the ulti-
mate form of deterrence, since it is difficult to steal while in the custody of
store agents or police authorities. Any agents used by retailers should be
carefully selected and thoroughly trained.
Recovery program
Prevention of loss is the key to any loss control program, but the following
programs allow retailers to recoup some of their losses. The following three
programs are effective recovery programs.
1. Civil action: When retailers fall victim to theft, they may take tort action
against offenders in an attempt to recover lost assets in the form of dam-
ages. By using civil demand, retailers can help offset some of their losses
and security costs.
2. Insurance: By adequately covering risk areas with insurance policies, retail-
ers may be able to lessen the damage they sustain from theft and disaster.
Shoplifting
57

3. Tax write-offs: State and federal tax laws allow deductions for many types
of losses incurred by retail chains.
Fitting/dressing room control
Many apparel retail stores have fitting/dressing rooms in their stores. These
areas provide shoplifters with ideal locations to steal unless some type of
control is established. Dressing room control procedures provide retailers
with a tremendous opportunity to prevent thefts. A good dressing room
control program should ensure that either an employee is assigned to the
dressing room area on a full-time basis or that salespeople escort customers
to the dressing rooms. Limit the amount of items permitted in a dressing
room to eight per person. Provide the customer with a pre-numbered tag
that correspond to the number of hangers being taken into the dressing
room. The retailer may also use plastic tags that have a specific number of
notches on them that correspond to the number of hangers being taken into
the room. Control of these tags is very important. Keep a logbook or post a
display board out of the customer’s reach to track merchandise flow to and
from specific dressing rooms. Be aware that shoplifters may steal #0, #1, or
#2 tags for later use. A typical shoplifting scenario at a dressing room may
be one in which the subject takes eight garments and a #8 tag into the room.
Once inside the room, the subject conceals the #8 tag, hides seven items,
and exits with one item and a #1 tag that was previously stolen.
Clerks assigned to the dressing room area can prevent losses while increas-
ing sales. While checking customers into the dressing room, the clerk can
make positive comments about the customer’s taste in garments and can
suggest additional sales. Smart managers put their best sales people in the
dressing room area. Clerks in this area are often the first employee the pub-
lic sees and this is the retailer’s chance to make a good impression. (Special
note: Employees should not peer into private areas such as restroom stalls or
fitting areas.)
Security systems and products
Employees are the single most effective tool retailers have to reduce shoplift-
ing losses. Store layout affects consumer and offender behavior alike, and
can lend support to asset protection efforts. However, when retail companies
reduce in-store staffing to a bare minimum, technology and products must
fill the gap. Another key point, store staffs are steadily being reduced. Properly
used, LP technology may ultimately make the difference between high and
low shrinkage in most companies if not all. Because most security systems
can be capitalized, they are often times very affordable.
Product packaging – The loss of “hot” or frequently-stolen products, can be
partially explained by the theft triangle and CRAVED (Concealable,
Removable, Available, Valuable, Enjoyable, and Disposable) model; that is,
58
Retail Security and Loss Prevention

when highly desirable items are small enough to be easily concealed, (espe-
cially in high quantities) their theft attractiveness multiplies. Larger packag-
ing designs make concealment more difficult, while certain plastics make
packaging removal difficult and noisy.
Display fixtures – Protective fixtures can minimize theft losses by reducing
quick access to high-risk products while increasing the probability of
offender detection. Fixtures that require customers to use two hands to
access an item; only allow access to a single item at a time; or create an audi-
ble, attention-getting noise can deter some types of shoplifting. Only very
high-loss items should receive the latter, since the frequent sounding of
such a noise will desensitize employees to it, thus minimizing its attention-
getting qualities. Keep in mind all fixtures should be easy to load and 
operate.
Miscellaneous security systems – Merchandise alarms are hooked up to
high-cost/high-loss merchandise (such as electronics). This alarm sounds
when the circuit is broken by a shoplifter taking the protected item from its
display case.
Article surveillance (AS)
The purpose of article surveillance technologies is to prevent theft activity by
creating or elevating deterrence. Electronic detection devices (or Electronic
article surveillance) deter theft by increasing the certainty that attempted
theft of tagged merchandise will be detected (and responded to by staff).
Usually when tagged merchandise passes the system’s antenna, an audible
alarm or announcement is sounded (see Figure 5.6). To gain maximum ben-
efit from electronic detection systems, the following steps are recommended:
1. Identify very high-loss/risk merchandise for tagging.
2. If store layout, regular item counting and tracking, and customer service
enhancements are not providing adequate protection, consider protec-
tive technologies.
3. Design and follow a tagging plan: include items to be tagged, by whom
and how different types of merchandise are to be tagged.
4. Set up and follow a system test schedule. The equipment must work.
5. Implement an alarm response policy including who and how to respond,
as well as incident documentation procedures.
6. An EAS/EDD training program for all of the above. This program must
take into account constant turnover.
7. Audit and adjust your AS at least quarterly.
To deter thieves, EAS must be both obvious and credible. Pedestals display
fixtures and symbols on products, letting would-be offenders know a product
Shoplifting
59

60
Retail Security and Loss Prevention
Figure 5.6
Article surveillance operating characteristics

is protected. Credibility comes from alarm activation response, and the
understanding that if the alarm is sounded, employees will react swiftly.
Benefit denial devices (BDDs) deter theft by devaluing stolen merchandise
and increasing the certainty that merchandise will provide no benefit 
(i.e., personal use or resell value) since BDDs when tampered with, damage
or destroy the protected merchandise.
All EAS and BDD tag detachers should be secured and numerically serial-
ized to prevent or discourage their theft.
The following questions should be asked by any retailer investigating AS
systems:
•
What technology is used?
•
What is the actual field detection or pick rate?
•
What is the non-theft alarm rate and what causes it (i.e., live tags from
other stores, staff failure to deactivate tags, system malfunction)?
•
What types of tags are available?
•
How can the system be defeated?
•
How close to the alarmed exit can tagged merchandise be placed?
•
What are the real total annual costs (e.g., installation, replacement tags,
training, maintenance, warranties)?
•
What is the system’s reputation? – Give references (at least three)
•
What are the applicable state laws regarding EAS alarm detection and
detention?
The cost of AS systems can be expensive, but can prove effective. However,
the effectiveness of AS systems diminishes as time goes by if store employ-
ees fail to tag articles or react to alarms or use other prevention methods. No
technology can stand on its own. It must be supplemented with human sur-
veillance and follow-up. In order for any AS system to prove cost-effective
over the long-term, senior management and store management must
endorse its use and ensure that it is properly used. Employees must be
trained in AS system use and properly supervised to add credibility to the
system. All targeted goods must be kept tagged and alarm situations must be
responded to.
CCTV
More and more retailers are using CCTV to prevent, detect, and document
theft activity in their stores and distribution centers. In a back-up role,
CCTV can record slip-and-falls, abductions, purse-snatching, as well as ver-
ify fire, burglar, and robbery alarms, or other access control systems.
CCTV can be installed outside to observe parking lots and alleys, and
installed inside to watch high-loss or unauthorized areas. Camera installa-
tion can be temporary or permanent. Smoked-glass panels or domes may be
permanently installed and a camera may be swiftly installed when needed.
Shoplifting
61

Infrared, pixel-change, and other sensors detect movement and trigger the
DVR/VCR to turn on and record the target area.
Prominent display of the camera or dome is important to achieving deter-
rence. A large dome, sign, feedback monitor, or flashing red diode are exam-
ples of highlighting techniques.
When placing CCTV cameras in stores in an attempt to deter crime, it is
important to realize that some offenders may not recognize very small cam-
eras or domes, thus compromising their effectiveness. Likewise, the perva-
siveness of simulated CCTV cameras may negate their deterrent effect.
Cameras can be equipped with a variety of lenses including zoom, split-
image, night vision, covert (pin hole), right angle, and fixed focal length.
The lens used depends on the area or spot to be monitored, the distance to
the target and the environmental conditions.
Time-lapse DVRs allow the retailer to record significant activity. If a dis-
honest act is believed to have occurred, the investigator can quickly review
the data. It is possible to produce instant still photos from CCTV video as well.
Date/time generators (DTG) display the current date and time on the screen
and can be used as evidence in criminal or civil trial proceedings. Some sys-
tems also display transaction data and can be programmed to record trans-
actions of certain types or rung by selected employees.
The following questions should be asked when selecting and installing a
CCTV system:
•
Is a color or black- and-white television required?
•
What type of lens is required?
•
What type and size of monitor is desired?
•
What type of VCR is needed?
•
How should the camera be mounted and where?
•
What will the light level be during the surveillance?
•
Who will monitor the system and how often? What will the labor cost be?
•
How will suspicious incidents be responded to?
Evolving CCTV technologies allow retailers to automatically track individ-
uals across multiple cameras, quickly retrieve a suspect’s activity from data
storage, as well as alert staff to pre-programmed suspicious behaviors such as
shelf sweeping – the rapid removal of multiple high-risk items.
Article security
Article surveillance deters theft by increasing the certainty of detection, with
little or no increase in employee labor intensity. Article security reduces loss
by restricting unauthorized access to high-risk merchandise. This restriction
(sometimes called “sales prevention”) inconveniences customers but may be
required due to high losses, poor display visibility, and/ or inability to afford
other protection in high-loss stores.
62
Retail Security and Loss Prevention

Secure merchandise displays and tie-downs: High-risk merchandise, such as jew-
elry or handguns, should be kept in secure display cases. High-risk apparel,
such as fur coats, leather jackets and men’s suits, kept on display fixtures
require a clerk to access them. While this can be very inconvenient, it should
save a tremendous amount of merchandise from unauthorized removal. Also,
high-loss electronics and luggage can be tied down with metal cables to dis-
courage easy grab-and-run thefts. “Dummy” or customer service cards and
tickets can also be used to restrict customer access to high-theft merchandise
in hot stores.
Other LP systems: A combination of article surveillance and article security
involves oversized plastic cassette tape cases or apparel tags which include
EAS tags designed to alarm when tampered with.
Bar coding: Bar coding allows a retailer to quickly receive, distribute, and
ring-up merchandise. This technology makes price-switching and under-
ringing more difficult and can be combined with other technologies, such
as inventory trackers, price look-up and EAS systems. Electronic price codes
(EPC) based on microchips and RFID technology provide inventory man-
agement as well as some asset protection benefits.
Lighting systems: Designed to highlight merchandise the retailer wants fea-
tured, lighting systems can also be used to discourage shoplifting by over
illuminating areas a shoplifter would normally use as a concealment area.
Colored signs: Since the beginning of time, different colors have symbolized
different meanings. Red and black denote authority or signal the unknown.
According to researchers Farrell and Ferrara, an example of the use of colors
to discourage shoplifting is the placement of a stop sign in a high-loss area.
Researchers Farrell and Ferrara, in their book, Shoplifting: The Anti-Shoplifting
Guidebook, suggest some of the following unproven techniques to discour-
age shoplifting and employee theft:
•
Distribute anti-theft pamphlets in the store or mall.
•
Paint or display an eye or poster of an individual looking at customers to
psychologically deter theft.
•
Use intermittent, low sounds to put the potential shoplifter off balance.
•
Display “Thou Shall Not Steal” buttons or stickers at point-of-purchase
areas for sale.
•
Display album covers of the rock group Police.
•
Display a book with the word shoplifter in the title or display a bible.
Visual deterrents: Some retailers find that in some instances, displaying like-
nesses of police officers or security agents tend to discourage shoplifting
Shoplifting
63

activity. Life-sized cardboard cutouts or holographic projections are two
methods used to display these images or disrupt shoplifters. This practice is
intended to remind potential shoplifters of the consequences of theft. Be
alert to complaints by honest customers. In some cases, these cutouts are
actually stolen for souvenirs.
Product marking: Stickers, messages, and other messages on packaging are
sometimes used by retailers to let potential thieves and product handlers
know who the original, legitimate buyer/seller of the product was. Some
product marking includes messages asking purchasers to call a toll-free
number and report if they found the product in a location other than the
one marked.
Identification dye sprays and marking pens: Use inks that are normally invisi-
ble, but illuminate under ultraviolet or “black” lights to mark merchandise
or documents as belonging to a specific owner.
Surveillance aids (mirrors and observation towers): Surveillance aids increase the
retailer’s ability to survey the sales floor for shoplifters. Mirrors can assist an
employee in viewing merchandise or aisles, but may also be used by the
shoplifter to look for monitor employees. Many retailers build observation
towers in storage rooms, which enable store agents to observe sections of the
sales floor from concealed positions. The observation opening may be an air
conditioning vent or one-way mirror. These towers can increase the shoplift-
ing detection rate, but the agent temporarily loses sight of the perpetrator
while climbing out of the tower and “bad stops” may result. Towers are best
used (as is CCTV) with two agents who operate with 2-way portable radios
to avoid loss-of-sight incidents. Also, many true professional shoplifters real-
ize observation towers and mirrors are seldom used.
Counterfeit refunds
Shoplifters use insurance quote machines and personal computers to duplicate
receipts. By counterfeiting receipts, they are able to return stolen merchandise
for refund or claim unpaid-for merchandise at Customer Pick-Up areas. Multi-
colored POS ribbon with non-reproducible blue ink and custom ink color
mixes allow receipts to be printed that are more difficult to counterfeit.
Handling the shoplifter
Here, the handling of shoplifters has been broken down into seven steps 
(see Figure 5.7). It can be important to properly spot shoplifters and to take
action if so desired. Prevention of theft is the key to reducing annual losses.
However, some offenders will not be deterred, and a retailer may decide to take
action. The proper handling of shoplifters be actually a form of prevention,
64
Retail Security and Loss Prevention

Shoplifting
65
Figure 5.7
Handling the shoplifter: A phased approach

albeit the least desirable. Shoplifters should realize your company is serious
about controlling the problem. The next seven steps provide state information
on various options available. Always keep in mind the potential for violence
as well as the civil liability involved in customer theft detentions.
Step 1: Detection of possible shoplifters
This is where it all begins. Regardless of the retailer’s individual policies con-
doning the detention of suspected shoplifters or not, store employees should
understand how to spot shoplifters.
Behavioral cues: Most individuals, when committing a dishonest act such as
stealing, are under stress. They also must take possession of the desired item
and then carry, conceal, consume, or wear the item. All the while, they are
probably watching for individuals who may try to stop them. Shop theft
requires that thieves remove, conceal, and exit the store with goods. This
creates detectable behavioral cues – actions may indicate a person is about
to steal, is currently stealing or has recently stolen. Some examples
•
Most customers hold merchandise up with their hands and look it over.
They are often noting the style or look of the item, its price and the qual-
ity. Shoplifters may not pay as close attention to the product, and spend
more time looking for store employees or security. This activity is called
“scoping”.
•
Also, a shoplifter’s hands are often down concealing or tampering with
the merchandise, not up examining it.
Look for individuals who
•
Remain in corners, especially where they are hidden from view by displays.
•
Have “phony” or whispered conversations with a companion.
•
Seem nervous, turn red, light a cigarette, or constantly glance about,
watching salespeople and customers.
•
Move quickly around the store.
•
Look at merchandise, replace it, then begin pacing and scoping.
•
Refuse sales help and avoid salespeople and other customers.
•
Avoid the front of the store and stay along the back of the store.
•
Select merchandise quickly, without carefully choosing what they want.
•
Stand unusually close to displays, or at odd angles.
•
Move merchandise to the back of the store or to a more concealed display
rack.
•
These are just a few examples of actions that may indicate dishonest
activity.
Reactions: Because most shoplifters are under stress through-out their theft
sequence, they generally react in a more pronounced way to certain outside
66
Retail Security and Loss Prevention

stimuli. Examples include, jumpiness, flushed faces, frequent yawning,
stretching, running, ditching or throwing merchandise down or walking hur-
riedly to a “blind” area such as a restroom, fitting room or behind tall racks.
These overreactions can result from an employee suddenly asking them a
question, a police siren sounding outside or a P.A. announcement requesting
“security to XYZ department”, etc. The point is, dishonesty often breeds anx-
iety. This nervousness may be exhibited differently by different people, but
people under stress may react more demonstrably than honest customers.
Physical cues: Another method used to spot potential shoplifters is by noting
two types of physical cues. The first is something that indicates the capabil-
ity for removing a quantity of merchandise. Empty bags inside a pocket or
another bag, a large (open) purse, used shopping bag or book bag, bulges
around the lower part of the shirt or blouse possibly indicating a booster
girdle, baggy pants which would allow concealment in elastic hose or socks
are all examples of capability characteristics to be alert for.
The second physical tip-off of a potential shoplifter is known as the non-
typical customer profile. The type and location of a store generally dictates
the “look” of the average customer. Be aware, however, that there is no such
thing as a true average customer, but an individual wearing inappropriate
dress such as a raincoat in dry weather, etc., may signal behaviorally their
ability to steal. Most shoplifters are best detected by a combination or clus-
ter of behavioral and physical cues in context to the setting and situation.
Step 2: Evaluate and prioritize the situation and subjects
(Note: Many retailers today do not take any action against suspected
shoplifters.) Once a potential shoplifter has been spotted, a trained manager
or LP specialist should take over. If a theft takes place, it must be observed
by a manager or specialist if detention is to be attempted. The manager
should determine if a suspected shoplifter merits further watching. Retail is
a very demanding occupation and any task such as surveilling a possible
shoplifter means something else is left undone. Also, there may be more
than one suspected individual. The manager or specialist must quickly eval-
uate the situation. Determining the probability that a certain individual
may steal is subjective, but behavioral and physical cues combined with the
recollection of theft losses at that store are part of the equation. Another ele-
ment that should be considered at this point is the financial loss potential
of a particular incident. If there are two separate individuals that appear
inclined to steal, all things being equal, the one eyeing the most expensive
items may be the priority.
Step 3: Surveillance of the subject(s)
A prime consideration in watching anyone you feel might steal: Watch their
hands! Always watch their hands. With very, very few exceptions, people
use their hands to take your merchandise.
Shoplifting
67

Overt observation: Another decision to make is whether the observation
should be conducted openly or surreptitiously. If the goal is apprehension,
you normally watch the individual steal and attempt to exit without their
knowledge. If you would prefer they know you are watching them in the
hopes they will leave without stealing your goods, the key is to continually
let them know where you are and that you are watching. Also, let them
know that you have a way of signaling your observation to others. This is
called good “customer service.” It is typically the best way to prevent theft.
Any employee can do it. The suspect(s) should not however feel overly
threatened or be intentionally and publicly embarrassed. If you are asked:
“Are you watching me?” either do not reply or simply state: “I’m just trying
to provide great customer service” in a non-confrontational tone. The goal
is prevention without problems.
Covert observation: The covert surveillance of subjects from the sales floor is
perhaps the most difficult of all the techniques available. The agent must
continually watch the suspect(s) without the primary suspect(s) or their
accomplices spotting them. Some agents are able to look and act like an
ordinary customer while observing the suspect from close range. Others pre-
fer to observe from farther distances. In this case, they parallel the subject’s
moves, always striving to keep the suspect’s hands in view. Sometimes the
agent will hide in merchandise fixtures. Another key is to stay low and still.
Most shoplifters do not seem to look low. The human eye is also very sensi-
tive to spotting movement. Some store agents use hand mirrors and small
binoculars to look around corners or down long rows. Other agents use
CCTV systems to follow and record suspect activity. Every company has tac-
tics and techniques they may share with you.
Step 4: Subject’s actions
This step highlights actions taken by the subject(s) you have under surveil-
lance. Do they steal or simply exit the store without stealing? If the subject
tried to steal but leaves without committing a crime, the individual’s face
and vehicle can be recorded for future use.
If the subject takes possession of your merchandise look to Step 5 for a
possible next move.
Step 5: Decision to act
Once a shoplifter takes merchandise the retailer has at least three options:
No action: The potential for violence, lack of trained store personnel etc. may
dictate the suspected shoplifter be allowed to leave with no action taken on
your part. If this is the case, a short report can still be filled out, submitted, and
retained to document suspicious activity.
68
Retail Security and Loss Prevention

Burn or recovery: In some situations, a retailer may not desire or be able to
stop a suspected shoplifter. In this case, you may want to attempt a recov-
ery. This procedure is discussed in Step 6.
Apprehension: Some goals of detaining a person suspected of theft are to
recover merchandise, identify the subject(s), debrief the subjects to learn
their motivations and methods, and to process them (criminal and civil
sanctions) for deterrence reasons.
Risk/benefit: Before deciding on the proper course of action, you can quickly
weigh the risk to benefit ratio of each option. No-action, eliminates the risk
of injury or civil suit, but does fail to retrieve the merchandise or provide for
obvious deterrence. A burn may result in merchandise recovery and some
temporary deterrence, but many burns or bluffs can be unsuccessful. Also,
burn attempts should not lead to a confrontation. An apprehension will
normally lead to a recovery and some deterrence, but may be violent, or if
mishandled could lead to civil litigation.
Six steps to success: The first key is “witness a theft”, a basic rule of thumb
should be: If you did not see it, it did not happen. In order to take any action
at all, a member of management or a trained LP specialist should have per-
sonally observed the actual theft. Retailers can be held civilly liable for their
actions. Additionally, violent shoplifting incidents occur as drug abusers use
retail stores as a convenient source of products they can convert to cash.
The decision to detain a shoplifting suspect should be based on sound
company policy, but here are six steps we recommend you consider the fol-
lowing before you or your employees take action.
1. See the customer approach the item in question. This helps eliminate a
later claim that the item belonged to them previously.
2. See the actual selection of the article.
3. See where the article is placed or concealed.
4. Keep the subject(s) under constant surveillance. If the individual drops
the item, do not stop them. Just make a recovery and report.
5. Let the subject pass the last point of sale, without paying, before stopping
them, if at all possible. This makes it difficult for them to claim they
intended to pay for the merchandise.
6. Know where the articles are concealed on the suspect when making the
stop. Tell the individual in a calm, professional manner that you are
aware of the situation and in control.
Notice the first three rules all start with the word see. Remember that good
customer service is the best deterrent to shoplifting. Most shoplifters will
not attempt to steal if you are watching them.
Shoplifting
69

Step 6: Action by the retailer: Bluff/detain
In step 5 the course of action was determined. Bluff or detain is a typical choice.
Bluff/burn: Most retailers are advised to attempt to get suspects to drop the
goods before they leave the premises, rather than attempt an apprehension.
There are several ways to recover merchandise, but remember that customers
should never be accused of stealing. Retailers can let subjects know they are
being observed so they might “ditch” the merchandise. Shoplifters often avoid
eye contact, and do not like salespeople waiting on them or working around
them. By looking directly and frequently at the subject, while “working” in
close proximity, the subject may go and dump the shoplifted items if they are
given a little space. Another method to get the suspects to drop the merchan-
dise is to confront them without making accusations. Ask “helpful” questions
such as, “Can I help you find a shirt to go with those pants?” This contact may
make the shoplifter nervous. Continue making eye contact and stay close, but
give the subjects enough room to ditch their merchandise. Do not approach
shoplifters that appear chemically impaired, angry, or physically intimidating.
If the shoplifter attempts to leave the store before the first two “bluff” tech-
niques can be employed, a manager may walk quickly and loudly behind the
subjects as they approach the exit. Some shoplifters may detour back into the
store and dump the merchandise. Many shoplifters would rather risk appre-
hension than be too obvious in returning to the store. If a shoplifter con-
fronts a store employee, the employee is best advised not to escalate the
situation by arguing with a suspect. If all six steps have not been followed,
the subject should be allowed to move on. Call the police immediately if a
situation appears to be escalating, and ask for a police escort if you ever feel
personally threatened.
The point of these different techniques is to signal to suspects that a store
employee is aware of their activity and is ready to take action. The retailer’s goal
in these efforts is to recover merchandise without accusing a customer of theft.
Retailers should realize that while bums or bluffs sometimes work, they
are temporary measures, since many shoplifters return to a store to steal again.
This is especially true in the case of some professionals who often steal mer-
chandise in order to obtain cash for illegal drugs.
Apprehending the shoplifter: (Special note: always consult your attorney on all
potential customer contact and detention policies and procedures.)
If the decision is made to apprehend a shoplifter (and your criteria have
been followed), the manager or security specialist may wish to use some of
the suggestions in Figure 5.8.
Try to wait until the suspect passes the last point of sale with the stolen
merchandise. While not a requirement in many jurisdictions, this action
helps prove the suspect’s intent to steal the merchandise in question. When
70
Retail Security and Loss Prevention

Shoplifting
71
Figure 5.8
Shoplifting apprehension
Figure 5.9
Approach

possible, a second person can accompany the security specialist making the
stop and act as a witness and back-up.
Move quickly behind suspects, then step in front of them to impede their
direction of travel. Do not stand flat-footed and remain alert to attack or
escape. Keep your hands free. Do not touch the suspect. If a suspect attempts
to strike you or attempts to escape, use reasonable force to defend yourself.
Some retailers use reasonable force to detain suspects. Consult your attorney
on these points. It is never wise to pursue shoplifters outside or off the prem-
ises for safety reasons.
You may identify yourself by saying “I am a [manager/security specialist]
for [company name]. I’d like to talk to you inside the store. Please come with
me.” At times, suspects may ask why you want them to return to the store.
Without making an accusation, simply respond, “I want to talk to you about
some merchandise that may not have been paid for.” Never suggest that the
suspect “forgot” to pay for the items; this may be used as a defense in court.
Do not get into an argument or discussion with suspects at this time.
Encourage them to return to the store by saying that you will discuss every-
thing in the office. This is a good method to recover stolen merchandise in
a low-key manner. Stay in charge. Do not show uncertainty.
Remember the first words of the suspect, especially if they resemble a
“confession.” Often, a suspect will say, “Can I just pay for it?” This is further
assurance that the suspect has an item and may cooperate.
Escort suspects back into the store to a back room or office by walking
beside or behind them to help preclude escape, attack, or product disposal.
Whenever possible, take the suspect(s) to a place that provides some privacy.
Observe their hands at all times to be certain that they do not dump the
items prior to entering the office, or pull some kind of weapon. Some com-
panies have suspects carry their own packages. This can impede their actions
and leave you free to deal with situations that are created.
Try to keep the subject off balance mentally by continually asking them
questions such as “How did you get to this store?” If a suspect asks, “What is
going to happen to me?” just answer, “Let’s talk about it.” Do not give them
a reason to attempt an attack or escape. Also, covertly signal a prearranged
sign to another employee indicating they should notify law enforcement and
store management as soon as possible. Remember, a shoplifter may immedi-
ately sense uncertainty and may exploit it to their advantage.
Step 7: Processing the incident
Regardless of the action taken in a suspected shoplifting incident, it is re-
commended that a report be filled out and retained for future reference.
Detaining the shoplifter
After a subject has been apprehended, the security specialist should handle
the situation in a professional manner. Many states have statutes that allow
72
Retail Security and Loss Prevention

merchants to detain shoplifting suspects based on probable cause (without
making a formal arrest). This is in order to conduct an investigation to deter-
mine if the suspect either took store merchandise without permission or had
the intent to steal. Detention and investigation must be conducted in a rea-
sonable manner, for a reasonable length of time, without using excessive
force or threats of prosecution to coerce a civil release or confession. If the
security specialist determines a theft took place, they may decide to take
criminal and civil action.
Retailers may choose to follow some of the following guidelines when
detaining a suspect (see Figures 5.8 and 5.9).
Once inside the private office, ask the suspects if they know why they
have been asked to return to the store. This opens the door for a confession
and keeps you from making any accusations.
If the suspects deny knowing why they were asked to return, ask if there
is an item that has not been purchased. If the suspects still deny everything,
be more specific. Name the exact item and the location of concealment, and
ask for the item. Remain calm but firm.
Once the merchandise has been recovered, analyze the suspect. Remove
anything that could be used as a weapon (e.g., scissors, a pencil, etc.) from
within reach of the suspect. For protection, some retailers search for weapons
(females search females). The police are better trained and equipped to search
and handle suspects. If the suspect is uncooperative, call the police immedi-
ately and have them take over the situation. Local police or sheriff’s depart-
ments can be contacted to demonstrate proper safety search techniques.
If the suspect is cooperative and you feel safe, begin filling out the incident
paper work. Figure 5.10 is an example of a security incident report. Note that
many police agencies prefer to have all paper work completed prior to their
arrival. Any security/safety incident that takes place on company property
should be documented and saved for at least three years. Incident reports
serve as valuable evidence at subsequent criminal or civil trials. They are also
very useful for incident projection. By tracking incidents by type, time, and
location, trends may become apparent – thereby allowing for better allocation
of loss control resources.
It is not usually required that a non-law enforcement security agent read
any “rights” to the suspect.
Never leave any detainee alone.
Question the shoplifter to recover all merchandise and determine identities
and contact information of all suspects.
Strive to obtain a confession and pick up any valuable intelligence or infor-
mation the suspect may have about shoplifting activity in the local area. The
practice of interviewing subjects that have been apprehended for shoplifting
provides retailers with valuable information when planning LP efforts (see
Figure 5.11). Note that many shoplifting suspects will refuse to talk, but those
who do often provide information regarding the perception, “on the street,”
Shoplifting
73

74
Retail Security and Loss Prevention
Figure 5.10
Sample Incident Report

Shoplifting
75
Figure 5.11
Incident data

of security at your location and other retailers in the surrounding area. Any
information gained by the interviewer should be verified, if possible, by other
source before being considered absolutely credible.
Ask suspects for a form of identification. Then ask suspects to state their full
name, date of birth, and current mailing address. Compare the verbal infor-
mation with the information printed on the subject’s driver’s license or other
valid identification.
Do not make any threats or promises to the suspect, at any time.
If the subject is to be prosecuted, give the responding police officer the orig-
inal report. Send a copy to the corporate offices, if applicable, and keep a copy
in a locked file cabinet at the store. Record the case number, the name of the
company employee who made the apprehension, and the police officer’s
name on the incident report.
Strive to detain the suspect only for a reasonable length of time (1 hour is
the average).
Grant any reasonable requests such as prescribed medications, bathroom
privileges, or a drink of water. Use caution when granting requests for med-
ication and trips to the restroom. If suspects say they are ill or need assis-
tance of any kind, provide it immediately. Do not assume that it is a phony
complaint. Remain alert for escape attempts.
After the police officer arrives, mark the evidence and seal it in a bag.
Staple a copy of the incident report to the outside of the bag. Place the evi-
dence in a locker (access to this locker must be limited to management and
security) and do not disturb it until it is requested in court. Some states, or
jurisdictions within states, allow retailers to photograph merchandise and
require only a photograph during trial, thereby allowing the merchandise to
be sold. A check with local prosecuting attorneys will provide the proper pro-
cedure to follow.
If a customer is detained in error, it could lead to legal action by an angry
customer. Security specialists and other store employees can take the follow-
ing steps to help avoid liability claims.
Make an apologetic statement such as “Thank you for your time; we apol-
ogize for any inconvenience you’ve experienced.”
Be sincere. Stay calm. Be friendly, helpful, and courteous.
If a customer appears hostile, antagonistic or outraged, politely excuse your-
self and withdraw from the scene immediately, if able. Indicate to the customer
that you will summon a store manager.
Make absolutely no commitment to the customer, and above all, never
admit liability.
Discuss the incident with no one except your supervisors or the company’s
insurance brokers, and the company’s insurance carriers and law firm.
If an immediate response is needed by the customer, get a store manager
and have her inform the detainee that someone from the central office will
contact him as soon as possible.
76
Retail Security and Loss Prevention

If possible, politely obtain the name and address of the customer. Do not
insist. Obtain reports from employee witnesses and forward all documenta-
tion to the Risk Management Department as soon as possible.
Civil action
If it is decided to pursue civil action instead of or in addition to criminal
sanctions, the following guidelines are suggested (see Figure 5.12).
Fill out a report to take civil action against the person who was detained
and only when the security specialist can prove that the subject did take cash
or merchandise without proper permission and that the subject intended to
deprive the company of the full value of the cash or merchandise.
Avoid civil action against individuals who may be unable to form crimi-
nal intent, such as juveniles under the age of 10, and aged/ elderly persons
or those under the care of a physician for emotional disorders.
Make every attempt to properly identify the subjects that committed the
theft. Ask for two forms of identification. If the suspect is a juvenile, get both
parents’ names if your company pursues juvenile offenders.
Obtain a current mailing address, including city and zip code, and a cur-
rent phone number.
Avoid the appearance of extortion by not accepting payments at the point
of apprehension or by threatening subjects with criminal prosecution if they
fail to satisfy your demands.
Ensure that the incident report includes full name, driver’s license number
or state-issued identification number, current and complete mailing address,
and a short narrative describing the incident.
Send a legible copy of the incident report to the civil recovery firm or to
other appropriate individuals or groups.
Positively identify theft suspects
A person apprehended for theft can usually be prosecuted criminally, asked
or sentenced to provide restitution and civilly demanded simultaneously.
Retailers are advised to consult with their attorney for specifics, but the
recovery process is relatively simple.
Summary
Every retailer needs a shoplifting prevention program. The best programs are
those that are basic and uncomplicated. Physical design, systems, and store
personnel are the primary elements of any effective prevention plan.
Environmental design and layout of the store and its merchandise is the first
place to start in reducing loss. Most stores display their merchandise in ways
that are designed to induce customers to buy something. Many times, this
practice runs contrary to good security. However, a happy medium between
effective merchandise display and good store security can often be reached.
Shoplifting
77

78
Retail Security and Loss Prevention
Figure 5.12
Criminal and civil process

The next step is the continual training and motivation of store level associates.
They must recognize and react to possible shoplifters.
Store merchandise can be physically protected by restricting access to it or
by restricting its mobility. Display cases, display models and cable tie-downs are
examples of restricting the movement of merchandise. This is obviously not a
very desirable option, but may be necessary in select locations. Visibility of mer-
chandise is also very important in deterring theft activity. High-ticket or high-
loss items should be easily visible by trained employees. Here staff are the key
to reducing losses by serving all customers. Another effective physical shoplift-
ing prevention method involves the use of electronic (or dye) article tags.
The placement of a notification sign, the detection antenna, and the actual EAS
tag on merchandise can serve as a deterrent to theft. Many shoplifters avoid
stores that have EAS systems, security agents, cable tie-downs, or display alarms.
Would-be shoplifters often head to other stores that do not employ these
theft techniques. Finally, record all suspected theft incidents for later use.
Questions
What are the two broad categories of shoplifter?
Name four critical factors in shoplifting deterrence.
What are two types of merchandise controls?
How can store interiors be optimized to support asset protection efforts?
What is the single most effective tool retailers have to reduce shoplifting losses?
Fighting the Illicit Market
The Illicit Market in stolen, unlawfully imported, and counterfeit goods
is bad for the consumer, bad for the economy and bad for business.
We all suffer the consequences of the trade in illicit goods. Some, such
as the retail employee who is robbed or attacked by shop thieves in their
bids to supply illicit markets, are directly affected. So too are consumers
who often innocently buy counterfeit goods that pose significant health
and safety risks. Retail business is undermined as sales are siphoned from
legitimate stores into illicit markets.
Illicit traders damage the economy by avoiding taxes and undermining
local businesses that provide legitimate employment.
Perhaps, most sinister of all, there is clear evidence that many of those
involved in illicit trading are members of organized crime syndicates and
that their operations help fund terrorism.
Shoplifting
79

While the vast majority of second-source or diverted goods are licit, safe,
and do not create, support or enable illicit or other harmful activities, prod-
uct stolen from stores, transport assets and warehouses, as well as items
fraudulently diverted by dishonest employees, counterfeited, diluted or
otherwise altered routinely end up in licit supply chains and stores. This is
confirmed by evidence from criminal cases, informants, law enforcement
and security experts, and retailer and supplier loss data.
In order to maintain integrity with, and the safety of consumers, share-
holders and the public at large, a set of best practice guidelines have been
developed. These best practices are designed to help retail buyers reduce
the probability that they are buying stolen, counterfeit or altered goods.
The recommended best practices encourage all buyers to verify the origin
and authenticity of products they buy as well as the operational integrity
of buying sources.
These measures will help secure the retail supply chain and prevent the
thieves and counterfeits from gaining easy access to the licit channel.
Best Practice Guidelines
Unless you are sourcing goods directly from the original manufacturer,
these guidelines should be followed for all transactions involving a third
party supplier:
1. Know and work closely with your suppliers, they significantly impact
your relationship with your customers.
• Understand their corporate structure and leadership
• Assess their financial resources and solvency
• Ensure they offer you the appropriate written assurances of product
integrity and safety
2. Clearly communicate to all suppliers that your company only accepts
product that meets the highest standard of quality and integrity:
• Product must be in manufacturers’ cartons cased and shippers.
• Original carton and case seals must be unbroken and not tampered
with or altered in any way
• Imported goods must meet all applicable laws and the transaction is
supported by all the appropriate customs and import documentation
• Audit/inspect goods procured from all sources to assure standards
are met
3. Use good judgment as your best line of defense.
• Is this a product or category with a known history of stolen, counter-
feit or illegal importation?
• Is the price too low to explain even with a heavily supported manu-
facturer incentive and/or currency exchange rates?
80
Retail Security and Loss Prevention

81
6
Point-of-Sale Risks
There is no other place where retailers are more vulnerable to theft than the
point of sale (POS). Whenever a minimum-wage, poorly trained, and unmo-
tivated register clerk goes head-to-head with a determined and experienced
thief, the odds are good that the store will incur a loss.
Every day, retail businesses fall victim to fraud and forgery. Bogus currency,
forged checks, credit- and gift card fraud, and identity theft account for billions
in losses each year. While the task of preventing such fraud may seem daunt-
ing, most losses are avoidable if business owners take the necessary precautions.
Bad checks
Bad checks cost retailers billions of dollars in lost revenues annually and the
problem does not appear to be diminishing. Offenders range from “good”
customers to professionals who move from region to region across the
United States passing hundreds of thousands of dollars in “bad paper.”
The most frequent type of check fraud is or nonsufficient funds (NSF).
This occurs when customers issue checks, either intentionally or uninten-
tionally, without the funds in their account to cover the checks. Writing
checks on an account known to be closed is another bad-check scheme. In
many states, this action is prima facie evidence of the intent to defraud the
merchant. If the account is not closed, the bank’s written reason for not
honoring the check may constitute prima facie evidence of knowledge of
insufficient funds and, therefore, intent to defraud.
Checks that have been completely falsified or fabricated are another form
of bad checks. In many cases, individuals may steal unused checks and fill
them out to benefit themselves. Another variation of this type of crime
involves stealing issued checks and altering the payee name and, often, the
payment amount. The following actions can control check losses:
•
Track bad-check incidents by store and authorize clerks to determine 
significant trends. Oftentimes, a small percentage of stores and a small

percentage of a store’s cashiers will accept the majority of a company’s
bad checks.
•
Be wary of checks for more than $100 being cashed or used prior to a holi-
day or weekend. Paper hangers, as bad-check passers are commonly known,
realize that it will take several days for banks to notify the retailer of a
problem.
•
Insist on proper identification. Checks should be imprinted with the cus-
tomer’s name and address, and the customer should have a valid driver’s
license or state identification signed and with a recent photograph.
Merchants should be aware that if stolen checks are being used, credit
cards, Social Security cards, and other forms of identification may also be
stolen property.
•
Examine all checks. Insist that the checks be written and signed in front
of the clerk. Signs of worthless checks include oddly shaped, possibly
altered, numerals; variations in ink color or thickness of lines or letters;
erasures and obscured sections; unusual spacing; ink that appears to have
been traced over pencil; and endorsement signatures that differ from the
signature on a valid ID.
•
Watch for signatures that appear “out of character” for the individual
cashing the check. This is very subjective, but when in doubt, the subjects
should be asked to sign their name again in front of the clerk.
•
Use on-line check-clearing services, if possible. They are valuable for
screening checks, particularly in large operations. One service that is cur-
rently available will take responsibility for bad checks that were accepted,
provided their screening procedures were precisely followed. Other serv-
ices allow for quick screening by comparing the check’s account number
and check holders name against an updated list of overdrawn accounts or
known worthless-check passers.
•
Beware of individuals who take extreme caution and a lot of time to sign
their names, and who attempt to distract the clerk while they sign the
check or when the clerk is examining the check.
•
Verify certified checks. Checks that indicate that their validity has been
certified by the bank can be forged.
•
Examine traveler’s checks. Check-fraud artists know that merchants
believe that even stolen traveler’s checks will be redeemed by the issuing
companies. Major traveler’s check companies will honor stolen trav-
eler’s checks that have been unknowingly accepted by a merchant.
However, if the endorsement of the stolen check does not closely resem-
ble the authorized signature, the check issuer may refuse to redeem the
check.
•
Do not accept traveler’s checks that have been endorsed in advance. Ask
customers to sign their name again.
•
Request that checks be made out with the proper date of purchase.
•
Do not accept second-party checks.
82
Retail Security and Loss Prevention

•
Set reasonable dollar limits on checks, based on the average purchase
price for the business.
•
Do not accept post-dated checks.
•
Consider charging customers $1 for each check cashed. Generated funds
help cover losses incurred from bad checks.
•
If a check is accepted that has been written against nonsufficient funds,
send the issuer a notice by registered mail. Ensure that the notice 
contains a copy of the bad check, along with a notice from the state
authorities. If the notice brings no response, follow up with a phone call.
The retailers may file for prosecution with the local police or prosecuting
attorney. However, unless the check is for a felony-level amount or 
part of a suspected bad-check-passing ring, the authorities may be reluc-
tant to pursue the issue. Note that it is possible to take civil action in the
form of a written demand or small claims court. Another option is a 
collection agency.
Pay Attention to Those Checks
Consumers currently use personal checks to pay for approximately 60 per-
cent of their purchases, and this percentage continues to increase. As the
use of checks escalates, so does the likelihood of loss from check fraud.
Affordable computer technology is almost single-handedly responsible
for the rise in check forgery. Color copiers, scanners, desktop publishing
software and laser printers make it easy to alter, forge, and duplicate
checks. These forged documents are almost impossible to detect by the
untrained eye.
Already-written checks are also subject to fraud. For example, if you leave
a small space between the dollar sign and the number, as well as some
space in front of the written amount, the check can easily be altered.
Remember to keep names and written amounts hard left, an write from the
end of the name all the way to the right of the check.
Small operations should also be careful when accepting starter checks –
scams revolve around these because no name is printed on them.
Businesses should develop a comprehensive identity verification policy,
such as asking for two forms of ID, when accepting starter checks.
Another scam involves buying merchandise with a check and returning
the merchandise the next day for a cash refund. When the check bounces,
the store is left without the cash handed out for the refund. Stores can
avoid such a scenario by instituting a policy that allows refunds only after
checks have cleared.
Point-of-Sale Risks
83

Check Those Checks
Here are some basic tips for checking checks:
•
Look at the check number; 90 percent of all “hot” checks passed in the
U.S. are numbered from 101 to 150.
•
Checks now show the date the account was opened discreetly over the
signature section. So if you are presented with check number 803, but
798 is indicated in small numbers over the signature, you will know the
account was opened in July 1998.
•
Most legitimate checks have a minimum of one perforated edge. Never
accept checks which have four smooth edges.
•
All legitimate checks have magnetic numbers that will not shine or
reflect light. Never cash checks bearing numbers which reflect light.
•
The two bracketed digits within the account numbers at the bottom of
the check (01–12) reflect Federal Reserve Zones. Lower numbers are
eastern cities, and higher numbers are the western. Never cash a check
which shows high bracketed numbers if the check is drawn on an east-
ern account.
Check for standard copy paper by smearing the ink. A legitimately
printed check will not smear.
Note: U.S. Government checks always indicate the reason for the issue.
The person cashing the check should always read the reason for the check
and insure it is consistent with the person cashing the check (I.E.
teenagers cashing pension checks, etc.).
Credit card fraud
With more than 600,000,000 credit cards in circulation throughout the
United States, it is easy to see the opportunity for credit card fraud. The com-
mittee on Bank and Finance of the U.S. Congress reported that 73,000,000
credit cards are lost or stolen annually.1
Some common forms of credit card fraud include:
•
retail employees using a card left by a customer or using a customer’s card
number to make unauthorized purchases
•
a dishonest merchant working with a counterfeiter who imprints phony
sales receipts using plain cards embossed with real account numbers 
and submits them, along with legitimate receipts, to card companies for
payment
•
ironing card numbers flat and restamping new numbers
•
using stolen credit cards to make purchases.
84
Retail Security and Loss Prevention

Cashiers should be trained to look for the following signs that indicate a
credit card fraud in progress.
•
altered, expired, or not-yet-valid credit cards
•
signature that does not match the card or the sales slip
•
cards that do not register imprints on carbon copies
•
customers who make numerous, small credit card purchases under the
amount for which the authorization call must be placed to the card issuer
•
impatient applicants for department store credit cards who use impres-
sive names or titles to try and hasten the approval process.
Credit card companies are using new technology to foil most counterfeiters,
such as holographs, ultraviolet inks, bank identification numbers that are
micro-imprinted in magnetic strips, and fine-line printing. Also, with new
POS systems, retailers can instantly identify customers and determine avail-
able credit balances. Retailers who do not have these systems should call the
bank for verbal verification.
The following actions may prevent credit card fraud:
Use electronic authorization terminals, call credit card issuers for authoriza-
tion on all card purchases, or conduct random authorization checks on
small purchases.
Require a valid photo ID for acceptance of credit card purchases.
Copy the name, address, and phone number of the credit card customer
from the photo ID and then ask the authorization center to verify that
information.
Keep a list of local bank telephone numbers near each cash register and check
local card bank identification numbers (BINs) with the issuing bank to ver-
ify credit availability. After banking hours, call telephone directory assis-
tance. Although they will not provide addresses, they will verify address
given by questionable credit card users.
Check carbon copies to be certain that clear imprints have been made. The
carbon paper, which also contains the imprint of the credit card number,
should be destroyed, or merchants should use carbonless receipts or per-
forated carbons that split after use.
Guard proprietary credit cards from theft.
Credit cards are the property of the issuing companies. Those individuals
who legally carry and use credit cards do so with the permission and author-
ization of the issuer. A credit card company will instruct a merchant who
is presented with a card that is being used in an unauthorized manner to
refuse to allow the purchase and, often, will further authorize the merchant
to confiscate the card. Most issuing institutions emphasize the importance
of attempting to retain the card and thus prevent its further illegal use.
However, they also caution that an effort should be made to confiscate a
card only if it seems reasonably safe to do so. If not, try to discreetly copy
Point-of-Sale Risks
85

the card’s account number, BINs, and any other pertinent information
(for example, the suspect’s name, address, driver’s license number) before
returning the card.
Police authorities recommend that a merchant stall an individual suspected
of using a stolen or counterfeit card for as long as possible without resort-
ing to physical detention. While the suspect is “waiting for verification of
the card,” inconspicuously telephone the police. If the suspect insists on
leaving before the police arrive, try to get a license plate number and
description of the suspect’s vehicle. A detailed description of the suspect
and any companions and an indication of the direction taken by the sus-
pect is helpful to the police.
While credit card fraud is a federal crime and violators can and should be
prosecuted, merchants who suffer losses by not following verification pro-
cedures may have difficulty recovering lost funds. Some credit card issuers
may agree to reimburse some initial losses, but businesses that frequently
bypass the transaction verification procedure may be forced to cover their
own loss. Like bad check incidents, credit card frauds should be docu-
mented. Trends may develop that will focus theft awareness campaigns.
Avoiding Credit Card Fraud
You’re not alone in your concern about credit card fraud. A recent survey
found that 47 percent of small and mid-sized Internet merchants believe
fraud is one of the most significant problems their businesses face. Two
common examples of credit card fraud are counterfeiting cards and re-
embossing or re-encoding lost, stolen or never-received cards. Re-embossed
cards are heated, causing the account number to flatten. A new number is
then embossed, generally with a stolen embossing machine. Re-encoded
cards have the original account information deleted from the magnetic
strip. New information is then re-encoded onto the strip, giving the card
a new “identity.”
Fortunately, fraud is becoming more difficult, thanks to increasingly
sophisticated encryption systems, verification services and transaction
processing technology. Equally important, proactive payment service
providers are teaching business owners to protect themselves through
simple, yet effective, loss-prevention techniques.
The following tips may help you safeguard your business against credit
card fraud:
–
Always ask for identification.
–
Address the customer by the name embossed on the credit card.
–
Utilize the Address Verification Service (AVS) for card-not-present
transactions. The AVS confirms numerical address information with
86
Retail Security and Loss Prevention

card-issuing banks, and it returns codes that tell merchants whether
the figures match.
–
Learn to recognize a credit card’s built-in security features:
–
A hologram that changes color in the light.
–
A signature panel that resists erasure and protects the cardholder’s
signature.
–
A magnetic stripe that transmits specially coded information.
–
An embossed account number on the front of the card that
matches the number printed on the back.
–
CVC2 and CVV2 codes: three-digit codes indent printed in the sig-
nature panel on the back of every MasterCard and Visa card, fol-
lowing the 16-digit account number.
If you receive a credit card that seems suspicious, request a transaction
authorization over the telephone by calling the code 10 (or “call for assis-
tance”) hotline number supplied by your payment service provider.
Take an active role in fraud prevention. Remember, you are the first line
of defense against potential losses. By staying informed, you can work
with your payment service provider to greatly reduce fraud and save your
business money.
Counterfeit currency
Counterfeiting of currency is one of the oldest crimes in history. It was a
serious problem in the early history of the United States when banks issued
their own currency. At that time, there were approximately 1,600 state
banks that were designing and printing their own notes. Each note carried
a different design, making it difficult to distinguish the 4,000 varieties of
counterfeits from the 7,000 varieties of genuine notes. It was hoped that the
adoption of national currency in 1863 would solve the counterfeiting prob-
lem. However, the national currency was soon counterfeited so extensively
it became necessary for the government to take enforcement measures.
Therefore on July 5, 1865, the United States Secret Service was established to
suppress counterfeiting.
Three classes of U.S. paper currency are in circulation. The name of each
class appears on the upper face of the bill. The different classes of bills are
further identified by the color of their treasury seal and their serial numbers.
Class
Color of treasury seal
Denomination
and serial number
Federal Reserve Notes
Green
$1, $2, $5, $10, $20, $50, and $100
United States Notes
Red
$2, $5, and $100
Silver Certificates
Blue
$1, $5, and $10
Point-of-Sale Risks
87

The best method of detecting a counterfeit bill is to compare the suspect
note with a genuine bill of the same denomination and series. Pay particu-
lar attention to the quality of the printing and the paper’s characteristics.
Look for differences, not similarities.
Examine the tiny red and blue fibers imbedded in the paper of a genuine
note. It is illegal to reproduce this distinctive paper. Often, counterfeiters try
to simulate these fibers by printing tiny red and blue lines on their paper.
Close inspection reveals, however, that on a counterfeit bill the lines are
printed on the surface, not imbedded in the paper.
Notice the workmanship of the note’s design. Genuine money is made by
the government’s master craftsmen using expensive steel engraving and print-
ing equipment designed for that purpose. Most counterfeiters use a photome-
chanical, or “offset,” method to make a printing plate from a photograph of
a genuine note. The resulting product looks flat and lacks fine detail.
Also, look closely at the lines in the portrait background – they form
squares. On counterfeit bills, some of these squares may be filled in and many
of the delicate lines in the portrait may be broken or missing.
The belief that a bill must be counterfeit if the ink rubs off is not accurate.
Genuine currency, when rubbed on paper, can leave ink smears.
Detecting and Preventing Fraud
Falling victim to counterfeiting, check or credit card fraud can devastate
a small business. Since counterfeiting continues to become more com-
mon, entrepreneurs must focus on prevention.
The first step in preventing fraud is to educate employees who are
responsible for accepting currency, checks or credit cards. Because “front
line” employees are the decision makers when it comes to accepting pay-
ments, they must be trained to recognize questionable documents. Here
are some tips on how to detect it.
Special Note: US and other currencies change frequently with newer
security features added as they become available.
•
Compare a genuine bill to the bill in question. Look for differences
between the two, rather than similarities.
•
Many of the $10, $20, $50, and $100 bills in circulation have a secu-
rity thread to the left of the Federal Reserve seal. This thread, added to
bills printed after 1990, is a quick reference to verify legitimacy.
•
Examine the general look and feel of the bill. Genuine currency is
printed using the intaglio method. Counterfeit bills tend to look flat,
while intaglio printing gives bills an embossed, rigid texture. Counter-
feit bills are generally much smoother.
88
Retail Security and Loss Prevention

•
Paper stock – Look for red and blue fibers embedded in the paper.
•
Look for significant detail in crosshatch latticework.
•
Hidden microprinting on a security band in $20, $50 and $100 bills
can be seen when held up to the light.
•
Check the clarity of the presidential etching.
•
Numbers and letters should be clear and evenly spaced.
•
Outer margins of the bill are very standard and clean.
•
Saw tooth points of the Federal Reserve and Treasury seals should be
clear, sharp and unbroken.
A final word of advice: the more time and effort small business owners
invest in detecting and preventing fraud, the less time and effort they will
spend dealing with it once it hits.
Currency switch
Another form of counterfeiting is called the currency switch. Subjects will
usually attempt to pay a purchase with a bill that has been altered to appear
to be a higher denomination. In a typical scenario, subjects will handover a
$20 bill that is actually a $1 bill. The subject takes a number of $20 bills and
clips the numerical value from one corner of each bill. (Mutilated bills with
three corners are still negotiable). The clipped corners are then pasted over
the corners of the $1 bill and the edges are sanded to blend color and texture.
In some locales, this currency is known as raised currency.
Train cashiers to examine bills quickly for counterfeits. A quick look at 
the appearance and feel of the corners or presidential portraits of high-
denomination bills should be sufficient to quickly detect a counterfeit bill.
Container switch
In a container switch, the subject removes the contents from a ticketed con-
tainer and refills the container with a similar but higher priced, item.
Designer underwear, for example, may be removed from its plastic tube and
placed in a tube that originally contained a less expensive pair. The subject
may also add more items to the container.
Grocery stores that allow customers to bag their own groceries experience
customers concealing expensive produce in bags of less costly items.
Retailers should ensure that product containers are tightly sealed.
Containers with broken seals that are presented for purchase should be
opened and their contents examined in an inoffensive manner. In grocery
stores, make cashiers aware of the container switch and ensure that they can
identify different types of produce. Retailers should use transparent plastic
bags to expose high-loss items. Instruct cashiers to shake and check bags to be
certain that other items have not been mixed in with less costly merchandise.
Point-of-Sale Risks
89

Price switch
Adhesive-backed price tags came into widespread use in the 1950s and price
tag switches became a very common crime. Subjects peel price tags off mer-
chandise and replace them with lower priced tags. In grocery stores, subjects
switch the ticketed lids of containers of similar products. For example, the
plastic top of an expensive can of coffee may be exchanged for the top from
a less expensive can before the item is brought to the cashier.
The increasing use of Universal Product Code (UPC) bar codes stamped
directly on product packages is the most effective deterrent to price tag
switching. In stores where price tags are still used, managers should ensure
that the tags are affixed so that only the cashier can remove them or so that
the tags are destroyed upon removal. On clothing, for example, garment
tags affixed with plastic loops can be removed only by breaking the loop,
and once the loop is broken the tags cannot be reattached easily. Adhesive-
backed labels are available that rip when they are removed and conse-
quently cannot be reused for merchandise labeling.
The use of electronic cash terminals hooked up to a central computer that
contains current price information filed under stock numbers, called price
look-up, is very effective if mark-downs are recorded properly. Provide cashiers
with current lists of sale items and ensure they become familiar with item
prices and call for price checks when in doubt.
Refund fraud
The following are examples of customer refund and exchange fraud:
•
Merchandise is shoplifted and then returned for a refund or exchange.
The subject may or may not leave the store.
•
A shoplifter collects discarded sales receipts, “lifts” items priced at the
amounts shown on the salvaged receipts, and then returns the items,
with receipts, for refund.
•
An article is purchased by check; the customer stops payment on the
check and, before the check bounces, returns the article for a refund.
•
Merchandise that was broken or damaged by a customer is repackaged
and returned for exchange, refund, or credit.
•
An item purchased at one store is returned for credit to another store that
sells the same item at a higher price.
Most stores offer three basic options – refund, exchange, and credit – as an
important part of their customer service policy. Every retailer should estab-
lish a return policy that finds a balance between a no-return policy and 
an anything-goes policy. Policies should be simple, understandable, consis-
tent, and posted in a prominent location, such as over the cash register area.
90
Retail Security and Loss Prevention

Sales receipts should carry a printed explanation of the store’s refund/
exchange policy. In some states and localities, consumer protection laws spec-
ify the acceptable manner of posting the merchants’ refund and exchange
policies.
Return policies should stipulate that the customer must have a cash regis-
ter or credit card receipt as proof of purchase to return merchandise.
Many stores mandate that the refund of high-priced merchandise be cred-
ited to the customer’s charge account or sent via a refund check to the cus-
tomer’s home address.
There have been numerous cases of criminals purchasing bulk shipments
of damaged or defective goods at a fraction of retail costs and then return-
ing the items for credit or exchanging them for non-defective products.
Exchange policies should cover only merchandise that is in a condition to
be resold or that contains defects for which the customer cannot be held
responsible, and should require, at minimum, a sales receipt, cash register
receipt, canceled check, or other proof of purchase. Returns for store credit
should require that merchandise be returned within a specified time period.
Subjects may purchase bulk quantities of out-of-date or no longer stylish
items at greatly reduced prices and return them for credit or refund.
Quick-change schemes
Quick-change artists are well versed in the art of fast-talking. Con artists 
will bring a small purchase to a cashier and offer to pay for it with a high-
denomination bill. As the cashier hands over the proper change, subjects
“discover” that they have a smaller denomination bill and withdraw the
large bill. With their hands already on the change, the customer attempts,
through a rapid exchange of money, to confuse the cashier into believing
that the correct amount of money has changed hands. Con artists usually
end up walking away with all of the change from the small bill plus all or
part of the change issued for the larger bill. An alert cashier, who under-
stands the importance of taking time and not becoming rattled when
money is being transacted, is the best defense against quick-change artists.
Quick-Change Artists
Quick-change artists work when the store is busy and their trick is to try
and confuse the cashier. Whenever someone tries to confuse the cashier,
the cashier should STOP, close the cash drawer and call for Management.
Signs in recognizing these are:
•
anytime the customer changes his/her mind about the amount tendered 
•
when a small article is purchased using $50 or $100 bills.
Point-of-Sale Risks
91

Cashiers must make it a regular practice to say out loud the amount
received from the customer and place it on top of their register until
change has been given to the customer. This will safeguard any disagree-
ments on amounts tendered.
The cashier is to count the customer’s change twice. As it is being
pulled from the register drawer and as it is being handed to the customer.
Place the cash register out of reach of customers so that subjects cannot
“assist” the cashier in making change. When cashiers ring up a sale, they
should take bills from customers and place them on a safe, but open, spot
away from the open cash drawer. The customer’s money should not be
immediately placed in the cash drawer.
The cashier should count the change at least twice, once to herself and a
second time to the customer. If a customer attempts to exchange a smaller
bill for the larger bill, the cashier should retrieve the change she was about
to give the customer, return it to the cash register, and start over by making
change for the new bill. Do not mix the customer’s and cash register’s
money until the sale has been completed.
If cashiers become confused, they should close the cash drawer immedi-
ately and call for the store manager to assist in the transaction. Speed and
confusion are quick-change artists’ allies – when complications develop,
they will usually abandon the scam.
Preventing Fraud – A Detective Tells All
Detective Kris Hosford, a 25-year veteran of the Los Angeles Police Depart-
ment, is an expert on how small businesses can arm themselves with the
necessary tools to detect and prevent fraud. As he explains, “Los Angeles is
the fraud capital of the world. For this reason I try to educate local small
business owners on how to avoid being stung.”
“Companies tend to neglect their most important line of defense –
their employees,” says Hosford. “Motivating and training staff to ferret
out fraudulent behavior is crucial. The key is to reward them for doing
you an invaluable service by making you less susceptible to fraud.”
Detective Hosford offers the following 10 suggestions to help “front
line” employees detect fraudulent bills, checks and credit cards.
1. When suspicious of any bill, compare it to a real one. Also look for
differences in the two bills, rather than similarities.
2. When accepting a check, always ask for a driver’s license or similar
identification card. Check physical characteristics of the person with
92
Retail Security and Loss Prevention

the ID and, if suspicious, ask the customer’s birth date or even request
a signature on a separate piece of paper. Many crooks have numerous
false IDs and may forget which one they are using. Also ask for a
home or work phone number.
3. Make sure a repetitive design (e.g., MasterCard or Visa) appears on
the background of the signature panel of the credit card. An altered
signature panel may appear discolored, glued, or painted.
4. Always verify that the signature on the credit card matches the signa-
ture on the sales draft.
5. Check validation dates. Some credit cards may be stolen from the mail
before they are valid. If the card is used before the validation date and
receives a valid authorization number, it could be a re-encoded card.
Remember that if a business accepts any card outside of its validation
dates, that business will be stuck with the bill.
6. Credit cards are made of white plastic. If the sides are not white, it is
almost sure to be counterfeit.
7. Rub a finger on top of the card to check for smudging. Silk-screened
counterfeit cards usually smudge.
8. Check to see if all the credit card’s embossed characters are the same
size, style, and alignment. If a card has been re-embossed, employees
should be able to detect original numbers and letters on the back of
the card.
9. Watch for suspicious behavior. For example, is the customer taking a
credit card from a pocket instead of a wallet? Is the customer indis-
criminately buying an unusual mix of merchandise? Is the customer
exhibiting any signs of nervousness?
10. If you have an electric terminal, make sure the account number dis-
played matches the embossed number on the credit card. This will
ensure that your business is not accepting a re-encoded card.
Questions
What are three signs of a bad check?
Describe how a currency switch scam works.
Name three things retailers can do to avoid refund fraud.
What legitimizing elements should an employee check for when examining
credit cards?
Describe how the printing process of authentic currency affects the quality
of a paper bill.
Point-of-Sale Risks
93

94
7
Miscellaneous Risks
Employee theft and error, shoplifting, and vendor theft account for the
majority of losses retailers experience annually. However, there are other
damaging miscellaneous risks for which a company should prepare.
A Safe Place to Shop?
Our stores should be a place to relax, have fun, and spend money. But
some locations, unfortunately, have the opposite reputation.
Retailing competition is everywhere – today’s stores must battle the
Internet, catalogs, and television for shoppers’ attention. But the compe-
tition becomes even more threatening when customers perceive your store
as unsafe. Right or wrong, if an individual believes your store isn’t safe, they
may very well decide not to shop there. The technical term for this is avoid-
ance behavior. Such behaviors include: when a customer or employee will
not visit a location, restricts their visits to daylight hours, and/or curtails the
length of their visits to a certain store due to safety concerns. Violence on
retail premises is relatively uncommon – especially considering the number
of visitors that pass through a given shopping location – but it does occur.
Examples range from robberies to domestic disputes on store property.
Environmental cues often shape a customer’s perception of danger in a
retail space – either in a positive or negative way. Consider how the fol-
lowing cues might influence your perception of a store: abandoned shop-
ping carts, loiterers, beggars, abandoned vehicles, graffiti, broken lights,
signs of vandalism, associates or others smoking near store entrance, dirty
or dark restrooms, apathetic or disheveled employees, dirty, merchandise-
cluttered aisles.
Remember, sometimes the appearance of safety can be as influential as
safety itself in a customer’s perception of your store.

Robbery
Crimes against retail businesses are increasing annually. Violent crimes, such
as robbery, can cost the merchant not only financial loss but also loss of life.
By definition, robbery is a violent crime that uses force or threatens the use
of force while committing the crime. Stores are known (by potential robbers)
to have cash on hand and have inadequate security. These factors make the
stores very vulnerable to theft, especially isolated stores like convenience
stores and small stores at gas stations. Retail robbery targets include cash reg-
isters, cash rooms, and cash deposit runs. Loss of life or serious injury can
result from any robbery and retailers should keep this in mind whenever
confronted with a robbery situation. Criminals may use scissors, knives, or
guns during robberies and it is rare for a store employee to be able to deter-
mine if threats are real or bluffs. Robbers are unpredictable and almost any-
thing can happen.
Three primary types of robbers include professionals, semi-professionals,
and amateurs. Retail stores are rarely “hit” by true professionals, since the
volume of ready cash is not as high as in many banks. Professionals are often
given assignments by organized crime groups and will frequently flee rather
than use force. Semi-professionals plan their own crimes, to a certain extent,
but the sophistication and timing does not compare with professional
“jobs.” The chance of violence is greater with semi-professionals and this
possibility is enhanced by the fact that robberies seldom go as planned.
Incidents such as a robbery taking longer to accomplish than planned, vic-
tims not complying with the robbers’ requests and little or no money on
hand can cause the robbers to lose their composure and act unpredictably.
Amateur robbers, such as local juveniles or addicts are prone to rob area
stores even if the stores are not known to carry a lot of cash. Amateurs are
very dangerous, since their crimes are poorly planned and are often based
on crimes enacted on television. A weapon is generally used by the amateur
robber. If amateurs feel that they are losing control at any time, they can
become violent. Be aware that most amateurs are not proficient in the use
of weapons or in defeating security measures.
Each of these types of robbers may have differing skill levels, but all of
them use the same basic method to commit a robbery. Robbers will survey
the store and wait until all customers leave before attempting the robbery.
They then quickly enter the premises, make the confrontation, grab the
money, and flee.
Retailers should determine their vulnerability to robbery and train store
employees in proper reaction techniques. Before attempting the crime, rob-
bers normally conceal their weapons and survey the location for police or
security. Both of these actions are tip-offs to observant employees that a rob-
bery may be about to take place. By contacting the local police or sheriff’s
department for uniform crime statistics and current robbery trends, and by
Miscellaneous Risks
95

reading the local paper, any merchant can keep up with robbery trends and
methods being used to commit robberies.
Robbery prevention involves a combination of training and security hard-
ware. By determining local trends and the stores’ high-risk areas, an effective
prevention plan can be designed and implemented. Systems that have proven
effective in reducing the number of robberies that occur in a given store
include CCTV, cash storage or cache devices, and metal detectors. CCTV may
help deter some robberies and may be used as evidence to convict arrested
robbers. However, since “dummy” cameras are so commonplace, robbers
often pay less attention to this type of deterrent system. The most effective
robbery deterrents are to reduce the amount of cash on hand and increase the
visibility of clerk areas. A new CCTV system supports live, two-way video and
audio between the store and a central monitoring location. This type of sys-
tem may have a deterrent effect on robbery, shoplifting, and employee theft.
The following are some suggested robbery prevention methods:
Be totally unpredictable in regard to taking cash to the bank for deposit.
Routines, times, methods of money concealment, and deposit personnel
should be changed constantly.
Train and retrain all employees in robbery reaction procedures. Keeping
clerks safe is the priority issue when faced with a robbery.
Keep safes and money boxes locked (not on “day lock”), except when in use.
Keep the amount of cash in cash registers and safes to a minimum-under
$75 is suggested.
Refrain from handling or displaying cash in public view.
Keep all access doors to cash areas locked and unmarked, and include a
peephole for identification purposes.
Consider using “bait” money, or recording planted bills in higher crime
areas, to assist in robber apprehension.
Advise employees not to wear expensive jewelry to work.
Do not reopen the store for anyone after closing, regardless of their innocent
appearance.
Test all alarms at least monthly.
If you are working alone, keep a TV or radio playing in the back room to give
the impression others are present.
If a robbery does take place, there are certain actions an employee can
take.
Remain as calm as possible.
Try not to stare at the robbers or their weapons.
Obey any commands given to you.
Move smoothly and keep your hands in plain sight. Talk in a slow, polite
manner.
96
Retail Security and Loss Prevention

When it is safe, notify law enforcement and management.
Do not attempt to activate any alarms while a robber is present.
Inform the robber of any problems or surprises. If someone may enter the
area, let the robber know this may happen.
Give the robber time to leave the area.
In the event shooting starts, drop to the floor and seek cover. If a hostage 
situation occurs, do as you are told and try to observe and listen. Be calm
and cooperative.
After a robbery takes place, the following procedures are suggested:
Check for any injuries and call for medical assistance if needed.
Determine the robbers’ method of operation, habits, speech, any robbery
techniques.
Identify property that was taken.
Prepare a physical description of the robbers, such as height, weight, age,
race, sex, hair, and eye color, scars or facial hair, speech problems, etc.
Describe any get-away vehicles by their color, year, make, model, damage,
license plate, and direction of travel. Do not allow others into the crime
area until police arrive.
Do not discuss the robbery with other witnesses until the police question
them.
Do not touch areas the robbers may have touched.
Cooperate fully with the police investigation.
Do not exaggerate or estimate anything; give factual information.
Evaluate the crime and take preventative measures against future similar
incidents.
Burglary
Every retailer is vulnerable to some form of burglary. The most common types
of burglaries include stay-behinds, smash-and-grabs, drive-offs, and break-ins.
There are a variety of measures that retailers can take to prevent burglaries.
Check offices, store rooms, rest rooms, closets, dressing rooms, and display
fixtures for individuals who are attempting to remain in the store after it closes.
Due to fire regulations, most stores have fire doors with “panic alarm” locks
on the inside. These doors may be used for an quick escape after selected mer-
chandise and cash are bagged for removal. Some states allow these doors to be
locked after closing. Equip the store burglary alarm with motion-detection
sensors, such as passive infrared, which detects movement by the contraction
or disruption of the microwaves emitted by the sensor.
In smash-and-grab burglaries, robbers either smash display windows and
glass doors with bricks or other objects, or drive their vehicles through glass
windows and doors. Thieves then grab the merchandise and rush to their
Miscellaneous Risks
97

get-away vehicle. Very strong glass film or glazing and metallic coverings for
windows can prevent this type of crime.
No retailer who sells gasoline can escape the inevitable drive-off. Many
convenience chains report multi-million dollar losses for this type of bur-
glary. Requiring patrons to pay prior to pumping their gas and providing for
good visibility of the pump area are means of deterring this type of crime.
A break-in burglary occurs when offenders enter either by force or with
keys. In the case of a forced entry, doors, windows, and vents or hatches in
roofs are favored as entry points. To prevent burglars from using company
keys to gain entry, all keys should be carefully controlled and locks changed
when employees with access to keys leave the company. If the retailer’s
alarm system requires the employee to enter a personal code in order to enter
the premises, it is recommended a district manager or loss control manager
track store openings and closings, and follow up on irregularities.
Burglars can be categorized in general terms. Professionals carefully select
their target, case the building, study store routines, and plan the burglary.
Professional burglars often create diversions to tie up police patrols and
monitor police scanners to listen for police calls. This type of burglar seldom
attacks retailers unless the retailer is carrying a large quantity of cash or valu-
able merchandise including controlled drugs and electronics.
Semi-professional burglars are, generally, criminals who float between rob-
bery, burglary, shoplifting, and drug-dealing. Unfortunately, when police
agencies close down on the individuals who sell stolen goods (“fences”),
semi-professional burglars turn to more violent crimes, such as robbery.
Semi-professional and amateur burglars may be local thieves who have
conducted some surveillance and planning before burglarizing the retail
location. Store employees may see these individuals loitering in the area prior
to the burglary taking place.
Good burglary prevention starts with installing security equipment outside
the store, then focuses prevention techniques on high-risk areas.
Ensure front doors are clear and made of break-resistant glass or polymer
that has been coated with a window-glazing film.
Use high-quality door locks that are “pick-resistant” and have interchangeable
cores.
If fire regulations permit, use double cylinder locks that require keys to open
the lock from two sides.
Locate pin hinges on the inside of the door and anchor them so the doors
cannot be lifted out or forced in.
Wire doors to the perimeter burglar alarm system.
The following burglary prevention techniques are also recommended:
Remove attractive merchandise from display windows after the store is
closed.
98
Retail Security and Loss Prevention

Install windows that are of the same break-resistant quality as the doors and
wire them to the alarm system. Glass-breakage sensors can be used, but
may be defeated if the burglar tapes the glass before breaking it.
Ensure the interior of the store is visible from the parking lot, so that police
or passersby can detect unauthorized individuals moving about in the
store. Keep signs or displays that block this visibility to a minimum.
Ensure the store address is displayed prominently in both the front and back
to allow police to quickly locate the business in an emergency.
Ensure parking areas and the perimeter of the building are well-lighted to
discourage individuals from loitering in the area.
Equip each location with a burglar alarm system. The perimeter alarm should
cover all doors, windows, and roof hatches.
The interior alarm network should contain motion-detection sensors in likely
movement and high-risk areas. The safe should also be equipped with a
proximity sensor.
Check the alarm system at least monthly.
Ensure the alarm system is monitored either by an outside firm or by a pro-
prietary 24/7 team.
Place high-grade bars on all vents and skylights to prevent surreptitious
removal and entry.
Keep some lights on after closing to highlight movement inside the store.
Secure high-risk merchandise, such as jewelry, cigarettes, steaks, liquor, and
etc. in cases and safes for additional protection.
Remove all cash from registers at night and leave the drawers open to prevent
the burglar from damaging them.
Mark all office equipment and computers with identification numbers. Secure
all high-cost items.
If computer data or sensitive files are kept at a retail location, ensure all data
are backed up off-site.
If a burglary occurs, the following actions are recommended:
Evaluate the situation before entering the premises. If you know or suspect
there are burglars in the building, wait in a safe place until the police arrive.
Let law enforcement search the building.
Do not touch or alter anything that could be valuable evidence.
After the initial police report is made, provide the police with a list of missing
merchandise and money that is as complete as possible.
Report any suspicious incidents or persons that could be linked to the crime.
Do not immediately release the suspected dollar amount or loss until a follow-
up report is given, so the media does not release this information.
Notify company management of the situation as soon as possible and report
the current status of the store in regard to whether or not it can open for
business.
Get competitive bids on repair work and take photos of any damage for
insurance purposes.
Miscellaneous Risks
99

Critique the reasons for the crime and make prevention recommendations.
Burglaries create a serious drain on company profits and disrupt morale and
flow of business. Prevention and quick response are the keys to reducing
adverse impact from this type of crime.
Bomb threats
While the probability of receiving a legitimate bomb threat is relatively low,
the retailer should still plan for this type of incident. There are two objec-
tives in reporting to company employees or authorities that a bomb is going
to detonate in a place of business.
1. The caller has reason to believe an explosive device will detonate and
wants to minimize injury and damage.
2. The caller wants to disrupt normal activities by creating an atmosphere
of anxiety and panic.
Prior to receiving a bomb threat, the retailer must ensure that clear-cut
levels of authority are established and notification phone numbers are dis-
tributed with simple instructions to all facilities (see Figure 7.1).
The most important of all decision to be made by management in the event
of a bomb threat is whether or not to evacuate the building. Management pol-
icy may be to either immediately evacuate or to evaluate the threat to avoid
100
Retail Security and Loss Prevention
Figure 7.1
Sample bomb threat instructions

costly shut-downs and possible panic situations. Management’s first concern
must be the safety of its customers and employees.
What You Can Do
Identify all staff who could conceivably receive a bomb threat and ensure
either they are trained in handling procedures or at least have ready
access to instructions – and know where these are kept. This applies par-
ticularly to hotels, hospitals, news agencies, public transport organiza-
tions, voluntary organizations, and others offering any sort of emergency
service. Switchboard operators should understand their important role in
recording and communicating any bomb threat; they should be routinely
familiar with procedures and rehearse them regularly.
Draw up, ideally with advice from your local police Counter Terrorist
Security Advisor, a clear and accessible list of actions to take on receipt of
a call. A recommended checklist of actions is provided here. Ensure bomb
threat handling instructions are readily available so that staff can see
them instantly. They can include the following instructions:
1. Stay calm, and listen.
2. Try to obtain as much information as possible. Try to get the caller to
be precise about the location and timing of the alleged bomb and try
to establish whom they represent. If they are inclined to talk, keep
them talking.
3. If you may record the call, ensure that the system is switched on.
4. When the caller hangs up, attempt to get the number from the phone
company.
5. Immediately inform the designated manager responsible for deciding
the appropriate response (e. g. whether to initiate a search or evacu-
ation). The manager should also notify the police. If you cannot
reach anyone and even if you think the call is a hoax, inform the
police directly. Give them your impressions of the caller as well as an
exact account of what was said.
6. If you have not been able to record the call, make notes for the police.
7. Follow police instructions.
8. Ensure other staff mentioned in the action list are aware of their roles
and they or someone else remain in contact by phone (beware radio
or cell signals could interact with the device).
9. Ensure all staff, including night or temporary staff, are familiar with
all procedures and phone recording and other capabilities, as well as
how to notify law enforcement at all hours.
10. Rehearse your bomb threat procedures as part of your evacuation 
procedures. 
Miscellaneous Risks
101

102
Retail Security and Loss Prevention
Figure 7.2
Bomb threat checklist for telephone operators

The following are some guidelines to follow when preparing for and when
facing a bomb threat:
Contact police agencies for further information on preparing a bomb threat
reaction plan.
Establish strict procedures for control and inspection of suspicious packages.
Identify and control access of personnel entering critical areas.
Have local authorities point out vulnerable areas.
Ensure all employees are alert to unfamiliar or suspicious persons or objects.
Instruct personnel answering company telephones in the procedures for
handling bomb threat calls. Provide a bomb threat checklist at each tele-
phone answering area (see Figure 7.2).
Ask the caller where the device is located and when the bomb will detonate.
Tell the caller the building is occupied and that death or serious injury could
result from detonation.
Keep the caller on the phone as long as possible.
If possible, have a second person listen to the call.
Note peculiar background noises such as music, aircraft, etc.
Listen carefully to the caller’s voice for clues such as sex, age, accent, intoxi-
cation or health issues, etc.
Remember, when searching for bombs, the rule of thumb is “move people
away from a bomb,” not “move the bomb away from people.” You should
seek further information on this topic, from local authorities.
Coupon fraud
Retailers issue discounts or special coupons for promotions. This is in addi-
tion to the use of vendor coupons, particularly in grocery stores. As a result
Miscellaneous Risks
103
Figure 7.2
Continued

of this coupon usage, the incidents of fraud and theft are a constant threat.
If blocks of coupons are credited against purchases that never occur (misre-
demption) or are counterfeited, the result to the retailer can be lost revenue
and profit. Additionally, the promotion does not stimulate the intended
buying activity of targeted customers.
Generally, a coupon is a written offer of a discounted or free product.
Legitimate coupons contain the terms of the offer and inform retailers that
the issuer of the coupon will reimburse them for its face value. The issued
coupon may be redeemed by the consumer from the retailer selling that
product or service.
Coupons are often sent by the retailer to a clearinghouse, rather than
directly to the manufacturer. These clearinghouses sort the different coupons,
count them, and tabulate their value. Retailers are then reimbursed for the
total value of coupons received. The clearinghouse ships the canceled coupons
to the various manufacturers, which in turn pay the clearinghouse the face
value of the coupons plus a handling charge for its services.
There are numerous opportunities for coupon fraud throughout this system.
Common abuses include
•
theft of coupons by printing or Internet employees
•
sale of newspaper coupon inserts or links by newspaper or Internet
employees
•
theft of coupons (by dishonest retail employees) to be used later for pur-
chases or to substitute for cash from a register
•
interception and sale of direct-mail coupons by postal workers
•
redemption by retailers of coupons for purchases of merchandise other
than that specified by the manufacturers and the subsequent submission
of those coupons to the manufacturers for reimbursement
•
submission of illegally obtained coupons by clearinghouses to manu-
facturers
•
production of counterfeit coupons and their submission-in single amounts
to local retailers or in bulk amounts to clearinghouses.
The following security features should be checked in the printer’s, Internet
or newspaper office, and company facilities:
•
little or no apparent security in the storage of coupons or inserts
•
a poorly supervised or undocumented distribution, links and/or mailing
system
•
lack of a clear-cut procedure for recovering or accounting for undistrib-
uted coupons or inserts
•
no periodic checking system to determine whether coupons or inserts are
distributed and disposed of properly.
104
Retail Security and Loss Prevention

The only transfers of money in coupon redemption take place between
the consumer and the retailer, and between the retailer and the advertiser or
its clearinghouse.
Businesses are not required to accept coupons suspected to be counterfeit.
Usually, counterfeit coupons are poorly printed copies of the originals and
the printing is in one color and on one side only. Legitimate coupons should
give the name and address of the manufacturer, an expiration date or iden-
tification that there is no expiration date, and a description of redemption
guidelines. Businesses that use coupons in their promotions can make the
counterfeiter’s job more difficult by issuing coupons that contain all of these
elements and that are printed on both sides and at least two colors.
When inserts are provided by the business, the newspaper should verify
•
the number of inserts received matches the number shipped
•
inserts are placed in a secure area until removed by authorized personnel
•
inserts are placed in the newspaper for distribution according to the
agreement
•
leftover inserts are disposed of in a manner that makes them unusable for
redemption.
When the newspaper prints the inserts, its circulation department should
verify that
•
press room reports or statements list the number of sections run for each
issue
•
spoiled coupon sections remaining after printing and insertion are dis-
posed of in a manner that makes them unusable for redemption
•
coupon sections printed prior to the date of insertion are placed in a secure
area until removed by authorized personnel for insertion in the newspaper
•
printing plates or other material used to print coupon sections are dis-
posed of properly.
Newspapers should provide the retailer with
•
auditable records or statements to confirm the distribution of returns,
leftovers, and unsold copies from employees, distributors, carriers, driv-
ers, and others responsible for the recovery and destruction of newspa-
pers containing coupons
•
statements from wastepaper companies (or other firms that purchase
newspaper copies containing advertising coupons) that coupons are dis-
posed of in a manner that makes them unusable for redemption.
Internet links to coupons are also an issue whether run by authorized
providers or unauthorized websites. Retailers may conduct searches to locate
Miscellaneous Risks
105

problem sites, but regardless should be prepared for fraud and misuse of
electronic coupons.
Coupon fraud theft can be controlled by setting standards of security in
the printing, inserting, distributing, web operations, and storing phases.
Crime and data loss
Too few retail LP directors or other executives consider their computer man-
agement systems to be significant loss risks. Part of this feeling may stem
from a lack of knowledge about the capabilities, procedures, and vulnerabil-
ities of computer systems. A number of computer security books are pub-
lished annually and the retail loss control coordinator should read them to
acquire a working knowledge of the basic functions of their management
information systems in order to protect sensitive corporate information.
Massive amounts of data can be concentrated on relatively small, easily
concealed storage units. This portability creates a tremendous loss threat.
Valuable data can be easily stolen or easily destroyed. Some common com-
puter crimes include
•
issuing fictitious payroll checks
•
stealing expensive computer time
•
stealing highly confidential company data
•
placing incorrect data in system files
•
placing code viruses in a computer system
•
writing a code that causes software to periodically malfunction so that
programmers are required to make “maintenance” visits
•
destroying lists of inventory to cover theft activities
•
adding fictitious vendors or supplies to accounts payable lists
•
intercepting the transmittal of sensitive data
•
loss of data files due to power surges or loss or power.
A computer loss control program requires the following actions:
•
Screen all consultants or employees who have access to computers ini-
tially and periodically.
•
Restrict access to data-processing areas by using identification systems.
•
Secure computer areas using sound physical security procedures. Separate
computer functions from other administrative functions and assign work
to different individuals. Periodically audit the work of these employees
and place them on other assignments.
•
Use passwords, security codes, and code-scrambling devices to provide
some means of access control. Passwords should be a combination of six or
more numbers, letters, and symbols that are picked at random and have no
particular significant meaning. Do not note these codes in the computer
106
Retail Security and Loss Prevention

area or discuss them on the telephone. Change the codes periodically; the
frequency of change depends on the level of access or sensitivity of stored
data.
•
Program the computers to track unauthorized attempts to gain access.
•
Do not consider facsimile machines and cellular phones as secure means
of communication unless they have sophisticated scramblers.
•
Protect against loss of data files from power surges or outages by using
surge protectors, shutting down systems during lightning storms, and not
having computers on the same electrical circuit as other office machines.
•
Back up all computer files daily to secure off-site facilities.
•
Audit company records and computer security and procedures annually.
Recommendations on the effectiveness of the operation should be acted
on immediately.
Natural and civil disasters
All retail businesses are subject to the adverse effects that disasters can bring.
Loss of life, serious injury, loss of cash flow, and even loss of reputation may
all result from incidents that cannot be controlled by the business. Floods,
fires, explosions, hurricanes, tornadoes, earthquakes, product-tampering,
and violent strikes must be planned for to minimize potential injury and
damage, and to assist in resuming business as quickly as possible. The disas-
ter plan should include emergency evacuation procedures, identification
procedures, emergency team appointments and training, communication
capabilities, and coordination with other companies and outside agencies.
A comprehensive plan should be drawn up by retailers after they research
and consult with authorities and experts. Document the plan and make copies
for all personnel. Elements of the plan may include the following points:
•
potential risks and the degree of vulnerability for each risk
•
descriptions of the corporate offices, distribution facilities, and stores,
including square footage, construction, specific location, entry/exit points,
roster of personnel and schedules, and communication and power line
locations
•
the chain of command and quorum list
•
primary and secondary command center locations
•
emergency supplies locations
•
primary and secondary evacuation rosters
•
list of mutual aid agreements
•
emergency phone numbers
•
location and telephone numbers of personnel with cellular phones and
satellite beepers for emergency communication capabilities
•
shut-down and evacuation procedures
•
specific information for each retail operation
Miscellaneous Risks
107

•
plans for protection and storage of vital records
•
media-relations procedures.
This is a partial listing of some of the preparations that must be made before
a disaster strikes. In hurricanes and earthquakes are pointed reminders a dis-
aster can strike anywhere, at anytime. Some businesses were devastated and
some were up and running within 24 hours of the disaster. In most cases,
thorough planning, training, and testing made the critical difference.
Civil liability and litigation
Retailers are increasingly vulnerable to civil claims, such as employee and
customer accidents, false arrest, wrongful discharge, inadequate security,
slander/libel, and negligent hiring. The United States, in particular, is becom-
ing known as a litigious society. An abundance of personal injury lawyers
and “victims” are cause to put the retailer on alert. Every effort should be
made to determine risk areas within the company and to promote technol-
ogy and training to reduce vulnerability to these hazards.
Customer and employee accidents
When employees are injured on the job, the company suffers losses due to
decreased productivity, worker’s compensation claims, and civil claims of
negligence. Retailers are beginning to experience employee injury claims on
an almost routine basis. This is an expense that can be partially controlled
by gaining an understanding of the problem. Many times, an increase in
employee accidents stems from one-way (down) communication between
supervisor and employee. This type of communication can cause a passive
resistance, on the part of the subordinates, in which they either ignore direc-
tives or deliberately disobey them. The result is increased accident rates and
tremendous costs. As accident frequency escalates, so do insurance premi-
ums. Some recommended techniques to overcome resistance and error
include the following:
Investigate and document all accidents.
Hold monthly or bi-monthly safety meeting and ensure they are chaired by
first-line or middle managers. These meetings should be relatively short
(1 hour) and to the point.
Give each supervisor a copy of the accident report at the safety meeting.
Read the reports out loud and discuss the incident so that the group can decide
whether or not the accident was preventable.
Design and implement preventive measures. Examples of preventive meas-
ures are:
• on-the-job training in safe operating procedures
• using a safety checklist to identify any correct safety hazards
108
Retail Security and Loss Prevention

• improving guarding of hazardous equipment or supplies
• altering methods of operation
• ensuring better employee matching of skill and duty
• ensuring that supervisors are aware that feedback and recommendations
from their employees is important and not a threat to their authority
• holding quarterly safety-awareness workshops for store or distribution
employees.
Safety awareness meetings may be less than 1 hour in length and allow 
for two-way interaction. Fast-paced, humorous videos are available to retail-
ers for teaching purposes. Reinforce safety instructions using paycheck
inserts, posters, and a reward system for individuals who report or correct
safety hazards.
Be aware that customers make legitimate and contrived civil claims against
retailers daily. Some retailers have stores in their chain that experience so
many “slip-and-fall” lawsuits that they have a difficult time making a profit.
All store employees must be instructed of the importance of identifying and
removing unsafe conditions. Wet floors, children in shopping carts, sharp
merchandise display fixtures and pins in fitting rooms are all examples of
hazards that can be eliminated. If a customer does report an accident, the
store manager should
•
summon medical assistance if needed
•
not admit liability at any time
•
apologize for the incident
•
document the incident fully and contact their risk management depart-
ment or supervisor.
False arrest and imprisonment
Retailers are plagued by employee theft and shoplifting and, when this
activity is detected, these individuals are generally detained so that follow-
up action can be taken. Whether the individual is released, criminally pros-
ecuted, or civilly remanded, the processes leading up to the apprehension and
the circumstances of the detention must conform to accepted standards. A
single, poor decision by a store manager or loss prevention specialist can
wipe out that store’s annual profit. The store employee can generally detain
a theft suspect based on reasonable cause, but, as we discussed in Chapter 5,
once the reasonable cause is in doubt, the detaining employee must make a
quick decision to minimize possible problems. Any detention should be
made in a reasonable manner and last for a reasonable length of time. How
the suspect is approached, the use of force, and the accusations made all
have an impact on the outcome of possible subsequent civil proceedings.
The key to preventing false arrest claims is thorough training programs for
employees who have the authority to detain theft suspects. The training
Miscellaneous Risks
109

course should stress methods of detection, apprehension, processing, and
case follow-up. How to react in a situation in which something goes wrong
should also be taught. Any training program should be documented and
geared toward protecting the suspect’s rights, not geared to protecting just
the retailer.
Wrongful discharge suits
Retailers employ large numbers of employees and are increasingly vulnera-
ble to civil claims charging wrongful discharge and unfilled job promises. In
the past, employers could hire and fire their associates at will, but specific
statutes, collective bargaining agreements, and employment contracts can
eliminate this traditional business right.
The reason for terminating an employee may now be closely scrutinized by
federal, state, and local authorities. These authorities apply legal tests to deter-
mine what constitutes legitimate reasons for personnel decisions, especially if
personnel actions are retaliatory, arbitrary, discriminatory, or pretextual.
Some recommendations to avoid wrongful discharge claims include the
following:
Be aware that a court will hold any promises or statements of job security
against the employers.
All statements of promises made to recruit employees should be carefully
weighed.
Retailers should never assume that they are immune to wrongful discharge
suites because it appears that no federal, state, or local discrimination acts
are in effect.
Terminated employees are likely to consult with the Equal Employment
Opportunities Commission or an attorney. Therefore, carefully document
all personnel policies and specific actions dealing with the terminated
employee.
Ensure that each employee receives a well-written personnel policy hand-
book and signs a receipt statement when they are hired.
Ensure that all employee policies reflect the employee’s right to due process
and adhere to these policies.
Handle all personnel matters in a fair and consistent manner and keep them
confidential.
Inadequate security lawsuits
Most businesspeople are aware that their business is, in some way, vulnerable
to burglaries, robberies, internal theft, and many other potential loss hazards.
However, very few retailers are aware of and prepared for lawsuits against
them or their company alleging inadequate security. Currently, the number
of inadequate security suits is growing. Florida, New York, and California
lead the pack.
110
Retail Security and Loss Prevention

Any business that opens its doors to the public invites them in is expected
to provide a reasonably safe environment for employees and customers.
Owners of retail stores and shopping centers are examples of those most vul-
nerable to inadequate security claims. While they are not requited to guar-
antee the complete physical safety of all who enter their premises, they do
have a duty to provide reasonable care in regard to safety and security.
Reasonable care is not well-defined in existing laws or literature, but it is
usually decided by the court based on all evidence presented during a par-
ticular trial. Many courts are now ruling that if a criminal act took place on
the retailer’s premises and if that act was foreseeable, and, furthermore, if the
retailer did nothing to prevent it, the retailer is civilly liable. Generally, a crime
or safety hazard is foreseeable if, in the past, similar stranger-to-stranger acts
occurred on or near your property, or on a similar type of property in the
local area.
When these cases come before a court, all facts are weighed and a finding
for either the plaintiff or defendant is rendered. Any finding for the plain-
tiff means that an award for compensatory damages will be set. Usually, these
damages can be paid by either the business or its insurance company. How-
ever, if negligence on the part of the owner is proven, punitive damages are
assessed and the insurance company may not pay these fines.
Every business should have forms to document every accident, crime, or
suspicious incident. A good filing system for keeping these reports is also
necessary. Most lawsuits are not brought before the courts for months or
even years. The retailer will need to access these files when the court date is
set. Include copies of all company forms and procedures for handling secu-
rity situations in the company’s operation manual. Adhere to and upgrade
these policies. Make sure that all company procedures are easy to follow and
that all employees are made aware of any changes.
Once the retailer has analyzed the possible causes that prompt these law-
suits, devise a plan of action and document both the causes and the plan.
Periodically check the program to make sure it is relevant and works as
planned. The plan may need to be modified to include better security meas-
ures, such as adding lighting to improve visibility, or increasing patrols. Review
in-house or contract security departments to determine whether adequate
training and supervision is being given.
Every business owner or CEO should take immediate steps to avoid and
defend against inadequate security lawsuits. A complete, well-documented
security survey, plan of action, and audit process are the best prevention
effort the retailer can make.
Negligent hiring
If an employee of a retail operation commits a crime against a fellow employee,
customer, or other member of the public, the retailer may be held civilly
liable, to some degree, for the employee’s action. Therefore, employers should
Miscellaneous Risks
111

screen applicants for positions that have access to the public to determine 
if they have a history of conviction for violent crimes. This issue is very
complex and the corporate attorney should be consulted before a policy is
implemented.
Slander and libel
Retailers should be cautious when making spoken or written comments about
theft suspects, vendors, or competitors since these actions could result in
claims of slander or libel. This topic (as are all topics in this section) is best
discussed and reviewed with the corporate legal counsel to avoid misunder-
standings and to devise a comprehensive litigation avoidance program.
Questions
Name some environmental cues that may make shoppers feel unsafe.
Describe three strategies to prevent robbery.
What is a “smash-and-grab”?
List four ways offenders can take advantage of coupon offers.
Name some ways retailers can protect themselves from liability risks.
112
Retail Security and Loss Prevention

Part II Identifying and 
Prioritizing Risks

This page intentionally left blank

115
8
Security Surveys
Why theft, why me?
The complex explanations of theft and loss are many, and are often not well-
understood. Loss problems have always been a function of demand, supply
and the “plumbing that connects the two”. Insatiable demand for basic and
luxury items from commercial buyers and illicit supply chains are fed by
vulnerable licit supply chains and stores. However, a formalized approach to
crime control and asset protection is possible, and a growing body of well-
founded research and theories supports this possibility.
One such theory is the Routine Activities Theory (see Figure 8.1). It holds
that people (likely offenders, employees, and patrons alike) make daily deci-
sions about what they will or will not do. On the basis of their daily routines,
paths, and surroundings, likely offenders may or may not come into contact
with a suitable target – that is, one with low perceived guardianship or risk.
For example, a potential offender who passes a convenience store every day
(a routine activity) may notice, one day, that the store is understaffed, and that
the employee on duty is busy or vulnerable (a suitable target). This combina-
tion of routine activity and suitable target sets the stage for an offense.
2. Level of Guardianship
1. Suitable, Vulnerable Target(s)
3. Likely Offender(s)
Figure 8.1
Routine activities theory

In the early nineties, researchers Brantingham and Brantingham expanded
upon routine activities theory and developed what is called Environmental
Criminology Theory. It illustrates how decisions and movements by offend-
ers and victims can lead to crime. The Brantinghams believe the activity
spaces (home, recreation, work/school) of offenders and victims overlap.
Criminal activity tends to occur along the paths offenders routinely take
(see Figure 8.2).
It is also important to consider the offender’s individual decision-making.
Potential offenders will often consider the following before initiating a crime:
1. Is there an attractive/desirable/vulnerable target?
2. Is it quick and easy to get to the target and remove the item(s)?
3. What are the chances I will be seen?
4. If I am seen, will anyone actually do something about it?
5. Is there a quick, direct escape route? One should also note that if these
thoughts occur, they could take place instantaneously or over time.
The theft triangle model further explains offender decision-making (see
Figure 8.3). The model uses three main variables to help describe an indi-
vidual’s decision to attempt a theft:
1. a perceived need, desire or intention to possess and actually steal some-
thing from a location
116
Retail Security and Loss Prevention
Offender’s Home
Offender’s
Workplace or School 
Offender’s Favorite
Entertainment Area 
High-risk Target
Nodes
Paths
Figure 8.2
Offender’s behavior space and crime events
Motive and intentions for the act
Personal risk of detection and
sanction for committing the act
Opportunity for, and
 difficulty of the act
Figure 8.3
Theft triangle: Offender considerations

2. a belief that there is an opportunity to safely and successfully commit the
theft with relatively little effort
3. little perception of risk, such as capture or sanction.
Using theory to take action
LP managers and personnel need to understand how best to influence would-
be offenders before or during their decision to commit a crime. This will allow
for better decisions about what assets to carry and how best to protect them.
The preceding theories help us begin to assemble a workable, testable asset
protection methodology. Why people are deviant is just as important as
how. If we understand the dynamics of human behavior, we can often influ-
ence both negative and positive behavior. Retailers can then gear prevention
efforts toward altering and countering undesirable behaviors.
Situational crime prevention
The concept of situational crime prevention is also very useful for protecting
assets and supporting safety. This model recommends full analysis of a crime
problem, then design and testing of specific situational protective measures.
By better understanding the desirable asset(s), the probable ‘threat’ (motives
and techniques) and current protective efforts and vulnerability, it is possi-
ble to design a set of initiatives to reduce crime attempts in a specific situa-
tion. The following are 16 examples of such crime prevention initiatives (see
Figure 8.4).
CPTED
A final guiding method for our purposes is termed Crime Prevention Through
Environmental Design or CPTED. Shaped over the last three decades CPTED
has gained widespread acceptance since it is easily understood, and can pro-
vide practical ideas and guidelines for crime prevention in a variety of settings.
CPTED principles can guide designers as they layout new or redesigned spaces
and places. Environmental protective designs should help shape the percep-
tions and behavior of workers, visitors, and potential offenders. All CPTED
efforts should first support the primary intent of the treated space. Treated
stores should sell more and lose less, and places like shopping centers should
be more inviting and safer. CPTED principles include
1. Natural surveillance:
a. The placement and design of assets, displays and physical features to
maximize visibility. This includes building and inside spatial layout and
orientation, windows, entrances and exits, parking lots, walkways,
landscape trees and shrubs, fences or walls, signage, and other physical
obstructions.
Security Surveys
117

Increasing
Perceived
Effort
Increasing
Perceived
Risks
Reducing
Anticipated
Rewards
Social Control
1.Target 
hardening 
Locks 
Bollards for ram 
raids 
Bandit screens 
Hard plastic safes 
Special item 
packaging 
5.Entry/exit 
screening 
Visible entry-way 
cameras 
Bag checks at entry 
EAS/RFID 
Parking lot 
entry/exit cameras 
(ID driver & tag #) 
9.Target 
removal 
Removable car 
radio 
Time-lock safe or 
frequent cash 
deposits 
Remove firearms, 
knives, alcohol, 
etc. from high-
risk stores 
13.Rule 
setting 
Workplace behavior 
code 
Sign workplace 
behavior code 
2.Access 
control /Item 
removal 
Parking lot 
barriers 
Fenced areas 
Locked backrooms 
Merchandise cabling 
Locking POS 
register 
Safes 
Limit parking lot 
entry/exit curb 
cuts 
6.Formal 
surveillance 
Obvious cameras 
Obvious 
burglar/EAS/merchan
dise alarms 
Security 
guards/police 
Alert staff 
Store detectives 
Exception reporting 
software 
10.Identifying 
property 
Property marking 
(ink, dye, 
etching, RFID, 
etc.) 
Vehicle licensing 
Item branding 
14.Stimulating 
conscience 
Roadside 
speedometers 
Signage: 
“Shoplifting is 
stealing” 
“Drugs don’t work 
here” 
“Delivery people 
check in” 
3.Deflecting 
offenders 
Bus stop placement 
Game room location 
Street/parking 
closures & traffic 
channeling 
7.Surveillance by 
employees 
Pay phone location 
Parking lot 
attendants 
CCTV systems 
11.Reducing 
temptation 
Quick & friendly 
customer service 
Quick & friendly 
employee benefits 
& service 
Deliveryman 
service 
15.Controlling 
disinhibitors 
Drinking/smoking-
age laws 
Protective 
merchandising (off 
open-sale) 
4.Controlling 
facilitators 
Credit card/check 
photo 
Gun controls 
Caller-ID 
8.Natural 
surveillance 
Defensible space 
(regular employee 
surveillance from 
work station) 
Street lighting 
“Hot products 
corrals” 
12.Denying 
benefits 
Ink & mechanical 
merchandise tags 
Special clothes 
hangers       
Graffiti cleaning 
Close down 
fences/TDCs that 
convert items to 
cash 
16.Facilitating 
compliance 
Easy store 
checkout 
Good employee pay 
& benefits 
Trash cans 
Figure 8.4
Sixteen situational crime prevention techniques

b. The placement of persons and/or activities to maximize surveillance
possibilities including natural gathering areas, travel routes, security
placement, and regularly manned workstations.
c. Lighting that provides for enhanced illumination of work areas, sales
floors, parking lots, walkways, entrances, and exits.
2. Natural access control:
a. The use of sidewalks, pavement, lighting, and landscaping to clearly
guide the public to and from entrances and exits.
b. The use of fences, barriers, display fixtures, signage, or landscaping to
influence travel direction and speed as well as to prevent and/or dis-
courage public access to or from dark and/or unmonitored areas.
3. Territorial reinforcement:
a. The use of physical attributes that express ownership of property, such
as pavement treatments, landscaping, art, signage, screening, display
fixtures, and fences.
4. Maintenance:
a. The use of low maintenance landscaping, surveillance and access 
control technologies, and lighting treatment to facilitate the CPTED 
principles of natural surveillance, natural access control, and territo-
rial reinforcement.
The three Ds of CPTED
CPTED involves the design of the physical space or place to maximize the
bona fide use of the space, the normal and expected use of that space, and the
predictable behavior of the bona fide users and offenders. CPTED emphasizes
the connection between the functional objective of space usage and behav-
ior management. We must differentiate between designation of the purpose
of space, its definition in terms of management and identity, and its design
as it relates to function and behavior management. By using the “Three Ds”
as a guide, space may be evaluated by asking the following types of questions:
Designation:
What is the designated purpose of this space?
For what purpose was it originally intended?
How well does the space support its current use or its intended use?
Is there conflict?
Definition:
How is space defined?
Is it clear who owns it?
Where are its borders?
Are there social or cultural definitions that affect how space is used?
Are the legal or administrative rules clearly set out and reinforced in policy?
Are there signs?
Is there conflict or confusion between purpose and definition?
Security Surveys
119

Design:
How well does the physical design support the intended function?
How well does the physical design support the desired or accepted behaviors?
Does the physical design conflict with or impede the productive use of the
space or the proper functioning of the intended human activity?
Is there confusion or conflict in the manner in which physical design is
intended to control behavior?
Once these questions have been asked, the information received may be
used as a means of guiding decisions about the use of human space. The
proper functions have to be matched with space that can support them. The
design has to assure that the intended activity can function well and it has to
directly support the control of behavior.
CPTED examples
Example 1
Current approach: A retail store is designed with an expansive sales floor,
numerous head height or higher display shelves, and several poorly lighted
“dead zones” where other customers or employees rarely venture. Over time,
losses mount, employees, and customers complain about the discarded pack-
aging and frequent out of stocks of certain items. The store manager installs
CCTV and mirrors to monitor the situation. But by now people do not feel
comfortable coming here. They feel they cannot always find what they came
looking for, that it may be unsafe, they are being watched on video cameras,
and NOW things are so bad that they have to have a security guard at the
front of the store all the time.
A better approach: The CPTED or environmental approach would have been
to design in the opportunity for Natural Surveillance from the beginning.
Wider aisles, brighter lighting, upbeat and modern signage, and shoulder
height display fixtures with long sight lines angled so employees at regular
workstations can easily monitor them can be employed. Destination points
are placed at the back of the store, and displays act to steer consumers and
workers through less visited spots. A coffee stand, staff break area, local
police substation work area, or reading area may be placed so as to increase
legitimate activities and traffic flow in select areas. Put some type of helpful
activity into an unassigned space in order to create natural crime preven-
tion. In addition, the CPTED approach should be much more customer serv-
ice oriented. It serves the same purpose as the guard, but does not look as
harrowing. In fact, it is much more inviting.
Example 2
Current approach: A local store reports increasing high losses of certain goods,
but is reluctant to stop carrying or lock up the important items since these
120
Retail Security and Loss Prevention

practices caused them to lose needed sales of the products to competitors in
the past. The store’s interior design has store products arrayed to maximize
visibility, but some cosmetics, over the counter medications and other items
just seem to always be out of stock, with discarded packaging for them being
frequently found. Just as in the first example, customers and employees are
growing very frustrated.
A better approach: CPTED principles would suggest re-setting the store so most
of the very high-loss items moved to a new store inside a store concept. An
area near the center of the store is set apart with display fixtures so that peo-
ple must enter and leave through a single point. That point is where a cash
register that is always manned is placed. All purchases of the protected items
must take place at the special register. This concept promotes natural access
control, natural surveillance, and territorial reinforcement at the same time.
Customer service should improve with adequate numbers of well-trained
and motivated staff. Currently power tools, electronics, cosmetics, and other
categories are protected in some high-loss stores using this CPTED approach.
Although this example is more intense, and can hinder staff and consumer
flow, some stores may require more extreme measures.
CPTED principles can help provide natural protection, but the concept is
best used in conjunction with a sound asset protection audit to provide
focus, as well as with complimentary procedures and technology. The good
and unintended negative effects of any loss prevention design should always
be considered before taking action.
Displacement versus diffusion of benefits
Another concept worth mentioning is displacement. Through our protection
efforts, we may displace targeted crime to other areas, other times, other tar-
gets, or to other crime tactics. But hopefully, if a protective treatment proves
effective, we gain deterrence as well as additional benefits from situational
prevention efforts.
Specific crime and loss control efforts often result in a “diffusion of benefits”
(Clarke and Weisburg, 1994), or what is termed the “halo effect” (Scherdin,
1986), by fooling would-be thieves into believing all of our assets or stores
are similarly protected. Some protective efforts not only reduce crime, they
may also reduce the fear of crime felt by our visitors and staff. Managing fear
of crime levels means reducing avoidance behavior (limiting the frequency
and duration of shopping visits) by customers. Finally, in some cases, crime
may just be completely ‘quashed’ (Felson, 1994) with no displacement or
diffusion.
Setting goals
Zero tolerance of crime as a goal is good, but usually not reasonable. In order
to maximize shareowner value we must increase or maintain our sales levels
Security Surveys
121

while reducing our losses and costs. Sound loss prevention should help achieve
both. Soundly protected items mean more desirable assets available for sale
(data show thieves do not usually steal our throw always). Consistent on-shelf
availability of key products means more revenue and happier customers.
Protected cash receipts mean the retailer retains hard-earned money. A safe
atmosphere means our best customers and staff feel comfortable spending
time, and money, on our property.
In order to reduce loss, we must first reduce crime attempts. We must con-
vince people they should not even try to steal from us. Secondly, we must
reduce the loss we incur from those theft attempts that do take place. Finally,
we must reduce the impact of those losses on our company; we can reduce
the impact of loss by tax write-offs, insurance claims, and some civil actions.
We can reduce loss from incidents by an early detection and quick response,
this means we either catch the thief in action so nothing is lost, or catch
them sooner. If we catch a burglar in the act, or the clerk the second or third
time they steal from the register (rather than the 10th or 20th time), we do
not lose as much. By sometimes focusing on the second goal of reducing loss
from incidents, we can accomplish our primary goal: reducing crime attempts.
Quick response, and total or partial recovery of stolen assets, reduces the
inducement or rewards for crime. Hence, the real possibility of sustained
crime and loss reduction exists. This paper focuses primarily on our first
obligation: to reduce crime attempts.
Action process
Using the action process or “road map” (see Figure 8.5), LP planners 
should form a multi-functional team made up of human resources, logistics,
122
Retail Security and Loss Prevention
Call to Action
Prioritize & Plan
Map & Measure
Analyze
Evaluate
Implement
Develop & Test Solutions
Figure 8.5
Project road map or action process

merchandise, IT, store operations, and loss prevention (Beck et al., 2002).
The road map provides for consistent project execution.
After the issue is raised and prioritized, we begin our loss prevention strat-
egy by conducting a situational crime analysis (see Figure 8.6). Our team can
evaluate stock counts, video footage data, cash and inventory transaction
exception reports, protection audits, supply chain and in-store process map-
ping, staff and offender observations, interviews and surveys, staff hotline
calls and other loss, crime and apprehension reports, by benchmarking against
competitors, and with other situation-specific data.
A thorough situational analysis should provide considerable detail on the
scope, scale, dispersion, and prime causes of the problem. Crime and loss
events tend to non-randomly cluster in space and time (Clarke, 1999), and
using fairly clean data from multiple sources and methods should visually
indicate priority protection opportunities. The data patterns should also
provide for reasonable goal setting, given resource and time capabilities and
limitations.
War of maneuver versus a war of attrition
The military science literature contains useful concepts and models. Perhaps
none more suitable to crime and loss control then the comparisons of two
different types of operational strategy. Some armies train to conduct wars of
attrition, while others practice the concept of maneuver. Most militaries
strive to defeat their enemies through incremental attrition. Their objective
is to defeat he enemy on the battlefield by destroying a significant portion
of their assets thereby rendering them combat impotent.
Still other units now practice a war-fighting style termed maneuver
(Department of the Army, 1993). These officers practice to win the dangerous,
fluid and uncertain combat environment by rapid flexible and opportunistic
Security Surveys
123
Asset Analysis
Desirability/Loss Risk of Item
Criticality/Impact of Item Loss
Situation
Threat Analysis
Threat/Offender Profiles
Threat/Offender Density Levels
Threat/Crime Techniques
Vulnerability Analysis
Current Protection Level
Current Compliance/Execution Level
Event Analysis
Density & Dispersion of Crime/Loss/Events
Geographic and Temporal Clustering
Event Movement and other Patterns
Figure 8.6
Situational asset protection analysis

maneuvers. Maneuver proponents operate to gain a spatial and temporal
advantage. They seek to shatter the enemy’s cohesion and morale by rapid,
violent and unexpected actions. Effective maneuver requires the team gain an
overmatch in decision-making data, flexibility and decisive firepower over the
opposition. Good intelligence about the enemy (threat assessment) and well-
trained, focused, independent, mobile and creative personnel with high-
impact tools are critical.
Felson (1996) invites his readers to ‘think about retail crime and its preven-
tion. This proactive thought process offers more promise than almost inviting
people to steal and then trying to catch them afterwards’. The argument here
is crime and loss control efforts should move from an attrition model of
solely defending assets and chasing offenders (although both practices can be
helpful) to the more aggressive maneuver style. We should quickly analyze our
potential and current crime risks and ‘attack’ the ‘enemy’s’ centers of gravity.
Retailers should work collaboratively with product suppliers, transport com-
panies, law enforcement agencies, and solutions providers to gather sound
data and test and implement focused solutions. Simply sticking EAS tags on
merchandise, putting up cameras or catching a sub sample of thieves may not
always be enough. A retailer’s best loss prevention ROI. may result from study-
ing their assets and potential offenders and applying the following model. The
protection strategy or model is designed to exploit the motives and weaknesses
of the threat. Retailers can take the initiative from potential offenders.
Multi-level marketing
The ebb and flow of people, desirable assets, effective protection and crime
events take place in many dimensions. People make choices or decisions, but
within their own circumstances (Felson, 1994, 1998) and based on their par-
ticular (and often unique) perceptions. The best way for us to reduce crime
attempts on our property is to try and influence would-be offenders (their ideas
and actions) in stages. Hayes (1996) called this action “prevention-marketing.”
Prevention marketing concepts are built on traditional marketing principles.
People do, or do not do, things based on their current activities, interests, and
opinions (Blackwell, 1993). And perceptions (influenced by biology and social
learning) shape both lifelong activities and more importantly for us, on-site
behavior (Akers, 1998; Jeffery, 1990). LP managers can reasonably think of
crime reduction efforts as a form of marketing. For instance, store interior
layouts, in-store signage, employee behaviors, and other cues help shape
perceptions and resulting behavior. When an offender commits a crime, our
“deterrence message” probably was not received, recognized, believed, or cared
about. To reduce deviance, we need to improve our prevention-marketing pro-
gram. Our marketing “messages” are delivered in the form of four methodolo-
gies: social control, benefit denial, asset surveillance, and asset control by using
the three primary mediums (see Figure 8.7) of people, programs, and systems.
124
Retail Security and Loss Prevention

Security Surveys
125
Prevention 
Methodologies 
Prevention 
Message(s)
People 
Systems
Social Control 
(Cultural 
Integrity 
Initiatives) 
(informal 
control 
by 
establishing 
an 
hones 
culture 
or 
reinforcing 
guilt 
or 
embarrassment) 
"What's 
right, 
what's 
wrong" 
"Crime 
hurts the 
victims"  
"If you do
it, 
you 
can't get 
a 
good 
job, etc" 
"Don't 
humiliate 
yourself 
in 
front 
of 
your 
friends, 
families 
and 
peer 
groups" 
Leaders 
at 
all
levels 
maintaining 
culture 
of 
honesty 
through 
direction 
and 
discipline. 
Peer 
review 
committees 
for 
policy 
and 
discipline 
Loss 
prevention 
team 
as 
omni-
present reminder.
Employee awareness 
multi-media 
initiatives  
Joint 
mass 
media
prevention efforts 
Exterior 
and 
in-
store 
customer 
deterrence efforts.
Community programs 
Loss 
Performance
Bonuses 
and
Incentives 
Crime 
offender 
database 
system 
Benefit Denial 
(Formal 
control 
by 
denying 
a 
benefit 
from 
stolen assets 
"Don't 
(steal 
this 
item), you 
won't 
be 
able 
to 
use it" 
Loss 
prevention 
and 
non-LP 
enforce 
BDD 
compliance 
I.D. 
mark 
select
items with visibly
and covertly  
Tag 
select 
items
with 
Benefit 
denial 
devices  
Work 
with 
law
enforcement 
and 
shutdown 
aftermarket (TOC'S)
Civil 
action 
to
recover  
Damages 
against 
criminal 
Ink tags 
Mechanical 
tags/clamps
Electronic 
implants 
I.D. 
marking 
systems 
Asset 
Surveillance 
(Formal 
control 
by 
(the credible 
threat 
of 
detection and 
sanction) 
"Don't 
(steal 
this 
item), 
your 
attempts 
will 
be 
detected 
and you'll 
be quickly 
and 
severely 
punished".
Store greeter 
Store staff 
Fitting 
room 
clerks 
Store 
agents/detectives
Uniformed 
personnel 
Parking 
lot 
patrols 
Procedural controls 
which 
require 
approval 
or 
observations 
Employee Awareness 
Initiatives 
CCTV 
Electronic 
detection 
tags (EAS) 
Merchandise 
display 
alarms 
Access 
Control 
Systems 
(AC) 
P.O.S. 
exception 
reports  
Lighting 
Mirrors  
Barriers 
Asset Control 
(Formal 
control 
by 
restricting 
access to an
asset, or the
mobility of an
asset) 
"Don't try 
to (steal 
this 
item), it 
will 
be 
too tough 
or 
take 
too long. 
Company staff 
Guards 
 Procedural 
Controls 
which 
require 
I.D. 
or
restrict access  
Employee Awareness 
Initiatives 
Barriers 
(fencing 
et)  
Locks/Doors
Safes  
P.O.S. 
terminals 
Cabling 
Secure 
fixtures 
Access 
Control 
Systems 
Programs/Procedures
Figure 8.7
Prevention messages and mediums

The four basic prevention methodologies provide any retailer with a variety
of tools for reducing crime attempts. These methodologies, and their inherent
messages, are designed to reduce the desire or inducement for deviance. The
messages should impact behavior by targeting shaping a would-be offender’s
perceptions of motive, opportunities, and personal risk. Social control (or cul-
tural integrity) initiatives allow the retailer to unilaterally build and maintain
a solid, cultural base of honesty and safety in the office, distribution center,
transport vehicles, store, and even the nearby community environment.
Our prevention messages here can take several forms: ‘Don’t steal from us,
don’t hurt us’ (there is a real victim); ‘Don’t do it (the crime), because you will
hurt and/or embarrass yourself’. Company leaders can use these messages by
establishing a simple company vision; clearly defining deviant behaviors and
corresponding sanctions, having staff learn the principles through multi-
media and testing, and sign pledges and codes of conduct. Equally critical is
the constant maintenance of peer/leader driven honesty and loss prevention
efforts. Ethical and protective behavior must be considered the norm. Near
term (such as every paycheck timeline), and readily achieved performance
bonuses for all employees is a powerful way for the company to reinforce its
commitment to an honest workplace.
Numerous opportunities also exist for retail companies to work with each
other and through associations to target specific problems with mass-
marketing and community programs. Parents, teachers, and peers need 
guidance and support resources. Initially, retailers should build their loss pre-
vention program with these social control efforts. Formal controls such as
well-designed, consistent enforcement personnel, procedures, and tech-
nologies should enforce and reinforce the desired culture of honesty.
The relatively new benefit denial concept reduces theft by denying would-
be offenders any real benefit from their crime. Our deterrent message here
is ‘don’t steal it, because you can’t use it’. Ink stained garments, broken eye-
glass frames, or VCRs that must have an inside circuit completed before they
are usable, are examples of benefit denial. Benefit denial also includes the
practice of marking high-risk assets with indelible (visible or invisible) engrav-
ing, inks, or unique chemical isotopes. Efforts against illicit after-markets for
stolen property such as flea markets and pawnshops, some beauty shops and
other ‘theft demand centers’ also fit this category. Benefit denial can elimi-
nate an offender’s motive for theft.
The most widely used prevention technique asset surveillance (threat of
detection) encompasses technologies like store, area, display or merchandise
alarms and annunciators, electronic detection tags and targets (EAS), point
of scale (POS) and merchandise transaction exception reports, increasingly
“intelligent” CCTV domes and camera systems, and lighting. This category
also includes alert employees (absolutely key), store detectives, uniformed
greeters, and even special procedures (i.e., utilizing clear trash bags, or requir-
ing management approval of high-risk transactions like voids or refunds).
126
Retail Security and Loss Prevention

Unfortunately the asset surveillance-marketing message: ‘don’t steal from me
because I will detect your act, apprehend you, and quickly and severely pun-
ish you’, is relatively long and difficult to transfer convincingly. Asset surveil-
lance messages must be easily seen, appear very credible, and be constantly
reinforced.
Retailers are most reluctant to use our fourth methodology – asset control
and security techniques because of capital expense, aesthetic appearance, and
hindrance. However, in many cases, crime and loss levels that require we
restrict access to something by way of passwords, codes, locks, barriers, safes,
displays, signage, POS terminals, or secure merchandise fixtures. In extreme
situations, very high-risk items are removed from open sale during certain
shifts or at all times. Cabling and other special fixtures restrict the mobility
of selected merchandise, slow down selection rates, or require two hands to
remove an asset to disrupt concealment. Keep in mind some policies or pro-
cedures also restrict access to areas (or information), or the mobility of those
assets. Over sized product, tamper-resistant packaging, and applied plastic
“safers” simultaneously hinder concealment, reduce the carrying capacity of
items by thieves, and may even make a noise if the covers are removed.
Electronic tags and store-specific logos may also be affixed to further affect
item disposal. Asset control also bolsters deterrence by threatening increased
risk of detection (asset surveillance). The longer we delay someone, or the
more demonstrative or involved the theft attempt must become, the more
likely the fear of detection and capture forces the offender to retreat.
All crime and loss control efforts should be evidence-based. Offender, con-
sumer and staff interviews, video footage analyses, and randomized con-
trolled trials or field experiments can provide data to critically determine real
world efficacy and cost-effectiveness of protective measures.
Delivery in the zones
To maximize our success, we should consider delivering our prevention mar-
keting messages in concentric ‘zones of influence’ (see Figure 8.8). In the
past we often thought of prevention and security solely in terms of things we
do to protect an asset locally (the asset itself and its immediate surroundings).
Now we can add to that model as we now think three-dimensionally.
Security Surveys
127
5. Home
4. Public
3. Exterior
2. Area
1. Asset/Point
Figure 8.8
Zones of influence

Asset protection efforts begin with the asset itself and work their way out-
ward. Our initiative in Zones 1–3 are generally unilateral in nature, while we
often act in conjunction with other companies and law enforcement agen-
cies in Zones 4–5. There are some crime-reduction actions companies can
take individually such as protective policies and systems. There are other ini-
tiatives (advertising, community outreach), which are probably best done in
conjunction with groups of companies and public entities.
The zones of influence encompass interrelated environmental areas. When
scholars talk about crime, and when security partners (vendors) design crime
control solutions, and of course when proprietary loss prevention people
implement measures, there is sometimes a large jumble of ideas and opin-
ions with no real shape. This makes it difficult for us to visualize what we are
really trying to do. Proper execution in this instance is difficult at best, and
training and mentoring future LP decision-makers is next to impossible. The
‘zones’ concept can give us a clearer, more visual way to plan, describe, and
deliver our strategy. We can insert prevention/protection packages into it.
This strategy is easier to explain to senior managers what we are up to, and
it is easier to assign responsibility. With the zones of influence model, and
the prevention/protection matrix, we can coordinate our efforts within our
company, with other companies, and with public entities.
An important point to consider in developing prevention marketing
packages is the tendency of humans to quickly adjust to and learn to ignore
our efforts. We must keep coming up with fresh protection ideas and con-
cepts (Ekblom, 1997; Farrington et al., 1994). Zone 1 is the actual asset or
point we must protect and really is the most important because if the other
zones fail (or the theft act is purely impulsive), this zone is where the action
is. In most cases our deterrent measures such as CCTV, employees, signage,
product marking, and security systems should be visible and/or clearly
understood to exist in order to work (Farrell, 1985). Whether our would-be
thief thought about stealing from us before they came into our store (pre-
meditated), or after (impulsive/opportunistic), they must understand our
previously outlined prevention messages. We do not want them to try any-
thing in the first place!
Zone 2 is the interior location of a specific area (places and spaces). We
obviously have multiple opportunities to influence the behavior of people
in our stores, and retailers spend millions of dollars to merchandise the store
in very specific ways for that exact purpose. From the moment people (cus-
tomers or staff) enter the store, they should perceive they are in a warm, per-
sonable location, with a strong sense of discipline and control (Turner and
Cashden, 1988; Schlueter et al., 1989; Cox et al., 1990). For example, an
atmosphere of local ‘ownership’ and control reduces theft while boosting
sales (Carroll and Weaver, 1986). It is through a combination of environmen-
tal and technological cues and through contacts with our staff that potential
128
Retail Security and Loss Prevention

offenders form their opinions about crime opportunity. It is important 
to bear in mind that many people may see deterrent cues until they are 
looking for them, so prevention marketing in Zone 2 is vital (Farrell, 1985). 
CCTV domes and monitors, active greeters, specially designed signage, visi-
ble tags, a visible sales floor with few hidden areas, protective displays for
very high-risk products, and of course motivated and mobile staff all create
a subtle atmosphere of control and concern inside Zone 2.
We also have the opportunity to market our store and its security in the
parking lot and at the front door. Zone 3 initiatives can include highly visi-
ble camera domes, bicycle or motorized patrols, carefully designed lighting,
traffic and landscape barriers, signage and even a sense that people inside
the store can, and do, see those outside it. Zone 3 helps us pre-form visitors’
perception of security and control before they enter our building.
The possibility is also there to shape attitudes and opinions about theft,
fraud and fencing (or buying questionable merchandise) behavior, company
vulnerability, and even the apprehension risks to potential offenders in a gen-
eral public setting. Retailers working with other retailers and law enforce-
ment agencies can deliver focused prevention messages in neighborhoods,
schools, buses, clubs, on the Internet, in movie theaters, churches, wherever
likely offenders, and there “handlers” congregate. We call this public venue
Zone 4. We can help prevent problems by ‘planting’ perceptions in Zone 4
(Decker, 2003; Hiew, 1985; Johnson and Bowers, 2003). We can also support
groups that train, counsel, or otherwise have dealings with our youth, and
other potential offenders. Zone 4 initiatives may also bolster (pre-market) the
effectiveness of our prevention efforts in other zones by pre-selling the per-
vasiveness and effectiveness of asset protection efforts. Collaborative efforts
against organized retail crime (ORC) networks also take place in Zone 4 since
demand reduction marketing to retail buyers and consumers need to be con-
vinced that buying suspicious items helps support product tampering, theft,
hijacking, counterfeiting of items and packaging, expiration date changing,
public corruption, and violence at several levels (Hayes and Rogers, 2003).
Likewise, disruption of illicit markets and ORC offenders is typically a joint
project involving retailers, associations and law enforcement professionals
(Hayes and Rogers, 2003).
The home (Zone 5) is similar to Zone 4, and provides several opportuni-
ties for prevention marketing via home study kits, TV, radio, and Internet-
delivered messages. Core value formation and informal control start in the
home (Felson, 1998), and parents need graphic, user-friendly teaching tools
such as those provided for anti-smoking and drug use campaigns. Parents,
teachers, clergy, and other influencers also need reinforcement for their own
teaching efforts. Companies (victims) working with each other can affect
public perceptions and behavior (Decker, 2003; Hiew, 1985; Johnson and
Bowers, 2003).
Security Surveys
129

Discussion
This introduction outlines some current thinking on real solutions retailers
can examine and tailor to their individual situations. Much remains to be
done, but through cooperation, retailers, law enforcement, academia, and
others, the ‘mixed’ record of crime and loss prevention success can be
improved. The concepts of focused prevention marketing of evidence-based
protective measures and messages into multiple zones of influence offer
hopes for moving toward real, sustained theft, and loss control. This multi-
faceted, multi-level marketing effort better ensures loss prevention success.
Lowered theft and crime attempts mean safer and more profitable stores.
This model (see Figure 8.9) is meant to provide a starting point for research
and development. More research on individual crime prevention efforts,
perhaps using experimental designs, should be done in cooperation with
individual retail companies. Also, retail companies need academic support
for their loss prevention training programs as well.
On the basis of the previous concepts, we can now begin the diagnosis and
treatment process. Crime and loss result from the integration of risk (a threat
level of error and deviance) and vulnerability level (the store’s weaknesses).
It is our job to collect the data needed to assess risks and vulnerabilities –
before and during the problem. Many businesses and public law enforcement
agencies tend to throw money and limited resources at highly visible or per-
ceived risk areas rather than determining, through survey and incident analy-
sis, the risks that are the highest and where the resulting negative financial
impact is the greatest. The first step in designing a cost-effective loss control
program for any retail operation is to conduct a complete security survey. 
A security survey is generally defined as an on-site examination of a business
or location to determine risks, probability of each risk, vulnerability to those
risks, security measures and policies currently in effect, and the effectiveness
and operating/ongoing execution status of those measures and policies. This
130
Retail Security and Loss Prevention
•
Collect Credible Data
•
Diagnose and Clearly Define the Problem
•
Prescribe Asset Protection Solutions
o
Deterrent messages and mediums
o
Zones to deploy the program in
•
Test and Refine Solutions 
o
Deterrence and Financial Effectiveness
o
Employee Compliance Over Time
•
Set AP Program Performance Goals
•
Deploy the Asset Protection Program
•
Monitor Program Performance
•
Evaluate Program Performance and Refine or Discontinue
Figure 8.9
Prevention marketing model

information is collected through visual inspection, employee interviews,
responses to employee questionnaires, and review of company documents,
CCTV footage, and computer data.
To ensure accurate data collection, the individuals who conduct the 
survey must be experienced in determining risk and adequacy of security
measures. The survey used should focus on risks to the organization in 
three areas – physical security, personnel security, and information security.
In defending the company’s physical, personnel, and information assets
against the risks identified in the previous chapters of this book, retailers
should consider a twofold protection strategy. This strategy includes Defense
in Depth (layers of physical and psychological barriers that deter, delay, 
or stop perpetrators in their efforts) and Accumulated Delay Time, which 
are achieved by delaying perpetrators with layered defenses so that the 
probability of their becoming discouraged or being apprehended increases
with time.
Surveys take these factors into account and help measure the probable
effectiveness of current and recommended defense efforts in accomplishing
the goals of defense in depth and delay. These defensive efforts should not
hinder positive customer service efforts, but fit well within the company’s
overall goal of increased profits.
Before starting the survey, it is important to step back and look at the
retail operation as a whole. Normally, the process begins with the merchan-
dise buyer agreeing to purchase a quantity of merchandise from a vendor. A
purchase order is generated and the merchandise is delivered. At this point,
the merchandise is processed, priced, and displayed or sent to individual
stores. Once in the stores, items are stored or displayed for sale. As the items
are sold, clerks accept cash, checks, or credit cards for payment. The sales
receipts are then deposited in a bank. At every point of this oversimplified
process, corporate assets are vulnerable to theft and waste. Therefore, the
survey should include every aspect of this process. This review process can
be used for expected and current issues including terror incidents, robbery,
bad checks, natural disasters, etc.
Historical data
A major aspect of any security survey is the collection of historical data from
local retailers and law enforcement agencies on past incidents. The type of
events taking place in the business or in similar businesses, as well as fre-
quency and location information can be collected. When historical data are
considered with other data types, keep two facts in mind.
1. Studies generally indicate only 31–102 percent of shoplifting incidents are
detected. If thieves and their activities are not detected, they cannot be
apprehended and the incidents cannot be documented.
Security Surveys
131

2. Of those individuals actually apprehended, it is estimated only 353 percent
are referred to law enforcement agencies.
This information indicates those local retailers, who keep detailed records,
should have a more accurate picture of the major retail threat risks 
(e.g., employee theft, vendor fraud, and shoplifting) than federal, state, or
local police agencies. Law enforcement agencies should, however, have rel-
atively accurate data on robbery and burglary incidents in a given area, since
these crimes are more frequently reported. Although retailers consider each
other competitors, this is generally not the case when it comes to the area
of asset protection. If informal contact is made with another retailer in the
area, a discussion of security problems and a sharing of information is usu-
ally the result.
Document all loss incidents and store them for later study. The best pre-
dictor of the future is often the past and this axiom holds true for the retail
business. Retailers forecast anticipated sales and merchandise needs based on
past experiences and so too should the security practitioner forecast security
challenges and needs.
The system used to collect and analyze theft data does not have to be
expensive or overly sophisticated – just consistent and usable. Incident reports
can be electronic, or designed for easy data input, they have information
blocks, to be checked where appropriate, that indicate certain minimal infor-
mation. Examples of required information include
•
date of the incident
•
time of the incident
•
location of the incident
•
type of incident
•
method of operation (i.e., how the offense was committed)
•
offender descriptions
•
what protective measures were breached or ignored
•
offender de-brief data
•
how the incident was discovered
•
distinctive case number
•
a short descriptive narrative.
The surveyor needs to access historical incident data. Any prevailing crime
or loss patterns need to be identified, such as which loss threats impact the
operation, who is likely to cause the threat, how these threats are likely to
occur, and when and where these threats are likely to occur.
The way to understand the data collected is to express them as incident
rate by opportunity. This form of data expression compares the number of
incidents of a particular type to the number of potential targets of that par-
ticular incident over a specified period of time. For example, if there were
132
Retail Security and Loss Prevention

3,000 reported shoplifting incidents in the company in the last year and there
are 100 stores, the incident rate by opportunity for shoplifting was 0.30. If, for
the same company, there were 24 armed robberies during the same period,
the incident rate by opportunity factor would be 0.024. In this example, the
probability of a shoplifting incident occurring is much greater than the proba-
bility of an armed robbery.
Other information that can be gleaned from historical data includes the
dollar amount of loss per incident, the location of theft accidents, common
theft methods used, the identity of the offenders, and how the incidents
were detected.
As mentioned earlier, other data sources can help assemble a more com-
plete diagnostic and deeper understanding. CCTV video footage can reveal
employee and visitor behavior patterns. Employee and offender interviews
can offer tremendous insight into problems and proposed solutions. Cycle
counts can isolate item loss times and places, and product sales, replenish-
ment or adjustment, and recovered packaging data all assist in a more accu-
rate diagnostic as well as in testing and refining solutions.
Assets to be protected
After probable risks are identified and multi-method data on incidents
involving these risks are collected, the next step of the survey involves iden-
tifying the assets to be protected. Obvious examples include
•
corporate office/buying offices
•
sensitive information
•
employees
•
computer systems and websites
•
office equipment
•
integrity of merchandise buyers, purchasing agents, real estate site locaters
•
company reputation
•
physical facility security
•
merchandise buying operations and behaviors
•
distribution centers, receiving/vendor delivery, merchandise movement
and pricing, invoice processing, inventory control process, shipping to
stores, physical facility security, safety of employees
•
store safety of employees and customers, merchandise, cash on hand,
physical facility security.
The surveyor should list assets to be protected and the approximate aver-
age retail dollar value of these assets, if possible. Company reputation and loss
of life are examples where the assignment of a numerical value is difficult or
inappropriate.
Security Surveys
133

Flow charting
An ongoing asset protection program should include making charts to illustrate
the flow of cash, documents, and merchandise through the enterprise (see
Figure 8.10). This effort helps the loss control team to step back and view the
total organization. This view of the company as a system, not a static entity,
should be the mind-set of those involved in shortage control. This type of chart
can also prove useful in the initial and periodic analysis of survey data.
Review of current company policies and practices
An examination of the company’s current protection program is another
key part of the asset protection survey. Every retailer should have some sort
of security or prevention program. We can break a protection program down
into general categories:
1. People: All personnel involved, in some way, with the loss control effort
(which should be all employees) are included in this category. Examples
include selection, orientation, training, duties, and responsibilities of
company employees in regard to safeguarding corporate assets.
2. Programs: This category includes all policies and procedures designed to
control losses, such as policies and procedures that restrict access (oppor-
tunity reduction), require transaction verification by a supervisor (increase
detection probability), or require that all employees be trained to detect
and prevent potential loss situations. Policies generally indicate what sen-
ior management wants specified personnel to do. Procedures are the direc-
tions needed to enact and enforce policies. A process is broken down into
procedures.
3. Systems: This category includes physical and psychological deterrents to
theft and error. Alarms, lighting, locks, doors, EAS, CCTV, computer or
manually generated reports, and subliminal messaging machines are all
examples of asset protection systems.
Company policy and document review
Obtain and review copies of company goals, policy statements, delega-
tions of authority, responsibilities, directives, and job descriptions to 
134
Retail Security and Loss Prevention
•
Receive merchandise
•
Reconcile received goods with purchase order(s) 
o
Proper quantity, brand, condition, etc.
•
Process merchandise through center or store in proper location
•
Pick orders
•
Stage and process picked items for truck loading
•
Load and dispatch truck to one or more stores
Figure 8.10
Merchandise processing cycle for distribution centers

understand where the company is, where it wants to go, and how it plans to
get there.
It is recommended that part of the assert protection process is explicit map-
ping. In other words, primary process steps in say handling high-risk prod-
ucts, cash register handling, or bank deposits should be identified in the field.
A cross-functional team should visit facilities to observe and question people.
Compare this information to the data collected in subsequent interviews and
observations.
Interview
Interview individuals involved in loss prevention and groups of store and
distribution facility employees to gain an understanding of what is actually
taking place in the work environment. Find out how well control policies
and procedures are understood and adhered to. Many times, a retailer will have
well-planned and documented security policies, but the policies are not rou-
tinely followed. Company employees are usually aware of loss problems and
may have even worked out solutions to perceived problems. It is important to
gain company employees’ cooperation by putting them at ease. Employees
must know that they can speak candidly, without negative repercussions.
Encourage and enable your staff.
Observation of operations
Make a preliminary tour of the targeted facility noting areas for later closer
study. Revisit the facility, observe and carefully note employee activity, and
photograph protection equipment and vulnerable areas for later study.
Appendix 4 provides an abbreviated survey and Appendix 5 contains a
sample completed store audit report to be used when collecting data for a
loss control program. The data contained in these tools will be used during
the analysis phase to determine key asset vulnerability.
Summary
A thorough, open-minded security survey is the first critical step in deter-
mining the type of loss control program for a given organization. Every
retail operation should have an experienced consultant or in-house security
personnel conduct the initial survey. The operation then should be fully sur-
veyed on an annual basis, although high-risk or problem areas should be
surveyed more frequently.
The retail risk survey, when properly conducted, will identify probable loss
areas within the organization. Additionally, it should reveal the actual effec-
tiveness of current prevention activities. By personal observation of routine
activities, review of company documents and interview of company employ-
ees, the security specialist can determine the majority of the problem areas.
The detail of the conducted survey is dependent on the objectives of the loss
control director.
Security Surveys
135

Questions
Name the main theories that, together, form CPTED.
What are the three elements of the Theft Triangle and how do they interact?
Which loss incidents should a retailer thoroughly document?
What are two things you can do to start to understand problems are taking
place in a specific store?
Name two major components of a security survey.
136
Retail Security and Loss Prevention

137
9
Data Analysis
Phase II of designing a cost-effective protection program involves the break-
down and study of data collected during Phase I, The Security Survey. If the
conducted survey was fairly comprehensive, there should be enough informa-
tion available to help determine loss trends and indicate future security needs.
This chapter describes a three-step approach to prioritizing risk threats.
The study of loss targets, the current protection program, and past loss inci-
dents allows the retailer to assign a priority value to each risk. By prioritizing
risks, the retailer saves time and resources in the future by first focusing on
major problems.
Do our asset protection programs really “work”
Most retailers try to find out if LP investments work well enough to payback
before buying them, but the credibility of LP effectiveness evidence can
vary widely. Fact-based or evidence-based solutions are the “gold-standard”
for most critical disciplines. Most evaluation research in medicine, agricul-
ture and law enforcement for example includes certain elements. These
elements provide the rigor needed to decide if something really works
well enough to invest in.
Basic scientific elements allow a retailer to infer cause and effect (or
lack of it). Some testing may indicate using a new system or procedure brings
loss down, but there are usually a bunch of other things that caused a change
in loss level besides the “treatment.” By using a before and after look, we
can help isolate the cause-effect relationship. Likewise, comparing the
before and after of stores getting treated with similar stores that do not
further eliminates competing explanations for loss changes. Random store
selection and assignment to groups provides even stronger evidence. The
more control we use, the stronger the research design (Figure 9.1). The
stronger the evidence, the better the decision.

Possible and probable financial loss
Each type of loss identified in the security survey can be ranked according
to two factors – possible maximum loss and probable maximum loss.
Possible maximum loss is the total loss sustained if a risk target or asset is lost
and/or destroyed. Probable maximum loss is the loss the risk target is likely to
sustain. Certain parts of a target are more susceptible or vulnerable than oth-
ers (hot spots). If the target under examination is the merchandise inventory
of a particular store, certain items (hot products) are more likely to be stolen
(e.g., fine jewelry vs. men’s ties or pain relievers vs. recorded music) than
others. These losses should be expressed in terms of dollars, since that is a
measurement common to all retailers. The security specialist must show sen-
ior management the total ramification of their losses.
Every loss can be broken down into two types of costs to the company –
direct and indirect.
I
Examples of direct costs
A. Cash – operating capital needed to service debts and fund expansion;
and the time value and opportunity costs.
B. Merchandise – the cost of buying, shipping, processing, and advertis-
ing merchandise held for sale.
C. Property – the replacement cost of nonsalable property (i.e., damaged
or destroyed), and stolen and lost goods.
D. Information – sensitive information, such as customer addresses, future
store sites, etc.
E. Lost or stolen product out of stocks can reduce sales when product is
not available for customer purchase.
II
Indirect costs
A. Reputation with public or creditors – retailers with shrinkage prob-
lems can be suspected of suffering from bad management.
B. Loss of employees – recruiting, hiring, and training costs are multiplied
when employee turnover increases due to dishonesty, poor morale, or
fear.
C. Employee morale – honest employees are demoralized by the presence
of dishonest employees and rampant shoplifting, possibly reinforcing
apathy.
138
Retail Security and Loss Prevention
Weak
Moderate
Strong
1. Reliable, powerful correlation test

2. Temporal ordering of cause and effect

3. Elimination of Major Rival Hypotheses

Figure 9.1
A scale of evidentiary strength for cause and effect

D. Goodwill – the loss of targeted customers due to public perception of an
unsafe atmosphere or the absence of desired merchandise due in part to
theft.
These costs can be measured in terms of loss of assets, replacement costs, or
loss of income. If an asset such as merchandise or critical information is lost,
the resulting costs may come from one or all of the following areas:
Permanent replacement cost – permanent replacement cost includes the whole-
sale purchase price, shipping charges and costs, and the cost to prepare and
display merchandise lost to theft, accident, or error.
Insurance cost – the cost of applicable insurance premiums and deductibles
should be subtracted from the coverage amount. The amount of coverage
should then be subtracted from the maximum probable cost amount to
accurately determine real costs.
Temporary replacement cost – if a part of a store location is damaged by fire, tem-
porary costs may include rent or lease expenses and additional labor costs.
Related cost – if a store is damaged by a natural disaster, an example of a related
cost includes the salary cost of idle store employees.
Lost income cost – the loss of the use of a store or key merchandise can result in
the operation having to divert cash, which could be earning interest elsewhere,
to subsidize replacement and related costs. This is in addition to the loss of rev-
enues. The following simple formula is used to determine lost income cost:
TT I 
 P  t
where Iincome earned
iannual rate of return
Pprincipal amount available for investment
ttime, in days, during which P is available for investment.
Assigning financial impact rates
By affixing a total cost to each projected loss target, a rate can be assigned to
each target. This rate reflects the financial impact the loss or destruction of
that target would have on the retail organization. There are five rates that can
be assigned to projected loss targets.
1. Rating grave – a loss of this magnitude could result in the abandonment
of long-term shutdown of the company.
2. Rating critical – a loss of this magnitude could have a major negative
impact on company assets or could force a major change in the company’s
investment policy.
i
365
Data Analysis
139

3. Rating serious – a loss of this magnitude would have a noticeable impact
on annual earnings.
4. Rating moderate – a loss of this magnitude would be covered by normal
contingency reserve funds.
5. Rating unknown – this is a temporary rating that is assigned until all 
priorities are established and a specific financial impact rate is 
assigned.
Every retailer can use this rating system, since it is subjective in design. The
level of a company’s annual revenues and its contingency funds determine
the rating assigned to a potential loss. A $10,000 loss for a small retailer may
equate a $100,000 or even a $1,000,000 to a larger retailer. Therefore, a small
one-store jewelry operation that grosses $100,000 a year might assign a
“grave” rating to a potential loss of $50,000 worth of inventory.
Probability of incident occurrence and causal probing
In order to more accurately rank loss threats from grave to moderate, the
analyst should strive to determine the probability or likelihood that a par-
ticular incident will occur, or how often it is likely to occur. The study of
data collected during the survey can focus on two areas – current security
and protective measures, and review of past loss incidents that have affected
the company.
A major factor to consider when determining probability and frequency of
adverse incidents are the data collected in the survey. Every attempt must be
made to acquire this type of information. If there are no records of this infor-
mation, the analyst can try to obtain similar information from businesses in
the area and from local law enforcement authorities. Interviews and written
surveys from employees can reveal much of this information.
As past incidents are examined, trends should become apparent. Trends to
look for include
•
type of incident
•
predominant time of occurrence, such as time of day, day of week, season,
etc.
•
type of merchandise taken, such as apparel, jewelry, health and beauty
aids, etc.
•
particular store, distribution center, district, or region
•
specific places within stores or facilities
•
method of theft used, such as robbery, armed robbery, etc.
•
profile of offenders, such as age, sex, employee, motives, etc.
•
number of offenders
•
average dollar amount of loss and/or recovery.
•
breakdown in protective efforts.
140
Retail Security and Loss Prevention

The primary causes of loss should be determined. Loss dynamics include
the who, what, when, where, why, and how. An example of this might be if
sales and loss data indicate a set of stores is losing a particular product at an
exceptionally high rate, then the analyst might want to look at the data to
understand if the problem is theft, and if so, if it is internal or external. If
external, self-use or convert to cash shoplifters. Then theft methods and
times might be isolated.
One factor to consider when determining a target’s vulnerability is the
number of ways a particular loss event can happen. In the case of high-cost
merchandise, the target may be damaged, lost, stolen by vendors, employ-
ees, and customers. Since the variety of ways to lose this target is so exten-
sive, the probability of a financial loss is much higher than other lower cost
merchandise.
Characteristics of the target should also be considered when determining
vulnerability to loss. Examples include the mobility of the item, access to the
item, the numbers and types of people who have access to the item, and the
real or perceived value of the asset with merchandise, asset value to offenders
is in part related to its portability, concealability, desirability, and how readily
it can be converted to cash or drugs. Also, in the case of natural or man-made
disasters, physical and political environments must be considered.
There are several tools the security analyst can use to help determine prob-
ability and frequency of adverse incidents, such as incident calendars and plot
maps. Incident calendars are large calendars on which incidents are entered
by the date on which they occurred, to determine if patterns are taking place.
Plot maps are geographical maps or schematic charts of a business that have
been covered with plastic or acetate so that loss incidents can be plotted to
indicate patterns of occurrence. Plot maps are also used to indicate whether
prevention efforts are displacing incidents from one locale to another map-
ping and statistical software can facilitate this process.
Examining data
Once financial impact rates have been assigned, the prime causes of loss have
been described, and probability of incident occurrence has been estimated
for potential losses, the next step is to analyze the data collected during the
survey regarding current security efforts. Starting with grave loss targets and
working down to moderate loss targets, the analyst may review stated policies
and procedures for those loss targets and compare them to the actual prac-
tices taking place. In each case, barriers, control procedures, and employee
training designed to detect and deter theft and error should be in place. If
there are no control, no adherence to control policies, or an inadequate train-
ing effort, this should be noted. This information helps gauge the vulnera-
bility of that asset to loss and suggests what effective countermeasures should
be considered for implementation.
Data Analysis
141

Individuals who analyze data should have the expertise to correctly inter-
pret collected information. It is also helpful to understand the day-to-day
operation of the business. Data should be interpreted in context, and multi-
source data are better than those from just one source. Sales and loss data
provide a better picture than just one loss, for example.
The probability of a particular crime or loss incident changes constantly.
Employees may be more liable to steal cash from a register if their personal
needs are strong, there is a large amount of cash available, or if a more lax
member of store management is on duty. Crime and loss tend to be situational.
There is no secret formula or mathematical equation that will ensure perfect
analysis of loss threat data due to the number and complexity of social and
environmental factors that affect loss incidents. However, the primary results
of a thorough analysis can include
•
trends or patterns of similar type incidents
•
suspect or crime links, that indicate a possible perpetrator or criminal 
network
•
target profiles that indicate locations, merchandise or other assets that are
frequently victims of losses
•
forecasting of future incidents or shrinkage percentages
•
adjusting protective program types, deployment tactics or execution.
Assigning loss incident probability rate
After all available data have been collected and examined in context, a prob-
ability rating can be estimated similar to the rating used to rank impact of
financial loss on a business. This rating is recommended before new coun-
termeasures are tested. The analysis process we have gone through should
provide for more focused solutions. The assigned rating estimates the likeli-
hood of an event occurring compared to other significant adverse events.
Below are five loss incident probability rates that may be used:
1. Rating almost certain – barring major changes in circumstances, this event
will occur or will occur frequently, compared to other events (shoplifting
of hot products in hot stores for instance).
2. Rating very probable – this type of incident is more likely to occur than not
to occur.
3. Rating probable – this type of event should occur if circumstances remain
stable.
4. Rating improbable – this event is less likely to occur.
5. Rating unknown – more data are required to assign a rate.
While this type of rating system is not exact, it does allow the security spe-
cialist to make systematic, more informed guesses. When in doubt, you may
assign a higher rating.
142
Retail Security and Loss Prevention

Prioritizing risks
Now that risks have been assigned financial impact and probability rates, the
asset protection specialist may prioritize risks, starting with listing the most
serious risks. By prioritizing risks in descending order, attention can be focused
on the most serious threats first. By following this method, risks could be
listed as follows:
1. A1, A2, A3, A4
2. B1, B2, B3, B4
3. C1, C2, C3, C4
4. D1, D2, D3, D4
The analyst can make the determination if greater weight should be given
to the financial impact, or the vulnerability of the asset when prioritizing
risks. Obviously, threats to human safety or privacy should be handled care-
fully. Once all risks have been ranked, the formal security data analysis is
complete. The security specialist has identified and prioritized risks, the
threats or loss dynamics have been examined and described, and the asset
protection specialist may now design, test, and refine, and implement cost-
effective countermeasures to reduce losses.
Questions
Describe the five costs that result from the loss of merchandise or critical
information.
Explain three things to look for when determining probability of incident
occurrence.
What is the purpose of assigning financial impact rates to projected loss 
targets?
What should come first while prioritizing risks?
Loss trends and future security needs can be determined following the com-
pletion of what?
Data Analysis
143

This page intentionally left blank

Part III Designing and
Implementing Prevention
Programs

This page intentionally left blank

147
10
Loss Prevention Program Design
The third phase of the integrated approach to controlling retail loss is the
design of a comprehensive countermeasure program. Because the retailer has
already examined and prioritized identified risks or problems, the loss con-
trol program can be more focused. The required level of sophistication of the
program depends on the extent of loss problems, leadership, mandates, and
the available investment resources.
Basic program focus
Using a basic matrix (such as that shown in Figure 10.1), the loss control
director may decide which risk management methods to use to reduce losses.
Depending on the rates assigned during the ranking process, one or more risk
management techniques are recommended for a given countermeasure pro-
gram. The generally accepted risk management techniques include:
•
risk avoidance
•
risk reduction
Figure 10.1
Sample risk management decision matrix

•
risk spreading
•
risk transfer
•
risk acceptance
One or all of these methods can be used to manage loss risks or problems
to some extent.
Risk avoidance
Risk avoidance involves removing the loss target so that risk is generally
avoided. When a retailer deposits sales receipts in a bank, or when a store
decides not to carry certain items, the risk of losing these funds or items on
the retail premises no longer exists, at least temporarily. This technique is
the most effective way of removing risk, but because it is so severe, it is
impractical. A grocery store would not normally consider moving all health
and beauty aid products from their stores, but a department store chain
might not carry firearms in a riot-prone area.
Rarely can significant risks be completely avoided, but, when extreme
(i.e., a very high-risk trading area and a weak store management team) the
loss control director should at least consider this method.
Risk reduction
Since most risks cannot be avoided completely, risk reduction is the most
preferred risk management method. A retailer can reduce the maximum
probable loss of risks by reducing the amount or attractiveness of specific
loss targets. Instead of removing all high-loss items from their inventory,
store managers can reduce on-shelf levels to the normal rate of sale, with
special positioning and protective fixtures for the most high-risk products.
Another example of risk reduction is to make periodic cash pick-ups from
point-of-sale registers to reduce the amount of cash vulnerable to theft.
Risk reduction should be considered prior to considering the more expen-
sive risk-spreading method, since the success of the risk reduction is often
more successful with the implementation and ongoing sustainment of good
control procedures, and not on costly hardware or services.
Risk spreading
After avoidance and reduction techniques have been applied or examined,
the very similar risk spreading may be considered, particularly for high-risk
targets. Risk spreading is perhaps the best known of the risk management
methods and involves the application of situational, active asset protection
security systems and procedures to accomplish the four Ds.
1. Deter potential incidents by discouraging perpetrators with control hardware
and procedures, and by educating customers and employees about hazards
and security techniques.
148
Retail Security and Loss Prevention

2. Deny access to sensitive information, unsafe areas, or high-risk assets.
3. Delay offenders with a series of physical and psychological barriers so that
they might be identified and/or apprehended.
4. Detect unsafe or dishonest situations as part of an overall LP program.
Examples of risk spreading include regular counting and special handling
of hot products, intrusion detection devices, access control barriers, surveil-
lance systems, inventory control procedures, employee awareness training,
and accounting control and verification procedures.
Retailers may pass on costs of theft and security to their customers in the
form of higher prices. This is a form of risk spreading that is increasingly
unpopular with retail operations and their customers. With intense compe-
tition from other retailers and selling channels, as well as the use of civil
lawsuits increasing, and increasing competition, high pricing tactics should
continue to decrease.
Another form of risk spreading is sharing or passing on civil liability to
merchandise and service vendors with contracts. Court rulings will deter-
mine, overtime, the effectiveness of this practice. Currently, many companies
view incorporation and partnership agreements as well as special pricing or
credits as a form of risk spreading.
Risk transfer
The next option available to retailers is to transfer the risk to another entity.
A primary method used to accomplish this is the purchase of a comprehen-
sive insurance policy. Insurance should not be purchased until the first
methods have been applied or the insurance may be so expensive that risk
transfer is not cost-effective.
Risk avoidance, reduction, and spreading methods should be well-
planned, documented, and presented to the insurance agent before a cost
quote is requested, to keep unit cost to a minimum. Insurance is an excellent
risk management tool and should be considered, but thoroughly research the
issue before premiums are budgeted.
Risk acceptance
The final method used by retailers is risk acceptance. This method is gener-
ally considered a last resort and is used after other methods have been 
tried or are found to be not cost-effective. In accepting risk, the retailer
accepts the maximum probable loss of a particular risk as a cost of doing
business. Risk acceptance is generally defined as the level of loss a retailer
can sustain without financially impacting the business. This cost may be
budgeted for specifically, covered by a general reserve fund, or simply
absorbed. Examples of risk acceptance include replacement costs for small
items that have been pilfered, shrinkage reserves insurance premiums, or
insurance deductibles.
Loss Prevention Program Design
149

Risk control countermeasures
Retail organizations exist to make a profit. Therefore, when designing risk con-
trol countermeasures, the security specialist may keep several factors in mind.
Cost-effectiveness
Any loss control program (or part of the program) should prove cost-effective
over a period of time. The total cost of security must be kept to the minimal
amount required to control losses. Most retailers express their cost to control
shrinkage as a percentage of sales.
The cost of control can range from almost nothing (certain loss control
procedures) to moderate cost (employee awareness training programs), to
higher cost (placing EAS systems in DCs and all stores). Generally both pro-
cedures and LP require ongoing human effort to function as planned. These
programs may be cost-justified based on the threats that a retailer faces, but
the security specialist should think in terms of least-cost techniques and
sound management principles before recommending that sophisticated
security hardware be used. The efficacy of countermeasures can sometimes
be determined with systematic research such as cycle counts, CCTV review,
sales and loss data, and surveys. Time and place controls should be used to
ensure valid and generalizable findings.
Redundancy
The company employee responsible for loss control should keep in mind
that systems designed to protect very high-risk assets should have back-up
security systems in case of primary system failure. For example, perimeter
and internal alarm systems should be separated in case one system fails or
in case those to be deterred do not notice or respect the countermeasures.
Teamwork
While planning the loss control program, asset protection specialists should
take into account the fact that there may be policies, personnel, and equip-
ment inside and outside of their control that must be altered or eliminated.
LP is often mostly an advisory function with few controllable resources.
Customer service levels, product handling procedures, the use of security
hardware, and other important functions are not usually within the purview
of LP staff. When possible, these factors should be identified and made a
part of the action plan and budgeting process. Senior management must be
made aware of the situation, and a teamwork approach taken to resolve
these issues so working relationships between the loss control department
and other departments are not hindered. All affected departments should
serve on a corporate LP team.
Both LP and management executives should be sensitive to each other’s
goals. Total access to items enhances the tendency to buy them. However,
150
Retail Security and Loss Prevention

this practice also enables shrinkage. Many retailers start off with a few con-
trol procedures and practices, and move toward more control as losses con-
tinue to mount. It is recommended to work together to accomplish the
ultimate goal of increased profitability.
Customer convenience and perception
Store planners use store layout and fixture protocols to influence the behav-
ior of both employees and customers. Effective visual merchandising and
prominent product display, for example, will induce customers to buy more
merchandise. Likewise, retailers often strive to make their customers’ shop-
ping experience a convenient and pleasant one. As the LP program is
designed, the security specialist should work with store operations and mer-
chandise display personnel to reach a happy medium between displaying all
merchandise on the sidewalk and locking everything up. The position of
employee workstations as well as hot product display can influence both
sales and loss.
Bar coding self-checkout (when well-executed), and RFID are all examples
of systems that decrease the time a customer spends at the cash register, while
enhancing inventory control.
Labor requirements
Loss control procedures or programs may require an increase in the labor force
hours or may divert employees’ attention from other tasks to LP. These fac-
tors must be considered and planned for. Some security systems can reduce
labor intensity by simplifying procedures or by assuming functions formally
handled by employees or outside contract agencies. Card access, EAS, and
CCTV systems all take over functions that may have been previously pro-
vided by security personnel, but many require employee surveillance to
work properly.
Time sensitivity of countermeasures
Many procedures or security systems become obsolete annually or even
monthly because of new technology, sociological changes, or new court rul-
ings. Therefore, retailers should consider countermeasures timeliness as a part
of their program design. A retailer should not, however, wait indefinitely
before implementing needed policies and equipment.
Program manageability
Another factor to be considered during the design phase is the ability of
executives in charge of the security function, their staffs, and store and facil-
ity personnel to effectively manage the LP program. Before attempting to
implement a costly, sophisticated program, the affected personnel involved
should be interviewed, procedures and systems should be tested for sustain-
ability, effectiveness, and desirability. Likewise, involved staff should be
Loss Prevention Program Design
151

carefully selected and trained. Individuals in supervisory roles should have
demonstrated technical knowledge, proficiency, as well as and leadership
qualities, or the best-designed program in the world is doomed to minimal
effectiveness.
No guarantees
Retailers at all levels should realize there is no such thing as an infallible
security system. No single process is always effective. Incidents will occur and
losses will take place. The key is to prepare for and attempt to cost-effectively
reduce adverse incidents, and reduce the negative effects of previously
uncontrolled losses.
Threat analysis
Each risk requires certain actions or inactions to take place in order for the
loss to occur. For example, if the asset to be protected is high-loss merchan-
dise, such as fragrances in a DC awaiting shipment to stores, threats to that
asset may include employee pilferage. In analyzing the threat, a link chart
may be drawn up indicating the events that must take place in order for the
loss to occur (see Figure 10.2). In this case, an employee must gain access 
152
Retail Security and Loss Prevention
Figure 10.2
Simplified threat model

to the items, surreptitiously take possession of the items, and exit the prem-
ises. By identifying the actions that must take place for the loss to occur, the
security specialist can design countermeasures to eliminate these actions or
inactions.
In this example, certain circumstances are indicated that would disrupt
the chain of events that usually take place for the theft to occur. Access to
the merchandise can be controlled or limited by identification and barrier
systems. The high-risk goods might have EAS tags installed when they are
received or implanted by the vendor. The CCTV system might have a cam-
era trained on the storage area to discourage or identify perpetrators. An
employee package check policy might detect items being carried out of the
store. Finally, a well-motivated employee who has been made aware of the
company’s ability and intent to detect and prosecute offenders might pre-
vent the situation in the first place, or at least report it on an anonymous
hotline.
Threat analysis should be performed on priority risks in order to design
comprehensive countermeasures. Countermeasures should
•
eliminate or reduce probability of loss events by reducing opportunities
and increasing the offenders’ risk of detection
•
prevent “and” connections within the threat model
•
disrupt or interrupt required event sequences
•
include the ability, if possible, to neutralize more than one link or “and”
point in the event chain
•
give the required reliability, which can often be illustrated as a 1 in 10 (or
1 in 100, etc.) chance of failure or defeat
•
compound the impact of countermeasures by selecting those that reduce
more than one risk
•
involve the fewest countermeasures, at the lowest cost, while reducing
risks to the necessary level of reliability.
Protection program designs
One step of the integrated LP program is to define an appropriate protection
program based on a variety of security-related factors.
Types of asset protection
The most basic types of asset protection in an organization are:
1. Physical – the protection of assets by implementing physical equipment
and services to deter, delay, and detect loss events.
2. Personnel – the protection of assets by screening employees, imple-
menting procedural controls, training employees to perform their jobs
(including loss control procedures), performance monitoring, rewarding
Loss Prevention Program Design
153

effective execution, and implementing fair and consistent disciplinary
procedures.
3. Information – identifying sensitive information, controlling access to that
data, and informing employees, vendors, and customers of their roles in
the protection of confidential information.
Levels of security/protection
It is helpful to categorize the level of security desired or required for any
organization. The following security levels serve as a guide.
•
Level 1 – minimum security
•
Level 2 – moderate security
•
Level 3 – medium security
•
Level 4 – maximum security.
The level of assigned security should be looked at as a system approach
and should not be based on its individual parts or components. Any system
that is designed can be as much psychological in nature as it is physical.
Level 1 – Minimum security
Minimum security policies and systems are designed to impede or deter
some unauthorized activity by employees or non-employees. Examples of
minimum security include the use of standard door locks, an open style
store selling floor layout, and the requirement that all merchandise transac-
tions be rung up at a cash register.
Level 2 – Moderate security
Moderate security policies and procedures are designed to impede, detect, and
in some cases, assess most unauthorized activity by internal and external
sources. This level is applied in addition to the basic procedures and barriers
used at Level 1. Basic or advanced alarm systems; window glazing or bars;
high-security locks; trained, unarmed guards; better lighting systems;
employee awareness training; and more elaborate procedural controls are
examples of moderate security.
Level 3 – Medium security
Distribution centers, computer facilities, very hot products like pharmaceuti-
cals, and store safe rooms are examples of areas requiring medium security.
This level of security is designed to impede, detect, and assess most unau-
thorized internal and external activity. Examples of medium security meas-
ures include CCTV systems; advanced perimeter, fire, internal motion
detection, and safe “teleproach” alarm systems; high-security lighting; trained
guards and plainclothes agents; card access systems; and coordination with
local law enforcement agencies.
154
Retail Security and Loss Prevention

Level 4 – Maximum security
Security at this level is rare for retailers and is described as a total, diversi-
fied, redundant system designed to allow the strength of one component to
offset the weakness of another. Distribution or storage facilities for very
high-risk merchandise, such as expensive jewelry, fuel, or controlled phar-
maceuticals require this level of protection. Examples of maximum security
include layered fencing and wire cages, sophisticated alarm systems with
layered “dummy” and “live” sensors, and highly trained and even sometimes,
armed response forces.
Defense in depth or layering
Regardless of the level of protection required, the concept of defense in
depth remains a priority. By designing countermeasures from the threat tar-
get outward, the perpetrator must bypass or defeat more than one barrier to
cause the loss of a valuable asset. Figures 10.3 and 10.4 illustrate two sim-
plified layering charts.
By layering defenses in this manner, perpetrators may be displaced to
another area, discouraged from the attempt, convinced of heavy protection
even where it is really not or delayed so long that they are detected.
The protection plan
Retailers often use two types of plans to guide their businesses. The business
plan and the budget are the result of careful study and reflect forecasted
sales and expenses. The point in having a plan is supposed to help ensure
Loss Prevention Program Design
155
Figure 10.3
Physical security layering

business success, as well as promote thorough planning; secondly, to have a
reference guide for day-to-day operations (in addition to operating proce-
dures); and, thirdly, to use in assessing the results of efforts and accuracy of
previous assumptions.
The protection plan is just as important to the asset protection leader as
the business plan is to the CEO. The protection plan should provide the pro-
tection strategy based on the evaluation of expected problems, as well as guide
the day-to-day activities of the LP department. The comprehensive protec-
tion plan can include three elements – people, programs, and systems. These
three elements should complement each other, and be highly focused.
The next three chapters highlight some features of each of the three ele-
ments of the protection plan. Retailers may use the following chapters to
help select appropriate countermeasures and tailor them to their specific
organization.
Questions
Give an example of how a retailer could minimize losses using risk reduction.
Explain the difference between risk transfer and risk spreading.
Name five factors a retailer should keep in mind when designing risk control
countermeasures.
On what basis are effective risk control measures developed?
Explain the concept of “layered” risk defense.
156
Retail Security and Loss Prevention
Figure 10.4
Personnel security layering

157
11
People
The use of people to control losses is perhaps the most important LP method.
This chapter is dedicated to this very important topic. All employees of any
retail organization are responsible for controlling profit-draining loss. How-
ever, senior management often designates one individual to be responsible for
the administration of a loss control program. This individual may handle
asset protection duties in addition to other responsibilities, or as their pri-
mary responsibility. Additional full or part-time individuals, whose main
function is LP, may be employed by the retailer, or may be provided by an
outside contract agency.
In-house employees
This section provides insight into the most common LP positions held in
retail operations of various sizes and their role in loss control. For the purpose
of this book, titles or specific job positions will be used interchangeably, since
there are many common names for each position.
Director or vice president of LP or asset protection
Every group needs a leader. For the LP department, the director or vice president
is responsible for implementing and managing company loss control functions
in larger retail companies. This individual normally reports to the CEO or high-
level president to ensure that top decision-makers are kept abreast of loss
control efforts and shrinkage problems. This reporting level is also important
in maintaining companywide credibility for the loss control department and
its efforts. LP must be viewed as a priority issue by all company employees.
Building on experience and education, the senior leader sets loss control
goals that fit into and support the overall corporate goals, and designs the LP
program to accomplish these goals. In larger chains, subordinate managers
implement and run the LP program and the senior leader acts as advisor and
counselor to these subordinates to ensure and enhance the effectiveness of
the program as well as the managers’ efforts and abilities. To accomplish this,

the director stays abreast of new control techniques and technologies by
attending conferences, reading security journals, initiating rigorous R & D
activities and exchanging ideas with peers (networking).
The primary role of the senior leader is to provide the direction and
resources needed for cost-effective security.
Shortage control committees
In an effort to get key company executives involved in reducing shrinkage,
committees are formed at store and corporate levels to study the problems
the company is experiencing and to ensure that loss control procedures are
implemented and followed. Human resources, IT logistics, store operations,
buying, and other functions should have senior leaders represented on the
corporate team.
158
Retail Security and Loss Prevention
Senior LP Staff
Large retailers employ senior executives to manage multi-billion dollar
crime and loss issues. Since loss control is a multi-faceted, and complex
problem, responsibility for its operation cuts across departmental lines.
Protecting people and physical assets is the responsibility of all employees. 
Loss prevention managers deal with a large number of issues. Large
thefts, widespread item loss problems, inquiries from their superiors, vio-
lent incidents, and legal claims were mentioned as some of these types of
issues. LP managers also invest many hours dealing with their own staffs
(i.e. recruiting, hiring, training, transferring, disciplining, and terminat-
ing employees). Not normally a proactive action, but important for keep-
ing their operations on track.
Not all of an LP executive's time is spent responding or reacting. A good
deal of time is invested in building relationships and partnerships as well
as conducting some long-term analysis and planning.  LP executives also
play a strategic role in their companies by specifying, testing, and recom-
mending loss prevention systems. Some of these purchases constitute large
capital expenditures, and can require great selling skills to have them
funded by senior company executives. 
LP managers play an important role in their organizations. They directly
affect sales and profit by managing key item availability, employee and
customer safeness, and cash and other asset protection. Their role in their
companies continues to evolve though. Many are being assigned a broader
scope of responsibility, and dealing with non-crime issues that may ulti-
mately dilute their loss control effectiveness. Finally, the quality of man-
agement decision-making may be adversely affected by a lack of quality,
evidence-based data. This important job function deserves more examina-
tion since prevention activities are so critical to successful retail operations.

LP staff
Line managers (i.e., regional, group, and district managers) coordinate all loss
control activities in their assigned geographic area. Their duties include mon-
itoring relevant data and variances such as cash overages and shortages, exces-
sive voids, excessive refunds and price under-rings; presenting LP awareness
courses to store employees and managers; acting as loss control consultants to
district and store operations managers; and conducting store audits.
In larger retail chains, the district-level manager represents the LP depart-
ment in the “field” and motivates store-level personnel to integrate preven-
tion techniques into their routine activities. Larger organizations often have
corporate-based LP managers as well as regional managers to coordinate dis-
trict activities. Some large stores also have LP managers.
Investigator/auditor
The investigator audits stores and distribution areas to determine vulnerable
areas of the operation and to uncover crimes in progress. The investigator
also sifts through computer data or paperwork and conducts interviews and
surveillances to determine the causes and extent of suspected employee
theft. Because of the civil liabilities involved in accusations of theft, and the
more sophisticated nature of retail crime, the individuals in this position
require extensive training in modern detection, investigation, and interview
techniques.
Store detective, agent, operative, or specialist
In larger chains, or retailers with large stores, the store detective is often con-
sidered the first line of defense against shoplifting and employee theft. The
LP specialist is normally assigned to one or more stores. The primary respon-
sibility of the LP specialist is to detect and apprehend shoplifters. The training
program for this position must be very comprehensive and well-documented.
Violent incidents involving shoplifters and the threat of false arrest lawsuits
are on the increase. Well-trained LP specialists can be very effective at stem-
ming store losses, especially when working in conjunction with well-trained,
alert, non-security employees and protective technology. The job tasks of a
store detective can be classified into five primary domains, the “Five A’s”.
They are
1. Apprehension: Internal and external theft resolutions such as apprehending,
deterring, and processing thieves.
2. Awareness: Training and motivating non-LP employees on asset protection
issues.
3. Auditing: Checking for and following up on store risk levels and LP proce-
dural compliance.
4. Area Focus: Collecting and analyzing local crime and loss events, offender
interview data, and demographic data for systematic patterns, high-loss
items and locations, and theft techniques.
People
159

5. Additional Responsibilities: Other tasks and situations store detectives deal
with such as escorting bank deposits, security during storms or riots, and
helping with non-LP-related tasks like freight delivery.
Greeters
Many retailers employ greeters or other staff positioned at the store’s entrance
or exit doors. These individuals serve the dual purpose of welcoming visitors
as well as deterring and detecting problems. Sometimes these employees
monitor CCTV and EAS systems as well.
Uniformed guard
Some chains use guards who wear blazers or uniforms and station them at the
front of the store to allow them to patrol in order to deter theft and serve cus-
tomers. It is recommended that guards be part of a LP program, but not be con-
sidered a prime theft deterrent. Off-duty law enforcement officers, uniformed
or otherwise, identified staff should rotate randomly through the store. Guards
and law enforcement people often observe and present themselves inside and
outside stores to prevent and detect crime and safety problems.
Fitting room attendant or store monitor
Courteous, alert individuals should be assigned as fitting room attendants/
store monitors whenever possible. Store monitors can promote goodwill for
the company while deterring theft. Usually, monitors report to the store man-
ager, although they are trained and motivated by LP personnel. Monitors
should compare the quantity and specifics of items as customers enter and
exit fitting rooms, as well as keep the general area neat and free of clutter.
LP department organization
A central reporting system is critical to maintaining a corporate wide, consis-
tent, and focused loss control program. It is important to note the most effec-
tive reporting system for a modern loss control department is vertical, not
horizontal (as shown in Figure 11.1). District and store managers are rarely
prepared to supervise store-level LP specialists at least for three reasons.
1. Most operations managers lack the continuous training required to iden-
tify and reduce losses from the myriad of internal and external threats,
and still run the store in a profitable manner.
2. Operations managers operate in an environment of constantly changing
priorities and LP agents may be assigned non-LP duties at the expense of
crime and loss control.
3. Unfortunately, store managers themselves may be dishonest and could
schedule store detectives opposite planned dishonest activity.
It is very difficult for a LP specialist to effectively operate in this type of
environment for obvious reasons.
160
Retail Security and Loss Prevention

People
161
Figure 11.1
Loss prevention department organization

Non-LP employees
As previously stated, all employees of the company should be trained to pre-
vent theft and waste. These employees are critical to reducing crime and loss.
Senior management
The top executives of any retail operation provide leadership and direction to
the company in terms of what is to be done and how it should be done and
why. The primary LP role of senior management is to approve, endorse, fund,
and adhere to the security program. An endorsement from senior management
legitimizes the personnel, procedures, and systems used to reduce shrinkage,
and ensures that security remains a significant priority to the company. LP
programs and personnel need to be supported by senior executives.
Senior management can also infuse a sense of responsibility for shrinkage in
subordinate managers by holding them accountable for their annual shrink-
age and by reflecting shrinkage results on annual performance reviews,
which also triggers incentive bonuses. However, remember that is difficult to
hold anyone accountable for shrinkage levels in their area of responsibility if
a company’s inventories are sporadic or poorly conducted. Good, sound
management that pays attention to details and motivates employees can
simultaneously increase sales while reducing losses.
Regional/district operations manager
In many retail chains, this individual implements corporate procedural and
merchandising policies in the field, as well as supervises store managers. District
managers influence the priorities of their store managers. For example, if clean
floors and realigned display fixtures are stressed by the district manager during
the store visit, these elements become the priority – sometimes at the expense
of other operations. Therefore, district managers can help control crime and
loss by continually stressing the need for LP measures at the store level, as well
as supporting their counterparts (the loss control district manager) in their
activities. District-level operations, and loss control and human resource repre-
sentatives can form a triad by keeping each other informed of their activities
and presenting an organized, unified front. This team approach helps to ensure
that all company priorities are addressed and objectives are achieved.
Store manager
Store and DC managers may be the most integral players in LP. Location
managers set the tone of operation in their stores and DCs. Whatever store
managers and DC managers stress and praise becomes important to their
employees. If an employee detects a price switch, for example, the manager
should compliment the individual.
Loss control specialists assigned to stores must work in concert with all
store employees. The store manager and loss control specialist on duty should
check in with each other periodically and compliment the actions of one
another. Safety and security are at stake and those issues far outweigh any
162
Retail Security and Loss Prevention

petty differences that may exist. Store managers are responsible for their store
and their actions should be respected. Similarly store managers should foster
a mutual professional respect between LP and store operations personnel as
both of these sources play an important part in boosting company profitability.
Store managers often receive bonuses based on quarterly results of their
efforts. Profitability and shrinkage figures should be part of the requirement
to receive an incentive bonus. If the store has tremendous sales figures but
horrendous shrinkage, the company may not be making a profit. The
shrinkage goals that are set must be achievable and store managers must be
able to incrementally reduce their shrinkage or the concept of reward has lit-
tle value. It is important that managers have reliable information on losses,
and the best solutions for them to be effective.
Store/distribution center employees
While store detectives are often a LP department’s first line of defense against
shoplifting, store and distribution center employees are the company’s first
line of defense against other theft and waste. As a group, store employees
play the largest role of all in day-to-day control of losses. These individuals
must be trained to recognize and report loss situations, and rewarded by their
supervisors for consistent, positive efforts.
Miscellaneous company employees
Regardless of the size of the corporation, all employees from buyers to corpo-
rate office staff should be made aware of loss threats that exist within their span
of control and be told what they can do to deter these threats. Supply chain
protection, and all crime and loss are controllable by ongoing employee efforts.
Outside personnel
Many retail businesses attempt to maintain streamlined corporate staffs and
supplement expensive in-house employee salary and benefit costs with asset
protection technology and contract services. By using contract services, the
retailer can sometimes limit personnel costs to those times when dedicated
personnel are specifically needed. This section briefly describes the most
commonly used outside security personnel. Appendix 12 of this book will
assist retailers in finding quality outside security personnel.
Loss control consultants
Retail companies often use outside consultants or experts for services and
advice. Outside corporate legal counsel, accounting firms, and management
consultants are examples of non-employee advisors. Loss control consultants
are usually called in to provide a fresh, objective view of corporate loss vul-
nerabilities and to make control recommendations. The in-house VP/director
of LP should not feel the use of consultanting signals their inability to resolve
shrinkage or crime control problems. The use of professional consultants is
People
163

standard practice in government and industry around the world. The out-
side consultant may provide the recommendation that finally pushes senior
management to authorize the installation of some key loss control program or
system.
When selecting a LP consultant, the retailer must first explain the area
they want studied and/or improved. The following questions should then be
considered for asking any prospective consultant:
1. Who will contact the survey and make recommendations?
2. What are their qualifications and performance?
3. What will you do for my retail business, and how will you do it (deliver-
ables)?
4. What are the anticipated long-term results of your services?
5. What is the total cost for using your services and following your advice?
When receiving the proposal, the retailer should thoroughly evaluate it to
ensure that the consultant is qualified to delivery satisfactory results and to
ensure that the scope and methods to be used are acceptable.
Expert witness
As retailers find themselves the target of civil lawsuits alleging wrongful action
or inaction, the need arises for expert witnesses to do research and provide
testimony before and during any trial proceedings. Like the consultant, the
expert witness should have sufficient education, experience, and training to
conduct a comprehensive study of the incident in question, and to provide
credible testimony.
Featured speaker/trainer
Many in-house LP or operations employees are experts in their field, but are
poor public speakers or trainers. Because of the need for well-trained, moti-
vated employees, LP directors may solicit expert speakers and trainers to
conduct workshops for key personnel.
Private investigators
Small and average-size retail chains often use outside private investigators to
conduct background investigations on prospective employees, to investigate
allegations regarding prospective employees, or to investigate allegations of
employee theft. Because of the complexity of some employee theft incidents,
retail companies that have no in-house investigators should consider the use
of experienced, licensed investigators. References should be checked.
Shopping services and plainclothes agent patrol
The use of “mystery shoppers” is common by a variety of retail operations.
These individuals, who are specially trained in observation techniques and
164
Retail Security and Loss Prevention

dressed as ordinary shoppers, test the skill, courtesy, honesty, and procedural
compliance of store employees, as actual store practices may be a far cry from
stated policy. Shoppers then issue a detailed report that describes their shop-
ping experience. Senior executives may use in-house or contract shopping
teams to gauge the actual environment of their stores and to test suspected
dishonest employees. Some retailers also hire highly trained plainclothes
agents to patrol their stores for shoplifters. All outside agencies should provide
proof of insurance, training, and other assurances of needed abilities and
resources.
Uniformed security guards and off-duty police
Many local, regional, and national companies exist that provide businesses
with armed or unarmed guards. These guards may be used to monitor spe-
cific locations during emergency situations such as power failure and special
events (e.g., new store opening, large sale, celebrity visit), or used on a rou-
tine basis as a form of theft deterrent. The retailer should verify all training
claimed by the guard company and scrutinize the guards sent. Ground rules
must be established as far as detention of theft suspects and patrol proce-
dures, since most contract guards are not qualified to detect and apprehend
shoplifters or dishonest employees.
Retailers should ask for and contact retail client references of any outside
agency offering security personnel before securing their services. A contract
should also be drawn up and thoroughly reviewed by the retailer’s corporate
legal counsel before starting the service. Likewise, off-duty police can pro-
vide security services, but may also create liability risks if they commit errors.
Specific duties should be provided in writing to all outside personnel.
Summary
It is really all about people. Employees are our greatest assets, if carefully
selected, thoroughly trained, and properly motivated. These dedicated to
full-time asset protection and all others are needed to reduce losses. Apathy,
errors, and deviance are best controlled by employees themselves. Senior
executives set priorities, resources, and support for LP while buyers, place
managers, and LP staff set standards and execute them.
Questions
Which store employees are responsible for preventing loss?
List three ways that LP managers directly affect sales and profit.
What should the district-level store manager do to help prevent loss?
Why are district-level store managers unprepared to supervise store-level LP?
What is the primary LP role for senior management?
People
165

166
12
Programs
This chapter highlights programs retailers can consider for action as part of
their crime and loss control plan. As with personnel and systems approaches
to loss control, programs should be focused on well-researched problems,
selected on a priority basis and tailored to the specific needs of each retail
organization.
Retailers should realize employees need direction and guidance. Standard
operating procedures provide their managers, who are often isolated and
thousands of miles from their supervisors, with a handy reference to guide
their actions. The difference in having well-planned procedures being unpre-
pared could impact the future of the business.
Programs designed to control losses can be categorized as policies, proce-
dures, training, and follow-up.
Loss control policies
Retailers may study loss control policies that appear successful in other retail
chains, and design a similar policy based on the particular circumstances of
their operation. Protection policies should have specific objectives, such as to
control access, require supervisory verification of certain transactions, and
require that shoplifters and dishonest employees be prosecuted if certain crite-
ria are met. A policy tells employees where the company stands on specific
issues and what the company will do if the policy is disregarded. Policies
should be fair, consistent, documented, and kept up-to-date (which is easy with
on-line or DV). Assemble a policy manual and distribute copies to all stores and
department heads. Review and update these policies periodically. The follow-
ing significant policies should be considered for design and implementation:
Employee searches – the right to search employees, their packages, and their
lockers or desks.
Employee termination or suspension criteria – the action or inaction that is serious
enough to cause suspension or termination.

Non-disclosure of proprietary information – the information that is not to be
disclosed to anyone, unless specifically authorized.
Conflict-of-interest – the company’s position on outside employment and
business with vendors.
Alcohol and substance abuse – a policy for screening, detecting, and treating
employees with abuse problems.
Expense accounts – accepted business expenses and established expenditure
limits.
Contact with the press – restrictions on making public statements regarding
company activities.
Ethics – accepted and unaccepted ethical behavior.
Employee pre-employment screening – established criteria the applicant must
meet prior to being hired.
Apprehension, detention, and disposition of dishonest employees and shoplifters – the
company’s stance on the detection and handling of theft suspects, includ-
ing criminal prosecution, termination of employment, and civil action.
Evacuation of premises – criteria that must be met prior to ordering an evac-
uation of the premises and those individuals authorized to order such
actions.
Auditing payables – importance of periodic audits of accounts payable activity.
Loss control procedures
Security procedures build on the stated company policies by telling employees
how to carry out the policies. Like policies, procedures should be researched
and tested before implementation. They also should be included in the
Operating Procedures Manual along with their corresponding policies. Some
of the more common loss control procedures are discussed in the following
pages.
Procedural controls
Procedural controls for cash handling, merchandise handling, paperwork
routing, and safety are designed to limit risks by limiting access or vulnera-
bility. Controls may also increase offender risk by adding supervisor approval
for example procedural controls include the following:
Cash-handling controls reduce loss of cash and negotiable instruments and
include POS, cash office, or deposits. POS controls include voided transac-
tions, no sales, cash sales, check cashing, change requests, cash or credit
refunds, check acceptance, and credit card acceptance procedures. Cash
office controls include limited access, money-counting, drawer and deposit-
counting, deposit-reporting, impress fund-auditing, cash pick-ups, cash
Programs
167

variance tracking, and clerk error tracking procedures. Deposit procedures
indicate the techniques to use in depositing sales receipts in the bank.
Paperwork controls reduce shrinkage due to manipulation or errors when pro-
cessing paperwork or data in the corporate office, DC, and store. Corporate
controls include merchandise purchase orders, computerized data, payroll,
accounts payable, and purchasing procedures. DC controls include receiv-
ing, processing, item picking, pricing, transferring, and shipping procedures.
Pricing controls include pricing and price changes (mark-ups and mark-
downs), mark out-of-stock, refund slips, and discount coupon procedures.
Merchandise controls reduce loss of merchandise at DCs and stores. DC controls
include separating receiving and shipping areas, verifying purchase orders,
separating items, hanging items, EAS tagging, store distribution assignment,
protective packaging, and shipping. Store controls include receiving, indi-
vidual item or carton count variances, processing, display techniques,
secure storage of high-loss or high-risk items, ongoing high-risk product
in-store counting, protection from the elements, return-to-vendor proce-
dures, trash and carton removal, damaged merchandise log-in and disposal,
clerk check-out of merchandise containers, and employee package checks.
Safety controls reduce losses from customer and employee accidents, and
destruction of assets from natural or man-made disasters. Safety controls
include storing and handling hazardous materials or chemicals, reducing
fire hazards, eliminating slip-and-fall hazards, and correcting dangerous
fixtures.
Situational or informational procedures
These procedures provide guidance to employees at all levels and include
the following:
Shoplifting – this procedure dictates the criteria an employee needs to 
satisfy in order to detain a shoplifting suspect and explains the steps to fol-
low in processing the case. To avoid costly lawsuits, this policy and proce-
dure must be well-designed and employees should be thoroughly trained in
following this procedure.
Employee investigations – this procedure dictates the steps to follow when
conducting an employee investigation to substantiate or disprove allegations
and to determine the extent and cause of a problem.
Miscellaneous crimes – these procedures reduce the damages that can occur as
a result of different crimes and facilitate the recovery of assets and success-
ful prosecution/civil action.
Bomb threats and hostage situations – these procedures detail how to deal with
bomb threat or employee abduction situations.
Natural and man-made disasters – this procedure details disaster prevention,
containment, and recovery plans.
168
Retail Security and Loss Prevention

Reporting structure or Chain of command – this procedure details the organi-
zational structures and provides steps to avoid communication misunder-
standings.
Protection programs
Programs designed to control losses are an extension of established policies
and procedures. For the purposes of this book, programs are broken down
into three categories based on the objective of the program – deterrence,
detection, and recovery.
Deterrence programs
Deterrence programs are primarily designed to prevent theft by discourag-
ing criminal activity, making theft incidents less probable, or by providing
data used to plan future prevention activity. A variety of deterrence pro-
grams are discussed in the following paragraphs.
New store/site selection
A great place to start when designing a loss control program is the site of a
new store or other facility. Whether the new location is to be built from the
ground up or remodeled from an existing structure, the security of company
assets must be considered from the start of the planning cycle. Many factors
are considered when new store sites are being evaluated and they include
•
demographics (i.e., number of target customers and possible offenders in
the area)
•
visibility of the location
•
accessibility of the site (and escape routes)
•
“anchor” or other stores in the same center if the site is located in malls
or strip centers (including “crime generators” that may attract offenders
such as bars, labor pools, and check cashing sites)
•
available support services (such as police substations, private security, etc.)
•
expenses per square foot
•
available advertising support
•
area crime patterns.
Crime potential is the primary concern of the LP specialist when evaluating
a new site. A security employee should conduct a survey of the area and gather
input from other area merchants and law enforcement agencies regarding
past and projected criminal activity in the proposed site area. The likelihood
of crime in the area may not cause a particular site to be abandoned, but the
information allows the company to plan and budget for appropriate protec-
tive efforts.
Programs
169

Store environment design
Just as stores are laid out to positively influence the customer’s buying
behavior, display fixtures and walls can be designed to discourage pilferage
and theft by creating physical and psychological barriers, and surveillance
opportunities.
The environmental design and physical layout of individual stores can
impact the behavior of the retail shopper. Marein and co-workers noted,
The retail store is a bundle of cues, messages and suggestions that com-
municate to shoppers. The retail store is not an exact parallel to the skin-
ner box, but it does create mood, activate intentions, and generally affect
customer reactions.1
Environmental cues that say “do not steal” or “buy this” are not neces-
sarily mutually exclusive. Store planners can place interior walls and mer-
chandise display fixtures in patterns that can accomplish the dual goals of
increased merchandise visibility and protection. The goal of the environ-
mental design concept is to minimize the opportunity to commit a crime in
two ways. The first technique involves blocking access to specific areas or
merchandise with physical barriers, such as cash registers, walls, display fix-
tures, locked doors, and merchandise tie-downs. Psychological barriers, such
as “Employees Only” signs, also serve to discourage unauthorized personnel
from entering into sensitive areas.
The second design technique, surveillance opportunity, opens up displays
of high-risk merchandise to better observation by store employees and/or
larger groups of customers. For example, by removing the large signs or 
6-foot high merchandise fixtures from blocking the view of employees at
POS locations, the chances of a potential shoplifter being spotted or deterred
increase. Lighting type and intensity on certain products can influence buy-
ing and stealing behavior. Also, channeling the flow of customers near
potential crime areas that have walkways is a form of a surveillance oppor-
tunity design technique. Other examples of crime control using environ-
mental design for consideration include the following:
Eliminate blind spots by rearranging racks or by installing CCTV, domes, or
mirrors.
Place high-risk merchandise displays near employee work areas and away
from exits.
Keep aisles containing tall merchandise fixtures straight and wide enough to
allow for full observation.
Consider placing CCTV domes or smoked plexiglass panels over all POS 
stations and cash-counting areas to deter employee theft. Design these
locations to readily accept live CCTV cameras.
170
Retail Security and Loss Prevention

Fit emergency exits with audible-sounding, observable panic alarms to dis-
courage shoplifters or employees from using them as covert exit points.
Limit the number of customer exits and entrances and control them by
turnstiles, consider using EAS sensors, and monitor them by commonly
used POS stations whenever possible.
Install covert surveillance areas in walls, ceilings, or pillars where store per-
sonnel are able to survey the sales floor and use two-way mirrors, false air
conditioning vents, and peepholes.
Design receiving and stockroom areas to eliminate hiding places and pro-
vide clear observation of the work area to prevent dishonest activity.
Ensure the exterior of the building and parking areas are well-lighted,
fenced-off from potential problem areas (such as teen hang-outs, liquor
stores, and bars), and readily observable from inside the store. Dumpsters
should be kept locked and not used when supervised. Cartons should be
crushed before removal.
Control procedures
As mentioned earlier, control procedures may be considered a program. This
type of program may, in fact, be one of the least expensive, since there is
generally no capital requirement. Appendix 7 illustrates selected control
procedures that should be integrated into the company’s operations man-
ual. This format reinforces the fact that LP should be practiced every day.
Employee awareness
Employee diligence and honesty are paramount to asset protection. But they
must be informed on what to look for and how to handle situations. This
type of program, when combined with procedural controls, is considered
the minimum action a retailer should take to control losses. More detailed
employee awareness information is in Chapter 5 of this book.
Public awareness campaigns
In many states, retailers band together to form retail associations to further
their common interests. One program often promoted by these associations
is a public awareness campaign aimed at making the negative result of a
shoplifting arrest a high-visibility issue. Local law enforcement agencies also
contribute to this effort by holding discussions with local groups, such as
school children in all grades.
Detection programs
Detection programs are implemented to detect theft, indications of theft, or
vulnerabilities to theft. Prominent examples of this type of program include
exception reports, auditing, and store agent patrol.
Programs
171

Exception reports
In-house or third-party exception reporting software is a powerful asset pro-
tection tool. Manual or computerized reports should be designed to detect
voids, cash overages or shortages, credit, refunds, and price ring-ups that
vary from established company norms. At the POS, a system can be devised
to report the number of occurrences of a particular type of incident as a per-
centage of sales. Incidents that can be tracked in this manner include voided
transactions, refunds, cash overages and shortages, price variances, number
of bad checks accepted, and other activities the retailer desires to track.
Immediately, certain stores and clerks will stand out when compared with
the average. The loss control department has determined the place to focus
training and investigative efforts.
Auditing
Employee execution in stores and DCs is mission critical. Regular and ran-
dom auditing detects problems and patterns, gathers data to refine processes
and keeps managers focused on execution. By setting up a planned and sur-
prise auditing program, including a hands-on review of the paperwork and
procedural compliance of specific departments or stores, the LP department
can spot areas that may develop problems or can uncover existing problems.
More detailed information appears in Chapter 17. Retailers cannot afford to
operate without an ongoing audit program.
Store agent patrol
By using plainclothes LP specialists to supplement technology, retailers will
detect shoplifters who previously went unnoticed. The use of store detec-
tives is often considered a reactive measure, but is actually a form of deter-
rence, since it is difficult to steal while in the custody of store agents or
police authorities. Any agents used by retailers should be carefully selected,
thoroughly trained, and constantly supervised.
Recovery programs
Prevention of loss is the key to any loss control program, but the following
programs allow retailers to recoup some of their losses. The following three
programs are effective recovery programs.
Civil action: When retailers fall victim to theft, they may take civil action
against offenders in an attempt to recover lost assets in the form of damages.
By using civil demand, retailers can help offset some of their losses and secu-
rity costs. Retailers can operate their own civil recovery process, or contract
an outside firm.
Insurance: By covering risk areas with insurance policies, retailers may be able
to lessen the damage they sustain from theft and disaster.
172
Retail Security and Loss Prevention

Tax write-offs: State and federal tax laws may allow deductions for many types
of losses incurred by retail chains.
Policy and procedure manuals
As legal claims against retail firms continue to increase, retailers are looking
for ways to better protect themselves against adverse outcomes. One of the
most effective ways to protect people and other assets is to have a written pol-
icy and procedure manual. Every company should have a policy manual, and
security procedures should be an entire section in this manual. Some retailers
also prefer to have a separate loss prevention manual (see Appendix 8).
Regardless of the format used, important points to keep in mind include
•
document procedures
•
ensure all personnel have ready access to proper procedures
•
update procedures periodically
•
adhere to procedures as closely as possible
•
use audit programs to maintain procedural relevance and compliance.
While the establishment of sound procedures may greatly assist in defend-
ing a civil claim, these same procedures can compromise retailer if it can be
shown they were not common knowledge or were not used in the field.
The policy and procedure manual is an integral part of any loss control pro-
gram. The manual should reflect the policies of the organization and should
detail how they are to be carried out. By implementing and following sound
procedures, the retailer ensures a consistent, long-term approach to reducing
losses. Internet and electronic media enable quick procedural revisions and
disseminations.
Training employees
After procedures have been designed, employees should be shown how to
implement and use them. Orientation and training are important to suc-
cessful accomplishment of profit goals. Training can be one of the most neg-
lected facets of any organization. Training is sometimes ignored, under funded,
or assigned to individuals who have no training experience. Employees at all
levels must strive to achieve competence in their field and become aware of
those habits that make them good or bad at their jobs. Good training flows
from analysis of LP job tasks and common situations should be identified,
broken down, and addressed with focused training. Training consists of
highly relevant knowledge and skill development. Skill and knowledge com-
petence should be gauged initially and periodically with written and hands-
on testing.
Programs
173

A good trainer must be both competent and conscientious, and training
sessions must be well-planned and lively. Each workshop should combine a
little entertainment with a lot of education. The trainer must interact with
the trainees to allow for a two-way flow of ideas and methods.
LP training takes two primary forms in any retail company – orientation
and training of non-security employees, at all levels, in tasks they can perform
to reduce losses, and training security employees on their specific duties.
Companies can either purchase training manuals or develop their own.
To train LP employees, retailers should put together a comprehensive in-
house, or solicit an outside, training program.
Suggested courses for entry-level training include: retail theft laws; detec-
tion, surveillance, and apprehension techniques; safety procedures; auditing,
offender interviewing, employee awareness training techniques; physical
security; and report writing.
Appendix 9 provides a checklist that can be used when setting up an in-
house training program or when evaluating outside training firms.
Follow-up
Once focused, policies and procedures have been designed and implemented,
and employees have been trained in their use, retailers should follow-up on
these activities to ensure the success of their long-term loss control pro-
grams. Follow-up occurs in several forms – testing and update, reward and
recognition, and direction and discipline.
Testing and updating policies, procedures, and programs
The retail industry is rapidly changing. New products, selling channels, and
threats continue to emerge and evolve. Because of this, no loss control pro-
gram can remain completely relevant for very long. For example, a policy to
control direct store delivery may become obsolete when vendors begin DC
deliveries exclusively.
For these reasons, the retailer should periodically audit and alter proce-
dures and programs currently in use. Some of the questions to ask about
each policy, procedure, or program include, Does this policy fit our corpo-
rate or department objectives? Does this procedure unnecessarily hinder the
flow of business? Is there a better way? Is the program working? Is this pro-
cedure being used? Is this process saving or costing me money?
Recognition and reward
Employees should be motivated by their leaders to follow procedures and
prevent losses, and one of the most powerful ways to do this is by having
supervisors recognize and reward employee efforts.
Employee meetings and get-togethers are a great forum for recognizing
the contribution of a certain employee to the company’s profitability. By
174
Retail Security and Loss Prevention

recognizing employee efforts to control practices to the attention of employ-
ees, a retailer may reward one employee and deter another from dishonest
activity at the same time.
A formal reward program is recommended to ensure loss control remains
a priority with employees. Employees are in a position to make a significant
difference in a company’s annual shrinkage figure and in today’s society the
businessperson should consider incentives to accomplish their objectives.
One retail chain awards bonus points in the form of a “check” to employees
who have been recommended by their supervisor for reporting or preventing
an (security/safety) incident. These points are accumulated and used to pur-
chase items displayed in a catalog based on their point value. For example,
employees receive 50 points each time they deter a shoplifter or report an
unsafe condition. After accumulating more than 500 points, they can pur-
chase an AM/FM stereo. Because employees earn points each time they follow
a procedure, they tend to be more alert all year long. After experimenting with
various options, this same chain reported that programs award cash or gift
certificates may actually cause employees (who feel slighted for not receiving
a cash reward for their action) to take money from a cash register to com-
pensate themselves. Carefully designed and executed programs can keep LP
a daily priority, while reinforcing the idea that the only way any employee
may receive cash or merchandise from the company is through a paycheck
or legitimate purchase.
Direction and discipline
Supervisors should give their employees specific directions, in the form of
clear communication, demonstration, or training, to perform their jobs ade-
quately and to follow company procedures. If employees fail or refuse to 
follow a particular procedure, supervisors should gain control by applying
discipline.
Discipline is defined as training or instruction that corrects, molds, or per-
fects actions and is exercised to impose order and reasonable control.
Supervisors must maintain some level of discipline in order to keep their
groups focused and productive to accomplish corporate and department goals.
All discipline should be applied in an objective and consistent manner.
Questions
What stores provide great opportunities to start a new LP program?
Explain the goal of merchandise controls.
Name two techniques that can help to create a theft-deterring environment.
Name two ways retailers can recoup some of the losses incurred by theft.
What three questions should be addressed when auditing a LP procedure or
program?
Programs
175

176
13
Asset Protection Systems
Other protective countermeasures a retailer can choose include protective
hardware and electronic systems. While the total cost of security labor
increases, the cost of some sophisticated protective systems is decreasing.
This chapter briefly highlights the large variety of available security hardware
and electronic security systems retailers can use to include in their total loss
control plans. For more in-depth information on physical systems described in
this chapter, refer to the Internet and Security Industry Buyers Guide.
The security countermeasures discussed in this chapter generally work in
three ways. They are
1. limit or control access to sensitive or off-limit areas
2. limit the mobility of protected merchandise
3. physically or psychologically discourage dishonest activity by promoting
personal risk of detection or promoting personal guilt.
Access control systems
A first line of defense in protection programs involves limiting access to sen-
sitive assets such as cash, property, or information. ID and access control sys-
tems of all types are designed to limit or control access to specific areas. The
following are examples of access control systems:
•
physical barriers – fences, walls, barred windows, landscaping, and display
fixtures
•
Entrance hardware – electric locks
•
Color-coded and/or electronic ID cards
•
Turnstiles and gates
•
Guards and other place guardians.
Access control technology is constantly changing. Retailers interested in
acquiring new systems should carefully review the available products, as
well as carefully check references or indications of measurable impact.

There are many miscellaneous control devices available that retailers can
experiment with
•
clear trash bags or shopping bags – to discourage individuals from concealing
items
•
devices designed to make high-loss items less concealable – plastic cases and
oversized packaging that renders concealment and multiple-item theft
more difficult
•
tear-apart price tickets – to make price-switching more difficult
•
fitting or dressing room tags – with preprinted number or with hanger slots
that correspond to the number of items being taken into the dressing room
•
Special inks and dyes – for receipts and other printed media to discourage
counterfeiting and fraud.
Physical barriers
The following physical barriers are designed to delay or deter intruders:
Doors: The barrier at the point of entry must provide maximum delay time by
forcing the perpetrator to pick the lock or use sophisticated tools to force entry.
The construction should be sturdy enough to resist attack without tools. Door
hinges should be inside the door or covered to prevent pin removal.
Roof: If a potential intruder can gain access to the roof of the premises, the
roof should be sufficiently constructed to resist entry. Root hatches, sky-
lights, and vents or smoke stacks should be wired-off, locked, and alarmed.
Floor: If a perpetrator could gain entry through the floor, floor construction
should be of materials, such as reinforced concrete, designed to resist unau-
thorized entry.
Fences: Fences are used to define a specific area, deter accidental or non-crim-
inal entry, prevent or delay entry by unauthorized individuals, and guide
foot and vehicle traffic from specific areas. Fences should be at least seven
feet tall, anchored to the ground, and of sufficient strength to support a
potential intruder.
Windows: Windows are natural entry points for burglars and should be kept
locked, hooked up to the store’s alarm system, protected by protective film
or glaze-coated, illuminated by exterior lights, and barred.
Parking lots, reduced curb cut openings and channeling car traffic to slow
vehicle speed and bring all cars through more remote parking areas all dis-
courage crime.
Locks
Locking systems are an important element of any loss control program.
Security specialists must take the time to learn about the basic principles of
Asset Protection Systems
177

locking mechanisms to select the brand suitable to their use. Some types of
locks use include
•
door locks of all types (e.g., key, combination, electronic)
•
trailer fifth-wheel locks to prevent the unauthorized removal of trailers
•
trailer door seals to prevent/detect unauthorized entry into a merchandise
trailer
•
doors, safes, and drawers.
At this point, it is important to point out some techniques retailers can use
to maintain control of keys.
1. Use a key cabinet, which is a cabinet that can be locked, to store all keys.
2. Use a key sign-out log to track keys. This document should also list those
individuals who are authorized to check out specific keys. The key log
should also be used as an inventory record.
3. Conduct audits of key usage to periodically check key locations.
4. Enforce the re-keying policy and change safe combinations whenever a
manager leaves a specific location.
5. Electronic locks allow for in-person or remote changes as well as for track-
ing and patterning of usage.
Safes
Any company location at which more than a few thousand dollars is stored
overnight should be equipped with a safe. Safes are rated by Underwriters
Laboratories (UL) based on their fire and/or burglary tool/drill resistance
ability. Keep safes locked at all times. Use cash cache systems to take cash
from the POS and place it in a secure container. Safes may be imbedded in
the floor or mounted in a wall. Locking file cabinets should be treated like
safes. Some stores use tubes to transport cash from the POS to cash rooms
for extra protection and manpower reduction.
Lighting
The use of lighting for security purposes dates to the beginning of civiliza-
tion. Protective lighting has evolved through the years to the highly effi-
cient gas bulbs of today. Lighting is considered a deterrent to crime, since it
reveals to passersby the presence of individuals attempting unauthorized
entry of specific locations. Effective lighting can make legitimate users feel
safe while simultaneously making offenders feel vulnerable. Bad lighting, on
the other hand, can have the opposite effect.
Lighting sources include incandescent, mercury vapor, fluorescent, metal
halide, and sodium vapor. These sources provide general types of lighting.
Continuous lighting – provides glare projection or controlled lighting. Glare
lighting projects out from a protected area to form a psychological barrier to
178
Retail Security and Loss Prevention

intruders. Controlling lighting illuminates a specified area while controlling
the amount of glare.
Standby lighting – the same as continuous lighting, but designed to back up
or supplement primary lighting systems. Sensors can activate primary or
additional lighting to “shock” intruders.
Moveable lighting – portable or search light systems.
Emergency lighting – generally used during power failure.
Protective lighting can be used inside or outside of any area where a retailer
wants to discourage unauthorized activity. High-pressure sodium (HSD) lights
are generally regarded as the outdoor security light of choice since they pro-
vide fairly accurate color definition, are very energy efficient, and have a long
lamp life. HSD lights do have a moderate to high front-end cost, but are likely
to be more efficient in the long run.
Alarms
Alarm systems are designed to provide surveillance of or detect intrusion
into an area or object without an expensive investment in manpower. It can
be more cost-effective to have alarm systems installed in 100 stores than to
station guards in every location every night. Retailers use a variety of alarm
systems to protect stores, warehouses, and merchandise.
The primary function of any alarm system is to signal the presence of an
intruder or to detect unauthorized removal of a targeted asset. Another ben-
efits is the deterrence of potential offenders by displaying notices of the use
of an electronic protection system. The proper alarm system depends on the
area and/or item to be protected. Some questions to be asked when select-
ing an alarm system include
•
What is the asset to be protected?
•
What is the asset to be protected against?
•
What sensors are available to provide needed protection?
•
How is the signal to be transmitted, who will receive it, and who will
respond?
Some of the more common types of alarm systems currently in use with
retail operations worldwide include perimeter protection, area/space protec-
tion, and object/point protection. Sensors employed in the perimeter pro-
tection mode are designed to detect intrusion into a protected area. Doors,
windows, hatches, and vents are protected by metallic tape, glass-break
detectors, magnetic contacts, and shock sensors. Barrier fences and cleared
perimeter areas around DCs and structures can have layered sensors to
detect intruders. CCTV can also detect intruders, recognize its objects have
been removed, and be integrated with other sensors.
Asset Protection Systems
179

Area/space protection sensors are designed to protect outside zones or inte-
rior areas of a premises. A space protection system is also effective at detect-
ing a stay-behind intruder or an individual that gains entry through a wall or
the roof. Retailers should realize that interior sensors should be carefully and
thoughtfully installed to gain maximum effectiveness and avoid false alarms.
Common types of area/space protection sensors include the following:
Photoelectric beams – signal an alarm when their pulse beam is disrupted.
Microwave detectors – detect movement with high frequency radio waves,
may be used indoors and outdoors, and may pass through building walls,
doors, and windows (application is limited, because of false alarms triggered
by movement outside of protected areas).
Ultrasonic detectors – sound an alarm when movement is detected by inter-
ruption of a radio wave pattern but will not penetrate walls and may trigger
false alarms by air conditioning or water movement.
Infrared detectors – are considered passive since they do not transmit a wave
pattern, but sense a thermal object (human) moving in and out of their field
of view, and may be used indoors or outdoors.
Sound sensors – either enable a monitoring guard to listen to noise in the pro-
tected area or automatically sound an alarm when the sound level increases
above the normal pattern.
Object/point protection systems provide direct protection for a single
location or specific object. Two types of object/point protection include the
following:
1. Proximity/capacitance detectors – turn the object to be protected (metal)
into a sensor (such as a safe) that sounds an alarm when a perpetrator
approaches or touches it.
2. Vibration detectors – may be attached to movable objects or located near a
wall or window to detect movement and breakage.
3. CCTV detectors – recognize pixel changes using smart software can recog-
nize the presence of an individual or movement of an item.
The alarm’s sensor detects the intrusion and the annunciator (or alarm)
signals it. The signal may be monitored or sounded in one of two ways – as
a local alarm or at a central station. Local alarms sound an audio-visual sig-
nal that serves to warn local individuals and may deter amateur burglars.
Central station monitoring involves the alarm signal being transmitted over
telephone wires to a monitoring station.
Before purchasing any alarm system, the loss control director or a qualified
consultant should consider several factors – correct sensor selection, correct sen-
sor placement, sensor defeat techniques, backup sensors, and alarm follow-up.
180
Retail Security and Loss Prevention

Correct sensor selection
The security specialist, when evaluating the purchase of an alarm system, can
consider the asset to be protected, the level of security required, the environ-
ment in which the system will operate, and the budget available. Ultrasonic,
passive infrared and capacitance sensors each have advantages and disad-
vantages that must be weighed before a selection is made. Ultrasonic sensors
must be installed and monitored in the area in which they will be located to
allow for adjustment of the sensor, since power surges and wind can trigger
false alarms. Infrared sensor effectiveness can be downgraded by solid object
blockage and confined spaces.
Correct sensor placement
Sensors designed to protect a certain area or object must be correctly posi-
tioned to achieve maximum effectiveness. Microwave or ultrasonic sensors
should be placed so that intruders must walk directly at them. Passive infrared
sensors should be placed so intruders walk across the collection paths. An
intruder could consciously walk between the detection paths by slowly walk-
ing straight at the sensor. Because of these differences, a detector unit with
both passive infrared and ultrasonic sensors is not usually recommended,
since both sensors would not perform at maximum capacity.
Just as important as the position of the sensor is the proper aiming of the
sensor and keeping the wave or detection path clear of obstruction. The fol-
lowing planning data can aid in the placement of exterior and interior intru-
sion detectors.
I
Exterior intrusion detector planning data
A. Infrared sensors
1. Place bottom beam no higher than 6 inches above the ground.
2. Place top beam at least 4 feet above the ground.
3. Overlap detection zones.
B. Microwave sensors
1. Keep grass and snow lower than 4 inches in the zones between
transmitters and receivers.
2. Keep sensors far enough away from fences and other obstacles to
avoid interfering with the beam.
3. Overlap detection zones.
C. Fence disturbance sensors
1. Keep trees and brush from rubbing up against fences.
2. Secure any moving parts of fences such as signs, loose wires, and gates.
3. Tighten fence posts and fabric to avoid vibration.
II Interior intrusion detector planning data
A. Infrared Sensors
1. Avoid aiming a heat source or vent at the passive infrared sensor.
Asset Protection Systems
181

2. Avoid mounting sensors over, near, or toward any heat source.
B. Sonic sensors
1. Avoid placing sonic sensors where an intruder might hear it before
being detected.
C. Ultrasonic sensors
1. Avoid placing sensor transmitters or receivers near any telephone bells.
2. Avoid air conditioning vents or registers when placing sensors.
3. Avoid aiming sensors at items or areas that might vibrate, such as
movable partitions or large windows.
4. Do not aim sensors at each other.
D. Microwave sensors
1. Do not aim sensors at water pipes, walls, or windows that allow the
beam to detect movement outside of the protection area.
2. Avoid aiming sensors at vibrating objects or surfaces.
E. Glass breakage/Vibration sensors
1. Mount sensors solidly to object.
2. Adjust sensors for specific application.
F. Magnetic opening switches
1. Beware of intruders using a magnet to disable the reed contact inside
the switch.
2. Tightly shut windows and doors being monitored to avoid false
alarms.
G. Proximity/Capacitance sensors
1. Ground the reference ground plane to allow for proper detection.
H. Photoelectric beams
1. Conceal transmitters, if possible.
2. Do not use mirrors for detection of distances over 100 feet.
I.
Audible sensors
1. Be careful not to locate microphones or sensors close to constant or
sporadic noise sources.
Sensor defeat techniques
Knowing the techniques some criminals use to defeat intrusion detection
sensors is helpful when designing the protection system. For example, an
ultrasonic sensor may be blocked by placing masking tape over the cover.
Insiders working alone or in concert with others may block sensors or covertly
mark the detection patterns on the floor for later theft activity.
Infrared sensors may be defeated by blocking the emitter with objects, glass,
hair spray, magazines, or plastic garbage bags. Another sensor defeat tech-
nique is to set the room temperature to 85–88F – the approximate temper-
ature of human skin – and remain in the room until the system is turned on.
Alarm follow-up
To make an intrusion alarm system credible, its presence should be known,
it should be responded to and kept in working order. If the individual
182
Retail Security and Loss Prevention

responding to the alarm determines it was not crime-related, the cause
should be found, corrected, and noted.
If a central station is used to monitor the protection systems of DCs, offices,
and stores, an opening/closing report can be generated that lists the activity
next to an employee identification number. This report may be used to indi-
cate trends and suspects.
Other types of alarms
In addition to intrusion detection systems, retailers use several other types
of alarms to signal unauthorized activity. 
Robbery duress alarms can be used to alert law enforcement agencies to a rob-
bery or other violent crime in progress by tripping a switch. This type of alarm
can be very dangerous since violent offenders may notice a clerk attempting
to actuate a switch, or may observe police officers responding and take subse-
quent violent action.
Merchandise alarms are hooked up to high-cost/high-loss merchandise (such
as electronics). This alarm sounds when the circuit is broken by a shoplifter
taking the protected item from its display case.
EAS
EAS systems are designed to protect very high-loss merchandise by sounding
an alarm when tagged items (“live” tags) are removed from a store or DC.
The detection antennae at the store entrance/exit area may have a deterrent
effect, especially when combined with notification signs on the doors, dis-
plays, and protected items.
There are many types of tag devices, including a dye tag that when tam-
pered with will break a dye ampule and damage the targeted garment.
Another factor to consider when evaluating EAS systems is to determine how
it fits in with the total LP effort. What type of offenders present the greatest
threat to protected items since many professional thieves are not easily
deterred, and many amateur thieves are not aware of hidden tags. Should hard
or soft tags be used? Can the system be integrated with other technologies,
such as CCTC, RFID, or bar coding?
EAS companies generally offer a choice between hard or soft tags, depend-
ing on the goods to be protected, the layout of the stores, and the tech-
nology used. Figure 13.1 illustrates the characteristics of different EAS
technologies.
Another practice is for merchandise manufacturers to implant EAS circuits
into their product or packaging. These circuits are converted to a live mode
by passing through an activation device. If source-tagging reduces theft
losses, the manufacturer can move more products by having their merchan-
dise more openly displayed and retailers can more effectively protect their
merchandise while increasing sales.
Apparel retailers can prefer hard tags that are mixed with soft tags disguised
as price tickers, sew-in labels, “inspected by” cards that have been placed in
Asset Protection Systems
183

184
Retail Security and Loss Prevention
Figure 13.1
Electronic article surveillance operating characteristics

pockets or hidden in clothing and shoes. Groceries, auto part stores, super-
markets, and drugstores often use the soft tag systems. Studies on the effi-
cacy and effectiveness of EAS have produced mixed results.
Any retailer investigating EAS systems ought to consider the following
questions:
•
What technology is used?
•
What is the detection or pick rate?
•
What is the non-theft alarm rate and what are its primary causes?
•
What types of tags are available?
•
How can the system be defeated?
•
How close to the alarmed exit can tagged merchandise be placed?
•
What are the total costs (e.g., installation, training, maintenance, war-
ranties)?
•
What is the system’s reputation, and have rigorous efficacy studies 
tested it?
•
What are the applicable state laws regarding EAS alarm detection and
detention?
The cost of EAS systems can be expensive, but can be cost-effective. However,
as time goes by, the effectiveness of EAS systems is compromised if its not
well-marketed, and if store employees routinely fail to react to alarms or use
other prevention methods. No technology can stand on its own. It must be
supplemented with human surveillance and follow-up. In order for any EAS
system to prove cost effective over the long-term, senior management and
store management should endorse its use and ensure that it is properly used.
Employees must be trained in EAS system use and properly supervised to
add creditability to the system. All targeted goods must be kept tagged and
alarm situations must be responded to.
CCTV
Many retailers use CCTV to prevent, detect, and document theft activity in
their stores, parking lots, offices, and DCs. In a back-up role, CCTV can verify
fire, burglar, and robbery alarms, or other access control systems.
CCTV can be installed outside to observe parking lots and alleys, or
installed inside to watch high-loss or unauthorized areas. Camera installa-
tion can be temporary or permanent. Portable camera kits are used by retail
investigators to respond to suspected theft activity. The carrying case may
include a small color-chip camera, two or three types of lenses, a portable
monitor for aiming the camera, RF transmitters and receivers power cords,
tools, mounting brackets, and a time-lapse DVR. These covert surveillance
kits allow the investigator to respond to a location where theft activity is tak-
ing place and quickly install the equipment to record specific unlawful activ-
ity. By using this portable equipment, the retailer may avoid the investment
Asset Protection Systems
185

of equipping an entire store. Smoked-glass panes or an domes may be
installed and a camera may be swiftly installed when needed. Aim infrared
sensors via lens to detect movement. Movement triggers the VCR or DVR to
turn on and the VCR or DVR records the target area.
When placing CCTV cameras in stores in an attempt to deter crime, it is
important to realize that the pervasiveness of simulated CCTV cameras has
negated their deterrent effect to some degree.
Cameras can be equipped with a variety of lenses, including zoom, split-
image, night vision, covert (pin hole), right angle, and fixed focal length.
The lens used depends on the area or spot to be monitored, the distance to
the target, and the environmental conditions.
Time-lapse DVRs or VCRs allow the retailer to record a full day’s activity
on the hard drive or tape. If a dishonest act is believed to have occurred, the
investigator can quickly review the tape. It is possible to produce instant still
photos from CCTV video with an attachment.
Date/time generators (DTG) display the current date and time on the screen
and can be used as evidence in criminal or civil trial proceedings. Remote
viewing is commonplace with digital video data transmitted via radio fre-
quency, phone line, cable, or satellite to offices, vans, or other stores.
“Intelligent” CCTV systems can recognize merchandise or body movements,
offender speed changes, individual appearance. Recognizing these variables
allows the system to detect, track, and alert managers to suspicious activity
via mobile telephones or PDAs. The system can also record all relevant activ-
ity and provide quick, easy playback from multiple cameras – so managers
can track and confirm activity almost instantaneously.
The following questions should be asked when selecting and installing a
CCTV system:
•
Is a color or black- and-white system required?
•
What type of lens is required?
•
What type of recorder and transmitter is needed?
•
What type and size of monitor is desired?
•
How should the cameras be mounted and where?
•
What will the light level be during most surveillance?
Other LP systems
Alarms can be an effective way of protecting assets of all descriptions in stores
and storage facilities. However, other strategies and systems may be used to
complement alarms to provide greater protection.
Secure merchandise displays and tie-downs: High risk merchandise, such as jew-
elry or handguns, should be kept in secure display cases. High-risk apparel,
such as fur coats, leather jackets, and men’s suits, should be kept on display
186
Retail Security and Loss Prevention

fixtures that require a clerk to access them. While this can be very incon-
venient, it can save a tremendous amount of merchandise from authorized
removal. Radios and luggage can be tied down with secure cables to discour-
age easy grab-and-run thefts.
Bar coding and RFID: These identification technologies allow retailers to
quickly receive, distribute, and ring-up merchandise. Used throughout the
supply chain, these technologies make ordering, replenishment, handling,
distributing, and selling more cost-efficient. RFID can be used on pallets, car-
tons, inners, packaging, and in products. 
Lighting systems: Designed to highlight merchandise the retailer wants 
featured, lighting systems can also be used to discourage shoplifting by 
over-illuminating areas a shoplifter would normally use as a concealment
area.
Colored signs: Since the beginning of time, different colors have symbolized
different meanings. Red and black denote authority or signal the unknown.
According to researchers Farrell and Ferrara, an example of the use of colors
to discourage shoplifting is the placement of a stop sign in a high-loss area.
Researchers Farrell and Ferrara, in their book, Shoplifting: The Anti-Shoplifting
Guidebook, suggest some of the following non-tested techniques to discour-
age shoplifting and employee theft:
•
Distribute anti-theft pamphlets in the store or mall.
•
Paint or display an eye or poster of an individual looking at customers to
psychologically deter theft.
•
Use intermittent, low sounds to put the potential shoplifter off balance.
•
Display “Thou Shall Not Steal” buttons or stickers at point-of-purchase
areas for sale.
•
Display album covers of the rock group Police.
•
Display a book with the word shoplifter in the title or display a bible.1
Visual deterrents: Some retailers find that in some instances, displaying like-
nesses of police officers or security agents tend to discourage shoplifting
activity. Life-sized cardboard cutouts or holographic projections are two
methods used to display these images. This practice is intended to remind
potential shoplifters of the consequences of theft.
Paper shredders: Paper shredders are an important part of the protection pro-
gram. Documents containing sensitive data, such as sales figures, should be
shredded before being disposed. If enough paper is shredded annually, the
bulk waste may be sold to recyclers. This extra income may eventually off-
set purchase and service costs.
Asset Protection Systems
187

Identification dye sprays and marking pens: Use inks that are normally invisi-
ble, but illuminate under ultraviolet or “black” lights to mark merchandise
or documents as belonging to a specific owner. When subjects are detained
with a targeted asset in their possession, the item is held under the special
light. If the item is marked with the special ink, this indicates unauthorized
removal. Examples of marked items include
•
currency
•
price tickets
•
merchandise labels
•
containers or cartons
•
apparel of all descriptions
Counterfeit currency detectors: Many banks and retailers use a machine
designed to detect counterfeit currency by variances in the reflection of light
off of the ink used in printing bills. This technology is controversial and has
staunch supporters and serious doubters. Retailers should confirm support-
ing research before purchasing any professed currency detectors.
Computerized time systems: Computerized time systems are a sophiscated ver-
sion of the standard time clock. These systems record employee time totals
and provide other benefits, such as
•
reduce manual totaling and verification time
•
fairly and consistently apply company policies, such as grade periods and
averaging of uneven times
•
restrict employees from punching-in outside of authorized work schedules
•
speed up payroll service by transmitting data directly to paycheck gener-
ation facilities
•
generate hard copy reports to be used as management tools, such as cost-
to-sell and budget versus payroll hours.
Surveillance aids (mirrors and observation towers): Surveillance aids increase the
retailer’s ability to survey the sales floor for shoplifters. Mirrors can assist an
employee in viewing merchandise or aisles, but may also be used by the
shoplifter to look for employees. Many retailers build observation towers in
storage rooms, which enable store agents to observe sections of the sales
floor from concealed positions. The observation opening may be an air con-
ditioning vent or one-way mirror. These towers can increase the shoplifting
detection rate, but the agent temporarily loses sight of the perpetrator while
climbing out of the tower and “bad stops” may result. Towers are best used
(as is CCTV) with two agents who operate with 2-way portable radios to
avoid loss-of-sight incidents.
Two-way radios: Two-way radios can greatly enhance surveillance. It is diffi-
cult to covertly use radios while surveilling shoplifting suspects due to the
188
Retail Security and Loss Prevention

obvious behavioral signs given off when talking into a “bag” or due to the
appearance of a white earphone in an agent’s ear. These systems are best
used during dishonest employee surveillance. VHF or UHF radios are best-
suited to business security use, since they have the range required and can
penetrate throughout metal buildings. Federal regulations should be checked
for any applicable licensing requirements.
Physical security design should be based on an integrated approach. It
should provide protection in depth, contain mutually supporting elements,
and be coordinated to minimize gap or overlap in responsibilities and per-
formance. An integrated system
•
continuously analyzes protective measures
•
identifies possible interference with the operational capabilities of instal-
lations from any or all sources
•
carefully evaluates all measures that cost-effectively maintain security at
the desired level
•
is tailored to the needs and local conditions of each location or activity.
Mutually supporting elements include
•
physical perimeter barriers
•
clear zones
•
protective lighting
•
entry control facilities
•
detection, including the use of sensors and assessment systems
•
warning systems
•
CCTV
•
Security personnel.
Questions
What are the peripheral benefits of an alarm system?
What is necessary to ensure an alarm system’s maximum effectiveness and
minimal chance of false alarm?
What preventable situation can cause an EAS system’s effectiveness to dimin-
ish over time?
Name three components of an integrated system.
What are the three main ways security countermeasures work?
Asset Protection Systems
189

190
14
Selecting Protection Equipment 
and Services
The previous three chapters highlight protection equipment and services.
This chapter discusses the process retailers use to secure the best quality serv-
ice or hardware at a reasonable price. Many retail executives are not required
to know all the technical intricacies of specific procedures and systems, but
appropriate purchasing is vital to a successful loss control operation. The
systems or services purchase should not only perform to the standard set,
but should provide retailers with a return on their investment in the pro-
jected length of time.
The process of purchasing security countermeasures often consists of four
equally important elements – specifications, bids, testing, and negotiating
the contract.
Specifications
The first step in the purchasing process is to detail what is needed in terms
of performance on the part of the service or equipment. There are some very
important performance questions that need to be answered when putting
together the specifications for security countermeasures.
•
What type of target is the program or system supposed to detect or deter
(see Figure 14.1)?
•
Why and how does this system work to reduce crime and loss?
•
Are there earlier, available test data that support this system’s efficacy?
•
What kind of environment and conditions will the system work in?
•
Who will install and maintain the system?
•
How many, and who are, the personnel required to support the system?
•
Is the system expandable as the size requirements grow or new technol-
ogy comes along?
•
What is covered under the warranty or guarantee?
•
Can this system be installed in increments, instead of one installation?

Selecting Protection Equipment and Services
191
Figure 14.1
Accountability control

•
Should a reliable consultant or engineer be secured to draw up the speci-
fications of all or part of the system?
•
How much is the system likely to cost?
•
Are there any hidden costs?
•
Is the budget capable of supporting this purchase?
•
What are the metrics to gauge system efficacy?
•
What is a likely ROI business case?
Bids
The next step in the purchasing process is to secure bids from competing
vendors. In some instances, the only source for a particular product may be
single distributors. It is recommended that the retailer accepts bids or pro-
posals from three to five companies, if able. The old saying “Buyer Beware”
should guide the actions of the retailer studying the qualifications and abil-
ities of various vendors.
During the review process, consider both the technical capabilities of the
vendor’s product, and its support ability.
The retailer’s specifications should indicate the level of protection the secu-
rity hardware or service must provide and the conditions of vendor/client
relationship regarding delivery time frames, training, and maintenance sup-
port. All of these elements are critical. A selection should not be based purely
on initial purchase price.
Look into the vendor’s background and reputation. What has been the
track record of that company’s product? Reliability, effectiveness, and access
to key people in the security product company are all indicators of a com-
pany with which the retailer will want to do business. Ask for and check ref-
erences and studies from the vendor.
Many retail firms find bidder’s conferences a very effective purchasing
technique. This technique is used when collecting bids for a large project,
such as EAS or access control systems, and involves calling all competing
companies together for a single, well-organized, meeting. During the con-
ference, the retailer gives the bidders either a personally guided tour and/or
a slide/video show of the facility and holds an information question- and
answer session. A short, private tour for each vendor is recommended to
ensure receiving the best possible proposal.
The financial status of the vendor is important to the potential buyer since
good, long-term support and future technological upgrades are dependent on
a financially secure company.
When evaluating the various bids and proposals, it is very helpful to make
up and use a simple matrix (see Figure 14.2). This matrix is used to simplify
the key data being considered during the bid evaluation phase. All vendors
are judged on an even, consistent basis.
192
Retail Security and Loss Prevention

Testing
Before making a large purchase of equipment or a commitment to a service
organization, it is recommended that a controlled test be conducted to
determine if desired results and support are obtained. A controlled test usu-
ally includes a group of average stores that do not have the system or pro-
gram. These stores are randomly divided into test and control cells. Relevant
metrics, such as item sales, on-shelf availability, or loss levels, are collected
and at mid-point the new system is implemented in the test locations. Upon
conclusion, the before and after metrics are compared between the test and
control groups. The resulting data should help signal if the tested system
provides the impact necessary. Controlled tests should include other data
for insight into whether or not the system worked, and why. Helpful data
can be provided by staff and offender interview, CCTV footage reviews, and
field observations. Any test conducted should be consistently applied to
ensure that all vendors compete under similar conditions. It is important to
allow the test to last a sufficient length of time. By testing the product or
service over a period of weeks or months, the probability of discovering
problems or ineffectiveness greatly increases before a major capital invest-
ment is made.
Selecting Protection Equipment and Services
193
Figure 14.2
Vendor bid analysis matrix

Negotiating the contract
After all proposals are weighed and ranked, services or products have been
tested, and a vendor with the best record and ability to meet specifications
is selected, the contract can be negotiated. The retailer, not the vendor,
should literally write the contract, specifying when the product is to be
delivered, support activities, maintenance responsibilities, and payment
schedules. The retailer’s corporate counsel should be involved in the word-
ing of the contract and/or it review before the documents are signed. The
cost of a good lawyer’s services can pay for itself over the long-term by
avoiding conflicts over liability for non-performance, maintenance, etc.
If vendors insist on using their contracts, be aware that their standard, or
boiler-plate contract, is designed to place the vendor in the best possible
position. The boiler-plate contract is the starting point for negotiation, not
the final point. Vendors anticipate most retailers will insist on modifications
to the original contract, but also realize there are a few who may sign the
first draft. Any contract should be specific and closely reflect the perform-
ance standards that have been established. The following points should be
considered when negotiating a contract:
During negotiations
Include in written contract
• System expandability
• Legal technicalities
• System adaptability
• Equipment or personnel descriptions
• Precise threats to be detected
• Product or service delivery schedule
• Environmental conditions
• Security and care of equipment and
premises during installation
• Operating personnel required
• Implementation and installation details
(i.e., who, what, when, where, how)
• Service and maintenance
• System testing plan
• Spare parts or back-up personnel 
• Payment/lease plan
availability
• Distance from vendor operations 
• Maintenance agreement
from retailer
• Warranty and down-time acceptability
• Warranties
• Access to key vendor personnel
• Mutual indemnification clause(s)
Document the delivery and installation schedule. Any acceptable installation
plan should be realistic and take into account other activities and projects
on the part of both the vendor and the retailer.
Working with the purchasing department, devise a procurement payment
schedule with “out” clauses included, if possible, to avoid payment for faulty
equipment or in case of adverse financial conditions.
Establish a credit line, if possible, to make final payments only upon com-
plete implementation/installation and good system operation.
194
Retail Security and Loss Prevention

During negotiations, obtain purchase discounts, if possible, to cut unit costs
and increase ROI.
Devise a preferred payment method to pay x amount or percent upon
awarding the contract, x percent upon installation, and x percent for total
payment after a period of satisfactory operation.
It is recommended that at least 10–30 percent be withheld until the product
has been judged satisfactory. It normally takes from 72 hours to 2 months
before a system can be judged satisfactory. Small or local vendors may not
be able to afford a large percentage being withheld.
Installation and follow-up
The time frame required to implement a service or install equipment should
be detailed in the contract and the vendor should be held to those terms. The
retailer should maintain contact with the vendor at regular intervals to make
sure all is proceeding according to plan. The vendor’s efforts should be super-
vised periodically to evaluate progress and assist where needed.
The contract should specify a system-check procedure itinerary, such as
quarterly or annually, after final acceptance. This plan should be monitored
to ensure detection and resolution of problems with performance or effec-
tiveness. In addition to vendor checks, retailers should conduct their own
objective surveys of all loss control countermeasures.
To ensure that any implemented program, service, or system achieves the
intended results, it must be supported by thorough and ongoing training
and reinforcement. In-house and contract personnel must understand the
intent and procedures behind specific countermeasures and be motivated to
use them properly if lowered losses are to result. In any case, the retailers
and all vendors must operate as a team. There must be continuous open
communication to gain desired results. Most vendors put their customers
first to protect their reputation. Retailers should keep this in mind if prob-
lems arise.
Questions
List the four main elements of the equipment purchasing process.
What should a retailer pay attention to when selecting a vendor?
Who writes a vendor contract?
Name four topics that should be covered in a vendor contract.
What is a controlled test? Why is it important when selecting products or
vendors?
Selecting Protection Equipment and Services
195

196
15
Sample Protection Program
Every retail company, regardless of its size, should develop annual business
plans. These plans serve as written road maps for those individuals expected
to execute them. The loss control plan is an integral part of the overall cor-
porate business plan and, as such, its details must be coordinated with com-
pany employees involved in its execution or affected by its impact.
An effective and efficient comprehensive protection plan often begins
with the determination of major loss areas and the best countermeasures to
address those areas. The security director then selects the best people to
implement and manage prevention efforts, as well as sets time tables for
implementation and goal achievement.
Where to begin
All retail companies should appoint a single individual who is responsible
for corporate loss control efforts. Depending on the size of the company, or
its losses, that position may be either full- or part-time. The appointed per-
son will be designated as the authority to plan the LP effort as well as expend
the funds required to execute it. No plan can be expected to work precisely
as designed but by carefully surveying the company’s problems and current
prevention programs, and establishing realistic prevention procedures, the
eventual outcome should be positive.
The first step to take in developing a protection plan is to list the inven-
tory of tasks, time lines, and assets available for the effort.
1. List the tasks to be performed in executing the plan (e.g., training meet-
ings).
2. List all personnel in the company who will play a role in the plan (e.g.,
CEO, CFO, store managers, LP staff, store employees).
3. List implementation and operational time frames (e.g., by second quarter).
4. List all administrative and support requirements, such as payroll, human
resources, transportation or equipment, and use of company computers.

5. Familiarize staff with corporate and loss control goals and objectives.
Reinforce your message with a similar one from the CEO.
6. Access the status of any collective loss control efforts already in place.
7. Establish priorities for countermeasures. Attack your biggest problems
first; address secondary concerns later.
8. Identify individual, collective, and leadership tasks that support loss con-
trol efforts. Regardless of the organization’s size, every department must
get involved. Those individuals in leadership positions must understand
their roles and responsibilities. Do not assign a responsibility to someone
unable to carry it out because of lack of time, expertise, or ability.
How to prepare a loss control plan
Using an annual/quarterly calendar and a list of individual and leader tasks,
the plan can be designed in six basic steps. A sample Loss Control Plan is
included in Appendix 10.
Step 1: Select priority countermeasures to be implemented
As mentioned in previous chapters, selected countermeasures should be the
most cost-effective available and should be aimed at those risks deemed the
most likely and costly. After reviewing the three previous years’ sales, loss,
and incident data of the company, it may become apparent that shoplifting
is increasing, and a combination of staff awareness training, better handling
procedures, store detective teams, and EAS technology may solve major loss
problems. This decision may also be based on the fact that the review also
indicated only one burglary incident the same period. Therefore, the pur-
chase of new safes can be delayed.
Step 2: Identify all collective, individual, and leader tasks associated
with planned loss control efforts
Each employee involved with the LP effort should be identified and their
tasks described, including
•
Collective tasks of both LP and non-LP employees associated with priority
countermeasures
•
Individual tasks associated with the collective tasks
•
Leader tasks (implementation, audit, and follow-up) associated with col-
lective tasks.
These tasks lists only need to be prepared once, although they will be
updated periodically. Copy the lists and distribute them to each member of
the loss control team. Input from company employees at all levels should be
actively sought when designating specific tasks.
Sample Protection Program
197

Step 3: Identify collective, individual, and leader tasks to be trained
and evaluated before and during loss control efforts
No individual should be assigned a task or responsibility without first being
properly trained. The planners of collective training must sort through all
the individual, leader, and collective tasks to determine tasks that need train-
ing (based on the best estimate of the current training status derived from
observation and reports) and tasks that need evaluation. It is impossible to
gather enough evaluators to observe all the tasks being trained. Therefore,
those tasks that require special attention should be selected, such as proper
techniques to use when counting cash for deposit or changing prices on mer-
chandise. If the director of loss control or the training coordinator is suffi-
ciently aware of training needs, that individual can personally identify these
tasks. Otherwise, their identification can be delegated to capable subordinate
leaders. A copy of the task list can be used as a worksheet to record the iden-
tified or delegated tasks. This step doesn’t need to be overly complex, but it
is critical to the success of the overall plan.
The second part of Step 3 is to decide whether the selected tasks are to be
trained and evaluated before or during collective exercise. The following
procedure may prove useful in reaching this decision:
1. List the tasks to be trained prior to implementing specific countermeasures,
including tasks that are required to implement priority countermeasures.
2. List the tasks that may be trained after total program implementation.
Good candidates for this list are tasks that require that specific counter-
measures be in place before training can occur, such as monitoring a CCTV
system.
Step 4: Check resources and support availability
There is a great deal of resources and support required to implement and
manage an effective protection program. Sources for needed services and
assets must be identified and contacted. In addition to budget dollars, exam-
ples of resources required include the following:
Time: Sufficient time must be allocated for training, implementation, and
management of loss control operations. Be realistic.
Manpower: The avoidance of building up large staffs is paramount. A stream-
lined work force should be the goal of any asset protection organization, but
there must be enough quality manpower available to effectively control
losses.
Authority: All the planning in the world will prove fruitless if the employees
charged with the responsibility of protecting corporate assets are not taken
seriously or have no real authority to accomplish stated goals. Support and
backing of security efforts must originate at the very top of any retail company.
198
Retail Security and Loss Prevention

By the same token, loss prevention employees are cautioned to keep their
overall importance to the company in perspective. Loss control is but one of
several means to increased profits.
Just as a variety of resources is required to effectively control losses, so is
support and cooperation required by groups or individuals inside and out-
side of the organization. Examples of groups or individuals that can provide
needed support of security efforts include the following:
Legal counsel: During planning phases, it is important to confer with the
company legal counsel on certain matters where action or inaction on the
part of the company employees could pose a civil liability. It is also impor-
tant to report any incidents to the company attorney that may develop into
a lawsuit against the company.
Finance/accounting: Individuals in finance and accounting can be very help-
ful in putting together budget forecasts, estimating the ROI on protection
investments, assisting in evaluating vendor bids, and assisting in fraud inves-
tigations by spotting or explaining financial documents and paper trails.
Human resources personnel: Human resources employees can provide invaluable
support by recruiting and selecting top-quality security applicants, providing
expertise in matters involving the employment life cycle (such as policies
and procedures), and supporting investigation of employee theft or fraud.
Planning and construction: Store design and layout play an important role in
discouraging and detecting theft. Individuals involved in this type of work
can assist in the set up of special observation areas or can pre-wire surveil-
lance setups. Also, store designers can include psychological barriers when
plotting fixture layouts.
Information Technologies: IT experts should support asset protection decision-
making with data mining and statistical modeling software. Training man-
agement, case management, incident patterning, transaction and inventory
management software are all vital LP elements.
Buyers or merchants: Buyers and planners have a vested interest in the flow
of merchandise from the vendor to the POS. They can provide information
on the recorded location of particular items or on incoming high-loss mer-
chandise, such as leather jackets or designer jogging suits. Buyers and plan-
ners should be judged on their shrink adjusted gross margins where possible.
Buyers, store planners, and others can also enlist high-loss product suppliers
to collaboratively plan and fund product protection development.
Distribution center: Distribution center employees can assist in investigations
of missing merchandise.
Outside firms: Outside firms, such as consultants, investigators, and guards can
all assist in a total protection program without adding to the permanent staff.
Sample Protection Program
199

Government agencies: Police, fire, and government agencies should be con-
tacted and plans established for their support of routine or emergency loss
control activities, such as bomb threats, major fires, earthquakes, etc.
Step 5: Prepare the training and implementation schedule
The training and implementation (T&I) schedule illustrates, for all parties
involved, the tasks that are to be performed and when they are to be per-
formed. Supervisors at all levels should participate in creating this schedule,
especially if lower level supervisors have been authorized to select individual
and lower level collective tasks and training scenarios. If subordinate depart-
ments require time for training or evaluation prior to implementing specific
countermeasures, an appropriate time frame must be made available.
The T&I schedule has several uses. Subordinate leaders use it to plan training
and operation for which they are responsible. Senior leaders and evaluators
use it as a basic reference in preparing to evaluate and make adjustments to
performance. Supporting departments use it when planning their schedules
and budgets.
To prepare a realistic T&I schedule that efficiently uses time and other
resources, the LP specialist must have a clear mental picture of the daily real-
world conditions under which the loss control effort operates. Manpower
shortages, high-crime areas, and the skill of local managers are examples of
conditions that vary from location to location and can significantly impact
the results of a protection program. These varying and changing business
conditions must be planed for. Forecasted results and time frames should be
optimistic, yet realistic.
Consider the following points when preparing a T&I schedule:
Use time efficiently. Training and operations should be scheduled to allow
for simultaneous accomplishment of more than one task, if possible. It is also
important to attempt to place the right individuals in the right positions. A
certain employee may have considerable skill or knowledge in a particular
area, but may not have the personality or the desire to become a good leader.
Resource availability should not drive the entire program. If certain serv-
ices or equipment are absolutely required to reduce shrinkage, the needed
resources should be proposed and vigorously lobbied. If the desired systems,
manpower, and training needs cannot be secured in the indicated quality or
quantity, this must be planned for.
A critique should be scheduled after each phase of training or implemen-
tation. These critiques can be used to discuss the successful and unsuccess-
ful performance of all participants and equipment. This will help ensure
that employees remember the correct things they did and will help identify
incorrect procedures. The critiques will also provide ideas for future training
and how it should be conducted. Evaluators and employees taking part in
the programs should be included in any critiques. The extent of the critique
depends on available staff and time.
200
Retail Security and Loss Prevention

Realism in training is key to a successful profit protection program. Actual
conditions should be simulated whenever possible and a moderate degree of
stress should be introduced to determine if specific personnel or programs
will prove effective over the long-term.
When estimating the time required for training or implementation, lead-
ers who will be conducting the training or supervision should be consulted.
These estimates will guide the determination of time requirements. The
actual schedule must remain flexible.
Evaluators and observers will use the schedule to be at the proper location
to evaluate assigned tasks or training.
Step 6: Write the actual loss control plan
Each retail security manager will have a preferred style (or the company will
dictate the style) to be used when documenting the annual LP plan.
Regardless of the style used, the plan should state, at a minimum, the objec-
tives of the program, the tasks to be performed, and the equipment to be
used, the individuals to carry out these tasks, the support and resources
required to accomplish the stated objectives, and the time needed to accom-
plish the plan. It may be advisable to design the plan so that it can be imple-
mented in phases (e.g., training, evaluation, implementation, operation,
re-evaluation, operation).
Questions
A loss control plan should be integrated with and be part of what?
Define the three categories of LP tasks in which employees are usually
involved.
Plans for bomb threats or natural disasters should include whom?
What does a T & I schedule do?
What are the five basic objectives a loss control plan should include?
Sample Protection Program
201

Annex A
Loss Control Departmental Goals
202
This annex outlines the goals of the Loss Control Department and the objec-
tives to meet those goals for this fiscal year.
1. Goal: Reduce shoplifting losses to under an estimated $6 million annually
or 0.079% of gross sales.
Objectives to meet goal: Identify top 25 high-loss items in top three high-
loss categories and isolate top 30% of high-loss stores on these items. Use
video, incident interviews, and survey data to determine the prime causes
of loss. Test and refine special handling procedures, fixturing, and other
potential countermeasures. Assign one loss control agent to each store.
Train 90% of all store employees in shoplifting prevention techniques.
2. Goal: You may list further goals and methods here.

Annex B
Loss Control Training Objectives
203
Prioritized listing of training requirements for this fiscal year:
1. Employee awareness training in all stores: At least 90% of the employees
in each store must complete the Loss Control Workshop. Maintain this
standard throughout the year with normal turnover.
2. Store management training: All managers must complete the Loss Control
Workshop.
3. Store-level agents-etc.
4. You may list further goals and methods here.

Annex C: Sample Program
Director’s Program – Four “A”s for Loss
Control
204
In an attempt to focus our loss control efforts on high-priority risk areas
while keeping our program simple, we have organized these efforts into four
main areas – Awareness, Auditing, Apprehension, and Area focus. Subordinate
leaders will be issued checklist/activity forms to help keep themselves and
their employees on track throughout the fiscal year.
Awareness
Employee awareness and training is the single most important issue in deal-
ing with reduction theft and waste in any business. Our ongoing program
will show all employees what the problems are, how these problems affect
them, and what they can do to reduce these problems. Apathy, changing
priorities, and high-employee turnover are realities in any retail setting. Our
three-tiered program keeps these facts in mind; it consists of employee work-
shop packages, awareness bulletin boards, and an incentive award program.
A seminar series for our store employees has been put together and con-
sists of three topics – shoplifting/external theft, employee theft, and safety.
Each topic is a separate workshop. The seminar can be given by any manager,
assistant manager, or LP specialist and should consist of the custom video
and facilitator’s guide that shows, step-by-step, how to present the program.
Also included are workbooks and handouts. Each workshop can be presented
in less than one hour to allow for maximum floor coverage at all times. These
workshops can be part of new employee orientation, can be given to a group
of employees as reinforcement training, or can be presented according to the
manager’s wishes.
Each store is provided with a LP awareness bulletin board that is posted
either in the employee lounge or central meeting area. The board serves as
a constant reminder to employees and is an important part of the program.
Three topic updates can be posted on the board monthly – theft preven-
tion techniques, safety techniques, and congratulation notices to employees
who prevented a loss or potential accident the previous month.

To reinforce positive LP actions on the part of our employees, the third
part of our program consists of incentive awards. All employees are taught
to acknowledge all customers, make add-on sales through subtle suggestive
techniques, and verify questionable prices. These activities not only increase
sales and customer satisfaction, but are proven deterrents. When an employee
deters an incident, recovers merchandise, or provides information that results
in an apprehension, a request for bonus points can be submitted. A “check”
for 50–100 bonus points will be issued to that employee. Employees save
their points to purchase merchandise from a catalog. With this program,
awareness remains a priority with employees.
We will also provide a tool free, 24-hour hotline for employees to report
suspicious incidents anonymously or to suggest ways we can improve our
security efforts.
Auditing
After employee awareness, the second most critical issue in reducing loss is
to establish controls on money and merchandise. For the purpose of this
plan, we have included the establishment and verification of compliance to
loss controls in one section.
We studied procedural controls used by different retailers that apply to all
aspects of store operations. From these studies, we selected those controls
that not only prove most effective, but that fit in our hassle-free customer
service atmosphere. All procedures were thoroughly researched, tested, and
documented. Employees and supervisors who will practice these procedures
will be taught the reasons for these controls and allowed to practice them
before going back to the sales floor.
Controls can be internal or external and can be designed to protect either
cash or merchandise. In addition to procedural controls, we will also emphasize
external controls such as high-quality locks, safes, burglar alarms, glass film,
CCTV, and EAS. Our EAS system has been useful in reducing the bottom line
shrinkage figures in EAS stores. If properly used, EAS can be very effective and
presents a positive return on investment. More pre-tagged high-loss items will
be requested from the vendor to reduce store labor requirements for this effort.
Once controls are implemented and adjusted to fit in the real-world work
flow of daily business, they must be continually tested and reinforced. The
best controls in the world are useless if employees do not practice them on
a consistent basis (as is very often the case).
Procedures that control voids, refunds, and cash register access are absolutely
essential. Our store inspection report is similar to an audit that our LP man-
agers perform with store managers twice annually. The report is used as a pos-
itive management tool.
Managers set the mood, as well as the priorities, in their stores. If employ-
ees perceive that management does not emphasize or enforce procedure
Sample Protection Program
205

compliance, the morale and theft activity reflects this mood. The inspection
report will indicate specific problems to the store and district managers, so
that a concentrated effort can be made to reduce them.
Apprehension
If a customer or employee steals cash or merchandise from your store, what,
if any, action should be taken? A lot of research and deliberation went into
our decision to combine criminal and civil action against the majority of
apprehended shoplifters and dishonest employees. We felt that arrest and
prosecution still provide a degree of deterrence for certain categories of
offenders, since “the word” still travels in schools and some neighborhoods.
If Store A has EAS, highly trained, effective store agents and/or employees;
and prosecutes perpetrators, a thief will most likely steal from Store B.
Civil action against dishonest employees and shoplifters has been made
relatively easy with the advent of civil demand laws that exist in at least 44
states. Civil demand has not only proven itself effective in our stores as a
deterrent to repeat offenders, but is a deterrent to juvenile theft as well.
Parents tend to keep a closer eye on their children when their theft acts begin
to impact the household budget.
When dishonest employees or shoplifters are taken into custody for com-
mitting a crime, they are deterred from theft activity for as long as they are
detained. Other potential criminals who hear of the situation may think
twice about committing a similar crime in that establishment. The deten-
tion also may result in a recovery of assets.
A third benefit of apprehension is the opportunity to interview the suspect.
Interviews often provide the retailer with valuable intelligence. Information
collected from these sources can reveal break-downs in controls or morale,
implicate others involved in criminal activity, and can provide insight into
methods and motives of shoplifters and dishonest employees. For these rea-
sons, we will not be discouraged from pursuing the apprehension of offenders.
Area focus
All merchants have high-loss stores and high-loss departments. Our compre-
hensive exception report tells us, on one page, which stores, employees, or
merchandise areas are experiencing the majority of the problems in voids,
refunds, price variances, cash overages and shortages, bad checks, and shrink-
age percentage. We will combine these data with a trend analysis report that
indicates type of incident, high-loss time, and high-loss location to allow
our LP resources to be quickly and efficiently applied.
206
Retail Security and Loss Prevention

Annex D
Individual Departmental Tasks
207
The following guidance is provided for training and operation of individual
departments within the company.
1. Loss control – will concentrate on the tasks listed in Annex C.
2. Human Resources Department – will implement sound pre-employment
screening techniques and will provide advice and support during dishon-
est employee investigations.
3. Finance Department-etc.
4. You may list further goals and methods here.

Annex E
Follow-Up Interdepartmental Meetings
208
In order to ensure effective two-way communication and conflict resolution
to achieve ultimate corporate objectives, a follow-up meeting is scheduled
between the Loss Control Department and each of the departments that play
a significant role in the corporate loss control effort. This schedule is flexible
to allow for additional meetings, if required.
1. Human resources: March 15, 2006; Meeting Room C; three representatives.
2. Finance-etc.
3. Store operations-etc.
4. You may list further goals and methods here.

Annex F
Fiscal Year T&I Calendar
209
This schedule provides the anticipated start and completion dates for train-
ing and implementing loss control countermeasures. This schedule should be
used as a guide for all departments and supervisors when planning resources
and activities required to successfully implement an effective control program.
First quarter
1. February 1–3; Install test display systems in stores 14, 28, and 29–31.
2. February 5–8; Provide training on high-risk product procedures in appli-
cable stores.
3. March 2–5; Provide enhanced loss control training to store managers in
Region 2 etc.

210
16
Implementing the Program
Once the protection program has been designed, it must now be imple-
mented. The task of beginning or refining a corporate-wide loss control pro-
gram can be very complex. The asset protection specialist must understand
the objectives and methods, and gain the support of senior executives and
peers if the control effort is to be a success. Everything possible should be
done to ensure a relatively smooth implementation of the total loss control
program.
Justification of the control program: making the business case
Once a total asset protection program has been developed, it must be justi-
fied to those individuals who pay for it. Retailers must justify the program
in terms of the need for protection of assets to control costs and, therefore,
ultimately to increase safety and gross profit margins. The tendency, for
many retailers, is to consider the security function to be, at best, a “necessary
evil” that displays little tangible benefit. Therefore, the loss control special-
ist should strive to demonstrate that shortage control programs can play a
positive role in the business, and need not always be viewed as a negative
activity.
While the programs are being designed, the LP specialist should ask and
answer the question that will, or should, be asked by senior management
regarding the plan. Do the expected results of countermeasures justify the
expense? Is this countermeasure the most cost-effective technique available?
Is this countermeasure absolutely necessary? Do we have credible evidence
to support these assertions? Can the company afford to capitalize requested
security equipment purchases? Can a positive ROI be shown for each coun-
termeasure?
All countermeasures do not need to be cost justified. Few corporations
would require a security director to justify the need for fire or safety protec-
tion, but they may question the methods and equipment used. Efficacy
should be demonstrated.

Cost justification
When funds are spent on protection efforts, those funds are not earning
income by traditional investment. The protection specialist can use three
methods to demonstrate to top decision-makers, in economic terms, the
need to protect assets.
Cost avoidance: Cost avoidance shows the losses that will most likely occur if
the security program is not implemented or is only partially implemented.
If the amount of the loss exceeds the cost of the program (and the capital
cost of the money spent on the program), then the program can be justified.
For example, if the cost of locking 100 leather jackets, which cost $250 each,
with cables is $1200 and the estimated loss of these protected jackets is zero
(compared to the projected loss of $10,000 if the jackets are not cabled), this
indicates that the proposed cabling program should result in a savings of
$8,800.
Recovery of assets: Recovery of assets includes the projected dollar amount of
total merchandise and cash recovered due to security efforts in a fiscal year.
Examples of recovery include
1. An employee who is apprehended for writing a false refund for $170. The
cash taken from the register is recovered. Additionally, the cashier admits
to taking $3500 over an 8-month period and begins paying that money
back in monthly payments.
2. Three shoplifters are arrested carrying $1800 worth of athletic shoes out
of a store in plastic garbage bags.
3. A sales clerk notices that a customer is attempting to purchase $198 worth
of merchandise for only $58 because the prices have all been altered.
Return on investment (ROI) capital, or expenditure: ROI includes totaling calcu-
lated avoided losses and their resulting costs, and counting the cost of mer-
chandise and cash recovered. The retailer then subtracts the projected cost of
the loss control program from the above ROI figure (or the combined total of
avoided loss and recoveries), which includes all losses to be avoided and the
dollar amount of recoveries projected. It is not possible to precisely project
the ROI of any protection program, but the program should show an accept-
able return over a specified time frame. Sound research can provide estimates
or benefits useful for ROI analyses. Retail finance executives may require test
results to indicate payback timeframes, internal rates of return, or …
Selling the protection program to senior management
In addition to the cost justification, there are some other methods that loss
control directors can use to convince top managers that their loss control
program is worth the proposed costs.
Implementing the Program
211

Conduct (or have a consultant conduct) a thorough survey and analysis of
the company.
Document the protection plan in clear, concise terms.
Open, and keep open, lines of communication with all key decision-makers
and the individuals that influence those decision-makers.
Use video, survey, and other data to graphically demonstrate the problem
and recommended solutions.
Deal in principles, not personalities, when collecting data to support the
proposed program.
Be aware if the feelings about security that many retailers have. These feel-
ings range from support, to indifference, to outright hostility and may be
due to previous exposure to obnoxious or incompetent security “types.”
At all times, loss control executives or their staffs should dress and act like
competent professionals.
Maintain an air of neutrality and professionalism, and avoid a narrow, self-
serving view of corporate goals and objectives.
Maintain a fresh and focused view of the department’s methods and objec-
tives by reading books and journals on retail and retail loss control. This
activity on the part of the loss control executive will become apparent to
key decision-makers.
After the security manager (and/or the security consultant) has analyzed all
obtainable data and structured the protection plan, the following sequence of
events is recommended:
1. Prior to scheduling a meeting with senior management, start a public
relations program within the company to determine the feeling most
employees have about safety and security at the work place. Personally
visit stores and key corporate employees to discuss their perceptions of
the current loss control effort to make your plans for better control clear
and to attempt to gain their support of loss control efforts.
2. Timing is important in any situation and presenting a loss control plan
and budget at the appropriate moment is beneficial. If at all possible, the
LP director should time the initial submittal when the executive com-
mittee is most receptive. It may be very difficult to judge this, but, often
times, either a very positive or very serious incident may create a favor-
able atmosphere for making the loss control pitch. Always be prepared for
the presentation.
3. When presenting the proposal, keep it short and to the point. Discuss the
highlights and the projected results of the plan. Make sure the issues that
are based on educated guesses are described as such. Do not over or under
exaggerate the capabilities of the program.
4. Keep in mind that very few programs are accepted in their initial form.
Remember that thorough research and a well-prepared plan are appreciated.
212
Retail Security and Loss Prevention

Teamwork
Any loss control program is doomed to failure if all individuals concerned
are not brought into the planning and implementation “loop.” A concerted
effort must be made by LP specialists to present their educated views as well
as to listen to the views of others. No effort will be conflict-free; human
nature will not allow for all individuals to agree on every issue or method.
However, it is possible to rise above misunderstandings and personality
clashes to achieve shrinkage-control goals.
Implementing the Program
213

This page intentionally left blank

Part IV Testing and Follow-Up 
of the Loss Control Programs

This page intentionally left blank

217
17
Auditing and Follow-Up
Any loss control program should be continually inspected to ensure it is rel-
evant to the current situation, and effectively achieves its goals. The inspec-
tion process should have a well-conceived structure in order to collect the
specific data required to give the most accurate picture of the shrinkage sit-
uation. This inspection will also help judge the efforts that control shrink-
age. This chapter demonstrates some of the tools available to retailers to
help evaluate their loss control efforts.
It is important to note the fact that many people resist change. Because of
this resistance, recommendations resulting from an inspection may be diffi-
cult to implement.
Another factor to consider when designing the company audit/inspection
program is the natural defensive posture taken by anyone or any depart-
ment that comes under close scrutiny. Any inspection program must be tem-
pered with diplomacy and tact. No program that reflects a “gotcha” attitude
will succeed. The plan, as well as those chosen to promote it, must reflect
the true intent of the exercise – to gain an accurate picture of problems so
that those problems can be fixed.
The purpose of an audit and follow-up plan is to determine the level of
compliance to company policies and what would happen if changes are
required to better achieve full compliance. The next step in the audit process
is to design the changes. Finally, those changes must be implemented. The
programs appear sound, but the individuals being inspected may be reluc-
tant to cooperate in any or all of these phases. It then follows that senior
corporate managers must understand and wholly endorse the program in
order for it to succeed. It is the responsibility of the loss control manager to
ensure that key members of company management are aware of the risks that
exist if such a plan is not carried out. Once the top managers understand the
cost-to-benefit ratio of this activity, they can make an educated decision about
any phase of the loss control plan, including the audit and follow-up phase.
The true support of senior management will be tested at some point – either
an influential employee or a significant event will force the issue. By keeping

the lines of communication open between the loss control manager and sen-
ior management, misunderstandings can be kept a minimum.
Inspections
The audit/inspection program can take many different forms. It can be a for-
mal, structured program; informal; unstructured; or a combination of all of
these inspection programs should be continuous, as the organization and its
problems are constantly changing, and new technology and procedures are
being developed and made available periodically.
Perhaps the best design for the inspection program is a combination of
formal and informal events. By asking senior managers to accompany the
security specialist on announced inspections, the three following objectives
can be reached:
1. Key company managers become personally familiar with normal supply
chain and store operations, as well as loss control vulnerabilities and
countermeasures.
2. When senior executives are seen actively inspecting current loss control
initiatives, rank- and-file employees realize loss control is a priority issue
with top management.
3. People, programs, and systems are reviewed and evaluated. If the program
is proving successful, future security proposals tend to be easier to “sell”
to senior management. 
Informal or unannounced audits are just as important as formal inspec-
tions. These visits can be preplanned or purely spontaneous. Information
inspections should be the norms, since it is imperative that the loss control
manager gets a realistic view of normal routines and practices. As stated ear-
lier, security personnel must go to great lengths to avoid turning company
employees against them by using unannounced audits as weapons against
selected or targeted individuals. All audits/inspections should be fairly and
consistently applied. This does not mean, however, that high-loss locations
or departments should not receive closer scrutiny or control activities.
Sometimes, certain managers may be capable of covering shrinkage prob-
lems by “playing games” with merchandise or paperwork (such as tem-
porarily changing prices to increase revenue). It is for this reason, as well,
that audits should be conducted of all areas of the company.
Inspections and audits should be conducted by different people, depending
on the data to be collected and/or objectives of the inspection. If the data to be
collected are procedural and financial, internal auditors or specially trained loss
control inspectors would be designated to conduct the audit. If, however, a
strong message is to be sent to the managers and employees being visited, high-
ranking managers are the appropriate personnel to carry out the inspection.
218
Retail Security and Loss Prevention

The periodic use of a qualified security consultant may be recommended
in cases when there is no in-house security department or when the LP
director needs an objective, “fresh” perspective on current activity.
Effectiveness analysis
The point of conducting program inspection/audits is to maintain needed lev-
els of program execution, as well as measure LP program impact and effective-
ness. All indicators studied should be end-oriented and should relate to loss
control program strategies, goals, and objectives. By evaluating end-oriented
data, the results of an effort, rather than the effort itself, can be determined and
the effort’s effectiveness can be gauged. It is at this point that procedures and
systems can be evaluated for necessary fine-tuning or elimination.
Data collection
Data collected and used in the formulation of the protection program can
be compared to data collected during inspections conducted at planned
intervals. Examples of this type of data include
•
inventory sales, margin, and shrinkage figures
•
reported incidents (quantity and distribution)
•
comments and perceptions from rank- and-file employees and active
offenders.
These data, when compared to similar data collected earlier, should indicate
an upward or downward trend in problem areas. The trend direction indicates
success or failure of implemented countermeasures. Trends must be studied in
relative terms. In other words, new store locations or new risk problems may
distort the numbers. If all numbers are given as a percentage of sales, or a fairly
constant metric, then comparison of trends will be much more accurate.
Inspection/audit reports
Every retailer will have a preferred procedure for auditing their operation, as
well as a preferred method of documenting their efforts. The objective is to
implement a fair and consistent procedure that stands the test of time. An
example of a standard store inspection report is included in Appendix 11.
Auditing and Follow-Up
219

220
18
Inventories1
Retail method of inventory
As every retailer knows, an annual physical inventory of all merchandise is
required by federal income tax law. However, this should not be your only
reason for taking inventory. A physical inventory serves several purposes
that are as important as satisfying the legal requirement. But unless it is
meticulously taken to ensure its accuracy, you will find that the information
obtained is worthless and misleading.
By comparing the actual physical inventory with the book inventory, the
retailer is able to check the accuracy of the record keeping that is being
done, not only in the office but in the receiving and marking department
and on the sales floor. Many things will affect the accuracy of the book
inventory, such as unrecorded markdowns, unrecorded markdown cancella-
tions or markups, merchandise sales that are recorded in a wrong class due
to carelessness, or merchandise received and counted in the physical inven-
tory without its invoice being recorded in the books. The list can go on and
on. The important thing to remember is that careless record keeping and the
resulting “paper shortage” will hide real shortages caused by shoplifting and
theft.
If the retailer will keep unit inventory information in addition to cost and
retail, he/she will have a tool to be used to analyze the amount of shrinkage
that has occurred since the last physical inventory was taken. This shrinkage
can tell the retailer many things if he/she will take the time to analyze it. By
comparing the average retail dollars of shrinkage with the average retail price
of merchandise sold and merchandise in the actual ending inventory, he/she
will be able to determine how much of the shrinkage is due to unrecorded
markdowns, merchandise recorded in a wrong classification, missing mer-
chandise, or employee theft.
Of course, if the physical inventory count is inaccurate, the information
obtained will be useless. An inaccurate physical inventory has many far-
reaching consequences that retailers often do not consider when actually

preparing for and taking a physical inventory. An inaccurate physical inven-
tory that overstates the total amount of merchandise actually in inventory
at year-end will result in overstated gross profit and net profit for the cur-
rent year, which in turn can result in the paying of excess income tax. This
misstatement of gross profit and net profit will distort the company’s finan-
cial statement for two years, the year in which the inaccurate physical
inventory took place, and the following year, when the inaccurate physical
inventory is corrected by the taking of a correct physical inventory. Many
retailers base their store manager’s and/or buyer’s compensation, in part, on
the achievement of certain gross profits, stock turn rate and shrinkage goals.
When the physical inventory is incorrect, this causes the amount of com-
pensation to be computed incorrectly. While one manager could be over-
compensated, another could be unfairly penalized.
A bad physical inventory can also seriously affect a company’s merchan-
dising decisions by causing erroneous information at the classification level,
even though the overall store figures look valid. If the actual inventory counts
taken in the store for each class are incorrect, the buyers will be basing their
purchase on figures that are distorted. For example, if the physical inventory
erroneously shows that a particular classification’s inventory level is too low,
the buyer will mistakenly buy merchandise the store does not need. This can
simultaneously work the other way, with the inventory showing that a class
has too much inventory. In this case, the buyer will avoid placing needed
orders and sales can be lost.
The inventory process
As shown in the above examples, it is easy to see that a physical inventory
carelessly taken is worse than not taking one at all. Instead of bringing the
book inventory back in line with what is actually in stock, a bad inventory
just causes more work and confusion, and results in a wealth of misleading
information. Fortunately, there are steps the retailer can take to ensure the
accuracy of physical inventory.
The taking of a good physical inventory involves almost all of the store’s
employees, whether they work on the sales floor, in the receiving and mark-
ing department, or in the office. It also requires careful advance preparation.
The merchandise on the sales floor must be checked to verify that the infor-
mation on the garment tags is correct. Personnel must be scheduled for the
actual count. The numbered inventory count sheets must be ordered, and
written procedures must be established to ensure a clean cut-off of all move-
ment of merchandise and the resulting paperwork. A store meeting must be
held to review the procedures and emphasize their importance.
No matter how careful the retailer and his/her employees are, there are
items that may be overlooked, which can result in a poor count. Following
are some of the things to be aware of and watch out for, in preparing for,
Inventories
221

and taking a physical inventory. You can most likely add more based on
your own experiences.
•
merchandise held for evidence
•
merchandise out for repair
•
merchandise on display
•
merchandise taken out of the store for use in developing advertising
•
hold merchandise
•
owned merchandise being repaired in the alteration shop
•
merchandise being stored in a seldom-used storage area
•
improperly counted interstore transfers
•
merchandise in the receiving area that is not counted, even though the
paperwork was processed, or vice versa
•
merchandise taken off the sales floor by a buyer and left in the buyer’s office
•
damaged merchandise that was taken off the sales floor for which the RTV
has not been processed
•
merchandise returned by customers but not put back into stock
•
merchandise left in the layaway room, even though the paperwork has
been processed to return it to stock
•
merchandise stored in what inventory counters assume is an “empty” box
•
an inaccurate cut-off of paperwork: receipts, interstore transfers, price
changes, and return-to-vendors.
On the day the inventory is taken, inventory teams must be carefully
instructed concerning the appropriate manner for counting the merchan-
dise and filling out the inventory count sheet. If outside help and non-sales
employees are used, it is important that the person doing the actual count-
ing is familiar with the merchandise, and can therefore spot any mismarked
merchandise that otherwise might go unnoticed. All teams should be checked
during the first half-hour to verify that the forms are being filled out correctly,
as this will prevent a large number of recounts. Finally, it is of the utmost
importance that all count sheets be left on the fixtures until unit counts are
verified and the store manager is ready to begin picking them up. This helps
to ensure that everything is counted.
The taking of an accurate physical inventory, because of the many details
that must be attended to, can be an awesome task. But it is not impossible.
Remember, it takes no longer to take a good, accurate physical inventory than
it does to take a sloppy, inaccurate physical inventory.
Inventory tips
•
Conduct an inspection tour and prepare a listing and timetable of things
to do in preparation for inventory.
•
Train all personnel on inventory procedures.
222
Retail Security and Loss Prevention

•
Develop a floor plan – a drawing of the selling and stock areas.
•
Arrange merchandise in the stockrooms and on the selling floor to facil-
itate a timely and accurate inventory.
•
Perform a careful review of store paperwork to be sure that all adjustments
and corrections have been made.
•
Clear up problem receipts before inventory.
•
Do not allow merchandise to be moved during inventory.
•
Provide adequate supervision for all inventory-counting times.
•
Verify counts made on a random basis.
•
Remember, communication and training are key elements to an accurate
inventory!
Inventories
223

224
19
The Future
No book on loss control would be complete without a chapter discussing
what lies ahead for retailers and, specifically, for asset protection specialists.
The forecasting of future trends is an inexact science, but it is also one of the
most important tasks a competent executive can perform. Strategic as well as
short-term activities should be planned with an eye toward the future. The
world is rapidly changing, demographically and geopolitically, as seen by
the radical changes taking place in Eastern Europe, the Americas, Asia, and
the Middle East. These changes have a dramatic impact on the way retailers
do business. They also determine the way crime and loss affect the retail
industry. Consumers, desired goods, and selling channels are all evolving.
Industry trends
General trends
Globalized buying and selling will continue to increase. Retailers are taking
more time to carefully plan their future business moves. This trend should
continue as chains re-evaluate company images, merchandise mixes, pricing
strategies, and customer convenience practices, and target customer profiles
and selling methods. Many retailers are forced to service mounting debts
that are a result of leverage buy-outs and acquisitions.
Another significant trend that must be recognized is the shrinking edu-
cated labor pool, which provides entry-level employees.
Most retail chains are beginning to apply more and better training resources
to their lower level managers. These managers must cost-effectively run the
business. In order to remain flexible and responsive to rapidly changing
needs and problems, decision-making authority must be granted at a much
lower level. Merchandise mixes, employee-hiring needs, advertising require-
ments, and security levels will vary greatly from region to region and even
neighborhood to neighborhood. Centralized command and control will
become more difficult. Overall company goals and objectives will be based on
more realistically achievable goals that are set by the various store managers.

Many goals and objectives will not be set solely by an executive committee
that is somewhat isolated from the day-to-day operations and realities of the
store.
Also, the use of technology continues to decrease the manpower require-
ments in the central office, distribution facility, and stores. This may
decrease “paperwork” shrinkage and employee theft. The downside to this
trend is the resulting loss of personal service to the customer and an increase
in shoplifting losses.
Drug abuse
As the use of illegal drugs increases, theft incidents increase. Employees and
shoppers who abuse drugs constantly need a supply of available cash to pur-
chase their drugs and associated paraphernalia. A retail store or warehouse
is the ideal source of ready cash, as merchandise can be easily converted to
cash. Liberal store refund policies provide the best source of cash to the
hardcore shoplifter. As substance abuse testing procedures become less
obtrusive, they will become more routine.
Employee theft
As the educated labor pool increases, retailer’s pre-employment screening
efforts will become increasingly futile. The merchant will be forced to hire
whatever applicants show up. Also, as lower level managers are forced to
handle more and more tasks, the level of employee theft will rise as super-
visors and policy enforcement decreases.
Companies must make a concentrated effort to recognize and reward
employees for sound loss control behavior. Morale levels in stores and dis-
tribution centers must be kept high. Employees must be made to feel an
important part of the operation. Managers at all levels will be held more
accountable for their focus on procedural controls, which directly affect
year-end shrinkage levels. High growth in new store counts also forces less
experienced or otherwise capable employees to be promoted beyond their
abilities.
Shoplifting
Store pilferage is, unfortunately, a fact of life in our society. This practice will
continue to increase. Merchandise display methods will directly determine
the amount of shoplifting losses a retailer can expect. The trend of extended
store hours and fewer store employees will continue and these practices will
boost theft losses for obvious reasons. As store designers cram more items
into each square foot of the display floor and create blind spots, theft levels
will increase accordingly.
All store operations should implement and maintain employee awareness
and reward programs to positively impact theft losses from shoplifting. No
technology is more important than employee involvement.
The Future
225

As technology improves, it will provide retailers with the tools they need to
significantly reduce theft losses. By integrating RFID and CCTV with access
control, merchandise and access to that merchandise can be more effectively
controlled. Carefully designed store layout, packaging, fixtures, and procedures
supported by surveillance and technology will provide better protection.
Paperwork errors
Technology improvements will reduce errors in pricing markdowns and
inventory manipulation. RFID, UPC-scanning, DSD, and price look-up tech-
nologies will steadily improve and will result in more efficient and accurate
purchasing, accounts payable, delivery verification, and POS transactions.
Summary
As always, the future holds much uncertainty and much excitement for the
retailer. This is especially true for those employees, charged with the respon-
sibility of protecting corporate assets. It is no longer someone else’s job to
plan for and adapt to our rapidly changing world. The businesses that survive
the next two decades will do so because of their strategic, flexible approach
to doing business.
The bottom line is to get back to basics. Clearly define problems and goals,
and devise and implement simple, plainly stated strategies to reduce the
negative impact of loss control problems. Swiftly changing technologies will
greatly enhance loss control efforts, but good, sound leadership and manage-
ment provides the ultimate resolution to loss control problems. Globalization
and better IT and technology support will continue to evolve, but better
selection, development, and management of staff is the key to selling more
and losing less.
226
Retail Security and Loss Prevention

Appendix 1
Sample Conflict of Interest Policy
1. Objective
The purpose of this policy is to provide key employees of the Company basic
principles and guidelines to aid in avoiding conflicts of interest. The Company
is committed to conducting its business in accordance with the best interest
of its shareholders and the highest ethical standards. The Company likewise
expects all its employees to conduct themselves in accordance with the high-
est standards of integrity, honesty, and fair dealing, including avoidance of
any conflicts between the interests of the Company and the personal interests
of the employee.
2. Definition of conflict of interest
A conflict of interest occurs when an employee allows the prospect for direct
or indirect personal gain to influence his or her judgment or actions on behalf
of the Company.
3. Statement of policy
a. Each employee will be free of any investment, association, or connection
which interferes, or may be considered to interfere, with the independent
exercise of his or her judgment on behalf of the Company.
b. The fulfillment of this obligation shall include, but not be limited to, the
following:
(i)
No employee or his or her family1 may own, directly or beneficially,
any financial interest in any supplier if the employee is in a position
to influence decisions with respect to the Company’s business with
that supplier.
(ii) No employee or a family member may hold a position of director,
officer, employee, or agent with any supplier or potential supplier.
227

(iii) No employee may accept cash, gift certificates, or trips for any rea-
son whatsoever from any vendor or supplier. Token Christmas gifts
of $25.00 or less and vendor promotional gifts (containing vendor’s
name) may be accepted. The acceptance of conventional business
courtesies, such as an occasional lunch or dinner, is not considered
capable of influencing an employee to disregard the best interest of
the Company.
(iv) No employee should use information which comes to them in the
course of their employment for personal investment or gain. This
would include dealing in the Company’s stock while possessing
insider information.2
(v)
Any employee who becomes involved in, or becomes aware of, any
situation which represents a possible conflict of interest is to imme-
diately report that situation to their supervisor or the Chief Financial
Officer.
4. Reporting requirements
a. The attached conflict of interest certificate should be completed annually
by all:
(i)
Employees of Director level and above, including buyers.
(ii) Any other employee requested to do so by the President, an Executive
Vice President, Senior Vice President, or Vice President.
b. Certificates are to be sent to the Chief Financial Officer or designee. New
hires may be requested to complete a certificate when hired.
c. Any questions should be directed to the Chief Financial Officer.
228
Retail Security and Loss Prevention

229
Appendix 2
How-To Manual for Shoplifters
According to police intelligence, two schools for shoplifters have been found –
one in Casper, Wyoming, and the other in Dallas, Texas. Printed material pro-
vided by the Texas school was also confiscated and is very similar to material
which was taken from a shoplifter in Southern California.
Read this document carefully. Reprint it for your store employees. Discuss
it in store meetings. This is how store personnel and security people are per-
ceived by professionally trained thieves. Only by understanding shoplifters
and their methods, and by being constantly aware, can the retailer defend
against professionally trained shoplifters.
The following is the unedited text of what appears to be a procedure man-
ual for shoplifters.
DRESSING ROOM
This method should not be used unless you can’t “do it off the floor,” or
the opportunity is obvious. Of course, many stores have dressing room
counters and this prevents their use. The most important thing to remem-
ber in working the dressing room is to make sure no one can tell how many
and what specific pieces you have taken in; needless to say, if you are plan-
ning to take 4 or 5 pieces, it is necessary to take into the dressing room at
least twice as many. Of those that you take in, it is essential that the pieces
be similar; this is because if a salesperson or security sees you, they see a
certain print or style go into the dressing room and if it is not there when
you are finished, it will tip them off. So whatever pieces you decide to take,
make sure you have at least one other of that print. A good way of dis-
guising how many pieces there are, is to hang the piece you want to take
on the one you’re not going to take.
Never wander around with any of the pieces you are planning to take and
either swing them around to one rack or when the salespeople are not pay-
ing any attention to you, quickly gather them up and go into the room.
Try not to look too obvious about this because you never know if security

is watching. Once in the dressing room, separate out which pieces you
want to take and try to hide them by putting them on a chair, covered by
your jacket. Often saleswomen will come in and check on you and when
this happens, your pieces are protected. Most dressing room doors have
slits in them which face in your direction; these allow people on the out-
side to see in. These were designed specifically for this purpose because
before security can make a bust, they have to be absolutely sure that you
have taken something and the best way to do this is to observe you.
One way to guard against this is to hang some clothes on the door itself
so they cannot see in. You can see if someone is observing you by bending
down low and looking up through the slits or open the door and see if
someone is out there. Once you have taken your pieces, leave the remain-
ing ones in the dressing room.
This gives you more time to leave the store undetected because by the time
someone goes back there to see what’s left, you will be on your way out.
If you feel uneasy about something and you want to test if security is sus-
picious, take the remaining pieces out and see if they are paying attention
or acting funny. One thing to your advantage is that when a salesperson
is suspicious, they will almost always show it by acting rude or looking
you up and down, etc.
OFF THE FLOOR
This seems a lot more nerve-wracking than in the dressing room because
you are practically doing it in front of people around you. The best ones
are those who block you from view of any and all people around you; the
best ones are those that shield you from both sides. Of course, you can’t
have anyone close by, but as long as no one can see you, don’t be stopped
by other people in the department. The only thing you have to worry
about is observation windows and 3-sided mirrors. Also, many stores have
disc-shaped mirrors in the corner which reflect down; however, these are
not too dangerous unless you are standing close by them, besides which
somebody has to be looking close and you should notice if they are. The
last thing you must be concerned with is a 2-way mirror observations win-
dows, these are usually small dark little holes located toward the top of the
wall. Most of the time there is never anyone in there, but if they can be
avoided, do so. If not, you can usually tell if someone is behind them by
standing directly under them.
One nice thing about working off the floor is that if someone has seen
you, they will let you know because they get crazy. If it is a customer, they
will usually look twice to make sure they saw what they thought they saw,
and then run and find a salesperson to tell. If a salesperson sees you, they
will have a suspicious expression on their face and either go tell someone,
230
Retail Security and Loss Prevention

or pick up the phone to call security. Security can be contacted by three
methods: phone the security office and tell them where the suspected
thief is; or they have walkie-talkies; or a system of dings will go off in the
store to notify them. I’m sure you’ve heard them and in a large depart-
ment store, they are going off constantly. Unfortunately, no one has the
code to be able to figure out which department is calling them and most
of the time you should ignore the bells; however, if you think a salesper-
son is suspicious and you see them pick up the phone or push something
and you hear bells go off, then be aware because they could be for you.
If you have gotten your pieces all right and there are no detachers, you can
get ready to leave the store. Check in a mirror to see if you look all right
and there are no belts or tags hanging out. Remember, because you know
those pieces are there, you can see them but nobody else can. As you’re
getting ready and getting closer to the door to leave, be double-checking
security because they will not grab you until you are out that door. How
to spot security will be described later, but be suspicious of anyone who is
around you a lot or following you; if they were around when you took the
pieces and they are around you when you’re leaving, watch them. Security
almost always gives themselves away by using their walkie-talkie, which
will be in their purse or some shopping bag. They will stare at you from
behind racks, they will keep looking at you, following you, etc. Never, ever
leave the store without checking for them no matter how cool you
thought you were. If for some reason you think someone is onto you,
don’t panic because they can’t do anything unless you leave that store.
Keep walking around from department to department just casually shop-
ping and if they’re still around, give them back their merchandise. Quickly
go behind a rack and dump it or go into a dressing room and leave it. At
that point, security knows what you’re doing and you know who they are,
but you haven’t broken the law. They might even say something to you
but just act like you don’t know what they are talking about and leave. Do
not go directly to your car because they know you are a pro and that you
probably have other pieces in your car, so if they can get your plates, they
will call the police and get you searched. Just walk around and see if some-
one is following you and if no one is, then go to your car. If some is, call
“J.S.” and arrangements can be made. Your car is very important; it can
keep you from getting busted. Always park it as close to the store entrances
as possible, the further away it is, the further you may have to run. Leave
the door unlocked so you can jump in as fast as possible and as soon as
you get in, close and lock the door. Make this a reflex action because once
you are in that car, you are almost home free.
After you leave, put the pieces in the trunk and take you trunk key off the
ring and put it somewhere else. This way if you do get pulled over and
Appendix 2
231

they want to search your trunk, tell them you don’t have the key. The
police can either take you and the car in and get a warrant and search
your car and you’re sunk; or, they will probably bust open the trunk and
this is an illegal search and seizure and though you might go to jail. The
case will not hold up in court. Always check for people tailing you.
Sometimes, they will let you leave the store but a plainclothes will follow
you from store to store, waiting for you to finish so they can bust you and
get more charges against you.
If you’re being tailed, get out of the city and if they try to pull you over,
ignore them; you could always claim you didn’t believe they were police.
If you have pieces in the car, rip off the price tags, and throw them out
because without these, they have no proof.
DETACHERS
These are a royal pain in the ass. They are designed to sound an alarm as
you leave the store. As I’m sure you have seen, they are white plastic and
must be taken off with the proper tool. At one time, only about 50% of
the stores had them, but now all of them do so they must be dealt with.
When working off the floor, take your pieces as usual and then go into
the dressing room, but make sure you take some clothes in with you. This
is necessary when you take the detachers off-you will have no place to
put them. Put them on the clothes you have taken in, they clip on. Put
them in the seams because that is where the stores place them. Don’t put
more than one on if there is already one there; if for some reason you
don’t have enough clothes to put them on, put them in your pocket and
then put them in pockets of clothing out on the floor.
Quite often, you can sort through the pieces and find some that are unde-
tached but always feel the pieces because you may not be able to see
them. This brings up another point, there are other forms of this; little
pieces of cardboard; however, these can be ripped off. These usually say
inventory control on them but sometimes stores, especially smaller ones,
try to disguise them by putting them in plastic and putting the store
name on them. Because they are small, they are tricky to find, so make
sure you check the garment inside and out. Be extra sure and if you’re
not, go into the dressing room and double check.
Finally, some stores have really slick methods; always check the door to
see if they have alarms, they will take different forms: white or wood pil-
lars, overhanging ones, or things that sort of resemble gates-if you see any
of these, be clued that there is something on the clothes. If you can’t find
anything on them, hang out by the cash register and see what they do to
the clothes when something is bought. If the beeper does go off, you
have to make a decision whether to run for it or give back the pieces. In
232
Retail Security and Loss Prevention

a department store, if you can walk back into the store and drop off the
pieces without too much attention, go ahead; if your car is real close, run;
but that is a decision you have to make.
SECURITY
As I mentioned earlier, security almost always gives themselves away, but
nevertheless, there are some that are as slick as you are. The one thing
most of them have in common is their mentality. I mean, it takes a cer-
tain type of person to have a job where you suspect everyone and send
people to jail. This mentality expresses itself – most security look like real
“pricks”; they get off on the power they think they have. When they’re
working, they will be sneaking looks at people, looking over racks, or hid-
ing behind things, trying to spy on whoever. Most often security works
in couples because they can see more that way and more importantly, a
man has the strength to grab you and keep you. They almost always carry
a walkie-talkie, so if you see a woman sort of talking to her purse, be care-
ful. The men carry theirs inside their jacket or bag, like they bought some-
thing. They also try to dress down and usually wear blue jeans because
they are trying to look like your average shopper. If you see a supposed
customer talk to a salesperson like they know them, be suspicious; if you
see two customers who aren’t together, stop and briefly talk to each other,
that is another good sign. When they’re suspicious, they will keep look-
ing because they have to make sure that you have taken something.
Sometimes they will even bump into you to see if they can feel some-
thing on you. If you act cool, however, there is no reason for them to be
suspicious of you, unless of course, they see you doing something. Security
looks for people who look nervous, minorities. They are always suspi-
cious of blacks, chicanos, etc., sometimes this works against you because
if there are some around you in a store, you can be pretty sure security is
around; however, most of the time security will be so worried about
them, they won’t be paying any attention to you. One should be more
careful when working the dressing room because security is real aware of
this method. When you go into a dressing room, stop and check real fast
and see if anyone is watching you go in. If you see someone and they
come into the dressing room, be aware; and if they leave when you do,
the odds are real high that is who they are. I try and make it a practice
never to leave through the men’s department. This is because if you are
being followed by a man, he will be much more obvious if you’re in the
women’s department than in a man’s. The reason this is important is, as
I mentioned earlier, he can grab you. If a woman tries to bust you by her-
self, you will probably be so scared that you will have the strength to get
away and if that involves kicking her or hitting her, do so because you
really don’t want to go to jail. Some stores also have security who wear
red jackets and although they are obvious, they should be paid attention
Appendix 2
233

to. Also, some smaller stores have armed guards, and if you can avoid
dealing with these, it would be better.
WHERE TO GO
You should have a list of stores; when you are first starting out, go to the
smaller stores until you build up your confidence for the bigger stores.
Remember, you have to keep going back into these bigger stores every
couple of weeks so the less attention you draw to yourself, the better. The
bigger stores have different departments, which helps, because you can
go in on department one week and a separate department the next.
Mostly, you have to use common sense and act cool and you shouldn’t
really have any trouble. If you are careful and alert, you should never get
caught. Remember too that it is better to come home with no pieces than
to get arrested, don’t force it. If, God forbid, you do get caught, don’t
panic. You will be out in several hours. Do not tell security or the police
anything about your name. They will try to get you to confess, or tell
them who you work for, etc. They will also ask you who the pieces are for.
Tell them that they are for yourself.
234
Retail Security and Loss Prevention

235
Appendix 3
Civil Recovery Laws
History
Civil recovery is not a new concept; it is as old as common law. What is new
are the civil demand laws being passed across the nation. These statutes are
written to make it easier, administratively, for merchants to collect for dam-
ages incurred as a result of increasing losses due to theft.
The first civil recovery statute was enacted in Nevada in 1973. Prior to this,
the legal damages awarded to the retailer for incurring shoplifting offenses
were small, if any. Attorney’s fees were generally not recoverable, and such
fees would typically outweigh any recovery of damages. This situation placed
the financial burden of pursuit of the shoplifter (and security costs in gen-
eral) on the retailer and ultimately, through increased prices, on the non-
shoplifting customer.
By establishing automatic, pre-set ranges of penalties directed at the
shoplifter, civil recovery statutes shift this financial burden from the consumer
to those who commit acts of shoplifting and theft. Civil recovery statutes were
enacted in order to compensate the retailer and provide for theft deterrence.
By 1986, 16 states had adopted civil recovery statutes. Since then, that num-
ber has more than doubled and now includes 41 states. Civil demand arose
in and spread among the western states. Currently, only a few of the north-
eastern states have civil recovery laws. The states that currently use civil recov-
ery include
•
Alaska
•
Arizona
•
California
•
Colorado
•
Connecticut
•
Florida
•
Georgia
•
Hawaii

•
Idaho
•
Illinois
•
Indiana
•
Iowa
•
Kentucky
•
Louisiana
•
Maryland
•
Massachusetts
•
Michigan
•
Minnesota
•
Mississippi
•
Missouri
•
Montana
•
Nebraska
•
Nevada
•
New Hampshire
•
New Jersey
•
New Mexico
•
North Carolina
•
North Dakota
•
Ohio
•
Oklahoma
•
Oregon
•
Pennsylvania
•
Rhode Island
•
South Dakota
•
Tennessee
•
Texas
•
Utah
•
Virginia
•
Washington
•
West Virginia
•
Wisconsin
Inent of the laws
1. The laws help offset the tremendous costs of theft and security by plac-
ing the cost burden on the offenders, not by raising consumer prices.
2. The laws serve as a deterrent – especially to repeat offenders.
3. In some states, the laws are viewed as a possible alternative to criminal
action – although they can be used simultaneously. The state of Ohio is
the only exception. In Ohio, retailers can either pursue the criminal or
seek civil remedy – not both.
4. The laws provide a source of revenue to retailers for funding loss control
training, programs, and equipment.
236
Retail Security and Loss Prevention

Civil action for theft
When a customer or employee steals from a company, that action is both a
crime and a civil tort. In 41 states, a retailer can take not only criminal
action, but also civil action in the form of civil demand. In both cases, a
third party with legal expertise is generally used. In the case of criminal
action, the state or district attorney files information or secures an indict-
ment to prosecute the offender.
In a civil action, a civil recovery firm (with a staff attorney) screens all
incident reports sent by a client (retailer) and issues carefully written letters
of demand to theft subjects. These firms also answer questions posed by
demanded subjects, their attorneys, and parents.
The following information explains some of the differences between crim-
inal action and civil (tort) action and references Figure A3.1.
I
Burden of Proof – “What is required to get a conviction or judgment?”
A. Criminal Action – The state must prove beyond any reasonable doubt
that the individual is guilty. This is sometimes difficult to prove.
B. Civil Action – Burden of proof is preponderance of evidence. If a
retailer has stopped an individual for theft, with good reason, that is
enough. Preponderance of evidence is much easier to prove than
guilt beyond any reasonable doubt.
II
Restitution – “How will my company be compensated for our losses due
to theft?”
A. Criminal Action – Retailers must rely on the state to determine if
they will receive restitution. If some sort of restitution is granted to
the retailer, it is usually for the value of the merchandise. Due to high
workloads or politics, a prosecuting attorney may drop a retailer’s
case, regardless of the merchant’s wishes.
B. Civil Action – Retailers control from whom they demand restitution
(through the civil demand process). In most states, a retailer can
recover not only the value of the merchandise, but also general, spe-
cial, and/or punitive damages. Since the retailer is in control, a case
can be dropped at any time.
III Deterrent – “What provides the best deterrent to future theft in my
stores?”
A. Criminal Action – Although prosecution is a good deterrent, it is most
effective when used in conjunction with civil action. Since criminal
courts and jails are overcrowded, the chance of incarceration or seri-
ous penalty is virtually nonexistent.
B. Civil Action – Crime prevention is sometimes best described as crime
“displacement.” If thieves know that stealing from your company
will result in their arrest, recovery of the merchandise from them,
and a fine of $150 payable to the retailer, thieves will probably avoid
stealing in your retail establishment.
Appendix 3
237

IV Corporate Image – “How will my customers view the use of criminal/
civil action?”
A. Criminal Action – Criminal prosecution is a necessary evil. Although
it is a good deterrent, the retailer is sometimes looked upon as the
“bad guy.” Also, criminal action is a public issue as arrest reports are
public record.
B. Civil Action – The high cost of security should be passed along to the
offender not to the good-paying customer in the form of higher
prices. Therefore, customers should be outraged if a retailer is not
practicing civil recovery! Unlike criminal action, civil action in the
form of demand letters is a private issue. The offender is not finger-
printed, photographed, or incarcerated. Therefore, the public does
not have access to the records.
V
Variance in Processes – “How complex is a criminal/civil action program?”
A. Criminal Action – There are as many different statutes and policies
regarding the handling of apprehended shoplifters as there are cities
in the United States. Every municipality has different criteria that
retailers must follow.
B. Civil Action – There are only 41 different variations since 41 states
have civil demand laws. All that is needed to civilly demand is a civil
demand law in your state, a correct subject name and address, and pre-
ponderance of evidence. (Note: A certain degree of legal expertise is
required to research civil laws, write appropriate demand letters, and
respond to inquiries from demanded subjects and their attorneys.)
The merchant, and ultimately the customer, pays for losses incurred as a
result of shoplifting and internal theft. Civil recovery laws help offset higher
prices due to theft and enable retailers to offer the competitive prices cus-
tomers expect.
238
Retail Security and Loss Prevention

Appendix 3
239
Figure A3.1
Civil and criminal action for theft

240
Appendix 4
Abbreviated Retail Security Survey
(Sample)
I
People
A. LP Coordinator/Director/VP
1. If part-time, list the percent of time spent on asset protection, plan-
ning, and leadership.
2. Describe the chain of command from the LP Coordinator to the CEO
to help gauge support and ongoing advice to senior leadership.
B. Number of full-time (non-clerical) loss control employees.
C. Number of part-time (non-clerical) loss control employees.
D. Is a Loss Control Training Program in effect?
1. Hours of initial, annual, and in-service training for both LP and non-
LP staff.
2. Briefly describe the content of the training course, the quality of the
instruction, and testing.
E. On the basis of visual observation of work activity, as well as interviews
and surveys with store management and employees, are loss control
policies and procedures
1. published?
2. taught to LP personnel?
3. followed routinely?
4. reinforced by supervisors and incentives?
5. audited and updated at least bi-annually?
F. Do these policies and procedures appear to be well focused on total
loss control efforts?
G. Is an Employee Awareness Training Program in place?
1. Briefly describe the content and frequency of workshops, the quality
and technique of instruction, information reporting procedures, and
any incentive program.
H. Are loss control briefings given to senior management?
1. What is the frequency with which they are given? Daily? Weekly?
Monthly? Quarterly?

I. Personnel Screening
1. Is a written, signed employment application reviewed?
2. Are all candidates interviewed twice?
3. If a job classification requires the following screening procedures,
verify and cite exceptions to the following conditions:
a. Previous employment
b. Education
c. Criminal convictions
d. Credit history
e. Driving record
f. Workers’ compensation history
g. Administer special assessments and test
J. Comments
II Programs
A. Are all suspected and confirmed incidents reported?
B. Are incidents documented and compiled for analysis and patterning?
C. Are detected incidents investigated?
D. Is there a criminal prosecution policy?
E. Is there a civil action/recovery policy?
F. Is there a restitution policy for dishonest employee cases?
G. Is there a bad check, gift card, credit follow-up policy?
H. Has top management established loss control policies?
I. Are these policies published, issued, signed, and updated?
J. Are managers accountable for the success of these policies?
K. Has top management established loss control and ethics policies?
1. Are codes of conduct and disciplinary procedures published?
2. Are responsibilities listed?
3. Are responsible employees designated? Notified? Trained?
L. Are emergency, prevention, response, and recovery plans published?
1. Do they cover natural and man-made disasters?
2. Are responsibilities listed?
3. Are responsible employees designated? Notified? Trained?
4. Are periodic drills held and resulting adjustments made?
5. Are critical areas and operations protected and replicated?
6. Are emergency communications and notifications planned for?
7. Have public emergency services been planned for and notified?
8. Have mutual-aid pacts been established?
9. Is a post-disaster recovery plan established?
III Systems
A. Are purchase order management systems in place?
B. Is a vendor verification system in place?
C. Are accounts payable notices verified?
D. Is payroll verified and updated regularly?
Appendix 4
241

E. Are distribution and corporate office facilities as well as other supply
chain assets secure?
1. Is proper fencing done?
2. Is there proper lighting arrangement?
3. Are alarm systems in place and tested?
4. Are keys controlled?
5. Is access controlled?
F. Are DC receiving, put away, picking, and store shipments verified?
G. Are stores tested periodically on overship reporting?
H. Are asset protection systems installed?
1. Are they being used?
2. Is targeted merchandise protected per analyses?
3. Is proper system usage rewarded?
4. Are systems checked daily, prior to use?
I. Are high-risk display areas observable?
J. Is high-loss merchandise specially controlled?
K. Are inventories and high-risk product cycle counts taken periodically?
L. Are interstore transfers controlled, reconciled, and tested?
M. Are price changes verified and checked?
N. Is a clear refund and credit policy posted?
O. Are suspicious refunds and other transactions tracked?
P. Are cashiers limited to one per register during work periods for
accountability purposes?
Q. Are cash variances tracked?
R. Are cash pick-ups made periodically?
S. Are deposits verified?
T. Are adequate safes in place and equipped with alarms and trading
reports?
U. Is the store equipped with an effective alarm system?
1. Is the system tested periodically?
V. Are fitting rooms controlled?
W. Comments.
242
Retail Security and Loss Prevention

243
Appendix 5
Sample Completed Store Audit
Report
Figure A5.1
Loss prevention inspection report

244
Retail Security and Loss Prevention
Figure A5.1
Continued

Appendix 5
245
Figure A5.2
Voids

246
Retail Security and Loss Prevention
Figure A5.3
Void profile chart

Figure A5.4
Customer service desk
Appendix 5
247

248
Retail Security and Loss Prevention
Figure A5.5
Refund profile

Appendix 5
249
Figure A5.6
Register operation

250
Retail Security and Loss Prevention
Figure A5.7
Sales floor

Appendix 5
251
Figure A5.8
Receiving/stockroom area

252
Retail Security and Loss Prevention
Figure A5.9
Physical security

Appendix 5
253
Figure A5.9
Continued

254
Appendix 6
Sample Consulting Proposal
Consulting Service X proposes to conduct a study for Corporation Y to
determine loss vulnerabilities and study loss control practices. The overall
objective is to answer the questions, “What is the retail operation doing to
maintain a healthy gross profit margin?” “Are these measures reasonable
and sufficient to achieve their purposes?”
I. Scope
The security audit will cover
•
security measures presently used, with respect to the buying, receiving,
processing, and distributing of merchandise
•
efficiency of security hardware currently in use in stores and distribution
facilities
•
considerations involved in screening, hiring, orienting, training, and moti-
vating company employees
•
study of the quality and extent of the rapport between individuals respon-
sible for loss control and senior management
•
store vulnerabilities to employee, vendor, and customer theft, with major
emphasis on employee theft
II. Approach
Current practices in merchandise control, especially in the receiving, mark-
ing, processing, and distributing portions of the distribution operation, will
be observed. Interviews will be conducted and a survey completed.
Security and inventory control practices and equipment will be evaluated.
The effectiveness of loss control people, programs, and systems in the stores
and distribution facilities will also be evaluated. The study will determine
prioritized risks and high-loss areas in the operation.

Cost-effective countermeasures and shrinkage control programs will be
designed, and an implementation plan, which includes recommended prac-
tices, will be submitted.
III. Resolution
At the conclusion of the information-gathering phase, we will analyze our
findings and prepare tentative recommendations. Thereafter, these recom-
mendations will be discussed with your selected committee to ensure that
the recommendations meet standards of reasonableness and feasibility.
Our discussions will be documented in a written report that contains our
findings. The report will contain our recommendations. Two copies of the
report will be produced by the release date.
IV. Considerations and limitations
The study will be conducted in a professional, low-key manner. It is under-
stood that this review does not denote any dissatisfaction with Corporation
Y security operations or its management. Rather, the study is a positive effort
to ensure that reasonable provisions have been made to protect the com-
pany and its assets.
Consulting Service X reserves the right to use the services of other con-
sultants only if the requirements of the project establish this need. Any
expenses would be included in the standard fees.
V. Background
Consulting Service X is a retail security consulting and training firm. We are
a company that has been created by retailers for retailers. Our retail back-
ground and experience gives us the ability to provide you with the best eval-
uation and plan of action possible.
Our principal consultant, Mr. Z., is also our Vice President. Mr. Z. is a
Certified Protection Professional (CPP) and a Certified Security Trainer (CST).
He has more than x years of retail loss prevention experience and has served
as Deputy Sheriff for the Alachua County Police Department.
Mr. Z. has been a featured speaker for many organizations, including the
American Society for Industrial Security (ASIS), the International Mass Retail
Association (IMRA), the International Security Conference (ISC), and the
Florida Attorney General’s Office.
VI. Fees and time commitment
Our fee for this study will be based on our standard rates. The estimated cost
of our services for this project is $x.
Appendix 6
255

It is noted that charges are not assessed for travel time. Only time spent
on-site, time spent off-site in analysis, or time spent preparing written mate-
rials is charged.
Cost of travel expenses is estimated at $x. Miscellaneous expenses are pro-
jected at $x, for a total of $x. These costs include expenses and fees for two
trips to your location.
We will bill Corporation Y in two installments for services, submitting the
initial statement at the end of 30 days and the final statement when the
report is delivered.
If any follow-up visits or surveys are indicated in the future and any addi-
tional fees are required, these issues will be negotiated at that point.
The dates for the project will be secured, by agreement, between Corporation
Y and Consulting Service X.
256
Retail Security and Loss Prevention

257
Appendix 7
Recommended Control Procedures
(Sample)
Opening the store
At the start of the day, make sure you
1. turn off the alarm
2. turn on the lights, music, and paging system
3. inspect the floor for problem areas that need attention either before the
store opens or during the workday.
List problem areas and assign your employees to handle them. For example,
you may notice an empty feature rack in the Men’s Department that needs
to be filled before the store opens. Complete the following steps either
simultaneously or in a different order than listed here. Make sure you com-
plete all steps properly.
1. Supervise the front door to let employees into the store.
2. Ensure the head customer service clerk opens the registers. Direct any
problems to the cash office person.
3. Oversee garbage removal by walking with the stock person to remove
garbage through the back door. Supervise everything that leaves the store
through the back door.
4. Identify any problem areas for the janitorial service to handle before the
store opens (e.g., re-vacuum the Children’s Department).
5. Complete the daily personnel schedules (this can be done the night before).
Handling personal checks
Acceptable checks must have
•
pre-printed customer name and address (in case of change-of-address,
customer must delete old pre-printed address and write in correct, current
address)

•
current date
•
numeric amount equal to the written amount
•
preprinted bank name
•
pre-printed magnetic ink character recognition (MICR) account number.
Out-of-state checks are acceptable only when they are on-line. Note that
employees must have a supervisor deny a check. The following criteria apply
to unacceptable checks:
•
second-party checks
•
check written in pencil
•
check with alterations not initialed by customer in cashier’s presence
•
check that has an illegible amount
•
check written or presented by a juvenile on an account other than 
their own
•
check presented by intoxicated or out-of-control customer
•
traveler’s check in foreign money
•
check that has a rubber-stamped bank name
•
check payable to “cash”
•
government check
•
payroll check
•
business check made out to or endorsed by a second party
•
check with a P.O. Box address.
1. Ask customer for valid driver’s license with a photograph.
2. If customer has a driver’s license, enter the following information on the
front of the check, to the right of the name and address:
• license expiration date
• birth date
• telephone number
• state on the license
• license number
• approval code.
The approval code is entered later, only when a “2” or a “9” appears on
the terminal.
3. If the customer does not have a driver’s license, the cashier should call a
supervisor who will determine whether or not to accept a secondary ID.
Secondary ID includes
• Visa card
• Master card
• American Express card
258
Retail Security and Loss Prevention

• Diner’s Club card
• Carte Blanche card.
Be cautious when accepting any identification without a photograph.
4. If identification is accepted, your cashier should
• press “check tendered” on the terminal.
• line up the MICR reader to the personal check and enter the check’s
MICR number in the terminal.
5. A code will appear on the terminal. If the last digit in the code does not
appear, the check has been approved and the cashier should complete the
transaction.
Task: handling customer returns and exchanges
Handling cash or check without receipt
The customer service clerk follows the basic return and exchange procedures,
along with these additional steps:
1. After printing the customer’s name, address, telephone number, and obtain-
ing customer signature, ask to see a current driver’s license.
2. Write the driver’s license number in the identification box of the charge
slip.
3. Ensure that the check ID information matches the information the cus-
tomer previously stated.
4. Print “Without Receipt” on the chart slip.
5. Call a supervisor for approval.
While waiting for the supervisor to reach the Customer Service Desk, the
customer service clerk should discreetly check the unmarked folder to see if
the customer’s name appears on the “No Refunds” list. If the name does not
appear on the list, the clerk should check the refund and ID. If they are OK,
endorse the charge slip and let the customer service clerk complete the
transaction.
If the customer’s name appears on the “No Refunds” list, the clerk should
put the refund slip in the folder and hand the folder to the supervisor. The
supervisor should politely tell the customer,
I have been instructed to give no more refunds or exchanges to you. If
you have any questions, please contact the Director of Loss Prevention at
the Central Office.
Appendix 7
259

Watching out for refund fraud
If you have reason to suspect a fraudulent return
1. Tell the customer you will mail the check in one week.
2. Apologize and emphasize, if necessary, that the store is not refusing 
the refund.
3. Give the customer a receipt for the merchandise and retain the 
merchandise.
4. After the customer leaves, contact the Loss Prevention Office with the
customer information.
5. Write “customer-owned goods; holding for approval” on the yellow copy
of the refund slip and staple the slip to the top of the bag with the items
inside. Keep the items at the Customer Service Desk.
6. If the refund information checks out positive, send cashier’s check to the
customer within one week. Ring up a refund and endorse the slip. Write
“check sent to customer” on refund slip.
7. If refund information checks out negative, the Loss Prevention Office will
instruct you further.
Paging customers, employees and management, and security
Paging customers
When paging customers, summon them to a specific location. Do not state
the content or nature of the request. Announce the page by saying, “Mr./Ms.
(surname), please come to the (location).” For example, you might say, “Mr.
Jones, please come to the Customer Service Desk.” If there is no response,
repeat the page after 30 seconds.
Paging employees and management
Always page management by title or surname only, never by first name. Page
other employees and management for business reasons only. Do not make
personal pages. Page by name, department, or title and request the individ-
ual to report to a location. Do not page an individual more than twice: leave
30 seconds between pages.
Paging LP
Page LP on a regular basis throughout the day to discourage shoplifters.
Increase the number of pages during the holiday season. Also, page LP when
you suspect a shoplifter is in your store. Change the department locations at
random.
260
Retail Security and Loss Prevention

261
Appendix 8
Standard Operating Procedures
(Sample Employee Investigation
Policy)
Purpose
This policy is designed to protect the company’s assets and ensure proper
handling of the employee/employer relationship.
Scope
This policy is to be implemented when the Loss Prevention Department,
while protecting the physical assets of the store, finds an alleged perpetrator
to be an employee.
Policy
The Loss Prevention Department will protect the assets of the company via
effective loss prevention methods, including the counsel of the Human
Resources Department. When an employee is suspected of theft (i.e., when
suspicious behavior has been observed or reported), a representative of store
management, the Loss Prevention Department, or the Human Resources
Department will document the reason for suspicion. One of these represen-
tatives will then contact the District Loss Prevention Manager, who will
review the documentation. If an employee investigation is to be started, the
District Loss Prevention Manager will meet with the District Manager and
the Human Resources Representative, in person or by telephone, to develop
an agreed upon action plan. This plan must be documented and must
include the following items:
•
the individual who will document the action (Primary responsibility for
loss prevention documentation normally belongs to the District Loss
Prevention Manager)
•
the investigation strategy and the time frame for the investigation

•
the names of the individuals who may access the confidential personnel
documents and the reasons why they may do so
•
the names of the individuals who will be told of the investigation and
who will tell them
•
the disposal procedures for the original and all copies of the documenta-
tion if the employee is not prosecuted
•
the investigation start and completion dates.
The Human Resources Representative will be advised of any employee surveil-
lance plan. This representative will ensure that the reason for the surveillance
is clearly documented by the Loss Prevention specialist before the surveillance
takes place. The Human Resources Representative will also ensure that the time
frame for the surveillance is clearly indicated, the reason for the surveillance
does not conflict with the employer/employee relationship, and, that if suffi-
cient evidence leading to prosecution or disciplinary is not obtained on video-
tape or any other media, the videotapes or other surveillance media are erased,
destroyed, or sent to the Central Office Records Department in a sealed pack-
age to be destroyed within 1 year of the investigation.
The Human Resources Representative will cooperate and take direction from
the District Loss Prevention Manager in regard to assisting in the interview,
preparing documentation, and supplying employee background information.
Any employee interrogations should be held in the presence of a Human
Resources Representative (or a member of the employee management team or
another loss prevention employee). This action is to ensure that the employee
meets with someone who represents both the company’s and the employee’s
interests. The Human Resources Representative must ensure that the
employee’s rights, as well as the company’s rights, are protected during the
interrogation. It is the responsibility of this representative to thoroughly doc-
ument (personally or by receiving the notes of the loss prevention specialist)
all activities and conservations with the employee regarding the alleged theft,
even if the Human Resources Representative was not present at those meetings.
The Human Resources Representative must also ensure that the documen-
tation for investigations that do not result in a clear indication of theft or
violation of company policy on the part of the employee, are sealed and sent
to the Central Office where the custodian of records will automatically
destroy the records after 12 months (if the investigation is not resumed by
the Loss Prevention Department).
262
Retail Security and Loss Prevention

263
Appendix 9
Training Program Checklist (Sample)
What are the training goals?
The questions in this section are designed to help the designated loss pre-
vention trainer define the objectives or goals to be achieved by a training
program. Whether the objective is to conduct initial training, provide for
upgrading employees, or retain employees changing job assignments, goals
should be spelled out before developing the plan for the training program.
1. Do you want to improve the performance of your employees?
2. Will you improve your employees’ performance by training them to per-
form their present tasks better?
3. Do you need to prepare employees for newly developed or modified
jobs?
4. Is training needed to prepare employees for promotion?
5. Is the training goal to reduce accidents and increase safety practices?
6. Should the goal be to improve employee attitudes, especially about theft
and errors?
7. Do you need to improve the understanding of theft techniques in order
to better deter potential incidents?
8. Is the goal to orient new employees to their jobs?
9. Will you need to teach new employees about the overall operation?
10. Do you need to train employees so they can help teach new workers in
an expansion program?
What does the employee need to learn?
Once the objective or goal of the program is set, you will need to determine
the subject matter. Employees need specific job knowledge and skills to exe-
cute assigned tasks as well as to handle common workplace situations. The
following questions are designed to help you decide what the employee needs
to learn in terms of duties, responsibilities, and attitudes.

11. Are there certain types of knowledge, skills or techniques that trainees
must learn?
12. Are there standards of quality that trainees can be taught?
13. Can loss prevention techniques be broken down into steps for training
purposes?
14. Are there hazards and safety practices that must be taught?
15. Have you established the methods that employees must use to avoid or
minimize error and waste?
16. Are there proper cash and merchandise-handling techniques that must
be taught?
17. Have you determined the best way for the trainees to operate point-of-sale
equipment?
18. Are there loss prevention performance standards that employees must
meet?
19. Are there attitudes that need improvement or modification?
20. Will information on your merchandise help employees do a better job?
21. Should the training include information about the location and use of
fire and first-aid equipment?
22. Do employees need instruction about departments other than their own?
23. Are there relevant government standards or laws?
What type of training?
The type of training to be offered has an important bearing on the balance
of the program. Some types lend themselves to achieving all of the objec-
tives or goals, while others are limited in scope. Therefore, review the advan-
tages of each type of training in relation to your objective or goal.
24. Can you provide on-the-job training so that employees can produce
while they learn?
25. Should you have classroom training conducted by a paid instructor?
26. Will a combination of scheduled on-the-job training and vocational
classroom instruction work best for you? What type of testing will be
used to evaluate its effectiveness?
27. Can your goal be achieved with a combination of on-the-job training
and correspondence courses?
What method of instruction?
One or more methods of instruction may be used. Some are better for one
type of training than another. For example, lectures are good for imparting
knowledge and demonstrations are good for teaching skills.
28. Does the subject matter call for a lecture or series of lectures?
29. Should the instructor follow-up with discussion sessions?
264
Retail Security and Loss Prevention

Appendix 9
265
30. Does the subject matter lend itself to demonstrations?
31. Can operating problems be simulated in a classroom?
32. Can the instructor direct trainees while they perform the job?
What audio-visual aids will you use?
Web- or computer-based aids help the instructor to make points and enable
trainees to grasp and retain the instructions as well as providing electronic
tracking.
33. Will an instruction manual – including job instruction sheets – be used?
34. Will trainees be given an outline of the training program?
35. Can outside textbooks and other printed materials be used?
36. If the training lends itself to the use of videos, or on-the-floor scenarios,
can you get ones that show the basic operation?
37. Do you have drawings or photographs of the equipment or products
that could be enlarged and used?
38. Do you have miniatures or modes of equipment that can be used to
demonstrate the operation?
What physical facilities will you need?
The type of training, the method of instruction, and the audio-visual aids
will determine the physical facilities needed for training. In turn, the neces-
sary physical facilities will determine the location of the training. For exam-
ple, if a certain processing machine is necessary, the training should be
conducted in the distribution center.
39. If the training cannot be conducted on the sales or processing floor, do
you have a conference room or a lunchroom in which training can be
conducted?
40. Should the training be conducted off the premises – in a nearby school,
restaurant, hotel, or motel?
41. Will the instructor have the necessary tools, such as a computer, white-
board, lectern, TV, VCR/DVD, and microphone, if needed?
42. Will there be sufficient seating and writing surfaces, if needed, for trainees?
43. If equipment is to be used, will trainees be provided with their own?
What about course length?
The length of the training program will vary according to the needs of your
company, the material to be learned, the ability of the instructor, and the
ability of the trainees to learn.
44. Should the training be conducted part-time during working hours?

266
Retail Security and Loss Prevention
45. Should the sessions be held after working hours?
46. Will the instruction cover a predetermined period of time (e.g., 4 weeks,
6 weeks, or 3 months)?
47. Can the length of each session and the number of sessions per week be
established?
48. How often will refresher training or testing be given?
Who will be selected as instructor?
The success of training depends, to a great extent, on the instructor. A qual-
ified instructor can achieve good results even with limited resources. On the
other hand, an untrained instructor may be unsuccessful even with the best
program. You may want to use more than one person as an instructor.
49. Can you fill in as an instructor?
50. Do you have a personnel manager who has the time and the ability to
instruct?
51. Can your supervisors or department heads handle instructing?
52. Should a skilled employee be used as an instructor?
53. Will you have to train and test the instructor?
54. Is there a qualified, outside instructor available for employment on an
as-needed basis?
Who should be selected?
Employees should be selected for training on the basis of the goals of the
program as well as their aptitude, previous experiences, and attitudes.
55. Should new employees be hired for training?
56. Should the training of new employees be a condition of employment?
57. Would you prefer trainees with previous experience in the work?
58. Are there present employees who need training?
59. Will you consider training employees presently in lower rated jobs who
have the aptitude to learn?
60. Is the training to be a condition for promotion?
61. Will the training be made available to handicapped employees whose
injury occurred while employed by the company?
62. Should employees displaced by job changes, departmental shutdowns,
automation, etc., be given the opportunity to be trained in other jobs?
What will the program cost?
It may be beneficial to compute the cost of your training before starting the
program. Thus, you can budget sufficient funds for the program and use the
budget as a tool for keeping training costs in line.

Appendix 9
267
63. Should you change the program for the space, the equipment, and
materials used?
64. Will trainees’ wages be included?
65. If the instructors are employees, will their salaries be included in the
training costs?
66. Will the time you and others spend in preparing and administrating the
program be part of the training costs?
67. If usable products result from the sessions, should they be deducted
from training costs?
What checks or controls will you use?
The results of the training program need to be checked to determine the
extent to which the original goal or objective was achieved.
68. Can you check the results of the training against the goal or objective?
69. Can standards of learning time be established against which to check
the progress of trainees?
70. Can trainee performance data be developed before, during, and after
training?
71. Will records be kept on the progress of each trainee?
72. Will trainees be tested on the knowledge and skills acquired?
73. Will the instructor rate each trainee during and at the end of the course?
74. Will the training be followed-up periodically, by a supervisor or depart-
ment head, to determine the long-range effects of the training?
75. Should you personally check and control the program?
How should the program be publicized?
Publicizing the company’s training program in the community helps attract
qualified job applicants. Publicity inside the company helps motivate
employees to improve themselves.
76. If the program is announced to employees, will the announcement be
made before the program starts? During the program?
77. Are pictures to be taken of the training sessions and used on bulletin
boards and in local newspapers and newsletters?
78. Should employees who complete the training be awarded certificates?
79. Should the certificates be presented at a special affair, such as a dinner
or lunch?
80. When the certificates are awarded, will you invite the families of the
trainees?
81. Should local newspaper, radio, and TV personalities be invited to the
“graduation” exercises?

268
Appendix 10
Sample Loss Control Plan
I. Purpose
This plan provides the goals, priorities, and guidance for all employees
involved in this planning and implementation of the corporate-wide loss
control effort.
II. Applicability
The provision of this plan applies to all departments assigned tasks designed
to reduce corporate losses.
III. Documentation
To better protect customers, employees, and other assets, this plan and other
documents will be retained. These documents serve to act as road maps or
reference lists of current and future activity, and provide historical data for
future planning or explanation of past activity. The following is a listing of
required documents:
A. updated lists of prevention tasks for the training plan
B. a written assessment from each Loss Control District Manager of their
reporting area, including training requirements, resources needed, com-
munications problems or conflicts, and high-loss areas or stores
C. updated training schedules that include actual training and reflect addi-
tions, deletions, and other changes
D. copies of training files for each employee
E. work schedules of loss prevention specialists
F.
monthly report on incidents that occur in individual districts
G. Results of store audit/inspection reports
H. Copies of investigative notes of all current and past dishonest employee
investigations.

All documents will be secured and monitored by the designated custodian
of records. Records will be destroyed annually per company policy.
IV. Responsibilities
A. The director of loss control is the corporate security manager and has the
principal responsibility for planning, scheduling, and supervising all com-
pany loss prevention efforts and training. The determination of specific
training or operational needs rests with supervisors most familiar with
their group’s primary job, personnel, levels of proficiency, and availability
of loss control resources and constraints.
B. The regional loss control manager is responsible for ensuring that all
assigned districts comply with the policies and instructions listed in this
plan or issued by the director of loss control.
C. District loss control managers are the primary loss control trainers and
supervisors. They are responsible for implementing company security poli-
cies and for ensuring, through close and continuous supervision, that
training and operations are conducted in accordance with company policy.
D. All loss control supervisors enforce the standards of training and opera-
tions contained in this plan.
E. The duties and responsibilities of operations (i.e., non-loss-prevention
personnel) are listed in Annex D.
V. Mission
Our mission is to reduce losses suffered by the company through coordinated,
simultaneous action on the part of every company employee. Specifically, we
will reduce losses by identifying major current or potential loss areas and
implementing cost-effective countermeasures to prevent and detect problems,
educating and motivating all company employees to recognize and reduce
loss problems, and recovery assets or lost revenue where possible.
IV. Program analysis
The policies, goals, and objectives outlines in this plan are based on analysis
of this company’s current shrinkage and loss control program status. Surveys
of risk areas, questionnaires completed by employees, annual shrinkage fig-
ures, incident trend reports, and a consultant’s report were all used in this
analysis. These analyses are good indicators of our current status and pro-
vide future direction.
The quantity and quality of store-level loss control specialists needs to be
increased by better recruiting efforts. The quality of these critical personnel
will improve by sending each agent to a comprehensive training course. The
leadership and management skills of district loss control managers can be
Appendix 10
269

improved by requiring additional intensive training. Awareness programs
will be presented quarterly, in all stores, by loss control personnel to heighten
employee awareness. All store managers and assistant store mangers will
attend a loss control workshop presented by the loss control director.
All stores will receive intelligent CCTV equipment and it will be used to its
fullest potential. High-loss merchandise, such as health and beauty aid and
athletic shoes, will be pre-tagged by the manufacturer to achieve maximum
sales by open display and maximum protection. High-loss leather jackets
will be cabled to fixtures. The top ten high-shrink stores will have subliminal
messaging systems installed.
VII. FY loss control goals
A. The goal for this fiscal year (FY) is to trim the annual shrinkage figures
from 1.55% of sales across the board, while spending only 0.52% of sales
on this effort.
B. Annex A contains goals and objectives to meet the shrinkage goal for this
fiscal year.
C. Priority control efforts are outlined in Section VIII.
D. Annex B contains fiscal year training objectives.
E. Annex C contains the major control directions to be used in achieving
the overall goal.
F.
Annex D identifies individual tasks to be emphasized during this fiscal year.
VIII. Priority control efforts to meet goals
There are many areas that the director and staff recognize as being deficient
or needing emphasis.
A. Store pilferage/shoplifting is believed to be increasing, particularly in
new stores in the northeastern United States and Florida. By increasing
the use of EAS, employee training, and well-trained store agents, the
upward trend should decrease by the second quarter.
B. Employee cash pilferage is also on the rise, particularly in the south and
central Florida stores. Paper and pencil honesty testing, better interviewing,
and background checks will help reduce this problem. A greater emphasis
on procedural controls will result in fewer incidents or at least in quicker
discovery. A combined effort with the Human Resources Department in all
of these areas should result in a reduction of employee theft.
C. Interstore transfers are creating paper and real shrink problems due to
lack of compliance by store.
D. Mark down error is believed to be very common and has an error rate in
some stores as high as 20% of marked-down items. Again, district man-
agers will pay close attention to this matter.
270
Retail Security and Loss Prevention

Appendix 10
271
E. Accidents by both customers and employees are at the same level as the
previous year and must be reduced by better awareness training and
motivation.
F.
Vendor error is increasing in some merchandise classes. Better receiving
procedures have been implemented to quickly discover errors and to 
follow-up with the appropriate vendor.
G. Individual training of store agents and managers will receive priority
attention.
H. Leadership development training for loss control supervisors is a very
important issue during this fiscal year.
I.
Employee awareness training will be continued since this program proved
very successful in the previous fiscal year. Owing to natural employee
turnover, these efforts must continue on a regular basis.
J.
Enhanced communication between different departments within the
company must be emphasized. Annex E outlines the schedule of inter-
departmental meetings for this purpose.
K. Physical fitness is an issue to be dealt with this fiscal year, since fewer loss
control agents will be used relative to the number of stores. Injuries and
sick leave have increased, in part, due to poor physical fitness on the part
of field lost control personnel.
IX. Performance evaluations and inspections
To ensure that loss control activities remain focused on priority risk areas
and that programs and personnel are operating as expected, evaluations and
inspections will be conducted periodically.
A. Personnel reviews and counseling sessions will identify and assist indi-
viduals who are not performing to company standards.
B. Spot surveys will determine perceptions and actual activities of store and
distribution center employees.
C. Inspection and audit reports will indicate to managers at all levels where
loss problems exist or are likely to begin due to lack of adherence to pro-
cedural controls. These audits also tend to uncover suspicious trends.
D. Listening to employees will assist in determining what is working and
what is not.
X. Support
The ability of the Loss Control Department to achieve its objectives is depend-
ent on the availability of support by other departments within the company,
such as
•
store operations (e.g., the director, district, and store managers)

•
human resources (e.g., the director of personnel, district representatives,
and benefits coordinator)
•
finance (e.g., chief financial officer, accounting, accounts payable, payroll,
and internal audit personnel)
•
store planning and real estate
•
marketing
•
corporate staff.
XI. Resources
Sufficient resources required to keep losses to an acceptable level must be
identified and allocated.
A. Authority and cooperation are key ingredients of any successful shortage
control program. Senior management has designated the director of loss
control as the lead figure in the company’s efforts to increase profitabil-
ity by decreasing losses. As the lead, the loss control director may assign
control tasks to subordinates and employees in other departments. This
plan identifies those personnel, in departments other than loss control,
that fall under this category.
1. Example 1
2. Example 2
3. Example 3
B. A recommended general and administrative (G&A) budget and a capital
expenditure (CAPEX) budget have been approved and are sufficient to
fund the activities listed in this plan.
C. Time is a very valuable resource that must be carefully used. Annex F out-
lines the time frame for program implementation.
272
Retail Security and Loss Prevention

273
Appendix 11
Sample Loss Prevention
Inspection/Audit Report
Cash control
Cashier – general office
1. Are the daily cash register tracking charts in use?
2. Are current shortage of $3 or greater entered on the chart or accounted
for by the cash office?
3. Are overages in any dollar amount entered?
4. Were problem overages/shortages found? If yes, list the names of the
problem operators.
5. Describe the corrective action to be taken regarding the operators.
6. Were “shotgun” shortages found? If yes, list the action taken.
7. Was the price variance report reviewed with the manager? Were any prob-
lems found? If yes, what was the corrective action taken?
8. Are adding machine tapes on pick-up tapes saved?
9. Do bank deposits agree with call-in sheets?
10. Is the Cash Office door locked? The office door locked?
11. Is access restricted?
12. Is the safe locked when not in use?
13. Provide comments.
Register operation
1. Is each register balanced daily?
2. Is the register operator entering the register, per company policy, before
ringing?
3. Is the operator using a wand? Is the bar coding functional?
4. Is the register drawer closed, except when entering sales?
5. Is the operator making change per company policy?
6. Are improper careless register operations observed?
7. Is the operator calling for price checks, when applicable?
8. Is the operator checking for concealed merchandise?

9. Are checks processed per company policy?
10. Provide exceptions/comments on observation.
Cash control (possible addendum) photocopy of tracking chart and
price variance profile sheets
1. Provide additional comments.
Voids
1. Are void stamps used?
2. Are void reason and signature on the back of the receipt?
3. Are post voids of $5 or more, with reasons, “No money,” “Not enough,”
“Didn’t want,” and “Check refused,” checked on the detail tape for evi-
dence of re-ringing?
4. List exceptions found and add any other comments. Attach the void pro-
file sheet.
Customer service desk
1. Are refunds handled per company policy?
2. Are “No Receipt” refunds over $10 recorded in the No Receipt Refund
Book?
3. Is the store using a round-robin reporting system?
4. Is the manager checking refunds, by phone, with the customer, for
validity?
5. Is the refunded merchandise cleared from the Customer Service Desk on
a timely basis? Is it signed for?
6. Are refunds being defaced?
7. Note exceptions.
8. Are package checks handled per company policy?
9. Are employees purchases handled per company policy?
10. List exceptions, add comments, and attach the refund profile sheet.
Receiving/stockroom area
1. Is the receiving door locked?
2. Are roll-away doors locked at the bottom and on both sides when not
receiving freight?
3. Are blocked fire exits found?
4. Search stockrooms for signs of shrinkage. Are any found?
5. Is receiving freight checked in by carton number and total carton count?
6. Is loose merchandise found in stockrooms?
7. Are manifests in order and exceptions noted?
8. How many storage trailers are used?
9. Are storage trailers locked?
10. Are keys secure?
274
Retail Security and Loss Prevention

11. How many keys are there?
12. Are outgoing shipments handled per company policy?
13. List exceptions and add any comments on freight delivery observations.
Sales floor
1. Is the store making periodic security calls, using a “genderless” name,
when no specialist is present?
2. Are pricing guns found on the sales floor?
3. Are safety hazards found?
4. Are blind areas containing high-shrink merchandise observable with
mirrors?
5. Are clerks using mirrors?
6. Are display alarms installed and functional?
7. Are displays orderly?
8. Is it easy to spot missing merchandise?
9. Are salespeople preventing theft with good customer service?
10. Are sales people familiar with security codes?
11. Provide comments.
Physical security
1. When were the alarm systems last tested? Note data shown on the alarm
door inspection tag.
2. What types of alarms are being used? Infrared? Battery?
3. Any alarm problems found?
4. Is there evidence of theft around the exterior of the building?
5. Are trash-handling procedures being followed?
6. Check the dumpster. Are plastic bags intact or broken open?
7. If plastic bags are intact, check them. Is any merchandise found?
8. Are exterior lights around the building broken?
9. Is trash or weeds found among the building?
10. Is the inventory disposal log complete? Any problems?
11. Provide comments.
Shoplifting
1. Is the store using incident reports?
2. What is the number of incidents reported in the last 30 days?
3. What are the manager’s comments on shoplifting in the store?
4. Provide additional comments, from the store manager and district manager.
Describe the corrective action planned.
Appendix 11
275

276
Appendix 12
Model Civil Recovery Statute
1. In addition to any criminal action, a person who commits an act for which
he could be charged with the crime of theft, as defined in the state theft
statute, shall be liable to the victim of the act for (a) the full retail price of
the unrecovered property or the recovered property that is not in salable
condition and (b) a civil remedy of not less than $150 and not more than
$1000 for actual damages.
2. If the person to whom a written demand is made complies with the writ-
ten demand within 30 days after its receipt, that person shall incur no fur-
ther civil liability to the merchant or business for that specific act of theft.
3. A person who commits an act described in Section (1) and who fails to
comply with a written demand within 30 days, shall be liable to the mer-
chant or business for a civil penalty of $200 and reasonable court costs
not exceeding $100, in addition to Subsections (a) and (b) of Section (1).
4. An action under this section may be brought to small claims court. If the
amount demanded exceeds the jurisdiction of the small claims court, the
action may still be brought to the small claims court. However, the amount
recovered shall not exceed the jurisdiction of the small claims court.
5. A merchant or business may recover damages in an amount allowable under
this section from the parent(s) or guardian(s) of a minor who lives with his
parent(s) or guardian(s) and who commits an act described in Section (1).

277
Appendix 13
Model Retail Theft Statute
I. Theft by shoplifting defined
A. A person commits the offense of theft by shoplifting if, with intent to
appropriate merchandise without paying the merchant’s stated price for
the merchandise, such person, alone or in concert with another person
knowingly
1. Conceals the merchandise.
2. Removes, takes possession of, or causes the removal of the merchandise.
3. Alters, transfers, or removes any price marking, or any other marking
that aids in determining the value affixed to the merchandise.
4. Transfers the merchandise from one container to another.
5. Causes the cash register of other sales-recording device to reflect less
than the merchant’s stated price for the merchandise.
II. Evidence and presumptions
A. Knowing concealment of merchandise shall create a rebuttal presump-
tion that the person intended to appropriate the merchandise without
paying the merchant’s fee for the merchandise.
B. Evidence of stated price or ownership of merchandise may include, but
is not limited to
1. The actual merchandise or container that held the merchandise alleged
to have been shoplifted.
2. The content of the price tag or marking from such merchandise.
3. Properly identified photographs of such merchandise.
III. Penalties
A person convicted of theft by shoplifting shall be punished as follows:
A. Upon a first theft-by-shoplifting conviction,

1. When the merchant’s stated price of the merchandise is less than or
equal to $100, the defendant shall be fined not more than $250.
2. When the merchant’s stated price of the merchandise exceeds $100,
the defendant shall be fined not less than $100 not more than $500
and such fine shall not be suspended or the defendant shall be pun-
ished by imprisonment not to exceed 1 year, or both.
B. Upon a second theft-by-shoplifting conviction,
1. When the merchant’s stated price of the merchandise is less than or
equal to $100, the defendant shall be fined not less than $100 not
more than $500 and such fine shall not be suspended, or the defen-
dant shall be punished by imprisonment not to exceed 1 year, or both.
2. When the merchant’s stated price of the merchandise exceeds $100, the
defendant shall be fined not less than $500 and shall be imprisoned for
not less than 30 days and not to exceed 3 years. The first 30 days of
such sentence shall not be suspended, probated, deferred, or withheld.
C. Upon a third or subsequent theft-by-shoplifting conviction, regardless of
the merchant’s stated price of the merchandise, the defendant shall be
fined not less than $500 not more than $5000 and shall be imprisoned
for 1–10 years. The first year of such sentence shall not be suspended,
probated, deferred, or withheld.
D. In determining the number of prior theft-by-shoplifting convictions for
purposes of imposing punishment under this section, the court shall dis-
regard all such convictions occurring more than 7 years prior to the theft-
by-shoplifting offense in question.
IV. Merchant’s immunity from civil and criminal liability
A. General rule – a merchant who detains, questions, or causes the arrest of
any person suspected of theft by shoplifting shall not be criminally or
civilly liable for any legal action relating to such detention, questioning,
or arrest if
1. The merchant has reasonable grounds to suspect the person has com-
mitted or is attempting to commit theft by shoplifting.
2. The merchant acts in a reasonable manner under the circumstances.
3. The merchant detains the suspected person for a reasonable period of
time.
B. Reasonable grounds – reasonable grounds to suspect that a person has
committed or is attempting to commit a crime by shoplifting may be
based on, but is not limited to
1. Personal observation, including observation via closed-circuit televi-
sion or other visual device.
2. Report of such personal observation from another merchant.
3. Activation of an electronic or other type of mechanical device designed
to detect shoplifting.
278
Retail Security and Loss Prevention

C. Reasonable manner – a merchant or peace officer who has reasonable
grounds to believe that a person has committed or is attempting to com-
mit an offense of theft by shoplifting, as defined in Section 1 of this act,
may detain such person on or off the premises of the mercantile estab-
lishment if such detention is done for any or all of the following purposes:
1. To question the person, investigate the surrounding circumstances,
obtain a statement, or any combination thereof.
2. To request and/or verify identification.
3. To inform a peace officer of the detention of such person and/or sur-
render that person to the custody of a peace officer.
4. To inform a peace officer, the parent(s), and/or other private person(s)
interested in the welfare of a minor, of the detention and to surrender
the minor to the custody of such person(s).
5. To institute criminal proceedings against the person.
D. Reasonable force – The merchant may use a reasonable amount of force
necessary to protect himself, to prevent escape of the person detained, or
to prevent the loss or destruction of property.
E. Reasonable time – A reasonable period of time, for purposes of this section,
shall be deemed to be a period of time long enough to accomplish the
purpose set forth in this section and shall include any time spent await-
ing the arrival of law enforcement officer or the parent(s) or guardian(s)
of a juvenile suspect, if the merchant has summoned such law enforce-
ment officer, parent(s), or guardian(s).
F.
Any detention as defined in this section shall not constitute an arrest.
V. Arrest of theft-by-shoplifting suspects
A law enforcement officer may arrest without warrant any person he has
probable cause for believing has committed the offense of theft by shoplifting.
“Probable cause,” as used in this section, includes but shall not be limited to
the statement of a merchant containing facts and circumstances demonstrat-
ing that he has reasonable grounds to suspect that a person has committed
theft by shoplifting.
VI. Definitions
A. Conceal means to hide, hold, or carry merchandise, so that, although there
may be some notice of its presence, it is not visible to ordinary observation.
B. Merchant means an owner or operator of any mercantile establishment
and includes the merchant’s employees, security agents, or other agents.
C. Mercantile establishment means any place where merchandise is displayed,
held, or offered for sale, either at retail or wholesale prices. Mercantile
establishment includes adjoining parking lots or adjoining areas of com-
mon use with other establishments.
Appendix 13
279

D. Merchandise means any goods, foodstuffs, wares, or personal property, or
any part or portion thereof any type or description displayed, held, or
offered for sale.
E. Merchants stated price for the merchandise means the price that the mer-
chandise is offered for sale at the time and place of the offense.
VII. Effective date
This act shall become effective 90 days after enactment.
VIII. Repeater
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this act are hereby repealed.
280
Retail Security and Loss Prevention

281
Notes
Chapter 1
1.
Ernst and Young. An Ounce of Prevention Security Survey (New York: Chain Store,
1990), 17.
2.
Ibid., 17.
Chapter 2
1.
W. Terris and J.W. Jones, “Attitudinal and Personality Correlates of Theft Among
Supermarket Employees,” Journal of Security Administration 2 (1980): 65–78.
Chapter 4
1.
Virginia Shomp, How to Protect Your Business (Elmsford: The Benjamin Co., 
1985), 136.
Chapter 5
1.
R.J. Markin, C.M. Lillis, and C.L. Narayana, “Social Psychological Significance of
Store Space,” Journal of Retailing 52:1 (1976): 43–54.
Chapter 6
1.
Virginia Shomp, How to Protect Your Business (Elmsford: The Benjamin Co., 
1985), 110.
Chapter 8
1.
U. S. Department of Commerce, “1981 Revised Monthly Sales and Inventories:
January 1971–December 1980,” Current Business Reports, BR-13-805 (January 1981).
2.
E. Blankenburg, “The Selectivity of Legal Sanctions: An Empirical Investigation of
Shoplifting,” Law and Society Review 11 (1976).
3.
R. Griffin, Shoplifting – A Twelve-Year Review, 1966–1977 (Van Nuys, CA: Commercial
Services Systems, 1978).

Chapter 12
1.
R. Marken, C. Lillis, and C. Naranya, “Social Psychology Significance of Store Space,”
Journal of Retailing 52:43–45, 94–95.
Chapter 13
1.
Farrell and Fervara, Shoplifting: The Anti-Shoplifting Guidebook (New York: Praeger,
1985).
Chapter 18
1.
This chapter was contributed by retail management consultant Gerald H. Smith
and is printed with the permission of Gerald H. Smith and Associates of Dallas, TX.
Appendix 1
1.
For this purpose, the employee’s family includes the employee’s spouse, parents,
children, siblings, mothers- and fathers-in-law, sons- and daughters-in-law, and
brothers- and sisters-in-law.
2.
For this purpose, insider information means information about the company
which is not generally available to investors and which would be substantially
likely to affect either (1) a reasonable person’s investment decision regarding the
Company’s stock; or (2) the market value of the Company’s stock.
The definition of insider information and trading on insider information are
defined in much greater detail by Regulation of the Security and Exchange Commission.
The definition given in the above paragraph should be sufficient to provide guid-
ance to most individuals. If further clarification or assistance is required, please
contact the Chief Financial Officer.
282
Notes

283
Index
Access controls
176–7
Accidents, liability for customer and 
employee
108–9
Accumulated delay time
131
Alarms/sensors
area/space protection sensors
179–80
follow-up on
182–3
merchandise
183
object/point protection sensors
180
placement of
181–2
purpose of
179
robbery duress
183
selection of
181
sensor defeat techniques
182
Alcohol abuse
14
American Trucking Association
29
Application screening
19
Apprehending shoplifters
70–2
Apprehension program
206
Area/space protection sensors
179–80
Audit programs
controlling cash theft and
10, 22–3
data collected from
219
description of
205–6
follow-up and
217–9
implementation of
217–8
as part of a deterrence program
172
purpose of
217–9
Audit reports
219
sample of loss prevention
273–5
sample of store
243–53
Awareness programs
employee
52, 171, 204–5 
public
171
Background checks
20
Bank deposit rolling
9
Bar coding
benefits of
151, 187
price switching and
63
shoplifting and
39
Bids, securing
192–3
Bomb threats
100–3
Break-in burglaries
98
Bribery
12
Burglars, types of
98
Burglary
prevention
98–100
types of
97
Cargo theft, controlling
loading and
31
receiving and
32
shipping and
29–30
staging and
30–1
transporting and
31–2
Cash controls
22–3, 167–8
Cash theft
4
embezzlement and employee 
fraud
9–10
how to control
10–11
how to detect
8
layaway fraud
8–9
refund fraud
8
CCTV, see Closed-circuit television
Charge-backs
26
Check(s)
84
bad
81–3
clearing services
82
kiting
9
traveler’s
82
Civil action
company policy on
23
programs
172
shoplifting and
77
theft and
237–8
Civil disasters
107–8
Civil recovery laws
235–8
Civil recovery statute, model
276
Cleaning crews, theft by
13
Closed-circuit television 
(CCTV)
5, 61–2
description of
185–6
labor requirements of
151
robbery and
96
Colored signs, use of
187

Company policies
and procedure manuals
173
regarding theft
23
security surveys and review of
134–5
updating
174
Computer crime and data loss
106–7
Computerized time systems
188
Conflict of Interest Policy, 
sample of
227–8
Consultants, loss control
163–5
Consulting proposal, sample
254–6
Container switch
89
Cost(s)
avoidance
211
direct
138
indirect
138–9
insurance
139
justification of loss prevention 
program
211
lost income, formula for
139
permanent replacement
139
related
139
of shoplifting
4, 38
temporary replacement
139
Counterfeit currency
87–8, 188
Coupon fraud
103, 104–6
Credit card fraud
84–7
Currency
classes and colors of treasury seal and 
serial number
87
counterfeit
87–8, 188
raised
89
switch
89
Customer convenience and perception, 
risk control and
151
Defense in depth
131, 155
Delivery control procedures
27
Delivery persons, dealing with
26
Detachers
232–3
Detaining shoplifters
69, 72–3, 76–7
liability and
109–10
Detection loss prevention 
program
171–2
Detectives/agents, loss control 
and
159–60
auditing programs
172
exception reports
172
store agent patrol
172
Deterrence loss prevention
programs
169
control procedures
171
detection programs
171
employee awareness
171
new store/site selection
169
public awareness campaigns
171
store environment design
170–1
Director/vice president of security or 
loss control
157–8
Displays, secure merchandise
51, 186–7
Dressing room control
role of fitting room attendants
160
shoplifting and
58, 229–30
Drive-off burglaries
97
Drug abuse
14, 225
Education verification
19
Electronic Article Surveillance (EAS)
description of
183–5
labor requirements and
151
tags
5, 21, 51
Embezzlement and employee 
fraud
9–10
Employee(s)
awareness programs
52, 171, 204–5
benefits of offering discounts to
5, 13
direction and discipline
175
error and waste, how to control
4
investigation policy
261–2
rewards and recognition of
174–5
Employee Assistance Programs (EAPs)
14
Employees, loss control and role of
detectives/agents
159–60
director/vice president
157–8
fitting room attendants or store
monitors
160
investigators/auditors
159
line managers
159
regional/district operations 
managers
162
senior managers
162
shortage control committees
158
store/distribution center
163
store manages
162–3
uniformed guards
160, 165
see also Security personnel
Employee theft
cash theft
3–4, 8–11
284
Index

Employee theft (Contd.)
categories of
4
company attitudes toward
23
detection of
14–6
future for
225
how to control
19–24
merchandise theft
4, 5–7
miscellaneous business abuse
4, 11–4
shoplifting versus
3
statistics on
3
types of risk areas
3
Employee thieves, psychological
predictors of
17–9
Employment/education verification
19
Environmental design and physical
layout
170–1
Ernst and Young
3
Exception reports
172
Expense account fraud
10
False arrest and imprisonment
109–11
Financial loss
assigning financial impact rates
139–40
possible and probable
138–9
Fitting/dressing room control
role of fitting room attendants
160
shoplifting and
58, 229–30
Flow charts, use of
134–5
Freight charges
25–6
Goals, loss control department
202
Graphoanalysis
20
Guards, loss control and 
uniformed
160, 165
Handwriting analysis
20
Identification dye sprays and 
marking pens
188
Incident calendars
141
Information security
131
Inspection programs
218–9
Inspection reports, sample of loss 
prevention
273–5
Insurance
57, 172
Interdepartmental meetings
208
Interviews, integrity
19–20
Inventories
how to do physical
221–2
retail method of
220–1
tips for conducting
222–3
Investigators/auditors, 
loss control and
159, 164
Jones, J.W.
17
Kickbacks
12
Labor requirements, 
risk control and
151
Lapping
9
Layaway fraud
8–9
Liability and litigation
customer and employee 
accidents
108–9
false arrest and imprisonment
109–10
inadequate security lawsuits
110–1
wrongful discharge suits
110
Lighting
178–9, 187
Line managers, loss control and
159
Loading, cargo theft and
31
Locks
177–8
Loss control
apprehension and
206
area analysis and
206
auditing and
205–6, 217–9
awareness
204–5
department goals
202
follow-up to
174–5, 217–9
individual departmental 
tasks and
207
interdepartmental tasks and
207
policies
166–7
policy and procedure manuals
173
procedural controls
167–8
sample of procedural controls
259–60
sample plan for
268–72
situational or informational 
procedures
168–9
training objectives
203
training of employees
173–4
training schedule
209
trends in
224–6
Loss prevention program,
implementation of cost 
justification
211
importance of teamwork
213
selling to senior management
211–2
Index
285

Loss prevention program design
basic program focus
147–9
central department 
organization and
160–1
cost-effectiveness and
150
customer convenience and 
perception and
151
defense in depth or layering and
155
detection
171–2
deterrence
169–71
developing a list of tasks, time lines, 
and assets
196–7
guarantees and
152
labor requirements and
151
levels of security and
154–5
people and
157–65
program manageability and
151–2
protection program designs
153–6
recovery
172–3
redundancy and
150
risk control countermeasures
150–3
steps for creating
197–201
teamwork and
150–1
threat analysis and
152–3
time sensitivity of
151
types of security and
153–4
Management, selling the protection
program to senior
211–2
Managers and loss control, role of 
regional/district operations
162
senior
162
store
162
Marein, R.
170
Merchandise
alarms
183
controls
21–2, 49, 168
Merchandise displays
secure systems
186–7
shoplifting and
51
Merchandise theft
4
how to control
5–7
removal of trash
5
sweethearting
4
underringing
4–5
Mirrors, use of
188
Miscellaneous business abuse
4, 11–4
Natural disasters
107–8
Object/point protection sensors
180
Observation towers
188
Operating procedures, sample of 
standard
261–2
Paper hangers
82
Paper shredders
187
Paperwork controls
168, 225
Payoff schemes
12
Payroll fraud
9–10
Personnel, loss control and outside, 
see Security personnel
Personnel security
153–4, 156
Physical barriers
177
Physical layout, 
loss control and
50–1, 170
Plot maps
141
Point-of-sale risks
bad checks
81–4
container switch
89
counterfeit currency
87–8
credit card fraud
84–7
currency switch
89
price switch
90
quick-change schemes
91–2
refund fraud
90–1
Policy and procedure manuals
173
Possible financial loss
138–9
Pre-employment screening
19–20
Price look-up
90
Price switch
90
Price variances, importance of 
reports for
5
Private investigators, 
loss control and
164
Probable financial loss
138–9
Proprietary information
14
Prosecution, company policy on
23
Protection equipment, 
see Security systems/hardware
Protection program designs, 
see Loss prevention program design
Public awareness campaigns
171
Quick-change schemes
91–2
Raised currency
89
Receivers, checking
25–6
Receiving, cargo theft and
32
Recovery of assets
211
286
Index

Recovery programs
172–3
Reference checks
19
Refund fraud
8, 90–1
Retail theft statute, model
277–80
Return on Investment (ROI)
211
Returns
types of store policies
90–1
vendors and
26
Rewards and recognition, 
employee
174–5
Risk control countermeasures
cost-effectiveness
150
customer convenience and
perceptions
151
labor requirements
151
program manageability and
151–2
redundancy
150
teamwork
150–1
threat analysis and
152–3
time sensitivity of
151
Risk management techniques
decision matrix
147–8
risk acceptance
149
risk avoidance
148
risk reduction
148
risk spreading
148–9
risk transfer
149
Risk, prioritizing
137, 143
by assigning financial impact rates
139–40
by assigning loss incident probability 
rate
142
determining probability of incident
occurrence and
140–1
examination of security data 
and
141–2
by possible and probable financial 
loss
138–9
Robbers, types of
95–6
Robbery
definition of
95
duress alarms
183
how to act during a
96–7
prevention methods
96
what to do after
97
Safes
178
Safety controls
168
Security
in depth layering
155, 156
levels of
154–5
types of
153–4
Security lawsuits, inadequate
110–1
Security personnel
expert witnesses
164
featured speakers/trainers
164
loss control consultants
163–5
private investigators
164
shopping services and plainclothes
agents
164–5, 172
uniformed security guards
160, 
165
Security surveys
accumulated delay time
131
collection of historical data
131–3
defense in depth
131, 155
definition of
130–1
identifying assets to be protected
133–4
methods of collecting data for
131
review of company policies and
procedures
134–5
sample of abbreviated retail
240–2
use of flow charts
134–5
Security systems/hardware
access controls
176–7
alarms/sensors
179–83
bar coding
187
closed-circuit television
5, 61–2, 96, 151, 185–6
colored signs
187
computerized time systems
188
electronic article surveillance
5, 21, 51, 151, 183–5
identification dye sprays and 
marking pens
188
integrated
189
lighting
178–9, 187
locks
177–8
merchandise displays and tie-downs
186–7
paper shredders
187
physical barriers
177
safes
178
subliminal messaging systems
134, 270
surveillance aids
188
two-way radios
188–9
visual deterrents
187
Index
287

Security systems/hardware, selecting
determining specifications
190–2
installation and follow-up
195
negotiating the contract
194–5
securing bids
192–3
testing of items before purchasing
193
Sensors, see Alarms/sensors
Shipping, cargo theft and
29–30
Shoplifters
apprehending
70, 71
detaining
72–3, 76–7
how to detect
66–7
how-to manual for
229–34
methods of approaching
70, 71
opportunist/amateur
36–7
professional
33, 35
steps to follow prior to detaining
70–2
true professional
35
Shoplifting
civil action and
77
closed-circuit television and
5, 61–2
costs of
4, 38
electronic article surveillance tags 
and
5, 21, 51
employee awareness programs and
52
employee theft versus
3
fitting/dressing room control for
58
future for
225–6
how to prevent
38–41
manual
229–34
merchandise display and
51
methods
36
plainclothes agents and
46
Shortage control committees
158
Short-packaging
31
Site selection, loss control and
169
Small Business Administration (SBA)
10
Smash-and-grab burglaries
97–8
Staging process, cargo theft and
30–1
Stay-behind burglaries
97
Store/distribution center employees, 
loss control and
163
Subliminal messaging systems
134, 270
Supplies, pilferage of
13
Surveillance aids
188
Sweethearting
4
Tax write-offs
173
Teamwork
implementation of loss prevention 
program and importance of
213
loss prevention program design 
and
150–1
Termination, company policy on
23
Terris, W.
17
Testing
for honesty
20
of security items before 
purchasing
193
Threat analysis, loss prevention 
program design and
152–3
Tie-downs
187–8
Time sensitivity, loss prevention
program design and
151
Time systems, computerized
188
Time theft
13
Training organizations, list of
268
Training programs
23
checklist for
263–7
description of
173–4
objectives for
203
for plainclothes agents
46
preparing for
200–1
schedule for
209
Transporting, cargo theft and
31–2
Trash removal, theft and
5–7
Travel account fraud
10
Traveler’s checks
82
Two-way radios
188–9
Underringing
4
Unethical conduct
11–2
Uniformed security guards
160, 165
U.S. Congress, Committee on Bank 
and Finance of
84
Universal product code (UPC), 
see Bar coding
Vendor theft and error, 
risks of
25–8
Visual deterrents
187
Witnesses, use of expert
164
Worker’s compensation claims, 
filing false
13
Wrongful discharge suits
110
288
Index

