
RFID
HANDBOOK
Applications, Technology,
Security, and Privacy


CRC Press is an imprint of the
Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business
Boca Raton   London   New York
RFID
HANDBOOK
EDITED BY
SYED AHSON
MOHAMMAD ILYAS
Applications, Technology,
Security, and Privacy

CRC Press
Taylor & Francis Group
6000 Broken Sound Parkway NW, Suite 300
Boca Raton, FL 33487-2742
© 2008 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC 
CRC Press is an imprint of Taylor & Francis Group, an Informa business
No claim to original U.S. Government works
Printed in the United States of America on acid-free paper
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
International Standard Book Number-13: 978-1-4200-5499-6 (Hardcover)
This book contains information obtained from authentic and highly regarded sources. Reprinted material is quoted 
with permission, and sources are indicated. A wide variety of references are listed. Reasonable efforts have been made to 
publish reliable data and information, but the author and the publisher cannot assume responsibility for the validity of 
all materials or for the consequences of their use. 
Except as permitted under U.S. Copyright Law, no part of this book may be reprinted, reproduced, transmitted, or uti-
lized in any form by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including photocopy-
ing, microfilming, and recording, or in any information storage or retrieval system, without written permission from the 
publishers.
For permission to photocopy or use material electronically from this work, please access www.copyright.com (http://
www.copyright.com/) or contact the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc. (CCC) 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, 
978-750-8400. CCC is a not-for-profit organization that provides licenses and registration for a variety of users. For orga-
nizations that have been granted a photocopy license by the CCC, a separate system of payment has been arranged.
Trademark Notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks, and are used only for 
identification and explanation without intent to infringe.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
RFID handbook : applications, technology, security, and privacy / edited by Syed Ahson and 
Mohammad Ilyas.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN-13: 978-1-4200-5499-6
ISBN-10: 1-4200-5499-6
1. Radio frequency identification systems--Handbooks, manuals, etc. I. Ahson, Syed. II. Ilyas, 
Mohammad, 1953- III. Title.
TK6570.I34R485 2008
658.7’87--dc22
2007036582
Visit the Taylor & Francis Web site at
http://www.taylorandfrancis.com
and the CRC Press Web site at
http://www.crcpress.com

Contents
Preface ........................................................................................................................................... ix
Editors........................................................................................................................................... xv
Contributors .............................................................................................................................. xvii
Section I
Introduction
1.
Physics and Geometry of RFID...........................................................................3
Marlin H. Mickle, Leonid Mats, and Peter J. Hawrylak
2.
EPCglobal Network ............................................................................................ 17
Alﬁo R. Grasso
3.
Design Automation for RFID Tags and Systems ............................................ 35
Swapna Dontharaju, Shenchih Tung, Raymond R. Hoare, James T. Cain,
Marlin H. Mickle, and Alex K. Jones
4.
Far-Field Tag Antenna Design Methodology .................................................. 65
Damith C. Ranasinghe and Peter H. Cole
5.
Contemporary RFID Reader Architecture........................................................ 93
Behnam Jamali and Peter H. Cole
6.
Progress in RFID Education ............................................................................ 109
Brian J. Garner
Section II
Technology
7.
RFID Reader Synchronization ........................................................................ 125
Kin Seong Leong, Mun Leng Ng, Alﬁo R. Grasso, and Peter H. Cole
8.
Adaptive Tag Anticollision Protocols for RFID Passive Tags..................... 139
Jihoon Myung, Wonjun Lee, and Timothy K. Shih
v

9.
Comparative Performance Analysis of Anticollision
Protocols in RFID Networks............................................................................ 161
Wonjun Lee, Jihoon Choi, and Donghwan Lee
10.
Maximizing Read Accuracy by Optimally Locating
RFID Interrogators ........................................................................................... 181
Lin Wang, Bryan A. Norman, and Jayant Rajgopal
11.
Minimum Energy=Power Considerations ...................................................... 199
Alex K. Jones, Gerold Joseph Dhanabalan, Swapna Dontharaju,
Shenchih Tung, Peter J. Hawrylak, Leonid Mats, Marlin H. Mickle,
and James T. Cain
12.
Electomagnetic Coupling in RFID.................................................................. 231
Peter H. Cole and Damith C. Ranasinghe
13.
RFID Tags for Metallic Object Identiﬁcation................................................ 249
Mun Leng Ng, Kin Seong Leong, and Peter H. Cole
14.
WISP: A Passively Powered UHF RFID Tag with Sensing
and Computation .............................................................................................. 261
Daniel J. Yeager, Alanson P. Sample, and Joshua R. Smith
Section III
Applications
15.
From Automatic Identiﬁcation and Data Capture
to ‘‘Smart Business Process’’: Preparing for
a Pilot Integrating RFID .................................................................................. 279
Samuel Fosso Wamba, Élisabeth Lefebvre, Ygal Bendavid,
and Louis-A. Lefebvre
16.
Technological Requirements and Derived Beneﬁts
from RFID Enabled Receiving in a Supply Chain........................................ 295
Harold Boeck, Louis-A. Lefebvre, and Élisabeth Lefebvre
17.
A Prototype on RFID and Sensor Networks for Elder Health Care............ 311
Melody Moh, Loc Ho, Zachary Walker, and Teng-Sheng Moh
18.
Triage with RFID Tags for Massive Incidents .............................................. 329
Sozo Inoue, Akihito Sonoda, and Hiroto Yasuura
19.
RFID Tagging and the Design of ‘‘Place’’ ..................................................... 351
Anijo Punnen Mathew
20.
Photosensing Wireless Tags for Precise Location
and Geometry Queries ..................................................................................... 369
Ramesh Raskar, Paul Beardsley, Paul Dietz, and Jeroen van Baar
vi

21.
RFID and NFC on Mobile Phones .................................................................. 375
Paul Coulton, Omer Rashid, and Reuben Edwards
22.
Applying RFID Techniques for the Next-Generation
Automotive Services ........................................................................................ 391
Peter Harliman, Joon Goo Lee, Kyong Jin Jo, and Seon Wook Kim
23.
Application of RFID Technologies for Communication Robots ................. 417
Masahiro Shiomi, Takayuki Kanda, Hiroshi Ishiguro, and Norihiro Hagita
24.
Browsing the World with RFID Tags: Design and Implementation
of an RFID-Based Distributed Environmental Memory .............................. 435
Alberto Rosi, Marco Mamei, and Franco Zambonelli
25.
RFID-Enabled Privacy-Preserving Video Surveillance: A Case Study....... 455
Jehan Wickramasuriya, Sharad Mehrotra, and Nalini Venkatasubramanian
Section IV
Security and Privacy
26.
Is RFID Technology Secure and Private? ...................................................... 469
Surinder Mohan Bhaskar
27.
Privacy and Personal Information Protection in RFID Systems ................. 485
Yasunobu Nohara, Kensuke Baba, Sozo Inoue, and Hiroto Yasuura
28.
Multilateral Approaches for Reliable Mobile RFID Service Systems........ 499
Namje Park and Dongho Won
29.
ONS Security .................................................................................................... 523
Benjamin Fabian, Oliver Günther, and Sarah Spiekermann
30.
Practical Steps for Securing RFID Systems ................................................... 533
A. Karygiannis, Bernie Eydt, and Ted S. Phillips
31.
Lightweight Cryptography for Low Cost RFID: A New Direction
in Cryptography................................................................................................ 573
Damith C. Ranasinghe, Raja Ghosal, Alﬁo R. Grasso, and Peter H. Cole
32.
Low Overhead RFID Security ......................................................................... 589
Shlomi Dolev, Marina Kopeetsky, Thomas Clouser, and Mikhail Nesterenko
33.
Layers of Security for Active RFID Tags ....................................................... 603
Shenchih Tung, Swapna Dontharaju, Leonid Mats, Peter J. Hawrylak,
James T. Cain, Marlin H. Mickle, and Alex K. Jones
34.
Cryptographic Approaches to RFID Security and Privacy........................... 631
Koutarou Suzuki, Miyako Ohkubo, and Shingo Kinoshita
vii

35.
RFID Authentication: Reconciling Anonymity and Availability................ 643
Breno de Medeiros and Mike Burmester
36.
Security and Privacy of RFID for Biomedical Applications:
A Survey ............................................................................................................ 657
Ellen Stuart, Melody Moh, and Teng-Sheng Moh
Index .............................................................................................................................................675
viii

Preface
Realization in the business community of the beneﬁts of widespread adoption coupled
with advances in manufacturing techniques and efﬁcient data-handling methodologies is
fostering explosive growth of radio frequency identiﬁcation systems. RFID-enabled appli-
cations have grown at a tremendous rate with system deployments in a number of
industries such as pharmaceuticals, health care, transportation, retail, defense, and logis-
tics. An important aspect of RFID technology is its utilization in a wide spectrum of
applications. RFID technology can help a wide range of organizations and individuals
realize substantial productivity gains and efﬁciencies. Existing system components inte-
grate the beneﬁts provided by RFID while maintaining system modularity and efﬁciency.
Radio frequency tags allow objects to become self-describing, communicating their identity
to a close at hand RF reader. RFID is replacing bar-code–based identiﬁcation mechanisms,
as communication between a reader and a tag is not limited by the requirement of ‘‘line-
of-sight’’ reading and each tag has a unique ID. RFID technology enables the optimization
of multiple business processes through the improvement, the automation or even the
elimination of existing processes, and the emergence of new processes called intelligent
processes or smart processes, which are automatically triggering actions or events.
The major areas that have driven the commercial deployment of RFID technology are
logistics, supply chain management, library item tracking, medical implants, road tolling
(e.g., E-Z Pass), building access control, aviation security, and homeland security applica-
tions. These systems are used for a wide range of applications that track, monitor, report,
and manage items as they move between different physical locations. From inventory
management to theft detection, RFID has been applied in many areas such as in the
automotive industry and logistics, as well as in warehouses and retail stores. Most cars
are equipped with a remote control to open and lock a door. Money cards are used for
public transportation payments. Although there is no RFID association in their names, both
a car remote control and money cards are RFID applications. RFID technology has become
more and more widely used in real-world applications without people realizing it. Poten-
tial has also been seen for the application of RFID in capital asset management applications
such as keeping track of maintenance tools in the aircraft maintenance sector. RFID has the
ability of giving a unique identity to each tagged object. Hence, there is a vision to extend
this technology to item-level tagging (other than pallet and case-level tagging).
Radio frequency identiﬁcation is revolutionizing supply chain management, replacing
bar codes as the main object tracking system. RFID technologies better manage supply
chain operations by tracking the movement of products or assets through a system. Over
the last four years, major organizations in the U.S. (e.g., Wal-Mart and U.S. Department of
Defense) and in Europe (e.g., Metro AG and Tesco) have mandated the use of RFID. Since
then, the motivations for RFID adoption have moved from mandatory compliance to
voluntary undertakings as companies are increasingly exploring the true potential of the
technology, especially in the context of supply chains. RFID enabled automated receiving
optimizes the handoff of products between supplier and client. Products maybe received at
a manufacturing facility, a distribution center’s warehouse or a retail store without manu-
ally scanning or verifying the merchandise. Although current state-of-the-art receiving
ix

systems are highly optimized by using bar coding and wireless communications to a
central computer, the process is error-prone and time-consuming because of human
intervention.
RFID presents security and privacy risks that must be carefully mitigated through
management, operational, and technical controls in order to realize the numerous beneﬁts
the technology has to offer. Each RFID system has different components and customiza-
tions so that it can support a particular business process for an organization; as a result, the
security risks for RFID systems and the controls available to address them are highly
varied. The RFID handbook provides an overview of RFID technology, the associated
security and privacy risks, and recommended practices that will enable organizations to
realize productivity improvements while safeguarding sensitive information and protect-
ing the privacy of individuals. While RFID security is a rapidly evolving ﬁeld with a
number of promising innovations expected in the coming years, these guidelines focus on
controls that are commercially available today. Implementing the recommendations pre-
sented in this handbook should help organizations improve the security of their RFID
systems.
The RFID Handbook provides technical information about all aspects of RFID. The
areas covered in the handbook range from basic concepts to research grade material,
including future directions. This handbook captures the current state of RFID technology
and serves as a source of comprehensive reference material on this subject. It comprises
four sections: Introduction, Technology, Applications, and Security and Privacy. It has a
total of 36 chapters authored by 83 experts from around the world.
I
Introduction
Chapter 1 (Physics and Geometry of RFID) introduces RFID tags and presents an overview
of backscatter communication, antenna directivity, and gain.
Chapter 2 (EPCglobal Network) outlines the components of the EPCglobal Network.
Chapter 3 (Design Automation for RFID Tags and Systems) describes design automation
techniques for the creation of customized RFID tags.
Chapter 4 (Far-Field Tag Antenna Design Methodology) considers RFID label antennas
for near-ﬁeld operation in the HF region and far-ﬁeld operation in the UHF frequency
range.
Chapter 5 (Contemporary RFID Reader Architecture) studies several aspects of a software-
based RFID reader, including experimentation, implementation, and theoretical work.
Chapter 6 (Progress in RFID Education) addresses the educational issues in highlighting
the advantages of RFID and smart labels. An overview of business drivers, trends and
processes for RFID is presented.
II
Technology
Chapter 7 (RFID Reader Synchronization) identiﬁes synchronization of RFID readers as a
mechanism to assist in RFID reader deployment in dense reader environments.
Chapter 8 (Adaptive Tag Anticollision Protocols for RFID Passive Tags) introduces
adaptive splitting protocols, which use tree search for tag identiﬁcation.
x

Chapter 9 (Comparative Performance Analysis of Anticollision Protocols in RFID Networks)
presents a detailed description of tree-based and probabilistic anticollision protocols.
Chapter 10 (Maximizing Read Accuracy by Optimally Locating RFID Interrogators) dis-
cusses the signiﬁcance of proper RFID interrogator location and examines the relationship
between RFID reader antenna placement and the ability of a tag to be read accurately.
Chapter 11 (Minimum Energy=Power Considerations) describes several techniques to save
power in existing RFID systems or extend capabilities in a power efﬁcient manner.
Chapter 12 (Electromagnetic Coupling in RFID) outlines the fundamental principles
governing electromagnetic coupling between an interrogator and its labels in an RFID
system.
Chapter 13 (RFID Tags for Metallic Object Identiﬁcation) considers the behavior of elec-
tromagnetic waves near metallic surfaces and the effects of metallic surfaces on RFID tag
antennas.
Chapter 14 (WISP: A Passively Powered UHF RFID Tag with Sensing and Computation)
describes WISP (Wireless Identiﬁcation and Sensing Platform), a wireless, battery-free
platform for sensing and computation that is powered and read by a standards-compliant
ultrahigh frequency RFID reader.
III
Applications
Chapter 15 (From Automatic Identiﬁcation and Data Capture to ‘‘Smart Business Process’’:
Preparing for a Pilot Integrating RFID) examines the logic underlying the rules conﬁgured
in an RFID middleware to support smart business processes in a retail supply chain.
Chapter 16 (Technological Requirements and Derived Beneﬁts from RFID Enabled Receiv-
ing in a Supply Chain) focuses on the implementation of RFID enabled automated receiv-
ing, which has been identiﬁed as one of the quickest proﬁtable Supply Chain Management
(SCM) RFID applications.
Chapter 17 (A Prototype on RFID and Sensor Networks for Elder Health Care) describes a
project that integrates both sensor network and RFID technologies.
Chapter 18 (Triage with RFID Tags for Massive Incidents) describes a triage system using
RFID in which triage tags are used to classify and transport the injured as well as obtain
and publish the state and the scale of the casualty incident.
Chapter 19 (RFID Tagging and the Design of ‘‘Place’’) evaluates how RFID tagging can
transform the way we look at place and the negotiation and design of place.
Chapter 20 (Photosensing Wireless Tags for Precise Location and Geometry Queries)
presents a radio frequency identity and geometry transponder that can also communicate
geometry, intertag location history or context-sensitive user annotation.
Chapter 21 (RFID and NFC on Mobile Phones) introduces RFID and NFC in relation to
mobile phones and provides details of the associated standards, software development
tools, and environments.
Chapter 22 (Applying RFID Techniques for the Next-Generation Automotive Services)
presents ideas for new RFID applications in the automotive industry.
Chapter 23 (Application of RFID Technologies for Communication Robots) introduces
applications of RFID technologies for communication robots through two ﬁeld trials
involving communication robots and active-type RFID tags.
Chapter 24 (Browsing the World with RFID Tags: Design and Implementation of an
RFID-Based Distributed Environmental Memory) describes the design and implementation
of a distributed environmental memory for browsing the world.
xi

Chapter 25 (RFID-Enabled Privacy-Preserving Video Surveillance: A Case Study) describes
the design of a privacy preserving video surveillance system that monitors subjects in an
instrumented space only when they are involved in an access violation.
IV
Security and Privacy
Chapter 26 (Is RFID Technology Secure and Private?) presents case studies where infor-
mation stored on RFID tags has been compromised.
Chapter 27 (Privacy and Personal Information Protection in RFID Systems) presents
personal information protection in RFID systems. Privacy protection and personal infor-
mation protection are contrasted and two properties—anonymity and unlinkability—for
personal information protection are introduced.
Chapter 28 (Multilateral Approaches for Reliable Mobile RFID Service Systems) presents
an analysis of security and privacy threats, and multilateral security approaches to pro-
moting a globally mobile RFID service.
Chapter 29 (ONS Security) discusses privacy and security risks introduced by the current
Object Name Service (ONS) design and investigates possible countermeasures.
Chapter 30 (Practical Steps for Securing RFID Systems) discusses security controls that can
mitigate the business risks associated with RFID systems.
Chapter 31 (Lightweight Cryptography for Low Cost RFID: A New Direction in Crypto-
graphy) expounds upon a new direction in cryptography needed to address the security
and privacy needs of networked low cost RFID systems.
Chapter 32 (Low Overhead RFID Security) surveys various approaches to RFID security
and presents two examples of low overhead authentication algorithms.
Chapter 33 (Layers of Security for Active RFID Tags) surveys common attacks to RFID
tags, existing security techniques, and security requirements of RFID standards.
Chapter
34
(Cryptographic
Approaches
to
RFID
Security
and
Privacy)
surveys
studies pertaining to the security and privacy for RFID tags from the context of crypto-
graphy.
Chapter 35 (RFID Authentication: Reconciling Anonymity and Availability) explores the
issues attending to the provision of two security services, namely privacy and availability,
in the context of RFID applications.
Chapter 36 (Security and Privacy of RFID for Biomedical Applications: A Survey) discusses
an innovative set of biomedical RFID applications and the relevance of current security
solutions to these emerging disciplines.
The targeted audience for the RFID Handbook includes professionals who are designers
and=or planners for RFID systems, researchers (faculty members and graduate students),
and those who would like to learn about this ﬁeld.
The handbook contains the following speciﬁc salient features:
. To serve as a single comprehensive source of information and as reference material
on RFID technology
. To deal with an important and timely topic of emerging technology of today,
tomorrow, and beyond
. To present accurate, up-to-date information on a broad range of topics related to
RFID technology
. To present the material authored by the experts in the ﬁeld
. To present the information in an organized and well-structured manner
xii

Although the handbook is not precisely a textbook, it can certainly be used as a textbook
for graduate courses and research-oriented courses that deal with RFID. Any comments
from the readers will be highly appreciated.
Many people have contributed to this handbook in their unique ways. The ﬁrst and the
foremost group that deserves immense gratitude is the group of highly talented and skilled
researchers who have contributed 36 chapters to this handbook. All of them have been
extremely cooperative and professional. It has also been a pleasure to work with Ms. Nora
Konopka, Ms. Jessica Vakili, and Mr. Richard Tressider of CRC Press and Ms. Chitra
Subramaniam of SPi, and we are extremely gratiﬁed for their support and professionalism.
Our families have extended their unconditional love and strong support throughout this
project and they all deserve very special thanks.
Syed Ahson
Mohammad Ilyas
xiii


Editors
Syed Ahson is a senior staff software engineer with Motorola, Inc., in Plantation, Florida.
He has extensive experience with wireless data protocols (TCP=IP, UDP, HTTP, VoIP, SIP,
H.323), wireless data applications (Internet browsing, multimedia messaging, wireless
e-mail, ﬁrmware over-the-air update), and cellular telephony protocols (GSM, CDMA,
3G, UMTS, HSDPA). He has contributed signiﬁcantly in leading roles toward the creation
of several advanced and exciting cellular phones at Motorola. Prior to joining Motorola,
he was a senior software design engineer with NetSpeak Corporation (now part of
Net2Phone), a pioneer in VoIP telephony software.
Ahson is a coeditor of the WiMAX Handbook (CRC Press, 2007) and the Handbook of
Wireless Local Area Networks: Applications, Technology, Security, and Standards (CRC Press,
2005). He has authored ‘‘Smartphones’’ (International Engineering Consortium, April
2006), a research report that reﬂects on smartphone markets and technologies. He has
published several research articles in peer-reviewed journals and teaches computer engin-
eering courses as an adjunct faculty at Florida Atlantic University, Boca Raton, Florida,
where he introduced a course on smartphone technology and applications. Ahson received
his BSc in electrical engineering from Aligarh Muslim University, Aligarh, India, in 1995
and completed his MS in computer engineering in July 1998 at Florida Atlantic University.
Mohammad Ilyas received his BSc in electrical engineering from the University of Engin-
eering and Technology, Lahore, Pakistan, in 1976. From March 1977 to September 1978, he
worked for the Water and Power Development Authority, Pakistan. In 1978, he was
awarded a scholarship for his graduate studies and he completed his MS in electrical
and electronic engineering in June 1980 at Shiraz University, Shiraz, Iran. In September
1980, he joined the doctoral program at Queen’s University in Kingston, Ontario, Canada,
and completed his PhD in 1983. His doctoral research focused on switching and ﬂow
control techniques in computer communication networks. Since September 1983, he has
been with the College of Engineering and Computer Science at Florida Atlantic University,
Boca Raton, Florida, where he is currently the associate dean for research and industry
relations. From 1994 to 2000, he was chair of the Department of Computer Science and
Engineering. From July 2004 to September 2005, he served as interim associate vice
president for research and graduate studies. During the 1993–1994 academic year, he took
a sabbatical leave to work with the Department of Computer Engineering, King Saud
University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
Dr. Ilyas has conducted successful research in various areas including trafﬁc manage-
ment and congestion control in broadband=high-speed communication networks, trafﬁc
characterization, wireless communication networks, performance modeling, and simula-
tion. He has published 1 book, 8 handbooks, and over 150 research articles. He has
supervised 11 PhD dissertations and more than 37 MS theses to completion. He has been
a consultant to several national and international organizations. Dr. Ilyas is an active
participant in several IEEE technical committees and activities. He is a senior member of
IEEE and a member of ASEE.
xv


Contributors
Jeroen van Baar
Mitsubishi Electric Research Labs, Cambridge, Massachusetts
Kensuke Baba
Department of Informatics, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan
Paul Beardsley
Mitsubishi Electric Research Labs, Cambridge, Massachusetts
Ygal Bendavid
ePoly Centre of Expertise in Electronic Commerce, École Polytechnique
de Montréal, Montreal, Quebec, Canada
Surinder Mohan Bhaskar
Department of Information Technology, Ministry of Commu-
nications and Information Technology New Delhi, India
Harold Boeck Department of Marketing, Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Quebec,
Canada; ePoly, École Polytechnique de Montréal, Montreal, Quebec, Canada
Mike
Burmester
Department
of
Computer
Science,
Florida
State
University,
Tallahassee, Florida
James T. Cain
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
Jihoon Choi
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Korea University, Seoul,
Republic of Korea
Thomas Clouser
Department of Computer Science, Kent State University, Kent, Ohio
Peter H. Cole
Auto-ID Laboratory, School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering,
North Terrace, University of Adelaide, South Australia, Australia
Paul Coulton
Department of Communication Systems, Infolab21, Lancaster University,
Lancaster, United Kingdom
Gerold Joseph Dhanabalan
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
Paul Dietz
Mitsubishi Electric Research Labs, Cambridge, Massachusetts
Shlomi Dolev
Department of Computer Science, Ben-Gurion University, Beer-Sheva,
Israel
Swapna Dontharaju
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
xvii

Reuben Edwards
Department of Communication Systems, Infolab21, Lancaster Uni-
versity, Lancaster, United Kingdom
Bernie Eydt
Booz Allen Hamilton Inc., McLean, Virginia
Benjamin Fabian
Institute of Information Systems, Humboldt University, Berlin,
Germany
Brian J. Garner
School of Engineering & IT, Deakin University, Geelong Campus, Victoria,
Australia
Raja Ghosal
Auto-ID Laboratory, School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, North
Terrace, University of Adelaide, South Australia, Australia
Alﬁo R. Grasso
Auto-ID Laboratory, School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering,
North Terrace, University of Adelaide, South Australia, Australia
Oliver Günther
Institute of Information Systems, Humboldt University, Berlin, Germany
Norihiro Hagita
ATR-IRC, Sourakugun, Kyoto, Japan
Peter Harliman
Compiler and Advanced Computer Systems Laboratory, School of
Electrical Engineering, Korea University, Seoul, Republic of Korea
Peter J. Hawrylak
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
Loc Ho
Department of Computer Science, San Jose State University, San Jose, California
Raymond R. Hoare
Concurrent EDA, LLC, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
Sozo Inoue
Library, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan
Hiroshi Ishiguro
ATR-IRC, Sourakugun, Kyoto, Japan, Osaka University, Japan
Behnam Jamali
Auto-ID Laboratory, School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering,
North Terrace, University of Adelaide, South Australia, Australia
Kyong Jin Jo
Compiler and Advanced Computer Systems Laboratory, School of
Electrical Engineering, Korea University, Seoul, Republic of Korea
Alex K. Jones
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
Takayuki Kanda
ATR-IRC, Sourakugun, Kyoto, Japan
A. Karygiannis
U.S. Department of Commerce, National Institute of Standards and
Technology, Gaithersburg, Maryland
Seon Wook Kim
Compiler and Advanced Computer Systems Laboratory, School of
Electrical Engineering, Korea University, Seoul, Republic of Korea
xviii

Shingo Kinoshita
NTT Laboratories, Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Corporation,
Musashino-shi, Tokyo, Japan
Marina Kopeetsky
Department of Software Engineering, Sami-Shamoon College of
Engineering, Beer-Sheva, Israel
Donghwan Lee
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Korea University,
Seoul, Republic of Korea
Joon Goo Lee
Compiler and Advanced Computer Systems Laboratory, School of
Electrical Engineering, Korea University, Seoul, Republic of Korea
Wonjun Lee
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Korea University, Seoul,
Republic of Korea
Élisabeth Lefebvre
ePoly Centre of Expertise in Electronic Commerce, École Polytech-
nique de Montréal, Montreal, Quebec, Canada
Louis-A. Lefebvre
ePoly Centre of Expertise in Electronic Commerce, École Polytech-
nique de Montréal, Montreal, Quebec, Canada
Kin Seong Leong
Auto-ID Laboratory, School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering,
North Terrace, University of Adelaide, South Australia, Australia
Marco Mamei
Dipartimento di Scienze e Metodi dell’Ingegneria, Universita’di Modena e
Reggio Emilia, Reggio Emilia, Italy
Anijo Punnen Mathew
Design Research & Informatics Lab (DRIL), College of Architec-
ture, Art, and Design, Mississippi State University, Mississippi
Leonid Mats
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
Breno de Medeiros
Department of Computer Science, Florida State University,
Tallahassee, Florida
Sharad Mehrotra
Bren School of Information and Computer Sciences, University of
California, Irvine, California
Marlin H. Mickle
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
Melody Moh
Department of Computer Science, San Jose State University, San Jose,
California
Teng-Sheng
Moh
Department
of
Computer
Science,
San
Jose
State
University,
San Jose, California
Jihoon Myung
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Korea University,
Seoul, Republic of Korea
xix

Mikhail Nesterenko
Department of Computer Science, Kent State University, Kent, Ohio
Mun Leng Ng
Auto-ID Laboratory, School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering,
North Terrace, University of Adelaide, South Australia, Australia
Yasunobu Nohara
Department of Computer Science, Kyushu University, Fukuoka,
Japan
Bryan A. Norman
Department of Industrial Engineering, University of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
Miyako Ohkubo
Information-Technology Promotion Agency, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan
Namje Park
Information Security Research Division, Electronics and Telecommunica-
tions Research Institute, Daejeon, South Korea
Ted S. Phillips
Booz Allen Hamilton Inc., McLean, Virginia
Jayant Rajgopal
Department of Industrial Engineering, University of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
Damith C. Ranasinghe
Auto-ID Lab, Institute of Manufacturing, Cambridge University
Engineering Department, Cambridge University, United Kingdom
Omer Rashid
Department of Communication Systems, Infolab21, Lancaster University,
Lancaster, United Kingdom
Ramesh Raskar
Mitsubishi Electric Research Labs, Cambridge, Massachusetts
Alberto Rosi
Dipartimento di Scienze e Metodi dell’Ingegneria, Universita’di Modena e
Reggio Emilia, Reggio Emilia, Italy
Alanson P. Sample
Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Washington,
Seattle, Washington
Timothy K. Shih
Department of Computer Science and Information Engineering,
Tamkang University, Taiwan
Masahiro Shiomi
ATR-IRC, Sourakugun, Kyoto, Japan
Joshua R. Smith
Intel Research Seattle, Seattle, Washington
Akihito Sonoda
DNP LSI Japan Co. Ltd., Tokyo, Japan
Sarah Spiekermann
Institute of Information Systems, Humboldt University, Berlin,
Germany
Ellen Stuart Department of Computer Science, San Jose State University, San Jose,
California
xx

Koutarou Suzuki
NTT Laboratories, Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Corporation,
Musashino-shi, Tokyo, Japan
Shenchih
Tung
Department
of
Electrical
Engineering,
University
of
Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
Nalini Venkatasubramanian
Bren School of Information and Computer Sciences,
University of California, Irvine, California
Zachary
Walker
Department
of
Computer
Science,
San
Jose
State
University,
San Jose, California
Samuel Fosso Wamba
ePoly Centre of Expertise in Electronic Commerce, École
Polytechnique de Montréal, Montreal, Quebec, Canada
Lin
Wang
Department
of
Industrial
Engineering,
University
of
Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
Jehan Wickramasuriya
Pervasive Platforms & Architectures Lab, Applications Research,
Motorola Labs, Schaumburg, Illinois
Dongho Won
School of Information and Communication Engineering, Sungkyunkwan
University, Suwon, South Korea
Hiroto Yasuura
Department of Computer Science, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan
Daniel J. Yeager
Intel Research Seattle, Department of Electrical Engineering, University
of Washington, Seattle, Washington
Franco Zambonelli
Dipartimento di Scienze e Metodi dell’Ingegneria, Universita’di
Modena e Reggio Emilia, Reggio Emilia, Italy
xxi


Section I
Introduction


1
Physics and Geometry of RFID
Marlin H. Mickle, Leonid Mats, and Peter J. Hawrylak
CONTENTS
1.1
Overview................................................................................................................................. 3
1.2
Backscatter Communication................................................................................................. 4
1.2.1 General Overview of the Physics of RFID .............................................................. 5
1.2.2 Polarization.................................................................................................................. 8
1.2.3 Reﬂection.................................................................................................................... 13
1.3
Antenna Directivity and Gain............................................................................................ 13
1.4
Summary............................................................................................................................... 14
1.5
Future Directions ................................................................................................................. 15
1.1
Overview
Radio frequency identiﬁcation (RFID) is rooted in discoveries made by Faraday during the
mid-nineteenth century and discoveries made between 1900 and 1940 in radio and radar
technologies. Faraday discovered the concept of mutual induction, which forms the basis
for powering passive tags operating in the near ﬁeld. Technological advances enabling the
development of far-ﬁeld tags occurred during the ﬁrst half of the twentieth century. This
chapter focuses on passive tags operating in the far ﬁeld.
Far-ﬁeld tags must harvest energy to operate and backscatter the interrogation signal
transmitted by the reader to communicate with the reader. Two discoveries form the
basis for far-ﬁeld passive RFID tags. First, the development of crystal set radios provides
the basis for a tag to power itself. Crystal set radios used energy contained in the radio
frequency (RF) signal to move a diaphragm in the headset enabling those without
electricity (most people outside a major city during the early twentieth century) to listen
to radio broadcasts. Second, discoveries in the ﬁeld of radar during the Second World
War form the basis for the backscatter communication employed by passive RFID tags.
All objects reﬂect radio waves, and the tag can change the characteristics of the radio
waves it reﬂects by changing the matching at the connection between the chip and the
antenna making up the tag. These two discoveries form the basis of far-ﬁeld passive
RFID tags.
There are many types of RFID tags in existence, and although this chapter focuses on
passive RFID tags, a brief introduction of the other types of RFID tags is presented in this
section. EPCglobal designates four classes of RFID tags. Class 1 and Class 2 tags are purely
3

passive tags with Class 2 being a Class 1 tag with additional memory or supporting
additional protocol commands. Semipassive tags, designated as Class 3 and Class 4, are
active tags.
Semipassive tags have an onboard power source and may have onboard sensors. The
onboard power source serves two purposes: (1) it provides continuous power for the sen-
sors and (2) it allows the intelligence contained in the chip to function without harvesting
energy. When monitoring an asset, it is critical to take sensor readings at the required
intervals to obtain a complete history of the asset with respect to a given phenomenon. The
onboard power supply ensures that the semipassive tag can take these readings even in the
absence of a reader to power the tag. Another use of semipassive tags is to increase the read
range or to read the tag in an unfriendly environment. Because the chip in a semipassive tag
is powered by the battery, the semipassive tag is not required to harvest energy for operation
from the reader signal. Hence, a semipassive tag does not need to harvest energy to power
the circuitry for the backscatter communication to produce a stronger signal that is easier for
the reader to detect, resulting in increased range or the capability to be read in an unfriendly
environment. Semipassive tags are currently investigated for use in the cold chain, where
items (such as frozen foods or drugs) must be kept below a given temperature.
Active tags have an onboard power supply, active receiver, distinct active transmitter,
and may talk with each other and form a network. Active tags are very similar to nodes in
a sensor network. ZigBee and IEEE 802.11 networks can be considered as containing active
tags using a very broad deﬁnition of active tags. One standard deﬁning a network of active
tags, ISO 18000–7, does not permit tag-to-tag communication, but only communications
between a tag and a reader. Because of the active transmitter, active tags can transmit a
signal to a reader several hundred meters away. Similarly, the active receiver enables the
active tag to receive a very weak signal from devices up to several hundred meters away.
The active communications hardware enables active tags to be used in places with large
amounts of metal, which is typically very unfriendly to passive and semipassive tags. As
more memory can be incorporated into an active tag, it is often used to store information
about a shipment of goods in a shipping container. Active tags may incorporate sensors.
With active tags, battery life is critical as an active tag cannot harvest energy from the
reader signal as a passive or semipassive tag can.
Passive tags are the cheapest of the four but have the least capability. Passive tags are
commonly used to track items functioning as a wireless barcode. Semipassive tags
are more expensive than passive tags, but cheaper than active tags, with capabilities falling
in the middle as well. Because of their cost, semipassive tags are ideal in cases where a
large number of assets must be monitored (with sensors), or in situations where the tag
cannot be reused. Active tags are the most expensive, but offer the greatest capabilities.
Currently, the military and highway drivers (EZ-Pass) are the primary users of active tags.
The remainder of the chapter focuses on far-ﬁeld passive RFID tags.
1.2
Backscatter Communication
All objects reﬂect radio waves, where RF energy and these reﬂected waves are the basis for
pulsed radar systems. Pulsed radar allows distance and direction to be determined. Two
basic types of antennas exist, an omnidirectional and a directional antenna. An omnidi-
rectional antenna emits RF energy in all directions, whereas a directional antenna emits RF
energy in a speciﬁc direction.
Backscatter takes advantage of the reﬂection of radio waves. A passive tag contains an
antenna, which is used for two purposes: (1) to harvest energy from the reader signal,
4
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

command, and carrier wave (CW) and (2) to communicate with the reader. The amount of
energy that the tag receives depends on many factors, but the distance between the reader
and tag, the reader transmitter power, and the efﬁciency of the RFID tag antennas are the
keys. The following section elaborates on all the factors governing the received power.
The impedance matching between the antenna and the tag circuitry determines the
amount of energy that can be transferred between the antenna and tag circuitry. When
matched, the maximum amount of energy is transferred between the antenna and the tag
circuitry and this occurs when the imaginary parts of the complex tag circuitry impedance
and antenna impedance completely cancel each other resulting only in a real resistance.
The target input impedance value is not 50 V as in a typical RF system, which provides a
degree of freedom and ﬂexibility in an antenna design and matching networks. When the
matching is not optimal, a parasitic imaginary part is present in the impedance quantity.
This can be either capacitive or inductive, and results in less power being transferred from
the antenna to the tag circuitry. Hence, this reduces the read range of the tag.
Matching and deliberate mismatching are used for backscatter communication. The tag
can alter the matching by adding or removing an impedance, typically a capacitor, by
means of a switch. When the capacitance is included in the circuit, the matching is not
optimal and the tag reﬂects an amount of energy B. When the capacitance is not in the
circuit, the matching is optimal and the tag reﬂects an amount of energy A. The energy
amounts A and B are not equal. Using this difference, the tag can modulate data onto the
reﬂected radio waves and communicate with the reader. Amplitude shift keying (ASK) or
phase shift keying (PSK) are possible using this difference in backscatter.
1.2.1
General Overview of the Physics of RFID
The reading of an RFID tag is more than recognizing the backscatter by a simple RF
receiver. In order for a passive tag to operate, the reader=interrogator must supply the
operating energy to the tag through the transmission of an RF continuous wave (CW). The
magnitude of the transmission of this energy is determined by the Friis equation as shown
in Figure 1.1. There are three key elements involving physical aspects of antennas in energy
harvesting: (1) antenna gains, (2) reﬂection coefﬁcients, and (3) polarization.
Consider ﬁrst the antenna gains, GT and GR, for the transmitter and receiver, respect-
ively. These gains are dependent on the simple relative physical orientations of the
two antennas for energy supply and energy harvesting. The polar coordinates of the two
antennas are shown as functions of u and f for both tag and reader. The maximum energy
transfer normally occurs when the center lines of the planes associated with each antenna
are coincident. As the angles change from this most favorable orientation, the respective
gains will begin to decrease. Thus, in order to evaluate the amount of power that is really
available at the tag, it is necessary to know the relative physical (structural) orientations of
the reader and the tag antennas.
Reflection coefficients
Antenna gains
PR = PT
G T(q T,f T) GR(q R,f R)l 2
(4πr )2
Polarization
(1−⏐ΓT⏐2)(1−⏐ΓR⏐2)⏐pT • pR⏐2
∧
∧
FIGURE 1.1
The Friis equation showing key elements.
Physics and Geometry of RFID
5

In addition to the antenna gains which deal with the physical (structural) antenna
orientations, there is a question of the polarization of the two antennas again as indicated
in Figure 1.1. Polarization is concerned with the relative orientations involving the electric
ﬁelds generated by the conducting elements of the interrogator and tag antennas. The
polarization is a somewhat complicated facet and will be considered in a separate section
to follow.
The term from the Friis equation that most people are familiar with is the distance, r,
between the interrogator and the tag. This is important both for the powering of the tag
and the ability of the receiver in the interrogator to see the changes in radar cross section of
the tag antenna. In the case of powering, the PR must be sufﬁcient to operate the tag
where the interrogator is supplying PT. For the interrogator to read the backscatter from
the tag, the change in the tag reﬂection coefﬁcient, GT, alters the power received by the
interrogator, PR, which is used to decode the data/number from the tag.
There are differences between tags, which operate close to the interrogator based on the
wavelength of the frequency being used. The closer is termed the near ﬁeld and the more
distant operation is the far ﬁeld which is the object of this presentation. This discussion is
concerned with the far ﬁeld. In particular, in the case of far-ﬁeld ultrahigh frequency
(UHF), there is always an effort to reduce the power required by the chip and thus the
tag. Each time the matching impedance within the tag is changed to provide the modula-
tion of the backscattered RF, the reﬂection coefﬁcient is changed. Thus, power harvested by
the tag is changed (reduced) by this change in reﬂection coefﬁcient indicated in Figure 1.1.
The reﬂection coefﬁcient is again somewhat more complicated and will be discussed in a
later section dedicated to that subject.
The power transmitted by the antenna, PT, in Figure 1.1, is governed by the Federal
Communications Commission (FCC). This power is spread over a three-dimensional area
as determined by the antenna radiation pattern as shown in Figure 1.2. The frequency used,
915 MHz in EPCglobal Gen2, has a wavelength, l, which is calculated from the relationship:
FIGURE 1.2
A radiation pattern.
6
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

c ¼ f  l,
(1:1)
where c is the speed of light. Thus, l of the Friis equation is 0.3278þ m. The gain of the
transmitting antenna, GR(uT,fT), means that the energy provided to the antenna is focused
to some extent thus causing the energy density to be greater in some area than would have
been if it had been radiated in all directions equally (an isotropic antenna). The angular
orientations uT, fT make it clear that the tag orientation will receive power that will be
varied over all the angles of orientation with respect to transmitting energy (power). In the
pattern of Figure 1.2, an RFID tag placed at the orientation (0,0,0.7) would receive the most
energy from the transmitter. This location is part of the terminology of the most favorable
location which is used by most vendors as the distance at which the tag can be read.
The next term of the Friis equation considered is the gain of the tag antenna, GT(uT,fT),
where a pattern is likewise to be produced. Many RFID tags today are some form of a
dipole. Figure 1.3 is an illustration of an ideal dipole. The dipole can be thought of as two
collinear wires end to end with a small space between them. The two wires would be
oriented along the Y axis of Figure 1.3. Figure 1.4 illustrates an interrogator patch antenna
and the tag antenna simultaneously in the most favorable relative orientation. It is assumed
that the Y and Z plane of the tag antenna illustration is parallel with the plane of the
interrogator antenna. It is further assumed that the X axis of the tag antenna is perpen-
dicular to the plane of the interrogator antenna at the (0,0) origin of that plane.
Thus, in Figure 1.4, the most favorable orientation of the interrogator and tag antenna
implies that GR(uT,fT) and GT(uT,fT) are at their maximum values. That is the best you can
do for the antennas speciﬁed. Thus, the distance, r, is the relative positional difference
along the X axis as discussed earlier.
y
x
Phi
Theta
z
FIGURE 1.3
Radiation pattern of an ideal dipole.
y
z
Theta
x
Phi
FIGURE 1.4
Interrogator radiation pattern (left), an ideal dipole (right).
Physics and Geometry of RFID
7

From the energy pattern of Figure 1.5, it can be understood that the energy along the Y
axis is essentially 0, thus backscatter from the tag has very little if any practical energy in
that orientation (Figure 1.6).
By this time, it should be clear to the reader that there are many scenarios in which the
interrogator=tag combination will not work. Figure 1.7 provides a most favorable orien-
tation for the two dipole antennas.
1.2.2
Polarization
Polarization is the term used to describe the motion of the tip of the electric ﬁeld vector
when electromagnetic (EM) energy is transmitted from an antenna, in this particular case,
radio frequency waves for RFID. Consider the two sinusoidal waveforms in Figure 1.8,
where the two waves are 908 out of phase. Each of these waveforms can be represented as a
Theta
z
x
Phi
y
FIGURE 1.5
Most unfavorable orientation for the tag.
Theta
z
x
y
Phi
FIGURE 1.6
Another highly unfavorable orientation.
8
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

vector with magnitude, jEj and jHj, and angles, ﬀQ and ﬀF, respectively, where the two
vectors will always be 908 out of phase.
Consider two dipole antennas A and B, aligned on a center line as shown in Figure 1.9,
where we wish to view the E ﬁeld between the two antennas from point a looking to
point b.
The ﬁeld pattern generated by an ideal dipole is shown in Figure 1.10 (left). The ﬁeld
patterns of the two aligned dipoles are shown in Figure 1.10 (right). While the full
explanation of how the pattern is calculated is not necessary here, there is an intuitive
understanding that can be derived by the color scheme where red indicates the strongest
signal level, that is, the largest magnitude of jEj.
As shown in Figure 1.10, the Y axis is the vertical axis of Figure 1.9. Now consider the
view from point a to point b (Figure 1.9 looking left to right) looking along the line
connecting the two points as shown in Figure 1.11.
The magnitude of the E ﬁeld, jEj, will appear as a vertical line. The antenna A is said to be
linearly polarized. Based on the orientations shown in Figure 1.9, the two antennas are
aligned such that the E ﬁeld transmitted by A will impinge on antenna B in the same
orientation as viewing the vector in Figure 1.11. Under certain conditions, it is possible to
cause the E ﬁeld of a particular type of antenna to rotate in angle such that the tip of the
vector of Figure 1.11 will trace a circle as shown in Figure 1.12. In this case, the antenna is
said to be circularly polarized. Any mathematical discussion of how this is done is beyond
FIGURE 1.7
Most favorable polarization—reader (left) and tag (right).
Time
H Field
E Field
FIGURE 1.8
The E and H ﬁelds showing phase and time.
Physics and Geometry of RFID
9

FIGURE 1.9
Two dipole antennas aligned verti-
cally and horizontally as shown.
Feed
Receive
a
b
A
B
Y
Y
Y
Phi
Theta
Z
Theta
Z
Theta
Z
X
Phi X
Phi X
FIGURE 1.10
Radiation patterns ideal dipole (left) and aligned dipoles (right).
FIGURE 1.11
The E ﬁeld in time and angle.
E
a
A
FIGURE 1.12
The E ﬁeld with a circularly polarized antenna.
10
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

the scope of this chapter. However, in general, the means by which this can be accom-
plished is to use a ﬂat planar antenna, typically circular, with two feed attachments where
the two attachments are electrically 908 out of phase. The feed points can be coupled to the
antenna surface through the air with appropriate spatial distance and orientation.
The reason why the two antenna polarizations are important in RFID is because of the
various possible orientations of the item that is tagged relative to the interrogator antenna.
For example, consider the view from antenna A to antenna B under the condition where
antenna B has been rotated by 908 in space as shown in Figure 1.13.
From Figure 1.13, it is obvious that very little of the E ﬁeld vector as pictured in Figures
1.8 (E ﬁeld) and 1.11 (E vector) from antenna A will impinge on antenna B. Thus, the
amount of energy delivered from antenna A to antenna B will be minimal. In general, this
means the RFID tag will likely not have received sufﬁcient energy from the continuous
wave (CW) of the interrogator antenna to power the RFID chip on the tag (Figure 1.14).
In the traditional use of radio, the station transmitting antennas are typically vertical,
and most radio receivers are going to be placed on a ﬂat surface parallel to the earth in
which case the manufacturer will include the antenna with the proper polarization with
respect to vertically polarized transmitting antennas, which are mounted vertically to be in
the same polarization as the transmitting antennas. However, when RFID tags are placed
on an item, it is most difﬁcult to ﬁx the orientation of the item throughout the item life cycle
at all possible locations where the tag may be read. Thus, the relative polarizations will be
at the best as in Figure 1.9, and at the worst as in Figure 1.13, with any other orientations in
between these two extremes. Thus, except in very special circumstances, one does not want
both the RF interrogator transmitter and the RFID tag to be dipole antennas due to the
possibility of the orthogonal or other unfavorable orientations as illustrated in Figure 1.13,
when transmitter or receiver may not be permanently aligned.
While radio transmitting antennas are typically mounted vertically for vertical polariza-
tion, television antennas are horizontally polarized. Before the days of cable and satellite
TV, rooftops were adorned with antennas formed with multiple horizontal elements
resulting in what is termed a Yagi antenna. The plane formed by the parallel elements
A
A
(a)
(b)
B
B
FIGURE 1.13
Two orthogonal dipoles.
a
A
E Field
Time
B
b
FIGURE 1.14
Linearly polarized antennas with most favorable orientation.
Physics and Geometry of RFID
11

was (is) parallel to the earth, that is, horizontally polarized. Thus although radio and
television do not share the same frequency bands, there is still little or no interference
due to the respective polarizations.
The orientation issue in RFID is normally addressed by providing a circularly polarized
antenna on the interrogator and a dipole antenna on the tag. Thus, the dipole will receive
energy more favorably through virtually any possible orientation where the plane of the
dipole if rotated in such a manner that the plane in which it is rotated will be parallel to
the plane of the circularly polarized transmitting antenna. Due to the phasing and dual
feed conﬁguration requirements, the tag antenna cannot practically be circularly polarized
and is typically some form of a dipole antenna.
The use of a circularly polarized antenna for the interrogator with the tag antenna
orientations maintained as parallel planes insures suitable tag performance in many
circumstances. However, the relative angles of the planes on Figure 1.15c vary, when the
tag plane is rotated through the angles indicated as a-variations in efﬁciency will exist.
Consider the circularly polarized and dipole antennas of Figure 1.16. The pattern of the
dipole on the right allows it to be rotated about the Y axis while maintaining a favorable
orientation with the circularly polarized antenna on the left. In addition, the dipole can
be rotated about the X axis of the dipole diagram.
Hence, in summary, a circularly polarized antenna reduces the number of unfavorable
reader=tag antenna orientations allowing an increased success of reading the tag.
A circularly polarized antenna does have a cost in terms of the distance at which the tag
can be read. Typically, circularly polarized antennas do not have as great a range as
linearly polarized antennas. One use of a circularly polarized antenna is when reader=tag
orientations vary. In practice, linearly polarized antennas are used when maximum dis-
tance is required and reader=tag orientation is ﬁxed. This is often the case in a manufac-
turing plant. Further, portals, which employ multiple antennas, typically four, can position
antennas to cover all three, or at least two of the three coordinate axes. Here, the extra
FIGURE 1.15
Planes of the interrogator antenna (a) and rotated tag
antenna (b) and (c).
(a)
(b)
a  = 0
a
(c)
Phi
Theta
Z
Theta
Z
Y
X
Y
PhiX
FIGURE 1.16
Patch=dipole orientations favorable (left) and unfavorable (right).
12
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

range, or power capabilities, of the linearly polarized antenna can help in reading a tag
through material that is RF-unfriendly.
1.2.3
Reﬂection
Reﬂection is a property of the matching of the impedance of the antenna to the impedance
of the load (chip) on the RFID tag. Consider the connection of the two components as
shown in Figure 1.17.
The reﬂection coefﬁcient is deﬁned as:
G ¼ (ZL  ZA)=(ZL þ ZA):
(1:2)
If the load impedance is shorted (0), Gshort ¼ 1. If the load impedance is open (1),
Gopen ¼ 1, and if the two impedances are matched, that is, complex conjugates, Gmatch ¼ 0.
Thus, all other variations of matching the antenna and load impedances result in a G
somewhere between þ1 and 1, which is the value used in the Friis equation of Figure 1.1.
There is a GT for the transmitting device and a GR for the receiving device.
1.3
Antenna Directivity and Gain
Two critical antenna characteristics are the directivity and the gain. The deﬁnitions for
antenna directivity and antenna gain are essentially identical except for the power terms
used in the deﬁnitions.
The directivity of the antenna [D(u,f)] is deﬁned as the ratio of the antenna radiated
power density at a distant point to the total antenna radiated power density isotropically.
Figure 1.18 demonstrates the coordinate system on which the directivity and the gain
are based. The directivity is typically expressed in decibels (dB) above a reference, where
D(u,F)[dB] ¼ 10 log10 D(u,f). The directivity of an isotropic radiator is equal to one. An
isotropic antenna with the spherical pattern is the typical reference antenna, which is
speciﬁed in the dBi units (Figure 1.19).
Antenna
impedance
(Z A)
Chip (load)
impedance
(Z L)
FIGURE 1.17
Antenna and chip (load) connection.
FIGURE 1.18
Coordinate system.
Physics and Geometry of RFID
13

In real world applications, an antenna is driven by a source (power generator), where the
total radiated power of the antenna is not the total power available from the generator. The
loss factors which affect antenna’s efﬁciency can be attributed to the effects of the mismatch
(reﬂection) losses at the connection of the antenna and the source. Therefore, the total
power delivered to the antenna terminal is equal to the ohmic (Pohmic) losses plus the
radiated power (Prad) by the antenna, Pin ¼ Prad þ Pohmic.
The gain [G(u,f)] is deﬁned as the ratio of the antenna radiated power density at a
distant point to the total antenna input power (Pin) radiated isotropically. Thus, the
antenna gain represents the actual efﬁciency of the antenna, where the gain and directivity
are related with the efﬁciency factor that is applied to the directivity value to calculate
the gain of the antenna. The graphical representation of the antenna gain is accomplished
with the radiation patterns, which are typically drawn for the vertical and horizontal
polarizations or three-dimensional polar plots.
The antennas can be classiﬁed into two principal groups: directional and omnidirec-
tional. The directional antennas have a high gain, but a narrow ﬁeld view (i.e., patch). The
omnidirectional antennas have a low gain, but a wide ﬁeld view (i.e., dipole).
In a typical RFID system, the tags are designed to use either a dipole, omnidirectional
type antenna or a combination of two-dipole antennas to eliminate the problem of nulls in
the radiation pattern of a single dipole (Figure 1.18). The radiation pattern of the dipole
antenna allows the tag to intercept most of the incident signal regardless of the tag
orientation with respect to the reader’s antenna, where a dipole antenna typically has a
gain of about 2.2 dBi. In addition, the RFID readers are designed to operate with the patch
(directional) type antennas. Thus, the power of radiated signal is focused toward a passive
tag. The antenna manufacturers normally specify the antenna gain for the circularly
polarized patch antennas to be on the order of 6 dBi.
1.4
Summary
The successful operation of a passive RFID system is dependent on numerous factors most
of which are interrelated and incorporated in the Friis equation of Figure 1.1. The typical
hands on manipulation of tags in the presence of a reader involves various factors
illustrated in this chapter. Such manipulation simultaneously varies multiple factors that
FIGURE 1.19
The isotropic radiation pattern.
14
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

can only be separated by an in-depth analysis of the physical factors of the tag and reader
design. In addition, the multiple orientations and distances increase the dimensionality of
the problem.
A successful read or nonread is an amalgamation of these many factors. One means of
separating these factors is a well-documented testing procedure, providing a geometric
positional log in conjunction with a real-time spectrum analyzer that can monitor the air
medium and document the reader to tag energy proﬁle and the tag to reader backscatter.
This chapter presents an overview of many interrelated factors that relate to the suc-
cessful operation of a passive RFID system.
1.5
Future Directions
Primarily driven by the cost-insensitive products, the Class 3, battery-assistant smart
passive technology offers an excellent solution for applications requiring more functional-
ity than passive systems that are used today. The Class 3 is a proposed EPCglobal standard,
which targets the battery-assistance passive tags with additional functionality on the chip
(i.e., memory and sensors), longer operating distance, and moderate cost. The cold-chain
visibility is the ideal candidate for the Class 3 type devices where temperature sensors can
be used to insure that the temperature was adequate through the cold supply chain.
Class 3 devices require advances in lowering cost, increasing battery life, and lowering
power sensors. Lowering cost is critical because the cost of using the tag must be recouped
and each participant is only willing to pay so much. Lowering the cost will open doors for
semipassive technology in areas where it was previously too expensive. Battery life is
critical to powering the sensors to take the required sensor readings. The battery must last
at least as long as time that the asset must be monitored to prevent incomplete or
inaccurate results. For some assets, their lifetime is too long for the semipassive tag to
monitor them over their entire lifetime. This is also an issue for active tags. Finally, lower
power sensors are one way to reduce energy consumption and extend battery life.
Advances in sensor technology will enable lower power sensors to be incorporated into
semipassive tags.
Physics and Geometry of RFID
15


2
EPCglobal Network
Alﬁo R. Grasso
CONTENTS
2.1
EPCglobal History ............................................................................................................. 17
2.2
EPCglobal Network........................................................................................................... 19
2.2.1 EPCglobal Standards Development Process....................................................... 19
2.3
Class 1 Generation 2.......................................................................................................... 20
2.4
Tag Data Standards........................................................................................................... 22
2.4.1 General Identiﬁer .................................................................................................... 24
2.4.2 Serialized Global Trade Item Number................................................................. 24
2.4.3 Serial Shipping Container Code ........................................................................... 24
2.4.4 Serialized Global Location Number..................................................................... 24
2.4.5 Global Returnable Asset Identiﬁer....................................................................... 25
2.4.6 Global Individual Asset Identiﬁer........................................................................ 25
2.4.7 DoD Identity Type.................................................................................................. 25
2.4.8 Detailed Description of Tag Data Standards...................................................... 25
2.5
Tag Data Translation......................................................................................................... 26
2.6
Reader Protocol.................................................................................................................. 26
2.7
Low-Level Reader Protocol.............................................................................................. 27
2.8
Reader Management ......................................................................................................... 28
2.9
Application Layer Events ................................................................................................. 28
2.10
ECPIS EPC Information Services..................................................................................... 29
2.11
Security Certiﬁcate Proﬁle................................................................................................ 30
2.12
Object Naming Service...................................................................................................... 31
2.13
Drug Pedigree Standard ................................................................................................... 31
2.14
EPCIS Discovery ................................................................................................................ 32
2.15
Subscriber Authentication ................................................................................................ 32
2.16
Conclusions......................................................................................................................... 32
References...................................................................................................................................... 32
2.1
EPCglobal History
EPCglobal Inc. is a joint venture between GS1 US (http:==www.gs1us.org=) and GS1
(http:==www.gs1.org=).
17

EPCglobal was formed to commercialize and set up a user-driven standards process
based on intellectual property developed by the Auto-ID Center at the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology (MIT). The Auto-ID Center at MIT (http:==autoid.mit.edu=cs=)
was established in 1999 to develop the ‘‘Internet of Things.’’ Led by Prof. Sanjay Sarma,
Dr. Daniel Engels, David Brock, and Kevin Ashton, the center quickly expanded with the
addition of other RFID laboratories around the world:
. Institute for Manufacturing, University of Cambridge, UK (http:==www.autoi-
dlabs.org.uk=), headed by Prof. Duncan McFarlane
. RFID Laboratory, University of Adelaide, Australia (http:==autoidlab.eleceng.
adelaide.edu.au=), headed by Prof. Peter Cole
. Keio University Shonan-Fujisawa Campus Murai Laboratory, Keio University,
Japan (http:==www.kri.sfc.keio.ac.jp=en=lab=AutoID.html) headed by Prof. Jun
Murai
. Fudan Auto-ID Center, China (http:==www.autoidlab.fudan.edu.cn=), headed by
Prof. Hao Min
. St. Gallen University and Swiss Federal Institute of Technology, ETH Zurich,
Switzerland (http:==www.autoidlabs.org=the-labs=stgallen=), headed by Prof.
Elgar Fleisch
In October 2003, the Auto-ID Center ceased to operate and the Intellectual Property
developed by the six laboratories was licensed to the newly formed joint venture, EPCglobal
Inc. In addition, the six Auto-ID Centers were renamed Auto-ID Labs. In April 2005, a
seventh Auto-ID Lab was admitted to the Federated Auto-ID Labs. That laboratory was
from the Information and Communications University (ICU) (http:==www.autoid.or.kr=),
headed by Prof. Sang-Gug Lee.
During the Auto-ID Center years of operation (1999–2003), more than 110 Auto-ID
Center research papers were published. Those papers available from the Auto-ID Labs
Web site (http:==www.autoidlabs.org=publications=page.html) formed the basis of today’s
EPCglobal Network. Before its hand over to EPCglobal, the Auto-ID Center also published
the following speciﬁcations:
. 900 MHz Class 0 Radio Frequency (RF) Identiﬁcation Tag Speciﬁcation
. 13.56 MHz ISM Band Class 1 Radio Frequency (RF) Identiﬁcation Tag Interface
Speciﬁcation
. 860–930 MHz Class 1 Radio Frequency (RF) Identiﬁcation Tag Radio Frequency &
Logical Communication Interface Speciﬁcation
These speciﬁcations are available from http:==www.epcglobalinc.org=standards=specs=
Today, EPCglobal has established a network of organizations, both end users and
solution providers. As of April 2007, EPCglobal had over 1300 member organizations, in
which over 4000 individuals contribute to 100 work groups. Some of these groups require
the participant to sign an opt-in agreement (see Section 2.2.1). The work groups are divided
into a number of classes:
. Discussion Groups (open to everyone)
. Industry Action Groups (EPCglobal Subscribers some with optional opt-in)
. Joint Requirement Groups (opt-in required)
18
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

. Cross Industry Adoption & Implementation Groups (EPCglobal Subscribers only,
but no opt-in)
. Technical Action Groups (opt-in required)
Some of these work groups gather business requirements and document use cases, others
develop speciﬁcations that address those requirements and use cases, formulate conform-
ance and performance test procedures, and certify solution provider’s solutions. EPCglobal
maintains a list of certiﬁed solution providers (hardware, software, and test centers) at
http:==www.epcglobalinc.org=certiﬁcation=
Apart from the speciﬁcations (http:==www.epcglobalinc.org=standards=), EPCglobal
also publishes information documents, mainly from the Cross Industry Adoption and
Implementation Groups, in the form of an RFID Cookbook (http:==www.epcglobalinc.
org=what=cookbook=), Key Learnings (only available to EPCglobal Subscribers), speciﬁc
information for European or Asian adoption and other information such as EPCglobal
Recommended Occupational Use Best Practices for Complying with Limits on Human
Exposure to Electromagnetic Fields (http:==www.epcglobalinc.org=public=bestpractice=).
2.2
EPCglobal Network
The EPCglobal Architecture Framework speciﬁcation (EPCglobal, 2005a) is a collection of
interrelated standards for hardware, software, and data interfaces, together with core
services that have a common goal of enhancing the supply chain through the use of
Electronic Product Codes (EPCs).
2.2.1
EPCglobal Standards Development Process
EPCglobal has also established a Standards Development Process (EPCglobal, 2007a). This
process starts with end user requirements and develops a speciﬁcation, which is proto-
typed, tested, and evaluated before the standard is ratiﬁed by the EPCglobal Board of
Governors. EPCglobal works with retailers, manufacturers, and hardware, software, and
integration solution providers to create and share intellectual property that will beneﬁt the
entire subscriber base. Similarly, EPCglobal is committed to open use of the EPCglobal
Network. The EPCglobal Intellectual Property (IP) Policy (http:==www.epcglobalinc.
org=what=ip_policy=) ensures that all companies subscribing to the organization have
open, neutral access to EPCglobal Network technology and standards. The agreement
guarantees that the technology remains nonproprietary for the beneﬁt of industry as a
whole. Companies with a desire to participate in any Action Group or Working Groups are
required to sign the appropriate EPCglobal Intellectual Property (IP) Policy. At key points
in the process, calls for Intellectual Property are made and if IP is noted, every attempt is
made to ensure that the speciﬁcation developed is free from IP claims. Every participant in
the technical work groups must execute an opt-in agreement, in which it is agreed that IP
will be divulged at those key points. The objective is to have EPCglobal speciﬁcations that
are free from IP claims.
The EPCglobal Network consists of standards that specify both hardware and software
elements. The hardware speciﬁcation details the air interface protocol, communication
between the reader and tags, and is known as UHF Class-1 Generation-2 V1.0.9 (or
C1G2 V1.0.9) (EPCglobal, 2005c). At the time of writing, other hardware speciﬁcations
were in development, namely the HF Air Interface Protocol for Item Management, and the
EPCglobal Network
19

UHF Air Interface Protocol for Item Management UHF C1G2 V1.1.2. Both of these speci-
ﬁcations build on the command set of C1G2 V1.0.9 with HF in particular deﬁning a
signaling layer at 13.56 MHz, but using almost the same command set. The advantage of
using the command set is that other parts of the EPCglobal Network may be able to be
protocol agnostic.
The rest of the standards that comprise the EPCglobal Network are software elements
namely:
. Tag Data Standards
. Tag Data Translation
. Reader Protocol
. Low-Level Reader Protocol
. Reader Management
. Application Layer Events
. ECPIS EPC Information Services
. Security Certiﬁcate Proﬁle
. Object Naming Service
. Drug Pedigree Standard
. EPCIS Discovery
. Subscriber Authentication
The rest of this chapter is devoted to providing a short description of each element in the
EPCglobal Network and a status of the speciﬁcation as of April 2007.
2.3
Class 1 Generation 2
The Class 1 Generation 2 Speciﬁcation (EPCglobal, 2005c) details the communications
between the RFID tag and the RFID reader. It contains speciﬁcations of an air interface.
Communication between readers and tags is based on ‘‘Reader Talks First’’ principles,
whereby the reader issues commands (along with communication parameters) to a popu-
lation of tags that are in the reader’s RF ﬁeld. The objective of the protocol is to singulate a
tag in a multiple tag environment to read its identity or other information stored in the
tag’s memory.
The frequency of transmissions of the RFID reader operate anywhere from 860 to 960
MHz according to local regulations, whereas in general RFID tags should be able to
operate anywhere in that frequency band, responding to locally conﬁgured readers.
There are three frequency bands of interest:
. Region 1 (EU and Africa), typically 865–868 MHz, 2 W ERP Frequency Agile, LBT
. Region 2 (FCC—United States and Canada) 902–928 MHz, 4 W EIRP Spread
Spectrum Frequency Hopping
. Region 3 (Asia). Most follow Europe, some follow FCC
Usually, the available spectrum in a local region is divided into channels or sub-bands. In
the United States, channels are 500 kHz wide, whereas in Europe sub-bands are 200 kHz
wide. In the United States, the 50 available channels, with operation at 4 W EIRP, are used
20
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

according to a random selection process known as Spread Spectrum Frequency Hopping,
in which operation in one channel is limited to 400 ms after which the reader must select
another channel to transmit. In Europe, only 10 channels are available for operation at 2 W
ERP, and are used according to a Frequency Agile operation. In addition, readers must
follow a Listen before Talk operation, in which a reader must ﬁrst listen for transmissions
in the intended sub-band of operation, and only transmit if no transmissions are detected
above a very low threshold. However, work within an ETSI Technical Group has begun to
produce a Technical Report (TR 102 436) that recommends a code of practice that will
enable RFID readers to be synchronized. EPCglobal Inc. also maintains a database of
worldwide UHF regulations (EPCglobal, 2007b).
Tags must understand three different modulation schemes; one of these would be
selected by the reader and sent to the tags that are in the reader’s RF ﬁeld as parameters
of the command that establishes communication with the tags. The reader selects the most
appropriate modulation scheme, based on its own operating parameters, such as regula-
tory environment, received noise information, and preferences established by the system
engineer. The three different modulation schemes are
. Double Sideband Amplitude Shift Keying DSB-ASK
. Single Sideband Amplitude Shift Keying SSB-ASK
. Phase Reversal Amplitude Shift Keying PR-ASK
Data sent to the tag by the reader is encoded using a coding scheme known as pulse
interval encoding (PIE). This coding scheme deﬁnes the duration of a zero-data bit pulse,
also known as Tari, as part of the parameters sent when communication is established with
tags by the reader. The duration of a one-data bit is at least 50% longer. This enables the
reader to specify variable data rates of 40, 80, 160, 320, and 640 kbits (kilobits per second).
The speciﬁcation also caters for different modes of operation, Single Reader Use when
isolated readers are deployed in an environment, or Dense Reader Use, in which the
transmit spectrum masks are adjusted to allow for dense operation.
The commands that establish communication with tags also deﬁne the communica-
tion parameters for the tag’s response. Again, these choices are made by the reader,
based on local regulations, required application and noise performance of previous
communication techniques. Tags may respond to reader commands using one of two
tag backscatter modulation schemes, either ASK or PSK modulation, with the format
being selected by the tag vendor, and readers are capable of demodulating either
modulation type. Tags may be commanded by the reader to encode the backscattered
data as either FM0 base band or Miller modulation of a subcarrier at the data rate (either
2,4, or 8 cycles of subcarrier per bit). A variety of data rates can be selected by the reader
from 40 to 640 kbps.
Additionally, the speciﬁcation details the reader commands and tag responses to those
commands. Most of those commands are concerned with reading or writing data to the
tag. Tags are identiﬁed (singulated) in a population of multiple tags, by the anticollision
protocol, which is called the Q protocol. This protocol is an ALOHA-based reply protocol,
in which tags receive anticollision parameters from the command by the reader and then
randomly self-select a period to respond. This reply period is called a slot, one of many
slots in a round. The round size (Q value) is provided by the reader and slots are numbered
from 0 to 2Q  1. Tags provide a response to anticollision commands, by virtue of a handle,
known as RN16. This is a 16 bit random value selected by the tag for this communication
session. This handle can also be used by the tag, under reader control, to cover-code
(encrypt) the response data from the tag.
EPCglobal Network
21

The anticollision commands include selection commands, in which tags are chosen to be
in a round, based on parameters in the command, which dictate which bits are used for the
selection process. Complex selection criteria can be developed by a succession of select
commands.
There are four memory banks deﬁned:
. Reserved memory (contains the kill and access passwords)
. EPC memory (contains CRC-16, Protocol-Control (PC) bits, and a code (such as an
EPC)) that identiﬁes the object to which the tag is or will be attached
. TID memory (contains an 8 bit ISO=IEC 15963 allocation class identiﬁer, 111000102
for EPCglobal) and sufﬁcient identifying information to uniquely identify the
custom commands and=or optional features that a tag supports
. User memory
Other commands implement access and kill passwords, which allow readers access to
memory, for reading and locking. Other passwords are used to kill the tag at the point of
sale, if requested by the consumer. Tag memory can be selected for access and locking,
such that only readers that issue the correct access password will be able to read the tag
data. Some memory can be locked for either read or write access.
Tags implement a number of internal states: Ready, Arbitrate, Reply, Acknowledge,
Open, Secured, and Killed. Tags also have four sessions, which can be used by a succession
of interrogators to inventory tags, and a number of ﬂags, some of which have persistent
states (keep the state for at least a minimum period of time, after RF power is lost to the
tag), and each session ﬂag has two values, known as A and B.
2.4
Tag Data Standards
At the time of writing this chapter, there were two Tag Data Standards ratiﬁed by
EPCglobal. The ﬁrst is EPCglobal Tag Data Standards Version 1.3 (EPCglobal, 2006a)
and the second is an older version EPC Generation 1 Tag Data Standards Version 1.1
Rev 1.27 (EPCglobal, 2005b). The main difference between the two standards is that V1.3 is
aimed for use in UHF Class 1 Generation 2 Tags, whereas V1.1 was aimed for use in UHF
Class 1 Generation 1 Tags. V1.3 maintains compatibility with V1.1 at the identity level,
continuing to support the GS1 system* and DoDy identity types. Other differences between
V1.1 and V1.3 are
. The deprecation of 64 bit encodings. EPCglobal has determined that 64 bit headers
allocated in V1.1 will no longer be used after July 1, 2009 (EPCglobal SAG TDTS
WG October 2006)
. The elimination of tiered header rules
. The encoding of EPC to ﬁt the structure of Gen 2 Tags
* Previously known as the EAN.UCC system.
y DoD stands for the U.S. Department of Defense.
22
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

. The addition of the extension component to the Serialized Global Location Num-
ber (SGLN)
. Addition of SGTIN-198, SGLN-195, GRAI-170, GIAI-202 (deﬁned later in this
chapter) and corresponding changes in Uniform Resource Identiﬁer (URI) expres-
sion for alphanumeric serial number encoding
The rest of this section is devoted to describe V1.3, since it is the most recent version.
The document deﬁnes the standards for encoding data onto RFID tags which conform to
C1G2 and deﬁne completely that portion of EPC tag data that is standardized, including
how that data is encoded on the EPC tag and how it is encoded for use in the information
systems layers of the EPC Systems Network. The EPC encoding includes a Header ﬁeld
followed by one or more Value Fields. The Header ﬁeld deﬁnes the overall length and
format of the Value Fields. The Value Fields can contain a unique EPC code and if required
a Filter Value. The speciﬁcation deﬁnes four categories of URI:
. URIs for pure identities, which contain only the unique information that identiﬁes
a speciﬁc physical object, location, or organization, and are independent of tag
encodings
. URIs that represent speciﬁc tag encodings, which are used in software applications
where the encoding scheme is relevant
. URIs that represent patterns or sets of EPCs are used when instructing software
how to ﬁlter tag data
. URIs that represent raw tag information are generally used only for error reporting
purposes
In V1.3, the speciﬁc coding schemes include:
. 196 bit General Identiﬁer (GID)
. Serialized version of the GS1 Global Trade Item Number (GTIN)
. GS1 Serial Shipping Container Code (SSCC)
. GS1 Global Location Number (GLN)
. GS1 Global Returnable Asset Identiﬁer (GRAI)
. GS1 Global Individual Asset Identiﬁer (GIAI)
. The DoD Construct
The speciﬁcation details levels of identity:
. Pure identity level: Pure identity is the identity associated with a speciﬁc physical or
logical entity and is independent of the identity carrier (RF tag, bar code, or
database ﬁeld), and takes the form of a URI (a character string). For the EPC
General Identiﬁer, the pure identity URI representation is urn:epc:id:gid:General-
ManagerNumber.ObjectClass.SerialNumber
. Encoding identity level: The encoding identity is achieved by encoding a pure
identity together with additional information such as ﬁlter value into a speciﬁc
syntax, which again is independent of the identity carrier.
. Physical realization level: The encoding of the identity into a physical implementa-
tion such as an RF tag.
EPCglobal Network
23

2.4.1
General Identiﬁer
The General Identiﬁer (GID-96) is a generic scheme which can be used when the other
schemes may not be applicable. It consists of three ﬁelds:
. General Manager Number which identiﬁes an organizational entity that is respon-
sible for maintaining the numbers in subsequent ﬁelds and ensuring uniqueness
among the ﬁelds under its domain
. The Object Class used by that entity to identify a class or ‘‘type’’ of object, and
which must be unique within each General Manager Number domain
. The Serial Number code, or serial number, is unique within each object class
For the rest of the encoding schemes, there are rules for converting an EAN.UCC (GS1)
scheme to a serialized EPC code.
2.4.2
Serialized Global Trade Item Number
The Serialized Global Trade Item Number (SGTIN) consists of the following ﬁelds:
. The Company Preﬁx, assigned by GS1 to a managing entity
. The Item Reference, assigned by the managing entity to a particular object class
. The Serial Number, assigned by the managing entity to an individual object
The serial number is not part of the GTIN code, but is formally a part of the SGTIN.
2.4.3
Serial Shipping Container Code
The SSCC as deﬁned by the General EAN.UCC Speciﬁcations is already intended for
assignment to individual objects and therefore does not require any additional ﬁelds to
serve as an EPC pure identity. The SSCC consists of the following ﬁelds:
. The Company Preﬁx, assigned by GS1 to a managing entity
. The Serial Reference which is derived from the SSCC by concatenating the Exten-
sion Digit of the SSCC and the Serial Reference digits
2.4.4
Serialized Global Location Number
The SGLN consists of the following ﬁelds:
. The Company Preﬁx, assigned by GS1 to a managing entity.
. The Location Reference, assigned uniquely by the managing entity to an aggregate
or speciﬁc physical location.
. The GLN Extension, assigned by the managing entity to an individual unique
location. The use of the GLN Extension is intended for internal purposes by the
managing entity.
24
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

2.4.5
Global Returnable Asset Identiﬁer
The GRAI consists of the following ﬁelds:
. The Company Preﬁx, assigned by GS1 to a managing entity
. The Asset Type, assigned by the managing entity to a particular class of asset
. The Serial Number, assigned by the managing entity to an individual object
2.4.6
Global Individual Asset Identiﬁer
The GIAI consists of the following ﬁelds:
. The Company Preﬁx, assigned by GS1 to a managing entity
. The Individual Asset Reference, assigned uniquely by the managing entity to a
speciﬁc asset
2.4.7
DoD Identity Type
The DoD Construct identiﬁer is deﬁned by the United States Department of Defense. This
tag data construct may be used to encode 96 bit Class 1 tags for shipping goods to the
United States Department of Defense by a supplier who has already been assigned a CAGE
477 (Commercial and Government Entity) code. At the time of this writing, the details
of what information to encode into these ﬁelds is explained in a document titled
United States Department of Defense Supplier’s Passive RFID Information Guide that can be
obtained at the United States Department of Defense Web site (http:==www.dodrﬁd.
org=supplierguide.htm).
2.4.8
Detailed Description of Tag Data Standards
The speciﬁcation provides a number of tables deﬁning each of the ﬁelds in making up an
EPC code, such as all of the headers (256 available) that are currently deﬁned, detailed
structure of C1G2 EPC Memory Bank, such as CRC16, Protocol Control (PC) bits (16 in
total), Numbering System Identiﬁer (NSI), and reserved bits.
Then for each type, ﬁne details of how each of the ﬁelds are further split, for example the
SGTIN-96 consists of 8 bits for the header, 3 bits for the ﬁlter value, 3 bits for the partition
value, 20–40 bits for the company preﬁx, 24–4 bits for the item reference, and 38 bits for the
serial number.
The ﬁlter value is used to provide for a fast ﬁltering and preselection of basic logistic
types, where 000 deﬁnes all types, 001 is reserved for Retail Consumer Trade Items,
010 for Standard Trade Item Groupings, 011 for Single Shipping Trade Items, and the
other four are reserved. Different identity types have different encodings for the ﬁlter
value.
The partition value is to provide combinations of company preﬁx and item reference; for
example, some organizations may need a large number of reference items, whereas others
may need fewer than 16. For example, the SGTIN 7 combinations are deﬁned. Different
identity types have different encodings for the partition value.
EPCglobal Network
25

2.5
Tag Data Translation
The Tag Data Standards earlier describe how to translate between three representations of
the EPC, namely the binary format (stored in the tags EPC Memory Bank) and two formats
of URI, one for tag-encoding and another for pure identity. URIs are intended for commu-
nicating and storing EPCs in information systems, databases and applications, to insulate
those systems from knowledge about the physical nature of the tag. The tag-encoding URI
provides a one-to-one mapping with the binary number recorded in the physical tag and as
such indicates the bit length of the tag and may also include an additional ﬁlter ﬁeld. The tag-
encoding URI is therefore intended for low-level applications which need to write EPCs to
tags or physically sort items based on packaging level. The pure-identity URI format isolates
the application software from details of the bit length of the tags or any fast ﬁltering values.
The Tag Data Translation Speciﬁcation (EPCglobal, 2006b) provides a machine-readable
version of the EPC Tag Data Standards speciﬁcation. The machine-readable version can be
readily used for validating EPC formats as well as translating between different levels of
representation in a consistent way. This speciﬁcation describes how to interpret the machine-
readable version. It contains details of the structure and elements of the machine-readable
markup ﬁles and provides guidance on how it might be used in automatic translation or
validation software, whether standalone or embedded in other systems.
Tag Data Translation capabilities may be implemented at any level of the EPC Network
stack. Tag Data Translation converts between different levels of representation of the EPC
and may make use of external tables. It is envisaged that Tag Data Translation software
will be able to keep itself up-to-date by periodically checking for and downloading TDT
markup ﬁles, although a continuous network connection should not be required for
performing translations or validations, since the TDT markup ﬁles and any auxiliary tables
can be cached between periodic checks; in this way, a generic translation mechanism can be
extensible to further coding schemes or variations for longer tag lengths, which may be
introduced in the future.
2.6
Reader Protocol
The Reader Protocol Speciﬁcation (EPCglobal, 2006c) deﬁnes the protocol by which tag
readers interact with EPCglobal compliant software applications (host). The terms ‘‘tag
reader’’ or ‘‘reader’’ include RFID tag readers, supporting any combination of RF proto-
cols, ﬁxed and handheld, and so on. Also included are readers of other kinds of tags such
as bar codes. Tag readers may also have the ability to write data into tags. The goal of the
Reader Protocol is to insulate the host from knowing the details of how the reader and tags
interact. The Reader Protocol is speciﬁed in three distinct layers:
. Reader layer (speciﬁes the content and abstract syntax of messages exchanged
between the reader and host)
. Messaging layer (speciﬁes how messages deﬁned in the reader layer are formatted,
framed, transformed, and carried on a speciﬁc network transport)
. Transport layer (corresponds to the networking facilities provided by the operat-
ing system or equivalent)
Each messaging layer and transport layer pair is called a messaging=transport binding
(MTB). Different MTBs provide different kinds of transport, for example, TCP=IP versus
26
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

Bluetooth versus serial line. Different MTBs may also provide different means for estab-
lishing connections (e.g., whether the reader contacts the host or the host contacts the
reader), initialization messages required to establish synchronization, and means for pro-
visioning of conﬁguration information.
The speciﬁcation also deﬁnes two message channels: a control channel (carries requests
issued by the host to the reader, and responses from the reader back to the host) and a
notiﬁcation channel (carries messages issued asynchronously from the reader to the host).
The protocol speciﬁcation can conceptually be divided into subsystems, the read sub-
system (which consists of Sources [read tags], ReadTriggers [initiate read operations], and
TagSelectors [deﬁnes and maintains a list of ﬁlter patterns], and acquires data from one or
more tags from a single source called a read cycle), event subsystem (provides event
smoothing, for example, when a tag ﬁrst enters or leaves the RF ﬁeld), the output subsys-
tem (which determines what data to communicate with the host), and the communication
subsystem (which consists of a speciﬁc MTB). The speciﬁcation contains a list of commands
(or functions) along with parameters (data ﬁeld) and objects (variables). Also deﬁned are
a number of MTBs.
2.7
Low-Level Reader Protocol
The Low-Level Reader Protocol (LLRP) (EPCglobal, 2007e) deﬁnes a protocol to provide
control of RFID air protocol operation timing and access to air protocol command param-
eters, and is the second generation of the Reader Protocol deﬁned earlier. The LLRP
features provide the following:
. A means to command an RFID reader to inventory tags, read tags, write to tags,
and execute other protocol-dependent access commands (such as ‘‘kill’’ and
‘‘lock’’ in C1G2)
. A means for robust status reporting and error handling during tag access oper-
ations
. A means for conveying tag passwords necessary to effect commands that may
require them, such as the ‘‘kill’’ command in C1G2
. A means to control the forward and reverse RF link operation to manage RF power
levels and spectrum utilization, and assess RF interference, among RFID readers in
a system
. A means to control aspects of Tag Protocol operation, including protocol para-
meters and singulation parameters
. A means to facilitate the addition of support for new air protocols
. A means for the retrieval of reader device capabilities
. A means for vendors of reader devices to deﬁne vendor-speciﬁc extensions to the
protocol in a manner that is noninterfering among vendors, and which, to the
extent possible, is vendor-administered
While LLRP is component of the second-generation Reader Protocol, the other component
will be the High-Level Reader Protocol (HLRP). Reader devices may implement HLRP,
LLRP, or both. LLRP is air-protocol-aware (V1.0 is C1G2 protocol aware), whereas HLRP
will be air-protocol-unaware, and will incorporate only those commands and facilities that
are generic across air protocols.
EPCglobal Network
27

LLRP is speciﬁcally concerned with providing the formats and procedures of commu-
nications between a client and a reader. The LLRP protocol data units are called messages.
LLRP operation consists of the following phases of execution: capability discovery; device
conﬁguration; an optional inventory and access operations setup; inventory cycles; RF
survey operations and reports returned to the Client.
The speciﬁcation deﬁnes a number of objects and commands, along with their para-
meters (data ﬁelds).
2.8
Reader Management
The Reader Management Speciﬁcation (EPCglobal, 2006d) deﬁnes a protocol used by
management software to monitor the operating status and health of EPCglobal compliant
tag readers, and deﬁnes the EPCglobal Simple Network Management Protocol (SNMP)
RFID Management Information Bases (MIB), and speciﬁes the set of SNMP MIBII (a sub-
tree that contains basic objects) groups required to comply with this EPCglobal Reader
Management Speciﬁcation over SNMP. The Reader Management Protocol speciﬁes the
interaction between a device capable of interfacing with tags (reader) and management
software (host). The speciﬁcation deﬁnes two separate but related management protocol
speciﬁcations; the ﬁrst speciﬁes the EPCglobal SNMP MIB for monitoring the health of a
reader, whereas the second speciﬁes the EPCglobal Reader Management Protocol for
monitoring the health of a reader. Just like the Reader Protocol described earlier, the reader
management speciﬁes three distinct layers:
. Reader layer
. Messaging layer
. Transport layer
However, unlike the Reader Protocol, three message channels are used. The ﬁrst is the
control channel; the second is the notiﬁcation channel; and the third (and new channel) is
one or more alarm channels (which carries alarms issued asynchronously from the reader
to the host). The speciﬁcation deﬁnes a number of objects and commands along with their
parameters (data ﬁelds).
2.9
Application Layer Events
The Application Layer Events Speciﬁcation (EPCglobal, 2005d) provides an interface
through which clients may obtain ﬁltered, consolidated EPC data from a variety of sources.
In most EPC processing systems, there is a level of processing that reduces the volume of
data that comes directly from EPC data sources such as RFID readers into coarser ‘‘events’’
of interest to applications. The processing done at this layer typically involves:
. Receiving EPCs from one or more data sources such as readers
. Accumulating data over intervals of time, ﬁltering to eliminate duplicate EPCs and
EPCs that are not of interest, and counting and grouping EPCs to reduce the
volume of data
. Reporting in various forms
28
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

The ALE interface has a number of features:
. Provides a means for clients to specify what EPC data they are interested in
. Provides a standardized format for reporting accumulated, ﬁltered EPC data that
is largely independent of where the EPC data originated or how it was processed
. Abstracts the sources of EPC data into a higher level notion of ‘‘logical reader,’’
often synonymous with ‘‘location,’’ hiding from clients the details of exactly what
physical devices were used to gather EPC data relevant to a particular logical
location
The speciﬁcation includes a formal processing model, an application programming inter-
face (API) described abstractly via a Uniﬁed Modeling Language (UML), and bindings of
the API to a Web Services Interoperability (WS-i) compliant Simple Object Access Protocol
(SOAP) with associated bindings of the key data types to XML schema.
The client of the ALE will be responsible for interpreting and acting on the meaning of
the report (i.e., the ‘‘business logic’’), and may be a traditional ‘‘enterprise application,’’ or
it may be new software designed expressly to carry out an EPC-enabled business process
but which operates at a higher level than the ‘‘middleware’’ that implements the ALE
interface. The ALE interface revolves around client requests and the corresponding reports
that are produced. Requests can either be (1) immediate, in which information is reported
on a one-time basis at the time of the request or (2) recurring, in which information is
reported repeatedly whenever an event is detected or at a speciﬁed time interval. The
results reported in response to a request can be directed back to the requesting client or to a
‘‘third party’’ speciﬁed by the requestor.
A read cycle is the smallest unit of interaction with a reader. The result of a read cycle
is a set of EPCs. The output of a read cycle is the input to the ALE. From the ALE
perspective, a read cycle is a single event containing a set of EPCs, with nothing more
implied. An event cycle is one or more read cycles, from one or more readers that are to
be treated as a unit from a client’s perspective. It is the smallest unit of interaction
between the ALE interface and a client. Clients in the Application Business Logic specify
the boundaries of event cycles to the ALE as part of a request for a report. A report is data
about an event cycle communicated from the ALE implementation to a client. A client
can specify how event cycle boundaries may be extended for a speciﬁed duration,
or report periodically; may be triggered by external events; be delimited when no new
EPCs are detected by any reader speciﬁed for that event cycle for a speciﬁed interval
of time.
The speciﬁcation deﬁnes a number of commands, along with their parameters (data
ﬁelds), to deﬁne event cycle speciﬁcations (ECSpec) and corresponding reports.
2.10
ECPIS EPC Information Services
The EPC Information Services (EPCIS) (EPCglobal, 2007d) speciﬁes a means to enable
disparate applications to leverage EPC data via EPC-related data sharing, both within and
across enterprises. Ultimately, this sharing is aimed at enabling participants in the EPC-
global Network to gain a shared view of the disposition of EPC-bearing objects within a
relevant business context. Version 1.0 is intended to provide a basic capability to meet the
requirements of a basic set of use cases.
EPCglobal Network
29

The EPCIS speciﬁcation is organized into several layers:
. Abstract Data Model Layer speciﬁes the generic structure of EPCIS data, speci-
fying the general requirements for creating data deﬁnitions within the Data
Deﬁnition Layer.
. Data Deﬁnition Layer speciﬁes what data is exchanged through EPCIS, what its
abstract structure is, and what it means.
. Service Layer deﬁnes service interfaces through which EPCIS clients interact. In
the present speciﬁcation, two service layer modules are deﬁned, Capture and
Query. The Core Capture Operations Module deﬁnes a service interface (the
EPCIS Capture Interface) through which EPCIS Capturing Applications use to
deliver Core Event Types to interested parties. The Core Query Operations Mod-
ule deﬁnes two service interfaces (the EPCIS Query Control Interface and the
EPCIS Query Callback Interface) that EPCIS Accessing Applications use to obtain
data previously captured.
. Bindings specify concrete realizations of the Data Deﬁnition Layer and the Service
Layer. A total of nine bindings are speciﬁed for the three modules deﬁned in the
Data Deﬁnition and Service Layers.
Generically, EPCIS deals in two kinds of data: event data and master data. Event data
arises in the course of carrying out business processes, and is captured through the
EPCIS Capture Interface and made available for query through the EPCIS Query Inter-
faces. Master data is additional data that provides the necessary context for interpreting
the event data. It is available for query through the EPCIS Query Control Interface,
but the means by which master data enters the system is not speciﬁed in the EPCIS
1.0 speciﬁcation.
Vocabularies are used extensively within EPCIS to model conceptual and physical
entities that exist in the real world. There are two kinds of vocabularies: Standard Vocabu-
lary (a vocabulary whose elements, deﬁnition, and meaning are agreed to in advance by
trading partners) and a User Vocabulary (a vocabulary whose elements, deﬁnition, and
meaning are under the control of a single organization).
The speciﬁcation deﬁnes a number of commands, along with their parameters (data
ﬁelds), to deﬁne EPCIS events and then a query command to extract events from an EPCIS
Events Repository.
2.11
Security Certiﬁcate Proﬁle
The Security Certiﬁcate Proﬁle (EPCglobal, 2006e) documents a security certiﬁcate that can
be used in the authentication of entities (subscribers, services, physical devices) operating
within the EPCglobal Network. The EPCglobal Architecture allows the use of a variety of
authentication technologies, but it is expected that X.509 authentication framework will be
widely employed. This speciﬁcation deﬁnes a proﬁle of X.509 certiﬁcate, based on two
Internet standards, deﬁned in the IETF’s PKIX Working Group, RFC3280—Internet X.509
Public Key Infrastructure Certiﬁcate and Certiﬁcate Revocation List (CRL) Proﬁle and RFC
3279—Algorithms and Identiﬁers for the Internet X.509 Public Key Infrastructure Certiﬁ-
cate and CRL Proﬁle. The proﬁle supports the RSA asymmetric algorithm, with key lengths
of 1024 (before 2010), 2048 (before 2030), and 3072 (after 2030).
30
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

2.12
Object Naming Service
The Object Naming Service (EPCglobal, 2005e) speciﬁes how the Domain Name System
(DNS) is used to locate authoritative metadata and services associated with a given EPC. It
provides a service that returns a list of network addresses that may contain pertinent data
about the EPC. ONS is also authoritative in that the entity that has change control over the
information about the EPC is the same entity that assigned the EPC to the item to begin
with. This is different to the Discovery Service (which is not universally authoritative) as it
returns locations that have some data related to an EPC, and may contain pointers to
entities other than the entity that originally assigned the EPC code.
In order to use DNS to ﬁnd information about an item, the EPC is converted to its pure
identity URI form as deﬁned by the EPCglobal Tag Data Standard (EPCglobal, 2006a).
Since ONS contains pointers to services, it uses the Naming Authority Pointer (or NAPTR)
DNS record type. The ONS speciﬁcation consists of
. A procedure that an ONS Client must follow to present a query to ONS, DNS
NAPTR query
. A set of rules that ONS Publishers must follow to represent pointers to services for
EPCs as DNS NAPTR records
. A procedure that an ONS Client must follow to interpret the results of an ONS
query
2.13
Drug Pedigree Standard
The Drug Pedigree Standard (EPCglobal, 2007c) speciﬁes an architecture for the exchange
of electronic pedigree documents for use by pharmaceutical supply chain participants, and
is targeted for use in complying with document-based pedigree laws. A pedigree is a
certiﬁed record that contains information about each distribution of a prescription drug,
such as the sale of an item by a pharmaceutical manufacturer, any acquisitions and sales by
wholesalers or repackagers, and ﬁnal sale to a pharmacy or other entity administering or
dispensing the drug. The pedigree contains product information, transaction information,
distributor information, recipient information, and signatures. The digital signature pro-
cess conforms to the X.509 certiﬁcate proﬁle deﬁned in the EPCglobal Certiﬁcate Proﬁle
(EPCglobal, 2006e).
Two XML Schemas deﬁne a standard electronic pedigree format:
. A standard electronic envelope format that can be used by supply chain partners
to package multiple pedigree documents for exchange
. A standard electronic pedigree response format that can be used by supply chain
partners to respond to each pedigree transmitted
A high level, simpliﬁed pedigree process involves the creation of the pedigree, adding
information to pedigree, certifying (digitally signing) the pedigree, sending pedigrees for
products in shipment to customer, receiving the pedigrees, electronically authenticating
each pedigree (including manually authenticating transactions that were not electronic),
verifying products received against authenticated pedigrees, certifying the pedigree for
receipt and authentication.
EPCglobal Network
31

2.14
EPCIS Discovery
At the time of writing, the role and function of the EPCIS Discovery had not been deﬁned.
It is a placeholder for an architecture that provides a means to locate all EPCIS services that
may have information about a speciﬁc EPC.
2.15
Subscriber Authentication
At the time of writing, the role and function of the Subscriber Authentication had not been
deﬁned. Functionality envisaged is the need to authenticate the identity of an EPCglobal
Subscriber, by providing credentials so that one EPCglobal Subscriber may authenticate
itself to other EPCglobal Subscribers, without prior arrangement.
2.16
Conclusions
The EPCglobal Network is a collection of speciﬁcations that are developed by thousands of
persons in a cooperative and global way. The network is expanding with many new
speciﬁcations expected to be ratiﬁed in 2007. It is anticipated that some of the speciﬁcations
will be revised in the near future to accommodate the newer speciﬁcations, changes to
business processes, new industries, new applications, and new technologies. The common
thread to the EPCglobal Network is that the identiﬁer, the EPC tag, acts as a simple licence
plate or key to a database, and multiple databases spread geographically can be accessed
by applications to retrieve or discover the most up-to-date information about the object
that is identiﬁed by the EPC code.
References
EPCglobal Inc. 2005a. The EPCglobal Architecture Framework Version, July 1, 2005. Downloaded
from http:==www.epcglobalinc.org=standards=Final-epcglobal-arch-20050701.pdf
EPCglobal Inc. 2005b. EPC Generation 1 Tag Data Standards, Version 1.1, Revision 1.27. Down-
loaded from http:==www.epcglobalinc.org=standards=EPCglobal_Tag_Data_Standard_TDS_
Version_1.1_Revision_1.27.pdf
EPCglobal Inc. 2005c. EPC Radio-Frequency Identity Protocols Class-1 Generation-2 UHF RFID
Protocol for Communications at 860 MHz–960 MHz, Version 1.0.9, January 31, 2005. Down-
loaded from http:==www.epcglobalinc.org=standards=Class_1_Generation_2_UHF_Air_Interface_
Protocol_Standard_Version_1.0.9.pdf
EPCglobal Inc. 2005d. The Application Level Events (ALE) Speciﬁcation, Version 1.0, September 15,
2005. Downloaded from http:==www.epcglobalinc.org=standards=Application_Level_Event_
ALE_Standard_Version_1.0.pdf
EPCglobal Inc. 2005e. Object Naming Service (ONS), Version 1.0, October 4, 2005. Downloaded from
http:==www.epcglobalinc.org=standards=Object_Naming_Service_ONS_Standard_Version_1.0.pdf
EPCglobal Inc. 2006a. EPCglobal Tag Data Standards, Version 1.3, March 8, 2006. Downloaded from
http:==www.epcglobalinc.org=standards=EPCglobal_Tag_Data_Standard_TDS_Version_1.3.pdf
EPCglobal Inc. 2006b. EPCglobal Tag Data Translation (TDT), Version 1.0, January 21, 2006. Down-
loaded from http:==www.epcglobalinc.org=standards=EPCglobal_Tag_Data_Translation_TDT_
Standard_1.0.pdf
32
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

EPCglobal Inc. 2006c. Reader Protocol Standard, Version 1.1, June 21, 2006. Downloaded from http:==
www.epcglobalinc.org=standards=Reader_Protocol_Standard.pdf
EPCglobal Inc. 2006d. Reader Management, Version 1.0, December 05, 2006. Downloaded from
http:==www.epcglobalinc.org=standards=RM_Ratiﬁed_Standard_Dec_5_2006.pdf
EPCglobal Inc. 2006e. EPCglobal Certiﬁcate Proﬁle Version 1.0, March 8, 2006. Downloaded from
http:==www.epcglobalinc.org=standards=EPCglobal_Certiﬁcate_Proﬁle.pdf
EPCglobal Inc. 2007a. Standards Development Process, Version 1.3, Approved by EPCglobal Board
on
February
27,
2007.
Downloaded
from
http:==www.epcglobalinc.org=standards=sdp=
EPCglobal_SDP_10002.3_Feb_27_2007.pdf
EPCglobal Inc. 2007b. Regulatory status for using RFID in the UHF spectrum, February 25, 2007.
Downloaded from http:==www.epcglobalinc.org=tech=freq_reg=RFID_at_UHF_Regulations_
20070225.pdf
EPCglobal Inc. 2007c. Pedigree Standard, Version 1.0, January 5, 2007. Downloaded from http:==
www.epcglobalinc.org=standards=Ratiﬁed_Drug_Pedigree_Standard_Jan_5_2007.pdf
EPCglobal Inc. 2007d. EPC Information Services 1.0, April 12, 2007. Downloaded from http:==www.
epcglobalinc.org=standards=EPCglobal_EPCIS_Ratiﬁed_Standard_12April_2007_V1.0.pdf
EPCglobal Inc. 2007e. Low Level Reader Protocol 1.0, April 12, 2007. Downloaded from http:==www.
epcglobalinc.org=standards=EPCglobal_LLRP_Ratiﬁed_Standard_20April_20042007_V1.0.pdf
EPCglobal Network
33


3
Design Automation for RFID Tags and Systems
Swapna Dontharaju, Shenchih Tung, Raymond R. Hoare, James T. Cain,
Marlin H. Mickle, and Alex K. Jones
CONTENTS
3.1
Introduction.......................................................................................................................... 35
3.2
Background and Related Work ......................................................................................... 37
3.3
RFID Physical Layer Design Automation........................................................................ 38
3.3.1 Speciﬁcation of Waveform ...................................................................................... 39
3.3.2 Waveform Features Library .................................................................................... 43
3.3.3 Physical Layer Synthesis and VHDL Generation ................................................ 46
3.3.4 Results......................................................................................................................... 47
3.4
RFID Controller Design Automation................................................................................ 48
3.4.1 Speciﬁcation of Macros ............................................................................................ 48
3.4.2 RFID Controller Behavior........................................................................................ 50
3.4.3 Compiler-Generated RFID Tag Program .............................................................. 51
3.4.4 Results......................................................................................................................... 52
3.4.4.1 RFID Compiler Prototype Targets............................................................ 53
3.4.4.2 ISO 18000 Part 7 RFID Standard............................................................... 54
3.4.4.3 ISO 18000 Part 6C RFID Standard............................................................ 57
3.4.4.4 ISO 18185 RFID Standard .......................................................................... 60
3.5
Conclusions........................................................................................................................... 61
References...................................................................................................................................... 63
3.1
Introduction
Radio frequency identiﬁcation (RFID) systems are expanding rapidly with their applica-
tions in a wide range of areas. RFID systems consist of radio frequency (RF) tags and RF
readers or interrogators. These systems are used for a wide range of applications that track,
monitor, report, and manage items as they move between different physical locations. The
tags consist of integrated circuits and an RF antenna. A wide range of extensions such as
memory, sensors, encryption, and access control can be added to the tag. The interrogators
query the tags for information stored on them, which can include items like identiﬁcation
numbers, user written data, or sensory data.
The major areas that drive the commercial deployment of RFID technology are logistics,
supply chain management, library item tracking, medical implants, road tolling (e.g., E-Z
35

Pass), building access control, aviation security, and homeland security applications. Each
of these RFID systems has customized requirements that currently are deﬁned ad hoc. In
addition, multiple, often competing, standards exist (ISO=IEC JTC1, ANSI, EPC, etc.) for
RFID hardware, software, and data management. Thus, most of the RFID systems are
deployed for closed loop applications using either proprietary protocols or nonintersecting
standards with nonreusable tags and readers. As a result, in most applications, RFID tag
and reader hardware and software must be speciﬁcally designed for each particular
application, and must be physically modiﬁed or redesigned every time the speciﬁcation
for the current application is adjusted, as new applications are introduced, and the
standards are modiﬁed or new standards are developed. This keeps the overall design
time long and the system costs high.
Figure 3.1 presents a comparison of different RFID tag design methodologies. The
current state of the art tag development shown in Figure 3.1a requires lengthy design,
fabrication, and testing cycles, which can take months with intellectual property (IP) reuse
to years if developing new IP. A customizable RFID tag, as shown in Figure 3.1b, can
handle variations in standards and requirements as they are developed with a signiﬁcantly
shorter time to market than current ﬂows. Such a tag could be mass produced and tailored
to a particular RFID use after fabrication. With the use of automation to program the
device, the design time could be reduced to hours or days.
This chapter presents an extensible RFID tag system, as shown in Figure 3.2. The tag can
be easily customized to work with different existing or newly developed standards and
even concurrently with proprietary commands tailored to the desired application. The tag
Design RFID
specification
Synthesis, place,
and route
Fabrication
Final tag
Testing
Design rule
checking
Correct
simulation?
Physical
layer
library
Air
interface
library
Design RFID
specification
RFID compiler
Extensible
RFID tag
(a)
Implement in
VHDL
(b)
FIGURE 3.1
Comparison of RFID tag design philosophies. (a) Current RFID tag design ﬂow. All tag components integrated
manually. Estimated time: months or years. (b) Automated RFID tag design ﬂow. Prepackaged extensible silicon
device. Estimated time: hours or days. (From Jones, A.K., Hoare, R., Dontharaju, S., Tung, S., Sprang, R., Fazekas,
J., Cain, J.T., and Mickle, M.H., J. Microprocess. Microsys., 31, 116, 2007. With permission.)
36
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

consists of automatically generated controller and physical layer hardware that works with
existing air interface blocks. To generate the controller and physical layer blocks, a design
automation methodology has been developed.
For the physical layer, the methodology allows the speciﬁcation of waveform features of
the encoding, which are speciﬁed in a textual format. These features are then used as inputs
to parameterized hardware blocks and combined with automatically generated custom-
ized hardware blocks. The result is automatically generated encoding and decoding
hardware blocks.
For the controller, the methodology allows RFID primitives or the commands employed
by the RFID system to be speciﬁed using RFID macros, an assembly-like format. These
RFID macros are processed to generate a template ﬁle to specify the behavior for each
primitive or macro. All behavior is speciﬁed using ANSI-C allowing the user to create
arbitrarily complex behaviors. Finally, the RFID compiler generates the ﬁnal controller
used for managing the tag. This technique allows the seamless coexistence of several RFID
standards such as the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) standard 256–2001 [1]
and the International Standards Organization (ISO) standard 18000 Part 7 [2].
The chapter is organized as follows: Section 3.2 contains some background on research
and related work pertaining to RFID. The physical layer design automation ﬂow is pre-
sented in Section 3.3 with examples of encodings used in active, passive, and near-ﬁeld
communication standards. Section 3.4 describes the controller design automation ﬂow
with examples demonstrated for various RFID standards such as ISO 18000 Part 7 and
Part 6C. Finally, conclusions are given in Section 3.5.
3.2
Background and Related Work
There has been an explosion of interest in RFID in the recent years. Research and devel-
opment in RFID has made possible its deployment in numerous applications including
supply chain management [3], automatic toll collection [4], retail stores [5], location sensing
[6], libraries [7,8], healthcare [9], airports [10,11], animal tracking [12], and building access
control.
Extensible RFID tag
Command
Physical layer
decoder
RX / TX
Customized
controller
Response
Physical layer
encoder
FIGURE 3.2
Extensible RFID tag. Balloon objects
are
automatically
generated
with
RFID compiler.
Design Automation for RFID Tags and Systems
37

Some of the open issues in the RFID domain are the existence of multiple standards,
handling of stored data, tag orientation, reader collision [13], range, cost, and security
concerns [14]. For active tags, maximizing battery life is an important concern. Recent
research has been focused on ﬁnding solutions for some of these issues. To overcome
privacy concerns, research groups have proposed novel solutions such as blocker tags [15]
and authentication using novel encryption techniques [16]. A survey of the state of RFID
security can be found in Chapter 33. Recent advancements in tag hardware contribute to
improved range and power consumption [17], improved tag antenna design [18,19],
packaging, and tag orientation. For the performance characterization of the RFID systems
under active interference, a test protocol has been presented by Porter et al. [20] and its
effectiveness is veriﬁed. For RFID readers, a solution is developed for the problem of Tx=Rx
isolation at the physical layer [21].
The existence of multiple RFID standards calls for comparative studies that can help
the end user in choosing the suitable approach for implementing the communication
between interrogator and tag. There has been some previous work discussing the features
of the ISO 18000 Part 6C (previously Gen 2) protocol and their implications for asset
management [22]. The features discussed are tag memory, security techniques, operational
modes, communication methods, global applicability, and other improvements with
respect to the EPC class 0 and class 1 generation 1 protocols. The necessity for a uniform
organization of user memory and the related omissions in the EPC protocols are addressed
by Harmon [23].
Another issue is that proprietary hardware and software are used in speciﬁc application
domains. These devices must be physically modiﬁed or redesigned for adjustments in the
speciﬁcation, introduction of new applications, and modiﬁcations to relevant standards.
A customizable RFID tag, as shown in this chapter, can handle variations in standards and
requirements as they are developed with a signiﬁcantly shorter time to market than current
ad hoc techniques. This RFID design automation ﬂow is demonstrated toward the rapid
prototyping of a tag with a representative set of commands from the ISO 18000 Part 7 and
Part 6C protocols, among others.
In addition, the ability to rapidly prototype a custom RFID tag provides an economically
viable means for individual companies to provide specialized features to differentiate their
products from the competition in that particular application. The tools described here give
the company the ability to obtain this differentiation without hiring large teams of skilled
personnel.
3.3
RFID Physical Layer Design Automation
One of the main components of an RFID system communication is the physical layer
protocol employed to encode bits of information. The physical layer features for the bit
encoding mechanism vary across various RFID standards. For example, the ISO 18000 Part
7 active tag standard speciﬁes Manchester encoding [24] to transmit encoded data RFID
interrogators and tags [2], whereas the ISO 18000 Part 6C standard deﬁnes different
physical layer features of transactions among readers and tags. Pulse-Interval Encoding
(PIE) [25] is used to encode data transmitted from readers to tags, and either FM0 [26] or
Miller encoding [27] is used to encode the backscattered data from tags back to readers
[25]. Additionally, many other possible physical layer encodings can be considered for
RFID communications.
This section describes how the physical layer decoder and encoder blocks can be
automatically generated from a high-level speciﬁcation of the protocol. This design ﬂow
38
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

is described in Figure 3.3. The user describes the waveform features of the encoding
scheme such as edge transitions, level detection, pulse width detection, etc., from a
physical layer speciﬁcation. The user can then combine one or more wave features to
represent bits or groups of bits. The physical layer synthesis tool then automatically
generates hardware blocks for encoding and decoding the signal in VHDL. These VHDL
descriptions are created from the combination of predeﬁned parameterized hardware
libraries and automatically generated hardware blocks for detecting and generating the
waveform features in the encoding.
3.3.1
Speciﬁcation of Waveform
The user describes the features of the encoding scheme using a textual representation. This
representation is created from a physical layer speciﬁcation such as an RFID standard. It
may include edge transitions, level detection, pulse width detection, etc. After this ﬁle
has been created, it becomes the input into the physical layer synthesis tool shown in
Figure 3.3. The textual ﬁle contains three major segments: (1) declaration of the waveform
to encode data values, (2) declaration of the preamble waveform, and (3) transmission
characteristics for serial to parallel conversion.
Manchester encoding [24] is a ﬁxed-bit-window encoding scheme speciﬁed in ISO 18000
Part 7 for transactions among active RFID readers and tags. The waveforms of encoded
bit 0 and bit 1 are illustrated in Figure 3.4a.
The waveform for encoding a bit as either 0 or 1 is described in Figure 3.5. Sig
represents the nonreturn to zero (NRZ) value of the signal. The keyword after describes
the delay from the beginning of a bit window. The length of the bit window is speciﬁed by
a period T. Changes in the signal are represented by an & with a nonzero after parameter.
Finally, A speciﬁes how accurately each measurement must be as a percentage of T. In the
example from Figure 3.5, a 0 is represented by a 50% duty cycle clock with a falling edge in
the middle of the bit window. The edge must be within 12.5% of the total period,
which means 6.75% of the period before or after the expected transition. In this case, the
transition occurs at 18  2.43 ms. A 1 is similar except with a rising edge.
Differential Manchester encoding shown in Figure 3.4a is a modiﬁcation of Manchester
encoding used most prominently in token ring networks [28]. At ﬁrst glance, Manchester
and differential Manchester encodings are indistinguishable as they both require a transi-
tion in the middle of a bit window for synchronization, and may or may not have a
transition at the edge of a window. However, differential Manchester determines its
RFID standard
bit coding specification
Physical layer
waveform feature
library
Encoder
VHDL
Physical layer
waveform
features
Synthesis
Decoder
VHDL
FIGURE 3.3
Generation ﬂow for an RFID data encoder and decoder.
Design Automation for RFID Tags and Systems
39

value by examining the level between windows. As shown in Figure 3.4a, if there is a
transition between windows this encodes a 0 and if there is no transition this encodes a 1.
To support this case, we add an Lprev condition to our waveform representation as
shown in Figure 3.6. Depending on the previous level, our description describes a level
change for a 0 encoded bit and no level change for a 1 encoded bit. The if statement
determines which waveform to consider based on Lprev.
PIE and FM0 encodings are two different encodings used in the ISO 18000 Part 6C
standard. These encodings are shown in Figure 3.7. PIE is used for the data transmission
and FM0 is used for backscattering the response, through absorption or reﬂection of the
transmitted RF energy.
The physical layer characteristics of PIE are shown in Figure 3.7a. Encodings for both
1 and 0 are based on an active high pulse followed by a ﬁxed width space called PW. The
length of the pulse determines whether a 1 or 0 is encoded. Thus, the period T is different
for each value. Unlike previous encodings, there is a large amount of ﬂexibility in the pulse
lengths to make a valid PIE-encoded value.
For PIE encoding, in the textual representation shown in Figure 3.8 we introduce the
error keyword, which allows a transition to take place within a range of times. For
example, 7.5 us error 1.6 us means that the transition could occur anywhere from
5.9 to 9.1 ms. This is different from the A which corresponds to jitter associated with the RF
transmission. For the PIE encoding described in the ISO 18000 Part 6C standard, there are
three possible periods for encoding the values, each described in a separate statement in
Bit 0
Bit 1
50%
50%
T = 36 µs
50%
50%
T = 36 µs
(a)
Bit 0
50%
T = 36 µs
50%
Bit 1
50%
T = 36 µs 
50%
or
or
(b)
FIGURE 3.4
Continuous waveform for bits 0 and 1 of NRZ encodings. (a) Manchester encoding. (b) Differential Manchester
encoding.
’0’: Sig ¼ ’1’ after 0 us & ’0’ after 18 us;
T ¼ 36 us; A ¼ 12.5%;
’1’: Sig ¼ ’1’ after 0 us & ’1’ after 18 us;
T ¼ 36 us; A ¼ 12.5%;
FIGURE 3.5
Textual description of Manchester encoding.
40
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

Figure 3.8. In some cases, the period itself may fall within a range that is described by the
error keyword.
The physical layer encodings for FM0 are shown in Figure 3.7b. Unlike PIE, FM0 is a
ﬁxed period encoding. The data rate of FM0 can be one of several discrete values as
speciﬁed by the ISO 18000 Part 6C standard, including 160, 256, 320, and 640 kbps. The
corresponding bit window period are 6.2, 3.9, 3.1, and 1.5 ms with the error tolerance of 7%,
10%, 10%, and 15%, respectively. To encode a 0, there must be a transition at the middle of
a bit window. To encode a 1 there is no transition within a bit window; however, between
two adjacent bits, there must be a transition at the edge of the bit window.
The textual representation of FM0 is shown in Figure 3.9. The description for FM0 is
similar to how differential Manchester is described except that each value has four different
representations corresponding to each of the four data rates. In addition, the encoding for 1
is simpler, as it does not have a transition within the bit window and as such has no & in
the waveform description.
Modiﬁed Miller encoding [29] is an encoding scheme that is often employed in near ﬁeld
communication, or communication of 10 cm or less [30]. Modiﬁed Miller encoding has a
low pulse at the beginning of the bit window to encode a 0 or the low pulse is delayed by
half a period to encode a 1. However, if a 0 is preceded by a 1 the 0 is encoded with no low
pulse at all. This is shown in Figure 3.10.
To represent this in our text, we introduce the new ﬁeld Vprev which corresponds the
previously encoded value. In the example from Figure 3.11, the modiﬁed Miller encoding is
’0’: if Lprev ¼ ’0’ then Sig ¼ ’1’ after 0 us & ’0’ after 18 us;
if Lprev ¼ ’1’ then Sig ¼ ’0’ after 0 us & ’1’ after 18 us;
T ¼ 36 us; A ¼ 12.5%;
’1’: if Lprev ¼ ’0’ then Sig ¼ ’0’ after 0 us & ’1’ after 18 us;
if Lprev ¼ ’1’ then Sig ¼ ’1’ after 0 us & ’0’ after 18 us;
T ¼ 36 us; A ¼ 12.5%;
FIGURE 3.6
Textual description of differential Manchester encoding.
Pulse0
Pulse1
PW
PW
Bit 0
Bit 0
Bit 1
Bit 1
T0
1.5 T0 < T1 < 2.0 T0
T = {6.25, 3.9, 3.1, 1.5} µs 
50%
50%
or
or
00
or
01
or
10
11
or
or
(b)
FM0 encoding
(a)
PIE encoding
FIGURE 3.7
Continuous waveform for bits 0 and 1 of PIE and FM0 encodings.
Design Automation for RFID Tags and Systems
41

shown for a period of 9.4 ms. To encode a 0 we either see a pulse at the beginning of the
window if the current bit was preceded by a 0 or no pulse if preceded by a 1. The encoding
1 does not specify a Vprev value.
The preamble in a transmission alerts the system that a transmission packet is beginning.
It typically includes a sequence of several pulses that are different from the encoded values
in the encoding. The preamble must be matched exactly before any data transmission can
’0’: Sig ¼ ’1’ after 0 us & ’0’ after 3.55 us error 0.65 us;
T ¼ 6.25 us; A ¼ 1%;
Sig ¼ ’1’ after 0 us & ’0’ after 7.5 us error 1.6 us;
T ¼ 12.5 us; A ¼ 1%;
Sig ¼ ’1’ after 0 us & ’0’ after 15.1 us error 3.3 us;
T ¼ 25 us; A ¼ 1%;
’1’: Sig ¼ ’1’ after 0 us & ’0’ after 8.3 us error 2.2 us;
T ¼ 10.95 us error 1.55 us; A ¼ 1%;
Sig ¼ ’1’ after 0 us & ’0’ after 19.95 us error 7.75 us;
T ¼ 21.85 us error 3.15 us; A ¼ 1%;
Sig ¼ ’1’ after 0 us & ’0’ after 33.8 us error 9.5 us;
T ¼ 43.75 error 6.25 us; A ¼ 1%;
FIGURE 3.8
Textual description of PIE.
’0’: if Lprev ¼ ’0’ then Sig ¼ ’1’ after 0 us & ’0’ after 3.1 us;
if Lprev ¼ ’1’ then Sig ¼ ’0’ after 0 us & ’1’ after 3.1 us;
T ¼ 6.2 us; A ¼ 7%;
if Lprev ¼ ’0’ then Sig ¼ ’1’ after 0 us & ’0’ after 2 us;
if Lprev ¼ ’1’ then Sig ¼ ’0’ after 0 us & ’1’ after 2 us;
T ¼ 3.9 us; A ¼ 10%;
if Lprev ¼ ’0’ then Sig ¼ ’1’ after 0 ns & ’0’ after 1.5 us;
if Lprev ¼ ’1’ then Sig ¼ ’0’ after 0 ns & ’1’ after 1.5 us;
T ¼ 3.1 us; A ¼ 10%;
if Lprev ¼ ’0’ then Sig ¼ ’1’ after 0 ns & ’0’ after 0.7 us;
if Lprev ¼ ’1’ then Sig ¼ ’0’ after 0 ns & ’1’ after 0.7 us;
T ¼ 1.5 us; A ¼ 15%;
’1’: if Lprev ¼ ’0’ then Sig ¼ ’1’ after 0 us;
if Lprev ¼ ’1’ then Sig ¼ ’0’ after 0 us;
T ¼ 6.2 us; A ¼ 7%;
if Lprev ¼ ’0’ then Sig ¼ ’1’ after 0 us;
if Lprev ¼ ’1’ then Sig ¼ ’0’ after 0 us;
T ¼ 3.9 us; A ¼ 10%;
if Lprev ¼ ’0’ then Sig ¼ ’1’ after 0 us;
if Lprev ¼ ’1’ then Sig ¼ ’0’ after 0 us;
T ¼ 3.1 us; A ¼ 10%;
if Lprev ¼ ’0’ then Sig ¼ ’1’ after 0 us;
if Lprev ¼ ’1’ then Sig ¼ ’0’ after 0 us;
T ¼ 1.5 us; A ¼ 15%;
FIGURE 3.9
Textual description of FM0 encoding.
42
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

commence. Figure 3.12 shows an example preamble using a textual preamble description
starting with a 15 ms pulse followed by 5 ms pulses separated by 10 ms. A typical preamble
could continue for several more pulses.
RFID standards may also specify transmission protocols between readers and tags. Thus,
corresponding transmission characteristics must be declared. For example, the transmis-
sion protocol deﬁned in ISO 18000 Part 7 speciﬁes that an RFID reader transmits the least
signiﬁcant bit (LSb) ﬁrst within a byte and sends the most signiﬁcant byte (MSB) ﬁrst
within a packet. Each byte is followed by a stop bit within a packet. The transmission order
determines the sequence of the serial-to-parallel process for receiving, and the parallel-to-
serial sequence for responding.
The textual description of each protocol ends with transmission characteristics.
For example, the characteristics for ISO 18000 Part 7 are shown in Figure 3.13. This
declares that in the byte the LSb is ﬁrst, in the packet the MSB is ﬁrst, each byte contains
9 bits and one of these bits is a stop bit. Thus, a complete physical layer description ﬁle
contains a waveform description, preamble description, and a transmission characteristics
description.
3.3.2
Waveform Features Library
The physical layer waveform feature library in Figure 3.3 is a collection of basic hardware-
based components corresponding to various waveform features. For example, this set
contains a hardware-based edge detector, sampling counter, sampling registers, serial-to-
parallel hardware blocks, ﬁrst-in-ﬁrst-out (FIFO) blocks, and other basic blocks as prede-
ﬁned components in the library. These components are programmable and designed to ﬁt
different user-deﬁned parameters speciﬁed in the textual description from Section 3.3.1.
A hardware-based edge detector, for instance, can be used for detecting only a rising edge,
only a falling edge or either edge. Similarly, a sampling counter can vary based on different
sampling rates corresponding to the different data toggling rates and different duty cycles
of bit data in the description.
T = 9.4 µs 
1 bit
1/2 bit 1/2 bit
1/2 bit 1/2 bit
1 bit
Bit ‘0’
Bit ‘1’
Bit ‘1’
Bit ‘0’ after bit ‘1’
4 µs 
4 µs 
FIGURE 3.10
Continuous waveform for bits ’0’ and ’1’ of modiﬁed Miller encoding.
’0’: if Vprev ¼ ’0’ then Sig ¼ ’0’ after 0 us & ’1’ after 4 us;
if Vprev ¼ ’1’ then Sig ¼ ’1’ after 0 us;
T ¼ 9.4 us; A ¼ 5%;
’1’: Sig ¼ ’1’ after 0 us & ’0’ after 4.7 us & ’1’ after 4 us;
T ¼ 9.4 us; A ¼ 5%
FIGURE 3.11
Textual description of modiﬁed Miller encoding.
Design Automation for RFID Tags and Systems
43

Waveform variables are parameters that are converted from the waveform description
ﬁle. These parameters describe the physical layer characteristics of an encoding mechanism
in a way that the hardware blocks used to detect the waveform can understand. Thus, the
synthesis process translates the textual description into the parameters for the feature
library.
A bit window period is a simple example of a waveform characteristic. A bit window
can contain a transition at a particular time during the period. Similarly, the direction of
this transition is another characteristic. From Figure 3.4a, the Manchester encoding requires
a 50% duty cycle waveform with a period of 36 ms where the direction determines the
value. A 1 has identical features with a 0 except that it is composed of a rising edge at the
middle of a bit window as opposed to a falling edge. Because the waveform is a continuous
wave, a transition may also occur at the edge of two adjacent bits depending on the values
of these windows.
The bit rate for a waveform with a period of 36 ms is 27.7 kbps. Due to the 50% duty
cycle, a transition occurs at the middle of a bit window, and logic levels may change
between bit windows. Therefore, the data signal toggling rate is 55.4 kbps. The sampling
rate ( fs) must be least two times faster than the toggling frequency ( ft) of the target signal:
fs ¼ 2 3 ft. Since the data signal toggling rate is 55.4 kbps ( ft) the minimal sampling rate is
110.8 kbps or four times oversampling. However, the A parameter of the description tells
us the typical ﬂuctuation that might occur in the signal, which was speciﬁed as 12.5%.
Thus, a minimum of eight times oversampling should be used for edge detection and
synchronization.
An overview of the general waveform detection circuit is shown in Figure 3.14. This
circuit contains a preamble detection circuit, an edge detection circuit used for synchron-
ization with the incoming waveform, a timer circuit for signaling the controlling state
machine to change states, a sampling register ﬁle for converting levels and edges into
decoded bit values, and a serial-to-parallel converter for building bytes from the incoming
bits. The system clock speed is also variable based on the required sampling by the circuit.
The data transmission begins after a valid preamble is detected by the start signal. The
edge detection circuit shown in Figure 3.15 is used to keep in synchronization with the
incoming waveform. Every system cycle in which the value changes signals the timer that
an edge has occurred.
The timer circuit shown in Figure 3.16 controls the sampling times to check for levels or
value changes in the incoming waveform. The timer circuit contains a counter that counts
system cycles until its next sampling window. Thus, the hardware library contains param-
eters for the number of time points n to sample, the number of cycles to count between each
sample N0, N1, . . . , Nn1 and the bit width of the counter which is log2 max(N).
The timer signals become inputs into an automatically generated ﬁnite state machine
(FSM) controller circuit. The FSM uses the timer signals and the sampling registers block to
determine the actual encoded values. The sampling registers circuit, shown in Figure 3.17,
preamble: pre ¼ ’1’ after 0 us & ’0’ after 15 us & ’1’ after 10 us
& ’0’ after 5 us & ’1’ after 10 us & ’0’ after 5 us. . . . ;
FIGURE 3.12
Preamble textual representation example.
transmission: bitOrder ¼ least; byteOrder ¼ most;
byteSize ¼ 9; stopBits ¼ 1;
FIGURE 3.13
Serial transmission characteristics.
44
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

samples two data values when signaled by the controller and reports back whether there
has been a rising edge (0 followed by a 1), a falling edge (1 followed by a 0), or a constant
level 1 or 0. Based on these values, the controller traverses states to match one of the bit
conditions speciﬁed in the textual description. It can also base this on one or more previous
values seen in the serial stream with the previous_value signal.
The controller uses the synchronization signal Edge_out to tell the timer when to reset
with the Sync_reset signal. For cases where the bit window is not ﬁxed, a bit may be
determined before all timers have expired as with PIE encoded values of 0. The controller
can reset the timer early in these cases to begin looking for the next bit.
Finally, once a bit is determined it is fed into the serial-to-parallel circuit. This circuit,
shown in Figure 3.18, has parameters such as the number of bits per byte and the direction
of shifting. For MSb ﬁrst the circuit shifts bits into the register from the left and for LSb ﬁrst
the circuit shifts bits from the right. When buffering the whole packet a similar shifting
technique is used for most and least signiﬁcant bytes (MSB and LSB).
Edge
detector
Edge_out
Timer
Sampling_clk.
Sync_reset
t0 
t1 
tn −1 
Sampling 
registers
(first and second 
level 
sampling points)
Sampling_clk.
  Data In
Feature_type 
Serial_to_parallel
and
bit counter
Sampling_clk
Bit_value
Byte
Previous_Value
FSM
Sampling_clk
Edge_out
Sync_reset
t0 
t1 
tn −1
Bit_count
Samp_en1
Samp_en2
Shift_en
Bit_count_en
  Data_In
Sampling_clk
Samp_en1
Samp_en2
Shift_en
Bit_count_en
Bit_count
Previous_Value
Bit_value
Feature_type
start
FIGURE 3.14
General waveform detection circuit.
XOR
FIGURE 3.15
Edge detection circuit.
Design Automation for RFID Tags and Systems
45

3.3.3
Physical Layer Synthesis and VHDL Generation
The synthesis process from the textual description is primarily based on discovering sampling
points based on the waveform properties. For example, consider the modiﬁed Miller encoding
in Figure 3.10. The basic waveforms for 0 and 1 with an inverse pulse indicate sampling both
during thepulse andoutside the pulse. The synthesis process ﬁrst selects sampling pointsin the
center ofalevelregion,thusat2and6.7msfora0and at2.7,6.7,and9.05msfora1.First,the9.05
ms is discarded, because the signal is high for all three descriptions. 6.7 ms is retained directly,
because it matchesboth the 1 and 0 directly. The 2 and 2.7ms values aredetermined to represent
the same sampling window as they are within stable regions for both the 1 and 0 waveforms.
As a result, any value within the range of 2–2.7 may be selected for a sampling point.
Match
Counter
tn −1 time
t2 time
Array of time points
t1 time
Match
Match
t1
t2
tn −1
FIGURE 3.16
Timer circuit schematic.
Feature_type
to FSM
Features
look-up table
Sample_v2
Sample_v1
Sampling
register
Sampling
register
Data_In
Data_In
Samp_en2
Samp_en1
FIGURE 3.17
Sampling registers circuit schematic.
46
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

The controller FSM is generated to detect different sequences of features for each
encoded bit in a similar manner as a numeric sequence detector. For example, if there is
a rising edge between the samples, it is a 0, a falling edge indicates a 1, and a constant level
high is a 0. Both versions of 0 can be checked against the previous value.
For a PIE encoding (Figure 3.7a) there are three sampling points to consider. This is
demonstrated for the ﬁrst description for each 0 and 1 from Figure 3.8. According to the
description, a falling edge occurs between 2.9 and 4.2 ms making this an invalid detection
region. Thus for a 0 the sampling points are 1.45 and 5.225 ms. Because the period is not
ﬁxed for a 1 and the invalid detection region and period completion time overlap,
the system can move into active sampling mode. Because a falling edge has not occurred
by 4.2 ms, one must occur between 6.1 and 10.5 ms. Therefore a timer indicates when 6.1 ms
have elapsed, and then the FSM looks for an edge before a timer indicates 10.5 ms. Finally,
on seeing a second edge, the FSM begins a new bit window.
The process for encoding these values into the appropriate encoding is a much simpler
subset of the detection process. The process requires a parallel-to-serial block complemen-
tary to the serial-to-parallel block. Each bit waveform is generated with a very simple
controller FSM that uses timers to traverse states and each state outputs one particular
level. This is a fairly straightforward conversion process from the textual representation.
The VHDL code generation is the ﬁnal phase of the synthesis ﬂow. The structure of the
block is shown in Figure 3.14. Several of the libraries included are parameterized with
VHDL generic constructs for speciﬁed parameters including the timer and serial-to-
parallel blocks. The FSM controller is entirely generated by the synthesis engine using a
generic for the number of timer signals to include.
3.3.4
Results
Hardware was generated for the ﬁve encodings, Manchester, differential Manchester, PIE,
FM0, and modiﬁed Miller. The results for the decoders are shown in Table 3.1. Encoders
TABLE 3.1
Decoder Hardware Block Statistics for Five Different Encodings
Encoding
Clock (MHz)
Area (mm2)
Power (mW)
Manchester
0.5
3780
2.9
Differential Manchester
0.5
3520
2.7
Pulse interval (PIE)
6
9264
84.8
FM0
6
6052
44.6
Modiﬁed Miller
2
3780
11.9
MSb
L-shift or R-shift (including stop bits)
Byte
FIFO or LIFO
(LSB)   (MSB)
LSb
FIGURE 3.18
Serial-to-parallel circuit schematic.
Design Automation for RFID Tags and Systems
47

have been omitted because their hardware is trivial compared with the decoders for each
type of encoding.
The Manchester and differential Manchester decoders have similar architectures. The
size and power consumption are within 10% of each other requiring approximately 3500
mm2 in area and 3 mW in power. These decoders also require relatively low sampling rates
of 500 kHz. The modiﬁed Miller encoding requires a similar area as Manchester encoding
but requires about 12 mW of power likely because of the four times higher sampling
frequency. FM0 and PIE encoding requires signiﬁcantly higher area (2–3 times more)
than the other encodings. Due to the increased sampling rate and complexity these encod-
ings require signiﬁcantly higher power consumptions of 45 and 85 mW.
3.4
RFID Controller Design Automation
The RFID communication system consists of a transponder or tag and an interrogator or
reader. The format for exchanges between the interrogator and the transponder is a set of
commands or primitives that requests that the transponder perform a set of actions. The
speciﬁcations of these commands vary from one standard to another. The ﬂow of the RFID
compiler is speciﬁed in Figure 3.19. This particular compiler can accept virtually any set of
commands as input and target a microprocessor or hardware device to provide the RFID
tag controller functionality.
Figure 3.20 shows an example of the ISO 18000 Part 6C protocol for inventory and access
of a single RFID tag. In step 1, the interrogator (reader) issues a query. In step 2, the tag
responds with a randomly generated 16 bit number. The reader acknowledges by returning
a random 16 bit number in step 3. This selects only one tag with which to communicate. This
random number is designed to avoid contention between multiple tags and to ensure
that the reader is communicating with only a single tag. In step 4, only the tag that issued
the matching random number responds with its PC=EPC, essentially its identiﬁer. In step 5,
the reader issues a transaction request with the same random number. The tag responds
with a transaction handle in step 6. In step 7, the actual transaction is issued with the handle
as a parameter. Finally, the tag responds to the transaction in step 8.
3.4.1
Speciﬁcation of Macros
The communication transactions between the RFID reader and the tag can be broken down
into a series of RFID primitives. To automate the generation of the tag controller for the
prototype, these primitives are implemented as simple, assembly-like instructions called
RFID macros. For example, the RFID macros required for executing the Write command of
the ISO 18000 Part 6C standard are shown here. The format of the respective ﬁelds
Convert to
RFID macros
RFID parser
rfpp
RFID compiler
rfcc
Embedded
C compiler
Microprocessor-
based RFID tag
Hardware-
based RFID tag
Commercial
synthesis flow
C
VHDL
Include RFID
behavior
Behavior
template
RFID
specification
FIGURE 3.19
Speciﬁcation methodology and compilation ﬂow. (From Jones, A.K., Hoare, R., Dontharaju, S., Tung, S., Sprang,
R., Fazekas, J., Cain, J.T., and Mickle, M.H., Proceedings of FCCM, 165, 2006. With permission.)
48
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

of each necessary primitive and its corresponding response are both illustrated in
Figure 3.21.
The command code of each RFID primitive is a unique ﬁeld or opcode that serves as the
identiﬁer. Each of the RFID primitives also contains a subset of ﬁelds with varying lengths
providing positions for data present in a command, as can be inferred from Figure 3.21.
Similarly, the tag response to each RFID primitive has ﬁelds of varying lengths.
Each RFID macro description contains a relatively short character string corresponding
to the speciﬁc name of the primitive, a number indicating how many bits are used to
represent the opcode of this particular primitive as well as the distinct number correspond-
ing to the value of the opcode. Additionally, a set of operands that correspond to the
primitive is included. On the next line, a set of operands is included that corresponds to
the standard response.
Figure 3.22 shows an example RFID macros ﬁle containing the basic primitives of the
ISO 18000 Part 6C standard for initiating a transaction as well as the Write primitive.
The macros ﬁle has a declarations section and a main section. The declarations
section allows the user to predeclare the lengths of all of the corresponding ﬁelds that occur
in each of the primitives and responses. In the section identiﬁed as main, the primitives
and their speciﬁc responses are deﬁned in terms of their ﬁelds.
The speciﬁc ﬁelds can be easily described, as illustrated in Figure 3.22. This provides the
user with the ability to adopt any level of granularity to manipulate the primitives and
their corresponding responses. For example, in the macros illustrated in the ﬁgure, the
string denoting the Write command is write. The decimal value of the command code for
this speciﬁc command is 195, stored using 8 bit.
Interrogator issues Req_RN
containing same RN16
Interrogator
Tag
Interrogator accesses tag.
Each access command uses
handle as a parameter
Tag verifies handle. Tag ignores
command if handle does not match
5
6
7
8
Interrogator acknowledges
Tag by issuing Ack with
same RN16
3
Two possible outcomes:
1. Valid RN16: Tag responds with {PC, EPC}
2. Invalid RN16: No reply
4
Interrogator issues a Query,
QueryAdjust, or QueryRep
1
Two possible outcomes:
1. Slot = 0: Tag responds with RN16
2. Slot <> 0: No reply
2
Query/Adjust /Rep
Ack (RN16)
RN16
{PC, EPC}
Req_RN (RN16)
Handle
Command ( handle )
Notes:
– CRC-16 not shown in transitions
– See command /reply tables for command details
Two possible outcomes:
1. Valid RN16: Tag responds with {handle}
2. Invalid RN16: No reply
FIGURE 3.20
Example transaction for ISO 18000 Part 6C.
Design Automation for RFID Tags and Systems
49

3.4.2
RFID Controller Behavior
Communication from the RFID interrogator (reader) is accomplished by transmitting the
primitive to the RFID tag using a standard air interface. The tag responds by changing the
current state and transmitting a designated response message to the interrogator. The user
has the capability of specifying the tag behavior in ANSI-C.
To simplify the user interaction, the RFID parser generates a template for the response
behavior indicating where the user must specify such custom behavior. Any C language
constructs (conditionals, loops, etc.) can be added (or left unchanged) by the user to check
the values of the ﬁelds of the incoming primitive and to specify the values of the ﬁelds of
the response. The template generated for the Query command is shown in Figure 3.23.
A ﬁle containing similar templates for all the macros that were included in the macros
speciﬁcation ﬁle will be generated for the user.
The details involving size and ﬁeld position in the command of the interrogator and the
corresponding response packet are handled by the compiler. Therefore, complexities
encountered in unpacking the command and subsequently packing the response can be
abstracted from the user, as shown in Figure 3.24. However, the ability of the user to
manipulate each of the individual ﬁelds in the response is intact. Therefore, the response
customization along with the corresponding state changes can increase in complexity
with ease.
Query command
QCmd
DR
M
TRext
Sel
Session
Target
Q
CRC-5
4 bit
1 bit
2 bit
1 bit
2 bit
2 bit
1 bit
4 bit
5 bit
Response
RN16
16 bit
Ack command
AC md
RN
2 bit
16 bit
Response
PC
EPC
CRC-16
16 bit
96 bit
16 bit
Req _RN command
Cmd
RN
CRC-16
8 bit
16 bit
16 bit
Response
RN
CRC-16
16 bit
16 bit
Write command
Cmd
Mem Bank
Word Ptr
Data
RN
CRC-16
8 bit
2 bit
8 bit
16 bit
16 bit
16 bit
Response
Header
RN
CRC-16
1 bit
16 bit
16 bit
FIGURE 3.21
Selected primitives and response formats from ISO 18000 Part 6C.
50
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

3.4.3
Compiler-Generated RFID Tag Program
The code generation is the ﬁnal compiler phase determined by the tag behavior and the
input macros speciﬁcation. Code generation can be in the form of ANSI-C for general-
purpose microprocessor controllers or VHDL in the case of hardware controllers. The
decode instructions generated by the compiler identify the received RFID primitive. For
each incoming command, routines are generated by the compiler that unpack the com-
mand generating the ﬁelds that it is expected to contain. The corresponding behavior is
attached to each ﬁeld, and the corresponding routines for packing the response are then
generated.
By virtue of the fact that C is a signiﬁcant and universally known language compared
with hardware description languages, the primitive behaviors are speciﬁed in C in the case
of a target described with VHDL. Therefore, the C code must be converted to a readily
synthesizable hardware code.
declarations
DR(1)
M(2)
TRext(1)
Sel(2)
Session(2)
Target(1)
Q(4)
CRC-5(5)
RN16(16)
RN(16)
PC(16)
EPC(16)
CRC-16(16)
MemBank(2)
WordPtr(8)
Data(16)
Header(1)
main
query
(4,4)
DR
M
TRext
Sel
Session
Target
Q
CRC-5
RN16
ack(2,1)
RN
PC
EPC
CRC-16
req_rn(8,193)
RN
CRC-16
RN
CRC-16
write(8,195)
MemBank
WordPtr
Data
RN
CRC-16
RN
CRC-16
RN16 ¼
inventoryFlag ¼
current_state ¼
. . .
FIGURE 3.23
Template generated for Query command.
FIGURE 3.22
Macros speciﬁcation.
Design Automation for RFID Tags and Systems
51

During the hardware conversion, the C code is converted into a control and data ﬂow
graph (CDFG). Compilers commonly use CDFGs to perform optimizations and transform-
ations. Typically, behavioral synthesis tools will also use CDFGs as an internal represen-
tation [31]. In many cases, the control dependencies present in a CDFG create cycle
boundaries during high-level synthesis.
In contrast, in the RFID compiler the CDFG is transformed into an entirely combin-
ational representation by the SuperCISC compiler. The result is a super data ﬂow graph
(SDFG). The SuperCISC compiler [32,33] takes advantage of well-known compiler trans-
formations including loop unrolling, function inlining, and hardware predication to convert
each control dependency into a data dependency creating a combinational representation.
The SDFG for the Query command is shown in Figure 3.25. The need for many potentially
high-power consuming sequential constructs such as registers and clock trees are removed
by this technique. Thus, the resulting SDFG-based hardware implementations are
extremely power efﬁcient [34].
The RFID compiler contains both power and area optimization routines. The power
optimizations are described in detail by Jones et al. [34]. The area optimizations attempt to
discover the maximum precision used by signals in the design and propagate that infor-
mation through the design to reduce the size of storage elements and synthesized func-
tional units. The automatically generated design is expected to be less optimal than a hand
design, but provides a reasonable estimate for a system designer to compare different
protocols and different implementation targets.
3.4.4
Results
The RFID design automation ﬂow has been used to implement RFID primitives from a
variety of different standards such as ISO 18000 Part 7, ANSI NCITS 256, ISO 18000 Part 6C,
and ISO 18185 Part 1. The most critical metrics for success with the resulting implementa-
tions are area and power of the resulting tag controller. Performance is rarely an issue
because of the limited transmission speeds of the RF protocols.
if (current_state ! ¼ KILLED) {
if (((current_state ¼ ¼ ACKNOWLEDGED) jj (current_state ¼ ¼ OPEN)
jj (current_state ¼ ¼ SECURED)) && ((sel_var ¼ ¼ sel)
&& (target_var ¼ ¼ target))) {
if (session ¼ ¼ last_session) {
if (inventoryFlag ¼ ¼ ’A’)
inventoryFlag ¼ ’B’;
else if (inventoryFlag ¼ ¼ ’B’)
inventoryFlag ¼ ’A’ ;
} else {
slot_counter ¼ rand ((1 << Q)  1) ;
if (slot_counter ! ¼ 0)
current_state ¼ ARBITRATE;
else
current_state ¼ REPLY;
if (current_state ¼ ¼ REPLY)
RN16 ¼ slot_counter;
}
}
}
FIGURE 3.24
Tag behavior for Query command.
52
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

For RFID tags, area is the primary concern as the size of the circuit results in a direct per
part cost impact. In many cases, the memory components of the controllers dominate the
area impact. In some cases this is dominated by the ﬁrmware for a microprocessor-based
solution and in others by the memory used for storage in memory-enabled RFID tags.
Power optimization is important in RFID systems as the power supplied to the tags is
ﬁxed and battery drain needs to be limited. Because active systems are designed for
extremely low-cost large-scale applications, frequent replacement of batteries is not feas-
ible. Although the transceiver power dominates the power consumption in active tags, the
controller power consumption is also a signiﬁcant consideration.
3.4.4.1
RFID Compiler Prototype Targets
The prototype microprocessor-based system is composed of an Altera Apex FPGA proto-
typing board used for logic buffering the packets from the air interface, 16 bit EISC
Q
1
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
S
S
2
!
!
1
1
1
0
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
66
2
2
2
S
2
2
S1
1
1
1
1
1
current_state
2
2
2
1
S
target
target_var
2
1
sel_var
sel
==
==
==
==
==
==
mux
mux
mux
mux
mux
mux
mux
mux
mux
mux
mux
mux
mux
mux
65
65
66
inventoryFlag
Basic block 0
current_state
inventoryFlag
RN16
1
1
1
S
1
1
==
==
==
RN16
last_session
session
mux
5
1
2
5
!=
!=
4
2
1
1
1
–
2
3
rand
0
1
<<
FIGURE 3.25
SDFG for the Query command.
Design Automation for RFID Tags and Systems
53

microprocessor development board from AD Chips [35], and a custom development board
created at the University of Pittsburgh for the active air interface.
The prototype FPGA-based system uses a Spartan 3 FPGA development board from an
Opal Kelly for the controller logic and any buffering logic that is required for the tag. For
this prototype, the air interface is an off-the-shelf ultra high frequency (UHF) transceiver
connected to the FPGA board through a custom board created at the University of
Pittsburgh. This board does the analog-to-digital conversion.
3.4.4.2
ISO 18000 Part 7 RFID Standard
The ISO 18000 Part 7 standard [2] is an international standard that deﬁnes the air interface
for RFID devices used in item management applications. The standard deﬁnes the forward
and return link parameters for an active RFID air interface at 433 MHz and the commu-
nications protocol used.
Figure 3.26 shows the interrogator-to-tag command format for the Collection command.
The command contains a command code to signal the tag what type of command is issued.
Additionally, the command contains a CRC to ensure the command packet is properly
formed. The remainder of the packet contains particular ﬁelds appropriate to the com-
mand. Similarly, the tag response includes the command code, CRC, and other data ﬁelds.
The tag response also includes a tag status ﬁeld, which consists of nested ﬁelds such as
acknowledge, tag type, battery, etc.
Figure 3.27 shows an example RFID macros ﬁle containing the Collection primitive. The
corresponding SDFG representation is shown in Figure 3.28. Thus, RFID compiler has been
used to implement all the commands from ISO 18000 Part 7 for microprocessor-based as
well as custom hardware-based tags.
3.4.4.2.1
Microprocessor-Based Tag
The RFID compiler was used to generate three programs: A with 24 primitives, B with 12
primitives, and C with 4 primitives. Experiments were conducted by executing one
primitive of Program A, one primitive of Program B, and one primitive of Program C
[36–38].
The sim-panalyzer [39] and XTREM [40] tools were used to estimate the power dissipa-
tion of the microprocessor-based tag for the ARM-based cores. Sim-panalyzer is a cycle-
accurate, architecture-level power simulator built on top of the SimpleScalar simulator.
XTREM is a SimpleScalar-based power and performance simulator tailored for Intel XScale
microarchitecture. SimpleScalar’s sim-proﬁle was used to obtain ARM instruction and
Collection command
Preﬁx
Type
Owner Id
Interrogator Id
Command code
Size
Reserved
CRC
8 bit
8 bit
24 bit
Response
Tag status
Message length
Interrogator Id
Tag Id
Command code
CRC
16 bit
1 bit
2 bit
1bit
2 bit
2 bit
Tag status
Modeﬁeld
Reserved
Acknowledge
Reserved
Tag type
Reserved
User Id
Battery
4 bit
3 bit
1 bit
2 bit
3 bit
1 bit
1 bit
1 bit
16 bit
16 bit
16 bit
8 bit
8 bit
FIGURE 3.26
Collection command and response format from ISO 18000 Part 7.
54
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

instruction class proﬁles for tag software. Because an instruction set simulator was not
available for the EISC, the application was run on the development board and the execu-
tion time was measured by setting a pin output from low to high on each iteration. Thus,
the duration was measured using an oscilloscope. The energy consumed by the EISC was
declarations
prefix(8)
type(8)
ownerid(24)
interid(16)
tagid(32)
comcode(8)
siz(16)
res(8)
crc(16)
tagstatus(16)[
modefield(4)
reserved1(3)
acknowledge(4)
reserved2(2)
tagtype(3)
reserved3(1)
userid(1)
battery(1)
]
mesglen(8)
main
icol(16)
prefix
type
ownerid
interid
comcode
siz
res
crc
tagstatus
mesglen
interid
tagid
ownerid
crc
FIGURE 3.27
Macros speciﬁcation for Collection from ISO 18000 Part 7.
Basic block 0
 != 
mux
S
mux
S
mux
S
isPasswordProtected
1
0
2
modefield
modefield
2
reserved1
reserved1
2
acknowledge
acknowledge
2
 != 
mux
S
1
reserved2
tagtype
reserved3
userid
battery
mesglen
0
1
7
1
commandValid
1
0
2
0
1
1
2
3
2
1
0
0
14
FIGURE 3.28
Super data ﬂow graph for the example ISO 18000–7 command. (From Jones, A.K., Hoare, R., Dontharaju, S., Tung,
S., Sprang, R., Fazekas, J., Cain, J.T., and Mickle, M.H., Proceedings of the 43rd Design Automation Conference (DAC),
131, ACM, 2006. With permission.)
Design Automation for RFID Tags and Systems
55

estimated* based on a static power estimate from ADC [35], which should be within about
10% accuracy of an instruction level power estimation approach [41].
Figure 3.29 shows the power consumption (Figure 3.29a) and energy consumption
(Figure 3.29b) of the tag programs on the StrongArm, XScale, and EISC processors. Both
ARM-based processors operate in the 250–400 mW range, whereas the XScale uses signiﬁ-
cantly less energy. The EISC processor uses an order of magnitude less power, but operates
much slower. However, the energy consumed is still less than half of XScale. The energy of
executing Program A on the EISC could not be calculated because of the program size
exceeding the program memory of the EISC board. This is probably reﬂective of a real area
constraint in an RFID tag, as the chip size would be increased because of memory required
for the ﬁrmware. Thus, a program size optimization might be necessary for actual imple-
mentation.
It can be seen that the power consumption of XScale is less than that of StrongArm
though they both implement the ARM Instruction Set Architecture. This is because the
XScale family of microprocessors uses deep pipelines and microarchitectural optimizations
for high performance [42]. Further, the reduced power consumption and greater clock
speed of XScale result in its far lower energy consumption.
3.4.4.2.2
Custom Hardware-Based Tag
Using the RFID compiler, the number of primitives for the custom hardware-based com-
piler were scaled up to 40 and implemented in 3 hardware targets, a Xilinx Coolrunner
II CPLD, an Actel Fusion FPGA, and custom cell-based ASIC hardware at 0.16 mm. Initial
results appear in Jones et al. [37]. It should be noted that to ﬁt all 40 primitives, the largest
Coolrunner II device available (XC2C512) had to be used, but all the primitives comfort-
ably ﬁt into the smallest Fusion device available (AFS090).
The area and power results for the implementations are presented in Tables 3.2 and 3.3,
respectively. As previously mentioned, the area required by the custom hardware for ASIC
implementation directly impacts the cost. As shown in Table 3.2, the ASIC controller area is
quite low, less than 4300 cells for a 40 primitive controller, which is smaller than the 10s of
kilobytes of memory required in software-based designs. The three implementations
provide levels of power consumption, as shown in Table 3.3. The CPLD power hovers
Microprocessor power comparison
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
Program A
Power (mW)
StrongARM power
(a)
Beachmark program
Beachmark program
(b)
XScale power
EISC power
StrongARM energy
XScale energy
EISC energy
Program B
Program C
Microprocessor energy comparison
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
0
Program A
Energy (mJ)
Program B
Program C
FIGURE 3.29
Power and energy comparison of tags with different microprocessor cores. (a) Power. (b) Energy.
* Energy calculation is static power consumption multiplied by measured execution time.
56
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

around 1 mW when active, whereas the FPGA implementation stays between 6 and 9 mW
when active. When idle, the quiescent power of the CPLD is 0.05 mW and the FPGA has
standby=sleep modes dropping the power to 0.03 mW [43]. The direct ASIC implementa-
tion drops the power consumed to 0.065 mW when operating and to 0.0004 mW when idle.
3.4.4.3
ISO 18000 Part 6C RFID Standard
ISO 18000 Part 6C standard [25] is a recent amendment to ISO 18000 Part 6 that describes
the RFID air interface for devices operating at 915 MHz and the associated communication
protocols used. Part 6C extends the existing Part 6 standard, which previously contained
type A and B devices with a type C modeled after the EPCGlobal Class 1 Generation 2
speciﬁcation.
An interrogator manages tag populations using three basic operations, select, inventory,
and access. The Select command is applied successively to pick a particular tag population
based on user-speciﬁc criteria, enabling union-, intersection-, and negation-based tag
TABLE 3.2
Area for Implementing the Primitive Logic on a Coolrunner II XC2C512, an Actel Fusion AFS090,
and 0.16 mm ASIC
Prims
2
4
6
8
10
12
15
20
24
30
35
40
Xilinx Coolrunner II XC2C512
MCs
332
335
338
340
350
366
426
447
447
447
449
447
% Used
66
66
67
67
69
72
84
88
88
88
88
88
PTs
444
477
514
506
477
552
772
953
993
1106
1181
1213
% Used
25
27
29
29
27
31
44
54
56
62
66
68
Regs
262
267
271
271
283
307
422
443
443
443
443
443
% Used
52
53
53
53
56
60
83
87
87
87
87
87
FBIs
360
379
408
391
338
396
611
767
801
870
900
914
% Used
29
30
32
31
27
31
48
60
63
68
71
72
Actel Fusion AFS090
VTs
256
258
265
292
300
317
329
371
380
411
434
442
% Used
11.1
11.2
11.5
12.7
13.0
13.8
14.3
16.1
16.5
17.8
18.8
19.2
0.16 mm ASIC
Cells
3809
3836
3841
3835
3859
3961
3990
4140
4170
4235
4264
4298
Area
1.092
1.097
1.098
1.097
1.105
1.116
1.121
1.158
1.161
1.174
1.182
1.187
Note:
Macrocells (MCs), product terms (PTs), registers (Regs), function block inputs (FBIs), VersaTiles (VTs).
ASIC area is 100 mm2.
TABLE 3.3
Power in MilliWatts for Implementing the Primitive Logic on a Coolrunner II XC2C512, an Actel
Fusion AFS090, and 0.16 mm ASIC
Prims
2
4
6
8
10
12
15
20
24
30
35
40
Xilinx Coolrunner II XC2C512: Quiescent Power 0.05 mW
Total
1.06
1.06
1.06
1.07
1.06
1.06
1.24
1.24
1.24
1.24
1.24
1.24
Actel Fusion AFS090: Quiescent Power 3 mW
Total
6.76
6.82
6.87
7.40
7.41
7.47
7.47
8.23
8.27
8.35
8.36
8.48
0.16 mm ASIC: Quiescent Power <0.4 mW
Total
0.063
0.063
0.063
0.063
0.063
0.063
0.064
0.064
0.064
0.064
0.064
0.065
Design Automation for RFID Tags and Systems
57

partitioning. An interrogator begins an inventory round by transmitting a Query command
in one of four sessions. One or more tags may reply to this. The interrogator then detects a
single tag reply and requests more information from the tag. The access operation allows
the issuing of commands that read from or write to a tag once the tag is uniquely identiﬁed.
ISO 18000 Part 6C tags implement features such as accessing and killing passwords,
checking the electronic product code (EPC), CRC checking, manipulating the slot counter,
pseudorandom number generation, etc. The states and keys of the target device are used to
facilitate tag singulation, collision arbitration, security encoding, etc.
The communication primitives of ISO 18000 Part 6C standard are signiﬁcantly different
and more complex than the ISO 18000 Part 7 standard. The complexity of the Part 6C
standard makes the design of these tags extremely time consuming and challenging
for reducing power consumption and silicon area. Dontharaju et al. [44] examines
various features of the ISO Part 6C standard and compares it with the ISO 18000 Part 7
standard for active tags for the purpose of evaluating generic interrogator=tag protocol
complexity.
An example transaction of this protocol is shown in Figure 3.30. The output shown in
this ﬁgure is generated from a special piece of equipment housed in the University of
Pittsburgh RFID Center of Excellence called a real-time spectrum analyzer (RTSA).
The example tag uses passive RFID technology requiring the RF energy generated by the
reader to be used to power the tag, and to be used for a backscatter-based response.
Backscattering uses the reﬂection of RF energy provided by an external source (in this
case the reader) to transmit information. The backscattering device (in this case the tag)
either absorbs or reﬂects the energy of the incoming RF to generate low and high values in
the backscattered response.
Section 3.4.1 describes some of the commands such as Query, Ack, Req_rn, and Write. The
corresponding macros representation is shown in Figure 3.22. Figures 3.23 through 3.25
show the synthesis process of the Query primitive.
FIGURE 3.30
Real-time spectrum analyzer output of an example ISO 18000 Part 6C transaction.
58
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

3.4.4.3.1
Custom Hardware-Based Tag
Using the RFID compiler, up to ﬁve inventory commands of the ISO 18000 Part 6C
standard were implemented with 0.16 mm custom cell-based ASIC hardware and a Spartan
3 FPGA. To evaluate the effectiveness of the automated approach in providing a rapid
prototype and accurate estimate of resource requirements of the RFID system, the areas of
the automated tag designs generated by the RFID Compiler have been compared with the
areas of our own manual tag designs for the above targets. The tools used for estimating
area are design compiler and precision synthesis.
Table 3.4 shows the total area of ISO 18000 Part 6C tag designs for a 0.16 mm ASIC. Table
3.5 shows the resource utilization of Gen-2 tag designs for a Spartan 3 FPGA. The FPGA
resource utilization is almost the same for all the designs and actually decreases slightly
with the automated approach. For the ASIC implementation of ﬁve primitives, there is a
nominal increase in area of up to 10.55%. We note that there is a trend that as primitives are
added the area increase percentage rises. This is in part due to how Design Compiler does
resource sharing. We noticed that this did not occur with other synthesis tools for FPGAs.
TABLE 3.4
Area for Implementing the Gen-2 Primitive Logic on a 0.16 mm ASIC
Prims
1
2
3
4
5
Manual
1.1642
1.1933
1.2288
1.2313
1.3212
Automated
1.1326
1.2159
1.2842
1.2942
1.4606
% Increase with automation
2.71
1.89
4.51
5.11
10.55
Note:
ASIC area is 100 mm2.
TABLE 3.5
Resource Utilization for Implementing the Gen-2 Primitive Logic on a Spartan 3 FPGA
Prims
1
2
3
4
5
IOs
Manual
419
419
419
419
419
Automated
419
419
419
419
419
% Increase with automation
0
0
0
0
0
Global Buffers
Manual
2
2
2
2
2
Automated
2
2
2
2
2
% Increase with automation
0
0
0
0
0
Function Generators
Manual
720
757
787
789
817
Automated
713
742
814
814
825
% Increase with automation
0.97
1.98
3.43
3.17
0.98
CLB Slices
Manual
569
572
580
580
588
Automated
559
563
571
571
571
% Increase with automation
1.76
1.57
1.55
1.55
2.89
Dffs or Latches
Manual
1138
1143
1159
1159
1176
Automated
1118
1125
1141
1141
1141
% Increase with automation
1.76
1.57
1.55
1.55
2.98
Design Automation for RFID Tags and Systems
59

Design Compiler does allow resource sharing through use of specialized controls, which
provide an opportunity to reduce this overhead.
3.4.4.3.2
Comparison with ISO 18000 Part 7
To understand and compare the complexity of different standards such as the ISO 18000
Part 7 and Part 6C, the RFID compiler has been used to implement commands from both
of them. A representative command, Query, was selected from ISO 18000 Part 6C and
has been implemented in hardware and synthesized for the ASIC target. Similarly, the
Collection command, which realizes similar functionality from ISO 18000 Part 7 standard,
was implemented in hardware and targeted to the same ASIC process. Table 3.6 shows the
power and area results for implementing these two commands. The Query command is
much larger and higher power consuming than the Collection command. We also compared
the Query command and the Collection command with nine additional primitives from the
ISO 18000 Part 7 standard. As shown in Table 3.6, the Query command is still larger and
higher power consuming than these 10 primitives from ISO 18000 Part 7.
3.4.4.4
ISO 18185 RFID Standard
The ISO 18185 Part 1 standard [45] is an international standard that provides a system for
the unique identiﬁcation and presentation of information about freight container electronic
seals. It is used in conjunction with the other parts of ISO 18185 such as Part 4 that speciﬁes
data protection and Part 7 that speciﬁes the physical layer protocol.
The electronic seal mandatory data includes seal id, seal status, battery sta-
tus, details on the sealing and opening times, and protocol information. The seal id is a
combination of the tag manufacturer id and the tag id and is used to uniquely
identify the seal. It is permanently programmed into the seal during manufacturing. The
seal status indicates the open, closed, or sealed state of the seal.
Figure 3.31 shows the interrogator to tag command=response formats for the Sleep All
But and Get Seal Model commands. The command contains ﬁelds such as a protocol to
identify the data link layer packet structures, an opcode code to identify the command, and
options to indicate whether it is a point-to-point or a broadcast command and whether
the command duration ﬁelds are present. The command duration ﬁelds are speciﬁed by
the interrogator in point-to-point commands so that the tag may switch to sleep mode after
waiting for the described duration. The Sleep All But command is a broadcast command. In
response to this command, the speciﬁed seal remains awake while all the other seals return
to sleep mode. This command does not require a response back to the interrogator. In the
TABLE 3.6
Power and Energy Results for Implementing Query, Collection,
and 10 ISO Part 7 Primitives (Inclusive of Collection)
as a 0.16 mm ASIC
Primitives
Dynamic Power (mW)
Area (100 mm2)
Query
0.06752
1.1642
Collection
0.06308
1.0944
10 primitives
0.06495
1.1232
Source:
Dontharaju, S., Tung, S., Jones, A.K., Mats, L., Panuski, J.,
Cain, J.T., and Mickle, M.H., IEEE Communications Magazine, 1,
4, 2007. With permission.
Note:
ASIC area is in 100 mm2. Dynamic power is in milliWatts.
Quiescent power <0.4 mW.
60
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

case of Get Seal Model command, the tag response includes the opcode code, the nested
seal status, and other data ﬁelds.
Figure 3.32 shows an example RFID macros ﬁle containing the Sleep All But, Get Seal
Version, Get Seal Model, and Collection primitives. The RFID compiler has been used to
implement the commands from ISO 18185 Part 1 standard for a custom hardware-based
tags target.
3.4.4.4.1
Custom Hardware-Based Tag
Using the RFID compiler, up to 10 commands of the ISO 18185 Part 1 standard were
implemented with 0.16 mm custom cell-based ASIC hardware. The tool used for synthesis
and area estimates is the Design Compiler. Power was estimated using PrimePower.
Table 3.7 shows the total area and the power consumption of ISO 18185 Part 1 seal
designs for a 0.16 mm ASIC. The area of this seal design is much smaller than the area of
ISO 18000 Part 6C tag design. The 18185 design is smaller than even the relatively
simple ISO 18000 Part 7 tag design. The power consumption is also correspondingly
lower. This could be in part because the commands in ISO 18185 Part 1 do not incorporate
security mechanisms such as passwords.* For example, ISO 18000 Part 7 provides a
password style security mechanism by the set password, set password protect, and unlock
commands. There is also an additional layer of privacy introduced by the user id ﬁeld. The
logic required to implement the checking of these ﬁelds increases the total area and the
power consumption of the tag designs.
3.5
Conclusions
This chapter presents an extensible RFID tag with associated design automation ﬂow. The
RFID compiler automatically generates RFID tag software or hardware for both micropro-
cessor- and FPGA-based extensible tags. The compiler takes as input simple descriptions
called RFID macros of the RFID primitives described in the standard and behavior for each
primitive written in C. The system is extensible, in that it allows for addition (or removal)
of a set of custom RFID primitives that may be a subset or superset of the original
standards. The physical layer blocks are automatically generated through the description
Sleep All But command
Protocol
Options
Interrogator
Code
Length
Manufacturer
Tag
CRC
8 bit
8 bit
16 bit
8 bit
8 bit
16 bit
32 bit
16 bit
Get Seal Model command
Protocol
Options
Manufacturer
Tag
Interrogator
Code
Min time
Max time
Length
CRC
8 bit
8 bit
16 bit
32 bit
16 bit
8 bit
16 bit
16 bit
8 bit
16 bit
Get Seal Model response
Protocol
Status
Length
Interrogator
Manufacturer
Tag
Code
Model CRC
8 bit
16 bit
8 bit
16 bit
16 bit
32 bit
8 bit
16 bit
Status
Modeﬁeld
State
Reserved
Acknowledge
Reserved
Seal type
Reserved
Reserved
Battery
4 bit
2 bit
1 bit
1 bit
2 bit
3 bit
1 bit
1 bit
1 bit
FIGURE 3.31
Example command=response formats from ISO 18185 Part 1.
* The security features of various RFID standards are described in Chapter 33.
Design Automation for RFID Tags and Systems
61

of waveform features of the encoding. We have presented several prototype systems
including a software-based system using an EISC microprocessor and a custom hardware-
based system using a Spartan 3 FPGA. Case studies that implement widely used standards
such as ISO 18000 Part 7 and ISO 18000 Part 6C using this automation technique are
presented.
declarations
protcl(8)
options(8)
manuf(16)
tagid(32)
interid(16)
opcode(8)
mindur(16)
maxdur(16)
arglen(8)
crc(16)
status(16)[
modefield(4)
state(2)
reserved(1)
acknowledge(1)
reserved2(2)
sealtype(3)
reserved3(1)
reserved4(1)
battery(1)
]
paclen(8)
wsize(16)
criteria(8)
nodata(0)
version(16)
model(16)
main
sleepbt (22) protcl options interid opcode
arglen
manuf
tagid
crc
nodata
sealver (12) protcl options manuf
tagid
interid opcode mindur
maxdur
arglen crc
protcl status
paclen
interid manuf
tagid
opcode
version crc
sealmd (14)
protcl options manuf
tagid
interid opcode mindur
maxdur
arglen crc
protcl status
paclen
interid manuf
tagid
opcode
model
crc
collect (16) protcl options interid opcode
arglen
wsize
criteria crc
nodata
FIGURE 3.32
Macros speciﬁcation for Sleep All But command from ISO 18185 Part 1.
TABLE 3.7
Area and Dynamic Power for Implementing the ISO 18185 Part 1 Primitive Logic on a 0.16 mm ASIC
Prims
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Area
0.7171
0.7284
0.7398
0.7678
0.7779
0.8125
0.8349
0.8509
0.8664
0.8815
Power
0.0338
0.0371
0.0379
0.0381
0.0382
0.0382
0.0383
0.0384
0.0385
0.0386
Note:
ASIC area is 100 mm2. Dynamic power is in milliWatts. Quiescent power <0.4 mW.
62
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

The RFID compiler and design automation ﬂows allow comparison of different conﬁg-
urations of the tag and the impact on area and power for microprocessor or ASIC tag
implementations. The design automation ﬂow also allows for evaluating interrogator=tag
complexity with respect to different protocols and encodings.
References
1. American National Standards Institute, ‘‘ANSI NCITS 236:2001.’’ Standard Speciﬁcation, 2002.
2. International Standards Organization, ‘‘ISO=IEC FDIS 18000-7:2004(E).’’ Standard Speciﬁcation,
2004.
3. X. Gao, Z. Xiang, H. Wang, J. Shen, J. Huang, and S. Song, ‘‘An approach to security and privacy
of RFID system for supply chain,’’ Proceedings of 2004 IEEE International Conference on E-Commerce
Technology for Dynamic E-Business, pp. 164–168, September 2004.
4. P. Blythe, ‘‘RFID for road tolling, road-use pricing and vehicle access control,’’ IEE Colloquium on
RFID Technology, October 1999.
5. G. Roussos, ‘‘Enabling RFID in retail,’’ Computer, 39, 25–30, March 2006.
6. L.M. Ni, Y. Liu, Y.C. Lau, and A.P. Patil, ‘‘LANDMARC: indoor location sensing using active
RFID,’’ Wireless Networks, 10, pp. 701–710, November 2004.
7. D. Molnar and D. Wagner, ‘‘Privacy: Privacy and security in library RFID: issues, practices, and
architectures,’’ Proceedings of 11th ACM conference on Computer and Communications Security, 2004.
8. TI, ‘‘Texas Instruments’ RFID Technology streamlines management of Vatican Library’s treas-
ured collections,’’ 2004. www.ti.com=tiris=docs=news=news_releases=2004=rel07-07-04.shtml
9. C. Li, L. Liu, S. Chen, C.C. Wu, C. Huang, and X. Chen, ‘‘Mobile healthcare service system using
RFID,’’ IEEE International Conference on Networking, Sensing and Control, 2, 2004.
10. A. Cerino and W.P. Walsh, ‘‘Research and application of radio frequency identiﬁcation (RFID)
technology to enhance aviation security,’’ Proceedings of IEEE National Aerospace and Electronics
Conference, 2000.
11. Y.F. Wong, P.W.K. Wu, D.M.H. Wong, D.K. Chan, L.C. Fung, and S.W. Leung, ‘‘RFI: Assessment
on human safety of RFID system at Hong Kong International Airport,’’ Proceedings of 17th
International Zurich Symposium on Electromagnetic Compatibility, pp. 108–111, February 2006.
12. A. Alu, C. Sapia, A. Toscano, and L. Vegni, ‘‘Radio frequency animal identiﬁcation: electromag-
netic analysis and experimental evaluation of the transponder-gate system,’’ International Journal
of Radio Frequency Identiﬁcation Technology and Application, 1(1), 90–106, 2006.
13. D. Engels and S. Sarma, ‘‘The reader collision problem,’’ November 2001. White paper MITAU-
TOID-WH-007, Auto-ID Center.
14. R. Want, ‘‘The magic of RFID,’’ October 2004, ACM Queue.
15. A. Juels, R. Rivest, and M. Szydlo, ‘‘The blocker tag: Selective blocking of RFID tags for consumer
privacy,’’ Proceedings of 10th ACM Conference on Computer and Communications Security, pp. 103–111,
2003.
16. M. Feldhofer, S. Dominikus, and J. Wolkerstorfer, ‘‘Strong authentication for RFID systems using
the AES algorithm,’’ Proceedings of 6th International Workshop Cryptographic Hardware and Embedded
Systems (CHES 2004), pp. 357–370, 2004.
17. A.K. Jones, S. Dontharaju, S. Tung, P.J. Hawrylak, L. Mats, R. Hoare, J.T. Cain, and M.H. Mickle,
‘‘Passive active radio frequency identiﬁcation tags (PART),’’ International Journal of Radio Fre-
quency Identiﬁcation Technology and Application (IJRFITA), 1(1), 52–73, 2006.
18. S.A. Delichatsios, D.W. Engels, L. Ukkonen, and L. Sydanheimo, ‘‘Albano multidimensional UHF
passive RFID tag antenna designs,’’ International Journal of Radio Frequency Identiﬁcation Technology
and Application, 1(1), 24–40, 2006.
19. L. Ukkonen, M. Schaffrath, J. Kataja, L. Sydanheimo, and M. Kivikoski, ‘‘Evolutionary RFID
tag antenna design for paper industry applications,’’ International Journal of Radio Frequency
Identiﬁcation Technology and Application, 1(1), 107–122, 2006.
20. J.D. Porter, R.E. Billo, and M.H. Mickle, ‘‘Effect of active interference on the performance of radio
frequency identiﬁcation systems,’’ International Journal of Radio Frequency Identiﬁcation Technology
and Application, 1(1), 4–23, 2006.
Design Automation for RFID Tags and Systems
63

21. K. Penttila, L. Sydanheimo, and M. Kivikoski, ‘‘Implementation of Tx=Rx isolation in an RFID
reader,’’ International Journal of Radio Frequency Identiﬁcation Technology and Application, 1(1), 74–89,
2006.
22. G. Barber and E. Tsibertzopoulos, ‘‘An analysis of using EPCglobal class-1 generation-2 RFID
technology for wireless asset management,’’ Proceedings of IEEE Military Communications
Conference (MILCOM 2005), pp. 245–251, October 2005.
23. C.K. Harmon, ‘‘The necessity for a uniform organisation of user memory in RFID,’’ International
Journal of Radio Frequency Identiﬁcation Technology and Application, 1(1), 41–51, 2006.
24. IEEE Computer Society, ‘‘IEEE Standard 802.3–2005,’’ December 2005.
25. International Standards Organization, ‘‘ISO=IEC FDIS 18000–6:2004=Amd 1:2006(E),’’ Standard
Speciﬁcation, 2006.
26. American
National
Standards
Institute,
‘‘ANSI=TIA=EIA-422-B,’’
Standard
Speciﬁcation,
May 1994.
27. ATIS Committee T1A1, ‘‘ATIS Telecom Glossary 2000,’’ Technical Report T1.523–2001, Alliance
for Telecommunications Industry Solutions (ATIS), 2001.
28. IEEE Computer Society, ‘‘IEEE Standard 802.5–1998E,’’ May 1998.
29. D.M. Levis, B.W. Thomson, P.I.P. Boulton, and E.S. Lee, ‘‘Transforming bit-serial communication
circuits into fast parallel VLSI implementations,’’ IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits, 23, 549–557,
April 1988.
30. E. Haselsteiner and K. Breitfuß, ‘‘Security in near ﬁeld communication (NFC): Strengths and
weaknesses,’’ Proceedings of the Workshop on RFID Security, 2006.
31. X. Tang, T. Jiang, A. Jones, and P. Banerjee, ‘‘Compiler optimizations in the PACT HDL
behavioral synthesis tool for ASICs and FPGAs,’’ IEEE International SoC Conference (IEEE-SOC),
September 2003.
32. A.K. Jones, R. Hoare, D. Kusic, J. Fazekas, and J. Foster, ‘‘An FPGA-based VLIW processor with
custom hardware execution,’’ ACM International Symposium on Field-Programmable Gate Arrays
(FPGA), pp. 107–117, 2005.
33. R. Hoare, A.K. Jones, D. Kusic, J. Fazekas, J. Foster, S. Tung, and M. McCloud, ‘‘Rapid VLIW
processor customization for signal processing applications using combinational hardware
functions,’’ EURASIP Journal on Applied Signal Processing, 2006, Article ID 46472, 2006.
34. A.K. Jones, R. Hoare, D. Kusic, G. Mehta, J. Fazekas, and J. Foster, ‘‘Reducing power while
increasing performance with SuperCISC,’’ ACM Transactions on Embedded Computing Systems
(TECS), 5, 1–29, August 2006.
35. Y. Cha, ‘‘EISC core,’’ Presentation to University of Pittsburgh, February 2005.
36. A.K. Jones, R.R. Hoare, S.R. Dontharaju, S. Tung, R. Sprang, J. Fazekas, J.T. Cain, and
M.H. Mickle, ‘‘A ﬁeld programmable RFID tag and associated design ﬂow,’’ Proceedings of
FCCM, pp. 165–174, 2006.
37. A.K. Jones, R. Hoare, S. Dontharaju, S. Tung, R. Sprang, J. Fazekas, J.T. Cain, and M.H. Mickle,
‘‘An automated, FPGA-based reconﬁgurable, low-power RFID tag,’’ Proceedings of the 43rd Design
Automation Conference (DAC), pp. 131–136, ACM, July 2006.
38. A.K. Jones, R. Hoare, S. Dontharaju, S. Tung, R. Sprang, J. Fazekas, J.T. Cain, and M.H. Mickle,
‘‘An automated, FPGA-based reconﬁgurable, low-power RFID tag,’’ Journal of Microprocessors and
Microsystems, 31, 116–134, March 2007.
39. Sim-panalyzer, ‘‘SimpleScalar-ARM power modeling project,’’ http:==www.eecs.umich.edu=
panalyzer
40. C. Gilberto, M. Martonosi, J. Peng, R. Ju, and G. Lueh, ‘‘XTREM: A power simulator for the Intel
XScale core,’’ Proceedings of ACM LCTES, 2004.
41. J. Russell and M. Jacome, ‘‘Software power estimation and optimization for high performance,
32-bit embedded processors,’’ Proceedings of ICCD, 1998.
42. Intel, Intel PXA27x Processor Family Developers Manual, 2004. ftp:==download.intel.com
43. Actel, Fusion Family of Mixed-Signal Flash FPGAs: DC and Power Characteristics, 0.5v ed., 2006.
44. S. Dontharaju, S. Tung, A.K. Jones, L. Mats, J. Panuski, J.T. Cain, and M.H. Mickle, ‘‘The
unwinding of a protocol,’’ IEEE Communications Magazine, 1, 4–10, April 2007.
45. International Standards Organization, ‘‘ISO=IEC FDIS 18185-1:2006,’’ Standard Speciﬁcation,
2006.
64
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

4
Far-Field Tag Antenna Design Methodology
Damith C. Ranasinghe and Peter H. Cole
CONTENTS
4.1
Introduction.......................................................................................................................... 65
4.2
RFID Label Antennas.......................................................................................................... 66
4.2.1 Magnetic Field-Sensitive Antennas ........................................................................ 66
4.2.2 Electric Field-Sensitive Antennas............................................................................ 68
4.2.3 Electromagnetic Field Antennas............................................................................. 68
4.3
Tag Antenna Design Considerations................................................................................ 69
4.3.1 Nature of Antennas Suitable for RFID .................................................................. 69
4.3.2 Label Antenna Equivalent Circuits ........................................................................ 72
4.3.3 Matching to an RFID Chip Impedance ................................................................. 72
4.3.4 Environmental Constraints...................................................................................... 74
4.3.5 Performance Measure............................................................................................... 75
4.4
Label Antenna Design Methodology................................................................................ 78
4.4.1 Design Requirements ............................................................................................... 78
4.4.2 Design Methodology................................................................................................ 78
4.5
Illustrating a Novel Antenna Design................................................................................ 80
4.5.1 Antenna Requirements, Material, and RFID IC Impedance .............................. 81
4.5.2 Antenna Type............................................................................................................ 81
4.5.3 Bow-Tie Antenna Design......................................................................................... 84
4.5.4 Bow-Tie Antenna with a Series Tuning Inductor ................................................ 85
4.6
Conclusions........................................................................................................................... 91
Acknowledgment ......................................................................................................................... 91
References...................................................................................................................................... 91
4.1
Introduction
Antennas used in the HF region operate at 13.56 MHz whose frequency has an electromag-
netic wavelength of around 22 m giving a near-ﬁeld far-ﬁeld boundary of around 3.5 m.
Thus, given reading distance requirements of <3 m and using the regulated radiation
power at the HF ISM band, reader antennas are almost always near-ﬁeld creation structures
that aim to create large energy density ﬁelds with the minimum amount of radiation.
However, at UHF frequencies the scenario is different. At UHF frequencies, the near-ﬁeld
far-ﬁeld boundary is around 50 mm. Thus the region of operation in the UHF spectrum
65

is almost always in the far ﬁeld, and therefore reader antenna designs are far-ﬁeld creation
structures that aim to operate at the highest possible efﬁciency.
This chapter considers RFID label antennas for both near-ﬁeld operation in the HF region
and far-ﬁeld operation in the UHF frequency range. To aid in the development of UHF tag
antennas, the chapter contains material on the formulation of antenna equivalent circuits
and presents an RFID label antenna design methodology, illustrated in the far ﬁeld with
the design of long-range, bow-tie antennas for tagging cases and pallets.
4.2
RFID Label Antennas
There are numerous label antenna designs, each with their own set of characteristics.
Antenna designs are inﬂuenced by a range of issues, such as the region of label operation
(near or far), the coupling ﬁeld (electric ﬁeld or magnetic ﬁeld), the regulatory constraints,
and the environment in which they operate. For example, an environment with many
metal structures can affect time varying electromagnetic ﬁelds, and thus affect the per-
formance of an antenna. Designing antennas to suit metallic structures requires special
consideration and is presented in Chapter 13 of this book. A number of examples of
antennas to suit their environment are outlined in Cole (2003), Pope et al. (1997), and
Ranasinghe et al. (2004). A vital aspect of the design process is to allow maximum coupling
between the reader antennas and label antennas for the coupling ﬁeld used. Before con-
sidering the subject matter of label antenna design, the following sections discuss a number
of different label antenna structures and the merits of their designs.
4.2.1
Magnetic Field-Sensitive Antennas
A common example of a magnetic ﬁeld-sensitive HF label suitable for operation in the HF
ISM band (13.56 MHz) is shown in Figure 4.1. The label is 42 mm in width and 47 mm in
length. The label is designed to have a sufﬁcient number of turns to provide the resonating
inductance for the microcircuit input capacitance, as well as a ﬂux collecting area in the
interior, which is as large as practicable and consistent with the size requirement for the label.
FIGURE 4.1
A magnetic ﬁeld-sensitive antenna.
66
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

Advantages of working in the near ﬁeld at HF rather than at LF are that the number of
turns required to resonate the microcircuit capacitance is small enough for low-resolution
lithography to be used in antenna construction, and that no additional external resonating
capacitance is required.
When a larger space is available for the tag label, a larger coil area should be used. As
shown in Figure 4.2, fewer turns are then needed to obtain the required tuning inductance.
A ﬁgure of merit for near-ﬁeld antennas is readily obtainable from the coupling volume
theory (Eshraghian et al., 1982; Cole et al., 2003; Ranasinghe, 2007) outlined in Chapter 12
of this book. It can be observed that the ﬁgure of merit (the coupling volume) for a planar
coil operating in the near ﬁeld varies as the third power of size, since the inductance of a
coil is dependent on the equivalent coil diameter. Thus, the antenna of Figure 4.2 is about
18 times more sensitive than that of Figure 4.1. Unfortunately, this increased sensitivity
does not translate to a corresponding increase in near-ﬁeld range, as small coil interrogator
antennas have an inverse sixth power decrease in energy density per unit volume as
distance from the interrogator increases.
Clearly, both of the designs illustrated earlier are unsuitable for being placed ﬂat against
metal, as the boundary conditions will not allow a normal component of magnetic ﬂux
density at the metal surface. For this situation, the label antenna employing a solenoid with
a magnetic core design shown in Figure 4.3 can be employed.
Eshraghian et al. (1982), Ranasinghe (2007), and Cole et al. (2003) show that without the
magnetic core the coupling volume of a long solenoid is just the physical volume, but when
a magnetic core is inserted, the coupling volume increases by a factor equal to the effective
permeability of the magnetic core.
FIGURE 4.2
A large-loop antenna for an HF label. (From Cole, P.H., Jamali, B., and
Ranasinghe, D., Coupling relations in RFID systems, 2003 Auto-ID
Center White Paper Series,  2003 by Auto-ID Center.)
FIGURE 4.3
An antenna for HF operation against metal. (From Cole, P.H.,
Jamali, B., and Ranasinghe, D., Coupling relations in RFID
systems, 2003 Auto-ID Center White Paper Series,  2003 by
Auto-ID Center.)
Far-Field Tag Antenna Design Methodology
67

4.2.2
Electric Field-Sensitive Antennas
Two varieties of electric ﬁeld-sensitive antennas are shown in Figures 4.4 and 4.5. Figure 4.4
shows a small bow-tie antenna that is intended to be sensitive to electric ﬁelds in the
horizontal direction.
Figure 4.5 shows an electric ﬁeld-sensitive antenna that is suitable for placement against
a horizontal metal plate.
Analysis of the structure in Figure 4.4 is provided later in this chapter. The ﬁgure of
merit for these antennas, when placed in the energy storage electric ﬁeld is a coupling
volume (Ranasinghe, 2007); for Figure 4.5 it is equal to the physical volume of the structure
and for Figure 4.4 it is derived from the label dimensions, even though the antenna itself
has no physical volume.
Both of the antennas will also have an effective electric ﬂux collecting area but this area
should not be confused with the effective area concept of a radiating antenna or of a far-
ﬁeld antenna. The effective area for a near-ﬁeld electric ﬁeld-sensitive antenna describes
the extent to which the antenna can extract current from the displacement current density
of the driving electric ﬁeld.
4.2.3
Electromagnetic Field Antennas
An antenna can be considered as an electromagnetic ﬁeld antenna on a couple of different
bases. Firstly, if the antenna is capable of responding to both electric and magnetic ﬁelds,
we would consider it to be an electromagnetic ﬁeld antenna. It is almost invariably true
that unless the antenna is very small, it does have this property. Proper analysis requires
that it should be analyzed using the full set of Maxwell’s equations rather than the subset
or simpliﬁed versions that pertain to electrostatic or magnetostatic problems. A good
example of this phenomenon is provided by the electromagnetic ﬁeld-sensitive antenna
shown in Figure 4.6, in which there is no obvious effort to couple to either electric or
magnetic ﬁeld alone.
Such electromagnetic antennas are generally useful for operation in the far ﬁeld because
far-ﬁeld interrogation systems have shorter wavelengths, and antennas of acceptable size
can no longer be considered to be electrically very small but are merely small.
Despite the earlier distinction, there are electromagnetic label reading environments in
the UHF region in which, through reﬂections, either the electric or magnetic ﬁeld is
emphasized at the expense of the other. For such situations it is normally useful to take
into account the nature of the driving ﬁelds in antenna design, and shape the design so that
it is recognizably attuned to one or other of those ﬁelds.
FIGURE 4.4
Electric ﬁeld-sensitive label. (From Cole, P.H., Jamali, B., and
Ranasinghe, D., Coupling relations in RFID systems, 2003
Auto-ID Center White Paper Series,  2003 by Auto-ID Center.)
FIGURE 4.5
A parallel plate electric ﬁeld-sensitive label. (From Cole, P.H.,
Jamali, B., and Ranasinghe, D., Coupling relations in RFID
systems, 2003 Auto-ID Center White Paper Series,  2003 by
Auto-ID Center.)
68
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

4.3
Tag Antenna Design Considerations
Use of RFID in the identiﬁcation of objects in various supply chains around the world has
created research avenues into consumer product packaging (CPP) to ﬁnd novel ways of
integrating RFID labels into packaging and developing labels to suit packaging and the
contents of packaged goods. The earlier sections have described the results of previous
label antenna design developments to illustrate the multifaceted world of tag antenna
design.
In addition to the antenna designs presented previously, there is an accumulating index
of publications on RFID label antennas, for both active and passive tags, such as the slot
antenna designs (Chen and Hsu, 2004), inverted F-antenna designs (Hirvonen et al., 2004),
and the folded dipole antenna design (Xianming and Ning, 2004), to consider a few. Most
of these publications only cover aspects of antenna analysis and practical aspects such as
the suitability of the antenna for a speciﬁc application (Leong et al., 2005). However, what
is not covered is a methodology for designing a tag antenna and a clear view of tag antenna
design criteria.
The discussions in the following sections of this chapter are aimed at bridging that
knowledge gap. Finally, Section 4.5 illustrates a successful antenna design for a passive
RFID label that can be placed on corrugated cardboard boxes containing dry goods. The
antenna designs presented are of a ‘‘credit card size,’’ considered generally to be a suitable
size for labeling a majority of cases used in supply chain applications.
4.3.1
Nature of Antennas Suitable for RFID
This section will consider, in general, types of antennas suitable for RFID applications. The
evaluation will be based on both practical aspects and performance aspects. Considering
practicable antennas for RFID applications restricts us to mostly planar structures that can
be attached to items, cases, and pallets. In addition, it is important to consider the RFID
chip input impedance at the threshold of operation to realize a conjugate antenna imped-
ance to achieve maximum power transfer to the RFID label IC. Unlike other applications,
it is not cost effective to design elaborate matching circuits based on lumped circuit
elements to match the antenna impedance to the chip input impedance because it is
both expensive and structurally unsuitable for labels used in a majority of supply chain
applications.
Since passive RFID tags operate in a power-constrained environment created by elec-
tromagnetic compatibility regulations and the power required to operate the tags is
obtained from the incident electromagnetic waves, maximum power transfer is of vital
importance. Therefore, before postulating a theoretical ‘‘best’’ antenna, it is important to
consider the load to which an RFID label antenna must provide power. The resulting load
impedance presented to a tag antenna is considered later.
A UHF RFID label IC with an antenna terminal and a rectifying circuit that is intended
to produce a rectiﬁed voltage used for powering the label circuits can be modeled as
FIGURE 4.6
An electromagnetic antenna.
Far-Field Tag Antenna Design Methodology
69

indicated in Figure 4.7. Here, Xl represents the reactance of the diode capacitance, XB is the
reactance of the reservoir capacitor that also serves as an RF bypass, and Rl represents
the loss in bringing reactive power into and out of the diode junction capacitance. It is clear
from Figure 4.7 that the input impedance of an RFID chip is largely dictated by the junction
capacitance of the rectiﬁcation diode. The rectiﬁers on modern UHF RFID ICs are fabri-
cated using Schottky diodes with a junction capacitance value in the range of a few
picofarads or less. Due to the sensitivity of the junction capacitance to the biasing voltage,
the input impedance of an RFID chip is a complex function of both the operating frequency
and the input power to the chip from the antenna. Thus in general, the chip impedance, Zc
is measured at the threshold of operation so that the antenna impedance is a conjugate
match at the lowest power level at which the chip will operate successfully. This ensures
that the chip receives the most amount of power possible when the tag is furthest from the
powering RF wave.
As illustrated in Figure 4.7, the input impedance of an RFID chip at the threshold of
operation (minimum input sensitivity) is capacitive. The input impedance of an RFID IC
can be modeled as indicated in Figure 4.8 as a series equivalent circuit or a parallel
equivalent circuit. Depending on the fabrication technology and the IC design, the typical
impedance of RFID ICs will vary. Some of the typical values expected are listed, using the
series equivalent circuit in Figure 4.8b, Zc ¼ Rseries þ (1=jvCseries), as follows.
. 17 – 149j V at 915 MHz (EPC Class I Gen I IC offered from Alien Technology,
R ¼ 1300 V, C ¼ 1.5 pF)
. 36 – 117j V at 866.5 MHz (EPC Class I Gen 2 from Impinj (registered trademark of
Impinj Inc., Seattle, Washington) (Impinj, 2005)
. 33 – 112j V at 915 MHz (EPC Class I Gen 2 from IMPINJ) (Impinj, 2005)
Junction
capacitance
Bypass and
reservoir
capacitance
Antenna terminals
DC output line
Logic circuits
jXB
jXl
Rl
FIGURE 4.7
A simpliﬁed RFID label IC schematic. (From Ranasinghe, D.C., Leong, K.S., Ng, M.L., and Cole, P.H., IEEE 2005
International Workshop on Antenna Technology: Small Antennas and Novel Metamaterials, New York, USA, 2006,
 2005 by IEEE. With permission.)
FIGURE 4.8
(a) A parallel equivalent circuit of an RFID IC input imped-
ance where (b) is a series equivalent circuit of the chip input
impedance.
R
C
Rseries
Cseries
(b)
(a)
70
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

The ﬁnal chip impedance seen by the antenna is also affected by the technique used to
attach the RFID IC to the tag. Generally, there are two different types of attachments
employed. When the IC is in a ﬂip-chip package (which is the industry standard technique
for low-cost packaging) as shown in Figure 4.9, the RFID ICs can be directly attached to the
antenna. The RFID ICs may also be obtained as a ‘‘strap’’ where the IC is connected to two
mounting pads with a thin superstrate as shown in Figure 4.10.
Typically a resistance R of around 1300 V in parallel with a 1.1 pF capacitor C—which is
that quoted for an Alien Class I Gen I RFID IC fabricated with CMOS technology and at the
threshold of operation of the IC (Alien Technologies, 2005)—resulting in a series equivalent
circuit impedance of 18.95–155.8j V can be expected from an RFID IC strap. Generally, it is
good practice before designing an antenna to measure the input impedance of the chip at
various operating frequencies using a network analyzer. Such a measurement method is
outlined in detail in Eunni (2004).
Maximum power transfer requirements dictate that the antenna impedance should be a
conjugate match to ensure the greatest possible performance from the RFID label (mea-
suring the performance of an RFID label is discussed in Section 4.3.5). Hence considering
the requirements of practicability and maximum power transfer, the ‘‘best’’ antenna for an
RFID IC is a planar inductive antenna with a reactance that is able to tune out the
capacitance of the label IC and also provide an adequate match for the real impedance of
the label IC. The following section will consider modeling the input impedance of a typical
label antenna by formulating a three-parameter circuit model.
RFID IC
Thin substrate
(polyethylene
terephthalate, PET)
Antenna terminals
(etched out copper
or aluminum)
Protective coating
FIGURE 4.9
A direct chip attachment of an RFID IC.
RFID IC
Mounting pad
FIGURE 4.10
An RFID strap.
Far-Field Tag Antenna Design Methodology
71

4.3.2
Label Antenna Equivalent Circuits
Equivalent circuits for small magnetic ﬁeld-sensitive antennas and electric ﬁeld-sensitive
antennas are shown in Figures 4.11 and 4.12. The range of validity of these equivalent
circuits is where the reactance properties of the antenna may be described by a single
parameter, L or C. When the antenna is larger, the reactance properties can be described by
an appropriate mixture of L and C.
In Figure 4.11, the source voltage is the voltage induced in the ﬂux-collecting area of the
coil by magnetic ﬁelds other than those ﬁelds which resulted from current ﬂowing within
the coil itself. Those induced voltages are represented by the voltage drop in the inductor L.
The parameters Rl and Rr are loss and radiation resistances, respectively. Figure 4.1 is an
example of a magnetic ﬁeld-sensitive label antenna.
In Figure 4.12, the source voltage is the voltage developed across the self-capacitance of
the antenna when it is open-circuited, as a result of the current injected into it, when it is
short-circuited, by the displacement current density of the electric ﬁeld in which the
antenna is immersed. The parameters Rl and Rr are loss and radiation resistances, respect-
ively. Figure 4.4 is an example of an electric ﬁeld-sensitive label antenna.
Calculating the parameters of the magnetic ﬁeld-sensitive antenna is straightforward,
the relevant formulae being obvious and outlined in many elementary electromagnetic text
books (Stutzman and Thiele, 1988; Cheng, 1989; Balanis, 1996; Kraus and Marhefka, 2002).
For the electric ﬁeld antennas, determination of the relevant parameters is sometimes not
so simple, as electrostatic ﬁeld solutions for the relevant geometries are not readily
available. Therefore, empirical results or numerical modeling are more commonly
employed for useful shapes.
Thus far, the nature of RFID ICs and the nature of the impedance of label antennas have
been considered. Clearly, matching a label’s input impedance to a label antenna’s impe-
dance is vital. While an antenna impedance may be adjustable by design variations (as
illustrated in Section 4.5), the input impedance of an RFID IC cannot be altered without
using external circuit components. This is an undesirable result. The following section
investigates the practicability of matching to an RFID IC’s input impedance at UHF
frequencies allocated for RFID around the world.
4.3.3
Matching to an RFID Chip Impedance
Before embarking on the design of tag antennas, it is useful to consider the impedance to
which a tag antenna must be matched. A useful tool for evaluating the practicability of
FIGURE 4.11
An equivalent circuit for a small magnetic ﬁeld-sensitive antenna.
+
_
Vs
Rr
L
Rl
FIGURE 4.12
An equivalent circuit for a small electric ﬁeld-sensitive antenna.
C
+
_
Vs
Rr
Rl
72
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

such a match can be derived from the Bode and Fano theorem (Fano, 1950). The theorem
can be used to investigate the existence of any theoretical limitations to matching to an
RFID IC’s chip impedance (Ranasinghe et al., 2006). Figure 4.13 shows a circuit with a real
source impedance, a lossless matching network, and an input impedance of an RFID IC
represented by a parallel RC load. According to Bode and Fano, the fundamental limitation
on impedance matching takes the form given in the following equation (Fano, 1950):
ð1
0
ln 1
G
j j dv  p
RC :
(4:1)
In Equation 4.1, G is the reﬂection coefﬁcient of the load and its assumed lossless matching
network with respect to the source impedance RS, and R and C represent the resistance and
capacitance, respectively, in the parallel RC load (Figure 4.8).
Equation 4.1 places a maximum limit on the integral to p=RC. In order to completely use
the given limit of p=RC for a desired angular frequency bandwidth (Dv), jGj should be unity
along the entire band except for the bandwidth, Dv under consideration, thus implying a
complete mismatch outside Dv. Considering a minimum achievable mismatch over Dv and
thus a minimum bound on the reﬂection coefﬁcient of jGjDv over the bandwidth, Dv (refer to
Figure 4.14) yields Equation 4.2 which reveals that for a given RC load there is a compromise
between the maximum matching bandwidth and the maximum power transfer to the load:
G
j jDv  e
1
2DfRC:
(4:2)
If matching is to be performed to satisfy a certain acceptable jGjDv (and hence, amount of
power transfer), the bandwidth may have to be reduced. On the other hand, if matching is
to be performed over a certain given bandwidth, the amount of power transfer to the load
may have to be compromised.
VS
RS
Lossless
matching
network
R
C
FIGURE 4.13
A circuit with a lossless matching network and a parallel RC load. (From Ranasinghe, D.C., Leong, K.S., Ng, M.L., and
Cole, P.H., IEEE 2005 International Workshop on Antenna Technology: Small Antennas and Novel Metamaterials, New York,
USA, 2006,  2005 by IEEE. With permission.)
Reflection coefficient ⏐⏐
w (rad/s)
1
w 1
w 2
w 
⏐⏐w
FIGURE 4.14
Theoretically possible minimum reﬂection coefﬁcient for the best
usage of p=RC over a bandwidth from v1 to v2. (From Ranasinghe,
D.C., Leong, K.S., Ng, M.L., and Cole, P.H., IEEE 2005 International
Workshop on Antenna Technology: Small Antennas and Novel Metama-
terials, New York, USA, 2006,  2005 by IEEE. With permission.)
Far-Field Tag Antenna Design Methodology
73

Using the bandwidths outlined in Table 4.1, calculations of reﬂection coefﬁcient limit
established in Equation 4.2 are performed for the four regions: the United States, Europe,
Japan, Australia, and all of these regions simultaneously. The results are outlined in
Table 4.2. In the calculations, a chip resistance R of 1.3 kV and a chip capacitance C of
1.1 pF is assumed.
All the values for jGjDv therein are small. This implies that the allocated bandwidths for
RFID usage pose no theoretical limitations toward achieving a good impedance match to
the input impedance of the RFID IC.
However, recent advances in the fabrication of Schottky diodes and low-power CMOS
processes have yielded RFID chips with input chip impedance values where the resistance
R is about 2500 V with a parallel capacitance C of around 500 fF. In this light, the cases
presented earlier are reevaluated and the results are presented in Table 4.3.
From the values in Table 4.3, it can be observed that in practice, if the tag chip has an
R ¼ 2500 V and a C ¼ 500 fF, the theoretically achievable minimum reﬂection coefﬁcient
becomes even smaller and still presents no practical limit to the maximum power transfer
to an RFID chip across the UHF RFID bands in the regions considered earlier.
4.3.4
Environmental Constraints
Understanding the effects of various environmental factors on a tag antenna is important
so that suitable antennas can be developed to overcome any difﬁculties.
Liquids and metals play an important role in the performance with respect to the manner
in which they affect electromagnetic waves. High dielectric and lossy materials such as
liquids absorb or attenuate UHF RF energy and detune tag antennas reducing radiation
efﬁciency, while metals can either absorb or reﬂect RF energy depending on the amount
and shape of the metal. The unwanted result of a tag’s reduced performance when
attached to materials with high dielectric constants or metallic objects needs to be taken
into consideration during the tag design process.
TABLE 4.1
Regulated Frequency Allocations in the UHF Band for RFID Use
in a Number of Major Geographic Regions around the World
Region
Frequency Range (MHz)
Bandwidth (MHz)
Europe
865–868
3
United States
902–928
26
Japan
952–954
2
Australia
918–926
8
TABLE 4.2
Theoretical Bounds on Reﬂection Coefﬁcients
(R ¼ 1300 V, C ¼ 1.1 pF)
Region
Theoretical Bound on jGjDv
United States
1.44 3 106
Europe
2.42 3 1051
Japan
1.18 3 1076
Australia
1.04 3 1019
All regions
0.032
74
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

Even a carton of photocopy paper may prove problematic for RFID labeling because
the liquid that affects RFID performance does not have to be an actual liquid. Paper
typically has high moisture content, and it does absorb RF energy. Wooden pallets made
with green or indeed anything but oven-dried wood present the same challenge because
of the moisture content. Fresh fruits and vegetables and frozen items will also pose
liquid-related problems for RFID. It is important to evaluate whether the items have the
potential to hold or attract moisture when considering the design of RFID tag antennas for
tagging the items.
Metal is perhaps more of a challenge because it may either reﬂect or absorb electromag-
netic waves. However, the behavior of electromagnetic waves next to a metal surface is
predictable as opposed to the effects mentioned previously. In certain situations,
the presence of metal can actually improve the performance of an RFID tag. Irregular
metal, on the other hand, will either absorb the signal or reﬂect it in random directions.
Metallized foil bags and even antistatic bags can act as metal. Some materials have metallic
contents or coatings that need to be considered. Rice, for example, has been stated as
having a high mineral iron content that affects RFID performance (Clarke et al., 2005).
The choice of void ﬁll can affect RFID. Bubble wrap and loose Styrofoam void ﬁll have
very little effect on RFID, whereas dense foam will absorb some RF energy. Crushed or
formed paper, corrugate cardboard will have little effect unless it is very densely packed
(and then may pose the potential of the liquid problem).
While it may seem obvious that certain products will have an adverse effect on RFID, it
is possible to design antennas that take advantage of the nature of the surrounding
material properties. There are RFID tag designs that can be placed directly on ﬂat metal
surfaces. These tags employ a relatively thin layer of dielectric insulation between the tag
and the metal surface. This effectively turns the metal surface into part of the antenna
(a ﬁnite ground plane) and can signiﬁcantly improve performance by using the metal to
reﬂect the RF signal back to the interrogator that would otherwise radiate into the item.
An example of an antenna design for tagging metallic objects can be found in Ranasinghe
et al. (2004) which resulted from the investigation into the tagging of drill strings employed
in oil rigs.
4.3.5
Performance Measure
While addressing the topic of RFID label antenna design, it is important to consider the
practical performances of such antennas when attached to an RFID label IC. The accepted
metric for such performance comparisons involves taking a read range measurement. The
read range of a tag is the maximum distance between a reader antenna and the tag before
the reader fails to decode the tag responses while the tag antenna is favorably oriented
to the reader antenna propagation ﬁeld. These read range measurements may be taken in
TABLE 4.3
Theoretical Bounds on Reﬂection Coefﬁcients
(R ¼ 2500 V, C ¼ 500 fF)
Region
Theoretical Bound on jGjDv
United States
2.08 3 107
Europe
1.24 3 1058
Japan
1.38 3 1087
Australia
1.93 3 1022
All regions
0.0014
Far-Field Tag Antenna Design Methodology
75

an anechoic chamber, or may be performed in a more practical environment where the tag
is to be deployed.
In the theoretical estimation of read range for systems operating in the UHF spectrum,
two scenarios can be analyzed. These are
. Tag power constrained analysis
. Reader sensitivity constrained analysis
In the tag power constrained analysis, it is assumed that the system is adequately designed
so that the sensitivity of the interrogator’s RF receiver is not a limiting factor (this might be
the case in the event of a reader using a bistatic antenna conﬁguration). In such a scenario,
the theoretical read range of a tag with a lossless antenna may be calculated from the Friis
equation given as
Pr
Pt
¼ grgt
l
4pr

2
,
(4:3)
where
Pr is the available source power from the tag antenna
Pt is the transmitted power
l is the associated wavelength of the frequency used
r is the distance between the transmit and the receive antennas
gr is the gain of the transmit antenna
gt is the gain of the receiving antenna
Thus the read range of a tag may be evaluated as given in Equation 4.4 where the radiated
power of the reader and the reader antenna gain are replaced by EIRP and the available
source power required at the tag antenna is Pr(tag):
r  l
4p
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
EIRPreadergtag
Pr(tag)
s
:
(4:4)
Equation 4.4 is useful only if an expression can be obtained for Pr(tag). This requires careful
consideration in case of passive tag technology. Thus if the minimum amount of power
required to operate a tag is known to be PIC, and it can be assumed that the tag is receiving
that power, and the efﬁciency of the rectiﬁer structure is h and km is the power transfer
factor from the antenna to the tag circuit in the presence of modulation, that is, the ratio of
the power reaching the tag circuit in the presence of modulation at the greatest mismatch to
the available source power from the tag antenna, then Equation 4.5 gives the minimum
power required by a tag at its threshold of operation. Then it is possible to use Pr(tag) from
Equation 4.5 in Equation 4.4 to obtain a maximum possible read range when having
enough power to energize the tag is the constraint:
Pr(tag) ¼ PIC
hkm
:
(4:5)
76
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

If however it is the sensitivity of the interrogator’s RF receiver that is limiting, it is
necessary to ﬁnd the distance at which the received signal at the interrogator’s receiver
just meets the SNR of the receiver. Hence, the minimum received power Pr(reader) at which
the SNR of the receiver is satisﬁed is given in the following equation:
Pr(reader) ¼ (S=N)minkTB(NF),
(4:6)
where
NF is the noise factor of the receiver
B is the bandwidth of the receiver
k is Boltzman’s constant
T is the absolute reference temperature used in the deﬁnition of the receiver noise
factor NF
(S=N)min is the minimum signal-to-noise ratio needed to decode a tag reply successfully
Thus the minimum read range can be calculated by considering the one-way signal
strength for a transmission from a tag to an interrogator with the required interrogator
received power given by Equation 4.6. The result is the read range given in Equation 4.7,
wherein the power Pt(tag) is the power scattered back from the tag and where it is assumed
that the tag is just sufﬁciently energized:
r ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
Pt(tag)greadergtag
Pr(reader)
s
l
4p


:
(4:7)
To calculate Pt(tag), we need the ratio of the effective modulated power radiated by the tag
antenna to the available source power from the tag antenna. We call this ratio kb. Thus,
Pt(tag) ¼ kbPr(tag):
(4:8)
The value of kb depends on how good we are in designing the modulator, and exactly how
we deﬁne the effective modulated power, and that depends in turn on the form of
modulation employed. In an inefﬁcient design (in which most of the available source
power is going to power the tag, so not much is backscattered), its value could be small.
It could also be small if most of the power is backscattered but not in a way that is time
varying or is a good expression of the type of modulation desired. Alternatively its value
could be up to about 1, in the case where not much of the available source power goes into
powering the tag and most is backscattered, and we are successfully using, for example,
binary phase shift keying modulation.
In practice, the read ranges always need to be veriﬁed using practical measurements as
practical RF propagation losses have not been taken into account in the Friis equation given
in Equation 4.3 and it is not easy to model the propagation loss in various environments
without extensive experimental data.
One simple method for evaluating tag performance in terms of tag read range in an ideal
propagation context is to use an anechoic chamber. The reader antenna can be placed at
one end of the anechoic chamber, whereas the tag is placed along the axis of maximum
radiation from the reader antenna. The tag should be correctly oriented on a polystyrene
stand so that there is maximum coupling between the tag antenna and the reader antenna.
The reader output can be monitored while the tag is moved away from the reader ant-
enna to obtain the read range. However, it may be more practical to conduct the read range
Far-Field Tag Antenna Design Methodology
77

measurement in an environment suitable to that in which the tag is to be deployed as it
would give a more useful indication of the performance of the tag with respect to the
application.
The following section considers identifying necessary tag antenna design requirements
for a given application. Such identiﬁcation should be undertaken before embarking on the
antenna design process. Identifying requirements will help the translation of application
requirements to design requirements for an RF engineer allocated to the task of designing
a tag antenna.
4.4
Label Antenna Design Methodology
4.4.1
Design Requirements
Table 4.4 provides a necessary set of considerations that should be deliberated upon to
identify design requirements before embarking on the tag antenna design process.
4.4.2
Design Methodology
Generally, RFID label size requirements are restricted by costs and practical aspects that
depend on the application and the frequency of operation. Most practical tag antennas for
UHF operation are physically small and hence tend to have a gain of around 1.76 dBi.
These antennas also have moderately small bandwidths of operation. Generally, designing
an antenna that is tunable in manufacture is highly desirable (Rao et al., 2005). This implies
TABLE 4.4
An Outline for Evaluating Antenna Design Requirements
Operational
frequency band
Operational frequency of the tag will depend on the country or countries in which the
tag is deployed. Table 4.1 outlines a list of such frequency bands in the UHF spectrum
Tag dimensions
Tag size requirements will depend on the application. For instance, the tag may need to
be printed on a label for sticking on a cardboard box, embedded in plastic casing or
placed within the conﬁned space of a bottle cap
Label cost constraints
Keeping the cost of a tag to a minimum will limit the choice of RFID ICs that can be used,
as well as the type of material that can be used for constructing the antenna. Generally,
tag antennas are constructed using copper, aluminum, or silver ink, while the material
used for the substrate may be anything from paper, polyester to FR4 dielectrics
Read range
requirements
Consider the read range required by the particular application. Generally less efﬁcient,
smaller antennas may be used for smaller read range requirements. The read range is
also affected by the electromagnetic compatibility regulations which control the EIRP
or ERP of the reader antenna. Another important consideration is the tag orientation
during an interrogation. This requires understanding the radiation pattern of the tag
antenna; certain applications may require an almost omnidirectional directivity
pattern, whereas others may only require tags to radiate in a particular direction
Objects to be tagged
It is important to consider the nature of the item on which the tag antenna is placed as
the tag antenna can be designed to be suitable to the surface on which the tag is placed
(such as metal or cardboard) or tuned for optimal performance based on the contents
of the tagged item (such as liquids)
Operational
conditions
The antenna design, material used, and the antenna package need to take into account
the environmental condition to which a tag may be exposed. For instance, tags may be
subjected to a range of temperature, pressure, or mechanical stresses depending on the
application
78
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

that the antenna impedance can be varied easily in a deterministic or a predictable manner
by tuning a certain physical dimension or dimensions of an antenna. This will allow the
same antenna design to achieve optimal performance when coupled to a range of different
RFID ICs, or when the antenna is to be placed on different packaging materials or used in
different frequency bands (as may be the case in porting an antenna design suitable for
operation from the United States to Japan).
A systematic method for designing an RFID label antenna is shown in the form of a ﬂow
chart in Figure 4.15. This methodology is an expansion of the approach to tag antenna
design found in Rao et al. (2005).
Once the antenna requirements are established by extracting them from the required
application scenario, it is possible to look at the types of materials suitable for constructing
the antenna in terms of cost constraints and operational conditions of the application. It is
then important to determine the input impedance of the RFID IC in a selected package at
the threshold of operation; this might be obtained from the manufacturer or may be
obtained by direct measurement using a network analyzer.
Selecting a suitable antenna type is now possible; there are numerous designs available
such as simple loops, dipoles, meander lines, spirals, and patch antennas. However, if an
antenna parametric study reveals that it is not possible to obtain the required input
impedance with a standard design within the design constraints, a designer is required
to think more imaginatively.
Identify the antenna requirements based on the application
Identify material suitable for constructing the antenna
Obtain the input impedance of the RFID IC to be used
Identify suitable antenna types, its dimensions, and
impedance properties if possible
Consider a one-element or two-element matching circuit
Integrate the matching circuit elements to the antenna
Does varying physical dimensions
yield a suitable conjugate match
to the RFID IC impedance?
Construct prototypes and measure performance
Perform simulations, measurements, and optimizations
Does the antenna meet design
requirements?
Ready for
manufacture
Yes
No
FIGURE 4.15
A label antenna design methodology
illustrated using a simple ﬂow chart to
outline the process steps.
Far-Field Tag Antenna Design Methodology
79

A simple approach is to consider a single element or two elements matching network
that will transform the antenna impedance to form a conjugate match to the chip imped-
ance. Such a matching network should then be physically implemented as part of the
antenna because the use of separate lumped circuit elements is an expensive, lossy, and less
area efﬁcient method.
The resulting RFID tags inevitably tend to be too complex for analytical investigation
and various numerical electromagnetic analysis software based on method of moments for
planar two-dimensional structures (MoM), ﬁnite element method (FEM), or ﬁnite differ-
ence time domain (FDTD) method for more complicated three-dimensional structures may
be used.
Before using design tools, it is important to develop a simulation strategy and evaluate
the performance of the tools by comparing simulated results with those from analytical
and measurement results. Then, new antenna designs can be modeled and simulated to
obtain desired antenna gain, input impedance, and to understand the relationship between
tag antenna dimensions and antenna input impedance, which is critical for delivering
maximum power to the tag.
Once an optimal antenna design has been developed, prototypes of the antenna can be
built and their performance can be evaluated by taking read range measurements under
controlled conditions (such as an anechoic chamber) or in the practical environment in
which the tags are to be deployed. In the event the tag design is unsatisfactory, the whole
design process needs to be iterated to obtain an antenna of adequate performance.
The following sections illustrate, in detail, the design of two tag antennas suitable for
tagging cases in a supply chain application, such as those required in fast-moving con-
sumer goods (FMCG) applications, depicted in Figure 4.16.
4.5
Illustrating a Novel Antenna Design
The antenna design methodology is best illustrated with an example. Considering the
design of an RFID label for labeling cases constructed from corrugated cardboard boxes at
a distribution center, a number of antenna requirements can be found.
FIGURE 4.16
An illustration depicting the use of RFID
labels in a supply chain application for
tracking cases. Here the RFID portal is
constructed by using an array of reader
antennas at various orientations to ensure
maximum coupling to tags placed at, pos-
sibly, different orientations.
RFID portal
(a suitable reader antenna
configuration to allow maximum
coverage of RFID tags)
Cases are labeled with RFID tags
Packed cases placed
on a conveyor belt
80
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

4.5.1
Antenna Requirements, Material, and RFID IC Impedance
Assuming the tags have to operate under the electromagnetic compatibility constraints
enforced by the FCC (2005), the following requirements can be outlined:
. A convenient size for an antenna for labeling most cases is approximately a credit
card size label (86 mm 3 54 mm).
. The frequency range of operation required is 902–928 MHz.
. While using a reader radiating 4 W EIRP to meet general application requirements,
tags should have read range of not <2 m.
. Since tag orientation can be ﬁxed on boxes, there are no constraints on the
directivity of the antenna.
. Losses in the antenna should be kept small.
Given the earlier requirements, copper was chosen as the material of choice for the
antenna due to its superior conductivity. Considering the skin depth of copper, copper
sheets of thickness 32 mm should be used. The substrate considered needs to be
ﬂexible, thin, and have a low dielectric loss. Polyesters with low dielectric constants
such as polyethylene terephthalate (PET) of thickness 50 mm are considered for the
application.
The RFID straps used will be those from Alien Technologies. The straps have a Class
I Generation 1 chip where the input impedance of a strap is typically 18.95  155.8j V based
on the parallel input impedance values of R ¼ 1300 V and C ¼ 1.1 pF (refer to Figure 4.8a) at
915 MHz.
4.5.2
Antenna Type
It is possible to extend the analysis and use the results of Brown and Woodward (1952) to
analyze bow-tie antennas. Then, the Ansfot HFSS simulation tool (Ansoft, 2005) can be
used to ﬁne-tune the antenna impedance properties to form a match to the label IC’s input
impedance.
A bow-tie antenna may be thought of as a construction of a monopole wedge above
ground where the perfect ground plane is removed and the image under the ground plane
is replaced by a physical structure as illustrated in Figure 4.17.
A three-parameter model for the bow tie can be developed using a detailed study
undertaken of results ﬁrst published by Woodward for a monopole wedge above ground.
The empirical model for an equivalent circuit for a bow-tie antenna is shown in Figure 4.18.
The model, which is derived from our experimental results that conﬁrm Woodward’s
results, has an associated reactance X(v) which is that of a capacitor CB, whose value is
that of the self-capacitance of the bow tie, and an inductor LB, placed in the series circuit
shown. The radiation resistance of the bow tie is represented by RBr.
Calculating the self-capacitance as depicted by the ﬁeld lines of Figure 4.19 of the bow-tie
antenna by seeking analytical solutions to Laplace’s equation presents a difﬁcult problem.
Nevertheless a numerical solution is tractable and has been performed using the method of
moments to provide a suitable numerical approximation to the self-capacitance of a bow-
tie antenna.
The radiation resistance outlined in the model parameters has signiﬁcance in two ways.
It allows the amount of radiated power to be calculated for a transmitting antenna, and
also provides for a label antenna a means of calculating, using the reciprocity theorem, the
effective electric ﬂux collecting area of the antenna as depicted in Figure 4.20.
Far-Field Tag Antenna Design Methodology
81

FIGURE 4.17
A bow-tie antenna with the height hB and ﬂare angle a.
Vs
+
_
hB
Top plate
Flare angle
a
Bottom plate
FIGURE 4.18
A three-parameter equivalent circuit model for a bow-tie antenna.
+
_
Vs
RBr
LB
CB
FIGURE 4.19
Field conﬁguration around a bow-tie antenna used for the calcula-
tion of its self-capacitance.
82
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

The model parameters outlined in Figure 4.18 will vary for different ﬂare angles and
heights of the bow-tie antenna, as is the case for a wedge above a ground plane antenna.
However, within the range of validity of the equivalent circuit, which depends on the
dimensions of the structure in relation to a wavelength, the radiation resistance, the
capacitance, and the inductance can be expected to scale up with increasing height for a
speciﬁc ﬂare angle. The radiation resistance, the capacitance, and the inductance variation
for a bow-tie antenna can be summarized by the general expressions provided in Table 4.5,
where the height hB refers to the height of the bow-tie antennas as depicted in Figure 4.17.
In Table 4.5 the constants KBC and KBL are dimensionless quantities, whereas KBR is
measured in ohm. Table 4.5 is a summary of the parameters obtained for a bow-tie antenna
using the relationship between a bow-tie antenna and a wedge above a ground plane
antenna, using image theory based on the results from Brown and Woodward (1952), and
using our own experiments.
However, the derived expressions are suitable only for electrically small antennas obey-
ing the strict limit given by the following equation:
hB << l
3 ,
(4:9)
where hB is the height of the antenna as indicated in Figure 4.17.
TABLE 4.5
Expressions for Evaluating Bow-Tie Antenna Circuit Model Parameters
Description
Expression
Capacitance (CB) in farads
KBC«0hB
Inductance (LB) in henrys
KBLm0hB
Radiation resistance (RBr) in ohms
KBR (bhB)2
FIGURE 4.20
Field conﬁguration for calculating the effective area of a bow-
tie antenna.
Far-Field Tag Antenna Design Methodology
83

4.5.3
Bow-Tie Antenna Design
While it is possible to ﬁnd a bow-tie antenna with an adequate radiation resistance to
match to an RFID chip impedance of 18.95 V (refer to Figure 4.21), it is not possible to ﬁnd
a bow tie with a ﬂare angle and a height that will provide a conjugate match to the RFID
chip’s reactance as an examination of Figure 4.22 reveals that all bow-tie antennas of
<90 mm in height appear to be capacitive. Hence any resulting bow-tie antenna, while
possibly having the correct matching real impedance, will not be inductive to form a
conjugate match to the chip impedance (Table 4.5).
The following sections will consider a different design of a bow-tie antenna. The design
illustrates the design process for an RFID tag antenna and shows how a useful antenna can
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.09
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
hB
Resistance ()
a = 5
a = 10
a = 30
a = 40
a = 50
a = 60
a = 90
FIGURE 4.21
RBr of bow-tie antennas of various ﬂare angles evaluated using the expressions in Table 4.5.
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.09
4000
3500
3000
2500
2000
1500
1000
500
0
500
hB
Reactance ()
a = 5
a = 10
a = 30
a = 40
a = 50
a = 60
a = 90
FIGURE 4.22
Reactance of bow-tie antennas of various ﬂare angles (from the expressions in Table 4.6).
84
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

be designed starting with a more easily analyzed and understood antenna such as the
bow-tie antenna.
4.5.4
Bow-Tie Antenna with a Series Tuning Inductor
Considering an approximately credit card size, bow-tie antenna shows that the input
impedance is capacitive. This is true for any bow-tie antenna of <90 mm in height. We
must therefore seek a suitable matching circuit that can be built into the antenna to match
to an RFID chip’s input impedance. The simplest possible matching circuit design, which is
simple to physically incorporate into the antenna, will generally provide the most suitable
antenna design.
Considering the equivalent circuit of the bow-tie antenna, it is possible to contemplate a
matching element as illustrated in Figure 4.23 to achieve a match to the RFID chip
impedance. The tuning element, LSmatch can be physically incorporated into the antenna
design. Such a series inductor may be conceptualized as indicated in Figure 4.24. An
outline of the antenna design structure is given in Figure 4.25. The copper strip width,
lw, the size of the gap between the wings, g, and the amount of copper removed, ic, can then
be adjusted to ﬁnd a suitable inductor value to form a match between the bow-tie
impedance and the RFID IC impedance.
Taking a bow-tie antenna 80 mm in height, the properties of the antenna can be
calculated as outlined in Table 4.7 where the center frequency of operation is taken as
915 MHz. However, adding the inductive strip will modify the antenna model developed
earlier since the added strip will affect the self-capacitance and the inductance of the
model. Instead of using an empirical method, simulation results from Ansoft HFSS (ﬁnite
element method based simulation package) can be used to understand the effect of adding
TABLE 4.6
Empirical Values for Evaluating Bow-Tie Antenna Circuit
Model Parameters
Flare Angle
KBR (V)
KBL
KBC
5
7.5
0.2888
0.5275
10
8.5
0.2823
0.5875
30
11.0
0.2605
0.8175
40
11.5
0.2470
0.9875
50
12.0
0.2349
1.1525
60
12.5
0.2250
1.2500
90
15.0
0.2128
1.9000
Equivalent circuit of
the bow-tie antenna
Equivalent
circuit of
RFID IC
LSmatch
Lossless
matching
network
+
_
Vs
RBr
LB
CB
R
C
FIGURE 4.23
An RFID tag with a bow-tie antenna
and a simple matching circuit.
Far-Field Tag Antenna Design Methodology
85

the inductive strip. Figure 4.25 describes the variable parameters used in the simulations,
while Table 4.8 outlines the results of simulations performed at 915 MHz.
Increasing the inductance of the strip by altering the strip size increases the reactance of
the bow-tie antenna. It can also be observed that the addition of the large inductor not only
alters the reactance but also alters the radiation resistance of the antenna.
The reactance contribution to the impedance transformation from the series inductor can
be increased by reducing the width of the inductor, iw, increasing the size of the inductor
by reducing ic, or by reducing the gap, g, between inductance lines. The real impedance of
the antenna can easily be adjusted by increasing or reducing the height of the antenna as
outlined in the bow-tie antenna model in Section 4.5.2. These results broadly agree with the
manner in which a series inductor transforms the antenna impedances as shown in the
antenna equivalent circuit in Figure 4.23.
The simulation results suggest two possibilities for constructing the bow-tie antenna as
given in Table 4.9. The antenna parameters can be further evaluated for their merits in
terms of maximum power transfer to help a designer select the most suitable antenna
design for a speciﬁc application. The two different physical constructions (as shown in
Figures 4.26 and 4.27) were built to evaluate their performance.
Figures 4.28 and 4.29 show the impedance variation of the two bow-tie antenna designs
over an operational frequency range of 850–950 MHz. The change in real impedance over
FIGURE 4.24
A bow-tie antenna with a series tuning inductor.
z
y
x
FIGURE 4.25
Bow-tie antenna design structure with a series inductor.
hB
g
lw
ic
fx
fy
iw
86
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

the frequency range is similar for both designs and neither design provides an advantage
in impedance variations over frequency. Both designs can be expected to maintain a
reasonably low-radiation quality factor over a range of frequencies with the added beneﬁt
of being able to better mitigate the detuning effects from environmental factors.
TABLE 4.7
Bow-Tie Antenna Input Impedance Characteristics
Rr
CB
LB
hb
Input Impedance
25 V
0.8 pF
23.1 nH
80 mm
25 – 84j
TABLE 4.8
Simulation Results
hb
(mm)
lw
(mm)
iw
(mm)
ic
(mm)
g
(mm)
fy
(mm)
fx
(mm)
Input Impedance
(V)
71
1
6
2
9
1
1
17.00 þ 122.00j
71
1
7
5
9
1
1
16.47 þ 93.54j
72
1
7
5
8
2
1
16.82 þ 98.50j
72
1
7
2
8
2
1
18.75 þ 142.65j
72
1
7
2
8
2
2
18.97 þ 141.61j
72
2
9
2
8
2
1
16.165 þ 93.14j
72
1
4
3
8
2
1
17.68 þ 80.35j
74
1
6
2
9
1
2
20.35 þ 146.10j
75
1
4
3
5
1
2
19.093 þ 89.86j
75
1
6
2
9
1
2
21.345 þ 154.42j
76
1
3.5
3
4
1
2
19.52 þ 79.33j
76
1
4.5
3
4
1
2
20.5 þ 102.92j
76
1
6
2
9
1
1
22.732 þ 162.33j
76
1
6
3
9
1
1
22 þ 148j
78
1
6
4
7
1
1
17.8 þ 101.83j
78
1
6
3
7
1
1
18.312 þ 114.70j
78
1
6
2
7
1
1
18.95 þ 128.34j
78
1
6
5
7
1
1
17.32 þ 89.35j
79
1
6
6
9
1
1
18.054 þ 90.814j
79
1
6
5
9
1
1
23.929 þ 141.78j
79
1
6
2
6
2
1
19.37 þ 138.00j
81
1
6
5
7
1
1
26.65 þ 152.32j
81
1
6
6
7
1
1
19.433 þ 98.55j
TABLE 4.9
Tag Bow-Tie Antenna Conﬁgurations
Antenna
Name
hb
(mm)
lw
(mm)
iw
(mm)
ic
(mm)
g
(mm)
fy
(mm)
fx
(mm)
Input
Impedance
(V)
BowAS
72
1
7
2
8
2
2
18.97 þ 141.61j
BowS
74
1
6
2
9
1
2
20.35 þ 146.10j
Far-Field Tag Antenna Design Methodology
87

FIGURE 4.26
Bow-tie antenna design, BowS.
z
y
x
FIGURE 4.27
Bow-tie antenna design, BowAS.
z
y
x
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
850
860
870
880
890
900
910
920
930
940
950
0
5
10
15
20
25
Reactance
Real impedance
Frequency (MHz)
Real impedance ()
Reactance ()
FIGURE 4.28
BowAS impedance variation over a frequency range of 850–950 MHz obtained from simulated results.
88
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

Figure 4.30 shows the radiation pattern of the bow-tie antenna. As expected, the radi-
ation pattern conﬁrms that the antenna behaves similarly to an electric dipole.
The simulation tools can be used to create a better understanding of the functioning of
the bow-tie antenna and conﬁrm expectations. Figure 4.31 shows the surface current
distribution on the bow-tie antenna as it is fed with an oscillating current. The diagrams
show the current traversing from the feed point, outward toward the end of the bow-tie
wings, over a period of p=2 of the oscillating current.
A practical construction of the tag can be achieved using copper sheets 0.035 mm in
thickness or more to the speciﬁcations given in Table 4.9 and the description given in Figure
4.25. Then an RFID strap can be attached to the antenna terminals using a conductive
adhesive. Figure 4.32 shows one of the antennas constructed in the laboratory for testing
purposes. Read range measurements (conducted in an indoor laboratory environment) of
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
850
860
870
880
890
900
910
920
930
940
950
0
5
10
15
20
25
Reactance
Real impedance
Frequency (MHz)
Real impedance ()
Reactance ()
FIGURE 4.29
BowS impedance variation over a frequency range of 850–950 MHz obtained from simulated results.
Bow-tie
antenna
q = 0
q = /2
04.00
3.01
2.03
1.04
30
60
90
120
150
180
150
4.0
4.0
0.05
120
90
60
30
FIGURE 4.30
The radiation pattern of BowS antenna obtained from
simulated results.
Far-Field Tag Antenna Design Methodology
89

BowS constructed and placed against polystyrene foam boxes showed a maximum read
range of 7.30 m when the tag is favorably oriented with the reader antenna, and where the
transmitted power is 1 W, using a 6 dBi gain reader antenna with an interrogator with a
monostatic antenna conﬁguration. BowAS showed a maximum read range of 6.70 m.
Similar read ranges were obtained when the tags were placed against corrugated cardboard
boxes.
If ﬁne-tuning is required for maximum read range, the antenna dimensions can be
altered. One such simple adjustment is changing ic by stripping away small portions
of the inductor until maximum read range is obtained at a required frequency. While
simulation results are capable of giving a very accurate result, ﬁner adjustments almost
always need to be made manually, as described previously, to obtain the optimal tag
dimensions for optimum performance.
FIGURE 4.31
Surface current distribution plots of BowS.
FIGURE 4.32
A practical construction of the BowS antenna used in
laboratory tests.
90
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

4.6
Conclusions
This chapter has explored the subject of RFID label antenna design, and illustrated the
requirements that a successful label antenna must possess by exploring the nature of RFID
label antennas and designing two RFID label antennas for tagging cases. The two different
structural designs presented have illustrated the antenna design process outlined in this
chapter and produced two successful RFID label antenna designs.
The discussion earlier clariﬁes that RFID label antenna design limits the designer to
planar structures with inductive input impedance due to cost limitations and the nature of
the load impedance presented by an RFID chip. Consideration of an adequate size for an
antenna involves designing an antenna with an impedance that is a conjugate of the RFID
chip’s input impedance.
Considering the subject of matching bandwidth, an interpretation of the Bode–Fano
theorem provided a theoretical limit to the achievable power transfer to the RC load of an
RFID label IC. It has been observed that, in practice, if impedance matching is performed
over a certain bandwidth, there is a limit to the minimum achievable reﬂection coefﬁcient.
Thus for a given chip impedance (RC load), there is a compromise between the maximum
matching bandwidth and the maximum power transfer to the load.
The RFID label antennas presented in this section have many advantages. One of the
main advantages is the simplicity of the matching network. The bow-tie antenna required
only a simple matching network and both empirical and simulation methods were used in
designing that network. In addition, because of the small size of the antennas considered,
an excessively complex equivalent circuit for the antenna was not required. The antennas
are also easily tunable by trimming the size of the inductors. Future work may be used to
evaluate the performance of the antennas against various packaging materials.
Acknowledgment
The authors would like to thank Ms. M.L. Ng and Mr. K.S. Leong for assistance offered in
the construction of prototype tags shown in Figure 4.32.
References
Alien Technologies, RFID tags, ALC-140-xx RFID transponder IC (January 2005). Available at: http:==
www.alientechnology.com=products=rﬁd_tags.php
Ansoft Corporation Web site (2005, August). Available at: http:==www.ansoft.com.au
C.A. Balanis, Antenna Theory: Analysis and Design, New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1996.
G.H. Brown and O.M. Woodward, Experimentally determined radiation characteristics of conical
and triangular antennas, RCA Review, 425–452, 1952.
S.-Y. Chen and P. Hsu, CPW-fed folded-slot antenna for 5.8 GHz RFID tags, Electronic Letters, 24,
1516–1517, November 2004.
D.K. Cheng, Field and Wave Electromagnetics, 2nd ed., New York: Addison-Wesley Publishing, ch. 4,
1989.
R.H. Clarke, D. Twede, J.R. Tazelaar, and K.K. Boyer, Radio frequency identiﬁcation (RFID) per-
formance: the effect of tag orientation and packaging contents, Packaging Technology and Science,
19(1), 45–54, 2005.
Far-Field Tag Antenna Design Methodology
91

P.H. Cole, A study of factors affecting the design of EPC antennas and readers for supermarket
shelves, Auto-ID Center workshop, October 2003.
P.H. Cole, D.C. Ranasinghe, and B. Jamali, Coupling relations in RFID systems II: practical perform-
ance measurements, Auto-ID Center workshop, June 2003.
K. Eshraghian, P.H. Cole, and A.K. Roy, Electromagnetic coupling in subharmonic transponders,
Journal of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, 2, 28–35, 1982.
M.B. Eunni, A Novel Planar Microstrip Antenna Design for UHF RFID, Master thesis, A.M.A. College of
Engineering, Kancheepuram, Madras University, May 2004.
R.M. Fano, Theoretical limitations on the broadband matching of arbitrary impedances, Journal of the
Franklin Institute, 249, 57–83, January 1950.
FCC Regulations, Title 47, Telecommunications, ch. 1, Part 15, Radio frequency devices (August
2005). Available at: http:==www.fcc.gov
M. Hirvonen, P. Pursula, K. Jaakkola, and K. Laukkanen, Planar inverted-F antenna for radio
frequency identiﬁcation, Electronic Letters, 40, 848–850, July 2004.
Imping RFID Technology Series, The RFID Antenna: Maximum Power Transfer, Technical report, 2005.
J.D. Kraus and R.J. Marhefka, Antennas—For All Applications, 3rd ed., New York: McGraw-Hill, 2002.
K.S. Leong, M.L. Ng, D.M. Hall, and P.H. Cole, A small passive UHF RFID tag for livestock
identiﬁcation, IEEE 2005 International Symposium on Microwave, Antenna, Propagation and EMC
Technologies for Wireless Communications, 1, 67–70, August 2005.
G. Pope, M.Y. Loukine, D.M. Hall, and P.H. Cole, Innovative systems design for 13.56 MHz RFID,
Proceedings of the First Annual Wireless and Portable Design Conference, p. 240, September 15–18,
1997.
D.C. Ranasinghe, New Directions in Advanced RFID Systems, PhD thesis, School of Electrical and
Electronic Engineering, The University of Adelaide, 2007.
D.C. Ranasinghe, D.M. Hall, P.H. Cole, and D.W. Engels, An embedded UHF RFID label antenna for
tagging metallic objects, Proceedings of the 2004 Intelligent Sensors, Sensor Networks and Informa-
tion Processing Conference, Melbourne, Australia, pp. 337–342, December 14–17, 2004.
D.C. Ranasinghe, K.S. Leong, M.L. Ng, and P.H. Cole, Small UHF RFID label antenna design and
limitations, IEEE International Workshop on Antenna Technology: Small Antennas and Novel Meta-
materials, New York, March 2006.
K.V.S. Rao, P.V. Nikitin, and S.F. Lam, Antenna design for UHF RFID tags: a review and a practical
application, IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, 53(12), 3870–3876, 2005.
W.L. Stutzman and G.A. Thiele, Antenna Theory and Design, 2nd ed., New York: John Wiley & Sons,
1988.
Q. Xianming and Y. Ning, A folded dipole antenna for RFID, Proceedings of IEEE Antennas and
Propagation Society International Symposium, 1, 97–100, June 2004.
92
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

5
Contemporary RFID Reader Architecture
Behnam Jamali and Peter H. Cole
CONTENTS
5.1
Software-Deﬁned RFID Reader ......................................................................................... 94
5.1.1
Introduction ............................................................................................................. 94
5.1.2
Problem Statement.................................................................................................. 94
5.1.3
Solution..................................................................................................................... 94
5.1.4
Novel Properties of SDLR ..................................................................................... 95
5.1.4.1 Automatic Change of Modulation Scheme ........................................... 95
5.1.4.2 Peer to Peer Component Sharing............................................................ 96
5.1.5
Software versus Hardware.................................................................................... 96
5.1.6
Summary.................................................................................................................. 98
5.2
SDLR Architecture............................................................................................................... 98
5.2.1
Introduction ............................................................................................................. 98
5.2.2
Hardware Design.................................................................................................... 99
5.2.3
Microcontroller........................................................................................................ 99
5.2.4
Digital Signal Processors...................................................................................... 100
5.2.5
Host Port Interface................................................................................................ 100
5.2.5.1 HPI Boot Process ..................................................................................... 101
5.2.5.2 Software Description............................................................................... 102
5.2.6
Complex Programmable Logic Devices ............................................................ 103
5.2.7
Analog-to-Digital Converter ............................................................................... 103
5.2.8
UHF Module.......................................................................................................... 103
5.2.8.1 Oscillator................................................................................................... 103
5.2.8.2 Transmit Chain ........................................................................................ 104
5.2.8.3 Receive Chain........................................................................................... 104
5.2.9
Software Design .................................................................................................... 105
5.2.9.1 Device Drivers.......................................................................................... 105
5.2.9.2 open() ........................................................................................................ 106
5.2.9.3 close()......................................................................................................... 106
5.2.9.4 ioctl().......................................................................................................... 106
5.2.9.5 read() ......................................................................................................... 106
5.2.9.6 write()........................................................................................................ 106
5.2.10 EPC Module........................................................................................................... 107
5.3
Conclusion .......................................................................................................................... 107
References.................................................................................................................................... 107
93

5.1
Software-Deﬁned RFID Reader
Wireless communication is becoming softer and softer. This means that radios, terminals,
and networks are becoming reconﬁgurable and programmable. Software and cognitive
radios are becoming one of the big trends in this ﬁeld. Although these concepts have been
studied for decades, many challenges remain making this vision a reality. In this work we
study several aspects of a software-based RFID reader, including experimentation, imple-
mentation, and theoretical work.
5.1.1
Introduction
RFID systems are demanding more data, faster logging, and higher interrogation rates, so
they require a powerful system that can manage information from a variety of sources,
store the data, and transmit it reliably and continuously for long periods of time to other
readers or a host PC. In addition, data logging is an extremely important part of RFID
because it is the best method for determining what happens during the tag interrogation
and for testing software strategies and protocol efﬁciencies. In the near future, software
will do much more than running a fancy graphical user interface (GUI). More and more of
the functionality of traditional radio systems will be implemented in software.
5.1.2
Problem Statement
When one hears the litany of reliability and readability woes that plague RFID in the
supply chain arena, it is possible to wonder if anyone is making any progress. The
problems with RFID range from nonfunctioning tags to environmental conditions, such
as temperature, humidity, and radio frequency interference, often from other readers. All
these effects can render tags unreadable. The challenge continues in a shipping and
handling process, in which tags can be thrown out of alignment (detuned) so that they
do not receive the reader signal at their resonant frequency. And the list goes on. Average
read rates are still under 80% (Lewis, 2004). Some of this is the result of tag failure, but
other important problems are incompatible tag and reader combinations as well as reader-
to-reader interference resulting in ghost tag reading (Engels, 2003).
Traditionally, RFID systems have been designed with only a single-reader scenario in
mind. The increasing use of RFID in multiple industries and also increasing deployment of
mobile RFID readers results in situations where readers are to operate in close proximity
with each other, leading to interference that in turn may result in incorrect or slower
operation.
The reader collision problem within an RFID network plays an important role in ubiquitous
RFID implementation (Engels, 2002). An anticollision protocol needs to be developed for a
mobile ad hoc network of RFID readers. One of the challenges of RFID development is to make
the tags as simple as possible even though doing so adds extra complexity to the reader. In a
case where multiple readers try to read the same tag, the tag cannot select a particular reader to
respond to. Therefore, passive tags, in which the collision may take place, are not able to take
part in the collision resolution. Reader–reader collision not only decreases throughput of tag
identiﬁcation, but also increases the bandwidth usage.
5.1.3
Solution
The software-deﬁned RFID reader, from here on referred to as SDLR, was developed to
solve this interoperability problem. Traditional radios use hardware circuits, ﬁxed at the
time of manufacture, to perform the high-speed signal-processing tasks that convert back
94
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

and forth between user data and the radio waveform. SDLR exploits advances in com-
ponents such as digital signal processors (DSPs) and ﬁeld-programmable gate arrays to
make the hardware generic, and move all of the waveform-speciﬁc tasks into software.
One SDLR device can support a variety of communications standards, just as one PC can
run a variety of software applications. SDLR has a number of beneﬁts in addition to
improving interoperability.
SDLR has signiﬁcant advantages over traditional RFID readers, that is why many Auto-
ID labs are supporting its development.
Desirable characteristics include:
1. Receive and transmit various modulation methods using a common set of hard-
ware.
2. Alter functionality of the system by downloading and running new software.
3. Possibility of adaptively choosing an operating frequency and a mode best suited
to prevailing conditions.
4. Opportunity to recognize and avoid interference with other RFID readers and
communication devices in a high-density reader environment.
5. Elimination of analog hardware and its cost, resulting in simpliﬁcation of data
logging reader architectures and improved performance.
6. Chance for new experimentation and development of new RFID protocols.
7. Support of multiple modulation formats.
8. System can be simulated Exactly.
9. Flexible bandwidth selection and management.
10. Ability to dynamically join or leave an ad hoc network formed by other readers in
proximity.
11. Ability to transmit neighbor information to other readers or a server along with a
request to transmit.
12. Ability to scan the status of its neighbors and respond accordingly.
13. On collision with other readers, reducing its power level by a predeﬁned factor.
Although SDLR offers beneﬁts as outlined above, a few obstacles remain to its universal
acceptance. Those include:
1. Difﬁculty of writing software for various target systems
2. Need for interfaces to digital signals and algorithms
3. Poor dynamic range in some of the designs
5.1.4
Novel Properties of SDLR
SDLR is capable of adjusting its software to suit the particular RFID environment in use.
The following sections give an overview of two novel applications that can be used to
demonstrate the advantages of integrating the software radio into an RFID reader.
5.1.4.1
Automatic Change of Modulation Scheme
A framework for changing modulation schemes on a per packet basis is given in a paper by
Bose and Hu (2001). In this case, the modulation scheme is determined by a packet header
Contemporary RFID Reader Architecture
95

that identiﬁes the modulation scheme. With proper signal processing it is possible to
determine the modulation scheme used at the transmitter (Keith Nolan and Linda Doyle,
2001). A novel approach would be for an RFID reader to detect the modulation scheme of
the incoming signal and then reconﬁgure its signal-processing stack accordingly. This
powerful feature can be used to provide ﬂexibility to readers not only in a multitag
environment but also in a high-density reader environment. An FPGA device could
dynamically load a new modulation scheme and become part of a new reader network
without changing the hardware.
A layer in the communication stack can be used to act as a modulation detector and
load the appropriate op-code into the FPGA device to demodulate the incoming signal. The
modulation detection layer must perform analysis of the incoming signal to determine
the modulation scheme used. This information can be added to attributes of the message
block as it is passed to the next layer in the stack. The DSP, then, makes sure that
the appropriate demodulation scheme is available to demodulate the incoming signal. If
it does not have the appropriate demodulation scheme then, it raises an alarm, notifying
the operator. Or alternatively it can send a request to the host computer asking for the
latest demodulation scheme.
5.1.4.2
Peer to Peer Component Sharing
Tuttlebee (1998) describes Over-The-Air Reconﬁguration (OTAR) for a software radio.
Using this concept, a remote device can be reprogrammed by the transfer of new software
into the device. Up to now, hardware restrictions have meant that OTAR has only been
used for one-off projects such as satellites.
Now, advances in hardware allow OTAR to be used in ad hoc networks. An ad hoc
network can be a connected set of RFID readers without any centralized or hierarchical
structure. In an ad hoc environment, readers might be communicating with tags using
many different protocols, modulation schemes, and location-speciﬁc parameters. The
ability of nodes to share information about network conditions would be of key impor-
tance to ensure reliable communication is happening.
In such a situation, readers can go beyond just sharing information by sharing their
network layer component as downloads. These network layers, for example, a new
demodulation scheme, can also be downloaded from a central computer. In the absence
of or unavailability of such a central computer system, the component sharing method can
be used as a backup or alternative procedure to keep the system running. For example, a
reader installed in a new location could contact its nearest operational reader using this
scheme to download the most popular communication environment variables used in that
area. These settings would include information such as available frequency allocation,
bandwidth, average number of tags per unit of time, number of readers and their locations,
noise conditions, etc. This information can be used to optimize communications. This
scheme therefore can tremendously increase the ﬂexibility of an RIFD system. Such
functionality is not available currently in any RFID system.
5.1.5
Software versus Hardware
A traditional radio receiver requires many analog components, as shown in Figure 5.1.
First the radio signal is received by the antenna and is then ampliﬁed by an LNA (low noise
ampliﬁer). These parts are shared by all the radio channels (Brannon, 1995). After these
components one receiver is required for each channel. The RF signal is down converted to
baseband by a mixer and a local oscillator. At each stage analog ﬁlters are used to
discriminate the signal outside the frequency band. The last step before the digitization
96
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

is to decompose the signal into inphase and quadrature components. These signals are then
converted in a narrow-band analog-to-digital converter (ADC). In UHF, for example, FCC
regulations limit the total bandwidth to 25 MHz while the channel bandwidth is about
500 kHz. A reader therefore can handle more than 50 channels.
If the ADC is moved closer to the antenna, more components can be shared for all
channels and more of the signal processing can be done in software (Figure 5.2). This
means that the hardware cost can be substantially reduced. An ideal software radio would
consist of an antenna, one ADC that samples directly on the antenna signal, one digital-to-
analog converter (DAC) that generates the outgoing antenna signal in the transceiver and a
DSP. All the signal processing should then be done in software in the DSP. This ideal
situation, however, is not feasible or very expensive with today’s technology.
RF
filter
Ant
RF/BB
conversion
BB
filter
User
FIGURE 5.1
Simpliﬁed hardware chain of a traditional RFID reader.
RF
filter
Ant
Decimating LPF
ADC
I
Q
DSP
I
Q
Digital Osc
cos(wt )
sin(wt )
Microcontroller
Ethernet
Serial
ROM
RAM
FIGURE 5.2
Simpliﬁed hardware and software chain of the SDLR receiver.
Contemporary RFID Reader Architecture
97

There are other advantages with a software radio architecture, besides the hardware
reduction. A software radio reader could be reconﬁgured without replacing any hardware.
The same hardware could also be used for different systems, for example, different tag
generations and different classes, since all the signal processing is performed in software.
The same software can be recompiled for a different processor and can be run on different
platforms such as in handheld terminals. Instead of implementing several RFID receivers
for different physical regions, one receiver could be used for all systems, and different
software packages could be used to switch between systems.
The requirements on the ADC in a software radio architecture are very high, as the
signal received by the antenna, for instance, does ﬂuctuate in amplitude by a large amount.
When such a wide dynamic range signal is converted in the ADC the dynamic range must
be high enough so that a weak tag reply can be separated from the harmonics and the
strong carriers. The SNR (signal to noise ratio) must also be high so that weak replies can
be seen above the noise ﬂoor.
5.1.6
Summary
This section has demonstrated a ﬂexible approach to implementation of an SDLR using
dynamic communication schemes. This platform provides a powerful solution for rapidly
building and testing new RFID communication systems and protocols, and it forms a basis
for developing highly ﬂexible RFID infrastructures.
The SDLR is an inexpensive and versatile solution to the collection of temporal and
spatial ﬁeld data for numerous research and educational endeavors. Deﬁning an open
architecture and implementing readers compatible with this architecture further enhances
interoperability. It can be integrated with a large array of available sensors. In the next
section we will discuss the SDLR in more detail.
5.2
SDLR Architecture
RFID systems are demanding more data, faster logging, and higher interrogation rates, so
they require a powerful system that can manage information from a variety of sources,
store the data, and transmit it reliably and continuously for long periods of time to other
readers or a host PC. In addition, data logging is an extremely important part of RFID
because it is the best method for determining what happens during the tag interrogation
and to test software strategies and protocol efﬁciencies.
5.2.1
Introduction
Today’s continuously changing technology in RFID brings the need to build futureproof
RFID readers. If the functions that were formerly carried out by hardware can be per-
formed by software, new functionality can be deployed easily by updating the software.
With the existing stringent requirements of RFID spectrum, increasing trafﬁc rates, and the
need to adhere with the regulations on spectrum usage, this requires even more sophisti-
cated signal-processing algorithms that can only be implemented on a software-based
RFID reader system.
The software-based RFID reader system will also allow the addition of new functionalities
with a short time-to-market. The SDLR includes excellent multipath and antenna diversity
performance, resulting in superb tag-reading performance. User-speciﬁc functions can be
conﬁgured easily to the performance required for different environments, and only the
98
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

software needs to be upgraded rather than a completely new hardware design. By integrat-
ing everything into software, fewer external components are required, which further
reduces the cost. This allows innovative new features and a rapid development cycle.
The SDLR can be part of a large distributed and dynamic system in which each reader is
responsible for the management of its own local population of tags that is changing
dynamically. In such a system, the reader acts as a gateway between the low-cost simple
tags and a very sophisticated distributed information system that can interface to enter-
prise software applications.
The fundamental physics of antennas and radio frequency propagation properties at
different frequencies cause devices operating at various bands to have different beneﬁts
and functionality trade-offs. Therefore, their use will remain a reality for a foreseeable
future. The SDLR must be designed around this notion as a modular system and be able to
support multiple frequency bands.
Furthermore, there is a need for ﬂexibility in RFID design because the speciﬁcations are
still changing, and even within a single speciﬁcation, the tags can be asked to reply at
different frequencies. For instance, tags working within the EPC Global Generation 2 speci-
ﬁcations can be asked to reply at a subcarrier frequency ranging from 40 up to 620 kHz.
Therefore, the reader must be able to be easily reconﬁgured to support frequency bands and
protocols of different geographical regions and those that will become available in the future.
5.2.2
Hardware Design
This section concerns the design and development of the hardware for a software-based
data logging reader. The prototype instrument developed for this project is called soft-
ware data logging reader (SDLR). It features a ColdFire network processor, which enables
it to perform high-speed data processing. It runs on an embedded Linux operating system
and comes with a number of PC-like functions built in that enable it to run additional
applications simultaneously. Additionally, it supports standard network protocols includ-
ing DHCP, UDP=IP over Ethernet, 820.11x (Wi-Fi), HTTP, and SNMP, and its superior
network adaptability enables its software to be easily implemented from remote sites.
The general setup of the implemented SDLR transceiver is shown in Figure 5.3. In the
following sections we discuss various considerations that led to its particular design.
A detailed description of the overall system and its individual components are also given.
5.2.3
Microcontroller
The microcontroller block is based on ColdFire, MC5407C3 Integrated Processor from
Freescale Semiconductor. The MC5407C3 core processor is identical to the MC68EC000
microprocessor and features full compatibility with the MC68000 as well. It operates at 162
MHz. It also provides a UART, SPI, LCD controller, Timer=PWM, and parallel I=O.
The microcontroller runs on uCLinux, which is an operating system for a microcontroller
without a memory management unit (MMU). uCLinux is derived from the 2.0 Linux
kernel. It is a multithreaded real-time operating system for embedded applications.
uCLinux is a mature, robust operating system that already supports a large number of
devices, ﬁle systems, and networking protocols. It gives the developers complete visibility
of the source code. Bug ﬁxes and new features are constantly added, tested, and reﬁned by
a large community of programmers and users.
The microcontroller block consists of an Ethernet controller, a UART Serial port, RAM,
and ROM. The system provides a boot strap mode function that allows system initializa-
tion as well as program=data download from ROM or via the UART (for debugging
purposes). The microcontroller uses its parallel interface to communicate and load DSP
Contemporary RFID Reader Architecture
99

ﬁrmware into the DSP chip. The microcontroller is responsible for high-level tasks such as
system management, self-test, database maintenance, and serving requests from other
readers or host PCs through a TCP=IP network, whereas the DSP handles low-level
computationally intensive processing tasks, such as FFT and ﬁltering.
5.2.4
Digital Signal Processors
This system uses the TMS320VC5416–160 ﬁxed-point, DSP chip from Texas Instruments,
operating at 160 MHz. The chip includes 256 kB of RAM and 32 kB of ROM, which is used
for both program and data storage. A six channel DMA, 16 bit host port interface (HPI),
and three multichannel asynchronous serial port (McBSP) are included. It operates with a
core voltage of 1.6 V, whereas the IO supply voltage is 3.3 V.
All the low-level signal processing such as FFT, ﬁltering, and waveform shaping are
done within the DSP chip. It operates in Microcontroller Mode, allowing it to boot from the
microcontroller board. It can be reset manually by power cycling or through the software
control of the microcontroller. At power up the DSP waits for the host microcontroller to
upload the DSP ﬁrmware into its internal RAM through its HPI. After the upload com-
pletes the DSP starts its boot cycle. More detail of the software architecture of the DSP
subsystem is provided later in this chapter.
5.2.5
Host Port Interface
HPI is an 8=16 bit parallel port used to interface a host processor or a device to the Texas
Instruments TMS320C5416 DSP (Texas Instruments Incorporated, 1997, 1999b). The HPI
enables glue-less interface with host processors containing single or dual data strobe in
HID
DSP
Microcontroller
CPLD
Ethernet
Serial
ROM
RAM
ADC/DAC
PLL, RF power
JTAG
RAM
RF modules
FIGURE 5.3
Simpliﬁed and abstract level hardware block diagram of SDLR.
100
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

addition to separate or multiplexed address and data buses. This section presents a
hardware interface and the accompanying software protocol that is involved in commu-
nicating between the host and target unit through the 8 bit HPI.
5.2.5.1
HPI Boot Process
The TMS320C5416 contains 4 k-words of on-chip ROM. A portion of this ROM is used to
store the bootloader code. The MP=MC bit of the processor is sampled at reset and its value
partially determines the conﬁguration of the DSP. If MP=MC is set low, then the C5416 is
set to microcomputer mode and the bootloader will start execution following reset. The
ROM code bootloader is located at memory address 0xF800.
There are two methods to signal the bootloader that HPI boot is active: INT 2 and
memory location 0x007F. The bootloader checks to see if the INT 2 pin is set to one (active);
if it is, then HPI mode is selected. The bootloader also clears the memory location 0x007F
and uses it as a software ﬂag to show that HPI boot is complete.
A simple way to achieve HPI boot is to connect pin HINT to INT 2 and wait at least 30
clock cycles for the bootloader to become ready. After this time delay the HPI code transfer
process can begin. After completing the code transfer, writing the start-up address to
memory location 0x007F will signal the DSP that the boot is complete. The TMS320C5416
will detect the change in the memory location 0x007F and branch to the indicated value
in that memory location and start program execution. The HPI boot is now complete and
the DSP will run normally.
The picture in Figure 5.4 shows the interconnection between the DSP’s HPI and the
ColdFire GP processor. As can be seen from the ﬁgure, the HPI is used in 8 bit mode and is
connected to the upper 8 bit of the data bus. Address lines A[1–4] are used to control the
HPI registers.
An 8 bit data bus exchanges information between the host and the target. Due to the
16 bit work structure of C5416, all data transfers with a host must consist of two consecu-
tive bytes. The dedicated HBIL pin indicates whether the ﬁrst or second byte is transferred.
HPIENA
D[7–15]
A[1]
A[2]
A[3]
A[4]
CLKOUT
CSB1\
INT2
GND
D[0–7]
GND
HINT
HCS\
HRDY
HPIL
HCNTL0
HCNTL1
R/W
TMS320VC5416
MC5407C3
Vcc
HPI16
GND
TP [23–30]
TP 32
TP 36
TP 37
TP 35
TP 38
TP 31
TP 33
FIGURE 5.4
HPI connection.
Contemporary RFID Reader Architecture
101

The HCNTL0=1 control inputs indicate which one of the three internal HPI registers is
accessed, as well as the type of access. In the proposed conﬁguration the host address bus
is used to drive these two control inputs along with HBIL and R=W signal.
The host can specify access to the HPIC, the HPIA, or HPID register. The HPIA serves as
a pointer to HPI memory. The HPID is used to transfer data to and from the address
pointed to by the HPIA. The HPID can also be referenced with the option of automatic
address increment. In this mode, a data read causes a postincrement of the HPIA, and a
data write causes a preincrement of the HPIA.
The HCS line serves as the enabling input for the HPI and must be low during an access.
Following shows the address bits connected to the HPI port and the corresponding
simpliﬁed C source code used to access the port for reading and writing.
=* The signals on the wires are shown in the following table.
A[4]
A[3]
A[2]
A[1]
A[0]
------------------------------------------------------------
1
0
0
0
3
HPIC Read (HI)
1
0
0
1
3
HPIC Read (LOW)
0
0
0
0
3
HPIC Write (HI)
0
0
0
1
3
HPIC Write (LOW)
0
1
HPID
1
0
HPIA
1
1
HPID (Auto-increment)
* =
#define HPI_PORT 0x202000
#define C_SEND 0x00 =* send ctl *=
#define A_SEND 0x08 =* send addr *=
#define D_SEND 0x04 =* send data, addr auto increment *=
#define N_SEND 0x0C =* send data, NO auto increment *=
#define HBIL_HI 0x02 =* Hi or Low byte *=
#define HPI_R 0x10 =* A[4] is RW\ *=
#define BYTE_HI(x) (x & 0xFF00)
#define BYTE_LO(x) (x << 8 & 0xFF00)
=* Writing to HPI *=
FPWV (HPI_PORT þ C_SEND) ¼ BYTE_HI (data);
FPWV (HPI_PORT þ C_SEND þ HBIL_HI) ¼ BYTE_LO (data);
=* Reading from HPI *=
data ¼ ( (FPWV(HPI_PORT þ A_SEND þ HPI_R)) & 0xFF00);
data þ ¼ ( (FPWV(HPI_PORT þ A_SEND þ HBIL_HI þ HPI_R)) & 0xFF00);
Host communication with the HPI is dependent on whether the HPI is ready to perform
a transfer as indicated by the HRDY output line. When HRDY is high, the HPI is ready
for a transfer to occur. When HRDY is low, it reﬂects that the HPI is busy completing the
previous transaction. Since HCS enables the HPI and it is inactive (low) when an access
occurs, it may be inferred that HRDY, which is always active high except for the duration
of an access, is always active when HCS is active.
5.2.5.2
Software Description
Theoriginal kernel andapplicationsare written in a combination of assembly andC sourceand
compiled into a common object ﬁle format (COFF). However, to be able to transfer this code
to the DSP through the HPI, it is necessary to convert the .out COFF ﬁle into a hex format.
102
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

A hex extraction utility program that was written for this purpose is called coff2hex. This
utility is used to extract hex equivalent of a 16 bit COFF ﬁle. During the extraction process,
the coff2hex utility also resolves all address references based on the memory map speciﬁed
in the linker command ﬁle. The coff2hex utility is based on an original coff_both.c source
for COFF extraction that was published by Texas Instruments (Texas Instruments Incor-
porated, 1999a).
5.2.6
Complex Programmable Logic Devices
The system used the EPM3256A from Altera class of Complex Programmable Logic
Devices (CPLD). This device is based on MAX 3000A family. It contains the electrically
erasable programmable read-only memory (EEPROM), which provides instant-on capabil-
ity and offers 256 macrocells. EPM3256A device supports in-system programmability (ISP)
and can be easily reconﬁgured in the ﬁeld. Each macrocell is individually conﬁgurable for
either sequential or combinatorial logic operation.
This device is responsible for the interface between the DSP chip and other peripherals
by converting and buffering the signals from the ADC, DAC, PLL, etc., to the McBSP
format, which is acceptable by the DSP chip.
The CPLD has various internal registers, which are mapped to its IO pins. These IO pins
are connected to PLL, LEDs, and several other peripherals that can be controlled by
software.
5.2.7
Analog-to-Digital Converter
The system makes use of an ADS5231 high-speed, dual-channel ADC. The ADS5231 offers
12 bit resolution at sample rates of up to 40 MHz. It is interfaced directly to the CPLD and it
drives its clock signal from the CPLD as well.
5.2.8
UHF Module
The UHF module is responsible for interfacing the DSP to the antenna. A simpliﬁed block
diagram of this module is depicted in Figure 5.5. Some blocks of this design may also be
found in Figure 5.3. It operates at 880–1050 MHz UHF band and is compatible with FCC’s
part 15.247 rules. These rules specify that a maximum output power of 1 W may be
exercised in a frequency-hopping system with at least 50 channels. The maximum dwell
time for each channel is set to 400 ms at any given frequency. The UHF band module is
subject to PLL lock-time and the receiver circuit turn-around time limitations. The lock-
time is the time that it takes the PLL to switch from one frequency to another for a given
frequency change to a given frequency tolerance. In order to mitigate the effect of PLL lock-
time, a two synthesizer design was chosen. This design allows the system to program the
second PLL to a new frequency while the ﬁrst one is still operating and then to switch over
to the second PLL when a frequency hop is required. This conﬁguration prevents the dead-
time during which the reader RF ﬁeld would be off and no data can be transmitted. In
addition, it reduces the risk of tags’ brown-out (when the voltage temporarily drops below
the operating voltage level and then recovers).
5.2.8.1
Oscillator
A PSA0965A phase locked loop (PLL) from Z-Communications Inc. is used to generate the
operating frequency. It is a small hybrid circuit block based on a National Semiconductor
LMX2316 PLL IC. This small module generates an output of 3 dBm with phase noise
of 1000 dBc=Hz at 10 kHz from the carrier frequency. The output of the oscillator
Contemporary RFID Reader Architecture
103

is bandpass ﬁltered and then ampliﬁed by 10 dB. The ampliﬁer output is then subjected to
a ceramic ﬁlter with center frequency of 915 MHz to remove the strong harmonics and
other unwanted spurious outputs. The output is then split into two parts, one is fed into
the receiver chain and the other into the transmitter chain.
5.2.8.2
Transmit Chain
The transmit chain comprises a PSN0930A PLL as local oscillator and frequency hopping.
A 3 bit digitally controlled attenuator is used to adjust the RF output power level. The
attenuator controls the gain of the RF power ampliﬁer (an M57785 IC from Mitsubishi
Semiconductors). That stage is followed by a ceramic bandpass ﬁlter to suppress harmo-
nics and spurious frequencies. The module is capable of delivering up to 4 W of RF power
in the UHF band. The modulation is achieved by means of a mixer (MCL SBL-1Z) from
minicircuits. The modulating signal is generated using a DAC, which receives its input
from the DSP module directly.
5.2.8.3
Receive Chain
A three-port circulator (CN-6) from MECA Electronics Inc. is used to separate the trans-
mitted signal from the weak tag reply. The tag reply is then ﬁltered using a ceramic
bandpass ﬁlter centered at 915 MHz. It is then split into two parts for I (Inphase) and Q
(Quadrature) demodulation. The two phases are then mixed with the local oscillator using
minicircuits double balanced mixers. The local oscillator signal for the Q channel is delayed
by a quarter of wavelength to generate a 908 lag in the Q path.
The mixed output signals are then ampliﬁed and ﬁltered by an antialiasing ﬁlter. The
outputs are then amplitude limited and then applied to the ADC. Further signal condition-
ing and processing are performed digitally in the DSP.
BP
filter
Ant
Q
I
Switch
Delay
PA
AMP
Circulator
LP
filter
LP
filter
I
Q
BP
filter
BP
filter
AMP
AMP
Modulating signal
ADC
PLL 2
PLL 1
DSP
Power
splitter
Mixer
FIGURE 5.5
Simpliﬁed hardware chain of the UHF module.
104
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

5.2.9
Software Design
The system makes use of DSP-BIOS II from Texas Instruments. DSP-BIOS is a scalable real-
time kernel, designed speciﬁcally for the TMS320C5000 and TMS320C6000 DSP platforms.
DSP-BIOS is an integral part of the Code Composer Studio Development Tools from TI.
The programming is done using Microsoft Visual Studio Cþþ and Texas Instruments’
Code Composer Studio.
The heart of the SDLR is the TMS320C5416 DSP, which runs a TI DSP-BIOS II real-time
kernel and controls the interface in addition to the speciﬁc transmit and receive functions.
DSP-BIOS provides a convenient multitasking capability through events, software and
hardware interrupts, which operate at various levels of priority. Other functions such as
tag management and communication to other readers or host PCs are performed in the
microcontroller.
The DSP is required to receive commands from the microcontroller, and form packets of
symbols, which are embedded into a ﬂexible frame in order to be recognizable by a tag.
The data is oversampled and pulse shaped before passing it on to the RF module. Thus, the
aims of the DSP implemented in software comprise:
1. Initialization of interfaces and interrupts.
2. Initialization of CPLD, PLL, ADC, and DAC. These are done via McBSP.
3. Reception and transfer of data from=to the microcontroller. This is performed over
the HPI.
4. Formation of tag command data frames.
5. Mapping from bytes to symbols. The bit stream is converted into amplitude
modulated (AM) symbols, whereby here an AM mode is employed, although
other modulation modes are possible.
6. Pulse shaping. The symbol stream is moderately oversampled by a factor of 2,
which is required as a minimum by the subsequent mixer hardware, and ﬁltered
by a root raised cosine ﬁlter.
7. Passing data samples to the RF module. The oversampled and pulse-shaped signal
values are passed over to the DAC, and its output is connected to the mixer’s
input.
8. Reception of I and Q data from ADC. The inphase and quadrature signal values
are received from the ADC via the McBSP=CPLD. These samples are oversampled
by a factor of 4 compared with the symbol rate to permit sufﬁcient resolution for
timing synchronization.
Steps 1 and 2 are performed at boot level. Initialization of PLL, ADC, and DAC needs to
be done via the McBSP after the CPLD is initialized and functional. Processing of both the
transmitter and receiver functions is performed in interrupt service routines, whereby the
processor falls into an idle mode if no interrupts need to be serviced.
5.2.9.1
Device Drivers
A software module that controls how a processor communicates with a device is called a
device driver. In SDLR, the interface from the DSP ﬁrmware to the hardware is abstracted
into a set of device drivers. The device drivers separate the high-level ﬁrmware and
protocol-speciﬁc modules from the low-level input=output (IO) routines of hardware.
Device drivers are provided for each of RF’s transmit and receive modules as well as for
actuators and sensors.
Contemporary RFID Reader Architecture
105

SDLR uses a special abstraction to access device registers independent of the under-
lying implementation. It hides the mechanisms to access a speciﬁc part of the address
spaces. The use of this abstraction is in almost all cases as efﬁcient as an assembly
language access. These device drivers are designed to provide access to the hardware in
a protocol-independent manner that allows the change of communication protocol with-
out the need of changing the rewriting low-level subroutines. The device driver applica-
tion program interface (API) is a set of C callable functions for writing to or reading from
the device or registers. This API is based on the POSIX ﬁle IO interface, using read,
write, and ioctl functions. A device is made active by calling open and released by
calling close.
5.2.9.2
open()
The routine open() opens a device as a ﬁle for reading, writing, or updating, and returns a
ﬁle descriptor for that ﬁle. The arguments to open are the device name and the type of
access. In general, open can only open preexisting devices and ﬁles. Files cannot be created
with open.
The return value of this call is a ﬁle descriptor number, or ERROR if a ﬁle name is not
speciﬁed, the device does not exist, no ﬁle descriptors are available, or the driver returns
ERROR.
5.2.9.3
close()
The routine close() closes the speciﬁed ﬁle and frees the ﬁle descriptor. It calls the device
driver-speciﬁc function to do the work.
The return value is the status of the driver close routine, or ERROR if the ﬁle descriptor is
invalid.
5.2.9.4
ioctl()
The ioctl call provides an interface to device-speciﬁc conﬁguration function and per-
forms an IO control function on the device. The control functions used by SDLR device
drivers are deﬁned in the header ﬁle io.h. Most requests are passed on to the driver for
handling. Since the availability of ioctl functions is driver speciﬁc, these functions are
implemented separately for each speciﬁc device.
The return value is the return value of the driver, or ERROR if the ﬁle descriptor does not
exist.
5.2.9.5
read()
The routine read() reads a number of bytes (less than or equal to maxbytes) from a
speciﬁed ﬁle descriptor and places them in a buffer. It calls the device driver to do the
work.
The return value is the number of bytes read (between 1 and maxbytes, 0 if end of ﬁle), or
ERROR if the ﬁle descriptor does not exist, the driver does not have a read routine, or the
driver returns ERROR. If the driver does not have a read routine, errno is set to NOTSUP.
5.2.9.6
write()
The routine write() writes a number of bytes from buffer to a speciﬁed ﬁle descriptor. It
calls the device driver to do the work.
106
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

The return value is the number of bytes written, or ERROR if the ﬁle descriptor does not
exist, the driver does not have a write routine, or the driver returns ERROR. If the driver
does not have a write routine, errno is set to NOTSUP.
The precise meaning of reading or writing from or to a device depends on the nature of
the device. For example, writing to an RF driver causes the data to be modulated over the
output RF signal, and reading from the RF driver ﬁlls an input buffer with samples from an
ADC chip. Reading and writing to or from some devices might be illegal. For example,
reading from the transmitter and writing to the receiver driver are illegal operations.
5.2.10
EPC Module
The EPC software module is entirely implemented on the DSP. It is based on
EPC speciﬁcations and supports both EPC Class 0 and Class 1 protocols as well as ISO
18000–6 protocols. It is also designed to accommodate Generation 2 protocol by EPC
Global (C1G2) by adding some variables in function calls.
This module consists of functions for generating EPC Class 1 Generation 1 commands
such as Ping, Global Scroll, and Masked Scroll and interpreting the tag reply. It can commu-
nicate with EPC 64 bit and 96 bit tag code structure and is capable of handling anticollision
protocols.
5.3
Conclusion
By minimizing the hardware requirements for different protocols and implementing
software modules that abstract away the differences between protocols, SDLR achieves
superior performance to most other solutions in terms of hardware cost and software
ﬂexibility.
This possibility has motivated the concept of the SDLR, whereby the digital-to-analog
and analog-to-digital conversion are performed as close as possible to the radio frequency.
The aim of this work was to extend the digital domain and implement modulation,
demodulation, channel coding, and other required processing tasks in software.
Being software based allows the SDLR to be customized to end-user needs. This design
has a boot loader feature allowing a user to make changes to the code. It can be upgraded
in the ﬁeld thus lowering operating costs.
References
Bose, V. and Hu, R.M. (2001, February). Dynamic physical layers for wireless networks using
software radio. International Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing, Salt Lake
City, USA, 4, 2045.
Brannon, B. (1995, September). Basics of designing a digital radio receiver, Analog Devices Inc.,
Greensboro, North Carolina.
Engels, D.W. (2002, February). The reader collision problem. Auto-ID Laboratories, White Paper Series,
Edition 1.
Engels, D.W. (2003, September). On the probability of ghost reads in an RFID system. Auto-ID
Laboratories, White Paper Series, Edition 1.
Keith Nolan, Linda Doyle, and Philip Mackenzie (2001, November). Software radio signal
space based adaptive modulation for wireless networks. First Joint IEI=IEE Symposium on
Contemporary RFID Reader Architecture
107

Telecommunications Systems Research. Network and Telecommunication Research Group, Trinity
College, Dublin, Republic of Ireland.
Lewis, S. (2004, January). A basic introduction to RFID technology and its use in supply chain.
Technical Report, Laran Technologies, White Paper.
Texas Instruments Incorporated (1997, February). TMS320C54X DSP Reference Set, CPU and Peri-
pherals. Texas Instruments Incorporated.
Texas Instruments Incorporated (1999a, March). Extracting Equivalent Hex Values from a COFF File.
Texas Instruments Incorporated.
Texas Instruments Incorporated (1999b, April). Practical Application of the TMS320C54x Host Port
Interface (HPI). Texas Instruments Incorporated.
Tuttlebee, W. (1998, September). Software radio: Impacts and implications. IEEE 5th International
Symposium on Spread Spectrum Techniques and Applications, 2, 541.
108
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

6
Progress in RFID Education
Brian J. Garner
CONTENTS
6.1
Introduction...................................................................................................................... 109
6.2
Overview of Business Drivers, Trends, and Processes .............................................. 110
6.3
Instructional Frameworks for RFID=Smart Labels..................................................... 112
6.4
e-Pedagogy in Learning Process Deﬁnition for Domains Requiring Automated
Identiﬁcation Technologies............................................................................................. 113
6.4.1 Instructional Strategies and Axioms .................................................................. 113
6.5
Suggested Strategy for RFID Education....................................................................... 115
6.6
Business (Value) Propositions........................................................................................ 115
6.7
Electronic Data Interchange Scenarios.......................................................................... 116
6.8
Critical Success Factors in RFID Application Marketing........................................... 118
6.9
RF Spectrum Use in RFID: International Protocol Standards................................... 118
6.10
RFID Operational=Management Requirements, Including
RFID Implementations.................................................................................................... 119
6.11
Process Technology Integration Issues......................................................................... 120
6.12
Summary of Educational Challenges in RFID Education ......................................... 121
References.................................................................................................................................... 121
Appendix..................................................................................................................................... 122
The content of this chapter solely reﬂects the experience and opinions of the author and
does not necessarily represent the views of institutions, companies, and colleagues unless
their contribution (research) is speciﬁcally cited.
Where reference is made to products and individual applications, the appropriate source
typically a Web site or research paper is given. No liability is accepted for errors regarding
these citations or to other causes.
6.1
Introduction
The rapid growth in applications using radio frequency identiﬁcation (RFID) devices,
sometimes in association with other mobile (communication) technologies, now warrants
signiﬁcant business interest in extending the options available for automated identiﬁca-
tion of commercial and industrial items. Unfortunately, education of the respective
business, government, and consumer communities has focused in the past on the physics,
109

electronics, and technical features of such devices, rather than stressing the overarching
beneﬁts that may be derived from their exploitation in complex and in extreme (e.g.,
hostile) operating environments.
The author’s experience in postgraduate education during the past 25 years regarding
emergent technologies, such as electronic data interchange (EDI) and more recently, mobile
technologies, strongly supports the need to include the appropriate industrial and consumer
marketing perspectives in educational paradigms for emergent and disruptive technologies.
While predictive models, in themselves, are helpful in trend analysis and in establishing
market potential of new technologies, there are numerous examples of market failure without
innovative integration of education and marketing requirements; for example, in the devel-
opment of effective business process models. A distinction is thus made with training pro-
vided by a supplier on the use of a speciﬁc product, which may digress from the use of existing
educational practices, including e-learning, due to business process integration issues.
The knowledge level of students undertaking advanced courses, typically postgraduate
certiﬁcate, graduate diploma, or a master degree, requires consideration in the selection and
presentation of blended learning material. The increasing use of distance learning, including
mobile education options, typically podcasting, also needs to be taken into account.
While it is not intended to duplicate training options widely available for students
interested in the scope, standards, and industrial=retail use of automated identiﬁcation
technologies, particularly bar codes, a rudimentary knowledge of current business practice
and limitations in the use of such technologies is considered desirable to appreciate the
rationale and transcendence of RFID.
Appropriate reference sources for remedial education on the EAN bar coding standard
for automated identiﬁcation purposes are provided in the appendix to this chapter. Note,
however, that several symbologies are still in use by the business community.
6.2
Overview of Business Drivers, Trends, and Processes
Effective technological forecasting techniques require analytical skills, and in particular, a
knowledge of diffusion theories. However, for marketing purposes, knowledge of business
trends and processes is also fundamental to understand the current business drivers and
engage the attention of business prospects including governments.
Global integration of business logistics, supported by EDI, by universal standards for
product identiﬁcation at the item, package, pallet, and container level, by ‘‘just-in-time’’
manufacturing processes and by government facilitation of customs harmonization (i.e.,
electronic clearance of goods) has established signiﬁcant productivity advances in the
advanced economies and remarkable improvements in living standards in the newly
industrialized economies (NIEs). This productivity drive now underway through business
process improvement has nurtured the management discipline of business process mod-
eling (BPM), particularly focused on the supply chain management requirements to
achieve just-in-time objectives.
Finance and service industries, such as Insurance and Superannuation (in Australia), and
more generally, the Financial Planning sector, have also embraced the productivity impera-
tive using EDI, including ﬁnancial EDI and BPM. More recently, cross-industry standards
for naming conventions have been adopted in Australia and progress with global (ISO)
semantic web standards will accelerate the use of service-oriented architectures (SOAs) in the
establishment of common web application design compatible with middleware requirements.
The rising cost of employees, compounded by adverse demographic trends in the
advanced economies, has spurred management interest in new electronic processes and
technologies that remove people from the supply, administration, and ﬁnancial chains
110
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

currently in operation. How may such processes be classiﬁed? Three categories have
proven useful and germane in an educational, speciﬁcally e-learning and RFID context:
1. Tightly coupled processes:
Illustrative examples of these processes would be
. Electronic business XML processes
. Supply chains (business-to-business)
. e-Taxation (government to business=tax agents=individuals)
. Super industry ﬂow model in Australia (refer below) (Source: Public presenta-
tion by Dr. Cameron at Deakin University, Melbourne, August 2002.)
. Real-time automation and process control
. Disaster recovery planning
Individuals
members
employee
Employer
Superannuation
product 
provider
Superannuation
fund
administrator
(SFA)
Third parties
regulators
insurance
underwriters,
etc.
4.2 Superannuation product
choice
1.4 Contributions advice
5.1 Product info
6.1 Administration
agreement
7.1 Regulations & compliance
8.1 Regulation compliance statements
& Transactions
8.2 Insurance premiums
3.1 Rollover
       another
3.2 Transfer within or with
3.3 Contribution passthru
1.1 Employer registration
4.1 Member/employee info
 
1.2 Member registration
1.3 Contribution info
(fund contribution)
8
1
7
6
5
4
3
2
ESF Agreement
Super industry flow model
>40% Costs ~$1 Billion
>20% Costs ~$600 Million
2.1 Investor/member application
2.2 Investment choice
2. Loosely coupled processes (note that choice of business partner, both B2B and B2C are
accommodated):
Illustrative examples would include
. Travel industry
. Hospitality and education
. Entertainment industry
. Health chains (e.g., telemedicine)
. ICT Industry
. Age care networks
3. Social networks:
Formal social networks might include
. Coordinated welfare agencies
. Voluntary services for the disabled
Progress in RFID Education
111

. Amateur sporting networks
. Libraries
. Private clubs=associations
The marketing opportunities for RFID typically depend not only on the productivity
imperative in categories (1) and (2) but also on quality control and continuous audit
requirements, focusing in particular on compliance requirements (e.g., safety requirements
in mining and manufacturing) established by government regulation or by formal busi-
ness=community contracts, including social compacts.
6.3
Instructional Frameworks for RFID=Smart Labels
The basic instructional framework used successfully by the author at Deakin (e.g., EDI
program, computer audit, and in knowledge engineering courses) and at Hong Kong
Polytechnic University may be summarized in an RFID context as follows:
1. Introduction
. Conventional labeling techniques
. RF Device characterization
. Progress with standards for RFID
. Regulatory implications (EPCglobal)
. Business drivers
2. Current application areas
. Retail industries (includes jewelry)
. Transport industries (air, shipping, vehicle)
. Healthcare=medical developments
. Gaming (Casino) software support
. Supply chain integrity (refer www.technologyreview.com)
. Mobile education tools (e.g., PDA=GPS)
. Tracking and authentication of individuals (e.g., electronic passports and board-
ing passes)
3. New developments
. Process integration (e.g., with biometrics and global positioning systems)
. Commercial workﬂow automation (e.g., document tracking)
. Network security (includes RFID encryption and smartcard technologies)
. Printed and thin ﬁlm electronics (includes reference to organic substrates)
Given that many of these topics are covered by other authors in this RFID Handbook, this
chapter will address the educational issues in highlighting the marketing and process
advantages of RFID and smart labels, namely:
. Solutions using RFID to limitations of existing technologies in automated identi-
ﬁcation domains
. Novel applications (i.e., unique to RFID solutions)
112
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

. Blended learning experience with current RFID implementations
. Summary of educational technologies for RFID instruction
6.4
e-Pedagogy in Learning Process Deﬁnition for Domains Requiring
Automated Identiﬁcation Technologies
The importance of leadership and innovation on pedagogical requirements for blended learning
is the subject of considerable current research into educational practice. Given the broad
scope of this subject, and the likelihood that part, at least, of the training program will be
delivered through e-learning, instructional frameworks and axioms speciﬁcally relevant to
RFID e-learning requirements will be selected and exempliﬁed in the ﬁrst instance.
6.4.1
Instructional Strategies and Axioms
The essence of an e-pedagogy is the relationship between learning objectives and instruc-
tional design. In practice, a set of learning objectives would be deﬁned, as is customary in
any training environment. However, it should be recognized that the value proposition for
the student depends on an explicit link between the assessment (success) criteria for each
objective and the design of an appropriate instructional process. A direct correlation needs
to be established between the critical success factors (CSFs) associated with the objective
and the learning paradigm employed. Context is paramount in any training scenario, but in
practice the educator is required to consider the motivation, self-assessment, and tacit
knowledge appropriate to e-learning context selection [1]. The instructional strategy
selected for RFID students, however, depends on their current knowledge level, including
business awareness, and on the complexity of the business process=application.
The subject complexity is also a key issue in designing the requisite learning grid,
which in simple terms is the educational resource grid available to students, with the
attendant web-link network and access authorities. Research by Philp and Garner [2] at
Deakin University in knowledge-mediated software engineering identiﬁed the need for
context-speciﬁc dynamics in managing the diverse programming support situations that
may be required. Students seeking to understand corporate information security man-
agement risks in a data hosting organization, for example, would usually be challenged
by wireless LAN implementation schematics, such as the referenced context shown in
Figure 6.1, without access to associated instructional links (e.g., virtual private network
instruction).
More generally, the management of subject complexity requires student access to rele-
vant explanation knowledge without having to prompt the student. The ability to personalize
context selection and dynamic support, rather than rely on the usual helpdesk solution, is
seen to be a CSF for e-learning management in frameworks that rely on learning grids. This
observation and conclusion follows from the overarching importance of effective self-
assessment in distance learning, and consequently, effective e-pedagogy may be simpliﬁed
to the formalization of axioms that strengthen self-assessment requirements with reference
to the CSFs. Readers wishing to know more of current processes and analytical tools to
assist students in self-assessment may wish to consult Tim Robert’s book [3] entitled Self,
Peer and Group Assessment in E-Learning. While there is, without question, an urgent need to
compare and contrast current practices, the emphasis by educators, predominantly aca-
demics, to promote a culture of critique has largely ignored the contextual signiﬁcance of
content, particularly complexity issues, in self-assessment, such as in training process
Progress in RFID Education
113

control operatives, who would typically not have a detailed knowledge of the chemical
processes involved or crisis management requirements.
Axioms derived from an analysis by the author of self-assessment requirements, particularly
CSFs in RFID education may thus be summarized as
. Conceptualization of roles, and the evolution of roles in event management, includ-
ing software module activation, is important in teaching business process dynam-
ics. In disaster recovery management, for example, role uncertainty and
constrained resource availability have a major impact on the effectiveness of
business recovery.
. Personalized contexts are required to enable students to exercise their skills and
imagination during a knowledge discovery process. Studies of electronic gaming
experiments support the requirement for student involvement in rule-based scen-
arios, and where possible, self-selection of roles, not just in routine problem
solving, but in the planning and execution of interim strategies designed to achieve
a requested outcome.
Laptop
Laptop
WLAN (WEP) security
VPN tunnel (ESP)
Gateway
router
DMZ
(medium
protected)
Access point
(AP)
WLAN
mobile
users
WLAN radio
links in
airspace
DMZ connection to
corporate network
Zone (1)
Corporate public
infrastructure
Zone (2)
Corporate secure 
and protected
infrastructure
Zone (3)
VPN
Gateway
firewall
Corporate/Govt. level WLAN implementation schematic drawing
user(s)
Database
Corporate
Zone
EAL4
Firewall
LDAP
server
Radius
server
Mail
server
Web
server
KEY
Manage-
ment server
Certificate
Server
(SA)
Corporate
Database
Server
FIGURE 6.1
WLAN (WEP) security schematic.
114
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

. Situated learning, in which the effect of a new technology is to be explored, requires
an appropriate scenario and communication of the underlying process knowledge,
possibly using BPM illustrations and by stressing group role dependencies.
. Knowledge-mediated e-learning is often required when students demonstrate (using
objective tests) that they lack the tacit knowledge to progress using the recom-
mended self-assessment processes. Note that the current trend to semantic enrich-
ment using metadata support for web and grid (service-oriented) architectures
does not, at this stage, offer students the required tools to analyze contextual
semantics and ambiguities during the context-awareness process.
. Intelligent human–computer interaction systems are known to provide effective sup-
port to students in context awareness, but are not typically customized to individ-
ual student requirements by existing learning management systems.
6.5
Suggested Strategy for RFID Education
The basic framework outlined earlier (p. 112) may usefully be focused and expanded in
strategic terms, given the cited importance of learning scenarios, e-pedagogy, self-assessment,
and the axioms derived from CSFs.
The recommended strategy drives the selection of appropriate learning scenarios, which
may involve BPM (simulation) to deﬁne functional RFID objectives. Students should be
expected to master the following topics, and to include in their sourcing of technical device
speciﬁcations, use of RFID Primers=Newsletters available from EPCglobal and from manu-
facturers=consultants:
. Business (value) propositions
. EDI Scenario
. Marketing CSFs in RFID applications
. RF Spectrum use in RFID: international protocol standards
. RFID operational=management requirements, including RFID implementation
. Process technology integration issues
Note: Novice learners would be expected to demonstrate prior competence in Automated
Identiﬁcation technologies, other than RFID, using course material available from external
reference sources such as those cited in the appendix.
6.6
Business (Value) Propositions
An overarching justiﬁcation for RFID lies in their role in tightly coupled processes, such as
global business supply chains relying on just-in-time production. The Auto-ID Center, for
example, was set up to develop a low-cost RFID system for this important business
requirement. Their technology was licensed in 2003 to EPCglobal, a partner in the collab-
orative Auto-ID Project, and six tag classes, including the two protocols produced by
Auto-ID, are royalty-free to manufacturers and end users. RFID standards coordinated
Progress in RFID Education
115

by EPCglobal and approved by the International Standards Organization (the ISO 18000
series) also depend on
. Object identiﬁcation using trade identiﬁcation numbers for global use (GTIN)
. Global location numbers for the identiﬁcation of locations (GLN)
. Global returnable asset identiﬁer (GRAI) for pallets, and so on
In global supply chains, manufacturers typically seek to minimize inventory, to satisfy
their customers on demand, and to manage their assets, including ﬁnancial cash ﬂow to
maximal advantage. This exact requirement may be identiﬁed from the importance of
global logistics linking multiple manufacturing sites, warehouses, and customer locations.
The ubiquitous requirement to locate and identify product, irrespective of packaging and
distribution process underpins the revolution in automated identiﬁcation techniques and
technologies. The value propositions sought by business, as appropriate to this complex set
of real-time interactions between suppliers and customers, may be generalized as
. Total visibility of product and logistics across the (global) supply chain
. Effective contingency plans for supply interruptions, including where possible,
automated advice to customers of goods locations and revised delivery schedules
. Optimal sourcing of business partners able to guarantee performance in a global
process management context
. Reliable automation and near-real-time information updates
Given these demanding requirements, automated identiﬁcation of product movement
without human intervention is essential to maximize ﬁnancial performance. The role of
RFID, supported by effective information and communication systems, is consequently
increasing due to the limitations of visual inspection systems, albeit with machine-readable
bar codes, or optical character recognition.
6.7
Electronic Data Interchange Scenarios
In the 1990s, a business communications revolution occurred using EDI standards for
the computer-to-computer exchange and processing of transaction data. The more com-
mon standards are ANSI ‘‘X12,’’ which originated in the United States, and EDIFACT,
which was developed under UN auspices. EDIFACT was conceived as a comprehensive
solution to
. EDI for administration
. EDI for commerce
. EDI for transportation requirement
Subsequent participation by global suppliers of business software, represented by the
OASIS Group, simpliﬁed the EDI standards, particularly for small and medium enterprises
(SMEs), by using the ‘‘XML’’ language. This UN=CEFACT initiative comprised the follow-
ing WorkGroups, in which XML has been universally adopted as the de facto standard,
particularly for Internet commerce (refer Figure 6.2).
116
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

The learning scenario preferred by the author in introducing EDI and automated
identiﬁcation technologies is, thus, a supply chain management scenario, using business
(modeling) processes in business-to-business (B2B) trading. Logistics management
provides the detailed context. This scenario has been used as the basis of EDI instruc-
tion at Deakin University, and from 1992 to 1997 in India through the All India
Management Association.
A useful instructional schematic for the EDI business cycle, and consequently, for
training in logistics management and in automated identiﬁcation requirements, is shown
in Figure 6.3. Naturally, such schematics may be extended to accommodate internal
processes and logistics, which has happened in the retail sector, but it should also be
Business Domain Groups (ewg) 
Business Process Analysis (bpawg) 
Business Process Definitions  
Core Components Discovery Teams (ewg) 
Cross Domain Harmonization (ewg) 
International Trade Procedures (itpwg) 
Reference Models (bpawg/itpwg) 
Trade Facilitation Best Practices (itpwg) 
FIGURE 6.2
UN=CEFACT work groups for ebXML.
Bank
Direct deposit
Supplier’s bank account
Vehicle production
planning system
Material
requirements
forecast
MRF
ASN
Accounts
payable
Remittance
advice
Mailboxes
Accounts
receivable
Trading
partners
electronic
Order processing
system
Warehousing
system
Despatch
system
(Interstate suppliers only)
Production
planning system
Receiving
advice
Remittance
advice
MRF
ASN
ASN
ex-transport
ASN
ex-supplier
Receiving
advice
Pseudo -invoice
Receiving
E l e c t r o n i c  t r a d i n g
Match goods received
with ASN
Holden
16
2
17
19
9
10
4
5
6
7
8
18
11
11
13
14
1
3
15
12
FIGURE 6.3
Supply chain management scenario.
Progress in RFID Education
117

noted that RFID is exciting general business interest in automated identiﬁcation as a new
business control and continuous auditing strategy.
6.8
Critical Success Factors in RFID Application Marketing
Stimulating management interest in the adoption of RFID in automated identiﬁcation has
posed a marketing challenge since 2004, originally due to the lack of RFID readers in
quantity. The market has developed steadily, however, and novel applications are now
reported worldwide. The scope of current applications encompasses:
. Supply chain management, including retail applications
. Management of expensive mining assets (e.g., RFID tag-based tracking system in
production scheduling and for safety control in minimizing underground truck
collisions—BHP Billiton)
. Loss (fraud) prevention (e.g., jewelry items, gaming ‘‘chips’’)
. Tracking sensitive documents in government organizations
. Compliance requirements in workﬂow process management (e.g., ﬁnancial and
legal sectors)
. Airline and postal security (customer luggage, freight, parcels)
. Personal identiﬁcation devices (e.g., passports)
While each application will usually have a unique business driver and value proposition, a
number of CSFs are beginning to emerge and may well inﬂuence the future direction of the
RFID industry and its associated research programs. CSFs known to be important in RFID
application marketing would include
. High reliability and response of read=write RFID volume applications.
. Flexibility in solutions engineering when off-the-shelf products are inadequate. For
example, integrating RFID with global positioning systems and with BPM solutions
may well achieve management performance targets and demonstrate business value.
. Engineering RFID solutions for hostile environments is increasingly required,
demanding novel substrates for embedded tags and an adequate signal processing
protocol=reader for multiple item conﬁgurations, such as parcels or luggage on
conveyor belts.
. System integration skills for near-real-time database processing when updating=
retrieving RFID data on-site.
The ability to understand the ﬁnancial implications of these CSFs is important in selecting
an educational strategy, particularly a learning reinforcement strategy.
6.9
RF Spectrum Use in RFID: International Protocol Standards
Students familiar with mobile technologies may nonetheless ﬁnd it useful to review the
allocated RF spectrum use in relation to the ISO=IEC 18000–6 RFID frequency used by the
Japanese in the 800=900 MHz band. Shown below are the relative spectrum allocations.
118
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

Frequency allocation in 800/900 MHz band in Japan
860
MCA
Mobile
station
(Downlink)
Mobile
Phone A
Base station
(Downlink)
MCA
Mobile
station
(Uplink)
Mobile
Phone is
Mobile
(Uplink)
U.S.A
902–928 MHz
Width: 26 MHz
(FCC 15.247)
Frequency range of ISO/IEC 18000-6
860–960 MHz
Mobile
Phone A
Mobile station
(Uplink)
MCA
Phone B
Base station
(Downlink)
870
880
890
900
910
920
930
940
950
960
EUROPE
865–868 MHz for REID devices
Width: 3 MHz
(CEPT/ERC/Rec 70-03 Annex II)
JAPAN
952–954 MHz
Width: 2MHz
for High-power RFID systems
(Anienma power >= 10mW)
6.10
RFID Operational=Management Requirements, Including RFID
Implementations
While the initial uptake of RFID was slower than expected, the evolution of RFID systems
since 2005 has, in fact, been quite remarkable due to
. Successful pilot studies by industry groups, coordinated by EPCglobal, typically
focused on transport, packaging, and warehousing applications (e.g., in Australia).
. Recognition that the RFID readers produced for high volume, online applications
(e.g., in 2005) were unable to provide the speeds or reliability required by industry
. Pioneering research in Australia into new protocols for read=write at high speed
(refer Magellan Web site: www.magtech.com.au)
. Intensive marketing of Magellan’s technology by system integrators and by com-
panies providing industry-speciﬁc software services (e.g., gaming industry)
. Rapid development methodologies for novel RFID tags using new organic sub-
strates appropriate to niche requirements and application-speciﬁc readers, such as
the Magellan tray reader for tracking commercial ﬁles=folders
. Growing range of security applications, typically involving smartcards with inte-
grated RFID capabilities, which may include encrypted data
. Novel RFID application research, supported by government grants (e.g., at Hong
Kong Polytechnic University)
To fully appreciate the scope and complexity of current RFID technology, the rapid
advances made by Magellan using phase jitter modulation (PJM) is worth emphasizing.
PJM is speciﬁed in the ISI=IEC 18000–3 Mode 2 standard. It provides a superfast high-
frequency (13.56 MHz) technology. A brief digression into Magellan technology inno-
vations accepted by the market, particularly the PJM StackTag, will reinforce student
enthusiasm for the potential of RFID:
. Faster data rates than VHF and most UHF technologies in use.
. The PJM ItemTag uses tuned coils, as do most item tags, and requires a signiﬁcant
separation for individual item identiﬁcation.
Progress in RFID Education
119

. The proprietary PJM StackTag is designed to read multiple tags, which touch or
are in a stack of some form. Hundreds of tags can theoretically be read, almost
simultaneously.
. Excellent anticollision function due to the use of eight channels offering a notional
data rate of 848 kbits per second.
. High- and low-power modes for RFID tags.
. Patented system using frequency and time division multiple access.
. Memory capacity up to 10 kbit is available using PJM technology, whereas legacy
RFID systems are typically limited to 512 bits.
Implementation of RFID systems may require project management expertise of a high
order due to the simultaneous rollout of new business processes. Careful consideration of
all stakeholder requirements and an effective risk management strategy are essential to
achieve quality outcomes. Standalone applications, without signiﬁcant BPM issues, may
still justify a pilot project to demonstrate the economic viability and technical feasibility of
the RFID proposal. High volume and=or fast response applications, which continuous
production and distribution lines require, naturally entail a detailed implementation
strategy. Successful implementations, based on anecdotal feedback received by the author,
include consideration of
. Ownership of the project by the customer, typically facilitated by a Steering
Committee chaired by a senior manager
. Comprehensive risk management process
. Ofﬂine technical assessments by an industry expert to identify CSFs
. Establishment of a Knowledge Process Team, including relevant production super-
visors, to focus on on-site problems during implementation
. Training strategy that identiﬁes blended learning requirements given that production
line workers are often fearful when challenged by a changed work environment
6.11
Process Technology Integration Issues
Business integration offers scope for process efﬁciencies, elimination of duplication, and
more effective use of human resources. BPM, supported by an SOA, has been identiﬁed as
a value-adding strategy for responding to global business challenges and to the opportunities
presented by technological change.
Less well appreciated are the facilitation, coordination, and knowledge acquisition
requirements to integrate new technologies, such as RFID, with process knowledge,
particularly when the most important process knowledge is tacit and is shared between
several individuals. Multiple roles will require a Knowledge Process Team to map existing
protocols with the functions and events comprising the new process requirements. This
typically requires a collaborative knowledge acquisition methodology for any changes to
workﬂow that affect process quality, and where related compliance=performance object-
ives are at risk.
The human resource challenges are often compounded by poor software integration
quality in the new data capture processes, and probably, in online database update. Risk
propagation scenarios need to be considered to ensure effective risk management and
contingency planning in real-time processes, particularly safety critical environments.
120
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

Applications, in which several technologies are rolled out for the ﬁrst time, RFID and GPS,
and disruptive technologies in general, for example, pose signiﬁcant difﬁculty in education on
risk management.
As noted later, the educational challenges are considerable in achieving an effective
RFID implementation, as marketing of new technologies typically understate the scope
and methods of workforce induction requirements.
6.12
Summary of Educational Challenges in RFID Education
The overarching requirement for most employees, whose roles are affected by RFID, and
possibly, RFID augmented with other new technologies such as GPS, is mapping their
current process knowledge with the new process requirements. A suggested educational
strategy for achieving this objective entails the presentation of training materials on
. Risk management principles and practice.
. Creation of Knowledge Process Teams to address speciﬁc areas of risk. Naturally, an
understanding of the corporate knowledge management systems is required by, at
least, one member of each Team.
. Adoption of a blended learning strategy for learning reinforcement [4].
. Assessment by senior management of compliance with IT governance principles and
practice in their evaluation of software integration strategies.
Finally, the need for motivational strategies and mentoring of production line employees,
when faced with handling technological change should be recognized in the implemen-
tation of educational strategies.
References
1. Garner, B.J. (2007): Motivation, self-assessment & tacit knowledge in e-learning context selection,
Unpublished paper.
2. Philp, B. and Garner, B.J. (2001): Knowledge mediation in software quality engineering. Proceedings
of ASWEC 2001 Conference, Canberra, Australia.
3. Roberts, T.S., editor (2006): Self, Peer and Group Assessment in E-Learning, Idea Group Inc., London.
4. Garner, B.J. and KcKay, E. (2007): Learning reinforcement strategies for a changing workforce.
Proceedings of WBE 2007, Chamonix, France.
Progress in RFID Education
121

Appendix
Reference sources for RFID students requiring knowledge of bar codes in automated identiﬁcation
1. Keeping Track—An Introduction to Automatic Data Capture (1995). Videotape, 70 min.
Produced by Practical Marketing on behalf of AIM Australia.
2. Richter, G., Hollingworth, M. (1995). What’s in a Number? Facts about the EAN
Numbering and Barcoding System. EAN Australia, Melbourne.
3. Palmer, R.C. (1991). The Bar Code Book. Peterborough, NH, Helmers.
122
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

Section II
Technology


7
RFID Reader Synchronization
Kin Seong Leong, Mun Leng Ng, Alﬁo R. Grasso, and Peter H. Cole
CONTENTS
7.1
Introduction...................................................................................................................... 125
7.2
RFID Regulations............................................................................................................. 127
7.2.1 ETSI 302 208........................................................................................................... 127
7.2.2 FCC ......................................................................................................................... 127
7.2.3 RFID Protocol ........................................................................................................ 128
7.2.4 Challenges in Dense Reader Environment in Europe..................................... 128
7.3
Reader Synchronization.................................................................................................. 129
7.4
Actual Implementation ................................................................................................... 130
7.4.1 Connectivity........................................................................................................... 130
7.4.2 Positioning of LBT Sensors.................................................................................. 130
7.4.3 Antenna Positioning............................................................................................. 131
7.5
Case Study ........................................................................................................................ 132
7.6
Synchronized RFID System Fine-Tuning..................................................................... 133
7.6.1 Reduction of Output Power................................................................................ 133
7.6.2 Reduction of Overall Reader Talking Time ...................................................... 134
7.6.3 Use of External Sensors........................................................................................ 134
7.6.4 RF Opaque or RF Absorbing Materials............................................................. 134
7.6.5 Frequent Rearrangement of Channels ............................................................... 134
7.7
Variation of Synchronization ......................................................................................... 135
7.7.1 Separation of Transmitting and Receiving Channels...................................... 135
7.7.2 Separation of RFID and Non-RFID Signals ...................................................... 136
7.8
Synchronization in the United States............................................................................ 136
7.9
Updated Progress on Development of RFID Reader Synchronization ................... 137
7.10
Conclusion ........................................................................................................................ 137
References.................................................................................................................................... 138
7.1
Introduction
Radio frequency identiﬁcation (RFID) has received much attention recently as it is widely
believed that RFID can revolutionize supply chain management, complementing bar codes
This chapter is based extensively on Leong et al. (2006a,d) with permission # 2006 IEEE and # 2006 Academy
Publisher.
125

as the main object-tracking system. Several major supply chain operators and retailers,
such as Wal-Mart in the United States, have deployed RFID systems in some of their
supply chains (Roberti, 2004). Initial test runs of RFID deployment show encouraging
results (Rendon, 2005), and hence large-scale RFID deployment is planned. However,
before any successful deployment can be achieved, some RFID issues have to be resolved.
One of them is the RFID reader collision problem, which is the focus of this chapter.
The term ‘‘reader collision(s)’’ is discussed extensively in Engels and Sarma (2002) and
Carbunar et al. (2005). In this chapter, reader collision is simply deﬁned as the pheno-
menon where an interrogation signal from a certain reader disrupts the communication
between a tag and another reader, and this reader collision problem is potentially magni-
ﬁed in a dense reader environment such as in a warehouse. To visualize a simple reader
collision situation, we can imagine a situation as shown in Figure 7.1.
In addition, the band RFID is using is an industrial, scientiﬁc, and medical (ISM) band.
Normally, there is other electronic equipment, intentional or nonintentional radiators that
are operating in this band. Unlike some of the other signaling equipment permitted to use
the band, RFID antennas use comparatively intense RF power to energize passive tags
within their interrogating zones and hence can interfere with nearby electronic equipment
operating in the band of interest. Due to this reason, RFID is subjected to very strict
regulations around the world.
Various regulatory and standardization bodies have tried to regulate the operations of
RFID readers. There are mainly two different standards on the spectrum management
adopted. One is the EN 302 208-1 v1.1.2: electromagnetic compatibility and radio spectrum
matters (ERM); RFID equipment operating in the band 865–868 MHz with power levels up
to 2 W as introduced by the European regulatory body (ETSI, 2006) and the Title 47,
telecommunication, chapter 1, Part 15, radio frequency devices as introduced by Federal
Communications Commission (FCC, 2001).
The air interface and command sets between an RFID reader and an RFID tag are
standardized by the ‘‘EPC radio-frequency identity protocols class-1 generation-2 UHF
RFID protocol for communications at 860 MHz–960 MHz version 1.0.9’’ as recommended
by EPCglobal.
As will be discussed in more detail in the later part of this chapter, the restrictions from
ETSI 302 208 that are put on the operation of RFID readers are very strict, making it quite
impossible to have an uncoordinated large-scale deployment of RFID readers. Hence, this
chapter introduces the idea of RFID reader synchronization to enable good RFID perform-
ance in a dense reader environment while adhering to strict regulations.
The next section introduces the ETSI 302 208, FCC Part 15, and RFID UHF Protocol
standards and their impact on RFID reader deployment, especially in the Europe. Section
7.3 explains the concept of RFID reader synchronization and how it adheres to strict
regulations. Section 7.4 suggests possible ways in implementing an RFID synchronization
system. A case study on RFID reader synchronization is presented in Section 7.5. Ways of
ﬁne-tuning RFID reader positioning are discussed in Section 7.6. Variations of possible
reader synchronization schemes are presented in Section 7.7. Sections 7.8 and 7.9 offer views
FIGURE 7.1
A simple illustration of reader collision. Reply from tag
will be interfered by signal sent from another nearby
reader. (From Leong, K.S., Ng, M.L., and Cole, P.H.,
IEEE
2005
International
Symposium
on
Microwave,
Antenna, Propagation and EMC Technologies for Wireless
Communications, Beijing, China, 2005, # 2005 by IEEE.
With permission.)
Reader A
Reader B
Tag
1
2
3
Antenna
Antenna
126
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

on reader synchronization in the United States and the current progress of reader synchron-
ization standardization in Europe, respectively, followed by conclusions in Section 7.10.
7.2
RFID Regulations
7.2.1
ETSI 302 208
ETSI 302 208 is a European regulation governing the operation of RFID readers (ETSI,
2006). It allocates the frequency band of 865–868 MHz for RFID deployment. This fre-
quency band is then divided into 15 sub-bands or channels, each spanning a total of 200 kHz.
However, when a reader is operating at the maximum radiated power, which is 2 W
effective radiated power (ERP), only 10 sub-bands are available, while the remaining 5 are
used as guard bands or for lower power readers. ETSI 302 208 also introduces the concept
of ‘‘Listen Before Talk.’’ An extract from the ETSI 302 208 best describes the essence of
‘‘Listen Before Talk.’’ It says ‘‘Prior to each transmission, the receiver in the interrogator
shall ﬁrst monitor in accordance with the deﬁned listen time for the presence of another
signal within its intended sub-band of transmission. The listen time shall comprise a ﬁxed
period of 5 ms plus a random time of 0 ms to 5 ms in 11 steps. If the sub-band is free the
random time shall be set to 0 ms’’ (ETSI, 2006). The threshold to determine the presence of
another signal within the intended sub-band is shown in Table 7.1. The measurement
method is deﬁned in the same standard.
Furthermore, once a sub-band has been selected, the RFID reader is permitted to use that
sub-band for up to 4 s. After use, it must free the sub-band for at least 100 ms. A reader can
however, listen to another sub-band for 5 ms and if free use that new sub-band.
7.2.2
FCC
The U.S. FCC Title 47 Part 15.247, with operation within the band 902–928 MHz, uses the
technique of frequency hopping spread spectrum (FHSS). FHSS is a method of transmitting
radio signals by rapidly switching a carrier among many frequency channels, using a
pseudorandom sequence known to both transmitter and receiver. In the context of FCC
Part 15.247 for a frequency hopping system operating in the 902–928 MHz band: if the 20 dB
bandwidth of the hopping channel is <250 kHz, the system shall use at least 50 hopping
frequencies and the average time of occupancy on any frequency shall not be >0.4 s within
a 20 s period; if the 20 dB bandwidth of the hopping channel is 250 kHz or greater, the
system shall use at least 25 hopping frequencies and the average time of occupancy on any
frequency shall not be >0.4 s within a 10 s period. The maximum allowed 20 dB bandwidth
TABLE 7.1
Transmit and Threshold Power
ERP (W)
ERP (dBW)
Threshold (dBW)
Up to 0.1
Up to 10
113
0.1 to 0.5
10 to 3
120
0.5 to 2.0
3 to 3
126
Source:
From Leong, K.S., Ng, M.L., and Cole, P.H. in IEEE 2005
International
Symposium
on
Microwave,
Antenna,
Propagation
and
EMC
Technologies
for
Wireless
Communications, Beijing, China, 2005, 658–661, # 2005
by IEEE. With permission.
RFID Reader Synchronization
127

of the hopping channel is 500 kHz. For an RFID system deployed in the United States
following EPCglobal RFID protocol (EPCglobal, 2004), which is discussed in detail in the
next part, a total of 50 channels are available, each with 500 kHz bandwidth. Hence the
occupancy time on any channel cannot be >0.4 s within a 10 s period. In addition, a 1 W
limit is allowed for systems employing at least 50 hopping channels with the use of
antennas with directional gains that do not exceed 6 dBi, giving a maximum total radiated
power of 4 W effective isotropic radiated power (EIRP). FHSS is adopted mainly in North
and South America, though with a slight difference in the total bandwidth in different
countries.
7.2.3
RFID Protocol
The idea behind standardization of RFID protocols is to have a uniform air interface and
command set between an RFID reader and an RFID tag, so that an RFID reader produced
by a company can be integrated into an RFID network setup by another company. There
are two standards although they are basically the same. The ﬁrst one is the ISO=IEC
18000-6:2004 Amendment 1: information technology—RFID for item management—Part 6:
parameters for air interface communications at 860–960 MHz (ISO, 2004), which is
based on the recommendation of the second standard, EPC Class 1 Generation 2 Protocol
‘‘EPC Radio-frequency Identiﬁcation Protocols Class 1 Generation 2 UHF RFID Protocol
for Communication at 860 MHz–960 MHz’’ (EPCglobal, 2004), in short EPC C1G2, by
EPCglobal. This protocol outlines the air interfaces and commands between an RFID
reader and an RFID tag. It also includes the spectrum management of RFID operation.
Frequency hopping or frequency agile systems are the suggested techniques. An allocated
frequency band, as allowed by local regulatory body, is divided into sub-bands or channels.
A reader will only use a certain channel for communication, not the entire allocated
frequency band.
EPC C1G2 covers single, multiple, and dense reader modes; multiple reader mode is for
an environment where the number of simultaneously active readers is modest relative to
the number of available channels while dense reader mode is for an environment where the
number of simultaneously active readers is comparable with more than the number of
available channels.
This document only focuses on dense reader mode. In dense reader mode, for narrow
bandwidth (European 200 kHz) channels, it is suggested in this protocol that odd-numbered
channels should be used for tag backscatter while even-numbered channels will be used
for reader interrogation. For a wide bandwidth channel (USA FCC 500 kHz channel
(FCC, 2001)), all available channels can be used for reader interrogation as tag backscatter
replies will be located at the boundaries of these channels.
7.2.4
Challenges in Dense Reader Environment in Europe
With the implementation of ETSI 302 208 and EPC C1G2, it is clear that when a reader is
operating at a certain sub-band or channel, this reader will effectively prevent other readers
from using that channel within an unacceptably large area. Leong et al. (2005, 2006b) have
presented detailed discussions and analysis on this matter and Table 7.2, as extracted from
Leong et al. (2006b), summarizes the minimum distance (calculated using a piecewise path
loss model with variable environmental factor) between two antennas connected to readers
before one antenna operating at a certain channel will prevent the other antenna from using
that channel. It should be noted that these results are obtained using a 0 dB isotropic
receiving antenna, and do not represent any real life situation, as a typical RFID antenna
will be a directional antenna. Nonetheless, the data presented in the table gives sufﬁcient
128
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

evidence that a low threshold value for the LBT as speciﬁed in ETSI 302 208 is severe enough
to impede the reader deployment in a dense RFID reader system.
7.3
Reader Synchronization
Under the concept of reader synchronization, all the RFID readers in a certain area, for
example all the readers in a warehouse, are networked together through a central control
unit. The connection method can be the common Ethernet connection, or equivalent, and
will be discussed in the next section.
Since all the readers are linked together, physically or wirelessly, they can be directed to
carry commands at the same time. In addition, they can be assigned channels dynamically
so that the spectrum management is optimized while the reader collision is minimized.
European regulation allows 10 channels when maximum radiated power, 2 W ERP, is
used. Following the recommendation of EPC C1G2, under dense reader mode, ﬁve of
them, the even-numbered channels, are used for reader interrogation. All the readers are
‘‘Listen Before Talk’’ compatible. They are conﬁgured to start to ‘‘Listen’’ at the same time,
and then at the end of the listen period, they can all synchronously start to ‘‘Talk,’’ as
shown in Figure 7.2. This is due to the fact that according to ETSI 302 208, if there is no
signal detected in the intended channel of interest, the ‘‘Listen’’ time is ﬁxed. Hence, all the
readers, which start ‘‘Listening’’ at the same time, will start ‘‘Talking’’ at the same time. If a
reader is turned on at a different time, or if a reader loses synchronization that reader can
be made to start again in synchronism with the rest of the readers, after the last reader has
ﬁnished its ‘‘Talk’’ session.
TABLE 7.2
Minimum Distance between Antennas
Channel
Difference
Antenna Projecting Horizontally
Front (m)
Side (m)
Back (m)
0
1400
350
210
1
180
45
30
2
130
25
15
3
95
20
10
Source:
From Leong, K.S., Ng, M.L., and Cole, P.H., 2006
International Symposium on Applications and the Internet
(SAINT)
Workshop,
RFID
and
Extended
Network:
Deployment of Technologies and Applications, Phoenix,
Arizona, USA, 2006, # 2006 by IEEE. With permission.
Reader 1
Reader 2
"Listen"
"Talk"
"Listen"
Reader N
"Listen"
"Talk"
"Talk"
Time
FIGURE 7.2
Synchronization of all readers: all the readers start to ‘‘Listen’’ at the same
time and ﬁnish ‘‘Listen’’ at the same time. (From Leong, K.S., M.L. Ng, and
P.H. Cole. 2006a. Synchronization of RFID readers for dense RFID reader
environments. International Symposium on Applications and the Internet.
SAINT, Phoenix, Arizona, USA, # 2006 by IEEE. With permission;
Leong, K.S., M.L. Ng, A. Grasso, and P.H. Cole. 2006d. J. Commun., 1, 9,
# 2006 by IEEE. With permission.)
RFID Reader Synchronization
129

7.4
Actual Implementation
7.4.1
Connectivity
In actual implementation, RFID readers must be able to communicate with each other to
enable synchronization of RFID readers. There are basically two ways in connecting all the
readers; either using wired (physical) connection or using wireless connection.
A physically connected system or wired system cannot support mobile readers. In
addition, a wired connection may suffer from data latency in the network. Skeie et al.
(2001) show that time synchronization in a wired network is possible, but will require
additional hardware and system reconﬁguration. In the best case, the time difference
achievable can be better than 1 ms. A wired system is often considered more reliable and
a more secure communication method than a wireless communication.
A wireless system signals through an RF link. It can use one of the ﬁve guard bands,
mentioned in Section 7.2.1, for sending a synchronizing signal. A synchronizing signal can
be a signal with a special pattern. A wireless system can also use any existing wireless
protocol such as Bluetooth technology. It supports mobile readers but is inevitably vulner-
able to interference (signal integrity problem) and unauthorized signal snifﬁng (security
problem).
Both connectivity methods have their own advantages and disadvantages. The decision
in choosing either of these two methods is largely dependent on the positioning of the LBT
sensor, which is discussed later.
7.4.2
Positioning of LBT Sensors
An LBT sensor of an RFID reader is responsible for detecting signals in the channel of
interest before transmission in that channel. This LBT sensor must have a power sensitivity
level better than 126 dBW as speciﬁed in ETSI (2006). If not, this LBT sensor will not be
able to function efﬁciently in determining whether there exists a signal with a power level
higher than the power level speciﬁed in regulations in the channel of interest. An LBT
sensor can be the RFID antenna used for transmitting and receiving signals in the com-
munication with RFID tags. An LBT sensor can also be a separate antenna connected to an
RFID reader.
In addition, several RFID readers could share an LBT sensor within a close vicinity. This
is also known as a centralized system. A localized system is where each and every RFID
reader has its own LBT sensor.
A centralized LBT system is as shown in Figure 7.3. The LBT sensor will constantly
monitor all the channels allocated for RFID operation, and dynamically assign available
channels to all the readers connected to it. The central control system has to be conﬁgured
FIGURE 7.3
Centralized LBT system, where readers are connected to one LBT
sensor in nearby surroundings. (From Leong, K.S., M.L. Ng, and P.H.
Cole. 2006a. Synchronization of RFID readers for dense RFID reader
environments. International Symposium on Applications and the Internet.
SAINT, Phoenix, Arizona, USA, # 2006 by IEEE. With permission;
Leong, K.S., M.L. Ng, A. Grasso, and P.H. Cole. 2006d. J. Commun., 1,
9, # 2006 by IEEE. With permission.)
Reader
LBT Sensor
Reader
Reader
• • •
Antenna
130
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

during the initial setup of the system. A ﬁne-tuned centralized LBT system offers high
reliability. However, it requires additional network hardware to connect all the readers to
the LBT sensor. In addition, a centralized LBT system will not be able to be implemented
effectively when mobile readers are dominant in the surroundings. Although the readers
can communicate with the centralized LBT sensor through a wireless link, it is very
difﬁcult for the centralized LBT sensor to estimate the position of mobile readers, and
hence is not possible to allocate the best channels for mobile readers. For example, if two
mobile readers operate simultaneously in an enclosed area, there is a probability that the
two readers move near to each other at some time. The centralized LBT sensor may at that
time allocate very nearby channels to those two readers and serious interference between
those two readers may occur.
In addition, if two nearby areas are running on different RFID wireless networks and
they are uncoordinated, interference with each other will occur, and in the worst case,
cause a complete system shut down. The coordination of wireless networks in different
premises will be time and cost consuming.
A localized LBT system is as shown in Figure 7.4. Each reader has its own LBT sensor.
The LBT sensor can either be a separate antenna (Figure 7.4), or be the same antenna a
reader uses to establish communication with an RFID tag within its interrogation zone. As
compared with a centralized LBT system, a localized LBT system with wireless connectivity
enables relatively easy new reader integration into an existing system, with no add-
itional cabling or setup needed. However, a localized LBT system has the problem with
management of channel sharing, signal interference, and possibly creation of unwanted
shielding.
In actual fact, the connectivity of readers and the positioning of LBT sensor are closely
related. In CISC (2006), a wired system and a centralized LBT are linked together as one
conﬁguration, whereas a wireless system and a localized LBT are linked together as
another conﬁguration.
7.4.3
Antenna Positioning
The positioning of RFID interrogation antennas depends primarily on the application.
Detailed operational considerations for the deployment of RFID system are presented in
Leong et al. (2006c). In this chapter, only one example will be given, which is the dock door
situation, as it will be used in the case study in the next section. A dock door is usually 2–3 m
in length and 3 m in height. The most effective way to create an RFID interrogation
zone is to position two antennas at the sides of the dock door, face-to-face, and with an
height elevation, h, as shown in Figure 7.5. The height elevation, h, mainly depends on the
average height of objects being shipped through the dock door. A normal choice of h is
between 0.5 and 1 m. In addition, antenna A and antenna B will be normally using
different channels for tag interrogation.
However, if antenna A and antenna B are operating at the same time, and a tag is located
in the middle of the dock door, the tag may be ‘‘confused’’ by the interrogation signals
Reader
LBT Sensor
Reader
Reader
• • •
Antenna
FIGURE 7.4
Localized LBT system, where each reader has its own LBT sensor.
(From Leong, K.S., M.L. Ng, and P.H. Cole. 2006a. Synchronization of
RFID readers for dense RFID reader environments. International Sym-
posium on Applications and the Internet. SAINT, Phoenix, Arizona, USA,
# 2006 by IEEE. With permission; Leong, K.S., M.L. Ng, A. Grasso, and
P.H. Cole. 2006d. J. Commun., 1, 9, # 2006 by IEEE. With permission.)
RFID Reader Synchronization
131

from both of the antennas with the result that the tag is misread. This effect is known as the
tag confusion problem. The discussion of this issue is outside the scope of this chapter but a
simple solution to this is to alternate the operation of antenna A and antenna B every query
cycle.
7.5
Case Study
A case study on dense RFID reader deployment at the dock doors of a warehouse is
presented here. As shown in Figure 7.6, the dark color rectangles represent trucks loading
or unloading goods at the dock doors of a warehouse. Each door is around 3 m in width,
and has two RFID antennas facing each other for tag interrogation.
Since all the readers are synchronized in a way described in Section 7.3, they will start
‘‘Listening’’ at the same time and will be assigned a channel for interrogation at the
end of ‘‘Listen’’ period. The assignment of channels will be geographically inﬂuenced.
Two readers assigned to be operating in the same channel will be as far apart as possible.
In
addition,
the
neighboring
antennas
will
be
using
channels
as
far
apart
as
FIGURE 7.5
A typical antenna setting at dock door, with h being the
height of the antenna from the base of a dock door.
(From Leong, K.S., M.L. Ng, and P.H. Cole. 2006a.
Synchronization of RFID readers for dense RFID reader
environments. International Symposium on Applications
and the Internet. SAINT, Phoenix, Arizona, USA, #
2006 by IEEE. With permission; Leong, K.S., M.L. Ng,
A. Grasso, and P.H. Cole. 2006d. J. Commun., 1, 9,
# 2006 by IEEE. With permission.)
Truck docks
h
Antenna
A
Antenna
B
Best
read
zone
Moderate read zone
FIGURE 7.6
Alternating of ‘‘Listening’’ and ‘‘Talking’’
mode. (From Leong, K.S., M.L. Ng, and
P.H. Cole. 2006a. Synchronization of RFID
readers for dense RFID reader environ-
ments. International Symposium on Applica-
tions and the Internet. SAINT, Phoenix,
Arizona, USA, # 2006 by IEEE. With per-
mission; Leong, K.S., M.L. Ng, A. Grasso,
and P.H. Cole. 2006d. J. Commun., 1, 9,
# 2006 by IEEE. With permission.)
2
8
4
10
6
2
8
4
10
6
2
8
Channel
Time
"Listening"
Truck
Truck
Truck
Truck
Truck
Truck
Truck
Truck
Truck
Truck
Truck
Truck
132
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

possible. As illustrated in Figure 7.7, the spectrum is split into 10 channels, all 5 of the
odd-numbered channels are reserved for tag backscattering, whereas all 5 of the even-
numbered channels are assigned for reader interrogation. Figure 7.6 shows how the channel
assignment is done. The antenna on the furthest left is using channel 2 for interrogation.
The next antenna on its immediate right is using channel 8, which is six channels away.
Channel 10, though is the furthest channel away, is not chosen. This is because the
arrangement of {2, 8, 4, 10, 6} gives best channel separation between every channel.
7.6
Synchronized RFID System Fine-Tuning
Fine-tuning of a synchronized RFID system, as presented in this section, can be carried out
to further reduce the tendency of reader collision. The ﬁne-tuning methods discussed later
include the reduction of output power, the reduction of overall reader talking time, the use
of external sensors, the use of RF opaque or absorbing materials, and the frequent
rearrangement of channel allocations.
7.6.1
Reduction of Output Power
Although up to 2 W ERP can be used in single or small population reader environment, in
dense reader populations this higher power may not be necessary. Currently, a state-of-
the-art reader can read up to 10 m. However, normal reading operations do not require
such a read range. In the case study presented in Section 7.5, the dock doors of the
warehouse are around 3 m in width. Since two antennas are positioned facing each other
in every dock door, the read range required is also around 1.5–2 m. By reducing the
radiated power of readers, the minimum distance between two antennas using the same
channel can also be reduced, which is beneﬁcial in a dense reader environment.
Figure 7.8 gives an approximation on the reduction of output power. In the far ﬁeld
region, using the Friis equation, the power received is the inverse function of the square of
Channel
Frequency
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
FIGURE 7.7
Channeling of the allocated frequency spectrum. (From Leong, K.S.,
M.L. Ng, and P.H. Cole. 2006a. Synchronization of RFID readers for
dense RFID reader environments. International Symposium on Appli-
cations and the Internet. SAINT, Phoenix, Arizona, USA, # 2006 by
IEEE. With permission; Leong, K.S., M.L. Ng, A. Grasso, and P.H.
Cole. 2006d. J. Commun., 1, 9, # 2006 by IEEE. With permission.)
Estimation of radiated power
Distance (m)
Max = 10 m
Max = 5 m
Radiated power (W ERP)
0
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2
4
6
8
10
FIGURE 7.8
Estimation of required radiated power
given that maximum read range corres-
ponds to maximum radiated power.
(From Leong, K.S., M.L. Ng, and P.H.
Cole. 2006a. Synchronization of RFID
readers for dense RFID reader environ-
ments. International Symposium on Appli-
cations and the Internet. SAINT, Phoenix,
Arizona, USA, # 2006 by IEEE. With per-
mission; Leong, K.S., M.L. Ng, A. Grasso,
and P.H. Cole. 2006d. J. Commun., 1, 9,
# 2006 by IEEE. With permission.)
RFID Reader Synchronization
133

distance (r2). If the maximum read range corresponding to maximum radiated power
(2 W ERP) of an RFID reader is known, we can compute the required radiated power for a
shorter read range. For example, if the maximum read range of a reader is 5 m using 2 W
ERP (shown in Figure 7.8), and if a read range of only 2 m is required, the required
radiated power can be lowered to 0.32 W ERP. This estimation may not be accurate in
real life due to complex electromagnetic propagation phenomena, such as reﬂection caused
by the surroundings objects, but it demonstrates that power reduction is a viable option.
7.6.2
Reduction of Overall Reader Talking Time
While it is possible to talk for 4 s, reader applications should be conﬁgured to talk for only
the time necessary to capture tag data. There is no optimum talking time. It depends on the
application and also the surroundings of the deployment zone. On-site ﬁne-tuning and
measurements are needed before the reduction of talking time can be carried out.
7.6.3
Use of External Sensors
Sensors can be used to turn RFID readers on only when tags are approaching to further
reduce reader interference in that area. This will free up the channels allocated for those
antennas, and also avoid unnecessary interference to other surrounding reader antennas.
For example, external sensors can be attached to the dock door in the case study in Section
7.5. When the dock door is not in use, the designated RFID readers would be switched off,
as shown in Figure 7.9. Optionally, the central control unit can then dynamically shift the
channels assigned for the antennas at door 3 to door 4 as shown.
7.6.4
RF Opaque or RF Absorbing Materials
Another effective, but more expensive, way to reduce reader interference and collision is to
use RF opaque or RF absorbing materials to contain the interrogating signal within the
designated zone of interrogation. For the case study presented in Section 7.5, the use of
such materials is shown in Figure 7.10. Although there will still be some signal leakage
through the door openings, it would not have caused much interference. This is due to the
fact that the signal strengths at the sides of the antenna are relatively weak as compared
with the front of the antenna. According to Leong et al. (2006b), the gain at the side of a
typical RFID antenna is 20 dB less than the gain at the front of the antenna.
7.6.5
Frequent Rearrangement of Channels
Interrogating Channels can be switched around every cycle of ‘‘Listen Before Talk.’’ This is
to prevent the jamming of the interrogation signal by any external noise. Figure 7.11 shows
a simple example on how the switching is done. There are other more complex switching
FIGURE 7.9
Using sensors in an RFID system. Both the antennas at
dock door 3 are switched off when the absence of truck
3 is detected. (From Leong, K.S., M.L. Ng, and P.H.
Cole.2006a.SynchronizationofRFIDreadersfordense
RFID reader environments. International Symposium on
Applications and the Internet. SAINT, Phoenix, Arizona,
USA, # 2006 by IEEE. With permission; Leong, K.S.,
M.L. Ng, A. Grasso, and P.H. Cole. 2006d. J. Commun.,
1, 9, # 2006 by IEEE. With permission.)
Channel
2
8
4
10
6
2
8
4
10
6
Truck
Truck
Truck
Truck
Truck
134
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

methods involving higher artiﬁcial intelligence in the central control unit, depending on
the noise received from the surrounding environment, but these await full development.
7.7
Variation of Synchronization
In the previous sections, suggestions on the implementation of a real life RFID reader
synchronization system are presented, together with some deployment options, such as the
connectivity of all the readers. In addition, ﬁne-tuning methods are presented. In this section,
some of the interesting variations of RFID reader synchronization schemes are presented.
These variations may not be readily incorporated into the suggested methods mentioned in
previous sections, but are presented here for future reference and for completeness.
7.7.1
Separation of Transmitting and Receiving Channels
For the RFID full-power operation (2 W ERP) as governed by ETSI 302 208, only
10 channels are available as shown in Figure 7.7. However, as discussed in Section 7.2,
there are actually 15 channels available for RFID in total. Five of the ﬁfteen channels,
though used as guard bands, can be used for RFID operation with reduced maximum
allowable radiated power. There are 3 channels located lower in frequency than the normal
10 channels, which can only be operated below 100 mW ERP, whereas there are 2 channels
higher in frequency than the normal 10 channels, which can be operated below 500 mW
ERP. The complete frequency range for RFID operation with respective regulated power
level is as shown in Figure 7.12.
The channel numbering system shown in Figure 7.7 is included in Figure 7.12 along with
a new channel numbering system to simplify the discussion hereon. Channels 4, 7, 10, and 13
RF absorbing materials
2
8
4
10
6
2
8
4
10
6
2
8
Truck
Truck
Truck
Truck
Truck
Truck
FIGURE 7.10
Use of RF absorbing materials. The antennas
facing each other at the same door are at least
four channels away. (From Leong, K.S., M.L. Ng,
and P.H. Cole. 2006a. Synchronization of RFID
readers for dense RFID reader environments. Inter-
national Symposium on Applications and the Internet.
SAINT, Phoenix, Arizona, USA, # 2006 by IEEE.
With permission; Leong, K.S., M.L. Ng, A. Grasso,
and P.H. Cole. 2006d. J. Commun., 1, 9, # 2006 by
IEEE. With permission.)
Channel
Channel
2
8
4
10
6
2
8
4
10
6
2
8
8
2
6
10
4
8
2
6
10
4
8
2
FIGURE 7.11
Channel switching within antennas. (From Leong,
K.S., M.L. Ng, and P.H. Cole. 2006a. Synchroniza-
tion of RFID readers for dense RFID reader environ-
ments. International Symposium on Applications and
the Internet. SAINT, Phoenix, Arizona, USA, #
2006 by IEEE. With permission; Leong, K.S., M.L.
Ng, A. Grasso, and P.H. Cole. 2006d. J. Commun., 1,
9, # 2006 by IEEE. With permission.)
RFID Reader Synchronization
135

are assigned to be the reader transmitting channels while the tag reply channels are the
four channels beside the transmitting channels (Impinj, 2006). For example, transmitting
channel 4 uses channels 2, 3, 5, and 6 for tag reply (Figure 7.13).
Although the transmitting channels are reduced from a total of ﬁve down to four, the
transmitting channels are placed two channels away rather than one channel away. From
the transmit mask shown in Figure 7.14, an improvement of 5 dB can be obtained. Hence
with the reduction of interference between transmitting channels, readers can be placed
nearer to each other.
7.7.2
Separation of RFID and Non-RFID Signals
Another variation of synchronization is to differentiate an RFID signal from a non-RFID
signal. A method using signal recognition is presented in Intermec (2006). The idea is that
all the RFID readers in a certain region can be treated as a single entity in the regulation as
outlined in the ETSI 302 208. Hence, it is only required to avoid the signal interference
between all the RFID readers and the rest of the short-range devices. If this concept is valid,
the interrogation signals of RFID readers are not treated as a signal in a channel when an
LBT test is carried out.
The main advantage of this method is that a lot of readers can be deployed in a small
conﬁnement area. However, reader antenna positioning can become more challenging, as
all the readers can choose any channel for transmission as long as there is no other type of
short-range device around.
7.8
Synchronization in the United States
Synchronization cannot be implemented in the United States under Part 15.247 or any
countries regulated RFID using FHSS. As discussed earlier, FHSS requires the reader to
switch (hop) from channel to channel when a collision is detected. In synchronization, the
switching or hopping is not random (or pseudorandom) in nature, and is in violation with
the regulations. However, the USA FCC has another clause with Part 15 which does not
specify FHSS. This part 15.245 allows an RF transmission to operate at 0.0375 W EIRP on a
duty cycle with a 20 dB peak to average ratio.
FIGURE 7.12
The complete frequency band allocated for
RFID operation as compared with Figure 7.7.
(From Leong, K.S., M.L. Ng, and P.H. Cole.
2006a. Synchronization of RFID readers for
dense RFID reader environments. International
Symposium on Applications and the Internet.
SAINT, Phoenix, Arizona, USA, # 2006 by
IEEE. With permission; Leong, K.S., M.L. Ng,
A. Grasso, and P.H.Cole. 2006d.J. Commun., 1,
9, # 2006 by IEEE. With permission.)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12 13 14 15
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10
Complete
2 W
100 mW
500 mW
FIGURE 7.13
Variation in the separation of transmitting (Tx) and receiv-
ing (Rx) channel of an RFID reader. (From Leong, K.S.,
M.L. Ng, and P.H. Cole. 2006a. Synchronization of RFID
readers for dense RFID reader environments. International
Symposium on Applications and the Internet. SAINT, Phoe-
nix, Arizona, USA, # 2006 by IEEE. With permission;
Leong, K.S., M.L. Ng, A. Grasso, and P.H. Cole. 2006d.
J. Commun., 1, 9, # 2006 by IEEE. With permission.)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12 13 14 15
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10
Tx
Tx
Tx
Tx
Rx
Rx
Rx
Rx
Rx
136
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

If a synchronized RFID system in European countries, which only occupied a bandwidth
of 3 MHz, can perform on par with an FHSS RFID system in the United States, it can be
safety deduced that RFID reader synchronization using 15.245 can bring improvement to
the RFID operation in the United States. With a broader bandwidth available (50 channels
of 500 kHz each as compared with 10 channels of 200 kHz each), a synchronized RFID in
the United States can offer more coverage and higher reading speed.
7.9
Updated Progress on Development of RFID Reader Synchronization
The regulation of RFID reader synchronization in the European countries is governed by ETSI.
TG34: RFID devices, a technical work group within ETSI has been ﬁeld-testing late in 2006 in
an operational distribution center using a synchronized RFID system (O’Connor, 2006). The
testing involved up to 36 adjacent portals operating simultaneously. Using identical pallets
comprising 63 ‘‘RFID unfriendly’’ cartons, a read rate of better than 98.5% is recorded. In the
near future, RFID reader synchronization would be included in ETSI TR 102 436 ‘‘Electro-
magnetic compatibility and Radio spectrum Matters (ERM); Improved spectrum efﬁciency for
RFID in the UHF Band,’’ and be harmonized with the current EN 302 208. In addition, with the
standardization of RFID reader synchronization, the mandatory use of ‘‘Listen Before Talk,’’
which is a deterrent to large-scale deployment of RFID system, will be lifted, allowing a better
performance and better coverage RFID system in Europe.
7.10
Conclusion
This chapter has identiﬁed synchronization of RFID readers as a mechanism to assist in
RFID reader deployment in dense reader environments. Some implementation methods
and several ﬁne-tuning methods are presented in optimizing the performance of a
synchronized RFID system. As compared with conventional unsynchronized RFID sys-
tems, a synchronized RFID system can offer more coverage, less reader collision or
interference, while strictly following the European regulations and the EPC C1G2
Integrated power
0 dBch
30 dBch
60 dBch
65 dBch
Frequency/Tari
6.25
6.25
1.25
1.25
3.75
3.75
FIGURE 7.14
Transmit mask for dense interrogator environments (EPC radio frequency identity protocols class-1 generation-2
UHF RFID protocol for communications at 860–960 MHz version 1.0.9. (From EPCglobal, EPC Radio-Frequency
Identity Protocols Class-1 Generation-2 UHF RFID Protocol for Communications at 860 MHz–960 MHz Version
1.0.9, EPCglobal Standard Speciﬁcation, 2004, With permission # 2004 by EPCglobal.)
RFID Reader Synchronization
137

recommendation, and with variation of the normal operating procedure can also deal with
the effects of tag confusion. However, these beneﬁts require the use of more complex
hardware and hence can marginally increase deployment costs.
References
Carbunar, B., M.K. Ramanathan, M. Koyuturk, et al. 2005. Redundant reader elimination in
RFID systems. Second Annual IEEE Communications Society Conference on SECON, Santa Clara,
California, USA.
CISC. Consolidated proposal on synchronization. 2006. ETSI Electromagnetic Compatibility and
Radio Spectrum Matters, Task Group 34, RF Identiﬁcation Devices, ETSI ERMTG34#12_012.
Engels, D.W. and S.E. Sarma. 2002. The reader collision problem. IEEE International Conference on
Systems, Man and Cybernetics. vol. 3, 6 pp.
EPCglobal. 2004. EPC Radio-Frequency Identity Protocols Class-1 Generation-2 UHF RFID Protocol
for Communications at 860 MHz–960 MHz Version 1.0.9, EPCglobal Standard Speciﬁcation.
European Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI). 2006. EN 302 208-1 V1.1.2 (2006–03),
Electromagnetic Compatibility and Radio Spectrum Matters (ERM); Radio Frequency Identiﬁ-
cation Equipment Operating in the Band 865 MHz to 868 MHz with Power Levels up to 2 W;
Part 1: Technical Requirements and Methods of Measurement.
Federal Communications Commission (FCC). 2001. Title 47, Telecommunication, Chapter 1, Part 15,
Radio Frequency Devices.
Impinj. RFID Operation in Europe. 2006. ETSI Electromagnetic Compatibility and Radio Spectrum
Matters, Task Group 34, RF Identiﬁcation Devices, ETSI ERMTG34#12_11r1.
Intermec. Smart Listen Before Talk. 2006. ETSI Electromagnetic Compatibility and Radio Spectrum
Matters, Task Group 34, RF Identiﬁcation Devices, ETSI ERMTG34#12_010.
International Standards Organization (ISO). 2004. ISO=IEC 18000-6:2004: Information Technology—
Radio Frequency Identiﬁcation for Item Management—Part 6: Parameters for Air Interface
Communications at 860 MHz to 960 MHz.
Leong, K.S., M.L. Ng, and P.H. Cole. 2005. The reader collision problem in RFID systems. IEEE 2005
International Symposium on MAPE, Beijing, China.
Leong, K.S., M.L. Ng, and P.H. Cole. 2006a. Synchronization of RFID readers for dense RFID
reader environments. International Symposium on Applications and the Internet, SAINT, Phoenix,
Arizona, USA.
Leong, K.S., M.L. Ng, and P.H. Cole. 2006b. Positioning analysis of multiple antennas in a dense RFID
reader environment. International Symposium on Applications and the Internet, SAINT, Phoenix,
Arizona, USA.
Leong, K.S., M.L. Ng, and P.H. Cole. 2006c. Operational considerations in simulation and deploy-
ment of RFID systems. 17th International Zurich Symposium on Electromagnetic Compatibility,
Singapore.
Leong, K.S., M.L. Ng, A. Grasso, and P.H. Cole. 2006d. Dense RFID reader deployment in Europe
using synchronization. Journal of Communications, ISSN 1796–2021, 1(7), 9–16.
O’Connor, M.C. October 2006. ETSI tests show EPC scaleable in Europe. RFID Journal. Available at
http:==www.rﬁdjournal.com=article=articleview=2712=1=1.
Rendon, J. 2005. Wal-Mart touts RFID results. Available at: http:==searchmobilecomputing.
techtarget.com=originalContent=0,289142,sid40_gci1048680,00.html?bucket ¼ NEWS (accessed
on April 11, 2007).
Roberti, M. April 2004. Wal-Mart begins RFID rollout. RFID Journal. Available at http:==www.
rﬁdjournal.com=article=view=926=1=1.
Skeie, T., S. Johannessen, and O. Holmeide. 2001. Highly accurate time synchronization over
switched Ethernet. Proceedings of 8th IEEE International Conference on Emerging Technologies and
Factory Automation, vol. 1, pp. 195–204.
138
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

8
Adaptive Tag Anticollision Protocols
for RFID Passive Tags
Jihoon Myung, Wonjun Lee, and Timothy K. Shih
CONTENTS
8.1
Introduction........................................................................................................................ 139
8.2
Tree-Based Tag Anticollision Protocols.......................................................................... 141
8.2.1 Binary Tree Protocol............................................................................................... 142
8.2.2 Query Tree Protocol ............................................................................................... 142
8.3
Problems in Tree-Based Protocols................................................................................... 143
8.4
Adaptive Tag Anticollision Protocols............................................................................. 145
8.5
Adaptive Query Splitting ................................................................................................. 145
8.5.1 Query Insertion ....................................................................................................... 145
8.5.2 Query Deletion........................................................................................................ 147
8.6
Adaptive Binary Splitting................................................................................................. 149
8.6.1 Tag Transmission Control ..................................................................................... 149
8.6.2 Frame Termination ................................................................................................. 150
8.7
Performance Evaluation.................................................................................................... 151
8.7.1 Impact of the Number of Tags.............................................................................. 152
8.7.2 Impact of Tag Movement ...................................................................................... 153
8.7.3 Impact of the Similarity of ID............................................................................... 155
8.8
Conclusion .......................................................................................................................... 157
Acknowledgment ....................................................................................................................... 157
References.................................................................................................................................... 157
8.1
Introduction
Radio frequency identiﬁcation (RFID) is an automatic identiﬁcation system which consists
of readers and tags. An RFID reader recognizes an object through reading the identiﬁcation
number (ID) of the RFID tag attached to it [1]. To read tag IDs, the reader sends out a signal
supplying instructions to tags. The tag transmits its own ID to the reader, and then the
reader consults an external database with the ID to recognize the object. RFID is fast
replacing bar code-based identiﬁcation mechanisms because (1) communication between
a reader and a tag is not limited by the requirement of ‘‘line-of-sight’’ reading and (2) each
tag is allowed to have a unique ID.
139

Reader transmissions or tag transmissions lead to collision because readers and tags
operate within the same frequency band due to cost considerations. Collisions are divided
into reader collisions and tag collisions [2,3]. When neighboring readers interrogate a tag
simultaneously [4,5], reader signals collide and the tag cannot decode any reader signal.
On the contrary, when multiple tags transmit IDs to a reader at the same time, tag signals
collide and tag collision prevents the reader from recognizing any tag [6]. Collisions make
both communication overhead and transmission delay often lose their usefulness. As a
result, either the reader may not recognize all objects or retransmissions are required for
successful recognition. Especially, since low-functional passive tags can neither detect
collisions nor ﬁgure out neighboring tags, tag collision gives rise to the need for a tag
anticollision protocol that enables the recognition of tags with few collisions, and also
executes in real time.
Tag anticollision protocols can be grouped into two broad categories, namely ALOHA-
based protocols and tree-based protocols. ALOHA-based protocols [7–21] reduce the
occurrence probability of tag collisions since each tag tries to transmit the ID at randomly
selected time. ALOHA-based protocols, however, cannot completely prevent collisions,
and hence they have the serious problem that a speciﬁc tag may not be identiﬁed for a long
time, leading to the so-called ‘‘tag starvation problem.’’ On the other hand, in tree-based
protocols such as the binary tree protocol [20–25] and the query tree protocol [26,27], tag
identiﬁcation conceptually forms a tree. Based on the collision resolution algorithms
studied in Refs. [28–31], tree-based protocols split a set of tags into two subsets at a time
and attempt to recognize the subsets one by one. By splitting until each set has only one
tag, the reader can recognize all the tags in the reader’s reading range. Tree-based protocols
do not cause tag starvation, although they have relatively long identiﬁcation delay as
compared with ALOHA-based protocols.
Based on the analysis earlier, a good tag collision arbitration protocol for passive RFID
tags should have the following characteristics:
. The reader ought to recognize all the tags inside its own reading range. Tag
starvation problem results in the failure of object tracking and monitoring. Since
the reader, however, cannot estimate the number of tags precisely, the guarantee of
recognizing all tags must be taken into consideration in the design of the tag
anticollision protocol.
. The reader has to recognize tags promptly. Since an object with a tag is potentially
mobile, tag identiﬁcation must keep pace with the object’s velocity. If tag identi-
ﬁcation is carried out slower than the object’s velocity, the reader cannot recognize
it and the RFID system fails in monitoring or tracking.
. The tag should be recognized while consuming a small amount of resource. Since
the passive tag is supplied with power by the reader’s signal, tag’s available power
is limited. In addition, the tag has low computational capability and limited
memory. Thus, the tag anticollision protocol must load the tag with the least
possible communication and computation overheads.
This chapter introduces tree-based tag anticollision protocols and adaptive splitting
protocols [32], an adaptive query splitting (AQS) protocol and an adaptive binary splitting
(ABS) protocol, which are enhanced versions of tree-based protocols by suppressing the
occurrence of tag collisions and shortening tag identiﬁcation delay. For decreasing tag
collisions, adaptive splitting protocols adaptively decide the starting point of the
tag identiﬁcation by using information on the previous identiﬁcation process in an envir-
onment where the reader executes tag identiﬁcation repeatedly for object monitoring and
140
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

tracking. The reduction in collisions facilitates tag identiﬁcation with a small delay and
few transmissions while recognizing all the tags inside the reader’s reading range.
8.2
Tree-Based Tag Anticollision Protocols
Tree-based tag anticollision protocols perform tag identiﬁcation in units of reading cycle. In
a reading cycle, a reader transmits a query (or a feedback) to tags and then one or some of
tags transmit ID to the reader. Since the passive tag cannot detect collision, the reader
detects whether or not tag collision occurs among tag responses and determines the
contents of the query (or the feedback) in the next reading cycle according to the result
of the detection. On receiving a query (or a feedback) from the reader, the tag decides
whether to transmit or not. Only if a single tag transmits in a reading cycle, the reader can
recognize it successfully.
In tree-based protocols, the reader recognizes all the tags within its reading range during
an identiﬁcation frame, which consists of several reading cycles. The reader attempts to
recognize a set of tags in a reading cycle. A set includes tags, which transmit at the same
reading cycle. If a set has more than one tag, tag transmissions lead to collision. When tag
collision occurs, the mechanisms split the set into two subsets by tag IDs or random binary
numbers. After that, the reader attempts to recognize two subsets one by one in the same
frame. By continuing the splitting procedure until each set has only one tag, tree-based
protocols are capable of recognizing all the tags in the reader’s range.
An identiﬁcation frame in tree-based protocols can be represented by a tree structure as
shown in Figure 8.1a. Each node in the tree corresponds to a reading cycle and a number in
a node is the number of tag transmissions in that reading cycle. According to the number of
3
2
2
1
1
1
0
Tag
Tag C
Tag
1011
Collision cycle
Readable cycle
Idle cycle
Tag
0010
Tag
0001
000
001
01
00
0
1
Tag A
Tag B
1
0
0
0
1
1
Tag
(a)
(b)
(c)
Tag
FIGURE 8.1
Tag identiﬁcation of tree-based protocols. (a) Tree expression of tag identiﬁcation. (b) Tag identiﬁcation of the
binary tree protocol. (c) Tag identiﬁcation of the query tree protocol.
Adaptive Tag Anticollision Protocols for RFID Passive Tags
141

tag transmissions in a reading cycle, reading cycles can be divided into three types as
follows:
. Idle cycle: No transmission is attempted. The idle cycle does not make the reader
fail to notice a tag, but it is a source of an unnecessary increment of identiﬁcation
delay.
. Readable cycle: Exactly one transmission is attempted. The reader recognizes a tag
successfully.
. Collision cycle: More than one transmission is attempted. A tag collision occurs and
the reader is unable to recognize any tags. The collision cycle defers tag identiﬁ-
cation and the tag’s communication is pure overhead. The reader sends a query
(or a feedback) conducting the split of the set including conﬂicting tags.
In a tree of an identiﬁcation frame, only a node of a collision cycle has two child nodes
because a set is split into two subsets in the collision cycle. Consequently, all intermediate
nodes in the tree correspond to collision cycles and all the leaf nodes correspond to either
readable cycles or idle cycles. Tag identiﬁcation in tree-based protocols is coincident with a
tree search starting at the root of the tree for ﬁnding nodes of readable cycles. The
performance of tag identiﬁcation is inﬂuenced signiﬁcantly by how efﬁciently it splits
the tag set.
8.2.1
Binary Tree Protocol
The binary tree (BT) protocol [20–25] uses random binary numbers generated by colliding
tags for the splitting procedure. The tag has a countervalue initialized to 0 at the beginning
of the frame. The tag transmits ID when the countervalue is 0. Therefore, all tags, at the
beginning of the frame, form one set and transmit concurrently. The reader transmits
a feedback to inform tags of the occurrence of tag collision. According to the reader’s
feedback, all tags change their countervalues. The tag randomly selects a binary number
when its transmission causes collision (i.e., the countervalue is 0). By adding the selected
binary number to the countervalue, a set is split into two subsets. When tag collisions
occur, the tag which is not involved in collision (i.e., the countervalue is not 0) increases its
countervalue by 1. When the reader’s feedback indicates no collision, all tags decrease their
countervalues by 1. The tag infers the successful transmission from the following feedback
indicating no collision. The tag recognized by a reader does not transmit any signal until
the ongoing frame is terminated. Figure 8.1b shows an example of tag identiﬁcation of the
binary tree protocol and the number by the side of the lines indicates the binary number
selected randomly by conﬂicting tags.
The reader also has a counter to terminate a frame. It initializes the countervalue with 0
in every frame. The countervalue of the reader indicates the number of tag sets which are
not yet recognized in a frame. If tag collision occurs, the reader adds 1 to its countervalue
since the number of tag sets, which the reader should recognize, increases. Otherwise, it
decreases its countervalue by 1. When the countervalue is <0, the reader terminates the
frame.
8.2.2
Query Tree Protocol
The query tree (QT) protocol [26,27] uses tag IDs to split a tag set. The reader transmits a
query including a bit string. The tag whose ﬁrst bits of ID equal the bit string of the query
responds by transmitting ID. If tag responses of query q1q2 . . . qx (qi 2 {0, 1}, 1  x  b, and b
142
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

is the number of bits in the tag ID) collide, the reader uses two 1 bit longer queries,
q1q2 . . . qx0 and q1q2 . . . qx1 in next reading cycles. The set of tags which match q1q2 . . . qx
is split into two subsets; one is a set of tags which match q1q2 . . . qx0 and the other is a set of
tags which match q1q2 . . . qx1. The reader has queue Q for bit strings of queries. At the
beginning of the frame, Q is initialized with two 1 bit strings, 0 and 1. The reader dequeues
(i.e., removes from queue and returns) a bit string from Q and transmits a query at a time.
If tag responses collide, the reader enqueues (i.e., adds to queue) two 1 bit longer bit strings
into Q. By expanding the query until either a response or no response follows, all tags are
recognized. Figure 8.1c shows an example of tag identiﬁcation of the query tree protocol
and the number inside the nodes indicates the query transmitted by the reader.
Contrary to the binary tree protocol, the query tree protocol imposes simple functions on
tags. The query tree protocol is also called a memoryless protocol because tags do not need
to have additional memory except ID for identiﬁcation. However, identiﬁcation delay is
affected by the distribution of tag IDs. For example, as tags have much similar IDs, delay
is increased.
8.3
Problems in Tree-Based Protocols
The reader performs tag identiﬁcation frame repeatedly for object tracking and monitoring.*
Let ax denote tag x. For reader r, let Ar,i be the set of tags which dwell inside reader r’s range
in the ith frame of reader r. To consider the tag’s mobility, we classify tags into staying tags,
arriving tags, and leaving tags. For the given ith frame of reader r, the staying tag is the tag
which was recognized in the last frame by reader r and stays within the reader r’s range in
the current frame, that is, a staying tag is one of {ax:ax 2 Ar,i1 \ Ar,i}. The arriving tag is the
tag which was not recognized in the last frame by reader r and has arrived in the reader r’s
range before the starting of the current frame, that is, an arriving tag is one of {ax:ax 2 Ar,i 
Ar,i1}. The leaving tag is the tag which was recognized in the last frame by reader r and has
left from the reader r’s range before the starting of the current frame, that is, a leaving tag is
one of {ax:ax 2 Ar,i1  Ar,i}. Tag identiﬁcation should recognize staying tags and arriving
tags quickly.
Staying tags have been recognized in the last identiﬁcation frame and the reader will
rerecognize staying tags in the current identiﬁcation frame. Since the reader already knows
information on staying tags, tag collision arbitration can prevent collisions between signals
transmitted by staying tags during the current frame. However, the existing tree-based tag
anticollision protocols cause collisions between staying tags because they do not take any
information on staying tags into consideration. At the beginning of the identiﬁcation frame,
they make one set, which includes all the tags inside the reader’s identiﬁcation range, and
start the splitting procedure. To show collisions between staying tags, we measure inter-
staying tag collisions through simulations of the binary tree protocol and the query tree
protocol. In our simulations, there are 50 tags in an area of 10 m 3 10 m, and tags have
mobility following the random walk model [33]. A reader, which has the identiﬁcation
range of 3 m, is deployed in the center of the simulation area and recognizes tags
repeatedly. To pinpoint an individual tag, we give tags virtual IDs from 1 to 50. To
make tag 1 the staying tag, we ﬁx it in the vicinity of the reader. Figure 8.2 shows the
number of collisions caused by tag 1 and other staying tags during two consecutive
* Prominent retailers such as Wal-Mart, Target, and Best Buy, as well as logistics companies like UPS and Fed-Ex
have made this a requirement of all their operations. Manufacturers are following suite.
Adaptive Tag Anticollision Protocols for RFID Passive Tags
143

identiﬁcation frames. Under the binary tree protocol, tag 1 suffers from more collisions
with some staying tags during the second frame in comparison with the ﬁrst frame as
shown in Figure 8.2a. This is due to the fact that the binary tree protocol adopts the
probabilistic approach of exploiting random numbers and does not use information on
staying tags. As shown in Figure 8.2b, under the query tree protocol, tag 1 causes the same
number of collisions with other staying tags again. The query tree protocol also does not
consider collisions by staying tags though it differs from the binary tree protocol in the
sense of exploiting tag IDs.
When tag collision occurs in tag identiﬁcation of tree-based protocols, colliding tags need
to retransmit their IDs. Resolution of tag collisions consumes the tag’s limited energy and
causes additional identiﬁcation delay. Therefore, eliminating interstaying tag collisions can
shorten the total delay for tag identiﬁcation and reduces the tag’s communication over-
head. To prevent collisions between staying tags, adaptive splitting protocols start the
splitting procedure from several tag sets; each of the sets has one staying tag at most. They
are still simple and recognize all tags quickly.
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
3
8
10
11
18
21
22
23
Tag’s virtual ID
No. of collisions
One frame
Next frame
25
26
29
35
46
48
(a)
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
8
21
22
25
Tag’s virtual ID
No. of collisions
One frame
Next frame
26
29
48
(b)
FIGURE 8.2
Collisions between staying tags in tree-based protocols. (a) Collisions by the binary tree protocol. (b) Collisions by
the query tree protocol.
144
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

8.4
Adaptive Tag Anticollision Protocols
In tree-based tag anticollision protocols, the tree search causes tag identiﬁcation delay, and
the reduction in identiﬁcation delay can be accomplished by skipping of collision cycles.
However, once a frame is started, the tree searches of the binary tree protocol and the
query tree protocol depart from the root or the level 1 nodes of the tree and investigate all
intermediate nodes wherein tag collisions occur. The unreasonable starting point of the tree
search prolongs identiﬁcation delay.
The basic idea of adaptive splitting protocols is to adaptively decide the starting point of
the tree search with information on tags recognized in the last identiﬁcation frame. At
every identiﬁcation frame, the tree search of tag identiﬁcation starts from the nodes which
were the leaf nodes of the tree in the last identiﬁcation frame. Note that these starting nodes
were readable cycles or idle cycles in the last frame. To recognize arriving tags, the
identiﬁcation process traces down the path of the tree by inserting two child nodes of
the current node into the tree. To handle unnecessary idle cycles induced by leaving tags,
the identiﬁcation process traces up the path of the tree by replacing two leaf nodes with
their parent node. The key institution behind this approach is that in most applications
employing RFID tags, the set of objects encountered in successive readings from a particu-
lar reader does not change substantially and information from one reading can be used for
the next.
8.5
Adaptive Query Splitting
AQS uses reader’s queries and tag IDs analogous to the query tree protocol. The reader
transmits a query including a bit string. The tag responds to a query with its ID, if the
preﬁx of its ID is equal to the bit string of the query, that is, r1r2 . . . rx ¼ q1q2 . . . qx where
the tag ID is r1r2 . . . rb (ri is the ith binary value of the ID and b is the total number of bits
of the ID) and the bit string of the query is q1q2 . . . qx (qi is the ith binary value of the
query, 1  x  b). Tags are memoryless because they do not maintain any information
except their own IDs.
The reader has queue Q and candidate queue CQ to make queries. Queue Q maintains
bit strings for queries in the current identiﬁcation frame. Candidate queue CQ
maintains bit strings for queries in the next identiﬁcation frame. The reader uses the bit
strings stored in CQ as the starting point of tag identiﬁcation in the next frame. The
starting point of tag identiﬁcation moves downward (toward descendants in the tree) by
the query insertion procedure and moves upward (toward the root of the tree) by the
query deletion procedure. At the beginning of the frame, the reader initializes Q with
bit strings of CQ and makes CQ empty. If CQ does not have any bit string (e.g., when the
reader resets), Q is initialized with two 1 bit strings, 0 and 1. The reader dequeues a bit
string from Q and transmits a query at a time. The reader enqueues some of the used
bit strings into CQ according to the result of receiving tag responses. The identiﬁcation
frame continues until Q is empty.
8.5.1
Query Insertion
Let q1q2 . . . qx be the bit string of the transmitted query. According to the number of tags
responses, the reader acts as follows:
Adaptive Tag Anticollision Protocols for RFID Passive Tags
145

. Idle query (number of tag responses ¼ 0): The reader enqueues q1q2 . . . qx into CQ.
. Readable query (number of tag responses ¼ 1): The reader enqueues q1q2 . . . qx
into CQ.
. Collision query (number of tag responses  2): The reader enqueues q1q2 . . . qx0
and q1q2 . . . qx1 into Q.
The reader enqueues idle queries as well as readable queries into CQ. Therefore, CQ has
all the leaf nodes in the tree at the end of the frame. By maintaining CQ, the tree search of
AQS begins at the leaf nodes in the tree of the last frame and skips nodes whose queries
caused tag collisions in the last identiﬁcation frame. Since some arriving tags may not
match any nodes of readable cycles of the last frame, the tree search of AQS starts not only
at the nodes of readable cycles but also at the nodes of idle cycles of the last frame. To split
a set of conﬂicting tags into two subsets, the reader uses two queries 1 bit longer than the
collision query. By expanding the collision queries, the reader can recognize all tags.
Consider the situation that a reader attempts to recognize three tags whose IDs are 0101,
0110, and 1001, respectively. CQ of the reader has no bit string because the reader resets. In
this case, tag identiﬁcation of AQS is equal to that of the query tree protocol. Figure 8.3a
shows signals transmitted by the reader and tags for tag identiﬁcation, and Figure 8.3b is
the tree expression of tag identiﬁcation. Recognizing three tags causes two collisions, and
at the end of the frame, CQ stores 1, 00, 010, and 011. Thereafter, tag 1101 comes into the
reader’s reading range, and now the reader attempts to recognize four tags. As shown in
Reader’s
transmission
Tag
(0101)
Tag
(0110)
Tag
(1001)
Reader’s
reception
Collision
No response
0
1
Tag 1001
Idle
Readable
Collision
(b)
01
00
010
011
Tag 0110
Tag 0101
(a)
Collision
Time
0110
0101
1001
1001
0110
0110
0110
0
1
00
01
010
011
0101
0101
0101
FIGURE 8.3
Tag identiﬁcation in AQS after the reader resets. (a) Communication between the reader and tags. (b) Tree of tag
identiﬁcation.
146
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

Figure 8.4a and b, the reader recognizes four tags with only one collision. Since arriving tag
1101 responds to query 1 which staying tag 1001 responds to, query 1 causes a tag collision.
By expanding query 1 into query 10 and query 11, the reader recognizes both of two
conﬂicting tags quickly.
8.5.2
Query Deletion
In performing the procedure, the query insertion procedure enables only to expanding the
tree and therefore augments the number of leaf nodes in the tree. Since the number of
readable queries is the same as the number of tags, idle queries will proliferate and worsen
the reader’s identiﬁcation ability. It results from where readable queries are transformed
into idle queries by leaving tags. For fast tag identiﬁcation, the query deletion procedure
removes unnecessary idle queries from CQ under the condition that CQ has bit strings
covering all branches in the tree.
Let l(q1q2 . . . qx) be the number of responses following query q1q2 . . . qx. Since the tag
responds to either q1q2 . . . qx0 or q1q2 . . . qx1 when its ID matches query q1q2 . . . qx,
l(q1q2 . . . qx) ¼ l(q1q2 . . . qx0) þ l(q1q2 . . . qx1):
When query q1q2 . . . qx is a collision query, l(q1q2 . . . qx)  2 since more than one response
follows the collision query. The node of collision query q1q2 . . . qx has two child nodes
which are a pair of node types as follows:
Reader’s
transmission
1
00
010
011
10
11
0101
0110
1001
1001
1101
1101
Collision
No response
0101
0110
1001
1101
Time
(a)
(b)
1
0
00
01
10
11
011
010
Tag 0101
Tag 0110
Tag 1001 Tag 1101
Idle
Readable
Collision
Tag
(0101)
Tag
(0110)
Tag
(1001)
Tag
(1101)
Reader’s
reception
FIGURE 8.4
Tag identiﬁcation by the query insertion procedure. (a) Communication between the reader and tags. (b) Tree of
tag identiﬁcation.
Adaptive Tag Anticollision Protocols for RFID Passive Tags
147

. Two collision nodes: The node of query q1q2 . . . qx has two child nodes of
collision queries if and only if l(q1q2 . . . qx0)  2, l(q1q2 . . . qx1)  2, and
l(q1q2 . . . qx)  4.
. A collision node and a readable node: Two child nodes are a node of a collision query
and a node of a readable query only if l(q1q2 . . . qx0)  1, l(q1q2 . . . qx1)  1, and
l(q1q2 . . . qx)  3.
. A collision node and an idle node: Two child nodes are a node of a collision query and
a node with an idle query only if l(q1q2 . . . qx0)  0, l(q1q2 . . . qx1)  0, and
l(q1q2 . . . qx)  2.
. Two
readable
nodes:
The
node
of
query
q1q2 . . . qx
has
two
child
nodes
of readable queries if and only if l(q1q2 . . . qx0) ¼ 1, l(q1q2 . . . qx1) ¼ 1, and
l(q1q2 . . . qx) ¼ 2.
When some tags become leaving tags, a pair of node types can be transformed into as
follows:
. A readable node and an idle node: l(q1q2 . . . qx) ¼ 1 when l(q1q2 . . . qx0) ¼ 0 and
l(q1q2 . . . qx1) ¼ 1, or l(q1q2 . . . qx0) ¼ 1 and l(q1q2 . . . qx1) ¼ 0. Therefore, query
q1q2 . . . qx is not a collision query but a readable query.
. Two idle nodes: l(q1q2 . . . qx) ¼ 0 when l(q1q2 . . . qx0) ¼ 0 and l(q1q2 . . . qx1) ¼ 0.
Therefore, query q1q2 . . . qx is also an idle query.
When CQ has two bit strings corresponding to the pair of child nodes which have the
transformed types after an identiﬁcation frame, the reader deletes q1q2 . . . qx0 and q1q2 . . . qx1
from CQ and enqueues q1q2 . . . qx into CQ. The reader deletes all transformed queries from
CQ recursively. As the query deletion replaces two bit strings with their common preﬁx in
CQ, AQS can recognize all tags with less idle queries.
Consider that tag 0110 moves to the contrary direction of the reader and ﬁnally crosses
over the boundary of the identiﬁcation area of the reader after tag identiﬁcation illustrated
in Figure 8.4. In the following frame, query 011 changes into the idle query from the
readable query. Figure 8.5 shows the operation of the query deletion procedure after tag
0110 becomes the leaving tag. Since query 010 is a readable query and query 011 is an idle
query, query 01 is substituted for queries 010 and 011. The query deletion is implemented
once more because query 00 is an idle query and the newly inserted query 01 is a readable
query. The reader deletes queries 00 and 01 from CQ, and inserts query 0 into CQ.
Eventually, CQ has three queries, 0, 10, and 11, and the reader can recognize tags 0101,
1001, and 1101 with these queries.
FIGURE 8.5
Query deletion procedure after tag 0110 went out of
the reader’s reading range.
Tag 0101
0
00
01
10
11
1
Tag 1001
010
011
Tag 1101
Idle
Readable
Collision
148
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

8.6
Adaptive Binary Splitting
ABS uses random numbers with the aim of splitting a set of tags transmitting at the same
cycle like the binary tree protocol but starts the tree search only from the nodes of readable
cycles of the last frame. AQS, as described in the previous section, can reduce collisions
as compared with the binary tree protocol and the query tree protocol, but it produces idle
cycles. To guarantee identiﬁcation of all tags, the reader uses not only queries of readable
cycles but also queries of idle cycles of the last frame. Though the query deletion proced-
ure of AQS eliminates unnecessary idle cycles by leaving tags, it cannot be avoided that
the start of the tree search includes some of idle cycles to cover all possible ranges of the
tag ID. On the contrary, ABS starts tag identiﬁcation only from readable cycles of the last
frame and uses binary numbers selected randomly in each conﬂicting tag for the splitting
procedure. During tag identiﬁcation, ABS allocates different cycles to tags by revising the
tag’s counter into the ranking of recognition. The allocation of cycles to staying tags
enables fast identiﬁcation without collisions between staying tags in the next identiﬁcation
frame. ABS also has a mechanism for deallocating cycles of leaving tags. A transmission of
an arriving tag is decided by a random number selected among possible values inside a
reader’s range. Tag transmissions are aligned in the increasing order of countervalues.
ABS achieves fast identiﬁcation by diminishing not only collisions but also unnecessary
idle cycles.
8.6.1
Tag Transmission Control
A tag has two counters, a progressed slot counter (PSC) and an allocated slot counter (ASC).
PSC signiﬁes a numerical order of the readable cycle in a frame. Tags and readers initialize
their PSC to 0 at the beginning of the frame and increase by only 1 in the readable cycle.
ASC indicates which reading cycle the tag can transmit its ID to the reader. That is, the tag
is allowed to transmit when its ASC is equal to PSC. If the tag has ASC less than PSC, it
does not attempt the transmission until the completion of the frame, because it has already
been recognized in the ongoing frame. To control PSC and ASC, the reader informs tags of
the type of the last reading cycle by transmitting a feedback. According to the contents
of the reader’s feedback, every tag acts as follows:
. Idle (number of tag responses ¼ 0): The tag which has not been recognized in the
current frame yet, that is, the tag which has ASC greater than PSC decreases ASC
by 1.
. Readable (number of tag responses ¼ 1): All the tags increase PSC by 1. The
recognized tag does not react to the reader’s feedback and does not transmit its
ID to the reader before the start of the next identiﬁcation frame.
. Collision (number of tag responses  2): Conﬂicting tags (tags which have ASCs
equal to PSC) randomly select one of two binary numbers, 0 and 1, and then add it
to ASC. The tag which has ASC greater than PSC adds 1 to ASC.
During a frame, PSC does not decrease, and an ASC value is not changed in such a way
that ASC becomes smaller than PSC. Therefore, a tag recognized by the reader gets to
obtain a unique ASC which implies the allocation of the cycle to the tag for the next
identiﬁcation frame. The decrement of ASCs in the idle cycle deallocates cycles correspond-
ing to ASCs of leaving tags. A set of conﬂicting tags is separated into two subsets by the
tag’s random binary number selection after tag collision; the ﬁrst subset includes tags
Adaptive Tag Anticollision Protocols for RFID Passive Tags
149

which select 0 and the second subset includes tags which select 1. Since PSC is not changed
in the collision cycle, the ﬁrst subset tries to retransmit in the following cycle. The second
subset transmits after the ﬁrst subset is recognized. The increment in ASC values of
unrecognized tags in the collision cycle prevents the second subset from combining with
another set (tags which have already had ASC of 1). Preserving ASC at the boundary of
two consecutive frames makes it possible that the tree search starts from the readable
cycles of the last frame.
8.6.2
Frame Termination
To terminate the frame at once after identifying all tags, the reader of ABS acts as the tag
which has the largest ASC. The reader determines the end point of the frame with a PSC
and a terminated slot counter (TSC). PSC of the reader represents the number of tags
recognized successfully. In a readable cycle, the reader adds 1 to PSC. TSC signiﬁes the
number of tag sets in the reader’s range. If a collision occurs, the reader increases TSC by 1
because the number of tag sets has increased. When a reading cycle of type ‘‘idle’’ is
encountered, the reader decreases TSC by 1. This is to reﬂect the effect of the elimination of
idle cycles. As soon as PSC is greater than TSC, the reader concludes that all tags have been
recognized and transmits the command terminating the frame to all tags. For fast identi-
ﬁcation in the next frame, the reader preserves TSC after the end of the frame.
In an environment with multiple readers, an arriving tag can be recognized with its ASC
given by other readers. If an arriving tag has ASC less than TSC, it is obvious that the
arriving tag has the same ASC with a staying tag or a leaving tag and is recognized by
the reader in the following frame. To cope with ASC greater than TSC, the reader supports
the TSC value when a frame starts. A tag having ASC greater than TSC changes its ASC to
a random number from 0 to TSC. ABS recognizes all tags quickly through scaling ASCs of
arriving tags into the range of TSC.
Figure 8.6 illustrates an example of the operation of ABS. Assume that a reader
attempts to recognize tags A, B, and C, and there was no tag inside the reader’s reading
range in the previous frame. Therefore all three tags are arriving tags and the TSC value
ASC/TSC
value
3
(R)
(R)
(R)
(R)(A)
(A)
(A)
(A)
(A)
(A)
(A)
(B)
(B)
(B)
(C)
(C)
(C)
(C)
(C)
(C)
(C)
(R)
(R)
(R)
(R)
(A), (B),
and (C)
TSC of
reader
ASCs of
tags
PSC
Splitting
Collision
handling
Idle
handling
(B)
(B)
(B)
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Reading
cycle
FIGURE 8.6
Tag identiﬁcation by ABS.
150
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

of the reader is 0. In this case, tag identiﬁcation of ABS is equal to that of the binary tree
protocol because all three tags have ASCs of 0. In the ﬁrst reading cycle, three tags
transmit simultaneously and collision occurs. Tags A and B select 0, and tag C selects 1.
In the second cycle, a collision between tags A and B occurs and both of them select 0
again. Tag C and the reader increase ASC and TSC by 1, respectively. Tags A and B are
split successfully in the third cycle, and hence the reader recognizes tags A and B in the
fourth and ﬁfth cycles, respectively. The sixth cycle is an idle cycle because there are no
tags which have ASC equal to PSC (¼2). ASC of tag C and TSC of the reader are
decreased by 1 and the reader recognizes tag C in the seventh cycle. The reader
terminates the identiﬁcation frame after the seventh cycle. By using the values of ASCs
and TSC decided in the current frame into tag identiﬁcation of the next frame, the reader
achieves fast tag identiﬁcation. The arriving tags in the next frame can randomly select
their ASCs among numbers ranging from 0 to 2. Especially, when there is no leaving tag
and no arriving tag in the next frame, the reader can reidentify these three tags without
any collision.
8.7
Performance Evaluation
We evaluate the performance of AQS and ABS compared with the binary tree protocol and
the query tree protocol. To measure the efﬁciency of tag identiﬁcation in the tree-based
protocols, we consider the following aspects:
. Number of collisions: We measure the number of collisions between tag-to-reader
signals. A collision defers identiﬁcation and increases power consumption of tags.
. Number of idle cycles: The idle cycle is a factor of identiﬁcation delay.
. Identiﬁcation delay: We measure the total delay for recognizing all tags by the
interrogation cycle. Fast identiﬁcation is the most signiﬁcant factor in the tree-
based anticollision protocols because they do not cause the tag starvation problem.
. Tag communication overhead: This metric is the average number of bits transmitted
by a tag in a frame. This inﬂuences the amount of power consumption. Due to lack
of power source in tags, this must be low.
The simulation setup is shown in Table 8.1. To avoid the reader collision problem [4], we
place readers in such a manner that their reading ranges do not intersect. To appreciate the
impact of tag’s mobility, we deﬁne meter per frame (MPF). The MPF of tag ax, MPF(ax), is
given by
TABLE 8.1
Simulation Setup
Parameter
Value
Simulation area
100 m 3 100 m
No. of readers
100
Identiﬁcation range of the reader
3 m
No. of tags
1000
Tag ID
Randomly selected 96 bit ID
Maximum meter per frame (MPF)
2 m=frame
Adaptive Tag Anticollision Protocols for RFID Passive Tags
151

MPF(ax) ¼ ma(t1; t2)
Fp(t1; t2) (m=frame),
where ma(t1, t2) is the distance that tag ax moves in the time interval [t1, t2] and Fp(t1, t2)
is the number of frames executed by protocol p in the interval [t1, t2]. By using MPF,
we can ensure that tree-based protocols recognize the same tags in a frame. In our
simulations, initial positions and destinations of tags are randomly selected under the
simulation area. A tag moves from its initial position toward its destination with MPF,
which is randomly selected from 0 to the maximum MPF. We run each simulation 50
times under the earlier parameters and investigate the average results for the perform-
ance evaluation.
8.7.1
Impact of the Number of Tags
Figure 8.7 shows the simulation results obtained by changing the number of tags in the
simulation area. In the readers’ reading ranges, there averagely exist 31.62% of tags. As
the number of tags increases, the identiﬁcation delay gets longer and tag collisions occur
2000
1800
1600
1400
1200
1000
800
600
400
200
0
200
600
1000 1400 1800 2200
No. of tags
No. of collisions
2600 3000 3400 3800 4200
Binary
Query
AQS
ABS
(a)
1000
900
800
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
200
600
1000 1400 1800 2200
No. of tags
No. of idle cycles
2600 3000 3400 3800 4200
Binary
Query
AQS
ABS
(b)
FIGURE 8.7
Performance comparison with varying number of tags. (a) Collisions. (b) Idle cycles.
152
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

more often. The binary tree protocol and the query tree protocol show comparable delay
curves. The subtle difference in the delay results from the starting points of tag identiﬁca-
tion. Note that the binary tree protocol departs from the root of the tree and the query
tree protocol departs from the level 1 nodes of the tree. The performance of the
binary tree protocol can be improved up to the performance level of the query tree protocol
by initializing the tag’s countervalue to a random binary number instead of the value of 0.
By restraining the occurrence of collisions, AQS and ABS have shorter delay than the
binary tree protocol and the query tree protocol. Small collisions activate small tag
communication overhead. ABS has the shortest delay because it eliminates many idle
cycles. AQS generates more idle cycles than others due to additional queries to guarantee
recognizing all tags. On the other hand, AQS makes less collision and less tag communi-
cation than ABS because idle cycles assist arriving tags to avoid conﬂicting with other tags.
8.7.2
Impact of Tag Movement
We evaluate the performance by increasing the tag velocity. Figure 8.8 presents the
simulation results obtained by varying the maximum MPF. We normalize the measured
4000
3500
3000
2500
2000
1500
1000
500
0
200
600
1000 1400 1800 2200
No. of tags
No. of reading cycles
2600 3000 3400 3800 4200
Binary
Query
AQS
ABS
(c)
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
200
600
1000 1400 1800 2200
No. of tags
No. of transmitted bits
2600 3000 3400 3800 4200
Binary
Query
AQS
ABS
(d)
FIGURE 8.7 (continued)
(c) Identiﬁcation delay. (d) Tag communication overhead.
Adaptive Tag Anticollision Protocols for RFID Passive Tags
153

0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
No. of collisions
Binary
Query
AQS
ABS
0
1
2
3
4
5
Maximum MPF (m/frame)
6
7
8
9
10
(a)
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
No. of idle cycles
Binary
Query
AQS
ABS
0
1
2
3
4
5
Maximum MPF (m/frame)
6
7
8
9
10
(b)
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
No. of reading cycles
Binary
Query
AQS
ABS
0
1
2
3
4
5
Maximum MPF (m/frame)
6
7
8
9
10
(c)
FIGURE 8.8
Impact of tag mobility on tag identiﬁcation. (a) Collisions. (b) Idle cycles. (c) Identiﬁcation delay.
154
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

values by the number of recognized tags. When tags move at low speed, adaptive splitting
protocols outperform the binary tree protocol and the query tree protocol considerably.
Tags would like to be staying tags, and AQS and ABS block collisions between staying tags
completely because they do not allocate more than one staying tag to a set. Especially, they
achieve collisionless tag identiﬁcation when the maximum MPF is 0. As tags move faster,
the performance of AQS and ABS deteriorates. When the maximum MPF is >6 m=frame,
AQS has longer delay than the query tree protocol. When the tag mobility has high
speed, there are few staying tags and collisions between staying tags at the binary tree protocol
and the query tree protocol hardly occur. Additionally, AQS and ABS generate idle cycles
because leaving tags increase and leaving tags make idle cycles. Hence, AQS and ABS show
the performance similar to the binary tree protocol and the query tree protocol at high speeds.
8.7.3
Impact of the Similarity of ID
For the purpose of another comparison, we evaluate the impact of the similarity among
IDs. The query tree protocol and AQS may be inﬂuenced by the distribution of IDs because
they use tag IDs for splitting a tag set. To quantify the similarity of IDs, we deﬁne an
identical bit as the length of the identical preﬁx all tag IDs have. The tag ID is depicted by
x1x2 . . . xaxaþ1 . . . x96 (xi is a binary digit, 1  a < 96) and all tag IDs have the same
x1x2 . . . xa if the identical bit is a and each tag has a 96 bit ID. Figure 8.9 gives the
simulation results for various identical bits from 0 (IDs are completely randomly selected)
to 80. We normalize the measured values by the number of recognized tags. As the
identical bit increases, the query tree protocol rapidly degenerates as expected. The
query tree protocol has the highest communication overhead because the reader transmits
all queries causing collisions in every frame. On the other hand, the performance of AQS is
not seriously affected by the similarity of IDs. Since candidate queue CQ excludes queries
of collision cycles of the last frame, AQS uses a collision query only once. However, as the
identical bit increases, idle cycles in the trees of the query tree protocol increase. When
the identical bit is >48, AQS has longer delay than the binary tree protocol because of an
increment of idle cycles. ABS and the binary tree protocol are not affected by the identical
bit because they do not use the patterns of IDs. As in the previous scenarios, ABS shows
the shortest identiﬁcation delay.
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
No. of transmitted bits
Binary
Query
AQS
ABS
0
1
2
3
4
5
Maximum MPF (m/frame)
6
7
8
9
10
(d)
FIGURE 8.8 (continued)
(d) Tag communication overhead.
Adaptive Tag Anticollision Protocols for RFID Passive Tags
155

0
0
0.5
1
1.5
No. of collisions
2
2.5
3
3.5
8
16
24
32
40
Identical bit
48
56
64
72
80
Binary
Query
AQS
ABS
(a)
0
0
0.5
1
1.5
No. of idle cycles
2
2.5
8
16
24
32
40
Identical bit
48
56
64
72
80
Binary
Query
AQS
ABS
(b)
0
0
1
2
3
No. of reading cycles
4
5
6
7
8
16
24
32
40
Identical bit
48
56
64
72
80
Binary
Query
AQS
ABS
(c)
FIGURE 8.9
Impact of ID distribution on tag identiﬁcation. (a) Collisions. (b) Idle cycles. (c) Identiﬁcation delay.
156
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

8.8
Conclusion
A collision caused by tags transmitting simultaneously is a major factor in deferring tag
identiﬁcation of RFID systems. This chapter has described tree-based tag anticollision proto-
cols and adaptive tag anticollision protocols for passive tags. Adaptive splitting protocols
are the enhanced tree-based protocols to reduce collisions by exploiting information
obtained from the last frame of tag identiﬁcation. The key institution behind adaptive
splitting protocols is that in most applications employing RFID tags, the set of objects
encountered in successive readings from a particular reader does not change substantially,
and information from one reading can be used for the next. A simulation-based evaluation
shows that AQS and ABS signiﬁcantly reduce delay and communication overhead for the
tag reading process.
Acknowledgment
This work was jointly supported by SK Telecom, the Korea Science and Engineering
Foundation (KOSEF) grant funded by the Korea government (MOST) (No. R01-2007-000-
11203-0) and the Ministry of Information and Communication (MIC), Korea under ITRC
IITA-2007-(C1090-0701-0046).
References
1. K. Finkenzeller, RFID Handbook: Fundamentals and Applications in Contactless Smart Cards and
Identiﬁcation, John Wiley & Sons, New York, 2003.
2. S.E. Sarma, D. Brock, and D.W. Engels, Radio frequency identiﬁcation and the electronic product
code, IEEE Micro, 21(6), 50–54, 2001.
3. S.E. Sarma, S.A. Weis, and D.W. Engels, RFID systems and security and privacy implications, in
Workshop on Cryptographic Hardware in Embedded Systems, LNCS 2523, pp. 454–470, August 2002.
0
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
8000
9000
No. of transmitted bits
8
16
24
32
40
Identical bit
48
56
64
72
80
Binary
Query
AQS
ABS
(d)
FIGURE 8.9 (continued)
(d) Tag communication overhead.
Adaptive Tag Anticollision Protocols for RFID Passive Tags
157

4. D.W. Engels and S.E. Sarma, The reader collision problem, in Proceedings of IEEE International
Conference on System, Man and Cybernetics, Hammamet, Tunisie, October 2002.
5. J. Waldrop, D.W. Engels, and S.E. Sarma, Colorwave: an anticollision algorithm for the reader
collision, in Proceedings of IEEE International Conference on Communications, pp. 1206–1210, May
2003.
6. C. Floerkemeier and M. Lampe, Issues with RFID usage in ubiquitous computing applications, in
Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference of Pervasive Computing, LNCS 3001, pp. 188–193,
April 2004.
7. N. Abramson, The aloha system—another alternative for computer communications, in Proceed-
ings of Fall Joint Computer Conference, AFIPS Conference, vol. 37, pp. 281–285, November 1970.
8. L.G. Roberts, Extensions of packet communication technology to a hand held personal terminal,
in Proceedings of Spring Joint Computer Conference, AFIPS Conference, vol. 40, pp. 295–298, 1972.
9. R. Metcalfe, Steady state analysis of a slotted and controlled aloha system with blocking, in
Proceedings of the 6th Hawaii Conference System Science, pp. 375–380, January 1973.
10. S. Lam and L. Kleinrock, Packet switching in a multi access broadcast channel: dynamic control
procedures, IEEE Transaction on Automatic Control, COM-23(9), 891–904, 1975.
11. R. Rao and A. Ephremides, On the stability of interacting queues in a multiple-access system,
IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 34(5), 918–930, 1988.
12. V. Anatharam, The stability region of the ﬁnite-user slotted aloha protocol, IEEE Transactions on
Information Theory, 37(3), 535–540, 1991.
13. I.E. Teletar and R.G. Gallager, Combining queuing theory and information theory for multiaccess,
IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, 13(6), 963–969, 1995.
14. F.C. Schoute, Control of aloha signalling in a mobile radio trunking system, in Proceedings of the
IEE International Conference on Radio Spectrum Conservation Techniques, pp. 38–42, 1980.
15. F.C. Schoute, Dynamic frame length aloha, IEEE Transactions on Communications, COM-31(4), 565–
568, 1983.
16. J.E. Wieselthier, A. Ephremides, and L.A. Michaels, An exact analysis and performance evalu-
ation of framed aloha with capture, IEEE Transactions on Communications, COM-38(2), 125–137,
1989.
17. H. Vogt, Efﬁcient object identiﬁcation with passive RFID tags, in Proceedings of the International
Conference on Pervasive Computing, LNCS 2414, pp. 98–113, April 2002.
18. J. Zhai and G. Wang, An anti-collision algorithm using two-functioned estimation for RFID tags,
in Proceedings of International Conference on Computational Science and its Applications, LNCS 3483,
pp. 702–711, May 2005.
19. EPC radio-frequency identiﬁcation protocols class-1 generation-2 UHF RFID protocol for com-
munications at 860 MHz–960 MHz version 1.0.8, EPCglobal, December 2004.
20. Information technology automatic identiﬁcation and data capture techniques—radio frequency
identiﬁcation for item management air interface—part 6: parameters for air interface communi-
cations at 860–960 MHz, Final Draft International Standard ISO 18000-6, November 2003.
21. UCODE, Philips Semiconductors, http:==www.semiconductors.philips.com, 2005.
22. D.R. Hush and C. Wood, Analysis of tree algorithms for RFID arbitration, in Proceedings of IEEE
International Symposium on Information Theory, pp. 107, August 1998.
23. M. Jacomet, A. Ehrsam, and U. Gehrig, Contactless identiﬁcation device with anticollision
algorithm, in Proceedings of IEEE Conference on Circuits, System, Computers and Communications,
pp. 269–273, July 1999.
24. Draft protocol speciﬁcation for a 900 MHz class 0 radio frequency identiﬁcation tag, Auto-ID
Center, February 2003.
25. S.A. Weis, S.E. Sarma, R.L. Rivest, and D.W. Engels, Security and privacy aspects of low-cost
radio frequency identiﬁcation systems, in Proceedings of the 1st Annual Conference on Security in
Pervasive Computing, LNCS 2802, pp. 201–212, March 2003.
26. C. Law, K. Lee, and K.-Y. Siu, Efﬁcient memoryless protocol for tag identiﬁcation, in Proceedings of
the 4th International Workshop on Discrete Algorithms and Methods for Mobile Computing and Com-
munications, pp. 75–84, August 2000.
158
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

27. F. Zhou, C. Chen, D. Jin, C. Huang, and H. Min, Evaluating and optimizing power consumption
of anti-collision protocols for applications in RFID systems, in Proceedings of the International
Symposium on Low Power Electronics and Design, pp. 357–362, August 2004.
28. J.I. Capetanakis, Tree algorithms for packet broadcast channels, IEEE Transactions on Information
Theory, IT-25(5), 505–515, 1979.
29. G. Fayolle, P. Flajolet, M. Hofri, and P. Jacquet, Analysis of a stack algorithm for random access
communication, IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, IT-31(2), 244–254, 1985.
30. P. Mathys and P. Flajolet, Q-ary collision resolution algorithms in random access systems
with free or blocked channel access, IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, IT-31(2), 217–243,
1985.
31. J. Moseley and P. Humblet, A class of efﬁcient contention resolution algorithms for multiple
access channels, IEEE Transactions on Communications, COM-33(2), 145–151, 1985.
32. J. Myung, W. Lee, J. Srivastava, and T. Shih, Tag-splitting: adaptive collision arbitration protocols
for RFID tag identiﬁcation, IEEE Transactions on Parallel Distributed Systems, 18(6), 763–775, 2007.
33. R.A. Guerin, Channel occupancy time distribution in a cellular radio system, IEEE Transactions on
Vehicular Technology, 36(3), 89–99, 1987.
Adaptive Tag Anticollision Protocols for RFID Passive Tags
159


9
Comparative Performance Analysis of Anticollision
Protocols in RFID Networks
Wonjun Lee, Jihoon Choi, and Donghwan Lee
CONTENTS
9.1
Introduction........................................................................................................................ 161
9.2
Background Material......................................................................................................... 162
9.3
Tree-Based Anticollision Protocols.................................................................................. 164
9.3.1 Query Tree ............................................................................................................... 164
9.3.2 Binary Tree............................................................................................................... 165
9.3.3 Adaptive Query Splitting ...................................................................................... 166
9.3.4 Adaptive Binary Splitting...................................................................................... 167
9.4
Probabilistic Anticollision Protocols ............................................................................... 168
9.4.1 Dynamic Slot Allocation........................................................................................ 169
9.4.2 Dynamic Framed Slotted ALOHA....................................................................... 169
9.4.3 Dynamic Frame Length ALOHA ......................................................................... 171
9.5
Analytic Study.................................................................................................................... 171
9.5.1 Average Slot Delay Analysis................................................................................. 171
9.6
Performance Evaluation and Analysis ........................................................................... 174
9.6.1 Identiﬁcation of Motionless Tags ......................................................................... 175
9.6.2 Identiﬁcation of Moving Tags............................................................................... 176
9.7
Discussions and Summary ............................................................................................... 178
9.8
Conclusions......................................................................................................................... 178
Acknowledgment ....................................................................................................................... 179
References.................................................................................................................................... 179
9.1
Introduction
Radio frequency identiﬁcation (RFID) is an automatic recognition system that consists of a
number of tags and readers. An RFID reader identiﬁes objects by reading the data
contained in the tags [1]. RFID can be used in various applications ranging from identify-
ing objects to using memory within its own chip. Attaching tags to wild animals, for
instance, makes it possible to track them. For such reasons, the RFID system has been
spotlighted as the technology that can replace bar code systems.
Tags can be classiﬁed into two types based on the existence of self-electric power: active tags
and passive tags. The active tags can transmit data without the aid of a reader because it has its
161

own battery. They also have a more powerful memory than passive tags. On the other hand, it
is possiblefor a passive tag totransmit only when a reader is involved since it does not support
self-electric power. Passive tags have constraints in functionality, but they have distinct
advantages over active tags. They are small enough to attach to an object easily, and they do
not need to consider power consumption due to its dependency on the reader’s power. In this
chapter, the focus of consideration is to the passive tags. An RFID reader sends out a signal
supplying power for tags. The tag extracts energy from the electromagnetic ﬁeld by charging
its capacitor until it is able to operate. When it is charged, communication between the reader
and the tag is possible, that is why passive tags can operate without their own battery.
An RFID reader communicates with tags through radio frequency, which is performed
in a different manner than the bar code system in which a reader identiﬁes a bar code
through the light. Due to these characteristics, the RFID has wider range of identiﬁcation of
tags where tags can be identiﬁed even when line of sight (LOS) is not obtained. Both RFID
system and bar code system readers are able to identify one object at a time. In a bar code
system, one should secure the LOS between a bar code and its reader. It is possible to
identify tags as long as they are within the reader’s range, but the order of identiﬁcation
should be determined.
There may be multiple tags a reader should identify. All that the tags should do is to
respond with the data corresponding to the signal received from a reader. The communi-
cation between tags is impossible when passive tags cannot make a decision on whether
the channel is busy or not. Since a medium is shared by tags, a collision occurs at the
reader’s side when two or more tags get transmitted simultaneously [2]. Since collisions
make collided signals be retransmitted, it increases delay for identifying tags and con-
sumption of energy. Therefore, the arbitration mechanism is required.
We call the protocol designed for avoiding collisions between a reader and tags an
anticollision protocol. The anticollision protocol should have the following characteristics:
. A reader should identify all the tags within its range.
. The anticollision algorithm should have a mechanism which is capable of verifying
that all the tags are identiﬁed.
. It should minimize the time elapsed for the identiﬁcation of tags. It lies on the same
line as reducing collisions. As the time which is required to identify tags increases,
it is more difﬁcult to identify objects moving fast.
We introduce various anticollision protocols including adaptive query splitting (AQS)
and adaptive binary splitting (ABS), which we have proposed in our earlier work. We also
evaluate their performance.
This chapter is organized as follows. Background material is presented in Section 9.2. We
give a detailed description on tree-based and probabilistic anticollision protocols in
Sections 9.3 and 9.4, respectively. Section 9.5 presents analytic study on performance of
tag anticollision protocols, and is followed by performance evaluation and analysis in
Section 9.6. In Section 9.7, we give a summary and discussion. Finally, the conclusions can
be found in Section 9.8.
9.2
Background Material
The tag identiﬁcation process is a continuation of many reading slots, which consist of a
reader’s request and tags’ replies. Figure 9.1 shows data transmission between an RFID
reader and tags. We deﬁne some terms for detailed description.
162
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

. Reading slot: the operation cycle composed of the transmissions of reader’s query
and replies from the tags.
. Readable slot: the reading slot that only one tag replies to. The tag can be identiﬁed
successfully.
. Collided slot: the reading slot that has two or more tags which transmit their replies.
It is the case that the result of CRC is failed. The reader cannot recognize any tags.
. Idle slot: the reading slot that has no tag reply.
Tag anticollision protocols can be classiﬁed into two approaches in terms of the way of
determining the point of transmission time: (1) tree-based approach and (2) probabilistic
approach. In tree-based tag anticollision protocols, a tag determines the point of transmis-
sion on receiving a message from a reader and making a process from the message, that is,
a decision of whether to respond to it. On the other hand, probabilistic tag anticollision
protocols use the random number generated by a tag to determine the point of transmis-
sion. Each tag generates a random number and waits for its transmission time according to
the chosen number. Figure 9.2 shows the taxonomy of tag anticollision protocols.
Collided slot
Query
Reader
Collision
detected
No reply
Tag ID
Tag ID
Tag ID
Tag B
Tag A
Query
rep
Query
rep
Query
rep
Continuous
wave
Continuous
wave
Idle slot
Readable slot
FIGURE 9.1
Data transmission between an RFID reader and tags.
Query tree
ISO/IEC 18000-3 Mode 1
ISO/IEC 18000-6 Type B
IEEE Transactions on Parallel
and Distributed Systems
BTG Super Tag,
ISO/IEC 18000-3 Mode 1 Extension
ISO/IEC 18000-3 Mode 2
ISO/IEC 1800-3 Mode 1 Extension,
ISO/IEC 18000-6 Type A,
EPC UHF class 1 Generation 2
Binary tree
Adaptive
query splitting
Adaptive
binary splitting
ALOHA
Slotted ALOHA
Framed slotted
ALOHA
Adaptive
framed slotted
ALOHA
Vogt, DFSA,
Zhen...
Probabilistic
approach
Deterministic
approach
RFID tag
anticollision
FIGURE 9.2
Taxonomy of RFID tag anticollision protocols.
Comparative Performance Analysis of Anticollision Protocols in RFID Networks
163

9.3
Tree-Based Anticollision Protocols
In tree-based tag anticollision protocols, a reader divides tags into two groups. A reader
further divides each of them into two groups again. It is required that a reader be able to
distinguish each divided group. The process of dividing tags is continued until a group
contains only one tag so that each tag could be successfully identiﬁed. The dividing process
of a group is continued until a reader identiﬁes all the tags.
Tree-based protocols work similar to census. The reader can recognize all tags in its
identiﬁcation range. An identiﬁcation process of the reader can be illustrated as a process
of creating and searching a tree where a node in the tree represents a reading slot. As stated
earlier, the result of identiﬁcation can be classiﬁed into three cases: readable, idle, and
collided. After the identiﬁcation cycle is completed, a tree is constructed. A leaf node in the
tree corresponds to either readable slot or idle slot, and an intermediate node represents a
collided slot.
Both the query tree [3,4] and binary tree [5,6] protocols represent a tree-based RFID tag
collision protocol. Although each of them has different dividing algorithms and tree
maintenance methods, they are very similar with respect to constructing a searching
tree in an identiﬁcation cycle. The main advantage of tree-based tag anticollision protocol
is that all tags in identiﬁcation range of the reader can be identiﬁed. An identiﬁcation cycle
is a process that constructs a tree from root node to leaf nodes. When the next identiﬁcation
cycle begins, information of tree in the previous cycle is initialized. AQS protocol [7] and
ABS protocol [7] can improve the performance by using the information of tree in the
previous cycle.
9.3.1
Query Tree
A reader transmits a query to tags using a query tree protocol. The query contains the
preﬁxes of the tag identiﬁcation (ID) codes. All tags within the range of a reader compare
the query of the reader with their ID codes and transmit their ID codes to the reader when
the result of the comparison is true. This protocol uses a query of reader and preﬁxes of tag
ID codes to divide tags into two groups. Tags in one group transmit their ID codes to the
reader while tags in the other group wait for the next query of the reader.
The content of a query is the identiﬁer of each group. The reader repeats dividing tags
into two groups until the number of tags in a group is one. When the number of tags in a
group is one, the reader is successful in identifying the tag. This identiﬁcation process can
be considered as constructing a searching tree based on tag ID codes. The reader increases
the length of the query until the identiﬁcation cycle is completed.
The operation of the reader can be implemented by using a data structure (e.g., queue or
stack). The queries set to 0 and 1 are stored in the data structure initially. When a collision
occurs, the reader makes two queries whose lengths are 1 bit longer than the queries
which cause the collision by concatenating query and the extra bit (0 and 1). Then the
reader inserts itself to the stack or queue. When a readable slot or an idle slot occurs,
the reader gets a next query from the data structure without any further processing. In case
of using a stack for the data structure, the search is depth ﬁrst search like the binary tree.
When a queue is used, the search is breadth ﬁrst search.
In Figure 9.3, we give an example of the identiﬁcation procedure of the query tree
protocol. The queue is initialized with null query. At the ﬁrst reading slot, all tags reply
and a collision occurs. It makes reader push query ‘‘0’’ and query ‘‘1’’ into queue. The
reader extracts the query ‘‘0’’ from the queue and transmits it to tags. Three tags (001, 010,
and 011) which start with ‘‘0’’ reply simultaneously and a collision occurs. The reader
164
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

pushes query ‘‘00’’ and queries ‘‘01’’ into the queue. At the next reading slot, the reader
transmits query ‘‘1’’ to tags and two tags (110 and 111) reply. Both queries ‘‘10’’ and ‘‘11’’
are pushed into the queue. A tag with its ID ‘‘001’’ is identiﬁed successfully at the next
reading slot. At this point, the queue has three queries (01, 10, and 11). The reader transmits
query ‘‘01’’ in the next reading slot. Two tags (010 and 011) which start with ‘‘01’’ reply and
a collision occurs. The reader pushes query ‘‘010’’ and query ‘‘011’’ into the queue. In this
way, tag identiﬁcation process is continued until the queue is empty. There are ﬁve
collided slots, one idle slot, and ﬁve readable slots under the query tree protocol.
9.3.2
Binary Tree
The binary tree protocol uses the pseudo-random number generator to divide tags into two
groups. The counter variable in each tag is used for identifying each group. At the
beginning of identiﬁcation operation, the reader sends a message which notiﬁes the start
of its cycle to tags. All tags receiving this message generate random numbers of 0 or 1. Tags
set their counter values by adding the generated random number to their counter values.
Tags are divided into two groups: one group has 0 in their counter values; the other group
has the counter values of 1.
The group with the counter value of 0 tries to transmit and wait for the reply from the
reader. If a collision occurs, tags which tried to transmit their ID codes in the previous cycle
are divided into two groups by using a pseudo-random number, and tags that did not try
the ID transmission increase the value of their counters by 1. If there are no collisions, all
tags decrease the value of their counters by 1.
The tags identiﬁed successfully set the value of their counters to 0 and wait for the start
of a frame message from the reader. Since the binary tree protocol uses the random number
generator in branching out, idle slots can occur many times. However, the probability of
this is very low. As the information regarding tag ID codes is not used in the identiﬁcation
process as in probabilistic tag anticollision protocols, the performance of the binary tree
protocol is not affected by the distribution of the ID codes of tag population.
In Figure 9.4, we provide an example of the identiﬁcation procedure of the binary tree
protocol. Initially, all tags set the value of their counter variables to 0. The tags with the
counter value of 0 try to transmit and a collision occurs. Each tag generates random
number of 0 or 1. Tag A, tag B, and tag D choose 0 as their counter value and make one
group. On the other hand, tag C chooses 1 as its counter value and makes another group. In
the next reading slot, the former group tries to transmit and a collision occurs. The reader
Query
Medium
Collision
Slot
Tag 011
0 l 1
1 l 00,01
1 l 01,10,11
01 l 10,11
10l1,010,011 11 l 010,011
011 l 110,111
110 l 111
111
010l
011,110,111
φ
Tag 001
Tag 010
Tag 001
Tag 010
Tag 011
Tag 110
Tag 111
Tag 001
Tag 010
Tag 011
Tag 110
Tag 111
Tag 001
Tag 010
Tag 011
Tag 110
Tag 111
Tag 010
Tag 011
Tag 110
Tag 111
Tag 010
Tag 011
Tag 110
Tag 111
Tag 010
Tag 010
Tag 011
Tag 011
Tag 110
Tag 111
Tag 110
Tag 111
Tag 011
Tag 110
Tag 111
Tag 110
Tag 111
Tag 111
Tag 110
Tag 111
Collision
Collision
Tag 001
Tag 010
Tag 011
Tag 110
Tag 111
Collision
Collision
Collision
FIGURE 9.3
An example of tag identiﬁcation using the query tree protocol with ﬁve tags.
Comparative Performance Analysis of Anticollision Protocols in RFID Networks
165

informs tags of the result of current reading slot. Tag C which has nonzero value of its
counter increases its counter value by 1. Tag A, tag B, and tag D generate random number
and add it to their counter value. Since tag A and tag B have the counter’s value of 0, they
perform transmission and a collision occurs. Tag C and tag D which have nonzero value of
their counter increase their counter value by 1. Tag A and tag B generate random number
and add it to their counter value. Tag A tries to transmit its data to reader because it has its
counter’s value of 0. In this case, tag A is successfully identiﬁed. The reader notiﬁes the
result of current reading slot. All tags decrease their counter value by 1. In this way, tag B,
tag D, and tag C are identiﬁed in successive reading slots.
9.3.3
Adaptive Query Splitting
AQS protocol is the method that can reduce a search space of a current identiﬁcation
process by using the queries in the leaf nodes of the tree which were constructed in the
previous process. Searching from the leaf nodes of the previous tree can decrease identi-
ﬁcation delay present in the existing search method of query tree protocol that starts from
root node of tree while covering all possible search spaces.
The reader maintains a queue Q as well as a candidate queue CQ. There are preﬁxes of
tag ID codes in readable slots and idle slots from the previous identiﬁcation cycle in CQ.
At the start of the identiﬁcation process, the reader initializes Q with the CQ and empties
out CQ.
Figure 9.5 shows the operation of query tree protocol and the AQS protocol. If popula-
tion of tags is same as in the previous identiﬁcation cycle, no collisions occur in the current
cycle under AQS protocol. If there exists an incoming tag whose ID matches a preﬁx of
readable nodes in the previous cycle, it decreases the number of collision nodes to use
preﬁxes of readable nodes. A new tag, whose ID does not match a preﬁx of a readable
node in previous cycle, is quickly identiﬁed with preﬁxes of idle nodes in previous cycle
by the reader.
To prevent the growth of CQ (which carries information of leaf nodes), the query
deletion process is used. The query deletion process is the process that merges queries
Slot
Tag A
Tag B
Tag C
Tag D
Counter
0
Tag A
Tag A
Tag A
Tag A
Tag B
Tag D
Tag C
Tag B
Tag B
Tag B
Tag C
Tag C
Tag C
Medium
Collision
Collision
Collision
Tag D
Tag D
Tag D
Tag B
Tag C
Tag D
Tag D
Tag C
Tag C
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
2
3
2
1
2
1
1
1
FIGURE 9.4
An example of tag identiﬁcation using the binary tree protocol with four tags.
166
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

that share the same query content except the last bit. Idle nodes unnecessarily disturb the
speed of identiﬁcation, and CQ can eliminate preﬁxes of unnecessary idle nodes. For
example, if the nodes of the preﬁx p0p1 . . . pi0 and p0p1 . . . pi1 contain at least one idle
node and the non-idle node is a readable node, CQ stores the preﬁx p0p1 . . . pi instead of
the preﬁx p0p1 . . . pi0 and p0p1 . . . pi1.
9.3.4
Adaptive Binary Splitting
ABS protocol is the method by which tags remember their identiﬁcation order in the previous
cycle by adding one to the counters in the tags. A tag maintains a progressed-slot counter
(PSC) as well as an allocated-slot counter (ASC). PSC maintains the number of timeslots
passed in an identiﬁcation cycle. At the start of an identiﬁcation cycle, PSC is initialized to 0.
In every readable slot, all tags increase their PSCs by 1. ASC determines whether a tag can
transmit its data. If a tag has the same value for both ASC and PSC, the tag can transmit.
A tag can be in one of the following three states:
. Wait state: If the tag has ASC greater than PSC, it waits for a command from the
reader.
. Active state: If a tag has ASC equal to PSC, it transmits its data to the reader.
. Sleep state: If a tag has ASC less than PSC, the tag does not transmit any data. This
tag waits for the next identiﬁcation cycle since it has already been identiﬁed in the
current identiﬁcation cycle.
Adaptive query splitting
001
011
110
111
011
110
Set of tags is changed
111
111
110
011
001
000
Medium
Query
00 l 10 010 011
110 111
10 l 010 011 110
111 000 001
010 l 011 110 111
000 001
011 l 110 111
000 001
110 l 111 000 001
111 l 000 001
000 l 001
001
Collision
Idle
Idle
Readable
Readable
Readable
Readable
Readable
001
000
CQ: 00 10 010 011 110 111
010
FIGURE 9.5
An example of tag identiﬁcation using the adaptive query splitting protocol with ﬁve tags.
Comparative Performance Analysis of Anticollision Protocols in RFID Networks
167

In a collided slot, the colliding tags, the tags of the active state, add a random number (0 or
1) to ASC. The active tags with the addition of 1 in their ASCs convert their state into wait
state. The tags in wait state increase ASC when collision occurs. When the reader sends
tags the message which means the idle slot, the tags in the wait state decrease ASC.
Figure 9.6 shows the operations of the binary tree protocol and ABS protocol. If the tag
population does not change, neither collision nor idle occurs in the current cycle under ABS
protocol. The reader remembers the number of tags in the previous cycle and informs them
of it at the start of an identiﬁcation cycle. If there are incoming tags, they randomly set their
counters into a smaller value than the number sent by the reader. Incoming tags can cause
collisions with existing tags. When a collision occurs, those collided tags add a randomly
selected binary number (0 or 1) to ASC. If there are leaving tags, an idle slot can occur.
9.4
Probabilistic Anticollision Protocols
Probabilistic tag anticollision protocols are based on ALOHA [8]. ALOHA is one of the
basic medium access control mechanisms. In ALOHA, each tag generates a random
number and waits for its transmission time according to the number chosen. If the data
transmitted by a tag is not interfered by other data, the reader can identify the tag. A tag
continues to do the same work after its transmission; generating a new random number
and transmitting its own data after waiting for random amount of time. If during the
interval two or more tags transmit, a complete or partial collision occurs. In order to
solve partial collision problems, transmission time is divided into discrete time intervals
in the slotted ALOHA [9]. All tags try to transmit their data after random back-off. If there
are no partial collisions under the slotted ALOHA protocol, the slotted ALOHA doubles
the channel utilization. A framed slotted ALOHA [10–19] groups some slots into a frame,
each frame having N slots. In a frame, each tag transmits its data only once. Under the
framed slotted ALOHA, collisions caused by backlogged tags can be prevented.
FIGURE 9.6
An
example
of
tag
identiﬁcation
using
the adaptive binary splitting protocol with
four tags.
D
D
3
2
1
0
Set of tags is changed
C
B
A
C F
B
A
Adaptive binary splitting
Progressed-slot
number
Splitting
Collision handling
Idle handling
Reader Reader Reader
D
D
D
Reader
Reader
Reader
D
D
D
C
C
C
F
F
F
C F
C
C
F
F
B
B
B
B
A
A
A
A
A
A
1
0
Allocated-slot number
1
2
3
4
2
3
4
5
6
Slot
168
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

Under ALOHA, slotted ALOHA, and framed slotted ALOHA, the waiting time for a tag
is determined by a random function. The important factor which inﬂuences performance is
the relationship between the number of tags and random space and the maximum value of
the back-off timer. If the random space is larger than the number of tags in the reader’s
range, there exist many collision slots. On the other hand, if it is smaller than the number of
tags, there are many idle slots in the frame. It is important to set suitable random space
based on the predicted number of tags.
Under the framed slotted ALOHA protocols, the frame size is the size of random space.
It is easy to change the frame size at the start of a frame. There have been many proposed
protocols which improve framed slotted ALOHA, called adaptive framed slotted ALOHA.
Figure 9.7 shows examples of the operation of slotted ALOHA, framed slotted
ALOHA, and adaptive framed slotted ALOHA. An optimal frame size happens when
the number of tags is the same as the frame size. Many protocols have been proposed that
estimate the number of tags, and use the number of readable slots, collided slots, and idle
slots. We now introduce three of them. The symbol notions and their descriptions used
throughout this chapter are summarized in Table 9.1.
9.4.1
Dynamic Slot Allocation
A readable slot which occurred in the previous frame is the one that contains a single
tag. A collided slot has at least two tags. By using these two facts, the lower bound of the
number of tags can be estimated. The lower bound of the number of tags can be
estimated as
Vogt1: Ntag ¼ S þ 2C:
(9:1)
In Ref. [17], the author proposed a different way to estimate the number of tags. If we know
the frame size and the number of tags, we can calculate the expected value of readable
slots, idle slots, and collided slots. This expectation is a function of frame size and the
number of tags. We can create a vector using the three values earlier. We could also create
another vector that consists of the actual value of readable slots, idle slots, and collided
slots in the previous frame. By using Chevyshevs inequality, we can make tag estimation
function as
Vogt2: Estimation function ¼ min
Ntag
SEXP(F, Ntag)
CEXP(F, Ntag)
IEXP(F, Ntag)
0
@
1
A 
S
C
I
0
@
1
A


:
(9:2)
We refer to these methods using the author name, Vogt1 and Vogt2, respectively. Vogt1
can easily estimate the number of tags. However, as the number of tags increases, the
number of errors increases accordingly. On the contrary, when the number of tags is small,
Vogt2 has a large error rate. Vogt2 can estimate the number of tags precisely, but it may
have larger computational complexity.
9.4.2
Dynamic Framed Slotted ALOHA
The probability mass function of the number of reacting tags in a slot can be obtained by
using a binomial distribution. Given the number of tags and the frame size, we can
compute the probabilities of the occurrences of readable, idle, and collision slots. By
using these probabilities, we could calculate the collision ratio [18], which is a fraction of
the number of collision slots to the frame size. The collision ratio can be obtained by
Comparative Performance Analysis of Anticollision Protocols in RFID Networks
169

subtracting the summation of the probability of the appearance of readable slots and the
probability of the appearance of idle slots from one. We already know the previous frame
size and the number of collision slots so that we can estimate the number of tags using the
collision ratio. The number of tags can be obtained by
DFSA: Cratio ¼ 1 
1  1
F

Ntag
1 þ Ntag
F  1


:
(9:3)
ID
ID
ID
ID
ID
ID
ID
ID
ID
ID
ID
ID
ID
ID
ID
Slot
Frame
ID
ID
ID
ID
ID
ID
ID
ID
ID
ID
ID
ID
ID
ID
ID
ID
ID
ID
ID
Idle
Idle
Idle
Idle
Tag 1
Tag 2
Tag 3
Tag 4
Medium
Tag 1
Tag 2
Tag 3
Tag 4
Medium
Tag 1
Slot
Frame size=3
Frame size=4
Frame size=4
Frame
size=2
Tag 2
Tag 3
Tag 4
Medium
Collision
Collision
Colli
sion
Colli
sion
Colli
sion
Collision
Collision
(a)
(b)
(c)
Slot
FIGURE 9.7
Examples of the operation of slotted ALOHA, framed slotted ALOHA, and adaptive framed slotted ALOHA.
(a) Slotted ALOHA. (b) Framed slotted ALOHA. (c) Adaptive framed slotted ALOHA.
170
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

We refer to this protocol as DFSA in this chapter. DFSA must maintain a table to return the
number of tags provided that the collision ratio and the frame size are given. It may be
burdensome to maintain a table, but DFSA makes possible to estimate the number of tags
precisely.
9.4.3
Dynamic Frame Length ALOHA
In Vogt1 protocol, we use the number of readable slots and the number of collision slots to
estimate the number of tags. The number of tags in a collision slot is at least two. If the
number of tags approaches to inﬁnity, we can obtain the expected number of 2.39 tags in
a collision slot [13,19]. We can estimate the number of tags by using the following equation:
Zhen: Ntag ¼ S þ 2:39C
(9:4)
We, in this chapter, refer to this estimation method Zhen for convenience’s sake. This
method can easily estimate the number of tags. This is a less error-prone method that
requires only simple calculation.
9.5
Analytic Study
In this section, we analyze the performance of tag anticollision protocols. All four tree-
based protocols (binary tree, query tree, ABS, and AQS) use binary search tree as their
searching method to identify tags. Therefore, we choose binary tree protocol as the
representative of tree-based protocols. On the other hand, adaptive framed slotted
ALOHA is mainly researched among the probabilistic tag anticollision protocols. Hence,
we compare the performance of adaptive framed slotted ALOHA with the binary tree
protocol.
9.5.1
Average Slot Delay Analysis
In general, the performance of anticollision protocols is represented by average slot delay.
Average slot delay can be deﬁned as the expected number of slots consumed for identify-
ing m tags. In most existing protocols to date which are related with RFID tag, anticollision
aimed to minimize average slot delay or maximize average slot throughput. In similar
vein, we will present the performance of tag anticollision protocols in slot delay in analytic
manner, dividing them into binary tree protocol and adaptive framed slotted ALOHA.
TABLE 9.1
Notations
Symbol
Description
F
Frame size
Ntag
Estimated number of tags
S
Number of readable slots
C
Number of collided slots
I
Number of idle slots
SEXP(F, Ntag)
Expected value of readable slot given frame size and the number of tags
CEXP(F, Ntag)
Expected value of collided slot given frame size and the number of tags
IEXP(F, Ntag)
Expected value of idle slot given frame size and the number of tags
Comparative Performance Analysis of Anticollision Protocols in RFID Networks
171

Theorem 9.1
The average slot delay of binary tree protocol approximates to 2.885 3 m.
Proof
The proof of this theorem follows an analysis presented in Ref. [20], which is based on a
research that investigated on tree-based multiple access channel [5]. The average slot delay
T(m), which is the expected number of consumed slots until identifying m tags, in binary
tree protocol is as follows:
T(m) ¼ C(m) þ I(m) þ m,
(9:5)
where C(m) and I(m) denote the average number of collided slots and idle slots, respect-
ively. The m in the equation accounts for the m slots corresponding to readable slots. Since
the random number generator in a tag for binary tree protocol follows uniform distribu-
tion, the probability that k out of m tags try to reply at level L in the tree is given by the
binomial distribution as following:
P(X ¼ kjm,L) ¼
m
k


pk 1  p
ð
Þmk,
(9:6)
where p ¼ 1L
2 . Using this, we get the probabilities that a slot at level L of the tree is readable,
idle, or collision:
Pread(X ¼ 1jm, L) ¼ (1  p)m,
(9:7)
Pidle(X ¼ 0jm, L) ¼ mp(1  p)m1,
(9:8)
Pcoll(X  2jm, L) ¼ 1  Pread(X ¼ 1jm, L)  Pidle(X ¼ 0jm, L)
¼ 1  (1  p)m  mp(1  p)m1:
(9:9)
For slots are visited only when their parent experiences collisions, we can write the average
slot delay by the summation of the expected number of nodes whose parents are collided
slots in all levels:
tTS(m) ¼
X
1
L ¼ 0
X
2L1
i ¼ 0
Pcoll(X  2jm, L  1)
¼ 1 þ 2
X
1
L ¼ 0
2LPcoll(X  2jm, L):
(9:10)
Substituting from Equation 9.9 gives
tTS(m) ¼ 1 þ 2
X
1
L ¼ 0
2L 1  (1  p)m  mp(1  p)m1


 2:885  m:
(9:11)
In case of framed slotted ALOHA, not like tree-based protocols, there can be diverse
variant protocols according to which frame adaptation algorithm is used. However,
since the optimal condition of slotted ALOHA channel with given number of nodes has
been revealed in the other work [9], we will assume an optimal framed slotted ALOHA
protocol.
172
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

Theorem 9.2
The average slot delay of optimal framed slotted ALOHA protocol approximates to e 3 m.
Proof
When the probability that m tags transmit to a slot is p, the successful transmission
probability of a tag, S, is given by,
S ¼ mp(1  p)m1:
(9:12)
Due to the concavity of the equation, we can ﬁnd the optimal condition through the ﬁrst
derivative with respect to p as follows:
ds
dp ¼ m(1  p)m1  m(m  1)p(1  p)m2 ¼ 0:
(9:13)
Using this, the optimal condition is given by p ¼ 1
m. When frame size is L, p is represented
as p ¼ 1
L. Therefore, the relationship of L and m when it is in the optimal condition is L ¼ m.
Under this condition, the (n þ 1)th frame size Lnþ1 in adaptive framed slotted ALOHA is
denoted as the following relationship:
Lnþ1 ¼ m 
X
n
i ¼ 0
Li  S*,
(9:14)
where S* is the optimal utilization of a frame as follows:
S* ¼ lim
m!1 P(X ¼ 1jL ¼ m) ¼ lim
m!1
1  1
L

n1
¼ 1
e :
(9:15)
To know the asymptotic property of frame size, n is taken to inﬁnity, then:
lim
n!1 Lnþ1 ¼ lim
n!1
m 
X
n
i ¼ 0
Li  S*
 
!
:
(9:16)
Intuitively, as time goes by, the number of unidentiﬁed tags will decrease. By the optimal
condition, frame size will decrease as well. Hence, lim
n!1 Lnþ1 converges to zero, and ﬁnally
we get the following relationship:
X
1
i ¼ 0
Li ¼ e  m:
(9:17)
Two theorems in this section allow us to measure the exact performance of tag anticollision
protocols. As a result, it seems that adaptive framed slotted ALOHA protocol is little better
than binary tree protocol. However, as this result gives us only asymptotic property, it is
needed to conﬁrm that in reality. We conducted a Monte Carlo simulation to make sure
what we have analyzed. Figure 9.8 depicts the measurement of the average slot delay of
the two protocols. The adaptive framed slotted ALOHA protocol with DFSA is assumed as
the optimal one in our simulation. The difference between two protocols is not obvious
when the number of tags is low, but it clearly increases as the number of tags increases. The
reason for this observation is that they converge to the asymptotic average delay values as
Comparative Performance Analysis of Anticollision Protocols in RFID Networks
173

the number of tags is getting bigger. Nevertheless, we cannot determine which protocol is
the best in reality because, in the RFID standards, the frame sizes of probabilistic protocols
are formatted to the powers of two, not integer values. Of course, the protocols with the
powers of two frames will show the same average slot delay asymptotically, but its
converging speed will be fairly degraded.
9.6
Performance Evaluation and Analysis
In this section, we evaluate the performance of tag anticollision protocols examined so far.
We make following assumptions for reﬂecting only the effect on the operational principle
of tag anticollision protocols. Reliability in transmission between a reader and a tag is
perfectly guaranteed. All the protocols considered make use of the same type of physical
functionalities. The transmission rate depends on modulation scheme of physical layer. All
protocols have same time for transmitting their ID codes. The reader just targets tag
identiﬁcation and does not perform any additional operations.
The transmitted message format is set based on ISO 18000-6 speciﬁcation. Table 9.2
shows message formats of tag and reader. Protocols which have ﬁxed-length reader
message are frame slotted ALOHA-based protocols, binary tree protocol, and ABS proto-
col. Query tree protocol and ABS protocol have variable length reader message. Figure 9.9
describes data transmission between a reader and a tag. As we mentioned earlier,
the identiﬁcation operation begins with reader’s starting message under frame slotted
ALOHA protocols. Since we would like to evaluate the performance of protocols based
100
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
2000
2200
2400
2600
DFSA
Binary tree
e  m
2.885  m
150 200 250 300 350 400 450 500
Number of tags
Total identification slot delay
550 600 650 700 750 800 850 900
FIGURE 9.8
The average slot delay of DFSA and binary tree protocol.
TABLE 9.2
Message Format
Message Type
Preamble Detect
Header
Data
CRC
Reader message
400 ms
7 bits
11 bits=variable length
5 bits
Tag response
300 ms
—
96 bits
16 bits
174
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

on transmission slots, we do not consider the computation delay between end point of data
receiving and start point of data sending. The reader which receives a data from a tag
sends a synchronizing message. Deterministic protocols have also similar data transmis-
sion structure. After reader’s transmission, tags try to transmit their data to a reader.
9.6.1
Identiﬁcation of Motionless Tags
Mobility of tags varies accordingly as the kinds of RFID applications are employed. For
some applications, one can locate objects in front of a reader, which then are identiﬁed.
Such a scenario happens when a reader is deployed at an entrance or an exit of a store
where products are disposed of. In this case, a user should determine the starting point and
wait until all tags are identiﬁed. We perform a simulation study to investigate how long a
user should wait for in each protocol. As we assume that mobility of tags is not considered,
a reader performs identiﬁcation process without changes on tags’ sample during its
identiﬁcation.
Figure 9.10a shows the relationship between the number of tags and the time taken to
identify all tags by each protocol. Probabilistic tag anticollision protocols are independent
of each round, and they keep three slots: the readable, the collided, and the idle slots, all of
which follow the identical probabilistic distribution.
Reader
Tag
Inventory
request
Preamble
detect
Preamble
detect
Data
C
R
C
Header
Data
CRC
Reader
message
Preamble
detect
Tag reply
Header
Data
CRC
3100 µs
800 µs
800 µs or
variable
3100 µs
Preamble
detect
Data
C
R
C
Tag reply
FIGURE 9.9
Data transmission between a reader and a tag.
100
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
 104
Vogt1
Vogt2
DFSA
Zhen
Query tree
Binary tree
AOS
ABS
Vogt1
Vogt2
DFSA
Zhen
Query tree
Binary tree
AOS
ABS
150 200 250 300
Number of tags
(a)
(b)
Total identification time delay (ms)
Total identification time delay (ms)
350 400 450 500
100
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
4000
150 200 250 300
Number of tags
350 400 450 500
FIGURE 9.10
Total identiﬁcation delay of motionless tags. (a) Total identiﬁcation delay (no quiet state). (b) Total identiﬁcation
delay (quiet state).
Comparative Performance Analysis of Anticollision Protocols in RFID Networks
175

Query tree and binary tree, which belong to the tree-based protocol, show better
performance than the probabilistic protocols. They are, however, somewhat different in
total identiﬁcation delay. There is not much of a difference in the performance of different
probabilistic protocols until the sample size becomes >250. The reason why Vogt’s
methods have larger delays when sample size is over 300 is that they assume that the
maximum frame size is 256. In Zhen and DFSA, the predicted number of tags is employed
as the frame size, so they outperform Vogt’s methods when the number of tags increases. It
is expected that both protocols show the similar results provided that Vogt’s use the frame
size that is the same as the predicted number of tags.
ABS and AQS experience the least amount of delay among the protocols. This is
because they already have knowledge of the population of tags since the simulation on
them is performed after the identiﬁcation is done once. Due to the inherent character-
istics of ABS and AQS, such as the similar condition with binary tree and query tree, we
obtain the same results shown. ABS has the advantage of all slots being conﬁgured as
readable slots provided that the tag population of previous round is identical to that of
the current one. In the same situation, AQS is able to terminate the identiﬁcation process
with only idle and readable slots occurrence in the previous round. Only difference
between ABS and AQS is due to the essential fact that ABS does not need to keep
additional idle slots.
For applications where there is no mobility of tags and the start point of the identiﬁ-
cation process is distinct from the end, it is efﬁcient to make use of quiet state of a tag.
The tag, which has already been identiﬁed successfully, gets into the quiet state, and
it does not take part in the process until it gets the next wake-up message from a reader.
Figure 9.10b shows the effect on quiet state on the probabilistic protocols. Note that
probabilistic protocols have improved performance. Among probabilistic protocols, the
performance of DFSA is the best where it can estimate the number of tags more precisely.
We can also ﬁnd that there exists a linear relationship between the number of tags and
the identiﬁcation.
9.6.2
Identiﬁcation of Moving Tags
This section presents performance of tag anticollision protocols in the applications with
high mobility of tags. We consider a situation where objects with an RFID tag move toward
a reader through a conveyer belt. There can be >200 tags within its reader’s range. We
measured performance by changing the velocity of a conveyer belt. Figure 9.11 shows the
identiﬁed number of objects for each anticollision protocol when 5000 objects get moved.
The main purpose of this application is to identify tags passing by a reader.
In such an application, if tags are woken up in advance before an identiﬁcation process
by a reader, we can have the advantage of adapting quiet state of tags because the tag that
has been already identiﬁed does not need to perform that process again. We show
evaluation of both cases in Zhen and DFSA in Figure 9.11a.
As the speed of conveyer belt increases, the interval entering the reader’s range is
reduced. In other words, the larger the interval becomes, the slower the conveyer belt
moves. Among probabilistic protocols, only Zhen and DFSA using quiet state succeed
in identifying all tags of 5000 even with the fastest condition. ABS is the second best in
adaptability of the speed of a conveyer belt.
The probabilistic tag anticollision protocols adapting quiet state of tags outperform since
the number of tags is small in the initial part. The reader performs the identiﬁcation
operation with a small number of tags and makes them sleep. In this case, the size of
population is maintained at small size. On the other hand, due to the fact that the tags
which were already identiﬁed in the pervious identiﬁcation process rejoin the identiﬁcation
176
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

operation in the current process in deterministic tag anticollision protocols, every process
has more tags than the probabilistic tag anticollision protocols adapting quiet state. The
average number of tags is 200.
The probabilistic tag anticollision protocols without using the quiet state of the tag
cannot identify 5000 tags with 30 ms interval due to the rejoining of identiﬁed tags. AQS
and query tree have similar performance, and the performance of the binary tree is not
good. However, the binary tree can identify all tags under the interval of 0.026 per
incoming tag. It shows that the binary tree can identify all tags when the population is
200 and 37 incoming tags per second to the reader’s range.
The identiﬁcation delay, the time to identify all tags within a reader’s range, is a critical
metric. In this chapter, we have deﬁned a new metric as the time taken to identify if a tag
left a reader’s range after the reader had recognized a tag. This metric can be described as
how fast a reader can identify whether a certain tag exists within its reader’s range.
In order for an application to make this metric meaningful, we consider an application
where the state of the tags are to be checked out in real time. It is meaningless to use
the quiet state in such applications, and a method that wakes up tags at appropriate
time must be considered. There has been little investigation on such a method, and
we compare the probabilistic tag anticollision protocols without quiet state with the
deterministic ones.
Accordingly, we can apply the conveyer belt to this. In a conveyer belt, the interval and
the moving speed of the tag can be regarded as the speed of the belt and the rate of change
of samples, respectively. Figure 9.11b shows the changing rate of samples and the number
of readable slots per unit time. The number of readable slots per unit time is the number of
readable slots when a reader identiﬁes all tags within its range.
Since even probabilistic protocols without quiet state achieve high identiﬁcation ratio
over 98%, we present the results from 40 ms in interval. ABS and AQS show desirable
results while the other protocols are comparable. The reason why the readable slots
increase as the speed decreases is that the time taken for tags to pass by increases.
Therefore, the identiﬁcation process is performed during a number of rounds. ABS and
AQS achieve good performance compared with other protocols because they can take
advantage of the identiﬁcation information of the previous stage.
25
Zhen
Vogt1
Vogt2
Zhen
DFSA
QT
BT
AQS
ABS
DFSA
Zhen (quiet)
DFSA (quiet)
QT
BT
AQS
ABS
30
40
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
 104
45
50
55
60
65
Interval (ms)
70
75
80
85
90
5
10
15
Interval (ms)
Number of identified tags
Number of identified tags
(a)
(b)
20
5000
4000
3000
2000
1000
0
FIGURE 9.11
The number of identiﬁed tags and readable slots. (a) The number of identiﬁed tags. (b) The number of
readable slots.
Comparative Performance Analysis of Anticollision Protocols in RFID Networks
177

9.7
Discussions and Summary
RFID applications have various requirements. Mobility of tags is a key factor for branching
properties of RFID applications. Mobility of tags varies accordingly as what kinds of RFID
applications are employed. We divide RFID applications into two cases. The ﬁrst one is the
case that has little mobility of tags. In these kinds of applications, the time for identifying
all tags in reader’s range is a critical factor for evaluating performance of RFID tag
anticollision protocols. We ﬁnd out that probabilistic and tree-based tag anticollision
protocols show similar ability in identifying tags. The second one is the case in which we
have to consider mobility of tags for performing identiﬁcation operation. In case an RFID
reader has to recognize tags in reader’s range persistently, a reader continues to perform
identiﬁcation process. ABS and AQS achieve good performance than other protocols. They
can recognize fast whether the tag is in reader’s range or not.
Table 9.3 shows characteristics of tag anticollision protocols. A variable for maintaining a
slot number is required in probabilistic tag anticollision protocols. The binary tree protocol
should have such a variable for a counter. ABS protocol needs two variables for ASC and
PSC. The query tree protocol and AQS protocol require neither counters nor a random
number generator. As the length of query varies, the length of reader’s message also varies.
AQS and ABS are appropriate for satisfying this evaluating factor.
9.8
Conclusions
In this chapter, we have introduced tag anticollision protocols and have presented the
performance evaluation results of them. According to the types of RFID applications, we
have considered two cases: motionless tags and moving tags. For applications employing
motionless tags, a user can determine the start as well as the end of the identiﬁcation
process. When such applications are considered, probabilistic and deterministic tag anti-
collision protocols show similar ability in identifying tags. For applications requiring
persistent observations on tags, AQS and ABS outperform any other protocols, especially
under the situation that tag population varies at low speed. One of the important factors
we should consider in evaluating performance of persistent observation is to identify
TABLE 9.3
Summary of Tag Anticollision Schemes
Probabilistic Protocols
Deterministic Protocols
Characteristics
Query Tree
Binary Tree
AQS
ABS
Vogt1
Vogt2
Zhen
DFSA
The number of variables
in tag memory for
identiﬁcation process
0
1
0
2
1
1
1
1
The existence of random
number generator in
the tag
N
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Existence of upper bound
of the number of tags
that can be identiﬁed
N
N
N
N
Y
Y
Y
Y
The variety of the reader
message length
Y
N
Y
N
N
N
N
N
Note:
Y, yes (exist); N, no.
178
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

whether a tag exists within its reader’s range as quickly as possible. We also have shown
that AQS and ABS are appropriate for satisfying this evaluating factor.
Acknowledgment
This work was jointly supported by SK Telecom, the Korea Science and Engineering
Foundation (KOSEF) grant funded by the Korea government (MOST) (No. R01-2007-000-
11203-0) and the Ministry of Information and Communication (MIC), Korea under ITRC
IITA-2007-(C1090-0701-0046).
References
1. K. Finkenzeller, RFID Handbook: Fundamentals and Applications in Contactless Smart Cards and
Identiﬁcation, John Wiley & Sons, New York, 2003.
2. C. Floerkemeier and M. Lampe, Issues with RFID usage in ubiquitous computing applications, in
Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference of Pervasive Computing, LNCS 3001, pp. 188–193,
2004.
3. C. Law, K. Lee, and K.-Y. Siu, Efﬁcient memoryless protocol for tag identiﬁcation, in Proceedings
of the 4th International Workshop on Discrete Algorithms and Methods for Mobile Computing and
Communications, pp. 75–84, Boston, MA, USA, August 2000.
4. F. Zhou, C. Chen, D. Jin, C. Huang, and H. Min, Evaluating and optimizing power consumption
of anti-collision protocols for applications in RFID systems, in Proceedings of the International
Symposium on Low Power Electronics and Design, Newport Beach, CA, USA, August 2004.
5. D.R. Hush and C. Wood, Analysis of tree algorithms for RFID arbitration, in Proceedings of IEEE
International Symposium on Information Theory, p. 107, 1998.
6. S.A. Weis, S.E. Sarma, R.L. Rivest, and D.W. Engels, Security and privacy aspects of low-cost
radio frequency identiﬁcation systems, in Proceedings of the 1st Annual Conference on Security in
Pervasive Computing, LNCS 2802, pp. 201–212, March 2003.
7. J. Myung, W. Lee, J. Srivastava, and T. Shih, Tag-splitting: adaptive collision arbitration protocols
for RFID tag identiﬁcation, IEEE Transactions on Parallel Distributed Systems, 18(6), 763–775, 2007.
8. N. Abramson, The aloha system—another alternative for computer communications, in Proceed-
ings of Fall Joint Computer Conference, AFIPS Conference, vol. 37, pp. 281–285, 1970.
9. L.G. Roberts, Extensions of packet communication technology to a hand held personal terminal,
in Proceedings of Spring Joint Computer Conference, AFIPS Conference, vol. 40, pp. 295–298, 1972.
10. EPC radio-frequency identiﬁcation protocols class-1 generation-2 UHF RFID protocol for com-
munications at 860 MHz–960 MHz version 1.0.8, EPCglobal, December 2004.
11. Information technology automatic identiﬁcation and data capture techniques—radio frequency
identiﬁcation for item management air interface—part 6: parameters for air interface communi-
cations at 860–960 MHz, Final Draft International Standard ISO 18000-6.
12. F.C. Schoute, Control of ALOHA signaling in a mobile radio trunking system, in Proceedings of the
IEE International Conference on Radio Spectrum Conservation Techniques, pp. 38–42, 1980.
13. F.C. Schoute, Dynamic frame length ALOHA, IEEE Transactions on Communications, COM-31(4),
565–568, 1983.
14. J.E. Wieselthier, A. Ephremides, and L.A. Michaels, An exact analysis and performance evalu-
ation of framed ALOHA with capture, IEEE Transactions on Communications, COM-38(2), 125–137,
1989.
15. UCODE, Philips Semiconductors, http:==www.semiconductors.philips.com, 2005.
16. J. Zhai and G. Wang, An anti-collision algorithm using two-functioned estimation for RFID tags,
in Proceedings of International Conference on Computational Science and its Applications, LNCS 3483,
pp. 702–711, 2005.
Comparative Performance Analysis of Anticollision Protocols in RFID Networks
179

17. H. Vogt, Efﬁcient object identiﬁcation with passive RFID tags, in Proceedings of the International
Conference on Pervasive Computing, LNCS 2414, pp. 98–113, April 2002.
18. J. Cha and J. Kim, Dynamic framed slotted ALOHA algorithm using fast tag estimation method
for RFID system, in Proceedings of the IEEE Consumer Communications and Networking Conference
(CCNC’06), Las Vegas, USA, January 2006.
19. B. Zhen, M. Kobayashi, and M. Shimizu, Framed ALOHA for multiple RFID objects identiﬁca-
tion, IEICE Transactions on Communications, E88-B(3), 991–999, 2005.
20. M.A. Kaplan and E. Gulko, Analytic properties of multiple-access trees, IEEE Transactions on
Information Theory, 31(2), 255–263, 1985.
180
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

10
Maximizing Read Accuracy by Optimally
Locating RFID Interrogators
Lin Wang, Bryan A. Norman, and Jayant Rajgopal
CONTENTS
10.1
Portal Design and Antenna Placement......................................................................... 181
10.2
Powering Region with a Single Reader Antenna ....................................................... 182
10.2.1 Powering Region versus Read Range.............................................................. 183
10.2.2 Friis’ Equation and Antenna Gains.................................................................. 184
10.2.3 Powering Region with a Single Reader Antenna .......................................... 186
10.3
100a% Read Accuracy Powering Region with Multiple Reader Antennas............ 187
10.3.1 Merging 100a% Read Accuracy Powering Regions...................................... 188
10.3.2 Integer Programming Formulation for Multiple Reader Coverage ............ 189
10.3.3 Enumeration Scheme for Multiple Reader Coverage.................................... 191
10.3.3.1 Discretization of Orientations............................................................ 191
10.3.3.2 Effects of Discretizing the Tag Space and Orientations ................ 193
10.3.4 Numerical Examples .......................................................................................... 194
10.4
Conclusions and Extensions........................................................................................... 196
References.................................................................................................................................... 197
10.1
Portal Design and Antenna Placement
In recent years there has been a rapid growth in interest in the implementation of RFID
technologies to better manage supply chain operations by tracking the movement of
products or assets through a system. RFID implementations have also been motivated by
mandates from large organizations like the U.S. Department of Defense and Wal-Mart. In
typical logistics or supply chain applications, portals have been commonly chosen to
streamline the automatic RFID scanning processes so that tags which move through portals
are automatically tracked, read, and recorded into a suitable information system. The
primary motivation of course, is labor savings since RFID technology can be used to
simultaneously read multiple tagged items (typically, pallets or cases today) going through
the portal, as opposed to having a human being manually read and record bar-coded
information or process RFID tags manually. Portals are currently used by companies at
several points within the overall supply chain. These could include shipping (e.g., at a
plant or warehouse loading docks), receiving (e.g., at warehouse receiving docks), ﬂoor
replenishment (e.g., between the backroom=storage area and the retail ﬂoor), sales (e.g., at
181

check-out lanes), or packaging materials disposition (e.g., at a box crusher area). In its
simplest form a portal is merely a wide doorway with one or more RFID reader antennas
mounted at locations along the portal perimeter. In supply chain applications, such
portals are designed primarily to read passive tags that receive their power from the reader.
Although their sizes and speciﬁc conﬁgurations might vary depending on individual
applications, RFID-equipped portals are all designed with the objective of maximizing read
accuracy as tagged objects move through the portal. Read accuracy is of great importance
to the success of RFID applications. A missed read at the pallet or case level gives rise to
discrepancies between recorded inventory and physical inventory, which in turn leads to
various inefﬁciencies within the supply chain. For example, suppose 10 tagged cases are
received, but only 9 are read and recorded in the system by the receiving dock portal
reader. This could lead to nonvalue added activities such as manually reconciling stock for
payment purposes or potentially costly outcomes such as inaccurate reorder points within
the inventory control system. Missed reads at the item level can be even more worrisome as
these could lead to lost sales from stock sitting in a backroom but not being available on the
shelf; this directly affects revenue. It is fair to say that despite steadily decreasing costs of
tags and readers, a major factor inhibiting the increased adoption of RFID technology in
supply chain and logistics applications is the less-than-perfect reliability of the tag-reading
process that is prevalent today. Even if the cost of RFID tags falls to the level of barcode
labels, their use will not become ubiquitous until read accuracy levels are close to 100%. It
is worth noting that although using barcodes for tracking is a slow and manually intensive
process, it is rare to miss a read other than by human error. With RFID tags, this human
element can be eliminated but unfortunately, the technology usually cannot guarantee
100% accuracy in real-world applications.
Read accuracy at a portal obviously depends on factors such as the quality, reliability, and
capabilities of the tags and readers used, as well as the speciﬁc application domain. How-
ever, when considering a ﬁxed technology (tag=reader) and application, the design of the
RFID-equipped portal becomes critical. Tag reads can be missed because of many factors
including limitations in the read range, tag orientation, or interference (from water, metal, or
other tags). Another complicating factor is that in an automated RFID-scanning process the
locations of tags are often not ﬁxed because items are of different sizes and might be moving
on a truck, or material-handling equipment such as a pallet, forklift, or conveyor belt. In fact,
not only the location but also the orientation of each tag may differ when the interrogation
process starts within a portal—this is especially true with item-level applications.
To compensate for the problem of imperfect read-rates, multiple reader antennas are
commonly used in portal design, and a major determinant of read accuracy is the correct
placement of reader antennas at the portal. Given that tag locations cannot be isolated and
ﬁxed, it is important to optimize and ﬁx the locations of multiple RFID reader antennas so
that the probability of a tag being read is maximized. The readability of a passive tag is
directly related to the amount of power it receives, which in turn, is a function of the
distance between the tag and reader antennas as well as their orientations relative to each
other. Thus the objective of optimal reader antenna placement is equivalent to maximizing
the powering region, that is, the area within the portal where tags can receive the minimal
power required for them to be read at almost all likely orientations of the tag.
10.2
Powering Region with a Single Reader Antenna
Historically, read range has been the primary measure used to measure performance in
RFID applications. In this section, we begin by showing that performance is not only
182
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

determined by the relative distance of an RFID tag from a reader, but also by the relative
orientation of the tag’s antenna with respect to that of the reader. The power received by a
passive tag is determined by Friis’ equation and includes the effects of orientations and
polarizations. Based on Friis’ equation, an efﬁcient scheme for calculating the powering
region with a single reader antenna is introduced.
10.2.1
Powering Region versus Read Range
Regardless of whether RFID deployment is at the pallet level or at the item level, RF has
limited radio range. This is especially true for passive RFID tags, where such distance may
range from a few centimeters for near-ﬁeld inductive coupling to several meters for back-
scatter. It is also worth noting that the desired read range is case dependent and it is not
necessarily always desirable for it to be as large as possible because in some cases, longer
read range can be detrimental due to detecting unintended or irrelevant tags.
It is important to realize that read ranges are based on a path loss model that
considers that the power received by an RFID tag is only related to the path that the signal
traverses. Equation 10.1 shows the free space Friis’ transmission equation used in such
applications:
PR ¼ PT
GTGRl2
(4pr)2
(10:1)
In Equation 10.1, PT is the power from the transmitting (reader) antenna while PR is
the power received by the receiving (tag) antenna. GT and GR represent, respectively, the
antenna gains of the transmitting and receiving antennas, r is the distance separating the
two antennas, and l is the wavelength (in the same units as r). To use the above formula,
both antennas have to be perfectly aligned, that is, at the most favorable orientation. The
read range obtainable at some other relative antenna orientation is dependent on the
radiation pattern, which might differ based on the speciﬁc design used for the antenna. In
particular, an antenna that is not omnidirectional is orientation sensitive so that whether a
tag with such an antenna can be activated depends not only on its relative distance to the
reader but also the relative orientations between the tag and the reader. For example, an
RFID tag that claims to have a read range of more than 20 ft could fail to be read at a
much shorter distance if the relative orientation between the two antennas is unfavorable.
In many RFID applications such as mixed totes and item-level tracking, users might not
have full control over the tag orientations, and even in case- or pallet-level applications it
is very hard to ensure that the operator will always place the objects in such a way that
the tags are oriented in a speciﬁed fashion. Therefore, there is a need for a more compre-
hensive version of Friis’ equation in which orientations are included in the coverage
calculation. To do this we start with the following formal deﬁnitions of read accuracy
and powering region.
Deﬁnition 1: Given the location of a tag and the locations of a set of reader antennas, read
accuracy is deﬁned as the percentage of all possible orientations of the tag for which it can
be adequately powered by one or more of the reader antennas.
From a probabilistic perspective, read accuracy can be interpreted as the probability that
a tag with some random orientation can be read, given its location and the locations and
orientations of the reader antennas.
Deﬁnition 2: Given some suitably deﬁned fraction a, the 100a% read accuracy powering
region is deﬁned as the space within which a tag can be read with at least 100a% read
accuracy.
Maximizing Read Accuracy by Optimally Locating RFID Interrogators
183

10.2.2
Friis’ Equation and Antenna Gains
It can be shown [1] that the power received by an RFID tag is determined by the version of
Friis’ equation that is listed below that takes into account the relative positions of the tag
and the reader’s antennas:
PR ¼ PT
GT(uT, fT)GR(uR, fR)l2
(4pr)2
(1  jGTj2)(1  jGRj2)j^pT  ^pRj2,
(10:2)
where
(uT, fT) are the spherical coordinates to deﬁne transmitter antenna orientation
(uR, fR) are the spherical coordinates to deﬁne receiver antenna orientation
PR is the received power
PT is the transmitted power
GR(uR, fR) is the receiver (tag) gain
GT(uT, fT) is the transmitter gain
GR is the receiver reﬂection coefﬁcient
GT is the transmitter reﬂection coefﬁcient
^pR is the receiver polarization vector
^pT is the transmitter polarization vector
r is the distance between the transmitter and the receiver
l is the wavelength
The reﬂection coefﬁcients GR and GT account for the impedance mismatch between the
antenna and circuitry [2] that are introduced in the simple modulation of the backscatter. In
an ideal situation, its value is 0, which means no power will be reﬂected back because of
the mismatch. In reality, its magnitude is between 0 and 1 depending on the circuit design.
The squared dot product of the polarization vectors j^pT  ^pRj2 is called the polarization loss
factor (PLF) and reﬂects the loss due to the mismatch of the polarizations of a transmitter
antenna and a receiver antenna. When readers have a circular-polarized antenna, the PLF
is 0.5 no matter what polarization the tag antenna has [3]. Finally, the transmitter and the
receiver antenna gains are determined by their orientations as deﬁned by the spherical
coordinates (uT, fT) and (uR, fR), respectively.
In Equation 10.2, the antenna gain is not a constant. Rather, it is a function of the
antenna’s own orientation unless the antenna radiates power isotropically. Antennas of
different types differ in their own radiation patterns, which leads to different values of
GR(uR, fR) and GT(uT, fT) in Equation 10.2. In this section, for purposes of illustration we
will use a half-wave dipole antenna for the tag and a patch antenna for the reader. Patch
antennas are chosen for RFID readers because they are less sensitive to tag orientations.
Similarly, passive backscatter tags with half-wave dipole antennas are common in far-ﬁeld
applications and usually have longer read ranges than inductive-type tags.
Deﬁnition 3: The reader axis is deﬁned as the line joining the centers of the tag antenna and
the reader antenna (which are r units apart).
The following equation may be used to calculate the gain of a half-wave dipole antenna,
which is omnidirectional:
GR(uR, fR) ¼ 1:641
cos p
2 cos uR


sin uR
2
4
3
5
2
(10:3)
In the above formula, we align the z-axis with the direction of the tag’s antenna. The
spherical coordinate uR is deﬁned as the angle between the reader axis and the antenna
184
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

direction, while fR is the angle between the x-axis and the projection of the reader axis on
to the x–y plane; these are shown in Figure 10.1. As Equation 10.3 indicates, the gain of a
half-wave dipole antenna only depends on uR.
The following equation shows the gain of a patch antenna that is used on the reader; the
spherical coordinates uT and fT are deﬁned as in Ref. [1] and shown in Figure 10.2:
GT(uT, ft) ¼ 3:136 sin uT
sin p
2 cos uT


cos uT
cos p
2 sin uT sin fT


2
4
3
5
2
(10:4)
RFID antenna design has been undergoing rapid evolution. New antennas have been
developed for better read range, smaller size, or better handling of water and metal.
Mathematical calculation of antenna gains can become very complicated and in some
cases it might not even be possible to ﬁnd a closed-form expression to describe these.
However, an RF anechoic chamber can still be used to measure the antenna radiation
pattern or radar cross section in such cases.
Equations 10.2 through 10.4 can be used in conjunction with each other for determining
the amount of power received at the tag. It is also worth mentioning that Equation 10.2 is
r
y
x
z
Dipole
antenna
qR
fR
FIGURE 10.1
Dipole antenna angle deﬁnition.
x
W
y
z
L
y
x
z
q
f
(r, q, f)
FIGURE 10.2
Patch antenna and its coordinate system.
Maximizing Read Accuracy by Optimally Locating RFID Interrogators
185

based on a free space model in which multipath effects and interference are neglected. The
received power from the formula is a theoretical value that can only be obtained in an
anechoic chamber. When Friis’ equation is used for estimating the powering region in
a portal, reﬂection, scattering, diffraction, and shadowing may occur in the signal propa-
gation; it is hard to quantify these since the extent of each may differ on a case-by-case
basis. Nevertheless, Friis’ equation does provide one with a fundamental tool for power
calculations.
10.2.3
Powering Region with a Single Reader Antenna
In the previous section, Friis’ equation gives the power received by an RFID tag, given the
positions and orientations of the tag and the reader. Suppose that at a ﬁxed location we
discretize the set of all possible orientations of an RFID tag into M unit direction vectors;
then Friis’ equation can be evaluated M times to ﬁnd the values of power received at that
location for all possible orientations. The tag’s position is deﬁned as possessing 100a% read
accuracy as long as aM of the values computed are greater than a speciﬁed value Pmin, the
minimum operational power required to activate the tag.
Although it is true that evaluating the 100a% read accuracy powering region in a portal
can be done using Friis’ equation, the computational effort could be overwhelming to
achieve sufﬁciently high precision: not only does one need to discretize the orientations in
three-dimensional space, but also the portal space. Discretizing a 1 m3 volume with 1 cm
search steps leads to 1 million search points, each of which presumably can take on as
many as M different orientations. With a 18 resolution, there will be M ¼ 64,800 values for
the gain for each point (180 3 3608). Therefore, there are 64,800 3 106 evaluations for just
a 1 m3 space.
Greene has developed an efﬁcient algorithm to overcome this computational challenge
[2]. With a single reader antenna, we can ﬁx the position and orientation of the reader
antenna, and the location and orientation of the tag can be uniquely deﬁned relative to this
point of reference. The reader antenna is assumed to be at the origin with its maximum
gain direction aligned with the x-axis, and the reader axis as per Deﬁnition 3. The mono-
tonicity of power received along the reader axis as a function of distance from the reader
yields the following corollary.
Corollary 1: Along the reader axis, if there exists any point with 100a% read accuracy,
then there is always a point with 100a% read accuracy such that any point closer to the
reader has at least 100a% read accuracy while any point further away fails to meet 100a%
read accuracy.
Proof: In Friis’ equation, let the transmitter gain along the reader axis be given by GT.
Suppose there are M (M ! 1) orientations for each tag position along the reader axis; and M
corresponding values of the receiver gain GR at each of these points. Let T be the threshold
point with distance rT such that exactly 100a% of the M orientations at point T can receive
power greater than or equal to the minimum activation power. Then for any point T0 on the
reader axis with distance r0 > rT, any of the M orientations will receive power that is greater
than the power received from the same orientation at point T. Therefore, at least 100a% of M
orientations at point T0 can be activated with sufﬁcient power.
Corollary 1 indicates that for the case of a single reader antenna there will be a three-
dimensional boundary surface within which lies the 100a% read accuracy powering
region. In Ref. [2], instead of evaluating every point in the portal space, an algorithm is
developed to obtain such a boundary surface. At any given point on the reader axis for a
given tag position, all the parameters in Friis’ equation are known except for the receiver
gain GR. Regardless of the mathematical form of the gain function GR, if substituting
the value of the 100a percentile of GR in Friis’ equation gives power that is greater than
186
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

the required activation power, then such a point can be read with at least 100a% read
accuracy. In other words, a threshold point T on any reader axis is such a point that the
received power equals the required activation power Pmin when GR assumes the 100a
percentile value. Based on the above analysis, we can obtain the following formula:
r2
GT(uT, fT) ¼ PT  GR 100al2
Pmin(4p)2
(1  jGTj2)(1  jGRj2)j^pT  ^pRj
(10:5)
In Equation 10.5, GR_100a is the 100a percentile value of receiver gain while Pmin is the
minimum receiver power to activate a tag. Therefore, the right-hand side of Equation 10.5
is a constant. Let C be the value of the constant in Equation 10.5. Then f(uT, fT, r) ¼
(r2=GT(uT, fT)) ¼ C deﬁnes the boundary surface of the 100a% read accuracy powering
region.
If RFID tags use half-wave dipole antennas, then the antenna gain is a function of uR with
a period of p and is symmetric about uR ¼ p=2, as shown in Figure 10.3. This is because the
shape of cos p
2 cos uR


= sin uR is similar to that of sin uR.
In the case of a half-wave antenna, the 100a percentile value of the receiver gain is
obtained when uR ¼ 90 3 (1  a) degrees. Figure 10.4 shows an example of a 90% read
accuracy powering region when the radio frequency is 915 MHz, transmitter power is
0.5 W, and the minimum operational power of an RFID tag is 50 mW.
10.3
100a% Read Accuracy Powering Region with Multiple
Reader Antennas
In Section 10.2, an efﬁcient algorithm was presented to calculate the 100a% read accuracy
powering region of a single reader antenna. From Corollary 1, such a region is bounded by
a surface on which each point has exactly 100a% read accuracy. However, when the
number of reader antennas placed at a portal is more than one, such a region cannot be
obtained by simply merging the 100a% read accuracy powering region from each indivi-
dual antenna. In this section, we ﬁrst discuss why merging such regions does not work.
After providing a mathematical representation of the problem, we then discuss a method-
ology for locating readers and related implementation issues.
0
50
100
150
200
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
qR
GR
FIGURE 10.3
Half-wave dipole antenna’s gain versus uR.
Maximizing Read Accuracy by Optimally Locating RFID Interrogators
187

10.3.1
Merging 100a% Read Accuracy Powering Regions
Given the location of a tag along with its orientation, the tag can be regarded as readable as
long as there is at least one reader antenna that provides enough power to activate the tag.
The read accuracy with respect to a tag location is thus the percentage of all orientations of
the tag at that particular position that can be powered by at least one reader antenna. For a
single reader antenna, the 100a% read accuracy powering region is ﬁxed with respect to
the reader’s location. However, with more than one reader antenna, such a region is not
simply the union of the individual 100a% read accuracy powering regions.
Consider Figure 10.5, where a unit ball is used to represent all possible orientations for
an RFID tag with its antenna center located at the center of the ball. Note that the surface of
the ball does not have any signiﬁcance by itself—a line joining the center of the ball to any
point on the surface represents one possible orientation for the tag’s antenna. Now suppose
that a is speciﬁed as 0.95, and suppose further that each of the two RFID reader antennas
shown can individually cover only 90% of all of the orientations. The points on the surface
within the conical shadow represent those 10% of the orientations of the tag where it
cannot be powered by the corresponding reader. Based on our deﬁnition of read accuracy,
the current tag position does not meet the speciﬁcations for either antenna individually.
Thus this point would not lie within the individual football-shaped powering region
(Figure 10.4) for either reader. However, because the unreadable orientations shown
below are mutually exclusive with respect to each other, orientations missed by one reader
antenna are covered by the other; hence the position can actually be read with 100%
accuracy using the two reader antennas in conjunction with each other as shown. In a
different example, there could be a point that can have 80% of its orientations read by one
antenna and 80% of its orientations read by a second antenna, but the union of the two
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
−0.1
−0.2
0.2
0.1
0
−0.1
−0.2
0
0.05
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.25
0.15
0
FIGURE 10.4
90% read accuracy powering region.
188
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

antennas results in 95% of the orientations being readable. In this case, the point would not
be in either antenna’s readable region when the antennas are considered separately but is
readable when the antennas are considered jointly. Unfortunately, in determining the
coverage area for multiple antennas, Corollary 1 cannot be extended to this case since
there is no direct monotonicity result with multiple readers that can be exploited to deﬁne
the powering region.
Consequently, there is no straightforward way to ﬁnd the boundary surface of the
powering region, which can be disjoint and have some irregular shape. In conclusion
(1) union of the 100a% read accuracy powering regions for each individual antenna
underestimates the real coverage volume because there might be points that would be
considered unreadable by each reader individually, yet would be readable when all of
the readers are considered jointly and (2) there is no straightforward process whereby one
can deﬁne the boundary of the powering region because of the absence of any direct
monotonicity result.
10.3.2
Integer Programming Formulation for Multiple Reader Coverage
In this section we formulate the reader antenna location problem as a mathematical
program by deﬁning a suitable objective, and translating our read accuracy requirements
and the corresponding powering region into mathematical relationships that deﬁne the
constraints of the math program. Suppose that the region within a portal where a tag can
lie is discretized into L distinct points and that each of these is a possible location for the
center of the tag’s antenna (henceforth referred to as tag position; the entire set of L tag
positions will be referred to as the tag space). Suppose further that we are given N potential
locations along the portal for the center of any reader antenna (henceforth referred to as
reader position), and we have a maximum of n0 (<N) reader antennas available for
placement at these positions. Finally suppose that the (inﬁnitely many) orientations that
a tag’s antenna could take on are also discretized into a total of M distinct orientations.
Given a suitably speciﬁed fraction a, our objective is to determine the optimal number of
readers along with their optimal locations, so as to maximize the number of positions in the
tag space that can be powered with at least 100a% read accuracy, that is, for which at least
aM orientations can receive the threshold power required to be read.
RFID reader antenna 1
RFID reader antenna 2
FIGURE 10.5
Orientations for the two reader cases.
Maximizing Read Accuracy by Optimally Locating RFID Interrogators
189

The reader antenna placement problem can be formulated as the following integer
program [4]:
Max
X
L
l ¼ 1
zl
s.t.
X
N
n ¼ 1
xn  n0
(10:6)
ylm 
X
N
n ¼ 1
plmn  xn  0,
8l ¼ 1,2,    , L,
m ¼ 1,2,    , M
X
M
m ¼ 1
ylm  a  M  zl  0,
8l ¼ 1,2,    , L
(10:7)
xn 2 f0,1gN,
ylm 2 f0,1gL*M,
zl 2 f0,1gL
(10:8)
where
N is the number of candidate reader positions
L is the number of tag positions in the tag space
M is the number of discretized orientations considered for each tag position
n0 is the maximum number of reader antennas available
100a% is the required percentage read accuracy for every point in the powering region
plmn is the binary coefﬁcient. plmn ¼ 1 if a tag at point l with orientation m is in range to
receive enough power from a reader antenna at location n
zl is the binary variable. If zl ¼ 1 then the point l is covered with 100a% read accuracy
xn is the binary variable. If xn ¼ 1 then there is a reader antenna placed at location n
ylm is the binary variable. If ylm ¼ 1 then a tag at the point l with orientation m will be
covered by at least one reader antenna
Note that the last three quantities are the decision variables. Whether plmn takes on a
value of 0 or 1 is determined by ﬁrst computing the received power PR for the location l
with orientation m using Friis’ equation, and then checking to see whether or not this
exceeds Pmin (the minimum operational power required to activate the tag). Constraint 1
requires that the number of antennas installed be no more than the number available.
Constraint 2 ensures that a tag position with a speciﬁc orientation is marked as covered
only if the required power is received from at least one of the reader positions. Constraint 3
guarantees that only a point with at least 100a% read accuracy will be counted.
In the above formulation, the number of constraints is 1 þ (L*M) þ L, while the number of
binary variables is N þ (L*M) þ L. The density of the coefﬁcient matrix is determined by the
plmn values, and in general will be much higher than it is for typical 0–1 integer program-
ming problems of this size. The number of binary variables in the problem can be reduced
because the structure of the model allows for the ylm to be relaxed and deﬁned as
continuous variables with lower and upper bounds of 0 and 1, respectively. Note that
the objective attempts to make the zl values as large as possible, and these are bounded
from above by the ylm values in Constraint 3, so that we would also like to make the latter
values as large as possible. Thus ylm will be set to 1 in the optimal solution as long as a tag
at position l with orientation m can be covered by at least one reader; otherwise Constraint
190
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

2 forces ylm to be 0. Therefore, the problem can be reduced to N þ L binary variables and
L 3 M continuous variables in the range [0,1]. However, the number of constraints cannot
be reduced.
Unfortunately, the integer program is poorly structured and it is impractical to solve the
problem to optimality with a high level of discretization for the portal space as well as the
orientations. The fact that the number of constraints is very large and cannot be reduced,
and that the technological coefﬁcient matrix problem for the problem is dense makes it a
very hard integer programming problem.
10.3.3
Enumeration Scheme for Multiple Reader Coverage
Given that integer programming presents signiﬁcant computational problems for large
problems, an enumeration scheme is examined in this section. Suppose we are given a set
of n reader positions. For each reader position and for each of the L points in the tag space,
Friis’ equation is used for each of M possible orientations to calculate received power. As
soon as we ﬁnd a reader position that can activate more than aM orientations for the tag at
that point, we mark the tag position as readable and move on to the next point in the tag
space. If no reader can cover the point as required it is marked as unreadable. Thus each
tag position could entail as few as aM and as many as nM computations of received power.
For the current set of reader positions we use the number of points in L that have at least
100a% read accuracy as the performance measure. This process is repeated for each of the
CN
n choices for the set of reader positions to ﬁnd the one that yields the maximum coverage
across the entire tag space.
Two important issues need special attention with respect to the implementation of the
enumeration scheme. First, although it is easy to discretize the portal space into L points, it
is not obvious as to how all possible orientations can be evenly discretized into M distinct
vectors. Second, it is obvious that the enumeration scheme does not solve the complexity
issue in that there are still CN
n  L  M evaluations possible and L rises rapidly with an
increase in the portal space resolution. It is important to select reasonable values for L and
M, so that the computational effort can be reduced without sacriﬁcing the precision of the
ﬁnal solution.
10.3.3.1
Discretization of Orientations
At the pallet=case level, tags tend to be placed on one of the faces of a case (typically a
rectangular shape), although the cases themselves could be oriented in any way relative to
the reader. Thus it is not unreasonable to expect that the tags would lie in one of the three
Cartesian planes but with an arbitrary orientation within that plane, although this would
certainly not be true if cases are not stacked in some uniform fashion as they move through
the portal. On the other hand, in item-level applications it is not possible to accurately
predict how the product will lie and the tags can thus be expected to randomly take on
many different orientations. Even in some pallet-level retailer applications, cases with
RFID tags are sometimes carried through the portal by staff, therefore strictly limiting
the orientations of tags is not a good idea. To determine the 100a% read accuracy region
it is necessary to be able to represent and evaluate the readability of all of these different
possible tag orientations. If we discretize all possible orientations into M discrete unit
vectors from the location of the tag center, then if there is no bias toward a speciﬁc
orientation each of these unit vectors should be uniformly distributed on the surface of a
unit sphere whose center is coincident with the location of the tag center.
The conventional approach is to discretize uniformly around the latitude and the
longitude (e.g., every 38 from 08 to 3608); however, as shown in Figure 10.6, this approach
Maximizing Read Accuracy by Optimally Locating RFID Interrogators
191

leads to a biased sample that is highly anisotropic and has a stronger concentration of
directions pointing toward the poles and relatively few directions pointing toward posi-
tions on the equator.
Determining the exact uniform conﬁguration of the orientation vectors is a hard math-
ematical problem [5,6]. Although a continuous spherical uniform distribution is explicitly
deﬁned [7], there is unfortunately no single deﬁnition of a corresponding discretized
uniform distribution. Researchers in different ﬁelds such as geometry, climate modeling,
molecular structure, or electrostatics have studied the problem with their own deﬁnitions,
each of which may lead to some different distribution [5,8]. However, although it may be
hard to obtain M vectors uniformly distributed on a sphere for our purposes, such vectors
need be computed only once and used repetitively for L points. Therefore, the computation
complexity of the discretization algorithms should not be regarded as an important factor
in our methodology.
An approximation algorithm by Rusin [9] is used in the numerical examples shown later
in the chapter. In this approximation method, a sphere is ﬁrst cut by a series of evenly
spaced horizontal planes, each of which forms a constant-latitude circle on the sphere. On
each such circle, points are placed so that the arc distance between each pair of adjacent
points is the same. This distance is kept the same for all of the latitude circles. Thus, circles
closer to the pole have smaller radii and consequently a smaller number of points on them.
Before listing out the details of the algorithm we review the terminology used. A great
circle is deﬁned as a circle around the surface of a sphere that has its center at the same
point as the center of the sphere. Great circles which pass through the North and South
poles are called meridians. The great circle that is perpendicular to the axis (the line joining
the two poles) and lies half-way between them is known as the equator, whereas small
circles around the surface that are parallel to the equator with centers lying on the axis are
called parallels. The algorithm may then be described as follows:
Approximation algorithm for creating M uniformly distributed unit vectors on a
unit ball:
Begin
K ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
p=4  M
p
j
k
;
Divide a meridian into K equal segments with K1 points (p1,p2, . . . , pK1);
FIGURE 10.6
Longitude–latitude–grid discretization method.
192
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

Draw a parallel Ci at each pi (i ¼ 1,2, . . . , K1);
For each Ci
Divide Ci into
2K  cos  p
2 þ i  p
K



	
equal segments with
2K  cos  p
2 þ i  p
K



	
points;
Add two points, one from each pole;
End;
10.3.3.2
Effects of Discretizing the Tag Space and Orientations
The maximum number of evaluations of Friis’ equation is CN
n  L  M in the enumeration
scheme. In most cases, the number of reader antennas n used in a portal tends to be
relatively small, so that the computational complexity is largely determined by the values
of N, L, and M. Among these three values, the number of candidate antenna locations N is
subject to design issues such as available portal space, the physical size of the antennas, etc.
However, the number of discretized points in the portal L and the number of discretized
orientations M can be freely selected. In general, larger values lead to better and more
reliable ﬁnal solutions to the placement problem, but at the same time, also lead to
increased computational effort. Thus the choice of values for L and M is important because
it determines the quality of the solution as well as the amount of computation effort
required.
The tag space resolution, which determines the value of L, is a critical parameter because
it determines the number of evaluations for each set of reader’s antennas. Moreover, a
decrease in search resolution (meaning searching more precisely) by a factor of 10 leads to
an increase in L by a factor of 1000.
Discretizing the tag orientation and location space is an approximation to what is truly a
continuous space and simply looking at the percentage of all points in the tag space that
receive coverage (as a measure of performance) can give rise to misleading results as a
result of this approximation. This can be illustrated in Figure 10.7, which shows a portal
equipped with a single reader antenna. Consider ﬁve consecutive grid points in the
discretization as shown, and suppose the vertical line represents the actual 90% read
accuracy boundary. Then based on the current discretization scheme, the 90% read accur-
acy powering region covers 3 out of 5, or 60% of the portal space (Points 1, 2, and 3).
Suppose now that we use a coarser search resolution where only every other point will be
examined, that is, we only have points 1, 3, and 5. Then the coverage actually increases to
66.67% since points 1 and 3 are within the boundary. By the same token if the boundary
had been between points 2 and 3 then the coverage would have dropped from 40% to
33.33%. Thus, the percentage coverage attained is not a good comparative measure. In fact,
since the coverage percentage should ideally be calculated in continuous three-dimensional
space, a higher search resolution is always preferred because the results in such a case are
always closer to the actual coverage for the ideal case.
A coarse resolution in the tag space might lead to two different types of errors. First, an
optimal set of n antennas might be chosen, but the percentage of the tag space that is
covered with 100a% read accuracy might not be correct, as illustrated in Figure 10.7.
1
2
3
4
5
FIGURE 10.7
Coverage percentage calculation with different search solutions.
Maximizing Read Accuracy by Optimally Locating RFID Interrogators
193

Second, because the powering region of each set of n antennas is only approximated,
a suboptimal set of n antennas might be chosen, which is a much more serious error than
the ﬁrst one. On the other hand, from a computational viewpoint, if a coarse resolution
can lead to the same optimal reader placement, then it would be ideal to use such a
resolution for determining the actual placement of the readers in the enumeration proced-
ure but a ﬁner resolution can then be used at the end to obtain a more precise estimate of
the actual coverage percentage obtained by the placement scheme.
Similar to the tag space search resolution, for every point, the coverage for various
orientations should also ideally be calculated in continuous three-dimensional space;
therefore a larger value of M is always preferred. A less-than-ideal value of M could give
rise to two types of errors. Type 1 error occurs when a point for which more than 100a% of
the orientations can be covered with the ﬁnest resolution is (mistakenly) classiﬁed as not
being covered with the smaller value for M. Conversely, a Type 2 error occurs when a point
that does not achieve the minimum coverage of 100a% with the ﬁnest resolution is
classiﬁed as being covered with the coarser resolution. Increasing the value of M reduces
both types of errors; however, to reduce the computational time, the value of M should be
chosen as small as possible without leading to suboptimal or erroneous solutions.
10.3.4
Numerical Examples
In the example shown in Figure 10.8, a portal with dimensions 3 3 3 3 3 m has 18
candidate antenna positions on three walls spaced at 0.5 m intervals. The smaller cube
(2 3 2 3 2 m) inside the portal represents all possible tag locations during the interrogation
processes. The tag space is smaller than the portal volume because we assume items move
through the central region of the portal. Thus, we eliminate the space that is closest to the
wall, ﬂoor, or ceiling on consideration. Each of the 18 reader antenna positions has 3
orientations: 458, 08, and 458, respectively. In our tests, we set n0 to either 2 or 3, and
used a value of 90% for the required read accuracy. The transmit power from an RFID
reader was 0.5 W with 50 mW needed to activate an RFID tag that operates at 915 MHz.
With a resolution of 0.1 m for the tag space and 450 possible orientations for the tag
antenna at each location, the optimal solution, which chooses positions 3 and 16, will cover
71.8% of the 8400 tag locations with 90% read accuracy. When three reader antennas are to be
FIGURE 10.8
Portal design with 18 candidate antenna positions,
each of which has 3 orientations.
1
13
12
11
2
3
4
5
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
194
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

placed, the extra one, which is placed at position 9 in the optimal solution, increases coverage
by another 14.8%. In other words, the extra antenna can cover approximately 1.18 m3 more
of the tag space with 90% read accuracy. Even though antennas may be placed with different
orientations, in the optimal solution they are mounted perpendicular to the walls.
Figure 10.9 displays results from different search resolutions ranging from 0.1 to 0.4 m
that were used to ﬁnd the best antenna placements in the example, but with the coverage
reevaluated with the ﬁnest discretization resolution used (0.1 m). In all cases, M ¼ 450
discretized orientations were used for read accuracy calculations. The coverage percentage
is represented by the proportion of discretized points in the 2 3 2 3 2 m portal space that
can be read with 90% read accuracy. It can be seen that coarser search resolutions may or
may not ﬁnd the same solution as a ﬁner search resolution. When 0.3 or 0.4 m resolution is
used, the enumeration method results in suboptimal solutions.
To evaluate the effect of M, a value of M ¼ 1916 is ﬁrst chosen for calculating the read
accuracy of each point, and then the calculation is repeated with smaller M values. Table 10.1
shows the extent of the two types of errors that are caused by smaller M values.
The two types of errors stabilize and quickly converge to a very small value as M
increases. In particular, the total classiﬁcation error is well below 1% once M reaches a
value of 450. This point is further illustrated by Figure 10.10, which shows the percentage
of tag locations that achieve 90% read accuracy coverage (at the ﬁnest tag space discretiza-
tion) using the optimal solution that is determined by each value of M. For example, the
antenna placement found using an M value of 20 results in an actual coverage of about
63%, which is much smaller than the 72% that can be found by using a larger value of M. In
the three reader antenna placement case, the optimal placement is found even when M is as
small as 20. But for the two reader placement problem, a smaller value of M can result in a
suboptimal solution, which covers as much as 10% less than the tag space than the best
solution. In the example problems, the optimal two reader placement solution can only be
found when the value of M is greater than 100.
Figure 10.11 shows the optimal 90% read accuracy coverage with different numbers
of antennas. The marginal beneﬁt is diminishing as n0 increases. With three readers,
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Search resolution (m)
Optimal coverage percentage (%)
Coverage
percentage for
two reader
antennas
placement
Coverage
percentage for
three reader
antennas
placement
FIGURE 10.9
Optimal coverage percentage for different
search resolutions.
TABLE 10.1
Two Types of Errors for Different Values of M
M
20
44
80
246
450
984
1454
Type 1 Error Percentage (%)
38.18
3.76
11.01
2.67
0.22
0.22
0.44
Type 2 Error Percentage (%)
0.56
3.90
0.29
0.18
0.33
0.18
0.06
Maximizing Read Accuracy by Optimally Locating RFID Interrogators
195

about 86.5% of the tag space will be covered with 90% read accuracy. The fourth
reader brings another 4% of the tag space into the 90% read accuracy region and the
covered space becomes saturated as n0 increases. Due to the limitation in candidate
antenna positions in the example, some corners of the portal space will not be covered
even with 18 antennas.
10.4
Conclusions and Extensions
Imperfect read rates constitute a major obstacle to the widespread adoption of RFID
technology. Without human intervention, it is hard to ﬁx the location and orientation of
a tag during the interrogation process. Hence, multiple reader antennas have been used in
portals, docks, etc., to improve read accuracy and the powering region. Properly locating
these antennas is essential to the success of RFID portal designs. In this chapter, we have
addressed the important but difﬁcult problem of determining the location of RFID inter-
rogators to maximize read accuracy.
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
0
50
100 150 200 250 300 350 400 450 500
Number of discretized orientations
Coverage percentage (%)
Coverage
percentage for two
reader antennas
placement
Coverage
percentage for three
reader antennas
placement
FIGURE 10.10
Optimal coverage percentage for different numbers of discretized orientations.
FIGURE 10.11
Optimal coverage percentage for different
numbers of reader antennas.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Number of reader antennas
1
3
5
7
9
11
13
15
17
Optimal coverage percentage (%)
196
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

The orientation and polarization of antennas from both readers and tags have direct
impacts on the power received and the success of an interrogation process; therefore, the
read range parameter, which is deﬁned under ideal conditions, is too simplistic to describe
the powering region of RFID interrogators. To fully answer the question of where to
locate the RFID antennas requires the use of an expanded Friis’ equation and careful
deﬁnition of the terms read accuracy and powering region.
Although Greene [2] has provided an efﬁcient methodology for determining the power-
ing region of a single reader antenna, merging the powering regions of individual antennas
underestimates the real powering region of a multiple reader antenna conﬁguration. An
enumeration scheme is developed, where the number of Friis’ equation evaluations is
CN
n  L  M, where N is the number of candidate antenna locations, n is the number of
antennas to be installed, L is the number of discretized tag positions, and M is the number
of discretized orientations for each tag position. However, the computational effort
required for this approach can be overwhelming if these parameters are selected for high
resolutions. The effect of varying the values of L and M on the ﬁnal solution found by the
enumeration scheme are studied. Considering the trade-off between computational time
and the precision of the solutions, the values of L and M should be carefully chosen so that
minimum computational time can be spent without resulting in suboptimal antenna
locations. Unfortunately, choosing appropriate values for the enumeration parameters
does not totally eliminate the computational problem; in particular when the portal
space is considerable in size and the number of candidate antenna positions is not small.
In such cases, the number of candidate antenna locations, N, can initially be limited to a
relatively small number of points around the portal to facilitate the enumeration process
and obtain a solution in a reasonable amount of computational time. The solution could
then be ﬁne-tuned by picking the best few locations and reﬁning the search to include
points close to these locations.
In this chapter, we assumed that tags can take any orientation and any position within
the portal space with equal likelihood. However, in pallet-level RFID applications, tags are
more likely to be on cases, which tend to have a limited number of orientations. In
addition, cases are usually stacked onto pallet jacks so that tags are likely to be more
frequently located in the lower levels of the portal space. In these cases, a weighting factor
based on either more probable orientations or more probable tag heights can be added into
the enumeration scheme. Use of this weighting scheme may potentially change the ﬁnal
choice of antenna locations.
References
1. Constantine A. Balanis, Antenna Theory Analysis and Design, second edition, John Wiley & Sons Inc.,
1997.
2. Charles E. Greene, Area of Operation for a Radio-Frequency Identiﬁcation (RFID) Tag in the Far-Field,
Ph.D. Dissertation, Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Pittsburgh, February 2006.
3. Klaus Finkenzeller, RFID Handbook: Fundamentals and Applications in Contactless Smart Cards and
Identiﬁcation, second edition, John Wiley & Sons Inc., 2003.
4. Lin Wang, Bryan A. Norman, and Jayant Rajgopal, Optimizing the Placement of Multiple RFID Reader
Antennas to Maximize Portal Read-Accuracy, Technical Report 07-01, Department of Industrial
Engineering, University of Pittsburgh, 2007.
5. Hallard T. Croft, Kenneth J. Falconer, and Richard K. Guy, Unsolved Problems in Geometry, Problem
F17, pp. 165–166, Springer-Verlag, New York, NY, 1991.
6. Edward B. Saff and Arno Kuijlaars, Distributing many points on a sphere, Mathematical Intelligen-
cer, 19(1), 1997.
Maximizing Read Accuracy by Optimally Locating RFID Interrogators
197

7. Nicholas I. Fisher, Toby Lewis, and Brian J.J. Embleton, Statistical Analysis of Spherical Data,
Cambridge University Press, 1987.
8. Ali Katanforoush and Mehrdad Shahshahani, Distributing points on the sphere, I, Experimental
Mathematics, 12(2), 2003.
9. Dave Rusin, Topics on sphere distributions, http:==www.math.niu.edu=rusin=known-math=95=
sphere.faq
198
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

11
Minimum Energy=Power Considerations
Alex K. Jones, Gerold Joseph Dhanabalan, Swapna Dontharaju, Shenchih Tung,
Peter J. Hawrylak, Leonid Mats, Marlin H. Mickle, and James T. Cain
CONTENTS
11.1
Introduction...................................................................................................................... 200
11.2
Increasing Memory Capacity......................................................................................... 200
11.2.1 Memory Block Model......................................................................................... 201
11.2.2 Memory System Architecture ........................................................................... 201
11.2.2.1
Power-On Reset................................................................................. 202
11.2.2.2
Banking Memory Blocks .................................................................. 204
11.2.3 Results .................................................................................................................. 204
11.3
Power Macromodeling for RFID Protocols.................................................................. 207
11.3.1 Power Macromodeling Framework ................................................................. 208
11.3.2 Library of Power Proﬁles................................................................................... 210
11.3.3 SystemC Simulator Construction ..................................................................... 211
11.3.4 Power Estimation................................................................................................ 211
11.3.5 Results .................................................................................................................. 212
11.4
Combining Passive and Active Technologies.............................................................. 212
11.4.1 Burst Switch......................................................................................................... 213
11.4.1.1
Characterization of the Receiver Enable Input Pin...................... 214
11.4.1.2
Extended Low-Power Logic ............................................................ 215
11.4.1.3
Results................................................................................................. 215
11.4.1.4
Scenarios............................................................................................. 216
11.4.2 Smart Buffer......................................................................................................... 217
11.4.2.1
Algorithm for RF Transceiver Coprocessor .................................. 218
11.4.2.2
Preamble Removal Unit ................................................................... 220
11.4.2.3
Manchester Decoder ......................................................................... 220
11.4.2.4
Packet Analysis Unit......................................................................... 221
11.4.2.5
Interrupt Process Unit ...................................................................... 222
11.4.2.6
Command Control Unit ................................................................... 222
11.4.2.7
Preamble Generator .......................................................................... 224
11.4.2.8
Manchester Encoder.......................................................................... 224
11.4.2.9
Air Interface Unit .............................................................................. 225
11.4.2.10 Results................................................................................................. 225
11.4.2.11 Scenarios............................................................................................. 225
11.5
Conclusions....................................................................................................................... 227
References.................................................................................................................................... 228
199

11.1
Introduction
Typically, the biggest metric of concern for RFID tags and, in particular, the silicon control-
ler devices for the tags has been production cost. In chip fabrication terms, the cost of the
device directly relates to the CMOS process chosen for implementation and the area of
the device produced. Older CMOS processes such as 0.18–0.35 mm are targeted for RFID as
they are relatively cheap to produce than the newer 65–90 nm processes. The design goal is
to create a device with the smallest area using one of these older processes. However, one
metric that has been held secondary is the power consumption of these devices.
RFID tags generally come in two types, passive and active. Active tags include an
internal power source (usually a battery) to power the transceiver used for receiving
queries and transmitting responses and the controller that computes the tag’s responses
to transactions. The controller is typically either an ASIC or a low-power embedded
microprocessor. Passive tags do not contain an internal power source. As a result, these
tags not only receive information from a query, they also receive energy. This energy is
used to power the tag to determine and send a response to the query. Although passive
tags are generally cheaper than active tags, they have two major disadvantages: (1) range
of passive tags is signiﬁcantly lower than active tags and (2) complexity of response is
signiﬁcantly reduced over active tags because of the limited energy budget. However,
active tags, in addition to being more costly than passive tags, often require battery
replacement.
Power consumption affects both passive and active devices. For an active device, the
amount of power=energy consumption required by the tag dictates the lifetime that a tag
may operate. Ranges and complexity of computation of passive devices for features such as
added security capability or access to sensors are directly impacted by power usage. In this
chapter, we present techniques and architectures that are applicable to either passive or
active tags, or both. These techniques are designed to address the concerns of reducing
power in RFID systems without compromising their capability or to extend their capability
in a power-efﬁcient manner.
The remainder of this chapter is organized as follows: Section 11.2 presents a technique to
signiﬁcantly increase the memory capacity of a passive tag while minimizing the amount of
additional energy required. Section 11.3 describes a power macromodeling technique that
works in concert with the RFID design automation ﬂow described in Chapter 13 and allows
the effective evaluation of alternate protocol designs. Section 11.4 presents the design and
evaluation of a passive active RFID tag that has many of the beneﬁts of an active tag that uses
considerably less energy. In particular, we describe a passive switch for an active transceiver
called the burst switch and a power-aware packet storage and ﬁltering technique called the
smart buffer. Each of these techniques allows us to save power by allowing high energy
consumption components of the tag to be powered down.
11.2
Increasing Memory Capacity
Conventional writable memories require some static power to retain their stored values.
However, passively powered devices require nonvolatile memories that retain the values stored
even when the device is not powered. Nonvolatile memories currently employed on passive
tags are typically very small (e.g., <200 byte) due to small power budgets of passive tags.
In this section, a memory architecture is presented that can be employed to expand the
memory capacity of fully passive tags and can be employed to lower energy consumption
200
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

in active tags or hybrid passive and active tags. Our solution is to build a hierarchical low-
power memory block based on current state-of-the-art nonvolatile memory blocks.
11.2.1
Memory Block Model
Clock gating has been the conventional solution for low-power operation. However, gating
the clock is insufﬁcient for our purposes of developing an ultra-low power nonvolatile
memory with capacity many times greater than existing integrated nonvolatile memory
blocks. Thus, our memory design is based on preexisting memory blocks with a 200 byte
capacity optimized for use in passive RFID systems.
Typical RFID systems are implemented in older CMOS technologies such as
0.18–0.35 mm. Thus, we assume that the power consumed in our system is because of
dynamic power, as static power only becomes a dominant effect at much smaller feature
sizes [1]. And as such the dynamic power or switching power of the system is governed by
the formula shown in the following equation:
P ¼ f CVdd
2
(11:1)
where
P is the dynamic power
f is the frequency of operation
C is the capacitance of the circuit
Vdd is the supply voltage
11.2.2
Memory System Architecture
In our ﬁrst design, we added a power-enable PMOS device in series with the memory
block, as shown in Figure 11.1. This allows only the block that is actually addressed to be
powered, while the remaining blocks remain disconnected from power. To manage which
bank is activated, an address decoder is required to enable which power-enable signal is
asserted. An overview of this architecture is shown in Figure 11.2, where N is the number
of memory blocks and M is the number of inputs to the decoder.
The primary beneﬁt of the power-gated implementation is that the static and dynamic
powers can both be eliminated from all but the active memory block. The addition of a
series power-enable PMOS device does not affect the average power consumed by the
device, but reduces the peak power consumed by the device. This technique has been
previously applied to I=O buffers to reduce the SSN (simultaneous switching noise)
produced on the supply lines when the output buffers switch [2]. The design implication
on RFID tags relates to the reduction of peak power consumed by the device, in particular
Memory
block
Power enable
Data
FIGURE 11.1
Memory block with power gate.
Minimum Energy=Power Considerations
201

that the peak power requirement in passively powered tags is greatly reduced. A greater
peak power requirement can be problematic as the peak power delivered to the tag is
limited by the power delivered by the reader. Since RFID tags typically operate at a
relatively low frequency (e.g., <500 kHz), the addition of the PMOS device does not
have an adverse impact on the speed of the memory.
11.2.2.1
Power-On Reset
The decoder is constructed using standard dynamic CMOS design with a precharge
transistor acting as the pull-up network [3]. The precharge signal is driven by a periodic
signal related to the clock. In our case, we can use the system clock directly as the
precharge signal. For a rising edge triggered memory when precharge is 1, the precharge
PMOS transistor is off and the precharge NMOS transistor is on, which allows the pull-
down network or evaluation network to pull the appropriate power-enable line to ground,
thus turning on the associated memory block. On the back half of the cycle, precharge
is 0, turning on the precharge PMOS and disconnecting the power-enable line from
ground, thus turning off all the memory blocks.
However, one problem with this power-gating technique that occurs in particular with
fully passive RFID tags powered by radio frequency (RF) is due to powering up of the power
supply to Vdd. Initially, the power-enable lines are low because of the power-up delay of the
decoder. This effectively allows each of the memory blocks to power up as the power supply
powers up as if they were not power gated, which causes a tremendous amount of power
consumption during power-up. This is particularly problematic for passive RFID because
the power-up time for Vdd from RF energy harvesting is long. Figure 11.3 shows
Address decoder logic
Addr A[M -1...0]
Power enable 0
Power enable 1
Power enable N-1
Memory
block
0
Power enable 0
Memory
block
1
Power enable 1
Power enable N -1
Data
Cout +Cwire
Memory
block
N -1
FIGURE 11.2
Flat power-gated memory architecture.
FIGURE 11.3
Simulation for the power-on condition.
t P
t D
Power supply
Vdd
0 V
Power-enable inputs
202
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

the assumptions for our power-on condition of the power supply and the power-enable
input lines. The power supply changes to Vdd linearly in time tP and the power-enable lines
are delayed by a time tD, where tD << tP.
To solve this problem, a power-on reset PMOS transistor is added to each of the decoder
lines to raise all the power-enable lines high and effectively block any of the memory blocks
from charging until Vdd has fully powered up. This is shown for the power-enable line 0 in
Figure 11.4.
The power-on reset transistor is enabled with the power-on reset signal held low until
the power-on reset circuit shuts off the transistor by setting power-on reset high. This is
assumed to happen well after the power supply is fully charged, as shown in Figure 11.5,
where Vdd is activated well after the power supply has powered up. This circuit causes
all the power-enable lines to rise at approximately the same speed as the power supply.
A0
A1
AM −1
Power enable 0
Power-on reset
Precharge
Power-on reset
Precharge
Vdd
FIGURE 11.4
Precharge for the decoder lines.
Reset time period 
Power supply
Vdd
0 V
Power-on reset 
FIGURE 11.5
Simulation for the precharge transistor with power-on reset.
Minimum Energy=Power Considerations
203

Thus, the power-enable transistor from Figure 11.1 has a Vgs  0 during power-up and
does not turn on.
Xinquan et al. provide an example of a low-power power-on reset circuit that consumes
5.1 mW, shown in Figure 11.6 [4]. However, if the additional power requirement is
problematic for this circuit, a possible solution is to use the burst switch to drive the
power-on reset signal. The reader would transmit on its standard frequency to begin
powering the tag, and after the reset period had expired, transmit on a different frequency
for the burst switch. Thus, the burst switch would activate the power-on reset signal after
the requested duration.
11.2.2.2
Banking Memory Blocks
Typically, the data line from each memory block is directly tied together to create a global
data line. This is possible because only the active bank drives the line avoiding the
potential for multiple drivers. On implementing the architecture from Figure 11.2,
the load capacitance for the data lines increases dramatically as each memory block adds
its output load capacitance to the system, thus signiﬁcantly increasing the power required
to drive the full memory system. To avoid this, we have grouped the memory blocks into
memory banks. The data lines within the banks are tied together, however, between banks
they are separated by a multiplexer, as shown in Figure 11.7. This accounts for a signiﬁcant
reduction in required power.
11.2.3
Results
For our fundamental memory building block, we used a model of a 200 byte nonvolatile
memory block built in 0.2 mm CMOS operating at 1.5 V with an active power consumption
of 5 mW. Using this memory block, the memory block was used to construct a memory that
can contain more than 68 KB with a nominal increase in power consumed. This architec-
ture requires approximately 350 memory blocks arranged into banks of 22 blocks each.
These speciﬁcations are based on conversations with RFID tag manufacturers that include
VDET
REF
IBIAS
M3
cd
M5
NOR2
POR
M7
M6
M4
M2
R4
M1
vcc
COMP1
−
+
COMP2
−
+
Refer-
ence
R1
R2
O
G
S
S
G
D
S
D
G
S
D
G
S
G
D
S
D
G
S
D
G
S
D
G
S
D
G
S
D
G
S
D
G
S
D
G
R3
FIGURE 11.6
Power-on reset circuit (Reproduced from Xinquan, L., Weixue, Y., Ligang, and Yu, C., ‘‘A low quiescent
current and reset time adjustable power-on reset circuit,’’ Proceedings of International Conference on ASIC (ASIC),
559–562, 2005. With permission.)
204
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

nonvolatile memory for tags meeting passive standards such as ISO 18000 Part 6C and
have applications that require up to 64 KB of memory.
We model the memory block as an inverter with an approximated load capacitance, CL,
based on details of the memory block architecture, as shown in Figure 11.8a. Based on
the memory block speciﬁcations, we calculated CL as 4.44 pF. Any device that
allows switching could be used to model the dynamic power of the device; however,
the inverter was selected because of its simpliﬁed modeling. To this device we added
the power-enable PMOS device in series to the system. The circuit diagram is shown in
Figure 11.8b.
For a passively powered RFID system, the peak power requirement is the determining
factor as to whether the device works correctly. The memory system described in Section
Bank
0
Bank
1
Bank
B-1
Data
Mux 
Memory
block
0 
Memory
block
1 
Data 
Cout+ Cwire
Memory
block
N/B-1 
Address
LSBs
Address
MSBs
Data
Power enable 0
Power enable 1
Power enable N/B-1
FIGURE 11.7
Banked memory architecture.
Vdd
IN 
OUT 
CL
(a)
Vdd
IN
OUT
CL
Power enable
(b)
FIGURE 11.8
Dynamic power memory block models. (a) Memory block model. (b) Memory block model with power gate.
Minimum Energy=Power Considerations
205

11.2.2 was implemented in 0.2 mm CMOS technology from TSMC with a combination of
tools from Cadence and Micromagic. Power analyses were conducted with HSpice.
The memory block model from Figure 11.8 was examined both with and without the
PMOS power-enable transistor. The results shown in Table 11.1 suggest that the power-
enable transistor cuts the peak power approximately in half when the device is active as a
result of being in series with the pull-up network. This power reduction is due to the peak
current attenuation from the power-enable transistor current plot shown in Figure 11.9
from a HSPICE simulation.
When combining all of the memory banks, as shown in Figure 11.2, the power-up time
and in particular the delay have a signiﬁcant impact on the power consumed by the
memory. For example, with a power-up time tP ¼ 100 ms and an ideal ramp up of
the power-enable inputs tD ¼ 0, average power consumption is approximately 25.5 nW.
However, as the power-enable delay increases linearly, the power consumption increases
exponentially to reach 25.4 mW for tD ¼ 40 ms based on the simulations as indicated in
Figure 11.3. tD was varied between 26 and 40 ms to study the peak currents in more detail.
The results are shown in Figure 11.10. For delays exceeding 30 ms, there are initially spikes
TABLE 11.1
Peak Power Reduction with Added Power-Enable
PMOS Transistor
Peak
Power (mW)
Average
Power (mW)
Without power enable
109.1
5.1
With power enable
57.2
5.1
20.0
−20.0
−40.0
−60.0
−80.0
−100
0
Current 
with PE
Current 
without PE
Current consumption with and without power enable
Branch (E− 6)
Times (E− 6)
8.8
9.0
9.20
9.4
9.6
FIGURE 11.9
Peak current reduction from memory banking.
206
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

in supply current because the power-enable transistor is turned on causing the internal
memory block node capacitances to draw current from the supply. With delays lower than
30 ms, the power-enable transistors do not turn on very much and draw a much lower
current.
As noted earlier, the memory blocks were arranged into banks and a multiplexer was
used to tie the banks together (see Figure 11.7). In our implementation, we chose 16 banks,
each containing 22,200 byte memory blocks, thus the entire system contains 352 memory
blocks. Compared with the nonbanked approach, the reduction in average power is
signiﬁcant. The banking approach saves approximately 43% decreasing the power for
the memory blocks from 11.8 to 6.7 mW. The overall power savings from the architectural
approach is 98.7%, as shown in Table 11.2.
11.3
Power Macromodeling for RFID Protocols
RFID protocols are typically designed without taking into account many of the impacts of
their ﬁnal implementation. For example, the design of a protocol can signiﬁcantly impact
25.0
Transient response
Supply Current (35µ)
Supply Current (40µ)
Supply Current (26µ)
Supply Current (28µ)
Supply Current (30µ)
0
26 µs
28 µs
30 µs
35 µs
40 µs
−25.0
−50.0
−75.0
−100
−125
−150
−175
0
25.0
50.0
75.0
Time (E–6)
100
125
150
Branch (E–6)
FIGURE 11.10
Supply current versus time for various delays of power-enable signals.
TABLE 11.2
Power Savings due to Architectural Improvements
Power consumption from naive implementation
1750 mW
Power consumption of banked memories
6.69 mW
Power consumption of address decoder
16.82 mW
Total optimized memory power consumption
23.51 mW
Power savings
98.7%
Minimum Energy=Power Considerations
207

the complexity of the protocol realization requiring additional area and cost in the ﬁnal
implementation. Additionally, this complexity can impact the power consumption. Even
decisions about primitive opcode encoding can signiﬁcantly impact power consumption
while only minimally impacting area.
With existing design ﬂows, to gain an accurate estimate of power consumed for a
protocol implementation, the protocol must be designed, tested for correctness, implemen-
ted in hardware, and ﬁnally studied for power. This process can take months or years of
engineering effort to complete. RFID companies typically do not have this type of man
power to dedicate for this purpose.
In this section, we describe a power macromodeling technique that works in concert
with the RFID design automation ﬂow described in Chapter 3.
As shown in that chapter, the RFID compiler, as illustrated in Figure 11.11, allows the
RFID system designer to design and implement new RFID protocols in a matter of hours.
A team of design engineers without this tool would require months or longer. The team
would require additional time and effort to examine the power and area impacts of their
completed designs to optimize the tag.
However, the generation of the performance and area details of the design requires
specialized ASIC synthesis tools such as Synopsys Design Compiler, which must be
manually tuned to achieve good results. Performance and area may be estimated at this
level but require additional time and computer-aided design effort such as placement,
routing, and design rule checking with tools like Cadence SoC Encounter to get a more
accurate result. Achieving power consumption statistics requires an additional level of
effort by simulating the design and putting it through additional power estimation tools
such as Synopsys Nanosim, or HSPICE.
In the following subsections, a tool is described based on a power macromodeling
technique that calculates a power estimate at a much higher level during the design
automation process of the RFID compiler. The tool generates a behavioral representation
of the hardware that generates a custom simulator for the controller design generated by
the RFID compiler. Through access to a preproﬁled library of blocks in the target CMOS
process, the power consumption can be estimated 100 times faster than the fastest
ASIC power estimation ﬂows. Thus, the user has near instantaneous feedback about the
power consumption of their design without detailed knowledge of ASIC synthesis
and power estimation ﬂows.
11.3.1
Power Macromodeling Framework
Power macromodeling was originally proposed by Gupta and Najm as a fast power
estimation technique that considers the impact of different input combinations on the
circuit [5]. This technique has been shown to be far more accurate than static power
estimation methods that do not consider design input values. Power macromodeling has
Convert to
RFID macros
RFID
specification
Behavior
template
Include RFID
behavior
Commercial
synthesis
flow
Hardware-
based RFID
tag
RFID parser
rfpp
RFID compiler
VHDL
C
Embedded
C compiler
Microprocessor-
based RFID
tag
rfcc
FIGURE 11.11
RFID high-level speciﬁcation methodology and compilation ﬂow.
208
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

been proposed for a variety of purposes including high-level synthesis of circuits for
minimal power consumption [6,7]. Power macromodeling discretizes the components
used to build up the circuit into functional blocks that can be implemented and analyzed
for their power consumption based on different input stimuli. These results are then
compiled into a look-up table of power consumption based on different characteristics of
the input stimuli. During a behavioral simulation of the system, rather than computing the
power consumption of the block based on the simulated inputs, a table look-up is per-
formed to determine the power value at a signiﬁcant savings in time and effort.
An overview of our power macromodeling ﬂow used in our RFID compilation ﬂow is
shown in Figure 11.12. The SystemC generation occurs just before VHDL generation
(Figure 11.11). The RFID compiler reads the RFID protocol description, including the
RFID macros and their corresponding behavioral in C and automatically generates a
system level simulator for the tag in the SystemC language.
SystemC is a hardware description language built using Cþþ libraries that include facilities
for discrete event simulation, concurrency, ﬁxed-width bit vectors, and block-based design,
among others. As it is at heart a Cþþ program, a SystemC description of the hardware design
is compiled into an executable custom simulator for that particular hardware design [8].
SystemC is particularly appropriate for power macromodeling as the power table and esti-
mation behavior can be seamlessly integrated into the simulator through Cþþ code. Add-
itionally, the ﬁnal simulator is typically fast as the simulator is a compiled binary rather than
an interpreted simulation of other hardware description languages.
After the SystemC simulator is generated, it is compiled into a binary using a software
compiler. Probabilistic input test vectors are then automatically generated for use in
simulation. The compilation ﬂow executes the simulation and generates annotated trace
ﬁles with information about all the functional units in the design. These functional units
have been preproﬁled for power based on input parameters described in more detail in
Section 11.3.2. The power estimation of each RFID primitive and the overall tag design are
calculated by combining the trace information with the proﬁles to determine each unit’s
power, which is aggregated. The resultant power estimates correspond to the actual
activity of the tag behavior in hardware.
SuperCISC compiler
SystemC generation
Compilation
Simulation
Power estimation
Library
Power optimization
SystemC model
Executable simulator
Trace file
C behaviors
RFID compiler
RFID macros
RFID AST
Super data flow graphs
FIGURE 11.12
Power
macromodeling
ﬂow.
Before
VHDL code generation in Figure 11.11,
this ﬂow generates a SystemC model to
allow power analysis. The user changes
the
speciﬁcation
until
an
acceptable
power result is achieved, and then Figure
11.11 resumes at VHDL generation.
Minimum Energy=Power Considerations
209

11.3.2
Library of Power Proﬁles
Three parameters of input signals can be used to accurately estimate power dissipated in
digital circuits, as suggested by other authors [5,9,10]. They are: average input signal
probability, p, average transition density, d, and spatial correlation, s. Transition density
represents the frequency of bit changes between two or more values in sequence. Signal
probability describes the number of 1s to appear within a value. Spatial correlation
describes the likelihood for 1s and 0s to appear in groups within the value.
All the types of functional units used by the RFID compiler for hardware generation,
such as adders, multiplexers, etc., have been power proﬁled with different values of p, d,
and s. These have been used to construct a library of power proﬁles.* We used the Markov
chain-based sequence generator described by Liu and Papaefthymiou [12], which converts
the probabilistic p, d, and s values into an actual sequence of test vectors for use in
simulation. Measurements were taken at 0.1 intervals ranging from 0.05 to 0.95 in each
probabilistic dimension. The functional units are synthesized using 0.16 mm Oki cell-based
ASIC technology. The synthesis was executed with Synopsys Design Compiler and the
power was estimated using Synopsys PrimePower.
The power consumption for an adder proﬁled as described earlier is displayed in Figure
11.13. This chart plots power versus p, d, and s. Power is indicated as a grayscale between
black and white where white represents the least power consumed by the device and black
indicates the most power consumed by the device. From Figure 11.13, it can be seen that the
most power is consumed by the adder when spatial correlation is low and transition density
is high. This shows that using transition density, d, alone for dynamic power optimization
can be insufﬁcient, although it is often considered the only metric of interest.
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
s
0.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
d
p
0.2
0.0
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
FIGURE 11.13
Four-dimensional plot of p, d, and s versus power for an adder synthesized as 0.16 mm OKI ASIC.
* The power proﬁles were originally published in Jones et al. [11].
210
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

11.3.3
SystemC Simulator Construction
The SystemC simulator construction is completed in two phases. In the ﬁrst phase, the
user-speciﬁed C behaviors that correspond to the different RFID primitives are converted
into SystemC designs. The compiler translates each super data ﬂow graph (SDFG) into a
behavioral SystemC design.* This uses a SystemC abstract syntax tree (AST) for the
intermediate representation, which contains data structures that behave according to
the SystemC speciﬁcation.
In the second phase, the compiler generates the simulator framework for the entire tag,
which includes the unpacking, decode, and packing logic. The compiler uses the informa-
tion in the input macros ﬁle along with the SystemC AST data structures to generate this.
The SystemC hardware blocks generated in the ﬁrst phase are instantiated in the design for
the complete tag simulator. Trace instructions are added to the design, which save infor-
mation about the functional units associated with changing signal values. The simulator is
made by compiling the SystemC design.
11.3.4
Power Estimation
The power macromodeling ﬂow automatically generates probabilistic input test vectors
for use in the tag simulation. It uses the Markov chain-based sequence generator, discussed
in Section 11.3.2, to generate test vectors with p, d, and s values that are evenly distributed
in the three-dimensional space. Since the actual commands issued by the RFID reader may
be unknown at the time of simulation, sequences with all possible statistics are applied to
the tag simulation. However, while designing tags for a given RFID system, the user may
be able to predetermine the expected workloads generated by the RFID reader. The user
can use these input vectors instead of the probabilistic vectors for designing tags that are
power optimized for the actual workloads.
When the simulation is executed, a trace ﬁle is generated with the program execution
statistics. If the signal values at a functional unit change, a trace instruction records the
unit’s identiﬁcation number and its signal values. During power estimation, each trace
instruction is read and the module power is constructed behaviorally. The power estima-
tion is illustrated using a simple example module, as shown in Figure 11.14.
The energy calculation for the module is based on the energy consumed by each of the
functional units. In the example, this consists of an adder, an equivalence checker, a
selector, and logical not. Consider the adder unit. Based on its inputs, the p, d, and s values
* An SDFG is an extension of the more common control and data ﬂow graph (CDFG), where basic blocks have
been merged by converting control edges into data edges using hardware predication [13,14].
+
==
mux
!
S
FIGURE 11.14
Example module. Energy of the module is based on the energy of each of
the individual functional units addition, equivalence, multiplexer, and
logical not.
Minimum Energy=Power Considerations
211

are computed using the technique described by Liu and Papaefthymiou [12]. For the inputs
(0,1), the computed p, d, and s values are 0.017, 0.031, and 0.061. The power consumed by
the adder for these values is obtained by looking up the library, and is 1.14 3 106 W. The
corresponding energy is calculated as the power multiplied by the time spent in executing
the add operation. Similarly, the power consumed by the equivalence operator, logical not
operator, and the multiplexer units are 1.09 3 106, 1.22 3 106, and 1.14 3 106 W, respect-
ively. The energy of the module is constructed by aggregating the individual energies.
Energy is averaged over the simulation time to calculate power.
11.3.5
Results
We compared our power macromodeling approach with generating a design and power
proﬁling it with existing tools. The ﬂow we compared with was design synthesis using
Synopsys Design Compiler and power proﬁling by simulating the design in Mentor
Graphics ModelSim to generate switching information and power estimation using
Synopsys PrimePower.
Table 11.3 shows the run times and power estimated with the power macromodeling
technique and the traditional power estimation method for the collection command from
ISO 18000 Part 7 and the query command from ISO 18000 Part 6C standards. These
commands have similar functionality but use a signiﬁcantly different protocol. As can be
seen from the table, the power consumption is estimated to be very similar between both
techniques, and shows the signiﬁcant advantage of collection over query for power.
However, the calculation time was improved by 267 times and 99 times, respectively.
For full tag designs, this technique provides an answer in seconds, whereas the other
technique can take minutes or hours.
11.4
Combining Passive and Active Technologies
There are many applications that require the capability of an active RFID tag but the
application is such that battery replacement is at least inconvenient, if not impossible. To
solve this problem we have developed an active tag architecture, as shown in Figure 11.15.
The goal is a tag system with essentially inﬁnite battery shelf life and an active battery
life essentially equal to that of the tag. The overall architecture for such a tag is given in
Figure 11.15. This architecture is referred to as a passive active radio frequency identiﬁca-
tion tag (PART). The system contains passive energy receiver called the burst switch
connected to the active transceiver. When RF energy is received on the passive receiver it
TABLE 11.3
Power Macromodeling versus Traditional Method
Primitives
Collection
Query
Power Macromodeling
Power (W)
3.42E  06
1.68E  04
Time (s)
0.12
0.41
Traditional Method
Power (W)
2.98E  06
1.14E  04
Time (s)
32.12
40.71
Times Speedup
267
99
212
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

activates the active transceiver. This is described in more detail in Section 11.4.1. Once the
active transceiver is activated, the smart buffer keeps the main processing controller asleep
until it is needed for processing an incoming packet. The smart buffer is described in
Section 11.4.2. The controller may be a microprocessor, an ASIC, or even an FPGA,
depending on the particular application.
The operation of this architecture is as follows. When the tag is not interrogated the
battery power to the transceiver and smart buffer will be disconnected and the controller
will be in the sleep mode if processor or SRAM FPGA based or disconnected from power if
ASIC or Flash FPGA based. When a group of tags is to be interrogated the passive
transceiver burst switch supplies power to the transceiver and smart buffer. If the particu-
lar tag is interrogated, the smart buffer awakens or supplies power to the controller and the
controller interprets the interrogation and issues the appropriate reply. The controller then
returns to the sleep or off mode and power is disconnected from the smart buffer and
transceiver.
11.4.1
Burst Switch
There exists a class of devices for converting RF energy into a direct current (DC) potential
using a circuit such as that shown in Figure 11.16. In other areas, the circuit has been used
to provide DC power to operate remote autonomous devices that have no on-board power
supply. In the case of the PART, a battery is used to power the device. The particular
application used as an illustration is when the PART is to be attached to the asset for a long
Transceiver
Smart buffer
Passive energy
receiver
Passive
transceiver
switch
Controller
Passive active RFID tag (PART) system
FIGURE 11.15
Overview of the ultra low-power active RFID tag.
Parasitic
cap.
Currently wake-up
pin is here
Voltage
sensor
Vdd
Wake-up
pin
FIGURE 11.16
Simple generic burst switch.
Minimum Energy=Power Considerations
213

period of time but requires no maintenance. Thus, the battery life must be extended to a
maximum—likely the life of the asset being tagged.
Many commercial CMOS (silicon) devices are equipped with a form of sleep circuitry
with current draw at a minimum during sleep. An external input signal is used to wake up
the device. As an example, the burst switch circuit of Figure 11.16 is used to wake up a
microcontroller.
The generic burst switch implementation has been shown to wake up the microcontrol-
ler as designed for a prototype of the PART [15]. However, the use of the switch requires
considerably more design and analysis to avoid false wake-up states and insure function-
ality under adverse conditions. Some of these conditions may be analyzed using RF test
equipment such as a real time spectrum analyzer (RTSA) from Tektronix. This equipment
is in particular very useful in measuring low signal levels such as backscatter from
traditional passive ISO 18000 Part 6C tags, as shown in Figure 11.17.
11.4.1.1
Characterization of the Receiver Enable Input Pin
It is important to match the burst switch to the Receiver Enable Circuitry, as seen by the
output of the charge pump. The ISO 18000, Part 7 Standard for active RFID allows for a
30 kHz wake-up tone to wake up the tags. In the spirit of this frequency range, the
characterization of the Receiver Enable Input (REI) Pin was completed at 50 and 25 kHz.
The actual circuitry inside the chip is nonlinear. However, an approximate identiﬁcation of
the circuit was an inductor in the range of 1–10 mH. Other chips can be expected to have
variations of this or in fact act as capacitors.
T
Query
TAG: RN16
ACK
TAG: {PC, EPC}
FIGURE 11.17
ISO 18000 Part 6C interrogator=tag communications exchange.
214
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

The important point here is that it is necessary to ﬁrst characterize the REI pin as a part of
the design procedure. It is believed that the tuning at the input is necessary to essentially
provide a resonant tank to the extent possible so as not to deliver any energy to any
circuitry on the chip itself, that is, the burst switch is to function as a signaling device, and
any energy harvesting that is likely to take place would decrease the response speed
and possibly degrade the bandwidth in some manner.
11.4.1.2
Extended Low-Power Logic
One of the difﬁculties with the simple RF wake-up circuit is that spurious RF energy (noise)
could potentially waken the sleeping device. Thus, it may be necessary to interface a low-
power or passive circuit (essentially a ﬁlter) between the RF switch and the higher power
consuming receiver, as shown in Figure 11.17.
The low-power circuit (ﬁlter) of Figure 11.18 could be any low-power device that could
either operate off of harvested energy or be turned on for a short period of time, increment
counters, and go back to sleep. In effect, this device acts like a receiver. A watch dog timer
may be used to reset the device after extended noisy periods or after long intervals of
inactivity.
An alternative embodiment to the switch is a parallel implementation that will include
multiple switches of differing frequencies where logic can be performed with the switches.
All of the logical conditions of AND, OR, etc., are candidates with the implementation
being the key problem. One such implementation is two switches in series where the
combined voltages at two frequencies are required to turn on the device. This particular
embodiment is especially interesting as it is totally passive, thus not reducing the shelf life
of the battery.
11.4.1.3
Results
To verify the burst switch capability, the burst switch was prototyped on a PC Board and
tested using a Samsys RFID reader to generate pulses of RF energy to be recognized by the
burst switch [16]. The system was tested using a RTSA from Tektronix, whose output is
shown in Figure 11.19. This test was taken with the reader at a distance of 1 m from the tag.
Burst
switch
Low-power
circuit
(filter) 
Higher
power
circuit
FIGURE 11.18
Low-power ﬁlter to avoid false wake-up from RF
noise.
FIGURE 11.19
Burst switch veriﬁcation with a real-time spectrum analyzer.
Minimum Energy=Power Considerations
215

In this plot, time is on the Y-axis and frequency is on the X-axis. The RTSA has a color
output and power is indicated by a color gradient. The burst switch activation can be seen
in a column near the right at a frequency of approximately 933 MHz. The responses are
shown on the left in a column with slightly less intensity at approximately 433 MHz. The
white box indicates a burst switch activation that triggered a tag response. The lighter
columns are radio interference that occur at low intensity within the lab and are not related
to the experiment.
The power consumption savings for the burst switch is highly dependent on the scenario
when the tag is used. When the burst switch is used in a hardware-based receiver or
software-base receiver [17], the energy consumption of the device is due to the time when
the active transceiver is powered. For a nano Tag, or a tag whose sole function is when
queried to respond with its unique ID, the number of tag accesses determines the lifetime
of the battery. For a 100 mA h battery, 1 access per day would last well over 2000 years,
10 accesses per day would last 281 years, and 100 accesses per day would last 28 years [17].
In actuality, the battery would breakdown well before the energy of the battery would be
exhausted.
11.4.1.4
Scenarios
The potential impact of the burst switch on energy dissipation in a network was evaluated
on a ZigBee sensor network [18]. ZigBee networks are low-power two-way wireless
networks intended for embedded consumer electronics [19]. Although this is not an actual
RFID communication network, many of the transactions are similar and it can provide
insights into how an RFID network can beneﬁt from the burst switch.
The particular ZigBee conﬁguration tested consisted of temperature sensors connected to
routers, which in turn were connected to the coordinator. The temperature sensors in
the network periodically take a temperature reading and then broadcast that reading to
the router controlling them. The router averages the readings and sends the average
temperature to the coordinator. The coordinator processes and communicates the tem-
perature information to the outside world. The router can also request the temperature at
any time by transmitting the temperature request command.
In this scenario, only the temperature sensors are of interest for evaluating energy
consumption. Two cases were considered. Both cases assume that a protocol is setup so
that each command or command type has a different length. We used the software receiver
to distinguish between the commands [17].
In the ﬁrst case, a normal active RF receiver is a component of the temperature sensor. In
the second case, the receiver consists of a burst switch acting as a front end and a
microprocessor that analyzes the signals detected by the burst switch. Since the two
commands differ in length, the burst switch can be easily substituted in place of the active
receiver.
The temperature sensors are designed such that the only command they receive is the
temperature request command. When a burst of RF energy long enough to be the tem-
perature request command is observed the temperature sensors can take appropriate
action. In this case, they take a temperature reading and transmit that reading to the
router. With an appropriate anticollision protocol, the transmission of multiple tempera-
ture readings to the router is regulated to prevent collisions. The sensors were modeled via
a Markov process, as shown in Figure 11.20.
This Markov model is identical in structure for both cases, with the energy consumption
portion of the model being different. With the models as a basis, the energy consumed by
each network for a period of 1 day was determined to be as shown, as in Table 11.4. Using
the burst switch receiver in place of the active receiver, the energy consumed by the burst
216
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

switch-based sensor was approximately 56% lower than that of the sensor with the
RF receiver.
11.4.2
Smart Buffer
Broadcasting is the only communication method between RFID readers and tags. How-
ever, RFID technology uses not only broadcast RFID commands but also point-to-point
(P2P) commands speciﬁed in ISO 18000 Part 7 and ANSI 256 active RFID standards. For
broadcast RFID commands such as Collection or Collection with Data in ISO
18000 Part 7, an RFID reader broadcasts this type of commands to all RFID tags and they
wake up and respond associated information back to the reader. For P2P commands such
as Sleep or User ID access in ISO 18000-7, the RFID reader broadcasts this type of
command to all RFID tags even though it attempts to access only one of the tags. All tags
wake up and process the incoming command. However, only one of the tags needs to
respond with the associated information and the rest of the tags ignore the incoming
command. For those tags ignoring the incoming command, on-tag controllers dissipate
energy for receiving and dropping commands.
To reduce the power consumption of the embedded processor-based tag, it is necessary
to decrease the time when the processor is active. Therefore, an RF transceiver coprocessor
was created to manage buffering messages to and from the transceiver and activating the
processor for responding to RFID primitives when necessary. Thus, the RF transceiver
coprocessor or smart buffer (see Figure 11.15) allows the embedded processor to sleep or
stay in a low-power idle mode while any nonrelevant packet arriving at the RFID tag is
Idle
I
Receive
message
R
Take
Reading
S
Transmit
reading
T
No event
Detect
preamble
Message
receive
Time to take a
reading
Take and
process reading
Transmit
reading
FIGURE 11.20
Markov process of the temperature
sensor model.
TABLE 11.4
Energy Consumed by a Sensor Network with
and without a Burst Switch
Network model
Energy Consumed (kJ)
Without burst switch
150.9
With burst switch
65.8
Minimum Energy=Power Considerations
217

ignored, and when valid packets arrive, the smart buffer must also wake up the processor
to respond appropriately [20,21].
The amount of power savings allowed by the smart buffer is highly dependent on the
scenario. First, the smart buffer must consume less power than the active tag controller,
which is supported by the data shown in Section 11.4.2.10. Second, the amount of power
savings depends on how many successful accesses the tag receives on average, how long
the processor is active, etc. We examine several scenarios and the smart buffer impact in
Section 11.4.2.11. As seen in Section 11.4.2.10, the power savings from the smart buffer can
be several orders of magnitude for the microprocessor-based tag.
11.4.2.1
Algorithm for RF Transceiver Coprocessor
The conceptual ﬂow in Figure 11.21 shows the mechanism for the RF transceiver copro-
cessor, that is, the smart buffer. In the ﬁrst four states on the left of the ﬁgure, the smart
buffer veriﬁes the message preamble and buffers the incoming packet. The smart buffer
then checks to see if the packet was intended for this particular tag. The processor is not
used to make the check, it is done in hardware while the processor remains idle or asleep.
As a result, only the smart buffer consumes power. If the incoming packet is invalid, the
smart buffer will ignore it and go back to the sleep state.
If the incoming packet is identiﬁed as an intended packet for the Tag, by matching
the tag ID or group ID from the packet, the smart buffer will wake up the processor
FIGURE 11.21
Conceptual ﬂow of the smart buffer.
Listen
Check
Receive
preamble
Noise/
not valid
preamble
Check
Valid
preamble
Receive
Manchester
code
Error — not
match timing
constraint
Check
Analyze
packet 
Check tag ID
Check group ID
Not intended
for me
Proc
read
Wake-up
processor
Send interrupt
Proc
write
Transfer data
to processor
Generate
preamble
Preamble
Generate
Manchester
code
Man-
chester
Done
Smart buffer
back to listen
218
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

to process the packet. The processor reads data from the smart buffer and responds
correspondingly.
After the processor writes response data back to the smart buffer, the smart buffer generates
a bit stream of data consisting of a preamble signal and the response data with Manchester
coding. It is at this point that the processor returns to the low-power mode. On completion of
sending the packet response, the smart buffer returns to listening for the next preamble.
Figure 11.22 depicts the top-level diagram of the smart buffer. The smart buffer has four
I=O pins to the RF front end circuit. The blocks described in Figure 11.22 are enumerated as
follows:
Preamble Removal Unit: Detects the incoming preamble signal and differentiates
between signals intended for tags and readers.
Manchester Decoder: Converts Manchester code into binary values.
Preamble Generator: Generates the Manchester code for the tag response.
Packet Analysis Unit: Detects ID ﬂags to determine whether to wake up the processor.
Interrupt Process Unit: Generates an interrupt to the processor.
Processor Control Command Unit: Communicates data to and from the processor.
Air Interface Unit: Communicates data to and from the air interface.
Embedded
microprocessor
Control
command
CPU
Control
Interrupt
Data
command
RFID tag
side
Smart
Buffer
Smart buffer—top-level diagram
Tx enable
Rx enable
Tx line
Rx line
I/O
control
command unit
Input FIFO
Output FIFO
Owner ID registers
(3 bytes) ISO standard
Group ID register
(1 byte) ANSI standard
Preamble
generator
Manchester
Air interface
Tx
Tx Enable
Rx Enable
Rx
RF front
end circuit
Air Interface
control
Preamble
remove unit
Manchester
decoder
Packet analysis unit
(Match Tag ID, Owner
ID, Group ID)
encoder
Air
interface
4 bit
8 bit
Interrupt
Interrupt
process unit
1 bit
Data
PIO1
FIGURE 11.22
Top-level block diagram for the smart buffer architecture.
Minimum Energy=Power Considerations
219

11.4.2.2
Preamble Removal Unit
The preamble removal unit detects a valid incoming preamble signal. It receives bit stream
data from the RF front end circuit. These digital bit stream data are converted from an
analog signal the RF circuitry receives from the antenna. However, because the input signal
is analog, a signal may be due to noise rather than a preamble. Therefore, the smart buffer
has the ability to tolerate noise and only recognize the valid preamble signal. The speciﬁ-
cation of the preamble signal is deﬁned in the ANSI and ISO standards [22,23].
The preamble signal begins with a series of pulses with 30 ms high followed by 30 ms
low. Every preamble signal, regardless of whether it has originated from a tag or a reader,
has 20 of these regular pulses. These 20 regular pulses are followed by the ﬁnal sync pulse,
which determines whether a tag or reader originated the preamble. If an RFID packet
comes from a tag, the ﬁnal sync pulse is 42 ms high and 54 ms low. If an RFID packet comes
from a reader, the ﬁnal sync pulse is 54 ms high and 54 ms low. The smart buffer can ignore
RFID packets that come from other tags by checking the length of the ﬁnal sync pulse. It
will only focus on RFID packets from interrogators as long as the sync pulse is 54=54
pattern. Other packets are not buffered.
The implementation of the preamble removal unit uses four times oversampling within
each 30 ms period for each pulse. The design uses counters to count the sampling period.
The difference in the sync pulse can be detected by counting for how many samples the
ﬁnal signal is high, 5 for tags and 7 for readers.
11.4.2.3
Manchester Decoder
The Manchester decoder translates the Manchester encoded data immediately following a
valid preamble. It is the block for ﬁltering and buffering incoming RFID packets. The
decoder extracts a bit stream of nonreturn to zero (NRZ) data from the encoded data.
The Manchester code combines the concept of clock with synchronous data into a single
serial data stream, as shown in Figure 11.23. In order to enforce synchronization, Man-
chester code contains a transition in the middle of each Manchester bit. The Manchester bit
Clock
Data
Manchester
1
3
5
1
0
0
18 µs 
b1
b2
b3
b4
2
4
0
1
FIGURE 11.23
Example of Manchester encoding.
220
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

represents zero (0) NRZ data if this transition is from high to low. Similarly, the Manches-
ter bit represents one (1) NRZ data if the transition is from low to high. By representing
data with a guaranteed transition for each bit, slight discrepancies of timing can be
tolerated without disrupting the communicated data. The timing speciﬁcation of the
Manchester code is deﬁned in the ISO and ANSI standards.
The Manchester decoder block converts eight serial decoded data bits into a parallel 8-bit
datum (e.g., byte). In addition, the Manchester code contains a ninth bit for synchroniza-
tion, which is always 0. This is called a stop-bit, and is removed during decoding. Each
byte is stored in an output FIFO shown in Figure 11.22. When the decoder detects the ﬁnal
bit of an RFID packet, it stops storing data into the FIFO and asserts the end of packet
(EOP) signal to the interrupt process unit. Based on the analysis result, the interrupt
process unit determines if it is necessary to wake up the processor.
11.4.2.4
Packet Analysis Unit
Based on the header information obtained from the RFID packet, the packet analysis unit
attempts to determine the speciﬁc characteristics of this particular packet needed to decide
whether to wake up the processor for response generation. These elements include (1) the
primitive operation code (or opcode), (2) the tag id for which the packet is intended, and (3)
some other distinguishing information or id from the packet.
Both the ISO and ANSI standards have their own algorithms for tags to identify RFID
packets. Therefore, the packet analysis unit has the ability to switch between these two
algorithms seamlessly. For example, if the tag travels to Europe or Asia where the RFID
system follows the ISO standard, the smart buffer can perceive that it is being accessed by
ISO primitives. However, if the tag returns to the United States, it would switch over to
recognizing ANSI commands.
For broadcast commands, both standards allow partitioning of the tags into different
bins with a unique identiﬁer where a logical bin can contain an unlimited number of tags.
This is accomplished by assigning that unique id to each tag contained within the bin. In
ISO this is called the Owner ID and for ANSI the Group ID. For P2P commands, a Tag ID is
used to distinguish the destination tag.
The packet analysis algorithms are summarized in Tables 11.5 and 11.6. In both stand-
ards, commands are segregated into broadcast commands (B) and P2P commands. If the
tag receives an ISO broadcast command, it always responds if no Owner ID is set within
the tag. If an Owner ID is set, the tag only responds if an Owner ID is included in the
command and it matches the stored Owner ID. For ANSI, broadcast commands are
subdivided between 3 opcodes, 30, 16, and 35. If the opcode is either 16 or 35, the tag
always responds. If the opcode is 30, the tag only responds if the internal Group ID
TABLE 11.5
Packet Analysis Algorithm for the ISO Standard
Input
Output
B=P2P
Owner ID ﬁeld
Owner ID in tag
Process Command
B
No
No
Yes
B
No
Yes
No
B
Yes
No
Yes
B
Yes
Yes
If Owner ID matches
P2P
No
No
If Tag ID matches
P2P
No
Yes
If Tag ID matches
P2P
Yes
No
If Tag ID matches
P2P
Yes
Yes
If Tag ID and Owner ID match
Minimum Energy=Power Considerations
221

matches the primitive Group ID. ANSI speciﬁes that a stored Group ID of zero (0) always
results in a match. For P2P commands, both standards require a Tag ID match. However,
ISO requires that the Owner ID must match as well as the Tag ID for P2P commands with
an Owner ID present in both the tag and the command.
Once the packet analysis unit veriﬁes that the packet requires a response, it sends a
signal to the interrupt process unit to process the packet stored in the FIFO. Because the
packet analysis occurs in parallel with the packet buffering, a signal can be sent to the
interrupt unit before the entire packet is buffered. If the packet does not require processing
it is dropped from the FIFO. This prevents the processor from being powered up unless it is
needed to process the packet.
11.4.2.5
Interrupt Process Unit
The interrupt process unit will wake up the processor only when a whole RFID packet has
been stored into the output FIFO and the analysis result forwarded by the packet analysis
unit is positive. Figure 11.24 shows the state diagram for the interrupt procedure. The
interrupt process unit will go back to the idle state after sending an interrupt signal to
the processor.
11.4.2.6
Command Control Unit
The command control unit (Figure 11.25) fetches control commands from the processor,
such as read and write data to FIFO, update Tag ID or Group=Owner ID, starts the
transmission procedure, and so forth. For processor compatibility, it was desirable to
minimize the number of lines between the processor and the smart buffer. Thus, four (4)
parallel lines are used to communicate the processor to buffer command control.
The processor to smart buffer commands are illustrated in Figure 11.25. After waking up
the processor, the smart buffer listens for the processor to initiate commands for data
communication. As shown in Figure 11.25, the control unit decodes 4 bit processor
commands into ﬁve basic operations: transmit, update, push, pull, and null. The double
circle represents a potentially multicycle operation.
Based on different control commands, the unit determines the direction of the bidirec-
tional smart buffer, processor interface. In Figure 11.25, dir = 0 represents that the
direction of I/O is from processor to smart buffer and dir = 1 is the reverse. Because the
smart buffer and processor are operated in two different clock domains, a handshaking
communication approach is required to push/pull data to/from the FIFOs. Therefore, it is
TABLE 11.6
Packet Analysis Algorithm
for the ANSI Standard
Input
Output
Opcode
Process Command
30
If Group ID matcha
16
Yes
35
Yes
P2P
If Tag ID match
a Group ID match always occurs if the
currently stored group ID within the
tag is zero.
222
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

necessary to dedicate more than one cycle to transmit a single byte of data between the
processor and FIFO.
Once the processor has generated a response and completed pushing the response data
into the FIFO, it sends the transmit command. This signals the smart buffer to generate
Idle
Back
Not finished storing RFID packet or
negative packet-analysis result
Finished storing RFID packet and
positive packet-analysis result
Send an interrupt to the
embedded microprocessor
Set interrupt low
Interrupt
FIGURE 11.24
Interrupt ﬁnite state machine.
Sleep
Mode
Halt
Read an RFID
packet from the
output FIFO
Be interrupted  
Interrupt
procedure call
Execute
Execute an
RFID command
Response
Respond to an
RFID command 
Go back to
sleep mode
Embedded microprocessor
Fetch
Null
Transmit
Update
Push
Pull
Microprocessor to
smart buffer
commands
dir = 0
dir = 0
dir = 0
dir = 0
dir = 0
dir = 1
FIGURE 11.25
Fetch and operation diagram for the command control unit.
Minimum Energy=Power Considerations
223

the preamble signal, convert data in the FIFO to a serial data stream, and encode the bit
stream data in Manchester coding.
11.4.2.7
Preamble Generator
According to the ISO and ANSI standards, the preamble generator generates a preamble
signal with 20 pulses of 60 ms, 30 ms high and 30 ms low, followed by the ﬁnal sync pulse.
Due to this RFID packet generated from a tag, the ﬁnal sync pulse is 42 ms high and 54 ms
low. The preamble generator uses several counters to trace the period of time for each
pulse. These counters are running with the smart buffer system clock at 33 MHz. Therefore,
the preamble signal will be skewed less than 1 ms requiring the reader to tolerate an error
of þ/ 3.3%.
In order to help the receiver ﬁlter out an ambient noise in the air, a mark state, or a stable
logic low signal for 120 ms is generated and transmitted just before the preamble signal.
While the preamble generator creates the mark state and preamble signal, the air interface
unit forces the rx_enable signal low and raises the tx_enable signal.
When the ﬁnal sync pulse is transmitted, the preamble generator informs the Manchester
encoder to begin to output its serial-encoded data immediately. Any signiﬁcant gap
between data and the preamble signal may cause an error, which may not be tolerated
in the system.
11.4.2.8
Manchester Encoder
The Manchester encoder starts encoding the data in the input FIFO after it is notiﬁed by the
preamble generator. This notiﬁcation occurs during the transmission of the ﬁnal sync pulse
to give the encoder enough time to have the ﬁrst byte of data ready. First, the Manchester
encoder converts the next available byte in the FIFO to eight (8) single serial bits. Those
eight (8) bits are individually stored in single-bit shift registers. In addition, a stop bit needs
to be appended for each byte of data in the shift registers.
The Manchester encoded data is the output of an NRZ data XOR coding clock shown in
Figure 11.23. The NRZ data is synchronized with the coding clock. According to the
speciﬁcation of ISO and ANSI standards, the period of coding clock is 36 ms; 18 ms high
and 18 ms low. This clock signal is generated in the Manchester encoder block. The
Manchester encoder combines the coding clock and serial data, as shown in Figure 11.26.
FIGURE 11.26
Top-level diagram for the Manchester
encoder.
Input FIFO
Encode
Coding clock
generator
Manchester
encoded data
Stop bit
Shift registers
Current
8 bit data
Next 8 bit data
224
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

11.4.2.9
Air Interface Unit
The air interface unit has two output control signals, tx_enable and rx_enable. Since
the smart buffer defaults to listening for incoming signals from the air, the rx_enable
signal is set high and tx_enable signal is set low at all times, except when the smart
buffer is ready to transmit an RFID response packet back to readers.
11.4.2.10
Results
The smart buffer was prototyped on the Spartan 3 FPGA as well as studied for ASIC
implementation using 0.16 mm OKI standard cells. Although it was possible to implement
FIFO blocks on the Spartan 3 FPGAs using Xilinx IP blocks, ASIC versions of these FIFOs
were not available. In order to study the impact of having the smart buffer in an ASIC
versus the Spartan 3 FPGA, three components were separated from the larger design and
synthesized and power proﬁled independently. These blocks include the preamble detec-
tion, a 30 kHz wake-up signal detection, and the Manchester decoder.
The results for power estimation of the ASIC and Spartan 3-based smart buffer com-
ponents are displayed in Table 11.7. Both power analyses are based on post synthesis
simulation with the exact same stimuli. The FPGA power results were computed using
Xilinx Xpower, and the ASIC power results were calculated using Synopsys PrimePower.
Based on the results from Table 11.7, the ASIC version of the implementation uses orders of
magnitude less dynamic power for all three components. Interestingly, the quiescent
power alone is nearly three orders magnitude greater than the dynamic power of the ASIC.
11.4.2.11
Scenarios
In order to analyze the power dissipation of each tag in detail, two different Markov
process models of an RFID transaction are built: the ﬁrst shown in Figure 11.27 for a tag
with microprocessor only, which is abbreviated as the MP-mP model, and the second
shown in Figure 11.28 for a tag with a microprocessor and a smart buffer, which is
abbreviated as the MP-mP-SB model. Five states are used in both Markov process models:
S1, sleep; S2, listen for preamble; S3, receive command; S4, process command; and S5,
transmit response. By traversing those ﬁve states, both models represent the control ﬂow
of an RFID tag for a communication transaction.
During a scenario, when a tag is not participating in a transaction, the tag remains in the
sleep state, S1. After receiving a wake-up tone, it proceeds to state S2 and listens for the
preamble signal. The transition from S2 to S3 occurs when a tag receives a valid preamble
and is ready to receive the incoming command. After receiving the command, the tag
decides whether to continue processing the command (e.g., move to state S4) or return to
the listen for the preamble state (move to state S2). If the incoming command is intended
TABLE 11.7
ASIC versus FPGA Power Consumption for Portions
of the Smart Buffer
Component
Spartan 3 0.16 mm
ASIC
Wake-up signal
0.01 mW
0.001 mW
Preamble detection
0.87 mW
0.005 mW
Manchester decoder
0.95 mW
0.284 mW
Quiescent power
92 mW
0 mW
Total
93.83 mW
0.29 mW
Minimum Energy=Power Considerations
225

for the tag, it will process the command in state S4 and transmit the associated information
back to the reader in state S5. Otherwise, the tag will drop the command and move from S3
to S2. If the command received is to put the tag to sleep it transitions to the sleep state, S1.
CMD
receiving
S3
Transmission
S5
Preamble
listening
S2
Sleep
S1
CMD
processing
S4
µP (S)
µP (A)
µP (A)
µP (A)
µP(A)
p11
p12
p23
p32
p34
p44
p33
p31
p52
p45
p55
FIGURE 11.27
Markov process model for an RFID tag with an on-tag microprocessor (MP-mP model).
Transmission
S5
Sleep
S1
Preamble
listening
S2
CMD
processing
S4
µP(S)
& SB(S)
µP(S)
& SB(A)
µP(S)
& SB(A)
µP(A)
& SB(A)
µP(A)
& SB(A)
p11
p12
p23
p32
p41
p34
p44
p45
p52
CMD
receiving
S3
p33
p55
FIGURE 11.28
Markov-process model for an RFID tag with a microprocessor and a smart buffer (MP-mP-SB model).
226
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

The only difference between the transitions of the two scenarios is that for the MP-mP
scenario the transition to S1 occurs in S3 and for MP-mP-SB this transition occurs in S4. This
is because the smart buffer does not currently recognize the sleep command.
The labels mP(A) and mP(S) are used to represent that the microprocessor is in the Active
mode and Standby mode, respectively. Similarly the labels SB(A) and SB(S) in the MP-mP-
SB model represent that the smart buffer is in the Active mode and Standby mode,
respectively.
In the MP-mP model, the microprocessor is in standby in the sleep state, and active in all
other states. For many scenarios the on-tag microprocessor will dissipate energy for
receiving incoming commands that are not intended for the tag and are eventually
dropped. For example, an RFID reader sends N P2P commands equally distributed to N
RFID tags in a reachable area. For each tag, the MP-mP model in Figure 11.27 indicates that
a microprocessor will stay in a loop between states S3 and S2 for N  1 communications.
Consequently, the microprocessor dissipates energy to process N  1 extraneous commu-
nications.
In contrast, in the MP-mP-SB model the smart buffer alone becomes Active (SB(A)) while
listening for a preamble signal and receiving a command (states S2 and S3) while the
microprocessor still remains in the Standby mode (mP(S)). Thus, if the incoming command
is not destined for this tag, the microprocessor will never become active. This can result in a
power reduction of several orders of magnitude (see Section 11.4.2.10).
Based on these two models, an analysis of power dissipation is able to depict the impact
of a smart buffer to an RFID tag based on different communication patterns such as
broadcast and P2P communication. In all experimental scenarios, a general assumption is
that only one RFID reader (R0) starts the communication to a ﬁeld of RFID tags (T)
containing N tags with a wake-up signal followed by a collection broadcast command.
The reader then submits a series of k P2P commands. Finally, the reader puts all the tags to
sleep using the P2P sleep command. The duration of each experimental scenario is an hour
and each experiment is repeated 20 times and the average is taken of all trials.
The result of three different scenarios is shown in Figure 11.29. Scenario one (solid line)
sets k ¼ 1, scenario two (dashed line) sets k ¼ 50, and scenario three (dotted line) sets
k ¼ 100. Data points with þs are the microprocessor only tag and data points with os
have a smart buffer. In this scenario the P2P command selected is the set owner id
command. The average energy saved by adding the smart buffer is 82%, 88%, and 90% per
tag where N ¼ 100 for scenarios one, two, and three, respectively. As expected, as k
increases, the energy consumed by the microprocessor-based tags increases because the
microprocessor is processing every packet. In contrast, the smart buffer tags consume
approximately the same energy regardless of the number of messages because the micro-
processor is rarely activated. The increase in energy consumed by the microprocessor tags
as N increases is due to the P2P sleep commands which scales with N. The smart buffer
based tags avoid this increase with N.
11.5
Conclusions
In this chapter we have presented several techniques that apply to both passive and active
RFID systems that address and reduce power and energy consumption. In particular, we
have shown how memory capacities for passive tags can be increased by 350 times with
only a 5 time increase in power consumption. This allows a potential for greatly increased
capabilities of passive RFID system. We have shown a power macromodeling technique
that can reduce the time to determine the power consumption of a protocol by 100 times.
Minimum Energy=Power Considerations
227

This allows an opportunity for design space exploration of new protocols that considers
power as a primary metric. Finally, we have presented a combined passive and active
RFID tag that retains many of the capabilities of active RFID tags while having a signiﬁ-
cantly reduced power consumption through architectural innovation.
This chapter provides only a starting point in the thought process for designing energy-
efﬁcient RFID systems. In practice, circuit, antenna, and other various low-level design
techniques are and should be applied. The purpose of this chapter is to provide some new
directions in the thought process for RFID design. The ﬁnal product will likely consider
these low-level techniques in concert with techniques described here, possibly with new
directions yet to be discovered. However, this chapter does show that power is a metric to
be considered, and innovation is required for RFID technology to continue to be successful.
References
1. S.G. Narendra and A. Chandrakasan, Leakage in Nanometer CMOS Technologies, Springer, 2006.
2. L. Yang and J.S. Yuan. ‘‘Design of a new CMOS output buffer with low switching noise,’’
Proceedings of the International Conference on Microelectronics (ICM), pp. 131–134, 2003.
3. J.M. Rabaey, A. Chandrakasan, and B. Nikolic, Digital Integrated Circuits: A Design Perspective, 2nd
edn., Prentice Hall, 2003.
4. L. Xinquan, Y. Weixue, Ligang, and C. Yu, ‘‘A low quiescent current and reset time adjustable
power-on reset circuit,’’ Proceedings of International Conference on ASIC (ASIC), pp. 559–562, 2005.
5. S. Gupta and F.N. Najm, ‘‘Power macromodeling for high level power estimation,’’ DAC ’97:
Proceedings of the 34th Annual Conference on Design Automation, pp. 365–370, ACM Press, 1997.
6. A.K. Jones, X. Tang, and P. Banerjee, ‘‘Compile-time simulation for low-power optimization using
SystemC,’’ IASTED International Conference on Modeling and Simulation, 2004.
Energy dissipation comparison on a tag with and without smart buffer
Microprocessor-based tag + 50 p2p CMD
Microprocessor-based tag + 1 p2p CMD
Microprocessor-based tag + 100 p2p CMD
SB-based with uP tag + 1 p2p CMD
SB-based with uP tag + 50 p2p CMD
SB-based with uP tag + 100 p2p CMD
18,000
16,000
14,000
12,000
10,000
Energy dissipation for each tag in 1 h (µJ)
8,000
6,000
4,000
2,000
01
2
3
4
5
6
Number of tags (  10)
7
8
9
10
11
FIGURE 11.29
Energy impacts on a tag for point-to-point communication patterns.
228
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

7. X. Tang, T. Jiang, A. Jones, and P. Banerjee, ‘‘High-level synthesis for low power hardware
implementation of unscheduled data-dominated circuits,’’ Journal of Low Power Electronics, 1,
259–272, December 2005.
8. ‘‘Overview of the SystemC Initiative.’’ SystemC Website, www.systemc.org.
9. Z. Chen and K. Roy, ‘‘A power macromodeling technique based on power sensitivity,’’ DAC ’98:
Proceedings of the 35th Annual Conference on Design Automation, pp. 678–683, ACM Press, 1998.
10. X. Liu and M.C. Papaefthymiou, ‘‘A Markov chain sequence generator for power macro-
modeling,’’ IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems
(TCAD), July 2004.
11. A.K. Jones, R. Hoare, D. Kusic, G. Mehta, J. Fazekas, and J. Foster, ‘‘Reducing power while
increasing performance with SuperCISC,’’ ACM Transactions on Embedded Computing Systems
(TECS), 5, 1–29, August 2006.
12. X. Liu and M.C. Papaefthymiou, ‘‘A static power estimation methodology for IP-based design,’’
Design, Automation, and Test in Europe, pp. 280–287, March 2001.
13. A.K. Jones, R. Hoare, D. Kusic, J. Fazekas, and J. Foster, ‘‘An FPGA-based VLIW processor with
custom hardware execution,’’ ACM International Symposium on Field-Programmable Gate Arrays
(FPGA), pp. 107–117, 2005.
14. R. Hoare, A.K. Jones, D. Kusic, J. Fazekas, J. Foster, S. Tung, and M. McCloud, ‘‘Rapid VLIW
processor customization for signal processing applications using combinational hardware func-
tions,’’ EURASIP Journal on Applied Signal Processing, Vol. 2006, Article ID 46472, 2006.
15. A.K. Jones, R. Hoare, S. Dontharaju, S. Tung, R. Sprang, J. Fazekas, J.T. Cain, and M.H. Mickle,
‘‘An automated, FPGA-based reconﬁgurable, low-power RFID tag,’’ Proceedings of the 43rd Design
Automation Conference (DAC), pp. 131–136, ACM, July 2006.
16. A.K. Jones, S. Dontharaju, S. Tung, P.J. Hawrylak, L. Mats, R. Hoare, J.T. Cain, and M.H. Mickle,
‘‘Passive active radio frequency identiﬁcation tags (PART),’’ International Journal of Radio Fre-
quency Identiﬁcation Technology and Application (IJRFITA), 1 (1), 52–73, 2006.
17. P.J. Hawrylak, L. Mats, J.T. Cain, A.K. Jones, S. Tung, and M.H. Mickle, ‘‘Ultra low-power
computing systems for wireless devices,’’ International Review on Computers and Software (IRE-
COS), 1 (1), 1–10, 2006.
18. P.J. Hawrylak, Analysis and Development of a Mathematical Structure to Describe Energy Consumption
of Sensor Networks. PhD thesis, University of Pittsburgh, 2006.
19. ZigBee Standards Organization, ‘‘ZigBee Speciﬁcation.’’ Standard Speciﬁcation, Document
053474r13, 2006.
20. A.K. Jones, R.R. Hoare, S.R. Dontharaju, S. Tung, R. Sprang, J. Fazekas, J.T. Cain, and
M.H. Mickle, ‘‘A ﬁeld programmable RFID tag and associated design ﬂow,’’ Proceedings of
FCCM, pp. 165–174, 2006.
21. A.K. Jones, R. Hoare, S. Dontharaju, S. Tung, R. Sprang, J. Fazekas, J.T. Cain, and M.H. Mickle,
‘‘An automated, FPGA-based reconﬁgurable, low-power RFID tag,’’ Journal of Microprocessors and
Microsystems, 31, 116–134, March 2007.
22. American National Standards Institute, ‘‘ANSI NCITS 236:2001.’’ Standard Speciﬁcation, 2002.
23. International Standards Organization, ‘‘ISO/IEC FDIS 18000–7:2004(E).’’ Standard Speciﬁcation,
2004.
Minimum Energy=Power Considerations
229


12
Electromagnetic Coupling in RFID
Peter H. Cole and Damith C. Ranasinghe
CONTENTS
12.1
Introduction...................................................................................................................... 232
12.2
Outline............................................................................................................................... 232
12.3
Notation ............................................................................................................................ 232
12.4
Electromagnetic Theory .................................................................................................. 232
12.4.1 Complete Laws ................................................................................................... 232
12.4.1.1 Faraday’s Law ..................................................................................... 233
12.4.1.2 Ampere’s Law as Modiﬁed by Maxwell ......................................... 233
12.4.1.3 Gauss’ Law for the Electric Flux....................................................... 233
12.4.1.4 Gauss’ Law for the Magnetic Flux ................................................... 233
12.4.2 Source and Vortex Interpretation..................................................................... 233
12.4.3 Boundary Conditions ......................................................................................... 234
12.4.4 Demagnetizing and Depolarizing Factors ...................................................... 235
12.4.5 Retarded Potentials............................................................................................. 236
12.4.6 Reciprocity ........................................................................................................... 236
12.5
Field Creation Structures................................................................................................ 237
12.5.1 Near-Field Creation............................................................................................ 237
12.5.2 Far-Field Creation............................................................................................... 237
12.6
Measures of Label Excitation ......................................................................................... 238
12.6.1 Magnetic Field-Sensitive Antennas.................................................................. 238
12.6.2 Electric Field-Sensitive Antennas ..................................................................... 239
12.6.3 Electromagnetic Field Antennas....................................................................... 240
12.7
Coupling Relations .......................................................................................................... 240
12.7.1 Near and Far Fields............................................................................................ 240
12.7.2 Field Measures .................................................................................................... 241
12.7.3 Far-Field Operation ............................................................................................ 242
12.7.4 Power-Matching Considerations ...................................................................... 242
12.7.5 Near-Field Operation—Magnetic Field ........................................................... 243
12.7.6 Near Field—Electric Field.................................................................................. 244
12.7.7 Coupling Volume of a General Shape............................................................. 245
12.7.8 Properties of the Bow Tie Antenna.................................................................. 246
12.7.9 Comparison of Formulations ............................................................................ 246
12.8
Conclusions....................................................................................................................... 247
References.................................................................................................................................... 247
231

12.1
Introduction
Radio frequency identiﬁcation (RFID) systems are evolving rapidly as a result of (1)
increased awareness of the technology; (2) development of improved techniques for
multiple tag reading; (3) realization in the business community of the beneﬁts of wide-
spread adoption in the supply chain; (4) adoption by designers of sensible concepts in the
arrangement of data between labels and databases; (5) development of efﬁcient data-
handling methodologies in the relevant supporting communication networks; (6) apprecia-
tion of the need for cost reduction; and (7) development of new manufacturing techniques
that will achieve manufacture of billions of labels at acceptable costs. This chapter is
designed to provide support to RFID system designers in what is probably the least
understood aspect of system design, that of the electromagnetic propagation to and from
the label.
12.2
Outline
We will begin with a formal statement of the laws of electrodynamics, and use them to
derive boundary conditions that apply where ﬁelds interact with materials. Such relations
are ampliﬁed by introduction of the useful concepts of demagnetizing and depolarizing
factors. The retarded potential solutions of Maxwell’s equations and their utility in devel-
oping near and far radiated ﬁelds are developed, especially for inﬁnitesimal electric and
magnetic dipoles. A number of ﬁeld creation structures or near and far ﬁelds are illus-
trated, and label antenna parameters for use in various object geometries are illustrated.
Coupling volume theory for electric ﬁeld- and magnetic ﬁeld-sensitive antennas is devel-
oped at length and the relation to far-ﬁeld antenna theory is established. Some conclusions
about antenna optimization are drawn.
12.3
Notation
The notation and nomenclature used in this chapter for physical quantities will be as
deﬁned in ISO 1000 (ISO, 1992). Sinusoidally, varying quantities will be represented
by peak (not root-mean-square) value phasors. Lowercase variables will be used for
instantaneous values of scalars, and bold script characters for instantaneous values of ﬁeld
vectors. Uppercase variables will be used for phasors representing sinusoidally varying
quantities, and bold upright Roman characters will be used for phasors representing
sinusoidally varying ﬁeld vectors. There are some traditional exceptions to these rules
where Greek and Roman uppercase symbols do not differ sufﬁciently.
12.4
Electromagnetic Theory
12.4.1
Complete Laws
The complete laws of electrodynamics were ﬁrst assembled correctly by Maxwell in the
form enunciated in words as follows.
232
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

12.4.1.1
Faraday’s Law
The circulation of the electric ﬁeld vector E around a closed contour is equal to minus the
time rate of change of magnetic ﬂux through a surface bounded by that contour, the
positive direction of the surface being related to the positive direction of the contour by
the right-hand rule.
12.4.1.2
Ampere’s Law as Modiﬁed by Maxwell
The circulation of the magnetic ﬁeld vector H around a closed contour is equal to the sum
of the conduction current and the displacement current passing through a surface bounded
by that contour, with again the right-hand rule relating the senses of the contour and the
surface.
12.4.1.3
Gauss’ Law for the Electric Flux
The total electric ﬂux (deﬁned in terms of the D vector) emerging from a closed surface is
equal to the total conduction charge contained within the volume bounded by that surface.
12.4.1.4
Gauss’ Law for the Magnetic Flux
The total magnetic ﬂux (deﬁned in terms of the B vector) emerging from any closed surface
is zero.
With the aid of Gauss’ and Stokes’ laws of mathematics and the deﬁnitions
D ¼ «0E þ P
and
B ¼ m0(H þ M):
These laws may be expressed, when the ﬁelds are spatially continuous, in the differential
form
r  E ¼  @B
@t ,
r  H ¼ J þ @D
@t ,
r  D ¼ r,
r  B ¼ 0:
12.4.2
Source and Vortex Interpretation
We remain ﬁrmly committed to the source and vortex interpretation (Cole, 2002) of those
equations. In that interpretation, the earlier equations stated that the electric ﬁeld vector E
can have vortices caused by changing magnetic ﬂux; the magnetic ﬁeld H can have vortices
caused by conduction or displacement currents; the electric ﬂux density D can have sources
caused by conduction charge density; and the magnetic ﬂux density vector B can have no
sources.
Electromagnetic Coupling in RFID
233

In linear media, some of the statements about D and B can be extended to E and H, but
when nonuniform ﬁelds and boundaries are considered, it can be shown that E, D, and H
can have both sources and vortices, but B is alone in that it can have no sources.
Figures 12.1 and 12.2 provide archetypical illustrations of the source nature of the
electrostatic ﬁeld and the vortex nature of a magnetodynamic ﬁeld, as well as illustrations
of two of the most important boundary conditions which apply when any electric ﬁeld E or
a magnetodynamic ﬁeld H approaches a conducting surface.
12.4.3
Boundary Conditions
We have already given simpliﬁed illustrations for the most important cases of sinusoidal
electric and magnetic ﬁelds occurring adjacent to conductors.
A full statement of the electromagnetic boundary conditions is provided later. All of
those results may be derived from the statement in words of the basic laws given earlier.
What we can deduce from those laws, without taking into account the properties on any
materials involved, is that the tangential component of E is continuous across any bound-
ary; the normal component of B is continuous across such a boundary; the normal com-
ponent of D may be discontinuous across a boundary, with a discontinuity being equal to
any conduction charge density rvc per unit area on the surface; and the tangential com-
ponent of H may be discontinuous across a boundary, with the discontinuity being equal to
in magnitude and at right angles in direction to a surface current density ﬂowing on the
surface.
FIGURE 12.1
Electric ﬁeld near a conducting surface.
Charge
Conducting surface
Electric field
FIGURE 12.2
Oscillating magnetic ﬁeld near a conducting
surface.
Conducting plane
Current
Magnetic field
234
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

When we take into account the restrictions imposed by the properties of the materials
which may exist on one or other side of the boundary, we may further conclude that the
electric ﬁeld is continuous across the boundary for all materials and time variations; that
there are no electric ﬁelds or ﬂuxes, or time-varying magnetic ﬁeld or ﬂux densities inside a
good conductor; that a surface current density can exist only on the surface of a perfect
conductor; and that time-varying charge density cannot exist on the surface of a
perfect insulator although a static surface charge density can.
12.4.4
Demagnetizing and Depolarizing Factors
The theory of demagnetizing and depolarizing factors (Osborn, 1945) is useful in gaining
an appreciation of how the interior ﬁelds of an object differ from the ﬁelds exterior to that
object, and for calculating useful properties of magnetic cores.
When an ellipsoidal shape as illustrated in Figure 12.3 of dielectric or soft magnetic
material is introduced into a region in which there was previously a spatially uniform
electric ﬁeld E or magnetic ﬁeld H caused by some distribution of sources (charges or
currents), and these sources do not vary as a result, the material becomes uniformly
polarized with a polarization vector P or magnetized with a magnetization vector M.
That polarization or magnetization causes on the surface of the shape induced surface
charge densities or magnetic pole densities which make an additional contribution Ed or
Hd to the ﬁelds interior to the shape. These ﬁelds are in a direction opposite to the original
applied ﬁelds Ea or Ha and tend to depolarize or demagnetize the material, and hence
reduce (but not reverse in direction) the polarization or magnetization in the interior of the
shape. The internal ﬁelds E and H are also reduced.
The depolarizing or demagnetizing ﬁelds are given by
E d
x
E d
y
E d
z
2
4
3
5 ¼  1
«0
Nx
0
0
0
Ny
0
0
0
Nz
2
4
3
5
Px
Py
Pz
2
4
3
5,
H d
x
H d
y
H d
z
2
4
3
5 ¼ 
Nx
0
0
0
Ny
0
0
0
Nz
2
4
3
5
Mx
My
Mz
2
4
3
5,
where Nx, Ny, or Nz are known as depolarizing or demagnetizing factors. These
dimensionless constants depend on the shape of the ellipsoid, and are subjected to
the condition
Nx þ Ny þ Nz ¼ 1:
x
y
z
FIGURE 12.3
An ellipsoid of dielectric or magnetic material.
Electromagnetic Coupling in RFID
235

These constraints and relations between Nx, Ny, or Nz for certain symmetrical shapes allow
conclusions to be drawn for the cases of the sphere, a long thin rod, or a ﬂat thin desk.
12.4.5
Retarded Potentials
The retarded potentials listed later may be regarded as integral solutions for Maxwell’s
equations, which are available when charge and current distribution are known.
For the calculation of electric and magnetic ﬁelds at a point r2 caused by a distribution of
charge and current at points r1 over a volume v we may make use of the retarded
potentials:
F(r2) ¼
1
4p«0
ð
v
r(r1)ejbr12
r12
dv
and
A(r2) ¼ m0
4p
ð
v
J(r1)ejbr12
r12
dv:
The ﬁelds in the sinusoidal steady state can be derived from these potentials by the
equations
E ¼ grad F  jvA
B ¼ curl A:
These formulae may be used in the calculation of the electromagnetic ﬁelds generated by
oscillating inﬁnitesimal electric or magnetic dipoles as reported later.
12.4.6
Reciprocity
The integral form of the Lorenz reciprocity relation for two solutions E1, H1 and E2, H2 of
Maxwell’s equations in the same region and at the same angular frequency v is under
appropriate conditions
ð
S
E1  H2  E2  H1
ð
Þ  ds ¼
ð
v
J1  E2  J2  E1
ð
Þ dv
where the integral is over a closed surface S bounding a volume v. In the derivation, which
proceeds from Maxwell’s equations, it is allowed that the material parameters be charac-
terized by complex (to allow for losses) and possibly tensor (to allow for anisotropy)
dielectric permittivity and magnetic permeability, but gyromagnetic behavior of magnetic
materials is not permitted.
In certain cases, the right-hand side becomes zero. These cases include those where the
surface is a conducting surface, where the surface encloses all sources, where the surface
encloses no currents, and where currents ﬂow only by the mechanism of drift (but not by
diffusion, as in a semiconductor).
The theorem has in electromagnetic theory, and on the simpliﬁcation of electromagnetic
theory known as lumped circuit theory, some profound consequences. These include the
symmetry of impedance, admittance, and suitably deﬁned scattering matrices; the equiva-
lence of transmitting and receiving antennas; the gain of a lossless transmitting antenna
236
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

being related to effective area of the same antenna used as a receiver; and the propagation
loss from an interrogator to label being equal to propagation loss from label to receiver
when the antennas have single ports. Use of these results will be made in later sections
dealing with coupling between interrogators and labels.
12.5
Field Creation Structures
12.5.1
Near-Field Creation
We ﬁrst illustrate in Figures 12.4 and 12.5 structures which may be useful in the HF region.
Such structures can generate either electric or magnetic ﬁelds, either in the near ﬁeld, or
the midﬁeld, that being the ﬁeld at the boundary between the near ﬁeld and the far ﬁeld.
As a consequence of the value (22 m) of the electromagnetic wavelength at 13.56 MHz,
the structures are always in practice electrically small. The ﬁrst one can be considered as
creating in the near ﬁeld mainly electric ﬁeld, but as a consequence of the expressions given
earlier for dipole ﬁelds, which apply to some extent to this situation, the structures will also
create some lesser value of near magnetic ﬁeld.
In the far ﬁeld, these structures will create electric and magnetic ﬁelds in equal propor-
tion, in the sense that for radiated ﬁelds in the far ﬁeld jEj ¼ hjHj.
As HF labels often couple to magnetic ﬁelds because they are less easily stopped by
conducting materials than are electric ﬁelds, there is in fact a more common interest in the
creation of strong near-ﬁeld magnetic ﬁelds. The usual structure by means of which this is
achieved is a small current carrying loop such as is illustrated in Figure 12.5. This 250 mm
square loop has tuning and matching elements at the top end. A strip line transmission line
(not visible in the picture) on the underside of the right-hand half conveys the driving
signals from the connecting point at the center of the bottom to the driving point terminals
at the center of the top. When the loop antenna is made large such as shown for a 1.2 m
square loop in Figure 12.6, the capacitive tuning elements are best distributed around the
circumference. The balanced drive of Figure 12.5 cannot be implemented in Figure 12.6, but
other balanced drive arrangements can be made.
12.5.2
Far-Field Creation
The almost universal choice for the creation of far ﬁelds, particularly in the UHF region, is
the patch antenna which should be placed against a ground plane of sufﬁcient size to
achieve a good front to back ratio.
hW
Vertical plate
Horizontal ground plane
Angle
W
FIGURE 12.4
A monopole plate antenna above a ground plane.
(From Cole, P.H., Jamali, B., and Ranasinghe, D.,
Coupling Relations in RFID Systems, 2003 Auto-ID
Center White Paper Series, # 2003 by Auto-ID Cen-
ter. With permission.)
Electromagnetic Coupling in RFID
237

12.6
Measures of Label Excitation
An appropriate measure of tag excitation in the near ﬁeld is the oscillating reactive power
density per unit volume, and in the far ﬁeld is power propagating per unit area. At UHF,
for calculation of power transfer in the far ﬁeld, we may use the concepts of gain and
effective area as deﬁned in Section 12.7.3. At HF, we will derive power transfer from
coupling volume concepts to be deﬁned in Section 12.7.4. In those calculations, we can
recognize both electric ﬁeld-sensitive and magnetic ﬁeld-sensitive designs of label
antennas.
12.6.1
Magnetic Field-Sensitive Antennas
A common example of a magnetic ﬁeld-sensitive HF label is shown in Figure 12.7. The
label is 42 mm wide by 47 mm high. The label is designed to have sufﬁciently many turns
to provide the resonating inductance for the microcircuit input capacitance, as well as a
ﬂux-collecting area in the interior which is as large as practicable consistent with the size
requirement for the label.
Advantages of working in the near ﬁeld at HF rather than at LF are that the number of
turns required to resonate the microcircuit capacitance is small enough for low-resolution
lithography to be used in antenna construction, and no additional external resonating
capacitance is required.
Clearly the design illustrated in Figure 12.7 is unsuitable for being placed ﬂat against
metal, as the boundary conditions shown in Figure 12.2 will not allow a normal component
FIGURE 12.5
A small loop antenna.
FIGURE 12.6
A large loop antenna. (From Cole, P.H., Jamali,
B., and Ranasinghe, D., Coupling Relations in
RFID
Systems,
2003
Auto-ID
Center
White
Paper Series, # 2003 by Auto-ID Center. With
permission.)
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
Vf
H
H
R
R
A
B
x
z
y
W
238
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

of magnetic ﬂux density at the metal surface. For this situation, the label antenna employ-
ing a solenoid with a magnetic core design shown in Figure 12.8 is employed.
Section 12.7.3 describes that without the magnetic core the coupling volume, a concept
deﬁned in Section 12.7.4, of a long solenoid is just the physical volume, but when a
magnetic core is inserted, the coupling volume increases by factor equal to the effective
permeability deﬁned in that section. This behavior may be contrasted with that of electric
ﬁeld labels, in which, in Section 12.7.6, we will ﬁnd that the inclusion of dielectric material
into the interior of the label is not helpful.
12.6.2
Electric Field-Sensitive Antennas
Two varieties of electric ﬁeld-sensitive antennas are shown in Figures 12.9 and 12.10.
Figure 12.9 shows a small bow tie antenna that is intended to be sensitive to electric ﬁelds
in the horizontal direction. Figure 12.10 shows an electric ﬁeld-sensitive antenna that is
suitable for placement against a horizontal metal plate where it intercepts a downward
component of electric ﬂux density.
FIGURE 12.7
A magnetic ﬁeld-sensitive HF label antenna.
FIGURE 12.8
Antenna for HF operation against metal. (From Cole,
P.H., Jamali, B., and Ranasinghe, D., Coupling Relations
in RFID Systems, 2003 Auto-ID Center White Paper
Series, # 2003 by Auto-ID Center. With permission.)
Electromagnetic Coupling in RFID
239

Analysis of these structures is provided in Sections 12.7.6 and 12.7.7. In the case of the
bow tie, the analysis is for the half bow tie (wedge above ground plane) shown in Figures
12.11 and 12.12. The analyses have a common feature that the ﬁgure of merit for these
antennas, when placed in the energy storage electric ﬁeld is a coupling volume, in the
second case, if no dielectric is present, equal to the physical volume of the structure, and in
the ﬁrst case a volume derived from the label dimensions, even though the antenna itself
has no physical volume.
Both of the antennas will also have an effective area, but this area should not be confused
with the effective area concept of a radiating antenna or a far-ﬁeld antenna. The effective
area for a near-ﬁeld electric ﬁeld-sensitive antenna describes the extent to which the
antenna can extract current from the displacement current density of the driving electric
ﬁeld.
12.6.3
Electromagnetic Field Antennas
We consider an antenna as an electromagnetic ﬁeld antenna on a couple of different bases.
Firstly, if the antenna is capable of responding to both electric and magnetic ﬁelds we
would consider it to be an electromagnetic ﬁeld antenna. It is almost invariably true that
unless the antenna is very small, it does have this property. Proper analysis requires that it
is analyzed using the full set of Maxwell’s equations, rather than the subset or simpliﬁed
versions that pertain to electrostatic or magnetostatic problems. A good example of this
phenomenon is provided by the electromagnetic ﬁeld-sensitive antenna shown in Figure
12.13, in which there is no obvious effort to couple to either electric or magnetic ﬁeld alone.
12.7
Coupling Relations
12.7.1
Near and Far Fields
In the analysis of the performance of RFID systems, it is important to consider whether the
labels are placed in the far (propagating) or near (energy storage) ﬁelds of the interrogator
FIGURE 12.9
An electric ﬁeld-sensitive label. (From Cole, P.H.,
Jamali, B., and Ranasinghe, D., Coupling Relations in
RFID Systems, 2003 Auto-ID Center White Paper Ser-
ies, # 2003 by Auto-ID Center. With permission.)
FIGURE 12.10
A parallel plate electric ﬁeld-sensitive label.
(From Cole, P.H., Jamali, B., and Ranasinghe,
D., Coupling Relations in RFID Systems, 2003
Auto-ID Center White Paper Series, # 2003
by Auto-ID Center. With permission.)
240
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

antenna. When that antenna is of small gain, the distance which divides the near and far
ﬁelds is the size or the radian sphere of radius r ¼ l=(2p), where l is the free space
electromagnetic wavelength at the operating frequency.
12.7.2
Field Measures
For a linearly polarized magnetic ﬁeld described by a peak value phasor H, we may
develop the two measures of the exciting ﬁeld
Radial component of Poynting vector Sr ¼ hjHj2
2
in W m2,
Volume density of reactive power Wv ¼ vm0jHj2
2
in V A m3:
For a linearly polarized magnetic ﬁeld described by a peak value phasor E, we may
develop the two measures of the exciting ﬁeld
Radial component of Poynting vector Sr ¼ jEj2
2h in W m2,
Volume density of reactive power WV ¼ v«0jEj2
2
in V A m3:
In both cases, the latter expression is v times the peak value of stored magnetic or electric
energy per unit volume. We can easily show that if b is the propagation constant at the
frequency used
WV ¼ bSr:
The last expression assumes that we are in the far ﬁeld, that is, there are no near-ﬁeld
reactive energy storage ﬁelds to augment WV without contributing to Sr.
FIGURE 12.11
Field conﬁguration for self-capacitance calculation of
half bow tie antenna.
FIGURE 12.12
Field conﬁguration for calculation of effective
area of bow tie antenna.
Electromagnetic Coupling in RFID
241

12.7.3
Far-Field Operation
For calculation of the power coupled in the far ﬁeld to a label with a lossless receiving
antenna, the usual approach is to ﬁrst calculate the power density per unit area at the label
position from the formula
Power density per unit area ¼ gtPt
4pr2 ,
where
gt is the gain of the transmitter antenna
Pt is the power it transmits
r is the distance from the transmitter antenna to the label position
In using this formula, we are implicitly assuming that the label has been placed in the
direction of strongest radiation from the interrogator antenna.
The power Pr which may be extracted under optimum conditions of tuning and match-
ing by a lossless label antenna placed at the earlier position is given by
Pr ¼ Aer  Power flow per unit area,
where Aer is a property of the label known as its effective area. It is unrelated to the
physical area of the antenna (which if it is just a piece of thin wire, does not have a physical
area), but has the desirable property that we may imagine the label antenna collects all of
the radiated power which ﬂows through that effective area which may be thought of as
surrounding the label antenna.
The Lorenz reciprocity theorem of electrodynamics may be used to show that the
effective area of a receiving antenna is related to the gain gr it would have in a transmitting
role by the equation
Aer ¼ grl2
4p ,
so we are able to derive for the power transfer ratio the formula
Pr
Pt
¼ grgt
l
4pr

2
:
12.7.4
Power-Matching Considerations
However we regard our label, we expect to have, in its series equivalent circuit, as well as a
reactance, a radiation resistance Rr, a loss resistance Rc, and a load resistance RL, and
FIGURE 12.13
An electromagnetic ﬁeld-sensitive antenna.
242
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

possibly a matching reactance. Considerations of maximum power transfer to the load will
always require that at optimum, we set
RL ¼ Rr þ Rc
and the power delivered to the external load is reduced for the value obtained earlier by
the ratio
Rr
Rr þ Rc
:
12.7.5
Near-Field Operation—Magnetic Field
For near-ﬁeld operation, the ﬁelds which excite the label are basically energy storage ﬁelds
for which consideration of power ﬂow is inappropriate, and for which pre-Maxwell
versions of electrodynamics can give correct calculations. Both the interrogation ﬁeld
creation means and the label ﬁeld detection means can be considered as weakly coupled
inductors of self-inductances L1 and L2 and mutual inductance M. When both these coils
are tuned to resonance with respective quality factors Q1 and Q2, it can be shown that the
power P2 dissipated in the losses of the label coil is related to the power P1 dissipated in the
losses of the ‘‘transmitter’’ coil by
P2
P1
¼ k2Q1Q2
where k ¼
M
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
L1L2
p
:
This equation is useful to show the role of the quality factor, Q, of the resonances in both
the label and interrogator coils in promoting power transfer, but it is not useful in
separately optimizing the properties of those two widely dissimilar elements. For that
purpose, we can focus ﬁrst on the energy storage measure of exciting ﬁeld, which is the
reactive power per unit volume in the ﬁeld created by the interrogator at the label position.
In terms of that measure, we can deﬁne (Eshraghian et al., 1982) a ﬁgure of merit of a label
antenna as the ratio
Vc ¼
Reactive power flowing in the untuned label coil when it is short-circuited


Volume density of reactive power created by the interrogator at the label position

,
which clearly has the dimensions of volume, and is for this reason called the coupling
volume of the label antenna. For the performance of the interrogator antenna, we can
deﬁne the companion concept of dispersal volume Vd given by
Vd ¼
Reactive power flowing in the inductor of the interrogator field creation coil


Volume density of reactive power created by the interrogator at the label position

:
When both antennas are tuned, it is possible to show
P2
P1
¼ Vc
Vd
Q1Q2:
The beneﬁt of this formulation is that the coupling volume is a property of the label
parameters alone, and the dispersal volume is a property of the interrogator antenna
Electromagnetic Coupling in RFID
243

parameters alone (and of the label position), and separate optimization becomes possible,
whereas k2 is a complex function of the entire system geometry.
Coupling volumes for various label antennas are readily determined. For an air-
cored solenoidal antenna it is approximately the volume of that antenna, and when
a magnetic core is in place that volume becomes multiplied by the relative effective
permeability
mer ¼
mir
1 þ N(mir  1) ,
where mir is the relative intrinsic permeability of the core material and N is the demagnet-
izing factor in the direction of the interrogator ﬁeld.
For a planar coil, which in its idealized state has no physical volume, the coupling
volume is given by
Vc ¼ m0A2
L
,
where A is the ﬂux-collecting area (incorporating by summation of area for each turn) of
the coil and L is the self-inductance.
12.7.6
Near Field—Electric Field
In RFID systems, the coupling can be via the magnetic ﬁeld or the electric ﬁeld. While in
the near ﬁeld the coupling is almost always chosen to be by way of the magnetic ﬁeld, it
is possible with an appropriate electric ﬁeld antenna to couple to the electric ﬁeld, and
that can be done whether the tag is in the far ﬁeld or the near ﬁeld. The energy transfer is
then provided by the electric ﬂux terminating on the antenna surface and inducing a
charge on the antenna. The induced charge will oscillate as the ﬁeld oscillates to produce
a current.
The issues of understanding and optimizing coupling to the electric ﬁeld are important.
The coupling volume theory developed here for the electric ﬁeld case assists in that effort
and allows comparisons between different antenna structures for their effectiveness and
efﬁciency in terms of their actual physical volume and the coupling volume. It is also of
interest in making comparisons with the magnetic ﬁeld case.
When we can focus on the energy storage measure of exciting ﬁeld, which is the reactive
power per unit volume in the ﬁeld created by the interrogator at the label position, we can
deﬁne a ﬁgure of merit of a label antenna as the ratio
Vc ¼
Reactive power flowing in the untuned label capacitor when it is open-circuited


Volume density of reactive power created by the interrogator at the label position

,
which clearly has the dimensions of volume, and is for this reason also called the coupling
volume of the label antenna. For the performance of the interrogator antenna, we can
deﬁne the companion concept of dispersal volume Vd given by
Vd ¼
[Reactive power flowing in the capacitance of the
interrogator field creation electrodes]
[Volume density of reactive power created by the
interrogator at the label position]
244
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

When both antennas are tuned, it is possible to show
P2
P1
¼ Vc
Vd
Q1Q2:
The beneﬁt of this formulation is that the coupling volume is a property of the label
parameters alone, and the dispersal volume is a property of the interrogator antenna
parameters alone (and of the label position), and separate optimization becomes possible.
Coupling volumes for various label antennas are readily determined, as will be done in the
next section.
12.7.7
Coupling Volume of a General Shape
In order to derive the coupling volume of antenna structures, it is important to deﬁne a
number of concepts. For a given antenna, we can deﬁne an electric ﬂux-collecting area as
the area in space required by the antenna to generate from the displacement current of the
exciting ﬁeld an oscillating current I when the antenna is placed in an oscillating electric
ﬁeld of ﬂux density D. This area may or may not be equivalent to the physical area. This
electric ﬂux-collecting area will be denoted by the symbol Af and will be referred to as
effective area.
The formula for the current I ﬂowing from an antenna placed in an electric ﬁeld with a
ﬂux density D and oscillating angular frequency v, using the effective area Af of the
antenna structure is
I ¼ jvDAf:
The reactive power ﬂowing in the antenna with a self-capacitance C when the antenna is
open circuit is given by
Reactive power ¼ jIj2
2vC :
The reactive power per unit volume in the ﬁeld is obtained by
WV ¼ «0jEj2v
2
:
Thus, the coupling volume of an antenna structure with a self-capacitance C can be
obtained as
Vc ¼ «0A2
f
C
:
This formula provides the coupling volume of any antenna with a self-capacitance C
and an effective area of Af. It should be pointed out that Af can easily be determined
experimentally by measuring the current ﬂowing from an antenna placed in an oscillating
electric ﬁeld of known strength.
If the antenna takes the form of a parallel plate capacitor and the space between the
plates is ﬁlled with a dielectric, the coupling volume is reduced by a factor equal to the
relative dielectric permittivity.
Electromagnetic Coupling in RFID
245

12.7.8
Properties of the Bow Tie Antenna
Calculating the self-capacitance, as depicted by the ﬁeld lines in the upper half of Figure
12.11, of the monopole bow tie (wedge above ground plane) antenna by seeking analytical
solutions to Laplace’s equation presents a difﬁcult problem. A numerical solution is both
tractable and much simpler and has been performed to produce results quoted later.
In addition, a detailed study undertaken of results ﬁrst published by Woodward
(Brown and Woodward, 1952) provided the following empirical model for the equivalent
circuit shown in Figure 12.14 of a monopole bow tie antenna. The model, derived from
Woodward’s results (Brown and Woodward, 1952) for the resistance RWR(v) and react-
ance X(v) of a bow tie antenna, provides the values for the capacitor, whose value is that
of the self-capacitance of the monopole, a value for the inductor placed in the series
circuit shown, and a value for the radiation resistance. The following results give the
model values for a monopole bow tie (wedge above ground plane) antenna with a ﬂare
angle of 908:
CW ¼ KWC«0hW with KWC ¼ 7:6,
LW ¼ KWLm0hW with KWL ¼ 0:2135,
RWR ¼ KWR(bhW)2 with KWR ¼ 30 ,
where hW is the height (top to ground plane) of the monopole antenna. The signiﬁcant
ﬁnding is that, as expected, the low frequency impedance of the antenna is mainly capacitive
and this value can thus be obtained by calculating the self-capacitance of the antenna. The
radiation resistance obtained has signiﬁcance in two ways. It allows the amount of radiated
power to be calculated for a transmitting antenna, and also provides for a label antenna a
means of calculating, using the reciprocity theorem, the effective electric ﬂux-collecting area,
as depicted by the ﬁeld lines in the upper half of Figure 12.12, of the antenna. All of the
results from Woodward agree with the results of our own direct measurements of ﬂux-
collecting area and our own numerical analysis performed using the method of moments.
12.7.9
Comparison of Formulations
As the Poynting vector-effective area formulation and the coupling volume–dispersal
volume formulation are so apparently dissimilar, it is desirable to show that they are
equivalent, but useful in different contexts where different approximations may be
made. It has been shown, but we have not the space to do it here, that the formulations
are indeed equivalent, and that the basic difference between the formulations is whether
they emphasize the radiation resistance or the internal losses of the label antenna.
After considering all issues concerned with the generation of label exciting ﬁelds, we are
led to conclude that the optimum frequency for operation of an RFID system in the far ﬁeld
FIGURE 12.14
Three parameter equivalent circuit for a half bow tie
antenna. (From Cole, P.H., Jamali, B., and Ranasinghe,
D., Coupling Relations in RFID Systems, 2003 Auto-ID
Center White Paper Series, # 2003 by Auto-ID Center.
With permission.)
+
_
Vs
CW
R WR
LW
246
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

is the lowest frequency for which a reasonable match to the radiation resistance of the label
antenna can be achieved, at the allowed size of label, without the label or matching element
losses intruding.
12.8
Conclusions
The fundamental principles governing electromagnetic coupling between an interrogator
and its labels in an RFID system have been outlined, and a set of concepts suitable for
describing coupling in the near and far ﬁelds, using electric ﬁeld-, magnetic ﬁeld-, or
electromagnetic ﬁeld-sensitive antennas, have been deﬁned. Some of the properties of
electric ﬁeld and magnetic ﬁeld antennas have been derived.
Some important theorems about optimizing antenna sizes and operating frequencies
subject to electromagnetic compatibility regulations have been derived.
References
Brown, G.H. and O.M. Woodward Jr. 1952. Experimentally determined radiation characteristics of
conical and triangular antennas. RCA Review, 13, 425–452.
Cole, P.H. 2002. A study of factors affecting the design of EPC antennas and readers for supermarket
shelves. http:==www.autoidcenter.org=research=ADE-AUTOID-WH-001.pdf
Eshraghian, K., P.H. Cole, and A.K. Roy. March 1982. Electromagnetic coupling in subharmonic
transponders. Journal of Electrical and Electronics Engineering, Australia, pp. 28–35.
International Organisation for Standardisation (ISO). 1992. SI units and recommendations for the use
of their multiples and of certain other units. International Standard ISO 1000.
Osborn, J.A. 1945. Demagnetising factors of the general ellipsoid. Physical Review, 67, 351.
Electromagnetic Coupling in RFID
247


13
RFID Tags for Metallic Object Identiﬁcation
Mun Leng Ng, Kin Seong Leong, and Peter H. Cole
CONTENTS
13.1
Introduction...................................................................................................................... 249
13.2
Electromagnetic Waves near Metallic Surfaces........................................................... 250
13.3
Effects of Metallic Surfaces on RFID Tag Antennas................................................... 251
13.4
RFID Tag Antennas Suitable for Metallic Surfaces..................................................... 253
13.4.1 RFID Tag with a Simple Rectangular Patch Antenna................................... 253
13.4.2 RFID Tag with a Small Loop Antenna............................................................ 255
13.4.3 Other RFID Tags................................................................................................. 258
13.5
Conclusion ........................................................................................................................ 258
References.................................................................................................................................... 258
13.1
Introduction
RFID is a technology that has existed for many years, but it is only recently that it has
experienced the rapid growth that has arisen from application of this technology in various
supply chains. From inventory management to theft detection, RFID has been applied in
many areas such as in the automotive industry and logistics, as well as in warehouses and
retail stores (Angeles, 2005). Potential has also been seen for the application of RFID in
capital asset management applications such as keeping track of maintenance tools in the
aircraft maintenance sector (Lampe et al., 2004). RFID has the ability of giving a unique
identity to each tagged object. Hence, there is a vision to extend this technology to item-
level tagging (other than pallet and case-level tagging), to give each speciﬁc item-level
object a unique identity (Sarma et al., 2001).
The increasing implementation of the RFID technology in supply chains has posed many
challenges and one of the biggest is the degradation of the system performance when
tagging metallic objects or operating in an environment containing metals. The tagging of
objects at pallet, case, and even item levels will most likely involve metallic objects. For
example, in the automotive industry, when RFID is used for part tracking, a majority of the
parts are made of metal (Strassner and Fleisch, 2003). To meet the challenge posed by
metallic objects on RFID and to encourage the full deployment of RFID especially down to
item-level tagging, results of research on the design of RFID tags suited for metallic
application are presented in this chapter.
249

Following this introduction, the next section will consider the behavior of electromag-
netic waves near metallic surfaces. This will be then followed by a section on the effects of
metallic surfaces on RFID tag antennas. Finally, the chapter will present a few examples
of passive UHF RFID tags suitable for attaching to metallic structures.
13.2
Electromagnetic Waves near Metallic Surfaces
For a boundary that lies between two media in space with medium 1 characterized by
dielectric permittivity «1, magnetic permeability m1, and electric conductivity s1, and
medium 2 characterized by «2, m2, and s2, the electromagnetic boundary conditions for a
general case can be expressed (in vector form for time varying ﬁelds) as follow:
^n  (E2  E1) ¼ 0,
(13:1)
^n  (D2  D1) ¼ rs,
(13:2)
^n  (H 2  H 1) ¼ Js,
(13:3)
^n  (B2  B1) ¼ 0,
(13:4)
where
^n is the unit normal vector to the boundary directed from medium 1 to medium 2
E and H are the electric and magnetic ﬁelds, respectively
D and B are the electric and magnetic ﬂux densities, respectively
rs and Js are the surface charge density and surface current density, respectively, that
may exist at the boundary
If medium 1 is a metallic medium and we assume as a practical approximation that it is a
perfect electric conductor with inﬁnite conductivity (s1 ! 1), there will be no electric ﬁeld
in this medium (i.e., E1 ¼ 0). Consequently, D1 ¼ 0, B1 ¼ 0, and H 1 ¼ 0. Hence, for this case,
the boundary conditions become
^n  E2 ¼ 0,
(13:5)
^n  D2 ¼ rs,
(13:6)
^n  H 2 ¼ Js,
(13:7)
^n  B2 ¼ 0:
(13:8)
Since ^n is the unit normal vector to the boundary, the expressions can be further written
in terms of the corresponding tangential and normal components (denoted with subscripts
‘‘t’’ and ‘‘n,’’ respectively) to
E2t ¼ 0,
(13:9)
D2n ¼ rs,
(13:10)
H 2t ¼ Js,
(13:11)
B2n ¼ 0:
(13:12)
From here, it can be seen that for oscillating ﬁelds there are only perpendicular (normal)
components of the electric ﬁeld at the surface of a perfect electric conductor. There are no
250
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

tangential components of the electric ﬁeld directly next to a perfect electric conductor. On
the other hand, there are only tangential components of the magnetic ﬁeld directly next to a
perfect electric conductor. There are no normal components of the magnetic ﬁeld to the
surface of a perfect electric conductor. Hence, not all components of electromagnetic ﬁelds
are available near a perfect electric conductor.
There are actually no perfect electric conductors in reality, but since metal has a high
conductivity, it is qualiﬁed to be close enough as a perfect electric conductor. Figure 13.1
shows simpliﬁed illustrations of electric ﬁelds and magnetic ﬁelds near a metallic surface.
Note that only the most relevant to RFID expressions for the boundary conditions have
been shown earlier; detailed derivations of those expressions can be found in literatures
such as Balanis (1989) and Hayt (1989). The relation of those results to RFID will be
discussed in the following section, but we note here that the results provide a preliminary
design consideration for one of the RFID tags that is presented in this chapter.
Before proceeding to the next section, another part of the electromagnetic theory that is
related to the presence of metallic media in the environment should be mentioned. For a
uniform plane electromagnetic wave directed at normal incidence to a boundary formed
by having a perfect electric conductor on one side, a phase reversal of the ﬁeld occurs
on reﬂection from the boundary. Consequently, the total of the incident and reﬂected
electric ﬁelds at the boundary will be zero. Further, the total of the incident and
reﬂected magnetic ﬁelds at the boundary will be double that of the incident magnetic
ﬁeld. It can be observed that these results satisfy the boundary conditions discussed earlier.
13.3
Effects of Metallic Surfaces on RFID Tag Antennas
Passive UHF RFID tags are able to provide good read ranges for object identiﬁcation
compared with LF or HF RFID tags, and they are also seen as potentially low cost.
However, conventional planar passive UHF RFID tags will suffer degradation in perform-
ance when attached to metallic objects or structures. A number of commercially available
planar and label-like passive UHF RFID tags have been tested against a large aluminum
plate (Dobkin and Weigand, 2005). Results from the testing have shown that as the tags are
brought closer to the aluminum plate, the read range decreases. It is also shown that the
read range has approached zero when the tags are <2 mm from the aluminum plate.
Charge
Current
Perfect electric conductor
Perfect electric conductor
Electric
field
Magnetic
field
FIGURE 13.1
Electric ﬁelds and magnetic ﬁelds near a metallic surface. (From Cole, P.H., Jamali, B., and Ranasinghe, D.,
Coupling Relations in RFID Systems, Auto-ID Center White Paper Series, 2003, # 2003 by Auto-ID Center. With
permission.)
RFID Tags for Metallic Object Identiﬁcation
251

Passive RFID tags obtain their energy from interrogation ﬁeld from the RFID reader
antenna. The energy obtained is then converted to electrical energy within the tag for
powering up of the tag chip (Cole, 2002). If there is insufﬁcient interrogation ﬁeld from the
RFID reader antenna reaching the tags, the tags would not be readable. As discussed in the
previous section, in the presence of a metallic structure, not all electromagnetic ﬁeld
components are present near the surface of the metallic structure; there are only the normal
component of the electric ﬁeld and tangential component of the magnetic ﬁeld. Hence, any
RFID tag that depends on either the tangential component of the electric ﬁeld or the normal
component of the magnetic ﬁeld to operate will suffer from serious performance degrad-
ation when attached to and close to a metallic surface.
Another issue that arises when placing an RFID tag near a metallic surface is the change
of the tag antenna parameters such as the input impedance, directivity, radiation pattern,
and the efﬁciency. Antennas, such as electric dipoles, will suffer a signiﬁcant change in
their impedance when placed near a metallic surface. Plots of impedance change for a basic
half wavelength dipole as well as a basic circular loop antenna placed horizontally and
located at different distance above a metallic or conducting surface can be found in Balanis
(2005). Studies on impedance changes of a folded dipole antenna corresponding to differ-
ent distances of the antenna from a metallic plate are also presented in Raumonen et al.
(2003) and Prothro et al. (2006). The change of the tag antenna impedance will then lead to
two issues. First is the perturbation of the resonant frequency of the tag. The resonant
frequency of a tuned circuit can be expressed as
fr ¼
1
2p
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
LC
p
,
(13:13)
where L and C are the inductance and capacitance of the circuit, respectively. This
expression shows that the change of the reactive part of the antenna impedance will lead
to the change of the resonant frequency. Hence, when the tag is brought close to a metallic
surface, the tag antenna impedance will change, which then affects the resonant frequency.
This means detuning will occur and the read range (between the RFID tag and the RFID
reader antenna) will degrade. The seriousness of the read range performance degradation
will depend on the amount of the resonant frequency perturbation and the role that the
quality factor of the tag resonance may play in impedance matching.
The second issue caused by the change in the tag antenna impedance is impedance
mismatch. The tag antenna is usually designed to have an impedance, which matches as
closely as possible to the RFID tag chip impedance. A match between the tag antenna and
chip impedances means that one of the impedances is the complex conjugate of the other
and hence in theory, a maximum power transfer will occur. When the tag antenna
impedance is affected by the presence of metallic structures, the impedance matching
will be affected. Hence, the amount of power transfer from the antenna to the tag chip
will also change. This will in turn affect the read range performance. In addition, the
change of the tag antenna impedance may also affect the bandwidth over which good
performance is obtained.
Besides changing the input impedance, the presence of metallic structures may also
cause changes to other antenna parameters such as the directivity and the radiation
pattern. Antennas such as an electric dipole with an omnidirectional radiation pattern
may become directional when placed close to a metallic surface. The reﬂections caused by
the metallic surface may change the concentration of the electromagnetic ﬁelds near the
antenna and hence, will lead to the change of directivity. Measurements have shown that
when an omnidirectional antenna is placed near a cylindrical metallic can at a separation
of 50 mm, the antenna gain has suffered a reduction of as much as 20 dB (in the direction
252
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

of the antenna nearer to the metallic can) compared with the gain when the antenna is in
free space (Foster and Burberry, 1999). The changes in the directivity and radiation pattern
will of course depend on the shape and size of the metallic structure and also the
separation distance of the antenna from the structure. These have been studied for a folded
dipole antenna in Raumonen et al. (2003).
Discussed earlier are some of the effects the metallic structure can possibly cause to RFID
tags. Although they are negative effects, and make tagging metallic objects seem difﬁcult,
satisfactory solutions may be engineered. One obvious solution for metallic object tagging
is to use an antenna, such as a patch antenna, that requires a ground plane to operate. Since
the ground plane is a part of the antenna design, this type of antenna will not be affected
too much when attached to a metallic object. Another solution is to use a tag antenna
design that is able to use the electromagnetic ﬁelds that are present near the metallic
surface to operate. An increase in the antenna directivity due to the metallic surface may
also be obtained. Tag designs corresponding to both solutions above will be discussed
further in this chapter.
13.4
RFID Tag Antennas Suitable for Metallic Surfaces
Some of the biggest challenges when it comes to designing RFID tags for metallic objects
are the size and cost of the tags. Small tags are most desired, as the tags may be required
to ﬁt on smaller size metallic objects or even in tight spaces. However, small tag antennas
are usually associated with low radiation resistance, efﬁciency, and gain. It is also the aim
to maintain a low tag cost to increase the feasibility of tagging every item. One direct way to
do this is to keep the tag antenna design as simple as possible to reduce the manufacturing
cost, and another way is to use if possible cheap materials. In this section, a number of RFID
tags suitable for attaching to metallic surfaces will be discussed. Brief design concepts and
methods, as well as experimental results, will also be included for some of the tags.
13.4.1
RFID Tag with a Simple Rectangular Patch Antenna
Since patch antennas require a ground plane to operate, they will less likely be affected
when attached to metallic surfaces.* As will be shown in the following, we have experi-
mented with an RFID tag consisting of a simple basic rectangular patch antenna that can be
used for metallic object identiﬁcation.
Shown in Figure 13.2 is the top view of the RFID tag. The tag is designed to operate in
the Australian UHF RFID band that spans 920–926 MHz. A double-sided copper clad FR4
board material with substrate thickness of h ¼ 1.6 mm and relative dielectric permittivity
«r ¼ 4.4 is used. The dimensions of the rectangular patch are determined ﬁrst by theoretical
calculations using the methods in Balanis (2005) and later veriﬁed (with some slight
adjustments) by simulations using the Ansoft HFSS simulation program. The patch has a
length Lpatch ¼ 76 mm and width Wpatch ¼ 99 mm. Both the substrate and ground plane
have the same size and are 6h longer on each side compared with the rectangular patch.
The tag design also consists of a simple impedance matching method, whereby the
antenna is fed using an inset feed method and the impedance is transformed using a
microstrip line to have an overall antenna impedance that is the complex conjugate of the
tag chip impedance. The chip used has an impedance of 20j141 V at 923 MHz. The tag
chip is located at the end of the microstrip line between the microstrip line and a small
* This section is based on the work by Ng et al. (2007) # 2007 by IEEE with permission.
RFID Tags for Metallic Object Identiﬁcation
253

square area that is connected to the ground plane through a via. The inset distance of the
feed and the length of the microstrip line are determined using simulations. Further details
on the design steps and tag dimensions can be found in Ng et al. (2007).
The tag antenna was fabricated and a practical read range measurement was carried out.
An RFID reader (Model ALR-9780-EA) suitable for operation in Australia was used in the
measurement. The RFID reader antenna used has a 6 dBi gain and the equivalent isotropic
radiated power (EIRP) from the antenna is 4 W. The tag is placed on a 1.5l 3 1.5l
aluminum metallic plane and with the reader antenna radiating at normal incidence to
the metallic plane, the read range measured was 1.44 m.
Since it is always desirable to have a small tag size, further analysis on the tag antenna
has been performed by reducing the tag antenna size to ﬁnd the smallest possible size
while still offering acceptable read range performance. The patch width Wpatch of the tag
antenna was reduced in steps of 10 mm from the original size of 99 mm to 19 mm. Changes
to the overall input impedance of the tag antenna have been observed through simulations
when Wpatch is reduced. To cater for the impedance changes and maintain a conjugate
match of both real and imaginary parts between the antenna and the chip, the inset
feed distance and the microstrip line length were adjusted slightly for each decrement
of Wpatch.
RFID tags corresponding to different patch widths were fabricated. Read range
measurements of these tags are performed using the same RFID reader and reader antenna
as mentioned earlier. The plot of read range versus Wpatch is shown in Figure 13.3 for the tag
in free space and when the tag is attached to a 1.5l 3 1.5l aluminum metallic plane. It can be
observed from Figure 13.3 that there is a pattern in the reduction of read range when Wpatch
is reduced. The read range of the smallest size tag (with Wpatch ¼ 19 mm) is about half
that of the full size tag (with Wpatch ¼ 99 mm). However, despite the read range reduction,
the read range for the smallest tag is still acceptable considering the amount of tag size
reduction compared with the full size tag. Hence, the smaller tag can be suitable for use
in applications that do not require a maximum possible read range but do require a smaller
tag size to attach the tag to a limited space or area on the metallic object.
Wpatch
Lpatch
Lpatch + 12h
Wpatch + 12h
Via
Patch
Substrate
Chip
FIGURE 13.2
Structure of the RFID tag consisting of a patch antenna (top view). (From Ng, M.L., Leong, K.S., and Cole, P.H., in
IEEE Antennas and Propagation Society International Symposium, Honolulu, Hawaii, June 10–15, 2007, # 2007 by
IEEE. With permission.)
254
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

13.4.2
RFID Tag with a Small Loop Antenna
The RFID tag uses a design approach different from that of the earlier and utilizes the
electromagnetic ﬁelds that are present near the metallic surface.* According to the theory of
electromagnetic boundary conditions, there are only tangential components and no normal
components of the magnetic ﬁeld to the metallic surface. In addition, the magnetic ﬁeld
(tangential component) will be doubled when it is very near the metallic surface. The RFID
tag design here exploits this fact by having a loop antenna oriented such that the plane of
the loop is perpendicular to the plane of the metallic surface to which the RFID tag will be
attached. The idea is to have the rich concentration of the magnetic ﬁeld near the metallic
surface to couple to the loop antenna of the tag.
The structure of the tag, consisting of a rectangular loop antenna and a tag chip, is shown
in Figure 13.4. The loop antenna is made of a wide copper strip of width Wrec. The physical
dimension of the rectangular loop antenna can be adjusted to provide sufﬁcient inductance
to be tuned by the combination of the capacitance of the tag chip and the self-capacitance of
the inductor. The trade-off of this method is that the small rectangular loop antenna will be
able to provide sufﬁcient inductance but not the resistance that corresponds to the tag chip
impedance, since it is a characteristic of small loop antennas to have low radiation
resistance. However, this method has the beneﬁt of maintaining simplicity and low cost.
In Ng et al. (2006), the loop antenna width Wrec is varied with the rest of the loop
dimensions such as length Lrec and height Hrec ﬁxed.
Theoretical calculations can be used ﬁrst to estimate the dimensions of the loop antenna
that resonate at the target frequency when tuned with the capacitance of the tag chip. The
formulae used for such calculations are the same as for rectangular loop antennas made of
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Patch width,Wpatch (mm)
Read range (m)
Free space
On metal plane
FIGURE 13.3
Practical read range measurement results for
tag in free space and tag attached to metallic
plane. (From Ng, M.L., Leong, K.S., and
Cole, P.H., in IEEE Antennas and Propagation
Society
International
Symposium,
Honolulu,
Hawaii, June 10–15, 2007, # 2007 by IEEE.
With permission.)
Tag antenna
Tag
chip
Width (Wrec)
Length (Lrec)
Height
(Hrec)
x
y
z
FIGURE 13.4
Structure of the RFID tag consisting of a rectangular
loop antenna. (From Ng, M.L., Leong, K.S., and
Cole, P.H., in 21st International Technical Conference
on Circuits=Systems, Computers and Communications
(ITC-CSCC), Chiang Mai, Thailand, July 10–13, 2006,
# 2006 by ECTI. With permission.)
* The RFID tag shown in Figure 13.4 and this section are based on the work by Ng et al. (2006) # 2006 by ECTI
with permission.
RFID Tags for Metallic Object Identiﬁcation
255

circular wire, except that the copper strip of this antenna has to be converted to its
equivalent circular wire radius r before calculations are performed. Deriving from the
equivalent radius expression given in Balanis (2005), the equivalent radius r corresponding
to the wide copper strip of width Wrec is
r ﬃ0:2Wrec:
(13:14)
The rectangular loop antenna with the structure presented here can be approximately
represented (assuming it to be lossless, electrically small, and of negligible self-capacitance)
by a resistor with radiation resistance Rrad and an inductor with inductance Lant in series.
Small loop antennas with the same loop area carrying a uniform current have the same
radiation resistance. Hence, the radiation resistance and approximate inductance of the
rectangular loop antenna are determined using the expressions found in Balanis (2005) that
correspond to a small circular loop antenna with loop radius R and circular wire radius r.
The expressions are
Rrad ¼ 20p2(bR)4,
(13:15)
Lant ¼ m0R ln 8R
r


 2


,
(13:16)
where b ¼ 2p
l is the free space propagation constant with wavelength l and m0 ¼ 4p 3 107
H m1 is the free space permeability. With R ﬁxed depending on the desired loop area, the
circular wire radius r corresponding to the required Lant can be determined using these
expressions. Wrec can then be determined after ﬁnding r.
A fabricated tag based on the theoretically calculated dimensions can be checked for its
resonant frequency. This can be done by setting a network analyzer to couple to the tag by
means of a small untuned loop, and to measure the reﬂection from that loop over a set
frequency range. By observing the reﬂection pattern on the network analyzer, the approxi-
mate resonant frequency of the tag can be found. If the resonant frequency of the tag
deviates slightly from the target frequency, the loop antenna width Wrec can be adjusted
to ﬁne-tune the design. Further details on the ﬁne-tuning steps can be found in Ng
et al. (2006).
An example of a tag designed using this method has a rectangular loop antenna with
dimensions of Wrec ¼ 15 mm, Lrec ¼ 25 mm, and Hrec ¼ 10 mm (Lrec and Hrec are ﬁxed from
the very beginning of the design process). The tag is designed to resonate at the frequency
of around 915 MHz. For the theoretical calculations during the design, a tag chip imped-
ance of 7–j150 V at the frequency 915 MHz is assumed. Shown in Figure 13.5 is the
simulated directivity patterns of the tag antenna located in both free space and 3 mm
above a 1.5l 3 1.5l aluminum metallic plane. The small 3 mm gap is required to avoid
short circuit of the tag to the metallic plane. As can be observed from Figure 13.5, the shape
of the antenna pattern has been signiﬁcantly changed and the directivity is enhanced with
the presence of a metallic plane. It has also been found that a smaller ground plane gives
lesser directivity and more backward radiation. As already noted, in terms of impedance
matching, there is a reasonable conjugate match to the imaginary part but the real parts
maintain somewhat mismatched. The design maintains the advantages of simplicity and
economy.
An RFID reader which has the ability to operate over the band 900–940 MHz was set up
to measure the read range performance of the RFID tag. The reader has an output peak
power of 250 mW. Taking into consideration of the 8 dBi gain circularly polarized reader
antenna used, the total equivalent transmit power is 1.6 W EIRP. As in the simulation, the
256
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

RFID tag is placed 3 mm above a 1.5l 3 1.5l aluminum metallic plane. With the reader
antenna radiating at normal incidence to the metallic plane, the read range measured at a
number of frequencies within 900–940 MHz is shown in Figure 13.6. At 915 MHz, a read
range of 0.83 m is achieved for the above speciﬁed total transmit power of the RFID
reader. For a total transmit power of 4 W EIRP (e.g., in the United States), the read range is
expected to increase by 1.6 times. Overall, the read range performance of this RFID tag
(a)
(b)
30
2.00
60
90
120
150
−30
−60
−90
−120
−150
2.0
−180
30
5.00
0.90
−3.19
−7.29
0
60
90
120
150
−30
−60
−90
−120
−150
−180
−0.34
−2.67
−5.01
0
−7.3
2.0
5.0
−9.3
5.0
FIGURE 13.5
The yz-plane radiation pattern of the RFID tag antenna: (a) tag in free space; (b) tag located 3 mm above
a 1.5l 3 1.5l metallic plane. (From Ng, M.L., Leong, K.S., and Cole, P.H., in 21st International Technical Conference
on Circuits=Systems, Computers and Communications (ITC-CSCC), Chiang Mai, Thailand, July 10–13, 2006, # 2006
by ECTI. With permission.)
1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
Read range (m)
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
895
900
905
910
915
920
Frequency (MHz)
925
930
935
940
945
FIGURE 13.6
Read range measured over a frequency range. (From Ng, M.L., Leong, K.S., and Cole, P.H., in 21st International
Technical Conference on Circuits=Systems, Computers and Communications (ITC-CSCC), Chiang Mai, Thailand, July
10–13, 2006, # 2006 by ECTI. With permission.)
RFID Tags for Metallic Object Identiﬁcation
257

is promising, with a good read range achieved over a wide frequency range. The reason for
this is that the RFID tag antenna has enhanced performance when it is near a metallic
surface, and the structure of this antenna has allowed good coupling to the magnetic
components of the interrogation ﬁelds from the RFID reader near the metallic surface.
13.4.3
Other RFID Tags
Two RFID tags that are based on rather different design approaches and concepts have
been discussed earlier. RFID tags suitable for attaching to metallic objects are, of course, not
just limited to these two earlier examples. Other examples, such as presented in Ukkonen
et al. (2004a) and Choi et al. (2006), have used a planar inverted-F antenna in their tag
designs. There are also different patch antenna designs for RFID tags suitable for metallic
objects. In Ukkonen et al. (2004b), a patch antenna with an electromagnetic band gap (EBG)
ground plane has been used in the tag design and it has been shown in Ukkonen et al.
(2005) that this tag offers a slightly better read range performance compared with a tag
consisting of a similar patch antenna but with a conventional ground plane. Yu et al.
(2007), Kim et al. (2006), and Son et al. (2006) have also offered different tag designs that
use patch antennas.
Although there are different tag designs for tagging metallic objects and they vary in
sizes and read range performances, all the tags mentioned earlier have a common problem,
that is, they have a certain signiﬁcant thickness as compared with conventional label-like
planar RFID tags. For example, patch antennas will usually have a thickness contributed
by the dielectric substrate layer. For the loop antenna discussed in this chapter (loop
perpendicular to the metallic surface), the thickness is caused by the area encompassed
by the loop. Hence, there is actually no universal choice of tags for metallic object. The
choice of the tag antenna used will depend on the type of object to be tagged, the amount of
tagging space available, tagging cost limitation, and as well as the read range requirement.
13.5
Conclusion
In recent years, research on RFID involving metallic object identiﬁcations has signiﬁcantly
increased. There have been more experiments performed to study the severity of the effects
caused by metallic objects toward the RFID tag antenna and the read range performance,
some of which have been mentioned in this chapter. With the aid of a few examples, this
chapter shows that with proper tag antenna choice and design, it is possible to tag metallic
objects with an acceptable level of read range performance. Although the research in the
area of metallic object tagging is growing rapidly, more research is still required to
encourage wider RFID implementation.
References
Angeles, R. 2005. RFID technologies: Supply-chain applications and implementation issues. Informa-
tion Systems Management, 22(1), 51–65.
Balanis, C.A. 1989. Advanced Engineering Electromagnetics. John Wiley & Sons, New York.
Balanis, C.A. 2005. Antenna Theory: Analysis and Design, 3rd ed. John Wiley & Sons, New York.
Choi, W., H.W. Son, J.-H. Bae, G.Y. Choi, C.S. Pyo, and J.-S. Chae. 2006. An RFID tag using a planar
inverted-F antenna capable of being stuck to metallic objects. ETRI Journal, 28(2), 216–218.
258
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

Cole, P.H. 2002. A Study of Factors Affecting the Design of EPC Antennas and Readers for Supermarket
Shelves. Auto-ID Centre White Paper.
Dobkin, D.M. and S.M. Weigand. 2005. Environmental effects on RFID tag antennas. Microwave
Symposium Digest, 2005 IEEE MTT-S International.
Foster, P.R. and R.A. Burberry. 1999. Antenna problems in RFID systems. IEE Colloquium on RFID
Technology, London, UK, pp. 3=1–3=5.
Hayt, W.H., Jr. 1989. Engineering Electromagnetics, 5th ed. McGraw-Hill, New York.
Kim, S.-J., B. Yu, Y.-S. Chung, F.J. Harackiewicz, and B. Lee. 2006. Patch-type radio frequency
identiﬁcation tag antenna mountable on metallic platforms. Microwave and Optical Technology
Letters, 48(12), 2446–2448.
Lampe, M., M. Strassner, and E. Fleisch. 2004. A ubiquitous computing environment for aircraft
maintenance. Proceedings of the 2004 ACM Symposium on Applied Computing, Nicosia, Cyprus,
pp. 1586–1592.
Ng, M.L., K.S. Leong, and P.H. Cole. 2006. A small passive UHF RFID tag for metallic item
identiﬁcation. 21st International Technical Conference on Circuits=Systems, Computers and Commu-
nications (ITC-CSCC), Vol. 2, Chiang Mai, Thailand.
Ng, M.L., K.S. Leong, and P.H. Cole. 2007. Design and miniaturization of an RFID tag using a simple
rectangular patch antenna for metallic object identiﬁcation. IEEE Antennas and Propagation
Society International Symposium, Honolulu, Hawaii.
Prothro, J.T., G.D. Durgin, and J.D. Griffn. 2006. The effects of a metal ground plane on RFID tag
antennas. IEEE Antennas and Propagation Society International Symposium, Albuquerque, New
Mexico.
Raumonen, P., L. Sydanheimo, L. Ukkonen, M. Keskilammi, and M. Kivikoski. 2003. Folded dipole
antenna near metal plate. IEEE Antennas and Propagation Society International Symposium, vol. 1,
pp. 848–851.
Sarma, S., D. Brock, and D. Engels. 2001. Radio frequency identiﬁcation and the electronic product
code. IEEE Micro, 21(6), 50–54.
Son, H.W., J. Yeo, G.Y. Choi, and C.S. Pyo. 2006. A low-cost, wide-band antenna for passive RFID
tags mountable on metallic surfaces. IEEE Antennas and Propagation Society International Sympo-
sium, pp. 1019–1022.
Strassner, M. and E. Fleisch. 2003. The Promise of Auto-ID in the Automotive Industry. Auto-ID Center
White Paper.
Ukkonen, L., D. Engels, L. Sydanheimo, and M. Kivikoski. 2004a. Planar wire-type inverted-F RFID
tag antenna mountable on metallic objects. IEEE Antennas and Propagation Society International
Symposium, vol. 1, pp. 101–104.
Ukkonen, L., L. Sydanheimo, and M. Kivikoski. 2004b. Patch antenna with EBG ground plane and
two-layer substrate for passive RFID of metallic objects. IEEE Antennas and Propagation Society
International Symposium, vol. 1, pp. 93–96.
Ukkonen, L., L. Sydanheimo, and M. Kivikoski. 2005. Effects of metallic plate size on the performance
of microstrip patch-type tag antennas for passive RFID. Antennas and Wireless Propagation
Letters, vol. 4, pp. 410–413.
Yu, B., S.-J. Kim, B. Jung, F.J. Harackiewicz, and B. Lee. 2007. RFID tag antenna using two-shorted
microstrip patches mountable on metallic objects. Microwave and Optical Technology Letters,
49(2), 414–416.
RFID Tags for Metallic Object Identiﬁcation
259


14
WISP: A Passively Powered UHF RFID
Tag with Sensing and Computation
Daniel J. Yeager, Alanson P. Sample, and Joshua R. Smith
CONTENTS
14.1
Introduction: Ubiquitous Sensing.................................................................................. 261
14.2
WISP Design..................................................................................................................... 263
14.2.1 Analog Front End and Tuning ......................................................................... 265
14.2.2 Demodulation and Modulation........................................................................ 266
14.2.3 Uplink................................................................................................................... 266
14.2.4 Digital Section and Power Conditioning ........................................................ 266
14.2.5 Software................................................................................................................ 267
14.2.5.1 Packet Decoding and Encoding ........................................................ 267
14.2.5.2 System State and Power Management Algorithm......................... 268
14.2.5.3 Sensor Data Encoding ........................................................................ 268
14.3
Power Budget................................................................................................................... 269
14.3.1 Turn On Power Requirement............................................................................ 269
14.3.2 Active Energy Consumption............................................................................. 270
14.4
Experimental Results....................................................................................................... 271
14.5
Sensors and Applications ............................................................................................... 273
14.6
Conclusion ........................................................................................................................ 274
References.................................................................................................................................... 276
14.1
Introduction: Ubiquitous Sensing
This chapter describes the wireless identiﬁcation and sensing platform (WISP), a wireless,
battery-free platform for sensing and computation that is powered and read by a stand-
ards-compliant ultrahigh frequency (UHF) RFID reader. WISP features a wireless power
supply, bidirectional UHF communication with backscatter uplink, and a fully program-
mable ultralow power 16 bit ﬂash microcontroller with analog to digital converter. This
particular point in the sensor platform design space offers some attractive features for
ubiquitous sensing, but has not yet been explored very thoroughly. Using the WISP
platform, we have implemented the ﬁrst accelerometer to be powered and read wirelessly
in the UHF band, and also the ﬁrst UHF powered-and-read strain gage. Even without its
sensing capabilities, WISP can also be used as an open and programmable RFID tag: with
261

collaborators we implemented the RC5 encryption algorithm on WISP [1], which we
believe is the ﬁrst implementation of a strong cryptographic algorithm on a UHF tag.
One approach to ubiquitous sensing is to use wired sensors. This approach is well-suited
to creating purpose-built instrumented environments supporting long-term observation
[2]. This approach has the advantage that there is no battery lifetime or battery size
constraint. The drawback is the need for wires. In Ref. [2], the authors describe such a
purpose-built living space, which includes custom cabinetry to house sensors as well as
cables for both power and data. A second approach, favored by the Wireless Sensor
Networks community, is to use battery-powered devices that communicate by ordinary
radio communication, often in a peer-to-peer fashion [3]. One disadvantage of this
approach is the size and lifetime constraints imposed by batteries. Because of the lifetime
constraint, it would not be possible to permanently embed a battery-powered device in a
building or civil structure such as a bridge. A third approach includes generating power
from environmental sources [4], such as vibration, light, or human motion [5], and then
communicating the sensor data by ordinary RF transmission. The ﬁnal class of approaches,
within which this work ﬁts, is to deliberately transmit power from a large source device to
the sensor platforms, which then harvest this ‘‘planted’’ power, rather than relying on
generation of electrical energy from naturally occurring or ‘‘wild’’ sources as in the third
approach.
The space of wireless power=data transmission can be subdivided further. Chip-less
approaches such as Theremin’s cavity resonator microphone [6], as well as more recent
examples such as Refs. [7,8], are based on an analog technique in which a quantity to be
sensed modiﬁes the frequency or quality factor of a resonant structure. Changes in the
resonance can be detected by a ‘‘reader’’ device that is effectively supplying power and
collecting analog sensor data. This analog approach is generally limited to a small number
of sensors, since the devices cannot be given arbitrarily long unique IDs. Furthermore,
these analog sensor devices are not capable of onboard computation, which means the
system cannot beneﬁt from channel sharing, error detection and correction, embedded
compression and ﬁltering, cryptography, and other capabilities enabled by digital compu-
tation and communication.
RFID tags are wirelessly powered digital devices that include a conventional integrated
circuit (IC) [9]. Conventional RFID tags are ﬁxed function devices that typically use a
minimal, nonprogrammable state machine to report a hard-coded ID when energized by
a reader. The Electronic Product Code (EPC) standard operates in the UHF band (915 MHz
in the United States), which has substantially improved the range and ﬁeld-of-view for RFID
reading over previous generations of RFID technology. The ‘‘EPC Class 1 Generation 1’’
speciﬁcation [10] (Gen 1) was the ﬁrst UHF RFID standard to be widely deployed. The
standard’s broad adoption enabled a new generation of applications and interoperable
products. This standard has been supplanted by a second generation spec of the speciﬁca-
tion, ‘‘EPC Class 1 Generation 2’’ [11]. As of this writing, WISP supports the Gen 1 but not the
Gen 2 speciﬁcation, although we are developing a Gen 2 WISP.
RFID has been used for sensing in several contexts. Conventional short-range HF RFID
tags with a worn RFID reader have been used for activity monitoring in eldercare scenarios
[12]; in this case, the RFID read event is in effect a reader-tag proximity sensor. Integrating
RFID tags with secondary sensors has been proposed [13] or implemented [14] in various
contexts, and a small number of commercially available RFID sensors exist. In almost all
cases, these devices are ﬁxed function, and simply report a unique ID and sensor data.
Most of the commercially available products are ‘‘active tags,’’ meaning that the sensor
platform is battery-powered; they use the RFID channel for communication but not power.
In addition, existing RFID sensor devices are generally not programmable platforms
supporting arbitrary computation. Most recent research in IC-based passive sensor tags
262
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

has proceeded incrementally to augment the capabilities of RFID tags by integrating
additional functional blocks without going beyond a simple digital state machine at the
core. Thus these devices are, like ordinary ID-only tags, ﬁxed in function, not programm-
able. For example, ADCs, specialized logic, and temperature sensors have been integrated
into tag ICs with a ﬁnite state machine architecture typical of RFID tags [15,16]. WISP
represents an alternative design philosophy that focuses on the programmability of a full
microcontroller as part of a sensor-enhanced, passive RFID device.
One commercially available fully programmable microcontroller with an RFID interface
is described in Ref. [12]. However, this device can only transmit 1 bit of sensor data per
read event, and operates at 125 kHz, which limits its range to inches. The Near Field
Communication (NFC) standard is also a relevant point of comparison [17]. NFC uses
short-range RFID style 13.56 MHz communication to link powered devices. It does not
provide any power-harvesting capability.
The general purpose WISPs that are the focus of this chapter were preceded by several
less capable devices (also called WISPs) that were described in previous publications.
The a-WISP [1] used two mercury switches to mechanically toggle between two com-
mercially produced RFID integrated circuits. Thus if either of the two IDs was detected,
it is interpreted as indicating object presence; which of the two IDs is read effectively
conveys 1 bit of sensor data. We refer to this technique as ‘‘ID modulation.’’ The p-WISP
[18] used a microcontroller powered by harvested RF power to activate a GaAs RF
switch, which multiplexed two commercially available RFID ICs to one tag antenna, to
implement an electronically controlled form of ID modulation [19]. The p-WISP could
transmit at most 1 bit of sensor data per query, and used two separate antennae for
communication and power-harvesting. In Ref. [20], we presented the ﬁrst WISP to
implement the Gen 1 protocol on its own, without using a commercial RFID tag. This
was the ﬁrst WISP to use a single antenna for power-harvesting, reader-to-WISP data
downlink, and WISP-to-reader data uplink. Like its predecessors, this WISP also
encoded the sensor data in the EPC ID, but was able to control all bits of the ID, unlike
the earlier ID modulation devices. We reported light level measurement using this
platform; it also used its onboard processor to compute the CRC of the live light level
data [20]. In Ref. [21], we described a next generation of the WISP hardware (known as
Rev I), and presented a more detailed discussion of its design. The Rev I WISP used a
demodulation technique based on a ‘‘miniharvester.’’ This chapter focuses on a next
generation of WISP (called Rev 2.3) that is smaller than its predecessors and uses a new
demodulator called the ‘‘multifunction harvester–demodulator’’ that reduces demodula-
tor current leakage thus yielding improved range. Figure 14.1 is a photograph of the
Rev I and Rev 2.3 WISPs. Instead of a demodulator based on a second parallel harvester
(as in the Rev I WISP), the Rev 2.3 WISP’s main harvester can be selectively placed in a
demodulation mode; when demodulation is not enabled, there is no power leakage
through the demodulator.
The remaining sections of this chapter present the WISP design and power budget,
followed by experimental results on range, and several representative applications, includ-
ing several sensors and the RC5 cryptographic algorithm.
14.2
WISP Design
A block diagram of the WISP is shown in Figure 14.2. An antenna and impedance
matching circuit precede the analog front end. The power-harvester block rectiﬁes incom-
ing RF energy into DC voltage to power the system. The demodulator follows the envelope
WISP: A Passively Powered UHF RFID Tag with Sensing and Computation
263

of the RF carrier wave to extract the amplitude shift keying (ASK) data stream. This
extracted baseband waveform is read by the MSP430 microcontroller (MCU) to receive
downlink data from the reader. Uplink data is sent via the modulator circuit, which
functions by changing the antenna impedance. Finally, onboard sensors are powered
and measured by the MCU.
The Rev I WISP pictured in Figure 14.1 is made of a two-layer FR4 PCB with components
limited to the top side. The Rev 2.3 board, also pictured, has components on both sides.
A dipole antenna made of solid core wire is visible. The Rev 2.3 WISP in its base
conﬁguration (with no sensor daughterboard) has two onboard sensors: a temperature
sensor and an accelerometer.
Small header pins expose microcontroller ports for expansion of daughter boards,
external sensors, and peripherals.
FIGURE 14.1
Photograph of WISP (Rev 2.3, at top) and an older WISP (Rev I, bottom), with a ruler for scale. The design was
shrunk by using both sides of the PCB, using smaller components, and eliminating headers. Both boards include
an accelerometer and an external temperature sensor (in addition to one built in to the microcontroller). Additional
sensors or LEDs can be added by attaching a daughter board to header pins on the WISP.
Impedance
matching 
Power
harvester 
Modulator
(FSK)
Demodulator
(ASK)
External
sensor
ADC
Voltage
regulator 
MSP430
MCU
Ant
FIGURE 14.2
Block diagram of the WISP platform. (From Sample, A.P., Yeager, D.J., Powledge, P.S., and Smith, J.R., IEEE
International Conference on RFID 2007, March 26–28, 2007. With permission.)
264
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

14.2.1
Analog Front End and Tuning
A schematic of the WISP analog circuitry is shown in Figure 14.3. The WISP analog front
end differs slightly in purpose from that of conventional RFID tags. Due to the relatively
high power consumption of WISP, the rectiﬁer is designed to supply more current than
ordinary tags. This circuit is excited by commercial, EPC Class 1 Generation 1 compliant
readers operating at 902–928 MHz with an allowable transmission power of 4 WEIRP
(effective isotropic radiated power).
Due to loss in signal strength over transmission distance, there is potentially very little
power for the tag. Therefore, efﬁcient conversion of the incoming RF energy to DC power
for the tag is an important design consideration. A matching network provides maximum
power transfer from the antenna to the rectiﬁer, and a ﬁve-stage voltage doubling circuit
converts the incoming power to voltage. Low-threshold RF Schottky diodes are used to
maximize the voltage output of the rectiﬁer. Finally, this rectiﬁed DC voltage is stored in a
large capacitor and supplied to a 1.8 V regulator to power the WISP.
To tune the antenna, the two dipole branches were mounted to an SMA connector that
was then connected to a network analyzer, and the dipole length was optimized for 902–
928 MHz band. Next, an SMA connector was attached to the WISP board in place of the
antenna and the WISP was attached to the network analyzer, which was set to sweep from
902 to 928 MHz at a power of 0 dBm. The microcontroller was programmed to remain in
LPM4 sleep mode to minimize its power consumption. The WISP’s discreet matching
network, composed of a series inductor and parallel trimmable capacitor, was tuned
until the output voltage of the WISP was maximized. Note that the power-harvester is a
nonlinear device, and its efﬁciency is highly load-dependent. Ultimately, the front end
must be tuned to provide maximum output voltage in the presence of the desired load.
Optimizing the matching network for the load of the microcontroller in its LPM4 sleep
state effectively maximizes read range. To maximize read rate at close range, or power
delivered at close range, one would tune the matching network differently.
Antenna
Vrectified
Bit power
Enveloped 
signal ASK
1.8 V
LS
Demodulator
enable 
Voltage
regulator 
1.8 V
Voltage
supervisor 
Sufficient
voltage
FIGURE 14.3
Schematic of Rev 2.3 WISP. This design improves on the miniharvester of the Rev I WISP. The two rightmost
diodes are low frequency, low leakage diodes. The 10 diodes in the voltage doubling ladder are RF Schottky
diodes. Instead of using a second miniharvester for demodulation, the demodulator is connected directly to the
main harvester, but can be disabled to prevent energy from leaking through the demodulator’s pull-down resistor.
The component labeled ‘‘LS’’ is a level shifter. (From Sample, A.P., Yeager, D.J., Powledge, P.S., and Smith, J.R.,
IEEE International Conference on RFID 2007, March 26–28, 2007. With permission.)
WISP: A Passively Powered UHF RFID Tag with Sensing and Computation
265

14.2.2
Demodulation and Modulation
To encode reader-to-WISP data, in the EPC Gen 1 standard the reader amplitude modu-
lates the 915 MHz RF carrier wave it emits. Normally, the carrier waveform remains at a
constant amplitude; when bits are transmitted, the amplitude of the carrier drops to 10%
of its normal value. The duration of the low ‘‘break’’ indicates a logical ‘‘one’’ or a ‘‘zero.’’
A short break (2 mS) indicates ‘‘zero,’’ and a long break (5 mS) indicates ‘‘one.’’ The
harvester effectively demodulates the 915 MHz carrier, and leaves a baseband data
signal—the downlink data—on the order of 70 kHz. Most of this signal is rectiﬁed into a DC
voltage by the top right diode and large charge storage capacitor. When the demodulator is
enabled, some of the signal travels through the demodulator branch. This signal is also
rectiﬁed to produce a reference voltage for the bit detector, but the ﬁlter capacitor after the
demodulator diode is much smaller than the power accumulator capacitor. Effectively, it
removes the 70 kHz data signal and leaves a slowly varying average power level (i.e., just
fast enough so that it can change on the timescale that the tag moves in space, say 10 Hz)
that provides a dynamic reference for bit detection. Using this dynamic threshold, the
instantaneous output voltage from the voltage doubling ladder is thresholded by a Schmitt
trigger inverter, which removes noise and glitches. Finally, a level shifter (labeled LS in the
schematic) converts the relative magnitude of the incoming data waveform into a 1.8 V
logic level for the MSP430.
Note that the rails of the inverter and level shifter are connected neither to the main
unregulated supply (Vrec) nor to the regulated supply, but instead are fed by the output of
the ﬁnal, ‘‘additional’’ rectiﬁcation diode–capacitor pair in the demodulator section. In
addition, note that because the ﬁnal diodes are rectifying a 70 kHz signal instead of an RF
signal, we were able to use an ultralow leakage diode for this component instead of the
relatively high leakage Agilent HSMS-2852 RF diode used elsewhere.
14.2.3
Uplink
RFID tags do not actively transmit radio signals. Instead, they modulate the impedance of
their antenna which causes a change in the amount of energy reﬂected back to the reader.
This modulated reﬂection is typically called backscatter radiation. In order to change the
impedance of the antenna, a transistor is placed between the two branches of the dipole
antenna. When the transistor conducts current, it short circuits the two branches of the
antenna together, changing the antenna impedance; in the nonconducting state, the tran-
sistor ideally has no effect on the antenna, and thus the power-harvesting and data
downlink functions occur as if it were not present. WISP accomplishes this impedance
modulation with a 5 GHz RF bipolar junction transistor which allows for effective shunting
of the 915 MHz carrier wave.
14.2.4
Digital Section and Power Conditioning
As the power available to WISP is extremely limited, careful component selection must be
made to minimize current consumption. As advances in IC manufacturing now allow
discreet components with <1 mA current consumption and 1.8 V operation, we have
shown that it is now possible to construct working, passively powered RFID tags with
discreet components.
Most importantly, the general purpose computation abilities of WISP are enabled by an
ultralow power microcontroller. The 16 bit ﬂash microcontroller used in the Rev I WISP, the
MSP430F1232, can run up to 4 MHz with a 1.8 V supply and consumes 470 mA when active
for this choice of frequency and voltage. (The microcontroller has a 6 MHz 3 V mode which
266
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

consumes 1800 mA, which was used in Ref. [20]; in Ref. [21], we extended the range over the
early results of Ref. [20] by improving the microcontroller’s ﬁrmware, allowing for operation
at lower voltage and clock frequency, and thus longer range.) Of particular interest for low
power RFID applications, the MSP430 has various low power modes, and the minimum
RAM-retention supply current is only 0.1 mA at 1.5 V. The device provides over 8 kilobytes
of ﬂash memory, 256 bytes of RAM, and a 10 bit, 200 kilo-samples per second analog to
digital converter (ADC). The low power consumption of this relatively new device is a
critical factor in enabling use of a general purpose microcontroller in passive RFID systems.
Another critical design consideration is operation with uncertain power supply condi-
tions. Because the available RF power varies greatly throughout device operation, super-
visory circuitry is necessary to wake and sleep the device based on the supply voltage
level. The Rev I WISP uses a 1.9 V supervisor and a 1.6 V power-on-reset to control device
state and reset the microcontroller, respectively. The supervisor provides roughly 100 mV
of headroom on the storage capacitor above the 1.8 V regulator voltage. This serves to
buffer the supply voltage from dropping below 1.8 V due to the large power consumption
of the microcontroller in active mode.
14.2.5
Software
The onboard MSP430 programmable microcontroller is responsible for implementing EPC
Class 1 Generation 1 communication between the WISP and an RFID reader, as well as
measuring any attached sensors. Efﬁcient programming for the device is essential in
meeting the low power requirements of passive RFID tags. The WISP software can be
described on three levels. At the lowest level is the communication code, which generates
uplink bits and detects downlink bits. The next level, state and power management, is
responsible for managing the device state, including sleep vs. active modes. The third level
implements the application layer protocol for encoding sensor data in the tag ID.
14.2.5.1
Packet Decoding and Encoding
The most challenging aspect of programming the MSP430 involves meeting the timing
constraints of the EPC protocol while still maintaining a low clock frequency. RFID tags,
with custom state machines, are designed at the hardware level to receive and send using
the EPC protocol. The general purpose MSP430 must be carefully tuned to perform EPC
communication, both in the receiving and transmitting of data. In particular, a mix of C
and assembly language is used, where the C code maintains ease of conﬁgurability for the
ﬁrmware for different sensor applications and the assembly code allows ﬁne grained
control of the timing of the MSP430 for EPC communication.
The EPC protocol employs ASK modulation to encode data to the tag, representing the
data bits 1 and 0 with a long and short gaps in RF power, respectively. To receive data from
the reader, the MSP uses the periodic edge of the waveform as a hardware interrupt, and
then during the interrupt service routine re-samples the bit line to detect a 1 or 0 during the
differentiated part of the waveform. This data is quickly shifted into memory before
repeating this process. To detect the end of transmission, a timer is refreshed during each
bit. When bits are no longer received, the timer expires, the packet is interpreted, and if
appropriate, a response is sent to the reader.
If a valid query is received from the reader, the WISP responds with its current data
packet ‘‘ID.’’ First, the ID is copied into CPU registers to allow fast access during the
transmitting period. Second, the hardware timer is conﬁgured for pulse width-modulated
(PWM) output. Finally, each bit of the response is read from the CPU registers and
used to change the length of the PWM period, in time. Speciﬁcally, a zero is represented
WISP: A Passively Powered UHF RFID Tag with Sensing and Computation
267

by a 70 kHz square wave and a one is represented by a 140 kHz square wave. This
waveform is sent to the modulator, which creates backscatter radiation. It is important
to note that although the signal to the reader is in the form of an amplitude-modulated
reﬂection of energy, the data is encoded as a ‘‘higher order’’ frequency modulation of
the ‘‘lower order’’ amplitude modulation. The naming convention of describing the
uplink as frequency-modulated is maintained to be consistent with the EPC Gen 1
speciﬁcation.
14.2.5.2
System State and Power Management Algorithm
Meeting the low power requirements of passive RFID tags requires that the MSP430
dissipate, on average, as little power as possible. With various sleep modes and fast startup
time, this processor is well-suited to meet the stringent power requirements. In fact, time is
mostly spent in LP4 (low power mode 4) which draws only 0.1 mA, and the running
(active) mode current consumption is 470 mA at 3 MHz and 1.8 V.
Figure 14.4 shows the operational power cycle of the microprocessor. The system is
event driven by external interrupts from either the voltage supervisor signal or the bit line
communication interrupt. As shown in the diagram, the microcontroller sleeps between
events to conserve power.
There are three active mode blocks. The ﬁrst, designated ‘‘Generate Packet,’’ powers and
samples an attached sensor and calculates the CRC to complete the EPC-compliant ID. The
second block, designated ‘‘Receive,’’ is initiated by a communication interrupt from the
reader (demodulation circuit). The microcontroller receives the reader command and
responds if the query is recognized. The ﬁnal block, designated ‘‘Transmit,’’ involves
sending the ID to the reader. Some RFID readers must receive the same ID multiple
consecutive times to correctly report the ID. While not shown in Figure 14.4, the same
Receive and Transmit sequence is typically repeated three times to ensure that the reader
acknowledges the ID.
14.2.5.3
Sensor Data Encoding
To communicate sensor data from WISP to a computer through an RFID reader, the data
must be encoded into the tag ID. Using the ﬁrst byte after the CRC to denote the type
Hardware
reset
Power save mode (LP4)
Generate packet
(sample ADC, calculate CRC)
Sufficient
voltage
Insufficient voltage
Wait for
query (LP4)
Sufficient
voltage
Query
Receive and transmit
FIGURE 14.4
Operational power cycle. The hardware reset occurs at a lower voltage threshold; the ‘‘sufﬁcient voltage’’
threshold is higher than the hardware reset threshold. When the voltage is between the lower and upper
thresholds, the WISP remains in power save mode, which retains state. (From Sample, A.P., Yeager, D.J.,
Powledge, P.S., and Smith, J.R., IEEE International Conference on RFID 2007, March 26–28, 2007.)
268
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

of sensor attached, the remaining seven bytes can then be used to encode sensor data.
The onboard ADC provides with 10 bit samples, allowing a maximum of ﬁve measure-
ments to be transmitted per tag ID. This data is parsed on a computer in real time to
display the most recent measurements reported by WISP.
14.3
Power Budget
One of the signiﬁcant challenges of incorporating microcontrollers, sensors, and peri-
pherals into passive RFID technology is the ability to manage the large power consumption
of these devices. For example, the MSP430F1232 running at 3 MHz consumes 470 mA at
1.8 V. The resulting power consumption is signiﬁcantly larger than typical passive RFID
tags. Under these conditions, the harvester cannot continuously supply power to the WISP
during a single reader query.
One method used to overcome this challenge is to use a large storage capacitor (on the
order of microfarads) to accumulate charge over multiple EPC queries. This allows for
short bursts of power to activate and measure sensors and communicate at long distances
where received power is minimal.
If the single query power requirements are not met, the WISP sleeps for several
reader transmission cycles. This allows more time for charge accumulation. The approach
of duty cycling is often used in low power applications; however, this presents a
challenge for RFID networks when the WISP is not necessarily able to respond to each
reader query.
The next section examines the issues related to powering the WISP from two perspec-
tives. One is the power required to turn on the device and the other is the energy required
for active operation.
14.3.1
Turn On Power Requirement
In order to increase the operational distance of the WISP, the minimum power threshold
needed for turn-on is lowered by placing the device in a sleep mode, resulting in a
current consumption of 2 mA (MSP430 0.1 mA). Stated another way, the inactive current
consumption is minimized, allowing the harvester to rectify the 1.8 V needed for the
MSP430 to activate. Given sufﬁcient time, the storage cap will charge to the maximum
output voltage of the harvester. Thus, a key parameter for maximizing the read distance
of the WISP is not necessarily active current consumption but sleep current consump-
tion. (The other key parameter determining range is the minimum voltage required for
operation. The active mode power requirement determines maximum read rate, and is
less critical in determining range.) While this strategy can result in slower update rates,
it is necessary for powering large sensor loads over long distances. A signiﬁcant
amount of engineering is needed to keep the steady state inactive current consumption
under 2 mA.
As shown in Ref. [21], the Rev I WISP requires at least 4 dBm or 0.5 dBm to
function, depending on whether the power available to the WISP has dropped from a
higher level (in which case, it can function all the way down to 4 dBm) or is rising from
a lower level (in which case, it will not start until it has reached nearly 0.5 dBm). (In the
latter case, ‘‘start-up’’ energy costs as well as component brown-outs increase the device’s
effective power requirement.) Using these best- and worst-case input power ﬁgures, it is
possible to bracket the expected operating distance for the WISP using the Friis equation
14.1 for path loss.
WISP: A Passively Powered UHF RFID Tag with Sensing and Computation
269

PR ¼ PT  20 log 4pd
l


þ GT þ GR,
(14:1)
where
PR is the received power
PT is the transmitted power
l is the wavelength of the RF carrier wave
d is the distance from reader to WISP
GT and GR are the gains of the reader and WISP antennas in dBi
The transmit power of the reader PT ¼ 1 W ¼ 30 dBm. Its center frequency is 915 MHz,
corresponding to wavelength l ¼ 0.33 m. The transmit antenna gain GT ¼ 6 dBi (this yields
an EIRP of 4 WEIRP, the U.S. regulatory limit for this ISM band). The receive antenna gain
GR ¼ 2 dBi using the standard ﬁgure for the gain of a dipole antenna. Using the operating
thresholds of 4 and 0.5 dBm, the Friis model, which does not model multipath effects,
predicts operating range thresholds of 3.3 m (moving from near to far) and 2.2 m (moving
from far to near). Experimentally, we have observed longer ranges than predicted by the
Friis model enabled by additional multipath power. We have observed EPC packets
received up to 4.5 m, which is discussed further in later sections.
14.3.2
Active Energy Consumption
Thus so far, it has been shown that a minimum power requirement needs to be met to rectify
enough voltage to turn on the WISP. Additionally, an appropriate duty cycle period is
needed to allow the storage capacitor to charge to the turn-on voltage threshold. Since the
rectiﬁer cannot supply enough power for continuous operation, it is important to under-
stand the amount of energy that needs to be stored to power the WISP during active periods.
During one EPC Gen 1 reader query, the complete WISP (not just the microcontroller)
consumes on average 600 mA at 1.8 V. Only the WISP’s active period is considered, which
is measured from ﬁrst bit of the received preamble to 100 ms after the last bit of the
response packet is transmitted, totaling 2 ms. For a storage capacitor of 8.5 mF voltage
head room needed above 1.8 V is 136 mV, resulting in a total minimum voltage threshold
of 1.93 V for a complete packet transmission.
The same methodology of calculating the required stored energy can be used to when
selecting sensors to be added to the WISP platform. Sensor tasks and packet generation are
generally done before the EPC query. However, it is reasonable to assume that when
performing sensor applications the WISP will exhibit similar voltage and current consump-
tion. Inequality (Equation 14.2) expresses an energy feasibility condition for a particular
sensor: the energy required to read the sensor must not exceed the usable stored energy.
The expression can be used to calculate the voltage headroom required to operate a
particular sensor, which in turn determines the range at which the sensor can be operated.
Vdd(IS þ Iw)T  1
2 C V2
rec  V2
dd


,
(14:2)
where
IS and Iw are the current consumption for the sensor and WISP, respectively
C is the capacitance of the storage capacitor
T is the total time of active operation
Vrec is the rectiﬁed voltage
Vdd is the required operating voltage
270
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

Assuming that the sensor has the same voltage supply as the WISP, Vdd equals 1.8 V. The
left-hand side of inequality (Equation 14.2) is a straightforward expression for energy
consumed by the sensor and WISP. The right-hand side represents usable stored energy.
(Note that the total energy stored on the capacitor is 1
2 CV2
rec, but not all of it is usable since
charge stored on the capacitor at a voltage less than Vdd cannot operate the WISP.) Inequality
(Equation 14.2) makes it clear that the limiting factor when selecting sensors is not only the
current consumption (which determines power), but also the total required execution time
of the sensor and WISP (energy rather than power). Additionally, it is important that sensors
be disabled when not in use to minimize unnecessary energy expenditure.
14.4
Experimental Results
Figure 14.5 shows experimental results of the WISP performance: rectiﬁed output voltage,
uplink packet error rate, and tag responses per reader query are plotted versus received
power (dBm, top scale) and calculated distance (bottom scale). The experimental setup
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
Calculated distance (m)
Peak recieved power (dBm)
Output (V)
Responses per query (%)
Uplink packet errors (%)
WISP Threshold voltage (1.9 V)
Percent (%)
Voltage ( V )
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
3.3
0.2
2.7
4.7
6.2
7.6
8.7
9.8
10.7
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
FIGURE 14.5
WISP performance harvested voltage, uplink packet error rate, and ‘‘Responses per query’’ as a function of input
power (top scale) and calculated distance (bottom scale). The input power was controlled with an attentuator and the
effective distance was calculated using the Friis transmission formula. The horizontal line with no markers shows
the WISP voltage supervisor threshold of 1.9 V. ‘‘Uplink packet errors’’ is the number of failed uplink packets
divided by attempted uplink packets, expressed as a percentage. ‘‘Responses per query’’ is the percentage of
issued reader queries that return a packet with a valid CRC.
WISP: A Passively Powered UHF RFID Tag with Sensing and Computation
271

consisted of an EPC Gen 1 RFID reader driving a 6 dBi circularly polarized patch antenna.
The reader’s antenna and WISP were placed 1 m apart and 1 m off the ground to minimize
multipath effects. An adjustable attenuator was used to vary the power delivered from the
reader to the patch antenna. Then the Friis path loss equation was used to calculate the loss
of the RF signal from the reader to the tag over the 1 m. Thus, the WISP received power is
deﬁned as reader transmit power (1 Watt), minus variable attenuator, minus transmission
path loss. It should be noted that the 1 Watt source represents peak output power of the
RFID reader, while the average output power (not considered here) is highly dependent on
reader transmission rate and the speciﬁc implantation of the EPC Gen 1 protocol.
To measure rectiﬁed output voltage, the WISP is placed in its low power state, and
voltage is averaged over a 10 s interval using an oscilloscope. Responses per query shows
the number of successful tag responses received by the reader normalized over the total
number of queries made. This is roughly equivalent to the operating duty cycle of the
WISP, and as expected, is proportional to received power. The response rate drops to 0 at
–3 dBm because there is insufﬁcient voltage for operation. Uplink packet errors
is the fraction of query responses made by the tag that is not correctly received by the
RFID reader. Due to the limited data interface with the RFID reader selected for the
experiment, the number of reader-rejected uplink packets is not directly available. To
collect this data, the WISP counts the number of query responses it has made and reports
the current tally as data encoded in each uplink packet. When the RFID reader application
software receives gaps in the running tag response tally, an error is recorded. Figure 14.5
shows that uplink packet error rate increases and duty cycles decreases as available power
18:00
20:00
22:00
00:00
02:00
04:00
06:00
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
Light level data
Time of day (h)
Light level (amplitude)
FIGURE 14.6
Light level measured by WISP in a 13 h period. The experiment began at about 5:40 p.m. (17:40 h). The ﬁrst curve
down is sunset. At around 9 p.m. (21:00 h), the measured light level drops substantially, probably because some
lights in the laboratory were extinguished. At about 10 p.m. (22:00 h), the light level drops very low, probably
because the remainder of the lights in the laboratory were extinguished. Just before 6 a.m. (06:00 h), the beginning
of sunrise is visible, and the laboratory lights turn on. (From Smith, J.R., Sample, A., Powledge, P., Mamishev, A.,
and Roy, S., Proceedings of Ubicomp 2006: 8th International Conference on Ubiquitous Computing, Orange Country, CA,
USA, September 17–21, 2006. With permission.)
272
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

decreases. The communication instability is primarily caused by the digitally controlled
oscillator, which is used as the system clock, becoming detuned as supply voltage drops
below 1.8 V.
14.5
Sensors and Applications
Very low power sensors requiring <50 mA of current are relatively easy to integrate with
WISP. Examples include light, temperature, push buttons, and rectiﬁed voltage level.
Figure 14.6 shows results from a light level measurement made with WISP [20].
We found the accuracy and power consumption of the on-chip MSP430 temperature
sensor to be disappointing, but more accurate low power solid state temperature sensors
are readily available, and we added an external temperature sensor to the WISP. Figure
14.7 shows a time series of temperature measurements reported by WISP using an external
temperature sensor. An inverted can of compressed air was used to generate a low
temperature impulse. After the WISP’s temperature sensor had recovered for about 30 s,
a heat gun was used to generate a high temperature impulse. The WISP continued to
function properly even as its temperature sensor was driven from 408C to þ608C.
Figure 14.8 shows data collected by a triaxial accelerometer on WISP [J.R. Smith et al.,
submitted]. The accelerometer draws 200 mA at 1.8 V. Due to the relatively high current
consumption of these devices, continuously powering them would cripple the range of
WISP. To overcome these high power requirements, the sensor is only be powered for a
short period of time to take a measurement. Provided that the sensor and conditioning
electronics can stabilize sufﬁciently quickly, this allows for a wide range of sensors to be
measured over UHF RFID. Powering this accelerometer, the WISP is able to provide
accelerometer measurements at rates of 10–20 samples per second, depending on
Temperature sensor response
−40
−20
0
20
40
60
80
Time (s)
Temperature (°C)
Air duster
(cold)
Heat gun
(hot) 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
FIGURE 14.7
Temperature measurement with the WISP. A can of compressed air (held inverted) was used to generate a low
temperature impulse, visible at about 2.5 s in the ﬁgure. The temperature reported by the WISP is allowed to
recover toward room temperature for about 30 s, at which time a heat gun is used to generate a high temperature
impulse.
WISP: A Passively Powered UHF RFID Tag with Sensing and Computation
273

range. After the measurement is taken and the data packed into the EPC ID, the WISP
calculates the correct CRC. Then the ‘‘ID’’ is reported to the RFID reader, and the infor-
mation is then decoded in real time by the computer.
Figure 14.9 shows a WISP strain gage device, compared with a wired version of the
same transducer, and compared with a more accurate extensiometer device for ground
truth measurement [D.J. Yeager et al., submitted]. The power requirements of the strain
gage are more substantial than those of the accelerometer: the strain gage is a relatively high
current consumption resistive sensor, conﬁgured with a Wheatstone bridge and ampliﬁcation.
Figure 14.10 illustrates an application that makes use of WISP’s computing rather than its
sensing capabilities. With colleagues, we implemented the RC5 encryption algorithm on the
WISP platform [22]. Most previous work on cryptography for UHF RFID assumed that
sufﬁcient power for traditional cryptography would not be available on a UHF tag. There-
fore, many stripped down (or ‘‘minimalist’’) cryptographic schemes have been proposed for
UHF RFID. Unfortunately, many have been broken. WISP shows that traditional ‘‘max-
imalist’’ cryptography can be implemented on a UHF RFID tag.
14.6
Conclusion
This chapter presented the design of WISP, a programmable, passively powered
UHF RFID tag. WISP includes a general purpose 16 bit ﬂash microcontroller, with analog
to digital converter. WISP is powered by a read by an ordinary, unmodiﬁed standards-
compliant
UHF
RFID
reader.
After
presenting
the
design,
power
budget,
and
power-harvesting performance of WISP, we described several applications: measurement
of light, temperature, acceleration, and strain, as well as implementation of the RC5
cryptographic algorithm.
More generally, WISP has proven the feasibility of powering a 16 bit microcontroller and
arbitrary low power sensors using only the RF energy from a standards-compliant RFID
−1
−0.5
0
0.5
1
−1 −1
−0.5
−0.5
0
0
0.5
0.5
1
1
z axis acceleration
x axis acceleration
y axis acceleration
FIGURE 14.8
Data from two of the axes of a wirelessly powered triaxial accelerometer. The WISP was rotated with respect
to gravity to generate this ﬁgure. As the x- and y-sensitive axes of the WISP change orientation with respect to
gravity, the proportion of earth’s constant 1 G of gravitational acceleration reported by the changes in x- and
y-axes sensors.
274
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

reader. Furthermore, WISP has demonstrated the communication of sensor data using the
EPC Class 1 Generation 1 protocol. The authors believe that WISP is the ﬁrst of a new class
of battery-free, wireless sensing, and computational devices.
Step loading of specimen
0
500
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
1000
1500
2000
2500
Time [s]
Microstrain
WISP (S/G)
Strain gage
Extensometer WISP
Extensometer gage
FIGURE 14.9
Strain recorded during the step loading of a specimen. (From Yeager, D.J., Quetin, G.R., Kim, S.H., Duncan, J.,
Miller, M., Smith, J.R., and Feraboli, P., Development of a Wirelessly-Powered Strain Gage for Aerospace Applications,
2007, submitted for publication.) The four traces show data collected by the WISP strain gage ‘‘WISP (S=G),’’ the
same transducer powered and read conventionally (strain gage), and a more accurate ground truth sensor
measured simultaneously with the WISP (extensiometer WISP) and simultaneously with the conventional strain
gage (extensiometer gage).
VOUT
Generate packet
(RC5, Compute CRC)
Transmit &
receive
RESET
Power save mode (LP4)
LP4
Wait for query (LP4)
Reader OFF
Reader ON
1 1.00 v/
2  1.00 v/
480 ms
100 ms/
344 mv
Stop
Pat1
FIGURE 14.10
Trace of VOUT (power supply) before, during, and after RC5 encryption. While the Reader is ON (i.e., sending
queries), the WISP’s voltage level stairs up. The ramp up from 0 V is omitted on the left. The voltage supervisor
wakes up the WISP from LP4 when the voltage level exceeds 3.3 V, and WISP begins its computation (Generate
Packet). When the reader receives the WISP’s response, the reader stops sending queries, cutting off RF power to
the WISP. This is observed as a gradual decline of voltage at the right side of the ﬁgure. The WISP ﬁrst enters LP4
and then resets as the voltage level falls below the minimum operating voltage. The total latency from 0 V until the
end of RF response transmission in this case is 2 s. (From Chae, H.J., Yeager, D.J., Smith, J.R., and Fu, K.,
Proceedings of the Conference on RFID Security, July 2007. With permission.)
WISP: A Passively Powered UHF RFID Tag with Sensing and Computation
275

References
1. M. Philipose, J.R. Smith, B. Jiang, K. Sundara-Rajan, A. Mamishev, and S. Roy. Battery-free
wireless identiﬁcation and sensing, IEEE Pervasive Computing, 4(1), 37–45, 2005.
2. S.S. Intille, K. Larson, E. Munguia Tapia, J.S. Beaudin, P. Kaushik, J. Nawyn, and R. Rockinson,
Using a live-in laboratory for ubiquitous computing research. Proceedings of PERVASIVE 2006,
Vol. LNCS 3968, K.P. Fishkin, B. Schiele, P. Nixon, and A. Quigley (Eds.) Berlin, Heidelberg:
Springer-Verlag, 2006, pp. 349–365.
3. D.E. Culler and H. Mulder, Smart sensors to network the world, Scientiﬁc American, 85–91, June
2004.
4. S. Roundy et al., Energy Scavenging for Wireless Sensor Networks, Kluwer Academic Publishers,
New York, 2003.
5. J. Paradiso and M. Feldmeier, A compact, wireless, self-powered pushbutton controller. Proceed-
ings of the 3rd International Conference on Ubiquitous Computing (Ubicomp 2001), Berlin, Heidelberg:
Springer-Verlag, pp. 299–304, 2001.
6. Web pages on the cavity resonator microphone can be found at http:==www.nsa.gov=
museum=museu00029.cfm and http:==www.spybusters.com=Great_Seal_Bug.html
7. R. Fletcher, Low-Cost Electromagnetic Tagging: Design and Implementation, PhD Dissertation, MIT,
Cambridge, MA, 2001.
8. J. Paradiso, K. Hsiao, and A. Benbasat, Tangible music interfaces using passive magnetic tags.
Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems: Special Workshop on New
Interfaces for Musical Expression (CHI 2001), New York: ACM Press, 2001.
9. K. Finkenzeller, RFID Handbook, 2nd ed., John Wiley & Sons, 2003.
10. http:==www.epcglobalinc.org=standards_technology=Secure=v1.0=UHF-class1.pdf
11. http:==www.epcglobalinc.org=standards=uhfc1g2=UHFC1G2_1_0_9-StandardRatiﬁed-20050126.pdf
12. http:==www.datasheetcatalog.com=datasheets_pdf=M=C=R=F=MCRF202.shtml
13. R. Want, Enabling ubiquitous sensing with RFID, Computer, 37(4), 84–86,2004.
14. K. Opasjumruskit, T. Thanthipwan, O. Sathusen, P. Sirinamarattana, P. Gadmanee, E. Pootarapan,
N. Wongkomet, A. Thanachayanont, and M. Thamsirianunt, Self-powered wire-less temperature
sensors exploit RFID technology, IEEE Pervasive Computing Magazine, 5(1), 54–61, 2006.
15. C. Namjun et al., A 5.1-mW 0.3-mm2 UHF RFID tag chip integrated with sensors for wireless
environmental monitoring, IEEE European Solid State Circuits Conference (ESSCIRC), Grenoble,
France, September 2005.
16. F. Kocer and M.P. Flynn. A new transponder architecture with on-chip ADC for long-range
telemetry applications, IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits, 41(5), 1142–1148, 2006.
17. http:==www.nfc-forum.org=home
18. J.R. Smith, K.P. Fishkin, B. Jiang, A. Mamishev, M. Philipose, A. Rea, S. Roy, and K. Sundara-
Rajan. RFID-based techniques for human activity detection, Communications of the ACM, 48(9),
39–44, September 2005.
19. J.R. Smith, B. Jiang, S. Roy, M. Philipose, K. Sundara-Rajan, and A. Mamishev. ID modulation:
Embedding sensor data in an RFID timeseries. Proceedings of Information Hiding 2005, LNCS 3727,
pp. 234–246, 2005.
20. J.R. Smith, A. Sample, P. Powledge, A. Mamishev, and S. Roy. A wirelessly powered platform for
sensing and computation. Proceedings of Ubicomp 2006: 8th International Conference on Ubiquitous
Computing, Orange Country, CA, USA, pp. 495–506, September 17–21, 2006.
21. A.P. Sample, D.J. Yeager, P.S. Powledge, and J.R. Smith. Design of a passively-powered, pro-
grammable sensing platform for UHF RFID systems. IEEE International Conference on RFID 2007,
March 26–28, 2007.
22. H.J. Chae, D.J. Yeager, J.R. Smith, and K. Fu. Maximalist cryptography and computation on the
WISP UHF RFID tag. Proceedings of the Conference on RFID Security, Malaga, Spain, July 2007,
available online at http:==rﬁdsec07.etsit.uma.es=slides=papers=paper-31.pdf.
276
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

Section III
Applications


15
From Automatic Identiﬁcation and Data
Capture to ‘‘Smart Business Process’’:
Preparing for a Pilot Integrating RFID
Samuel Fosso Wamba, Élisabeth Lefebvre, Ygal Bendavid, and Louis-A. Lefebvre
CONTENTS
15.1
Introduction...................................................................................................................... 279
15.2
Background and Context................................................................................................ 280
15.2.1 Middleware as a Key Component of the RFID System................................ 280
15.2.2 Focus on Business Processes ............................................................................. 282
15.3
Research Design............................................................................................................... 283
15.3.1 Choice of One Supply Chain in One Industry............................................... 283
15.3.2 The Field Research and Corresponding Activities ........................................ 284
15.3.3 Research Sites and Data Collection Methods ................................................. 284
15.4
Results and Discussion ................................................................................................... 284
15.4.1 The Technological Infrastructure...................................................................... 286
15.4.2 The Underlying Logic for Decision Rules in Middleware............................ 286
15.4.3 Examples of Actions Triggered Automatically by Middleware.................. 287
15.5
Conclusion ........................................................................................................................ 290
References.................................................................................................................................... 292
15.1
Introduction
Radio frequency identiﬁcation (RFID) technology is considered as ‘‘the next big thing’’ in
management (Wyld, 2006, p. 154) since the technology enables (1) the optimization of
multiple business processes through the improvement, the automation, or even the elimi-
nation of existing processes (Strassner and Schoch, 2004; Fosso Wamba et al., 2006) and (2)
the emergence of new processes called ‘‘intelligent processes’’ or ‘‘smart processes,’’ which
are automatically triggering actions or events. The latter point represents one of the most
promising beneﬁts from RFID applications and is the focus of this chapter.
Over the last four years, RFID technology has received a great deal of attention which
was initially triggered by mandatory requirements from major organizations in the U.S.
(e.g., Wal-Mart and U.S. Department of Defense) and in Europe (e.g., Metro AG and Tesco).
Since then, the motivations for RFID adoption have moved from mandatory compliance to
voluntary undertakings as companies are increasingly exploring the true potential of the
279

technology, especially in the context of supply chains. As stated by Pisello (2006, p. 1), ‘‘the
network effects of a synchronized supply chain will result in numerous beneﬁts, including
improved scan reliability, process automation, and real-time information access.’’
Recent key developments in technology with respect to hardware (i.e., integrated cir-
cuits, readers, antennas, printers) and software (i.e., ﬁrmware, middleware) have permit-
ted to overcome some technical limitations of RFID applications. However, if the ability for
automatic capture of data has improved substantially, the capacity to efﬁciently manage
this data, and transform it into business intelligence is still limited. As the marketing
director of an RFID solution provider involved in our project mentioned ‘‘Today, second
generation tags are revolutionizing the way data is captured. Companies that initially
performed pilots a couple years ago were faced with multiple technological limitations
such as limited reading performance. Today, the main focus should be on one core
component of RFID systems, that is the middleware.’’ While most supply chain managers
have now some knowledge of what RFID technology is about, they do not yet grasp the
full implications of the business process redesign entailed by RFID implementation, and
their understanding of the required conﬁguration in the middleware to optimize supply
chain operations is still limited.
The main objective of this chapter is to propose an approach for conﬁguring and
validating business rules in an RFID middleware. The proposed approach, relying on
empirical evidence gathered from a detailed ﬁeld study, will facilitate the dialog and
bridge the gap between technical professionals and managers involved in RFID projects.
This would in turn allow to better capitalize on the potential of RFID technology, which
eventually lead to more successful RFID implementation.
15.2
Background and Context
15.2.1
Middleware as a Key Component of the RFID System
RFID technology is classiﬁed as a wireless automatic identiﬁcation and data capture
(AIDC). A basic RFID system is composed of a tag containing a microprocessor, a reader
and its antennas, and a computer equipped with a middleware program, in which business
rules are conﬁgured (Asif and Mandviwalla, 2005). The tag generally attached to a product
communicates through radio frequencies with the reader’s antennas. The reader sends the
location and unique identiﬁcation of the product to a computer. On the basis of precon-
ﬁgured rules, the middleware can adjust or initiate business processes automatically.
RFID middleware is considered as one essential intelligence-added component of any
RFID system and could be linked with other ﬁrm information systems (see Figure 15.1).
More precisely, the middleware consists of the operating system, the data repository, and
the processing algorithms that convert multiple tag inputs into visible tracking or identi-
ﬁcation data. The middleware could provide the following: (1) multiple reader conﬁgur-
ation, control and monitoring; (2) access coordination to an environment with multiple
applications; (3) receiving events generated by a reader; (4) data ﬁltering, smoothing, and
aggregating; and (5) data routing to enterprise applications such as a Warehouse Manage-
ment System (WMS), Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP), Transport Management System
(TMS), or a Manufacturing Execution System (MES) (Floerkemeier and Lampe, 2005;
Nurminen, 2006).
Driven by the rising number of RFID applications and by mandates from important
players such as Wal-Mart, the U.S. Department of Defense, Tesco, Target and Metro AG,
and from their own major suppliers, the market for RFID middleware has grown rapidly in
280
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

recent years. O’Connor (2006) estimates that the global market for RFID middleware
had expanded from 2004 to 2005 by almost 162%. Although the market for RFID middle-
ware is estimated to reach for $135 million in 2007 or roughly 3% of RFID systems
revenues, it is projected to grow to almost $1,557.5 million in 2011 (WinterGreen Research,
2005). The RFID middleware offering is characterized by the presence of numerous ﬁrms,
ranging from (1) pure-play vendors such as GlobeRanger and OATSystems; (2) application
vendors such as Manhattan Associates, RedPrairie, Oracle, and SAP; and (3) integration
specialists such as TIBCO Software and Ascential Software, to (iv) platform giants like
Sun Microsystems, IBM, Oracle, and Microsoft (O’Connor, 2007).
Some of the major obstacles to widespread RFID adoption tend to disappear. First, the
costs of an RFID middleware have decreased drastically, moving from about $125,000 per
installed site a few years ago to $5,000 to $20,000 today (Nurminen, 2006). This downward
trend positions RFID technology in a more affordable spectrum of potential investments
and will eventually facilitate its adoption. Second, the current correct tags reading has
reached 100% at the pallet level (Paxar, 2005) and is constantly improving at the item level.
Third, chip technology has improved to a point where tags have become much more
affordable. The concerns are now more focussed on middleware issues such as the capacity
needs in order to manage large number of readers and the huge amount of data these
readers generate (Floerkemeier and Lampe, 2005). In addition, the next trends in the RFID
middleware will be more and more integrated with other technologies. For example, the
Internal
database
External
database
ERP
WMS
• Context-based filtering and routing
• RFID network monitoring
Mobile
readers
Fixed
readers
RFID tags
RFID middleware
1st layer
2nd layer
• Basic data filtering-aggregation
• Reader connectivity
• Process management
• Enterprise and B2B application integration
Business
partner
information
systems
FIGURE 15.1
Positioning RFID middleware in an RFID system.
From Automatic Identiﬁcation and Data Capture to ‘‘Smart Business Process’’
281

integration with wireless technologies, such as Local Area Network (LAN), General Packet
Radio Service (GPRS), and Global Positioning System (GPS), could enable real-time track-
ing and tracing (LogicaCMG, 2004).
In all cases, ‘‘installing the software is only the start’’ (GXS, p. 11, 2005). Indeed,
applications at the process level as well as at the technical level need to be conﬁgured in
the RFID middleware in order to trigger appropriate actions when speciﬁc events occur.
Finally, the increasing concerns from supply chain members with the accuracy of inventory
data and validity of RFID tagged items (O’Connor, 2004) can be effectively addressed by
the RFID middleware, which acts as a bridge between the ‘‘physical RFID world’’ and the
‘‘software RFID infrastructure.’’ The middleware thus allows the automatic interpretation
and the semantic transformation of observations generated from the automatic data
collection on tagged items into business logic data prior to their integration into existing
information systems (e.g., ERP, WMS) (Fusheng and Peiya, 2005).
Previous work on the role of the middleware in RFID applications within a supply chain
context is still scarce but represents an emerging and fast growing area of research. Among
the recent conceptual papers, Gunasekaran and Ngai (2005) suggest that RFID technology
may facilitate the development of supply chain conﬁgurations by acting as an enabler of a
build to order (BTO) strategy. In the same line of thought, Pramataris et al. (2005) suggest
that RFID technology may constitute a link to more collaborative approaches such as CPFR
(Collaborative Planning, Forecasting and Replenishment). Kelepouris et al. (2007) also
suggest that RFID technology can act as an enabler of traceability in the food supply
chain. While exploring the impacts of RFID technology in a retail supply chain, Lefebvre
et al. (2005) also identify the emergence of ‘‘intelligent processes’’ to support RFID-enabled
Business-to-Business electronic commerce applications. Finally, Loebbecke and Palmer
(2006) also examine the results of a joint RFID pilot project conducted between Kaufhof
Department Stores, a leading European retailer and Gerry Weber, a fashion merchandise
manufacturer. Results from the pilot study reveals that data derived from RFID technology
about ‘‘products, processes, product movement, and even customer behavior can be
used for proprietary and distinctive capabilities to gain competitive advantage, if turned
into understandable and usable ‘‘content.’’ The earlier-mentioned work points to the
overriding importance of middleware conﬁguration and integration as a key aspect of
RFID strategy.
15.2.2
Focus on Business Processes
IT (Information Technologies) and BPR (Business Process Reengineering) are strongly
associated. BPR (Hammer and Champy, 1993) is considered as ‘‘a critical enabler of new
operational and management processes’’ (Kohli and Hoadley, 2006, p. 41) and could be
used for instance as a means to cut nonvalue-added activities and to improve competi-
tiveness (Kohli and Hoadley, 2006). Yet, IT investments represent a major driver for
changes in business processes, enhancing informational and coordination capabilities,
and thus, leading to cost reductions and better customer services. IT and BPR could
therefore be viewed as ‘‘complimentary factors and must be changed in a coordinated
manner to improve performance’’ (Kohli and Hoadley, 2006, p. 42). In the particular case of
EDI, Riggins and Mukhopadhyay (1994) showed that the alignment of business process
and EDI adoption lead to better information sharing, and thus, higher ﬁrm performance.
In a supply chain context, Kohli and Sherer (2002) strongly suggest that in order to fully
capture the beneﬁts from IT investments, supply chain actors need to conduct major
changes in their business processes by adopting a process approach. In fact, ‘‘when the
process approach is used, other factors that affect the translation of IT assets to impacts are
investigated more clearly’’ (Kohli and Sherer, 2002, p. 7). This process approach is also
282
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

highlighted by many other authors (e.g., Mooney et al., 1996) when exploring that IT
business value and its potential as an enabler of organizational processes and supply chain
structure improvement. Finally, the business process approach has been promoted as an
appropriate or even an ideal approach to study the impact of IT at a more detailed level by
‘‘investigating how IT use in one stage affects a downstream IT and other organizational
effects’’ (Byrd and Davidson, 2003, p. 244).
More recently, some researchers such as Strassner and Schoch (2004), Subirana et al.
(2003), Youngil et al. (2006), Lefebvre et al. (2005), and Bornhövd et al. (2004) show that
automatic identiﬁcation technologies such as RFID technology could have a strong impact
on business processes. For instance, Lefebvre et al. (2005) used a process mapping method-
ology and found that RFID technology could be considered as a disruptive technology as it
supports a new business model, entails major redesign of existing processes, and fosters a
higher level of electronic integration between supply chain members.
Our study builds on the business process approach and focuses on one supply chain in
the retail industry.
15.3
Research Design
As the main objective of this study is to improve our understanding of the role of the
middleware as an intelligent interface supporting RFID applications, the research design
clearly corresponds to an exploratory research initiative (Eisenhardt, 1989) and is
grounded in real-life settings. The following sections brieﬂy describe the industry and
one of its supply chain, the research activities, the research sites and the data collection
methods.
15.3.1
Choice of One Supply Chain in One Industry
The current retail industry is highly globalized and facing ﬁerce challenges: intense
competition from powerful mega players (for instance, the ten largest American retailers’
accounts for 65% of the U.S. market share), increasingly sophisticated and customized
demand from ﬁnal consumers, and thin proﬁt margins. Retailers have been relying on IT to
lower their transaction costs, manage the explosion of the number of Stock Keeping Units
(SKUs) within their stores, cope with high volume of daily transactions, and automate
manual processes (Fleisch and Tellkamp, 2005). Lately, they have turned to RFID technol-
ogy and are considered as the lead users of this technology.
As a lead user, Wal-Mart is probably the most cited example in the retail industry: by
adopting RFID, it would save annually almost $600 million and would in some cases
cut by half its out-of-stock supply chain costs (Asif and Mandviwalla, 2005). RFID
deployment at Wal-Mart is increasing at a rapid space. In fact, the number of Wal-
Mart stores has increased from 100 stores in 2003 to 1000 stores in 2007 (Cecere and
Suleski, 2007). Procter & Gamble represents another convincing example of rather
successful deployment of RFID with estimated annual savings of almost $400 million
for inventories (Srivastava, 2004) and reductions of out-of-stocks by half in some cases
(Johnson, 2007). Yet, results are not as conclusive for all retailers RFID pilots since some
have been delayed or even discontinued (Cecere and Suleski, 2007). The retained supply
chain under investigation in this paper (Figure 15.2) operates in the beverage retail
industry.
The focal ﬁrm, called here ﬁrm A, is considered as an important player with an overall
annual volume of 15 million cases transiting through its Distribution Centers (DC), and
From Automatic Identiﬁcation and Data Capture to ‘‘Smart Business Process’’
283

with an average of 2.7 million cases passing through its docks and its business partners.
The focus of the ﬁeld study encompasses three layers as indicated in Figure 15.2. Firm
A indicated that its primary motivations towards RFID technology were the reductions of
warehousing costs (e.g., inventory) and the elimination of inventory discrepancies.
15.3.2
The Field Research and Corresponding Activities
The overall research project was conducted in four phases as indicated in Figure 15.3.
Within the scope of this paper, results from phase 2 (i.e., scenario building and validation)
and phase 3 (i.e., scenario demonstration) are presented. More speciﬁcally, results from
steps 10, 11, and 12, which are directly linked to the middleware will be discussed in more
detail. All data and information gathered in the previous steps served as an input to the
subsequent steps. Although Figure 15.3 seems to indicate that research activities were
conducted in a linear manner, a few iterations were actually necessary in order to reach
a consensus among the participants.
Twenty four persons participated to steps 10, 11, and 12: seven key executives from the
focal ﬁrm and its supply chain partners, namely three ﬁrst-tier suppliers and one retailer,
eight professionals and managers from technology ﬁrms (including the middleware devel-
opers) and nine members of the research teams. The role of the researchers ranged from full
participants (when elaborating the technological scenario, for business rules conﬁguration
and testing in the middleware—i.e., step 10) and to full observers when activities 10, 11, or
12 were concerned.
15.3.3
Research Sites and Data Collection Methods
The ﬁeld study was carried on-site in the ofﬁces and distribution center of the ﬁve
organizations involved as business partners in the chosen supply chain (see Figure 15.2)
and in one university-based research laboratory. Both qualitative and quantitative data
were collected. Figure 15.4 summarizes the different data collection methods and their use
in the different research sites.
15.4
Results and Discussion
In this study, we have adopted a warehouse perspective in conformity with the choice of
the managers of the focal ﬁrm A. This choice enables all participants to understand how the
work is carried out within one type of a warehouse in order to fully grasp the impacts of
implementing RFID technology. Four distinct warehousing activities are usually identi-
ﬁed—namely the receiving, the put-away, the picking, and the shipping (Van Den Berg
Producers
1st tier
supplier
(firms S1,S2,S3)
Focal firm
(Firm A)
Retailer
(Firm R)
Stores
Final
consumers
FIGURE 15.2
Focus of the ﬁeld study in the selected retail supply chain.
284
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

and Zijm, 1999)—that can beneﬁt from RFID technology (Lefebvre et al., 2005).Within the
scope of this paper, only the picking and shipping processes will be discussed. We will ﬁrst
describe the technological infrastructure (Section 4.1) before presenting the underlying
logic for the elaboration of the decision rules in the middleware (Section 4.2). Finally,
Preliminary phase: Vision and orientation
Step a 
Choice of test bed based on the partners accessibility openness, readiness, and potential RFID applications
Step b 
Vision statement by or with potential industrial and technological partners (focus groups)
Step c 
Identification of generic business applications and commitment from strategic business partners to the
research project
Phase 1: Opportunity seeking
Step 1
Determination of the primary motivation towards RFID
Understanding the primary motivation to consider the use of RFID technologies (WHY?)
Step 2
Analysis of the product value chain (PVC)
Understanding the activities specific to a given product (WHAT?)
Step 3
Identification of the critical activities in the PVC
Identification of critical PVC activities (WHICH activities to select and WHY?)
Step 4
Mapping of the network of firms supporting the PVC
Mapping the Supply Chain Network to understand the link between the network of firms supporting the
product (WHO and WITH WHOM?)
Step 5
Mapping of intra organizational processes for the identified opportunities as they are carried out now
(«As is»)
Step 6
Mapping of inter organizational processes for the identified opportunities as they are carried out now
(«As is»)
Phase 2: Scenario building and validation
Step 7
Evaluation of RFID opportunities in the PVC with respect to the product  (level of granularity), to the
firms involved in the network and to the specific activities in the PVC
Step 8
Evaluation of RFID potential applications including scenario building and process optimization
 («As could be»)
Step 9
Mapping and simulating of intra and interorganizational processes integrating RFID technology
Selecting specific process for the demonstration
Phase 3: Scenario demonstration
Step 10
Proof of concept (POC) in laboratory
Configuring, testing, and refining business rules in the middleware supporting selected processes
Step 11
Demonstration of retained RFID-enabled scenarios using RFID infrastructure and evaluation of process
redesign (e.g., automation, cancellation) at all the supply chain member’s levels
Step 12
Demonstration of information system integration (e.g., ERP and middleware)  
Step 13 
Data analysis and decision to go for the pilot replicating POC scenarios in real-life setting
Phase 4: Real-life implementation 
Step 14 
Pilot project in real-life setting
Step 15
Deployment of application and its appropriation by the different organizations involved and their
staff
FIGURE 15.3
Steps undertaken in the ﬁeld study. (Adapted from L.-A. Lefebvre, É. Lefebvre, Y. Bendavid, S. Fosso Wamba, and
H. Boeck, J. Chain Network Sci., 5, 101, 2005.)
From Automatic Identiﬁcation and Data Capture to ‘‘Smart Business Process’’
285

some examples of screen shots corresponding to these rules will be illustrated and
discussed (Section 4.3).
15.4.1
The Technological Infrastructure
Several RFID-enabled scenarios were tested in a university-based laboratory (Figure 15.5).
The physical ﬂow of products as depicted by the solid black arrows starts with a
conveyor equipped with two antennas, one photo eye, and one light stack (top left side
of Figure 15.5): this set-up simulates the picking process in the focal ﬁrm DC. The function
of the photo eye is to automatically detect products equipped with an RFID tag and trigger
the activation of the two ﬁxed antennas thus allowing the antennas to be awaken and
transmit radio waves when necessary. These two antennas are connected to a ﬁxed reader
that captures the information written on the tags and forwards it to the middleware. The
stack light which is linked to the reader allows the conﬁrmation of the status of the
readings as the products pass on the conveyor belts. When the products reach the focal
ﬁrm’s shipping dock (right hand side of Figure 15.5) they go through another RFID
equipped portal with two ﬁxed antennas, two photo eyes and one light stack. Other
technological options could be considered such as mounted RFID fork lifts or hand held
RFID guns. Informational ﬂows indicated in dotted arrows in Figure 15.5 link the readers
to the ﬁrm’s middleware, which then ﬁlters the information to the ﬁrm’s ERP and-or other
systems. The three screens display the different types of information available namely the
RFID-enabled business processes, corresponding ERP screens, and the decision rules in
the middleware.
15.4.2
The Underlying Logic for Decision Rules in Middleware
Figure 15.6 presents the decision rules that are or will be included in the middleware. The
modelization used here corresponds to the EPC (Event-driven Process Chains) formalism,
which allows the logical representation of the activities within and between processes. An
interesting aspect of the EPC formalism is that it highlights all the events that trigger the
Participating organizations
Business partners in the selected supply chain
University -based research laboratory
Technological parteners
• Firm S3 (first-tier supplier)
• Firm S2 (first-tier supplier)
• Firm S1 (first-tier supplier)
• Firm R (retailer)
• Firm A (focal firm)
1. Interviews
2. On site observations
3. Time and motion studies
4. Focus groups
5. Dry runs
6. Proof-of-concept
• RFID hardware manufacturers
• ERP consulting firms
• BP consulting firms
• RFID middleware providers
Data collection methods
FIGURE 15.4
Research sites and corresponding data collection methods.
286
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

activities and the resulting sequence of events. Moreover, the modeling of a business
process using EPC formalism uses three types of logical connectors (see bottom part
of Figure 15.6) to indicate the workﬂow between activities and events, mainly the ‘‘^’’
(i.e., and), ‘‘_’’ (i.e., or) ‘‘XOR’’ (i.e., exclusive or).
In addition to the basic representation of a process using EPC formalism, it is possible to
assign responsibilities of employees to a speciﬁc function, allocate a system which is used
to perform the function (e.g., ERP, middleware), specify some business rules, assign them
to logical connectors, and quantify their probabilities of occurrence. The use of Business
Process Analysis (BPA) tools such as Aris Toolset was therefore required as it supports an
extended view of eEPCs.
15.4.3
Examples of Actions Triggered Automatically by Middleware
For the scenario under investigation, the products are tagged at the case and pallet levels in
order to ensure the product tracking when products are depalletized (upon receiving) and
repalletized during the picking process. More precisely, the following can be observed
from Figure 15.7:
Light stack
Antenna
Conveyor
Photo eye
RFID
tagged case
Computer with
business process
scenarios
Firm A ERP
Firm A
middleware
Middleware screen
ERP screen
Business process
screen
Physical flow
Information flow
Photo eye
RFID pallet tag
Light stack
Antenna
RFID
RFID
RFID
RFID
RFID
RFID
RFID
Reader
Reader
FIGURE 15.5
Technological infrastructure of the laboratory.
From Automatic Identiﬁcation and Data Capture to ‘‘Smart Business Process’’
287

1. The picking process starts with the event ePick order, which is received via an
electronic document in the WMS and sent to a forklift clerk via a LAN. Upon
reception of this order two functions are performed in parallel, namely (1) the
Electronic picking
(e-Pick) order sent
Automatically
receive e-Pick
order
LBS
Automatically
update inventory
Automatically
notify the clerk
to stop shipping
operations
Automatically
link palette tag to
the shipping
order
LAN
Electronic document
Forklift
terminal
e-Pick order
received
Go to first rack
for picking
Picking-clerk
Arrived at the
first rack
Semi-automatical
ly scan RFID tag
on the rack
(r-Tag)
Mobile Reader on the forklift
r-Tag read
Pick the case
equipped with an
RFID tag (c-Tag)
Picking-clerk
Case picked
Automatically receive the
location of the next rack
to visit or end of picking
Location of the next
rack received or end of
picking
Go to the next
rack for picking
until end of
picking
Picking-clerk
LAN
r-Tag
Move loaded
forklift to
shipping dock
Picking-clerk
Forklift moved to
shipping dock
Drive forklift
through the RFID
shipping portal 
Picking-clerk
Forklift drived
through shipping
portal
Automatically
read RFID palette
tag 
r-Tag
RFID Middleware
WMS
RFID shipping
portal
RFID Middleware
WMS
WMS
RFID palette tag
read
WMS
ERP
Palette tag
linked to shipping
order
Automatically
validate the
match
ERP
LAN
LAN
Shipping order
invalid
Forklift
terminal
LAN
Picking-clerk
Shipping order
valid
Inventory
updated
Place forklift into
the truck
Forklift placed
into the truck
Drop palette into
the truck
Palette dropped
into the truck
Bring palette to
the shipping
destination
Automatically
send an ASN
ERP
Internet
ASN
ASN sent
Automatically
generate the
pallet tag (p-Tag)
p-Tag
RFID Middleware
Forklift terminal
Automatically
validate the match
between the c-Tag
and the p-Tag
RFID Middleware
RFID Middleware
WMS
WMS
Forklift terminal
Forklift terminal
RFID reader on
forklift
r-Tag
c-Tag
Automatically
link cTags to
p-Tag
RFID reader on
forklift
RFID Middleware
WMS
RFID cases tags
linked to pallet tag
r-Tag
c-Tag
Automatically
initiate shipment
tracking in the LBS
system
RFID Middleware
= AND
= OR
= XOR
X
V
V
System
Human
resource
Electronic document
Event
Function
FIGURE 15.6
Decision rules for RFID-enabled picking and shipping processes.
288
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

automatic generation of a pallet tag (p-Tag) based on a number assigned by the
middleware (screen shot (b), Figure 15.7) and (2) the assignment of a picking order
to a picking clerk (i.e., going to the ﬁrst rack for picking). At this moment, the pallet
status is automatically set to palletize (PLT) in order to specify its status and has all
the information related to quantity of cases, types of products, customer ID (screen
shot (c), Figure 15.7).
2. The connectors allow the modelization of the sequence of events as the picking
clerk moves through the warehouse for the building of his pallet. At the assigned
rack, the picking clerk scans the RFID tag (r-Tag) using a mobile RFID reader. As a
case is picked, two activities are realized in parallel: (i) the automatic reading and
validation of the match between the case tag (c-Tag) and the pallet tag (p-Tag) in
the middleware and (ii) the automatic location of the next rack to visit if the end of
FIGURE 15.7
Business rules validation in the middleware and corresponding screen shots.
From Automatic Identiﬁcation and Data Capture to ‘‘Smart Business Process’’
289

the picking process is not completed. If there is no match, an error message is
automatically sent to the picking clerk (screen shot (d), Figure 15.7), resulting in
improved picking accuracy and reducing very early in the process the probability
of false shipment. Notice, that other conﬁgured rules such as horn alarm or
indication by a stack light could be used. The conscious choice of mobile RFID
reader for supporting the picking process addresses a key concern raised by the
stakeholders who wanted to identify any problem at the rack level (and not at
the shipping dock level) when using an RFID-enabled portal.
3. When the forklift drives through the shipping portal, the palette tag is automatic-
ally read, and thus automatically linked to the shipping order. This in turn triggers
automatically the validation of the shipping order by capitalizing on the informa-
tion system integration (RFID middleware ERP WMS). If it is an invalid shipping
order, based on a conﬁgured rule in the middleware, an automatic message is sent
to the clerk to stop the shipping operation and thus avoid false outbound move-
ment of goods (screen shot (e), Figure 15.7), thus reducing the probability of
product discrepancies. In the case of valid shipping order, many other actions
can be taken in parallel such as: (i) automatically send an Advance Shipping Notice
(ASN) and update inventory; (ii) automatically initiate shipment tracking in the
Location Based System (LBS); and (iii) automatically modify the status of the pallet
from ‘‘PLT: palletized’’ to ﬁt its new status (‘‘shipped’’), allowing real-time track-
ing of the products. Because RFID tags have unique numbers, the same pallet
cannot be shipped twice, since an error message such as ‘‘pallet not found’’ or
‘‘status invalid’’ will prevent such problem (screen shot (e), Figure 15.7).
Moreover, as the picking clerk takes the cases, the quantities are updated automatically
(screens shots (h), (i), and (j), Figure 15.8). and when the predetermined number of cases
has been taken by the picking clerk depending on the initial circuit, the palette status
moved from ‘‘PLT’’ to ‘‘closed pallet’’ meaning that the palette is ready to be shipped
(screens shots (f) and (g), Figure 15.7).
The validation of the decision rules for the RFID-enabled picking and shipping processes
as simulated in the above mentioned technological infrastructure (Figure 15.5) helped all
participants to better understand the challenges and beneﬁts of RFID systems and ﬁnd
a common ground for discussion.
15.5
Conclusion
In this paper, we examined the underlying logic behind the rules conﬁgured in an RFID
middleware to support ‘‘smart business processes’’ in one retail supply chain. The
FIGURE 15.8
Automatic update of cases tags (c-Tag) in the palette and corresponding screen shots.
290
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

validation of the retained scenarios integrating the RFID technology in the laboratory
settings enable participants to validate the business rules conﬁgured in the middleware.
Some implications emerge from the ﬁeld research.
First, it reveals that the University based RFID laboratory can serve as a neutral envir-
onment to investigate the real impacts of RFID technology at the ﬁrm level and at the
supply chain level), thus presenting a ‘‘win–win’’ situation wherein each player in
the supply chain is willing to invest on the RFID infrastructure. This can reverse the
current situation towards RFID adoption, where the supplier and manufacturers are
required to absorb most of the RFID technology costs.
Second, the scenario validation includes the conﬁguration of business rules in the
middleware came very late in the redesigning of the processes. In fact, prior to any
conﬁguration in the RFID middleware, ﬁrms need to conduct upfront homework in
terms of identifying inefﬁcient processes, ways to enhance them, redesign the new
processes, validate them with key stakeholders (i.e., technology and business partners),
and ﬁnally translate these processes in business rules to be conﬁgured. Moreover, this
work has to be conducted at the ﬁrm level and also at the supply chain level, suggesting
the importance of collaborating with their intra and inter organizational supply chain
partner’s to agree on business rules. For instance, when considering intraorganizational
processes, all the key stakeholders agreed on an RFID-enabled scenario, later ‘‘trans-
lated’’ in a set of speciﬁc business rules that enabled the integration of selected processes
(i.e., picking of an order and its shipping) that are conducted independently. In terms
of inter organizational considerations, key stakeholders had to agree on issues such as the
ways to organize the information ﬂow between organization and how to ensure
the integration of interrelated processes such as the shipping from the focal ﬁrm
and the receiving at the retailer.
Third, ﬂexibility is a key concern for the middleware conﬁguration. As an example, the
intelligence built in basic business rules could enable the same RFID portal to support
multiple operational processes such as the ‘‘receiving’’ or the ‘‘shipping’’ of an order. In
the laboratory settings, the use of ancillary devices such as photo eyes were used to
indicate the presence and the direction of an object. By breaking the photo eye, a
message is sent to the reader as an indication to activate the antennas, read the tag
number, and send the information to the middleware as an indication to automatically
perform a speciﬁc action attached to that rule. In real settings, the same logic could be
replicated using similar ancillary devices such as motion captor. Moreover, in a ware-
house environment other devices including screens and light stack can be used to
facilitate the management ‘‘RFID transparent processes.’’ A shipping clerk can validate
its operation by looking at the visual conﬁrmation sent through these devices, which
are in fact the results of processed information and transactions conducted in the
middleware.
In terms of investment, the integration of ﬂexibility in RFID infrastructure is the result
of a laborious process that highlights the importance scenario building, validation
(phase 2) and demonstration (phase 3). It is only by taking the time to assess each scenario
and think of ways to include ﬂexibility in the processes that ﬁrms can minimize their RFID
infrastructure investment, by limiting the installation of costly readers and antennas. On
the other hand, an alternative to the use of ancillary devices is the building of more
intelligence in the middleware. For example, when a tag is captured at a reading point in
the warehouse, if it is not recognized, based on a basic rule (i.e., not created by the internal
system) the transaction could automatically be considered as an incoming good
and veriﬁcation against an open ASN could be automatically realized to perform the
‘‘receiving’’ process. While building more intelligence in the middleware is a very inter-
esting way to minimize the reliance on physical infrastructure, it is, however, very
From Automatic Identiﬁcation and Data Capture to ‘‘Smart Business Process’’
291

demanding in terms of deﬁning, testing and validating the business rules. A cautious step
by step approach such as the one undertaken should therefore be considered, starting
with simple applications and building on the knowledge gathered from previous iteration
to arrive to more complex applications.
References
Z. Asif and M. Mandviwalla, Integrating the supply chain with RFID: A technical and business
analysis, Communications of the Association for Information Systems, 15, 393–427, 2005.
C. Bornhövd, T. Lin, S. Haller, and J. Schaper, Integrating automatic data acquisition with business
processes experiences with SAP’s auto-ID infrastructure, Proceedings of the 30th VLDB Confe-
rence, Toronto, Canada, 2004, Retrieved March 05, 2007, from http:==www.vldb.org=conf=
2004=IND6P1.PDF
T.A. Byrd and N.W. Davidson, Examining possible antecedents of IT impact on the supply chain and
its effect on ﬁrm performance, Information & Management, 41, 243–255, 2003.
L. Cecere and J. Suleski, What we have learned from three years of retail RFID pilots, AMR Research,
2007,
Retrieved
May
2007,
from
http:==www.amrresearch.com=Content=View.asp?
pmillid ¼ 20358
K.M. Eisenhardt, Building theories from case study research, Academy of Management Review, 14(4),
532–550, 1989.
E. Fleisch and C. Tellkamp, Inventory inaccuracy and supply chain performance: A simulation study
of a retail supply chain, International Journal of Production Economics, 95(3), 373–385, 2005.
C. Floerkemeier and M. Lampe, RFID middleware design—Addressing application requirements
and RFID, Proceedings of sOc–EUSAI 2005 (Smart Objects conference), Grenoble, 2005, Retrieved
December 2006, from http:==www.vs.inf.ethz.ch=publ=papers=ﬂoerkem-rﬁdmi-2005.pdf
S. Fosso Wamba, L.-A. Lefebvre, and É. Lefebvre, Enabling intelligent B-to-B eCommerce Supply
chain management using RFID and the EPC network: A case study in the retail industry, ICEC,
2006, pp. 281–288.
W. Fusheng and L. Peiya, Temporal management of RFID data, Proceedings of the 31st International
Conference on Very Large Data Bases, Trondheim, Norway, 2005, pp. 1128–1139.
A. Gunasekaran and E.W.T. Ngai, Build-to-order supply chain management: A literature review and
framework for development, Journal of Operations Management, 23(5), 423–451, 2005.
GXS, Electronic Product Code: RFID Drives the Next Revolution in Adaptive Retail Supply Chain Execution,
2005, Retrieved December 2006, from http:==www.gxs.com=pdfs=whitePapers=WP_RFID_GXS.
pdf
M. Hammer and J. Champy, Reengineering the Corporation: A Manifesto for Business Revolution, Harper
Collins Books, New York, NY, 1993.
J.R. Johnson, P&G achieves ‘‘signiﬁcant’’ ROI from RFID, RFIDWatch Weekly, 2007, Retrieved May
2007, from http:==www.dcvelocity.com=rﬁdww=?article_id¼117
T. Kelepouris, K. Pramatari, and G. Doukidis, RFID-enabled traceability in the food supply chain,
Industrial Management & Data Systems, 107(2), 183–200, 2007.
R. Kohli and E. Hoadley, Towards developing a framework for measuring organizational impact of
IT-enabled BPR: Case studies of three ﬁrms, ACM SIGMIS Database, 37(1), 40–58, 2006.
R. Kohli and S. Sherer, Measuring payoff of information technology investments: Research issues and
guidelines, Communications of the AIS, 9(14), 241–268, 2002.
L.-A. Lefebvre, É. Lefebvre, Y. Bendavid, S. Fosso Wamba, and H. Boeck, The potential of RFID in
warehousing activities in a retail industry supply chain, Journal of Chain and Network Science,
5(2), 101–111, 2005.
C. Loebbecke and J. Palmer, RFID in the fashion industry: Kaufhof department stores AG and Gerry
Weber International AG, fashion manufacturer, Management Information Systems Quarterly
Executive (MISQE), 5(2), 15–25, 2006.
292
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

LogicaCMG, Making waves: RFID adoption in returnable packaging, 2004, Retrieved December
2006, from http:==www.logicacmg.com=pdf=RFID_study.pdf
J.G. Mooney, V. Gurbaxani, and K.L. Kraemer, A Process oriented framework for assessing the
business value of information technology, ACM SIGMIS Database, 27(2), 68–81, 1996.
T. Nurminen, The end of RFID middleware? RFID Journal, 2006, Retrieved March 2007, from
http:==www.rﬁdjournal.com=article=articleview=2035=1=128=
M.C. O’Connor, RFID users want clean data, RFID Journal, 2004, Retrieved January 2007, from
http:==www.rﬁdjournal.com=article=articleview=1232=1=14=
M.C. O’Connor, RFID middleware market set for growth, change, RFID Journal, 2006, Retrieved
January 2007, from http:==www.vdc-corp.com=_documents=news=press-attachment-1290.pdf
Paxar Central Europe GmbH, Paxar’s Perfect Performance in Metro’s SCM, 2005, Retrieved October
2006, from http:==www.paxar-emea.com
T. Pisello, The ROI of RFID in the supply chain, RFID Journal, 2006, Retrieved March 2007, from
http:==www.rﬁdjournal.com=article=articleview=2602=
K.C. Pramataris, G.I. Doukidis, and P. Kourouthanassis, Towards ‘smarter’ supply and demand-
chain collaboration practices enabled by RFID technology, The Hermes Newsletter, Eltrum, 31,
March–April 2005.
F.J. Riggins and T. Mukhopadhyay, Interdependent beneﬁts from interorganizational systems:
Opportunities for business partner reengineering, Journal of Management Information Systems,
11(2), 37–67, 1994.
B. Srivastava, Radio frequency ID technology: The next revolution in SCM, Business Horizons, 47(6),
260–268, 2004.
M. Strassner and T. Schoch, Today’s Impact of Ubiquitous Computing on Business Processes,
Institute of Information Management of University of St. Gallen, 2004, Retrieved January,
2005, from www.vs.inf.ethz.ch=publ=papers=Strassner-Schoch-Impact-Ubicomp.pdf
B. Subirana, C. Eckes, G. Herman, S. Sarma, and M. Barrett, Measuring the Impact of Information
Technology on Value and Productivity using a Process-Based Approach: The case for RFID
Technologies, MIT Sloan, Working Paper, December 2003, Retrieved May 15, 2004, from www.
papers.ssrn.com=sol3=papers.cfm?abstract_id¼478582
J.P. Van Den Berg and W.H.M. Zijm, Models for warehouse management: Classiﬁcation and
examples, International Journal of Production Economics, 59, 519–528, 1999.
WinterGreen Research, RFID Middleware Market Opportunities, Strategies, and Forecasts, 2005
to 2010, 2005, Retrieved November 2006, from http:==www.wintergreenresearch.com=reports=
RFID_Middleware.html
D.C. Wyld, RFID 101: The next big thing for management, Management Research News, 29(4), 154–173,
2006.
K. Youngil, Y. Jung-Woon, and P. Namkyu, RFID Based Business Process Automation for Harbor
Operations in Container Depot, Working Paper, Wayne State University, 2006, Retrieved
February, 2007, from http:==imeresearch.eng.wayne.edu=Proceedings2006=JungWoon.pdf
From Automatic Identiﬁcation and Data Capture to ‘‘Smart Business Process’’
293


16
Technological Requirements and Derived Beneﬁts
from RFID Enabled Receiving in a Supply Chain
Harold Boeck, Louis-A. Lefebvre, and Élisabeth Lefebvre
CONTENTS
16.1
Introduction...................................................................................................................... 295
16.2
Background....................................................................................................................... 296
16.2.1 Technological Issues ........................................................................................... 296
16.2.2 Nontechnological Issues..................................................................................... 296
16.3
Methodology .................................................................................................................... 297
16.4
Results ............................................................................................................................... 298
16.4.1 Receiving Process without RFID ...................................................................... 298
16.4.2 RFID Enabled Automated Receiving System................................................. 299
16.4.2.1 Location of Data .................................................................................. 299
16.4.2.2 RFID Readers ....................................................................................... 300
16.4.2.3 RFID Tags............................................................................................. 303
16.4.2.4 RFID Middleware................................................................................ 304
16.4.2.5 Feedback Mechanisms ........................................................................ 304
16.4.3 Derived Beneﬁt.................................................................................................... 305
16.4.3.1 Streamlining Current Processes......................................................... 305
16.4.3.2 Improve the Quality of Information................................................. 307
16.4.3.3 Improve the Quality of Process Execution ...................................... 307
16.4.3.4 Enabling Business Process Re-Engineering ..................................... 308
16.4.3.5 Creating RFID Externalities ............................................................... 308
16.5
Conclusion ........................................................................................................................ 308
References.................................................................................................................................... 309
16.1
Introduction
RFID enabled automated receiving optimizes the handoff of products between supplier
and client. It consists of receiving products at a manufacturing facility, a distribution
center’s warehouse or a retail store without manually scanning or verifying the merchan-
dise (O’Connor, 2006). Although current state of the art receiving systems are highly
optimized by using barcoding and wireless communications to a central computer,
the process can still sometimes be error-prone and time-consuming because of human
intervention.
295

Few studies have been conducted on the receiving process itself (Gu et al., 2007) and
even fewer on RFID enabled automated receiving, despite the high proﬁle mandates in this
area. In fact, there is a lack of documented results and no common ground for comparing
technological RFID scenarios. Furthermore, beneﬁts and the measures used to compare
RFID applications differ from study to study and the scope of their beneﬁts has not yet
been fully uncovered. The goal of this chapter will be twofold in order to facilitate the
adoption of RFID technology in the context of automated receiving: ﬁrstly, to present the
different technological infrastructures for the RFID enabled automated receiving applica-
tion in six different organizations and secondly, to develop a more comprehensive list of
beneﬁts that can be used to measure the usefulness of such RFID applications.
This chapter focuses on the implementation of RFID enabled automated receiving,
which has been identiﬁed as one of the quickest proﬁtable SCM (Supply Chain Manage-
ment) RFID applications. The following section (Section 16.2) brieﬂy outlines the techno-
logical and nontechnological issues related to RFID enabled receiving while Section 16.3
offers some information about the detailed ﬁeld research carried out in six organizations.
The next section (Section 16.4) compares the different possible conﬁgurations of the
application applied to real-life environments, their associated beneﬁts and implications.
Finally, Section 16.5 concludes the chapter by highlighting how the application can
contribute to building a collaborative advantage in the supply chain.
16.2
Background
16.2.1
Technological Issues
The exponential growth in interest that RFID technology has recently gathered is without a
doubt attributable to the highly mediatized compliance mandates from large organizations
like Wal-Mart and the U.S. Department of Defense. The objective of these innovative organ-
izations and other early adopters like Marks and Spencer, Tesco and Metro is to use passive
Ultra High Frequency (UHF) radio frequency identiﬁcation for optimizing their supply chain.
UHF RFID technology, which is regulated under ISO=IEC 18000-6 and operates in the 860–960
MHz range, has the characteristic over more established Low Frequency (LF) and High
Frequency (HF) RFID applications of using far ﬁeld backscatter communications rather than
near-ﬁeld inductive coupling. The advantage of ISO=IEC 18000-6 and its improved ISO=IEC
18000-6C, commonly referred to as ‘‘Gen 2,’’ is that it uses less expensive tags which are able to
communicate more quickly, at a greater distance with better anticollision protocols. These
characteristics therefore enable companies to identify and track many fast moving products
through their supply chain more economically.
Additionally, the Electronic Product Code (EPC) network developed by the Auto-ID
Center and managed by GS1 facilitates real-time information sharing between companies
belonging to the same supply chain. A supply chain is deﬁned as a group of companies
that collaborate together in an effort to bring a product, service, or information from the
initial supplier to the ﬁnal customer. Collaboration among companies that belong to the
same supply chain is part of the strategic vision of having their network gain a collabora-
tive advantage by working as a team.
16.2.2
Nontechnological Issues
Innovative ﬁrms that have started to use RFID enabled automated receiving have meas-
ured and communicated tangible beneﬁts. For example, Paramount Farms a producer of
296
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

pistachio nuts receives 425 loads of nuts per day (Violino, 2004). It has implemented an
RFID system to improve the receiving process of its trailers by afﬁxing a passive 915 MHz
tag on each of them. The RFID receiving system automatically gathers the following
information: information about the trailer (tare weight, license plate number, owner infor-
mation), information about its contents (the name of the farmer and the ranch, the location
of the speciﬁc ﬁeld where the pistachio nuts were harvested, the method used to harvest the
nuts, the merchandise’s weight automatically retrieved from the scale house) and informa-
tion about the receiving process (a date and time stamp of when the shipment was
received). Paramount Farms indicates that the automated process speeds data entry and
ensures accuracy. Data acquisition has gone from 2 min to instantaneous and transaction
time required to initiate a new load has been reduced by 60%. The faster throughput of the
trailers at the receiving station also signiﬁes a better utilization of assets. This has in turn
reduced leased trailer usage by 30% and allowed Paramount Farms to cancel plans to build
a new scale house. At the warehouse level, RFID can potentially redesign the processes
(Lefebvre et al., 2006) and create beneﬁts like those observed during a receiving pilot at a
Canadian Staples location. RFID has reduced the processing time during receiving from
5.36 to 2.65 min (O’Connor, 2006) and at the store level, the Staples pilot has reduced the
processing time from 17.75 to 2.70 min and reduced the number of orders that were
delayed thus ensuring that items were available to be sold on time. RFID can thus assist
Just-in-Time ordering (Smith, 2005). When combining automated receiving data with retail
ﬂoor data and POS (Point of Sales) data, automatic replenishment can occur (Roberti, 2005)
which can reduce out of stocks by 30% for products selling between 0.1 and 15 units per
day (Hardgrave et al., 2006). Similar results are provided by the German grocer Rewe who
indicates a 80% reduction in the time required to match deliveries with orders (Wessel,
2007). RFID has the potential to transform the store receiving process which is often manual
(Jones et al., 2005) while improving the quality of information (Sellitto et al., 2007).
The retail industry has quickly identiﬁed RFID as having the potential to improve collab-
oration in its supply chain (Jones et al., 2004). It has also indicated that automated receiving is
one of the RFID supply chain applications can generate a quick return on investment (ROI)
(Roberti, 2007). In 2005, at least 140 Wal-Mart stores used automated receiving (Collins, 2005).
In 2007, over a 1000 Wal-Mart locations used RFID and the company has plans to continue
increasing the number of distribution centers and stores that use RFID automated receiving
(Johnson, 2007). Some concerns have, however, been raised about the added-value of RFID
enabled receiving. Many potential adopters of the application therefore see it as having
mostly incremental beneﬁts especiallywhen their receiving process is already highly efﬁcient.
16.3
Methodology
As part of a broader research program on RFID applications and deployment within
supply chains (SC), special emphasis is placed here on the RFID enabled receiving process,
which has been investigated in a detailed ﬁeld research involving six very different
organizations (Table 16.1). These organizations represent different types of SC players,
operating in either closed or open loop networks and in different environments. The level of
granularity needed for RFID tags also differs from the pallet to the item.
Data collection methods in the six organizations included direct observations, semistruc-
tured interviews and analysis of internal documents. Additional valuable data was also
collected in a university-based research laboratory following a ‘‘living lab’’ approach
(Loeh et al., 2005) whereby RFID enabled processes were modelized and technological
scenarios were tested and validated.
Technological Requirements and Derived Beneﬁts from RFID Enabled Receiving
297

The detailed ﬁeld research and the living lab approach involved six researchers (two
professors and four PhD students). Fifty-two additional people were also involved in the
study including key executives and staff members from the six earlier-mentioned organ-
izations and several senior managers from some leading-edge technology-based ﬁrms
acting as RFID solution providers, including ERP, RFID hardware components, middle-
ware, integrators, and process modelization providers.
16.4
Results
16.4.1
Receiving Process without RFID
The receiving process includes the data and physical handling necessary so that the
product is ready to be put-away. It starts once the truck has backed up into the receiving
dock and the paper Bill of Lading (BoL) for the merchandise has been handed off to the BoL
clerk. Figure 16.1 presents the usual drill down approach for the receiving process from the
more aggregate vision to the more detailed one. To simplify the presentation, only two
levels are displayed in Figure 16.1.
The information displayed represents the schematized synthesis of the real-life observa-
tions in the six investigated organizations. Their respective receiving processes were
compared in order to derive a generic receiving process. The process presented here
corresponds to a highly efﬁcient environment. These organizations are rather technologic-
ally advanced since they use barcoding, optical scanners linked to central computers
through a wireless network, specialized software such as a Receiving System and a
Warehouse Management System (WMS), which is integrated with an Enterprise Resource
Planning (ERP) software. They also place a strong emphasis on the coordination and
collaboration between the supplier and the client. The process is presented in the context
of a warehouse because they usually have higher volumes and therefore the processes are
more sophisticated and complex. By demonstrating that RFID can improve a highly
efﬁcient receiving process, we are also implying that it can improve the less efﬁcient ones.
Of course, slight variations to this process exist. The client could require that the supplier
already afﬁx its pallets with an SSCC-18 (Serial Shipping Container Code) barcode or
another type of identiﬁer. When this is the case, activity ‘‘4.3 Add a SSCC-18 barcode to the
pallet’’ is no longer necessary. The client could also require that the supplier send an
Advanced Ship Notice (EDI transaction # 856) at the time of the shipment. In such a
case, the supplier is afﬁxing its pallets with SSCC-18 barcodes as well as electronically
sending the information required to interpret the barcode. The electronic document arrives
before the physical shipment so that activities from ‘‘2.1. Create BoL in the Receiving System’’
to ‘‘2.4. Initiate unloading’’ are no longer necessary.
TABLE 16.1
Organizations That Participated in the Field Research
Organizations
SC Level
Environment
Network
Volume
Unit Level
M1
Manufacturer
Assembly plant
Open loop
Low
Item
DC1
Distribution center
Warehouse
Open loop
High
Pallet
DC2
Distribution center
Warehouse
Open loop
Very high
Pallet
DC3
Distribution center
Warehouse
Closed loop
Medium
Pallet
DC4
Distribution center
Outdoor storage area
Open loop
Low
Item
R1
Retailer
Store
Closed loop
Medium
Pallet, case
298
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

Depending on the quality of the previous shipments, the client may also need to
physically or visually inspect the content of the pallet. The pallet may be taken apart.
The cases may be opened. An item may be removed for sampling and quality assurance.
This can be performed during activity ‘‘4.2. Verify the cases on the pallet.’’ The more detailed
the inspection, the more expensive it becomes.
16.4.2
RFID Enabled Automated Receiving System
An RFID system depends highly upon its environment and the product that will be tagged.
Table 16.2 provides a summary of the different conﬁgurations necessary for each RFID
system in the six organizations under investigation.
As displayed in Table 16.2, the RFID system differs from one organization to the next, as
discussed in the following sections.
16.4.2.1
Location of Data
RFID enabled automated receiving requires replacing the different types of barcodes by
smart labels. Smart labels are simply RFID tags glued to an adhesive label. Depending on
Receiving subprocesses
Activities
1. Arrival of
 
merchandise
2. Accept
 
merchandise
3. Unload truck
4. Verify and
 
identify
 
merchandise
5. Complete the
 
receiving
 
process
1.1. A truck drives up and parks against a dock door
1.2. The truck driver drops off the BoL
2.1. Create BoL in the Receiving System
2.2. Type data from the paper BoL into the Receiving System’s BoL
2.3. Confirm quantity by associating with the Purchase Order
2.4. Initiate unloading
3.1. Open receiving dock door
3.2. Open truck door
3.3. Lower the dock door’s platform into the truck
3.4. Drive the pallet truck through the dock door
3.5. Drive the pallet truck into the truck
3.6. Pick up a palette from the truck
3.7. Backup pallet truck into the warehouse
4.1. Scan one of the case’s EAN/UCC-14 barcode
4.2. Verify the cases on the pallet
4.3. Add a SSCC-18 barcode to the pallet
4.4. Scan the pallet’s SSCC-18 barcode
4.5. Move loaded pallet truck to the dedicated staging area
4.6. Drop pallet into the staging area
4.7. Return to activity 3.4 until all pallets are unloaded
5.1. Generate a Transfer Order in the WMS to initiate the put-away process
5.2. Raise the dock door’s platform out of the truck
5.3. Close truck door
5.4. Close receiving dock door
FIGURE 16.1
The current efﬁcient receiving process of a warehouse.
Technological Requirements and Derived Beneﬁts from RFID Enabled Receiving
299

the speciﬁcities of each organization and of their supply chain, the RFID architecture can
differ. The smart labels could possibly contain only a unique identiﬁer such as an EPC if the
speciﬁc data resides on a shared network. Similar to a barcode, the identiﬁer on the label
has no meaning unless one looks up the data to which it is associated in a database. In the
case of M1, DC1, and DC2, it is recommended to use the EPC network because the data
will be shared more easily between the various business partners who will come in contact
with the tag.
Alternatively, if the data resides on the tags themselves (Diekmann et al., 2007) as it is the
case for DC3, DC4, and R1, the tags will contain any and all information deemed necessary
for the receiving process to be accomplished. The data on the case smart label could contain
the following information: EAN=UCC-14 identiﬁer, product description, and lot number.
The data on the pallet smart label could contain the following information: SSCC-18 identi-
ﬁer, quantity in pallet, order number, PO (Purchase Order), and BoL. A company may decide
to add additional data ﬁelds such as the name of the truck driver, the shipment time and
destination, storage requirements, etc. In the cold chain, an RFID battery assisted semi-
passive tag can record the temperature and various states of the product during transpor-
tation. In DC3 and R1, it is recommended to put the data directly on the tag and save the
costs associated to using the EPC network because it is a closed loop supply chain. For DC4
it is necessary that the data be directly on the tag even though the business network
functions in an open loop because the Internet will not always be accessible in the outdoor
environment.
16.4.2.2
RFID Readers
The system requires that RFID readers be in a relatively close proximity to the smart labels
during the receiving process. It is recommended that the antennas that are connected to the
readers have a circular polarization. Although a linear polarized antenna will be able to
TABLE 16.2
Technical Characteristics of the RFID System in the Six Organizations
RFID Conﬁguration
Organization
Data
Readers
Tags
Middleware
Main Feedback
M1
On the network
Mobile readers
Handheld readers
Passive UHF tag with
a plastic spacer
Pure play
Audible beep
Mounted monitor
DC1
On the network
Mobile readers
Handheld readers
Passive UHF pallet
smart labels
Permanent tags
WMS module
Audible beep
Mounted monitor
DC2
On the network
Mobile readers
Handheld readers
Passive UHF pallet
smart labels
Permanent tags
WMS module
Audible beep
Mounted monitor
DC3
On the tag
Mobile readers
Handheld readers
Passive UHF pallet
smart labels
Permanent tags
WMS module
Audible beep
Mounted monitor
DC4
On the tag
Handheld readers
Passive UHF tag with
a plastic spacer
ERP module
Audible beep
Handheld monitor
R1
On the tag
Fixed readers
Handheld readers
Passive UHF pallet
smart labels
Passive UHF case
smart labels
Pure play
Light stacks
300
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

read tags further if their orientation can be guaranteed, a circular polarized antenna will
provide better read rates in an environment where the tags may not be properly aligned
with the reader’s antenna. Three different options exist in terms of reader selection. The
choice of an option will impact how the RFID enabled automated receiving process will be
performed as well as its costs.
16.4.2.2.1
Reader Option #1: Fixed RFID Readers
This option consists of installing ﬁxed RFID readers at the dock doors. The reader’s
antennas are then placed on each side of the dock door behind protective bollards at the
height at which the products will pass. This conﬁguration is referred to as an RFID portal.
When the forklift or pallet truck passes through the RFID portal during activity ‘‘3.7.
Backup pallet truck into the warehouse,’’ the tags are automatically scanned. The advantage
of this option is that it signiﬁcantly reduces the activities necessary in the receiving process.
It also offers more efﬁcient read rates than the other reader options because it uses more
antennas. Its main disadvantage is that it requires more investment than the other two
options described later. Additionally, this option may not permit to capture all the case
smart labels. If the items within the cases on the pallet contain metal, liquid, or other
dielectric components then it may be difﬁcult to obtain a tag read of the cases located in the
middle of the pallet because of their inﬂuence on RF propagation. Another factor limiting
the capacity to read the cases in the middle of the pallets is tag shadowing. Tag shadowing
occurs when multiple tags are in close proximity, which can occur with tagged cases on a
pallet. Tags are continuously being improved in order to be read more effectively and at
greater distances. Paradoxically, this can sometimes be a problem when it causes false
positive reads. They occur when an RFID tag is being read by a neighboring reader. RFID
portals will therefore be installed with presence of movement detectors and an RF reﬂect-
ive surface like a metal mesh. The presence of detectors ensure that the portal is turned on
only when necessary. The metal mesh will isolate the reader’s signal to the vicinity of the
portal. Figure 16.2 shows an RFID portal near a dock door. A feedback mechanism is
installed on the wall to indicate the last pallet smart label to be scanned. A camera can also
be mounted on the wall as is the case in Figure 16.2. The camera is positioned right above
the feedback mechanism and takes a picture when a tag is scanned for optional auditing
purposes. It is recommended that R1 use an RFID portal because it has a limited number of
dock doors. The forklift mounted RFID reader alternative is not an option because it does
not use forklifts at the store. Although it could install the reader on one of its pallet trucks,
an RFID portal ensures that all shipments arriving at the location are scanned even if they
are not palletized.
16.4.2.2.2
Reader Option #2: Mobile RFID Readers
This option consists of mounting an RFID reader on the forklifts or pallet trucks instead of
near the dock doors. Although the readers are not ﬁxed in this option, it should be noted
that every option still requires a ﬁxed reference point. The ﬁxed reference points serves to
associate an activity to a location. For the mobile RFID reader option, it is possible to use
permanent RFID tags, which will be located near the dock door that the forklift will pass
through. When the forklift is in close proximity of the pallet, it will scan the smart label and
download the information it contains. It will also scan the permanent RFID tag located near
the dock door thereby associating the event with a location.
The advantages of this conﬁguration over RFID portals are numerous. Firstly, ﬁxed
RFID readers as their name implies are ﬁxed to a given location. This greatly reduces the
visibility of the product in the warehouse to only the dock doors. Because a pallet will
always be moved with a forklift or pallet truck, a forklift mounted mobile reader will
Technological Requirements and Derived Beneﬁts from RFID Enabled Receiving
301

always provide the last location of a pallet anywhere in the warehouse where permanent
RFID tags are located. Secondly, a typical warehouse has fewer forklifts than dock doors.
Purchasing costs and installation costs of the new system are thus greatly reduced. It is
recommended to use the mobile RFID readers at M1, DC1, DC2, and DC3 because it will be
more economical than to install RFID portals at every dock door. DC4 should also use a
mobile RFID reader because the receiving process is performed outdoors and therefore it is
not guaranteed that the arriving shipment will pass through a portal. Although the unit
level at DC4 is an item, each individual item is carried on a pallet. Therefore, even though
the item is tagged, the forklift can still read it when it takes the pallet.
16.4.2.2.3
Reader Option #3: Handheld RFID Readers
The handheld RFID reader offers the least beneﬁts in terms of process improvements when
compared with the two previous options because a certain level of manual intervention is
FIGURE 16.2
An RFID portal as can be used at R1.
302
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

still required. This option is more of a ‘‘semiautomated’’ receiving process. The handheld
reader is a mobile reader carried by an employee as illustrated in Figure 16.3. It is
composed of a rugged exterior and contains a keyboard and a terminal. It offers the
advantages of portability in remote locations. For example, if receiving is performed in a
temporary location or one that is not accessible by an RFID mounted forklift, then the
handheld reader is an interesting alternative. Unfortunately, its portability has to be offset
by a reduced Effective Radiated Power (ERP) in order to reduce the consumption of the
limited battery power supply. Rather than be considered as an alternative to RFID portals
and RFID mounted forklift readers, the handheld reader can also complement the other
equipment options for exception processing. When a problem shipment needs to be
investigated or a pallet needs to be broken down during activity ‘‘4.2. Verify the cases on
the pallet,’’ then the handheld reader is very useful. For this reason, all the organizations
studied can also use the handheld RFID reader in their receiving process.
16.4.2.3
RFID Tags
Four types of RFID tags may be used for the automated receiving process. Firstly, the smart
labels will be afﬁxed to the pallet and will become the ‘‘pallet tag’’ at DC1, DC2, DC3, and
R1. Secondly, permanent RFID tags may be installed near the receiving dock doors or any
other location that needs to be automatically identiﬁed during the receiving process. M1,
DC1, DC2, and DC3 will use permanent RFID tags because mobile RFID readers and dock
doors are used at these locations. Some organizations may decide that permanent RFID
tags during receiving are optional. Indeed, it may not matter through which receiving dock
door the shipment came through as long as its content is properly identiﬁed and veriﬁed.
However, these tags are relatively inexpensive and can provide valuable information that
can be used during data analysis such as dock door usage, being able to separate events by
location, etc. Thirdly, smart labels may also be afﬁxed on each case within the pallet. They
FIGURE 16.3
Handheld RFID reader.
Technological Requirements and Derived Beneﬁts from RFID Enabled Receiving
303

are not necessary in order to perform automated receiving at the pallet level but should an
error occur during the receiving process, they will improve exception processing during
activity ‘‘4.2. Verify the cases on the pallet.’’ Smart labels at the case level are, however,
necessary to automate the receiving process at R1 because not all shipments arrive on
pallets. Fourthly, smart labels will be afﬁxed at the unit level at M1 and DC4. UHF RFID is
not generally used for item level tagging because its far ﬁeld properties (as deﬁned by ISO
18000-6C) are not designed to isolate individual items. If the objective in automated
receiving is not to provide individual tracking nor the capacity to isolate a single item, a
UHF smart label can be used for automated receiving at the item level. Special care must be
taken when choosing this particular smart label, because the item’s composition might
contain more metal or water than the corrugated cardboard of the cases and pallets. In the
case of M1 and DC4, a plastic spacer was put between the tag and the item to create an air
gap. The following text covers this issue in more detail.
RFID inlays are the tags that are used in smart labels. They exist in a variety of sizes,
forms, costs, range, memory size, etc. The choice of tag will be highly dependent on the
nature of the project and the environment in which they are to be used. Nonetheless, it is
possible to give some generic indication of the type of tags to use.
Since it is highly unlikely that the tags’ orientation can be guaranteed during the
receiving process, it is recommended to use an RFID inlay containing a dual dipole
antenna. Additionally, certain inlays are optimized according to the material they will
come in contact with. For example, some smart labels are designed to perform efﬁciently
when afﬁxed to corrugated cardboard. The location where the tag or smart label will be
placed greatly inﬂuences its readability. It is therefore important to consider dynamic and
static air gaps in the products or packaging. An air gap behind the tag will offer ideal tag
performance. It is best to use a static air gap when possible as this will ensure that an air
gap is always behind the tag. The geographical location of the tag is also important as
different regions of the world determine the frequency to use. Although these consider-
ations can greatly increase the performance of the system, it is nonetheless crucial to test
various types of tags in order to ﬁnd the most appropriate one.
16.4.2.4
RFID Middleware
The RFID middleware software ensures the bridge between the RFID architecture and the
organization’s central data repositories such as the Receiving System, WMS, or ERP. The
middleware is often referred to as the intelligent portion of the RFID system because it
manages and coordinates it. The middleware will associate read items with an activity and
a location. It also sends commands to the readers to reprogram the tags. It will clean the raw
data to limit false positives and then ﬁlter the data before sending it to the receiving system,
WMS or ERP. This is a necessary procedure as the latter are not designed to store vast
amounts of data gathered by the RFID system. DC4 decided to use a middleware developed
by their ERP manufacturer because their IT department has taken the decision to standardize
all software on this platform. D1, DC2, and DC3 have opted to use a middleware provided by
their highly specialized WMS. M1 decided to use a middleware provided by a ‘‘pure play’’
company that services smaller organizations. R1 has opted for a pure play middleware
solution because its existing software does not currently provide an RFID module.
16.4.2.5
Feedback Mechanisms
Feedback mechanisms are an important part of the RFID system but are seldom covered
when describing the basic RFID components. Nonetheless, they are required in order to
provide a signal capable of being interpreted by a human that will indicate an error in the
304
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

automation process. This will inform the employee to intervene by processing the excep-
tion. Feedback mechanisms can take the form of light stacks, audible devices such as horns
or monitors such as the one present on Figure 16.2 for the receiving process at R1.
Organizations M1, DC1, DC2, and DC3 use forklift mounted mobile readers, which
provide an audible beep when a tag is read and transmits information to a monitor
mounted on the forklift. DC4 uses a handheld reader which provides an audible beep
and information about the tag on the handheld monitor when it is read.
16.4.3
Derived Beneﬁt
RFID enabled automated receiving can provide a number of beneﬁts to the organizations
studied as presented in Table 16.3. These beneﬁts have been regrouped under the following
categories: streamlining current processes, improving the quality of information, improv-
ing the quality of process execution, enabling business process re-engineering, and creating
RFID externalities.
16.4.3.1
Streamlining Current Processes
16.4.3.1.1
Instantaneous Data Acquisition
The nature of RFID is to automate the capture and transmission of data related to a
product’s identiﬁcation. In the receiving process presented in Section 16.2 the following
activities are therefore eliminated with the RFID system.
TABLE 16.3
Beneﬁts from RFID Enabled Automated Receiving for Each Organization
Beneﬁts
M1
DC1
DC2
DC3
DC4
R1
Streamlining current processes
Instantaneous data acquisition
þ
þ
þ
þ
þ
þ
Instantaneous veriﬁcation
þ
þþ
þþ
þþþ
þ
þþþ
Reduced paperwork
þ
þ
þþ
þ
þ
þ
Reduced errors
þ
þþ
þþþ
þþ
þ
þþ
Reduced bottlenecks
þ
þþ
þþþ
þþ
þ
þþ
Reduced assets
þ
þþ
þþ
þþ
þ
þþþ
Improving the quality of information
Paperwork gets ﬁlled out
þ
þþ
þþ
þ
þþþ
þþ
Fewer claims
þ
þþþ
þþþ
þ
þ
þþ
Better informed management decisions
þ
þ
þþ
þ
þ
þþ
Improving the quality of process execution
Better management and control of operations
þ
þþ
þþþ
þþ
þ
þ
Quicker shipments or replenishment
þ
þþ
þþ
þþ
þ
þþ
Enabling business process re-engineering
Cross-dock possibility
n=a
n=a
þþ
n=a
þ
n=a
Create smart processes
þ
þþ
þþ
þþ
þ
þþ
Creating RFID externalities
Downstream beneﬁts
þþþ
þþ
þþ
þþ
þþþ
þ
þ some beneﬁts, þ þ relatively high beneﬁts, þ þ þ high beneﬁts.
Technological Requirements and Derived Beneﬁts from RFID Enabled Receiving
305

1.2. The truck driver drops off the BoL
2.1. Create BoL in the Receiving System
2.2. Type data from the paper BoL into the Receiving System’s BoL
4.1. Scan one of the case’s EAN=UCC-14 barcode
4.3. Add a SSCC-18 barcode to the pallet
4.4. Scan the pallet’s SSCC-18 barcode
16.4.3.1.2
Instantaneous Veriﬁcation
As data from the smart label is captured by the RFID system, the enterprise system can
automatically perform the veriﬁcation activities. When the system is properly conﬁgured
and integrated, the following tasks are automated.
2.3. Conﬁrm quantity by associating with the Purchase Order
4.2. Verify the cases on the pallet
The beneﬁts from this category will be more signiﬁcant when many items need to be
veriﬁed as is the case when the unit level is a pallet at DC1 and DC2 instead of a single item
at M1 and DC4. It reaches a peak when the shipment is a mixed pallet of various items like
at DC3 and R1.
16.4.3.1.3
Reduced Paperwork
Paper-based information is less efﬁcient than electronically stored data. There is a cost
associated with transmitting paper-based information. It has a tendency of being mis-
placed. It is also bulkier and retrieving it is slower while at the same time requires more
effort to copy and manipulate the data it contains. The following activities during the
receiving process include paperwork that can be eliminated with the RFID application.
1.2. The truck driver drops off the BoL
4.2. Verify the cases on the pallet
16.4.3.1.4
Reduced Errors
Even though current receiving processes can be very efﬁcient, they are still error-prone
because of human intervention. Our ﬁeld study indicates that errors can occur at several
locations especially when the process is not followed as speciﬁed. Environments with high
volume, open loop networks where an ASN is not available and organizations where work is
performed manually are more error-prone and therefore better candidates to RFID beneﬁts.
16.4.3.1.5
Reduced Bottlenecks
An improved movement of goods during the receiving process and fewer errors translate
into a higher throughput. The improved throughput makes a bottleneck less likely. When
they occur, they potentially halt all other receiving activities and create a queue. Beneﬁts will
be more signiﬁcant for high volume receiving processes where bottlenecks currently occur.
16.4.3.1.6
Reduced Assets
Because the receiving process is performed more quickly, fewer assets involved in the
receiving process are required. For example, since throughput is increased, the dock
doors used by the trailers have a quicker turnover. Fewer dock doors are now necessary.
The same reasoning applies to very coveted warehouse real estate which is freed up: the
receiving dock and staging area. Additionally, fewer forklifts and their drivers are necessary
306
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

to accomplish the same output. Instead of reducing the employee headcount, it can rather
mean allocating more employees facing the customer which is one of R1’s strategic goals.
16.4.3.2
Improve the Quality of Information
16.4.3.2.1
Paperwork Gets Filled Out
Filling out paperwork is often considered as tedious by employees. When it is ﬁlled out, it
sometimes contains errors. RFID eliminates paperwork because all the necessary docu-
mentation is automatically created. This ensures that it is not only gathered, but gathered
correctly. This beneﬁt is especially useful in an outside environment where it is less
pleasant to ﬁll out paperwork in the rain or in the cold as is the case at DC4. Also,
sometimes employees have little time or are less motivated to ﬁll out the paperwork.
RFID thus makes the information more available and reliable.
16.4.3.2.2
Fewer Claims
A very signiﬁcant pain point for both suppliers and clients are the numerous claims that
occur when a discrepancy in shipments occurs. This is due to shrinkage which includes
breakage, misplacements, poor bookkeeping, or theft (Levy et al., 2004). It creates conﬂict
in the relationship between the buyer and seller. It is costly because of the time spent in
order to resolve the contentious matter and because of the money spent to compensate the
lost goods. RFID during the receiving process can assist in identifying who is responsible
for the shrinkage. This is especially useful in open loop networks where there is a high
volume of receiving as is the case with DC1 and DC2.
16.4.3.2.3
Better Informed Management Decisions
Improved quality of information can lead to better informed management decisions. For
example, by knowing which goods have already been received, redundant inventory will
not be ordered. This reduced inventory in addition to obviously improving cash ﬂow
also has the additional beneﬁt of freeing up warehouse ﬂoor space, reducing variable
costs such as insurance costs and avoiding depreciation costs on inventory that is not used.
It can also improve the management of faster moving items that need to leave the warehouse
as soon as possible like at DC2 or at a retail store to reduce Out of Stocks like at R1.
16.4.3.3
Improve the Quality of Process Execution
16.4.3.3.1
Better Management and Control of Operations
An efﬁcient process requires that all of the activities be continuously performed in the same
optimized manner. Humans do not like repetitive tasks. In our ﬁeld study we noticed that
employees would introduce variety in the receiving process. Sometimes the documented
process was not performed as suggested. This observation occurred when comparing
different employees performing the same tasks and also when comparing a single employee
performing the same task at different occasions at DC1 and DC3. The RFID system can
ensure that the process is performed as prescribed. This is especially useful when many
employees work on different parts of the same process as is the case at DC2. The system can
coordinate the activities and ensure that the process is completed correctly.
16.4.3.3.2
Quicker Shipments or Replenishment
Since RFID enabled automated receiving improves the throughput of goods, they have less
propensity to arrive late at their destination. This means that the application ensures that
Just-in-Time can be executed more efﬁciently. Environments with faster moving goods can
beneﬁt more from this aspect.
Technological Requirements and Derived Beneﬁts from RFID Enabled Receiving
307

16.4.3.4
Enabling Business Process Re-Engineering
16.4.3.4.1
Cross-dock Possibility
Instead of using RFID to create incremental beneﬁts in the receiving process, it is possible
to think outside the box and use it to radically change the way the current warehouse is
organized. One such way is to use RFID to enable cross-dock activities if the product is not
managed under a First In First Out (FIFO) method (Fosso Wamba et al. 2007). In this case,
the following receiving activity ‘‘4.5 Move loaded forklift to the dedicated staging area’’ is
bypassed along with the subsequent put-away and picking process because the goods
are moved directly to shipping. This is applicable only in the warehouses of DC2 and DC4.
16.4.3.4.2
Create Smart Processes
The facilitated real-time data acquisition and additional visibility that are provided by
RFID can enable new sets of business processes. These smart processes can immediately
trigger an event or another process when a speciﬁc RFID tag is read in a given situation
(Fosso Wamba et al., 2006). These can be, for example, alert notiﬁcations when hot items
that are in strong demand have arrived and should be treated in priority. Smart processes
are still in their nascent phase and have yet to be developed and widely adopted by
organizations. Nonetheless the potential they have to offer is interesting.
16.4.3.5
Creating RFID Externalities
16.4.3.5.1
Downstream Beneﬁts
When a receiving process is automated with RFID, it implies that a smart label is afﬁxed to
the pallet, case or item. The smart label is still afﬁxed to the unit during the following
processes. Therefore the put-away process, picking process, and shipping process can
beneﬁt from the infrastructure that was put in place to optimize the receiving process. It
is also possible to use the same smart label for the client’s receiving process. As the tagged
unit moves down the supply chain, it can create additional beneﬁts. The longer the tag
remains in use, the more beneﬁts can be derived from it. For example, the tag on the item at
M1 and DC4 can be used during its entire lifecycle thereby enabling Product Lifecycle
Management (PLM). In R1’s retail environment, the pallet or case to which the tag is
afﬁxed is quickly disassembled and the tag looses its meaning.
16.5
Conclusion
On the basis of the results of a comprehensive ﬁeld study carried out in six organizations,
this chapter presents the technical considerations that will inﬂuence the conﬁguration of an
RFID enabled automated receiving application and demonstrates that technical challenges
are numerous since such an application requires customization depending on the type of
products, the characteristics of the network, the volume of activity, the unit level, and the
organization’s position in the supply chain. Beneﬁts derived from this type of RFID
application are dependent not only on the characteristics of the RFID platform but also
on the chosen RFID conﬁguration. A preliminary but rather comprehensive list of beneﬁts
derived from the ﬁeld study represents a useful analysis tool to determine the full beneﬁts
that can be derived from the application in a given organization.
Results also point to the overriding importance of managerial considerations related to
supplier adoption. In an open loop network, RFID enabled automated receiving clearly
impacts the supplier and this represents a major consideration when implementing the
308
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

application. Client mandates are usually perceived by the supplier as generating additional
costs while contributing few beneﬁts. This can create a conﬂictual situation in the buyer-
seller relationship as many reports indicated was the case at Wal-Mart (Fogarty, 2004;
Keizer, 2004; Romanow, 2004; Schwartz, 2004). Early adopters agree that the supplier must
also see beneﬁts for the application to be adopted by both parties (Schwartz, 2004). In fact,
the biggest obstacle to successfully implementing this RFID application is not tied to
technical issues but rather to obtaining supplier buy in.
RFID enabled automated receiving application optimizes a process which is shared
between buyer and seller and thus should contribute to build a collaborative advantage.
In the context of RFID enabled automated receiving, the client shares the mandate require-
ments and numbering schema to be used. In return, the supplier sends a tagged shipment
and electronic information which can be transmitted through the EPC network when the
data is not on the tag. In addition to this basic form of collaboration that is required between
supplier and client to perform the essential functions of RFID enabled automated receiving,
it is also possible for the supplier to capitalize on some beneﬁts from the application. For
example, the higher quality and speed of acquisition of the information that has been
gathered by the client because of the supplier can be shared back with the supplier in the
form of feedback. As an additional incentive, the client could decide to accelerate the
payment of the shipment because the possible claims are resolved more efﬁciently and
quickly. Further research on the advantages for the supplier to assist the client in perform-
ing automated receiving is clearly necessary and is also expected by the industry.
References
Collins, J. (2005) Hampton unlocks ROI from RFID. RFID Journal. Retrieved May 15, 2007, from
http:==www.rﬁdjournal.com=article=articleprint=1489=-1=1.
Diekmann, T., Melski, A., and Schumann, M. (2007) Data-on-network vs. data-on-tag: Managing data
in complex RFID environments. 40th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences
(HICSS ’07) January 3–6, 2007, Waikoloa, Hawaii (available online at http:==www.hicss.hawaii.
edu=hicss_40= apahome40.htm)
Fogarty, K. (2004) RFID: An offer you can’t refuse. Baseline. Retrieved March 29, 2007, from http:==
www.baselinemag.com=article2–0,1540,1542214,00.asp.
Fosso Wamba, S., Lefebvre, L.A., and Lefebvre, É. (2006) Enabling intelligent B-to-B eCommerce
supply chain management using RFID and the EPC network: A case study in the retail industry.
Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Electronic Commerce (ICEC’06), 14–16 August,
Fredericton, Canada.
Gu, J., Goetschalckx, M. and McGinnis, L.F. (2007) Research on warehouse operation: A comprehen-
sive review. European Journal of Operational Research 177 (1): 1–21.
Hardgrave, B.C., Waller, M., and Miller, R. (2006) RFID’s impact on out of stocks: A sales velocity
analysis. University of Arkansas Research Article. Retrieved May 15, 2007, from http:==itrc.uark.
edu=research=display.asp?article¼ITRI-WP068–0606.
Johnson, J.R. (2007) Wal-Mart to enable 400 more stores. DC Velocity. Retrieved May 15, 2007, from
http:==www.dcvelocity.com=rﬁdww=?article_id¼126.
Jones, P., Clarke-Hill, C., Shears, P., Comfort, D., and Hillier, D. (2004) Radio frequency identiﬁcation
in the UK: Opportunities and challenges. International Journal of Retail & Distribution Manage-
ment, 32, 164–171.
Jones, P., Clarke-Hill, C., Hillier, D., and Comfort, D. (2005) The beneﬁts, challenges and impacts of
radio frequency identiﬁcation technology (RFID) for retailers in the UK. Marketing Intelligence &
Planning, 23, 395–402.
Keizer, G. (2004) Forrester: Most Wal-Mart suppliers won’t meet RFID deadline. Tech Web. Retrieved
May 15, 2007, from http:==www.techweb.com=wire=26804096.
Technological Requirements and Derived Beneﬁts from RFID Enabled Receiving
309

Lefebvre, L.A., Lefebvre, É., Bendavid, Y., Fosso Wamba, S., and Boeck, H. (2006) RFID as an enabler
of B-to-B e-Commerce and its impact on business processes: A pilot study of a supply chain in
the retail industry. Proceedings of the 39th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System
Sciences (HICSS’06) January 4–7, 2006, Poipu, Hawaii (available online at http:==www.hicss.
hawaii.edu= Hicss39=).
Levy, M., Weitz. B.A., and Beattie, S. (2004) Retailing Management (Canadian edition), 1st ed.
McGraw-Hill Ryerson Higher Education: Toronto, Canada.
Loeh, H., Sung, G., and Katzy, B. (2005) The CeTIM virtual enterprise lab: A living, distributed,
collaboration lab. 11th International Conference on Concurrent Enterprising (ICE’05), University
BW Munich, Germany, 20–22 June, 2005 (available online at http:==www.cetim.org=).
O’Connor, M.C. (2006) Staples business depot sees big beneﬁts from RFID test. RFID Journal.
Retrieved May 15, 2007, from http:==www.rﬁdjournal.com=article=articleprint=2684=
Roberti, M. (2005) Wal-Mart begins RFID process changes. RFID Journal. Retrieved May 15, 2007,
from http:==www.rﬁdjournal.com=article=articleview=1385–1=1=
Roberti, M. (2007) Collaboration is the key to success. RFID Journal. Retrieved May 15, 2007, from
http:==www.rﬁdjournal.com=article=view=1327=
Romanow, K. (2004) Wal-Mart RFID supplier conference: Moving ahead, with or without you. AMR
Research, Retrieved March 29, 2007, from http:==www.amrresearch.com=Content=View.asp?
pmillid¼17365.
Schwartz, E. (2004) Wal-Mart promises RFID will beneﬁt suppliers. InfoWorld. Retrieved March 29,
2007, from http:==www.infoworld.com=article=04–06=17=HNwalmart_1.html.
Sellitto, C., Burgess, S., and Hawking, P. (2007) Information quality attributes associated with
RFID-derived beneﬁts in the retail supply chain. International Journal of Retail & Distribution
Management, 35, 69–87.
Smith, A.D. (2005) Exploring radio frequency identiﬁcation technology and its impact on business
systems. Information Management & Computer Security, 13, 16–28.
Violino, B. (2004) Farm harvests RFID’s beneﬁts. RFID Journal. Retrieved May 15, 2007, from http:==
www.rﬁdjournal.com=article=articleprint=810.
Wessel, R. (2007) Anticipating ROI, rewe expands its RFID deployment. RFID Journal. Retrieved May
15, 2007, from http:==www.rﬁdjournal.com=article=articleprint=3107=
310
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

17
A Prototype on RFID and Sensor Networks
for Elder Health Care
Melody Moh, Loc Ho, Zachary Walker, and Teng-Sheng Moh
CONTENTS
17.1
Introduction...................................................................................................................... 312
17.1.1 RFID...................................................................................................................... 312
17.2
Related Studies................................................................................................................. 313
17.3
Learning Phase—Integrating Off-the-Shelf Sensor Network
with Simulated RFID Reader......................................................................................... 314
17.3.1 Software for RFID Reader Mote and Base Station Mote .............................. 315
17.3.2 RFID Reader Simulator...................................................................................... 316
17.3.3 Software for Base Station PC ............................................................................ 316
17.3.4 Performance Results........................................................................................... 317
17.4
Developing Phase—Sensor Network with HF=UHF RFID
for Elder Health Care...................................................................................................... 317
17.4.1 Prototype System................................................................................................ 318
17.4.1.1 Medicine Monitoring Subsystem ...................................................... 318
17.4.1.2 Patient Monitoring Subsystem .......................................................... 319
17.4.1.3 Base Station Subsystem ...................................................................... 319
17.4.1.4 System Component Conﬁguration................................................... 320
17.4.2 Application Mote Software ............................................................................... 321
17.4.2.1 Base Station Mote Software ............................................................... 321
17.4.2.2 Medicine Mote Software .................................................................... 322
17.4.2.3 Patient Mote Software ........................................................................ 323
17.4.3 Base Station Software......................................................................................... 323
17.4.3.1 RFID Data Fusion Module................................................................. 324
17.4.3.2 Graphic User Interface Module......................................................... 325
17.5
Technical Limitations, Challenges, and Future Improvements ................................ 325
17.5.1 Technical Limitations and Challenges............................................................. 326
17.5.2 Application Result and Future Improvements............................................... 326
17.6
Conclusion ........................................................................................................................ 327
Acknowledgment ....................................................................................................................... 327
References.................................................................................................................................... 328
311

17.1
Introduction
RFID technology has recently become a viable replacement for the Universal Product Code
(UPC) technology in many industries. Its fast growth and huge potential beneﬁts have
motivated a major move independently taken by Wal-Mart, the world’s largest retailer,
and the U.S. Department of Defense (DoD), that required their suppliers to install RFID
tags by 2005 [1]. In response, several major computer companies, including Intel, HP, IBM,
and Sun, have announced their efforts and future plans to support RFID. RFID technology,
however, has attracted relatively little attention in the network research community.
Meanwhile, sensors and sensor networks have in recent years been adopted as a major
research focus by federal funding agencies. This has resulted in vast amount of research
proposals, academic projects, and publications.
In an effort to bridge the gap between industry and academia focuses, we have worked
on a prototype that utilizes both technologies and investigated feasibility, technical chal-
lenges, and resulting capabilities of their integration.
An RFID system consists of two primary components—a tag and a reader. An RFID tag,
like an UPC, is usually attached to a tracking object; a reader is then used to track tagged
objects. While sensor network is used to sense and monitor physical, chemical, and
biological environments through sensing of sound, temperature, light, and etc., RFID
tags allow any objects to be track-able or ‘‘sensible’’ as long as an RFID tag can be attached.
Even though RFID technology has limitations, such as low tolerance to ﬂuid or metal
environments, tags can extend a sensor network by providing sensing=sensible property to
otherwise unsensible objects, thus provide the last-hop connection of a sensor network.
RFID have been used in a number of biomedical and healthcare applications, such as
artiﬁcial interocular pressure measurement [2], dental implants and molds [3], and hospital
workﬂow including intrahospital patient and equipment tracking [4].
From a recent study, the population of age 65 and older in the United State will grow
from 10.6 million in 1975 to 18.2 in 2025, an increase of 72%, while the overall population
increase is about 60%. The trend is global; the worldwide population over age 65 will be
more than double from 357 million in 1990 to 761 million in 2025 [5]. Longevity has caused
expensive age-related disabilities, diseases, and therefore healthcare. To help in addressing
this aging population medication needs, we target our prototype on an in-home elder
healthcare system. This is a continuation of our work on applying wireless technologies for
biomedical applications [6–8].
The rest of this section presents major features of the RFID technology. Related studies
on integration of RFID and sensor networks are described in Section 17.2. This is followed
by a presentation of the two phases of the prototype system, in Sections 17.3 and 17.4,
respectively. Section 17.5 discusses technical challenges and future improvements. Finally,
Section 17.6 concludes this chapter.
17.1.1
RFID
Since sensor network has been a familiar topic in academia, we skip its introduction and
focus only on RFID. An RFID system, more speciﬁcally, includes three components: (1) a
tag or transponder located on the object to be identiﬁed, (2) an interrogator (reader) which
may be a read or write=read device, and (3) an antenna that emits radio signals to activate
the tag and read=write data to it.
At its simplest form, a tag is a beacon announcing its presence to a reader. These types of
tags are often seen in retail stores used to prevent theft by announcing their presence when
taken past a reader. RFID tag capabilities, however, extend well beyond a simple beacon.
312
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

Tag can hold a unique identity (UID) of 8 bytes in length and can be used for inventory
management at global scale, such as an UPC. More than just a UID, a tag can carry
rewriteable persistent storage and accessible via a reader.
RFID tags are classiﬁed by its energy source as passive, semiactive (or semipassive), and
active. A passive tag has no battery of its own and makes use of the incoming radio waves
broadcast by a reader to power its response. An active tag uses its own battery power to
perform all operations. A semiactive tag uses its own battery power for some functions but,
like the passive tag, uses the radio waves of the reader as an energy source for its own
transmission.
RFID readers employ tag-reading algorithms that are capable of identifying hundreds of
tags per second. Once identiﬁed, a reader may read data from or write to tag memory,
depending on the permissions granted by the tag. RFID readers generally fall into two
categories—high frequency (HF) and ultrahigh frequency (UHF). Currently HF RFID
systems adhere to the ISO (International Organization of Standardization) standard
while UHF RFID systems have yet to become standardized globally. Table 17.1 shows a
comparison between HF and UHF RFID technology.
17.2
Related Studies
When an RFID tag is given sensing capabilities, the line between RFID and sensor network
becomes blurred. Many active and semiactive tags have incorporated sensors into their
design, allowing them to take sensor readings and transmit them to a reader at a later time.
They are not quite sensor network nodes because they lack the capacity to communicate
with one another through a cooperatively formed ad hoc network, but they are beyond
simple RFID storage tags. In this way, RFID is converging with sensor networking
technology. From the other direction some sensor nodes are now using RFID readers as
part of their sensing capabilities. The SkyeRead Mini M1 made by SkyeTek is an example
of an RFID reader designed to mate directly with the Crossbow Mica2Dot sensor motes [9].
In the following, we describe several projects and prototypes taken places in industrial
and federal research laboratories, as well as some products adopted by companies.
NASA: Sensor Webs—The project has the objective of using readily available technologies to
create a wireless network with embedded intelligence [10]. In this way, instead of reporting
TABLE 17.1
Comparison of HF and UHF RFID Technology
HF RFID
UHF RFID
Frequency
13.56 MHz
902–928 MHz N. America
860–868 MHz Europe
950–956 MHz Japan
Read range
10–20 cm
3–6 m
Read rate
50 tags=s
400 tags=s
Memory size
64–256 bits read=write
64–2048 bits
read=write
Power source
Inductive=magnetic ﬁeld
Capacitive=electric ﬁeld
Advantage
Low cost
High speed
Standard frequency
Longer read range
Source:
From SkyeTek Inc., SkyeRead Mini, http:==skyetek.com=readers_Mini.
html, downloaded16 April 2005.
A Prototype on RFID and Sensor Networks for Elder Health Care
313

to an external control system, sensed data can be shared throughout the network and be
used by the embedded intelligence to act directly on any detected changes. RFID tagged
objects, such as ﬁreﬁghters or astronauts, may be sensed and be guided by the intelligent
sensor web; or product components and production ﬂow may be sensed and be guided to
slow down or to speed up.
Intel Labs: Proactive Healthcare—In addition to leading a major force on sensor network
research, Intel Research Labs also initiated an effort to explore technology that can help
in caring for the growing elderly population [11]. A joint project called ‘‘Caregiver’s
Assistant and CareNet Display,’’ developed by Intel Research Seattle and University of
Washington, aims to provide elder care by monitoring elders’ activities [12]. RFID tags
are stuck on household objects. Combined with a sensor network, the system would collect
information on which objects are touched and when. These data are used by an artiﬁcial-
intelligent program, Caregiver’s Assistant, to ﬁll out a standard Activities of Daily Living
(ADL) form.
HP Labs: Smart Rack and Smart Locus—HP opened its U.S. RFID Demo Center at HP Labs on
October 2004. Two major research prototypes are Smart Rack and smartLOCUS [13]. Both
prototypes gear toward integrating RFID and other types of sensors, such as video cameras
or thermal sensors, into ‘‘multimodal sensor networks’’ that use more than one type, or
mode, of sensors. Smart Rack uses thermal sensors and HF RFID readers to identify and
monitor the temperature of servers sitting in large metal server cabinets. These sensors and
readers are networked and the collected data are used to show, in real time, an inventory of
the cabinets and temperature proﬁle of each cabinet. It may become a commercial product
and offered within HP’s OpenView network management system.
Others: DOD and BP Oil—A few other DOD and private sectors are also using RFID with
integrated sensor networks. The U.S. Navy, working with Georgia Tech, has developed an
RFID sensor network that monitors the temperature, humidity, and air pressure in con-
tainers where aircraft parts are stored [14]. The U.S. military’s Combat Feeding Program
pilot uses active RFID tag-based sensor networks to provide real-time visibility of rations
as they move from the manufacturer to units in the ﬁled [15]. The BP oil company uses
RFID and sensor network to monitor assets and react quickly to changes in environmental
conditions [16].
17.3
Learning Phase—Integrating Off-the-Shelf Sensor
Network with Simulated RFID Reader
The ﬁrst phase of the project is to investigate the capability of sensors and RFID and how
they may be integrated. In this section we ﬁrst illustrate an overview of the phase. Three
major components are described in the three subsections. Finally, the last subsection
presents performance results.
There are many choices of commercial products, and each costs from hundreds (sensors
and HF RFID readers) to thousands of dollars (UHF RFID readers). Before making actual
purchase decisions, in the learning phase, we develop a prototype consisting of some
hardware and some software simulators.
There are a number of embedded platforms available. Adapting the sensor network
platform
is
the
most
logical
choice.
The
initial
commercially
available
sensor
network platform is the Berkeley mote. The Berkeley mote has been replaced by Mica,
Mica2, Mica2Dot, and MCS Cricket manufactured by CrossBow Technology [17].
The Mica2 mote is selected for this phase to determine its capability, feasibility, and
integration effect with RFID. Because of expensive hardware cost, in this phase an RFID
314
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

simulator reader is developed and used. On the basis of the experience learned, in the next
phase, the developing phase, an actual RFID readers are used.
In this prototype, there are four system components—two Mica2 motes, one simulated
RFID reader, and a base station PC, as illustrated in Figure 17.1. The two Mica2 motes—
named RFID reader mote and base station mote—are used for RF communication. The
RFID reader simulator is used to simulate an actual RFID reader, communicating via a
serial port. The base station PC is also used to perform statistic gathering as well as other
required processing. It is connected to the base station mote via a serial port. The message
ﬂow of the entire system is also illustrated in Figure 17.1. Each component is described in
the following subsections.
17.3.1
Software for RFID Reader Mote and Base Station Mote
The software developed for RFID reader mote is ﬁrst described in detail, followed by a
brief description of the software for base station mote.
The RFID reader mote software is developed using TinyOS and the nesC language [18].
This software interacts with the simulated RFID reader via the mote’s serial port. The
software module consists of RFID mote (control), RFID reader, battery, and communica-
tion modules, as illustrated in Figure 17.2. The control module provides control to all
submodules and handles intermodule interactions. The RFID reader module handles
interactions with the RFID reader. All RFID-speciﬁc details are hidden in the module.
The battery module handles battery voltage measurement.
The communication module is divided into three submodules—packet management,
serial communication, and RF communication—with an interface module. With limited
PC RFID reader
simulator
Read tag command
Reader mote
(RF)
Base station
mote
Tag Msg
Statistic Msg
Battery Msg
Base station PC
Tag responses
Tag Msg
Statistic Msg
Battery Msg
FIGURE 17.1
System component overview.
RFID
mote
RFID
reader
Battery
Comm
Serial comm
Packet
management
SMAC
RFID reader
protocol
RFID reader
I/O
Serial
port 2
Battery
ADC
Mica2
radio
Serial
port 1
FIGURE 17.2
RFID reader mote software components (with SMAC RF communication submodule).
A Prototype on RFID and Sensor Networks for Elder Health Care
315

memory resource, the packet management submodule manages a ﬁxed memory size
associated with each communication packet. The serial communication submodule is
the TinyOS communication module over serial port. There are a few RF communication
modules developed by various members of the open source community. TinyOS has
an RF communication module [18]. CrossBow Technology has a mesh RF communi-
cation module [17]. An S-MAC module is also available for this platform [19]. The RF
communication submodule is designed to allow for easy replacement. All three
RF communication submodules are wrapped around a common interface and are selected
at compile time.
The RFID reader mote software queries the RFID reader simulator every second for tag
messages. In response, the RFID reader simulator sends a set of tag messages to the reader
mote. Tag messages are queued by the RFID mote software and transmitted over RF to the
base station mote. To allow efﬁcient transmission, up to 12 tag messages are encoded into a
single RF message. If there are fewer than 12 tag messages, the RFID mote waits for 300 ms
before starting transmission. With a baud rate of 115,200 bps, 300 ms delay is sufﬁcient. (To
see this, each tag consists of 19 bytes, but each byte of 8 bits needs 1 stop-bit; thus,
transmitting would need to transmit 171 bits. A message of 12 tags needs transmission
of 2,052 bits. Given the above baud rate, it needs theoretically 17.8 ms.)
The base station mote software is similar to the RFID mote with run-time behavior
changes based on the mote ID (identity). The base station mote software gathers the
received packets and forwards them via the mote serial port to the base station PC.
17.3.2
RFID Reader Simulator
A simulator is developed to simulate an HF RFID reader. The HF RFID reader simulator
emulates Texas Instrument HF Tag-it protocol [20]. It is written in Java using part of the
existing TinyOS serial communication module. When the simulator receives a ‘‘Read
Transponder Details Command,’’ it sends a series of simulated tag messages to the RFID
reader mote via serial port. The number of tags is speciﬁed via its command line. The
simulated tag ID’s are ﬁxed.
17.3.3
Software for Base Station PC
The base station PC is programmed to process data received from the base station mote. It
is written in Java, and making use of existing modules from TinyOS. The architecture of
this module is designed with component reuse for the next phase of the project. The base
station PC software consists of eight modules—RFID Station, RFID Database, RFID Station
Packet, RFID Station Statistic, RFID Station GUI (Graphical User Interface), TinyOS Comm,
and MySQL Server, as shown in Figure 17.3.
The RFID Station module is the main module and handles all the interactions among
various submodules. The RFID Database module handles all database-related interactions.
Its main task is to store received tag messages to a persistent storage. The persistent storage
is accomplished using MySQL server and interface via Open Database Connection
(ODBC). The RFID Station Packet module handles message decoding. The RFID Station
Statistic module gathers statistic information based on messages received or statistic
message from each mote. With the help of the RF message header, it can determine RF
message receive rate as well as lost packet. The RFID Station GUI module (obviously)
handles GUI; the GUI screen includes node statistics, list of node details, list of tag details,
and command input. Finally, the TinyOS Comm module is the TinyOS reliable communi-
cation module. This module handles all serial communications as well as network
communication over a serial port.
316
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

17.3.4
Performance Results
The TinyOS RF communication module has a packet size limited to 29 bytes. This allows
only one tag message with overhead to be transmitted in a single RF packet. The CrossBow
RF mesh communication module is too slow with too much overhead. It is rated at 1 packet
per second. The SMAC RF communication module has a packet size limit of 256 bytes; it is
used for bandwidth test described below.
The test setup consists of two motes, an RFID reader simulator, and a base station PC.
The reader simulator and base station software both run on the same PC. The two motes
are about 2 feet apart, both with battery power. The RFID reader mote (base station mote)
communicates with the simulator reader (base station PC) by a USB serial port; the two
motes communicate with each other via wireless communication.
The initial test achieved about 10 tag messages of 19 bytes in length. To achieve a better
transfer rate, as mentioned earlier, the communication module is modiﬁed to queue up to
12 tag messages. This achieves about 25 tag messages or 500 application bytes per second
with 100% reliable RF communication. This rate is sufﬁcient in most embedded applica-
tions. Most commercial RFID readers can handle between 50 to 100 tags per second. On a
pure ID-based application, this usually requires 12 bytes for a tag ID. Thus, this system can
handle about 41 (i.e., 500=12) tags per second. If only 8 bytes are required for a tag ID, the
support rate goes up to 62 (i.e., 500=8) tags per second.
17.4
Developing Phase—Sensor Network with HF=UHF RFID
for Elder Health Care
In this section, we shall describe the development phase, including the details of the
application prototype system, results, and future enhancements. As mentioned earlier,
we developed a medicine monitoring and notiﬁcation system for elder patients without
personal care assistants. The high-level functionality may be described as follows:
The system monitors, notiﬁes, and assists an elder patient in taking the accurate amount
of his=her medicines at the appropriate time. It notiﬁes the elder patient when it is time to
take his=her medicines. A buzzer (Patient Monitor system) mounted on the door of the
RFID
station
RFID database
RFID station packet
RFID station statistic
RFID station GUI
Communication module
TinyOS serial
comm
S-MAC
Commands
Tag details
Node details
Node statistic
MySQL server
ODBC
FIGURE 17.3
Base station PC module design overview.
A Prototype on RFID and Sensor Networks for Elder Health Care
317

patient’s room beeps when there are medicines to be taken. When the patient walks to
the medicine cabinet (Medicine Monitor system), the system guides the patient in taking
the proper type and accurate amount of medicines using a GUI.
The rest of the section is organized as follows. Section 17.4.1 describes the prototype
system, including its three subsystems and their interaction. Section 17.4.2 details three
application mote software corresponding to these three subsystems. Section 17.4.3 presents
the base station software including the GUI module.
17.4.1
Prototype System
The system utilizes the strengths of both HF RFID (lower cost) and UHF RFID (long
distance) with three sensor network motes. The system is an extension to a prototype
system researched by Intel Labs [21], but completely built from bottom up with newer scale
model, 3rd generation sensor network mote, and an additional UHF reader. There is no
hardware or software reuse as they are not available to the public.
The system consists of three subsystems: The medicine monitoring subsystem, the
patient monitoring subsystem, and the base station subsystem. Together, they use seven
components—three Mica2 motes, an HF RFID reader, a UHF RFID reader, a weight scale,
and a base station PC. In the following, we ﬁrst describe each of the subsystems, followed
by an illustration of their interactions in the system component conﬁguration.
17.4.1.1
Medicine Monitoring Subsystem
In this subsystem, as shown in Figure 17.4, HF RFID tags are placed on each medicine
bottle; each HF tag identiﬁes a medicine bottle. The HF RFID reader (SkyeRead M1
Mini [22]) is used in conjunction to track all medicine bottles within range of the reader.
FIGURE 17.4
Medicine monitoring system.
318
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

The Medicine Mote communicates with the HF RFID reader and with the scale to monitor
HF tags and the total medicine weight. By performing reads of all tags at a regular interval,
the system is able to determine when and which bottle is removed or replaced by the patient.
(The short range of the HF reader is actually desirable for this aspect of the application.)
The weight scale monitors the amount of medicine on the scale. Combining changes in
weight and HF tag event, which medicine bottle and the amount of medicine taken can be
determined when the patient takes their pills. The Medicine Mote software is described in
detail in Section 17.4.2.2.
17.4.1.2
Patient Monitoring Subsystem
This subsystem is shown in Figure 17.5. A UHF RFID system including a reader and one or
more tags is used to track the elder patient who needs the medicines. This patient wears a
UHF tag, which may be detected by the associated RFID reader within 3–6 meters. The
AWID UHF RFID reader [23] is chosen for this subsystem. The Patient Mote communicates
with the UHF Reader to monitor patient arrival at the door of a room or other areas where
the system is installed. Thus, the system is able to determine that the patient is in the
vicinity, and alerts the patient to take the required medicines via a buzzer. The Patient
Mote software is described in Section 17.4.2.3.
17.4.1.3
Base Station Subsystem
This subsystem is shown in Figure 17.6. The Base Station Mote provides message relay to
the Base Station PC. The Base Station PC is a PC running a Linux operation system and it
is re-designed from the ﬁrst phase to accommodate our application. The Base Station
software tasks include simulating a display and its GUI for the patient; determining
FIGURE 17.5
Patient monitoring subsystem.
A Prototype on RFID and Sensor Networks for Elder Health Care
319

when medicine is required; and maintaining various interactions between the Medicine
Mote and Patient Mote. The Base Station Mote software is described in Section 17.4.2.1.
17.4.1.4
System Component Conﬁguration
Next, we describe major interactions among the seven system components, as shown in
Figure 17.7. As explained before, motes are mainly used for communicating readers from
RFID readers to the control system. The Medicine Mote communicates with the HF RFID
reader and weight scale to monitor HF tags and medicines weight. (Recall that each HF
RFID tag identiﬁes a medicine bottle.) The Patient Mote communicates with the UHF RFID
FIGURE 17.6
Base station subsystem.
FIGURE 17.7
System component conﬁguration.
* The embedded display is simulated on the PC base station
  using appropriate messages
Base
station PC
Base station
mote
Medicine
mote
HF
reader
Scale
Display*
Patient
mote
UHF
reader
Serial
port
Serial
port
Serial
port
RF
RF
RF
Serial
port
320
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

reader to monitor patient arrives to room or an area where the system is installed. The Base
Station Mote provides message relay to the Base Station PC (the control system).
17.4.2
Application Mote Software
The software for all three motes (Medicine, Patient, and Base Station motes) is identical
with compile-time hardware assignment. Figure 17.8 shows the generic mote system
software component, enhanced from that in the ﬁrst phase (Figure 17.2). To support the
HF RFID reader, the internal of the RFID reader module developed in the ﬁrst phase is
replaced with the actual protocol interface. The weight scale module is added to handle the
scale measurement. The RFID tag and weight data are fused into a single source of
information for transmission. A set of data fusion messages is created to indicate the
following: weight change, tag no longer detected, tag detected again, and patient detected
(details in Section 17.4.3.1). This requires a number of error checking’s and handlings to
deal with unreliable serial port communications as well as scale weight instability. The
UHF RFID reader module is added to communicate with the AWID UHF RFID reader. The
scale reader module is added to communicate with the scale.
In correspondence to the three subsystems described in Section 17.4.1, there are also
three pieces of mote software: the medicine mote software, the patient software, and the
base station mote software. They are described in the following subsections.
17.4.2.1
Base Station Mote Software
The Base Station Mote hardware is a Mica2 mote with break out connectors and wire
connectors to connect to the Base Station PC. Its software and functionalities are the
simplest of the three motes. Its tasks are to receive wireless messages and relay them to
the Base Station PC software application via serial port 1. The Comm module developed in
RFID
mote
(control)
Data
fusion
Scale
reader
HF RFID
reader*
RFID reader
I/O
RFID reader
I/O
SMAC
TinyOS
comm
Packet
management
Serial
port 2
Battery
ADC
Mica2
radio
Serial
port 1**
UHF
RFID
reader*
Battery
Comm
* Only one of these module is active
** Only one of these module is active
Serial
port 2
Scale
reader I/O
Serial
port 1**
FIGURE 17.8
Mote system software components.
A Prototype on RFID and Sensor Networks for Elder Health Care
321

the ﬁrst phase is sufﬁcient. The application message length and S-MAC packet length
changed from 250 bytes to 50 bytes as our maximum message size is 50 bytes. This allows
30 messages to be queued for transmission instead of 12 messages from the ﬁrst phase of
the prototype system.
17.4.2.2
Medicine Mote Software
The Medicine Mote hardware is the same as the Base Station Mote with an HF RFID reader
and a scale. As illustrated in Figure 17.8, the scale reader and HF RFID reader modules
have its only communication path. The design of the scale reader module encapsulates the
scale communication protocol. When a scale reading is available, it notiﬁes the Data Fusion
module. Similarly, the HF RFID reader module encapsulates the HF reader communication
protocol. All tags detected by the HF RFID reader module are passed to the Data Fusion
module for processing.
The most complex module is the Data Fusion module, which performs aggregation on
the HF RFID reader and scale data. One of its tasks is intelligent data aggregation, which
aims to reduce the number of RF transmission. This process requires an additional message
type with ﬁve states—medicine detected, medicine removed, medicine placed back, medi-
cine taken, and medicine cleared. The medicine detected state message occurs when a new
medicine (or tag) is received. The medicine removed state message occurs when a medicine
is not detected after some elapsed interval. The medicine placed back state message occurs
when a medicine is detected again after it has been removed. The medicine taken state
message occurs when a medicine is placed back and the scale weight is stabilized. The
medicine cleared state message is intended to handle the situation where weight changed
because of the 100 mg resolution of the scale. In this case, the Base Station PC software will
handle this situation by ignoring the changed weight.
The data fusion algorithm used in the Medicine Mote software is described later.
Data Fusion Algorithm (Medicine Mote)
1. On ﬁrst receipt of each medicine message, perform the following operations:
a. Record the medicine tag ID
b. Notify the Base Station PC by sending a medicine detected state message
c. Set detected counter to 1
2. On subsequent receipt of each medicine message, perform the following oper-
ations:
a. Increment its detected counter by 1
b. Reset the removed counter to 0
c. If the medicine is marked medicine removed, notify the Base Station PC by
sending a medicine placed back state message and mark the medicine as
medicine placed back
3. On every half second timer, perform the following operations:
a. Reset the detected counter to 0
b. If the detected counter is 0, increment the removed counter by 1
c. If the removed counter is greater than a threshold, notify the Base Station PC by
sending a medicine removed state message and mark the medicine as medicine
removed
322
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

4. On each scale weight changed (and stabilized), perform the following operations:
a. If a medicine is marked medicine removed, determine the scale difference and
send a medicine taken state message to the Base Station PC
b. If no medicine is marked as medicine removed, send a medicine cleared state
message to the Base Station PC
To support reliable communication between the Medicine Mote and the Base Station PC
application, each message is echoed back to its sender. Message is cleared if the sequence
ID matches the expected sequence ID.
Finally, the scale reader module interfaces with the actual scale. At system startup, the
scale reader module will initialize the actual scale for proper operation. Every second
the scale reader module will send command to query the actual scale weight. This weight
is passed to the Data Fusion module for processing. All communication errors with the
scale will cause reinitialization.
17.4.2.3
Patient Mote Software
The Patient Mote hardware is the same as the Base Station mote with a UHF RFID reader. The
UHF RFID reader is connected to the mote via a broke out board with various connectors and
wire connectors. A passive UHF tag is worn on the patient’s wrist to provide proper detection
by the UHF RFID reader. (Because of limited access to UHF tags and interference of water
concentration in human body, the UHF tag is required to be held on the ﬁnger for proper
operation.) The Patient Mote software uses the same software modules as the Medicine Mote.
The UHF RFID reader module is enabled while the scale reader and HF RFID reader modules
are disabled via compiler switches. The UHF RFID reader module interfaces with the UHF
RFID reader. All protocol speciﬁc details are hidden in this module. (For more information on
the AWID UHF RFID reader protocol, refer to LR-911 reader manual.) When a UHF tag is
detected, it is forwarded to the Data Fusion module for processing. The design of the Data
Fusion module is extended to support the Patient Mote functionalities.
The data fusion algorithm for the Patient Mote is described below.
Data Fusion Algorithm (Patient Mote)
1. On reception of a UHF tag ID message from the Base Station PC, enable the UHF
RFID reader system. (This indicates medication needs to be taken.)
2. On reception of a cleared tag ID message, disable the UHF RFID reader system.
(This indicates no medication required.)
3. On reception of a UHF tag ID from the UHF RFID reader, increment its detected
counter if ID matches
4. On every half second timer, perform the following operations:
a. If counter is greater than 6, set counter to 6 (3 s)
b. If counter is not zero, enable buzzer and decrement counter by 1
c. If counter is zero, disable buzzer
17.4.3
Base Station Software
The base station PC software developed in the previous phase (Section 17.3.3, Figure 17.3)
is signiﬁcantly expanded for the application. A data fusion module is added to process
data aggregations. All data fusion messages are recorded in the persistent database. In
A Prototype on RFID and Sensor Networks for Elder Health Care
323

supporting the application, a number of new database tables and schemes are created for
recording additional information, patient, medicines, and log of events (from the Patient
Mote and Medicine Mote).
The Base Station PC software component is shown in Figure 17.9. The RFID Data Fusion
module tasks are to provide a list of medicines that needs to be taken based on the patient data
stored in the persistent database and handle response messages from the Medicine Mote
and Patient Mote. The list of medicines is queried by the RFID Patient GUI module for
display. In the following section, we ﬁrst discuss details of the Data Fusion module,
which is the most complex among all modules; this is followed by the GUI module.
17.4.3.1
RFID Data Fusion Module
The module performs a number of crucial operations, which include interfacing with the
database for patient data, computing the required medicines to be taken, handling mes-
sages from the Medicine Mote and Patient Mote, providing a list of medicines to be taken
to the RFID Patient GUI module, and providing coordination logics to support the various
application functionalities.
The RFID Data Fusion module algorithm is described below.
Data Fusion Algorithm (RFID)
1. On system startup, perform these operations:
a. Query the persistent database for the patient information such as user name and
the UHF tag ID
b. Query the persistent database for a list of medicines to take
c. Query the persistent database for a list of medicines taken today
d. Compute the medicine list for the patient based on when a medicine is required
to be taken and the current system clock
e. If there is medicine to be taken, send a UHF tag ID message to the Patient Mote if
presents
f. If there is no medicine to be taken, send a cleared message to the Patient Mote
if presents
FIGURE 17.9
Application base station software com-
ponent.
TinyOS comm
RFID database
Serial port
MySQL server
RFID data fusion
RFID patient GUI
RFID station packet
RFID GUI
RFID station
statistic
Commands
RFID
station
ODBC
324
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

g. If there is medicine to be taken, notify the RFID Patient GUI module
h. If the RFID Patient GUI module receives a notiﬁcation, it retrieves the list of
medicines required to be taken and displays them
2. Perform the following operations once every minute:
a. Compute the medicine list for the patient based on when a medicine is required
to be taken and the current system clock
b. If there is medicine to be taken, send a UHF tag ID message to the Patient Mote if
presents
c. If there is no medicine to be taken, send a cleared message to the Patient Mote if
presents
d. If the RFID Patient GUI module receives a notiﬁcation, it retrieves the list of
medicine required to be taken and displays them
3. Upon reception of any messages from the Patient Mote or Medicine Mote, mark
them as present
4. Upon reception of a Patient Detected state message, log the event
5. Upon reception of the Medicine Detected state message, perform these operations:
a. If the tag ID matches the tag ID in the database, log the event
b. If the tag ID does not match the tag ID in the database, notify the RFID Patient
GUI to display invalid medicine
6. Upon reception of the Medicine Taken state message, perform these operations:
a. Log the event
b. Clear the medicine
c. Notify the RFID Patient GUI to update its display
7. Upon reception of the Medicine Cleared state message, perform these operations:
a. Log the event
b. Add or subtract the additional weight to the last medicine taken record
c. Notify the RFID Patient GUI to update its display
8. Upon reception of any other messages, write to the persistent storage table accord-
ingly
17.4.3.2
Graphic User Interface Module
To provide user interactions with the system, a GUI is required with a display. An
embedded display may be used for this purpose. With limited resource, an emulated
display within the Base Station PC software is developed as a replacement. The display
emulates and provides a GUI to assist the patient, as shown in Figure 17.10. Note the use of
large font size for various medication=vitamins and of different colors for pill quantity;
this is to make it easier for old patients. Alternatively, pictures of various medicine
brands=bottles may be used to replace medicine names.
17.5
Technical Limitations, Challenges, and Future Improvements
In developing the prototype system, a number of technical challenges and limitations have
been encountered. We feel that it is important to discuss them as well as suggest future
improvements.
A Prototype on RFID and Sensor Networks for Elder Health Care
325

17.5.1
Technical Limitations and Challenges
The limitations and challenges included struggling with limited availability of hardware,
lack of expertise and knowledge of RFID technology, ﬁnding and acquiring the proper
hardware, immature RFID technology, and the nature of development on an embedded
system. Unlike the traditional research of a pure software application or algorithm that
requires only a PC or equivalent, our application required seven hardware components,
software development, and interaction with each of them. Acquiring the HF and UHF
RFID readers were quite difﬁcult. As the UHF RFID reader is relatively new technology
with limited availability, a few UHF RFID reader manufacture companies would not sell
us their hardware unless we attend their seminars, which could cost thousand of dollars.
Although there are only a few UHF RFID readers, we still need to determine which reader
would be appropriate for our application. Since we could not purchase all models, we
chose the AWID LR-911 model as recommended by UCLA WINMEC [24] as the most
reliable model available. For the HF and scale readers, we relied on Intel Labs’ prototype as
our guide lines. We chose newer models of the same HF RFID and scale readers used by
Intel Labs, as newer models are better, smaller, and more accurate.
Because our application involved embedded platform, the development process were
quite difﬁcult. After our mote software was written, it was downloaded into the mote
for testing. Without an in-circuit debugging capability, the only way to debug any part of
the code was via the mote’s three LEDs. Message printing capability was added after our
mote software functioned properly with basic functionalities. Although the primary way to
debug was still via toggling LEDs, we also carefully reviewed the mote source code when
the system did not performed as expected.
As the UHF RFID technology is relatively new, we did not ﬁnd an acceptable UHF tag.
The preferred tag is a wrist UHF passive tag that can be worn on the patient’s wrist
without interference. With the current tag, the patient UHF passive tag is required to hold
on the ﬁnger for proper detection.
On the HF reader end, the HF reader range was too short. Therefore, an external antenna
is required. For this, a custom designed external antenna may be more appropriate. At this
stage, it is unlikely that we will acquire an external antenna and integrate in time. It is likely
to be added in future phases of the prototype system.
17.5.2
Application Result and Future Improvements
The developed application can monitor and notify the patient to take their medication. The
design of the system is fairly ﬂexible. Additional Patient Motes can be added with minimal
FIGURE 17.10
Patient GUI.
Before Metolazone taken
After Metolazone taken
326
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

source changes on the Base Station PC software. As our ﬁrst application prototype on RFID
and sensors, the system is not a very commercially user-friendly. Yet, it has proven the
beneﬁt of the integration of sensor network and RFID technologies, which is one major
goal for this prototype.
There are a number of improvements and future extensions that can be added to the
prototype system in order to be a feasible product. Improvements of the prototype system
may include the following:
. Completely battery powered all system components with power management
. Higher precision scale as some medicines require 100 mg resolution
. Better UHF passive tag with less interference
. External HF antenna for more coverage area to detect medicine bottles
. Smaller HF tag in order to place on the bottom of medicine bottles
. An actual embedded display for the patient GUI
. A small form factor PC, such as mini-itx or embedded platform, instead of a laptop
. Molding for all system components for better appearance
. Use or experiment with other MAC protocols
17.6
Conclusion
We have described a project that integrates both sensor network and RFID technologies.
It includes an initial learning phase and a development phase. The learning phase
investigates technology compatibility and capabilities through a sensor network interact-
ing with a simulated RFID system. Simulating software modules are described as they
provide excellent learning experiences, and are needed before hardware purchases are
possible. The development phase builds a system that consists of sensors and both HF
and UHF RFID components. All the subsystems and the corresponding software modules
are presented in detail. The project is targeted for in-home medication monitoring for
elder patients. Future work may include, in addition of those improvements listed in
Section 17.5.2, extending the prototype from medication monitoring to a broader elder
home-care system, from one room to an entire house, featuring more sensors and RFID
components distributed at various strategic places and on various household items.
Another extension would be adding the capability of notifying family members via
email, and networked with an external healthcare center monitor system for any assist-
ance via the Internet.
Acknowledgment
A preliminary version of the work appeared in the following paper: ‘‘A Prototype on
RFID and Sensor Networks for Elder Healthcare: Progress Report,’’ by L. Ho, Z. Walker,
M. Moh, T. Hamada, and C.-F. Su, in Proc. of ACM Workshop on Experimental Approaches
to Wireless Network Design and Analysis, in conjunction with ACM SIGCOMM 2005,
Philadelphia, PA, Aug 2005. M. Moh is supported in part by Fujitsu Labs of
America and by CSUPERB (California State Univ. Program in Education and Research in
Biotechnology). T.-S. Moh is supported in part by CSU Research Grant.
A Prototype on RFID and Sensor Networks for Elder Health Care
327

References
1. DOD, DOD RFID website (Ofﬁcial Releases, Memos, etc.), http:==www.acq.osd.mil=log=rﬁd=
index.htmhttp:==www.dodrﬁd.org, downloaded 16 April 2005.
2. Finkenzeller, K., RFID Handbook: Fundamentals and Applications in Contactless Smart Cards and
Identiﬁcation, Wiley, England, 2003.
3. Ilic, C., Using tags to make teeth, RFID Journal, http:==www.rﬁdjournal.com=article=articleview=
1206=1=1=, downloaded 22 January 2005.
4. Exavera Technologies, eShepherd overview, http:==www.exavera.com=healthcare=eshepherd.
php, downloaded 22 January 2005.
5. Hooyman, N. and Kiyak, H., Social Gerontology: A Multidisciplinary Perspective, 6th ed., Allyn &
Bacon, 2002.
6. Culpepper, B., J.L. Dung, and M. Moh, Design and analysis of Hybrid Indirect Transmissions
(HIT) for data gathering in wireless micro sensor networks, ACM Mobile Computing and Commu-
nications Review (MC2R), January=February 2004, pp. 61–83, A preliminary version, Hybrid
indirect transmissions (HIT) for data gathering in wireless micro sensor networks for biomedical
applications, appeared in Proceedings of the IEEE Computer Communication Workshop, Laguna
Niguel, California, October 2003, pp. 124–133.
7. Moh, M., B.J. Culpepper, L. Dung, T.-S. Moh, T. Hamada, and C.-F. Su, On data gathering
protocols for in-body biomedical sensor networks, Proceedings of the IEEE Globecom, St. Louis,
MO, November 2005.
8. Z. Walker, M. Moh, and T.-S. Moh. A development platform for wireless sensor networks with
biomedical applications. Proceedings of the IEEE Consumers Communication Networks (CCNC), Las
Vegas, NV, January 2007.
9. Crossbow Inc., Mica2Dot Series, http:==www.xbow.com=Products=productsdetails.aspx?sid ¼ 73
downloaded 10 April 2005.
10. Colllins, J., NASA creates thinking RF sensors, RFID Journal, downloaded April 10, 2005, http:==
www.rﬁdjournal.com=article=articleview=1146=1=47=
11. Dishman, E., Inventing wellness systems for aging in place, IEEE Computer Magazine, May 2004.
12. Intel Research Seattle, Caregiver’s assistant and carenet display: Making eldercare easier, down-
loaded 10 April 2005, http:==seattleweb.Intelresearch.net=Projects=active=Dcdemo=
13. O’Connor, M.C., HP kicks off US RFID demo center, RFID Journal, http:==www.rﬁdjournal.com=
article=articleview=1211=1=50=, downloaded on 10 April 2005.
14. Roberti, M., Navy revs up RFID sensors, http:==www.rﬁdjournal.com=article=articleview=
990=1=, June 2004.
15. Roberti, M., Vendor to foxhole tracking, RFID Journal, http:==www.rﬁdjournal.com=article=
articleview=847, March 2004.
16. Roberti, M., BP leads the way on sensors, http:==www.rﬁdjournal.com=article=articleview=
1216=1=2=, November 1, 2004.
17. Crossbow Inc., Home page, http:==www.xbow.com, downloaded 10 April 2005.
18. TinyOS, Tiny OS Community Forum, http:==www.tinyos.net, downloaded 4 December 2004.
19. Ye, W., Download S-MAC Source Code for Motes, http:==www.isi.edu=ilense=software=
smac=#Introduction, downloaded 16 June 2004.
20. Texas Instrument Inc., HF Reader System Series 6000, downloaded 1 January 2005 http:==www.ti.
com=rﬁd=docs=manuals=refmanuals=RI-STU-TRDCrefGuide.pdf
21. Fishky, K. and Wang, M., A Flexible, Low-Overhead Ubiquitous System for Medication Monitor-
ing, Intel Research Technical Report IRS-TR-03–011, October 2003.
22. SkyeTek Inc., SkyeRead Mini, http:==skyetek.com=readers_Mini.html, downloaded16 April 2005.
23. AWID Inc., Home page, http:==www.awid.com, downloaded 10 April 2005.
24. WINMEC (Wireless Internet for Mobile Enterprise Consortium), Home page, downloaded
20 February 2005. http:==www.winmec.ucla.edu=index.asp
328
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

18
Triage with RFID Tags for Massive Incidents
Sozo Inoue, Akihito Sonoda, and Hiroto Yasuura
CONTENTS
18.1
Introduction...................................................................................................................... 329
18.2
Triage as a Challenge for Pervasive Computing ........................................................ 331
18.2.1 Triage .................................................................................................................... 332
18.2.2 Requirements....................................................................................................... 334
18.2.3 Challenges in Pervasive Computing................................................................ 334
18.3
RFID Triage System......................................................................................................... 335
18.3.1 System Architecture............................................................................................ 336
18.3.2 System Flow......................................................................................................... 338
18.4
Related Work.................................................................................................................... 339
18.5
Preliminary Experiment.................................................................................................. 339
18.6
Experiment........................................................................................................................ 341
18.6.1 Assumption.......................................................................................................... 341
18.6.2 System Assignment............................................................................................. 342
18.6.3 Network................................................................................................................ 342
18.6.4 Process of Experiment ........................................................................................ 342
18.6.5 Evaluation ............................................................................................................ 343
18.6.5.1 Transportation of Injured People...................................................... 343
18.6.5.2 Information Collection........................................................................ 344
18.6.5.3 Communication Time in the System................................................ 347
18.6.6 Discussion ............................................................................................................ 347
18.7
Conclusion ........................................................................................................................ 348
Acknowledgments ..................................................................................................................... 348
References.................................................................................................................................... 348
18.1
Introduction
In this chapter, a triage system using RFID and mobile devices with a wireless network is
proposed, and its advantages are veriﬁed through an experiment assuming an incident of
massive injured people.
Triage is a procedure used by emergency personnel to ration limited medical resources
to massive injured people, in which triage tags are used to (1) classify and transport the
injured people effectively and (2) obtain the information about the state and the scale of the
329

casualty incident to publish to the masses or to utilize for decision making such as medical
resource procurements. Figure 18.1 is a picture of a triage tag.
So far, triage is operated manually using paper triage tags, tallies, and radiophones.
However, manually obtaining the information about the state and the scale of the casualty
incident to publish to the masses or to utilize for decision making such as medical resource
procurements leads to failure, inaccuracy, and delay in the information transmission while
emergency personnel have priority over treatments for injuries, and causes inefﬁciency in
classiﬁcation and transport of the injured people effectively, which is the essential goal of
emergency medical services.
In this chapter, we propose a triage system in which RFID tags, which are silicon chips
with their IDs, radio frequency functions, and some additional logic and memory [1,2], are
attached to triage tags. Most of the RFID tags are passive, which means the power is
supplied through radio frequency communication from external readers. Employed RFID
tags in this work are passive and have 1 kb of rewritable memories. Figure 18.2 is a picture
of an RFID tag we employed.
Embedding an RFID tag to a triage tag has the following advantages:
1. Terminal that the emergency personnel use can identify the injured person by the
unique ID value in each RFID tag.
2. Rewritable RFID tags provide the storage for the information of the injured person,
and the emergency personnel can obtain the information when they are in a place
where wireless communication is out of service, such as deep in a mountain or in
the underground.
FIGURE 18.1
Triage tag.
330
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

3. Time required to input an injured person’s information can be independent of the
network communication, since the information already input so far about the
injured person, which is shown to the emergency personnel when they begin to
add information, is not obtained through the network, but from the RFID tag.
This application addresses important challenges for pervasive computing: data integrity,
the information that should not be lost after being input; input throughput, the time
required to input injured person’s information should be as short as possible; availability,
that is, emergency personnel should be able to use the system any time, and low latency of
communication. These should be as independent of the network status as possible.
In this chapter, we show a realistic solution for the challenges by specializing the
network usage in a way that only particular paths are used in particular stages of the
workﬂow by analyzing the workﬂow and exploiting RFID tags to slim down the possible
paths by the following approaches: input throughput and availability are assured by using
RFID tags as local buffer; data integrity is assured and latency is improved by deﬁning
minimum wireless communication areas in the paths in triage workﬂow.
To evaluate the effectiveness of the system, we performed two experimental perform-
ance of triage assuming a complex car crash of 5 cars and about 82 injured people, where
one of the performances is done in the current method, and the other is done using the
system. As a result of the experiment, the information collection was accelerated and made
more complete by using the system, especially for the information that is utilized in early
stages of the triage. The acceleration of the collection also resulted in the acceleration of the
transportation of the injured people, which is the most important objective in triage.
Moreover, we could estimate that the average acceleration of each input to the terminal
by employing RFID tag in the experiment was 14.3 s.
The rest of the chapter is organized as follows: Section 18.2 describes triage and chal-
lenges for pervasive computing, Section 18.3 introduces the RFID triage system, Section
18.4 describes the related work, Section 18.5 shows the result of a preliminary experiment
to complement the experiment, Section 18.6 shows the result of the experiment to conﬁrm
the effectiveness of the system, and Section 18.7 concludes the chapter.
18.2
Triage as a Challenge for Pervasive Computing
We position triage as not only a practical application that requires urgent and continuous
improvement since we are facing massive casualty incidents every day, but also a start
point for new horizons in pervasive computing concerning unexpected human behavior,
FIGURE 18.2
RFID tag.
Triage with RFID Tags for Massive Incidents
331

rapid deployment, and insufﬁcient computing infrastructure. In this section, we describe
the workﬂow of triage operated by emergency personnel, address technical requirements
for triage regarding the paths of the information collected as that of network, and motivate
the challenges for pervasive computing hidden in the requirements.
We target on incidents in which 10–100 people are injured in a regional place. Examples
of such incidents are a crash=derailment=overturn of a train, a crash=fall of a car, a
crash=ﬁre of a plane, and terrorism in a subway=building.
18.2.1
Triage
We call the people who are engaged in triage emergency personnel. Figure 18.3 shows an
abstract workﬂow of triage.
Current triage is done in the following procedure without using information systems by
the emergency personnel:
1. Emergency personnel who arrive to the incident site ﬁrst establish a ﬁrst-aid area,
which is a safe place for ﬁrst aid close to the incident site, and an operation point,
which is a place to command the triage.
2. First triage: After the evacuation of injured people once the incident site is secured
by ﬁremen, the emergency personnel enter the incident site and perform ﬁrst
triage, in which the personnel distinguish the injury level in about 30 s. During
the ﬁrst triage, they attach triage tags, each of which has a perforated colored label
representing the injury level, as the following, to the injured people:
a. Black=DECEASED: The person is severely injured to die and any hospital care
does not help survive.
Attach
triage tag
Date,
name/class of
emergency
person, age,
sex, level of
injury
Arrive at incident site
Name,
phone,
address
Hospital
Transportation
Second triage
Hospital selection
Name,
phone,
address
Name,
phone,
address
Hospital
Hospital
Hospital
Return to first-aid area
Submit copy
of tag
Decision making,
publication
Operation point
First-aid area
Red/immediate
Incident site
First triage
Yellow/delayed
Green/minor
Information collection
FIGURE 18.3
Workﬂow in triage.
332
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

b. Red=IMMEDIATE: The person requires immediate surgery or other life-saving
intervention, the person is unconscious, and has ﬁrst priority to be transported
to hospitals.
c. Yellow=DELAYED: The person requires hospital care and requires to be watched
by trained persons, but the person remains conscious and the condition is stable
for the moment.
d. Green=MINOR: The person may require a doctor’s care but not immediately,
and the person is able to walk on her=his own.
Simultaneously, the following information is written by the emergency personnel as much
as possible:
a. date of input
b. name of the emergency personnel
c. category of the emergency personnel, such as doctor, emergency medical tech-
nician
d. rough age of the injured person
e. sex of the injured person
f. written version of the injury level
3. Injured people are moved from the incident site to the ﬁrst-aid area.
4. Second triage: In the ﬁrst-aid area, besides treatment of the injured people, second
triage is performed if possible, in which the information of the injured people
such as
a. name
b. phone number
c. address
d. updated information from ﬁrst triage
are collected as much as the emergency personnel and the injured people can
afford to, and written on the triage tags.
5. Hospital selection: At the exit of the ﬁrst-aid area, the hospital to which each injured
person is transported is decided and written on the triage tag. A triage tag
has carbon copies, and one of them is left to the emergency personnel of the
operation point.
6. When an ambulance or a transport vehicle arrives at the ﬁrst-aid area, the injured
people are transported from the ﬁrst-aid area to the hospital. In the ambulances,
the information of the injured people are collected as much as possible and written
on the triage tags.
7. Other emergency personnel stand by at each hospital and collect the information
of the injured people transported. The ambulance, after transporting injured
people to hospitals, returns to the incident site again and repeats the transportation
of injured people to hospitals. On returning to the incident site, the ambulance
transports the carbon copy of the triage tag at the hospital to the operation point.
8. In the operation point, the information on the carbon copies are collected, and
reported to the ﬁre department of the area, which is to be used for decision
making, publication, etc.
Triage with RFID Tags for Massive Incidents
333

18.2.2
Requirements
The ﬁrst mission of triage targeted on in the chapter is to transport injured people as
quickly as possible. As for the mission, information collection of injured people affects the
latency of transportation in two ways: troublesome operations for information collection
by an emergency personnel cause latency by disturbing her=his work, and particular types
of input information should be collected in the early stages since they are used for decisions
in the transportation. For the latter, information such as the level of injury and hospital to
be transported have to be collected within ﬁrst or second triage before the transportation
where these information are used, whereas in the other types they have not been collected
since they are used in the afterward. However, in the current triage, all of this information
must be collected before transportation for the sake of avoiding loss and latency of the
collection after the ambulance has left.
Thus, several technical requirements that can be identiﬁed as important challenges for
pervasive computing arise regarding the paths through which the information of injured
people is collected:
1. Data Integrity: The information of injured people should not be lost after being
input. However, in current triage, the complete information of injured people
cannot be collected when triage tags fail to be cut off, are lost, or left in the pocket
of an emergency person. Moreover, the information ﬁlled in a triage tag later than
the ﬁrst or second triage stages will be lost when the ambulance does not return to
the incident site.
2. Input Throughput: The time to input injured person’s information should be as
short as possible. Especially, it should be so even if the latency of the network
communication becomes large.
3. Availability: Emergency personnel should be able to use the system. Especially,
input operations of injured person’s information should be available anytime in
the triage, even when the network is unreachable.
4. Low Latency: several types of input information should be quickly collected and
viewed from the operation point. In current triage, the information ﬁlled into a
triage tag later than the ﬁrst or second triage stage is not collected until the
ambulance that transported the injured person returns to the incident site, even
if they are ﬁlled in the ambulance or at the hospital, since additional manual
communication from the operation point to hospitals or the ambulance increases
the work in the operation point.
18.2.3
Challenges in Pervasive Computing
The requirements listed in the previous section are important challenges in pervasive
computing, which aims one in harmony with real world circumstance, including unex-
pected human behavior, rapid deployment, or insufﬁcient computing infrastructure. In
this chapter, we motivate these challenges, and address an improvement in a special but
realistic case of pervasive computing, in addition to the improvement of triage by intro-
ducing information technology.
Data integrity and latency will be improved by exploiting a wireless network, since the
input information can be collected through the network, even if emergency personnel do
not directly or indirectly give a triage tag to the person who is in charge of collecting the
information. However, this stands on the assumption that information once input can be
334
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

reached in a destination in the network for more than a while. This assumption does not
always hold in pervasive computing. Hence, data integrity and low latency in the semi-
reachable network is one of the challenges in pervasive computing.
Input throughput and availability against the network are further challenging require-
ments in pervasive computing. The real world is not of course composed as a set of
packets like TCP=IP, but behaves as the real time system. The interaction between the
real world and the network in the interface such as mobile devices, sensors, and RFID
tags becomes incoherent if the gap is not absorbed in the network nodes in appropriate
layers from physical to human workﬂows. In these sense, independence of network
status for real-world interfaces is also one of the attractive challenges in pervasive
computing.
In this chapter, we show a realistic solution for the challenges by specializing
the network usage in a way that only particular paths are used in particular stages of the
workﬂow by analyzing the workﬂow and exploiting RFID tags to slim down the possible
paths by the following approaches:
1. Input throughput and availability are assured by using RFID tags as local buffer:
users can input data by referring the RFID data already input so far and the input
device pushes the input data to the queue that is sent to the destination independ-
ent of the user’s operation, as well as writing to the RFID tag.
2. Data integrity is assured and latency is improved by providing wireless commu-
nication areas at least to the ﬁnal stages of the paths in triage workﬂow: hospitals
and the operation point. Actually, latency will be more improved if the stages
covered with wireless communication areas increases, but we believe it will be
better than current triage, as experimented in Section 18.6.
The requirements in environments of insufﬁcient network infrastructure including dis-
asters are also discussed in mobile and ad hoc networks [3–5] with a requirement for quick
deployment, but our approach of using RFID tags for input throughput and availability is
unique, while most of the RFID applications in the literature use RFID tags as a device to
identify objects or people by embedding unique IDs.
18.3
RFID Triage System
In this section, we describe the triage system using RFID Tags. Figure 18.4 shows an
abstract workﬂow in the RFID triage system.
Other than the advantages described in Section 18.2.3, we can employ the following
advantages of the system including primitive ones:
1. Using mobile devices with wireless communication, the information of the injured
people is collected quickly via the network.
2. Input method using mobile devices provides ease of reading compared with
handwriting.
3. Input throughput is improved by automating the information of the emergency
personnel and addresses from postal codes, and by reducing the data types
necessarily required to be input in the early stages only to the injury level and
hospital.
Triage with RFID Tags for Massive Incidents
335

18.3.1
System Architecture
The following are the system components, which are shown in Figure 18.5:
1. Triage Tag: A tag with input forms for the information of the injured person and an
RFID tag with rewritable memory of 1 kb and wireless communication in the
frequency of 13.56 MHz. Each RFID tag has a unique ID in the system.
2. First Triage Terminal: A mobile terminal device that an emergency person in charge
of the ﬁrst triage stage uses. It is equipped with an RFID reader and a wireless
communication interface. An emergency person can input injured peoples’ infor-
mation through the touch panel or buttons. After input, the information is saved to
the RFID tag, as well as sent to the server through the wireless network. In case the
network is disconnected, the information is stored on the terminal, and resent
when the network is connected. Static or automatic information such as the date
and name=category of the emergency personnel are input by the terminal auto-
matically. Figure 18.6 is the display of input terminal.
3. Second Triage Terminal: Similar to ﬁrst triage terminal, a mobile terminal device an
emergency person in the second triage stage uses.
4. Hospital Selection Terminal: Similar to ﬁrst triage terminal, a mobile terminal device
an emergency person in the hospital selection stage uses.
5. Ambulance Terminal: A notebook PC equipped with a handy RFID reader and
a wireless communication interface, placed in each ambulance. Emergency
personnel can input the information of injured people using a keyboard and a
mouse. First, several parts of an address can be converted from a postal code.
Attach
triage tag
Date,
name/class of
emergency
person, age,
sex, level of
injury
Arrive at incident site
Information of
injured people
Server
Hospital
Transportation
Hospital selectiion
First-aid area
Second triage
Green/minor
Yellow/delayed
Red/immediate
Incident site
First triage
View
information
Operation point
Decision
making,
publication
Return to first-aid area
Name,
phone,
address,
postal
code
Name,
phone,
address,
postal
code
Hospital
Hospital
Information
collection
Hospital
FIGURE 18.4
Workﬂow in RFID triage system.
336
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

6. Hospital Terminal: Similar to ambulance terminals, a notebook PC emergency
personnel in each hospital use.
7. Operation Point Terminal: A notebook PC equipped with a wireless communication
interface, placed in the operation point. Emergency personnel can browse the
information collected to the server through a web browser software.
8. Server: Server equipment that has a database of the injured people, placed away
from the incident site. The server stores the information sent from the terminals to
a database, and responds to the browsing request from the operation point ter-
minals with HTTP protocols. Moreover, the server keeps the information of an
injured person up-to-date from those sent by multiple terminals.
Terminal
First triage
terminal
Second triage
terminal
Hospital
selection
terminal
Incident site
First-aid area
Ambulance
Hospital
Hospital
terminal
Ambulance
terminal
Operation point
Internet
Server
Injury 
record
DB
Wireless communication
Wireless communication
FIGURE 18.5
System and the network architecture.
FIGURE 18.6
Display of input terminal in ﬁrst and second triage stages.
Triage with RFID Tags for Massive Incidents
337

18.3.2
System Flow
Rough workﬂow of triage does not change when the system is applied. The difference is
that instead of writing and collecting by hand, emergency personnel read the information
of each injured person from the RFID tag, input the information of each injured person to
the terminal, and then write it on the RFID tag. In the following, we describe the usage and
the behavior of the system for each role of the emergency personnel.
An emergency person in charge of ﬁrst triage inputs the information of each injured
person as much as possible to the ﬁrst triage terminal, and then writes it to the RFID tag.
Simultaneously, she=he attaches the triage tag with the RFID tag to the injured person, and
cuts off the perforated label to the corresponding color. The information of the injured
person written to the RFID tag is sent to the server as soon as the network becomes
available.
An emergency person in charge of second triage ﬁrst reads the information of each
injured person from the RFID tag through second triage terminal and adds=updates the
information to the RFID tag by interviewing the injured person. An emergency person in
charge of hospital selection selects the hospital each injured person is transferred to and
inputs it to the RFID tag through the hospital selection terminal.
An emergency person in an ambulance or in a hospital does the same operation to the
injured person as second triage but does it using a notebook PC and a handy RFID reader.
Address is automatically complemented when a postal code is input. Additionally, the
emergency person clicks the commit button on the display and records the time of carrying
the injured person to the ambulance.
An emergency person in the operation point views the information of the injured people,
which is collected to the server, on the operation point terminal using Web browser
software, and informs them to the emergency control center in the municipality as she=he
needs. The server stores the information sent from the terminals and serves them to the
operation point terminal through HTTP protocol. Multiple upload from terminals for
the same injured person are sorted in time order and kept up-to-date. This workﬂow is a
natural extension from current triage except the time for inputs, which we evaluated to be
trivial in Section 18.6.5.
Table 18.1 shows the types of collected information in each stage in the current workﬂow
or in using the system. From the table, we observe that the information used for the
publication and which needs time to input, such as name, phone number, and address,
TABLE 18.1
Types and Stages of Collected Information in Current Workﬂow or RFID Triage System
Type of
Information
Stage
Date
Emergency
Person
Category of
Emergency
Person
Age
Sex
Level of
Injury
Hospital
Name
Phone
Number
Address
First
triage
Auto
Auto
Auto
Y
Y
Y
—
—
—
—
Second
triage
Auto
Auto
—
—
—
—
—
Y>N
Y>N
Y>N
Hospital
selection
—
—
—
—
—
—
Y
—
—
—
Ambulance
—
—
—
—
—
—
Y
Y
Y
Y
Hospital
—
—
—
—
—
—
Y
Y
Y
Y
Note:
Y, input by emergency personnel both in current workﬂow and RFID triage system; Y>N, not input in
RFID triage system, while input in current workﬂow; Auto, automatically or previously input in the
system, while input in current workﬂow; —, not input in both cases.
338
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

is input after the hospital selection ﬁnishes, and the emergency personnel in charge of the
stage not later than hospital selection only have to input the information that is simple to
input, such as the level of injury, age, sex, and hospital. Moreover, the name and the
category of the emergency personnel, and the date can be input automatically or previ-
ously before the incident.
18.4
Related Work
Triage is captured as an application that requires immediate improvement in the ﬁeld of
emergency medicine [6–11] and is realized as one of the important applications in perva-
sive computing [12].
A variety of information systems can be considered to be useful to support triage, such
as wireless and mobile telemedicine systems [13]. Wireless network composition for such
an application is discussed [14]. Tiny devices such as sensors to the network are tried to be
used for vital sensors for injured people [12]. Active RFID tags are tried to be used for
tracking the location of injured people [15].
On the other hand, information systems for supporting disaster management are pro-
posed by featuring several key technologies in pervasive computing. Geographical infor-
mation systems are used to locate and identify the context of people and objects [16].
Immediate deployment of wireless networks is discussed in [17]. RFID tags are tried to use
for planning and guiding the evacuation [18].
Several works have exploited wireless networks, and several exploit RFID tags. How-
ever, these works along with networks do not address the requirements for data integrity,
input throughput, availability, and latency as we have shown explicitly. Moreover, RFID
tags are not used for improving the requirements. Our approach is unique in the sense
that we use RFID tags for the alternative of current triage tags, and for improving the
requirements by alternating wireless network communication with the communication
with RFID tags.
Similar to our approach, U.S. Navy tried to use rewritable RFID tags as triage tags,
but they did not try to incorporate wireless network communication and RFID communi-
cation [19].
18.5
Preliminary Experiment
Before the massive experiment, we evaluated several points with small number of partici-
pants. We measured input operations ﬁve times in a room. Figures 18.7 through 18.9 are
the results of the measurements.
Figure 18.7 is the comparison of input times of each part in ﬁrst triage with and without
the system. From the ﬁgure, the time for an injured person is reduced to about 38 s from
about 42 s. The detail shows that the most contribution is because the emergency person-
nel, with the system, do not have to input the level of injury, the name of the personnel, and
the date. On the other hand, the time for preparing and cutting triage tags are increased by
having input terminals in the case, and about 2.5 s for writing to triage tags.
Figure 18.8 is the comparison of input times of each part in ambulances or at hospitals
with and without the system. From the ﬁgure, the time for an injured person increased to
about 43 s from about 35 s. The detail shows that the address, the postal code, the phone,
and the name of the injured person take longer time with the system than without the
Triage with RFID Tags for Massive Incidents
339

system. Although the system employs automatic address complements from postal codes,
it is still longer than that without the system. Additionally, it needs about 3.5 s for writing
on triage tags. It requires further work to reduce the input time for ambulances and
hospitals, while there is a problem that, without the system, manual and hastened writing
is often difﬁcult to read.
Attaching triage tag to injured person
Cutting triage tag
Writing to RFID tag
Input of injury level
Input of sex
Input of age
Input of emergency person type
Input of emergency person name
Input of date
Prepare triage tag and read RFID tag
Without system
With system
0
5
10
15
20
25
s
30
35
40
45
FIGURE 18.7
Input time in ﬁrst triage.
FIGURE 18.8
Input time in ambulance and hospital.
Writing to RFID tag
Input of address
Input of postal code
Input of phone
number
Input of name
Prepare triage tag
and read RFID tag
Without system With system
0
5
10
15
20
25
s
30
35
40
45
50
340
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

Figure 18.9 is the comparison of input times of each part in hospital selections with
and without the system. From the ﬁgure, the time for an injured person was reduced to
about 8 s from about 12 s. The detail shows that the operations without the system require
the emergency personnel to pass the copy of the triage tags to other personnel nearby,
whereas they do not with the system. On the other hand, the operations without the system
can start the hospital information immediately, whereas in the case with the system,
emergency personnel need ﬁrst to read the information input so far from the RFID tags
before input.
18.6
Experiment
In this section, we describe the experiment of using the RFID triage system. The experiment
is done in a driving school in a day, assuming a complex car crash of 5 cars and about 82
injured people. On hearing from professionals of emergency operations, this population is
considered to be about maximum where current triage is feasible. The goal of the experi-
ment is to evaluate whether and how much the RFID triage system accelerates and
completes (1) the transportation of the injured people and (2) the collection of the injured
people’s information.
18.6.1
Assumption
The experiment spot is a driving school of about 2250 m2. In the experiment spot, we set
hospitals area, which corresponds to three points of hospitals, and set two hospitals about
700 m away from the spot.
Submission
Writing to RFID tag
Input of hospital
selection
Prepare triage tag and
read RFID tag
Without system
With system
0
2
4
6
8
s
10
12
14
FIGURE 18.9
Input time in hospital selection.
Triage with RFID Tags for Massive Incidents
341

We assume that two buses and three cars crash, where the injured people are located
and classiﬁed as: 5 people as Black=DECEASED, 18 as Red=IMMEDIATE, 31 as Yellow=
DELAYED, and 28 as Green=MINOR.
In the experiment, 14 ambulances (3 of them are for mass transportation) and 16 other
vehicles such as commander cars and machinery and materials cars are used. The popu-
lation of emergency personnel is 85, where 4 (2 pairs) for ﬁrst triage, 1 for second triage, 1
for hospital selection, 3 for each ambulance, and 1 for each hospital.
18.6.2
System Assignment
In the experiment, two ﬁrst triage terminals, one second triage terminal, and one
hospital selection terminal is used as mobile devices. 14 ambulance terminals are used,
where 6 of them are equipped with RFID readers and wireless communication inter-
faces, 3 are equipped with RFID readers but wireless communication interface, and
5 are without both. The ambulance terminals with no RFID readers and wireless com-
munication interfaces are introduced to assume the heterogeneous environment; here
not all the ambulances support the RFID triage system but only a usual notebook PC,
such that a neighbor municipality helps the triage. The ambulances with no wireless
communication interfaces are introduced to assume the situation where communication is
not available.
One hospital terminal is placed at each hospital. One operation point terminal is
placed at the operation point when the point is made during the experimental perform-
ance. The server is set in a data center about 1000 km away from the incident site.
18.6.3
Network
We prepared IEEE 802.11b wireless LAN interfaces for mobile device terminals, and
FOMA data communication interface that provides up to 385 kbps by NTT Docomo Inc.
As access point facilities are necessary if we adopt wireless LAN, since otherwise it
provides only several 10 m, we had to adopt them since there have been no mobile devices
that will be able to be equipped with an RFID reader and any long-range data communi-
cation interface of several kilometers. In the future, this cost of access points will vanish
when a mobile device with an RFID reader and a long-range data communication interface
is used.
18.6.4
Process of Experiment
In the experiment, we ﬁrst take about 1 h to perform the naive performance, which is the
current triage, and then perform the advanced performance, which is the triage using
the system, in the same condition.
Each performance starts with the departure of ambulances and ﬁre engines having
predeﬁned time differences from the car parking. Each ambulance that transports the
injured people to the hospitals inside the experiment spot arrives at the hospitals after
driving around inside the spot, and those that transport to the hospitals outside the spot
take the predeﬁned route.
The injured people are predeﬁned and informed their level of injury, and reply to the
questions from the emergency personnel acting according the deﬁned level. The emer-
gency personnel perform the triage as described in Sections 18.2.1 and 18.3.2.
In the two performances, 7 persons measured the time of the ﬂow of injured people and
the ﬂow of the collected information by stopwatches. Moreover, the collected information
ﬂow was also logged in the system in the advanced performance.
342
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

18.6.5
Evaluation
The result of the experiment is shown in Figures 18.11 through 18.15. The photos of the
experiment are given in Figure 18.10.
18.6.5.1
Transportation of Injured People
Figure 18.11 shows the progression of cumulative populations of the injured people who
are carried from the incident site to the ﬁrst-aid area and carried out from the ﬁrst-aid area
to the hospitals in each performance.
The population carried into the ﬁrst-aid area in the advanced performance always
exceeds that of the naive performance (Figure 18.11). This demonstrates that, using
the system, the injured people can be carried into the ﬁrst-aid area faster than the naive
performance. This mainly resulted from the fact that multiple injured people could be
carried in simultaneously using the system, whereas they must have been carried serially
to manually count the people by emergency personnel in order not to lose the information
of the injured people in the naive performance. Moreover, the population radically
increases at around 2 min after the start. This is the because it was possible to carry in
those who are in Green=MINOR level of injury and those who can walk simultaneously as
early as possible, whereas they must wait for the people of other levels to be carried in ﬁrst
in the naive performance.
FIGURE 18.10
Photos of the experiment.
Triage with RFID Tags for Massive Incidents
343

Moreover, the population carried out from the ﬁrst-aid area to the hospitals in the
advanced performance (Figure 18.11) always exceeds that of the naive performance. This
shows that, using the system, the injured people can be carried to the hospital faster than
the naive performance. This is assumed to be because, in addition to the acceleration of
carrying into the ﬁrst-aid area, the hospital selection was effectively performed using a
mobile device in the advanced performance. Moreover, the ﬁgure shows that plenty of
injured people are carried out after 22 min. This is assumed to have resulted from the fact
that the injured people of Green=MINOR level could be carried out early followed by the
acceleration of being carried in.
The population in naive performance expires before it becomes the total population
assumed because of the essential lack of the current workﬂow: several injured people in
Green=MINOR level were dismissed before going to the ﬁrst-aid area and could not be
monitored; the Black=DECEASED people who were not carried could not be monitored,
whereas the advanced performance could. Moreover, the population carried out from the
ﬁrst-aid area in the advanced performance exceeds that carried into there. This is because
the vehicles for Green=MINOR level could stop at different areas from the ambulances for
other levels, and several people of Green=MINOR level happened to be carried out without
being carried into the ﬁrst-aid area.
18.6.5.2
Information Collection
Figure 18.12 shows the progression of the cumulative populations whose information
about the injury level is collected to the manual copy at the operation point in naive
performance, to the RFID tag of the injured person in the advanced performance, and
the server in the advanced performance. Figure 18.13 is about the hospital selection, and
Figure 18.14 is about the address. If there are multiple input records for a single type of
information, we adopted the ﬁrst period of the collection. The time in the server was
measured in minutes whereas the others were in seconds.
Carried into first-aid area
in naive performance
Carried out from first-aid
area in naive performance
Carried into first-aid area
in advanced performance
Carried out from first-aid
area in advanced
performance
60
50
40
30
Time (min)
20
10
0
0
10
20
30
40
Cumulative population
50
60
70
80
90
FIGURE 18.11
Transportation time.
344
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

In the following, we describe the method for recording and adjusting the record in the
naive performance. The level of injury, the sex, and the age were assumed to be collected
when the entry in the triage tag is copied to a tally sheet before an injured person is
transported from the ﬁrst-aid area toward a hospital. The name, the address, and the
phone number were assumed to be so when they are copied after an ambulance returned
to the operation point after the transportation. The records have been made slightly
complementary to the deﬁcit in the data obtained from the stopwatch measurement in
the following way:
Server receipt in naive
performance
Terminal input in
advanced performance
Collection in naive
performance
0
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Cumulative population
10
20
30
40
50
60
Time (min)
FIGURE 18.12
Time of information collection (level of injury).
0
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
10
20
30
Time (min)
Cumulative population
40
50
60
Server receipt in advanced performance
Terminal input in advanced performance
Collection in naive performance
FIGURE 18.13
Time of information collection (hospital selection).
Triage with RFID Tags for Massive Incidents
345

1. We adopted the time of particular people for seven lacks of time where the subject
injured people could be assumed to be in the same ambulance.
2. We adopted the time of the closest line in the tally sheet for six lacks of time where
Green=MINOR people could be assumed to be transported at a time.
3. For two time lacks of the manual copy to the tally sheet after the transportation
when the times of collection are known, we adopted the collected times added by
the averages of the periods from the collection to the manual copy of other people
in the same hospital.
4. For one person whose collection time after the transportation and also that of
manual copy lack, we adopted the average time of the times of manual copy for
the same hospital.
It is not easy to compare the times of the naive and advanced performance since the
methods of measurement are different, but we can see the times for the operation point
to view the information for the ﬁrst time, if we consider that they correspond to the manual
copies at the operation point in the naive case, and so to the data arrivals to the server in
the advanced case.
From the ﬁgures, the information of the injured people using the system could be
collected faster than the naive performance in any information. Although we omit the
graphs for the other information, there was little difference in the shapes in the graphs of
level of injury, sex, and age. Similarly, so was in name, phone number, and address. These
mainly owe to the timing of input shown in Table 18.1, and we can observe that
the collection of the information in the early stages of the triage could radically be
accelerated using the system.
Collecting information of all the injured people is essentially difﬁcult, since that of the
Black=DECEASED people are not collected quickly, and the Green=MINOR people tend
to walk out on their own. However, Figures 18.12 and 18.14 show that the number using
the system is higher than the naive performance, which means that the system provides
more accurate and complete information of injured people, especially in the early stages of
triage. Although Figure 18.13 does not show the same, this can be assumed since the input
time using the system was longer than the naive performance, which we conﬁrmed in
0
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
10
20
30
40
Time (min)
Cumulative population
50
60
70
80
Server receipt in advanced 
performance
Terminal input in advanced 
performance
Collection in naive performance
FIGURE 18.14
Time of information collection (address).
346
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

Section 18.5 in which the average input time of the hospital selection in the system was
about 8.2 s, whereas 7.3 s without the system, with ﬁve trials in each case. Improving the
time and complexity of input, there is a possibility of making the information collection of
hospital selection accurate.
For data integrity in the advanced performance, all the peoples’ data have not been
collected in Figure 18.14 since the Black=DESEASED and Green=MINOR peoples’ infor-
mation have not been collected. However, the number of collection is more than that in
the naive case. In Figure 18.13, the number of collection in the naive case is better than
the advanced case. This can be assumed because the trial with the system needs, except for
submission, much time than that without the system, as shown in Section 18.5.
18.6.5.3
Communication Time in the System
From Figures 18.12 through 18.14, we can observe that the network communication time in
the system does not affect the triage to the critical delay. In addition, the receipt time on the
server can be earlier if the time for communication is reduced, although the result in the
advanced performance is better than the naive one. Figure 18.15 shows the distribution of
the difference between the time received by the server and that input to the input terminal
of each input of the injury information, where the differences of more than 60 s are omitted
as a device without wireless communication functionality. The average time of the differ-
ence between the time received by the server and that input to the terminal was 17.3 s, and
the variance was 35.39.
18.6.6
Discussion
We discuss the implications in network with the requirements discussed in Section 18.2.
Data integrity and availability are apparent to be improved without the experiment, as
discussed in Section 18.2.3.
0
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
5
10
15
20
25
Time (s)
Distribution of communication time from 
terminal to server
30
35
40
45
50
FIGURE 18.15
Distribution of communication time in the system.
Triage with RFID Tags for Massive Incidents
347

As to input throughput, note that the communication time does not affect the input time
by the emergency personnel, since they ﬁrst read the old information from an RFID tag,
and ﬁnish right after updating the information. The terminal automatically communicates
with the server subsequently, but the emergency personnel do not have to wait for the
network communication. If the system does not employ RFID tags, the ﬁrst step of reading
from the RFID tag must rely to the network communication. The throughput of an input by
discarding RFID tags can be supposed to increase by 14.3 s, since the network communi-
cation time is 17.3 s in average and the user-waiting time for the RFID communication is
3 s, as shown above.
Although latency needs further research to clarify the advantage of using RFID tags, we
could decrease the latency, especially the required types of information compared with the
naive performance, as shown in Figures 18.3 and 18.4, without affecting other factors such
as input throughput in triage.
18.7
Conclusion
From the experiment, the RFID triage system is demonstrated to be effective in mass
casualty incidents of about 100 injured people. In the future, the system will be more
valuable when it becomes applicable for other incidents, such as with smaller number of
injured people, or in broad area, such as earthquakes, storms, or ﬂoods.
Acknowledgments
This work has been supported by the Grant-in-Aid for Young Scientists (A) No.18680009
of the Ministry of Education, Science, Sports and Culture (MEXT) from 2006 to 2008.
We are grateful for the support of the experiment from Toppan Printing Co., Ltd., Fukuoka
City, Mizuho Information & Research Institute Inc., Institute of Systems & Information
Technologies=KYUSHU, NTT DoCoMo, Inc., NTT West Corp., and Kasuga-Ohnojo-
Nakagawa Fire department.
References
1. P. Hewkin, ‘‘Smart tags—the distributed memory revolution,’’ IEEE Review, 1989.
2. R. Want, K.P. Fishkin, A. Gujar, B.L. Harrison, ‘‘Bridging physical and virtual worlds with
electronic tags,’’ Proc. Int’l Conf. CHI 99, pp. 370–377, 1999.
3. M. Gerla, J. Tsai, ‘‘Multicluster, mobile, multimedia radio network,’’ ACM=Baltzer Journal of
Wireless Networks, 1 (no. 3), pp. 255–265, 1995.
4. G. Zussman, A. Segall, ‘‘Energy Efﬁcient Routing in Ad Hoc Disaster Recovery Networks,’’
22nd Conf. IEEE Computers and Communication Societies (INFOCOM), 10 pages, 2003.
5. T. ElBatt, S. Krishnamurthy, D. Connors, S. Dao, ‘‘Power management for throughput enhance-
ment in wireless ad-hoc networks,’’ Proc. IEEE ICC 2000, 9 pages, 2000.
6. F. Subash, F. Dunn, B. McNicholl, J. Marlow, ‘‘Team triage improves emergency department
efﬁciency,’’ Emergency Medicine Journal, 21, pp. 542–544, Sep. 2004.
7. T. Kilner, ‘‘Triage decisions of prehospital emergency health care providers, using a multiple
casualty scenario paper exercise,’’ Emergency Medicine Journal, 19, pp. 348–353, Jul. 2002.
348
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

8. S. Goodacre, F. Morris, B. Tesfayohannes, G. Sutton, ‘‘Should ambulant patients be directed to
reception or triage ﬁrst?’’ Emergency Medicine Journal, 18, pp. 441–443, Nov. 2001.
9. J. Terris, P. Leman, N. O’Connor, R. Wood, ‘‘Making an IMPACT on emergency department ﬂow:
improving patient processing assisted by consultant at triage,’’ Emergency Medicine Journal, 21,
pp. 537–541, Sep. 2004.
10. White, Ann, ‘‘Change strategies make for smooth transitions,’’ Nursing Management, 35(2) pp. 49–
52, Feb. 2004.
11. Parker, Pam, ‘‘Move care to a higher level with emergency systems,’’ Nursing Management,
35(9), pp. 82–84, Sep. 2004.
12. K. Lorincz, D. Malan, T. Fulford-Jones, A. Nawoj, A. Clavel, V. Shnayder, G. Mainland, M. Welsh,
‘‘Sensor networks for emergency response: challenges and opportunities,’’ IEEE Pervasive, 3(4),
pp. 16–23, 2004.
13. S. Voskarides, C. Pattichis, R. Istepanian, E. Kyriacou, M. Pattichis, C. Schizas, ‘‘Mobile health
systems: a brief overview,’’ Proc. SPIE AeroSense 2002, pp. 124–131, 2002.
14. K. Banitsas, R. Istepanian, S. Tachakra, T. Owens, ‘‘Modelling issues of Wireless LANs for
accident and emergency departments,’’ IEEE EMBC Conf., vol. 4, pp. 3540–3543, Oct. 2001.
15. http:==www.activewaveinc.com=applications_hospitals.html
16. P. Oosterom, S. Zlatanova, S. Fendel, M. Elfriede (Eds.) Geo-information for disaster management,
Springer Verlag, 1434, 2005.
17. S. Midkiff, C. Bostian, ‘‘Rapidly-Deployable Broadband Wireless Networks for Disaster and
Emergency Response,’’ 1st IEEE Workshop on Disaster Recover Networks (DIREN ‘02), 10
pages, June 2002.
18. S. Sharma, S. Gifford, ‘‘Using RFID to Evaluate Evacuation Behavior Models,’’ North American
Fuzzy Information Processing Society Conference, 5 pages, 2005.
19. J. Yoshida, ‘‘Navy to Use RFID Technology in Iraq,’’ EE Times News, May, 2003, http:==www.
embedded.com=showArticle.jhtml?articleID¼10700142.
Triage with RFID Tags for Massive Incidents
349


19
RFID Tagging and the Design of ‘‘Place’’
Anijo Punnen Mathew
CONTENTS
19.1
Background....................................................................................................................... 352
19.1.1 Problem of ‘‘Place’’............................................................................................. 352
19.1.2 ‘‘Disappearing’’ Computer................................................................................ 352
19.2
Place................................................................................................................................... 353
19.2.1 Inhabitable Interfaces ......................................................................................... 353
19.2.2 Communication Conundrum............................................................................ 353
19.3
RFID: State of Art ............................................................................................................ 354
19.3.1 RFID Technology ................................................................................................ 354
19.3.2 RFIDs in Smart Environments.......................................................................... 354
19.3.2.1 RFID Information Grid for Wayﬁnding .......................................... 355
19.3.2.2 Swiss House ......................................................................................... 355
19.4
RFID and Place................................................................................................................. 356
19.5
Applications...................................................................................................................... 358
19.5.1 Library Project..................................................................................................... 359
19.5.1.1 Scenario of Use .................................................................................... 360
19.5.1.2 How the System Works...................................................................... 360
19.5.1.3 Prototyping and Testing..................................................................... 361
19.5.2 ‘‘Smart’’ Home Project....................................................................................... 362
19.5.2.1 How the System Works...................................................................... 363
19.5.2.2 Prototyping and Testing..................................................................... 363
19.6
Discussion ......................................................................................................................... 364
19.6.1 Incorporation....................................................................................................... 364
19.6.2 Security................................................................................................................. 364
19.6.3 Obsolescence........................................................................................................ 365
19.6.4 Introspection........................................................................................................ 365
19.7
Closing Conversation...................................................................................................... 365
19.8
Acknowledgments........................................................................................................... 366
References.................................................................................................................................... 366
351

19.1
Background
19.1.1
Problem of ‘‘Place’’
Architects of the 20th century imagined that their new tools—electricity, steel, concrete,
plate glass, mass production and fresh ideas about design—could be used to transform
society for the better (Larson et al., 2004). In spite of great promises of the functionalist
architects of this era, the problem of ‘‘place’’ still counts as one of the primary needs of
humankind. However there has been a signiﬁcant transformation in the buildings of the
21st century from those of the last. Today’s buildings are not just well designed; they are
also ‘‘intelligent.’’ Computing technology ﬁnds pervasive application in many aspects of
the modern habitable spaces—environmental control systems, internet based systems for
information exchange, cellular systems for instant communication; the list goes on. Our
lives today exist in the midst of a complex weave of digital information and communica-
tion. Eventually we will all live, work, and play in so-called ‘‘smart’’ environments—
environments that not only protect us from the elements but also work with us to make
inhabitation more efﬁcient and experiential.
All this means that architects of the 21st century have to be concerned about more than
the just the ‘‘chassis’’ of the house. Today’s designers negotiate with two kinds of computer
usage—the ﬁrst, the use of digital media as a tool in the design of spaces, and the second,
the use of digital media embedded within designed spaces. ‘‘Smart’’ environments offer
new opportunities to augment people’s lives; not just with good design, but also ubiqui-
tous computing technologies that will provide users with increased communications,
awareness, and functionality (Weiser, 1991). With new tools such as inexpensive comput-
ing, wireless communication, high performance materials, and new design, fabrication,
and supply-chain technologies, we are today equipped with perhaps much more—the
ability to transform society in ways unimaginable in the 20th century.
19.1.2
‘‘Disappearing’’ Computer
Our thinking is beginning to shift from the notion of computers in architecture or
computers affecting architectural design to the notion of architecture as the computer
(Senagala, 2005). ‘‘Smart’’ spaces and interactive environments have found prevalence in
architecture with the emergence of powerful mobile computing devices and real time
context aware computing (Edwards and Grinter, 2001). As early as 1991, Mark Weiser
(Weiser, 1991) coined the term ‘‘ubiquitous computing’’ referring to computers embedded
in everyday objects. These arrays of embedded intelligent devices could work invisibly and
unobtrusively in the background of our everyday existence. This idea is now referred to as
the ‘‘disappearing’’ computer—thousands of ‘‘invisible’’ computers woven into the archi-
tectural fabric of our spaces allowing us to connect to a global network of information and
workﬂow.
The disappearance of the computer does not necessarily allude to a physical invisibility;
instead it refers to ‘‘invisibility through use’’—computers that are so embedded into our
lives that they work only in the periphery of our senses (Tolmie et al., 2002). An analogous
example is that of electricity. When electricity was introduced at the beginning of the 20th
century, it was considered a novel technology—one that would never reach the home of
the common man. Today, the pervasiveness of electricity is so embedded into our socio-
cultural framework that thoughts of life without it form stories of apocalyptic ﬁction. Not
only is electricity ubiquitous and necessary for human society, it is also invisible to us in
everyday use. In a similar vein, the basic premise of the disappearing computer is that one
day computing too will be both ubiquitous and invisible.
352
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

Streitz and Nixon (Streitz and Nixon, 2005) talk about two forms of the ‘‘disappearing
computer’’: a physical disappearance and a mental disappearance. It is the second category
that interests designers—artifacts that may still be large, but not perceived as computers
because people discern them as, maybe interactive walls or interactive tables. The image of
ubiquitous computing is not any longer that of an omnipresent, servile (or unservile)
computer (as science ﬁction has been telling us for years); instead it is that of an invisible,
augmentary appendage to our environments—redeﬁning what we call ‘‘place.’’
19.2
Place
19.2.1
Inhabitable Interfaces
Environmental Psychology categorizes ‘‘physical environment’’ as ‘typically neutral,’ only
coming into self conscious awareness when individuals form stable and enduring repre-
sentations of it (Auburn and Barnes, 2006). Place thus can be described as an appropriation
of experiences, while space merely the construct that envelopes it. McCullough
(McCullough, 2004) presents the idea of place as integral to the idea of architecture—the
phenomenological quality of space that enables us to retain memories, weave stories,
and describe our experiences. Walls, ceilings, tables, chairs are all simply physical artifacts
that aid inhabitants in the development of personal experiences. In short, the design of
place (architecture) is the design of interaction between humans and their environment and
place itself an interface for this interaction. Thus, architects and designers wield the
capability to design artifacts that can inﬂuence a person’s life—the way they live, move,
interact and so on. In short, architects are merely designers of large interfaces for informa-
tion interchange.
The idea of architecture as an interface is not new; it has found profound use even
before the birth of computing. The steeple of a church communicates that it is a place for
reﬂection or religious gathering. The bricks and ivy of Harvard Yard signiﬁes years of
scholarly research and education. The solid grey walls of a prison conjure up images of
torture and punishment. The bright colors of a playground indicate play and joyfulness.
Thus ever since humans have existed, our environments have been acting as interfaces for
information interchange. The difference today is that, as computers slowly recede into
walls, tables and furniture, we now have in our repertoire new tools of computing and
multimedia. Now for the ﬁrst time users can interact with information—change the way
it envelopes their existence; search for more or better information; communicate their
needs; and expect a reaction. All of this leads to a realm of experience that was herein-
before unheard of. Design of interactive (mediated) places will not necessarily change
what is being designed, only how it is designed, and how it is perceived by users. And the
onset of ubiquitous computing signals a paradigm shift—of new places in unique contexts
with their spatial, temporal and material conﬁgurations coalescing to form meaningful
experiences for its users.
19.2.2
Communication Conundrum
The design of ‘‘smart’’ places involves the seamless integration of both the physical and
virtual. As computing initiatives evolve intelligent devices that work in the background of
our day to day living, questions arise about how we interact with these devices. Traditional
input=output systems such as the keyboard and the mouse become redundant as compu-
tation reverts into physical entities such as walls, windows, and furniture. Several ideas are
being pursued in universities and research labs around the world—tactile interfaces using
RFID Tagging and the Design of ‘‘Place’’
353

gesture recognition and multitouch systems are being evaluated as interactive systems
(MERL, 2006; Microsoft, 2007; Synaptics, 2007); and voice recognition systems may one
day become our mode of interaction with computers in our homes (Furui, 2000).
However before we can interact with the computers ubiquitously prevalent in our
environment, identiﬁcation becomes critical. As computation becomes pervasive, it is
inevitable that there will be an increased demand for more secure and private communi-
cation channels. Traditional communication channels such as wi-ﬁ, wi-max, USB, Blue-
tooth, etc. may prove to be expensive technologies for ubiquitous use. And by themselves,
these technologies may not offer the best methods of identiﬁcation.
This leads us to the communication conundrum—we need an identiﬁcation technology
in ‘‘smart’’ environments and it must be cheap, ubiquitous, and reliable. While several
innovative schemes have been proposed, one of the most promising design ideas uses
Radio Frequency Identiﬁcation or RFIDs.
19.3
RFID: State of Art
19.3.1
RFID Technology
Radio Frequency Identiﬁcation (RFID) technology is an automatic identiﬁcation method
that relies on storing and retrieving data using radio transponders called RFID tags. RFIDs
can be of three types—passive (no internal power), semipassive (battery powered micro-
chip) and active (with internal power). Recent developments in RFID technology show that
this technology is on its way to becoming smaller (a paper thin microchip was introduced
in 2006 by Hitachi), ubiquitous (implantable tags), and cheaper (EPC complaint tags are
available at close to 5 cents each) (Morton, 2004; Hitachi, 2006; Roberti, 2006).
RFID tagging techniques have in the last decade demonstrated that identiﬁcation of both
humans and commodities can be connected to elaborate databases without direct
manipulation by a separate entity. RFIDs have become state of art in many identiﬁcation
programs—passports, transit cards, payment portals, credit cards, animal identiﬁcation,
etc. RFIDs have slowly started to replace traditional barcode based systems in many
database driven entities such as libraries, enterprises, logistics, etc., as signiﬁcant advance
for RFID technology came with Wal-Mart, Target and the U.S. Department of Defense
requiring that their suppliers place RFID tags on all shipments in an attempt to improve
supply-chain management and the ERP machinery.
As RFID becomes an accepted mainstream technology, it is inevitable that it will ﬁnd
application in many aspects of our daily living. Many companies like Symbol Technologies
(now Motorola) have been experimenting with the use of RFIDs in spatial conﬁgurations.
Very little work however has been done so far using RFIDs in ubiquitous computing
systems for the design of ‘‘place.’’ As other chapters in this book concentrate on the state
of art in RFID technology, this chapter will evaluate how RFID tagging can transform the
way we look at ‘‘place’’ and the negotiation and design of ‘‘place.’’
19.3.2
RFIDs in Smart Environments
In a world that has one computer to many, and one computer to one, it is easy to develop
interaction methodologies because the interaction is limited. But ubiquitous computing
talks of a world where there are many computers to one. In such a scenario, how do we
interact with the multiple computers that exist pervasively in our living space? In order for
designers to program systems to adapt to the personal demands of an individual, they
354
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

have to recognize which individual is currently asking for personalization from which
computer. Moreover, as ubiquitous computing ﬁnds pervasive use in public domains,
multiple ids and personalities may need to be recognized—you may have separate pref-
erences for your ofﬁce, home and play.
All this leads to one of the prime needs of ubiquitous computing–recognition and data
structuring. Since as early as 2000, several projects have evaluated the use of RFID
technology as a feasible format for identiﬁcation in ‘‘smart’’ environments. In this
half of the chapter we will explore two existing environmental solutions that use RFID
technology.
The ﬁrst system that we will explore is that of utilizing RFID technology in indoor and
outdoor environments for navigation and wayﬁnding.
19.3.2.1
RFID Information Grid for Wayﬁnding
In spite of great strides in Universal Design concepts, most working environments still
remain nonconducive to use by the physically challenged. Environmental limitations
restrict most wheelchair bound and visually impaired people from even conducting
everyday activities. In the U.S., the percentage of working age blind (for example) who
are unemployed remains at 74% in spite of several schemes in universities and corporate
systems to encourage physically challenged education and employment. One of the pri-
mary reasons for these statistics is a nonconstructive living and working environment
which till now has been passive to the needs of physically challenged individuals.
Willis and Helal (Willis and Helal, 2005) of the University of Florida propose a solu-
tion—a basic RFID information grid overlaid on the urban spatial framework. Such an
RFID information grid can be easily developed from passive, low-cost, High Frequency
RFID tags installed within the architectural fabric of a campus (or a city). The tags can be
programmed to convey precise location and detailed attributes about the surrounding
areas. Because the information about location and spatial attributes is situated within
speciﬁc tags, it removes the need for an extensive (central) database or a communication
infrastructure. People using the space can be provided with interrogators (RFID readers)
built into personal devices (PDA’s, watches, cell phones) or structured within the frame-
work of mobility devices (wheelchairs, scooters, walking canes).
The beauty of the design lies in its simplicity. RFID tags can be mandated in existing and
new architectural projects through Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) regulations. It
can be easily incorporated indoors as proposed by Willis and Helal into the weaving of
carpets and=or ﬂooring material. The tags can be programmed with spatial data about both
the location and the design of the place, for example, ‘‘entry doorway to Museum of
Modern Art (MOMA). Two steps up and then glass doorway.’’ It can also parse directional
information to electronic wheelchairs or walking canes so that physically challenged users
can negotiate architectural elements in their environment.
The second system is a more integrated one; an architectural design that employs RFID
identiﬁcation technology as a core part of its framework.
19.3.2.2
Swiss House
The Swiss House for Advanced Research and Education (SHARE) designed by Huang and
Waldvogel (Huang and Waldvogel, 2004) is a novel type of ‘‘inhabitable interface’’ that
supports direct and indirect communication and cultural awareness of habitants spread
around the globe. The primary role of the Swiss House is to become a physical and virtual
environment which fosters closer ties between Switzerland, New England and Eastern
Canada in academia, industry and society. Huang and Waldvogel deﬁne the basic idea of
RFID Tagging and the Design of ‘‘Place’’
355

the space as a convergent architecture—a system that develops the design of the interface
elements and software (the ‘‘virtual’’ architecture) in conjunction with the design of the
physical environment (the ‘‘physical’’ architecture).
The design of the house is a mesh of physical and virtual interfaces stitched into each
other. The house features technologies such as ‘‘teleports’’ which allows users to interact
with each other in spite of geographical dislocation; a media wall which extends the
perspective of the physical space through the internet to another space at another
place; and a knowledge café, which offers the possibility of interaction even while
having coffee.
Since the technology was designed to be used by multiple stake holders at many
different times, it is important that there is recognition of both user type and personality.
And in their design of the house, Huang and Waldvogel wanted the ‘‘house’’ to be aware
of inhabitants as they came in and used the technologies. In order to solve this problem
they came up with an innovative idea. The close circle of the Swiss scientist community
was each sent a personalized Swatch watch containing an RFID tag. The RFID tag has a
unique ID that points to the data entry with information about the user on the Swiss House
database server. Whenever a user walks into the Swiss House with the RFID Swatch,
his=her presence is sensed by the building by RFID interrogators placed around the space.
The house once ‘‘aware’’ of the user within its premises is also able to track the use of
technologies by this current user. Other (registered) users around the globe are also able to
see who is in the house at any time. This system works well because the Swiss House is
essentially a public collaborative that accords communication privileges based on commu-
nity participation. Issues of privacy and security are reduced because the users ‘‘expect’’ to
be tracked; and often ﬁnd it beneﬁcial to their use of the House.
19.4
RFID and Place
In the above examples we saw RFID technology used in two different schematics—one is
the conventional system when the interrogator is transient. In such a conventional system,
RFID tags on commodities store information that can be retrieved from a stored database
when interrogated by an RFID reader. The RFID readers may be portable, which means
that they can be carried by an employee, or permanent, built into computational entities,
like checkout machines. This concept has evolved through a legacy system from barcode
technology which could only expect a passive interaction from the entities that were
tagged. Nevertheless such a system is useful in places where there exists large numbers
of tagged entities—like a department or clothing store.
The Swiss House on the other hand demonstrates a completely different strategy. In this
system, the building itself acts as one big interrogator (albeit through separate readers
placed around the space). In short, the place is ‘‘aware’’ of its inhabitant. This is a
signiﬁcant attribute in the design of ubiquitous computing systems. The Swiss House
demonstrates that RFID technology coupled with wireless LAN and other connective
technology can be used for identiﬁcation in ‘‘smart’’ spaces. Once a personality has been
identiﬁed the technology can be extrapolated for interaction between these personalities
and the system. Such a system is however useful only when the numbers of entities that
need to be identiﬁed are limited. It is possible nevertheless to incorporate several layers of
interrogators wherein speciﬁc ids may trigger speciﬁc interrogators based on speciﬁc
requirements.
356
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

The critical difference between this method and the conventional one is that of location—
in the conventional system, the commodity is ﬁxed and the interrogator is transient; in the
spatial system, the interrogator is ﬁxed and the commodity is transient (see Figure 19.1).
The system of the RFID grid for wayﬁnding follows a conventional RFID schematic:
. Transient:
RFID interrogators
. Built into portable devices (PDA, cell phones)
. Stitched into fabrics (wearable computers)
. Designed into portables (like shoes, watches, etc.)
Environment is passive and “unaware” 
Environment is sensitive and “aware”
Interrogator (RFID reader) is transient
Interrogated (RFID tagged) entity is transient
Interrogators are fixed within the spatial system
Interrogated (RFID tagged) entity is fixed
FIGURE 19.1
Differences in the concepts of RFID interrogation in the RFID grid system and the Swiss House.
RFID Tagging and the Design of ‘‘Place’’
357

. Fixed:
Individualized RFID tags carrying location information and characteristic. These tags
can be
. Mandated by ADA regulations as
. Set into existing architecture
. Designed with new architecture
. Woven into architectural products (carpets, wallpaper, etc.)
The Swiss House, on the other hand follows a ‘‘spatial’’ RFID schematic:
. Transient:
Individualized RFID tags carrying personal information of user. This tag can be
. In person (bio-implanted RFID tags)
. Permanent identiﬁcation documents (RFID-enabled IDs—passports, university
ids, etc.)
. Temporary identiﬁcation systems (RFID-enabled watches, RFID-enabled devices
picked up from reception, etc.)
. Fixed:
RFID interrogators within the fabric of architecture in conjunction with wireless
LAN and=or other connective technology (Bluetooth, wireless USB) provide for
identiﬁcation and interaction.
From their perspective, spatial systems by default presume that inhabitants will be
transient. Hence an identiﬁcation system that allows for easy movement of tagged entities
is what is appropriate for the design of inhabitable interfaces. We can see that both the
above systems allow for such interaction.
19.5
Applications
In the following part of this chapter, we will evaluate two other projects (at various levels
of conceptualization) using RFIDs in the design and=or negotiation of place. The applica-
tions presented here are part of ongoing research projects by the author at the Design
Research & Informatics Laboratory (DRIL) at Mississippi State University’s College of
Architecture, Art and Design. DRIL is a multiplatform platform laboratory for carrying
out interdisciplinary research projects and consists of architects, industrial designers and
technology experts, internationally recognized for process and product innovations. The
exploratory nature of the DRIL enables faculty and students to carry out multiple levels of
design research, including research into the use of computing at various levels of architec-
tural design.
While several initiatives at the DRIL look at development of new products and design
processes, most projects are exploratory—evaluating the use of existing technology to
solve real world problems. Many of these problems have existed before the emergence
of the computer; ubiquitous computing solutions are explored in several layers of
358
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

augmentation to existing solutions. With (almost free) electronics and pervasive informa-
tion, we aim to develop interfaces that are not just innovative but also help in the society’s
day to day living. The following are a few examples of how the DRIL puts available
innovative technology to common day use.
19.5.1
Library Project
The Library of Congress or Dewey Decimal systems used in public libraries were devel-
oped to help in organization of book clusters. Our studies however show that while these
systems allows for easy data structuring, it is often inconvenient for novice or occasional
end users to comprehend and use these systems. This comes from the inherent lack of users
to convert the alphanumeric coding into a tangible search experience.
Problems mostly relate to the user’s unfamiliarity with the system and the time taken by
them to ﬁnd a book. Perhaps this is because the current system affords users with a high
cognitive load:
1) Memorizing a large alphanumeric code (e.g., NA1469. H43 A4 2003)
2) Having a relative knowledge of the library layout
3) An understanding of the coding
Our studies show that experienced users were able to ﬁnd books quite easily. This can be
easily attributed to their understanding of the library system and layout; in words of one
experienced user—‘‘I have been doing it for a long time.’’ However we found that novice
or ﬁrst time users were almost always frustrated by the system. It can become even more of
a frustrating experience if the book is misplaced or checked out (a common occurrence in
most public libraries).
Libraries began using RFID systems to replace their electro-magnetic and bar code
systems in the late 1990s. RFID systems are used primarily in libraries for inventory and
tracking (the ability track the movement of a book or a person carrying the book). With
RFID-enabled tools, inventory-related tasks can be done in a fraction of the time as with
bar code readers. A whole shelf of books can be read by the reader with one sweep of the
portable reader which then reports which books are missing or misshelved. Security is
another aspect of library operations that may be greatly improved with RFID-based
security systems. Rather than purchasing additional tags for security, a single tag can be
used for identifying items and securing them. As patrons leave the library, the tags are read
to ensure that the item has been checked out. (Ayre, 2004). Because these systems often
work at the organizational level, users of the library seldom beneﬁt (directly) from
such technology.
Our proposal for improvement suggests the use of existing RFID infrastructure in
libraries to decrease cognitive loads, thus making the library search easier. Such a system
would not only help in faster book searches but could also be used to add additional layers
of information for the particular book that would make the system more efﬁcient for all
stakeholders. In the proposed design, a PDA=Pocket PC=Cell Phone or other portable
device helps the user to search for books within the library database and also provides
information about book and its location. RFID placed on books and the ID cards of the user
provide the PDA with information which can help to locate the book from within the
library shelves. Proximity sensors on the shelves can detect the RFID on the user ID,
enabling the user to locate the appropriate shelf without interpreting the library’s coding
system.
RFID Tagging and the Design of ‘‘Place’’
359

19.5.1.1
Scenario of Use
To better explain how this design works lets create a scenario of an individual looking for a
book in a university library. For the purpose of this study, let’s call her Jill. In her ﬁrst week, Jill
receives a research assignment that requires extensive use of the library. In her earlier school,
she used an online catalogue to ﬁnd books. Having found the details of the book on the
computer, she would write down the name, title and alpha numeric information of the book
on a piece of paper. With this information, she would then go to the library to ﬁnd the book.
However Jill found that
1) The system was not easy to comprehend especially the ﬁrst few times.
2) It was time consuming.
3) It is frustrating if the book is misplaced or has been checked out.
4) Or if she forgets the alphanumeric code or loses the piece of paper she has it on.
5) She has to go back and search the online catalogue once again if she wants a
different book.
6) She has to wait in a queue to check out the book.
Her current school however has adopted a new RFID assistance system for library search.
Jill goes to the front desk and is handed a PDA after the front desk scans her RFID-enabled
student ID. On the PDA she uses a search engine linked to the library’s database and using
keywords, author name or title she is able to ﬁnd the book she wants. When Jill is ready to
get the book, the screen immediately shows her an easy to read graphic layout of the
library with information about the ﬂoor and the location of the shelf holding her book. Jill
follows the directions on the PDA leading to the correct shelf. As she nears the correct shelf,
proximity sensors on the shelf detect her ID and a colored LED ﬂashes on the rack. Once
near the correct rack, the image on her PDA changes showing her the location of her book
in relation to other books on the rack. Noting that the book is on the top right hand corner
of the rack, Jill looks for a ﬂashing LED under the book she was looking for. Having found
her book, she may choose to look for another book, or check out. On the PDA she sees a tab
recommending other books with the same key words or suggested by her professor. These
recommended books can be located within the library using the same mechanism. This
eliminates the time for Jill to go back to a computer to ﬁnd the alphanumeric code of
the book.
Deciding to check out, she collects all books she has found and moves towards the front
desk. She could use her PDA to check out the books; but Jill decides to use a self checkout
counter, not unlike the one in her neighborhood supermarket. The counter is placed next to
the front desk. She uses her student ID to check out the books at this counter and returns
her PDA to the front desk. Having completed her ﬁrst visit to the library in less time than it
would have taken at her last school, Jill leaves to work on her assignment.
19.5.1.2
How the System Works
To locate a book in a library, a database of information has to be stored about that book -
Call numbers, ISBN number, title, author’s name, abstract, key words. Such information
about the book can be used by the described search engine to ﬁnd the book. This
information can be located on the library database accessible through a wireless network
in the vicinity of the library. RFID tags transmit this information to a search device—a PDA
or cell phones or any other similar device with the appropriate interrogator and software.
In addition, the system also recognizes the user who is querying for information. RFID tags
360
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

on the school ID card (or alternatively on the search device handed at the check in desk)
transmit information to interrogators in the library ﬂoor and on the shelves. Once the
search device attaches itself to a book, it can track and locate the book by locating the RFID
information from the database or by sensing proximity.
19.5.1.3
Prototyping and Testing
To test the design, a comprehensive user study was designed and conducted in the Bob and
Kathy Luke Library of the College of Architecture, Art, and Design at Mississippi State
University. The participants included all stakeholders—faculty members of the school,
students as well as library staff (n ¼ 17). To verify our claim that the new system will take
lesser time than the conventional alphanumeric system, we developed the aforementioned
interfaces on a PDA (see Figure 19.2). Owing to constraints of a larger space, the study was
conducted in a small library. We believe that the study can be extrapolated to a larger system
with similar results.
Some salient results from our tests:
. New system took less time even for experienced users. Fifteen out of 17 users said
that the new system made it easier for them to ﬁnd books in the library.
. Time taken when PDA was used for the second time was much lesser as expected.
Results show that even in the ﬁrst book search the participants took lesser time
Digital Space
Help desk
Entrance
Digital Spaces
NA 2728.W43 1998
by Peter Weiser
NA 2728.W43.1998
FIGURE 19.2
The PDA used in the library project user study. The image shown in the screen (enlarged) shows the book racks in
gray and the desired rack in dark. The ﬁnal image shows an elevation of a rack in dark marking the section on the
shelf where the book is located.
RFID Tagging and the Design of ‘‘Place’’
361

than the conventional method to ﬁnd the book. Moreover when the participant
was asked to search for another book using PDA, it was found that it took much
lesser time than the ﬁrst search indicating a low learning curve.
19.5.2
‘‘Smart’’ Home Project
Aging in place is the term that is attributed to many adults (especially baby boomers) who
wish to grow older without having to move from their own homes. This is veriﬁed by
several studies—although almost 1.5 million seniors currently reside in nursing homes and
one-third of those have been there for more than three years; 77% of American consumers
say that nursing homes are a last resort for themselves and their family members. (Boehm
et al., 2004). This statistic within itself does not pose a problem except when one considers
that as people age, they people face various chronic and temporal illnesses leading to
severe limitation of activity in their daily life such as shopping, cooking, answering phone
calls, opening doors, paying bills, taking medicine in time and so on. Assisted home living
studies show that 50 percent of population, older than 70 years, needs assistance in their
daily activities while 11.6 percent of population above 65 years old has severe limitations in
self-care (Dominick et al., 2003).
Particularly in rural areas of the United States (like Mississippi) this poses a larger threat
because of two issues (Bryden, 2002):
1) A universal tendency for many young people to leave their rural homelands to
gain education, training and experience
2) A signiﬁcant lack of healthcare providers and able physicians
Computer scientists envision that one of the ﬁrst uses of ubiquitous computing at home
will be in the ﬁeld of proactive healthcare. Eventually these technologies can successfully
motivate long-term healthy decision making, and thus delay or even prevent the onset of
medical problems such as obesity and chronic illnesses, alleviating the pressure on the
traditional healthcare system. But as the demography of the U.S. slowly starts becoming
older as a population, the power of these technologies will be in the home—where it allows
people to age-in-place (Intille, 2004).
At the DRIL, we are evaluating several technologies that can help in the design of a rural
‘‘smart’’ home—a home that monitors the well being of the resident. However one of the key
characteristics of stitching ubiquitous computing into architecture is to create a nondisrup-
tive environment. Most ‘‘smart’’ home technologies have severe privacy implications. Even
the most subtle design may be too intrusive. Using sensors and cameras to monitor a user
may not be acceptable by certain communities, even though such a solution would be the
most apt for the problem they face. RFIDs can help. RFIDs carry relatively low perception
value—which provides them the ability to be relatively invisible. Moreover, used similarly
to Willis and Helal’s RFID information grid system, a relatively low quality RFID system
can be an efﬁcient method of gathering location information.
Location information of an elder can be used in multiple ways:
1) To develop contextual cues—if someone is in the kitchen, it can be assumed that
the person is cooking (or at least doing something related to food).
2) To monitor activity—long durations of inactivity may be a sign of a fall or illness.
In our designs at the DRIL, we are evaluating a system which uses RFID technology to look
for location clues in ‘‘smart’’ homes.
362
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

19.5.2.1
How the System Works
The system uses a hybrid of the two systems that were explained above—interrogators are
placed around the house to create an information grid; the user (elder) wears a passive
RFID tag. Interrogators can be designed with the house, added at a later stage, or built into
carpets or wall paneling systems. The RFID tags can be implanted or worn by the user and
may be in the form of non computational products like a ring or embedded into shoes. The
RFID tag when attached to the person is read by speciﬁc interrogators in the spatial
framework which then parses the location information to a central computer. For example
when the person enters the kitchen, the speciﬁc interrogator in that area reads the presence
of the RFID tag and informs the central computer of this status. The central computer then
tracks the location of the user as s=he moves around the house based on this simple binary
information (present=not present) (see Figure 19.3). The computer compares the informa-
tion it gathers to historical data to analyze for contextual clues and=or anomalies in activity
patterns. Unique identiﬁcation tags in conjunction with other sensing technologies (pres-
sure sensitive ﬂooring) can also be used to detect the presence of unwelcome guests in the
home. Such information can then trigger action—informing a trusted second person
(son=daughter or neighbor) in case of pattern anomalies or automatically calling for help
(911 or ambulance services) and so on.
The system is simple and effective because of its invisibility. Moreover, the feeling of
being ‘‘watched’’ by external entity is reduced because images are not being captured. And
because the system works on a relatively simple technology, maintenance issues are
minimized—this is especially important in rural areas with limited access to technical help.
19.5.2.2
Prototyping and Testing
The system described above is a very nascent stage of development. At this point we are
working with (quasi) rural communities to evaluate perceptions of elderly people towards
FIGURE 19.3
Design of the ‘‘smart’’ home showing position of RFID interrogators. The interrogator in the couch detects the
proximity of the person and parses this information to the central computer.
RFID Tagging and the Design of ‘‘Place’’
363

such technology. Eventually we will work with these communities to develop prototype
‘‘smart’’ homes to test these systems.
19.6
Discussion
In the above sections we saw four applications of RFID technology that concern the design
or negotiation of ‘‘place.’’ While these examples show the promise of this technology, there
are several aspects of it that may not be as rosy as painted. This section of the chapter will
look at some of the concerns of using RFID technology within the design of architecture.
19.6.1
Incorporation
All technologies go through what we call a ‘‘novelty’’ phase when ﬁrst introduced into
society. This idea is illustrated by an anecdote—a friend talks of his grandmother who
when the radio was introduced would leave windows open so as not to collect radio waves
in the house. While we laugh at such anecdotes, this is how our society approaches any
new technology. Any new technology traverses through necessary phases of awe, appre-
ciation, critique, incorporation, negotiation and ﬁnally acceptance. Rejection of technology
(however important and necessary) happens because designers and engineers protect it
from this ﬁre branding by society. Mature technology depends on not only on (tangible)
efﬁcient performance but also on an (intangible) socio-cultural incorporation.
RFID as a technology is not a new concept; but RFID in the design of place does not ﬁnd
mainstream (real world) applications beyond those in experimental or entertainment
settings. Within this perspective, it is important for designers to present novel ideas into
mainstream society and allow for it to be critiqued and developed.
19.6.2
Security
One whole section of this book is dedicated to privacy and security as it relates to RFID
technology. This alone is an indication of how critical a discussion on security is in this
context. However when RFIDs move beyond commodities into our environments, it brings
with it much greater implications of security compromises. A system like a ‘‘smart’’ home
for example hands over controls of security to a stakeholder that may not even be using the
system directly (a son or daughter). In focus group studies with elders in Mississippi, many
expressed concerns of what data they wanted to present to even close relatives (even a
child of their own). The idea of tracking individuals, in spite of how beneﬁcial, rings in
Orwellian nightmares. What implications do implanted biochips carry with respect to
personal information in the hand of untrustworthy (or even trustworthy) sources? What
happens to an information grid if location information were vandalized by new age
(technologically conversant) vandals? What happens to a rural ‘‘smart’’ home if a hacker
were to hack into the system and follow the movements of your grandmother?
Designers of technology often assume that the society will use the technology in a
particular manner; but users don’t. They will always ﬁnd novel ways to circumvent
conventional thinking of the designer and carve out new uses for the solution. Predicting
these circumventions may be difﬁcult, but it is important that we pay attention to the use
of these systems by actual users to understand not only the working but also the scope of
use afforded by the solution. Like other personal information technology (credit cards,
social security numbers), RFID is a technology which requires that designers be concerned
about issues of privacy and security from the offset of the design. Innovative designs
364
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

will require a continuous push to safeguard and protect what is valuable to users and
the society.
19.6.3
Obsolescence
In a world where information has the ability to travel at the speed of light, innovation
happens in weeks and months, not years. Computation technology has demonstrated this
quite adequately since its conception. Within the last 50 years, computers have made strides
ahead unlike any technology before it and will continue to do so into the future. This trend is
likely to continue with current RFID and other communication technology. With regard
to this, Huang and Waldvogel (Huang and Waldvogel, 2004) raise an important concern
in their paper: what happens when there is a discrepancy between the durability of
architectural materials and the rapid obsolescence of technology standards. Unlike a
product (cell phones or laptop computers), built environments are designed for decades of
use and cannot be refreshed every time there is a signiﬁcant change in technology.
Huang and Waldvogel suggest that a simple way to address the discrepancy is to
separate the elements based on their necessity to be replaced. They claim that in any
spatial design, the technology must be designed in layers—each of which can be easily
replaced without signiﬁcantly affecting the other. In addition, systems must be able to scale
as well as degrade gracefully. A component that fails should not bring the rest of the
system down. A second way to address this discrepancy is to shift the intelligence from
the device to the network. Traditional appliances, like telephones or televisions remain
relatively unchanged because the intelligence of the system lies in the network and not the
device. The home only contains the most simple and minimal ‘‘front end’’ functionality
needed to access the network (Edwards and Grinter, 2001). RFID is an ideal technology in
this respect because they are cost efﬁcient, easily replaceable, carry a small footprint, and
often independent of the front end functional element.
19.6.4
Introspection
Our homes (in an increasingly open world) have become our last bastion of privacy. In
many conferences where ideas of ubiquitous computing are presented, the question always
arises—do we really need our places to have computers built into them? Are we ready as a
society to deal with vandalism and privacy problems at a spatial level (think of spam on
the walls of your living room)?
The argument is however (slightly) ﬂawed—as a society; we have always embraced
technology into the places where we live, work, and play. Ever since we started living in
closed (man made) structures, technology has manifested itself in multiple forms within
these structures. New material, fabrication, climatic, communication, surveillance technolo-
gies continuously work to improve the way we build our spaces and live our lives in them.
While it is true that computing does have its problems—creases that have to be ironed out;
it also brings with it beneﬁts that are impossible to replicate with other technologies. As
ubiquitous computing evolves out of its nascent state, it is inevitable that we will face
problems. But problems can be solved and we as designers can only do so through continu-
ous innovation and evaluation of these systems in real world applications and designs.
19.7
Closing Conversation
The architect=designer is an important link in the design of ‘‘place’’ because s=he is
capable of changing the ﬁnal product to meet the cultural, ethnic and the socioeconomic
RFID Tagging and the Design of ‘‘Place’’
365

requirements of the user. But the architect=designer cannot work alone. Only through a
careful mediation of technical aspects of design along with the phenomenological and the
aesthetic, can we dream of using any technology in our homes. Hence the logical process
of designing responsive environments for proactive healthcare is through collaboration.
Elegant and usable design can be achieved only through conversations between
researchers in various disciplines and through widespread awareness of current literature
and research in this realm. This chapter and this book is just a beginning. We have seen in
this chapter that, because of low cost and easy interoperability, RFID tagging has the
potential to transform the way we design place. As RFID technology matures, its appli-
cation and acceptance will change. As designers and engineers we have to constantly
work to develop design ideas that are not only technically innovative but also socially
responsible and useful.
19.8
Acknowledgments
Several acknowledgments are due—to Larry Barrow, Director and Sarah Pittman,
coordinator of DRIL and Jim West, Dean of the College of Architecture, Art, and Design
at Mississippi State University whose encouragement and mentorship has been most
important to my research; the Mayor and people of the City of Meridian and in particular,
Sharon Smith for the Aging in Place project; and the MSU Library system and in particular,
Susan Hall for the Library project. Most importantly, gratitude is due to my families—ﬁrst,
my professional family which includes students who have been invaluable as research
thinkers over these years—Lalatendu Satpathy, Vikash Singh, Landon Voeller, and Sneha
Kochak, all of whom have been on the research team or helped with the projects described
above. And secondly, my own family—my wife, Shilpi Kumar and my parents, without
whom none of this would have been possible.
The research described in this chapter were developed using support from multiple
sources: The Hearin Foundation; MSU-OR Research Initiation Grant; MSU- John C. Stennis
Institute of Government; the City of Meridian; and the College of Architecture, Art, and
Design, Mississippi State University.
References
Auburn, T. and R. Barnes. 2006. Producing place: A neo-Schutzian perspective on the ‘psychology of
place.’ Journal of Environmental Psychology 26(1):38–50.
Ayre, L.B. 2004. Position Paper: RFID and Libraries, Galecia Group, Petaluma, CA, pp.1-21 [cited.
Available from http:==www.galecia.com=included=docs=position_rﬁd_permission.pdf.]
Boehm, E.W., B.J. Holmes, E.G. Brown, L. Bishop, S.E. McAulay, and J. Gaudet. 2004. Forrester Big
Idea: Who Pays For Healthcare Unbound (The $34 Billion Market For Personal Medical Monitoring)
[cited 04-05-2006. Available from http:==www.forrester.com=Research=Document=Excerpt=
0,7211,16524,00.html.]
Bryden, J.M. 2002. The Elderly Outside the Metropolis: Myths and Realities. Lecture for the Haskell
Master Class, Arizona State University, Arizona.
Dominick, K.L., F.M. Ahern, C.H. Gold, and D.A. Heller. 2003. Health-related quality of life
among older adults with activity-limiting health conditions. Journal of Mental Health and Aging
9(1):43–53.
Edwards, W.K. and R.E. Grinter. 2001. At home with ubiquitous computing: Seven challenges. Paper
read at UBICOMP 2001: Ubiquitous Computing International Conference, September 30–October 2,
2001, Atlanta, GA.
366
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

Furui, S. 2000. Speech recognition technology in the ubiquitous=wearable computing environment.
Proceedings of the 2000 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing
(ICASSP’00), 5–9 June 2000, Istanbul, Turkey.
Hitachi. 2006. News Release—Worlds smallest and thinnest RFID IC Chip [cited. Available from http:==
www.hitachi.com=New=cnews=060206.pdf.]
Huang, J. and M. Waldvogel. 2004. The swisshouse: An inhabitable interface for connecting nations.
Proceedings of the 2004 Conference on Designing Interactive Systems: Processes, Practices, Methods,
and Techniques, 1–4 August 2004, Cambridge, MA, pp. 195–204.
Intille, S. 2004. A new research challenge: Persuasive technology to motivate healthy aging. Transac-
tions on Information Technology in Biomedicine 8(3):235–237.
Larson, K., S.S. Intille, T.J. McLeish, J. Beaudin, and R.E. Williams. 2004. Open source building—
reinventing places of living. BT Technology Journal 22:187–200.
McCullough, M. 2004. Digital Ground: Architecture, Pervasive Computing, and Environmental Knowing.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
MERL. 2006. DiamondTouch [cited. Available from http:==www.merl.com=projects=DiamondTouch=.]
Microsoft. 2007. Microsoft Surface [cited. Available from http:==www.microsoft.com=surface=.]
Morton, S. 2004. Barcelona clubbers get chipped. BBC News (Technology), September 29, 2004.
Roberti, M. 2006. A 5-cent breakthrough. RFID Journal [cited. Available from http:==www.rﬁdjournal.
com=article=articleview=2295=1=128=].
Senagala, M. 2005. Building is a network for living in: Toward new architectures. Paper Presented at
Smart Architecture: Integration of Digital and Building Technologies; Proceedings of the 2005 Annual
Conference of the Association for Computer Aided Design in Architecture, 13–16 October 2005,
Savannah, GA.
Streitz, N. and P. Nixon. 2005. Introduction: The disappearing computer. Communications of ACM 48
(3):32–35.
Synaptics. 2007. The Onyx Concept [cited. Available from http:==www.synaptics.com=onyx=.]
Tolmie, P., J. Pycock, T. Diggins, A. MacLean, and A. Karsenty. 2002. Unremarkable computing.
Paper Presented at SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems: Changing Our
World, Changing Ourselves, Minneapolis, Minnesota, U.S.A.
Weiser, M. 1991. The computer for the 21st century. Scientiﬁc American 265(3):94–104.
Willis, S. and S. Helal. 2005. RFID information grid for blind navigation and wayﬁnding. Proceedings
of the Ninth IEEE International Symposium on Wearable Computers, 18–21 October 2005, Osaka,
Japan, pp. 34–37.
RFID Tagging and the Design of ‘‘Place’’
367


20
Photosensing Wireless Tags for Precise
Location and Geometry Queries
Ramesh Raskar, Paul Beardsley, Paul Dietz, and Jeroen van Baar
CONTENTS
20.1
Geometric Context of Wireless Tags............................................................................. 369
20.2
How It Works................................................................................................................... 370
20.3
Applications...................................................................................................................... 371
20.4
Discussion ......................................................................................................................... 374
References.................................................................................................................................... 374
20.1
Geometric Context of Wireless Tags
The geometry-rich functionality is achieved by augmenting each tag (Figure 20.1) with
a photosensor (Figure 20.2). We achieve optical communication with this composite
RF-photosensing tag with modulated light. In this chapter the operations are shown
using a projector that is paired with the tag-RF-reader. The projector performs the dual
operation of sending optical data to the tag (similar to your TV’s IR remote control unit)
and also giving visual feedback by projecting instructions on objects. Current tag-readers
operate in broadcast mode with no concept of a directional communication but the RFIG
tags allow locating of tags within a few millimeters, support selection of individual
tags, and create a 2D or 3D coordinate frame for the tags. The system of projector and
photosensing tag offers a set of rich geometric operations. It presents a new medium for
many of the results from the area of computer vision, with projector and tags replacing
camera and image interest points (Raskar et al., 2004).
Our experimental work is based on active, battery-powered radio frequency tags.
However, our goal has been to develop methods that can be used with passive, unpowered
radio frequency identiﬁcation (RFID) tags. The key issue in evolving our active tag system
to passive tags would be power. In this chapter, we allowed ourselves computation and
sensing consistent with only the size and power levels we felt were achievable on a passive
RFID system. For example, (a) tags are not photosensing or computing until woken up by
the RF reader and (b) we do not have a light emitting diode (LED) on the tag as a visual
beacon to a human or camera-based system because it would be power-hungry.
Location tracking using RF received signal strength or time of arrival is popular but
requires multiple readers and the accuracy maybe insufﬁcient for complex geometric
369

procedures (Hightower and Borriello, 2001). Previous systems have also married RF tags
with optical or ultrasound sensors to improve accuracy. Some systems use active RF
tags that respond to laser pointers. The FindIT Flashlight uses a one-way interaction and
an indicator light on the tag to signal that the desired object has been found (Ma
and Paradiso, 2002). Other systems use a two-way interaction, where the tag responds
back to the PDA using a power-hungry protocol like 802.11 or X10 (Patel and Abowd,
2003) and (Ringwald, 2002). CoolTown (The CoolTown Project, 2001) uses beacons that
actively transmit devices references but without the ability to point and without visual
feedback. The Cricket project (Teller et al., 2003) recovers pose of a handheld device using
installed RF- and ultrasound-beacons, and does projected augmentation.
20.2
How It Works
Conventional tag communication works by broadcast from an RF reader, with response
from all in-range tags. Limiting the communication to a required tag is traditionally
achieved using a short range tag-reader and close physical placement with respect to the
tag. In contrast, we can select tags for interaction at long-range using projected light, while
ignoring unwanted in-range tags. The handheld device ﬁrst transmits an RF broadcast.
Each in-range tag is awoken by the signal, and its photosensor takes a reading of ambient
light, to be used as a zero for subsequent illumination measurements. The projector
illumination is turned on. Each tag that detects an increase in illumination sends a response
to indicate that it is in the beam of the projector, and is ready for interaction.
Memory
Conventional RFID
RF data
Microcontroller
Reader
Computer
FIGURE 20.1
Conventional radio frequency identity (RFID) transponder communicates with RF reader and responds with the
id number stored in the tag’s memory.
Memory Microcontroller
Projector
Computer
Reader
RF data
Photosensor
Light
FIGURE 20.2
The RFIG tag: Radio frequency identity and geometry (RFIG) transponder communicates with RF reader as well
as spatio-temporal light modulator such as a modulated IR light. For example, with a full-ﬂedged data projector,
one can ﬁnd the stored Id as well as the (x,y) projector pixel location that illuminates the tag.
370
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

The handheld device is aimed casually in the direction of a tagged surface. The handheld
device sends an RF signal to synchronize the tags, followed by illumination with a
sequence of binary patterns, i.e., binary structured light. Each projector pixel emits
a unique temporal Gray-code, and thus encodes its position. The tag records the Gray-
code that is incident on its photosensor, and then makes an RF transmission of its identity
plus the recorded Gray-code back to the RF reader. The projector uses the identity plus the
recorded (x,y) location to project instructions, text or images on the tagged object. It is then
straightforward to create correctly positioned augmentation on the tagged surface.
20.3
Applications
Several aspects of RFIG have been described in our previous work (Raskar et al., 2004). The
work was motivated in terms of the commercially important application of inventory
control. But we believe that photosensing tags may have many innovative uses, and in
this chapter our goal is to present the new ideas in the context of a few promising
examples. We outline broad modes of deployment for geometric analysis. Note these are
speculative uses, not work done.
1. Location feedback, e.g., warehouse management (Figure 20.3): Consider the task of
locating boxes containing perishable items about to expire. Even with traditional
RF tagging with expiry date info recorded in the indexed database, the employee
would have to serially inspect boxes and mark the boxes with about-to-expire
products. Using RFIG tags, the handheld or ﬁxed projector ﬁrst locates the queried
tags and then illuminates them with symbols such as X and Ok so that the
employee has a visual feedback. Note that a second user can perform similar
FIGURE 20.3
Application A: Warehouse scenario: Employee locates items about to expire and gets visual feedback. A second
user performs similar operations, without conﬂict in the interaction because the projector beams do not overlap.
Photosensing Wireless Tags for Precise Location and Geometry Queries
371

operations, without RF collision with the ﬁrst reader or the tags because the two
projector beams do not overlap.
2. Obstruction detection, e.g., object obstructing a railroad (Figure 20.4): A common
computer vision task with camera includes detecting abnormal conditions by per-
forming image processing. One example is detecting obstruction on railway tracks,
for example, raising an alarm if a person is on the tracks in a subway station or if
there is some suspicious material on tracks. Processing images of videos from
camera-based system to detect such events is difﬁcult because the ambient lighting
condition can change and several other activities can result in false positives. But
one can solve this vision problem by instead sprinkling RFIG tags along the track.
One can illuminate these tags with a ﬁxed or steered beam of temporally modulated
light (not necessarily a projector), such as 40 Kz infrared beam from a sparse array of
light emitters. Then the operation is similar to ‘‘beam break’’ technique commonly
used to detect intruders. But a wireless tag based system is ideally suited for
applications where running wires to both ends is impractical. Using retro-reﬂective
markers and detecting a return beam is another common strategy to avoid wires but
sprinkling a large number of markers creates an authoring nightmare. In case of
RFIG, the tags id and location can be easily reported along with the status
of reception of the modulated light. Lack of reception indicates obstruction which
can be relayed to a central monitoring facility where a human observer can carefully
observe the scene possibly with a pan-tilt-zoom surveillance camera.
3. Ordered placement and orientation, e.g., books in a library (Figure 20.5): A
common task in libraries, pharmacies, or for facility managers is maintaining a
large number of objects in a predetermined order. In a library, if books are RF
tagged, it is easy to get a list of books within the RF range. However, without
location information it is difﬁcult to ﬁnd out which books are out of alphabetically
sorted order. In addition, without book orientation information, it is difﬁcult to
detect books that are placed upside down. With RFIG and a handheld projector,
the system gets book title as well as location. Then the system sorts books by title
as well as by their 2D geometric location. A mismatch in the two sorted lists
indicates that the corresponding book is placed in a wrong position. The system
FIGURE 20.4
Application B: Detecting obstruction on railway tracks, such as person on tracks near a platform, disabled vehicle
at a rail–road intersection or suspicious material on tracks. Finding obstruction with a camera-based system is
difﬁcult. The idea is to sprinkle RFIG tags along the track and illuminate them with a ﬁxed or steered beam of
temporally modulated light (not necessarily a projector). Tags respond with status of reception of the modulated
light. Lack of reception indicates obstruction, which can be relayed to a central monitoring facility where a human
observer can carefully observe the scene possibly with a pan-tilt-zoom surveillance camera.
372
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

knows the current location for these books as well their ideal position. The
projector display gives immediate visual feedback and instructions, shown in the
ﬁgure as red arrows from current positions to intended position. A single book can
also be tagged with two RFIG transponders, one at the top of the book spine and
one at the bottom of the spine. Then comparing the coordinates of these two tags
allows one to ﬁnd if the book has been placed upside down.
4. 3D Path Planning=Guiding, e.g., guiding a robot on assembly line for arbitrarily
oriented objects (Figure 20.6): RFIG tags can be used in factories for robot guid-
ance. The idea is similar to other laser guided operations. Suppose a robot is
instructed to grab a certain object in a pile moving on a conveyor belt. RFID can
simplify the object recognition problem in machine vision but precisely locating
FIGURE 20.5
Application C: Books in a library. If books are RF tagged, it is easy to get a list of books within the RF range.
However, without location information it is difﬁcult to ﬁnd out which books are out of alphabetically sorted order.
In addition, without book orientation information, it is difﬁcult to detect books that are placed upside down. With
RFIG and a handheld projector, the system gets book title as well as location. Based on the mismatch in title sort
with respect to the location sort, the system gives immediate visual feedback and instructions, shows here as red
arrows for original positions.
FIGURE 20.6
Application D: Laser guided robot: To guide a
robot to pick a certain object in a pile moving on
a conveyor belt, the projector locates the RFIG
tagged object and illuminates it with easily
identiﬁable
temporal
pattern.
A
camera
attached to the robot arm locks onto this pattern
and allows the robot to home in on this object.
Photosensing Wireless Tags for Precise Location and Geometry Queries
373

the object will be difﬁcult. The idea is to use a ﬁxed projector to ﬁrst locate the
RFIG tagged object and then illuminate the object with a steady easily identiﬁable
temporal pattern. A camera attached to the robot arm locks onto this pattern by
doing pattern matching and allows the robot to home in on this object.
Notice that in a majority of the applications described earlier, the projector behaves similar
to devices we are familiar with, remote controls and laser pointers, but with some spatial or
temporal modulation of light. The projector is a gloriﬁed remote control communicating
with a photosensor in the location-sensing phase and a gloriﬁed laser pointer in the image
projection phase.
20.4
Discussion
Several problems can inﬂuence optical communication between the projector and a tag.
It can be affected by ambient light. Wavelength division multiplexed communication is
commonly used to solve this problem (e.g., TV remote and IR photosensor). The optical
communication also gets noisier as projector-tag distance increases, and as the photosensor
gets dirty. However, within these limitations, the RFIG method can support very intricate
and multipurpose geometric operations with the ambient intelligence provided by wireless
tags. The work indicates some of the possibilities for blurring the boundaries between the
physical and digital worlds by making the everyday environment into a self-describing
wireless data source, a display surface, and a medium for interaction.
References
Hightower, J. and Borriello, G. August 2001. Location systems for ubiquitous computing. Computer,
34(8), 57–66.
Ma, H. and Paradiso, J.A. 2002. The FindIT ﬂashlight: responsive tagging based on optically triggered
microprocessor wakeup. Ubicomp, 160.167.
Patel, S.N. and Abowd, G.D. 2003. A 2-way laser-assisted selection scheme for handhelds in a
physical environment. Ubicomp, 200.207.
Raskar, R., Beardsley, P., Van baar, J., Wang, Y., Dietz, P., Lee, J., Leigh, D., and Willwacher, T. 2004.
RFIG lamps: Interacting with a self-describing world via photosensing wireless tags and
projectors. ACM Trans. Graph. (SIGGRAPH), 22(3), 809–818.
Ringwald, M. 2002. Spontaneous interaction with everyday devices using a PDA. Workshop on
supporting spontaneous interaction in ubiquitous computing settings. UbiComp.
Teller, S., Chen, J., and Balakrishnan, H. July 2003. Pervasive poseaware applications and infrastruc-
ture. IEEE Comp. Graph. Appl., July=August 2003, Canmore, Canada.
The Cooltown Project, 2001. http:==www.cooltown.com=research=
374
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

21
RFID and NFC on Mobile Phones
Paul Coulton, Omer Rashid, and Reuben Edwards
CONTENTS
21.1
Introduction...................................................................................................................... 375
21.2
Overview of RFID=NFC on Mobile Phones ................................................................ 376
21.2.1 Introduction ......................................................................................................... 376
21.2.2 NFC Speciﬁcations.............................................................................................. 377
21.2.2.1 NFC Data Exchange Format Speciﬁcation ...................................... 377
21.2.2.2 NFC Record Type Deﬁnition............................................................. 379
21.2.2.3 NFC Text Record Type Deﬁnition.................................................... 380
21.2.2.4 NFC Forum URI Record Type Deﬁnition ....................................... 380
21.2.2.5 NFC Smart Poster Record Type Deﬁnition..................................... 381
21.2.3 Overview of JSR-257........................................................................................... 382
21.2.4 Nokia NFC & RFID SDK................................................................................... 384
21.2.5 Using Nokia NFC & RFID API......................................................................... 385
21.3
Applications of RFID=NFC on Mobile Phones ........................................................... 385
21.3.1 PAC-LAN............................................................................................................. 385
21.3.2 MobHunt.............................................................................................................. 387
21.3.3 User Experience................................................................................................... 388
21.4
Conclusions....................................................................................................................... 390
21.5
Acknowledgments........................................................................................................... 390
References.................................................................................................................................... 390
21.1
Introduction
Although RFID is establishing itself across a range of business sectors it is likely that it’s
most signiﬁcant impact will come through being combined with mobile phones. Mobile
phones are often described as a disruptive technology in that they have overturned the
dominance of traditional ﬁxed phone service. The incorporation of RFID and NFC onto
mobile phone has similar possibilities in terms of micropayments, digital distribution
strategies, and interaction with everyday objects, which is likely to radically alter existing
consumer practices. In this chapter we will introduce RFID and NFC in relation to mobile
phones and provide details of the associated standards and software development tools
and environments. Finally, to highlight the potential of these technologies, we will discuss
the user experience in relation to three projects which have utilized this technology.
375

21.2
Overview of RFID=NFC on Mobile Phones
21.2.1
Introduction
While much of the focus on RFID has come through asset tracking, another area that has
greatly beneﬁted from RFID is micropayments and prepaid access services for mass transit
systems, which has seen huge take up in places such as Japan and Korea and has no doubt
fuelled the integration of RFID into the mobile phone feature set.
As this book has highlighted, RFID as a technology covers a range of possible operating
frequencies, which in turn affects the nature of the operation of the application of the
technology. The particular operating range for mobile phones is generally 13.5 MHz, which
limits the range to approx 3 cm or touch as shown in Figure 21.1.
Any discussion of RFID on mobile phones is incomplete without also discussing Near
Field Communications (NFC), which is an interface and protocol built on top of RFID and
is targeted in particular at consumer electronic devices, providing them with a secure
means of communicating without having to exert any intellectual effort in conﬁguring the
network [1]. Thus NFC takes RFID beyond the traditional use case scenario of interacting
with tags to allow the communication between devices. To connect two devices together,
one simply brings them very close together, a few centimetres, or make them touch. The
NFC protocol then automatically conﬁgures them for communication in a peer-to-peer
network. Once the conﬁguration data has been exchanged using NFC, the devices can be
set up to continue communication over a longer range technology such as 802.11 or
Bluetooth. The other advantage with NFC comes in terms of power saving, and it achieves
this by having an Active Mode (AM) and Passive Mode (PM) for communication. In AM
both devices generate an RF ﬁeld over which they can transmit data. In PM, only one
device generates the RF ﬁeld, the other device uses load modulation to transfer the data.
This is an ideal scenario for mobile phones as it would allow them to interact with other
devices such as laptops while minimizing battery consumption. The data rates available
are relatively low, 106, 212, or 424 kbits=s, although for the applications envisaged this
should be more than sufﬁcient [1].
FIGURE 21.1
Phone interfacing with RFID tag.
376
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

Nokia was the ﬁrst to combine mobile phones with RFID=NFC when it introduced clip-on
RFID shells for the 5140 and NFC for 3320 and 5140i Series 40 phones (Nokia Xpress-on
Mobile RFID=NFC Kits). The RFID=NFC shells can be accessed via J2ME applications
running on the phone to trigger deﬁned actions within the application. At the Consumer
Electronics Conference in Las Vegas in January of 2007 Nokia demonstrated the 6131 NFC
phone with in-built NFC capabilities which is expected to be released in the 2nd quarter
of 2007.
These phones were but the ﬁrst of a growing trend and the Japanese telecommunications
giant NTT DoCoMo has reportedly to have shipped more than 5 million RFID enabled
mobile phones for use instead of printed tickets in the National Rail Network [2]. Further
Sony has started to ship all of its laptops with RFID=NFC technology so that users can
download straight to RFID cards or RFID mobile phones [2].
In the following sections we shall discuss some of the important elements of the NFC
speciﬁcations before discussing programming RFID=NFC by considering both JSR 257 and
the Nokia SDK. Finally we shall provide examples of how RFID=NFC has been used for
three mixed reality gaming experiences.
21.2.2
NFC Speciﬁcations
As has already been highlighted, NFC is already on its way to becoming a part of everyday
life and in order to achieve successful consumer adoption of this technology companies
involved need to work together closely and applications need to be interoperable. In 2004
the NFC Forum was formed with its main objective to promote the use of NFC technology
in consumer devices and services, provide an extensive framework for interoperable
applications by developing standards based speciﬁcations, and ensure that products and
devices claiming to be NFC compliant conform to the forum speciﬁcations.
A major step towards the goals of NFC Forum was in 2006 when it announced the ﬁrst
ﬁve NFC speciﬁcations as follows:
. NFC Data Exchange Format (NDEF)
. NFC Record Type Deﬁnition
. NFC Uniform Resource Identiﬁer Service Record Type Deﬁnition
. NFC Text Record Type Deﬁnition
. NFC Smart Poster Record Type Speciﬁcation
Further, tag formats based upon ISO 14443 Type A, ISO 14443 Type B, and ISO 18092 were
also announced and an NFC Forum compliant device must support these. The technology
architecture of NFC is based upon three different modes of operation, i.e., peer to peer,
read–write, and card emulation as shown in Figure 21.2.
21.2.2.1
NFC Data Exchange Format Speciﬁcation
The main objective of NDEF speciﬁcation [3] is to build a common data format for NFC
devices and tags. It does not deﬁne any record types as it focuses on data structure of the
message to exchange information, record types are deﬁned in separate speciﬁcations as
listed earlier and they are discussed brieﬂy in the sections below. NDEF is a lightweight
binary message format designed to assemble single or multiple application deﬁned payloads
into a single message for information exchange between NFC Forum Devices or NFC Forum
Device and NFC Forum supported tags. An NDEF message consists of one or more NDEF
records which hold the payloads. Figure 21.3 shows the anatomy of an NDEF message [3].
RFID and NFC on Mobile Phones
377

The ﬁrst record in NDEF message contains the Message Begin (MB) ﬂag and the last
record contains the Message End (ME) ﬂag. In ﬁgure it can be seen that ﬁrst record (index
1) has the MB ﬂag set while last record of the message (index n) has the ME ﬂag set which
also points out that the message head is to the left and tail to the right. If the message is to
contain one record only then MB and ME are set at the start and end of the same record.
As the payloads are encapsulated in the NDEF record they can be of different sizes. Each
payload is deﬁned by a set of three attributes, i.e., type, length, and an identiﬁer as shown
in Figure 21.4. The payload length deﬁnes the payload as the number of octets where
maximum number of octets in a message being 232-1. Payload Type indicates the kind of
data being encapsulated in the record. This can be URIs, NFC Forum speciﬁc type format,
or MIME types. The key advantages of describing the type of content are that the appli-
cation receiving this NDEF message can direct it to the application responsible for handling
that particular type of data on the user device. Since an NDEF message can comprise of
multiple records so payload type of ﬁrst record should generally dictate the payload type
not only for itself but also for the records that follow. It is important to keep in mind that
the speciﬁcation does not deﬁne any model for handling of the data based upon type; in
fact the processing of data is totally left up to the user application involved in the NFC
information exchange. Third payload attribute, payload identiﬁer, is optional and allows
the application to identify the payload encapsulated in the record. This is crucial in
supporting URI based links. Similar to payload handling the speciﬁcation leaves the
linking mechanism deﬁnition to the application.
. MB: MB ﬂag (1 bit ﬁeld) shows the start of an NDEF message when set.
. ME: ME ﬂag (1 bit ﬁeld) shows the end of an NDEF message when set.
Peer-to-peer mode
LLCP
Logical link control
protocol
Card emulation
smart card ability for
mobile devices
RTD
Record type definition
NDEF
NFC data exchange
format
Read/write mode
Applications
NFC forum compliant tags
Card emulation
FIGURE 21.2
NFC Modes.
NDEF message
R1 MB = 1
Rn ME = 1
…
…
…
…
FIGURE 21.3
Structure of NDEF Message. (From NFC Forum, NFC Data Exchange Format (NDEF) Technical Speciﬁcation
NDEF 1.0, NFCForum-TS-NDEF_1.0, 24th July 2006.)
378
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

. CF (Chunk Flag): 1 bit ﬁeld which identiﬁes chunked payload.
. SR (Short Record): 1 bit ﬁeld which indicates an SR when set, it indicates that the
payload size is within the limits of payload ﬁelds, i.e., between 0 and 255 octets.
. IL (ID_Length): 1 bit ﬁeld when set shows that ID_LENGTH ﬁled is present in the
header of the record as a single octet.
. TNF (Type Name Format): 3 bit ﬁeld which shows the structure of TYPE ﬁeld.
NDEF speciﬁcation deﬁnes a list of values for this ﬁeld, e.g., 0 3 01 means NFC
Forum well-known type, 0 3 03 for absolute URI etc.
. TYPE_LENGTH: 8 bit unsigned integer deﬁnes the length of TYPE ﬁled in number
of octets.
. ID_LENGTH: 8 bit unsigned integer which speciﬁes the length in octets for ID ﬁeld.
. PAYLOAD_LENGTH: unsigned integer that indicates the length of PAYLOAD
ﬁeld in octets. If SR ﬂag is set then this ﬁled is set to 1 octet (8 bits) but if SR ﬂag
is not set then this ﬁeld is set to 4 octets (32 bits).
. TYPE: identiﬁes the type of payload and must follow the format deﬁned by the
value set in TNF ﬁeld.
. ID: contains an identiﬁer in the form of a URI reference which can absolute or
relative.
NDEF speciﬁcation leaves security and internationalization up to implementations. Since
the speciﬁcation supports deﬁnition of data types it is up to the application to consider the
implications of accepting different data types.
21.2.2.2
NFC Record Type Deﬁnition
The NDEF speciﬁcation discussed earlier deﬁnes a common data format for NFC Forum
devices but it does not deﬁne any record types in detail. Different record types are deﬁned
in separate speciﬁcations. The RTD speciﬁcation provides guidelines for the speciﬁcation of
well-known types for inclusion in NDEF messages being exchanged. Each NDEF record
MB
ME
CF
SR
Type length
Pay load length (3)
Pay load length (2)
Pay load length (1)
Pay load length (0)
ID length
Type
ID
Payload
IL
TNF
FIGURE 21.4
Structure of an NDEF record. (From NFC Forum, NFC Data
Exchange Format (NDEF) Technical Speciﬁcation NDEF 1.0,
NFCForum-TS-NDEF_1.0, 24th July 2006.)
RFID and NFC on Mobile Phones
379

contains a record type string which holds the name of the record type referred to as Record
Type Name (RTN). RTNs can be speciﬁed in several different ways, these can be MIME
types, URIs or NFC Forum well-known type names etc.
21.2.2.2.1
NFC Forum Well-Known Type
Well-known type is designed to create primitives for certain common types. It is mainly
used when there is no equivalent URI or MIME type available for a certain payload. It is
identiﬁed within an NDEF message by setting the TNF ﬁeld of a record to 0 3 01. A well-
known type is a URN with a namespace identiﬁer (NID) ‘‘nfc.’’ There are two kinds of
NFC Forum well-known types; NFC Forum global type and NFC Forum local type. The
earlier is solely managed by NFC Forum; other parties are not allowed to deﬁne them. The
later is available for use within the perspective of another record.
21.2.2.2.2
NFC Forum External Type
This is meant for the organizations who wish to assign a name space to be used for their
own purposes. External type is similar to well-known type; however, NSS part is put into
another namespace, i.e., ‘‘ext.’’ The external type must be formed by taking the domain
name of the organization issuing the external type.
21.2.2.3
NFC Text Record Type Deﬁnition
As the name suggests Text Record Type deﬁnes an NFC well-known type for plain text [4].
It has been created as plain text ﬁeld which can be used on its own as a solitary record in an
NDEF message or in combination with another record type to provide extra description for
the content. The speciﬁcation does raise some security concerns for this record type. These
are mainly due to the actual nature of this particular record type. For instance the text on a
tag can be over written and the user can be tricked into doing something else than actually
desired. To avoid this, the speciﬁcation recommends the usage of this record type to be for
information purposes only.
21.2.2.4
NFC Forum URI Record Type Deﬁnition
NFC URI Record Type Deﬁnition [5] is used to specify a record to be used with NDEF to
retrieve a URI stored in an NFC-forum compliant tag. This speciﬁcation provides a means
to store URIs inside other NFC elements such as Smart Poster [6]. The speciation deﬁnes
URI service with data model and speciﬁes simple Smart Poster examples. Smart Poster
RTD can be considered as an extension to URI RTD. URI is NFC well-known type and is
represented as U (0 3 55). Figure 21.5 shows the structure of a URI record [5].
The URI identiﬁer codes are available in the speciﬁcation, some examples of which are
0 3 04 for https:== and 0 3 03 for http:== etc. If the URI identiﬁer is set as 0 3 04 and the URI
ﬁled value is www.mobileradicals.com then the communicating device will receive the
URI as https:==www.mobileradicals.com. Using Figure 21.6 let us see how a URI will be
stored in the record structure provided previously.
Name
ID Code
0
1 Byte
N
1
URI
Offset
Size
Value
URI ID Code
UTF-8 String
Description
ID code of URI
URI
FIGURE 21.5
Structure of URI Record.
380
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

This ﬁgure shows a valid URI record type for URL http:==www.mobileradicals.com. The
NDEF record in this table shows that it is an SR. TNF is NFC well-known type, and since
we are not going to use multiple records within this NDEF message so MB and ME have
been set in the same record. This is followed by length of record and payload, respectively.
Then we declare the record type which is NFC well-known type URI followed by the
identiﬁer for URI. Finally we include the string for the URI.
21.2.2.5
NFC Smart Poster Record Type Deﬁnition
The Smart Poster record type [5] is an NFC forum well-known record type (well-known
type Sp). URI RTD deﬁnes a way to store and communicate URIs but there is no function-
ality to add metadata to those URIs. Smart Poster provides a way to add this meta data to
the URIs, for example, consider a poster advertising a new console game, by adding an
NFC tag with Smart Poster record we can transform this simple object into a smart object.
When users touch the poster with their mobile device (phone or PDA) they will be
provided with URI to the advert for the game to be seen on their device along with
some text based information for this clip, this information can be the size of clip, total
running time, where to buy the game, promotional offers, etc.
Smart Posters are in fact one the key use cases of NFC and is often seen in one way or the
other in different documents about NFC, press releases etc. Smart Poster records can also
contain certain actions embedded in them as part of the record which can trigger actions on
the user device, e.g., launch browser to access the URI etc. Smart Poster payload is an NDEF
message which can consist of multiple NDEF records (SR ¼ 0). Depending upon the content
being stored the Smart Poster can have none, one, or more of the following components.
21.2.2.5.1
Title Record
This is an optional record representing the service. This record can be used more than once
if the Smart Poster is required to support different languages but it is critical not to make
duplicate entries for languages being included in the record. This record is an instance of
Text RTD.
Offset
0
0  D1
0  01
0  01
0  6D
0  6D
0  6f
0 6f
0 62 0 69 0 6C
0  65 0  72 0 61 0 64 0 69
0 63 0  61
0  63
0 6C 0 73 0 2E
0  13
0  55
1
2
3
4
5
Content
Description
Length of record type
Size of payload
URI Identifier (http://www.)
String “mobileradicals.com” in
UTF 8
NFC well-known record type
URI (U)
SR = 1, TNF = 001, MB = 1,
ME=1
FIGURE 21.6
Example URL as URI record type.
RFID and NFC on Mobile Phones
381

21.2.2.5.2
URI Record
Since Smart Poster record provides an extension to URI record by adding metadata for the
URI, it forms the core of the Smart Poster record and must not be repeated (one URI per
smart poster record).
21.2.2.5.3
Action Record
This record is optional and can be used to trigger actions for the URI record, e.g., action can
be to launch the browser or simply save the URI as a bookmark for later on. Although this
record is optional but not including it can leave the handling of URI to the device and that
can result in a different user experience from device to device. It is a good practice to
include this record so that appropriate application can be launched to handle the URI.
21.2.2.5.4
Icon Record
This record is optional and can be used to hold one or more MIME type image records so
that the device reading the Smart Poster record can include one of those images (depending
upon its capabilities) in the URI display.
21.2.2.5.5
Size Record
This record is optional as well and can be used to indicate the size of the content. This can
be especially helpful to decide in advance if a device has lesser capabilities to handle that
particular object. Using a good combination of size and type records the mobile device can
decide whether it can handle the object being referenced or not.
21.2.2.5.6
Type Record
This record is used to declare the type of the external object being referenced through the
URI provided in the URI record. This record is optional and as mentioned earlier when
used in combination with size record can help determine if the mobile device is able to
handle this external object or not.
21.2.3
Overview of JSR-257
The Contactless Communication API, or JSR-257 [7], allows applications to access infor-
mation on contactless targets, such as RFID tags and visual codes such as QR codes and
sema codes [8]. The 2D barcodes are similar to RFID tags in that they contain data often in
the form of a URL. However, they hold much smaller amounts of information than the
newer RFID tags and they are generally slower and more difﬁcult to read [9].
The primary objective of JSR-257 is to provide easy access to various contactless targets
and transfer information to or from them. Before we provide details of programming
RFID=NFC applications we shall ﬁrst consider the mandatory and optional parts of the
API, which are divided into ﬁve packages as shown in Figure 21.7 [7].
Only javax.microedition.contactless is the mandatory package while the rest
are optional and can therefore be left unimplemented. A reference implementation must
provide a list of target types it supports and it is this list of targets that dictates the
packages that must be implemented. If a target type is listed in supported target types
an implementation must be provided. All the targets supported by this API implementa-
tion are deﬁned in the TargetType class. To aid understanding shall brieﬂy consider the
functionality provided by each package.
Javax.microedition.contactless: This package provides functionality com-
mon to all contactless targets supported by this API. The DiscoveryManager class sits
on top of this API and is the starting point of contactless communication. In order for an
382
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

application to receive notiﬁcations about targets in close vicinity an application must
obtain an instance of the DiscoveryManager class which in return provides the notiﬁc-
ations to application about contactless targets. An application can then use subpackages to
communicate with different targets depending upon their type. Connections to contactless
targets are built on top of Generic Connection Framework (GCF). Each target deﬁnes a new
protocol to GCF, although only the visual code protocol is visible and all RFID related
protocols are hidden due to the nature of communication involved.
The TargetListener interface provides notiﬁcations back to DiscoveryManager
instance once a target is discovered by the device hardware. In essence a Java Virtual
Machine (JVM) must provide a TargetListener for each TargetType obtained by
calling getSupportedTargetTypes () function of DiscoveryManager class. Only
one TargetListener can be registered at a time as RFID hardware can only handle one
physical connection and failing to do so will result in a registration failure and an exception
will be thrown.
Class TargetType provides all the contactless targets supported by the API while
the TargetProperties interface provides the properties common to all supported
contactless targets. Since the API can support card emulation mode, the interface
TransactionListener provides information to the application relating activity
between secure elements on the device and an external reader.
Discoverymanager 1
«interface »
Target listener 1
«interface»
Target properties 1
«interface»
Visual tag connection 5
«interface»
Image properties 5
«interface»
Plain tag connection 3
«interface»
«interface»
ISO14443 connection 4
Package legend
1
2
3
4
5
NDEF tag connection 2
Symbology manager 5
NDEF record 2
NDEF message 2
NDEF record type 2
javax.microedition.io.Connection
Target type 1
«interface»
Transaction listener 1
«interface»
NDEF record listener 1 
javax.microedition.contactless
javax.microedition.contactless.ndef
javax.microedition.contactless.rf
javax.microedition.contactless.sc
javax.microedition.contactless.visua
FIGURE 21.7
Overview of JSR 257 Reference Speciﬁcation.
RFID and NFC on Mobile Phones
383

Javax.microedition.contactless.ndef: NDEF records have been deﬁned by
the NFC Forum to exchange data between two NFC devices or an NFC device and a tag.
Since these records contain type, type format, identiﬁer, and payload, a connection can be
established with any physical target that supports the NDEF data format. To utilize this
feature the application must register with an NDEF Listener to receive notiﬁcations about
tags, or devices, detected. The data from the tag is passed on to the applications registered
to receive NDEF notiﬁcations.
NDEFMessage class represents messages which can consist of a number of NDEF
records. This class provides necessary functionality to manipulate these records; i.e., add,
delete, or update data payload within the records in the message. Each individual record
within the message is represented by the NDEFRecord class stored in a byte array. Class
NDEFRecordType stores the name and format of the record type. Record types are stored
as constants within the class and must abide by the rules of NFC Forum RTDs and RFCs
for example, MIME types, URL, etc. While other classes handle deﬁnition and storage of
NDEF messages the NDEFTagConnection interface provides the basic connection for
exchanging this NDEF data between NFC devices or NFC tag. This interface does not
concern itself with physical type of the contactless target; it simply reads and writes the
data. The protocol to do achieve this read and write process is extended from GCF.
Javax.microedition.contactless.rf:
Although
this
API
implementation
aims to use NDEF records as standard, it also provides access to physical RF targets that
do not support NDEF. This package contains one interface, PlainTagConnection,
which encloses functionality to detect RFID tags. This is done to enable comprehensive
support for various types of RFID tags since it would be undesirable to have an API
to support all different types of tags.
Javax.microedition.contactless.sc: This package is responsible for commu-
nication with external smart cards. Although JSR-177 covers communication with smart
cards, through an APDU connection, JSR-257 deﬁnes an ISO14443 connection interface to
access smart cards. Unlike an APDU connection, an ISO4443 connection can read both
resident and external smart cards and provide access at a much lower level.
Javax.microedition.contactless.visual: This package provides support for
visual tag targets which are detected as contactless targets. This package contains classes
and interfaces to read information stored on the visual codes.
21.2.4
Nokia NFC & RFID SDK
Although Nokia were the ﬁrst to launch the phones equipped with RFID=NFC readers and
reference implementation for JSR-257 is available there 6131 NFC will be the ﬁrst mobile
phone on the market that support it. However, the Nokia NFC & RFID API can be used
under commercial license to develop MIDlets that utilize Nokia NFC shells or express on
RFID shells on the 5140 and 3320 phones. Nokia provides an SDK to develop and test the
MIDlets. This SDK consists of the following components:
. Nokia NFC & RFID API: enables developers to create MIDlets able to connect to
NFC or RFID shells.
. LI Client API: enables MIDlets to employ the LI Server, which is also used in
Nokia’s Field Force Solution. The LI Server is web based and not only supports
reporting, but also manages users, mobile phones, tags, and events. It can
communicate with a MIDlet using HTTPS over GPRS or via SMS.
. Nokia NFC & RFID Cover Emulator: enables development on a PC. It emulates tag
touch and can not only emulate both NFC and RFID shells but can also be used to
manage and store tags to provide a thorough test and development environment.
384
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

21.2.5
Using Nokia NFC & RFID API
Class ContactlessConnection sits on the top of this API and provides a connection to NFC
or RFID shell and InterfaceFeature represents all the capabilities and functionalities of
this underlying hardware. Target class deﬁnes physical target types supported by each shell.
To receive notiﬁcations about contactless targets a registration is required with a con-
tactless listener which provides information about contactless events. Contactless events
can also be registered with the MIDlet push registry which means that the applications can
be auto launched once a certain contactless event occurs, e.g., scanning a tag, etc.
There are certain considerations that need to be taken into account when programming
NFC=RFID applications. Because of the nature of the communication taking place it is
always a good programming practice to have the listener registered with a separate thread
so that the user interface stays responsive. If authentication of the data being read from the
tag is to be done from a server, that information should be passed on to the network
handler, which should operate under a separate thread. This multithreading is important
when programming applications or games such as those discussed in Section 2.
Since all the information about the contactless targets is reported by the listener as events,
it is of utmost importance that the application must handle all the events that may arise
in. Further, our use case examples will show informative feedback must be given to the user,
through visual alerts, vibration and sounds, relating to the contactless event taking place.
21.3
Applications of RFID=NFC on Mobile Phones
To ascertain user experience of RFID=NFC we implemented two different mixed reality
games which are games that link the physical and digital worlds to create new experiences.
The types of games will often incorporate knowledge of their physical location and
landscape, and then provides players with the ability to interact with both real and virtual
objects within the physical and digital worlds. These games can incorporate some, or all, of
these elements using a rich variety of technologies and are thus an ideal platform for
evaluating user experience. In the following sections we will brieﬂy describe the games in
questions and the subsequent user experience.
21.3.1
PAC-LAN
PAC-LAN is a version of the video game PACMAN in which human players play the
game on a maze based around the Alexandra Park accommodation complex at Lancaster
University [9]. One player who takes the role of the main PAC-LAN character collects
game pills (using a Nokia 5140 mobile phone equipped with a Nokia Xpress-ony RFID
reader shell), which are in the form of yellow plastic discs ﬁtted with stick-on RFID tags
placed around the maze as shown in Figure 21.8. The discs are a direct physical manifest-
ation of the virtual game pills on the mobile screen and are placed at the real location
corresponding to the virtual maze.
Four other players take the role of the Ghosts who attempt to hunt down the PAC-LAN
player. The game uses a Java 2 Platform Micro Edition (J2ME) application, running on the
mobile phone is connected to a central server using a General Packet Radio Service (GPRS)
connection. The server relays to the PAC-LAN character his=her current position along with
position of all Ghosts based on the pills collected. The game pills are used by the Ghosts, not
to gain points, but to obtain the PAC-LAN characters last known position and to reset their
kill timer, which must be enabled to allow them to kill PAC-LAN. In this way the Ghosts
RFID and NFC on Mobile Phones
385

must regularly interact with the server, which is then able to relay their position to the PAC-
LAN. PAC-LAN sees a display with his own position highlighted by a red square around his
animated icon while the Ghosts see both a white square highlighting their animated icon and
red ﬂashing square around PAC-LAN. These character highlights were added after pretrials
revealed players wanted a quicker way of identifying the most important information. The
Ghosts can kill the PAC-LAN character by detecting him=her via an RFID tag ﬁtted on their
costume (as shown in Figure 21.9), assuming their kill timer has not run-out.
Once PAC-LAN is killed the game is over and the points for the game are calculated in
the form of game pills collected and time taken to do so (Figure 21.10). When PAC-LAN
eats one of the red power pills, indicated by all ghost icons turning white on the screen,
he=she is then able to kill the Ghosts, and thus gain extra points, using the same RFID
FIGURE 21.8
Montage of PAC-LAN Trials.
FIGURE 21.9
PAC-LAN kill tags.
386
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

detection process. Dead Ghosts must return to the central point of the game maze where
they can be reactivated into the game. Figure 21.4 shows a number of typical screens the
PAC-LAN character will experience throughout the game.
The scoring in the game is simple where the PAC-LAN character gets, 50 points for a
normal pill, 150 points for a power pill, 1000 points for collecting all the pills, and 500
points for a Ghost kill. The Ghosts get 30 points per pill (this is linked to the length of the
kill timer) and 1000 points for killing PAC-LAN. All players lose 1 point per second to
ensure they keep tagging.
21.3.2
MobHunt
In terms of operation Mobile Treasure Hunt (MobHunt) utilizes the same combination of
mobile application connecting to a server over GPRS as for PAC-LAN. However, it differs
from the previous system in that it was designed for ﬂexibility so that new treasure hunts,
in new or existing locations, can be created quickly and easily utilizing a simple mobile
application and online Web site and utilized Nokia 5140i phones with NFC shells.
There are two mobile clients for MobHunt, one is the basic user client and the other is an
administrator client which allows for new MobHunt to be created dynamically in a real
world scenario.
The MobHunt user client is a very simple application allowing the user to login before
instigating their authentication with the web server. Initially we implemented a standard
name and password login solution but decided to simplify the process for the user by
providing a unique membership card, as shown in Figure 21.11, that could be kept in a
wallet or purse that the user simply touches to their phone to initiate login. This proved to
be a much more elegant solution and considerably easier for the user given the restrictions
of the mobile phone keypad as an interface [10].
FIGURE 21.10
PAC-LAN Phone UI.
RFID and NFC on Mobile Phones
387

Once the user is logged into the game they simply tag the ﬁrst RFID tag of the treasure
hunt to start the game. A visual place marker was used to make locations or objects used
within a game easily visible to players as shown in Figure 21.8. The application also allows
the users to browse through the clues as they are collected, this is because initial trials
showed users often sought to reconﬁrm their earlier decisions if they got stuck at some
point within the game.
The mobile administrator client allows the creation of MobHunts in the ﬁeld by scanning
tag and entering a description. This information can be subsequently be altered or
amended on the web but we felt it would be beneﬁcial to able to place some tags while
surveying a site for likely objects or places to include in a game. Figure 21.12 provides some
example screen shots for both the administrator and user mobile clients, respectively.
21.3.3
User Experience
The data for PAC-LAN was from eight games played by forty ﬁve different players (ﬁve
per game) and was taken after their ﬁrst experience of the game. The players were students
FIGURE 21.11
MobHunt Login=membership card and
site marker.
FIGURE 21.12
MobHunt User Interface.
388
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

from Lancaster University who answered an advert distributed via the University email
system. The player groups were selected by the research team and care was taken to select
groups from the various faculties across the campus to ensure which did not have a
technophile biased sample. Of these forty ﬁve players, seven were female and the players
were aged between 18 and 24 except six males aged between 25 and 35.
A version of MobHunt was created as tour around the Infolab21 building at Lancaster
University and unlike the previous two games was designed to be played indoors rather
than outside. The game itself was very simple and primarily provides a tour around the
building and its facilities as shown in Figure 21.13 [2].
The game was played by 12 people within Infolab21 and was made up of both Univer-
sity staff and employees from companies within the Infolab21 incubator unit. The ages
ranged between 22 and 44 and there were eight males and four women none of whom had
any prior exposure to NFC phones.
In terms of learning to use the phone with the tags this proved to be remarkably easy and
a very quick demonstration and explanation was all that players required. Interestingly
unlike previous research [11] where users expressed concern about the social acceptability
of touching tags in public places even the University campus where the trial took place,
none of the users in our trials expressed this worry even though they were all conducted in
environments open to the general public. When we discussed this further with some of the
users they felt that in many ways creating questions in the mind of non players, who were
not aware that users were playing a game, added to the sense of fun.
The users found the objects very useful compared with just placing an RFID tag at a
location as they found it much easier to see and felt it added to the immersion within the
game play.
One of the other aspects we experimented with was related to giving the user feedback
after they have successfully read or written from or to a tag. For PAC-LAN we initially
created version that had either visual feedback, through a pop-up note, or audio feedback,
by playing a short tune. The audio feedback was unanimously preferred as players were
often running at speed and the audio feedback was perceived much less intrusive on the
game and harder to miss.
Overall the overwhelming user experience across all of the games was that the simple
touch interface was very easy to use and as one player put it
‘‘There is something intuitive about simply touching the object you want to connect
with.’’
FIGURE 21.13
Infolab21 MobHunt.
RFID and NFC on Mobile Phones
389

Further the vast majority of the players expressed a willingness to use and RFID=NFC
enabled mobile phone to access other services which is encouraging for the proponents of
this technology.
21.4
Conclusions
The use of mobile phones equipped with RFID=NFC not only creates a great method for
mobile payments and data distribution but it also allows these experiences to be extended
down to object level and they help create Mark Weiser’s seminal vision of future techno-
logical ubiquity—one in which the increasing availability of processing power would be
accompanied by its decreasing visibility, the so-called internet of things.
Further the traditional phone interface is generally too cumbersome for anything beyond
dialing numbers and the simple act of touching an object to gain access to information and
services is both simple and intuitive for the majority of users.
21.5
Acknowledgments
The authors acknowledge the support of Nokia for the provision of phones, software, and
Nokia Forum Pro access to the Mobile Radicals Re-search Group at Lancaster University
for the development of the projects featured in this chapter.
References
1. ECMA, Near Field Communication: White Paper, 2004. Ecma=TC32-TG19=2004=1.
2. Coulton, P., Rashid, O., and Bamford, W., Experiencing ‘touch’ in mobile mixed reality games,
Proceedings of The Fourth Annual International Conference in Computer Game Design and Technology,
15–16 November 2006, Liverpool, pp. 68–75. ISBN 1-9025-6014-0.
3. NFC Forum, NFC Data Exchange Format (NDEF) Technical Speciﬁcation NDEF 1.0, NFCForum-
TS-NDEF_1.0, 24th July 2006.
4. NFC Forum, Text Record Type Deﬁnition Technical Speciﬁcation RTD-Text 1.0, NFCForum-
TS-RTD_Text_1.0, 24th July 2006.
5. NFC Forum, URI Record Type Deﬁnition Technical Speciﬁcation RTD-URI 1.0, NFCForum-
TS-RTD_URI_1.0, 24th July 2006.
6. NFC Forum, Smart Poster Record Type Deﬁnition Technical Speciﬁcation SPR 1.1, NFCForum-
SmartPoster_RTD_1.0, 24th July 2006.
7. JSR 257 Expert Group, Contactless Communication API JSR 257, Version 1.0, Final Release 17th
October 2006.
8. Rashid, O., Mullins, I., Coulton, P., and Edwards, R., Extending cyberspace: Location based
games using cellular phones, ACM Computers in Entertainment, 4(1), 1–18, 2006.
9. Rashid, O., Bamford, W., Coulton, P., Edwards, R., and Scheibel, J., PAC-LAN: Mixed reality
gaming with RFID enabled mobile phones, ACM Computers in Entertainment, 4(4), 1–17, 2006.
10. Coulton, P., Rashid, O., Edwards, R., and Thompson, R., Creating entertainment applications for
cellular phones, ACM Computers in Entertainment, 3(3), 1–12, 2005.
11. Riekki, J., Salminen, T., and Alakärppä, I., Requesting pervasive services by touching RFID tags,
IEEE Pervasive Computing, 5(1), 40–46, 2006.
390
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

22
Applying RFID Techniques for the Next-Generation
Automotive Services
Peter Harliman, Joon Goo Lee, Kyong Jin Jo, and Seon Wook Kim
CONTENTS
22.1
Introduction...................................................................................................................... 391
22.2
Background of RFID Services ........................................................................................ 394
22.3
Current Automotive Services......................................................................................... 397
22.4
Innovative Ideas for Automotive RFID Applications ................................................ 399
22.4.1 Individual Authority.......................................................................................... 399
22.4.2 Customizing a Vehicle for Multiple Drivers................................................... 401
22.4.3 Automatic Vehicle Management ...................................................................... 402
22.4.4 Advertising with RFID Tags............................................................................. 404
22.4.5 Advanced Road Information System............................................................... 405
22.5
Architecture for Automotive RFID Systems................................................................ 406
22.5.1 Car Networking Systems................................................................................... 407
22.5.2 Modern Telematics Devices .............................................................................. 408
22.5.3 Proposed Architecture for an Automotive RFID System ............................. 408
22.6
Experimental Design: TalusRFID .................................................................................. 410
22.7
Conclusion ........................................................................................................................ 413
Acknowledgment ....................................................................................................................... 414
References.................................................................................................................................... 414
22.1
Introduction
RFID technology has been used and developed for more than 50 years, ﬁrst by Harry
Stockman in 1948 [1], and its applications have been commonly used around us. Instead of
the term RFID, we are popularly using the term wireless applications in their names. Due
to this reason, RFID remains unpopular despite its long history. Today most cars are
equipped with a remote control to open and lock a door. In Korea, T-Money [2] cards
are used for public transportation payments. Although there is no RFID term in their
names, both a car remote control and T-Money are in the domain of RFID applications.
RFID technology has become more and more widely used in real-world applications even
without people realizing it.
391

RFID tags are often envisioned as a replacement for a barcode technology in the future.
The reason to this is that RFID has many advantages over barcodes, such as a sight angle, a
distance, a collision, a tag size, etc. [3]. More detailed comparisons between RFID and
barcodes are shown in Table 22.1.
Despite its numerous technological advantages over barcodes, the development of
RFID technology did not grow as fast as it was expected, especially before the twenty-
ﬁrst century because of a high cost, lack of standards, privacy issues, lack of applications,
etc. [4]:
1. Cost: RFID readers and tags use more advanced technology than barcode scanners
and labels do, and it incurs a cost problem. Table 22.2 compares the prices for both
technologies.
2. Lack of Standards: Around 10–20 years ago, when RFID applications began to be
used in real-world applications, most developers used their own versions of RFID
systems. It resulted in lack of standards, which prevented the RFID markets from
growing fast.
3. Privacy Issues: Privacy is one major issue in RFID deployment. In RFID com-
munication, unlike that of barcode, there is a wide gap in space between a reader
and a tag. Some people think that this wide gap can be very vulnerable to data
intruders. In February 2005, a team of researchers at Johns Hopkins University
Information Security Institute and RSA Laboratories demonstrated that they could
capture data from Texas Instruments RFID systems [5]. This issue forced RFID
developers to reconsider their design, so it could guarantee enough safety to
consumers.
TABLE 22.1
RFID and Barcode Comparison
System Parameters
Barcode
RFID
Data quantity (bytes)
1–100
16–64 k
Data density
Low
Very high
Machine readability
Good
Good
People readability
Limited
Impossible
Inﬂuence of dirt=dampness
Very high
No inﬂuence
Inﬂuence of covering
Total failure
Moderate
Data carrier cost
Very low
Medium
Reading electronic cost
Low
Medium
Unauthorized copying=modiﬁcation
Slight
Almost impossible
Multiple reading
No
Yes
Reading speed
Low
Very fast
Maximum reading distance
50 cm
6 m
Source:
From CAEN RFID, About RFID, http:==www.caen.it=rﬁd=about_rﬁd.php.
TABLE 22.2
Price Comparisons between RFID and Barcodes
Barcode
RFID
Reader
U.S. $100–300
U.S. $700–2000
Passive Tag
0–3 cent
50–100 cent
Active Tag
—
U.S. $10–100
392
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

4. Lack of Applications: Currently, there are only a limited number of RFID applica-
tions that are commercially available. This makes it very difﬁcult for RFID to
attract various types of consumers.
Some of those problems have been resolved during the twenty-ﬁrst century. It has been
predicted that the cost of RFID readers and tags will drop quite signiﬁcantly in the coming
years, due to development of semiconductor technology and mass productions, as shown in
Figure 22.1. In 2006, one of the major protocols, EPC Gen2, has been already implemented by
many commercial RFID reader and tag vendors, and it was adapted as ISO 18000-6 Type C
standard [6]. Furthermore, current protocols, especially Gen2, are much safer than the
previous ones, which had issues with illegal data capturing. For example, the protocol
includes an option to kill a tag. After a tag is killed by a user, the tag will not respond to a
reader anymore. This approach alleviates the concern about privacy.
We think that the slow growth problem of RFID comes from the initial concept to
introduce the RFID technology as a barcode substitute. Due to this initial purpose, RFID
developments always have been driven toward existing barcode applications. Barcode
applications generally can be used only in a static environment, for example, by a cashier.
In contrast, RFID technology can be used in a dynamic environment, because of its reading
distance and reading speed. However, since RFID has so far only been used by the same
static environment, we have failed to get the full advantage from RFID technology.
Meanwhile, replacing barcode technology requires global effort to change many under-
lying systems. For this reason, most vendors are not willing to risk replacing a barcode
system with RFID. One similar case with this RFID–barcode situation happened in
PC–calculator transition around 30–40 years ago, as shown in Figure 22.2. Compared
with calculators, PCs are much more powerful for calculations. But in order to be success-
ful in a market, PC makers found many other applications like database, games, etc., in
addition to calculations. If PCs were only used for calculation, there would be no chance
for them to grow through the market. We should not focus only on barcode’s existing
applications. Instead, we need to create new applications that obtain maximum beneﬁts
from RFID abilities.
In this chapter, we propose innovative ideas for these new applications, with more
emphasis on automotive applications. We brieﬂy review several RFID services in Section
22.2 and the currently existing automotive services in Section 22.3. We introduce innovative
ideas for the next-generation RFID automotive services in Section 22.4, and discuss an
architecture for the new services in Section 22.5. In Section 22.6 we introduce our prototyped
system, and ﬁnally conclude in Section 22.7.
10
0.1
1
10
100
1,000
2004
2006
2008
2011
2016
2018
100
1,000
10,000
Number sold yearly (millions)
Tag price (cents)
100,000
1,000,000
FIGURE 22.1
Tag’s
price
prediction.
(From
Peter
Harrop,
The
price-sensitivity
curve for RFID, http:==www.idtechex.
com=products=en=articles=00000488.
asp, 2006.)
Applying RFID Techniques for the Next-Generation Automotive Services
393

22.2
Background of RFID Services
Current RFID applications can be classiﬁed into several categories as follows:
1. Transportation. Most countries in the world have used RFID technology for a
payment method in public transportations. Figure 22.3a shows T-Money, an
RFID smart card that is used for paying transportation fares in Seoul, Korea.
2. Manufacturing Control. Some companies have applied RFID technology to track
inventories inside their factory. In the application, an RFID system is used intern-
ally only by each company. This means that each company can use its own RFID
standards without having concern about global standards. Hence, this application
is easier to implement than other kinds of RFID applications. For this reason, a
manufacturing control is one of the ﬁrst successful RFID implementations in real-
world applications.
Before 1970
1970 to now
(a)
Calculation
Multimedia
Database
Games
Office
application
Computer
Before 2000s
After 2000s?
???
???
???
???
Item tracking
(b)
RFID
FIGURE 22.2
Analogy between PC-calculator and RFID-barcode cases. (a) PC-calculator. (b) RFID-barcode.
394
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

(a)
(b)
FIGURE 22.3
Various RFID applications. (a) T-Money RFID card for transports payment. (From Korea Smart Card Co. Ltd.,
Seoul’s New Transportation System, http:==www.t-money.co.kr=jsp=newpub=oversea=english=stories=S_story.
jsp) (b) RFID tag planted under the skin at Baja Beach Club. (From Robyn Curnow, The price to pay for VIP
status, http:==edition.cnn.com=2004/TECH=10=05=spark.bajabeach=, 2004.)
(continued)
Applying RFID Techniques for the Next-Generation Automotive Services
395

3. People Management. Some companies and educational institutes have added RFID
technology to their systems for managing their members. For example, RFID
technology is commonly used to manage employee attendance in a company. In
1998, Malaysia became the ﬁrst country to issue biometric passports, which are
passports with RFID tags embedded inside [7]. Since that time, more than 20
countries followed to apply RFID technology in their passports. One disadvantage
in this category of application was that IDs can be manipulated by some people.
For example, in the case of employee attendance, an employee can easily lend
his=her ID card to other employees. For this reason, RFID applications in this
category cannot rely solely on RFID. Instead, they combine more than one identi-
ﬁcation technology inside them. For example, a biometric passport still has its
usual physical appearance and a barcode label, in order to preserve the validity of
its ID. Another way to overcome this problem is to treat humans like any other
item. Rather than embed the tag in a card, it can be inserted beneath the skin. Thus,
the validity of an ID is guaranteed because the tag cannot be switched. Baja Beach
Club discotheque in Barcelona, Spain, has already planted RFID tags inside its VIP
customers [8], as shown in Figure 22.3b. In this application, the RFID tag under a
customer’s skin is used for an automatic payment method inside the discotheque.
4. Automatic Payment Method in Stores. At present, a barcode technology is used in
many stores for identifying purchased items. By using RFID, people will not have
to pay for them at a counter anymore. Instead, they just need to pass an RFID
reader and the payment will be automatically charged online. Gillette moved one
step ahead by adding RFID tags inside their Mach 3 Turbo razor blade packaging
[9,10], as shown in Figure 22.3c.
(c)
Tag
FIGURE 22.3 (continued)
(c) Gillette Mach 3 embedded with RFID tag in its case. (From Claudia H. Deutsch and Barnaby J. Feder, A radio
chip in every consumer product, http:==www.uazuay.edu.ec=bibliotecas=cibercultura=A%20Radio%20Chip%20in
%20Every%20Consumer%20Product.htm, 2003.)
396
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

22.3
Current Automotive Services
In Section 22.1, we explained that in order for RFID to grow faster, new applications are
required. The automotive industry is one of the best development targets for an RFID
application.
The automotive world has changed greatly from the way it used to be 10–20 years ago.
Surprisingly, the most signiﬁcant development is not happening in mechanical parts, but
in electronic parts [11]. From Figure 22.4, it can be seen that the proportion of electronics
cost inside a car has been increasing constantly, and will be increasing even more in the
next 10 years. It has been estimated that it will rise to US$36.8 billion in 2005 and will
reach US$52.1 billion by 2010 [12]. Some of these electronic parts are used for nonuser-
oriented applications (e.g., power train and chassis), but most of them are used for user-
oriented applications. For example, cars are often equipped with GPS services, sophisti-
cated in-car multimedia systems and seating, various kinds of sensors, etc. In other
words, there have been huge developments in automotive electronics toward user-
oriented services.
There are various user-oriented services that can be found inside a modern car, as shown
in Figure 22.5, and some are detailed as follows:
1. GPS (global positioning system), was developed by the U.S. Department of
Defense, and came into use in 1993 [13]. Nowadays, GPS has been used around
the world for many kinds of different applications. The most popular usage is in
automotive navigation. Normally, such a GPS device has user-friendly controls
and outputs and displays the car’s current position on a map. Relying on this
GPS navigation, other extended applications have also been developed, such as
online road guide systems, emergency rescue systems, and car-tracking services.
2. DSRC (dedicated short range communication) is considered a subset of the RFID
technology, since it also uses a radio frequency to communicate [14]. Different
from GPS and RFID, DSRC was speciﬁcally designed for automotive communica-
tion. DSRC technology is known to be fast, stable, and cheap. The DSRC system
basically consists of two components, RSE (roadside equipment) and OBE (on
board equipment). The RSE communicates and provides useful information
1978
1970
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
1980
1990
2000
2010
2020
1986
1991
1995
1999
2002
2005
2010
Year
Cost incurred by electronics (%)
FIGURE 22.4
Proportion of electronics cost inside
a car.
Applying RFID Techniques for the Next-Generation Automotive Services
397

to the OBE. European countries, Japan, Korea, and the United States use the
DSRC system for electronic toll collection, which automatically charges a toll
payment as a car passes the RSE near a toll gate. This way, the toll gate queuing
delay could be avoided. Other applications include an intersection collision
avoidance, an emergency vehicle warning system, electronic parking payments,
and an in-vehicle signing. Currently, DSRC applications are still very limited
compared with GPS applications. However, due to its good performance and its
economic efﬁciency, DSRC is predicted to occupy a great role in modern and
future telematic services.
3. In-car Internet access. People are spending more time in their cars than ever before.
For this reason, future cars must provide an environment such that a driver
can process his=her own job inside a car. In other words, engineers need to
expand their concept of a car from a transportation method to a moving ofﬁce.
Some modern cars are already installed with a multimedia tool that can connect to
the Internet. This access will lend itself to infotainment (information þ entertain-
ment) services. One example of the related services is a multimedia player that can
play mp3 ﬁles, DVD, and DMB (digital multimedia broadcasting). In order to
connect to the Internet in a moving vehicle, a car uses WIFI access points, cellular
base stations, satellites, WiBro [15], or HSDPA [16]. Microsoft is developing a
new foundry system, which is called Car.Net [17], which enables drivers to use
the Internet in their vehicles. By using this system, drivers and passengers
can check their e-mails, enjoy various kinds of entertainment, and search for
stock market conditions simultaneously.
RFID technology could generate many new user-oriented automotive applications.
Some possible automotive RFID applications are shown in Table 22.3, and the following
section will discuss some of these ideas in detail.
FIGURE 22.5
User-oriented applications in a modern telematics device.
398
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

22.4
Innovative Ideas for Automotive RFID Applications
22.4.1
Individual Authority
A car key is one of the most essential components of a car. It is used as a main identiﬁcation
tool that allows a car user to turn on an engine (ignition), open=close a door, open a glove
compartment, open a car trunk, open a fuel tank, etc. One limitation in a car key system
comes from the fact that a car keyhole is unique. Each car keyhole can only recognize one
key, and each key can only be used in one keyhole. If a car is used by more than one driver,
the key may be duplicated to give a copy of the key to each user. However, the keyhole is
not able to recognize who a current driver is. Consider RFID readers and tags instead of
conventional keys and keyholes. An RFID reader can read all tags in its reading zone, and
check the validity of the tag’s ID. Thus, if we use an RFID tag as an identiﬁcation tool for a
car, we basically move the ID-checking process from a mechanical (like in a keyhole) to an
electronic method.
In modern cars, keys have been replaced by remote keyless systems in many functions.
More than 70% of currently manufactured cars come with an RKE (remote keyless
entry) system, which allows doors to be locked and unlocked without using a key [18].
Meanwhile, some luxurious cars, such as Toyota Prius, Cadillac STS, and Audi A8, are
also equipped with an RKI (remote keyless ignition) system, which allows car engines to
be turned on without using a key [19]. Instead of using a key, the RKE system uses an
electronic key fob. In order to open a door, a user just needs to press a button on the fob
within 10–20 m of the car. That typical range is possible since the fob communicates
with the transmitter inside the car by using an RF signal. In an RKI system, in case of an
ignition, a user just needs to press one button inside the car. However, due to security,
most current RKI systems require the presence of the fob inside the car. This technique
will prevent an engine from being started by unauthorized users. The car uses RF com-
munication to check whether the fob is in the car or not. The RF transceiver inside the
car will broadcast a signal, and if the fob is present, it will reply to the transceiver. It can
actually be seen that RKE and RKI systems can be considered as RFID applications, since
they use RF communication to check an ID.
Apart from the fact that RKE and RKI systems have more beneﬁts than conventional car
keys, there are still some issues that need to be discussed in these systems. For example,
current RKE and RKI systems can only work for a single ID. In the case of a car that is shared
by multiple users, all possible users need to have the same ID inside their fobs. Hence, the car
will not be able to distinguish who the current driver is, since they use the same ID.
TABLE 22.3
Key RFID In-Car Appliances
RFID Combined with
Provided Feature
Ignition control
Remote keyless ignition system
Car lock system
Remote keyless entry system
Seat and mirror setting
Automatic customizable seat and mirror setting
Speedometer, odometer, and ignition
Individual authority
Multimedia
Automatic proﬁled multimedia setting
Internet
Mobile advertising
Road information and multimedia
Advanced road information system
Applying RFID Techniques for the Next-Generation Automotive Services
399

In addition, the scope of current RKE and RKI systems is very limited. They only focus on
services for a door entrance and an ignition. In this application, we can say that RFID
technology has not been used effectively. For this reason, in this part, we propose one idea
to expand the RKE and RKI systems to a broader scope of applications.
Consider if an RFID reader is put inside a car, and some electronic fobs with RFID tags
are developed. Each of the fobs will have its own unique ID. Each possible car user will be
given one of these fobs. When a user takes the car, the RFID reader will communicate with
the user’s fob. As already mentioned, in current RKE and RKI systems, there is only one ID
that is recognized as an authorized user. Even if the fobs are duplicated, the IDs for each
fob are still the same, as shown in Table 22.4. In our proposed idea, each fob will have a
different ID, as shown in Table 22.5. Using these different sets of IDs, the car can recognize
an individual driver.
The next step is to use a user recognition ability of a car for creating new applications.
Since now the car is able to recognize a current driver, we could connect this user
recognition system with some hardware controllers inside the car. A simpliﬁed architec-
ture for this idea is shown in Figure 22.6. The RFID reader is connected to a gateway. In this
manner, the gateway is deﬁned as an embedded computer that acts as a center of
communication between the RFID reader and hardware controllers. This gateway is also
the part that implements the user recognition system. It will have some amount of memory
to hold a database for all users.
One possible application can be created by connecting a timer and an ignition controller
to the gateway. This way, each user will have his own time limit when he drives a car. If
the time limit expires, the driver will not be able to turn on the engine anymore. In this
idea, the user recognition system will be expanded to keep settings for each user, as shown
in Table 22.6. Some possible ﬁelds to be controlled are:
1. Distance. Each user has his own distance limitation. When a user drives a car more
than the distance limit, the car will not be able to run anymore. In order to
implement this application, the gateway is connected to a distance counter (an
odometer, for example).
TABLE 22.4
Database Example of Single ID without
a User Recognition Ability
Name
ID
User 1
10180604
User 2
10180604
User 3
10180604
TABLE 22.5
Database Example of Multiple IDs
with a User Recognition Ability
Name
ID
User 1
10180604
User 2
10216154
User 3
12301240
400
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

2. Time. Each driver has his own time limitation, beyond which the car will not be
able to run any farther. In order to apply this application, the gateway is connected
to a timer.
3. Speed. Each user has his own speed limitation. A user cannot drive the car faster
than his designated speed limit.
These approaches will have different kinds of beneﬁts. For private cars, a user can
limit authorities of other users. Parents who share a car with their children can give
a low authority access to them. This will restrict the children to limited boundaries. For
company cars, these approaches are also useful since their cars are occasionally used by
different drivers. In car rental industries, these approaches can be used to limit use of
rented cars.
22.4.2
Customizing a Vehicle for Multiple Drivers
We now expand the database from Table 22.6 to control more items. Here, the idea is not
focused on a user’s authority as in the previous idea. Instead, it focuses on any item inside
the car that can be set for a user’s preferences. The architecture for this idea is shown in
Figure 22.7.
One example of items to be controlled is car seats, which need to be set according to
user’s preferences. In conventional cars, the users need to set the seats manually. For a car
that is shared by multiple users, each user will need to set the seats whenever there is a
new driver or passenger. Some luxurious cars have already used a memory management
TABLE 22.6
Database Example of Multiple IDs with a Customizable Authority
Name
ID
Speed Limit
Duration Limit
Distance Limit
User 1
10180604
15
60
120
User 2
10216154
—
—
50
User 3
12301240
50
30
—
Sensor input
Output controller
Clock
Odometer
Speedometer
Engine
power
Speed
limiter
I/O port
Embedded
computer
Database
RFID
reader
I/O port
FIGURE 22.6
Individual authority architecture.
Applying RFID Techniques for the Next-Generation Automotive Services
401

for the car setting. For example, in the Saab 9–5 [20], seat controls have memory settings
for three different drivers, including side-view mirror settings. However, they still need to
choose among those three settings by pressing some buttons. In our idea, the users do not
need to do any manual setting. Similar to the previous idea, the RFID reader will
automatically recognize the user from his tag. The gateway then automatically sets the
seat according to this user’s preference. Other items that might be controlled by using this
technique are:
1. Mirror. Car mirror settings are very critical for safety. Since they are dependent on
driver’s height, different drivers will usually require different settings. By using our
RFID concept, the settings change automatically when a new driver takes a car.
2. Multimedia Player Setting. Drivers will likely want different radio channels and CD
player settings. Furthermore, if the car is equipped with in-car Internet access, they
also need different settings for Internet (web page, e-mail, etc). With RFID, all
settings will be changed automatically by the gateway.
3. Future Applications. One of the biggest advantages of using RFID is that it triggers
development of new applications. For instance, perfume vendors could develop
some kinds of car perfumes that have different aromas, depending on the user’s
preference. If there is a new user, the perfume will automatically switch its aroma
based on new user’s preference. It is also possible to develop complex in-car
lighting. Teenagers can choose varieties of colors for lighting, while general users
can choose conventional lighting.
22.4.3
Automatic Vehicle Management
The condition of car tires needs to be monitored and replaced periodically. Goodyear has
embedded RFID tags in their tires for NASCAR race use [21]. Goodyear is the exclusive
provider of race car tires for all NASCAR events, supplying about 200,000 tires to racers
annually. Normally, participants have to buy their own tires. However, it is not uncom-
mon for a team to use multiple sets of tires in a single race. Hence, the cost for tires could
not be affordable for many potential racers. NASCAR came to Goodyear seeking a
leasing alternative for drivers who are unable to afford the cost of buying tires for their
Output controller
Car-seat
setting
Mirror
position
Lighting
colors
Multimedia
setting
Embedded
computer
Database
RFID
reader
I/O port
FIGURE 22.7
Customizable setting architecture.
402
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

vehicles. Goodyear then came with an idea to use RFID tags for managing the leasing of
tires. Michelin went further than Goodyear by embedding tags in car tires for public use
and more general purposes [22]. We basically extend the RFID tire service from Goodyear
and Michelin by attaching tags to other parts of a car. Considering the fact that passive
RFID tags costs are low, they can be attached to hundreds of car parts, as illustrated in
Figure 22.8. Each tag should hold the part’s information. An RFID reader can read
information from a tag in milliseconds. Hence, the reader will have no difﬁculty in
periodically reading information from all tags.
Conceptually, we exploit the fact that an RFID tag has some amount of user memory
that can be written by an RFID reader. Although the memory size is not big, typically less
than 1024 bit, [23], it is enough to store a limited amount of information. One type
of information that can be stored in tags is a history timetable for the car engine oil,
which needs to be replaced periodically. Assuming that there is a tag attached to the
car’s oil tank, this tag can hold the projected time for oil replacement. An RFID reader,
controlled by a gateway inside the car, will read this information periodically and inform
the user when oil needs to be replaced.
In addition, tags will be connected with various kinds of sensors for car management.
Related applications include:
1. Identiﬁcation. Tags are used for identiﬁcation purposes, similar to conventional item
tracking.
2. Operating Conditions. Sensor devices are attached to tires. For example, a pressure
detector is attached to each tire in order to detect when the tires’ pressure exceeds a
limit. The tag is connected with this sensor device, so that the gateway can read the
pressure information through RF signals.
3. Vehicle Performance. A sensor for detecting road condition is attached to each tire.
The tag connected with this sensor device sends the information to the gateway.
The gateway will adjust car’s performance according to that road condition.
Hoods
Mirrors
(a)
(b)
(c)
Header and
nose
panels
Radiator
supports
Grilles
Bumpers
Radiators
Devise name
Devise name
Part number
Part number
Data type
Data type
Insurance
checking
Manufacturer X
Company z
Car service Y
Car service Y
Manufacturer X
Company z
Car service Y
Car service Y
Repair time
Repair time
Production time
Insurance
checking
Repair time
Repair time
Production time
Added by
Added by
Time added
Time
added
Front left door
Front left door
Front left door
Front left door
Front left door
Front left door
Front left door
Front left door
Doors
A/C condensers
Tailgates trunk
lids
Tail lights
Step
bumpers
xxxxx
xxxxx
xxxxx
xxxxx
xxxxx
xxxxx
xxxxx
xxxxx
xxxxx
xxxxx
xxxxx
xxxxx
xxxxx
xxxxx
xxxxx
xxxxx
FIGURE 22.8
Tags are attached to various car parts for an automatic vehicle management. (a) RFID tags attached to various car
parts. (b) Information such as historical time data is added to each tag’s memory. (c) Allowed person can
write=read the info from the tags for their purposes.
Applying RFID Techniques for the Next-Generation Automotive Services
403

22.4.4
Advertising with RFID Tags
Many people have said that a multimedia system will be an essential component in cars of
the future [24]. For this reason, we need to ﬁnd new ideas that apply to the future
automotive media system, which is predicted to be one of the best places for advertise-
ment. Hence, we present an idea to use RFID technology for advertisement inside cars.
Eric Schmidt, Google’s CEO, believes that when he is listening to a radio in his car,
an advertisement should personally address his needs [25]. For example, if a person
drives by a clothing store, a radio advertisement should remind him that he needs a pair
of pants and instruct him to turn left at the upcoming clothing store. For this reason,
Google has planned to target on GPS-based in-car personalized advertising in the near
future. In October 2006, Viacom Outdoor in London added GPS technology to a number
of public buses [26,27]. Each bus has a large digital LED advertising panel, as shown in
Figure 22.9. Different from regular LED advertising, here the advertisement depends on
the current location of the bus. This means we have a mobile advertising billboard.
Furthermore, this kind of a billboard is customizable, which means that we can change
the advertisement easily with little time and cost. In both of these cases, GPS is used to
track the location of buses, since it is the only currently available technology to track the
vehicle position.
The RFID system can be also used to track a vehicle’s position. We put some tags at
different roadside locations, and an RFID reader inside a bus reads the tag while in transit.
Using this approach, we would be able to run a similar advertisement as with GPS. The
difference from the GPS approach is that the location detection is done by putting tags in
correct positions.
Advertising media can be implemented using in-car multimedia systems. It could be a
monitor or a speaker, depending on the output form. Although some people might
be willing to listen to any advertising channel, the best way to put an advertisement is
by integrating it into some kind of entertainment. For example, the advertisement could be
FIGURE 22.9
Bus with GPS advertising. (From Dody Tsiantar, Getting on board, http:==www.time.com=time=magazine=
article=0,9171,901060424-1184037,00.html, 2006.)
404
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

integrated into some radio channels, so that it will play just like ordinary radio advertising.
The only difference is that the advertisement will be different for each listener, depending
on which location he currently is. Another method is through an Internet browser. In this
method, an advertisement will pop-up on a web page automatically when someone
browses the Internet inside a car. The types of advertisement depend on which location
the car currently is.
In addition to that, we can also implement a user ﬁltering method for advertisement.
In the current advertising method, a person will receive various kinds of advertisement. The
problem is that sometimes a person only wants to receive some speciﬁc advertisement ﬁelds.
In this RFID advertisement idea, each advertisement is treated as a single unit of data.
For this reason, a driver can select which advertisement ﬁelds he is willing to receive. When
his car is passing an advertisement tag, an RFID reader inside the car will check whether
the tag’s advertisement ﬁeld matches the user preferences. If it does not match,
the advertisement data will not be transmitted to the car.
Meanwhile, in order to implement the mobile advertisement source idea that was
mentioned before, a tag is attached to a car. This car will then become a mobile billboard.
If another car is located near enough to the advertising car, an RFID reader inside this car
will communicate with the tag to get the corresponding advertisement.
The architecture for RFID advertising is shown in Figure 22.10. After a tag’s ID is read by
a reader inside a car, the ID will be sent to an advertisement database center using the
Internet wireless access. Using that ID, the database center will search for a correct
multimedia advertisement and then send it to the car by using Internet wireless access.
Hence, in order to apply for this idea, we need a well-established in-car Internet infra-
structure. Although this might sound unreasonable for the current time, in-car Internet
infrastructures have been developed suddenly and recently. In the United States, in-car
Internet can be seen in some rental cars, although so far it has not been used by many
people [28]. Currently, this kind of service is only worthy for a business person who likes to
run his business from the car. However, a recent survey shows that the number of car
Internet users is increasing [29]. Furthermore, there are many options to get an Internet
connection inside a car (GPRS, EDGE, CDMA, WIFI) [30]. For this reason, we believe that
the well-established in-car Internet infrastructure, which is required for our idea, will be
available in the very near future.
22.4.5
Advanced Road Information System
Some current telematics services have already provided a road information system.
In this feature, while passing a road, a driver will be able to obtain information
RFID reader (inside the car)
RFID tag (on the road)
FIGURE 22.10
RFID advertising architecture.
Applying RFID Techniques for the Next-Generation Automotive Services
405

about the road, including speed limit and road conditions. One disadvantage of the
currently used service is that in order to get the road information, the user needs to
download and install it. If the road information is changing, the users will need to
resynchronize the information. For this reason, a GPS-based road information system is
not suitable for supplying such dynamic information as road conditions.
RFID can provide a better solution to implement this road information system. We name
this service ARIS (advanced road information system) with its architecture shown in
Figure 22.11. In the GPS approach, road information is read from a map data inside a
GPS tool (located inside a car). In our approach, the road information will be read from
a tag located on the road, assuming that all cars are installed with an RFID reader. In order
to change road data, we change the tag’s data. After the data has been updated, all cars
that pass that tag can read the updated road information. Another option is to combine
the existing GPS system with the RFID technology. Here, RFID tags are used as calibration
tools to correct GPS errors. This technique will further improve the accuracy of GPS
technology.
The main limitation for using RFID in this system is its limited data capacity. Compared
with GPS, the data that can be held is relatively small (typically less than 1024 bits).
However, this storage size is generally enough, considering two things. First, the amount
of information to be sent to the car is small. Second, we could use some protocols to further
compress data. Using this way, we could limit the required data to be transferred by
focusing only on the information, and leave the decoding process to the reader inside the
car. Furthermore, if in-car Internet service is available, a combination with Internet can be
used to get more information data. Similarly to RFID advertising, in this idea, the car will
read the tag as it runs at a relatively high speed.
22.5
Architecture for Automotive RFID Systems
In order to implement RFID systems with the currently existing automotive systems, the
knowledge about the current car networking and telematics systems is needed. Fortu-
nately, current car technologies have already provided ﬂexible network infrastructures,
such as CAN [31], ITS [32], and FlexRay [33]. For this reason, automotive RFID architecture
can be easily attached onto the current existing car network systems. In addition, we can
borrow some ideas from GPS systems, since GPS applications are built as separate add-on
options for a vehicle.
RFID reader (inside the car)
RFID tag (on the road)
Speed Limit: 80 mph
Accident rate: High
Road condition: Very wet
FIGURE 22.11
Advanced road information system architecture.
406
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

22.5.1
Car Networking Systems
A currently available car contains thousands of circuits, sensors, and other electrical
components, as shown in Figure 22.12. Around 30 years ago, communication among
those components was handled by point-to-point wire connections. Adding more combin-
ations inside the communication resulted in an enormous increment of wires. Adding
more components will increase the complexity even more. This complexity increment
would create damaging effects to the car itself, such as increasing its weight, weakening
its performance, and reducing its reliability. For a normal car, every extra 50 kg of wiring
will result in extra 100 W of power consumption; hence it will increase fuel consumption
by 0.2 L for each 100 km [34]. During the 1980s, centralized and distributed networks
began to replace this point-to-point communication method, which provided more simple
implementation [35].
Controller area network (CAN), which was developed in the 1980s, has been used
to connect vehicle sensors and safety systems. Unlike a conventional point-to-point
communication, CAN uses a central gateway that controls all communications among
car’s devices. Hence, this centralized networking system reduces wiring size, weight, and
cost compared with conventional point-to-point communications. Furthermore, CAN also
provides a standard serial bus that can be used to connect various kinds of devices.
This means any vendor can synchronize their devices so that they could be hooked into
CAN. This approach eliminated the portability problem that occurred in point-to-point
connections, and so increased the productivity of development. More than 100 million
CAN nodes were sold in 2000, and currently it is the most widely used vehicle network [34].
Vehicle networks in CAN are commonly classiﬁed based on SAE (Society of Automo-
tive Engineers) standards. SAE formally classiﬁes vehicle networks based on their bit
transfer rate, as shown in Table 22.7. This classiﬁcation relies on the fact that each
application will need a different requirement of data bandwidth. Using this classiﬁcation,
Headlight control for dynamic cornering
Alarm with inclination sensor
Send–receive module for immobilizer
Electric steering wheel heating
Electronic steering column lock
Central locking system
Crash sensor
Inclination sensor
Electronic fuel pump control method
Electronic fuel gage control
Sliding roof control
Rear spoiler control
Headlight leveling
Retractable hood ornament
Airbag off module
Servotronic control module
Illuminated entry system
Passenger presence detection
BabySmart
Convertible top control
Dual sliding roof
control
Tailgate lift
Micropower module
Multifunctional steering wheel
Steering wheel sensor and control for cornering light
FIGURE 22.12
Electronics complexity inside current cars. (From Helbako, Details that make cars better, http:==www.helbako.
de=helbako=noﬂash=sprachen=eng=produkte.htm, 2006. With permission.)
Applying RFID Techniques for the Next-Generation Automotive Services
407

an application that requires huge amount of data, such as multimedia applications, can
use a bigger data bus in its communication with a gateway. Meanwhile, another appli-
cation that does not require a huge amount of data can use a different data bus with
smaller capability than the previous bus.
Although CAN includes many kinds of devices inside a car, ITS (intelligent transporta-
tion system) is focusing on factors that are visible to consumers. Examples of these factors
are safety, transportation times, and fuel costs. In ITS, as in CAN, car networks are handled
by a central gateway that controls all communications among various car devices.
FlexRay is one of the newest automotive network communication protocols. It is still
under review for protocol speciﬁcations. According to its speciﬁcation, FlexRay will give
more beneﬁts than CAN in terms of data rates (10 Mbps), redundancy, safety, fault tolerance,
and price. Due to these reasons, FlexRay is predicted to replace other conventional auto-
motive networking protocols in the near future. In 2006, the BMW X5 became the ﬁrst vehicle
to use FlexRay, but limited to its pneumatic damping system. The full use of FlexRay is
expected to be accomplished in 2008. Other recent car networking systems include LIN
(local interconnect network) [36] and MOST (media oriented system transport) [37].
22.5.2
Modern Telematics Devices
Recently developed modern telematics devices converge many technologies and services.
Basically, a telematics device not only has one communication technology, but also numer-
ous communication methods, such as cell-based wireless communications for telephone
services, in-car networking for controlling electronics of a car, GPS for LBS (location
based service), IP-based wireless communications for Internet services, DSRC for network-
ing with other cars, and digital broadcast communications for a digital radio and TV. It
also embeds a huge database for navigation, and has many large storages such as ODD
(optical disk drive), HDD (hard disk drive), and ﬂash memory for saving ﬁles. A display
and a voice/audio system have to be equipped to interface with a user. The device uses
TFT-LCD or OLED with various sizes and resolutions for display, voice recognition, and
noise cancellation methods for detecting user’s voice commands, and speakers with audio
DSP or special ASIC for enhancing output sounds. Many brand new technologies are
merged into one telematics device. Some major technologies and standards used in a
telematics device are shown in Table 22.8.
Figure 22.13 shows that a telematics system includes numerous functional blocks and
relevant modules. Typically, a host processor runs an operating system and executes many
software applications for the technologies mentioned above.
22.5.3
Proposed Architecture for an Automotive RFID System
In order to provide that standard, the current architecture usually uses a layered system.
The layer will act as a gate between two kinds of different networks. In a mobile RFID
TABLE 22.7
Classiﬁcation of Automotive Networks
Class
Speed
Example Application
A
Less than 10 kbit=s
Low speed
Convenience features, e.g., trunk release, electric mirror
adjustment
B
10–125 kbit=s
Medium speed
General information transfer, e.g., instruments, power window
C
125 kbit=s to 1 Mbit=s
High speed
Real-time control, e.g., power train, vehicle dynamics
D
More than 1 Mbit=s
Multimedia applications, e.g., Internet, digital TV
408
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

reader [38], the layer, which is called HAL (handset adaptation layer), acts as a gate
between RFID readers and cell phones. By doing this, both RFID reader vendors and cell
phone vendors can develop and produce their own part without having to depend on each
other, which surely will accelerate the development for applications. The other advantage
in a layered system is that a new system can be added easily.
Figure 22.14 shows our proposed architecture for an automotive RFID system, which
consists of three layers: physical layer, protocol layer, and application layer. The physical
layer handles communication between reader RF circuits and tags through radio frequency
waves. The protocol layer controls the rule of how data transfer should be done, which
component handles error checking and collision problems. Last, the application layer is the
place where RFID applications should lie.
In the physical layer, more consideration should be put on performance such as the
reading distance and the reading speed. The protocol layer is implemented inside a car
central gateway. A local database, which holds a database for user IDs and a small amount
of information, is also placed here. Next, the application layer should be implemented
inside the gateway also. ONS (object naming service) of the EPCglobal Network, which
holds a global database for all applications, is also placed in this layer. This ONS will be
used to handle requested information from a car. For example, in the case of RFID
advertising, ONS will receive the advertisement’s ID from a car, ﬁnd a corresponding
advertisement data based on this ID, and then transmit the data back to the car. There is
another option to implement the protocol layer separately by using an additional base-
band processor, which will require more resources, but will improve the overall network
performance.
TABLE 22.8
Technologies and Standards Used in a Recently Developed Telematics Device
Application
Technologies and Standards
Navigator
GPS (global positioning system), GIS (geographic information system), Dead-
Reckoning, NMEA 0183, NMEA 2000 protocol, SiRF, ISO 19100 series, GIS DB,
route planning, route guidance, map matching
Interfaces with a user
TFT-LCD, OLED, touch screen, mike, speaker, camera, keypad, vision=audio
enhancement, GUI (graphic user interface), voice recognition, noise cancellation,
speech synthesis, speaker adaptation
Wireless communication
Telephone, SMS=MMS, e-mail, mobile Internet, video conference,
GSM=GPRS=EDGE, CDMA 1x=EV-DO, WCDMA
Internet-based services
Web browser, online market, wireless LAN (IEEE 802.11a=b=g), WiBro=WiMAX
(IEEE 802.16), HSDPA
Storage
ODD, HDD, ﬂash memory, IDE=ATA standards, ﬁle system, CD-DA, CD-ROM,
DVD, DVD-R, DVDþR, DVD-RAM, DVD-RW, compact ﬂash, multimedia card,
Secure Digital, eXtreme Digital, memory stick, micro-SD ( ¼ T-Flash), mini-SD,
secure micro-SD, MMC-micro, RSMMC (reduced size multimedia card)
Car network
CAN (controller area network), FlexRay, RIN, MOST, ISO 11898=11992=11783
series, SAE J1939 series, SAE J2411, SAE J2561
Multimedia
Movie=music play, digital broadcast, recording, image view, multimedia codec
solutions (WMV, MPEG, Divx, QuickTime, WMA, MP3, AC3, JPEG), DSP
(digital signal processing), DAB, T-DMB, S-DMB, digital radio, DVB-H, multi-
tasking
Intelligent Transportation
System
Congestion control, trafﬁc light control, electronic toll, collection, emergency
warning=rescue, road information providing, DSRC (dedicated short range
communication), IEEE 1609 series, WAVE (IEEE 802.11p), LBS
Personal organizer
Calendar, scheduler, address book, word processor, spreadsheet, computer game,
operating system, synchronization, software application
Applying RFID Techniques for the Next-Generation Automotive Services
409

22.6
Experimental Design: TalusRFID
Most current RFID readers are implemented using a general processor. Some researchers
have proposed new ideas for implementing an RFID baseband processor. One of examples
can be seen in TalusRFID. In this approach, an RFID reader is designed using the Talus
architecture [39], which uses Java as its programming language and FPGA technology
as its target implementation.
Java has been evolved as one of the most preferable programming languages in the last
decade. However, there has not been any RFID reader to be implemented using this
language because Java execution speed is a lot slower than any other common program-
ming language. The Talus architecture overcomes this slow-speed problem by using a
coprocessor technique, which accelerates the execution on FPGA, hence making it able to
implement an RFID baseband processor.
Telematics host
processor
Memory
Multimedia processing
Operating system
Wireless network
Cellular based
(GSM, CDMA, WCDMA module)
IP based
(Wireless LAN, WiBro/WiMAX,
HSDPA module)
Bus
Audio/video DSP
Audio/video codec
Display
Monitor(s)
TFT-LCD driver module
OLED driver module
Video/image capture
Camera interface
Voice /audio
Mike
speaker
Noise cancellation
Speaker adaptation
Filter, effector, equalizer
Other devices
Cell phone, PDA, etc.
USB, Firewire
IrDA, bluetooth,
smart card
Extended interfaces
CD/DVD
HD
Memory card
CD-ROM/DVD-ROM
HDD
Flash memory interface
Storage
File system
RF modules
antennas
DSRC OBE
Navigation
GPS module
GIS DB interface
GPS
receiver
Car network
CAN/FlexRay interface
Gateway
Car electronics
Wiper, trunk, window,
light, brake, mirror,
sensor, etc.
Digital broadcast
(DAB, T-DMB, S-DMB, DVB-H
module)
Information
Software applications
for telematics services
Navigator, video/audio player,
hands free, traffic information,
emergency warning/rescue,
web browser, personal organizer, etc.
Human machine
interface
Voice recognition
GUI, touch screen
Keypad
Speech synthesis
Map database
Multimedia files
User information
Driving information
Traffic information
Sensing information
Camera
Embedded processor
and
DSP, ASIC, FPGA
(WMA / WMV, MP3, AC3, OGG,
Divx, MPEG4, JPEG, etc.)
FIGURE 22.13
Typical architecture of a telematics system.
410
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

The TalusRFID reader consists of three different parts:
1. RF circuit
2. Processor part
3. PDA, as the user terminal I/O
As shown in Figure 22.15, the TalusRFID reader can be seen as a prototype for the RFID
reader that will be used for the next generation automotive RFID system. The physical
layer discussed in Section 22.5.3 is the same as the physical layer in our proposed archi-
tecture. The protocol layer is implemented inside a baseband processor by the Java RFID
software inside Talus architecture, and the application layer runs identiﬁcation for users,
implemented inside a PDA.
The details of the TalusRFID processor are shown in Figure 22.16, which supports ISO
18000-6 Type B and Type C (EPC Gen2) standards. The protocol layer was implemented in
Java bytecodes, and lower layers, such as modulator, demodulator, and ﬁlters, are imple-
mented in an FPGA reconﬁgurable hardware. TalusCore, which is a Java native processor,
could only contain 3K instructions in its code memory due to resource limitation. For this
reason, it will only execute manually selected time-critical methods while rest of the codes
are executed on JVM (Java Virtual Machine), which in Talus is called TVM (Talus Virtual
Machine). In order to provide the TVM environment, Embedded Linux is installed in the
ARM processor. In order to use hardware parts for RF circuits directly, a software
programmer can use some special methods for external hardware control. The Java
application can control hardware by invoking them. In this system, hardware demodulator
and transmission controller are implemented in hardware. The demodulation of received
Individual
authority
Customizing
vehicle
Automatic
management
RFID
advertising
ARIS
Application
layer
ONS
Network
RFID next-generation automotive service
Car central gateway
RFID processor
RF circuit
RF wave
Tag
Local database
Protocol layer
Physical
layer
FIGURE 22.14
Proposed architecture for the next generation automotive RFID system.
Applying RFID Techniques for the Next-Generation Automotive Services
411

Application
layer
Java RFID
software
PDA
Baseband processor
ARM
processor
Coprocessor
(FPGA)
RF wave
RF circuit
Tag
Physical
layer
FIGURE 22.15
TalusRFID layer architecture.
Host processor (ARM)
JIT
SDRAM controller
AHB BUS
FPGA
Hardwate controller
TalusCore
(process Java
byte-code and
control hardware
by using register
map)
tx controller
rx controller
SPI for
cc1020
Preamble
detector 
and
decoder
Symbol
detector
LPF
ADC
controller
cc1020
ADC
TVM
(Talus
Virtual
Machine)
Method
with
time constraint
Microcodes
/commands
FIGURE 22.16
TalusRFID processor architecture. (From Joon Goo Lee, Peter Harliman, Kyongjin Jo, Sungjea Ko, Seon Wook
Kim, and Kwangjoo Choi, TalusRFID: Java-based RFID baseband processor, Proceedings of the 14th Korean
Conference on Semiconductors, 2007.)
412
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

signals in a software manner was almost impossible to satisfy a time constraint for tags’
identiﬁcation in ISO 18000-6 Type C due to overheads of OS. The details of the Talus
architecture have been given in detail by Hwang et al. and Lee et al. [39,40].
Figure 22.17 shows the TalusRFID demo with its PDA displays. The demo scenario was
designed to illustrate our previous idea in Section 22.4.2 (customizing a vehicle for multiple
drivers). In Step 1 of Figure 22.17, the reader detects an authorized tag, and automatically
sets car settings based on this tag owner’s preference. In Steps 2–4, a car owner wants to
add an additional user to the system. In this case, a new tag ID is registered in the system,
including the new user’s information and preferences. After the registration step is ﬁnal-
ized, the system will be able to recognize the new driver as an authorized user.
22.7
Conclusion
Since it was introduced, RFID has been expected to replace barcode technology. For this
reason, RFID is always compared with barcode technology in all kinds of parameters.
Furthermore, the development of RFID applications has always focused on existing bar-
code applications. These factors limit the creation of innovative and creative applications
for RFID systems. There are unlimited possibilities to generate new ideas for RFID appli-
cations. However, it will be easier to develop new ideas that have a visible effect on users.
In other words, we should focus on user-oriented applications.
In this chapter, we proposed new ideas for user-oriented RFID automotive applications.
For example, RFID technology can be used to provide some limits to drivers, depending
on time, distance, speed parameter, etc. In addition, drivers can use RFID technology
to automate settings in various devices such as car seats and mirrors. Since the cost of
an RFID tag is predicted to drop in the near future, RFID tags can also be attached
to numerous car parts in order to relay information to a car management system.
1
Detecting an authorized driver
Registering an
unauthorized
driver
2
3
Inputting
driver’s info and
preferences
Finalizing
registration
4
FIGURE 22.17
TalusRFID demo. (From Joon Goo Lee, Peter Harliman, Kyongjin Jo, Sungjea Ko, Seon Wook Kim, and
Kwangjoo Choi, TalusRFID: Java-based RFID baseband processor, Proceedings of the 14th Korean Conference on
Semiconductors, 2007.)
Applying RFID Techniques for the Next-Generation Automotive Services
413

Another possible innovation is to use RFID in advertising. Using RFID technology,
a new technique for location-based advertising can be implemented inside a car.
In ARIS, RFID is used to improve the accuracy of the existing GPS’s road information
system.
In order to implement those new applications, current car technologies have already
provided ﬂexible network infrastructures, such as CAN, ITS, and FlexRay. For this reason,
automotive RFID architecture can be easily attached to the current existing car network
systems. However, since automotive RFID applications combine many different types of
applications, a ﬁxed standard is required to accelerate the development of applications.
With a ﬁxed standard and networking protocol, different developers can focus on devel-
oping and producing their own parts without having to worry about compatibility
with other parts. In this chapter, we have proposed an architecture for future automotive
RFID applications. The architecture was designed so that only minimal modiﬁcations
are required in integration with the current car networking architecture. Finally, we
also discussed our prototyped system, called TalusRFID, which is an implementation of
a Java-based RFID reader using the FPGA technology.
Acknowledgment
This work was supported in part by Digital Media Company, LG Electronics.
References
1. Harry Stockman. Communications by means of reﬂected power. Proceedings of the Institute of Radio
Engineers (IRE), 36, 1196–1204, 1948.
2. Korea Smart Card Co. Ltd. Seoul’s new transportation system. http:==www.t-money.co.kr/jsp/
newpub/oversea/english/stories/S_story.jsp
3. Institution of Electrical Engineers (IEE). Radio frequency identiﬁcation device technology (RFID).
http:==www.rﬁdc.com/pdfs_downloads/IEE%20RFID%20Paper.pdf, 2005.
4. John R. Tuttle. Traditional and emerging technologies and applications in the radio frequency
identiﬁcation (RFID) industry. IEEE Radio Frequency Integrated Circuit Symposium, 5–8, 1997.
5. Steve Bono, Matthew Green, Adam Stubbleﬁeld, Ari Juels, Avi Rubin, and Michael Szydlo.
Security analysis of a cryptographically-enabled RFID device. Proceedings of the 14th USENIX
Security Symposium, 1–16, 2005.
6. Mary Catherine O’Connor. Gen 2 EPC protocol approved as ISO 18000-6C. http:==www.rﬁdjournal.
com/article/articleview/2481/, 2006.
7. Iris Corporation Berhad. Malaysia is the ﬁrst country to use computer chips in passport. http:==
www.iris.com.my/News/new_detail.asp?id¼12, 1998.
8. Robyn Curnow. The price to pay for VIP status. http:==edition.cnn.com/2004/TECH/10/05/
spark.bajabeach/, 2004.
9. David M. Ewalt and Mary Hayes. Gillette razors get new edge: RFID tags. http:==www.
informationweek.com/story/IWK20030110S0028, 2003.
10. Claudia H. Deutsch and Barnaby J. Feder. A radio chip in every consumer product. http:==www.
uazuay.edu.ec/bibliotecas/cibercultura/A%20Radio%20Chip%20in%20Every%20Consumer%20
Product.htm, 2003.
11. Klaus Grimm. Software technology in an automotive company: Major challenges. Proceedings of
the 25th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE), 498–503, 2003.
414
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

12. Ariz Scottsdale. Auto electronics market set to exceed US$50 billion by 2010. http:==www.instat.
com/press.asp?Sku¼IN0603375RE&ID¼1752, 2006.
13. United States Coast Guard’s Navigation Center of Excellence. General information on GPS.
http:==www.navcen.uscg.gov/gps/default.htm
14. ITS Standards Program. Dedicated short range communications (DSRC). http:==www.standards.
its.dot.gov/Documents/advisories/dsrc_advisory.htm
15. Seung-Que Lee, Namhun Park, Choongho Cho, Hyongwoo Lee, and Seungwan Ryu. The wire-
less broadband (WiBro) system for broadband wireless internet services. Vehicular Technology
Magazine, 44, 106–112, 2006.
16. Javier Gozalvez. Mobile radio—HSDPA goes commercial. Vehicular Technology Magazine, 1,
45–53, 2006.
17. Microsoft. Microsoft Car.NET connects motorists to the wireless internet. http:==www.microsoft.
com/Presspass/press/2000/oct00/carnetpr.mspx, 2000.
18. Maxim Integrated Products, Inc. Remote keyless entry systems overview. http:==www.maxim-ic.
com/appnotes.cfm/appnote_number/1774, 2002.
19. Warren Clarke. Will your next car have keyless start? http:==www.edmunds.com/insideline/do/
Features/articleId¼106651, 2005.
20. Svenska Aeroplan Aktiebolaget (SAAB). Saab 9–5 features and speciﬁcations. http:==www2.
saabusa.com/95s/features.asp?start¼home
21. Goodyear. Goodyear RFID technology—Key to managing your fast-paced world. http:==eu.good
year.com/home_en/sitewides/press/motorshow/rﬁd/index.jsp, 2006.
22. Michelin. Intelligent tires: Michelin outlines new technology at industry conference. http:==www.
michelinman.com/difference/releases/pressrelease03092005a.html, 2005.
23. Melanie Rieback, Bruno Crispo, and Andrew Tanenbaum. Is your cat infected with a computer
virus? Proceedings of the 4th IEEE International Conference on Pervasive Computing and Communica-
tions, 169–179, 2006.
24. Rajiv Mehrotra. Telematics Might Steer Your Car into the Future. IEEE MultiMedia, 9(3), 9–10,
2002.
25. Donna Bogatin. Google targets GPS-based in-car personalized advertising. http:==blogs.zdnet.
com/micro-markets/?p¼131, 2006.
26. CBS Outdoor. Viacom outdoor launched GPS advertising. http:==www.cbsoutdoor.co.uk/web/
Current-news/Newspage-UK/Viacom-Outdoor-launches-GPS-advertising-a-global-ﬁrst-with-Yell.
com.htm, 2006.
27. Dody Tsiantar. Getting on board. http:==www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171, 901060424-
1184037,00.html, 2006.
28. Christopher Elliott. Wi-Fi is hitting the road in cars from Avis, but technical and legal bumps lie
ahead. http:==www.nytimes.com/2007/01/02/technology/02avis.html, 2007.
29. Jeff Goldman. A look at the future of in-car internet access. http:==www.wireless-weblog.com/
50226711/a_look_at_the_future_of_incar_internet_access.php, 2006.
30. Thomas Nolte, Hans Hansson, and Lucia Lo Bello. Wireless automotive communications.
Proceedings of the 4th International Workshop on Real-Time Networks (RTN’05) in conjunction with
the 17th Euromicro International Conference on Real-Time Systems (ECRTS’05), 35–38, 2005.
31. Karl Henrik Johansson, Martin Törngren, and Lars Nielsen. Vehicle application of controller area
network. Handbook of Networked and Embedded Control Systems, pp. 741–766, 2005.
32. Fuqiang Liu and Fengzhong Li. Intelligent transportation system based on the next generation
broadband wireless communication. Proceedings of IEEE International Conference on Service Oper-
ations and Logistics, and Informatics, 41–45, 2005.
33. FlexRay Consortium. FlexRay. http:==www.ﬂexray.com/
34. Gabriel Leen and Donal Heffernan. Expanding automotive electronic systems. IEEE Computer, 35,
88–93, 2002.
35. Gabriel Leen, Donal Heffernan, and Alan Dunne. Digital networks in the automotive vehicle.
IEE Computing and Control Engineering Journal, 10, 257–266, 1999.
36. LIN Consortium. Local interconnect network. http:==www.lin-subbus.org/
37. MOST Cooperation. Media oriented systems transport. http:==www.mostcooperation.com/
Applying RFID Techniques for the Next-Generation Automotive Services
415

38. Joon Goo Lee, Seok Joong Hwang, Seon Wook Kim, Sunshin Ahn, KyungHo Park, Ji Hoon Koo,
and Woo Shik Kang. Software architecture for a multi-protocol RFID reader on mobile devices.
Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Embedded Software and Systems (ICESS’05), 81–88,
2005.
39. Seok Joong Hwang, Peter Harliman, and Seon Wook Kim. Talus: Compiler-assisted Java accele-
rator. Proceedings of the 4th International Workshop on SoC and MPSoC Design, 389–398, 2006.
40. Joon Goo Lee, Peter Harliman, Kyongjin Jo, Sungjea Ko, Seon Wook Kim, and Kwangjoo Choi.
TalusRFID: Java-based RFID baseband processor. Proceedings of the 14th Korean Conference on
Semiconductors, 187–188, 2007.
416
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

23
Application of RFID Technologies
for Communication Robots
Masahiro Shiomi, Takayuki Kanda, Hiroshi Ishiguro, and Norihiro Hagita
CONTENTS
23.1
Introduction...................................................................................................................... 418
23.2
Communication Robots with RFID Tag Technology
at an Elementary School ................................................................................................. 418
23.2.1 Introduction ......................................................................................................... 418
23.2.1.1 Interactive Humanoid Robot ‘‘Robovie’’......................................... 419
23.2.1.2 Person Identiﬁcation........................................................................... 420
23.2.1.3 Interactive Behaviors .......................................................................... 420
23.2.2 Experiment........................................................................................................... 420
23.2.2.1 Settings.................................................................................................. 422
23.2.3 Results................................................................................................................... 422
23.2.3.1 Children Behaviors ............................................................................. 422
23.2.3.2 Long-Term Interaction........................................................................ 424
23.2.3.3 Learning English ................................................................................. 424
23.2.4 Discussion and Conclusion ............................................................................... 426
23.3
Communication Robots with RFID Tag Technology at a Science Museum........... 426
23.3.1 Introduction ......................................................................................................... 426
23.3.2 System Conﬁguration......................................................................................... 427
23.3.2.1 Science Museum Environment.......................................................... 427
23.3.2.2 Humanoid Robots............................................................................... 428
23.3.2.3 Embedded Sensors in Environment................................................. 428
23.3.3 Robots’ Behavior................................................................................................. 429
23.3.3.1 Locomotive Robot............................................................................... 429
23.3.3.2 Robots That Talk with Each Other................................................... 430
23.3.4 Robot Bidding Farewell ..................................................................................... 430
23.3.5 Experiment........................................................................................................... 430
23.3.6 Discussion and Conclusion ............................................................................... 431
23.3.6.1 Contributions to HRI Research ......................................................... 431
23.3.6.2 RFID Tags and Tag Readers.............................................................. 432
23.4
Conclusion ........................................................................................................................ 432
Acknowledgments ..................................................................................................................... 433
References.................................................................................................................................... 433
417

23.1
Introduction
The development of robots is entering a new stage, focusing on interaction with people in
everyday environments. A robot can act as a peer providing mental, communication, and
physical support. For example, pet-type robots such as AIBO (Fujita, 2001) and PARO
(Shibata, 2004) have been developed to provide mental health care. Humanoid robots have
also been developed for the research of human–robot interaction. These robots investigate
how humanlike body movements or facial expressions contribute to interaction with
people (Breazeal and Scassellati, 1999; Ishiguro et al., 2001; Kozima et al., 2004). In
addition, robots have operated in such everyday environments as museums and an expo
to investigate the effectiveness of communication robots in everyday environments
(Burgard et al., 1998; Nourbakhsh et al., 1999; Siegwart et al., 2003).
For communication robots, person identiﬁcation functions are very important because
such functions enable them to interact with people using personal information such as
name and age. For example, name-calling behavior will attract people to interact with a
robot. Age information is useful to change the subject when a robot is talking with people;
in fact, such behaviors are basic elements of human interaction.
RFID technologies enable communication robots to achieve person identiﬁcation func-
tions easily. In particular, an active-type RFID tag is very useful for interaction between a
robot and people; detection is unaffected by the occurrence of occlusions, the detection area
is wide, and the distance between the tag readers and the RFID tag can be roughly
estimated. A robot can identify multiple people at the same time by using active-type
RFID tags.
Several past works focused on how a system recognizes people and objects in an
environment robustly. For example, Schulz and his colleagues proposed a method for
estimating the positions of mobile devices such as laptops by using wireless signal strength
(Letcher et al., 2005). However, we are focusing on how communication robots interact
with people by using personal information from person identiﬁcation functions. Personal
information will enable communication robots to behave more intelligently. We believe
that RFID technologies will largely promote the human–robot interaction.
In this chapter, we introduce applications of RFID technologies for communication
robots through our two ﬁeld trials with communication robots and active-type RFID tags
at an elementary school and a science museum. In the elementary school, communication
robots are used for studying English. Using RFID tags and sensors, these robots identiﬁed
and interacted with children who came near them. The robots gestured and spoke English
with the children, using a vocabulary of about 300 sentences for speaking and 50 words for
recognition. Moreover, in the science museum, communication robots were used for
providing information to multiple people; the robots explained and guided visitors to
exhibits. For this purpose, we installed multiple RFID tag readers and communication
robots at the science museum.
23.2
Communication Robots with RFID Tag Technology
at an Elementary School
23.2.1
Introduction
In this ﬁeld trial, two communication robots that had various communicative behaviors
interacted with children at an elementary school. The purpose of the trial was to improve
the children’s ability to speak English through the robot playing with the children and
418
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

communicating with them in English. We observed scenes of interaction between the
robots and the children over the course of 2 weeks.
Our choice of a task for the robots was motivated by the generally poor English language
ability of Japanese people. We believe a lack of motivation and opportunities to speak
English are major causes of this deﬁciency. Many children in elementary and junior high
school either lack motivation or do not recognize the importance and usefulness of English.
In fact, children have no need to speak English in Japan. Even though English teachers
speak English during class, children speak Japanese outside of class. In their daily lives,
they almost never encounter foreigners who do not speak Japanese. Thus, many children
are not motivated to study English.
For this reason, the interactive humanoid robot we developed could only recognize and
speak English, and its voice sounded somewhat like that of a child. The robot’s utterances
were based on recordings of a native English speaker (a professional narrator). In addition,
the robot used an RFID tag system to identify each child. With visual, auditory, tactile, and
RFID tag information, the robot took the initiative in interacting with children. For
example, it called a child’s name and initiated interaction after detecting the child from
his or her RFID tag.
23.2.1.1
Interactive Humanoid Robot ‘‘Robovie’’
Figure 23.1 shows Robovie (Ishiguro et al., 2001), an interactive humanoid robot char-
acterized by its humanlike physical expressions and its various sensors. The humanlike
body consists of a head, a pair of eyes, and two arms. When combined, these parts can
FIGURE 23.1
Robovie with RFID tag reader and RFID tag.
Application of RFID Technologies for Communication Robots
419

generate the complex body movements required for communication. We decided on a
robot height of 120 cm to decrease the risk of scaring children. The diameter was 40 cm. The
robot has two 4 3 2 degrees of freedom (DOFs) in its arms, 3 DOFs in its head, and a mobile
platform. It can synthesize and produce a voice via a speaker. We also attached an RFID
tag reader to Robovie that enables it to identify the individuals around it.
23.2.1.2
Person Identiﬁcation
To identify individuals, we developed a multi-person identiﬁcation system for communi-
cation robots using an RFID tag system (SPIDER-IIIA, RF-CODE). In this study, children
were given easy-to-wear nameplates (5 cm in diameter) in which an RFID tag was
embedded. The tag (shown in Figure 23.1, lower right) periodically transmitted its ID to
the reader, which was onboard the robot (shown in Figure 23.1, upper right). In turn, the
reader relayed received IDs to the robot’s software system. The RFID tag system can
adjust the reception range of the receiver’s tag in real time from the robot’s software. The
RFID tag system provided the robots with a robust means of identifying many children
simultaneously. Consequently, the robots could show some humanlike adaptation by
recalling the history of interaction with a given person.
23.2.1.3
Interactive Behaviors
Robovie has a software mechanism for performing consistent interactive behaviors
(Kanda et al., 2002). The intention behind the design of Robovie is that it should commu-
nicate at a young child’s level. One hundred interactive behaviors have been developed.
Seventy of them are interactive behaviors such as shaking hands (Figure 23.2a), hugging
(Figure 23.2b), playing paper–scissors–rock (Figure 23.2c), exercising (Figure 23.2d),
greeting, kissing, singing, brieﬂy conversing, and pointing to an object in the surroundings.
Twenty are idle behaviors such as scratching the head or folding the arms, and the
remaining ten are moving-around behaviors. For the purpose of English education in
this study, the situated module could only speak and recognize English. In total, the
robot could utter more than 300 sentences and recognize about 50 words.
Several interactive behaviors depended on the person identiﬁcation function. For
example, there was an interactive behavior in which the robot called a child’s name if
that child was at a certain distance. This behavior was useful for encouraging the child to
come and interact with the robot. Another interactive behavior was a body-part game; the
robot asked a child to touch a part of the body by saying the part’s name.
These interactive behaviors appeared in the following manner based on simple rules.
The robot sometimes triggered the interaction with a child by saying ‘‘Let’s play, touch me
please’’ and it exhibited idling or moving-around behaviors until the child responded; once
the child reacted, the robot continued performing friendly behaviors as long as the child
responded to it. When the child stopped reacting, the robot stopped the friendly behaviors,
said ‘‘good-bye,’’ and restarted its idling or moving-around behaviors.
23.2.2
Experiment
We performed the ﬁeld trial at an elementary school afﬁliated with Wakayama University.
Two identical communication robots were put in the open corridor near the ﬁrst- and sixth-
grade classrooms, and for 2 weeks the two robots interacted with ﬁrst-grade students and
sixth-grade students. The following sections describe the details of the trial.
420
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
FIGURE 23.2
Scenes of interaction between Robovie and people.
Application of RFID Technologies for Communication Robots
421

23.2.2.1
Settings
We carried out two sessions, one for ﬁrst graders and the other for sixth graders. In general,
there are six grades in a Japanese elementary school. This particular elementary school has
three classes for each grade and about 40 students in each class. There were 119 ﬁrst-grade
students (6–7 years old; 59 males and 60 females), and 109 sixth-grade students (11–12
years old; 53 males and 56 females).
In the three classrooms of the ﬁrst grade, there are no walls between the classrooms and
corridor, so that the corridor (which is called a workspace) is open to every ﬁrst grader. The
ﬁrst graders’ classrooms are located on the ground ﬂoor; the sixth graders’ classrooms
have the same layout as the ﬁrst graders’ and are located on the third ﬂoor.
We gave the children safety instructions before the trial. Pictures of the robot were
accompanied by messages in Japanese such as ‘‘do not treat the robots roughly,’’ and
‘‘do not touch the joints because it is not safe.’’ We did not give the children any further
instructions.
Both sessions (for ﬁrst and sixth grades) were conducted for 2 weeks, which is equivalent
to nine school days. The two robots were put in the corridor. The children could interact
freely with both robots during recess. Every child had a nameplate with an embedded
RFID tag (Figure 23.1, bottom right) so that the robots could identify the child during
interactions.
We did not involve the teachers in the ﬁeld trial. Two experimenters (university students)
looked after the two robots. They did not help the children interact with the robots but simply
ensured the safety of the children and robots. For example, when the children crowded
closely around the robot, the experimenters would tell them to maintain a safe distance.
23.2.3
Results
23.2.3.1
Children Behaviors
We investigated the microaspects of children’s behaviors. Table 23.1 indicates the rate at
which children interacted with the robot along with their friends. (Children provided their
friends’ names on the questionnaire before the experiment, and they were compared with
the ID information obtained through the wireless tag system.) Figure 23.3 shows scenes of
interaction between a robot and children. In the ﬁrst grade, 48% of time the children played
with the robot along with their friends. In contrast, this was 78% in the sixth grade. There
were 11 children who did not interact with the robot at all, who we omitted from the
statistical analysis of friend time rate. ANOVA proved a signiﬁcant difference between the
ﬁrst grade and sixth grade (F(1,215) ¼ 12.87, p < 0.01). We believe that ﬁrst-grade children
came to the robot to communicate with it, whereas the sixth-grade children used the robot
as a method of playing with their friends.
TABLE 23.1
Comparison of Friend-Related Behaviors
Grade
No. of
Valid
Subjects
No. of Non-
Interacting
Children
Interaction Time (min)
Friend Time (min)
Friend Time Rate
Average
Max.
S.D.
Average
S.D.
Average
S.D.
1
119
0
21.4
162.9
21.7
10.2
12.5
0.48
0.30
6
98
11
17.3
103.6
17.6
11.7
12.0
0.75
0.28
Friend time rate means average of each child’s ratio of Friend time to Interaction time.
422
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

By observing their interaction with the robots, we found several interesting cases.
. In Figure 23.3a, a child did not seem to understand English at all. However, once
she heard her name said by the robot, she seemed very pleased and began to
interact often with the robot.
. In Figure 23.3b, children counted how many times the robot called their respective
names. Left child’s name was called more often, so left child proudly told other
child that the robot preferred left child.
. In Figure 23.3c, a child passed by the robot. He did not intend to play with the
robot, but when he saw another child playing with the robot, he joined the
interaction.
Those children’s behaviors suggest that the robot’s behavior of calling names signiﬁcantly
affected and attracted children. Furthermore, observation of successful interaction was
related to the desire to participate in the interaction.
(a)
(b)
(c)
FIGURE 23.3
Scenes of interaction between Robovie and children. (a) Results of ﬁrst-grade students. (b) Results of sixth-grade
students. (c) Children are interacting with the robot.
Application of RFID Technologies for Communication Robots
423

23.2.3.2
Long-Term Interaction
Figure 23.4 shows the changes in relationships among the children and the robots during
the 2 weeks for the ﬁrst-grade and sixth-grade classes. We can divide 2 weeks into the
following three phases: (1) ﬁrst day, (2) ﬁrst week (except ﬁrst day), and (3) second week.
1. First day: On the ﬁrst day, as many as 37 ﬁrst-grade children gathered around each
robot (Figure 23.3). They pushed one another to gain a position in front of the robot,
tried to touch the robot, and spoke to it in loud voices. Since the corridor and
classrooms were ﬁlled with their loud voices, it was not always possible to under-
stand what the robots and children said. It seemed that almost all of the children
wanted to interact with the robots. There were many children watching the excite-
ment around the robots, and they joined the interaction by switching places with the
children around the robot. In total, 116 ﬁrst-grade students interacted with the robot
out of the 119 ﬁrst-grade students on the ﬁrst day. Moreover, 75 sixth-grade students
interacted with the robot out of the 109 sixth-grade students on the ﬁrst day.
2. First week: The excitement on the ﬁrst day soon quieted down. The average number
of simultaneously interacting children gradually decreased. In the ﬁrst week,
someone was always interacting with the robots, so the rate of vacant time was
still quite low. The interaction between the children and the robots became more
like inter-human conversation. Several children came in front of the robot, touched
it, and watched the response of the robot.
3. Second week: At the beginning, the time of vacancy around the robots suddenly
increased, and the number of children who played with the robots decreased. Near
the end, there were no children around the robot during half of the daily experi-
ment time. On average, there were two children simultaneously interacting with
the robot during the second week. This seemed to be advantageous to the robot
since it was easy for it to talk with a few of the children simultaneously. The way
they played with the robots seemed similar to the play style in the ﬁrst week. Thus,
only the frequency of children playing with the robot decreased.
23.2.3.3
Learning English
In Table 23.2, we describe the main measurements used in this study, that is, the number of
minutes each child interacted with the robot in the ﬁrst and second weeks of the trial, their
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
1
2
3
4
5
Day
Number of interacting children
Rate of vacant time
Average of simultaneously interacting
children
6
7
8
9
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
1
2
3
4
5
Day
Number of interacting children
Rate of vacant time
Average of simultaneously interacting
children
6
7
8
9
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
FIGURE 23.4
Transition in number of children playing with robots.
424
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

English scores on the pretest, ﬁrst week test, and posttest, and the amount and percentage
of time they interacted with the robot in the presence of friends. In Table 23.3, we show the
interaction times with robots of the ﬁrst and sixth grades during 2 week period.
The analyses we present are analyses of variance (ANOVA) in which the dependent
variable is the improvement in each child’s English test score from the child’s English
pretest score. Although many children did not know English at the beginning of the trial,
some knew a bit. If they knew any of the phrases on the English test (such as ‘‘bye’’) their
improvement might have been small owing to a ceiling effect. Therefore, the appropriate
analysis of the effects of the robot on learning is the change from the pretest to the posttest,
controlling for the initial pretest score. The main analyses we ran were standard least
squares analyses, described as follows:
Model (second week English score  pretest English score) ¼ Intercept þ Pretest English
score þ Week 1 interaction minutes with robot þ Week 2 interaction minutes with robot þ
Percent of interaction time with friends.
The results of this analysis are shown in Table 23.4. This analysis showed the expected
signiﬁcant ceiling effect of pretest English scores on the change in scores from pretest to
posttest (F(1,198) ¼ 86, p < 0.001). That is, the more English the children already knew at
the beginning of the trial, the less they learned from the robot. However, the amount of
time they interacted with friends and the robots together did not have an impact on the
change in the English scores. The amount of time children spent with the robot
during the ﬁrst week also had no effect on their improvement in English by the second
week, but the amount of time that children interacted with the robots during the
second week did have a signiﬁcant and positive impact on improvement in English in
the second week (F(1,198) ¼ 5.6, p ¼ 0.02, d ¼ 0.33).
One alternative explanation to the improvement in English scores at the end of 2 weeks
is that causality was reversed. That is, perhaps those children who were more interested in
English and knew more English at the start of the trial were more interested in interacting
with the robot. To investigate the possibility that knowledge of English caused the children
to interact with the robot more, we ran a regression analysis examining the impact of
TABLE 23.2
Descriptive Statistics and Correlations among Measures
Measures
M
S.D.
1
2
3
4
5
6
Interaction time at ﬁrst week (min)
12.5
14
1
—
—
—
—
—
Interaction time at second week (min)
2.7
5.4
0.27
1
—
—
—
—
Interaction with friends (%)
67
—
0.11
0.02
1
—
—
—
Pretest English score
0.69
0.16
0.02
0.11
0.08
1
—
—
English score after ﬁrst week
0.7
0.16
0.12
0.13
0.03
0.37
1
—
English score after second week
0.69
0.16
0.04
0.1
0.05
0.35
0.4
1
TABLE 23.3
Interaction Time with Robots of First-Grade Students and Sixth-Grade Students in 2 Weeks
Day 1
Day 2
Day 3
Day 4
Day 5
Day 6
Day 7
Day 8
Day 9
First grade (n ¼ 119)
M (min)
7.25
1.85
1.88
2.08
1.6
1.08
0.74
0.13
0.61
S.D.
7.36
3.57
3.14
4.9
3.77
3
2.43
0.51
2.35
Sixth grade (n ¼ 109)
M (min)
3.33
3.09
0.59
1.15
1.3
1.31
0.79
0.2
0.77
S.D.
5.15
5.94
2.01
2.87
2.74
2.64
2.48
0.88
1.37
Application of RFID Technologies for Communication Robots
425

pretest English scores on the ﬁrst and second weeks of time spent with the robot, control-
ling for the presence of friends. Pretest English scores did not predict the ﬁrst week of time
with the robot, but there was a marginal positive effect of pretest scores on time with the
robot in the second week (F(1,208) ¼ 2.5, p ¼ 0.11). This suggests that part of the reason for
the results shown in Table 23.3 might be the initial ability of some children to understand
the robot’s English and feel comfortable with it. They might have felt they had something
in common with the robot (i.e., the English language).
23.2.4
Discussion and Conclusion
We believe that this ﬁeld trial provided us with many useful insights that we can apply to
the development of future communication robots. The communication robots autono-
mously interacted with children by using their humanlike bodies and various sensors
such as visual, auditory, tactile sensors, and RFID tag system. They also had a mechanism
to identify individuals and to adapt their interactive behaviors to them.
The results suggest that the robots did encourage some children to improve their
English, and that the robots were more successful in engaging children who already
knew at least a little English. These ﬁndings support arguments based on previous
literature in social psychology on similarity and common ground; they suggest that robots
should be designed to have attributes and knowledge in common with their users.
Our robots currently recognize only those who are around them. That is, even if the
robot is faced with multiple parties, it does not distinguish the relationships among them.
However, as the earlier example indicates, relationships among people might affect the
interaction. For example, a child may take a friend to the robot, or someone may take part
in the interaction because a friend is playing with the robot. Thus, we believe that a
communication robot should also recognize relationships between children (friendship,
hostility, etc.).
23.3
Communication Robots with RFID Tag Technology
at a Science Museum
23.3.1
Introduction
In this ﬁeld trial, four communication robots that had various communicative behaviors
interacted with numerous people at a science museum. The purpose of the trial was to
investigate the effectiveness of communication robots in everyday environments. We
performed a 2 month exhibition to gather numerous people’s opinions and observe scenes
of interaction between communication robots and the people.
TABLE 23.4
Analysis of Variance Results for Effect of Interaction Time with Robots
on Improvement in English Scores on Posttest (after 2 Weeks)
Source
df
F Ratio
p
Pretest English score
1
85.8
<0.0001
Interaction with friends
1
1.5
ns
Interaction time during ﬁrst week
1
1.4
ns
Interaction time during second week
1
5.6
0.019
Error
198
—
—
426
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

We chose to work in a science museum because we expect that many people, with a wide
range of ages, would interact with the robots. In a science museum, visitors are going to
have the opportunity to interact with the robots and experience the advanced technologies
by which they are made, which is the fundamental purpose of a science museum. In
addition, we are naturally targeting people who are interested in science and are unlikely
to miss the chance to interact with our robots; thus, this ﬁeld is one of the best choices for
collecting feedback and examining the interaction between people and the communication
robot in various tasks.
In this ﬁeld trial, we used an RFID tag system to improve the robots’ abilities as with the
ﬁeld trial the elementary school. Moreover, we installed not only RFID tag readers but also
other kinds of sensors in the environment. We believe that embedded environment sensors
enable communication robots to behave more intelligently.
23.3.2
System Conﬁguration
We used four humanoid robots for interaction with visitors in guidance and giving
explanations (the details of the robots are described in Section 23.3.3). In addition, we
installed 20 RFID tag readers to record the movements and positions of visitors via their
RFID tags on the fourth ﬂoor of the Osaka Science Museum. In addition, we installed three
infrared cameras and four recording cameras; the details of the embedded sensors are
described in Section 23.3.2.3.
23.3.2.1
Science Museum Environment
Seventy-ﬁve exhibits were positioned on the fourth ﬂoor of the Osaka Science Museum.
Figure 23.5 shows a map of the fourth ﬂoor of the museum, around which people walk in a
counterclockwise direction. Typically, visitors go through the following steps:
1. If a visitor decides to register as part of our project, such personal data as name is
gathered at the reception desk (Figure 23.5, point A). The system binds that data to
the ID of an RFID tag and automatically produces a synthetic voice for the visitor’s
name. The visitor receives a tag at the reception desk.
84 m
42 m
W
W
W
W
W
W
W
W
W
W
W
W
W
W
W
W
W
W
W
RFID tag reader
B
C
D
E
A
FIGURE 23.5
Map of fourth ﬂoor of Osaka Science Museum.
Application of RFID Technologies for Communication Robots
427

2. When the visitor strolls around the fourth ﬂoor wearing the RFID tag, the RFID tag
readers detect its signal and the system records the information.
3. Four robots are placed at positions B, C, and D on the fourth ﬂoor, as shown in
Figure 23.5. After ﬁnishing, visitors return their tags at the exit point (Figure 23.5,
point E).
23.3.2.2
Humanoid Robots
23.3.2.2.1
Robovie
In this ﬁeld trial, we used Robovie, as with the ﬁeld trial at the elementary school. The
difference from the past ﬁeld trial is that we used the Robovies as sensors as well because
they contain RFID tag readers. In effect, they became not only interactive robots but also
part of the sensor system. Two of the four robots used in this experiment were Robovies.
23.3.2.2.2
Robovie-M
Figure 23.6 shows a ‘‘Robovie-M’’ humanoid robot characterized by its humanlike physical
expressions. We decided on a height of 29 cm for this robot. Robovie-M has 22 DOFs and
can perform two-legged locomotion, bow its head, and do a handstand. We used a
personal computer and a pair of speakers to enable it to speak, since it was originally
unequipped for that. The other two robots in this experiment were Robovie-Ms.
23.3.2.3
Embedded Sensors in Environment
On the fourth ﬂoor of the Osaka Science Museum, we installed 20 RFID tag readers
(Spider-IIIA, RF-CODE), which included the two equipped on the Robovies, three infrared
sensors, and four video cameras. All sensor data were sent to a central server data-
base through an Ethernet network. In the following sections, we describe each type of
sensor used.
23.3.2.3.1
RFID Tag Readers
We used an active type of RFID tag; it is the same hardware device as in the ﬁeld trial at the
elementary school. This technology enables easy identiﬁcation of individuals: detection is
unaffected by the occurrence of occlusions, the detection area is wide, and the distance
FIGURE 23.6
Robovie-M.
428
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

between the tag reader and an RFID tag can be roughly estimated. Such beneﬁts are
suitable for large environments.
However, drawbacks include low accuracy over long distances and the inability to
detect exact positions. We compensated for these shortcomings by installing many RFID
tag readers in the environment.
To achieve approximate distance estimation, we set the RFID tag readers to have eight
levels of sensitivity. Detection areas, however, are affected by the position of the RFID tag
readers and reﬂections due to walls. Therefore, we measured each detection area before the
experiment. We then attached the tag readers in positions 2 m above the ﬂoor, and to
successfully detect the tags we had to set the reader sensitivity level to at least ﬁve. We
placed them around particular exhibits, so that the system could detect whether visitors
approached them. Moreover, as a tag reader’s detection ﬁeld has a torus shape using
multiple sensitivity levels, the system can estimate the tag position by superposing the
circles calculated from the reader outputs.
23.3.2.3.2
Infrared Cameras
We placed an infrared LED on top of a Robovie and attached infrared cameras to the
ceiling to determine the robot’s correct position. The system produces binary images
from the infrared cameras and detects bright areas. It calculates absolute coordinates
with a reference to the weighted center of the detection area and sends them to the
database.
Infrared camera positions are shown in Figure 23.5. The distance between the ﬂoor and
the ceiling is about 4 m. The width and height of images from an infrared camera are 320
and 240 pixels, respectively. One pixel represents about 1 cm2 of area.
23.3.2.3.3
Video Cameras
The video camera positions are also shown in Figure 23.5. The output images of each video
camera are recorded by a PC and used to analyze the data generated by the experiment.
23.3.3
Robots’ Behavior
In this section, we introduce the roles and behaviors of the robots. For friendly interaction
with visitors, robots need information about them. For example, the ﬁeld trial at the
elementary school shows that children’s interest increases when the machines call
them by name. Moreover, human interactions are characterized by a shared memory
of events.
Acquiring information about visitors, such as their names and memories, is difﬁcult for
the robots themselves. However, the embedded sensors enable them to capture this data
through, for example, an Ethernet network. This is the way the robots can act more
intelligently and overcome the limitations of their features.
23.3.3.1
Locomotive Robot
We used a Robovie as the locomotive robot that moved around in parts of the environ-
ment, interacted with visitors, and guided them to exhibits.
23.3.3.1.1
Interaction with Humans: Childlike Interaction
The robot can engage in such childlike behavior as handshaking, hugging, and the game of
‘‘rock, paper, and scissors’’ as shown in Figure 23.2. Moreover, it has such reactive
behaviors as avoidance and gazing at a touched part of its body, as well as such patient
behavior as solitary playing and moving back and forth.
Application of RFID Technologies for Communication Robots
429

23.3.3.1.2
Interaction with Humans: Using Information from RFID Tags
The robot can detect RFID tag signals around itself by using its RFID tag reader, which
allows it to obtain personal data on visitors using RFID tag IDs. It can greet visitors by
name or wish them a happy birthday, and so on. In addition, the robot can behave
according to the length of the visitors’ stays because the system records the time.
23.3.3.1.3
Guiding People to Exhibits: Human Guidance
The robot can guide people to four kinds of exhibits by randomly determining the target.
For example, when bringing visitors to the telescope, the robot says, ‘‘I am taking you to an
exhibit, please follow me!’’ and approaches the telescope. It suggests that the person looks
through it and then talks about its inventor.
23.3.3.1.4
Guiding People to Exhibits: Using Information from RFID Tags
The RFID tags’ data are also used for guiding. We used the amount of time that visitors
spent near an exhibit to judge whether they tried the exhibit. For example, when an RFID-
tagged visitor has stayed around the ‘‘a pulley’’ exhibit longer than a predeﬁned time, the
system assumes that the visitor has already tried it. Thus, the robot says, ‘‘Yamada-san,
thank you for trying ‘a pulley.’ What did you think of it?’’ If the system assumes that the
visitor has not tried it, the robot will ask, ‘‘Yamada-san, you didn’t try ‘a pulley.’ It’s really
fun, why don’t you give it a try?’’
23.3.3.2
Robots That Talk with Each Other
Two stationary robots (Robovie and Robovie-M) casually talk about the exhibits as
humans do with accurate timing because they are synchronized with each other using an
Ethernet network. The topic itself is intelligently determined by data from RFID tags. By
knowing the previous visiting course of a visitor, the robots can try to interest the visitor in
an exhibit he or she overlooked by starting a conversation on that exhibit.
23.3.4
Robot Bidding Farewell
This robot is positioned near the exit, and after requesting data from their RFID tags, says
good-bye to the departing visitors. It also reorients visitors on the tour who are lost by
examining the visitor’s movement history and time spent on the fourth ﬂoor of the Osaka
Science Museum, which was recorded by the system. If visitors walk clockwise, they
will immediately see this robot at the beginning and will be pointed in the right direction
by the robot.
23.3.5
Experiment
We performed experiments to investigate the impressions made by robots on visitors to the
fourth ﬂoor of the Osaka Science Museum during a 2 month period. As they departed
the fourth ﬂoor, we asked visitors to complete a questionnaire by ranking ﬁve factors on a
scale of 1–5, where 5 is the most positive. They were also encouraged to give other opinions
on the robots.
By the end of 2 month period, the number of visitors had reached 91,107, the number of
subjects who wore RFID tags was 11,927, and the number of returned questionnaires was
2,891. Table 23.5 shows the questionnaire results. It indicates that most visitors had a good
impression of the robots and that they would not feel anxiety about robots in the future.
Table 23.6 displays the age and gender of subjects who wore RFID tags and returned
questionnaires. These results indicate that most questionnaires were returned by women
430
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

and visitors in their 30s and 40s. We think that this trend resulted because only adults were
asked to ﬁll out the questionnaires, and the typical visitor group was a mother accom-
panying her child.
Most opinions were along the lines of ‘‘We had a really good time,’’ ‘‘I had fun because
the robots called me by name,’’ and ‘‘We felt close to the robots.’’ The results revealed that
visitors held favorable impressions about the presence of the robots. Moreover, visitors
described their favorite robot behavior, such as hugging, the calling out of names, and so
on. Such behaviors are basic elements of human society.
The freely given opinions of visitors were analyzed and revealed that visitors’ opinions
of the robots differed according to age (Nomura et al., 2007). For example, younger
respondents did not necessarily like the robots more than elder respondents.
23.3.6
Discussion and Conclusion
23.3.6.1
Contributions to HRI Research
More than 90,000 people visited the exhibition, more than 10,000 people interacted with the
robots and wore RFID tags, and about 3,000 people returned questionnaires. The results
showed that most visitors evaluated the robots highly.
The ﬁeld trial revealed the advantages of using humanoid robots for interacting with
people in a daily environment. In the exhibition, we often observed that people saw the
robots, stopped at the robots, started to interact with the robots, and listened to the robot’s
explanations about exhibits. In addition, after the robot explained a telescope exhibit, one
child went to use the telescope (Figure 23.7). When she came back to the robot, another
child used the telescope. In other words, the presence of a humanoid robot attracted people
to interact with it. This is one of the advantages of humanoid robots.
On the other hand, the lack of speech recognition capability is one important problem.
Although it spoke much about the exhibits, the robot could not listen to the questions and
comments from the visitors. When a reliable technique of speech recognition in a noisy
environment becomes available, the robots will be more useful in this kind of application.
TABLE 23.5
Results of Questionnaires
Interesting
Friendly
Effective of
Guide
Anxiety about
Interaction
Anxiety about
Future Robots
Average
4.25
3.86
3.32
2.36
2.46
S.D.
0.90
1.10
1.19
1.36
1.23
TABLE 23.6
Number of Respondents and Their Percentages Based on Gender and Age
Male
%
Female
%
Total
%
10s
144
6
205
9
349
15
20s
64
3
118
5
182
8
30s
287
12
822
36
1109
48
40s
215
9
304
13
519
23
50s
19
1
37
2
56
2
60s
31
1
30
1
61
3
70s
17
1
8
0
25
1
Total
777
34
1524
66
2301
100
Application of RFID Technologies for Communication Robots
431

Nevertheless, it is interesting that people already accepted and appreciated the robot even
without the speech recognition capability.
We believe that this trial demonstrated the possibility of using interactive robots in open
environments, which is one of the most important contributions of this work. Human–
robot interaction was considered only as a kind of entertainment when research on
interactive robots started. Our perspective (and that of many other researchers) is very
different. We believe that robots will be part of the fundamental infrastructure of our
society and will support a wide range of our daily activities. We believe that it is important
to demonstrate possible applications of interactive robots, such as in the ﬁeld trial at the
elementary school, and this work particularly demonstrated the possibility for use in an
open environment where both the novelty and interactivity of the robots were appreciated.
23.3.6.2
RFID Tags and Tag Readers
As shown in the scenes of interaction with the robots, the application of RFID technology
largely promoted the human–robot interaction, particularly with regard to name-calling
behavior. For example, the robot bidding farewell could attract the interest of visitors
through the name-calling behavior although the Robovie-M is far cheaper than Robovie
and its functionality is very limited, such as its small size, no embedded speech functions
(we placed a speaker nearby), and no sensors (an RFID reader was also placed nearby).
However, the information obtained from the distributed RFID tag readers made a
relatively small contribution to the system. Robots talked to the visitors about their
exhibit-visiting experience, such as ‘‘You did not see the telescope exhibit, did you? It is
very interesting. Please try it,’’ based on the information from the RFID reader network,
but it seemed to be less attractive and impressive to the visitors. Perhaps, robots are too
novel for visitors, so they highly appreciate their experience of interacting with the robots
while less attention is paid to the detailed services that they offer.
23.4
Conclusion
In this section, we introduced the applications of RFID technologies for communication
robots through our two ﬁeld trials, an elementary school and a science museum. The two
trials showed the effectiveness of RFID technologies for communication robots.
In the elementary school, we performed the ﬁeld trial for 2 weeks using communication
robots with ﬁrst- and sixth-grade elementary school students. In the trial, the robots
(a)
(b)
(c)
FIGURE 23.7
Scenes when visitor had interest in telescope.
432
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

behaved as English peer tutors for Japanese students. The results suggest that the robot did
encourage some children to improve their English. Our ﬁndings demonstrate the possibil-
ity of having communication robots work in our everyday life, even though the beneﬁts
may still be too small to justify practical application. If the communication robots were to
acquire a more powerful ability to maintain relationships with humans, we would feel
more conﬁdent in them serving various roles in our everyday life in the immediate future.
In the science museum, we have developed an interactive robot system that combines
communication robots and embedded environment sensors. The system guided visitors
through a science museum with humanlike interaction, such as calling their names in a
free-play behavior and explaining exhibits with voice and gestures. In a 2 month exhib-
ition, 91,107 people visited the Osaka Science Museum, 11,927 of whom wore RFID tags to
participate in the ﬁeld trial. The results from questionnaires revealed that almost all visitors
evaluated these robots highly. In addition, we conﬁrmed the effectiveness of interactive
behavior with personal information such as name-calling behavior.
In both trials, RFID technologies enabled communication robots to identify multiple
persons simultaneously. That function signiﬁcantly promoted the human–robot inter-
action, particularly with regard to the name-calling behavior. In addition, by using a
person identiﬁcation function, communication robots could know detailed information
for interacting with people, such as the number of people, personal information of people,
approximate distance of people, and moving histories of people. This information is useful
for human–robot interaction; already, Kanda and coworkers have proposed a function to
estimate friendly relationship by using an RFID tag system (Kanda and Ishiguro, 2006).
By the results of these ﬁeld trials, we believe that RFID technologies support essential
functions of communication robots. For example, robotics researchers should pay attention
to long-term interaction between robots and people in the future. To achieve long-term
interaction, a robust person identiﬁcation function is important; RFID technologies can
achieve such a function easily. Moreover, they can gather interacting histories between
robots and people.
Acknowledgments
We wish to thank the teachers and students at the elementary school for their eager
participation and helpful suggestions. We also wish to thank the staff at the Osaka Science
Museum for their kind cooperation. This research was supported by the Ministry of
Internal Affairs and Communications of Japan.
References
Breazeal, C. and Scassellati, B. 1999. How to build robots that make friends and inﬂuence people.
IEEE=RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, Kyongju, Korea, pp. 858–863.
Burgard, W., Cremers, A.B., Fox, D., Hähnel, D., Lakemeyer, G., Schulz, D., Steiner, W., and Thrun, S.
1998. The interactive museum tour-guide robot. Proceedings of the National Conference on Artiﬁcial
Intelligence, Madison, Wisconsin, pp. 11–18.
Fujita, M. 2001. Toward the era of digital creatures. International Journal of Robotics Research 20(10):
781–794.
Ishiguro, H., Ono, T., Imai, M., Maeda, T., Kanda, T., and Nakatsu, R. 2001. Robovie: an interactive
humanoid robot. International Journal of Industrial Robotics 28(6): 498–503.
Application of RFID Technologies for Communication Robots
433

Kanda, T. and Ishiguro, H. 2006. An approach for a social robot to understand human relationships:
friendship estimation through interaction with robots. Interaction Studies 7(3): 369–403.
Kanda, T., Ishiguro, H., Imai, M., Ono, T., and Mase, K. 2002. A constructive approach for developing
interactive humanoid robots. IEEE=RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems.
pp. 1265–1270.
Kozima, H., Nakagawa, C., Kosugi, D., Kawai, N., and Yano, Y. 2004. A humanoid robot in company
with children. IEEE RAS=RSJ International Conference on Humanoid Robotics, Santa Monica,
California, CD-ROM.
Letcher, J., Fox, D., and LaMarca, A. 2005. Large-scale localization from wireless signal strength.
National Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, pp. 15–20.
Nomura, T., Tasaki, T., Kanda, T., Shiomi, M., Ishiguro, H., and Hagita, N. 2007. Questionnaire-based
social research on opinions of Japanese visitors for communication robots at an exhibition.
Artiﬁcial Intelligence & Society 21(1): 167–183.
Nourbakhsh, I., Bobenage, J., Grange, S., Lutz, R., Meyer, R., and Soto, A. 1999. An affective mobile
educator with a full-time job. Artiﬁcial Intelligence 114(1–2): 95–124.
Shibata, T. 2004. An overview of human interactive robots for psychological enrichment. The
Proceedings of IEEE, 92(11): 1749–1758.
Siegwart, R. et al. 2003. Robox at Expo. 02: a large scale installation of personal robots. Robotics and
Autonomous Systems 42: 203–222.
434
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

24
Browsing the World with RFID Tags: Design
and Implementation of an RFID-Based Distributed
Environmental Memory
Alberto Rosi, Marco Mamei, and Franco Zambonelli
CONTENTS
24.1
Introduction...................................................................................................................... 435
24.2
RFID Technology for Pervasive Computing ............................................................... 436
24.2.1 Overview of RFID Technology......................................................................... 437
24.2.2 Related Work....................................................................................................... 438
24.3
RFID-Based Environmental Memory............................................................................ 439
24.3.1 Overview.............................................................................................................. 439
24.3.2 Application Programming Interface ................................................................ 440
24.3.3 Implementation ................................................................................................... 443
24.3.3.1 Hardware ............................................................................................. 443
24.3.3.2 Software................................................................................................ 443
24.3.4 Reliability and Performance Issues .................................................................. 444
24.3.5 Privacy and Security Concerns......................................................................... 445
24.4
Application Examples ..................................................................................................... 446
24.4.1 A First-Aid Rescue Application........................................................................ 446
24.4.2 Post It Localization ............................................................................................. 448
24.4.3 Motion Coordination and Events Organizer.................................................. 449
24.4.4 Context Awareness............................................................................................. 450
24.4.5 Pervasive Workﬂow Management................................................................... 451
24.5
Conclusions and Future Work....................................................................................... 452
Acknowledgment ....................................................................................................................... 452
References.................................................................................................................................... 452
24.1
Introduction
Advances in miniaturization of electronic devices and in wireless communication tech-
nologies are making possible to enrich our everyday environments (and the objects in it)
with computation and communication capabilities [1]. The result may be an increased
capability of interacting with the physical world, by acquiring in a digital form a number of
information beyond our normal sensing capabilities. In the next few years, we will no
435

longer simply browse the Web, but will be able to ‘‘browse the world’’ around us: we will
seamlessly access both data coming form the physical environment via RFID tags, perva-
sive sensors and data coming form the Web, and we will be able to integrate them as
needed in a suitable user-centric perspective.
Starting from the earlier considerations, this chapter presents the design and implemen-
tation of a system for tuple-based information access, context acquisition, and coordination
in environments enriched with RFID tags [2]. The key idea is that our everyday environ-
ments will be more and more populated by RIFD tags, either attached to ﬁxed location of
the environment or to objects in it. These tags, while being low cost and battery-free, can
make available some small amount of digital memory, in which it is possible to read and
write data via wireless access. Thus, it is possible to collectively exploit such physically
distributed memory areas as a sort of distributed shared memory: agents in an environ-
ment (whether they are humans carrying a mobile device or autonomous robots) can
‘‘access’’ such digital memory and, in this way, retrieve useful contextual information
and=or coordinate with each other.
The choice of adopting a tuple-based coordination model [3], providing distributed agents
with associative content-based access to distributed memory areas (i.e., tuple spaces), suits
well modern distributed computing scenarios. In fact, the suitability of tuple spaces abstrac-
tions to act both as general repositories of shared contextual information and as suitable means
to support uncoupled coordination between agents is widely recognized. Still, while tuple-
based coordination has already been extensively adopted for the coordination of distributed
agents in distributed computational environments (e.g., high-performance computing [4] and
Internet computing [5]), its exploitation in the context of emerging pervasive computing
technologies and physical environments has started being explored only recently [6–8].
By bringing together the advantages of RFID technology and the power of tuple-based
coordination models—and also thanks to its clean-layered implementation architecture
and its simple API—our approach proves itself very ﬂexible, cheap to deploy, other than
easy to use and suited for a variety of application scenarios. In addition, our approach
clearly distinguishes from related work in the area: on the one hand, RFID technology has
been exploited so far only for reading preexisting information on tagged objects and to
exploit this information for logistics purposes [9] or to detect activities in an environment
[10,11]; on the other hand, systems for pervasive tuple-based coordination proposed so far
exploit costlier and more difﬁcult to deploy technologies than RFID [8].
In any case, beside its advantages, we also emphasize that we are aware of a number of
current limitations of our system, speciﬁcally in terms of reliability and security. These
limitations do not generally undermine the usability of our approach (although in critical
scenarios, they may limit its role to that of a complimentary support to more reliable and
secure technologies), but nevertheless indicate the need for further work and extensions.
The remainder of this chapter is organized as follow. Section 24.2 brieﬂy introduces RFID
technology and discusses related work in the area. Section 24.3 presents the design and
implementation of our system for RFID tuple spaces, the associated API and the current
limitations of our system in terms of reliability, performances, and security. Section 24.4
introduces some application examples to clarify the use of our system and also discusses
further potential application areas. Section 24.5 concludes and discusses future works.
24.2
RFID Technology for Pervasive Computing
This section brieﬂy introduces RFID technology and then discusses related work in the area, that
is, how RFID technology has been used so far to improve interactions with the physical world.
436
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

24.2.1
Overview of RFID Technology
Advances in miniaturization and manufacturing have yielded silicon-based postage-
stamp-sized radio transceivers, called radio frequency identiﬁcation (RFID) tags that can
be attached unobtrusively to objects as small as a wristwatch or a pen (Figure 24.1a). Each
tag is marked with a unique identiﬁer and is provided with a tiny rewritable memory, up
to some KB for advanced models (our test-bed implementation comprises tags with a
storage capacity of 512 bit). The memory of tags, organized in cells, can be exploited for
storing information in a persistent way. Tags can be purchased off the shelf and can
withstand day-to-day use for years. In fact, they are battery-free and do not experience
power exhaustion problems.
Suitable devices, called RFID readers, can be used to access the memory of RFID tags for
both read and write operations. An RFID reader can be interfaced with any computer-based
device, even portable (Figure 24.1b). RFID readers access to RFID tags wirelessly. When in
need of reading or writing a tag, an antenna on the RFID reader emits a radio signal that
has the twofold function of commanding the tag (e.g., ‘‘I want to read your unique
identiﬁer,’’ ‘‘I want to write the byte ‘FF’ in the third memory cell’’) and of bringing energy
to it. When receiving a signal, a tag takes power from it, activates itself, and responds or
stores data according to the command embedded in the signal. RFID readers divide into
short and long range depending on the distance within which they can access RFID tags.
Such ranges vary from a few centimeters up to some meters.
Currently, RFID tags are in widespread use as antitheft technology in shops and for the
production of personal ID cards. In addition, a growing number of business and logistics
information systems are exploiting RFID tags for automating the identiﬁcation and the
tracking of products and merchandises [9]. In these systems, each product in a warehouse
or in a production line is uniquely identiﬁed by a tag, possibly including some description
of the product. The automatic gathering of the data in the tag and its proper integration
into an information system allows for better and cheaper management operations.
The trends indicate that, in a few years, most household objects and furniture will be
RFID-tagged before purchase (e.g., WalMart already adopts tagging at the level of pallets,
and if will not be long before it will adopt it at the level of single package). The increasing
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 24.1
(a) Some tagged objects. (b) An RFID reader connected to a PDA.
Browsing the World with RFID Tags
437

diffusion of the technology will also make it cheaper and cheaper, and the advent of ink-jet
electronics will further reduce the cost of tags and will make it possible to print them nearly
everywhere [12]. Moreover, handheld devices will be more and more provided with RFID
reading and writing capabilities (e.g., the Nokia 5140 phone can be already equipped with
a short-range RFID reader [13].
The future pervasiveness of RFID technology, together with its low cost and wireless
data access, makes it an interesting option to explore in pervasive computing scenarios.
24.2.2
Related Work
In this section, we present some related work using RFID technology as the basis of an
infrastructure to support pervasive applications. In this section, we will focus on infra-
structural issue, and we try to highlight the peculiar characteristics of our proposal. In
Section 24.4, instead, we will present some applications that can be realized with RFID
technology and our infrastructure that are related to application works in the area.
Several research proposals in the area of pervasive computing exploit—in different
ways—RFID tags as a simple and cheap way to enforce some forms of context awareness.
The system described by Satoh [14] assumes that readers are static, embedded in the
environment, and connected to a ﬁxed network infrastructure, while tags are attached to
objects and mobile devices. This can be used by the network to recognize the presence of
speciﬁc tagged objects or tagged PDAs into a speciﬁc room=location, and to contextualize
activities of applications accordingly: if the RFID reader in a room can read a speciﬁc tag,
this means that the corresponding object is in the proximities.
Our proposal, as well as several other proposals in the area, starts from a different
assumption. In particular, we think that more ﬂexibility can be achieved by having mobile
devices themselves integrated with an RFID reader, thus having the capability of accessing
RFID tags around, as sorts of digital contextual information stores. Such an approach has
been used in several proposals with different application goals. However, rather than
considering the possibility of storing new information in RFID tags and enforcing coord-
ination through them (as we do), most of these proposals exploit RFID tags only for
reading preexistent environmental information and for extracting from it contextual infor-
mation.
Along these lines, Kulyukin et al. [15] propose embedding tags in an indoor environment
and associating location information with them (‘‘I am the tag of the living room’’). These
can be read by mobile robots carrying on an RFID reader to roughly localize themselves.
The work described by Hähnel et al. [11] has similar localization goals, but goes further.
There, it is shown that a robot equipped with multiple RFID readers can, while moving in
an environment, detect with a very high statistical accuracy its own position as well as the
position and motion patterns of other tagged objects=devices.
The system described by Philipose et al. [10] exploits RFID tags not only for localization
but also, more generally, for inferring information about contextual activity in an environ-
ment. There, users are assumed to wear a special glove instrumented with an RFID reader
and connected with a Wi-Fi portable device. Thus, when the user moves and acts in the
environment, the type and the sequence of tags read by the glove can suggest what the user
is doing, which may be of great use, for example, in elderly monitoring.
None of the earlier proposals exploits RFID tags as environmental memories for writing
application-speciﬁc information. However, proposals exist in this direction.
The system described by Kawamura et al. [16] is a human memory augmentation system
that lies on a distributed environmental memory and enables a user to directly associate
experiences with physical objects by using a ‘‘touching’’ operation. However, this work
has its focus on discovering memory externalization strategies that performed best,
438
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

without being really interested in creating a general purpose framework layer. The middle-
ware architecture proposed by Floerkemeier and Lampe [17], instead, deﬁnitely shares
with our work the motivation of deﬁning a general framework for exploiting RFID tags for
both reading and writing application-speciﬁc information. There, the authors propose a
sort of content-based publish=subscribe mechanisms through which applications can select
to which type of tagged data they are interested in, while the middleware service takes care
of controlling RFID readers in reading=writing data and in delivering it to applications
accordingly. As in our tuple-based approach, the proposal has the advantage of enforcing
associative access to tag data. However, the proposal is more oriented to logistics infor-
mation systems and considers multiple RFID readers embedded in an environment that
can be accessed and controlled by a single application agent. Our proposal, instead, is
speciﬁcally oriented to mobile and pervasive computing scenarios and assumes that each
RFID reader is attached to a single device and that application agents running on such
device are the only ones to control it.
A previous work of Mamei and Zambonelli [18] has reported about experiments related
to exploiting RFID distributed in an indoor environment as a memory infrastructure
to store pheromone paths for the sake of enforcing pervasive stigmergic (ant-like)
coordination [19]. However, in that work, we neither implemented any speciﬁc tuple
space abstraction, nor deﬁned a general API to access RFID tags. Conversely, the
tuple space system presented in this chapter can be indeed exploited also to deploy
distributed pheromone paths.
A proposal that, although not exploiting RFID technology, is worth reporting, is the
TinyLime middleware [8]. TinyLime extends the Lime middleware to account for the
environmental data collected by a sensor network. In Lime and in TinyLime, each mobile
device is assumed to host a local tuple space. When a mobile device such as a laptop or a
PDA ‘‘walk-through’’ a network of sensors deployed in an environment, all the data
collected by the in-range sensors automatically feeds the local tuple space of the mobile
device, which thus can perceive sensorial data collected by sensors simply by reading in
the local tuple space. Thus, as far as reading environmental data is involved, TinyLime is
functionally analogous to our proposal. However, TinyLime assumes the presence of
computer-based sensors, much costlier than RFID tags and exhibiting battery exhaustion
problems. In addition, TinyLime misses the possibility of exploiting sensors to enforce
coordination between mobile devices, in that it assumes that they cannot write tuples in
sensors that are considered as simple data providers.
24.3
RFID-Based Environmental Memory
In this section, we give a general overview of our system, detail its application program-
ming interface, and provide some technical remarks on its current implementation.
24.3.1
Overview
Our system for RFID-based tuple spaces assumes a scenario in which the environment
is densely populated by RFID tags, possibly attached to doors, walls, furniture, and other
objects of any kind, acting as the digital memory in which tuples are stored. For what
said in Section 24.2.1, the presence of tags will be more and more pervasive, mostly
avoiding the need of a priori deployment effort. In any case, enriching an environment
with tags is a dramatically simple operation, reducing at sticking them around as
needed. In addition, our system considers the possibility that an environment can be
Browsing the World with RFID Tags
439

enriched by tags on-the-ﬂy, whenever needed for application purposes. In other words, if
there is a need of environmental memory for users to store information, users themselves
can dynamically release a tag in the environment and immediately use it (e.g., by storing a
tuple there).
The current EPC standard (www.epcglobalinc.org) adopted by most major retailers uses
read-only RFID tags. Moreover, privacy concerns may force tags attached to objects to
be deactivated out of the retailer. We think that both these two constraints, that would
make our infrastructure unfeasible, are temporary and will disappear in the future. On the
one hand, there are a number of researches actively investigating novel writable tags with
large storage capacity [20]. On the other hand, research on security and privacy issues in
RFID is becoming more and more active, and some solutions addressing these concerns
without destroying the tags are emerging (see Section 24.3.5). Ultimately, applications—
like the one presented in this chapter—that are made possible by the availability of
writable tags will justify the increased costs and=or privacy concerns.
Users, in the form of humans carrying on a PDA connected to an RFID reader (as from
Figure 24.1b) or in the form of autonomous robots again connected to an RFID reader,
roam in the environment and they can exploit the environmental memory of RFID tags. In
particular, application agents running on the PDA or on the robots can control their
own RFID reader to access the environmental memory via simple tuple space operations.
These operations provide agents the capability of storing new tuples in the environment
and of reading=extracting tuples in an associative way. In addition, blocking read=extract
operations and asynchronous notiﬁcation mechanisms enable application agents on dif-
ferent devices to coordinate and synchronize their activities with each other through the
environmental memory. In any case, we emphasize that environmental memory may not
necessarily be the only coordination mean. For instance, Wi-Fi PDAs or robot could also
directly coordinate with each other via TCP=IP. But this is not our focus here.
From the viewpoint of application agents, the perception of the environment is that of a
normal tuple space. From a given position in an environment, an agent has access to a
locally bounded set of RFID tags, depending on the range of the associated RFID reader
(see Figure 24.2a). Thus, performing input tuple space operations implies extracting tuples
by applying the associative access mechanism to the aggregate memory of in-range tags.
Analogously, inserting a tuple in the tuple space implies storing it in some available
memory cells of one of the in-range tags (although we also provide the possibility of
storing tuples in speciﬁc tags).
In our system, unlike in most of tuple-based middleware, there is no such concept as a
single global tuple space [4] or as a multiplicity of localized tuple spaces [5]. In our
approach, tuples are spread everywhere in the physical space, without being at all pre-
organized in logical containers and rather deﬁning a sort of spatial ‘‘continuous’’ of tuples.
The concept of tuple space is logical and subjective, depending on the current position of
an agent and on the range of its RFID reader (see Figure 24.2b). The same agent perceives
different information in different physical position, whereas two agents in the same
position may perceive different information depending on the reading range. Clearly,
this implies that coordination between two agents has to be necessarily contextual, that
is, spatial. Two agents can synchronize and coordinate only when they access (possibly at
different times) to intersecting sets of tuples, that is, when they act in close position of the
spatial environment.
24.3.2
Application Programming Interface
The API of our system deﬁnes Linda-like Java primitives to write tuples in the environ-
ment, read or extract tuples, as well as primitives to subscribe=unsubscribe to events. The
440
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

usage of the primitives does not require any a priori bounding to a speciﬁc tuple space.
Instead, an agent invokes a primitive and this primitive will automatically act on the
logical tuple space deﬁned by the currently in-range RFID tags.
Despite the Linda common ground, some important differences have also been neces-
sary to deal with the extremely limited storage capability of RFID tags.
The main difference from the ‘‘standard’’ Linda model is about the deﬁnition of a tuple.
In our implementation, a tuple is deﬁned by means of a simple name and value pair. Given
the limited storage capacity of tags, names and values are coded with just 1 byte each. An
application-dependent ontology (i.e., codebook) provides the right correspondence
between high-level objects and low-level codes. For example, if an agent wants to create
the tuple (‘‘apple,’’ ‘‘red’’), it will look for the code of the strings ‘‘apple’’ and ‘‘red’’ in the
ontology (i.e., ‘‘apple’’ ¼ 0F, ‘‘red’’ ¼ 10), and then it will actually create (0F,10). Once a
speciﬁc ontology has been selected, both encode and decode operations are invisible from
the application point of view. Templates are analogous to tuples, but the value part can be
left unspeciﬁed (null) to represent wild cards. Both tuples and templates are encoded in a
data structure called TagEntry.
Agent A
(a)
(b)
Agent B
FIGURE 24.2
Overview of the system. (a) Physical overview of two users (or of the same user at different positions) accessing
different set of tags in an RFID enriched environment. (b) Logical perception of tuple spaces by two application
agents (or by the same user at different positions).
Browsing the World with RFID Tags
441

Taking inspiration from JavaSpace terminology, we deﬁned the write primitive to insert
a tuple in the environment:
boolean write(TagEntry[] tuple, TagEntry[] template);
In our implementation, this method can write more than one tuple at once (it writes
an array of tuples) and it returns a boolean indicating whether the operation was successful
or not. This capability of writing multiple tuples gives to the application developer the
illusion of being able to manage complex tuples consisting of several name and value pairs:
=* create a tuple*=
TagEntry[] tuple ¼ new TagEntry[2];
tuple[0] ¼ new TagEntry(‘‘apple’’, ‘‘red’’);
tuple[1] ¼ new TagEntry(‘‘cost’’, ‘‘10’’);
== write the tuple in the RFID tag
write(tuple, null);
Another remarkable difference with respect to standard Linda operations is the intro-
duction of a template matching process also in the write operation. Since in a given
environment there may be several in-range tuple spaces (i.e., RFID tags), it may be useful
to impose some constraints on where to actually write a tuple. To this end, the second
parameter of the write method is an array of templates (name–value pairs with wild cards).
The write operation ﬁrst selects among in-range RFID tags, those storing tuples that match
all the templates in the array (for each template, there must be at least one matching tuple).
Then, it writes the new tuple in one of the matching tags by a random selection:
=* create a tuple*=
TagEntry[] tuple ¼ new TagEntry[2];
tuple[0] ¼ new TagEntry(‘‘apple’’, ‘‘red’’);
tuple[1] ¼ new TagEntry(‘‘cost’’, ‘‘10’’);
=* create a template *=
TagEntry[] template ¼ new TagEntry[1];
template[0] ¼ new TagEntry(‘‘shop’’,’’open’’);
== this writes the tuple in one tag picked randomly
write(tuple, null);
=* this writes the tuple in one tag picked randomly among those already
containing the tuple ‘‘shop ¼ open’’ *=
write(tuple, template);
The other Linda methods follow rather simply from these considerations. The read and
take primitives are deﬁned to read or extract a tuple matching a given template from the
environment.
TagEntry[] read(TagEntry[] template, TagEntry[] tag, int lease);
TagEntry[] take(TagEntry[] template, TagEntry[] tag, int lease);
In these methods, there are two template matching processes. The ﬁrst (second para-
meter) selects some matching tuple spaces (i.e., tags) among the in-range ones, on the basis
of their content, in a process similar to the one described earlier. The second
template matching process (ﬁrst parameter) selects some tuples from the previously
442
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

selected tuple spaces. At the end, one of the resulting tuples is picked randomly and either
read of taken.
Finally, we implemented a subscribe primitive to have agents notiﬁed whenever a tuple
matching a subscription template enters the environment (or, which is the same from the
agent viewpoint, when the agent enters a region of the environment in which the tuple can
be found). The subscribe method returns a unique identiﬁer to be possibly used later to
remove that subscription with the unsubscribe method.
int subscribe(TagEntry[] tuple, TagEntry[] tag, Listener listener);
void unsubscribe(int subid);
In conclusion, we want to emphasize that some of the earlier differences from the
standard Linda model are likely to disappear when tags with more storage capacity will
be available. For example, we expect that both the need to have an ontology (codebook)
mapping java objects to bytes and the constraint of having a tuple deﬁned in terms of a
name–value pair will be removed when it will be possible to store in tags complete
serialized objects.
24.3.3
Implementation
In this section, we describe our hardware test-bed and the implemented software archi-
tecture.
24.3.3.1
Hardware
In our implementation, each application agent runs on a HP IPAQ r 3 3715, running Pocket
PC 2003 Pro and J2ME and provided with a Wi-Fi card and an inside midrange RFID
reader. Thus, each agent can be carried around and it can connect to different tags
deployed in the environment. In particular, we employed ISO 15693 RFID tags, each
with a storage capacity of 512 bits. These tags communicate at 13.56 MHz frequency and
the reader can interact with tags within 1.5 m. The information being read is passed to the
PDA via a serial cable where it is processed.
In addition, a mobile robot has been realized by installing one PDA connected to an
RFID reader onboard of a Lego Mindstorms robot (www.legomindstorms.com). The IPAQ
runs an agent controlling both the RFID reader and the robot microprocessor.
24.3.3.2
Software
The software architecture is depicted in Figure 24.3.
. Driver. The bottom level consists in the RFID reader device driver. This driver
has been realized in terms of a dynamic link library that exports a number
of methods to control the reader. In particular, we implemented methods to
read and write a speciﬁc byte in a speciﬁc tag. This is the only layer in our
architecture that is hardware-dependent. The driver, in fact, shields top layers
from hardware details.
. RFID Control Logic. On the top of the driver, we realized an RFID control logic layer.
Since RFID communication is error-prone (it happens quite often that an in-range
tag fails to respond to the reader), we developed some mechanisms to iterate
operations and merge the results accordingly.
Browsing the World with RFID Tags
443

. Tuple Space. This layer is the core of our tuple space implementation. It is in charge
of performing important operations such as pattern matching and notifying agents
on triggering conditions (e.g., with regard to event subscriptions and blocking
read). For example, on the execution of a blocking read, this layer remains active
and ready to notify the application layer on new tuples being inserted in the tags
around or new tags coming in-range due to device movements.
. API Interface and Ontology. This layer provides the Linda-like methods described
earlier and the (application-speciﬁc) ontology to map high-level objects in low-
level byte values to be stored in the tags. This ontology is integrated with the
TagEntry constructor (see earlier) to hide the low-level representation from the
application point of view.
. Application Agent. The top layer of our architecture is the application agent that
realizes the application itself. Although nothing would prevent from running
more than one agent on the same platform that coordinate using the available
tags, our standard application scenario involves multiple devices each with a
single agent.
24.3.4
Reliability and Performance Issues
In general, the act of reading and writing RFID tags is something that exhibits high degrees
of uncertainty for various reasons (we forward the interested reader to study Refs.
[17,21,22] for thorough analysis of these issues).
First, the more a tag is far from the reader, the more the probability that the radio energy
that reaches the tag is not enough to activate it. Second, the orientation of the tag with
respect to the antenna inﬂuences the capability of the reader of providing energy to the tag,
so that even a very close tag may happen not to be readable [21]. Third, a metal object in
the proximity of a tag tends to absorb the energy of the reader and may prevent a tag from
being activated. In addition, the presence of tags close to each other may induce radio
interferences in the answers of tags to readers, preventing some of these answers to
properly reach the reader [22]. For these reasons, in our system as well as in most systems
based on RFID tags, an RFID control layer is introduced (as described in the previous
subsection). Nevertheless, there is not any guarantee that a tag in the range of a reader will
be properly read (or written) by the reader.
FIGURE 24.3
Software architecture.
RFID tags 
Driver 
RFID control logic 
Tuple space 
Application agent 
Hardware-dependent layer
Hardware-independent layers  
API interface 
Ontology 
444
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

In out system, the impact of the earlier problem is intrinsically limited by the adoption of
the tuple space coordination model. The uncertainty in reading tags and the fact that some
existing tags may stay undetected (or, which is the same, the fact that some existing
matching tuple does not end up in an actual match) does not generally cause, from the
viewpoint of the tuple-based coordination model, any application-level critical error. The
fact that, among multiple matching tuples existing in the environment, only a few of them
may be detected at a given time by a reader, can be perceived by an application agent as
part of that nondeterministic process of tuple selection which is promoted by tuple-based
coordination. The fact that a speciﬁc existing matching tuple Tx may remain undetected is
not perceived as an error from the application level, but simply as the fact that the
requesting agent, from its current position, perceives a projection of the global tuple
ensemble that does not include Tx. Although some problems may arise if two agents use
an undetected tuple Tx as a synchronization point, one could deal with the problem by
spreading multiple copies of Tx around to increase its detection probability.
Getting to performance considerations, we emphasize that the interferences induced
when activating multiple tags, together with the limited radio frequency at which tag
activation commands have to operate, bound the number of distinct tags that can be read
in a timeframe to about 20–100 s1, depending on the speciﬁc technology, the character-
istics of the environment, and the positions of tags [17]. Even smaller numbers apply when
a tag selection process is included, since the real operation on a speciﬁc tag has to be
necessarily preceded by read operations to select the tag.
Accordingly, providing performance numbers for our system is a rather useless exercise.
In fact, the time required by agents to execute tuple space operations—consisting in a few
line of Java code intertwined by invocations of functions on the RFID control layer—is
directly proportional to the time required to access RFID tags, and limited by it. In
particular, time to perform an operation mostly depends on the amount of reading
attempts in a single operation performed within the RFID control layer. In the current
implementation, we have set up this number in such a way that tuple space operations take
an average of 0.4 s to return to the invoking agents. Such time ensures a good probability of
reading all accessible tags in the proximities (enabling, with the hardware in our hands, to
read a number of 10–40 distinct tags within a single operation). At the same time, this time
is satisfactory from the viewpoint of human reaction times.
24.3.5
Privacy and Security Concerns
The use of RFID technology raises several privacy and security concern. Privacy concerns
relate to the fact that anyone with an RFID reader could read information associated with
tags in the surrounding, possibly unveiling sensible information. For instance, if we wear
or have in our pocket some tagged objects, a user with a reader could take a sort of x-ray
picture and discover sensible information (e.g., do I have an expensive cell phone, do
I have a pack of cigarettes in my pocket). Security issues arise also because anyone with an
RFID reader can modify the data stored in tags (e.g., modifying the expiry date on a tagged
bottle of milk). Clearly, such problems affect our system too.
We want to make it clear that our system currently does not integrate speciﬁc solutions
for preserving privacy and security. Nevertheless, we can at least analyze what possible
solutions can be envisioned, and possibly share our bits of experience with those who are
currently concerned with extending the technology to account for security and privacy.
In general, the approach of giving users a reader and have it proactively explore the
environment puts users in less sensible position with regard to the tracking of personal
information: the user is not passively subjected to reading of his own data, and is not forced
to wear any tag to exploit the system. This notably contrasts with other proposals for the use of
Browsing the World with RFID Tags
445

RFID tags in pervasive computing, where RFID reader embedded in the environment collects
information about users by reading tags user wears [14,23]. Of course, this does not solve the
problem of having a user being inspected with regard to tagged objects he may wear. The
problem of users wearing tagged objects that no one should be allowed to read could be easily
solved with the introduction of ‘‘read-only-by-user’’ tags, as proposed by Stajano [24]. In this
way, publicly readable (and writable) RFID tags containing no user sensible information
could coexist with read-only-by-user ones. The presence of the former ensures the availability
of the necessary infrastructure for our memory system to be meaningful and usable. The latter
ensures that no sensible information can be accessed. It is worth outlining that, from the
viewpoint of users, one user would perceive the overall memory of the surrounding as
including both the set of all in-range public tags and the set of his own private ones.
More sensible is the issue of public access to writing of distributed tags, which could
affect the possibility of safely interacting across the environmental memory. For instance,
with reference to the ﬁrst-aid rescue scenario, the problem of having some malevolent
agent modifying what has been written on the tag of an injured person can have dramatic
consequences on his health. A reasonable solution to mitigate the problem could be that of
having write-once tags, so as to ensure that a sensible information associated to a tag
cannot be maliciously or erroneously modiﬁed. It is also worth outlining that the possibil-
ity of a single writing operation in some portion of a tag’s memory could also be a way to
enforce read-only-by-user operations (i.e., by associating to a tag an unmodiﬁable ID
associated to a speciﬁc user and have the tag circuitry check for that ID on read operations).
The great current interest in RFID technology, and the increasing number of applications
associated with it, will certainly drive the appearance of suitable solutions to privacy and
security problems, possibly along the earlier identiﬁed lines [25,26]. Our proposal too will
beneﬁt from these solutions and, by considering the presence in an environment of
read-only-by-user tags to protect private information, of write-once tags to protect by
modiﬁcation critical information, and of normal (read-and-write-by-all) tags to store
general contextual information, will become a safe and trusted one to exploit.
24.4
Application Examples
The implementation of tuple spaces within RFID tags enables exploiting the beneﬁts of
tuple-based coordination in a wide number of pervasive computing scenarios. Here, we
ﬁrst give some more details about an exemplary application related to agents’ coordination
in a ﬁrst-aid scenario. Then, we overview a number of relevant areas to show the wide
range of situations that could take advantage of our system.
24.4.1
A First-Aid Rescue Application
Knowing how to monitor and deal with a large number of casualties is critical to disaster
response scenarios. If ﬁrst responders cannot quickly coordinate and triage the injured
people, the large numbers could quickly overwhelm emergency ﬁeld personnel and
hospital staff, and prevent them from providing quality trauma care [27]. To avoid such
problems, it would be fundamental to provide responders with suitable tools to coordinate
their activities at every phase during the disaster response mission.
Let us focus the attention on a possible earthquake scenario. First responders coming to
the disaster area have the primary need to coordinate their search for injured people.
To this end, they could use RFID tags likely to be present in the crumbled environment
or leave new tags to coordinate efﬁciently. Speciﬁcally, when looking for people, each
446
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

rescuer could instruct his PDA to simply write the tuple (rescuer ¼ my_id) in the tags
around to indicate that the area has already been explored. At the same time, the PDA is
programmed to read periodically the tags around and notify to the rescuer if the area had
been visited before by another member of the rescue team (see code as follows).
while(true) {
=* read tag around *=
TagEntry[] template ¼ new TagEnrty[1];
template[0] ¼ new TagEntry(rescuer);
TagEntry[] ts ¼ read(template, null, 0); == non blocking
if(ts contains other rescuer IDs)
alert(‘‘The area has already been explored’’);
=* write rescuer ID *=
TagEntry[] tuple ¼ new TagEnrty[1];
TagEntry[0] ¼ new TagEntry(rescuer, my_id);
write(tuple, null);
}
At the same time, rescuers could leave useful context information related to environ-
mental conditions. Such information could be extremely valuable to other team members
coming later to the area. For example, ﬁrst rescuers could leave tuples indicating if the area
is suitable for ambulance crossing. Ambulance could be equipped with RFID readers to
read such tuples and alert their drivers accordingly.
Tuple-based coordination and RFID tags could also support the workﬂow in medical
operations. First responders, after visiting some injured people (see Figure 24.4a), could
stick RFID tags to them and write there tuples with relevant trauma care information (see
Figure 24.4b). Adopting the proposed infrastructure, the code to deploy such tuples
becomes trivial (see code as follows).
=* create a tuple storing: medicated ¼ true, to_be_carried ¼ true,
illness ¼ medium*=
TagEntry[] tuple ¼ new TagEnrty[3];
TagEntry[0] ¼ new TagEntry(medicated,true);
TagEntry[1] ¼ new TagEntry(to_be_carried,true);
TagEntry[2] ¼ new TagEntry(illness, medium);
== write the tuple in the patient RFID tag
write(tuple, null);
After that, ﬁrst responders could move further visiting other persons. In the mean time,
nearby paramedics and emergency medical technicians could care for already visited
patients by taking advantage of the information stored in their RFID tags (see Figure 24.4c
and the code as follows).
=* create a template with: to_be_carried ¼ true,*=
TagEntry[] template ¼ new TagEnrty[1];
template[0] ¼ new TagEntry(to_be_carried,true);
=* start a blocking read to ﬁnd a suitable patient *=
read(template, null, true);
=* notify that a patient to be carried has been found *=
. . .
Browsing the World with RFID Tags
447

This could notably reduce latencies and delays and allow to care for several patients at
once in parallel. After this ﬁrst stage, some patients would be carried in the ambulance.
During the journey to the hospital, the tuples stored in the RFID tags could be integrated
with additional information and be sent wirelessly to the hospital. This would allow
doctors there to save time by setting up things in advance (e.g., preparing surgery
rooms) to receive the incoming people more quickly and more efﬁciently.
24.4.2
Post It Localization
As already discussed in Section 24.2, RFID tags can act as a cheap yet effective indoor
localization infrastructure [11,14]. The approach we implemented consists of tagging
several places in the environment with RFID tags storing a URL where to download a
picture of the building map, and their own coordinates within the building. Users are
provided with a wireless PDA equipped with an RFID reader. The indoor localization
application periodically looks for RFID tags around. If a tag with the coordinates is
detected, the map of the building is downloaded and displayed on the user PDA, and
the user is localized at the same coordinates of the RFID tags being read (this is consistent
with the short reading range of the RFID reader). In addition, localization tags can be used
as a virtual ‘‘Post It.’’ Tags embedding information about ofﬁce position can also embed
information about people working on it, taking the place of small slip of notepaper
temporarily stuck to a door with sentences written above like ‘‘I’ll be back soon’’ or
‘‘You can temporarily meet me at Professor Zambonelli’s ofﬁce.’’
The pseudocode of the ‘‘Post It’’ localization application is straightforward (see later),
while a screenshot of the indoor localization application is reported in Figure 24.5.
(Medicated 
| True)
(Medicated 
| <Any>)
(Illness 
| Medium)
(To be carried 
| True)
(To be carried 
| True)
(b)
(a)
(c)
FIGURE 24.4
Tuple-based coordination and RFID in a ﬁrst-aid scenario. (a) First responder, after providing ﬁrst aid to injured
people, (b) can store in RFID tags attached to them relevant information about their conditions. Following these,
(c) paramedics can read those RFID tags to get aware of and treat injured people more quickly and more
efﬁciently.
448
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

=* Indoor localization tuples are in the form:
TagEntry[] tuple ¼ new TagEntry[3];
tuple[0] ¼ new TagEntry(‘‘map’’, ‘‘http:==155.185.3.4=map.kml’’);
tuple[1] ¼ new TagEntry(‘‘x’’, ‘‘130’’);
tuple[2] ¼ new TagEntry(‘‘y’’, ‘‘120’’);
*=
while(true) {
=* read tag around *=
TagEntry[] template ¼ new TagEnrty[1];
template[0] ¼ new TagEntry(‘‘map’’,null);
TagEntry[] ts ¼ read(template, null, 0); == non blocking
If(ts ! ¼null) {
display(ts[0].value); == map
localize(ts[1].value,ts[2].value); == x,y
}
sleep(1000); sleep 1 second
}
24.4.3
Motion Coordination and Events Organizer
Starting from Section 24.2 considerations, and from a previous work of Mamei and
Zambonelli [18], we introduce two application examples describing how to obtain self-
coordination and self-organization exploiting information spread on environment.
Tuples spread in the environment could enable a group of agents (both humans and
robots) to coordinate their respective movements. An exemplary application would be
distributed environment exploration. Users could mark already visited areas by writing
tuples in the RFID tags around. Later on, other users could decide to explore a speciﬁc area
if there are not any tuples pointing in that direction (the area is truly unexplored).
Another similar application could be based on spreading information trails, in RFID
tags spread in an environment, to be followed as trails of pebbles. Using RFID tags as
white pebbles, users can mark footprints of their movements directly in the environment.
FIGURE 24.5
RFID-based indoor localization.
Browsing the World with RFID Tags
449

Integrating them with contextual and user’s behavior information, we can easily obtain a
distributed events organizer. We can ﬁgure to be walking across a huge park, for example,
New York Central Park. A huge park like the one earlier contains several open spaces in
which people can self-organize and perform various activities and sports. If along park
alleyways we place a line of public RFID tags, with both writing and reading access, we
can ﬁgure how easy can be organize a soccer match.
A player, having a football in his hands, wants to organize a football match but he is
completely alone. While he is walking across alleyways searching for an empty space to
transform in a football pitch, he leaves on RFID pebbles as footprint of his passing
provided with a small description of the activity he is going to perform, for example,
‘‘27th March 2006, 4:10 p.m., arranging a football match’’ equipped with an implicit
message ‘‘if you are interested, follow me.’’ Other people, while entering the park, can
read RFID tags around to discover interesting activities going on. Then, they can start
following the pebbles to reach the location where a selected activity takes place. Now, our
lonely player has only to wait for other people to come.
The ‘‘Events Organizer’’ application can be eventually extended gathering information
either from devices measuring physical events or from inferencing user’s behaviors. For
example, wearable accelerometers [28] placed on clothes can indicate if the subject is
walking or running (or sitting, standing, shaking hands, etc.), integrating such information
over the time we can deduct user’s pace and understand the activity he is undertaking.
Likewise, for example, a microphone can capture user’s statements indicating aims and
intentions supporting the creation of a more distinct proﬁle of the events he is going to
perform. Scene classiﬁcation performed on speech recognition also permits to detect if user
is alone, is interacting with another person or with a larger group of people [29]. Informa-
tion can be taken too observing user habits like suggested by Castelli et al. [30]. A Bayesian
system can, for example, infer that our user, every day, uses to have jogging at 07:00 a.m.
This information can be stored on RFID pebbles; in this way people interested in running at
that time, and with user’s pace, can manage to run together.
24.4.4
Context Awareness
Tuples written in the environment can be used to help users (as well as robots) in getting
aware of what is in the environment more than their natural and artiﬁcial senses can do, by
reading the additional information provided by tags. Our RFID approach naturally suits
this application in that (1) RFID tags can store—or link to—semantically rich contextual
information, (2) context data can be actually written in the environment where it will be
most useful. For example, RFID tags stuck on objects or persons could hold information on
such objects and persons to be read by people nearby. Reading such tags could be very
valuable to assess the application context. As an exemplary application, we developed an
RFID-based system to provide tourist information to users. Tourist information related to
different art pieces are stored in RFID tags stick to the piece itself (such information can be
partially stored locally in the RFID memory, and partially stored in a Web site whose URL
is in the RFID). Users can trivially read and display such information on their PDA (see
Figure 24.6).
A similar, but more interactive, application we designed is ‘‘polite grafﬁti.’’ It allows
users to store short messages or links to content-rich information in RFID tags spread
in the environment. Such information can be then accessed and visualized via RFID
reader-equipped devices, possibly with an augmented reality interface [31]. The idea of
this application is to allow people to express themselves with grafﬁti-like messages with-
out damaging buildings’ facades or monuments. Grafﬁti could also be displayed on a
450
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

wide-screen display installed in proximity of the monument and eventually surrounded by
advertising messages.
24.4.5
Pervasive Workﬂow Management
In line with these ideas is the concept of pervasive workﬂow management. Standard workﬂow
management systems are rooted on a centralized engine that keeps track of the status of the
workﬂow being carried on. Workers notify to this engine the tasks being completed and the
engine in turn notiﬁes the subsequent tasks that have to be carried on [32]. RFID tags and
tuple-based coordination could remove the need for a centralized engine in a pervasive
computing environment. Basically, the RFID tags associated to the items to be processed
could store a tuple identifying the operations that the item undertook. Workers with RFID
readers could simply read the state of the item and process it further. This approach could be
employed in traditional manufacturing scenarios as well as in more mundane domestic
workﬂow (e.g., store in the pet’s collar a tuple reporting if it has already eaten or not).
FIGURE 24.6
Context information acquisition by read-
ing information stored in RFID tags.
Browsing the World with RFID Tags
451

24.5
Conclusions and Future Work
In this chapter, we have presented the design and implementation of a system that, by
exploiting the physically distributed memory of RFID tags, enables to enforce pervasive
tuple-based access to contextual information and distributed coordination activities. The
presented system is low cost, easy to deploy and to use, and makes available a simple yet
effective application programming interface, suitable for a variety of application scenario.
Our current research work deals with trying to overcome—or at least mitigate—some
identiﬁed problems of our system related to reliability and security, as discussed earlier in
this chapter. In addition, we are exploring the possibility of extending our system to
integrate other pervasive computing technologies than RFID tags. In particular, we think
that it is possible and useful to integrate into a uniform distributed tuple-based model any
embedded device in an environment—from RFID tags to active wireless sensors and
wireless computer-based devices—and exploit a single API to access information, control
active devices, enforce distributed tuple-based coordination, independently of the speciﬁc
type of devices existing in the environment.
Acknowledgment
Work supported by the project CASCADAS (IST-027807) funded by the FET Program of
the European Commission.
References
1. D. Estrin, D. Culler, K. Pister, and G. Sukjatme, Connecting the physical world with pervasive
networks, IEEE Pervasive Computing, 1(1): 59–69, 2002.
2. V. Stanford, Pervasive computing goes the last hundred feet with RFID systems, IEEE Pervasive
Computing, 2(2): 9–14, 2003.
3. D. Gelernter and N. Carriero, Coordination languages and their signiﬁcance, Communications of
the ACM, 35(2), 96–107, 1992.
4. S. Ahuja, N. Carriero, and D. Gelernter, Linda and friends, IEEE Computer, 19(8): 26–34, 1986.
5. A. Omicini and F. Zambonelli, Coordination for internet application development, Journal of
Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems, 2(3): 251–269, 1999.
6. M. Mamei and F. Zambonelli, Programming pervasive and mobile computing applications with
TOTA, Proceedings of the 2nd IEEE Conference on Pervasive Computing and Communication, Orlando,
FL, pp. 415–422, March 2004.
7. C. Fok, G. Roman, and C. Lu, Rapid development and ﬂexible deployment of adaptive wireless
sensor network applications, International Conference on Distributed Computing Systems, Columbus,
Ohio, 2005.
8. C. Curino, M. Giani, M. Giorgetta, A. Giusti, A.L. Murphy, and G.P. Picco, TinyLime: bridging
mobile and sensor networks through middleware, IEEE International Conference on Pervasive
Computing and Communications, Kauai Island, Hawaii, 2005.
9. C. Bornhovd, T. Lin, S. Haller, and J. Schaper, Integrating automatic data acquisition with
business processes: experiences with SAP’s Auto-ID infrastructure, International Conference on
Very Large Databases, Toronto, Canada, 2004.
10. M. Philipose, K.P. Fishkin, M. Perkwitz, D.J. Patterson, D. Fox, H. Kautz, and D. Hahnel, Inferring
activities from interactions with objects, IEEE Pervasive Computing, 3(4): 10–17, 2004.
452
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

11. D. Hähnel, W. Burgard, D. Fox, K. Fishkin, and M. Philipose, Mapping and localization with
RFID technology, Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation ICRA,
2004.
12. G. Collins, Next stretch for plastic electronics, Scientiﬁc American, 291: 74–81, 2004.
13. Nokia mobile RFID kit, http:==www.nokia.com=nokia=0,,55738,00.html
14. I. Satoh, A location model for pervasive computing environments, Proceedings of IEEE 3rd
International Conference on Pervasive Computing and Communications (PerCom’05), Kauai Island
(HW), pp. 215–224, March 2005.
15. V. Kulyukin, C. Gharpure, J. Nicholson, and S. Pavithran, RFID in robot-assisted indoor naviga-
tion for visually impaired, Proceedings of the 2004 IEEE=RSJ International Conference on Intelligent
Robots and Systems, Sendai, Japan, vol. 2, pp. 1979–1985, 2004.
16. T. Kawamura, T. Fukuhara, H. Takeda, Y. Kono, and M. Kidode, Ubiquitous memories:
a memory externalization system using physical object, Personal Ubiquitous Computing, 11(4):
287–298, Springer-Verlag, London, 2007.
17. C. Floerkemeier and M. Lampe, RFID middleware design—addressing application requirements
and RFID, Technical Report, Pervasive Computing Group, ETH Zurich, 2005.
18. M. Mamei and F. Zambonelli, Spreading pheromones in everyday environments through RFID
technology, Proceedings of the 2nd IEEE Symposium on Swarm Intelligence, Pasadena, CA, pp. 281–
288, June 2005.
19. E. Bonabeau, M. Dorigo, and G. Theraulaz, Swarm Intelligence, Oxford University Press, Oxford,
1999.
20. K. Greene, Wireless wonder chip, HP’s tiny chip could offer a new way for storing and sharing
video, audio, and pictures, http:==www.technologyreview.com=printer_friendly_article.aspx?
id ¼ 17182
21. K.P. Fishkin, B. Jiang, M. Philipose, and S. Roy, I sense a disturbance in the ﬁeld: unobstrusive
detection of interactions with RFID tagged object, Ubicomp 2004 Conference, Notthingam, UK,
2004.
22. C. Floerkemeier and M. Lampe, Issues with RFID usage in ubiquitous computing applications,
International Conference on Pervasive Computing, Vienna, Austria, 2004.
23. S. Hsi and H. Fait, RFID enhances visitors’ experience at the exploratorium, Communications of the
ACM, 48(9): 60–65, 2005.
24. F. Stajano, RDIS is x-ray vision, Communications of the ACM, 48(9): 31–33, 2005.
25. G. Avoine, Security and privacy in RFID systems, http:==lasecwww.epﬂ.ch=gavoine=rﬁd
26. M.R. Rieback, B. Crispo, and A.S. Tanenbaum, The evolution of RFID security, IEEE Pervasive
Computing, 5(1): 62–69, 2006.
27. K. Lorincz, D. Malan, T. Fulford-Jones, A. Nawoj, A. Clavel, V. Shnayder, G. Mainland, S. Moulton,
and M. Welsh, Sensor networks for emergency response: challenges and opportunities, IEEE
Pervasive Computing, 3(4), 2004.
28. N. Kern, B. Schiele, and A. Schmidt, Recognizing context for annotating a live life recording,
Personal Ubiquitous Computing, 11(4): 251–262, Springer-Verlag, London, 2007.
29. N. Kern, B. Schiele, H. Junker, P. Lukowicz, and G. Troster, Wearable sensing to annotate
meetings recordings, Proceedings of ISWC, Seattle, WA, USA, October 2002.
30. G. Castelli, M. Mamei, and A. Rosi, The whereabouts diary, Technical Report, University of
Modena and Reggio, Emilia, Italy, 2007.
31. D. Wagner and D. Schmalstieg, ARToolKitPlus for pose tracking on mobile devices, Computer
Vision Winter Workshop, St. Lambrecht, Austria, 2007.
32. A. Ricci, A. Omicini, and E. Denti, Virtual enterprises and workﬂow management as agent
coordination issues, International Journal of Cooperative Information Systems, 11(3=4): 355–379, 2002.
Browsing the World with RFID Tags
453


25
RFID-Enabled Privacy-Preserving Video
Surveillance: A Case Study
Jehan Wickramasuriya, Sharad Mehrotra, and Nalini Venkatasubramanian
CONTENTS
25.1
Surveillance for Pervasive Spaces: Utility versus Privacy......................................... 456
25.2
System Architecture ........................................................................................................ 457
25.2.1 Radio Frequency Identiﬁcation Technology................................................... 458
25.2.2 Video Processing Subsystem............................................................................. 458
25.3
RFID-Driven Access Control.......................................................................................... 459
25.3.1 Access Control Framework ............................................................................... 460
25.4
System Implementation .................................................................................................. 463
25.4.1 Hardware and Setup .......................................................................................... 463
25.5 Results and Observation ................................................................................................. 464
25.6
Conclusions....................................................................................................................... 466
References.................................................................................................................................... 466
RFID-enabled applications are growing at a tremendous rate with uses in a number of
different areas such as pharmaceuticals, health care, transportation, retail, defense,
logistics and many others. An important aspect of modern radio frequency identiﬁcation
(RFID) technology is the utility it can provide in a variety of different applications. The
idea is to enhance existing system components with the beneﬁts RFID provide while still
keeping the system modular and efﬁcient. An equally important and overarching
concern is that of privacy, which is particularly pertinent when dealing with pervasive
applications that deal with potentially personalizing information. The privacy concerns
stem from both the issues related to the particular technology (e.g., maintaining ano-
nymity while utilizing RFID for identiﬁcation purposes) as well as ensuring that the
end-to-end system takes them into account too. As an example of how these factors
come into play with designing and building an integrated system, this chapter will
outline a privacy-preserving video surveillance system that uses RFID hardware for
localization and identiﬁcation. Our focus here is on privacy concerns that pertain to the
end-to-end system and more speciﬁcally those stemming from interactions between
individuals and the environment. In this chapter, we describe the design of a privacy
455

preserving video surveillance system [1] that monitors subjects in an instrumented space
only when they are involved in an access violation (e.g., unauthorized entry to a region). In
this system, access control policies specify the access rights of individuals to different
regions of the monitored space. Policy violations (detected via use of localization sensors
such as RFID tags, motion detection, etc.) are used to trigger the video surveillance
subsystem. Video manipulation techniques such as masking are used to preserve the
privacy of authorized subjects when the surveillance system is turned on. The novel
facet of this system is the integration of sensor technology (namely RFID) with a video
surveillance subsystem.
25.1
Surveillance for Pervasive Spaces: Utility versus Privacy
Today, even though potential privacy concerns exist, a large number of work spaces and
critical infrastructures do not avail the beneﬁts of automation that pervasive spaces offer
because of concerns of privacy of individuals. Looking at the other extreme, if the beneﬁts
outweigh the concerns, pervasive environments are designed and used with complete
disregard to individuals’ privacy. Personalizing information is logged and available for
(mis)use at the whims of the organizations (and their employees) that collect data. With the
heightened consciousness among the public, private, and government organizations for
security, surveillance technologies (especially video surveillance) have recently received a
lot of attention. Video surveillance systems are being considered=deployed in a variety of
public spaces such as metro stations, airports, shipping docks, etc. As cameras go up in
more places, so do the concerns about invasion of privacy [2]. Privacy advocates worry
whether the potential abuses of video surveillance outweigh its beneﬁts. A fundamental
challenge is to design surveillance systems that serve the security needs while protecting
the privacy of the individuals.
Example Scenario: We demonstrate the basic functionality of the framework by means of
an example that examines security in a hospital setting. Assume the hospital is divided into
federated regions that are each covered by video cameras. The RFID sensor information is
used in conjunction with the video surveillance subsystem to provide coverage of the
monitored regions. Furthermore, access control policies are deﬁned for personnel carrying
RFID tags. The enforcement of these policies is used to inﬂuence the video surveillance
system. Figure 25.1 shows a scenario in which the hospital consists of four regions, each
surveilled by a single camera.
The idea is that if a subject is authorized to be in a particular region (which is determined
by their RFID tag) he=she may be hidden in the video. This way, subjects’ privacy is
maintained until they violate their given rights (e.g., enter a region they are not authorized
to be in). In Figure 25.1, each region (R1,R2,R3, and R4) is monitored by a video feed that is
triggered by a system that processes the information from RFID readers and predeﬁned
access policies. A paramedic entering R3 causes the motion sensor to initiate a read on
his=her tag that is forwarded to the RFID reader. This causes an access violation and
subsequently triggers the video feed for R3. However, medical personnel present in R3
(who are authorized for all regions) will be masked in the feed according to their given
privacy level. Additional constraints can also be enforced such as restricting certain
patient=doctor pairs or associating a bed (which can also be tagged with RFID) with a
particular patient.
456
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

25.2
System Architecture
Figure 25.2 depicts a high-level outline of the system architecture. The infrastructure
comprises the following components:
1. Sensing Module: Processes data from incoming sensors. More speciﬁcally, an RFID
control component deals with RF-related messaging arriving at the readers. Data
from motion detection sensors are also processed here. A video input module
handles the incoming video stream data from the various surveillance cameras.
RFID reader/DB
Medical staff
(R1,R2,R3,R4)
Patients
(R1,R2,R4)
Paramedics
(R1,R2)
Video camera
Lobby
[REGION 1]
Sensor (motion detector)
General
ward
[REGION 4]
Medical
records
[REGION 3]
Emergency
department
[REGION 2]
Unauthorized access
(access violation)
Administration
FIGURE 25.1
Instrumentation of a hospital’s physical space for privacy protecting video surveillance.
Sensing module
Data management
module
Auxillary services
Output module
Policy engine
(XML)
Video processing
obfuscation
motion detection
tracking
...
Streaming video
Logging
Reporting
...
Other sensors
(RFID, motion,
acoustic, chem, ...)
Vidio sensors
(cameras)
Databases
FIGURE 25.2
System architecture.
RFID-Enabled Privacy-Preserving Video Surveillance: A Case Study
457

2. Data Management Module: Consists of an XML-based policy engine for access
control. This policy engine interacts with a database subsystem consisting of
proﬁle and policy databases for the users.
3. Auxiliary Services: A service library contains modules that provide auxiliary ser-
vices on the sensed information (including the incoming video stream(s)). These
include obfuscation, motion detection, and object tracking modules. For example,
masking may be applied to the video stream before it is passed to the output
module, if the subject has been authorized by the policy engine.
4. Output Module: Handles customized reporting, logging, and video rendering func-
tionality.
In particular, RFID sensor information is utilized (together with motion detection
sensors) for localization of objects within the media space. The system has two major
components, the RFID-based localization system and the video subsystem.
25.2.1
Radio Frequency Identiﬁcation Technology
RFID technology provides the ability to interrogate data content without contact and the
necessity of the line-of-sight communication. RFID is a means of storing and retrieving
data through electromagnetic transmission to an RF-compatible integrated circuit [3].
A typical system consists of a tag (or a set of tags), a reader=receiver that can read and
write data to these tags, and optionally a ﬁeld generator (for relaying information from a
region). The communication occurs at a predeﬁned radio frequency and utilizes a protocol
to read and receive data from the tags via inductive coupling.
The system is instrumented as follows; each protected region is equipped with a ﬁeld
generator. The boundaries between adjacent spaces can either be physical, as in a door or
wall separating two rooms, or virtual, as in a nonphysical partition used to separate parts
of a large room. Since we are interested in entry (and exit) to a region, each ﬁeld generator
is equipped with a motion detector that triggers a read of the region when motion is
detected. If there is no tag information associated with the motion, the signal sent to the
reader is categorized as unauthorized and video surveillance of the region is triggered.
Tags are distributed to personnel, and a database stores the access rights associated with
each tag such as desired user privacy levels (which are subsequently mapped to video
masking techniques). When entry into a region is detected, the tag information is read
(if present) and that information is passed to the RFID control module that forwards an
authorization request to the policy engine. The policy decision for the object is then passed
to the video-processing module, which uses this information in rendering the video object.
25.2.2
Video Processing Subsystem
A ﬂow chart identifying the main components of the current video-processing subsystem is
depicted in Figure 25.3. Our video analysis software is based on detection of moving
foreground objects in a static background. The choice of a relatively simple algorithm is
motivated by the need for real-time processing. Using a background model, the pixel
detection module passes the result to a simple four-connected component algorithm to
cluster pixels into blobs. The object tracker identiﬁes objects entering the ﬁeld of view of the
camera and localizes them in the video frame using information passed to it by the RFID
control module. Depending on access control policy, the stream is further processed using
one of a number of masking techniques (Figure 25.4) before being displayed by the
rendering module. The entire process is tuned to maintain a frame rate of approximately
458
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

30 fps. It should be noted that the video camera capture facility is motion triggered. This
way, video is only captured when there is activity in the region being monitored, making it
much easier to focus on events of interest and save storage if video data is being archived.
25.3
RFID-Driven Access Control
An integral part of utilizing the RFID hardware in the system is the ability to specify and
enforce security policies based on information gathered via RFID. The access control model
is crucial to the system and allows speciﬁcation of spatial constraints (i.e., which regions a
person has access to). It allows the implementer to specify policies that dictate the manner
Mask
blur
bounding-box
Incoming video
stream
Background
model
Foreground pixel
detection
Connected
component
determination
Object
tracking
Object
obfuscation
Video
rendering
(display)
Sensor data
(RFID, motion)
FIGURE 25.3
Flow chart of the video subsystem.
FIGURE 25.4
Privacy-protecting masking techniques for video utilized by our system. They represent different levels of user
privacy. A frame of the original video is shown (top-left), followed by a noise=blur ﬁlter (top-right). A pixel-coloring
approach is shown (bottom-left) followed by a bounding-box based technique (bottom-right), which hides details
such as gender, race, or even dimensions of the person in question.
RFID-Enabled Privacy-Preserving Video Surveillance: A Case Study
459

in which video surveillance is conducted in a physical space. In other words, the policy
decisions drive the video subsystem. For example, a member of the janitorial staff cleaning
an ofﬁce suite at 2 AM might be considered normal. However, if corporate policy prohibits
entry to particular parts of the building after midnight, this event may be considered a
potential security breach and needs to be further investigated. The entire policy subsystem
is fairly complex and supports both simple and complex predicates; however, for the
purposes of this chapter we describe the basic model that supports instantaneous policies
(that is to say, the policies can be evaluated using the current RFID-sourced data).
Security policies are speciﬁed using the eXtensible Access Control Markup Language
(XACML), which are processed by an enforcement engine that provides mediated access to
a database. XACML [4] is utilized to deﬁne the access policies as well as carry out
enforcement on these policies. XACML is a standard, general-purpose access control policy
language deﬁned using XML. It is ﬂexible enough to accommodate most system needs, so
it may serve as a single interface to policies for multiple applications and environments. In
addition to deﬁning a policy language, XACML also speciﬁes a request and response
format for authorization decision requests, semantics for determining policy applicability,
etc. (Figure 25.5). The components of the access control model are the video-based objects,
the potential users, and modes of access that can be modeled as a traditional authorization
rule of the form hs, o, mi, where subject s is authorized to access object o under mode m,
where the mode is associated with a particular privacy level. In the following section we
give a general description of the type of policies supported by our system and then give
speciﬁc examples of their speciﬁcation in XACML. (A simple example of subject speciﬁca-
tion is shown in Figure 25.6.)*
25.3.1
Access Control Framework
Here we present a framework for access control speciﬁcation in the context of the system.
For the purposes of this chapter, we outline a simpliﬁed speciﬁcation of the framework.
Assume a set of regions R ¼ {r1, . . . , rn}, which are monitored over time, a set of corre-
sponding video streams V ¼ {v1, . . . , vn} to these regions. Assume that the region ri corres-
ponds to the video stream vi. But note that in a general setting more than one video stream
Attributes
Policy
Authorization decision
Authorization request
Policy decision point
(PDP)
Policy enforcement
point
(PEP)
XACML
response
XACML
request
Profile/access
database
Policy
database
FIGURE 25.5
XACML-based policy framework.
* In reality, any type of policy speciﬁcation framework can be implemented and applied to our general set of
primitives.
460
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

can correspond to a region. There is a set of objects O ¼ {o1, . . . , om}, which are being
surveilled (e.g., people). These objects can be static (e.g., inventory) or mobile. Each of
these objects may have an RFID tag associated with it, which in effect serves as its credential
and basis for authorization to a particular region. The mapping between a particular tag
and the corresponding object is stored in a proﬁle database. We specify a set of tags T ¼
{t1, . . . , tx} and use T as the subject of the authorization rules. Furthermore, each tag also
has associated with it a privacy level P, where P 2 L ¼ {L0, . . . , LN} (Figure 25.4). These
privacy levels specify the sensitivity at which video information pertaining to a particular
object should be collected or viewed. The privacy level of a tag is determined at the time
the tag is issued and can be modiﬁed later by an administrator. In our system, we use four
levels of increasing sensitivity (L0 corresponds to no privacy and L3 to total privacy) and
map a masking technique to each of these levels. The various video-masking techniques
are discussed in the next section. Finally, to aid in specifying group-based authorization
rules, we introduce an object association list, OA # O. This is a useful concept, not in the
traditional notion of access groups but for associating inventory (i.e., equipment, etc.) with
users authorized to use them. We use the more general notion here that members of OA are
simply other objects, however, in practice these objects are of a static nature.
Therefore we can associate with a tag ti (and therefore an object) a set Rules: ¼ (Ruleset, d)
which contains a Ruleset of authorization rules that allow or deny an action as well as an
element d that deﬁnes the default ruling of this rule set. Default rulings can be one of {þ, , ;},
corresponding to allow, deny, and don’t care. An ARi 2 Ruleset is a 5-tuple of the form hr, p,
oa, ts, resi, where r 2 R, p 2 L, oa # OA, ts is a temporal constraint (e.g., a time range, [tsmin,
tsmax] corresponding to the validity of the rule) and res 2 {þ, } corresponding to allow or
deny. A deny result would imply that the object in the corresponding video stream would be
unaltered and shown (p ¼ L0), whereas ‘allow’ would cause the stream to be altered so as to
protect the identity of the object in question, depending on p. Additionally, authorization
rules are subject to a deny-takes-precedence evaluation strategy. That is if an ARi, h r, p, oa,
ts,  i 2 AR0 exists, all tuples h r, p, oa, ts, þ i 2 AR0 are removed.
Some typical examples are given below, following a generic authorization request of the
form (tag, region, timestamp), which speciﬁes the tag in question, the region it has entered,
as well as the time of the request.
1. Person with No Tag(s) (;, ri, ts): A person entering a region with no tag will not have
any rules associated with him=her aside from the default ruling, which will deny.
This corresponds to a privacy level of L0, meaning the person will be shown
(Figure 25.7).
2. Person with a Valid Tag (ti, ri, ts): A person entering a region with a valid tag will
satisfy spatial and temporal constraints and return an allow decision together with
the corresponding privacy level, p. 8AR, ti ! ARi, 9ARi such that ri ¼ r, L (tsmin 
ts  tsmax) L (resi ¼ þ) (Figure 25.7).
<!–– Access request by tag 1001 ––>
<Subject>
<Attribute AttributeId ¼ ’’urn:oasis:names:tc:xacml:1.0:subject:subjectid’’
<Data Type ¼ ’’urn:oasis:names:tc:xacml:1.0:data–type:rfc822Name’’>
<Attribute Value>tag1201 <=Attribute Value>
<=Attribute>
<=Subject>
FIGURE 25.6
Subject speciﬁcation in XACML.
RFID-Enabled Privacy-Preserving Video Surveillance: A Case Study
461

3. Person with an Invalid Tag: Assuming the tag has been successfully authenticated,
two possible violations may cause a deny result from an authorization rule. (1) The
access rights associated with the current tag specify that the requesting region is
unauthorized, causing a spatial access violation. (2) The access rights associated
with the current tag specify that the timestamp associated with the request does
not satisfy the time bounds associated with the requesting region.* Figure 25.8
shows an authorization rule that enforces a time constraint on a region expressed
in XACML.
* We adopt two possible approaches to handle a violation of this manner. Either the person is immediately
unmasked in the current region or remains masked until subsequent reentry into the region causes reevaluation
of the associated access rights.
FIGURE 25.7
Interaction between authorized and unauthorized personnel in the space.
<!–– Only allow entry into region from 8am to 1pm -->
<Condition FunctionId ¼ ’’ urn:oasis:names:tc:xacml:1.0:function:and’’>
<Apply FunctionId ¼ ’’ urn:oasis:names:tc:xacml:1.0:function:time–greater–
than–or–equal’’
<Apply FunctionId ¼ ’’ urn:oasis:names:tc:xacml:1.0:function:time–one–and–
only’’>
<Environment AttributeSelector DataType ¼ ’’ http:==www.w3.
org=2001=XMLSchema#time’’
<AttributeId ¼ ’’ urn:oasis:names:tc:xacml:1.0:environment:current–time’’=>
<=Apply>
<AttributeValue DataType ¼ ’’ http:==www.w3.
org=2001=XMLSchema#time’’>08:00:00<=AttributeValue>
<=Apply>
<Apply FunctionId ¼ ’’ urn:oasis:names:tc:xacml:1.0:function:time–less–than–
or–equal’’
<Apply FunctionId ¼ ’’ urn:oasis:names:tc:xacml:1.0:function:time–one–and–
only’’>
<EnvironmentAttributeSelector DataType ¼ ’’http:==www.w3.
org=2001=XMLSchema#time’’
<AttributeId ¼ ’’ urn:oasis:names:tc:xacml:1.0:environment:current–time’’=>
<=Apply>
<AttributeValue DataType ¼ ’’ http:==www.w3.
org=2001=XMLSchema#time’’>13:00:00<=AttributeValue>
<=Apply>
<=Condition>
FIGURE 25.8
Example of a time-bounded authorization condition speciﬁed in XACML.
462
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

4. Group-Based Authorization: Associate a temporal threshold d with each tag request
(i.e., entry into a surveilled region). If multiple tag events are detected within this
threshold, they are treated as a group authorization request. In which case, the
respective object association lists are cross-checked.
25.4
System Implementation
Here we describe the setup and hardware for our ﬁrst prototype implementation of the
already mentioned framework, as well as some lessons learned from the initial deploy-
ment. Please note that this initial prototyping was done with RFID hardware that is little
outdated now, and due to technological advances this may be more streamlined with
newer hardware; however, the principles are still valid today.
25.4.1
Hardware and Setup
For our initial experiments we used Canon Optura 20 DV Cameras, capturing video at a
resolution of 320 3 240 (typical for a surveillance application). One RFID reader, passive
tags, and ﬁeld generator relays were used for the instrumented regions. All processing was
carried out on a uniprocessor Pentium 4 at 2.60 Ghz with 1 GB of RAM equipped with a
Pinnacle ﬁrewire video capture card under Windows XP Professional. Microsoft’s DirectX
SDK (8.0) was used for interacting with the camera. The RFID reader was connected to the
computer via a four-wire RS-232 interface, and we used medium-range RFID tags that
transmit and receive at 916.5 and 433 Mhz, respectively. The TrakTags utilized in the
experiments have a range of approximately 275 ft (85 m) and the ﬁeld generators possess a
wake-up range of between 6.5 and 108 ft (2–33 m). The instrumented space is illustrated in
Figure 25.9. The range of the ﬁeld generator relays are hardware adjustable, and were
~35 ft
Physical
boundary
Virtual
boundary
RFID
reader
Field
generator
Region 1
Region 2
Region 3
Motion sensor
~20 ft
FIGURE 25.9
Experimental setup.
RFID-Enabled Privacy-Preserving Video Surveillance: A Case Study
463

calibrated to detect activity in the regions of interest. We outﬁtted an ofﬁce workspace by
creating two regions with physical boundaries (rooms) and one open area that was
partitioned by one of the relays via a virtual boundary. Motion sensors were used to
monitor activity in and out of the chosen regions. As the motion detector senses movement,
it wakes up the ﬁeld generator which transmits a constant 433 MHz ﬁeld to detect any tags
in the region. This information is sent to the reader. Field generators and motion sensors
were positioned at the entry points to the regions being studied. Each region was mon-
itored by a single camera for the purpose of these experiments.
The RFID event handling process involves detection of a tag in a region, checking the
associated access control policy, and relaying the result to the video subsystem. On
detection of a tag, the tag ID, reporting ﬁeld generator ID (effectively the zone identiﬁca-
tion), and timestamp is obtained. A separate thread in the video process waits for this
information on a socket and depending on the policy decision renders the object (which
may be masked). Figure 25.10 depicts the high-level RFID event handling procedure for
(nongroup) events.
25.5
Results and Observation
We demonstrated the functionality of our framework by testing a variety of cases. In the
context of each of the scenarios outlined in Section 25.3.1, we also tested the functionality of
our tracking and masking algorithms. Interaction between multiple people with varying
access rights were tested, especially merging and splitting between masked and unmasked
objects. Here we can see the merging=splitting process as they pass each other in view of
the camera. In evaluating the performance of our implementation, we investigated the
overheads involved in our techniques. We observed that for a single camera the overhead
of the various masking techniques (shown in Figure 25.4) were negligible because of the
limited ﬁeld of view of the camera and hence the number of people interacting simultan-
eously at any given time. We chose a resolution of 320 3 240 as it strikes a good balance
between detail and performance (both in terms of framerate and storage space if the video
was being archived). Doubling the resolution to 640 3 480 affected the framerate signiﬁ-
cantly as expected, as on average just under 20 fps was achieved. At our target resolution
of 320 3 240, we achieved a constant framerate of 30 fps in all tested cases.
Our video analysis software is based on detection of moving foreground objects in a
static background. The choice of a relatively simple algorithm is motivated by the need for
real-time processing. Using a background model, the pixel detection module passes the
result to a simple four-connected component algorithm to cluster pixels into blobs. The
object tracker identiﬁes objects entering the ﬁeld of view of the camera and localizes them
in the video frame using information passed to it by the RFID control module. Depending
long TagEvent(long status, HANDLE funcId,
rfTagEvent_t* tagEvent, void* user Arg)
{
if (tagEvent–>eventType ¼ ¼ RF_TAG_DETECTED) {
if (PolicyCheck(GenerateXACMLRequest
(tagEvent—>tag–>id,tagEvent–>fGenerator,enterTime)))
signalVideoThread(videoSocket, szBuf);
}
}
FIGURE 25.10
RFID event handling.
464
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

on access control policy, the stream is further processed using one of a number of masking
techniques (Figure 25.4) before being displayed by the rendering module. This entire
process is tuned to maintain a frame rate of approximately 30 fps. It should be noted
that the video camera capture facility is motion triggered. This way, video is only captured
when there is activity in the region being monitored, making it much easier to focus on
events of interest and save storage if video data is being archived.
After each frame gets processed into legitimate blobs, the tracker tries to match each
person in the list with a candidate blob in the incoming frame using motion vector
prediction [5]. In essence, if a person’s cog falls within one of the candidate blobs’ bound-
ing box in the current frame, then the information is assigned to that particular blob (cog,
min/max parameters, area, etc.). If a match is not found between an object and all the blobs
in the current frame, the object is removed from the list and assumed to have exited the
scene. If a new blob does not have a match in the object list, a new object is created and
assigned authorization information (masking level) by the RFID subsystem. During the
rendering process, the blob’s corresponding masking level is applied to the outgoing video
stream. In the case of a merge, the highest masking level among the persons involved in the
merge is applied to the corresponding blob. For example, if a person p1, with privacy level
L1 merges with a person p2, with privacy level L2, then the merged blob is masked using L2.
The PADoC system is being deployed in the CAL-IT2 building at the University of
California, Irvine. The entire building has been instrumented with video cameras and
various sensors at the entry and exit points. A general class of policies that are being
investigated in the context of this building (in a privacy-preserving manner) are as follows:
1. Limiting Access to Spaces: These include triggers such as ‘‘Person A is allowed to
enter Room X between the hours of 3–5 PM’’ or ‘‘The Robotics group is allowed
access to the server room on their own ﬂoor.’’
2. Protection of Resources: These types of policies allow control over inventory items.
For example, ‘‘Members of group A are not allowed to bring/take K laptops
into=from the conference room.’’
3. Monitoring=Flagging of Suspicious Activity: For example, ‘‘Any individual who is
present in the lobby area more than 10 times in a 24 h period should be ﬂagged.’’
4. Studying Human Interactions: Policies can be devised for cross-party interaction. For
example, ‘‘Raise a ﬂag if the number of (spatial) interactions between the Middle-
ware and A.I. groups exceed 25 in a given week.’’ Now this is really a composite
trigger similar to that deﬁned for monitoring=ﬂagging. Such a trigger will be
translated to a union of two counting triggers, which detect entries by each
group into the other’s space.
Even though we have realized a fully functional implementation of our framework, the
deployment of a such a system should eventually be pushed to the camera level. In this
implementation, we tightly coupled the processing capabilities (of the PC) to the camera
and processed everything in real time with no archival of the original video data (only the
processed video stream is available). Ideally this processing capability should reside at
the camera level to make the privacy preservation in media spaces more acceptable to the
end users. Optimization of the algorithms used here for object tracking and masking for
privacy is a key component of such a realization as well as the possible use of MPEG-4
video. MPEG-4 has a superior compression efﬁciency, advanced error control, object-
based functionality, and ﬁne-grain scalability making it highly suitable for streaming
video applications. Recently, MPEG-4 has emerged as a potential front runner for sur-
veillance applications because of its layered representation, which is a natural ﬁt for
RFID-Enabled Privacy-Preserving Video Surveillance: A Case Study
465

surveillance tasks as they are inherently object based. It is also desirable to ﬁnd people
moving in the scene, independent of the background. Further, more ﬁne-grained local-
ization via the use of RFID and other low-cost sensors is also something that improves
the accuracy of the system. One of the features of these types of integrated applications is
that the overall system is as strong as each of the various subcomponents; thus it is
possible to improve them somewhat independently with the infrastructure in place.
25.6
Conclusions
In this chapter, we addressed privacy challenges that arose as a result of collecting
environmental data for the purposes of surveillance (via RFID and video sensors) in a
pervasive space. The fusion of RFID-based localization technology with traditional video
surveillance facilitated end-to-end privacy-preserving video surveillance (which would not
have been possible without both the video obfuscation and RFID-based localization).
Access control policies were used to implement predicates that would serve as triggers
to the surveillance system while still protecting the identity of those individuals present in
the video feed that were not violating the policies in effect. We view this work as the ﬁrst
step toward a grandiose goal of realizing privacy-preserving pervasive environments. Our
work has opened up numerous challenges that we listed in the introduction. Our imme-
diate goals are to improve performance and scalability of our approach as well as to extend
our approach to deal with more general classes of predicates. Much of this work requires
us to explore formal notions of privacy measures in pervasive environments. Quantiﬁable
measures similar to K-anonymity, uncertainty, entropy but appropriate for pervasive
applications will provide us a way to explore trade-offs between privacy and utility
including scalability and generalizability of the approach.
References
1. J. Wickramasuriya, M. Datt, S. Mehrotra, and N. Venkatasubramanian. Privacy protecting data
collection in media spaces. In ACM Multimedia 2004, New York, October 2004.
2. Privacy International. Privacy International: Video Surveillance. http:==www.privacyinternational.
org=issues=cctv=index.html.
3. F. Heubler, M. Chiesa, and R. Genz. RFID: A week long survey on the technology and its potential.
Technical report, Harnessing Technology Project, Interaction Design Institute Ivrea, 2002.
4. S. Godik and T. Moses (Eds.). eXtensible Access Control Markup Language (XACML) 1.0 Speciﬁcation
Set. OASIS Standard, 2003.
5. A. Lipton, H. Fujiyoshi, and R. Patil. Moving target classiﬁcation and tracking from real-time
video. In Proceedings of IEEE Image Understanding Workshop, pp. 129–136, 1998.
466
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

Section IV
Security and Privacy


26
Is RFID Technology Secure and Private?
Surinder Mohan Bhaskar
CONTENTS
26.1
Introduction...................................................................................................................... 470
26.2
Problems with RFID........................................................................................................ 474
26.2.1 Technology-Related Problems........................................................................... 474
26.2.1.1
Problems with RFID Standards ....................................................... 474
26.2.1.2
RFID Systems Can Be Easily Disrupted ......................................... 475
26.2.1.3
RFID Reader Collision=Interference................................................ 475
26.2.1.4
RFID Tag Collision ............................................................................ 475
26.2.2 Security, Privacy, and Ethics Problems with RFID ....................................... 475
26.2.2.1
Contents of an RFID Tag Can Be Read after the Item
Leaves the Supply Chain.................................................................. 475
26.2.2.2
RFID Tags Are Difﬁcult to Remove ................................................ 475
26.2.2.3
RFID Tags Can Be Read without Your Knowledge ..................... 475
26.2.2.4
RFID Tags Can Be Read at Greater Distances
with a High-Gain Antenna............................................................... 476
26.2.2.5
RFID Tags with Unique Serial Numbers Could Be Linked
to an Individual Credit Card Number............................................ 476
26.2.3 Security Issues ..................................................................................................... 476
26.3
Concerns about How RFID Will Be Used.................................................................... 476
26.4
Various Problematic Situations...................................................................................... 477
26.5
Other Security Concerns................................................................................................. 478
26.5.1 Viruses .................................................................................................................. 479
26.5.2 Passports .............................................................................................................. 479
26.6
Controversies.................................................................................................................... 479
26.6.1 Privacy.................................................................................................................. 479
26.6.2 Human Implantation.......................................................................................... 481
26.6.3 Religious Opinion ............................................................................................... 481
26.7
Protection against RFID Interception............................................................................ 481
26.8
RFID Shielding................................................................................................................. 482
26.9
Summary........................................................................................................................... 483
References.................................................................................................................................... 483
469

26.1
Introduction
Radio frequency identiﬁcation (RFID)1 chips are used everywhere. A number of examples
can be quoted where RFID technology has been implemented—companies and labora-
tories use them as access keys, to start their cars, and as inventory tracking devices. Drug
manufacturers rely on chips to track pharmaceuticals. In the near future, RFID tags are
also about to get a lot more personal. Next generation U.S. passports and credit cards will
contain RFIDs, and the medical industry is exploring the use of implantable chips to
manage patients in an effective manner. According to the RFID market analysis ﬁrm
IDTechEx, the push for digital inventory tracking and personal ID systems will expand
the current annual market for RFIDs from $2.7 billion to as much as $26 billion by 2016
Shadow of RFID chip and antenna when held close to a lamp is shown in Figure 26.1.2
During World War II, the British placed radio transponders in Allied aircraft to help
early radar system crews detect ‘‘good’’ guys from ‘‘bad’’ guys. The ﬁrst chips were
developed in research laboratories in the 1960s, and by the next decade the U.S. govern-
ment was using tags to electronically authorize trucks coming into Los Alamos National
Laboratory and other secure installations. Commercialized chips became widely manufac-
tured and available in the 1980s, and RFID tags were used to track difﬁcult-to-manage
property like farm animals and railroad cars, and so on. But over the last few years, the
market for RFIDs has exploded, driven by advances in computer databases and supported
by declining chip prices. Now a number of companies, from Motorola to Philips to Texas
Instruments, manufacture the chips.3
The tags work by broadcasting a few bits of information to specialized electronic readers.
Most commercial RFID tags are passive emitters and have no onboard battery:4 these tags
get activated by the reader power. Once activated, these chips broadcast their signal
indiscriminately within a certain range, usually a few inches to a few feet. However, active
RFID tags with internal power can send signals to hundreds of feet; these are deployed in
the automatic toll-paying devices (with names like FasTrak and E-ZPass) that sit on car
dashboards, pinging tollgates as autos whiz through.
For protection of information, RFID signals can be encrypted using suitable algorithms.
The chips that are used for applications like passports, for example, will likely be
RFID chip
Antenna
FIGURE 26.1
Shadow of the RFID chip and antenna when held close to a lamp.
470
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

coded=encrypted to make it difﬁcult for unauthorized readers to retrieve their onboard
information (which will include a person’s name, age, nationality, and photo and other
sensitive information). But then, most of the commercial RFID tags do not include security
as it is very expensive.
This leaves most RFIDs vulnerable to cloning and data tampering, if the RFID chip has a
writable memory area. RFID chips that are used to track product shipments or expensive
equipment, for example, often contain pricing and item information. These writable areas
can be locked, but often they are ignored, either because the companies using RFIDs do not
know the working of the chips, or the data ﬁelds need to be updated frequently. Either
way, these chips are open to hacking or tampering of data.
The world of RFID is like the Internet in its early stages. No one had thought
about building security features into the Internet in its early stages, and now we are paying
for it in viruses and other attacks by adversaries. The same thing is also true of RFIDs
(Figure 26.2).
Hacking of RFID chips is very easy. One can steal the smart card, lift someone’s passport,
jack someone’s car, and even clone the chip embedded in an arm. There are so many
accounts of how RFID has been hacked and one such case is shown in Figure 26.3.5,6
A wealthy software entrepreneur, James Van Bokkelen, was victimized by a hacker with
a laptop. This was not an e-mail scam or bank account hack but something different. An
adversary planned to use a cheap, homemade USB device to swipe the ofﬁce key out of
Van Bokkelen’s back pocket. He simply got his hand within a few inches of him. As Van
Bokkelen approached from the parking lot, the adversary brushed past him. A coil of
copper wire ﬂashed brieﬂy in the hacker’s palm, then disappeared.
The coil was an antenna for the wallet-sized device known as a cloner, which was
concealed up his sleeve. This cloner can elicit, record, and mimic signals from smart
card RFID chips. The hacker connected the device to his laptop with a USB cable and
downloaded the data from Van Bokkelen’s card for processing. Then, once he retrieved
FIGURE 26.2
World’s ﬁrst RFID chip infected with a virus.
Is RFID Technology Secure and Private?
471

the code, the hacker switched the cloner from Record mode to Emit. He headed toward
the locked door and waved the cloner’s antenna in front of a black box attached to the wall.
The single red LED blinked green. The lock clicked, and he walked in. Thus, we see how a
robbery can be committed by exploiting the information present on an RFID chip. It was so
simple and anybody could have very easily walked off with tens of thousands of dollars’
worth of computer equipment, and possibly source code worth even more.
In a library, destroying the data on the books’ passive-emitting RFID tags is possible by
wandering the aisles with an off-the-shelf RFID reader–writer and a laptop. These tags
store several writable memory ‘‘pages’’ that store the books’ bar codes and loan status, and
other information. The RFID-enabled checkout is indeed quite convenient. As the hacker
leaves the library, he stops at a desk equipped with a monitor, and shows the books one at
a time face up on a metal plate. The titles instantly appear on-screen. A person can borrow
four books in less than a minute without bothering the librarian. In one case, a student took
the books to his ofﬁce, where he used a commercially available reader to scan the data
from their RFID tags. The reader fed the data to his computer, which was running software
that the student had ordered from RFID-maker, Tagsys. As he waved the reader over a
book’s spine, ID numbers popped up on his monitor. He then found an empty page in the
RFID’s memory and typed ‘‘AB.’’ When he scanned the book again, he saw the bar code
with the letters ‘‘AB’’ next to it. This happened because of the Oakland library’s failure to
lock the writable area. One could even erase the bar codes and then lock the tags. And then
the library would have to replace the books.
FIGURE 26.3
German
hacker-cloned
RFID
e-passport.
(From German Hacker Clone e-Passport,
http:==www.engadnet.com=2006=08=03=
german-hackerscolone-rﬁd-e-passports=)
472
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

On the other hand, unlocking the library’s tags makes it easier for libraries to change the
data in future.
The Future Store in Rheinberg, Germany is the world’s preeminent test bed of RFID-
based retail shopping. All the items in this high-tech supermarket have embedded RFID
price tags, which allow the store and individual product manufacturers—for example,
Gillette, Kraft, and Procter & Gamble—to gather near real-time feedback on what is
bought. In July 2004, Wired hailed the store as the ‘‘supermarket of the future.’’ A few
months later, German security expert Lukas Grunwald hacked the chips and showed the
vulnerability of RFID chips.
Grunwald co-wrote a program called RFDump, which allows access and alters
price chips using a PDA (with an RFID reader) and a PC card antenna. With the
permission of the store owner, he and his colleagues strolled the aisles, downloading
information from hundreds of sensors. They demonstrated how easily they could
upload data from one chip onto another. He also showed how he could download
the price of a cheap wine into RFDump and then cut and paste it onto the tag of an
expensive bottle. The price-switching stunt drew media attention. Today, Grunwald
continues to pull even more elaborate pranks with chips from the Future Store in a
more sophisticated manner.
Apart from pranks, vandalism, and thievery, Grunwald has recently discovered another
use for RFID chips: espionage. He programmed RFDump with the ability to place cookies
on RFID tags the same way Web sites put cookies on browsers to track returning
customers=users. With this, a stalker could place a cookie on his target’s E-ZPass, then
return to it a few days later to see which toll plazas the car had crossed and at what time.
Private citizens and the government could likewise place cookies on library books to
monitor who is checking=reading them out.
Despite the increasing popularity of RFID technology, the electronic information it deals
with may not be as secure as was once thought. At least that is the story that has emerged
from the recent Defcon 2006 network security conference. This 3 day event is a Mecca of
sorts for network security experts, programmers, and hackers, who congregate yearly to
test their skills against one another, and to show corporations, consumers, and government
agencies how vulnerable their networks are, without the risk of criminal prosecution or
ﬁnancial liabilities.
The following sections raise serious concerns about the use of RFID tags. Newer
technologies allow everyday objects to beam electronic data to computers equipped
with special antennas. Lukas Grunwald successfully demonstrated that electronic pass-
ports (e-passports) being introduced in the United States have a major vulnerability in that
they could allow criminals to clone embedded secret codes and illegally enter countries
with ease. For the demonstration, Grunwald copied personal information stored on an
e-passport document and transferred it to another device. He disproved assurances by
ofﬁcials in government and participating private industry that the electronic information
stored in e-passports could not be duplicated. When the ﬁrst RFID passports came out in
the United Kingdom, the encryption on the chips was broken within 48 hours.
In 1997, ExxonMobil equipped thousands of service stations with SpeedPass, which let
customers show a small RFID device attached to a key chain in front of a pump to pay for
gas. About 7 years later, three graduate students—Steve Bono, Matthew Green, and Adam
Stubbleﬁeld—robbed a station in Baltimore using a laptop and a simple RFID broadcasting
device. They tricked the system into letting them ﬁll up for free.
The theft was invented by Avi Rubin’s computer science laboratory at Johns Hopkins
University. Rubin’s laboratory is best known for having found massive, hackable ﬂaws
in the code running on Diebold’s widely adopted electronic voting machines in 2004.
Is RFID Technology Secure and Private?
473

Working with RSA Laboratories manager Ari Juels, the group demonstrated how to crack
the RFID chip in ExxonMobil’s SpeedPass.7
Hacking the tag made by Texas Instruments,3 is not as simple as breaking into Van
Bokkelen’s Sandstorm ofﬁces with a cloner. The radio signals in these chips, dubbed DST
tags, are protected by an encryption cipher that only the chip and the reader can decode.
Unfortunately, says Juels, ‘‘Texas Instruments used an untested cipher,’’ and this is a case
of poor quality control. The Johns Hopkins laboratory found that the code could be broken
with a ‘‘brute-force attack,’’ in which a special computer known as a cracker is used to try
thousands of password combinations per second until it hits on the correct one. With a
home-brewed cracker that cost a few hundred dollars, Juels and the Johns Hopkins team
successfully performed a brute-force attack on TI’s cipher in just 30 min, contrary to
experts’ estimate that it would take hundreds of years for today’s computers to break the
publicly available encryption tool SHA-1, which is used to secure credit card transactions
on the Internet.8
Such stories about hacking the security of RFID tags and many more will keep on adding
to the list in the coming years.
26.2
Problems with RFID5,9–13
The problems with RFID can be divided into the following three categories:
1. Technology related
2. Privacy and ethics related
3. Security related
26.2.1
Technology-Related Problems
26.2.1.1
Problems with RFID Standards
RFID has been implemented in different ways by different manufacturers; global standards
are still being developed and interoperability is a serious issue. It should be noted that
some RFID devices are never meant to leave their network as the RFID tags are used for
inventory control within a company. This can cause problems for companies.
Customers may also face problems with RFID standards and interoperability issues. For
example, ExxonMobil’s SpeedPass system is a proprietary RFID system; if another com-
pany wanted to use the convenient SpeedPass (say, at the drive-in window of your favorite
fast food restaurant), they would have to pay to access it—an unlikely=unwanted scenario.
On the other hand, if every company had its own ‘‘SpeedPass’’ system, a consumer
would need to carry many different devices, which goes against user-friendliness of the
technology.
There are well-developed standards for low- and high-frequency RFID systems, but
most companies want to use UHF in the supply chain because it offers longer read
range—up to 20 ft under good conditions. UHF technology is relatively new, and stand-
ards were not established until recently and are still evolving. Another issue is cost. RFID
readers typically cost $1000 or more. Companies would need thousands of readers to
cover all their factories, warehouses, and stores. RFID tags are also fairly expensive—20
cents or more—which makes their use for identifying millions of items that cost only a few
dollars impractical.
474
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

26.2.1.2
RFID Systems Can Be Easily Disrupted
Since RFID systems make use of the electromagnetic spectrum (WiFi networks or cell
phones), they are relatively easy to jam by employing energy at the right frequency.
Although this would only be an inconvenience for consumers in stores (longer waits at
the checkout), it could be disastrous in other environments (e.g., hospitals, battleﬁelds)
where RFID is increasingly used.
In addition, active RFID tags (those that use a battery to increase the range of the system)
can be repeatedly interrogated to wear the battery down, thus disrupting the system.
26.2.1.3
RFID Reader Collision=Interference
Reader collision occurs when the signals from two or more readers overlap. The tag is
unable to respond to simultaneous queries. Systems must be carefully set up to avoid
this problem; many systems use an anticollision protocol (also called a singulation protocol).
Anticollision protocols enable the tags to take turns in transmitting to a reader.
26.2.1.4
RFID Tag Collision
Tag collision occurs when many tags are present in a small area; but since the read time is
very short, it is easy for vendors to develop systems that ensure that tags respond one at a
time by employing suitable algorithms.
26.2.2
Security, Privacy, and Ethics Problems with RFID12,13
The following problems with RFID tags and readers have been reported.
26.2.2.1
Contents of an RFID Tag Can Be Read after the Item Leaves the Supply Chain
An RFID tag cannot tell the difference between one reader and another. RFID scanners
are very portable; RFID tags can be read from a distance, from a few inches to a few yards.
This allows anyone to see the contents of your purse or pocket as you walk down
the street. It is also possible that some tags can be turned off when the item leaves the
supply chain.
26.2.2.2
RFID Tags Are Difﬁcult to Remove
RFID tags are difﬁcult to remove; some are very small (less than a half millimeter square
and as thin as a sheet of paper)—others may be hidden or embedded inside a product
where consumers cannot see them. New technologies allow RFID tags to be ‘‘printed’’
right on a product and may not be removable at all.
26.2.2.3
RFID Tags Can Be Read without Your Knowledge
Since the tags can be read without being swiped or obviously scanned (as is the case with
magnetic strips or bar codes), anyone with an RFID reader can read the tags embedded in
your clothes and other consumer products without your knowledge. For example, you
could be scanned before you enter the store, just to see whether you are carrying an RFID
chip, and so on. You might then be approached by a clerk who knows what you have in
your backpack or purse, and can suggest accessories or other items matching the amount
you have. This can pose a serious threat to one’s privacy and security.
Is RFID Technology Secure and Private?
475

26.2.2.4
RFID Tags Can Be Read at Greater Distances with a High-Gain Antenna
For various reasons, RFID reader=tag systems are designed so that the distance between
the tag and the reader is kept to a minimum (see the material on tag collision earlier).
However, a high-gain antenna can be used to read the tags from much further away,
leading to serious privacy problems.
26.2.2.5
RFID Tags with Unique Serial Numbers Could Be Linked to an Individual
Credit Card Number14
At present, the Universal Product Code (UPC) implemented with bar codes allows each
product sold in a store to have a unique number that identiﬁes that product. Work is in
progress on a global system of product identiﬁcation that would allow each individual item
to have its own number. When the item is scanned for purchase and is paid for, the RFID
tag number for a particular item can be associated with a credit card number.
26.2.3
Security Issues
The security problems surrounding RFID technology can be grouped into several classes:
1. Data ownership and data-mining techniques: All methods of data collection involve
privacy, data ownership, and the ethical use of data-mining techniques to dis-
cover the characteristics of an individual or an organization. For example,
customer-loyalty card data could be used to ﬁnd out private medical information
about an individual. This problem predates the use of RFID technology, but the
sheer volume of data provided by RFID tags adds a new urgency to these
discussions.
2. Data theft: For data theft, two things are required: (1) access to a computer system
and (2) considerable hacking skills to steal data. RFID tags are made to broadcast
information; the possibility of data theft by easily concealable RFID scanners is
very real and easy. Chip manufacturers counter this by adding security features
such as secure encryption schemes to the chips and data.
3. Data corruption: Most RFID tags are rewritable. This feature may be locked (turning
the tag into a write-once, read-many device) or left active, depending on applica-
tion and security sensitivity. For example, in libraries, the RFID tags are frequently
left unlocked for the convenience of librarians in reusing the tags on different
books or to track check-ins and check-outs. But when tags that should be
locked are not locked (e.g., in the supply chain management), the potential
does exist for pranksters or malicious users to rewrite the tags with incorrect or
fraudulent data.
26.3
Concerns about How RFID Will Be Used15,16
Civil liberties groups, among others, have become increasingly concerned, in particular,
about the use of RFIDs to track the movement of individuals. For example, passports will
soon be required to contain some sort of RFID device to speed border crossings. Scanners
placed throughout an airport, for example, could track the location of every passport over
time, from the moment you left the parking lot to the moment you got on your airplane.
476
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

The Japanese government passed a draft RFID Privacy Guideline that stated the following:
. Indication that RFID tags exist
. Consumer’s right of choice regarding reading tags
. Sharing information about social beneﬁts of RFID, and so on
. Issues on linking information on tags and databases that store privacy information
. Restriction of information gathering and use when private information is stored
on tags
. Assuring accuracy of information when private information is stored on tags
. Information administrators should be encouraged
. Information sharing and explanation for consumers
There are also concerns about the fact that, even after you leave the store, any RFID device
in the things that have been bought is still active. This means that a thief could walk past
you in the mall and know exactly what you have in your bags, marking you as a potential
victim. A thief could even circle your house with an RFID scanner and pull out data on
what you have in your house before robbing it.
Military hardware and even clothing have RFID tags to help track each item through the
supply chain. Some analysts are concerned that if there are particular items associated
with high-level ofﬁcers, roadside bombs could be set to go off when triggered by an RFID
scan of cars going by. This may pose a serious threat to the internal and national security of
a nation as a whole.
There was a recent report revealing clandestine tests at a Wal-Mart store where RFID tags
were inserted in packages of lipstick, with scanners hidden on nearby shelves. When a
customer picked up a lipstick and put it in her cart, the movement of the tag was registered
by the scanners, which triggered surveillance cameras. This allowed researchers 750 miles
away to watch those consumers as they walked through the store, looking for related items.
26.4
Various Problematic Situations10,11
1. Anyone with an appropriately equipped scanner and close access to the RFID
device can activate it and read its contents with ease. Obviously, some concerns are
greater than others. If someone walks by your bag of books from the bookstore
with a 13.56 MHz ‘‘sniffer’’ with an RF ﬁeld that can activate the RFID devices in
the books you bought, that person can get a complete list of what you just bought.
That is certainly an invasion of your privacy, but it could be worse in other cases.
2. Another scenario involves a military situation in which the other side scans
vehicles going by, looking for tags that are associated with items that only high-
ranking ofﬁcers can have, and targeting accordingly.
3. The increasing use of RFID devices in company badges is also causing concern.
A suitable RF ﬁeld will cause the RFID chip in the badge to ‘‘spill the beans’’ to
whoever activates it. This information is replayed to company scanners, allowing
the thief access, and your badge is the one that is ‘‘credited’’ with the access.
4. The smallest tags that will likely be used for consumer items do not have enough
computing power to support data encryption to protect your privacy. The most
they can handle is PIN-style or password-based protection. This may result in
serious security problems.
Is RFID Technology Secure and Private?
477

5. RFID tags inserted in credit cards, passports, and driving licenses being issued is a
serious cause for worry. Soon, there will be RFID tags in money. RFID tags are also
not very secure. When the ﬁrst RFID passports came out in the United Kingdom,
the encryption on the chips was broken within 48 h.
6. A fact is that without encryption, ‘‘Anyone within range can query a tag and ﬁnd
out what’s on them. As we get better performing tags, the longer will be the range
over which the tag will transmit.’’ Longer range means more potential intruders.
RFID tag-to-reader encryption is ‘‘being worked on’’ by major players but has
been challenging because passive RFID tags are powered by readers, then reﬂect
back a signal communicating their information, with little power left over to set up
an encryption channel. But lack of encryption can aid in petty breaches, and might
make it possible to corrupt or hack data.
7. Passive RFID tags cannot be read from >20 ft or so. But active RFID tags, which
use a battery to broadcast a signal and are used on cargo containers and other large
assets, could be read from a satellite if there is little RF ‘‘noise’’ (ambient RF energy
that causes interference) and the broadcasted signal is powerful enough.
26.5
Other Security Concerns10,11
The main security concern surrounding RFID technology is the illicit tracking of RFID tags.
Tags that are world-readable pose a risk to both personal location privacy and corporate=
military security. Such concerns have been raised with respect to the U.S. Department of
Defense’s recent deployment of RFID tags for supply chain management. Further more,
privacy organizations have expressed concern in the context of ongoing efforts to embed
electronic product code (EPC) RFID tags in consumer products.
Cryptography is used to prevent tag cloning. Some tags employ a form of ‘‘rolling code’’
scheme, wherein the tag identiﬁer information changes after each scan, thus reducing the
usefulness of observed responses. More sophisticated devices engage in challenge response
authentications17 where the tag interacts with the reader. In these protocols, secret tag
information is never sent over the insecure communication channel between the tag and
the reader. Rather, the reader issues a challenge to the tag, which responds with a result,
computed by using a cryptographic circuit keyed with some secret value. Such protocols
may be based on symmetric or public key cryptography (asymmetric key cryptography).
Cryptographically enabled tags typically require dramatically higher cost and power than
simpler equivalents, and as a result, deployment of such tags is much more limited. This
cost=power limitation has led some manufacturers to implement cryptographic tags using
substantially weakened or proprietary encryption schemes=algorithms, which do not
necessarily resist sophisticated attack=penetration. For example, the ExxonMobil Speed-
Pass uses a cryptographically enabled tag manufactured by Texas Instruments,3 called the
Digital Signature Transponder (DST),18 which incorporates a weak, proprietary encryption
scheme to perform a Challenge Response Protocol.17,19
Still other cryptographic protocols attempt to achieve privacy against unauthorized
readers, though these protocols are largely in the research stage. One major challenge in
securing RFID tags is a shortage of computational resources within the tag. Standard
cryptographic techniques require more resources than are available in most low-cost
RFID devices. RSA Security7 has patented a prototype device that locally jams RFID signals
by interrupting a standard collision avoidance protocol, allowing the user to prevent
identiﬁcation if desired. Various policy measures have also been proposed, such as mark-
ing RFID-tagged objects with an industry standard label.
478
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

26.5.1
Viruses20
Ars Technica reported in March 2006 an RFID buffer overﬂow bug that could infect
airport terminal RFID databases for baggage and passport databases to obtain conﬁdential
information on the passport holder.
26.5.2
Passports
In an effort to make passports more secure, several countries have implemented RFID in
passports. However, the encryption on the U.K. chips was broken in <48 h leaving millions
of citizens vulnerable. Since then, further efforts have allowed researchers to clone passport
data while the passport is mailed to its owner. Where before a criminal had to secretly open
and then reseal the envelope, now it can be done with ease without detection adding
signiﬁcant insecurity to the passport system.
26.6
Controversies10–13,21,22
26.6.1
Privacy
How would you like it if, for instance, one day you realized your underwear was reporting on
your whereabouts?—California State Senator Debra Bowen, at a 2003 hearing.
The use of RFID technology has engendered considerable controversy and even product
boycotts by consumer privacy advocates such as Katherine Albrecht23 and Liz McIntyre of
CASPIAN who refer to RFID tags as ‘‘spychips.’’ The four main privacy concerns regard-
ing RFID are as follows:
1. The purchaser of an item will not necessarily be aware of the presence of the tag or
be able to remove it, thus leaving him vulnerable to privacy breaches.
2. A tag can be read at a distance without the knowledge of the individual, which is a
serious security concern.
3. If a tagged item is paid for by credit card or in conjunction with the use of a loyalty
card, then it would be possible to tie the unique ID of that item to the identity of
the purchaser. This poses a serious risk to the privacy of the individual concerned.
4. EPCglobal system of tags creates globally unique serial numbers for all products,
which enables tracking of the product and the user of this technology.
Most concerns revolve around the fact that RFID tags afﬁxed to products remain functional
even after the products have been purchased and taken home, and thus can be used for
surveillance and other purposes unrelated to their supply chain inventory functions. This is
a breach of security and privacy of the individual.
The earlier concerns may be addressed partly by the use of the clipped tag. The clipped
tag is an RFID tag designed to increase consumer privacy. The clipped tag has been
suggested by IBM researchers, Paul Moskowitz and Guenter Karjoth. After the point of
sale, the consumer may tear off a portion of the tag. This allows the transformation of a
long-range tag into a proximity tag that still may be read, but only at short range—less
than a few inches or centimeters. The modiﬁcation of the RFID tag may be conﬁrmed
visually. The RFID tag may still be used later for returns, recalls, or recycling.
However, this is not a realistic mitigation considering that the read range is far more a
function of the reader than the tag itself. Improvements to technology or simply having
Is RFID Technology Secure and Private?
479

readers very close to the tags (such as the security readers at the doors of most major retail
stores) will make even supposedly short-range tags easy to read. All the abuses listed
previously are therefore still possible.
Another privacy issue is due to RFID’s support for a singulation (anticollision) protocol.
This is the means by which a reader enumerates all the tags responding to it without
mutual interference. The structure of some collision–resolution (Medium Access Control)
protocols is such that all but the last bit of each tag’s serial number can be deduced by
passively eavesdropping on just the reader’s part of the protocol. Because of this, whenever
the relevant types of RFID tags are near readers, the distance at which a tag’s signal can be
eavesdropped is irrelevant; what counts is the distance at which the much more powerful
reader can be received. Just how far this depends on the type of the reader and its power,
but in the extreme case some readers have a maximum power output of 4 W, enabling
signals to be received from tens of kilometers away. However, more recent UHF tags
employing the EPCglobal Gen 2 (ISO 18000-6C) protocol, which is a slotted-Aloha scheme
in which the reader never transmits the tag identifying information, are not subject to this
particular attack.
The Anti-Collision Scheme of ISO 1569324 will render this rather implausible. To eaves-
drop on the reader part of the protocol—and gather the 63 least signiﬁcant bits of a UID—
would require the reader to send a mask value of 63 bits. This can only happen when the
reader detects a collision up to the 63rd bit. In other words, one can eavesdrop on the
transmitted mask value of the reader, but for the reader to transmit a 63 bit mask value
requires two tags with identical least signiﬁcant 63 bits. The probability of this happening
must be near zero, that is, the eavesdropper needs two virtually identical tags to be read at
the same time by the reader in question. This may be good news for some time only.
While dealing with the issues of eavesdropping and skimming, it is important to make a
distinction between inductively coupled and radiatively coupled tags. Protocols like ISO
1569324 use 13.56 MHz radio frequencies and inductive coupling between the tag and the
reader. The signal power falls very rapidly to extremely low levels a few antenna diameters
away from the reader when inductive coupling is used; so an attacker must be within a few
meters to intercept the reader signal, and closer to read a tag. Protocols like 18000-6C,
which use 900 MHz signals, usually use radiative coupling between the tag and the reader;
a wave is launched, its power falling roughly as the square of the distance. Tag signals can
be intercepted from 10 m away under good climatic conditions, and the reader signal
can be detected from kilometers away if there are no obstructions.
The potential for privacy violations with RFID was demonstrated by its use in a pilot
program by the Gillette Company, which conducted a ‘‘smart shelf’’ test at a Tesco in
Cambridge, England. They automatically photographed shoppers taking RFID-tagged
safety razors off the shelf to see if the technology could be used to deter shoplifting. This
trial resulted in consumer boycott against Gillette and Tesco. While doing business, it is
very important to respect the privacy and sentiments of consumers.
In another incident, uncovered by the Chicago Sun-Times, shelves in a Wal-Mart in
Broken Arrow, Oklahoma, were equipped with RFID readers to track the Max Factor
Lipﬁnity lipstick containers stacked on them. Webcam images of the shelves were viewed
750 miles (1200 km) away by Procter & Gamble researchers in Cincinnati, Ohio, who could
tell when lipsticks were removed from the shelves and observe the shoppers in action at near
real-time basis.
In January 2004, privacy advocates from CASPIAN and the German privacy group
FoeBuD were invited to the METRO Future Store in Germany, where an RFID pilot project
was implemented. It was discovered=uncovered by accident that METRO ‘‘Payback’’
customer-loyalty cards contained RFID tags with customer IDs, a fact that was disclosed
neither to customers receiving the cards, nor to this group of privacy advocates.
480
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

This happened despite repeated assurances by METRO that no customer identiﬁcation
data was tracked and all RFID usage was clearly disclosed. This is a serious example of
privacy violation by METRO.
The controversy was furthered by the accidental exposure of a proposed Auto-ID
consortium public relations campaign that was designed to ‘‘neutralize opposition’’ and
get consumers to ‘‘resign themselves to the inevitability of it’’ while merely pretending to
address their concerns.
During the UN World Summit on the Information Society (WSIS) between 16 and 18
November 2005, founder of the free software movement, Richard Stallman, protested the
use of RFID security cards. During the ﬁrst meeting, it was agreed that future meetings
would no longer use RFID cards, and on ﬁnding that this assurance was broken, he
covered his card in tin foil, and would only uncover it at the security stations. This protest
caused the security personnel considerable concern, with some not allowing him to leave a
conference room in which he had been the main speaker, and then preventing him from
entering another conference room, where he was due to speak.
26.6.2
Human Implantation
The Food and Drug Administration in the United States has approved the use of RFID
chips in humans. Some business establishments have also started to chip customers, such
as the Baja Beach nightclub in Barcelona. This has provoked concerns about the privacy
of individuals as they can potentially be tracked wherever they go by an identiﬁer unique
to them. There is concern that this could lead to abuse by an authoritarian government or
to the removal of other individual freedoms.
On July 22, 2006, Reuters reported that two hackers, Newitz and Westhues, showed at a
conference in New York City that they could clone the RFID signal from a human implanted
RFID chip, proving that the chip is not hack-proof as was previously projected.
26.6.3
Religious Opinion
Critics from the Christian community believe that RFID tagging could represent the mark
of the beast (666) mentioned speciﬁcally in the Book of Revelation (see Revelation 13:16).
Katherine Albrecht23 and Liz McIntyre, authors of Spychips: How Major Corporations and
Government Plan to Track Your Every Move with RFID, wrote a new book on the subject from
a Christian perspective. John Conner, leader of an organization called ‘‘The Resistance of
Christ,’’ also believes that there is a strong connection. Related subjects include eschatology
(last things) and dispensationalism.
26.7
Protection against RFID Interception25,26
Various methods can be used to protect against RFID data interception:
. Physically disabling RFID chip: Most RFID chips can be disabled by physical
means. For example, the RFID chip inside RFID credit cards can be disabled by a
sharp tap of a hammer.
. One can prevent the RFID transponders from receiving power. This is accomplished
by obstructing the power supply; one approach is to shield the RFID transponders
in a Faraday’s cage, intercepting the electromagnetic signal that normally
powers them. UHF transponders can be shielded using an antistatic bag. LF and
Is RFID Technology Secure and Private?
481

HF (inductively coupled) transponders can be shielded with conventional
aluminum foil.
. By damaging the antenna with larger RFID transponders, one can recognize the
spirals of the antenna clearly, using a radiograph. If one splits the antenna circuit,
the effective range of the RFID transponder will be greatly reduced.
. Applying an intense electromagnetic impulse to the transponders and antenna can
induce high currents, interrupting the circuit and rendering the tag useless. A crude
way to do this is to put the RFID tag in a microwave oven. The degree of success
may vary, depending on the frequency of the microwave and the shape of the
antenna. There is a device in the RFID-Zapper that is built to destroy transponders.
. The system can be blocked by sending a spurious signal in conjunction with the
inquiry signal, preferably on the RFID frequency. This blocks the relatively weak
signals of the RFID transponder.
. If a simple memory chip is used to conﬁrm the authenticity of the inquiry, then one
can record the inquiry and at a later time reverse engineer the signal, allowing
replication. For the reader, it appears as if the correct RFID transponder were in
the ﬁeld.
. Many RFID tags include a built-in ‘‘kill’’ function. When provided with the correct
passcode, a tag can be either reprogrammed or told to ‘‘self-destruct,’’ rendering it
useless.
. Newer emerging RFID tags may include some sort of built-in transfer of control
and privacy enhancing technologies, using silencing or nonlinkable protocols to
ensure that the owner can control and prevent linkage of RFID.
26.8
RFID Shielding
Shielding is another protection mechanism. A number of products are available in the
market in the United States that will allow a customer of RFID-enabled cards or passports
to shield their data. It is pertinent to note that the U.S. government requires their new
employee ID cards to be delivered with an approved shielding sleeve or holder. There are
contradicting opinions as to whether aluminum can prevent reading of RFID chips. Some
people claim that aluminum shielding, essentially creating a Faraday cage, does work
effectively. Others claim that simply wrapping an RFID card in aluminum foil27 only
makes transmission more difﬁcult, and is not completely effective in preventing it. Further
research is required for shielding RFID tags.
Shielding is a function of the frequency being used.
. Low-frequencytags,suchasthoseusedforimplantable devicesforhumansandpets,
are relatively resistant to shielding, though thick metal foil will prevent most reads.
. High-frequency tags (13.56 MHz—smart cards and access badges) are more sen-
sitive to shielding and are difﬁcult to read when within a few centimeters of a
metal surface.
. UHF tags (pallets and cartons) are very difﬁcult to read when placed within a few
millimeters of a metal surface, although their read range is actually increased when
they are spaced 2–4 cm from a metal, due to the positive reinforcement of the
reﬂected wave and the incident wave at the tag. UHF tags can be successfully
shielded from most reads by placing them within an antistatic plastic bag.
482
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

26.9
Summary
Despite any security concern it does not appear that RFID will be running out of steam in
the future. In fact, it is just the opposite and its popularity is increasing. ABI Research
(www.abiresearch.com) recently reported that the global market for RFID readers and
reader modules grew to >35,500 unit shipments in 2005. Reader unit volumes grew by
nearly 14% in the ﬁrst quarter of 2006 as compared with the ﬁrst quarter of 2005. The IDC
(www.idc.com) market research ﬁrm supports these ﬁndings, having found similar evi-
dence of a booming RFID market in Malaysia. According to IDC, RFID spending in
Malaysia is estimated to grow at a compound annual growth rate of 45.84% from $2.45
million in 2005 to almost $20.94 million in 2010.
New applications such as RFID-enabled self-checkouts, contactless payment systems
using credit and debit cards with embedded RFID tags, and payment systems based on
ﬁnger scans or other biometrics, are also sure to boost the appeal of RFID in upcoming
applications—assuming, of course, that the price of RFID tags goes down and that con-
cerns regarding basic privacy and security can be adequately addressed. Thanks to the
efforts of experts like Grunwald, some of RFID’s inherent weaknesses, such as inadequate
security precautions, may be found before widespread deployment—when they are sure to
be easier and less costly to ﬁx.
Some vendors are working on combining RFID tags with sensors of different kinds. This
would allow the tag to report not simply the same information over and over, but
identifying information along with current data picked up by the sensor. For example,
an RFID tag attached to the leg of a lamb could report on the temperature readings of the
past 24 h to ensure that the meat was properly kept cool. This can be taken as the positive
side of RFID usage.
Over time, the proportion of ‘‘scan-it-yourself’’ aisles in retail stores will increase.
Eventually, we may wind up with stores that have mostly scan-it-yourself aisles and
only a few checkout stations for people who are disabled or unwilling. This will result in
added advantage to the users.
Similar to the growth of the Internet, anywhere a security hole exists, some hacker will
ﬁnd and exploit it for fun, proﬁt, or both. The security problems summarized earlier are
real and require real, practical solutions. The RFID industry is working on technical
solutions to all of the security problems noted earlier and additional progress in security
standards in 2007, coupled with increased RFID industry outreach to the general public in
the form of press releases and advertising about security features.
And lastly, you cannot ignore the security risks of RFID tags and their impact on the
security and privacy of an individual.
References
1. Radio Frequency Identiﬁcation, SearchNetworking.com RFID, http:==searchnetworking.techtarget.
com=sDeﬁnition=0,290660,sid7_gci805987,00.html
2. RFID Software a Pandora’s box, http:==www.in-pharmatechnologist.com=news=ng.asp?n¼66894-
rﬁd-hacking-malware
3. Texas Instruments, http:==en.wikipedia.org=wiki=Texas_Instruments
4. Klaus Finkenzeller, Giesecke & Devrient GmbH, RFID Handbook: Fundamentals and Applications in
Contactless Smart Cards and Identiﬁcation, Second Edition, John Wiley & Sons, New York, 2003.
5. What Are Zombie RFID Tags? http:==www.technovelgy.com=ct=Technology-Article.asp?Art
Num¼9
Is RFID Technology Secure and Private?
483

6. German
Hacker
Clone
e-Passport,
http:==www.engadget.com=2006=08=03=german-hackers-
clone-rﬁd-e-passports=
7. RSA Security, http:==en.wikipedia.org=wiki=RSA_Security
8. Fake products can bypass quality, safety, http:==www.aegis.com=news=Lt=2006=LT060622.html
9. Problems
with
RFID,
http:==www.slais.ubc.ca=courses=libr500=04-05-wt2=www=T_Gnissios=
problems.htm
10. RFID Is Dead! Or Is It? http:==www.b-eye-network.com=blogs=linstedt=archives=2007=01=
rﬁd_is_dead_or.php
11. Evan Schuman, Report: Major RFID Hurdles Ahead, Ziff Davis Internet July 20, 2006, http:==
www.eweek.com=article2=0,1895,1990814,00.asp
12. RFID & Individual Privacy, http:==www.netcaucus.org=events=2005=rﬁd=one-pagers=cpsr-rﬁd
2005.pdf
13. Ethical Problems with RFID, http:==www.ccsr.cse.dmu.ac.uk=resources=general=ethicol=Ecv14
no5.html
14. Item-Level RFID Tags Cost More than Expected, http:==www.eweek.com=article2=0,1895,
1987543,00.asp
15. RFID Privacy: An Overview of Problems and Proposed Solutions, Simson L. Garﬁnkel,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Ari Juels, RSA Laboratories, Ravi Pappu, ThingMagic,
IEEE, Security & Privacy, 3(3), 34–43, 2005.
16. Gildas Avoine, Philippe Oechslin, EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland, RFID Traceability: A Multilayer
Problem, http:==fc05.ifca.ai=p11.pdf
17. Challenge Response Protocol, http:==en.wikipedia.org=w=index.php?title¼Challenge-response_
protocol&action¼edit
18. Digital Signature Transponders, http:==en.wikipedia.org=wiki=Digital_Signature_Transponder
19. William Stalling, Cryptography and Network Security: Principles and Practice, Second Edition,
Prentice-Hall, New Jersey, 1998.
20. SearchSecurity.com,
RFID
Virus,
http:==searchsecurity.techtarget.com=sDeﬁnition=0,290660,
sid14_gci1174912,00.html
21. Will
RFID
Technology
Help
or
Hinder
Security?
http:==searchsecurity.techtarget.com=
originalContent=0,289142,sid14_gci1083417,00.html
22. Radio Frequency Identiﬁcation News and Commentary, RFID Gazette, May 8, http:==www.
rﬁdgazette.org=security=, 2007.
23. Katherine Albrecht, http:==en.wikipedia.org=wiki=Katherine_Albrecht
24. Anti-Collision Scheme of ISO 15693, http:==en.wikipedia.org=wiki=ISO_15693
25. Protecting RFID Tags and Other Discrete Wireless Devices, http:==searchsecurity.techtarget.
com=topics=0,295493,sid14_tax299848,00.html
26. Rolling Code Scheme, http:==en.wikipedia.org=wiki=Rolling_code
27. RFID Shielding, Aluminum Foil Does Not Stop RFID, http:==www.omniscienceisbliss.org=rﬁd.
html
484
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

27
Privacy and Personal Information
Protection in RFID Systems
Yasunobu Nohara, Kensuke Baba, Sozo Inoue, and Hiroto Yasuura
CONTENTS
27.1
Introduction...................................................................................................................... 485
27.2
Privacy and Personal Information Protection ............................................................. 486
27.3
Anonymity and Unlinkability........................................................................................ 486
27.4
Personal Information Protection in RFID Systems ..................................................... 487
27.4.1 Physical Blocking Approach............................................................................. 487
27.4.2 Changing Output Approach............................................................................. 487
27.4.2.1 Rewritable Tag Approach ................................................................. 488
27.4.2.2 Smart Tag Approach.......................................................................... 488
27.4.3 Comparison ......................................................................................................... 489
27.5
Hash-Based Scheme......................................................................................................... 490
27.5.1 Randomized Hash Lock Scheme...................................................................... 490
27.5.2 Hash-Chain Scheme ........................................................................................... 490
27.5.3 K-Steps ID Matching Scheme, Tree-Based Scheme ....................................... 491
27.5.3.1 ID Conﬁguration................................................................................. 491
27.5.3.2 Protocol ................................................................................................ 491
27.5.4 Avoine’s Scheme................................................................................................. 492
27.5.5 Yeo’s Scheme....................................................................................................... 492
27.5.6 Comparison ......................................................................................................... 492
27.5.6.1 Classiﬁcation of Hash-Based Schemes ............................................ 493
27.5.6.2 Security................................................................................................. 493
27.5.6.3 Comparison of Memory and Time .................................................. 495
27.5.6.4 Communication Cost ......................................................................... 495
27.6
Conclusion ........................................................................................................................ 496
References.................................................................................................................................... 496
27.1
Introduction
As RFID systems become popular, more and more people indicate the importance of RFID
privacy problems with comments such as, ‘‘It is necessary to regard privacy for RFID’s
success.’’
485

At the same time, unfortunately, not many engineers, users, and RFID tag vendors
understand the RFID privacy problem comprehensively. RFID is considered to penet-
rate wide application areas, some of which might be highly sensitive to users’ privacy.
Although applications in such privacy-sensitive areas have been avoided, and RFID tags
are killed before being handed to consumers with products, there are also predictions that
RFID’s power exists in the areas which involve consumers, that is, users.
Involved as we are in RFID, we must advance our knowledge and understanding of
RFID privacy to manage (properly and quickly) the troubles regarding user privacy.
In this chapter, with the help of technology, we try to solve problems with respect to
privacy and personal information protection in RFID systems.
27.2
Privacy and Personal Information Protection
First, we would like to distinguish privacy protection from personal information protec-
tion. In the literature, information systems, including RFID systems, do not directly
manage privacy protection. They manage personal information protection. Although
these are now confused worldwide, personal information protection concerns the techno-
logy and operation of information systems with respect to personal data management,
while privacy is one’s right to freedom from intrusion.
Here, it is important to note that personal information protection is not a sufﬁcient
condition, but a necessary condition, of privacy. That is, privacy invasion is accomplished
after the leakage of personal information. Privacy invasion involves abuse of the informa-
tion, manipulation of the victim’s behavior and actions, and social factors such as legal
environments. It would be illogical to state that use of RFID is an invasion of privacy. We
cannot expect RFID to manage this essential human right.
Hereafter, we do not use the term ‘‘privacy,’’ but ‘‘personal information protection,’’ to
limit the responsibility of RFID.
27.3
Anonymity and Unlinkability
When we discuss personal information protection in RFID systems, the following two
issues are considered as properties of an RFID system [1–3].
1. Anonymity: the guarantee that any person using an RFID system is not identiﬁ-
able from the data in the RFID system. For example, if an adversary can know the
correspondence between the ID of a commodity and personal information of a user
who bought the commodity, the user and the commodity do not have anonymity
against the adversary.
2. Unlinkability: the guarantee that any past record of the behavior of a person using
an RFID system is not traced from the data in the RFID system. For example, if an
RFID tag of a commodity outputs the ﬁxed value, the behavior of the person
bringing the commodity can be traced by an adversary. Therefore, the user and the
commodity do not have unlinkability against the adversary.
If anonymity against an adversary is broken, the adversary can link past records of a
person and the present record of the person by comparing the user’s identity. Therefore,
486
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

anonymity against the adversary is protected if unlinkability is protected against the
adversary. On the other hand, anonymity is not always broken if unlinkability is broken.
For example, consider the case that the ID of a user is stored in an RFID tag with a suitable
encryption. Although the encrypted ID is ﬁxed and linkable against the adversary, ano-
nymity is protected since the adversary cannot know the original ID. Therefore, the
achievement of unlinkability is more difﬁcult than that of anonymity.
In a ubiquitous computing environment, a user can be identiﬁed by methods like ‘‘the
person who is in front of me’’ even if we don’t know the user’s name. Therefore, it is also
important to satisfy unlinkability for protecting anonymity from this viewpoint.
27.4
Personal Information Protection in RFID Systems
In this section, we introduce personal information protection schemes in RFID systems.
Ideas, operations, and technologies for personal information protection of the RFID
system are basically the same as those of normal information systems. However, there
are two unique features in RFID systems. The ﬁrst feature is that an adversary can access
an RFID tag easily without notice since RFID uses radio frequency. The second feature
is that the restriction to the cost of the tag is very severe in RFID systems. Therefore, it is
necessary to achieve personal information protection with lightweight operation in RFID
systems. In this paper, we focus on personal information protection schemes that could
solve this unique problem.
We classify the protection schemes into (1) physical blocking approach, (2) rewritable tag
approach, and (3) smart tag approach. Each approach is explained in detail.
27.4.1
Physical Blocking Approach
The physical blocking approach satisﬁes anonymity and unlinkability by preventing an
adversary from accessing RFID tags physically.
The EPCglobal standard [4] speciﬁes kill command, which disables functionality of the
tag. Kill command is protected by PIN to prevent wanton deactivation of tags.
The Faraday cage is an enclosure formed by conducting material, and it blocks out radio
frequency. While a user encloses RFID tags with a Faraday cage, the tags do not work well
because the cage prevents communication between tags and readers.
Juels et al. [5] propose the blocker tag, which prevents an adversary from reading the ID
of the tags which are near the blocker tag. The blocker tag is a cheap passive RFID device
that can simulate many ordinary RFID tags simultaneously. Since the blocker tag pretends
that all possible tags exist there, an adversary cannot identify the tags that are actually
present. A blocker tag can block selectively by simulating only selected subsets of ID codes,
such as those by a particular manufacturer.
Karjoth and MosKowitz [6] propose clipped tags, in which a user can physically separate
the chip from its antenna. In this system, the user can deactivate the tag by removing its
antenna. This separation provides visual conﬁrmation that the tag has been deactivated.
The physical blocking approach, however, has a problem: a user cannot use the RFID
services because even a regular service reader cannot access the RFID tags.
27.4.2
Changing Output Approach
In this approach, an adversary can access an RFID tag, and read the output of the tag freely.
However, the approach satisﬁes anonymity and unlinkability by changing the output of the
Privacy and Personal Information Protection in RFID Systems
487

RFID tag. To satisfy unlinkability, it is necessary to change the output of the tag frequently
and prevent an adversary from discerning the relations between the outputs.
The changing output approach can be classiﬁed into the (1) rewritable tag approach and
(2) smart tag approach.
27.4.2.1
Rewritable Tag Approach
In this approach, a nonvolatile RAM (NVRAM), such as a ﬂash memory, is embedded
within each RFID tag. The ID of the tag is stored in the NVRAM and the server can rewrite
the ID.
Juels and Pappu [7] and Kinoshita et al. [8] propose the external re-encryption scheme and
anonymous-ID scheme. These schemes use a re-encryption scheme, which allows trans-
forming a ciphertext C into a new unlinkable ciphertext C0 using the public key only, without
changing the plaintext. The tag outputs the encrypted ID which is stored in the NVRAM
of the tag. The encrypted ID stored in the tag must be renewed because the tag outputs
constant value until the encrypted ID is renewed. The renewing process is as follows:
Step 1: The reader gets the encrypted ID from the tag.
Step 2: The reader re-encrypts the encrypted ID with the public key.
Step 3: The reader rewrites the old encrypted ID with the new encrypted ID.
The reading process is as follows:
Step 1: The reader gets the encrypted ID from the tag and sends it to the server.
Step 2: The server decrypts the encrypted ID using the private key, and obtains the ID
of the tag.
Inoue and Yasuura [2] propose the private ID scheme, in which each tag has a ROM and
an NVRAM. The permanent ID of the tag is stored in the ROM by a producer, and the user
can rewrite the temporary ID stored in the NVRAM. The ROM and the NVRAM are used
only exclusively. A user cannot read the permanent ID while the temporary ID is stored in
the NVRAM. The user can read the permanent ID only when no value is stored in the
NVRAM. Permanent ID is used for public uses like supply chain or recycling. Temporary
ID is used for private uses.
In the rewritable tag approach, each RFID tag stores its ID in the NVRAM, and the server
updates these IDs periodically. Since the tag does not need cryptographic function, the cost
of RFID tag is low. However, the running cost of the system is high because the server has
to update the tag’s ID periodically. Also since the tag outputs constant value until the next
update, unlinkability against an adversary is limited.
27.4.2.2
Smart Tag Approach
In this approach, a cryptographic function and a ROM are embedded within each RFID
tag. An RFID tag changes its output every time using a cryptographic function—public key
encryption, common key encryption or hash function—on itself.
Let N be the number of RFID tags in an RFID system where the ID idi of an RFID tag Ti
is a string of length L over a ﬁnite alphabet S for 1  i  N. We assume that if i 6¼ j, then
idi 6¼ idj for 1  i, j  N, and 2L  N. For s,t 2 S*, we denote by sjjt the concatenation of
s and t.
488
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

27.4.2.2.1
Public Key Encryption
Kinoshita et al. [9] propose the internal re-encryption scheme, which uses a public key
encryption. In this scheme, a public key encryption function and an NVRAM are embedded
within each RFID tag. The encrypted ID stored in the NVRAM is re-encrypted by the public
key encryption function on the RFID tag. Since the tag changes its output every time, this
scheme provides good personal information protection. However, there is the problem that
the tag is expensive because a public key encryption function is complex and costly.
27.4.2.2.2
Common Key Encryption
Kinoshita et al. [9] propose the common key encryption scheme, which uses a common key
encryption. In this scheme, a common key encryption function, a ROM, and a pseudorandom
number generator are embedded within each RFID tag. The server identiﬁes the tag through
the following protocol.
Step 1: RFID tag Ti generates a random number R, and sends X ¼ EK(idijjR) to the
server.
Step 2: The server decrypts X using the common key K and gets idi.
The calculation of the common key encryption is smaller than that of the public key
encryption; however, it is vulnerable to tampering because the common key must be
shared among all tags. The reason why the common key must be shared is as follows. If
each tag uses an individual key, the server must know which key to use for decrypting of
the encrypted ID. However, how does the server determine the tag’s ID before decrypting
of the encrypted ID? Therefore, it is difﬁcult to use individual common keys.
An exhaustive search of the key can solve this individual key problem; however, the
calculation load of the server is high. We describe the detail of the exhaustive search in
Section 27.5 because a hash-based scheme also uses the exhaustive search.
27.4.2.2.3
Hash Function
Hash-based schemes [3,10–16] use a hash function as a cryptographic function. Since the
hash calculation is a lightweight operation, the hash-based schemes are suitable for RFID
systems, where the implementation cost of an RFID tag must be low. However, the
calculation load of the server is high because the server needs to do an exhaustive search.
We describe the details of the hash-based schemes in Section 27.5.
27.4.3
Comparison
Table 27.1 compares the personal information protection schemes for RFID systems. A bold
font denotes the weakness of the scheme.
TABLE 27.1
Personal Information Protection Schemes for RFID Systems
Smart Tag
Physical Blocking
Rewritable Tag
Public Key
Common Key
Hash
Service
Not Available
Available
Available
Available
Available
Anonymity
Satisﬁed
Satisﬁed
Satisﬁed
Satisﬁed
Satisﬁed
Unlinkability
Satisﬁed
Partly satisﬁed
Satisﬁed
Satisﬁed
Satisﬁed
Vulnerability
Tamper free
Tamper free
Tamper free
Vulnerable
Tamper free
Calculation on server
Small
Small
Small
Small
Large
Cost of tag
Low
Low
High
Low
Low
Privacy and Personal Information Protection in RFID Systems
489

27.5
Hash-Based Scheme
In this section, we describe hash-based schemes and compare these schemes.
A hash-based scheme is one of the schemes using the smart tag approach. A tag changes
its output using the hash function, which is embedded on the tag. Since the hash function is
a lightweight operation, a hash-based scheme is suitable for RFID systems, where the
implementation cost of an RFID tag must be low.
We assume the hash function has one-way and pseudorandom properties. One-way
means it is computationally infeasible to calculate the input of the hash function from the
output of the hash function. Pseudorandom means the output of the hash function is
computationally indistinguishable from a true random number.
27.5.1
Randomized Hash Lock Scheme [3]
In this scheme, a hash function H, a ROM, and a pseudorandom number generator are
embedded within each RFID tag.
RFID tag Ti stores idi in the ROM. The server stores the IDs idi (1  i  N) of all tags. The
server identiﬁes the tag through the following protocol (see Figure 27.1).
Step 1: RFID tag Ti generates a random number R, and sends X ¼ H(idijjR) and R to
the server.
Step 2: The server ﬁnds idi that corresponds to X by checking X ¼ H(idijjR) for 1  i  N.
Since R changes every time, X ¼ H(idijjR) is not ﬁxed. It is computationally infeasible to
get idi from X and R due to the one-way property of the hash function. Therefore, this
scheme provides unlinkability against an adversary.
27.5.2
Hash-Chain Scheme [10,11]
In this scheme, two different hash functions H and G, a ROM, and an NVRAM are
embedded within each RFID tag.
H
H
X
R
Compare
Server
idi
id4
id3
id2
id1
idN
idi
Rand. Gen.
RFID tag
FIGURE 27.1
Randomized hash lock scheme.
490
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

RFID tag Ti stores idi in the ROM, and stores secret information cs1
i 2 SL0 in the NVRAM.
The server stores the pair (idi; cs1
i )(1  i  N) of all tags. The server identiﬁes the tag
through the following protocol (see Figure 27.2).
Step 1: RFID tag Ti sends X ¼ H(idikcsl
i) to the server. RFID tag Ti updates
cslþ1
i
 G(csl
i).
Step 2: The server ﬁnds the idi corresponding to X by checking X ¼ H(idikcsl
i) for all
1  i  N and all 1  l  M (where M is the maximum length of the hash chain).
Since csl
i changes every time, X ¼ H(idikcsl
i) is not ﬁxed. It is computationally infeasible to
get idi from X due to the one-way property of the hash function. Therefore, this scheme
provides unlinkability against an adversary.
Moreover, it is computationally infeasible to get csl0
i (l0 < l) even if idi and csl
i are tampered
with. Therefore, the scheme provides forward security, meaning that no RFID tag can be
traced from past ID information even if the secret information in the tag is tampered with.
27.5.3
K-Steps ID Matching Scheme [12], Tree-Based Scheme [13]
In these schemes, a hash function H, a ROM, and a pseudorandom number generator are
embedded within each RFID tag. These schemes use a tree ID structure. In this section we
explain the K-steps ID matching scheme [12].
27.5.3.1
ID Conﬁguration
We use a labeled tree of depth K, such as the tree shown in Figure 27.3. The tree has N
leaves, and each leaf corresponds to an RFID tag. Each node has a unique label. ID idi of an
RFID tag corresponding to a leaf node is deﬁned as the sequence of labels from the root
node to the leaf node (e.g., a2bX& in Figure 27.3).
In the following, the kth (1  k  Si) label of Ti is denoted by idi[k], where Si is the depth
of leaf i, and 1  Si  K.
27.5.3.2
Protocol
In the K-steps ID matching scheme, the server recognizes an ID from the output of an RFID
tag through the following protocol.
H
CS
G
H
X
Compare
Server
idi
id4
id3
id2
id1
idN
idi
CS1
CS2
CSM
RFID tag
FIGURE 27.2
Hash-chain scheme.
Privacy and Personal Information Protection in RFID Systems
491

Step 1: RFID tag Ti generates a random number R. Ti then sends (R, X1, X2, . . . , XK) to
the server, where Xk is H(idi[k]jjR) if 1  k  Si and a random number Rk if Si þ 1 
k  K.
Step 2: The server operates as follows:
STEP 2-1: let Z be the root of the labeled tree and let k  1;
STEP 2-2: ﬁnd Li s.t. H(LijjR) ¼ Xk by computing H (LijjR) for each child Li of Z, and
update Z  Li;
STEP 2-3: output the label corresponding to Z as the ID of the RFID tag if Z is a
leaf; otherwise, let k  k þ 1 and return to STEP 2-2.
In Step 1, RFID tag Ti sends a random number as Xk for Si þ 1  k  K, which hides the
depth of the leaf Si to prevent weakening the unlinkability against an adversary.
When K ¼ 1, the protocol and the ID structure of the protocol correspond to those of the
randomized hash lock scheme [3]. If some procedures of the protocol are changed, it
becomes a protocol corresponding to the hash-chain scheme [10,11].
27.5.4
Avoine’s Scheme
Avoine et al. [14,15] developed a speciﬁc time-memory trade-off that reduces the amount
of computation in the hash-chain scheme [10,11]. This time-memory trade-off reduces the
hash calculations on the server with the help of precomputation results. However, heavy
pre-calculation is needed with Avoine’s scheme [14,15].
27.5.5
Yeo’s Scheme
Yeo’s scheme [16] is one of the hash-chain schemes, and the same ID structure as in K-steps
ID matching scheme is used to reduce the server complexity. Yeo et al. propose two types
of schemes. One is a scheme without precomputation which uses only a grouping tech-
nique. The other is a scheme with precomputation which uses both a grouping technique
and a time-memory trade-off technique [14].
27.5.6
Comparison
We compare the hash-based schemes from the viewpoints of security, hash calculation
time, the amount of memory needed, and the amount of communication.
FIGURE 27.3
AnIDstructure for theK-steps IDmatching
scheme.
id1
id2
id3
id4
X
I
P
b
1
8
2
T
a
b
y
U
X
r
q
id5
i
&
+
=
0
a8J/i
a2bX&
a2bX+
a2bX=
yUi%0
492
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

27.5.6.1
Classiﬁcation of Hash-Based Schemes
For our comparison, we classify hash-based schemes with regard to three characteristics:
1. Base model (hash lock or hash chain)
2. ID structure (normal or tree)
3. Introduction of a time-memory trade-off technique [14] (yes or no)
Table 27.2 shows the classiﬁcation results. There are no proposed schemes with the
combination (Hash Lock, Normal, Yes) or (Hash Lock, Tree, Yes) because the responses of
RFID tags in a hash lock scheme are randomized, which means a large memory space is
needed to apply a time-memory trade-off technique [15].
27.5.6.2
Security
We compare the security of the hash-based schemes with respect to three concerns:
1. Unlinkability
2. Forward security
3. Prevention of replay attacks
27.5.6.2.1
Unlinkability
We analyzed the unlinkability of the hash-based schemes with the degree of unlinkability
[17]. The degree of unlinkability ranges from 0 to log2 N [bit], and unlinkability becomes
stronger as the degree of unlinkability increases. When an adversary has no ID informa-
tion, each degree of unlinkability for the hash-based schemes is log2 N.
Since anonymity and unlinkability are closely related, this evaluation of unlinkability is
also related to that of anonymity.
When an adversary obtains one ID, such as by tampering with an RFID tag, the degree
of unlinkability of each scheme differs depending on its ID structure. The degree of
unlinkability for the normal ID structure and that for the tree ID structure are given as
follows [17]:
Unormal ¼ N  1
N
log2(N  1)
(27:1)
Utree ¼ log2 N þ N  1
N
flog2(N1=K  1) 
N1=K
K(N1=K  1) log2 Ng
(27:2)
TABLE 27.2
Classiﬁcation of Hash-Based Schemes
Base Model
ID Structure
Time-Memory
Hash lock [3]
Hash lock
Normal
No
K-step [12], Tree-based [13]
Hash lock
Tree
No
Hash chain [10,11]
Hash chain
Normal
No
Avoine’s scheme [14,15]
Hash chain
Normal
Yes
Yeo’s without precomp. [16]
Hash chain
Tree (K ¼ 2)
No
Yeo’s with precomp. [16]
Hash chain
Tree (K ¼ 2)
Yes
Privacy and Personal Information Protection in RFID Systems
493

The normal ID structure schemes enable user unlinkability, except for the tampered user,
but the tree ID structure schemes cannot enable user unlinkability since some users share
part of the ID of the tampered user. From Equations 27.1 and 27.2, we can see that the degree
of unlinkability with the tree ID structure is lower than that with the normal structure.
However, the tree ID structure schemes provide the same level of unlinkability as
the normal ID structure if a ¼ N1=K is large enough. Since the optimized K is much less
than 10 even if N becomes 2100 [12], the tree ID structure decreases the degree of unlink-
ability only slightly.
Thus, the decrease in the degree of unlinkability with the K-steps ID matching scheme is
only small [17] compared to that with the normal ID structure.
27.5.6.2.2
Forward Security
Forward security is a property that means no RFID tag can be traced from past ID informa-
tion even if an adversary tampers with the secret information in the tag.
Hash lock schemes, including the K-steps ID matching scheme, cannot provide forward-
security because an adversary can easily get a random number R. On the other hand, hash-
chain schemes can provide forward security since it is computationally difﬁcult for an
adversary to get csl0
i (l0 < l) even if he has tampered with idi and csl
i.
However, Juels and weis have pointed out that hash-chain schemes create a security risk
in that an adversary can guess a tag’s count number [18]. We discuss this problem in
Section 27.5.6.3.
27.5.6.2.3
Prevention of Replay Attacks
A replay attack is one in which a valid data transmission is maliciously or fraudulently
repeated. The attack is carried out by an adversary who masquerades as a legitimate user.
Replay attacks must be prevented when a server has to authenticate as well as identify
an RFID tag. One way to do this is to use a fresh challenge by the server. Hash lock
schemes can prevent replay attacks if a step is added where the server sends a fresh
challenge to the tag and includes the challenge in the hash calculations. In K-steps ID
matching scheme, the protocol to prevent replay attacks is as follows:
Step 1: The server generates a random number Rs, and then sends Rs to RFID tag Ti.
Step 2: RFID tag Ti generates a random number Rd, and then sends (Rd, X1, X2, . . . , XK)
to the server, where Xk is H(idi[k]kRskRd) if 1  k  Si, and a random number Rk if
Si þ 1  k  K.
Step 3: The server operates as follows:
STEP 3-1: let Z be the root of the labeled tree and let k  1;
STEP 3-2: ﬁnd Li s.t. H(LikRskRd) ¼ Xk by computing H(LikRskRd) for each child Li
of Z, and update Z  Li;
STEP 3-3: output the label corresponding to Z as the ID of the RFID tag if Z is a
leaf; otherwise, let k  k þ 1 and return to STEP 3-2.
Avoine et al. propose a modiﬁed hash-chain scheme which prevents replay attacks using
a challenge [15]. This technique can be easily adopted in Yeo’s scheme without pre-
computation.
However, the technique of using a fresh challenge cannot be applied directly to Avoine’s
scheme or Yeo’s scheme with precomputation since the randomization of the tag’s
response prevents the server using a time-memory trade-off (see Section 27.5.6.1). There-
fore, the RFID tag must calculate a hash value(s) without a challenge and a hash value with
494
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

the challenge [15]. The former value(s) enable(s) the server to identify the tag, while the
latter prevents replay attacks.
All of the hash-based schemes proposed so far have a countermeasure against replay
attacks, and preventing replay attacks increases both the calculation complexity and the
communication amount. We discuss this problem in Sections 27.5.6.3 and 27.5.6.4.
27.5.6.3
Comparison of Memory and Time
We compare the different schemes regarding the number of hash calculations on the RFID
tag and on the server, the number of precomputations on the server, and the memory
required for the precomputation results.
Table 27.3 compares the memory and the time needed for each scheme. In the table, M is
the maximum length of the hash chain, m is the conversion factor, c is the memory size
parameter for Avoine’s scheme [14], and g is the rate of successful search parameter in that
scheme. For example, the success rate is 99.9% when g ¼ 8.
In the table, memory on server denotes the amount of secret information to be stored csl
i
in hash-chain schemes. Note that the memory amount does not include the space for the ID
list, which is required for every scheme. The additional number of calculations for the
scheme to prevent replay attacks is given in brackets.
As the table shows, the number of hash calculations on the server in a time-memory trade-
off scheme includes M3 or M1.5, while that in the K-step ID matching scheme includes N.
Therefore, the K-steps ID matching scheme might be disadvantageous in terms of the
required time if M3 or M1.5 is sufﬁciently smaller than N1=k.
The server cannot identify the RFID tag when the tag number is larger than M because it
will be outside the search range. In addition, there is a security risk in that an adversary can
guess a tag’s count number if M is small [18]. Therefore, M must be sufﬁciently large.
Avoine and Oechslin point out that replacing cs1
i by csk
i in the database regularly expands
the search range of the server [14]. However, the problem of a count number leakage
remains, and heavy precomputation (e.g., M2 N=2) is needed for every replacement.
27.5.6.4
Communication Cost
Table 27.4 compares the communication cost for each scheme in terms of the amount of
communication data. The costs are shown in each case of preventing or not preventing
replay attacks. In the table, r is the length of the random value for the challenge, and h is the
length of the hash output.
TABLE 27.3
Comparison of Required Memory and Time
Hash Calculation
on Device
Hash Calculation
on Server
Precomputation
on Server
Memory
on Server
Hash lock
1
N
0
0
K-step, Tree-based
K
KN
1
K
0
0
Hash chain
2
MN
0
N
Avoine’s scheme
2[þ1]
33
23
M3g
c3m2 [ þ 1]
NM2
2
cN
Yeo’s without precomputation
4
2M
ﬃﬃﬃﬃ
N
p
0
N
Yeo’s with precomputation
4[þ1]
25M6g
c3m2

1=4
[ þ 1]
23c3N4m2
34M2g

1=4 M2
2
cN
Privacy and Personal Information Protection in RFID Systems
495

In tree ID structures, including those of the K-steps ID matching scheme, the communi-
cation cost increases in proportion to the tree depth. For the K-steps ID matching scheme,
we measured the practical time for the entire execution (including the communication time
between the server and the RFID tag), and found it is shorter than that of a naive scheme
[3] when N is sufﬁciently large.
Thus, we expect the communication cost of the K-steps ID matching scheme to be
negligible in a practical situation. However, further evaluation is required since we used
contact smart cards in our experiment. With contact-less smart cards or RFID tags, the
communication cost might increase because of communication failures.
27.6
Conclusion
In this chapter, we have explained personal information protection in RFID systems. First,
we explained the distinction between privacy protection and personal information protec-
tion, and introduced two properties—anonymity and unlinkability—for personal informa-
tion protection. Secondly, we surveyed the personal information protection schemes which
provided anonymity and unlinkability. Finally, we have described hash-based schemes,
which are some of the smart tag approaches.
References
1. ISO=IEC 15408—International Standard Information technology—Security techniques—Evalua-
tion criteria for IT security—Part2: Security functional requirements, 1999.
2. Sozo Inoue and Hiroto Yasuura. RFID privacy using user-controllable uniqueness. In RFID
Privacy Workshop, MIT, MA, USA, Nov. 2003.
3. Stephan A. Weis, Sanjay E. Sarma, Ronald L. Rivest, and Daniel W. Engels. Security and privacy
aspects of low-cost radio frequency identiﬁcation systems. In 1st International Conference on
Security in Pervasive Computing—SPC2003, LNCS, Vol. 2802, pp. 201–212. Springer, 2004.
4. EPCglobal. http:==www.epcglobalinc.org=.
5. Ari Juels, Ronald L. Rivest, and Michael Szydlo. The blocker tag: Selective blocking of RFID tags
for consumer privacy. In 10th ACM Conference on Computer and Communications Security—
CCS2003, pp. 103–111. ACM Press, Oct. 2003.
6. Günter Karjoth and Paul A. Moskowitz. Disabling RFID tags with visible conﬁrmation:
Clipped tags are silenced. In Proceedings of 2005 ACM Workshop on Privacy in the Electronic Society,
pp. 27–30, 2005.
TABLE 27.4
Communication Cost
Not Preventing
Replay Attacks
Preventing
Replay Attacks
Hash lock
r þ h
2r þ h
K-steps, Tree-based
r þ Kh
2r þ Kh
Hash chain
h
r þ h
Avoine’s scheme
h
r þ 2h
Yeo’s without precomputation
2h
r þ 2h
Yeo’s with precomputation
2h
r þ 3h
496
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

7. Ari Juels and Ravikanth Pappu. Squealing euros: Privacy protection in RFID-enabled banknotes.
In Financial Cryptography—FC2003, LNCS, Vol. 2742, pp. 103–121, Jan. 2003.
8. Shingo Kinoshita, Fumitaka Hoshino, Tomoyuki Komuro, Akiko Fujimura, and Miyako Ohkubo.
Low-cost RFID privacy protection scheme. IPSJ Journal, 45(8):2007–2021, 2004 (in Japanese).
9. Shingo Kinoshita, Miyako Ohkubo, Fumitaka Hoshino, Gembu Morohashi, Osamu Shionoiri, and
Atsushi Kanai. Privacy enhanced active RFID tag. In Proceedings of 1st International Workshop on
Exploiting Context Histories in Smart Environments—ECHSE2005, 2005.
10. Miyako Ohkubo, Koutarou Suzuki, and Shingo Kinoshita. Cryptographic approach to a privacy
friendly tag. In RFID Privacy Workshop, MIT, MA, USA, Nov. 2003.
11. Miyako Ohkubo, Koutarou Suzuki, and Shingo Kinoshita. Hash-chain based forward-secure
privacy protection scheme for low-cost RFID. In 2004 Symposium on Cryptography and Information
Security—SCIS2004, Vol. 1, pp. 719–724, Jan. 2004.
12. Yasunobu Nohara, Toru Nakamura, Kensuke Baba, Sozo Inoue, and Hiroto Yasuura. Unlinkable
identiﬁcation for large-scale RFID systems. IPSJ Journal, 47(8):2362–2370, 2006. Online version:
IPSJ Digital Courier, Vol. 2, pp. 489–497.
13. David Molnar and David Wagner. Privacy and security in library: RFID issues, practices,
and architectures. In 11th ACM Conference on Computer and Communications Security—CCS2004,
pp. 210–219. ACM Press, Nov. 2004.
14. Gildas Avoine and Philippe Oechslin. A scalable and provably secure hash-based RFID protocol.
In 2nd International Workshop on Pervasive Computing and Communications Security—PerSec2005,
pp. 110–114. IEEE Computer Society Press, Mar. 2005.
15. Gildas Avoine, Etienne Dysli, and Philippe Oechslin. Reducing time complexity in RFID
systems. In 12th Annual Workshop on Selected Areas in Cryptography—SAC2005, LNCS, Vol. 3897,
pp. 291–306. Springer, 2005.
16. Sang-Soo Yeo and Sung Kwon Kim. Scalable and ﬂexible privacy protection scheme for RFID
systems. In 2nd European Workshop on Security in Ad-Hoc and Sensor Networks—ESAS2005, LNCS,
Vol. 3813, pp. 153–163. Springer, 2005.
17. Yasunobu Nohara, Sozo Inoue, Kensuke Baba, and Hiroto Yasuura. Quantitative evaluation of
unlinkable ID matching schemes. In Proceedings of 2005 ACM Workshop on Privacy in the Electronic
Society—WPES2005, pp. 55–60. ACM Press, Nov. 2005.
18. Ari Juels and Stephen A. Weis. Deﬁning strong privacy for RFID. In IACR Cryptology ePrint
Archive Report, no. 2006–137, 2006.
Privacy and Personal Information Protection in RFID Systems
497


28
Multilateral Approaches for Reliable Mobile RFID
Service Systems
Namje Park and Dongho Won
CONTENTS
28.1
Introduction...................................................................................................................... 499
28.2
Mobile RFID Primer ........................................................................................................ 500
28.2.1 Mobile RFID Technology................................................................................... 500
28.2.2 UHF-Band Mobile RFID Network ................................................................... 502
28.3
Security Requirements in Mobile RFID Network....................................................... 504
28.3.1 Mobile RFID-Oriented Security Threats.......................................................... 505
28.3.2 Requirements for Secure Mobile RFID Service .............................................. 506
28.4
Multilateral Approaches with Improved Security...................................................... 508
28.4.1 Overview of Secure Mobile RFID Environment ............................................ 508
28.4.2 Security-Enhanced Mobile RFID Middleware in the Phone ........................ 508
28.4.3 Using Crypto Algorithm in Mobile Terminal Platform ................................ 510
28.4.4 RFID Tag Access Control and Password Data Management ...................... 511
28.4.5 RFID Tag-Based Adult Certiﬁcation................................................................ 512
28.4.6 Recoding Scheme of RFID Tag Code Data ..................................................... 513
28.4.7 Secure RFID Discovery Service Gateway System.......................................... 513
28.4.8 Policy-Based RFID User Privacy Protection ................................................... 514
28.4.8.1 Privacy Level of RFID by Product.................................................... 516
28.4.8.2 Security Level of RFID by Product................................................... 517
28.5
Conclusion ........................................................................................................................ 519
Acknowledgments ..................................................................................................................... 519
References.................................................................................................................................... 519
28.1
Introduction
Radio frequency identiﬁcation (RFID) has been recognized as the key technology for the
ubiquitous network, which is deﬁned as an environment in which information can be
acquired anytime and anywhere through network access service [1,2]. Currently, RFID
technologies consider the environment in which RFID tags are mobile and RFID readers
are stationary. However, in the future RFID technologies could consider an environment in
which RFID tags are stationary and readers are mobile. RFID based on mobile telecom-
munications services could be the best example of this kind of usage. RFID-based mobile
499

telecommunications services could be deﬁned as services which provide information
access through the telecommunication network by reading RFID tags on certain objects
using an RFID reader in mobile terminals such as cell phones. RFID tags play an important
role as a bridge between off-line objects and online information. The RFID-enabled cell
phone was introduced by Nokia in 2004 [2–5].
Furthermore, the RFID tags of the future will evolve as active tags which have network-
ing capabilities, becoming a key component of the ubiquitous network environment rather
than the current passive RFID tags. In this stage, RFID tags will need network addresses for
communications. For the ubiquitous network, current RFID-related technologies need to be
changed to reﬂect the features of mobile telecommunications services; and additional
technologies for RFID-based mobile telecommunications services should be established
to provide harmonized operation of services.
A new security technology is required to provide a safe service among mobile RFID tags,
terminals, and applications to minimize the threat of personal information infringements
and leakage. Firstly, the potential for personal information protection infringement has
increased due to the mobility of mobile RFID readers; secondly, information leakage due to
mobile communication and wireless internet environment is expected; thirdly, the mobile
RFID service can be used illegally; and ﬁnally, RFID tag information can be counterfeited
or falsiﬁed. Therefore, in this chapter, we present an analysis of security and privacy
threats, and multilateral security approaches to promoting a globally mobile RFID service.
This new technology to RFID will provide a solution that protects absolute conﬁdentiality
from basic tags to the user’s privacy information.
28.2
Mobile RFID Primer
In this section, we will discuss the mobile RFID technology. We begin with a discussion of
the general details of mobile RFID system anatomy, followed by detailed discussions of the
components that make up a typical mobile RFID system and the underlying technologies
that make them work. The most common of these are described later.
28.2.1
Mobile RFID Technology
RFID is expected to be the base technology for the ubiquitous network or computing, and
is likely to be associated with other technologies such as Micro Electro Mechanical Systems
(MEMS), Telematics, and Sensors. Meanwhile, it is widely accepted that Korea has estab-
lished one of the most robust mobile telecommunication networks in the world. In parti-
cular, about 78% of the population use mobile phones and >95% of those phones have
Internet-enabled functions. Currently, Korea has recognized the potential of RFID techno-
logy and has tried to converge it with the mobile phone. Mobile phones integrated with
RFID can be expected to create new markets and provide new services to end-users, and as
such will be considered as an exemplary technology fusion. Furthermore, it may evolve its
particular functions as an end-user terminal device, or a ubiquitous device (U-device), in
the world of ubiquitous information technology [2,3,6–8].
Actually, the mobile RFID phone may represent two types of mobile phone device; one is
the RFID reader-equipped mobile phone, and the other is the RFID tag-attached mobile
phone. Each type of mobile phone has different application domains: On the one hand, for
example, the RFID tag-attached type can be used as a device for payment, entry control, and
identity authentication, and the main feature of this application stems from the fact that RFID
readers exist in the ﬁxed position and recognize each phone, giving the user-speciﬁc services
like door opening; on the other hand, the RFID reader-equipped mobile phone, to which
500
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

Korea is currently paying considerable attention, can be used to provide end-users with
detailed information about the tagged object through accessing the mobile wireless network.
The model of the mobile RFID service as shown in Figure 28.1 deﬁnes three additional
entities and two relationships compared with those deﬁned in the RFID tag, the RFID
access network, RFID reader, the relationship between the RFID tag and RFID reader, and
the relationship between the RFID reader and the application server.
Right now, there are several projects concerning ‘‘Mobile RFID’’ as shown in Table 28.1.
In particular, Korea’s mobile RFID technology is focusing on the ultrahigh frequency
(UHF) range (860–960 MHz), since the UHF range may enable a longer reading range
and moderate data rates, as well as a relatively small tag size and lower costs [2,3,6]. Then,
as a kind of handheld RFID reader, in the selected service domain the UHF RFID phone
device can be used to provide object information directly to the end-user using the
same UHF RFID tags which have spread widely. Table 28.1 shows a summary of
the possible implementations of mobile RFID.
As shown earlier, UHF-band mobile RFID uses 908.55–913.95 MHz and complies with
ISO=IEC 18000-6 Types B and C [3,8,9]. From the viewpoint of service deployment, the
UHF-band is more proﬁtable according to the following observations:
1. It has relatively longer range up to 100 cm.
. Longer range is favorable for most mobile RFID services, ensuring greater
convenience.
2. Short range is available up to 2 or 3 cm if required; in the case of the payment system,
short range may be supported by reducing the RF strength by application.
3. Avoiding duplicate investment for the RFID tag.
. Most RFID tags in supply chain management (SCM) work in the 900 MHz
range, that is, ISO 18000-6 Types A=B=C and EPCglobal.
. This means that both the SCM and mobile RFID applications can share an RFID
tag: thus, a single RFID tag can provide different contents according to its
application.
RFID Tag
Object
Mobile RFID user
Mobile terminal
(reader)
Mobile service
gateway
Application
server
ASP
RFID
network
Mobile
network
Open
network
FIGURE 28.1
Model of mobile RFID data communication.
TABLE 28.1
Summary of Mobile RFID Implementations
Nokia’s
Mobile RFID
KDDI’s
Mobile RFID
(Passive)
KDDI’s
Mobile RFID
(Active)
NFC
(Near-Field
Communication)
Korea’s
Mobile RFID
Radio frequency
13.56 MHz
2.45 GHz
315 MHz
13.56 MHz
860–960 MHz
Reading range
2–3 cm
5 cm
10 m
Compliant
standards
ISO=IEC
14443 A
ISO=IEC 18092
ISO=IEC
18000-6 B=C
Feature
HF RF reader
RF reader
Active RFID
reader
Tag and reader
UHF RF reader
Multilateral Approaches for Reliable Mobile RFID Service Systems
501

28.2.2
UHF-Band Mobile RFID Network
Networked RFID comprises an expanded RFID network and communication scope to
communicate with a series of networks, inter-networks, and globally distributed application
systems, engendering global communication relationships triggered by RFID, for such
applications as Business to Business (B2B), Business to Customer (B2C), B2B2C, Government
to Customer (G2C), and so on. Mobile RFID loads a compact RFID reader into a cellular
phone, thereby providing diverse services through mobile telecommunications networks
when reading RFID tags through a cellular phone. Since the provision of these services was
ﬁrst attempted in Korea in 2005, their standardization has been ongoing. Korea’s mobile
RFID technology is focusing on the UHF range [2–4]. Thus, as a kind of handheld RFID
reader, in the selected service domain the UHF RFID phone device can be used to provide
object information directly to the end-user using the same UHF RFID tags which have been
distributed widely.
The mobile RFID service has been deﬁned as the provision, through the wireless Internet
network, of personalized secure services—such as searching for product information,
purchasing, verifying, and paying for products—while on the move, by building the
RFID reader chip into the mobile terminal [10,11]. The service infrastructure required for
providing such an RFID-based mobile service is composed of an RFID reader, handset,
communication network, network protocol, information protection, application server,
RFID code interpretation, and contents development; the conﬁguration map is as follows.
Figure 28.2 shows the interface structure for the mobile RFID service’s communication
infrastructure and the types of relevant standards. RFID wireless access communication
takes place between the RFID tag and a cellular phone, Code Division Multiple Access
(CDMA) mobile communication takes place between a cellular phone and Base Trans-
ceiver Station (BTS)=Access Network Transceiver Subsystem (ANTS), and wire communi-
cation takes place between BTS=ANTS and a networked RFID application server.
Figure 28.2 represents the entities of the mobile RFID service network architecture. The
Object Directory Service (ODS) server plays the role of a Directory Name System (DNS)
server which informs the mobile RFID phone of the contents=service server’s location, as
explained earlier [2,6,12]. The ODS server may be organized in a hierarchical structure
similar to that of a DNS server. The Object Traceability Service (OTS) server keeps a record
of the tag readings in the RFID readers throughout the life cycle of the objects. Its main
purpose is to track objects in the SCM. The Object Information Service (OIS) records the
reading of the RFID tag event in the OTS server and may provide additional detailed
Root ODS
National ODS
Company ODS
OTS server
RPS
server
OIS
server
WAP/ Web
server
RFID reader
Mobile RFID
device
RFID
tag
Wireless internet and
mobile communication
network
FIGURE 28.2
Conceptual network model for mobile RFID service.
502
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

information on an object, such as manufacturing time, manufacturer’s name, expiration
time, and so on. The RFID Privacy Management Service (RPS) controls access to the
information on the object in accordance with the privacy proﬁle put together by the
owner of the object. The Wireless Application Protocol (WAP) and Web servers are
contents servers that provide wireless Internet contents such as news, games, music,
videos, stock trading, lotteries, images, and so on.
The mobile RFID service structure is deﬁned to support ISO=IEC 18000-6 A=B=C
through wireless access communication between the tag and the reader; however, as yet
there is no RFID reader chip capable of supporting all three wireless connection access
speciﬁcations so that the communication speciﬁcation for the mobile phone will be deter-
mined by the mobile communication companies [3,12,13]. It will also be possible to mount
the RF wireless communication function on the reader chip using Software Deﬁned Radio
(SDR) technology and develop an ISO=IEC 18000-6 A=B=C communication protocol in
software to choose from the protocols when needed.
The mobile RFID middleware is composed by extending the Wireless Internet Platform
for Interoperability (WIPI) software platform to provide RF code-related information
obtained from an RF tag through an RFID reader installed in the mobile phone. The
networked terminal’s function is concerned with the recognition distance to the RFID
reader chip built into the cellular phone, transmission power, frequency, interface, techno-
logical standard, Personal Identiﬁcation Number (PIN) speciﬁcation, Universal Asyn-
chronous Receiver and Transmitter (UART) communication interface, WIPI Application
Program Interface (API) extended speciﬁcation to control the reader chip. RFID reader chip
middleware functions are provided to the application program in the form of mobile
platform’s API. Here, the mobile RFID device driver is the device driver software provided
by the reader chip manufacturer.
The mobile RFID network function is concerned with communication protocols such as
the ODS communication for code interpretation, the message transportation for the trans-
mission and reception of contents between the mobile phone terminal and the application
server, contents negotiation that supports the mobile RFID service environment and
ensures optimum contents transfer between the mobile phone terminal and the application
server, and session management that enables the application to create and manage the
required status information while transmitting the message and the WIPI extended speci-
ﬁcation which supports these communication services [4,6,10,14,29].
A cellular phone requires a common control interface between the various RFID readers
and the application or the middleware; to that end, EPCglobal Inc. and ISO are deﬁning the
functions that an RFID reader should commonly support, as well as various common
command and standardizing message types. Mobile RFID functions will be extended
continuously into standard cellular phone RFID readers, and the RFID supported WIPI
extension model using WIPI—the wireless internet standard platform—will deﬁne the API
required in using the reader suitable for the mobile environment as the API extension of
WIPI, while maintaining compatibility among the various devices.
The basic communication scenario for mobile RFID service is as follows: ﬁrst, a mobile
RFID phone reads the RFID tags on an object and fetches the code stored in it [2,4,9].
Second, a mobile RFID phone should execute the code resolution with which the mobile
RFID phone obtains the location of the remote server that provides information on the
product or an adequate mobile service. The code resolution protocol is identical with
the DNS protocol. The ODS server in Figure 28.3 as a DNS server and is similar to
EPCglobal’s Object Name Service (ONS) server. The mobile RFID phone directs queries
on the location of the server with a code to the ODS server, then the ODS server replies by
giving the location of the server. Finally, the mobile RFID phone requests contents or a
service from the designated server whose location has been acquired from the ODS server.
Multilateral Approaches for Reliable Mobile RFID Service Systems
503

Figure 28.4 illustrates the detailed code resolution process. The code store in the RFID
tag is formed of a bit string such as ‘‘01001101110 . . . ’’ and this bit string should be
translated into a meaningful form such as EPC, mCode (Mobile RFID Code), uCode, ISO
Code, or something else [2,7,8,15]. Given that ‘‘1.2.3.4’’ is obtained from a bit string
translation and that ‘‘1.2.3.4’’ should be converted into a Uniform Resource Name (URN)
form as ‘‘urn:mcode:cb:1.2.3.4,’’ the remaining code resolution process is the same as the
DNS reverse lookup process. Mobile RFID reader requests contents retrieval after code
resolution. The RFID application in the mobile RFID phone requests contents from the
WAP or Web server returned by the code resolution.
28.3
Security Requirements in Mobile RFID Network
The mobile RFID can be used for entertainment, smart poster service, payment system, and
so on. However, the owners of the RFID tags cannot recognize that their RFID tags
are identiﬁed. In addition, the RFID tags do not store the list of identiﬁcation. So the
people who have a mobile RFID reader can read the information of the RFID tags. Owing
to these reasons, mobile RFID service has many security and privacy threats. In this
section, we describe security and privacy threats in mobile RFID system. We will discuss
vulnerability points in the basic mobile RFID system and privacy threats in mobile RFID
Mobile RFID
device
Mobile
RFID
middleware
RFID
tag
1. Code
2. Code query
3. URL response
4. URL response
5. Content request
Wireless internet and
mobile communication network
Service broker/
gateway
OIS
server
ODS
server
6. Content response
RFID reader
FIGURE 28.3
Block basic communication scenario for mobile RFID service.
RFID
tag
Code
URL query
URL query
URL response
HTTP (information) request
HTTP (information) response
RPS request via HTTP
RPS response via HTTP
URL response
0101110100...
4.3.2.1. odsroot.org
4.3.2.1. odsroot.org
http://wml.etri.re.kr/c.wml
Mobile
reader
ODS
resolver
ODS
server
WAP/Web
server
OIS
server
RPS
server
FIGURE 28.4
Detailed mobile RFID’s code resolution process.
504
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

service. Then we describe the security and privacy requirements for secure mobile RFID
service and its application (Figure 28.5).
28.3.1
Mobile RFID-Oriented Security Threats
The security vulnerability of the mobile RFID consists of potential infringements of the
owners’ privacy and physical attacks in cyber space [16–19]. The most typical vulnerabi-
lities are as follows:
1. Privacy vulnerability: Individual privacy is very likely to be infringed due to the
approval of unlimited access to an RFID tag owned by an individual. As such, it is
necessary to allow the access to information only for those who need to obtain it in
a given application, but to block it for those who have no authority. An individual
RFID tag may also become a means by which to track and locate its owner. The
infringement of privacy in the internet world results from the collection, storage,
and use of customer information by companies, but the problem has become more
serious in the mobile RFID world because anyone with an RFID reader can now
read any information on anybody who keeps a tag-attached object.
2. Possible hacking of mobile RFID applications: It is possible to hack tags, preventing the
normal use of tags or obtaining incorrect information from them with a tag
information alteration or a tag kill function.
3. Illegal collection of information: One may hide a system in a commodity or object for
remote communication to wiretap, track, catch information, or personal proﬁle.
4. Security vulnerabilities also result from jamming, replay attacks, covert reading, and
so on.
Some mobile RFID-oriented privacy threats are summarized later [4,14,16].
Firstly, an RFID tag identiﬁer, the ID, can easily be eavesdropped by intercepting
broadcasted radio signals or by actively reading the RFID tag. Accordingly, it is possible
to track an RFID-tagged object or monitor a user carrying a speciﬁed tag ID by using an
invisible rogue RFID reader. Secondly, an RFID tag can contain some important data, such
Authentication
Untraceability
Adult certification
Product authentication
Personalized service
Privacy protection
Secure tracking
E2E Security (TLS, Encryption, etc.)
WS-Security
RFID
tag
Mobile
RFID
M/W
Wireless
internet
and mobile
communication
network
Secure
M/W
Secure channel
Secure
reader
Crypto 
Library
RFID
Reader
Mobile RFID
device
Service
gateway
OTS
Local
ODS
National
ODS
mOIS
(1)
mOIS
(2)
RPS
(Privacy)
mOIS
(n..)
Password management 
and location management
system
Secure tag
FIGURE 28.5
Conceptual architecture for secure RFID over mobile networks.
Multilateral Approaches for Reliable Mobile RFID Service Systems
505

as passwords, IDs, user-speciﬁc service data for application, and so on. Consequently,
unauthorized tag access can cause denial or misuse of a service, including the permanent
disabling of a tag or the illegal modiﬁcation of tag-stored data. Thirdly, whenever an RFID
reader reads a tag ID, its recorded reading history—such as location and time—can be
collected without the agreement of the tag user. In particular, if the application of a tag is
tightly coupled with an individual, this can cause a violation of privacy due to a leakage of
the collected historical context data, such as the user’s preference proﬁle. Finally, mobile
RFID applications require stricter adult veriﬁcation. Currently, teenagers and even elem-
entary school students below the age of 10 are using cell phones which are in reality
ubiquitous information terminals when in fact they should be private devices; as such,
youngsters can access adult contents very easily. A strict and elaborate mechanism
for adult veriﬁcation should be provided to protect young people from adult contents,
but adult veriﬁcation is currently provided within contents at the application layer. That is,
the control role is given to contents providers, which means that network operators (called
ISPs) cannot control illegal behavior such as the provision of adult contents.
28.3.2
Requirements for Secure Mobile RFID Service
The mobile RFID service structure provides its services by associating the mobile commu-
nication network and the RFID application service network based on the RFID tag. The areas
to be considered with regard to security are essentially the RFID tag, reader terminal area,
mobile communication network area, RFID application service network area, while other
security issues such as conﬁdentiality=integrity=authentication=permission=nonrepudia-
tion shall be considered in each network area. Especially, as the mobile RFID service is the
end-user service, the issue of privacy protection must inevitably become a serious issue to
consider, and as contents accessibility increases due to the off-line hypertext property of
RFID, the authentication for adult services is also highly likely to become another important
issue for consideration.
1. The mobile RFID service based on the user’s ownership of tagged products needs
to guarantee the conﬁdentiality of the tag code information or the user’s data
information to ensure personal privacy protection. In this case, the mobile RFID
application service provider (ASP) should ensure the conﬁdentiality of the said
information or use other means to prevent personal privacy infringement.
2. The mobile RFID, on behalf of its owner, may need to communicate with ONS,
Electronic Product Code—Information Service (EPC-IS) to retrieve the information
of a particular tagged item [17–19]. It should identify and authenticate the genuine
EPC network and be able to secure the entire transaction, as well as protect the
owner’s privacy; however, these tasks could create a huge burden on the low-
computing and resource-poor mobile device, and are certainly not user-friendly.
Therefore, it would be lot easier for the mobile device to securely delegate its work
to a nearby, trusted, high-computing, and resource-rich entity, namely the mobile
operator. This approach would help in reducing the communication and compu-
tational burden on the mobile device.
3. The integrity of the data shall be guaranteed to monitor for counterfeiting=falsiﬁca-
tion of the data transmitted through the communication path in each section of the
mobile RFID service network reference structure. However, additional code-based
data integrity—other than the least method (e.g., Cyclic Redundancy Check, CRC)
speciﬁed in the air interface speciﬁcation—is not required in the communication
section between the tag and reader terminal, given the limit of the calculation
506
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

capacity of the tag. However, it is necessary to develop a method of securing data
integrity in the tag for the special mobile RFID application service, where personal
information is stored in the user data information of the tag and transmitted.
4. Establishing an efﬁcient and convincing trust model is essential if secure transac-
tions, key distribution, and job delegation are to be ensured. With the existence of a
trust model, it would be lot easier for the mobile device to delegate its work to the
mobile operator.
5. Authentication in the mobile RFID can be divided into device authentication in
each network layer and service user authentication.
. Device Authentication: Device authentication refers to the authentication of the
RFID reader installed in a cellular phone. Mobile RFID service requires device
authentication as it is based on the inter-working service between hetero-
geneous networks (mobile communication network–RFID application service
network).
. User Authentication: User authentication refers to the authentication for mobile
RFID service users. It is generally required to enable the reader terminal to
access the application server and obtain mobile RFID service contents.
6. The authentication that must be considered in the mobile RFID service structure is
as follows [14,16]:
. Tag Access Control: The reader terminal can give various commands to the tag,
and the tag will be able to support the access authentication through a pass-
word, especially when executing sensitive commands such as Write=Delete=
Lock=Kill.
. Reader Execution Authorization: Refers to the function that veriﬁes the validity of
the user before executing sensitive reader commands such as Write=Delete=
Lock=Kill at the reader terminal. It may be possible to develop the reader
execution authorization by developing the reader terminal.
. Authorization for Adult Service: Authorization for an adult service is required as the
adult contents provided by a mobile RFID service can be accessed indiscreetly.
. User Authorization: Must provide the access control for each user or the access
object when providing different services to each of the users accessing the
application server, or when differentiating the access level per user.
7. The mobile RFID application service—including such processes as bill payment
between the reader terminal user and the application server—requires nonrepu-
diation of the data transmitted by the reader terminal user and the application
server. In this case, the reader terminal and the application server must be able to
execute nonrepudiation.
8. The mobile RFID application service that uses the password to halt the tag or
authorize the access to the tag should be able to safely manage such passwords
and safely authorize the key to the reader terminal: such functions should be
provided by the mobile RFID service infrastructure; for example, the application
server or the separate key management server.
9. Since the mobile RFID service is a B2C service using RFID tags for end-users, it is
inevitably accompanied by issues of personal privacy infringement and hence
must provide solutions for such issues. The personal privacy issue encompasses
both location privacy, which relates to the personal identiﬁer role of the RFID tag,
and information privacy, which relates to the identiﬁcation of personal belongings
by browsing the tag interface information through the resolution of tag code.
Multilateral Approaches for Reliable Mobile RFID Service Systems
507

28.4
Multilateral Approaches with Improved Security
The mobile RFID is a technology for developing an RFID reader to be embedded in a
mobile terminal and for providing various application services over the wireless networks.
Robust mobile RFID security must both protect service network against security threat and
shield consumers from privacy intrusions. The keys to robust mobile RFID security are
simplicity and a fundamentally secure foundation. This section looks at these security
points and recommends an alternative approach to achieving robust mobile RFID security.
This section aims at providing secure mobile RFID services, suggesting and analyzing
secure mobile RFID service models to solve security issues like security among domains,
personal privacy proﬁle, authentication, end-to-end security, and track prevention.
28.4.1
Overview of Secure Mobile RFID Environment
There are many ways to interfere with RFID circumstances, issues which are not only
approved theoretically but also possible practically. Besides security vulnerabilities in
RFID security like passive signal interception attack on RFID tags and readers, reading
of RFID tags by unauthorized readers, falsifying tag or reader identity, use of attack tools
against RFID tags, neutralization of RFID tags, and elaborate attack on RFID tags with
cryptographic hacking methods, there are also similar vulnerabilities and possible infringe-
ment of privacy in mobile RFID circumstances. It requires proper security technologies.
Furthermore, needed are some information protection service models that ensure security
and privacy protection and management for service providers in practical compliance with
present RFID speciﬁcations and mobile RFID standards even when tags do not use code
algorithms. This chapter suggests and analyzes these mobile RFID information protection
service models considering situations mentioned earlier. The provision of secure mobile
RFID services needs a combined security framework resolving many security issues like
security among domains, personal privacy proﬁle, authentication, end-to-end security, and
track prevention. The following is the conﬁguration of the security framework based on the
mobile RFID service network.
Generally, in mobile RFID applications such as smart poster, the ASP has the ownership
of RFID tags [14,16,20,21]. Thus, mobile RFID users have to subscribe to both the ASP for
these kinds of RFID services and to the mobile network operator for the mobile commu-
nication service. Namely, there exist three potentially unreliable parties: the user-owned
RFID reader, the mobile network operator, and the ASP. Accordingly, a relationship of
trust must be established among the three parties to realize a secure mobile RFID service.
In particular, when an RFID reader tries to read or change the RFID service data stored in a
tag, the reader needs to obtain tag access rights. Additionally, it is important that the new
tag access rights obtained whenever some readers access the same tag must be different
from the old ones that have already been accessed. Main functions of the proposed mobile
RFID information protection service model are the provision of WIPI-based mobile
security middleware, tag authentication, tag tracking prevention, reader authentication,
message security, and protection of proﬁle-based privacy.
28.4.2
Security-Enhanced Mobile RFID Middleware in the Phone
One of the key problems with mobile RFID technology is how to quickly use the mobile
RFID reader and how to integrate it with the application software installed in the mobile
device. In the face of numerous existing types of application software, developing an
independent mobile RFID middleware layer is a good idea. The mobile RFID middleware
508
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

layer inhabits the middle ground between the RFID reader and the application logic layer.
The mobile RFID middleware layer will manage the RFID readers and server for the
application logic layer; so the application logic layer-based mobile RFID technology can
focus on implementing commerce logic.
WIPI is required to come into force in Korea in the case of mobile phones as of 2005 to
support the interoperability platform for various application software and hardware
platforms [22]. Therefore, we chose WIPI as the basic software development platform of
the mobile phone: the software architecture and the relationship between each of the
software functions are shown as Figure 28.6. The software architecture is composed of
REX OS, WIPI Handset Adaptation Layer (HAL) API, WIPI Runtime Engine (WRE),
WIPI C API, Phone application, Browser parser, and Phone GUI. Most functions for mobile
RFID technology are designed in the WIPI C API: they are Reader control, Tag control,
Buffer control and Filter control for interfacing with the RFID reader; and Code Decoder,
URN converter, FQDN (Fully Qualiﬁed Domain Name) converter, DNS resolver and
connect Contents server for communicating with a local ODS server and the contents
Web server [30,31].
In the WIPI speciﬁcations, the core functions are the functions of the handset hardware,
native system software, handset adaptation module, runtime engine, basic APIs, and app-
lication programs are the areas of the core functional speciﬁcations of WIPI. Actually, in the
WIPI speciﬁcations, only the handset adaptation and APIs are included, while the other
parts of the functions of the wireless Internet platform are considered as requirements of
the handset vendors whether they accept it or not. For example, the runtime engine part is
required as the mode of the download of the binary code for its maximum performance.
The core functions of the WIPI are the handset adaptation and APIs, which are called the
HAL and Application Adaptation Layer (AAL), respectively. The HAL deﬁnes an abstract
speciﬁcation layer to support hardware platform independence when porting applications;
WIPI application
manager
Phone GUI
WIPI-based mobile RFID
phone application
Extended mobile RFID
engine function
Extended mobile RFID
HAL API
XML browser parser
Extended mobile RFID
WIPI API
Extended mobile RFID
security library
Service network
Mobile RFID terminal
Secure mobile RFID
middleware platform
WIPI basic API
(C, java)
WIPI
Runtime engine
WIPI
Basic HAL API
Active tag
Passive tag
Device Basic S/W, operation system
RFID device driver
FIGURE 28.6
Mobile RFID’s software architecture in the mobile phone.
Multilateral Approaches for Reliable Mobile RFID Service Systems
509

the AAL deﬁnes the speciﬁcations for the API of the wireless Internet platform, and
supports the C=Cþþ and Java programming languages.
The mobile RFID middleware is implemented by extending the WIPI platform to
provide RF code-related information obtained from the RF tag through the RFID reader
installed in the mobile phone [20,21,23,24]. The functions of RFID WIPI C API include
RFID reader control, Buffer control, Tag control, Filtering, Networking for Code decoding,
URN conversion, FQDN conversion, DNS resolving, and the Content services. WRE
software for mobile RFID functions is extended to support RFID WIPI C API, and RFID
HAL API. The functions of RFID HAL API include RFID reader control, Buffer control, Tag
control, Filtering, Networking for conﬁguring the Internet Protocol (IP) address of the local
ODS server. Figure 28.7 shows the middleware functions and software.
The RFID device handler provides the deﬁnitions for the functions of starting the
platform and transferring the events from the upper layer of HAL to the RFID H=W
Reader. The categories of RFID device handle API cover call, RFID device, network, serial
communication, short message service, sound, time, code conversion, ﬁle system, input
method, font, frame buffer, and virtual key. The AAL provides the deﬁnitions for the
functions of the adaptive, functions for the RFID engine, WIPI C=Java API, Crypto
libraries, and RFID security components.
28.4.3
Using Crypto Algorithm in Mobile Terminal Platform
When selecting a suitable mobile RFID service system, consideration should be given to
cryptological functions. Applications that do not require a security function would be
made unnecessarily expensive by the incorporation of cryptological procedures. On the
other hand, in high security applications (e.g., mobile ticketing, payment systems) the
omission of cryptological procedures can be a very expensive oversight if manipulated
mobile RFID readers are used to gain access to services without authorization.
Mobile
application
C/JAVA
API extension
Runtime
extension
HAL API
extension
RFID reader module/chip
RFID reader device driver
Reader
control 
Reader
control 
Reader
configuration
control 
Tag
control
Tag
control
Tag
control
Buffer
control
Buffer
control
Filter
management
Filter
management
Filter
management
Configuration management
Mobile RFID application
(WIPI Clet /Jlet application)
Mobile
application
service server
Local
ODS
National
ODS
RPS
server
URI
caching
Crypto
function
Secure
comm.
Code
decoder
URN
converter
FQDN
converter
DNS
resolver
UART
RFID
HAL
API
RFID
WIPI
API
FIGURE 28.7
Security enhanced mobile RFID middleware in the mobile phone.
510
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

Following is the method of reinforcing RFID data communication security service by
using crypto algorithm based on mobile phone terminal platform in mobile RFID service.
The mobile RFID crypto library is a crypto library for the efﬁcient processing of the crypto
algorithms and security protocols. It provides security mechanisms to the mobile RFID
reader and targets the mobile RFID middleware based on the WIPI platform. The mobile
RFID crypto library enables the mobile RFID service provider, wireless contents provider,
and information security industry to support the information protection service on the
mobile RFID middleware terminal platform at a reasonable cost and in a short period of
time (Figure 28.8).
Its main features are crypto algorithms (AES, DES, 3DES, SHA-1, HAS160, HMAC, etc.),
High-speed Elliptic Curve Cryptosystem (ECC) and Digital signature (ECC, ECDSA, etc.),
High-speed Korean standard crypto algorithms and Digital signature (SEED, KCDSA,
ARIA, etc.), Secure communication protocol (SSL=TLS, etc.), and Public key crypto stand-
ard (PKCS #5, PKCS #8, ASN.1, etc.). Cryptological procedures are used to protect against
both passive and active attacks. To achieve this, the transmitted data (plain text) can be
altered (encrypted) before transmission so that a potential attacker can no longer draw
conclusions about the actual content of the message (plain text). Mobile RFID systems have
for a long time used only symmetrical procedures. Because block ciphers are generally very
calculation intensive, they play a less important role in mobile RFID service systems.
28.4.4
RFID Tag Access Control and Password Data Management
The mobile terminal platform for the mobile RFID service requires a security function to
secure its safety, and this standard deﬁnes the security of data on RFID tag information,
security of communication with the RFID system—including OIS and ODS, security setup
for tag passwords, and security API consisting of approval for execution of the main tag
control order [20,21,25]. RFID tag access-control function for secure reader operation must
be added to the expanded WIPI API function. The data format of the mobile RFID tag
access password based on the WIPI platform is as follows.
This tag access right management method is a method for safely managing by integ-
rating Kill password data and Access password data on WIPI standard platform, which is
mobile RFID terminal service environment. Such integrated password information can be
safely managed as an expanded security API function on WIPI platform. And let us see
the management method for serving by expanding such integrated password information
Mobile RFID device
Service gateway
Compiler
Application
verifier
Provisioning
Billing, etc.
Mobile RFID
contents
OIS
Mobile RFID WIPI application
Clet
WIPI
application
manager
Mobile RFID
WIPI APIs
Mobile RFID
Crypto Library
WIPI basic APIs
WIPI runtime engine extension
RFID WIPI HAL
RFID reader device driver
Mobile RFID reader (chip)
Jlet
MIDlet
Data encryption,
secure
communications
FIGURE 28.8
Service structure of mobile RFID crypto library.
Multilateral Approaches for Reliable Mobile RFID Service Systems
511

in the server system. In the mobile RFID service network environment, the RFID tag
password data of private mobile RFID readers are sometimes exposed to hackers because
of the lack of awareness of the need for information security. We apply a secret-sharing
scheme to solve the RFID tag password data management problems, but the existing
scheme is not suitable for the management of large quantities of data because that
required operation of large capacity (Table 28.2).
In this section, we recommend to use the secret-sharing scheme in which the right to own
the password is weighted in the RFID tag password data management. This method can
use security service protocol veriﬁed in a theoretical aspect and apply the password
management method that is safe between terminal and server.
28.4.5
RFID Tag-Based Adult Certiﬁcation
The mobile RFID service applications need stricter adult veriﬁcation. Currently, teenagers
and even elementary school students below the age of 10 are using cell phones, which are
in reality ubiquitous information terminals when, in fact, they ought to be private devices.
As such, they can access adult content very easily. Therefore, a strict and elaborate
mechanism for adult veriﬁcation should be provided to protect young people from adult
content. However, adult veriﬁcation is currently provided within contents at the applica-
tion layer: namely, the control role is given to content providers, which means that network
operators (referred to as ISPs) cannot control illegal behavior such as the unrestricted
provision of adult content.
A protocol solution would be a much better means of strictly controlling access to
adult content, as ISPs are responsible for clean and well-controlled content provision to
users, and the issue of legal responsibility might then arise. Such a protocol-level adult
veriﬁcation could enable service providers to control illegal content provision to young
people.
When mobile RFID services provide adult content, adult application data should be
included at the user data area of RFID tags. Adult application data shows the content’s
adult grade. Instead of the current grading method of adapting the user’s age, we provide
a method of deﬁning grades by dividing them into categories such as word, nudity, sex
and language, thus classifying the content in detail. If this grading method can adapt to
mobile RFID environments, four values of an item are recorded at user data area of RFID
tags and a combined value is selected as ﬁnal grade for this item. Through this grading
method, we can express grades of diverse multimedia content and can control the ﬁnal
grades of various applications by giving different weights to categories, that is, word,
nudity, sex and language, and so on. Such RFID tag-based adult authentication service
expands the user memory region in the tag to be used and applies the expanded
service mechanism to be applied to the relevant application service.
TABLE 28.2
Data Format of Tag Access Password Based on Mobile Terminal Platform
MIME Type
Data Format
RﬁdTagPassword
- Tag Password Data ¼ UII Blockþ\0þAPWDþ\0þKPWDþ\0\0
- UII Block : Tag UII Block (PC þ UII Field)
- APWD : Access Password, 16 characters
- KPWD : Kill Password, 16 characters
Ex) UII : FFF0FFF1FFF2FFF3, APWD : FA1B52D1, KPWD : AB1252E1,
* RﬁdTagPassword ¼ ‘‘FFF0FFF1FFF2FFF3\FA1B52D1\0AB1252E1\0\0’’
512
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

28.4.6
Recoding Scheme of RFID Tag Code Data
This is required to prevent the tracing of the tag owner’s location by tag code tracking.
There are two methods for satisfying the untraceability requirement. One consists of an
authentication between tag and reader. The tag allows the reader to access its ID code only
if the reader is authenticated by the tag, so an attacker cannot obtain the tag’s ID code
without the authentication process. The other consists of an ID recoding technique, which
consists of recoding the tag’s ID code periodically with a pseudo-ID (or meta-ID), thereby
reducing the connectivity of the tag’s ID code and the owner.
Tag killing has received so much attention because it has become clear that privacy in item-
level tagging will be a hot-button issue in consumer acceptance of RFID. Unfortunately, there
are several issues with kill commands. The killing tags prevent all post-point-of-sale uses for
RFID tag data. These uses are expected to become more important as the use of RFID tags on
retail items spreads. To address these issues, we suggest ‘‘recoding of tag code information’’
as an additional tool for mobile RFID privacy. In recoding, a tag is overwritten with a new ID
number when it changes hands. Without knowledge of the map from the old ID number to
the new ID, it is impossible to link sightings of the item from before and after recoding.
Recoding may occur at point of sale when an item passes from one organization to another.
Both killing and recoding raise infrastructure issues need to be solved before they can
become viable privacy protections. In particular, only authorized parties, such as a retailer,
should be able to kill or recode tags. In the end, while both are important tools, neither
killing nor recoding is the ﬁnal answer in mobile RFID privacy.
28.4.7
Secure RFID Discovery Service Gateway System
The secure mobile RFID application portal (SMAP) is a secure service portal for various
mobile RFID application services. A service provider using SMAP can easily deploy
several mobile RFID applications that are guaranteed security and privacy protection.
The structure of SMAP framework is as follows.
The secure RFID discovery service gateway is a system that classiﬁes and deﬁnes the
mobile OIS system as an individual element system in a mobile RFID security application
service network, and also supports internal functions comprising each element service
system. This gateway system manages the locations and interface of servers and services as
registered from the applicable product and service providers that provide product infor-
mation and contents corresponding to each EPC. Moreover, this system works as a
gateway system that seeks appropriate services with the capacity to provide information
on any product equipped with a tag containing the applicable EPC or the contents and so
forth related to such an EPC, and then provides such services by way of the wired and
wireless devices (particularly mobile RFID reader terminals) of users who access the
mobile RFID service network.
This portal allows you to ﬁnd out off-line product information on an EPC, online
additional service information, information on authentication for product families or
products related to this EPC, and more. This gateway system also has another advantage
of applying a privacy policy and security to personal information with regard to inquiries
about information, in the interest of creating a secure and reliable environment for making
information available. An additional feature of this system is its ability to automatically
generate and manage OIS for the mobile RFID. This function allows you to create and use a
variety of useful functions, such as a database for managing information corresponding to
each EPC by simply setting; security for access control, authentication, encoding, and so
on; data exchange for sharing necessary information among OISs; and interface generation
and management for the user, and external application to use the OIS.
Multilateral Approaches for Reliable Mobile RFID Service Systems
513

As a mobile RFID OIS module, mOIS (mobile OIS) offers information on any object, and
works for system management or commissioned management and administration. By
means of interlocking with the gateway system, the manufacturer’s OIS, the application
retailer’s mOIS, and the mOIS for additional service providers can provide services via the
user’s RFID reader terminal. The secure OIS is a security-enhanced IS system of EPCglobal.
It is capable of strengthening security for events management and tag information provi-
sion, and provides security mechanisms such as message security, authentication author-
ization, and so on. It can also be used as the OIS server of a mobile RFID in the mobile RFID
application environment. The method of building a safe server-based information system is
carried out by using Web service security technology that is used on the existing wire as a
standard and many communication security technologies to expand RFID data security
functions. It is suitable to use standardized security technology for compatibility of existing
service systems (Figure 28.9).
28.4.8
Policy-Based RFID User Privacy Protection
Widespread deployment of RFID technology may create new threats to privacy due to the
automated tracking capability. In the mobile RFID environment, the privacy problem is
particularly serious since the RFID reader is contained in a handheld device and many
application services are based on the B2C model. The RPS provides mobile RFID users with
an information privacy protection service for a personalized tag under the mobile RFID
environment [14,16]. When a mobile RFID user possesses an RFID-tagged product, RPS
enables the owner to control his backend information connected with the tag, such as
product information, distribution info, owner’s personal information, and so on.
In academia and industry, most efforts to secure a privacy protection mechanism have
focused on the tag=reader authentication protocol. However, these efforts cannot be
adapted to the real RFID environment, especially the mobile RFID applications, the
environment which the meaningful information of the RFID code value exists in the server
at the network domain. Therefore, it is necessary to produce a proper privacy protection
mechanism in this mobile RFID environment; a proﬁle-based privacy protection mechan-
ism could be one of the many possible solutions for this environment. The privacy
protection framework for mobile RFID services describes the types of privacy infringement
in the mobile RFID service environment, the requirements for privacy protection, and the
basic structure of RFID privacy protection based on the owner’s privacy proﬁle [9,16,17].
A proﬁle-based privacy protection service consists of three service systems as follows
(Figure 28.10):
1. RPS system: This system incorporates a management function for the owner’s
privacy policy: it creates a privacy proﬁle for the owner’s privacy policy, provides
the privacy proﬁle to the service-side system, and manages the event logs from the
service-side or RPS system for auditing.
2. Service-side system: This system provides information related to the ID code of the
RFID tag, and provides an access-control function by the owner-deﬁned privacy
proﬁle.
3. User-side system: This system has a wireless (or wired) network access function and
an RFID reader function. The tag owner accesses the service-side and RPS system
via this system.
In order to satisfy the privacy protection requirements of users of the mobile RFID service,
the proﬁle-based privacy protection service incorporates the following functions: access
514
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

SMAP framework
Secure RFID integration service system
SOAP
AS2
HTTP/
TCP
SOAP
TCP
Information service
Event query
Secure
RFID
discovery
service
gateway
National ODS
Local ODS
Mobile
RFID reader
RFID
tag
Fixed
RFID reader
OTS
ONS
System security
RFID application
(SCM. ERP..)
EPCIS
Reader
management
Event processing
Event management
ALE event collection
Repository interface
Reader proxy
Simple filtering
Gen2 ready
RPS system
Administrator (browser)
Password management and
location management system
TCP
TCP
Tag data collection
Middleware service
System resource security
(Authentication/Access control/Secure messaging)
Tag data processing
(Event collecting/Filtering/Report)
Reader management service
FIGURE 28.9
Structure of security-enhanced mobile RFID’s application portal framework.
Multilateral Approaches for Reliable Mobile RFID Service Systems
515

control, registration, privacy proﬁle management, privacy-enhanced log management,
obligation notiﬁcation, and tag data refreshment [14,16,21,26–28].
. Privacy proﬁle management is a core function of the proﬁle-based privacy protec-
tion service, which establishes and manages the owner’s (default) privacy proﬁle.
The RPS system should create and manage a default privacy proﬁle for each
application service and an owner-deﬁned privacy proﬁle from the user’s privacy
protection policy of the registration process. Once created, this privacy proﬁle can
be sent to the service-side system if the ASP so requests.
. A privacy-enhanced log management function performs secure event log collec-
tion, limitation of event log collection by the owner’s privacy proﬁle. Furthermore,
it is capable of detecting and analyzing privacy violation elements with regard to
the collected event logs.
. The result of obligation that should be performed by the service-side system can be
notiﬁed to the owner via various means (e-mail, text messaging, etc.). The service-
side system should notify the RPS system of the obligation result, while the RPS
system should notify the owner of the obligation result.
. The tag data refreshment function provides a mechanism for refreshing the
owner’s tag data, which should then be written by the user-side system to his=her
own tag. Furthermore, the service-side system should reestablish its relationship
between the information and the tag’s tag data. Thus, the tag data refreshment
function would seem to satisfy the untraceability to tag data requirements.
Next is detailed description of the selective RFID privacy protection method in RFID
privacy service mechanism [14,16,21,27]. In the RFID tag, data values of privacy level
and data values of security level are randomly used in the user memory region to be used
in linkage with service protocol described in the previous chapter. If we take a look at the
details by each level, they are as follows.
28.4.8.1
Privacy Level of RFID by Product
Privacy level refers to a grade of information that the owner of the tagged item can open to
the public. For example, Figure 28.11 shows four different privacy levels. Because of
people’s varying sensitivity to privacy issues, the levels were selected randomly for this
paper. The tag set as level 1 provides information about the kinds of product in question. In
the case of level 2, information about the product can be served. If the tag is set to level 4,
all of the information related to this tag can be presented. When a tag is read by a user, the
tag sends the privacy level to the reader. Using the data sent by the tag, the reader can
obtain the location of the server and request information customized to the privacy level
obtained from the tag.
FIGURE 28.10
Service systems comprising the proﬁle-
based privacy protection service.
Mobile RFID’s fronted system
(user side)
RFID tag
RPS system
Mobile RFID’s backend system
(server side)
516
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

28.4.8.2
Security Level of RFID by Product
The RFID tag memory space containing the level information can be divided as shown in
Figure 28.12. The packet from tag to reader includes this information.
The security level has become a key factor in ensuring privacy protection, along with
privacy preference. Furthermore, it could be an alternative solution to requests for infor-
mation that maliciously change the privacy level. Table 28.3 represents the additionally
required phases according to the request. A variant of the ways of access control can be
added as the importance of the information increases. The sophistication and strength of
the enforcement of access control should increase proportionally to the security level.
The main features of this RPS service mechanism consist of establishing and managing
the owner’s privacy protection policy, providing access control for information associated
with the personalized tag by the owner’s privacy policy, notifying the obligation result,
and executing a privacy audit by audit log management [14,16,21,27]. The brief personal
privacy protection process using the earlier functions of the RPS is as follows.
Firstly, the mobile RFID reader reads the tag ID and obtains the network addresses of
various types of information, such as the product information integrated into the tag ID
through the ODS resolver process. Secondly, it requests from the application server the
product information connected to the tag ID. Thirdly, the application receives the personal
privacy protection policy in relation to the product information through the RPS. Finally,
the product information is protected according to the requirements of the privacy protec-
tion policy conﬁgured by the individual and is then sent to the reader. The information
connected to the tag ID reﬂecting the personal privacy protection policy through the earlier
Product class
Privacy level
Increase of privacy levelity
X: Not to be disclosed
O: To be disclosed
Increase of confidentiality
for information security
1
2
3
4
Product infor.
Tracking info.
Owner info.
O
O
O
O
X
O
O
O
X
X
O
O
X
X
X
O
FIGURE 28.11
Privacy level in tag user’s product memory bank.
Tag distinguishable value
Privacy level number
Security level number
Additional data (high value)
Tag unique code
Cv
∗Cv : Tag distinguishable value
∗Pv : Privacy level value
∗Sv : Security level value
∗Extra: Hash value or else
Pv
Sv
Privacy
Security
Extra
FIGURE 28.12
Data structure in RFID tag.
Multilateral Approaches for Reliable Mobile RFID Service Systems
517

process is circulated through the network in a process intended to solve the personal
privacy infringement issue through the RFID network infrastructure. The detailed service
scenario for the proﬁle-based privacy protection service generally arises from the tag
personalizing process, such as tagged product purchasing. Figure 28.13 illustrates a basic
proﬁle-based privacy protection service scenario of the mobile RFID application [16,21].
1. A consumer reads the ID code from the tagged product with his=her mobile
terminal, which is equipped with an RFID reader.
2. The consumer browses the product-related information from the application ser-
vice network, and then purchases the product with various payment methods. At
this moment, the consumer becomes the tag owner.
3. Then, the networked RFID application requests the owner-deﬁned privacy proﬁle
from the RPS server, and the RPS server responds by sending the owner-deﬁned
privacy proﬁle to the application if the owner’s privacy protection policy has been
created.
4. The RPS server receives the owner’s privacy protection policy for this application
service.
5. Anyone requests the information associated with this tag ID to the application.
6. The requestor can browse all the information provided by the application service if
the requestor is the owner, but the requestor can only receive limited information,
or cannot access any information at all.
TABLE 28.3
Security Level for Privacy Based on Mobile RFID
Security Level
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
No security
O
X
X
Symmetric key-based security (password-based lock=unlock)
X
O
X
X
Symmetric-based security, protection of location-based traceability
X
X
O
X
Fourth-level heading
X
X
X
O
Note:
X: Not to be disclosed; O: To be disclosed.
RPS system
Mobile RFID reader
(Owner)
RFID tag
Anonymous reader
Mobile RFID’s backend system
(server side)
4. Privacy protection
  policy agreement
5. Information
    request
    associated with
    the tag
6. Limited information or
       access deny by owner ’s
       privacy protection policy
3. Owner’s privacy policy
request / response
2. Product purchase
1. Tag reading
FIGURE 28.13
Service scenario of proﬁle-based privacy protection.
518
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

The earlier generic service scenario would seem to be modiﬁed according to each speciﬁc
networked RFID application. In this section, we described the privacy-friendly service
mechanism which is hardly focused on in the RFID research area. Most interests are of
the privacy of the RFID tag owner. But we are aware of the necessity to protect the privacy
of users carrying the mobile reader. To address the reader-side privacy problem, we
employ the policy-based service model which is introduced and extend it to mobile
RFID service area.
28.5
Conclusion
As mentioned earlier, mobile RFID is an emergent and promising application that uses RFID
technology. However, the mobility of reader and its service model—which differs from the
RFID service in the retail and supply chain—will give rise to additional security threats.
To address these issues, while both are important tools, neither killing nor recoding is the
ﬁnal answer in RFID privacy. The killing alone is not enough, and new mechanisms are
needed for building privacy-preserving RFID architectures. In this chapter, we have tried
to introduce the concept of mobile RFID and expose some of the additional security threats
caused by it. The frequency band to support the air protocol is allocated from 908.5 to
914 MHz in Korea to comply with ISO 18000-6 for air interface communications at 860–960
MHz. We also describe a way of incorporating the new technology to work with cell
phones in particular, both as an external security reading device (replacing 900 MHz) and
as an added security service to manage all RFID mobile device mediums. With this
purpose in mind, the application areas of this service platform are also brieﬂy presented.
By doing so, customized security and privacy protection can be achieved. In this regard,
the suggested technique is an effective solution for security and privacy protection in a
networked mobile RFID service system.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the Korean Ministry of Information and Communication
under the Information Technology Research Centre (ITRC) support program supervised
by the Institute of Information Technology Assessment (IITA) and by the IT R&D program
of MIC=IITA [2005–S-088-03, Development of security technology for secure RFID=USN
service]. The authors thank the members of the RFID=USN Research Team at ETRI for
formulating many of the concepts discussed in this chapter. The authors also thank Dr.
Seungjoo Kim of Sungkyunkwan University and Dr. Howon Kim of ETRI for their
encouragement and support.
References
1. T. Tsuji, S. Kouno, J. Noguchi, M. Iguchi, N. Misu, and M. Kawamura. 2004. Asset management
solution based on RFID. NEC Journal of Advanced Technology, 1(3): 188–193.
2. S. Yoo. 2005. Mobile RFID activities in Korea. Contribution Paper of the APT Standardization
Program.
Multilateral Approaches for Reliable Mobile RFID Service Systems
519

3. J. Chae and S. Oh. 2005. Information report on mobile RFID in Korea. ISO=IEC JTC1=SC 31=WG4
N0922, Information Paper, ISO=IEC JTC1 SC31 WG4 SG 5.
4. W. Park and B. Lee. 2004. Proposal for participating in the correspondence group on RFID in ITU-
T. Information Paper, ASTAP Forum.
5. Nokia. RFID Phones—Nokia Mobile RFID Kit. http:==europe.nokia.com=nokia
6. Y. Kim and N. Koshizuka. 2006. Review report of standardization issues on network aspects of
identiﬁcation including RFID. ITU-T, Paper TD315.
7. J. Lee and H. Kim. 2006. RFID code structure and tag data structure for mobile RFID services in
Korea. Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Advanced Communication Technology. Vol. 2,
pp. 1053–1055, IEEE Press.
8. Y. Kim, J. Lee, S. Yoo, and H. Kim. 2006. A network reference model for B2C RFID applications.
Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Advanced Communication Technology. Vol. 2,
pp. 1049–1052, IEEE Press.
9. B. Park, S. Lee, and H. Youm. 2006. A proposal for personal identiﬁer management framework on
the Internet. ITU-T, COM17-D165.
10. L. Sullivan 2004. Middleware enables RFID tests. Information week, No. 991.
11. M. Tsukada and A. Narita. 2006. Development models of network aspects of identiﬁcation
systems (including RFID) (NID) and proposal on approach for the standardization. ITU-T,
JCA-NID Document 2006-I-014.
12. Y. Sakurai and H. Kim. 2006. Report for business models and service scenarios for network
aspects of identiﬁcation (including RFID). ITU-T, TSAG TD 314.
13. ITU-T, TSAG. 2005. A proposed new work item on object=ID associations.
14. B. Chug et al. 2005. Proposal for the study on a security framework for mobile RFID applications
as a new work item on mobile security. ITU-T, COM17D116E, Q9=17, Contribution 116, Geneva.
15. Mobile RFID Forum of Korea. 2005. Mobile RFID code structure and tag data structure for mobile
RFID services. Standard Paper. http:==www.mrf.or.kr
16. D. Choi, H. Kim, and K. Chung. 2007. Proposed draft of X.rﬁdsec-1: Privacy protection frame-
work for networked RFID services. ITU-T, COM17C107E, Q9=17, Contribution 107, Geneva.
17. MIC (Ministry of Information and Communication) of Korea. 2005. RFID privacy protection
guideline. MIC Report Paper.
18. H. Lee and J. Kim. 2006. Privacy threats and issues in mobile RFID. Proceedings of the First
International Conference on Availability, Reliability and Security. Vol. 1, pp. 510–514, IEEE Computer
Society, Washington, DC, USA.
19. D.M. Konidala and K. Kim. 2006. Mobile RFID security issues. Proceeding of Symposium on
Cryptography and Information Security. Abstracts, pp. 166, The Institute of Electronics, Information
and Communication Engineers. Hiroshima, Japan.
20. N. Park, J. Kwak, S. Kim, D. Won, and H. Kim. 2006. WIPI mobile platform with secure service for
mobile RFID network environment. Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Vol. 3842, pp. 741–748,
Springer-Verlag, Hiedelberg.
21. N. Park, S. Kim, D. Won, and H. Kim. 2006. Security analysis and implementation leveraging
globally networked mobile RFIDs. Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Vol. 4217, pp. 494–505,
Springer-Verlag, Hiedelberg.
22. M. Son, Y. Lee, and C. Pyo. 2006. Design and implementation of mobile RFID technology in the
CDMA networks. Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Advanced Communication Tech-
nology. Vol. 2, pp. 1033–1036, IEEE Press.
23. Mobile RFID Forum of Korea. 2005. WIPI C API standard for mobile RFID reader. Standard
Paper.
24. Mobile RFID Forum of Korea. 2005. HAL API standard for RFID reader of mobile phone.
Standard Paper.
25. Mobile RFID Forum of Korea. 2005. Access right management API standard for secure mobile
RFID reader, MRFS-4-03. Standard Paper. http:==www.mrf.or.kr
26. S. Weis et al. 2003. Security and privacy aspects of low-cost radio frequency identiﬁcation
systems. First International Conference on Security in Pervasive Computing (SPC) 2003.
27. B. Lee and H. Kim. Enhanced Security and Privacy Mechanism of RFID Service for Pervasive Mobile
Device. Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Vol. 3802, pp. 469–475, Springer Berlin=Heidelberg.
520
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

28. M. Ohkubo, K. Suzuki, and S. Kinoshita. 2003. Cryptographic approach to privacy-friendly tags.
RFID Privacy Workshop 2003.
29. ITU-T TSAG RFID CG Deliverable. 2006. Review report of identiﬁcation based business models
and service scenarios.
30. Mobile RFID Forum of Korea. 2005. WIPI network APIs for mobile RFID services. Standard
Paper.
31. Mobile RFID Forum of Korea. 2005. WIPI API for mobile RFID reader device. Standard Paper.
Multilateral Approaches for Reliable Mobile RFID Service Systems
521


29
ONS Security
Benjamin Fabian, Oliver Günther, and Sarah Spiekermann
CONTENTS
29.1
EPCglobal Network......................................................................................................... 523
29.2
Object Naming Service.................................................................................................... 524
29.3
ONS Risks......................................................................................................................... 526
29.3.1 Conﬁdentiality and Anonymity ....................................................................... 526
29.3.2 Integrity................................................................................................................ 527
29.3.3 Availability .......................................................................................................... 527
29.4
Risk Mitigation................................................................................................................. 528
29.4.1 Network Design.................................................................................................. 528
29.4.2 Cooperative VPN and Extranets...................................................................... 528
29.4.3 Mixes and Onion Routing................................................................................. 529
29.4.4 DNS Security Extensions................................................................................... 529
29.5
Summary........................................................................................................................... 530
References.................................................................................................................................... 531
29.1
EPCglobal Network
The inﬂuential ‘‘electronic product code’’ (EPC) numbering system is about to enhance and
ﬁnally replace traditional bar codes. It aims to assign a globally unique number to nearly every
object equipped with a radio frequency identiﬁcation chip (RFID tag). This EPC is serving as
an identiﬁer for the physical object carrying the tag, which can now be recognized, identiﬁed,
and tracked by an IT infrastructure [1]. Though the EPC standard is actually a meta frame-
work for different encoding schemes and name spaces, most EPCs have a structure similar to
the one shown in Figure 29.1, which depicts an example EPC for one of the most popular
standards, the Serialized Global Trade Identiﬁcation Number (SGTIN) [1].
The consortium EPCglobal, originating from the Auto-ID labs of MIT as well as the
former EAN International and Uniform Code Council (both now GS1), places its focus on
the development and establishing of global standards for RFID, EPC, and the EPCglobal
network. According to their intention, information about an object should in general not be
stored on its RFID tag itself, but instead be supplied by distributed servers on the Internet
[2]. By using the EPC and the help of an Object Naming Service (ONS) (also called Object
Name Service in some documents), it will be possible to locate EPC Discovery and EPC
523

Information Services (EPCIS), which are remotely accessible data collections about the
particular object [3].
One of the advantages the EPCglobal network offers is to let many parties (e.g., manu-
facturers, suppliers, shops, or after-sale service providers) dynamically register any kind of
EPCIS for the objects they are concerned with, thereby creating an open way to exchange
product-related information. The designers of the EPCglobal network anticipate that a
static list of available services would in general be outdated soon. As a solution, they
propose to ﬁrst ask the ONS (and not yet speciﬁed EPC Discovery Services) for a recent list
of sources each time fresh information about a particular object is needed. After retrieving
this list, one can directly contact all or some of the EPCIS that carry the information itself
[4]. This procedure will in most cases not be conducted manually, but in an automated
fashion, e.g., by the use of web services [5]. Example application scenarios include supply
chain management [5]—increasing efﬁciency, ﬂexibility, and cooperation—and potentially
smart homes [6], where a home IT infrastructure needs to identify objects of the real world
to provide services. Since ONS is a critical component of the EPCglobal network, we focus
on its security issues. An initial analysis has been given in [7].
29.2
Object Naming Service
From a technical point of view, the ONS [8] is a subsystem of the Domain Name System
(DNS) [9,10]. The main design idea is to ﬁrst encode the EPC into a syntactically correct
domain name, then to use the existing DNS infrastructure to query for additional infor-
mation. This procedure makes use of the Name Authority Pointer (NAPTR) DNS resource
record, which is also used for the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) for Voice-over-IP to map
phone numbers into Uniform Resource Identiﬁers (URI) [11].
The ONS resolution process is described in [4,8]; for a schematic view of the communi-
cation procedure see Figure 29.2. After an RFID reader has received an EPC in binary form,
it forwards it to some local middleware system. To retrieve the list of relevant EPCIS servers
for this particular object, the middleware system converts the EPC to its URI form [1] (e.g.,
urn:epc:id:sgtin:809453.1734.108265). This is handed over to the local ONS
resolver, which in turn translates the URI form into a domain name (e.g., 1734.809453.
sgtin.id.onsepc.com) by following a well-deﬁned procedure [8, Section 5]. This name
belongs to a subdomain of the domain onsepc.com, which is reserved for ONS use.
The current ONS speciﬁcation states that the serial part (item level, in the example:
108265) of the EPC, which differentiates between objects of the same kind and
brand, should not be DNS-encoded as of now, but it leaves room for such a possibility
[8, Section 3.2.1]:
Header
8 bits
Filter
3 bits
Partition
3 bits
EPC manager
20 – 40 bits
Object class
4–24 bits
Serial number
38 bits
00110000
“SGTIN-96”
001
“Retail”
101
“ 24:20 bits”
809,453
1734
108,265
FIGURE 29.1
SGTIN electronic product code (EPC).
524
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

The ability to specify an ONS query at the serial number level of granularity as well as
the architectural and economic impacts of that capability is an open issue that will be
addressed in subsequent versions of this document. Its lack of mention here should not
be construed as making that behavior legal or illegal.
This newly created domain name is now queried for by using the common DNS protocol,
possibly involving a recursive query to a local DNS or service provider DNS server, which
then queries iteratively accross the Internet [10]. This implies that the (for now partial) EPC
moves through the subsequent local networks and the Internet in clear text, and can be
read, stored, and analyzed by any interested party on its way through the DNS hierarchy.
DNS is an old and central Internet service with a long history of security and conﬁguration
issues [12,13] in the protocol itself and in particular implementations. Various vulnerabil-
ities and attacks can be listed by consulting established security sites as CERT [14],
SecurityFocus [15], and the SANS Institute’s ‘‘Top 20 List of Internet Security Vulnerabil-
ities’’ [16]. A corresponding ‘‘Request-for-Comments,’’ RFC 3833: ‘‘Threat Analysis of the
Domain Name System,’’ was published quite late [17], after two decades of use. Some of
the main known threats identiﬁed are: Packet interception, i.e., manipulating IP packets
carrying DNS information, query prediction by manipulating the query and answer
schemes of the DNS protocol, cache poisoning by injecting manipulated information into
DNS caches, betrayal by a trusted server that is actually controlled by an attacker, and
denial of service, a threat to every Internet service—but DNS itself might be used as an
ampliﬁer to attack third parties [17, p. 7].
Object with
RFID tag
EPC
RFID reader
Middleware
EPC-aware
application
LOCAL
GLOBAL
VeriSign
EPC discovery services
(to be specified)
ONS root
(onsepc.com)
Local ONS (company 809453)
(809453.sgtin.id.onsepc.com)
ONS hierarchy
EPCIS (company 809453)
EPCIS (third party)
Internet
DNS root (possibly)
FIGURE 29.2
The EPCglobal network.
ONS Security
525

Besides bugs in DNS software, the fundamental reason for most of these vulnerabilities
is the fact that even though DNS is a highly exposed service by deﬁnition, it has (in its
original and widely deployed form) no way of authenticating a client, the server, or the
information that is provided. These DNS weaknesses directly transfer to ONS. However,
as a central element of a global information system on physical objects, ONS involves new
risks to privacy.
29.3
ONS Risks
29.3.1
Conﬁdentiality and Anonymity
In many situations, the EPC of an RFID tag has to be regarded as highly sensitive
information [18]—be it in private [19–21] or in business environments where product
and raw material ﬂows constitute valuable market information. Even if the complete
serial number of the EPC is not known, the combination of object class and company
identiﬁer is enough to determine the brand and kind of object it belongs to. If the use of
the EPCglobal network becomes ubiquitous, the eavesdropper could easily add fake
serial parts to the captured incomplete EPC and query the corresponding EPCIS servers
until a precise match is found. Capturing EPCs can be used to identify assets of an entity,
be it an individual, a household, a company, or another organization. If someone
happens to own, wear, or carry a rare item, or a rare combination of belongings,
identifying and tracking her might be accomplished even without knowing the actual
serial numbers, just by using the object classes.
Many different ideas for securing the wireless RFID tag-to-reader communication
against unauthorized access and eavesdropping have been proposed, for example confer
Refs. [22–25]. However, most solutions to mitigate these privacy problems do not take into
account what will happen to the EPC once it is determined by an authorized reading
process. To use the information stored in the EPCglobal network about a given EPC, you
need to locate the corresponding EPCIS servers ﬁrst. Even if the connections to these
servers are secured by using protocols like Transport Layer Security (TLS), the initial
ONS look-up process would have neither been authenticated nor encrypted.
The DNS encoded main part of the EPC, which identiﬁes the asset manufacturer and
category, will ﬁrst traverse every network between the middleware and a possible
local DNS server in clear text—this could include an insecure local wireless network.
Depending on the conﬁguration of DNS caching and resolution process, this partial EPC
will also be transmitted as clear text to additional DNS servers on the resolution path,
which could include DNS root servers, servers for onsepc.com, and down the corre-
sponding delegation hierarchy [10, Section 2.6 on resolution], until the resolving process
ﬁnally gets to query a DNS server of the company that serves as main reference for
the object in question (usually the manufacturer). All traversed Internet service providers
and carriers might capture the partial EPC as well—this includes network taps placed
by governmental organizations of countries the packets may cross. It follows that
attack trees [26] describing, for example, the proﬁling of someone’s assets will have
new branches that represent remote tactics (Figure 29.3)—in addition to those already
identiﬁed in [21].
There is no simple solution to this problem given the proposed workings of ONS. The
main privacy enhancing strategy involves obfuscating the source IP or the real physical
orign of the query.
526
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

29.3.2
Integrity
Integrity in the ONS context refers to the correctness and completeness of the returned
information, i.e., addresses of EPCIS corresponding to the queried EPC. An attacker
controlling intermediate DNS servers or launching a successful man-in-the-middle attack
on the communication could forge the returned list of URIs and include, e.g., a server
under her control. If there are no sufﬁcient authentication measures for the EPCIS in place,
the attacker could deliver forged information about this particular or other related EPCs
from a similar domain. The corresponding risks will be application-speciﬁc: If the query
was initiated by a smart refrigerator to order matching ingredients for a cooking recipe,
this could result in spoiled meals; if the query was issued by a smart medicine cabinet (as a
precursor to an even smarter ‘‘home medical advisor’’ [27, p. 51]) to prevent harmful drug
mixes, this could involve more serious risks to personal safety.
29.3.3
Availability
If the EPCglobal network becomes widely accepted, more and more business processes
(B2B, B2C) as well as private applications will be able to use it without human intervention.
This would leave these processes highly dependable on a working EPC resolution service
for ﬁnding matching information sources.
ONS will constitute a service highly exposed to attacks from the Internet, if only due to
its necessary widespread accessibility. This could include distributed denial-of-service
(DDoS) attacks overwhelming the server or its network connection by issuing countless
and intense queries, or targeted exploits that shut down the server software or its operating
Profile assets of
company
Physical
inventory
Local RFID
 inventory
Capture EPC from
supply chain/smart
office
communication
Capture EPC
from ONS
communication
Capture EPC
from EPCIS
communication
Capture IP traffic
Control ONS
servers
Capture company
IP traffic
Capture IP traffic
at internet
backbone
Capture IP traffic
at common ONS
servers
Control root ONS
FIGURE 29.3
Asset proﬁling.
ONS Security
527

system. Therefore an integration of the EPCglobal network (with ONS as proposed)
into core business processes could leave even formerly non-IT related companies depend-
able on the availability of Internet services. This will most probably increase overall
business risk.
29.4
Risk Mitigation
29.4.1
Network Design
Larger enterprises may be able to somewhat reduce risks to EPC conﬁdentiality by using a
well-designed internal network structure, especially a carefully planned DNS server hier-
archy. All ONS queries from internal machines at any company site could be forwarded—
preferably using Virtual Private Networks (VPN)—to a central company DNS server,
which in turn does the external resolution process. Even then all the EPCs that are resolved
by the company could be intercepted outside of the Intranet borders, but not easily
assigned to particular locations, though an attacker might apply a careful analysis of
time, possibly combining this information with captured EPCs from region-speciﬁc objects.
For an attack in a realistic application scenario, consider a company using smart ofﬁces
with ubiquitous RFID readers, where outsiders might witness the introduction and the
actual kind of new items (such as newly introduced laptops of a speciﬁc manufacturer)
anywhere in the enterprise.
If a company just uses an internal and private version of the EPCglobal network
without depending on outside information, e.g., if only self-manufactured items are of
interest, on EPC leakage to outsiders would occur, and risks to integrity and availability
could be limited likewise to internal attackers. But this special case would deprive the
company of the intended advantages of a global and dynamically updated EPCglobal
network, as only company-internal data sources about EPCs could be accessed. Another
countermeasure could be the prolonging of ONS and EPCIS caching times to reduce the
frequency of the EPC crossing the Internet. Depending on the application scenario, the
EPCIS dynamics, and the demand for fresh information, risk-reducing caching strategies
might be viable.
29.4.2
Cooperative VPN and Extranets
The idea of concentrating ONS queries to prevent an exact locating of the corresponding
items could be extended to small networks of trusted business partners (or neighbors in
smart homes) by forming a so-called extranet [28, p. 247] (Figure 29.4).
All parties connect to a central ONS resolving server via VPNs, and this server issues the
ONS queries to the outside world. Beyond this point, no protection by VPN would be
practical; if access to many different ‘‘third parties’’ beyond the borders of the extranet is
required, because the possible communication partners are nearly countless and in general
not known in advance, the problem of key management for building VPNs to every
company that offers a relevant ONS and EPCIS server would render such solutions not
scalable.
Apart from issues of trust and administrative overhead, there will be an increased
network load for the central party, depending on the scale of RFID reader deployment,
caching strategies and the intense of usage of the EPCglobal network by every single
partner. The deployment of an extranet could only limit threats to EPC conﬁdentiality,
but not to information integrity or ONS availability.
528
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

29.4.3
Mixes and Onion Routing
The culmination of the concentration strategy stated earlier, i.e., collecting ONS queries from
different sources to hide the real source IP address, would be the use of so-called anonymous
mixes [29], a strategy that might be viable also for private households (Figure 29.5).
There are promising, but still not commonly used approaches such as Onion Routing
[30] and especially Tor [31], which cryptographically transform and mix Internet trafﬁc
from many different sources, making it highly difﬁcult to match a packet to a particular
source. Onion Routing could also anonymize trafﬁc to EPCIS servers, and has the potential
to become highly relevant to a privacy preserving use of the EPCglobal network. Again,
this approach offers enhanced conﬁdentiality, but does not necessarily increase the integ-
rity of the received messages nor could it do anything about ONS server availability, as any
host offering services needs to be somehow addressable and is therefore attackable.
29.4.4
DNS Security Extensions
The main approach to address the security shortcomings of the DNS protocol is called
DNSSEC (DNS Security Extensions) [32,33]. In its ﬁrst version it actually introduced two
different and independent procedures, one of these, called TSIG (Transaction Signature
[34]), would provide mutual authentication between two DNS servers by using shared
secrets, thereby introducing big problems of scalability. The other method provided
origin authenticity and data integrity for the delivered DNS information by using
public-key cryptography to sign sets of resource records (RR). These signatures are
stored in a different RR type. The server’s public key could be transferred out-of-band
or be stored in an RR of type DNSKEY. The new version of DNSSEC uses four resource
Local ONS
resolver
VPN
VPN
EPC resolving clients
Company A
Local ONS
resolver
EPC resolving clients
Company B
Central
ONS resolver
EPC resolving clients
Company C
EPC discovery services
(to be specified)
DNS root (possibly)
ONS root
(onsepc.com )
Local ONS
 (company 809453)
(809453.sgtin.id.onsepc.com)
ONS hierarchy
FIGURE 29.4
VPN and extranets.
ONS Security
529

record types: Resource Record Signature (RRSIG), DNS Public Key (DNSKEY), Delega-
tion Signer (DS), and Next Secure (NSEC), for details see [32]. To verify an arbitrary
DNSKEY, chains of trust down from the root of the DNS would be necessary where
each parent DNS server signs the keys of its children after having veriﬁed their
correctness by some external means.
DNSSEC is a very important approach for securing the Internet at a critical protocol level,
but has not been widely adopted so far, except for notable exceptions like the top-level zone
of Sweden [33]. Reasons might be the scalability problems of key management, the problem
of root zone key control, and difﬁculties in building chains of trust between servers of many
different organizations. Therefore global ONS information integrity could only be assured
by DNSSEC in the long run, if the Internet community as a whole adopts it.
However, even if DNSSEC could be widely deployed and even be conﬁgured to actually
encrypt the DNS information, which is not a stated goal so far [32, Section 4, p. 8], the
company preﬁx of a given EPC could still be guessed by following the sequence of IP
addresses the ONS queries are sent to. No additional protection against the availability
problem of ONS servers is offered by deploying DNSSEC; on the contrary, signature
checking introduces additional load to the involved servers [17].
29.5
Summary
Using the EPCglobal network—as it is designed today—to manage information about
objects introduces many new risks. Automated business processes on top of it might
Local ONS
resolver
EPC resolving clients
Company A
Local ONS
resolver
EPC resolving clients
Company B
Anonymous
Onion routing
network
EPC discovery services
(to be specified)
Exit node
DNS root (possibly)
ONS root
(onsepc.com)
Local ONS (company 809453)
(809453.sgtin.id.onsepc.com)
ONS hierarchy
FIGURE 29.5
Onion routing.
530
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

induce the same level of dependency on the Internet for traditional businesses tomorrow as
for e-commerce companies today. We have focused on the lookup service ONS because of
the new and crucial conﬁdentiality issues implied by its current design. We assume
the actual EPCIS communication to be more easily securable against third parties, for
example, by using standard authentication and encryption by TLS—though trust and
integrity problems through improper certiﬁcate handling might spoil this assumption,
and availability problems do occur likewise. In addition, every single EPCIS constitutes
an attractive opportunity for query data analysis, but only for observing a speciﬁc user
segment of the EPCglobal network (i.e., the customer base of a speciﬁc company), unlike,
e.g., the global coverage at the ONS root.
If ONS is based on DNS as has been proposed in the speciﬁcations, a whole new branch
of privacy problems do arise, which could only in part be mitigated by current security
technology, and would even then require huge efforts in network design. For companies
and individuals alike trafﬁc anonymizers like Tor [31] could present an interesting partial
solution to privacy-preserving ONS use and EPCIS access. This approach should be
investigated further in relation to scalability, manageability, and adverse effects due to
possible authentication measures for accessing the EPCIS. Integrity of ONS information
could be dealt with by deploying DNSSEC, though this needs to be set up between all
possible business partners and information service providers, which seems very unlikely
given the current diverse and complex state of the Internet. Availability of ONS and EPCIS
servers is a problem that would have to be approached and dealt with by every company
in the resolution path.
Moving from barcode to RFID tags containing an EPC was motivated by saving costs
and simplifying supply chains, without taking into account privacy concerns of individ-
uals. The implementation of a global system to store and access heterogeneous information
about countless products appears likewise at least in part be motivated by future after sale
business. Again, security and privacy measures are no integral part of the original design,
but, if at all, an afterthought. Based on a deeper analysis of the multilateral requirements
reﬂecting the security interests of all stakeholders involved, there is urgent need to design
an alternative model to ONS along with protocols for its implementation. One interesting
research direction is the use of peer-to-peer systems based on distributed hash tables for
ONS resolution [35].
References
1. EPCglobal, EPC tag data standards version 1.3, 2006. [Online] Available: http:==www.epcglobal-
inc.org/
2. EPCglobal, The EPCglobal architecture framework version 1.0, 2005. [Online] Available: http:==
www.epcglobalinc.org
3. M. Harrison, EPC information service (EPCIS), Auto-ID Labs Research Workshop, 2004. [Online].
Available: http:==www.m-lab.ch/auto-id/SwissReWorkshop/agenda.html
4. Y. Uo, S. Suzuki, et al., Name service on the EPC network, Auto-ID Labs Research Workshop, 2004.
[Online]. Available: http:==www.m-lab.ch/auto-id/SwissReWorkshop/agenda.html
5. K.S. Leong, M.L. Ng, et al., EPC network architecture, Auto-ID Labs Research Workshop, 2004.
[Online] Available: http:==www.m-lab.ch/auto-id/SwissReWorkshop/agenda.html
6. S. Helal, W. Mann, H. El-Zabadani, J. King, Y. Kaddoura, and E. Jansen, The gator tech smart
house: A programmable pervasive space, IEEE Computer Magazine, pp. 50–60, March 2005.
7. B. Fabian, O. Günther, and S. Spiekermann, Security analysis of the object name service, in
Proceedings of the 1st International Workshop on Security, Privacy and Trust in Pervasive and Ubiquitous
Computing (SecPerU 2005), with IEEE ICPS 2005, Santorini, 2005, pp. 71–76.
ONS Security
531

8. M. Mealling, EPCglobal object naming service (ONS) 1.0, EPCglobal, 2005. [Online] Available:
http:==www.epcglobalinc.org
9. A. Salamon. DNS related RFCs. [Online] Available: http:==www.dns.net/dnsrd/rfc/
10. P. Albitz and C. Liu, DNS and BIND, 4th ed., O’Reilly & Associates, Sebastopol, California, 2001.
11. M. Mealling and R. Daniel, The naming authority pointer (NAPTR) DNS resource record, Request
for Comment—RFC 2915, September 2000.
12. D. Kaminsky, Explorations in namespace: White-hat hacking across the domain name system,
Communications of the ACM, 49(6): 62–69, 2006.
13. V. Pappas, Z. Xu, S. Lu, D. Massey, A. Terzis, and L. Zhang, Impact of conﬁguration errors
on DNS robustness, in SIGCOMM ’04: Proceedings of the 2004 Conference on Applications, Technolo-
gies, Architectures, and Protocols for Computer Communications, ACM Press, New York, 2004,
pp. 319–330.
14. CERT Vulnerability Database. [Online] Available: http:==search.cert.org/
15. SecurityFocus
Vulnerability
Archive.
[Online]
Available:
http:==www.securityfocus.com/
vulnerabilities
16. SANS Top 20 Internet Security Vulnerabilities. [Online] Available: http:==www.sans.org/top20/
17. D. Atkins and R. Austein, Threat analysis of the domain name system (DNS), Request for
Comments—RFC 3833, 2004.
18. M. Bauer, B. Fabian, M. Fischmann, and S. Gürses, Emerging markets for RFID traces, http:==
arxiv.org/abs/cs.CY/0606018, 2006.
19. K. Albrecht and L. McIntyre, Spychips, Nelson Current, Nashville, Tennessee, 2005.
20. O. Günther and S. Spiekermann, RFID and the perception of control: The consumer’s view,
Communications of the ACM, 48(9): 73–76, September 2005.
21. S. Spiekermann and H. Ziekow, RFID: A 7-point plan to ensure privacy, in 13th European
Conference on Information Systems (ECIS), Regensburg, May 2005.
22. S.A. Weis, S.E. Sarma, R.L. Rivest, and D.W. Engels, Security and privacy aspects of low-cost
radio frequency identiﬁcation systems, in Security in Pervasive Computing (SPC 2003), ser. LNCS
2802, D. Hutter et al., Eds., Springer-Verlag, Berlin–Heidelberg, 2004, pp. 201–212.
23. S. Garﬁnkel, A. Juels, and R. Pappu, RFID privacy: An overview of problems and proposed
solutions, IEEE Security and Privacy, 3(3): 34–43, 2005.
24. A. Juels, RFID security and privacy: A research survey, IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Commu-
nications, 24(2): 381–394, 2006.
25. G. Avoine, Bibliography on Security and Privacy in RFID Systems, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA. [Online] Available: http:==lasecwww.epﬂ.ch/gavoine/rﬁd/
26. B. Schneier, Attack trees, Dr. Dobb’s Journal, December 1999. [Online] Available: http:==www.
schneier.com/paper-attacktrees-ddj-ft.html
27. F. Stajano, Security for Ubiquitous Computing, Wiley, 2002.
28. W.R. Cheswick, S.M. Bellovin, and A.D. Rubin, Firewalls and Internet Security, 2nd ed., Addison-
Wesley, 2003.
29. D. Chaum, Untraceable electronic mail, return addresses, and digital pseudonyms, Communica-
tions of the ACM, 24(2): 84–88, February 1981.
30. Onion Routing Resource Site. [Online] Available: http:==www.onion-router.net/
31. R. Dingledine, N. Mathewson, and P. Syverson, Tor: The second-generation onion router, in
Proceedings of the 13th USENIX Security Symposium, San Diego, California, August 2004.
32. R. Arends, R. Austein, M. Larson, D. Massey, and S. Rose, DNS security introduction and
requirements, Request for Comments—RFC 4033, March 2005.
33. DNS Security Extensions Resource Site. [Online] Available: http:==www.dnssec.org/
34. P. Vixie, O. Gudmundsson, D. Eastlake 3rd, and B. Wellington, Secret key transaction authenti-
cation for DNS (TSIG), Request for Comments—RFC 2845, May 2000.
35. B. Fabian and O. Günther, Distributed ONS and its impact on privacy, in Proceedings of the IEEE
International Conference on Communications (IEEE ICC 2007), Glasgow, 2007.
532
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

30
Practical Steps for Securing RFID Systems
A. Karygiannis, Bernie Eydt, and Ted S. Phillips
CONTENTS
30.1
Introduction...................................................................................................................... 533
30.1.1 Tailoring Security Controls for RFID Systems ............................................... 534
30.1.2 Risk Management ............................................................................................... 535
30.2
RFID Security Controls................................................................................................... 535
30.2.1 Management Controls........................................................................................ 536
30.2.1.1 RFID Usage Policy .............................................................................. 536
30.2.1.2 IT Security Policies.............................................................................. 537
30.2.1.3 Agreements with External Organizations ....................................... 538
30.2.1.4 Minimizing Sensitive Data Stored on Tags..................................... 538
30.2.2 Operational Controls.......................................................................................... 539
30.2.2.1 Physical Access Control ..................................................................... 539
30.2.2.2 Appropriate Placement of Tags and Readers ................................. 540
30.2.2.3 Secure Disposal of Tags...................................................................... 541
30.2.2.4 Operator and Administrator Training ............................................. 541
30.2.2.5 Information Labels=Notice................................................................. 542
30.2.2.6 Separation of Duties............................................................................ 542
30.2.2.7 Nonrevealing Identiﬁer Formats....................................................... 542
30.2.2.8 Fallback Identiﬁcation System........................................................... 544
30.2.3 Technical Controls .............................................................................................. 544
30.2.3.1 Authentication and Data Integrity ................................................... 545
30.2.3.2 RF Interface Protection ....................................................................... 549
30.2.3.3 Tag Data Protection ............................................................................ 556
30.3
Summary........................................................................................................................... 559
Appendix..................................................................................................................................... 561
30.1
Introduction
Like any information technology (IT), radio frequency identiﬁcation (RFID) presents secur-
ity and privacy risks that must be carefully mitigated through management, operational,
and technical controls in order to realize the numerous beneﬁts the technology has to offer.
When practitioners adhere to sound security engineering principles, RFID technology can
help a wide range of organizations and individuals realize substantial productivity gains
and efﬁciencies. These organizations and individuals include hospitals and patients,
533

retailers and customers, and manufacturers and distributors throughout the supply chain.
This document provides an overview of RFID technology, the associated security and
privacy risks, and recommended practices that will enable organizations to realize prod-
uctivity improvements while safeguarding sensitive information and protecting the priv-
acy of individuals. While RFID security is a rapidly evolving ﬁeld with a number of
promising innovations expected in the coming years, these guidelines focus on controls
that are commercially available today.
Each RFID system has different components and customizations so that it can support a
particular business process for an organization; as a result, the security risks for RFID
systems and the controls available to address them are highly varied. The enterprise and
interenterprise subsystems in RFID installations involve common IT components such as
servers, databases, and networks and, therefore, can beneﬁt from typical IT security
controls for those components. Implementing the recommendations presented in this
publication should help organizations improve the security of their RFID systems.
30.1.1
Tailoring Security Controls for RFID Systems
Personnel responsible for designing RFID systems should understand what type of appli-
cation an RFID system will support so that they can select the appropriate security
controls. Each type of application uses a different combination of components and has a
different set of risks. For example, protecting the information used to conduct ﬁnancial
transactions in an automated payment system requires different security controls than
those used for protecting the information needed to track livestock. Factors to consider
include the following:
. The general functional objective of the RFID technology. For example, does the
system need to determine the location of an object or the presence of an object,
authenticate a person, perform a ﬁnancial transaction, or ensure that certain items
are not separated?
. The nature of the information that the RFID system processes or generates. One
application may only need to have a unique, static identiﬁer value for each tagged
object, while another application may need to store additional information about
each tagged object over time. The sensitivity of the information is also an important
consideration.
. The physical and technical environment at the time RFID transactions occurs. This
includes the distance between the readers and the tags, and the amount of time in
which each transaction must be performed.
. The physical and technical environment before and after RFID transactions take
place. For example, human and environmental threats may pose risks to tags’
integrity while the tagged objects are in storage or in transit. Some applications
require the use of tags with sensors that can track environmental conditions over
time, such as temperature and humidity.
. The economics of the business process and RFID system. The economic factors for
RFID systems are different than those for traditional IT systems. For example,
many RFID tags offer few or no security features; selecting tags that incorporate
basic security functionality signiﬁcantly increases the cost of tags, especially if
encryption features are needed. Also, the operational cost of some basic IT security
controls, such as setting unique passwords and changing them regularly, may be
higher for RFID systems because of the logistical challenges in managing security
for thousands or millions of tags.
534
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

30.1.2
Risk Management
For RFID implementations to be successful, organizations should effectively manage their
risk. RFID technology enables an organization to signiﬁcantly change its business process
to increase its efﬁciency and effectiveness. This technology is complex and combines a
number of different computing and communications technologies. Both the changes to
business process and the complexity of the technology generate risk. The major high-level
risks associated with RFID systems are as follows:
. Business process risk. Direct attacks on RFID system components potentially could
undermine the business processes the RFID system was designed to enable. For
example, a warehouse that relies solely on RFID to track items in its inventory may
not be able to process orders in a timely fashion if the RFID system fails.
. Business intelligence risk. An adversary or competitor potentially could gain
unauthorized access to RFID-generated information and use it to harm the inter-
ests of the organization implementing the RFID system. For example, an adversary
might use an RFID reader to determine whether a shipping container holds
expensive electronic equipment, and then target the container for theft when it
gets a positive reading.
. Privacy risk. The misuse of RFID technology could violate personal privacy when
the RFID application calls for personally identiﬁable information to be on the tag
or associated with the tag. As people possess more tagged items and networked
RFID readers become ever more prevalent, organizations may have the ability to
combine and correlate data across applications to infer personal identity and
location and build personal proﬁles in ways that increase the privacy risk.
. Externality risk. RFID technology potentially could represent a threat to non-RFID
networked or collocated systems, assets, and people. For example, an adversary
could gain unauthorized access to computers on an enterprise network through
Internet Protocol (IP) enabled RFID readers if the readers are not designed and
conﬁgured properly.
Organizations need to assess the risks they face and choose an appropriate mix of
management, operational, and technical security controls for their environments. These
organizational assessments should take into account many factors, such as regulatory
requirements, the magnitude of each threat, and cost and performance implications of
the technology or operational practice.
An RFID security checklist has been included in Appendix A (Tables A.1 through A.6) of
this chapter. These tables summarize the security.
30.2
RFID Security Controls
This chapter discusses security controls that can potentially mitigate the business risks
associated with RFID systems. As previously discussed, RFID implementations are highly
customized. As a result, the security controls listed are not all applicable or effective for
all RFID applications. Organizations need to assess the risks they face and choose an
appropriate mix of controls for their environments, taking into account factors such as
regulatory requirements, the magnitude of the threat, cost, and performance.
This chapter covers security controls applicable to most RFID implementations. It does
not address the security of RFID-enabled smart cards and payment systems. This section
Practical Steps for Securing RFID Systems
535

also does not discuss security controls related to general IT systems, such as network
infrastructure, databases, and Web servers because these are already covered by other
security requirements and guidelines. For example, EPCIS servers, which can be accessed
by trading partners through the Internet, should be protected by the same types of controls
that would be used for any other Internet-facing system (e.g., encryption of sensitive
communications, access control to prevent unauthorized access to data and systems) to
ensure the security of the data collected by the RFID system. Guidelines on topics such as
IT server, application, database, and network security are available from many sources,
including NIST’s Computer Security Resource Center (CSRC).*
RFID security is a rapidly evolving discipline. Although promising research is noted
when applicable, this section focuses on controls that are presently commercially available.
The RFID security controls discussed in this section are divided into three groups:y
. Management. A management control involves oversight of the security of the RFID
system. For example, the management of an organization might need to update
existing policies to address RFID implementations, such as security controls
needed for an RF subsystem.
. Operational. An operational control involves the actions performed on a daily basis
by the system’s administrators and users. For example, RFID systems need
operational controls that ensure the physical security of the systems and their
correct use.
. Technical. A technical control uses technology to monitor or restrict the actions that
can be performed within the system. RFID systems need technical controls for
several reasons such as protecting data on tags, causing tags to self-destruct, and
protecting wireless communications.
30.2.1
Management Controls
Management controls are typically involved in risk assessment, system planning, system
acquisition, as well as security certiﬁcations, accreditations, and assessments. The sections
below discuss management controls for RFID systems in more detail.
30.2.1.1
RFID Usage Policy
Control: An RFID usage policy describes the authorized and unauthorized uses of
RFID technology in an organization and the personnel roles assigned to particular RFID
system tasks. Federal agencies should follow FIPS Publication 199, Standards for Security
Categorization of Federal Information and Information Systems, when developing the RFID
usage policy.
The usage policy also should be consistent or integrated with the organization’s privacy
policy, which addresses topics such as how personal information is stored and
shared. The RFID usage policy should also address privacy issues associated with the
* The CSRC is located at http:==csrc.nist.gov=publications=nistpubs=index.html. This site also has links to NIST
publications that address general security issues and provide guidelines for the conﬁguration of speciﬁc
technologies that might be of use when securing an RFID system, including the computing devices in the
enterprise subsystem.
y For more information on security controls, 6 see R. Ross, S. Katzke, A. Johnson, M. Swanson, G. Stoneburner,
and G. Rogers, Recommended Security Controls for Federal Information Systems. NIST Special Publication 800–53
(as amended), December 2006.
536
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

tag identiﬁer formats and the potential disclosure of information based on solely on the tag
identiﬁer format selected.
Applicability: This control applies to all organizations that use or are considering using
RFID technologies.
Beneﬁts: The policy establishes the framework for many other security controls. It provides
a vehicle for management to communicate its expectations regarding the RFID system and
its security. It enables management to take legal or disciplinary action against individuals
or entities that do not comply with the policy.
Weaknesses: The existence of a policy does not ensure compliance with the policy. A policy
needs to be coupled with the implementation and enforcement of appropriate operational
and technical controls to be effective.
30.2.1.2
IT Security Policies
Control: IT security policies describe the approach to achieve high-level security objectives
of the usage policy. The IT security policies related to RFID should cover each RFID
subsystem, including network, database, and application security in the enterprise and
interenterprise subsystems; they should not just be limited to security of tags and readers
in the RF subsystem.
IT security policies for RFID systems should address the following:
. Access control to RFID information, especially records contained in RFID analytic
system databases
. Perimeter protection, including port and protocol restrictions for network trafﬁc
between the RF and enterprise subsystems and between the enterprise subsystem
and a public network or extranet
. Password management, particularly with respect to the generation, distribution,
and storage of tags’ access, lock, and kill passwords
. Management system security for readers and middleware, including the use and
protection of SNMP read and write community strings*
. RFID security training for system administrators and operators
. Management of associated cryptographic systems, including certiﬁcation authori-
ties and key management
Applicability: All RFID implementations, particularly those with enterprise subsystems or
interenterprise subsystems.
Beneﬁts: Well-crafted security policies govern the mitigation of business risks associated
with the use of RFID technologies. The policies provide requirements and guidelines for
the individuals designing, implementing, using, and maintaining RFID systems. For
example, IT policies help the personnel designing RFID systems or procuring system
components to make appropriate decisions. Similarly, they help system administrators
correctly implement and conﬁgure software and related network components.
* SNMP community strings are passwords that provide anyone with an SNMP management client and network
access the ability to manage the associated systems. Knowledge of the read community string provides the holder
the ability to view the system conﬁguration and track system behavior. Knowledge of the write community string
provides the holder the ability to reconﬁgure system components.
Practical Steps for Securing RFID Systems
537

Weaknesses: The existence of a policy does not ensure compliance with the policy. A policy
needs to be coupled with the implementation and enforcement of appropriate operational
and technical controls to be effective.
30.2.1.3
Agreements with External Organizations
Control: When data associated with an RFID system needs to be shared across organizational
boundaries, formal agreements among the participating organizations can codify the roles
and responsibilities, and in some cases the legal liability, of each organization. These formal
agreements are usually documented as a Memorandum of Agreement (MOA) or Memo-
randum of Understanding (MOU). The MOU or MOA speciﬁes the network connections
and authentication mechanisms to be used, the data to be shared, and the manner in which
data should be protected both in transit and at rest. It may also address controls on vendors,
subcontractors, and other third parties to the extent they have access to the system.*
If the interenterprise application requires tag passwords to be shared across organiza-
tions, then the MOU or MOA should specify how these passwords will be generated,
stored, and shared. The memorandum may specify IT security controls such as methods of
authentication, access control, or encryption that participating organizations shall imple-
ment to protect the passwords.
Applicability: Any RFID system involving more than one organization, which is most
common in supply chain applications.
Beneﬁts: Having an MOA or MOU signiﬁcantly reduces the potential for subsequent
misunderstandings and security breaches. They enable signatories to communicate their
respective security requirements while also realizing the beneﬁts of the business partner-
ship that led them to collaborate in the development and use of the RFID system.
Weaknesses: Monitoring an external organization’s enforcement of an agreement is difﬁcult
without full access to its systems and personnel, which is unlikely. As a result, violations
may occur without detection. This risk can be mitigated with independent audits if
signatories agree to hire third parties to conduct such audits.
30.2.1.4
Minimizing Sensitive Data Stored on Tags
Control: Instead of placing sensitive data on tags, the data could be stored in a secure
enterprise subsystem and retrieved using the tag’s unique identiﬁer.
Applicability: Applications that use tags with on-board memory and process data that is
either considered sensitive or that could be combined with other data to infer sensitive
information.
Beneﬁts:
. Adversaries cannot obtain information from the tag through rogue scanning or
eavesdropping.
. Data encryption and access control is often more cost effectively performed in the
enterprise subsystem than in the RF subsystem.
* For additional information on agreements with external organizations, see NIST Special Publication 800–47,
Security Guide for Interconnecting Information Technology Systems, which can be found at http:==csrc.nist.
gov=publications=nistpubs=800–47=sp800–47.pdf
538
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

Weaknesses:
. Adversaries can often obtain valuable information from the identiﬁer alone. For
example, knowledge of the EPC manager ID and object class bits in certain EPC
formats may reveal the make and model of a tagged object concealed in a con-
tainer. An adversary might target containers based on the perceived worth of their
contents.
. Placing data in the enterprise subsystem makes the availability of that data
contingent on the availability of the network. Retrieving data over a network
also introduces a small delay, which could be unacceptable for some applications.
30.2.2
Operational Controls
There are several types of operational controls, which are given below:
. Physical access controls restrict access to authorized personnel where the RFID
systems are deployed.
. Proper placement of RF equipment helps avoid interference and reduce hazards
from electromagnetic radiation.
. Organizations can destroy tags after they are no longer useful to prevent adver-
saries from gaining access to their data.
. Operator training can help ensure that personnel using the system follow appro-
priate guidelines and policies.
. Information labels and notice can inform users of the intended purposes of the
RFID system and simple methods users can employ to mitigate risk.
The following sections discuss operational controls for RFID systems in more detail.
30.2.2.1
Physical Access Control
Control: Physical access controls include fences, gates, walls, locked doors, turnstiles,
surveillance cameras, and security guards. When the objective is to limit radio communi-
cation over a short distance, room walls or partitioned stalls might provide adequate
protection if they are opaque to the relevant radio frequencies that the RF subsystem uses.
Applicability: All RFID implementations except those in which RFID tags or other system
components are in public areas.
Beneﬁts: Physical access controls limit the ability of an adversary to get close enough to
RFID system components to compromise RFID data security or to modify, damage, or
steal RFID system components. Physical security applies to all RFID subsystems. In the
RF subsystem, the primary objective of the control is to prevent unauthorized radio
communications. In the enterprise and interenterprise subsystems, the primary objective
is to prevent physical access to system components.
Examples of risks that are mitigated by physical access controls include the following:
. Unauthorized reading and writing of tag data
. Rogue and cloned tags
. Reader spooﬁng
. Denial of service resulting from radio interference or unauthorized commands
. Targeting
Practical Steps for Securing RFID Systems
539

. Physical destruction of RFID equipment
. HERF=HERO=HERP
Weaknesses:
. Physical access controls are not a countermeasure for radio interference from
legitimate radios located within a perimeter designed to block external emissions.
. The effective range of RF signals may be much longer than stated operating ranges,
thereby allowing many attacks to occur using customized directional antennas and
other technologies.
. Physical access controls do not protect against attacks by insiders (i.e., those
granted access to the area).
. HERF=HERO=HERP still exists with respect to radiation emitted within the phys-
ical perimeter.
. Physical controls may fail to contain radio signals as expected if ductwork or other
openings allow radio signals to escape.
30.2.2.2
Appropriate Placement of Tags and Readers
Control: RFID system equipment can be placed to minimize unnecessary electromagnetic
radiation. Tags and readers can be kept away from the following:
. Fuel, ordnance, and other materials that could cause harm if exposed to electro-
magnetic radiation
. Humans and sensitive products (e.g., blood, medicine) that might be harmed by
sustained exposure to RF subsystem radiation
. Metal and reﬂective objects that can modify and amplify signals in unintended and
potentially harmful ways
. Legitimate radioswith which the RFsubsystemcommunication will causeinterference
Applicability: All environments in which the organization deploying RFID systems deter-
mines the location of the RF equipment (which excludes many consumer and supply chain
applications).
Beneﬁts:
. Reduced risk of interference with legitimate radios
. Reduced risk of eavesdropping and unauthorized RF subsystem transactions
. Mitigation of HERF=HERO=HERP
Weaknesses:
. Tag location cannot always be controlled, such as when tags are used to track
mobile items (e.g., hospital cart) or items in transit (e.g., pallet on a truck).
. Radio interference may persist even if the tags or readers are placed in a new
location that is still sufﬁciently close to other radios.*
* In this situation, a panel or wall of grounded wire fencing between the two RF sources is a possible alternative
means to reduce interference.
540
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

30.2.2.3
Secure Disposal of Tags
Control: Secure disposal involves physically or electronically destroying tags, as opposed to
just discarding them, when they are no longer needed to perform their intended function.
Physical destruction may involve manual tearing or shredding using a paper shredder.
Electronic destruction can be accomplished by using a tag’s kill feature or using a strong
electromagnetic ﬁeld to render a tag’s circuitry permanently inoperable. When a tag
supports an electronic disabling mechanism, it usually is the preferred way to disable a
tag before it is disposed because it can be accomplished without touching each tag, thereby
reducing the cost of the effort.
Applicability: RFID applications in which the continued operating presence of a tag after it
has performed its intended function poses a business intelligence or privacy risk (e.g., an
adversary can subsequently use the presence of the tag to track items or people).
Beneﬁts: Destroying or disabling tags:
. Eliminates the possibility that they could be used later for tracking or targeting.
. Prevents access to sensitive data stored on tags.
These beneﬁts apply to both business intelligence and privacy risks.
Weaknesses:
. Even if minimal, the effort it takes to destroy a tag increases the tag’s life cycle cost,
which is a concern if very low costs are required to justify an RFID-enabled
business process.
. Destruction of a tag precludes the ability to use it for future value-added applica-
tions such as post-sale product support, targeted recalls, receipt-free returns,
expiration date monitoring, and sorting assistance for recycling.
30.2.2.4
Operator and Administrator Training
Control: Operator and administrator training provides personnel with the skills and know-
ledge necessary to comply with RFID usage, IT security, and privacy policies, as well as
agreements with external organizations. In most RFID implementations, personnel will
perform various roles, which might require different training materials for each role. For
example, an administrator of middleware might need different information than an operator
of a mobile reader. Appropriate security and privacy training addresses at least three points:
. What constitutes unauthorized use
. How to detect that unauthorized use might be occurring
. To whom to report violations
If HERF=HERO=HERP risks are present, appropriate security training covers mitigation
techniques, such as safe handling distances.
If tags are destroyed or recycled, training should cover how to perform these functions.
For example, operators might be trained how to clear tag memory before reuse.
Applicability: All RFID implementations.
Beneﬁts: Operator training helps ensure that the system is used and maintained properly.
Training also helps operators identify security violations and take appropriate actions to
prevent their reoccurrence.
Practical Steps for Securing RFID Systems
541

Weaknesses: Training alone cannot ensure proper operation of the system or compliance
with policy.
30.2.2.5
Information Labels=Notice
Control: A written message is afﬁxed to or distributed with each tag or is posted near
readers. The notice may inform users of the purposes of the RFID system or advise users on
how to minimize privacy or other risks (e.g., place an RFID-enabled access card or
transponder in metal foil or a sleeve that shields RF radiation when the card or transponder
is not in use).
Applicability: All applications in which there is a risk that could be mitigated with simple
informational messages. The control is particularly relevant to consumer applications in
which privacy is a concern.
Beneﬁts: Information labels or notices can communicate basic information about risks that
might otherwise be left unknown by users that are able to take simple steps to mitigate the
risk (e.g., remove a tag or place it in a shielded sleeve).
Weaknesses: Distributing a notice is no guarantee that it will be read or understood. Notice
is not an appropriate communications medium for complex concepts or instructions that
may require formal training.
30.2.2.6
Separation of Duties
Control: RFID system duties are distributed among various personnel roles to minimize the
damage resulting from an inadvertent or malicious activity of a single person. The general
principle of the control is that malicious collusion between two or more authorized users is
much less likely than one person engaging alone in inappropriate behavior.
One example of separation of duties is having different personnel (1) attach tags to
objects and (2) read the tags. If an individual performed both functions, the individual
could intentionally put the wrong tag on an object to circumvent the objectives of the
business process. For example, a store clerk could afﬁx tags intended for low-priced items
on high-priced items, and then later work the checkout scanner while the clerk’s accom-
plice purchased the items. The system would not know that the tags had been switched,
but if another person performed the checkout, he or she might be suspicious of the
checkout total, which could uncover the plot.
Applicability: RFID applications in which an insider might have a motive to perform
unauthorized RFID transactions. This scenario is most likely to occur when tags support
commercial transactions, especially those related to high-value objects.
Beneﬁts: Separation of duties helps to reduce fraud and malicious damage, because any
user attempting to engage in such activities would be forced to collude with at least one
other user. Separation of duties also reduces errors, because a second operator will often
catch mistakes made or missed by the ﬁrst.
Weaknesses: Multiple employees still could collude to commit fraud or violate the RFID
usage policy. Also, organizations with a limited staff may not be able to perform complete
separation of duties.
30.2.2.7
Nonrevealing Identiﬁer Formats
Control: RFID tags are assigned identiﬁers using identiﬁer formats that do not reveal
any information about tagged items or the organization operating the RFID system.
542
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

Nonrevealing identiﬁer format options include serially assigning identiﬁers and randomly
assigning identiﬁers.*
In contrast, if an adversary reads an identiﬁer that is encoded with a standardized
format, such as the EPC format, that adversary may be able to discern the manufacturer
or issuer of the item, as well as the type of item. For example, all cans of a soft drink from a
certain manufacturer will have the same EPC manager ID and object class bits if their
identiﬁers are encoded in an EPC identiﬁer format. Figure 30.1 shows an example 96-bit
EPC and how it can be parsed into the four aforementioned, individual ﬁelds.
Tags must have programmable identiﬁers to support the control. Even tags that are
designed to support standard tag formats can still be assigned non-standard identiﬁers in
the ﬁeld. However, some tags have factory-initialized identiﬁers that cannot be modiﬁed
after manufacture.
Applicability: Any applications in which the implementing organization determines that the
revelation of a tag’s identiﬁer is a business intelligence risk.
Beneﬁts: Adversaries cannot obtain information about tagged items from the identiﬁer
alone.
Weaknesses:
. The use of nonrevealing identiﬁer precludes an organization from realizing bene-
ﬁts that come from standard identiﬁer formats that reveal organization and item
type information. For example, standard identiﬁer formats are particularly advan-
tageous when designing and maintaining distributed databases in interenterprise
systems. Lookup and query functions are much easier in such databases when the
identiﬁers provide information on where item data is located.
. If identiﬁers are assigned randomly, then a potential exists that two tags may be
assigned the same identiﬁer. The likelihood of such an event is very small, but it
could lead to errors in the supported business process.y
. If there is logic in how the identiﬁers are assigned, an adversary may uncover the
method that is used, which would defeat the control. For example, an adversary
knows that an identiﬁer was assigned to a certain item and that all items of that
FIGURE 30.1
Example 96-bit EPC.
* A related control is rotating identiﬁers. Auto-rotating tags store a list of identiﬁers and cycle through the list when
queried. To support multiple identiﬁers, databases in the enterprise subsystem must associate each identiﬁer in the
list to the particular item. The beneﬁt of rotating identiﬁers is that organization can make it more difﬁcult to identify
and track particular items as well as hide the type of item. Random and serialized identiﬁers, on the other hand, may
not reveal information about the type of item, but since these identiﬁers are ﬁxed, once they are revealed that
particular item can be tracked. One weakness to rotating identiﬁers is that a rogue reader can easily obtain the
complete list of identiﬁers through repeated queries. Therefore, this control is more appropriate when the primary
threat is eavesdropping. While research is being conducted on the concept of rotating identiﬁers, it is not speciﬁed in
any RFID standard and proprietary designs are not widely commercially available.
y When two tags are assigned the same identiﬁer, the event is called a collision. If identiﬁers are randomly
assigned, a collision is expected after approximately the square root of the total number of possible identiﬁers.
Therefore, in the case of a 96-bit EPC, a collision is expected after approximately 248 tags, which is an enormous
number not likely to be encountered in most RFID applications.
Practical Steps for Securing RFID Systems
543

type were assigned sequentially, then the adversary may be able to deduce the
approximate range of identiﬁers that correspond to items of that type. Similarly,
when identiﬁers are serialized, the adversary may be able to deduce the approxi-
mate time of the assignment based on the identiﬁer.
30.2.2.8
Fallback Identiﬁcation System
Control: A fallback identiﬁcation system provides an alternative means to identify, authen-
ticate, or verify an object when the RFID system is unavailable or an individual tag is
inoperable. Options include text labels and AIDC technology such as bar codes.* The
fallback may consist of just an identiﬁer, or it may also include additional data about the
tagged object. The fallback system is accompanied by standard operating procedures and
operator training to ensure that personnel know when and how to use it.
Applicability: All RFID applications.
Beneﬁts: Duplicating tag identiﬁers and data on a label provides a fallback in case of malicious
or accidental tag damage, reader malfunction, or enterprise subsystem network outage. The
redundant data can also be used to verify that tag data has not been altered improperly.
Weaknesses: This control has several potential weaknesses, including the following:
. Damage to the tag could render both the stored data and the printed data
unusable. Similarly, many enterprise subsystem outages that would affect the
RFID system would also affect its fallback alternative.
. The data stored on the label is visible, so it may be easier for unauthorized parties
to gain access to it than it would be to read the data from the tag.
. The text label or bar code might not provide the same data capacity as RFID
memory, although two-dimensional bar codes can encode at least as many bits
as standards-based tag identiﬁers.
. Text labels and AIDC technologies are static, so they do not provide a complete
fallback solution for applications in which tag data changes over time. However,
some identiﬁcation information is still likely to be better than none in most
applications.
30.2.3
Technical Controls
There are a number of technical controls currently available for RFID systems, and many
others are under development in industrial and university research labs. This section
focuses on technical controls that are commercially available as of the publication date of
this document. Supplementary information on selected emerging security technologies is
provided in footnotes. Many of the technical controls listed are speciﬁed in standards,
while others are available only in proprietary systems.
Many technical controls related to a tag require the tag to perform additional computa-
tions and to have additional volatile memory. Accordingly, a tag that uses such technical
controls requires a more sophisticated microchip than those that do not use such controls.
In the case of passive tags, the tags may also need to be closer to readers to obtain the
required power to perform these computations. Alternatively, readers may need to operate
* If the RFID application’s objective is to provide security or authentication, then a fallback technology such as
holograms or other optical security features may be used.
544
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

at greater power levels, although this may not be feasible or permitted in many cases.
These inherent characteristics of passive tags can limit the use of certain technical controls
in some environments.
Technical controls exist for all components of RFID systems, including the RF, enterprise,
and interenterprise subsystems. This section focuses on technical controls for the RF
subsystem. Many controls also exist for the enterprise and interenterprise subsystems,
but these typically apply to IT systems in general rather than to RFID systems in particular.
The general types of RF subsystem controls include controls to perform the following:
. Provide authentication and integrity services to RFID components and transactions.
. Protect RF communication between reader and tag.
. Protect the data stored on tags.
Examples of each of these types of controls are discussed in the following sections.
30.2.3.1
Authentication and Data Integrity
While a wide variety of authentication methods exists for IT systems, the most common
techniques for the RF subsystem of RFID systems are passwords, keyed-hash message
authentication codes (HMAC), and digital signatures. In some cases, the primary objective
of the authentication technology is to prevent unauthorized reading from or writing to
tags. In other cases, the objective is to detect cloning of tags. Authentication techniques
based on cryptography often provide integrity services for data included in the authenti-
cation transaction; in other words, an adversary cannot modify data in the transaction
without the reader or tag detecting the change.
30.2.3.1.1
Password Authentication
Control: A tag does not permit password-protected commands to be executed unless they
are accompanied by the correct password. Protected commands may include those that
support reading and writing of tag data, memory access control, and the kill feature.
Organizations properly implementing this control will develop a password management
system to support it. The password management system addresses all stages of the
password, including generation, conveyance, and storage. From a security perspective,
effective password generation involves random selection of each password.* Whenever
possible, the passwords are assigned to each tag in a physically secure environment to
reduce the likelihood of eavesdropping. Tags should not share passwords, although this
may not be administratively feasible in some environments, such as those in which the
reader is not expected to have access to networked database of tag passwords. In inter-
enterprise applications such as supply chains, multiple organizations may need to access
databases that contain tag identiﬁers and passwords. Authenticating external entities likely
will require additional security systems. While in traditional IT systems, passwords are
often changed on a periodic basis (e.g., every 90 days), in RFID systems, such changes may
be infeasible, especially if the tags are not always accessible to the organization assigning
the passwords.
Applicability: Any application where authorized execution of a particular command repre-
sents a business process, business intelligence, privacy, or externality risk.
* For additional information on proper random number generation, see E. Barker and J. Kelsey, Recommendation for
Random Number Generation Using Deterministic Random Bit Generators, NIST Special Publication 800–90, June 2006.
Practical Steps for Securing RFID Systems
545

Beneﬁts: The likelihood that tags will be used for unauthorized purposes is greatly reduced.
Weaknesses:
. Password management for RFID systems is complex, particularly if the application
deploys large number of tags or if passwords must be shared across organizational
boundaries as might be the case in supply chains.
. Adversaries can intercept passwords transmitted over the air and then use them at
a later time to perform unauthorized transactions.*
. If the application environment precludes access to an on-line tag password data-
base (e.g., mobile readers in remote locations), then the implementing organization
may need to take simplifying measures, such as assigning the same password to
multiple tags. In cases such as these, the compromise of a single password could
compromise the integrity of the entire system.
. RFID passwords can be obtained through brute force methods (i.e., cycling through
all possible passwords) when the tag technology is limited to short passwords.y
. RFID passwords can be revealed through power analysis attacks on some types of
passive tags.z
30.2.3.1.2
Keyed-Hash Message Authentication Code
Control: Both the reader and the tag share a common secret key that can be used in
combination with a hash algorithm to provide one-way or mutual authentication between
tag and reader. When HMAC is applied to messages, it also ensures the integrity of data in
the messages. HMAC is speciﬁed in FIPS Publication 198.§ HMAC supports any crypto-
graphic hash algorithm, but Federal agencies must use one of the secure hash algorithms
* RFID passwords are often transmitted ‘‘in the clear’’ (i.e., without cryptography to hide them), which makes
them particularly vulnerable to eavesdropping. The cover-coding technique described in Section 5.3.2.1 miti-
gates this risk for tags that support cover-coding, but this technique is not without its own limitations.
y For example, EPC Class-1 Generation-1 UHF tags support a maximum password length of 8 bits, which enables
only 256 possible passwords. An adversary can cycle through 256 passwords in a matter of seconds. EPC Class-1
Generation-2 tags support 32-bit passwords and, therefore, 232 possible passwords, which are sufﬁcient if the
passwords are randomly generated. However, if the binary password is based on American Standard Code for
Information Interchange (ASCII) characters, then the actual number of possible passwords may be much
smaller. For example, the ASCII representation of a 4-digit decimal number (a common length for personal
identiﬁcation numbers) is 32 bits, but results in only 10,000 possible combinations, a number certainly vulnerable
to brute force attacks. Tags typically do not lock-out readers after a certain number of incorrect guesses, which
means a determined adversary can continue to guess the password as long as the tag remains within the
operating range of the adversary’s reader.
z The power analysis attack (also called a side channel attack) is based on the fact some passive tags use different
levels of power depending on how close the password provided is to the actual password. For instance, if the
ﬁrst bit in a password is incorrect, the tag uses less energy than it would if the eighth bit is incorrect, given how
the algorithm is hard-coded into the tag’s circuitry. These power differences are detected in the backscatter to the
reader, but it requires that the adversary be reasonably close to the tag to get effective measurements. If such
measurements are possible, an adversary can determine the password much more quickly than by using a brute
force method. Lab experiments proved that someone could crack the 8-bit password protection found on EPC
Class-1 Generation-1 tags in one minute. For more information, see Y. Oren and A. Shamir, ‘‘Power Analysis of
RFID Tags,’’ discussed at the Cryptographers Panel of the Fifteenth RSA Conference, San Jose, 2006.
§ The FIPS HMAC is a generalization of HMAC described in H. Krawczyk, M. Bellare, and R. Canetti, ‘‘HMAC:
keyed-hashing for message authentication,’’ Internet Engineering Task Force, Request for Comments (RFC) 2104,
February 1997 and American Bankers Association, ‘‘Keyed Hash Message Authentication Code,’’ American
National Standards Institute (ANSI) X9.71, Washington, D.C., 2000.
546
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

(SHA) speciﬁed in FIPS Publication 180–2.* HMAC is not speciﬁed in any RFID standard,
but it is available in proprietary designs.
Applicability: Applications in which passwords are considered to offer an inadequate
authentication mechanism, perhaps because the risk of eavesdropping is high. Applica-
tions that require evidence of a tag’s authenticity.
Beneﬁts: The advantages of HMAC relative to password authentication include the
following:
. Provides evidence of tag’s authenticity.y
. Provides integrity protection.z
. Does not transmit secrets over the air, which eliminates the risk of eavesdropping
inherent with clear text passwords.
Weaknesses:
. The management of HMAC keys provides similar challenges to those of password
management and may not be practical if mobile readers do not have reliable access
to an HMAC key management system.
. The authenticity claims associated with HMAC authentication only hold when
the HMAC key remains secret. If an adversary has physical access to a tag and
can obtain its HMAC key, then the adversary can clone the tag. This attack,
however, assumes that that the adversary has some level of expertise, both
in reverse engineering the HMAC-capable tag and in producing a reasonable
facsimile.
. When HMAC keys are shared across organizations, authenticity claims rely on an
implicit trust between the organizations that may not be present in practice.
. HMAC requires greater computing power than password comparisons, and,
therefore, requires more complex tag designs to support it.
30.2.3.1.3
Digital Signatures
Control: Readers digitally sign tag identiﬁers, timestamps, and related event data to
provide for nonrepudiation of tag transactions. The resulting signatures are stored on
tags for subsequent veriﬁcation, although recording signatures in enterprise subsystem
databases provides additional assurance of the tag’s chain of custody.
Digital signatures are based on asymmetric cryptography, also commonly referred to as
public key cryptography. Federal agencies implementing digital signature technology must
* The speciﬁed algorithms are SHA-1, SHA-256, SHA-384, and SHA-512. While SHA-1 offers the lowest level of
assurance and is not recommended for use in digital signatures beyond 2010, it is likely most applicable to RFID
systems due to its greater computational efﬁciency relative to the other algorithms. See NIST Special Publication
800–57, Recommendation on Key Management, Part 1 for additional information.
y The evidence of tag or item authenticity is provided by authenticating a tag to a reader, which can be
accomplished when the tag computes and returns an HMAC using a random challenge provided by the reader.
Mutual authentication is also possible if both tag and reader provide challenges to each other. Passwords, on the
other hand, typically only are used to authenticate readers to tags, thereby protecting the tag against rogue
commands. If the tag were to authenticate itself to a reader using a password, an adversary could simply use a
rogue reader to obtain the password and the re-use with a legitimate reader. HMAC provides an effective
countermeasure to this attack because it never reveals the secret key during any of its transactions.
z Integrity protection is when either tag or reader computes an HMAC using as input the data for which integrity
protection is desired. Any change in the data results in a different value of the HMAC, which would be detected
by the receiving entity.
Practical Steps for Securing RFID Systems
547

comply with FIPS Publication 196, Entity Authentication Using Public Key Cryptography. The
use of digital signature technology in the context of RFID systems is also referred to as
authenticated RFID. It typically works as follows:
1. The tag has a permanent unique identiﬁer than cannot be modiﬁed after manu-
facturer.
2. The reader generates a public=private key pair and obtains a corresponding public
key certiﬁcate.
3. The reader uses a speciﬁed hash algorithm to compute a message digest of the
tag’s identiﬁer and possibly other transaction-related data, encrypts the message
digest with its private key to create a digital signature for the transaction, and
stores the resulting signature on the tag.
4. Other readers read the signature, decrypt it with the ﬁrst reader’s public key, and
compute the identical message digest to determine if a match exists. If the message
digests match, then veriﬁcation procedure provides assurance of the authenticity of
the earlier transaction. If the message digests do not match, then either the transac-
tion data has been altered or an unauthorized device created the digital signature.
5. The other readers can store their own event transactions on the tag or record them
in enterprise subsystem databases for later queries regarding the tag’s chain of
custody.
Applicability: Applications that require more robust evidence of authenticity than provided
by HMAC technology, including authentication of multiple chain of custody events.
Applications that require veriﬁcation of authenticity without network connectivity.
Beneﬁts: Digital signatures offer several advantages relative to HMAC authentication,
including:
. Digital signature systems do not require tags to store cryptographic secrets.
Instead, readers maintain private keys. In password and HMAC authentication,
both the tag and the reader must share a secret for the system to function, but there
are no shared secrets in the public key cryptosystems that support digital signa-
tures. Tags are typically much more vulnerable to compromise than readers, so
eliminating the need to store secrets on tags enhances overall system security. One
private key and one or more public key certiﬁcates are on the reader. Integrity is
needed for the certiﬁcates, but not conﬁdentiality.
. In many cases, digital signatures do not require network connectivity to success-
fully perform the authentication function. In password and HMAC authentication,
a reader is unlikely to have the memory to store the passwords or keys for large
numbers of tags. With digital signatures, a reader may only need to store the
public key certiﬁcate of the entity that initialized the tags or perhaps a relatively
small number of readers. In interenterprise systems, each participating organiza-
tion only has to share the public keys of its readers rather than provide its partners
reliable network access to a password or secret key database.
. Digital signatures are compatible with existing RFID tag standards. HMAC
requires tags to support hash algorithms and to implement a challenge-response
protocol, neither of which are included in existing RFID standards. On the other
hand, in authenticated RFID systems, tags can receive, store, and transmit digital
signatures with existing read and write commands because the complexity resides
in readers or middleware.
548
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

Weaknesses:
. A system of digital signatures requires a public key infrastructure (PKI), including
registration and certiﬁcation authorities, revocation functions, and associated pol-
icies and practice statements. Successfully implementing and operating a PKI
requires careful planning and considerable expertise. In addition, readers or mid-
dleware need to support digital signature and other PKI functionality that is not
commonly found in current RFID technology.
. Digital signatures systems require more memory than found on many current tags.
For example, NIST recommends that RSA signatures have a length of 1024 bits,
and a length of 2048 bits after 2010.* Additional memory is required to store
identifying information related to the transaction. Providing chain of custody
evidence requires storing a digital signature and related identifying information
for each transaction.
. Digital signatures that are not generated by the tag are subject to replay attacks. An
adversary could query a tag to obtain its evidence of authenticity (i.e., the digital
signature created by a previous reader) and then replicate that data on a cloned tag.
. The use of digital signatures to support authentication of readers to tags would
require tags to support relatively complex cryptographic functions beyond the
capacity of most common tag designs. Consequently, password or symmetric key
authentication systems likely will support tag access control, as opposed to tag
authenticity veriﬁcation, for the foreseeable future.
30.2.3.2
RF Interface Protection
Several types of technical controls focus on the RF interface to tags, including:
. Cover-coding can be used to obscure the content of messages from readers to tags.
. Data can be encrypted prior to its transmission.
. Shielding can be installed to limit eavesdropping and rogue scanning.
. The selection of an operating radio frequency can be used to avoid interference
from other sources or achieve certain operating characteristics such as the ability to
propagate through metals, liquids, and other materials that are opaque to many
frequencies.
. Reader and active tag transmission characteristics can be tuned to reduce the
likelihood of eavesdropping and help mitigate interference and the hazards from
electromagnetic radiation.
. The RF interface for tags can be temporarily shut off to prevent unauthorized
access when the tag is not expected to be used for authorized purposes.
. The RF interface may be turned off by default until a user takes an action to
activate it.
. Readers may periodically poll tags to determine the presence of the tags, assess
system health, and acquire environmental data.
These controls are discussed further in the following sections.
* Elliptic curve cryptography can reduce the size of signatures. Elliptic curve methods provide comparable
assurance to 1024-bit RSA signatures with 163 bits, and to 2048-bit RSA signatures with 224 bits. This approach
combined with greater memory on tags may alleviate storage concerns over time.
Practical Steps for Securing RFID Systems
549

30.2.3.2.1
Cover-Coding
Control: Cover-coding is a method for hiding information on the forward channel from
eavesdroppers.
In the EPCglobal Class-1 Generation-2 standard, cover-coding is used to obscure pass-
words and information written to a tag using the write command. The EPCglobal Class-1
Generation-2 cover-coding protocol works as follows:
1. The reader sends a message to the tag requesting a key.
2. The tag generates a random 16-bit number (i.e., the key) and returns it to the
reader.
3. The reader produces ciphertext (i.e., a message unintelligible to an eavesdropper
who cannot intercept the key) by applying an exclusive-or (XOR) operation* to the
key and the plain text.
4. The reader sends the ciphertext to the tag.
5. The tag applies the XOR operation using the ciphertext and the key it generated to
recover the plain text.y
Cover-coding is an example of minimalist cryptography because it operates within the
challenging power and memory constraints of passive RFID tags.z By itself, the XOR
operation would be considered a trivial encryption algorithm in traditional cryptography,
but it nonetheless mitigates risk to an acceptable level in many RFID environments.
Figure 30.2 illustrates how cover-coding works. As shown in the ﬁgure, the passive tag’s
back channel signal is weaker than the reader’s forward channel signal. This will always be
the case for a passive tag, which must use the forward channel to power both its compu-
tations and the backscattered signal. In the ﬁgure, the adversary is able to eavesdrop on the
forward channel but not the back channel. So long as this condition holds, the adversary
will not be able to learn the random number sent from the tag and, therefore, will be unable
to decipher cover coded information.
Applicability: Cover-coding is useful when eavesdropping is a risk that requires mitigation,
but adversaries are expected to be at a greater distance from the tags than readers.
Intelligible reception of back channel signals from a passive tag requires proximity of
less than four meters in most applications. In many applications, an adversary’s reception
equipment would be conspicuous if it were located within this range. In contrast, reader
signals can be detected at distances of a kilometer or more under ideal conditions.
Cover-coding is designed for RF subsystems in which the forward channel carries
stronger signals than the back channel, which essentially limits the control to passive
tags. EPCglobal Class-1 Generation-2 technologies support cover-coding. Proprietary tech-
nologies support similar features.
Beneﬁts: Cover-coding helps prevent the execution of unauthorized commands that could
disable a tag or modify the tag’s data. Consequently, cover-coding mitigates business
process, business intelligence, and privacy risks.
* The XOR operation is a binary operation denoted with the symbol ‘‘’’ that works as follows: 1  1 ¼ 0; 1 
0 ¼ 1; 0  1 ¼ 1; 0  0 ¼ 0. When the XOR operation is applied to two multi-bit strings, the XOR operation is
applied to the ﬁrst bit of the each string to produce the ﬁrst bit of the result, the second bit of each string to
produce the second bit of the result, and so on. To work properly, the inputs to the XOR operation must be of
equivalent length, and the output is also of the same length.
y The XOR operation is symmetric. For instance, given key K, plaintext P, and ciphertext C, if P  K¼ C, then C  K¼ P.
z For more information on minimalist cryptography, see A. Juels, ‘‘Minimalist cryptography for low-cost RFID
tags,’’ in the Fourth Conference on Security in Communication Networks, 2004, pp. 149–164.
550
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

Weaknesses:
. If an adversary can intercept a key distributed on the back channel, the adversary
could decrypt any cipher text message generated with that key.
. The effectiveness of cover-coding depends on the performance of the tag’s random
number generator. If the random number is predictable because of a ﬂaw in the
tag’s design or cryptanalysis, then an adversary can learn the key and decrypt
subsequent communication.
30.2.3.2.2
Encryption of Data in Transit
Control: Data collected or processed by the tag is encrypted prior to over-the-air transmission.
Applicability: Applications that require an effective countermeasure to the threat of eaves-
dropping and for which cover-coding offers inadequate protections. Tags typically only
require on-board encryption capabilities to protect the conﬁdentiality of data in transit if
they collect or process data from sensors or other directly connected sources. In these cases,
no alternative exists to hide the content of the data over the air because the data originates on
the tag.
On-board cryptography for conﬁdentiality is not required for applications in which
readers are the only source of data. In these cases, the data can be encrypted in the
enterprise subsystem or by a reader before it is written to the tag and then retrieved in
its encrypted form from the tag when needed. If the tag never has to perform computations
on the data, then it never has to decrypt it, but merely store it.
Proprietary tag designs support encryption for over-the-air conﬁdentiality, but EPCglobal
and ISO=IEC 18000 standards do not as of the date of this publication.
Beneﬁts: Encryption of data in transit prevents successful eavesdropping of over-the-air
RFID transactions.
Adversary
Tag
Interrogator
FIGURE 30.2
Cover-coding.
Practical Steps for Securing RFID Systems
551

Weaknesses:
. Data encryption requires a key management system, which can be complex to
manage and operate.
. Cryptographic functions may introduce an unacceptable delay in RFID systems
that require very fast read or write transactions.
. Cryptographic functions require additional power to complete, which could
impact applications that use passive tags.
. Tags that support onboard encryption currently are more costly than those that do
not. One reason for the increased cost is that onboard encryption requires add-
itional logic gates to perform the necessary computations. Most low-cost passive
tags do not have enough logic gates to perform complex encryption algorithms.*
30.2.3.2.3
Electromagnetic Shielding
Control: RF shielding encloses an area with a conducting material that limits the propaga-
tion of RF signals outside of the shielded area. Shielding can vary in size and form
depending on the application.
For example, some RFID-enabled travel documents are protected by a metallic anti-
skimming material. This material helps to prevent adversaries from reading the embedded
tag when the passport cover is closed. Shipping containers are sometimes shielded to
prevent the reading of tags during transit. Shielding is also placed in walls, partitions, or
stalls to prevent RF emissions from leaving a conﬁned area. When readers are placed in
tunnels on industrial production conveyor belts, the tunnels may be shielded to reduce
radio interference. Wrapping a tag in aluminum foil is also an effective means of shielding.
Figure 30.3 shows how shielded partitions can separate collocated readers to prevent
interference. The readers near forklift A can operate without inadvertently reading tags on
boxes on forklift B due to the shielding in the partition that separates the portals. Shielding
may be necessary when middleware is unable to correctly ﬁlter duplicate read events from
the two portals.
FIGURE 30.3
Grounded metal fencing as shielding.
Grounded metal fencing
RFID portals
A
B
* Low-cost tags currently have about 10,000 logic gates. The most efﬁcient implementations of AES require 3,400
gates, which suggests that cryptographic support on low-cost tags may be more feasible in the future. See
M. Feldhofer, J. Wolkerstorfer, and V. Rijmen, ‘‘AES implementation on a grain of sand,’’ IEEE Proceedings,
Information Security, vol. 152, issue 1, pp. 13–20, October 2005.
552
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

Applicability: Shielding is applicable for contexts in which eavesdropping or RF radiation is
a concern, and the use of temporary shielding would not stop valid transactions.
Beneﬁts: Shielding can limit the ability of eavesdroppers or unauthorized readers to collect
data from an RFID system.
Weaknesses:
. Shielding can prevent or hinder legitimate transactions. For example, shielded
containers require objects to be physically removed from the shielding material.
This prevents an implementing organization from realizing one of the key beneﬁts
of RFID technology, which is to read tags remotely without optical line of sight
and additional handling.
. It may still be possible for an adversary to place a radio inside the shielded area.
The radio could be used for malicious purposes, such as eavesdropping on RFID
transactions or causing interference.
30.2.3.2.4
Radio Frequency Selection
Control: RFID technology can communicate over various radio frequencies, including those
in the LF, HF, UHF, and microwave bands. Particular ﬁxed frequencies can be assigned to
an RFID application to avoid or reduce the effects of radio interference. Some tag tech-
nologies can perform frequency hopping within a limited frequency range, but in these
cases, the technique is used primarily to avoid collisions with other tag transactions, not
radio interference with different types of radio systems.* In some cases, the implementing
organization may need to obtain a license to use a particular desired frequency.
Ideally, an RF site survey will be performed before an RFID system is installed to
determine what frequencies are already in use. After the RFID system is installed,
site surveys can be conducted to determine if the RF characteristics of the site have changed
(e.g., new sources of interference).
Applicability: All implementations whose radio frequency is not determined by other
application requirements. Organizations that implement a closed RFID system have
more freedom to select an operating frequency because they do not have to interoperate
with other organizations. However, if tags are based on a particular air interface standard,
the range of potential frequencies will be limited to those supported by the standard.
Beneﬁts: Radio frequency selection permits the avoidance of RF interference with other
radio systems that could disrupt the RFID system or other technologies. A particular
frequency might be desirable because of radio interference on other frequency bands.
Some frequencies also have desirable propagation characteristics, such as the ability to
penetrate certain materials.
Weaknesses:
. It may be difﬁcult to identify sources of interference. For example, bug zappers
have been found to create interference in passive RFID trials.y Interference can be
caused by poorly grounded motors, noisy relays, old ﬂuorescent light ballasts, and
* For example, EPCglobal Class-1 Generation-2 915 MHz UHF systems use frequency hopping techniques. This
capability is built into tags complying with the standard. Therefore, organizations implementing RFID systems
using EPCglobal Class-1 Generation-2 compliant equipment do not have to conﬁgure this capability.
y L. Sullivan, ‘‘IBM Shares Lessons Learned From Wal-Mart RFID Deployment,’’ October 15, 2004, http:==
informationweek.com=story=showArticle.jhtml?articleID¼49901908.
Practical Steps for Securing RFID Systems
553

other devices that generate unintended RF noise in nearby environments. Each
RFID technology deployment should be tested in its intended environment prior to
production use to identify these sources of interference.
. New sources of interference can be later introduced at the site.
. When implementing an interenterprise RFID system, all organizations involved in
the system will have to agree on a tag type that supports all the frequencies that the
organizations collectively intend to use.
30.2.3.2.5
Adjustment of Transmission Characteristics Other Than Frequency
Control: Operators adjust the level of transmitted RF energy from a reader or active tag. The
use of particular antenna types and conﬁgurations can also determine the direction of
transmitted RF energy. Additionally, the duty cycle of a reader can be controlled.
Applicability: All applications for which eavesdropping, radio interference, or hazards of
electromagnetic radiation are a concern.
Beneﬁts: Reducing transmitted power can do the following:
. Reduce the likelihood that an adversary can intercept communication.
. Limit radio interference with other legitimate radios.
. Lessen hazards of electromagnetic radiation.
Weaknesses: The drawback of reducing transmission power or the duty cycle is perform-
ance degradation, especially with respect to back channel communication from a passive
tag. For instance, readers might fail to detect the presence of valid tags. Also, changes in the
physical environment or the introduction of new radio equipment can impact the power
levels required for consistently successful transactions. Consequently, the beneﬁts of power
adjustments based on a site survey can be negated by changes to the environment.
30.2.3.2.6
Temporary Deactivation of Tags
Control: The RF interface on some proprietary tags can be turned off temporarily. Tag
manufacturers have different methods of turning their tags on and off. For example, some
tags are designed so that the tag is on or off depending upon which end is inserted into a
mounting clip. Other tags have replaceable batteries that can be removed to deactivate them.
If the control is implemented, tags would be turned on inside a designated area where
the RF subsystem operates. When the tags leave that area, they would be turned off. For
example, in a supply chain application, tags may be turned off to prevent unauthorized
transactions during shipment. When the tags arrive at their destination, they would
be powered on again and managed. Conversely, tags used for in-transit visibility may be
turned on for their trip and turned off when they reach their destination.
Applicability: This control is most useful when communication between readers and a tag is
infrequent and predictable. For example, a warehouse might store items for an annual
event, such as a holiday celebration or parade. In this case, the RFID confers a beneﬁt only
for a short period each year, but could remain vulnerable to rogue transactions if left
operational for the rest of the year.
Beneﬁts: Deactivating tags temporarily:
. Prevents unauthorized tag transactions during periods of inactivity.
. Extends the battery life of active tags.
554
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

Weaknesses:
. If operators or system software fail to reactivate the tag when it is needed, then the
missing transactions resulting from the tag’s RF silence could adversely impact the
supported business process.
. If turning a tag on or off requires human intervention, then this control would
result in additional labor expense, which could be signiﬁcant for systems that
process large numbers of tags. The potential increased labor required to operate
the system could negatively affect the business case for RFID relative to other
AIDC technologies.
. Even if the activation and deactivation process is automated, it introduces a delay
that might not be acceptable for many time-sensitive applications.
30.2.3.2.7
Tag Press-to-Activate Switch
Control: The tag remains deactivated by default unless a user or operator takes a positive
action, such as holding a press-to-activate switch on the tag to turn it on. When the switch
is on, the tag is capable of RF communication, but when pressure on the switch is released,
the tag returns to its default deactivated status so that tag transactions can no longer occur.
Applicability: Primarily access control or automated payment applications in which the
holder of the tag desires or requires control over when tag transactions occur.
Beneﬁts: A press-to-activate switch provides a user with physical control over when and
where the tag can respond to a reader. Consequently, this control mitigates privacy and
business intelligence risks by providing a countermeasure to the threat of eavesdropping
and the execution of unauthorized tag commands. Eavesdropping would be limited to the
immediate vicinity of authorized readers and tracking beyond the immediate vicinity of
the authorized readers would not be possible.
This control also provides assurance that a person is knowingly in possession of the tag,
and that it has not been intentionally or inadvertently separated from that person. For
example, this control could be useful in ticketing or access control applications in which the
objective is to get an accurate count of the number of individuals present, and to prevent
spare tags in pockets or bags from interfering with the accuracy of the count.
Weaknesses:
. Requiring the user to activate the tag would require some level of instruction,
however minimal, which might add a cost or delay in the business process. For
example, the user would need to know when and for how long they would need to
activate the tag.
. Some users may consider activating a switch to be an inconvenience, which could
hinder user acceptance of the technology.
. A press-to-activate switch could distract the user from other functions that the user
is performing. For example, a press-to-activate switch is not an appropriate control
for an automated toll-payment system because the user needs to have both hands
available for driving the vehicle.
30.2.3.2.8
Tag Polling
Control: A reader periodically queries the tag to determine its continued presence and
operating status.
Practical Steps for Securing RFID Systems
555

Applicability: Process control or asset management applications in which a design objective
is periodic or near continuous monitoring. Examples include medical facilities that require
real-time inventory of certain medical supplies or systems that collect sensor data. Tag
polling also is applicable for high-value business processes that require early indications of
system failures or performance problems. This control is most effective in applications
in which those with access to the tags are trusted or when detaching the tag is not feasible
(e.g., when a tag is embedded in another item such as a poker chip).
Beneﬁts: Operators obtain timely information about system failures, item theft, or unusual
environmental conditions that enables them to proactively address problems.
Weaknesses: Tag polling:
. Reduces the battery life of active and semi-active tags.
. May not detect critical events in a timely manner if the polling frequency is
too low.
. Is a business intelligence risk if the tag polling enables an adversary to
perform trafﬁc analysis, or track or target tags that might have otherwise remained
silent.
. Could be circumvented in some cases by detaching the tag, taking the item, and
leaving the tag behind so that it continues to signal its presence to readers.
30.2.3.3
Tag Data Protection
Technical controls currently available for protecting tag data include
. Tag memory access control, which can restrict use of tag commands and protect
data stored in a tag’s memory
. Encrypting the data on tags
. The kill feature, which can prevent subsequent unauthorized use of a tag
. Tamper protection
These controls are described in more detail in the following sections.
30.2.3.3.1
Tag Memory Access Control
Control: Many tags support a password-protected lock feature which provides read or
write protection to memory. In some RFID technologies, the lock feature is permanent and
in others it is reversible. For example, the EPCglobal Class-1 Generation-2 has ﬁve areas of
memory, each of which can be protected using the lock command.* The memory is either
both read- and write-protected, or only write-protected, depending on the parameters
issued with the command. The EPCglobal Class-1 Generation-2 UHF standard also has a
permalock feature. If engaged, permalock will make the lock status (locked or unlocked)
permanent for all or part of a tag’s memory. ISO=IEC 18000-3 Mode 2 supports both read
and write protecting all areas of memory with a 48-bit memory access password. Finally,
Mode 2 of the ISO=IEC 18000-3 standard describes a lock pointer, which is a memory
address. All areas of memory with a lower address than the lock pointer are write-
protected, while those areas of memory above the pointer address are not.
* The ﬁve areas of memory are registers for the kill password, access password, EPC memory, TID memory, and
User memory. When locked, the kill password and access password become both read- and write-protected. If
they are locked, the EPC memory, TID memory, and User memory are only write-protected.
556
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

Applicability: All applications that store data on tags.
Beneﬁts: A write-protect lock command will prevent the contents of a tag’s memory from
being altered. A read-protect lock command will prevent unauthorized users from reading
or accessing the data on tags.
Weaknesses:
. The password length on many tags is too short to provide meaningful memory
access protection. Even when the technology supports longer passwords, pass-
word management is challenging.
. Locking a tag’s memory does not prevent data loss from electromagnetic interfer-
ence or physical tag destruction.
30.2.3.3.2
Encryption of Data at Rest
Control: Data stored on a tag is encrypted before it is written to the tag. The control does not
require that the tag encrypt or decrypt data. Instead, the encryption is performed by either
the reader, middleware, or other enterprise subsystem components.
Applicability: All applications that store additional data beyond an identiﬁer on the tag that
needs to be kept conﬁdential on the tag. If the encryption and decryption functions are
performed in the enterprise subsystem, then network access is required to read the content
of data stored on the tag, which makes the control unsuitable for mobile readers that do not
always have real-time network access.
Beneﬁts: Data encryption protects sensitive tag data from being read by individuals with
unauthorized access to the tags.
Weaknesses:
. Data encryption requires a key management system, which can be complex to
manage and operate.
. Sending tag data to network components for encryption or decryption is a source
of network latency, when in conjunction with the time to complete cryptographic
functions may introduce an unacceptable delay in RFID systems that require very
fast read or write transactions.
30.2.3.3.3
Kill Feature
Control: The kill feature permanently disables a tag’s functionality using a remote com-
mand. The most common implementation of the kill feature is the EPCglobal kill
command. The EPCglobal Class-1 Generation-2 kill command is password-protected
using a 32-bit password different from the access password.*
* Several alternative technical controls to the kill feature are under development, but have not yet been fully
commercialized. One approach is to disable the tag’s antenna in such a way that it can still perform transactions
over short distances (e.g., 10 cm or less) but not longer than that. The objective is to greatly reduce the probability
that an adversary could track or target someone in possession of the tag after the tag longer serves its primary
purpose, but still enable the tag to perform some additional functions, albeit with additional effort. For example,
the primary purpose of the tag might be to facilitate a point-of-sale transaction, but using the approach
described, the tag could also facilitate a receipt-less return, although the item would need to be placed closer
to the reader to complete this post-sale transaction. Another approach is to use multiple control domains as
described in the immediately preceding footnote. The objective of both of these approaches is to extend the life a
tag to support some residual functionality that would otherwise be eliminated as a result of the kill feature.
Practical Steps for Securing RFID Systems
557

Applicability: RFID applications that encounter business intelligence and privacy risks after
a tag has moved beyond its intended functional environment (e.g., after a tag moves
beyond the supply chain in which it served inventory and checkout functions). EPCglobal
tags are the only standards-based tags that support a kill feature.
Beneﬁts: Using the kill feature prevents a tag from being reused improperly. The kill feature
was designed and implemented in EPCglobal tags primarily to protect consumer privacy.
It also protects improper access to tag data used in business processes. For example,
discarded tags that have not been disabled may be read by adversaries to gain access to
data, such as which products an organization or individual is purchasing or using.
Weaknesses:
. The existence of a kill feature represents a signiﬁcant business process threat to an
RFID system. If an adversary who learns the kill password improperly disables
tags that should remain in operation, the supported application will not function
properly because it will not be able to perform transactions on the disabled tags.
This risk is particularly salient for organizations that assign the same password to
multiple tags because doing so could enable an adversary to disable large numbers
of tags with a single compromised password.
. Once killed, a tag cannot be used for any further application involving the asset
(e.g., recalls, receipt-less product returns).
. If an organization assigns a weak (e.g., short or easily guessed) password for the
kill command, unauthorized parties can kill the tag at will.* Moreover, the longer a
tag maintains the same password, the more likely it is that the password will be
compromised.
. Data stored on the tag is still present in the tag’s memory after it is killed (although
it can no longer be accessed wirelessly), and, therefore, still may be accessible to
someone with physical access to the tag.y
. Although the kill command was added to tags as a potential solution for privacy
concerns, consumers cannot easily detect whether a tag has been deactivated.z
Moreover, typical consumers cannot easily kill tags on their own because this
action requires a reader and knowledge of the kill password.
30.2.3.3.4
Tamper Resistance
Control: Certain RFID tags have tamper resistant or tamper-evident features that help
prevent an adversary from altering the tags or removing them from the objects to which
they are attached. One simple type of tamper resistance is the use of a frangible, or easily
broken, antenna; if a tag of this type is removed, the electric connection with the antenna is
severed, rendering the tag inoperable. Other, more complex types of RFID systems monitor
the integrity of objects associated with the tags to ensure that the objects have not been
compromised, altered, or subjected to extreme conditions.
* An EPCglobal Class-1 Generation-2 tag cannot be killed if it has a null password (i.e., one whose bits are all
zeros). See EPCglobal, ‘‘EPC Radio-Frequency Identity Protocols Class-1 Generation-2 UHF RFID Protocol for
Communications at 860–960 MHz Version 1.0.9,’’ January 2005, p. 58.
y Obtaining data from the tag in this circumstance would require an attacker to have specialized equipment and
expertise.
z This may open a door for future consumer products to test for the presence of passive RFID tags and probe their
characteristics. It is hypothesized that cellular phones may be able to provide this service for EPC passive tags
since cellular phones already operate in the 860–960 MHz band.
558
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

Applicability: Applications in which tags are frequently outside of the direct control of the
implementing organization and, therefore, vulnerable to tampering. Tamper resistance and
tamper-evident features are currently only available on specialty RFID tags that are
designed for tamper resistance to support speciﬁc buyer requirements.
Beneﬁts: This control helps to prevent adversaries from breaking the association between a
tag and its corresponding object. The more complex tamper-resistant=tamper-evident tags
provide health and status monitoring of the attached objects to ensure that they have not
been opened, manipulated, damaged, or subjected to extreme temperature, humidity,
or shock.
Weaknesses: Sophisticated adversaries may be able to defeat the tamper resistance mech-
anisms. This is dependent upon the implementation of the tamper resistance feature. For
example, a sophisticated adversary may be able to repair a frangible antenna. In addition,
tamper-resistance=tamper-evidence technologies do not prevent the theft or destruction of
the tag or its associated items.
30.3
Summary
Organizations should use a combination of management, operational, and technical con-
trols to mitigate the business risks of implementing RFID systems. Table 30.1 maps the
presented controls to the categories of risks that they mitigate. Because each RFID imple-
mentation is highly customized and each organization’s requirements are different, the
security controls discussed in this section are not all applicable or effective for all
RFID applications. Organizations need to assess the risks their RFID implementations
face and choose the appropriate controls, taking into account factors such as regulatory
TABLE 30.1
RFID Controls Summary
Risk Mitigated by Control
Externality Risk
Control
Business
Process
Risk
Business
Intelligence
Risk
Privacy
Risk
Hazards of
Electromagnetic
Radiation
Computer
Network
Attacks
Management
RFID usage policy
X
X
X
X
X
IT security policies
X
X
X
X
Agreements with external
organizations
X
X
X
X
Minimizing data stored on tags
X
X
X
Operational
Physical access control
X
X
X
X
X
Appropriate placement of tags
and readers
X
X
X
Secure disposal of tags
X
X
X
Operator and administrator training
X
X
X
X
X
Information labels=notice
X
X
X
X
Separation of duties
X
X
Nonrevealing identiﬁer formats
X
X
Fallback identiﬁcation systems
X
(continued)
Practical Steps for Securing RFID Systems
559

requirements, the magnitude of threats, and cost and performance implications of the
controls. For example, a remote warehouse may have little need to protect against eaves-
dropping, but it may require redundant processes in case of system failure. Traditional
security controls are often preferable to RFID-speciﬁc controls. For example, if RFID data
can be stored in an enterprise database rather than on tags, then physical and network
security controls for the database server probably is more practical than using tags with
cryptographic capabilities.
TABLE 30.1 (continued)
RFID Controls Summary
Risk Mitigated by Control
Externality Risk
Control
Business
Process
Risk
Business
Intelligence
Risk
Privacy
Risk
Hazards of
Electromagnetic
Radiation
Computer
Network
Attacks
Technical
Password authentication
X
X
X
X
HMAC
X
X
X
X
Digital signatures
X
X
Cover-coding
X
X
X
Encryption of data in transit
X
X
Electromagnetic shielding
X
X
X
Radio frequency selection
X
X
Adjustment of transmission
characteristics
X
X
X
Temporary deactivation of tags
X
X
X
Tag press-to-activate switch
X
X
Tag polling
X
Tag access controls
X
X
X
X
Encryption of data at rest
X
X
X
Kill feature
X
X
Tamper resistance
X
X
560
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

Appendix
TABLE A.1
RFID Security Checklist: Initiation Phase
No.
Security Practice
Rationale=Discussion
Affected
Components
Recommended or
Should Consider
Checklist
Status
1
Perform a risk
assessment to
understand RFID
threats, the likelihood
that those threats will
be realized, and the
potential impact of
realized threats on
the value of the
organization’s
assets.a
All risks should be considered, including the risk of RFID systems to other enterprise
information systems and the risk that the existence of RFID will enable adversaries to
collect information about an organization’s activities that could adversely impact its
ability to perform its mission. For supply chain applications, the risk assessment
should consider threats that occur when the RFID tags are located outside the
organization’s control, such as when tagged items are in transit.
The risk assessment is an important input to the development of the RFID usage policy
because it identiﬁes which RFID activities pose an acceptable risk to the
organization’s information resources and which do not. In particular, it can help
determine which type of RFID technology may be appropriate for the desired
application (e.g., active versus passive tags).
All
Recommended
The risks assessment should also determine whether the RFID system will collect, store,
process or share PII, or enable PII to be inferred through direct or indirect means.
A complete privacy impact assessment should be conducted for any RFID systems
involving PII.
2
Establish an RFID
usage policy that
speciﬁes what assets
should be tagged,
who is authorized to
use RFID technology,
and for what
business purposes
this authorization
applies.
An RFID usage policy is the foundation on which subsequent security controls are
based. The policy should cover all components of the RFID system, including tags,
readers, and support systems (e.g., middleware and analytic systems). The policy
should distinguish between the levels of access provided to those that use the system,
those that administer it, and those that need access to its data, including external
business partners. For instance, logistics administrators may be granted the ability to
modify a reader’s conﬁguration (duty cycle, power output, network settings, RF
frequency settings, Transmission Control Protocol [TCP] ports, etc.) while operations
personnel may only be able to scan tags. External parties should almost never get
access to an organization’s readers, but they might need read access to certain
database elements. The policy should also address the collection and handling of
sensor data that might be transmitted over the RFID system.
All
Recommended
(continued)
Appendix
561

TABLE A.1 (continued)
RFID Security Checklist: Initiation Phase
No.
Security Practice
Rationale=Discussion
Affected
Components
Recommended or
Should Consider
Checklist
Status
The RFID usage policy should also integrate privacy policies and practices. All
statements made in privacy compliance documentation should be reﬂected in and
supported by the RFID usage policy.
3
Establish an RFID
privacy policy.
Federal government agencies are required to create a privacy impact assessment (PIA) if
the RFID system will store or manage personal information. While privacy policy is
not within the scope of this publication, the technical security controls that result from
the policy are within the scope of the publication. For example, implementation of the
privacy policy might require the use of the kill command or an alternative means to
disable tags. Requirements related to data sharing limitations may need to be
supported by certain authentication and access control methods. A privacy policy
should be in place before RFID system architects determine the appropriate security
controls.
All
Recommended
4
Establish
HERF=HERO=HERP
policies if applicable.
If the risk assessment identiﬁes risks related to human health, fuel, ordnance, or other
sensitive materials (e.g., pharmaceuticals) that are not fully mitigated by the RFID
usage policy, then the organization should require additional controls to prevent the
associated hazard from being realized. A separate policy is needed for each hazard
type (HERF=HERO=HERP=other sensitive materials) because each one has distinct
issues. Organizations facing these hazards should also consult safety and regulatory
experts in this area to ensure their approaches are valid and comply with legally-
mandated FCC exposure limits.b
RF subsystem
Recommended
562
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

5
Enhance the
organization’s
information security
policy to account for
the presence of RFID
systems.
The introduction of RFID technology represents a new challenge to the security of the
enterprise network that should be mitigated by policy and associated technical,
operational, and management controls. Elements of the network security policy that
might require revision include (a) perimeter security (i.e., ﬁrewalls and extranets), (b)
database security, (c) application security, and (d) wireless connections (i.e., between
readers and the enterprise network). Typically a ﬁrewall separates readers from the
enterprise network that hosts RFID database and application servers. Policies related to
database and application security should cover authentication, access control, and
development practices to reduce the likelihood of malicious code insertion, exploitation
ofbufferoverﬂowvulnerabilities,andotherattacks.Inaddition,ifreadersareconnected
to the enterprise infrastructure via a wireless link, then the policy should require mutual
authentication between the reader and its network access point. It should also provide
for data conﬁdentiality and integrity services for wireless trafﬁc, if needed.
All
Recommended
6
Establish an RFID
security and privacy
training program for
operators of the RFID
system.
Many RFID risks are best mitigated when the personnel operating the system are aware
of the risks and the associated countermeasures. The training program should cover
the RFID usage policy and teach administrators and operators how to identify and
report violations of the policy. If the system involves PII, operator training should
explain how individuals and PII should be handled to sustain privacy protections.
NIST Special Publication 800–50, Building an Information Technology Security Awareness
and Training Program, contains detailed guidelines on designing, developing,
implementing, and monitoring an IT security awareness and training program.c
All
Should consider
a For more information on performing risk assessments, see G. Stoneburner, A. Goguen, and A. Feringa, Risk Management Guide for Information Technology Systems. NIST Special
Publication 800–30, July 2002.
b R. Cleveland Jr. and J. Ulcek, Questions and Answers about Biological Effects and Potential Hazards of Radiofrequency Electromagnetic Fields. Federal Communications Commission
Ofﬁce of Engineering and Technology (OET), Washington, D.C., OET Bulletin 56, Fourth Edition, August 1999, pp. 11–16.
c M. Wilson and J. Hash, Building an Information Technology Security Awareness and Training Program. NIST Special Publication 800–50, October 2003.
Appendix
563

TABLE A.2
RFID Security Checklist: Planning and Design Phase
Planning and Design Phase
No.
Security Practice
Rationale=Discussion
Affected
Components
Recommended or
Should Consider
Checklist
Status
7
Identify the RFID
standards with which
the RFID system will
comply.
The selected RFID standards in effect determine the types of tags that will be
deployed and the operating frequencies on which RF subsystem communication
will occur. The standards also specify the available technical security mechanisms.
For instance, some tags support passwords while others do not. An organization
may also choose a standard to support a particular operating frequency to avoid
unwanted RF interference, improve performance, and reduce technical problems.
The choice of operating frequency is often closely associated with relevant
regulations and the application area (e.g., healthcare, supply chain, security access
control, and animal tracking).
RF subsystem
Recommended
8
Include security and
privacy considerations in
RFID system investment
and budget requests.
Including security and privacy planning in funding plans ensures that adequate
resources are available for implementation of appropriate controls. Including these
considerations in budget planning and analysis also increases the likelihood that
cost-effective approaches will be selected to mitigate risk. Budget requests should
also demonstrate that plans for the RFID system are consistent with the
information technology architecture of the implementing organization.
All
Recommended
9
Conduct a site survey to
determine the proper
location of readers and
other devices given a
desired coverage area.
The estimated usable range of readers and tags should not extend beyond the
physical boundaries of the facility whenever possible. The survey should note the
location of metal or reﬂective objects and RF absorbing materials such as water
that have the potential to adversely affect the operation of the RFID system. The
site survey should also identify potential radio interference between the RFID
system and other RF sources at the site or in neighboring facilities.
RF subsystem
Recommended
10
Determine approach to RF
emissions control.
The approach should be based on the risk assessment and site survey. In many cases,
physical security may offer the best mechanism to protect against unauthorized
use of RFID technology, including attacks involving reader spooﬁng and jamming,
modiﬁcation of tag data, and eavesdropping. When this is not possible,
countermeasures such as shielding and adjusting the power level of the reader
may be employed. The selected approach might involve the location of readers
and tagged assets, the placement of blocker devices, the power levels at which RF
components operate, and the potential need for additional perimeter security (e.g.,
fences around warehouses).
RF subsystem
Recommended
11
Identify an approach to
securing network
management trafﬁc,
using dedicated
If network management trafﬁc is left unprotected, adversaries might be able to
breach the RFID system, enabling a number of subsequent attacks, including those
that could disable the system or compromise conﬁdential data. The approach to
securing network management trafﬁc depends largely on the technical
Enterprise
subsystem
and readers
Recommended
564
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

networks and encryption
when feasible.
architecture. If network management occurs over Web interfaces, then Secure
Sockets Layer (SSL) or Transport Layer Security (TLS) should be employed. In
some cases, devices such as readers will be managed using SNMP. In these cases,
SNMP version 3 is the preferred protocol, and community strings should be
changed from defaults to complex character strings (i.e., mix of upper and lower
case, both alphabetic and numeric characters).
12
Design a network ﬁrewall
between the RF
subsystem and the
enterprise network.a
A ﬁrewall can enforce a security policy on the information ﬂow between the RF
subsystem and any attached network, allowing only authorized protocols and
services to traverse this boundary, such as those needed for readers to
communicate with middleware servers and for management consoles to monitor
and conﬁgure readers. This conﬁguration limits the ability of an adversary that
compromises RFID equipment to exploit vulnerabilities on non-RFID systems that
also reside on the network. Appropriate ﬁrewall placement depends on the
network architecture. For example, if middleware is integrated into the switches to
which the readers connect, the ﬁrewall may be included in the switch or may
reside between the middleware and the enterprise network. On the other hand, if
middleware servers are located inside an enterprise network (e.g., at a remote data
center), then the ﬁrewall may reside between the readers and the middleware.
Enterprise
subsystem
Should consider
13
Develop RFID audit
processes and
procedures that identify
the types of security
relevant events that
should be captured, and
determine how audit
records will be securely
stored for subsequent
analysis.
Audit records are necessary for forensic analysis of security and privacy incidents
and also support real-time intrusion detection capabilities in many cases. The
audit procedures should be reviewed for privacy protection considerations to
determine if audit records contain or could be used to create PII. Ideally, audit
data should be forwarded to a dedicated audit server that can preserve the
integrity of event logs even when other RFID system components have been
compromised. To facilitate implementation and compliance, existing audit
processes and procedures for other enterprise information systems should be
leveraged whenever appropriate. Events to be captured should include, at a
minimum, unsuccessful authentication attempts.
Enterprise
subsystem
and readers
Recommended
14
Develop a password
management system for
tags that support
password-protected
features.
The password management system should specify how passwords are generated,
assigned, stored, shared, and discarded. Passwords should be randomly
generated. When passwords are written to tags using over-the-air mechanisms,
additional care should be taken to avoid eavesdropping. When passwords are
stored in enterprise databases, the databases have authentication and access
control mechanisms to prevent unauthorized reading of the passwords. MOUs
and MOAs with external organizations should cover roles and responsibilities
related to the handling of passwords.
Tags
Recommended
15
Determine approach to tag
memory protection, if
applicable.
Important considerations include what data elements require read or write
protection and to whether write protection for certain elements must be
permanent. In some applications, the tag identiﬁer may be modiﬁable while in
others it must be permanently ﬁxed.
Tags
Recommended
a For more information on network ﬁrewalls, see J. Wack, K. Cutler, and J. Pole, Guidelines on Firewalls and Firewall Policy. NIST Special Publication 800–41, January 2002.
Appendix
565

TABLE A.3
RFID Security Checklist: Procurement Phase
No.
Security Practice
Rationale=Discussion
Affected
Components
Recommended or
Should Consider
Checklist
Status
16
Procure products that use FIPS-
validated cryptographic modules.a
Federal agencies are required to use FIPS-validated cryptographic
modules. Cryptographic modules that are not FIPS-validated
cannot be assured of providing the level of cryptographic
protection intended. Identify all expected uses of cryptography,
including those that will be used to secure data trafﬁc in the
enterprise subsystem. Signiﬁcant resource constraints on tags
preclude the use of cryptography for many applications, but if an
organization decides that the additional expense of cryptography
is required to protect sensitive information, then the corresponding
cryptographic modules must be FIPS-validated.
All
Recommended
17
Procure products that are functionally
capable of supporting the
organization’s security and privacy
policy.
If a product that does not support the security and privacy policy is
deployed, noncompliance is guaranteed. For example, if the RFID
usage policy requires data conﬁdentiality between the reader and
the enterprise subsystem, then the readers need to support
appropriate cryptographic services on their enterprise interface. In
general, tags do not have cryptographic data functionality, but
data encrypted elsewhere can be stored on a tag if it has sufﬁcient
capacity, which typically is the case for active tags only. If a
requirement exists to read or write protect certain data elements on
a tag, then the organization should procure tags that support the
desired memory access protections.
All
Recommended
566
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

18
Procure readers, middleware, and
analytic systems that log security
relevant events and forward them to
a remote audit server.
Audit technology helps ensure that the organization can detect
unauthorized behavior and take actions to prevent or limit the
extent of a security breach. If software components do not support
audit event forwarding, then the organization should ensure that
the supporting operating systems do so. At a minimum, the events
should contain the tag ID, reader ID, and the reader timestamp for
security relevant events.
Readers and
enterprise
subsystem
Recommended
19
Procure readers and server platforms
that support the selected approach to
securing network management
trafﬁc.
The network management architecture only can be implemented if
the selected products support it. Potential protocols include SNMP
version 3 or the encapsulation of management trafﬁc within
SSL=TLS or Internet Protocol Security (IPsec) tunnels.
Readers and
enterprise
subsystem
Recommended
20
Procure readers and server platforms
that support Network Time Protocol
(NTP).
NTP allows distributed devices to synchronize timestamps, which is
critical to effective log analysis because it allows audit personnel to
establish accurate event sequences across multiple devices. Many
applications also need to obtain very accurate measurements of the
time elapsed between transactions.
Readers and
enterprise
subsystem
Recommended
21
Procure an auditing tool to automate
the review of RFID audit data.
Audit tools often are more effective than humans at distilling
relevant information from multiple sources. In large enterprise
RFID deployments, reviewing the amount of data generated could
overwhelm technical support staff if they do not have appropriate
tools to assist them with this task.
Enterprise
subsystem
Should consider
22
Procure readers that can be upgraded
easily in software or ﬁrmware.
This capability enables the readers to receive security patches and
enhancements released after product shipment.
Readers
Recommended
a The following reference provides a list of FIPS-validated cryptographic modules: National Institute of Standards and Technology, Cryptographic Standards and Validation
Programs at NIST, December 19, 2006. Available at http:==csrc.nist.gov=cryptval=.
Appendix
567

TABLE A.4
RFID Security Checklist: Implementation Phase
Implementation Phase
No.
Security Practice
Rationale=Discussion
Affected
Components
Recommended or
Should Consider
Checklist
Status
23
Harden all platforms supporting
RFID components (e.g.,
middleware, analytic systems, and
database servers).
Organizations should apply secure operating system
and database conﬁgurations to all relevant hosts.
See other NIST guidelines for recommended
conﬁguration information.a
Enterprise
subsystem
Recommended
24
Ensure that readers that support user
authentication have strong, unique
administrative passwords.
To protect against dictionary attacks, administrator
passwords on readers should not be easy
to guess.
Readers
Recommended
25
Secure wireless interfaces on readers.
If the reader is mobile, it likely will have a second wireless
interface to connect to the enterprise subsystem. In this case,
the second interface should have a secure conﬁguration.b
Readers
Recommended
26
Assign unique passwords to tags.
When tags support passwords, organizations should not use a
common password for multiple tags. Otherwise, a
compromised password on one tag could have much wider
consequences. Managing unique passwords requires the
implementing organization to maintain a password
database and support remote queries of the database, which
might not be feasible in all environments.
Tags
Should consider
27
Lock tag memory.
The organization should lock tag memory to meet business
and security requirements as determined in the planning
and design phase.
Tags
Recommended
568
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

28
Disable all insecure and unused
management protocols on readers
and enterprise subsystem
components. Conﬁgure remaining
management protocols for least
privilege.
Disabling all insecure and nonessential management
protocols eliminates potential methods that an adversary
can use when attempting to compromise a host. Examples
of insecure management protocols include SNMP version 1
and SNMP version 2. If SNMP version 3 is used, conﬁgure it
for least privilege (i.e., read only) unless write access is
required (e.g., to change conﬁguration settings as part of an
automated incident response procedure).
All
Recommended
29
Activate logging and direct log
entries to a remote audit server.
Logs enable security and support staff to identify potential
security issues and respond accordingly. Using a remote
central logging server facilitates reviews of logs across the
enterprise and ensures the integrity of log data when RFID
components are compromised.
Readers and
enterprise
subsystem
Should consider
30
If applicable, initiate a
HERF=HERO=HERP compliance
program to include operator
training, posting of notices, and
application of labels to sensitive
materials.
If personnel are reminded of risks to their safety, they are
more likely to engage in behavior that will prevent the
realization of those risks. The compliance program should
comply with Occupational Health and Safety
Administration (OSHA) regulations regarding workplace
safety.c Notices should appear in the same or comparable
locations as other OSHA notices.
RF subsystem
Recommended
a The NIST Security Conﬁguration Checklists Program for IT Products contains a repository of checklists for securing various operating systems and applications. Additional
information may be obtained at http:==checklists.nist.gov=.
b For more information on how to secure common wireless protocols, see T. Karygiannis and L. Owens, Wireless Network Security: 802.11, Bluetooth and Handheld Devices. NIST
Special Publication 800–48, November 2002 and S. Frankel, B. Eydt, L. Owens, and K. Scarfone, Establishing Wireless Robust Security Networks: A Guide to IEEE 802.11I. NIST
Special Publication 800–97, February 2007.
c 29 CFR § 1910.97. Nonionizing radiation.
Appendix
569

TABLE A.5
RFID Security Checklist: Operations=Maintenance Phase
No.
Security Practice
Rationale=Discussion
Affected
Components
Recommended or
Should Consider
Checklist
Status
31
Test and deploy software patches and
upgrades on a regular basis.a
Newly discovered security vulnerabilities of vendor products should
be patched to prevent inadvertent and malicious exploits. Patches
should also be tested before implementation to ensure that they
work properly.
All
Recommended
32
Review audit logs frequently.
Frequent reviews of audit logs allow security and support personnel to
identify security issues and take corrective or preventative measures
quickly. All components of the RFID system should generate event
logs. Automated logging tools can assist with log review and send
real-time alerts in response to critical events, such as repeated failed
authentication attempts during a short time period. RFID
middleware products often provide advanced audit capabilities,
including ‘‘dashboards’’ that allow administrators to monitor the
activities of readers in real time.b
All
Recommended
33
Perform comprehensive RFID
security assessments at regular
and=or random intervals.
Security assessments, or audits, are an essential tool for checking the
security posture of an RFID system and identifying corrective
actions necessary to maintain acceptable levels of security. The
assessments should include monitoring of the RF spectrum to
determine potential sources of RF interference and to identify
ongoing surveillance or attacks. The assessment should also verify
conﬁguration settings on all RFID components.
All
Recommended
34
Designate an individual or group to
track RFID product vulnerabilities
and wireless security trends.
Assigning responsibility to an individual for tracking wireless security
issues helps ensure continued secure implementation of the
organization’s RFID systems.
All
Should consider
a For more information on patching, see P. Mell, T. Bergeron, and D. Henning, Creating a Patch and Vulnerability Management Program. NIST Special Publication 800–40, Version
2.0, November 2005.
b For additional information on log management, see K. Kent and M. Souppaya, Guide to Computer Security Log Management. NIST Special Publication 800–92, September 2006.
570
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

TABLE A.6
RFID Security Checklist: Disposition Phase
No.
Security Practice
Rationale=Discussion
Affected
Components
Recommended or
Should Consider
Checklist
Status
35
When disposing of
tags, disable or
destroy them.
The appropriate disposal or destruction mechanism depends on the type of tag, the level of
assurance required, and the cost of the destruction. When tags contain memory, this
memory should be rendered inaccessible. Options include the kill command and physical
destruction. Many tags can be rendered inoperable by cutting them with a box knife,
scissors, or other sharp object. The antenna on some tags can be separated from their
transmitters by tearing them by hand, although accessing the tag data is still possible
through physical analysis. Even if a tag contains nothing but an identiﬁer, destruction may
be advisable if there is the potential for an adversary with knowledge of the tag encoding
protocol to correlate the identiﬁer with other information, such as tag ownership. This attack
is particularly salient for EPCglobal tags, because of the potential to discern the identity of
the EPC Manager from the pointers returned by the Root ONS. In many cases, the tag
identiﬁer also reveals the serial number of the asset. On the other hand, many organizations
may determine that that this risk is acceptable, especially if database records corresponding
to a particular identiﬁer are erased or disabled when the tag is no longer needed.
Tags
Should consider
36
When disposing
of an RFID
component,
ensure that its
audit records
are retained or
destroyed as
needed to meet
legal or other
requirements.
Information contained in the audit records may be needed even after an RFID component is
discarded (e.g., for an investigation of a subsequently discovered security breach).
Organizations should identify the legal requirements for data retention that apply to their
operations.a When log events are forwarded to a central audit server, regular backup of the
server facilitates the retention of records. When a log server does not exist, the disposal
process may include capturing the existing log data and storing it on alternative media, such
as CD-ROM or tape. On the other hand, retention of audit records may raise a privacy
concern in some applications. For example, records may reveal sensitive personal
information or associate a person with particular items or transactions in a manner that
violates privacy laws or policy. In these cases, the requirement may be to destroy the records
after a certain period of time or after they are no longer needed.
All
Recommended
37
Recycle retired
tags.
In some cases, recycling may involve putting the tags back into service. This type of recycling
is not recommended when tag memory contains conﬁdential data, but may be cost effective
otherwise. Recycling may also involve using discarded tag material for other purposes in a
similar manner to recycling programs for household plastics and metals. Both forms of
recycling address a concern about the environmental impact of large scale consumer and
industrial uses of tags.
Tags
Should consider
a For an example of a requirements document, see National Archives and Records Administration, General Records Schedule 24, Information Technology Operations and
Management Records, April 2003. Available at http:==www.archives.gov=records-mgmt=ardor=grs24.html.
Appendix
571


31
Lightweight Cryptography for Low Cost RFID:
A New Direction in Cryptography
Damith C. Ranasinghe, Raja Ghosal, Alﬁo Grasso, and Peter H. Cole
CONTENTS
31.1
Introduction...................................................................................................................... 574
31.2
Contemporary Ideas of Security.................................................................................... 574
31.2.1 Quantifying Security .......................................................................................... 575
31.3
New Direction in Cryptography ................................................................................... 576
31.4
Foundations of Lightweight Concepts ......................................................................... 577
31.4.1 Desired Level of Security................................................................................... 577
31.4.2 Computational Model ........................................................................................ 577
31.4.2.1 Usefulness of Complexity Theory..................................................... 578
31.4.3 Principles of Design............................................................................................ 579
31.5
Lightweight Primitives.................................................................................................... 580
31.5.1 Developments in the Area of Lightweight Primitives .................................. 580
31.5.1.1 Ultra Wide Band Modulation............................................................ 580
31.5.1.2 Physically Uncloneable Functions .................................................... 580
31.5.1.3 Minimalist Cryptography .................................................................. 580
31.6
Lightweight Cryptographic Protocols .......................................................................... 581
31.6.1 Developments in the Area of Lightweight Protocols .................................... 581
31.6.1.1 Hopper and Blum Protocols for RFID ............................................. 581
31.6.1.2 Noisy Tag Protocols............................................................................ 581
31.6.1.3 One-Time Codes.................................................................................. 582
31.7
Lightweight Hardware ................................................................................................... 582
31.7.1 Developments in the Area of Lightweight Hardware .................................. 583
31.7.1.1 Elliptic Curve Cryptography............................................................. 583
31.7.1.2 Block Ciphers....................................................................................... 583
31.7.1.3 Symmetric Key Ciphers...................................................................... 583
31.8
Future Directions ............................................................................................................. 584
31.8.1 Multivariate Polynomials and Hidden Field Equations
for Lightweight Systems.................................................................................... 584
31.8.2 Can We Look to Quantum and Quasar Cryptography? .............................. 584
31.8.3 Learning from the Smart Card Industry ......................................................... 584
31.8.4 Feed Back Shift Registers and XOR Cryptography....................................... 585
31.8.5 How Can We Advance the Study of Lightweight Protocols? ..................... 585
31.9
Conclusion ........................................................................................................................ 586
References.................................................................................................................................... 586
573

31.1
Introduction
The primary functionality of a modern radio frequency identiﬁcation (RFID) system is
that of identifying objects through a uniquely formatted number kept on each label (also
called a tag) as a data ﬁeld identiﬁer with the associated data being stored in a backend
database system. The unique object identiﬁer must have a global scope that is capable of
identifying all objects uniquely and acting as a pointer to information stored about the
object somewhere over a network.
Here we deﬁne the term ‘‘networked low cost RFID systems’’ as RFID systems based on
passive RFID technology using microelectronic transponders. In such a system the readers
(also called interrogators) are connected to a backend network. Conceptually, the backend
network can be described as an intelligent ubiquitous infrastructure that automatically and
seamlessly links physical objects to the global Internet. The network of physical objects is
achieved by integrating a tag, or an RFID label, into each object. The system network
objects seamlessly by communicating with these labels using a network of readers
(Ranasinghe et al., 2005).
The safe delivery of pharmaceuticals and health care as well as homeland security are all
areas that can signiﬁcantly beneﬁt from adopting RFID technology. Although the impact of
RFID technology on these applications is immense, it is not possible to engage the tech-
nology because of its many shortcomings, especially the lack of methods and infrastructure
for providing electronic information security (e-security) to networked low cost RFID
technology. Although shortcomings of low cost RFID systems have been detailed in
publications elsewhere (Juels, 2006; Ranasinghe and Cole, 2006a,b), solutions have not
been forthcoming.
Networked RFID systems are now a pervasive form of computing. In the context of
security and privacy, the most threatening (to privacy) and vulnerable (to insecurity) are
the low cost RFID systems. Modern cryptographic mechanisms are unsuitable for use in
securing RFID systems because of the lack of resources available on RFID microelectronic
transponders, and a novel avenue in cryptography with new thinking is required.
A new view on the development of cryptography to address the security needs of
networked resource constrained devices, relevant developments in the area of crypto-
graphy, and future avenues of promising research are presented in this chapter.
31.2
Contemporary Ideas of Security
The most commonly used encryption techniques in large information technology system
deployments are cryptographic methods based on the following problems considered to be
in a class of mathematically hard problems. A mathematical problem is said to be hard if
the time it takes to solve the problem becomes immense compared with the increase in
the size of the inputs to the problem. There are many other classes of problems, as
discussed later in this Chapter, some of which are not hard, and hence not of interest to
cryptography.
. Discrete-Logarithm Problem (examples of cryptographic systems are Difﬁe-
Hellman, El-Gamal, Massey-Omura systems, and relatively new Elliptic Curve
Cryptosystems)
. Integer Factorization Problem (the most popular example of a cryptosystem based
on the latter problem is the RSA cryptosystem)
574
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

We can deﬁne the term well functioned secure communication system as one in which
there are, at each end of the communication link, signiﬁcant computing resources, such as
provided by a microprocessor, with power supplied for operation for an indeﬁnitely long
period. In all communication systems a great variety of attacks on security are possible.
Security against such attacks is normally provided by exploiting the computing resources
of a well functioned secure communication system. In RFID labels it is impractical to
provide such computing resources.
Cryptosystems such as RSA, Difﬁe-Hellman, and ElGamal have withstood tests of time,
and proven to be secure, using sufﬁciently large keys, typically at least 1024 bits (Schneier,
1994), preferably 2048, 4096, or 8192 bits. The larger the key the higher is the computation
load on the device, due to the correspondingly larger size of the prime p, used in typical
arithmetic operations such as mp mod n. However, affordability of computing power has
evolved to support these cryptosystems in modern communication systems.
31.2.1
Quantifying Security
Shannon, in his information-theoretic approach, asked the following questions:
. Are there systems that withstand any attack (even those with unlimited computing
power)?
. How much ciphertext does the opponent need before they can uniquely solve for
the plaintext?
The answers to these questions have formulated modern ideas of deﬁning the level of
security provided by a cryptographic mechanism.
Perfectly secure (unconditional security): Shannon observed, that if plaintext X, and cipher-
text Y, are independent by information-theoretic measurements I, and uncertainty H, then a
perfectly secure or unconditionally secure system is one where I(X; Y) ¼ 0 (Rueppel, 1989).
Perfect security is the nonplus-ultra security model. It assumes unrestricted computa-
tional power of the adversary. Therefore, for a cryptographic primitive to fall into this
category there must not be an algorithm for breaking it, irrespective of the computational
power available. An example of a simple primitive offering unconditional security is the
one-time pad (Menezes et al., 1997). To generate the ciphertext a plaintext is XORed with a
unique secret key of the same length as the plaintext. Because of the possible large key sizes
required in modern communication systems for the transmitting large quantities of data,
one-time pads are impractical for conventional message encryption.
Ideally secure: Shannon further observed, when I(X; Y) < 0 there is some residual uncer-
tainty. Such systems are ideally secure. Cryptanalysts can sharpen probability distribu-
tions, but cannot ﬁnd a unique X (plaintext) such that I(X; Y) ¼ H(X) (Ruppel, 1989).
Complexity theoretic approach refers to quantitative analysis of the difﬁculty of algo-
rithms. In this classiﬁcation scheme we consider a hierarchy of problem classes with
varying degrees of difﬁculty. These classes and their potential applications to RFID are
discussed in Section 31.4.2.1. The following is an application of complexity theory, in
modern cryptography, to quantifying security.
Computationally secure (practically secure): A system is computationally secure if the best
known algorithm for defeating the system requires at least unrealistic number of opera-
tions or unreasonably large memory size. The number of operations in the deﬁnition is
chosen to be sufﬁciently high. Modern cryptographic primitives typically offer practical
security. However, as opposed to unconditional security, there are relative bounds on the
opponent. These bounds are described in terms of computing power and available mem-
ory for some hypothetical but realistic opponent.
Lightweight Cryptography for Low Cost RFID: A New Direction in Cryptography
575

Provably secure: A cryptosystem can be proved to be secure if it is possible to show that the
complexity of a successful attack on a cryptosystem is equivalent to solving a well known,
supposedly hard, mathematical problem such as the integer factorization problem. Typical
cryptographic primitives based on public keys fall into this category (Menezes et al., 1997).
Since the adoption of probably secure or ideally secure cryptosystems inevitably requires
computing resources beyond that of low cost RFID tags the prudent approach in RFID is to
achieve practical security with a realistic adversary envisioned, with the capabilities and
the potential application of the technology in mind.
31.3
New Direction in Cryptography
With the growth of inexpensive computing resources, modern cryptography has devel-
oped in a direction involving computationally intensive calculations. Most modern crypto-
systems are based on some mathematically hard problem and the level of security
provided by the system depends on the difﬁculty of the mathematical problem.
In the provision of security in RFID systems, the resources within the tags themselves are
particularly constrained. The set of currently available security primitives is unsuitable for
RFID microelectronic transponders for the reasons given below.
. Costly to be implemented on a cost constrained RFID Integrated Circuit (IC) with a
price tag, in large volumes, of around 8 US cents (Ranasinghe and Cole, 2006a).
. Relative power consumption by the cryptographic hardware modules is too high
for RFID labels that are passive (not self-powered).
. Unsuitable for RFID transponders with limited logic functionality (limited to a
simple ﬁnite state machine) and limited memory (limited to a few kilobits).
Large key sizes and the resulting ciphertext sizes are generally unsuitable for narrow band
communication systems where transmission of signiﬁcant amount of data directly affects
the performance of the system.
Most modern methods cannot be applied directly to lightweight cryptography because
modern security concepts have evolved in a direction of utilizing increasing key sizes
(typically 1024 bits in RSA) supported by increasing computing power to achieve adequate
levels of computational security. The algorithm adopted for low cost RFID systems must
match the processing capabilities of the devices. Thus there is scope for the design of
lightweight algorithms. In the lightweight context, the designer has to analyze the com-
putational complexity of the algorithm, with respect to the demands on the hardware and
other limitations of the device. There is both a direction, and a constraining challenge in
these limitations that guide the development of cryptography.
The emerging ﬁeld of lightweight cryptography is a fusion of separate disciplines in
cryptography, information technology, radio frequency engineering, and microelectronics.
It can be considered as a novel branch of cryptography that aims to develop fast and
efﬁcient security mechanisms for resource constrained environments. This branch of crypto-
graphy is becoming the most promising avenue for generating secure cryptographic solu-
tions for low cost networked RFID systems.
The following sections describe the development of the novel paradigm of lightweight
cryptography
for
resource
limited
environments.
Research
outcomes
from
light-
weight cryptography can be utilized to provide security services such as authentication,
conﬁdentiality and anonymity for resource limited microelectronic tags.
576
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

31.4
Foundations of Lightweight Concepts
Unlike more traditional forms of thinking, focusing on mathematically hard problems or
provable security, lightweight cryptography tends to use all aspects of RFID technology
from both a mathematical as well as an electrical and radio frequency engineering
perspective to generate research and solutions. The following sections describe the funda-
mental concepts underpinning developments in lightweight cryptography.
31.4.1
Desired Level of Security
The ﬂow of information in a traditional communication model using archetypical characters
can be likened to an RFID system. Figure 31.1 illustrates a reader transmitting information
and power over a communication channel that can be monitored and altered by an eaves-
dropper Eve and an active attacker Mallory. The tag is the recipient of power and commands
from a reader. A tag responds to reader commands by transmitting replies back to the reader
over the same insecure channel. While a reader’s connection to backend resources may be
either wired or wireless, this connection can be assumed to be secure. Taking into account
modern network security measures based on established cryptographic primitives this
assumption ought to be legitimate. Therefore considerations of securing networked low
cost RFID systems solely address security and privacy issues of the RFID air-interface and
tags, while the reader and the backend systems are treated as a single entity.
We will use the term computationally feasible to describe a cryptographic system that is
capable of being implemented on a networked low cost RFID system for providing any or
all of the required security services—authentication, integrity, conﬁdentiality and privacy
(anonymity and untraceability)—while meeting all of the end-user performance require-
ments (Ranasinghe and Cole, 2006a). For a computationally feasible cryptographic system
to be considered secure it must be practically difﬁcult for a cryptanalyst to recover the
plaintext, without prior knowledge of the keys, under a practical adversarial model that
considers the mobility of tags as well as the unique characteristics of low cost RFID systems
outlined in (Ranasinghe and Cole, 2006b).
31.4.2
Computational Model
In contrast to conventional security systems we need cryptographic systems with compu-
tational resources that are comparable with the complexity of low cost RFID hardware.
Communication channel
Alice
Powering channel
Reader to tag commands
Tag to reader responses
Bob
Eve
Mallory
Tag
Reader
FIGURE 31.1
Communication channel model capturing the interface between an RFID reader and a tag.
Lightweight Cryptography for Low Cost RFID: A New Direction in Cryptography
577

Complexity theory provides a theoretical and a procedural framework to any algorithmic
design. It helps in quantifying problems in terms of computation resources and running
time required for their solution as the size of inputs to the problem increases.
Complexity classes, as shown in Figure 31.2, provide ahead of any design or implemen-
tation a classiﬁcation of problems based on the type of computing machine and
the computing resources required to solve the problems or execute the algorithms. The
simplest set P, are a set of problems that can be solved by an algorithm in polynomial
time using a deterministic Turing machine. NP class of problems can be solved by
an algorithm using a nondeterministic Turing machine in polynomial time, however, for
NP-complete problems there is no known polynomial time solution.
Class C (circuits with polynomial order of the number of logic gates) has complete
overlap with P, and RP classes. Class P and class RP (randomly polynomial) are pro-
per subsets of C and class C has some overlap with NP but no overlap with the set
NP-complete (Welsh, 1990).
31.4.2.1
Usefulness of Complexity Theory
There are several ways of applying complexity theory to the development of lightweight
cryptographic primitives for RFID. One such approach is to ﬁrst assess the complexity of
the RFID circuits, and to locate the class of algorithms that can yield an acceptable circuit
complexity. The primary constraining factor in resource constraint devices is the limited
support for the complexity required for algorithms pertaining to hard problems. The
number of logic gates in RFID tags and, in general, in lightweight devices such as mobile
phones can be approximately modeled to lie in the C class of circuits. RFID tags belonging
to the C class can perform tasks that belong to the RP class of algorithms. These tasks
include processing of data, transmitting data, and other normal operational procedures. By
complexity theory, all RP (randomly polynomial) class of algorithms can be implemented
on the C class of circuits (Welsh, 1990).
P class is the simplest, but systems based on problems in this class can be easily broken
into by an intruder (cryptanalyst) in polynomial time, for instance by a simple exhaustive
search of the solutions space. However, NP class is more difﬁcult and is currently thought
to include the integer factorization problem and discrete logarithm problem. Discovering
a solution by an exhaustive search for an NP class of problem will require an unreason-
able amount of time. Cryptographic primitives based on the NP class of problems are
very secure. The complexity of the algorithm presents a difﬁculty in the implemen-
tation of cryptographic primitives based on NP class of problems in RFID tags, in spite
of the reduction in computation required due to the shorter keys, as in elliptic curve
cryptography (ECC).
FIGURE 31.2
Complexity classes.
P
RP
NP
NP
complete
EXPTIME
C
578
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

Therefore computational complexity (theoretical) results help in limiting the focus of the
security algorithms those that fall between the P class and the NP class. This suggests that
the focus of computationally feasible mechanisms should be on algorithms falling into the
RP class. Clearly, complexity theory also ensures that we do not look at problems that are
mathematically more hard and complex than RP class of problems, such as the integer
factorization problem expounded in RSA. Analysis of existing security mechanism for
networked low cost RFID systems, such as HB, HB þ, and noisy tags protocols, discussed
later in this Chapter, show that they can be anticipated to fall into the RP (randomly
polynomial) class of algorithms.
31.4.3
Principles of Design
Fundamental thinking and design paradigms envisioned to create cryptographic solutions
are guided by the limitations and computation boundaries of the underlying technology.
The following is a set of valuable design principles.
. Remove IC complexity by transferring resource intensive tasks to networked
backend systems or proxy servers and reduce the computation burden on resource
constrained tags (Ranasinghe and Cole, 2006a).
. Use Shannon’s concepts of confusion and diffusion (Schneier, 1994) instead of
complexity to achieve a high degree of information entropy. Confusion is a core
part of the process of a cryptographic primitive where the plaintext is transformed
into a ciphertext. Examples of confusion can be seen from simple schemes such as
the substitution ciphers to more modern techniques such as modular exponentia-
tion used in RSA. Diffusion is a mechanism of using redundant information in the
ciphertext to make it difﬁcult for the intruder to discover the actual ciphertext in an
encrypted communication. The discussion on the use of noisy tag protocols in
Section 31.6.1.2 is an example of using diffusion.
. Use mathematical operations and problems which translate to simple hardware
implementations to reduce the cost of implementation in silicon. This involves
shifting the focus on to simple operations such as bit shift, XOR and other general
GF(2n) operations, rather than complex arithmetic operations such as exponentia-
tion operations.
. The security of the cryptosystem should depend only on the key(s) and not on the
secrecy of the algorithm and its implementation (Kerckhoffs, 1883). Schneier (1994)
points out that keeping the algorithm secret has the risk that once the algorithm is
broken into, the entire organization has to redesign a new algorithm. On the other
hand if only, the keys are broken, then a redistribution of keys does not have the
same impact.
. The security systems should, ideally, have a level of security that is provably
secure, if not they should at least be practically secure as discussed in Section 3.2.1.
. Design systems where the keys utilized can be changed with ease so that the long
term storage of many keys on tags is unnecessary. This is because tags are constantly
in an untrusted environment and cannot be trusted to store long term secrets.
. Proportioning computation burden and participation to resource availability,
without attempting to increase resources to support complexity. This will ensure
that tag cost is kept to a minimum while ensuring the participation of the tag to
complete the execution of the security mechanism where the tag participation
achieves the set security objectives.
Lightweight Cryptography for Low Cost RFID: A New Direction in Cryptography
579

Lightweight cryptography needs to encompass three separate but related areas of light-
weight: hardware (low power, small IC footprint, and low cost), cryptographic protocols
(efﬁcient with low overheard), and primitives (distributed functions with low cost imple-
mentation on silicon) to provide a complete solution. The following sections discuss these
topics in more detail.
31.5
Lightweight Primitives
Cryptographic primitives form the building blocks of cryptographic systems (for instance
the RSA cryptographic primitive is used for building public key ciphers). Primitives for
lightweight cryptography must be generated using mathematical operations requiring a
simple translation into digital circuit designs. The functions used should be such that
complexity can be transferred to backend systems where bulk of the operations can take
place, while the hardware on an RFID label is only required to perform a minimal level of
computation.
31.5.1
Developments in the Area of Lightweight Primitives
31.5.1.1
Ultra Wide Band Modulation
This simple prudent method is based on time division of transmission to 65,536 slots in
which the data of an RFID tag can be transmitted. The security lies in the difﬁculty of an
intruder guessing in which time slot the sender has sent the desired data. This uses a pulse
position modulator (PPM). A CS PRNG (Cryptographically Secure Pseudo Random Num-
ber Generator) determines the time hopping codes (Avoine, 2007).
31.5.1.2
Physically Uncloneable Functions
Physically uncloneable functions is a lightweight primitive for implementing a challenge–
response authentication protocol on RFID tags without the need for costly cryptographic
hardware. A more recent implementation and application to low cost RFID can be found in
Ranasinghe et al. (2007). These schemes outlined are based on a hardware based random
function (PUF) being integrated on to a low cost RFID tag IC. The functions allow for
calculating a unique responses vector r, to a challenge vector c, based on a key k. The unique
feature of this primitive is the exploitation of statistical variations in the silicon fabrication
process to build a hardware based key k (Lee et al., 2004), onto the each individual RFID IC.
A formulation of the function is given in (1) and (2). The silicon implementation of the
hardware costs only hundreds of logical gates (Ranasinghe et al., 2007).
{c1, c2, c3, . . . , cm} ! f
(c1, c2, c3, . . . , cm), k
f
g ! {r}
(31:1)
ci ¼ (c1, c2, c3, . . . , cn) 2 0,1
f
g
for i ¼ 1, . . . , m
r ¼ (r1, r2, r3, . . . , rm) 2 {0,1}
(31:2)
31.5.1.3
Minimalist Cryptography
It will be challenging to provide security to RFID tags whose prices are likely to drop to 5
US cents over the next several years. Low cost RFID tags at present do not have
enough computational power to perform even the most rudimentary cryptographic
580
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

algorithms. RFID tags are fast becoming the alternate to barcodes technology in supply
chain applications.
In Juels (2004) there is a formal framework for a minimalist cryptography system for
such extremely resource scarce devices, based on one-time codes. A major idea in Juels
(2004) is the application of pseudonyms to help enforce privacy in RFID tags. A tag may
carry multiple, random-looking names. On each occasion a tag is queried, the tag releases a
different name. In principle, only an authorized veriﬁer can tell when two different names
belong to the same tag. It is possible for an adversary to query a tag multiple times to
collate all the names so as to weaken the security of the scheme. The approach described in
Juels (2004) involves enhancements to overcome the latter weakness. First, tags release
their names only at a certain (suitably slow) prescribed rate. Second, pseudonyms can be
refreshed by authorized readers.
31.6
Lightweight Cryptographic Protocols
Establishing robust and secure protocols is essential to describe the execution of various
cryptographic primitives. Lightweight protocols need to establish cryptographic protocols
with extremely low computational overhead and minimal digital logic implementation
costs. A promising avenue of research for developing lightweight protocols is based on the
conjectured hardness of the Learning Parity with Noise (LPN) problem (Piramuthu, 2006).
Lightweight protocols should be able to meet the end-user performance goals (such as
read rates) by delaying communications rounds with tags and their implementations
should not consume excessive computing resources. Such fresh approaches are based on
use of shared secrets between a tag and a database, with one or more of the features: (1) an
initial supply of random one-time codes for use through the life of the labeled product, (2)
update of the shared secrets in an environment secure against eavesdropping, and (3) use
of self-updating architectures using high entropy encrypted signaling generated by com-
putationally feasible mechanisms.
31.6.1
Developments in the Area of Lightweight Protocols
31.6.1.1
Hopper and Blum Protocols for RFID
Hopper and Blum have suggested two shared-key authentication protocols, HB and HB þ
protocols (Hopper and Blum, 2001). Adaptation of HB and HB þ protocols to RFID were
presented in (Juels and Weis, 2005). There have been further improvements, by various
authors as discussed in Piramuthu (2006). He has discussed modiﬁed HB and its variants,
the HB þ, and the most recent variant HB þ þ protocols. The HB protocol uses simple
operators such as the XOR operator. The computational basis of the HB protocol is based on
the hardness of the LPN. Piramuthu (2006) also indicates the classical symmetric key crypt-
ography solutions by other researchers make the protocol vulnerable to active attacks. HB
protocol is based on k-bit data binary vectors, k-bit secret key vectors, and some noise bits, 1 or
0, based on a probability function. It is possible for an intruder to correctly surmise the
probability function from the pattern of data using standard stochastic estimation theory.
31.6.1.2
Noisy Tag Protocols
Castelluccia and Avoine (2006) present a key exchange protocol for RFID based on noisy
tags. These tags belong to the system and are in the presence of the interrogation zone of
Lightweight Cryptography for Low Cost RFID: A New Direction in Cryptography
581

a trusted reader. The underlying concept is to generate noise during tag responses. The
pattern of the noise is known to the trusted reader and therefore can be subtracted in order
to recover tag responses. Unlike the trusted reader an eavesdropper cannot understand tag
responses because it cannot differentiate between noise and meaningful data.
31.6.1.3
One-Time Codes
Use of one-time codes coupled with the simple operators such as the XOR function has
provided three different avenues of developing lightweight protocols. These avenues are
based on use of shared secret strings between a tag and a database, with one or more of the
features outlined below.
1. Tags are given an initial supply of random one-time codes for use through the life
of the labeled product during a set-up phase.
2. Update of the tag one-time pad (the shared secrets strings) in an environment
secure against eavesdropping.
3. Alternatively, use self-updating architectures with high entropy encrypted signal-
ing generated by computationally feasible mechanisms.
A lightweight mutual authentication scheme for networked low cost RFID systems based
on random tag identiﬁers and XOR-padding is presented in Ghosal et al. (2006). This
scheme provides privacy in terms of preventing tags from being traced and security in
terms of mutual authentication between RFID readers and tags (Ghosal et al., 2006). The
main objective of the scheme described therein is to provide mutual authentication
between RFID readers and tags.
As mentioned in Section 31.4.1, the backend database and the reader are treated as a
single entity, which communicates with a tag via the RFID air-interface. The scheme uses
three different encryption strings (T, R, and A), which are used in conjunction with an XOR
operation to disguise transmissions of identiﬁers. These encryption strings are random
binary sequences that are shared between each individual tag and the backend database
(Ghosal et al., 2006).
31.7
Lightweight Hardware
Lightweight hardware focuses on research to develop efﬁcient low cost hardware imple-
mentations of cryptographic primitives and protocols. The process of developing or opti-
mizing existing hardware for security mechanisms has been an active area of research for
smart card processors (Aigner, 2006). However, research into developing cryptographic
hardware modules for low cost RFID ICs limited by available power, bandwidth, cost and
timing constraints is a challenging area.
Ideally, for security purposes we have to look at mathematically hard problems, typi-
cally one-way functions whose forward (encryption) path is easy, normally in the P class,
and whose reverse or inverse path (decryption) is hard, normally in the NP class. The
challenge often in the development of lightweight hardware is to implement a hard
problem, such as the integer factorization or the discrete logarithm problem, by way of
simple methods such as simple Boolean logic or shift logic circuits.
582
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

31.7.1
Developments in the Area of Lightweight Hardware
31.7.1.1
Elliptic Curve Cryptography
Elliptic Curve Cryptography (ECC) is a newer approach than RSA with the advantage
of smaller key sizes than RSA to achieve the same level of security as the more popular
RSA systems. ECC has the hardness of exponential time challenge for cryptanalysts
attempting to obtain plaintext from ciphertext with no knowledge of the keys used. As a
comparison, in ECC, a 160 bits key provides the same security as a 1024 bits key in
RSA, 224 key in ECC provides the same level of security as 2048 bits key in RSA. RSA
systems require larger key sizes to achieve a level of computational security considered
as being adequate given availability of relatively cheap computing power. ECC implemen-
tations require lower memory due to shorter keys and correspondingly lower computa-
tions. However, the nature of the ECC algorithm is such that their execution places
greater demands on power consumption (Menezes, 1993). There are also no known sub-
exponential time algorithms for successfully attacking elliptic curve cryptosystems
(Basubramaniun, 2003).
Shorter key sizes make ECC a suitable candidate for computing power and memory
limited devices. Sun Microsystems’s Sizzle, a coin sized wireless secure web browser,
uses ECC (Gupta et al., 2005; Morgan, 2005). However, the elliptic curve algorithm is
fairly complex, and hence thus far it is not directly applicable to RFID tags. A design of
an ECC processing unit on an RFID tag is presented in (Wolkerstorfer, 2005). Batina
et al. (2006) have reported further progress on the design of an ECC unit suitable for
RFID tags.
(Wolkerstorfer, 2003) presented a hardware implementation of an elliptic curve crypt-
ography processor and examined the feasibility of implementing it into low cost RFID tags
(Wolkerstorfer, 2005). He has implemented an ECC unit in RFID. He reported that 0.35 mm
CMOS requires a silicon area of 1.31 mm2 for an implementation of an ECC hardware unit.
This silicon area is somewhat large for an RFID tag IC. Even if the proposed ECC processor
is incorporated into an RFID tag, there are concerns about the power consumption,
execution time, and potential doubling of the cost of the RFID tag IC.
31.7.1.2
Block Ciphers
A lightweight block-cipher hardware implementation, mCrypton , was presented by (Lim
and Korkishko, 2005). mCrypton was especially designed for RFID and sensor applications
and shows a hardware complexity of 3500 to 4100 gates depending on the key size (64–128
bits, respectively).
31.7.1.3
Symmetric Key Ciphers
Feldhofer et al. (2004) presented a hardware implementation of the AES algorithm
for RFID tags for strong tag to reader authentication. The estimated hardware complexity
of the implementation is 3600. However, a drawback of the implementation is the rela-
tively large number of clock cycles (1000) required to encrypt a block of 128 bits. Feldhofer
et al. (2004) additionally proposed an enhancement for the ISO=IEC 18000 standard in
order to integrate the authentication mechanism and to deal with the long encryption time
in the tag.
Lightweight Cryptography for Low Cost RFID: A New Direction in Cryptography
583

31.8
Future Directions
31.8.1
Multivariate Polynomials and Hidden Field Equations for Lightweight Systems
Wolf and Leuven (2003) methods are along the lines of some 1980s asymmetric crypto-
graphic systems using multivariate polynomials. These methods can be used for both
signing and encryption. They use polynomials over ﬁnite ﬁelds of different sizes based
on the intractability (hardness) of the ‘‘MQ’’ problem, which denotes that, multivariate
quadratic (MQ) equations over ﬁnite ﬁelds are difﬁcult to solve. While some of the systems
based on multivariate polynomials have been broken, they offer alternate interesting
challenges using algorithms based on low computation costs.
Barkan et al. (2003) showed the use of the Hidden Field Equations (HFE) and multivari-
ate quadratic residue quotient systems (MCQ) in the analysis of cryptographic systems.
Use of HFE and MCQ was demonstrated in the analysis of the A5 algorithms used in GSM
mobile communication standard (Barkan et al., 2003). The methods used have a direct
application to the analysis of bit oriented stream generators based on shift registers with no
formal proofs of security but with the ability to represent the encryption hardware using
polynomial equations (Barkan et al., 2003).
The earlier-mentioned methods may be used to formulate attacks and analyze the
feasibility of attacks against lightweight cryptosystems based on bit shift and XOR opera-
tions. Unlike provably secure systems based on mathematically hard problems, most
lightweight systems do not have such rigorous formal quantitative analysis. The earlier-
mentioned methods provide directions to analyze lightweight cryptosystems.
31.8.2
Can We Look to Quantum and Quasar Cryptography?
Quantum Cryptography is one possible area of research in one-time codes. This is based on
the quantum states of spin and other variables of subatomic particles like photons or
electrons (Hershey, 2003). This area is an active area of research where its current applica-
tions include the secure transmission of cryptographic keys (Stix, 2005). It is not yet feasible
for full data encryption and its relevance to RFID systems can be questioned.
In its potential application to RFID, one may note the need for both a quantum trans-
mission channel and a classical channel, and the emergence of only partial keys and then
only after classical channel communication between sender and receiver of many quantum
channel communications.
Quasar Cryptography based on random noise in space, galaxies, via radio astronomy
(Hershey, 2003; Schneier, 2006), is claimed to be another promising area of one-time codes
generation. Any intruder must know exactly which of the many radio telescopes pointing
to a speciﬁc galaxy is being used for the random noise sequence (Schneier, 2006). Herschey
(2003) also pointed out the importance of channel based cryptography where the channel is
the cryptographic-variable. A short burst of random noise injected into the communication
channel affects the receiver and the transmitter in the same manner. Quantum computing
and Quasar Computing are both applications of channel based cryptography (Hershey,
2003). At the moment these concepts are infeasible alternatives in lightweight devices.
31.8.3
Learning from the Smart Card Industry
Aigner (2006) presents an analysis and an overview of crypto implementations for RFID
tags by reviewing the developments in the smart card industry. Oren and Shamir (2006)
have highlighted the current practical limitations of hardware implementations which are
584
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

theoretically proven secure. They have, on an optimistic note, pointed out the experiences
and evolution of smart cards, especially the outcomes of making them immune to power
and side channel attacks. These outcomes could eventually be applied to RFID tags
without reinventing the wheel.
31.8.4
Feed Back Shift Registers and XOR Cryptography
Developments in pseudo random bit generators (PRBG), based on LFSR (Linear Feedback
Shift Registers), have been used widely because of the information-theoretic security
provided by one-time pads. The barrier preventing the use of one-time pads is the need
to keep or transmit a key of the same length as the plaintext. Stream ciphers overcome
this impracticality by allowing the fast generation of pseudo random numbers at the
transmitter, for encrypting, and at the receiver, for decrypting the received data. The
encryption operation is a simple XOR operation of the plaintext with the key stream,
while the decryption operation is an XOR operation of the key stream with the plaintext.
In an RFID context, they also provide the most promising avenue for achieving mutual
authentication between a tag and a reader (Ranasinghe, 2007). However, bit stream
generators do not provide the same perfect secrecy as one-time pads as the key sequence
is only pseudo random.
There are several measures of the level of security provided by a stream cipher.
These are based on metrics such as the linear complexity of the key stream, and random-
ness and correlation-immunity of the output sequence. However, these metrics are not
sufﬁcient to guarantee the security of stream ciphers (Menezes et al., 1997). Most of
the vulnerabilities of stream ciphers result from the linearity of the feedback scheme.
A simple solution is to input the feedback values in LFSRs through a nonlinear function
before they are fed back into the shift registers. The result is to increase the level of
confusion in the output of the generator. An example of a nonlinear combination generator
is the Geffe generator consisting of three maximum length LFSRs of pairwise relatively
prime period lengths that are combined applying a nonlinear Boolean function (Menezes
et al., 1997).
The shrinking generator (Coppersmith et al., 1994) achieves such nonlinearity by utiliz-
ing two LFSRs, wherein the output of one LFSR is used to decide where to use or discard
the output of the second LFSR. By using maximum length LFSRs of length L1 and L2 where
gcd(L1,L2) ¼ 1, the shrinking generator has a linear complexity of 2L2.L1. With a prudent
choice of initial seeds and the tap polynomials for the 2 LFSRs, the shrinking generator is
very hard to defeat (Menezes et al., 1997). The order of complexity of known attacks has
exponential time complexity as they are a function of the length of both LFSRs. A shrinking
generator implementation offers the most promising avenue for achieving conﬁdentiality
and mutual authentication between a tag and a reader given its many practical advantages
related to efﬁciency, simplicity in implementation requiring only XOR cryptography, shift
registers and Boolean logic, and requiring very little memory (the only storage requirement
being the initial seeds and=or the connection polynomial weights).
31.8.5
How Can We Advance the Study of Lightweight Protocols?
We need to examine the properties of all existing cryptographic protocols to ascertain what
can be considered as lightweight cryptographic protocols. Such an exploration will allow
us to assess whether they are applicable to low cost RFID, and also to examine whether
they are indicative of directions in which to search for cryptographic protocols useful in
low cost RFID.
Lightweight Cryptography for Low Cost RFID: A New Direction in Cryptography
585

31.9
Conclusion
It is evident that RFID privacy and security are challenging areas of research. Limitations
and constraints of the enabling technology prevent the use of contemporary cryptographic
solutions. We have expounded upon a new direction in cryptography needed to address
the security and privacy needs of networked low cost RFID systems as well as to enable
many applications that can beneﬁt from security services provided to low cost RFID.
Lightweight cryptographic design ideas elaborated have recognized the resource limita-
tion of low cost labels that require simplicity at the tag silicon level.
It is evident that RFID privacy and security are challenging areas for both implementa-
tion and research. There are three speciﬁc areas of research (lightweight primitives, light-
weight hardware and lightweight protocols) which will greatly beneﬁt low cost RFID
security and privacy, and successful results from research on these topics will lead to the
widespread adoption of this technology. Lightweight hardware based on pseudo random
number generators such as the shrinking generator, lightweight primitives such as the
PUF, and lightweight protocols based on one-time codes (Ghosal et al., 2006), which
involve one or more small shared secrets between a label and an interrogator, provides
the best avenues for generating practicable solutions.
It is important to note that the level of security and privacy will depend on the
application. Clearly there is no universal solution but a collection of solutions suited to
different applications based on compromises and on security services required.
References
Aigner, M. 2006, Crypto implementations for RFID tags: Learning from the smart card industry.
PROACT, Crypto for RFID Series 2006, Graz.
Avoine, G. 2007, Bibliography on Security and Privacy in RFID Systems, MIT, Cambridge, MA. Avai-
lable from http:==lasecwww.epﬂ.ch=gavoine=rﬁd=.
Barkan, E., Biham, E., and Keller, N. 2003, Instant ciphertext-only cryptoanalysis of GSM encrypted
communications, Crypto 2003, Santa Barbara, CA.
Basubramanian, R. 2003, Elliptic Curres, Modular Forms and Cryptography, Hindustan Book Agency,
New Delhi, pp. 325–345.
Batina, L., Guajardo, J., Kerins, T., Mentens, N., Tuyls, P., and Verbauwhede, I. 2006. An Elliptic
Curve Processor suitable for RFID-tags, Cryptology ePrint Archive: Report 2006=227 (4th July
2006).
Castelluccia, C. and Avoine, G. 2006. Noisy tags: A pretty good key exchange protocol for RFID
TAGS, Proceedings of the International Conference on Smart Card Research and Advanced Applica-
tions, Springer Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 3928, 2006, pp. 289–299.
Coppersmith, D., Krawczyk, H., and Mansour, Y. 1994, The shrinking generator, Proceedings of Crypto
93, Springer-Verlag, 1994, pp. 22–39.
Feldhofer, M., Dominikus, S., and Wolkerstorfer, J. 2004, Strong authentication for RFID systems
using the AES Algorithm, Proceedings of the 6th International Workshop on Cryptographic
Hardware and Embedded Systems, Springer Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 3156,
pp. 357–370.
Ghosal, R., Jantscher, M., Grasso, A., and Cole, P.H. 2006, One Time Codes, White Paper Series, Auto-
ID Labs, WP030, Adelaide.
Gupta, V., Wurm, M., Zhu, Y., Millard, M., Fung, S., Gura, N., Eberle, H., and Sheuel Chang Shantz,
S. 2005, Sizzle: A standards-based end-to-end security architecture for the embedded internet,
Pervasive and Mobile Computing, 1, 2005, 425–445.
Hershey, J.E. 2003, Cryptography Demystiﬁed, McGraw-Hill, New York, NY. 2003.
586
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

Hopper, N.J. and Blum, M. 2001, Secure human identiﬁcation, protocols, LNCS Vol. 2248, 2001,
pp. 52.
Juels, A. 2004, Minimalist cryptography for low-cost RFID tags, in Proceedings of the 4th International
Conference on Security in Communication Networks, C. Blando (ed), Springer Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, Vol. 3352, 2004, pp. 149–164.
Juels, A. 2006, RFID, Security and privacy: A research survey. Journal of Selected Areas in Communi-
cation, 24(2), 2006, 381–395.
Juels, A. and Weis. S. 2005, Authenticating pervasive devices with human protocols, in Advances in
Cryptology—Crypto 2005, LNCS, Vol. 3621, Springer-Verlag, pp. 293–308.
Kerckhoffs, A. 1883, La cryptographie militaire, Journal des Sciences Militaires, 9, Jan. 1883, 5–83; Feb.
1883, 161–191.
Lee, J., Lim, D., Gassend, B., Suh, G.E., Dijk, M., and Devadas, S. 2004, A Technique to Build a Secret
Key in Integrated Circuits for Identiﬁcation and Authentication Applications. Symposium on
VLSI circuits, 2004.
Lim, C. and Korkishko, T. 2005, mCrypton—A Lightweight Block Cipher for Security of Low-Cost
RFID Tags and Sensors, in Proceedings of the 6th International Workshop on Information
Security Applications, Springer Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 3786, 2005,
pp. 243–258.
Menezes, A.J. 1993, Elliptic Curve Public Key Cryptosystems, Kluwer Academic Publishers, Boston, MA.
Menezes, A., van Oorschot, P. and Vanstone, S. 1997, Handbook of Applied Cryptography, CRC Press,
Boca Raton, FL.
Morgan, T.P. 2005, Sun Creates World’s Smallest SSL Web Server, http:==www.computerwire.
com=industries=research=?pid¼C55355B9-B6CD-42EC-80BC-ACFDA6F2CDD3.
Oren, Y. and Shamir, A. 2006, Power Analysis of RFID Tags. Available at http:==www.wisdom.
weizmann.ac.il=yossio=rﬁd=.
Piramuthu, S. 2006, HB and related lightweight authentication protocols for secure RFID tag=reader
authentication, CollECTeR Europe Conference, Basel, Switzerland, 2006.
Ranasinghe, D.C., Leong, K.S., Ng, M.L., Engels, D.W., and Cole, P.H. 2005, A distributed architec-
ture for a ubiquitous item identiﬁcation network, Seventh International Conference on Ubiqui-
tous Computing, Tokyo, Japan, Sept. 2005.
Ranasinghe, D. and Cole, P.H. 2006a, Confronting security and privacy threats in modern RFID
systems, Asilomar Conference on Signals, Systems, and Computers, California, October 2006.
Ranasinghe, D. and Cole, P.H. 2006b, Security in low cost RFID, Auto-ID Labs, White Paper Series on
Anti-Counterfeiting and Secure Supply Chain, 2006.
Ranasinghe, D.C. 2007, New directions in advanced RFID system, PhD dissertation, School of
Electrical and Electronic Engineering, The University of Adelaide, Australia.
Ranasinghe, D.C., Devadas, S., and Cole, P.H. 2007, A Low Cost Solution to Authentication Based on
a Lightweight Primitive, Auto-ID labs white paper series on anti-counterfeiting, 2007.
Rueppel, R.A. 1989, Good stream ciphers are hard to design, in Proceedings of the International
Carnahan Conference on Security Technology, pp. 163–174.
Schneier, B. 1994, Applied Cryptography: Protocols, Algorithms and Source Code in C, Wiley, New York,
NY, 1994.
Schneier, B. 2006, Quasar Encryption, in Schneier on Security, A Weblog Covering Security, and
Security Technology, 27th March 2006.
Stix, G. 2005, Best-kept secrets, quantum cryptography has marched from theory to laboratory to real
products, Scientiﬁc American Magazine, January 2005.
Welsh, D. 1990, Codes and Cryptography, Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1990.
Wolf, C. and Leuven K.U. 2003, Efﬁcient Public Key Generation for Multivariate Cryptosystems,
2003.
Wolkerstorfer, J. 2003, Hardware Aspects of Elliptic Curve Cryptography, Abstract of PhD Thesis,
IAIK, Graz, Austria.
Wolkerstorfer, J. 2005, Is elliptic-curve cryptography suitable to secure RFID tags? Workshop on
RFID and Lightweight Crypto, July 14–15, 2005, IAIK, Graz University of Technology, Graz,
Austria.
Lightweight Cryptography for Low Cost RFID: A New Direction in Cryptography
587


32
Low Overhead RFID Security*
Shlomi Dolev, Marina Kopeetsky, Thomas Clouser, and Mikhail Nesterenko
CONTENTS
32.1
Introduction...................................................................................................................... 589
32.2
Approaches to RFID Security ........................................................................................ 590
32.2.1 Using Traditional Cryptography...................................................................... 590
32.2.2 Using No Cryptography.................................................................................... 591
32.2.3 Using Low Overhead Cryptography............................................................... 591
32.2.4 Application of Low Overhead Cryptography through
Domain Restriction ..................................................................................................592
32.3
Mutual Authentication with M2M................................................................................ 592
32.3.1 Algorithm Description ....................................................................................... 592
32.3.2 Security Discussion............................................................................................. 594
32.4
Reader Authentication with PISP.................................................................................. 594
32.4.1 Security Model .................................................................................................... 594
32.4.2 PISP Description ................................................................................................. 594
32.4.3 Proactive Computationally Secure Protocol ................................................... 596
32.5
Tag Singulation ................................................................................................................ 598
32.6
Conclusion ........................................................................................................................ 599
Acknowledgments ..................................................................................................................... 600
References.................................................................................................................................... 601
32.1
Introduction
A radio frequency identiﬁcation device (RFID) technology is poised to revolutionize supply-
chain management and the retail industry [29]. An RFID system consists of a tag, a reader, and
a database. An RFID tag is a miniature electronic circuit that is capable of elementary informa-
tion storage, processing, and radio communication. An RFID reader is a device that is designed
to communicate with the tag. A reader can extract the information from the tag that identiﬁes
the tagged item. The reader is connected to a database that contains additional information
about the tag and the item. A tag can be self-powered or it can use the power of the reader to do
its processing and communication through a mechanism called backscatter. Depending on the
design, the range of this communication varies from a few centimeters to hundreds of meters.
* The preliminary version of some of the material of this chapter appeared in [6, 17].
589

As line-of-sight between the tag and the reader is not required for communication, RFID
systems reduce the time and cost of processing tagged items compared to optical bar-
codes. For example, purchased goods can be processed right inside a shopping cart as the
customer walks through an automated checkout gate. Potential applications of RFID
systems range from inventory-control to smart credit cards, automated toll collection,
and counterfeit protection. To be a viable alternative to optical bar-codes, the price of an
individual tag should be under ten cents [29].
Since the reader can potentially communicate with multiple tags, the problem of singula-
tion arises: the reader should be able to identify multiple tags or be able to communicate
with each tag individually. Juels et al. [15] propose treewalking singulation. The tag identi-
ﬁers are arranged as leaves of a binary tree. The reader poses queries to individual bits of
each tag and descends this binary tree depth-ﬁrst to identify individual tags.
One of the main hurdles for the widespread adoption of RFID systems is privacy
concerns. The concerns become particularly salient as the retail industry contemplates
moving from pallet and crate tagging to individual item tagging [29]. RFID use substan-
tially differs from that of other systems. The tag has a close association with the item it
identiﬁes. Moreover, the sensitive information usually does not pertain to the tag itself but
to the item. This close association between the tag and the item that it identiﬁes gives rise to
novel threats such as tracking [22] that are not usually addressed in conventional security
systems. For example, a conventional system is considered secure if the principal is capable
of recognizing the intruder and aborting the communication session before the intruder is
able to learn any sensitive information. However, even if the sessions are aborted, the
intruder may be able to match the tag across several communication sessions. This gives
the intruder the information about the location of the item or the person who carries it. The
tag is often used in the environment where the intruder can easily approach it and either
eavesdrop on the communication or interfere with it without the knowledge of the
communicating parties [10]. For example, an RFID-enabled credit card can be read through
the envelope as it is en route from the bank to its owner [11].
To be economically viable for most applications, the tag is not allowed to possess
sophisticated data processing capabilities. Thus, the design of security protection for
RFID systems is challenging. For example, extensive cryptosystems such as AES, DES,
ECC [18], or high-quality random number generators may not be available on the tag.
Hence, a substantial amount of recent research effort has been dedicated to design security
techniques with sufﬁciently low overhead to be feasible on RFID systems.
The remainder of the chapter is organized as follows. We survey various approaches
to RFID security in Section 32.2. We then present two examples of low overhead authen-
tication algorithms. In Section 32.3, we present an algorithm for mutual tag and reader
authentication—M2M that is specialized for the rental agency setting. In Section 32.4, we
describe a reader-only authentication algorithm—PISP. In Section 5, we describe how low
overhead algorithms such as M2M and PISP can be concurrently applied to multiple tags.
We conclude the chapter in Section 32.6 with the discussion of the potential of low
overhead cryptography in RFID applications.
32.2
Approaches to RFID Security
32.2.1
Using Traditional Cryptography
There is a large number of recent studies that consider RFID security. Avoine [1] maintains
an extensive bibliography on the subject. Juels [13] provides a comprehensive survey of the
590
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

general area. Most articles focus on RFID security using a variation of traditional symmet-
ric or asymmetric cryptosystems [18].
However, these mechanisms may be unavailable. The manufacturing costs limit the
functionality of the tags that are expected to replace optical bar-codes in retail industry.
Such tags contain between 500 and 5000 gates [8] most of which are dedicated to basic
operations. Only on the order of a few hundred gates are available for cryptographic
operations. For example, Feldhofer et al. propose to use AES [7]. Their solution requires
3595 equivalent gates for the security component of an RFID tag. Poschmann et al. [27]
present a lightweight version of DES and apply it to RFID. Their implementation requires
1848 gates. Ohkubo et al. [23] present a solution that utilizes two cryptographic hashes.
Their estimate is that their solution requires from 6000 to 13,000 gates. Several other keyed
hash-based approaches to secure tag authentication are proposed [4,33]. Batina et al. [3]
evaluate the feasibility of using elliptic curve cryptography for RFID. They design a proces-
sor dedicated to computing ECC on a tag. Their estimate is that such processor will require
either over 12,000 equivalent gates or over 8000 gates of dedicated circuits. Skiyama et al.
[30] present a specialized processor for ECC cryptography which, they claim, needs only
2171 gates. Molnar and Wagner [22] analyze the security threats of library RFID tags and
propose a solution that requires an RFID tag to use random numbers. They do not provide
an estimate of the implementation of their algorithm. However, it is known [18, Chapter 11]
that obtaining high-quality pseudorandom numbers is equivalent to producing crypto-
graphic hashes or digital signatures. Avoine and Oechslin [2] underline the risks of inad-
equate pseudorandom number generation in RFID tags. Juels [12] describes a one-time
random pad security scheme where the communication between the tag and the reader is
padded by a random sequence of bits. Both the tag and the reader store this sequence. The
communication is secure as long as the sequence is used only once. Because of the limited tag
storage, this method restricts the frequency of communication. Thus, an alternative to
conventional cryptography may be required for RFID security.
32.2.2
Using No Cryptography
The problems with consumer privacy prompted the suggestions to disable the tags after
their services are no longer required. Juels et al. [15] propose to erase all information from
the tag after it has been read. Certainly, this diminishes the usefulness of RFID. However,
the main difﬁculty in this approach is to reliably verify if the tag is indeed disabled. Karjoth
and Moskowitz [16] propose to physically separate the antenna from the tag. This, how-
ever, requires physical contact with the device, which diminishes the applicability of this
technology.
Several researchers [9,14,15,28] propose a blocker tag or a guardian—a device that
monitors communication to protected tags and, if necessary, blocks unauthorized inquir-
ies. For example, Juels et al. [15] propose a blocker tag that does not allow the reader to
descend past a certain depth in the singulation tree without authorization. This device
answers to the reader as if the identiﬁers are present in every leaf of the tree thus foiling
identiﬁcation. However, a blocker tag requires the user to inform it which authentication
requests are legitimate and which tags need to be blocked. Thus, this approach may not be
appropriate for some applications.
32.2.3
Using Low Overhead Cryptography
The advent of RFID technology and the need for lightweight security renewed interest in
the solutions that do not require extensive resources from one of the principals: these
solutions use limited memory and relatively simple operations such as XOR, addition,
Low Overhead RFID Security
591

and possibly multiplication. Such mechanisms might work in RFID security because of the
speciﬁcs of the application. For example, classic cryptographic protocols are designed to be
secure against open or chosen plaintext attacks [18] where the intruder needs to learn
the keys and either has access to the unencrypted text or can force one of the legitimate
principals to encrypt the text of its choosing. These attacks do not not seem to be applicable
to RFID systems.
A number of low overhead RFID security algorithms are proposed [24–26,34]. Peris-
Lopez et al. present a series of simple RFID authentication algorithms: LMAP [24], M2AP
[25], and EMAP [26]. The proposed algorithms use bitwise XOR, AND, and other simple
operations and require from 100 to 500 gates. However, recent publications [19,20] dem-
onstrate that all three protocols are vulnerable to desynchronization attack. To maintain the
freshness of its keys, the tag relies on the reader to provide them in each communication
session. If the intruder sends arbitrary information to the tag, the tag may accept it and
refresh its keys. This leaves the tag and the legitimate reader unable to communicate. It is
also shown that the intruder may determine the keys by observing a sufﬁcient number of
communication sessions. Vajda and Buttyán [34] propose another low overhead authenti-
cation protocol. To encrypt the communication, in each session the reader provides the tag
with a one-time pad. However, Defend et al. [5] show that due to random pad reuse, the
protocol can be compromised by a passive intruder within 70 sessions. Even quicker
cryptanalysis is possible if an active intruder is considered.
32.2.4
Application of Low Overhead Cryptography through Domain Restriction
The apparent vulnerability of low overhead cryptography appears to limit its usability for
RFID security. However, we believe that such approaches are still applicable if the domain
of RFID use is clearly deﬁned. For example, libraries or other rental agencies have a rather
particular routine for tag use. As the tagged items are in storage, the tags may be read for
inventory purposes but the security of tag reading is not of primary concern. The tags are
read at checkout. Upon return, the tagged items may have to be inspected for damage or
otherwise manually checked in. Thus, the tags are exposed to the intruder only between
the check-out and check-in time. At the return, there is a possibility to use a back-channel to
reinitialize the tags. In Section 32.3, we present a mutual authentication algorithm M2M
that is specialized for such environments. Alternatively, there may be some applications
where only the reader authentication is required. In Section 32.4, we describe PISP, which
is such an algorithm.
32.3
Mutual Authentication with M2M*
32.3.1
Algorithm Description
Each tag stores two square p 3 p matrices: M2 and M1
2 . The reader maintains another two
matrices: M2 and M1
1
of the same size. The matrices M1
1
and M1
2
are the inverses of M1
and M2 respectively. The tag and the reader also share a key K which is a vector of size q,
where q ¼ rp. Factor r is an integer. The matrices and the key are randomly chosen per
each tag.
* This algorithm was presented by Karthikeyan and Nesterenko [17].
592
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

As a slight abuse of notation, we denote A ¼ MB, where M is a p 3 p matrix and B is
a vector of size q, a component-wise multiplication of M and B (see Figure 32.1). That
is, each p-element component Ai of vector A, where 1  i  r, is obtained by multiplying
M and the following elements of B: bp(i  1)þ1, . . . , bpi. Also, we assume that in our
calculations the vector is always properly transposed so as to be compatible with
the matrix.
Key K is selected such that product X ¼ M1K is unique for each tag in the system. The tag
information stored in the reader’s database is indexed by X. A fresh key is used for every
authentication session.
The authentication session has two parts: the tag identiﬁcation and reader authentica-
tion. A complete session of the algorithm is shown in Figure 32.2. At ﬁrst, the tag is
identiﬁed by the reader. The reader initiates the session by contacting the tag. The tag
replies with X ¼ KM1. After replying, the tag starts a timer. Product X uniquely identiﬁes
the tag. Thus, when the reader receives X, the reader can obtain the rest of the information
about the tag and the tagged item from its database.
In the second phase, the reader authenticates itself to the tag and supplies it with a new
key. For authentication, the reader proves to the tag that it is in possession of the key. To
save tag resources, rather than sending the whole key back to the tag, the reader uses
exclusive OR bitwise on the p-size components of K and multiplies the result by M2. To
calculate a fresh key, the reader selects
unique Xnew and obtains
the
key as
Knew  XnewM1
1 . The reader sends both vectors to the tag. The tag veriﬁes the reader’s
credentials and accepts the new key. In case the reader authentication fails or the reader
fails to respond before the timeout expires, the tag stops further communication until reset.
The tag is allowed to participate in only one authentication session at a time.
A = (a1, . . . , apr), B = (b1, . . . , bpr), M = (mp  p)
(ap(i–1)+1, . . . , api) = (mp  p)
, where 1 ≤ i ≤ r
bp(i–1)+1
bpi
FIGURE 32.1
Explanation of A ¼ MB notation. (From Karthikeyan,
S. and Nesterenko, M., Proceedings of the ACM
Workshop on Security of Ad Hoc and Sensor Networks,
November 2005. With permission.)
Reader
Tag
K, M1, M2
–1
M1
–1, M2
Compute
X ← KM1
Start timer
Identify tag by matching X
Pick Knew, compute
Y ← (K1⊕K2⊕… ⊕Kr) M2
Z ← KnewM2
Hello
Verify YM2
–1 = (K1⊕K2⊕…⊕Kr),
get fresh key K ← ZM2
–1
Stop timer
Y, Z
X
FIGURE 32.2
M2M authentication scenario. (From Karthikeyan, S. and Nesterenko, M., Proceedings of the ACM Workshop on
Security of Ad Hoc and Sensor Networks, November 2005. With permission.)
Low Overhead RFID Security
593

32.3.2
Security Discussion
The security of our algorithm is based on the difﬁculty of recovering the multiplicand or
multiplier from the product of matrix multiplication [31, Chapter 2]. Hence, the intruder
cannot discover the key or the matrix used by the tag and the reader. This prevents the
intruder from identifying the tag. Observe that the algorithm is only secure against
known-ciphertext attacks. However, we assume that such guarantee is sufﬁcient for
RFID systems.
Let us consider the security of our algorithm against tracking. The tag does not partici-
pate in multiple concurrent authentication sessions, neither does it respond to identiﬁca-
tion requests after an unsuccessful session. Thus, there may be at most one aborted session
per tag. Observe that during each session, including the single aborted session, the tag and
the reader send data based on a fresh key. Since the intruder cannot decode the transmis-
sion, he cannot match the tag across multiple sessions. Hence, the intruder may not be able
to track the tag.
Note we assume that the intruder is not capable of matching multiple authentication
sessions of the same tags through nonradio means (e.g., by observing the tagged objects).
32.4
Reader Authentication with PISP*
32.4.1
Security Model
The proactive informational secure protocol (PISP) is based on the limited intruder
capabilities. The underlining assumption of this protocol is that the intruder is not eaves-
dropping in at least one of each n successive interactions between the tag and the reader.
The underlying assumption of PISP is that each communication session is atomic. We
mean that the intruder cannot modify part of the communication in a session. The intruder
may either listen to the communication during a session, or try to communicate (on behalf
of the RFID tag) during an entire session. The intruder may not impersonate the tag.
32.4.2
PISP Description
The pseudocode for PISP is shown in Figure 32.3. The tag and the reader share a square
n 3 n matrix B. Each element of this matrix contains two parts: aij and bij. The ﬁrst part aij is
a key assigned to the tag and the reader at initialization. The second part bij is a random
number obtained by the tag and the reader during their communication.
During initialization, both the tag and the reader get a square matrix B ¼ (aij) such that
dim (B) ¼ n (see Figure 32.3, protocols for the tag and the reader, lines 1–5). To authen-
ticate the reader, the tag initiates the session by sending the reader a message s1 ¼ (X1, b1)
(Figure 32.3, protocol for RFID Tag, lines 6–9). The message contains the following two
elements: XOR of the nth column X1 ¼ a1n  a2n      ann and a randomly generated
n-dimensional vector b1 ¼ (b11, b12, . . . , b1n). After message transmission both the tag and
the reader shift B’s rows down so that b1 ¼ (b11, b12, . . . , b1n) is treated as the ﬁrst B0s row
and the last row is deleted (Figure 32.3, protocol for RFID Tag, lines 10 and 11). This
procedure repeats in the next authentication session. That is, the tag generates a new
random n-dimensional vector b2 ¼ (b21, b22, . . . , b2n), calculates XOR of (n  1) B0s column
* This algorithm was presented by Dolev and Kopeetsky [6].
594
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

elements X2 ¼ b1n1  a1n1      an1n1 and sends the newly generated message
s2 ¼ (X2, b2) to the reader. The reader generates the response message riþ1 as described
above. That is, the ith authentication procedure consists of scanning the matrix columns
and shifts the B0s rows down so that the last matrix’ B row is deleted and the vector bi
occupies the ﬁrst row of B. Note that bi is randomly generated by the tag and sent to the
reader in the message sj1. See Figure 32.3 for the matrix update and XOR calculation
procedure (protocol for RFID Tag, lines u1–u4 and c1–c8).
To verify the authentication the reader executes the following authentication procedure:
after receiving message si ¼ (Xi, bi), the reader veriﬁes that Xi is the correct XOR of the
appropriate (n  (i  1)(mod(n)))th column. If so, the reader conﬁrms the authentication by
sending message ri ¼ Open to the tag. The reader also updates B (Figure 32.3, protocol for
RFID Reader, lines 6–11). Otherwise, the reader sends message ri ¼ DoNotOpen to the tag
and does not update B.
Protocol for RFID Tag
1: 
Initialization:
2: 
Deﬁne Data Structure E of
3: 
int array [1..n], int XOR, E · next
4: 
Create Linked List L of n
 
 
elements of type E
5: 
int i : = 1;
 
column = n − (i  − 1)mod n
6: 
Upon user request
7: 
 
Call function
 
 
XOR X of column i
8: 
 
Create new random array b
9: 
 
Send = (X,b) to Reader
10: 
 
Call Updating procedure
11: 
End user request
u1: 
Updating procedure
u2: 
 
Add b into the head of List
u3: 
 
Remove last element of List
u4: 
 
i := i + 1
c1: 
Function
 
XOR X of index column
c2: 
 
X : = 0
c3: 
 
current := head
c4: 
 
while current.next not equal to
 
 
NULL do
c5: 
 
 
X := X ⊕
 
 
 
current.array[column]
c6: 
 
 
current := current.next
c7: 
 
end while
c8: 
 
Return X
Protocol for RFID Reader
1: 
Initialization:
2: 
Deﬁne Data Structure E of
3: 
int array [1..n], int XOR, E · next
4: 
Create Linked List L of n
 
 
elements of type E
5: 
int i = 1;
 
column = n − (i  − 1)mod n
6: 
Upon reception of key message
7: 
 
Call function
 
 
XOR Y of column i
8: 
 
if X = Y
9: 
 
 
Send “OPEN” to Tag and
 
 
 
Call Updating procedure
10: 
 
else Send “DoNotOpen”
 
 
to Tag
11: 
End of key message reception
FIGURE 32.3
PISP pseudocode.
Low Overhead RFID Security
595

Suppose that for any sequence of authentication messages of length n, at least one
message is not received by the intruder. In order to compromise the authentication
algorithm the intruder has to perform authentication procedure similar to the tag. To do
so the intruder has to forge the key message sji in any authentication session Sth
j . For that
the intruder has to correctly guess the XOR of the corresponding (n  (ji  1) (mod(n)))th
column elements of the matrix B.
Recall that dim (B) ¼ n. Let the intruder be unfamiliar with the authentication message
s1 ¼ (X1, b1) sent by the tag to the reader during the ﬁrst authentication session (Figure 32.4,
Step 1). That is, the intruder does not know the nth column of B—(a1n, a2n, . . . , ann) and the
appropriate row vector is b1 ¼ (b11, b12, . . . , b1n).
After the tag transmits the authentication message s1 ¼ (X1, b1), X1 ¼ (a1n  a2n     
ann), b1 ¼ (b11, b12, . . . , b1n), both the tag and the reader shift the rows of B down as descri-
bed earlier. Note that in the next session the tag will send to the reader the XOR of the
updated (n  1)th B0s column X2 ¼ (b1n1  a1n1      an1n1) and a new randomly
generated vector b2 ¼ (b2n, b2n1, . . . , b21) (Figure 32.4, Step 2). Now matrix B differs
from the previous one by the newly inserted ﬁrst row and the appropriate deletion of
the last row.
The PISP is secure from the information-theoretic standpoint, or unconditionally secure
as was deﬁned in [32, Chapter 2]. That is, the probability that the intruder will forge the key
message and successfully perform session on behalf of the reader is negligible for long
enough l, where l is the number of bits of the element of B. Note also that the matrix size n
factors in the security of PISP. If n is large the probability that the intruder does not
overhear at least one authentication session is greater. However, large n and l require
greater storage resources on the tag.
Note that if the intruder is allowed to eavesdrop n consecutive sessions, it can desyn-
chronize the tag and the reader by forcing the reader to replace a row in B which is
unknown to the tag.
32.4.3
Proactive Computationally Secure Protocol
We now describe the proactive computationally secure protocol (PCSP). It is the extension
of PISP that allows us to lift the assumption on limited intruder eavesdropping. The
pseudocode for the protocol is shown in Figure 32.5. As in PISP, the reader and the tag
Step 1
Step 2
b11 ··· ··· ··· b1n
b21 ··· ··· ··· b2n
a11
b11
· · · · · · · · ·
· · ·
· · ·
· · ·
· · ·
an − 11
an − 21
an − 11
b1n
an − 2n
an − 1n
b1n – 1
an − 2n − 1
an − 1n − 1
· · ·
· · ·
an,1
a1n
an − 1, n
ann
· · · · · · · · ·
· · · · · ·
· · ·
· · ·
· · ·
· · ·
· · ·
· · · · · ·
· · ·
· · ·
· · ·
· · ·
· · ·
· · ·
· · ·
· · ·
· · ·
· · ·
· · ·
· · ·
· · ·
· · ·
FIGURE 32.4
Operation of PISP.
596
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

share a square n 3 n matrix B (Figure 32.5, protocols for the tag and the reader, lines 1–6).
In addition, the tag and the reader also share a string keyword [k].
During the ﬁrst authentication session the tag acts as follows. As in PISP, the tag
calculates the XOR of the nth column of B and X1 ¼ a1n  a2n      ann. Similar to PISP,
a new row b1 ¼ (b11, . . . , b1n) is also created as in the proactive information secure protocol
case. Tag uses X1 to initialize its pseudorandom number generator [21, Chapter 12].
The tag creates a new vector row Y1 that it sends to the reader in the ﬁrst authentication
message. Y1 is the XOR of the previously generated pseudorandom sequence (c11, . . . , c1m)
Protocol for RFID Tag
1: 
Initialization:
2: 
Deﬁne Data Structure E of
3: 
int array [1..n], int XOR, E · next
4: 
Create Linked List L of n
 
 
elements of type E
5: 
int j := 1,   seed = 0
 
 
column = n − ( j − 1)mod n
6: 
int keyword [k]
7: 
Upon user request
8: 
 
Call function XOR X [column]
9: 
 
Create new random array b
10: 
 
Create pseudo-random sequence
 
 
(c[column])  of length m
11: 
 
from seed = X[column] ⊕ seed
12: 
 
Y = (b ||keyword [k] ) ⊕ (c)
13: 
 
Send s = (Y ) to Receiver
14: 
 
Call Updating procedure
15: 
End user request
u1: 
 
Updating procedure
u2: 
 
Add b into the head of List
u3: 
 
Remove last element of List
u4: 
 
j := j + 1
c1: 
Function XOR X [column]
 
 
of index column
c2: 
 
X [column] := 0
c3: 
 
current := head
c4: 
 
while current .next not equal to
 
 
NULL do
c5: 
 
 
X [column] := X [column]⊕
 
 
 
current.array [column]
c6: 
 
 
current := current.next
c7: 
 
end while
c8: 
 
Return X
Protocol for RFID Reader
1: 
Initialization:
2: 
Deﬁne Data Structure E of
3: 
int array [1..n], int XOR, E · next
4: 
Create Linked List L of n
 
elements of type E
5: 
int j := 1, seed = 0
 
column = n − ( j − 1)mod n
6: 
int keyword [k]
7: 
Upon key message reception
8: 
 
Call function XOR X [column]
9: 
 
Create pseudo-random sequence
 
 
 
(c[column]) of length m
 
 
 
10: 
 
from seed = X[column] ⊕ seed
11: 
 
 
Z = Y ⊕ c[column]
 
 
 
12: 
 
if Z [(n + 1)..m] = keyword [k]
13: 
 
 
send “OPEN” to Tag and
 
 
 
call Updating procedure
14: 
      else
15:             send “DoNotOpen” to Tag
16:  End of key message reception
FIGURE 32.5
Pseudocode for PCSP.
Low Overhead RFID Security
597

and b1 concatenated with the keyword: Y1 ¼ (c11, . . . , c1m)  (b1kkeyword[k]) (Figure 32.5).
Eventually, the secure information encapsulation is provided. The ﬁrst key message sent
from the tag to the reader during the ﬁrst communication session is s1 ¼ (Y1) (Figure 32.5,
protocol for RFID Tag, lines 7–13).
Upon receiving this message s1 ¼ Y1, the reader decrypts it by calculating Y1  (c11, . . . ,
c1m). If the decrypted sufﬁx of the string is equal to the predeﬁned string keyword[k], then
the reader authenticates the tag and returns the message r1 ¼ Open to the tag. The matrix B
updating is provided by the preﬁx of the decrypted string as in the basic information
secure protocol. Otherwise, the reader sends message r1 ¼ DoNotOpen (Figure 32.5,
Protocol for RFID Reader, lines 7–16). The update procedure and calculation of XOR for
the corresponding column elements of B is described in Figure 32.5 (protocol for RFID Tag,
lines u1–u4 and c1–c8 respectively).
During any jth authentication session Sj,j ¼ 1, 2, . . . , the tag sends authentication
message sj ¼ Yj ¼ (cj1, . . . , cjm)  (bjkkeyword[k]), where cj ¼ (cj1, . . . , cjm) is the pseudoran-
dom sequence generated by the seed ¼ Xj  seed, where the initial value of seed is zero
(Figure 32.5, protocols for RFID Tag and for RFID Reader, line 5). Xj is the XOR of
(n  (j  1)(mod(n)))th column elements, and bj is a newly generated random vector that
updates matrix B.
Note that the keyword and the pseudorandom number generation function can be
known to the intruder. The random seed ensures the security of PCSP. The recursive
reuse of the seed used in the previous communication session enhances the security
of PCSP.
32.5
Tag Singulation*
Observe that the tag identiﬁcation algorithms assume that the reader and the tag use
the radio channel exclusively. In practice, multiple tags may potentially share the
channel. However, the tags do not have sophisticated channel arbitration capabilities.
In this section we discuss the scheme that augments our tag identiﬁcation algorithms
to enable the reader to communicate with multiple tags. Notice that the singulation
proceeds concurrently with authentication. Thus, multiple tags can be authenticated
concurrently.
The main change in the algorithms is in the identiﬁcation phase. Recall that in this phase
the reader obtains the key from the tag. In the multiple-tag version, the reader learns the
keys of all the tags present. Moreover, each tag learns its key’s position in the order (e.g.,
ascending) of the keys of the tags participating in the identiﬁcation session. Once the tag
knows its position, the second phase of the identiﬁcation algorithm can proceed sequen-
tially. The reader broadcasts the messages for the tags in the order of their keys. Each tag
receives the message sent speciﬁcally to it and ignores the rest.
We assume that each tag is capable of broadcasting its key bit-by-bit. If multiple tags
broadcast the same bit—0 or 1 simultaneously—the reader is able to receive the bit
successfully. If some tags broadcast 0 and others 1, then all tags and the reader sense a
message collision [15]. In case the tags are incapable of sensing the collision on their own,
the reader has to notify the tags if the collision has occurred.
Reader-side singulation. Our scheme is based on breadth-ﬁrst descent of the binary tree
of the key-space. See Figure 32.6 for the illustration. Note that for the reader, learning the
* This algorithm was presented by Karthikeyan and Nesterenko [17].
598
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

tag’s key is equivalent to establishing the path from the root of the tree to the particular
leaf. The reader discovers this path as it descends the tree. The part of the path already
learned by the reader terminates in a growth point. The reader iterates through growth
points in a sequence of trials. Observe that all paths share preﬁxes of various lengths. The
objective of the trial is to let the reader know what the next bit on the path after the growth
point is and whether the paths split.
In each trial the reader requests that every tag whose key contains the path from the
root to the the particular growth point sends its next bit. The reader appends the
received bit to the growth point. If there is a collision, the path splits producing two
growth points.
We illustrate the principle of multiple tag singulation scheme with the example
shown in Figure 32.6. Assume that the key length is three bits. The tags participating in
the identiﬁcation session have keys: (011), (100), and (101). The reader starts from the
growth point a which is the root of the tree. The ﬁrst trial results in collision. This
produces two growth points—b and c. The reader examines b ﬁrst. The trial produces
the next bit without collision, the reader moves the growth point to d. Then the reader
examines c and moves it to e. In the next two trials the complete keys of the tags
are discovered.
Tag-side singulation. The pseudocode for the algorithm executed by the tag is shown in
Figure 32.7. The tag has to participate in trials as well as determine its position in the
sequence of keys. To be able to do that, the tag maintains the number of growth points in
front and behind the growth point that leads to its own key. The tag keeps track as to
which growth point is being examined at the current trial. If there is a collision the
appropriate number of growth points is incremented. After the entire tree is descended
the growth points terminate in the concrete keys and the tag learns its position in the key
sequence.
32.6
Conclusion
The need to adequately address RFID security and privacy is important for the technology
to fully realize its potential. Certainly, this need will be addressed in part by the conven-
tional cryptography algorithms that are adapted to use for RFID. However, for the systems
a
b
d
e
f
g
h
c
Collision
0
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
011
100
101
1
0
1
1
Collision
FIGURE 32.6
Example tag singulation.
Low Overhead RFID Security
599

such as retail item-tagging where such heavyweight solutions are prohibitively expensive,
low overhead cryptography may provide a convenient alternative.
Acknowledgments
This work was partially supported by Rita Altura Trust Chair in Computer Sciences, Lynne
and William Frankel Center for Computer Sciences and Deutsche Telekom, DARPA
contract OSU-RF #F33615-01-C-1901, NSF CAREER Award 0347485, and a grant from
the Wright Center for Sensor System Engineering.
1: 
Initialization
2: 
constants
3: 
q : integer {key size}
4: 
k[1..q]: integer {key}
5: 
variables
6: 
collide : boolean {trial outcome}
7: 
cfront, pfront : integer, initially 0
8: 
 
{currently and previously number of growth points in front}
9: 
cback, pback: integer, initially 0,
10: 
 
{currently and previously number of growth points behind}
11: 
Operation
12: 
for i := 1 to q do
13: 
for j := 1 to pfront do
14: 
 
collide := trial()
15: 
 
cfront := cfront + 1
16: 
 
if collide = true, then cfront := cfront + 1
17: 
collide := trial()
18: 
if collide = true, then
19: 
 
if key[i] = 0 then
20: 
 
 
cback := cback + 1
21: 
 
else
22: 
 
 
cfront := cfront + 1
23: 
for j := 1 to pback do
24: 
 
collide := trial()
25: 
 
cback := cback + 1
26: 
 
if collide = true, then cback := cback + 1
27: 
pback := cback, cback := 0, pfront := cfront, cfront := 0
FIGURE 32.7
Tag-side singulation algorithm.
600
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

References
1. G. Avoine. Bibliography on security and privacy in RFID systems. Available Online, 2006.
2. G. Avoine and P. Oechslin. RFID traceability: A multilayer problem. In Financial Cryptography
(FC), Roseau, The Commonwealth Of Dominica, February–March 2005. Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, vol. 3570, pp. 125–140. IFCA, Springer-Verlag, 2005.
3. L. Batina, J. Guajardo, T. Kerins, N. Mentens, P. Tuyls, and I. Verbauwhede. An elliptic curve
processor suitable for RFID-tags. Cryptology ePrint Archive, Report 2006=227, 2006.
4. M. Burmester, T. van Le, and B. de Medeiros. Provably secure ubiquitous systems: Universally
composable RFID authentication protocols. In Conference on Security and Privacy for Emerging
Areas in Communication Networks (SecureComm), Baltimore, Maryland, USA, August–September
2006. IEEE, 2006.
5. B. Defend, K. Fu, and A. Juels. Cryptanalysis of two lightweight RFID authentication schemes.
In International Workshop on Pervasive Computing and Communication Security (PerSec) 2007,
New York, USA, March 2007. IEEE Computer Society Press.
6. S. Dolev and M. Kopeetsky. Secure communication for RFIDs proactive information security
within computational security. In Stabilization, Safety, and Security of Distributed Systems (SSS),
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 4280, pp. 290–303. Springer, 2006.
7. M. Feldhofer, S. Dominikus, and J. Wolkerstorfer. Strong authentication for RFID systems using
the AES algorithm. In Workshop on Cryptographic Hardware and Embedded Systems (CHES), Boston,
Massachusetts, USA, August 2004. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 3156, pp. 357–370. IACR,
Springer-Verlag, 2004.
8. K. Finkenzeller. RFID Handbook: Fundamentals and Applications in Contactless Smart Cards and
Identiﬁcation. John Wiley, New York, NY, USA, 2003.
9. C. Floerkemeier, R. Schneider, and M. Langheinrich. Scanning with a purpose—supporting
the fair information principles in RFID protocols. In International Symposium on Ubiquitous Com-
puting Systems (UCS), Tokyo, Japan, November 2004. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 3598,
pp. 214–231. Springer-Verlag, 2004.
10. G. Hancke. Practical attacks on proximity identiﬁcation systems (short paper). In IEEE Symposium
on Security and Privacy, Oakland, California, USA, May 2006, pp. 328–333. IEEE Computer Society
Press, 2006.
11. T.S. Heydt-Benjamin, D.V. Bailey, K. Fu, A. Juels, and T. O’Hare. Vulnerabilities in ﬁrst-
generation RFID-enabled credit cards. Manuscript, October 2006.
12. A. Juels. Minimalist cryptography for low-cost RFID tags. In International Conference on Security in
Communication Networks (SCN), Amalﬁ, Italia, September 2004. Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
vol. 3352, pp. 149–164. Springer-Verlag, 2004.
13. A. Juels. RFID security and privacy: A research survey. Manuscript, September 2005.
14. A. Juels and J. Brainard. Soft blocking: Flexible blocker tags on the cheap. In Workshop on Privacy
in the Electronic Society (WPES), Washington, DC, USA, October 2004, pp. 1–7. ACM Press, 2004.
15. A. Juels, R. Rivest, and M. Szydlo. The blocker tag: Selective blocking of RFID tags for consumer
privacy. In Conference on Computer and Communications Security (CCS), Washington, DC, USA,
October 2003, pp. 103–111. ACM Press, 2003.
16. G. Karjoth and R. Moskowitz. Disabling RFID tags with visible conﬁrmation: Clipped tags are
silenced. In Workshop on Privacy in the Electronic Society (WPES), Alexandria, Virginia, USA,
November 2005. ACM Press, 2005.
17. S. Karthikeyan and M. Nesterenko. RFID security without extensive cryptography. In Proceedings
of the 3rd ACM workshop on security of ad hoc and sensor networks (SASN), New York, NY, USA,
2005, pp. 63–67. ACM Press, 2005.
18. C. Kaufman, R. Perlman, and M. Speciner. Network Security: Private Communication in a Public
World. Prentice-Hall, 1995.
19. T. Li and R.H. Deng. Vulnerability analysis of EMAP—an efﬁcient RFID mutual authentication
protocol. In Second International Conference on Availability, Reliability and Security (AReS), Vienna,
Austria, April 2007.
Low Overhead RFID Security
601

20. T. Li and G. Wang. Security analysis of two ultra-lightweight RFID authentication protocols. In
International Information Security Conference (IFIP SEC), Sandton, Gauteng, South Africa, May 2007.
IFIP, 2007.
21. A.J. Menezes, S.A. Vanstone, and P.C. Van Oorschot. Handbook of Applied Cryptography. CRC
Press, Boca Raton, FL, USA, 1996.
22. D. Molnar and D. Wagner. Privacy and security in library RFID: Issues, practices, and architec-
tures. In ACM Conference on Computer and Communications Security (CCS), Washington, DC, USA,
October 2004, pp. 210–219, ACM Press, 2004.
23. M. Ohkubo, K. Suzuki, and S. Kinoshita. Cryptographic approach to ‘‘privacy-friendly’’ tags.
In RFID Privacy Workshop, MIT, MA, USA, November 2003.
24. P. Peris-Lopez, J.C. Hernandez-Castro, J. Estevez-Tapiador, and A. Ribagorda. LMAP: A real
lightweight mutual authentication protocol for low-cost RFID tags. In Workshop on RFID Security
(RFIDSec), Graz, Austria, July 2006. Ecrypt.
25. P. Peris-Lopez,
J.C. Hernandez-Castro,
J.
Estevez-Tapiador,
and
A.
Ribagorda. M2AP:
A minimalist mutual-authentication protocol for low-cost RFID tags. In International Conference
on Ubiquitous Intelligence and Computing (UIC), Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 4159,
pp. 912–923. Springer-Verlag, 2006.
26. P. Peris-Lopez, J.C. Hernandez-Castro, J.M. Estevez-Tapiador, and A. Ribagorda. EMAP: An
efﬁcient mutual authentication protocol for low-cost RFID tags. In OTM Federated Conferences
and Workshop: IS Workshop, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 4277, pp. 352–361. Springer-
Verlag, 2006.
27. A. Poschmann, G. Leander, K. Schramm, and C. Paar. A family of light-weight block ciphers
based on DES suited for RFID applications, July 2006.
28. M. Rieback, G. Gaydadjiev, B. Crispo, R. Hofman, and A. Tanenbaum. A platform for RFID
security and privacy administration. In USENIX=SAGE Large Installation System Administration
conference (LISA), Washington DC, USA, December 2006.
29. G. Roussos. Enabling RFID in retail. IEEE Computer, 39(3):25–30, 2006.
30. K. Sakiyama, L. Batina, N. Mentens, B. Preneel, and I. Verbauwhede. Small-footprint ALU for
public-key processors for pervasive security. In Workshop on RFID Security (RFIDSec), Graz,
Austria, July 2006. Ecrypt.
31. W. Stallings. Cryptography and Network Security: Principles and Practices, 2nd end. Prentice-Hall,
Upper Saddle River, NJ, USA, 1999.
32. D. Stinson. Cryptography: Theory and Practice, 3rd end CRC=C&H, 2006.
33. G. Tsudik. YA-TRAP: Yet another trivial RFID authentication protocol. In International Conference
on Pervasive Computing and Communications (PerCom), Pisa, Italy, March 2006. IEEE Computer
Society Press, 2006.
34. I. Vajda and L. Buttyán. Lightweight authentication protocols for low-cost RFID tags. In Second
Workshop on Security in Ubiquitous Computing (Ubicomp), Seattle, WA, USA, October 2003.
602
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

33
Layers of Security for Active RFID Tags
Shenchih Tung, Swapna Dontharaju, Leonid Mats, Peter J. Hawrylak,
James T. Cain, Marlin H. Mickle, and Alex K. Jones
CONTENTS
33.1
Introduction...................................................................................................................... 604
33.2
Security in RFID Systems ............................................................................................... 604
33.2.1 Types of Attacks for RFID Systems ................................................................. 605
33.2.1.1 Eavesdropping..................................................................................... 605
33.2.1.2 Spooﬁng................................................................................................ 605
33.2.1.3 Denial of Service.................................................................................. 606
33.2.1.4 Brute Force ........................................................................................... 606
33.2.1.5 Relay...................................................................................................... 606
33.2.1.6 Side Channel ........................................................................................ 607
33.2.2 Authentication Techniques in RFID Systems ................................................. 607
33.2.2.1 Lightweight Authentication Protocols ............................................. 608
33.2.2.2 Symmetric Authentication Protocols................................................ 609
33.2.2.3 Asymmetric Authentication Protocols ............................................. 609
33.2.2.4 Strong Authentication Protocols....................................................... 609
33.2.3 Encryption Techniques in RFID Systems........................................................ 610
33.2.3.1 Symmetric Key Encryption................................................................ 610
33.2.3.2 Asymmetric Key Encryption ............................................................. 611
33.2.4 Security in RFID Standards............................................................................... 611
33.2.4.1 ISO 18000 Part 7 .................................................................................. 611
33.2.4.2 ISO 18000 Part 6C ............................................................................... 611
33.2.4.3 ISO 14443.............................................................................................. 612
33.2.4.4 ICAO Extension to ISO 14443 ........................................................... 613
33.2.4.5 ISO 18185.............................................................................................. 613
33.2.4.6 ANSI NCITS 256 ................................................................................. 614
33.2.5 Conclusions about Existing Techniques.......................................................... 614
33.3
Layers of Security ............................................................................................................ 614
33.3.1 Passive Activation Layer Security.................................................................... 614
33.3.1.1 Results................................................................................................... 616
33.3.2 Physical Layer Security...................................................................................... 617
33.3.2.1 Results................................................................................................... 619
33.3.3 Encrypted Data Transmission with AES......................................................... 619
603

33.3.4 Physical Security ................................................................................................. 622
33.3.4.1 Results................................................................................................... 623
33.3.4.2 Resistance to the DPA Attack ........................................................... 623
33.4
Conclusions....................................................................................................................... 626
References.................................................................................................................................... 626
33.1
Introduction
Applications for RFID continue to expand into domains such as electronic passports,
electronic payment systems, and electronic container seals. These applications have a risk
of unauthorized access to sensitive biometric or ﬁnancial information through the RFID tag
or tag communication.
However, as RFID devices are intended to be small and relatively simple devices,
security protocols and techniques can signiﬁcantly lag behind the other details such as
correctness, read rate, power consumption, etc. As such, the state of security in RFID
systems is generally weak compared with other mature computational technologies such
as Internet servers, shared computing workstations, and even smartcards.
RFID systems require security features to be implemented using techniques that provide
a high strength of protection while not signiﬁcantly increasing the complexity of the system
as complexity can increase power consumption and implementation cost. Thus, it is
important to develop new security techniques that take advantage of the fundamental
properties of RFID communication such as physical layer protocols, low-power commu-
nication extensions, sleep modes, physical implementation variations, etc.
This chapter provides a survey of existing security techniques employed in RFID
systems, including authentication and encryption as well as commonly employed types
of attacks, and security features of existing RFID standards. This discussion is contained in
Section 33.2. Subsequently, we present a security scheme called layers of security for an
RFID tag that combines features from passive and active tags. Our security system takes
advantage of the fundamental properties of the tag to create multiple levels of low-
complexity security features, that when combined provide a strong protection. This is
described in Section 33.3. Some concluding remarks are related in Section 33.4.
33.2
Security in RFID Systems
RFID systems in general and RFID tags in particular have the requirement of a power
versus area tradeoff. The power consumed by the tags impacts the range of the device
(passive) or lifetime of the tag (active) where the area dictates the cost of the device. In
general, the industry has focused more on the area constraint than the power constraint.
The 5¢ RFID tag is a famous example of an area optimized device for reduction in cost. The
5¢ tag is composed of less than 10,000 gates.
Security concerns have often been a secondary concern for vendors primarily because
strong authentication and encryption algorithms are complex and would signiﬁcantly
increase the cost and power budget of the tag. Sarma et al. [1] discusses the security
risks and challenges of low-cost RFID tags. For example, in the 5¢ tag, <1000 gates are
dedicated to security. In contrast, commercial implementations of the Advanced Encryp-
tion Standard (AES) require 20,000–30,000 gates.
604
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

As a result, security techniques for RFID tags must leverage speciﬁc details of RFID
communication to create low-overhead secure transmissions. It is important to ensure
that neither the tag nor the reader is malicious with the intent to access restricted data or
destroy data. To prevent this, authentication techniques for RFID are described in Section
33.2.2. Additionally, once a reader and tag have entered into a trusted communication,
it is important to prevent a malicious device from overhearing the communication
and stealing data. To prevent this, encryption techniques for RFID are described in
Section 33.2.3.
33.2.1
Types of Attacks for RFID Systems
An intrusion or an attack to a computer on a traditional network has a physical limitation
due to physical network links. An intruder attempting to perform an attack requires
either some physical connection to the network through tapping a network cable or
access to some terminal on the victim’s network. Those attacks may be traceable by
detecting trafﬁc over particular network links or tracing with IP addresses, etc. However,
a malicious access to computing nodes in an open RF environment, such as RFID
network, wireless sensor network, or other wireless or RF network is not easy to be
detected and much more difﬁcult to track. For example, data travels over the air, which
is easily detectable by many nontrusted devices. As a result, there is a high demand to
increase the security and privacy for RFID networks. To understand potential attacks
to RFID networks we have summarized several common attacks in the following
subsections.
33.2.1.1
Eavesdropping
An unauthorized observer attempts to capture the exchanged information between the
reader and tags without permission. This is a passive style attack. RFID communication
occurs over the air and is thus an easy target for an eavesdropper to monitor data
transmitted without being detected. As a result, sensitive corporate or personal informa-
tion may be captured, recorded, and analyzed by a malicious attacker. Complex data
encryption and decryption algorithms would be suggested as good approaches to prevent
this type of attack. Unfortunately, complex data encryption such as AES encryption is often
too expensive for low-cost or passive RFID tags (or both).
33.2.1.2
Spooﬁng
In the spooﬁng attack, a malicious device forges an existing tag with a cloned tag that can
interact in a trusted manner by a reader. For example, after employing the eavesdropping
attack, an unauthorized third party may be able to analyze and reverse engineer the
captured encrypted information. Often, this information is easy to crack as the encryption
is typically simple because of the limited design complexity of these tags. After the attacker
breaks the architecture or the secret key of the encryption algorithm, they are capable of
cloning the tag to deceive a legitimate reader.
This type of attack is able to defeat access control [2], allow unauthorized access to
personal property and systems such as e-payment [3]. Mutual authentication and complex
data encryption are suggested for preventing this type of attack. As before complex data
encryption is often too expensive for many RFID systems. When adding mutual authen-
tication as a requirement, the cost is increasingly prohibitive.
Layers of Security for Active RFID Tags
605

33.2.1.3
Denial of Service
In computer networks, a denial-of-service (DoS) attack attempts to paralyze computers so
that they are not available for a legitimate access. One DoS attack is to ﬂood a network in
order to disrupt services to legitimate users or occupy the most of the network bandwidth.
SYN ﬂood and PING ﬂood are two well-known DoS attacks in computer networks.
From the RFID system perspective, a DoS attack may cause either RFID readers or RFID
tags to malfunction [4]. In consequence, it will cause a tag temporary or permanent
paralysis where the tag becomes unreadable or untraceable. This type of attack may
cause problems to applications such as automated inventory processing (e.g., shopping)
or tracking military shipments.
The DoS attack can be easily performed on active RFID tags where tags utilize batteries.
The energy of battery will be exhausted at a drastic rate when an attacker surreptitiously
transmits a large number of RFID commands.
33.2.1.4
Brute Force
A brute force attack is an approach to guess a secret key of an encryption algorithm or to
gain an access of a computer resource by exhaustively trying all possible keys. For
example, to search the 56-bit secret key of a DES encryption system, a hacker needs to
try 256 possible keys, meaning 255 trials (36 3 1015 trials), to ﬁnd the match. To exhaust-
ively compute this is easily accomplished within 7 days as illustrated by the study of
Kumar et al. [5].
Researchers at the Johns Hopkins University Information Security Institute and RSA
Laboratories ( JHU-RSA) successfully demonstrated the vulnerability of a 40-bit RFID-
enabled cryptographic tag [3]. The Digital Signature Transponder (DST) by Texas Instru-
ments utilizes a 20-round unbalanced Feistel cipher encryption algorithm with 40-bit secret
key [3]. This is the RFID technology behind ExxonMobil speedpass, a wireless payment
system tied into a credit card. The research group at JHU-RSA built a parallel Field
Programmable Gate Array (FPGA) platform to perform a brute force attack to crack the
40-bit secret key. By utilizing parallel computation of 16 FPGA devices, the 40-bit secret key
can be recovered on average in <1 h. This group suggests that a 40-bit cipher key is
vulnerable for brute-force attack and a 128-bit cryptographic algorithm is recommended
for commercial and homeland security applications.
33.2.1.5
Relay
The relay attack, also called the ‘‘man in the middle’’ attack, is an example of a spooﬁng
attack where a third party deceives the ﬁrst legitimate party thinking he is the second
legitimate party and deceives the second party into thinking he is the ﬁrst party. In effect
the third party relays the message from one party to the second and vice versa. Thus, the
two authorized parties intending to communicate with each other are tricked into a three
party conversation without being aware of the third party. Two relay-attack examples are
shown in Refs. [6,7].
The longest distance to make this type of attack is 50 m [7]. However, the relay attack
is limited by the distance between the reader and the tag. For example, as the distance
between the tag and reader increases, the time of relaying signals by the third
party between the reader and the tag increases as well. According to the ISO 18000 Part
6C standard, the reader waits for the tag response within 77 ms after transmitting a Query
to the tag. Otherwise, the reader will terminate this communication attempt. Therefore, a
606
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

possible prevention for this type of attack is to set a more strict time requirement to prevent
this attack even at reasonably close distances.
33.2.1.6
Side Channel
Unlike previous attack types, in a side channel attack a cryptanalyst exploits some infor-
mation measured externally from the device [8], such as timing [9], power [10], or electro-
magnetic [11,12] details. Side channel attacks based on power analysis have seen particular
interest for RFID and similar systems.
Power analysis techniques measure or monitor power consumption of a cryptosystem
by physically probing a ground pin [10]. These analysis techniques have been classiﬁed
into two sets: simple power analysis (SPA) and differential power analysis (DPA) [10]. The
accuracy of performing SPA can be easily affected by the signal-noise-ratio (SNR) on the
probed pin. However, the DPA technique not only measures power consumption of a
cryptosystem, but also requires a statistical analysis based on the collected power con-
sumption information. Thus, it can minimize the effect of SNR because it differentiates
output power traces.
The statistical technique of DPA works using a correlation function that indicates the
correlation between using a guessed key and the unknown secret key of the cryptosystem.
The key is subdivided into sub keys and each permutation of the sub key is tested while the
remainder of the key is held constant. If the correct guessed sub key is used, the correlation
function will indicate high correlation (e.g., spikes of differential power traces) between the
correct guessed sub key and the actual secret sub key. At the end the entire correct key is
composed of the high correlation sub keys. By using this technique the number of keys to
try is reduced by orders of magnitude over a brute force attack.
In 1999, Kocher et al. [10] announced a DPA attack against a Data Encryption Standard
(DES) coprocessor. This work describes DPA traces with correct and incorrect guessed sub
keys against a secret key of the DES coprocessor and shows the actual power spikes when
the correct sub key is guessed. DPA attacks have been proven effective on various
cryptosystems such as an AES ASIC coprocessor [13], AES hardware-based implementa-
tions [14,15], and a DES FPGA implementation [16]. To increase resistances of DPA, many
protection countermeasures are proposed [14,17,18].
For RFID systems, Rakers et al. [19] describe a DPA attack on an ISO 14443 RFID
enabled ‘‘contactless’’ smartcard. In 2002, Messerges et al. [20] illustrate an implementa-
tion of a similar DPA attack on smartcards. Rakers also describes an approach to protect
the contactless smart card from DPA attacks by exploiting an isolation circuit. An
isolation circuit is primarily used on an ASIC to prevent bit error rate degradations due
to digital interference. It behaves like a current source that is independent of power
consumption of the digital circuitry. Thus, the power signature of the digital circuitry is
reduced by a factor of 2000 or 66 dB, which signiﬁcantly increases the difﬁculty to
perform DPA.
33.2.2
Authentication Techniques in RFID Systems
Authentication is a mechanism or process to either verify the identiﬁcation of a party with
which communication occurs or to verify the integrity of received messages without
their having been modiﬁed. For example, symmetric encryption mechanism provides
a form of authentication among those who share the same secret key. In addition, asym-
metric encryption provides authentication and conﬁdentiality among those who share
public keys.
Layers of Security for Active RFID Tags
607

An alternative approach to authenticate a message is the use of a hash function. The hash
function maps a variable-length message into a ﬁxed-length hash value. It is easy to
convert a message into a hash value, but it is difﬁcult to recover the message from a
hash value without appropriate information. An advanced hash function, such as Secure
Hash Algorithm, combines hash function with secret keys.
33.2.2.1
Lightweight Authentication Protocols
Vajda and Buttyan [21] describe several lightweight authentication protocols for RFID
tags, including encrypting a challenge message using XOR, subset, square, RSA, and
KNAPSACK. For example, in the XOR authentication protocol, a reader and a tag initially
share two different, independent random keys, k0
R and k0
T, respectively. The RFID reader
initiates the authentication protocol, shown in Equation 33.1, by transmitting an initial
challenge message of x0 XOR k0
R to the tag. The tag retrieves the challenge message
by computing XOR with k0
R and responds with another challenge message computed by
XOR with k0
T to the reader. The reader extracts x0 and compares with the one it transmitted
to the tag.
R ! T : x0  k0
R,
T ! R : x0  k0
T:
(33:1)
For subsequent runs of the protocol, xi and ki
R are random numbers generated by the
reader. The reader transmits not only the encrypted challenge message but also the ki
R XOR
ki1
R . Equation 33.2 details the protocol for XOR. The other four authentication protocols
utilize a similar ﬂow but apply additionally complex encryption methodologies to encrypt
challenge messages.
R ! T : xi  ki
Rkki
R  ki1
R ,
T ! R : xi  k0
T:
(33:2)
Peris-Lopez et al. [22] propose a new lightweight mutual authentication protocol
(LMAP) technique targeting area optimized implementation for low-cost devices such as
RFID tags. The LMAPs is decomposed into four steps: tag identiﬁcation (TID), mutual
authentication, index updating, and key updating. The implementation of their proposed
protocol needs 86, 173, 346, 691, and 1037 gates for 8, 16, 32, 64, and 96-bit authentication
messages, respectively.
Bernardi et al. propose a new architecture of a UHF RFID transponder compatible with
the ISO 18000 Part 6C standard and extending the system with secure authentications.
Additionally, they proposed a multilayer network protocol for ISO 18000 Part 6C. The
architecture includes a microprocessor, output control unit, memory blocks, I=O encoder
and decoder, and an encryption module. A simpliﬁed asymmetric RSA encryption algo-
rithm is implemented in the encryption module, which encrypts 16-bit input plain text with
a 1024-bit ﬁxed secret key and provides 1024 bits of encrypted data. For a 90 nm HMOS
process, a design running at 1.9 MHz required 1.4 mm2 of area and consumed 1.5 mW
of power.
Bolotnyy and Robin [23] proposed a hardware-based authentication approach based on
physically unclonable functions (PUFs). PUFs take advantages of variations in silicon
processes and operating conditions to increase authentication strength. The PUF is based
on a silicon random
number generator [24–26]. The value
generated from the
silicon random number generator depends highly on the wire delay, temperature, thermal
608
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

gradients, etc., of the physical device. The proposed RFID architecture combines the PUF
with a universal hash function [27]. The proposed 64 PUF hash function circuit is com-
posed of 64 single-bit units and 1 oscillating counter circuit. Each single-bit unit requires an
estimated 8 gates and the oscillating counter circuit are estimated at 33 gates, which when
extrapolated to a 64-bit PUF hash function requires 545 gates.
Leung et al. [28] proposed the use of a cryptographic nonce as the tag identiﬁer designed
to avoid the tracing and cloning style attacks. A cryptographic nonce is a one-time-use
number. Because the identiﬁers are used only once, it is not possible to trace the tag with its
identiﬁer unless the sequence of identiﬁers is known to the attacker. Similarly, it is not
possible to clone the device. However, it is relatively easy for the tag and reader to be
desynchronized through a denial of service attack.
33.2.2.2
Symmetric Authentication Protocols
A symmetric authentication protocol is an authentication mechanism for those who
share the same secret key to verify authenticated messages. In describing the tradeoffs of
security versus cost of RFID tags, Weis et al. [29,30] proposed hash-lock and randomized
hash-lock authentication protocols. As hash-lock authentication uses hash-based access
control using one-way hash functions. By comparing an internal ‘‘metaID’’ with the value
of a hash function of a received key from the reader, the tag unlocks itself to the reader
upon a match.
The randomized hash-lock authentication protocol [29,30] extends the hash-lock tech-
nique to include randomly generated numbers as identiﬁers in the exchange. For example,
a tag is equipped with a random number generator. When the tag is queried it responds
with a pair (r; h(IDkkr)) where r is a random number, h is a hash function, and IDkkr is the
kth ID concatenated with the random number. The reader performs a hash function of all
ID in the database concatenated with r until it ﬁnds a match. To unlock the tag, the reader
transfers IDk back to the tag.
33.2.2.3
Asymmetric Authentication Protocols
An asymmetric authentication protocol utilizes a public and private key to perform the
authentication process. For example, the reader transmits an authentication message to the
tag encrypted by the tag’s public key. The tag decrypts the message with its private key.
The tag responds with the same authentication message back to the reader encrypted by
the reader’s public key. The reader then decrypts it with its private key and checks it
against the message it initially sent. General asymmetric encryption implementations such
as Elliptic Curve Cryptography (ECC) are exponential computations inefﬁcient for perva-
sive computing environments [31].
Niederreiter asymmetric encryption is an existing asymmetric encryption algorithm that
does not require exponential complexity but requires matrix operations [32]. Cui et al. [31]
introduced a lightweight asymmetric authentication protocol designed for RFID devices.
This technique employs the Niederreiter asymmetric encryption technique to perform a
challenge response authentication protocol by using public and private keys. The public
and private keys are built in Niederreiter encryption algorithm by generating several
matrices and an (n,k)-linear code.
33.2.2.4
Strong Authentication Protocols
Feldhofer proposed a strong authentication technique for RFID based on AES [33]. First the
reader generates a random number Nreader and sends it to the tag. The tag returns
Layers of Security for Active RFID Tags
609

a random number Ntag and both the Ntag and Nreader encrypted with the AES secret key.
The reader decrypts and veriﬁes the encrypted Nreader is the same as originally sent. It
then reverses the order of Nreader and Ntag and returns this, encrypted, back to the tag.
If the reader decrypts the correct Ntag, then the reader and tag continue with their
transaction.
For this implementation the system for AES encryption is an 8-bit coprocessor for and
thus requires only 3600 gates. However, it requires 1000 clock cycles to accomplish each
encryption operation thus requiring 10 ms to computation time. From a power consump-
tion perspective, this implementation of the design utilizes 0.35 mm technology and
requires 8.15 mA at 100 kHz.
33.2.3
Encryption Techniques in RFID Systems
Authentication provides a procedure to verify the identity of the parties to communication.
In the case of RFID, this includes tags and readers. However, after the authentication has
been completed, the readers and tags transmit insecure information. As the communication
is wireless, it is very easy for a snooping device to pick up and steal this information. In
many cases this information may be of a sensitive nature, such as biometric data, identi-
ﬁcation numbers such as credit card or social security numbers, corporate infrastructure
details, etc.
To secure the information exchanged between readers and tags, data encryption is
needed to protect these systems. However, current commercial data encryption modules
may be too expensive in terms of area (cost) and power (range or lifetime) to be feasible for
an RFID system. Therefore, several efforts have studied how to ﬁnd ‘‘low-cost’’ encryption
techniques suitable for RFID systems.
33.2.3.1
Symmetric Key Encryption
A symmetric key encryption mechanism utilizes a single private key shared among
readers and tags to encrypt or decrypt a message or data. The length of the key controls
the level of security for this encryption quantiﬁed by the time taken to break the encryption
with a brute-force attack. The length of key also correlates with the implementation
complexity of the security technique. For example, a modern 128-bit symmetric-key
encryption core costs more than 100,000 gates in area [34] while performing high through-
put of encrypted data with the strength of 2128 possible key values. However, for low-cost
RFID systems, an RFID tag has much stricter area constraints, making this algorithm
infeasible. Thus, implementations for RFID systems must trade off encryption strength
against implementation complexity.
The Tiny Encryption Algorithm (TEA) [35] has been proposed for low-cost RFID data
encryption [36]. A 32-bit TEA algorithm has been implemented and synthesized for a
0.35 mm CMOS technology. The implementation required 0.21 mm2 of area and could
achieve a maximum clock frequency of 50 MHz. The dynamic power dissipation is
estimated at 7.37 mW with a 25.6 kHz clock.
The TinyAES architecture is based on AES-128 for RFID systems [33]. The data path of
the hardware-based architecture is 8-bits wide. The silicon implementation result shows
that the TinyAES module draws a current of 3.0 mA and consumed the power of 4.5 mW
when operated at 100 kHz and 1.5 V. The core needs an area of 0.25 mm2 on a 0.35 mm
CMOS technology, which compares roughly to 4400 gates.
Another approach describes a tradeoff between area and timing of an AES encrypt-
ion implementation [37]. This implementation was introduced to reduce timing require-
ment of AES encryption by optimizing the data processing of the algorithm. The 8-bit
610
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

hardware-based architecture implemented in 0.25 mm CMOS technology has a gate count
of 3868 and requires 870 clock cycles at 10 MHz. However, the power dissipation infor-
mation for this implementation is not provided.
33.2.3.2
Asymmetric Key Encryption
An asymmetric encryption algorithm relies on one key, called a public key, for encryption
and a different, but related key, called a private key for decryption [38]. Thus, to send an
encrypted message, ﬁrst the receiver provides the sender with its public key. The sender
encrypts the message with the public key and the receiver decrypts the message with its
private key. It is important not to be able to determine the private key from the public key.
To increase security by adding an authentication component, to verify that the message
came from a trusted sender, it would be required to decrypt the message with the receiver’s
private key and sender’s public key.
Asymmetric key encryption requires more complex algorithms compared with symmet-
ric key encryption for comparable encryption strengths, but also provides many advan-
tages such as not having to divulge and share a secret key and the capability to manage the
system for individual devices and groups of devices. For RFID systems, implementing an
asymmetric encryption scheme is a signiﬁcant challenge.
ECC is a type of public-key cryptography proposed for low-cost RFID systems [39] and
in particular for ISO 18000 Part 6C [40]. The ECC processor is composed of a control unit,
arithmetic unit (ALU), and memory (RAM and ROM). The ECC synthesized in 0.25 mm
CMOS technology shows that the ALU requires 6300–7800 gates, depending on the size of
the Galois Field adder GF(2m), where m is the length of the key. It can also be much larger
depending on the size of the memory block.
The study of Leung et al. [28] describes an implementation of a 173-bit ECC crypto-
processor based on an Optimal Normal Basis (ONB) methodology. This implementation
is designed for a low-power inductive RFID application such as the ISO 14443 contactless
smartcard standard, which operates at 13.56 MHz. The 173-bit ECC crypto-processor
is capable of operating at 18 MHz and executing an ECC encryption process within
7.56 ms and requires 95 mW with a 3.3 V power supply.
33.2.4
Security in RFID Standards
33.2.4.1
ISO 18000 Part 7
The ISO 18000 Part 7 standard [41] is the most popular protocol for active ultra high
frequency (UHF) systems. To prevent malicious access to the tags, a password style
authentication mechanism is provided in the standard by the set password, set pass-
word protect, and unlock commands. The set password command sets an internal
password required for further tag accesses. The set password protect command
enables or disables password authentication. The unlock command allows unprotected
access to the tag. Unfortunately, password protection is not a strong authentication
technique, and passwords can easily be stolen and spoofed.
33.2.4.2
ISO 18000 Part 6C
The ISO 18000 Part 6C standard [42] is a recent adoption by ISO of the Class 1 Generation 2
‘‘Gen 2’’ RFID speciﬁcation [43] for passive UHF tags from electronic product code (EPC)
global, Inc. Even prior to its standardization by ISO, Gen 2 tags have become very popular
and widely used for applications requiring passive RFID.
Layers of Security for Active RFID Tags
611

Neither the ISO standard nor the Gen 2 speciﬁcation contain any particular requirements
for security in compliant tag or reader implementations and typical implementations
employ minimal security features.
The interrogator or reader can lock or unlock each individual area of memory. This
includes access to the access or kill passwords, the electronic product code (EPC) memory
bank, or TID memory bank. When the tag is locked, the passwords cannot be read or
modiﬁed and all other memory banks are write protected. Additionally, the reader can
permalock the lock status for a password or memory bank so that it is not changeable. As the
name implies, one permalock is asserted to a particular memory block, and it cannot be
changed. Finally, the tag can be permanently deactivated if the tag receives the kill
command with the correct password. After the tag is killed it no longer responds to
interrogator commands. Interestingly, killed tags are actually alive and can still receive
passive power and actually buffer incoming packets, but never respond.
Juels proposes an authentication protocol to combat tag cloning even in environments
with untrusted readers [44]. This protocol assumes an authenticated tag that contains
its own unique EPC identiﬁer and its own 32-bit secret key. The readers authenticated
to communicate with the tag contain a database of secret keys associated with the
authenticated tags. During a transaction, a tag identiﬁes itself and the reader veriﬁes
the identiﬁer with its database. The reader responds with the appropriate secret key.
Finally, the tag veriﬁes the secret key from the authenticated reader. Unfortunately, if
any adversary eavesdrops during this authentication process the tag identiﬁer and secret
key can be captured. Data encryption is required to protect this technique for this
information leakage.
33.2.4.3
ISO 14443
The ISO 14443 standard [45] is the most popular standard for high frequency proximity
cards or what are also called contactless RFID cards or contactless smartcards about
to the size of a credit card. ISO 14443 compliant devices typically have a range of
3 inches and cost <$5. The devices are passively powered. The ISO 14443 standard
does not specify any speciﬁc cryptographic algorithm or authentication protocol. How-
ever, security features, such as authentication and encryption, available in the smart
card standard ISO 7816 [46] are also compatible for ISO 14443 devices [47]. The ISO
7816 smartcards, which are in contact with the readers when they are accessed,
can be directly powered. Thus, the passively powered ISO 14443 devices have a signiﬁ-
cantly lower power budget, making many of these cryptographic algorithms difﬁcult to
implement.
Mandel et al. [2] describe how to use a $30 device to perform a relay attack on proximity
cards that adhere to the ISO 14443 standard. The technique takes advantage of the passive
authentication feature employed by these devices rather than more secure alternatives such
as active authentication and a challenge–response protocol. The broadcast signal from the
proximity card is captured and then relayed using a $30 AM transmitter to a gate that
subsequently opens. In addition to being able to recreate the signal, after snooping several
proximity ID and broadcast signals, the passive authentication structure in the card was
easily reverse engineered.
Kﬁr and Wool [6] analyzed the man-in-the-middle attack approach to perform relay
attacking on the RFID-enabled contactless smartcard. In their approach they use a theor-
etical model to describe the behavior of the device and show that it is possible to perform
relay attacks when the authorized tag and reader are in relatively close proximity to
each other.
612
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

Hancke implemented prototypes called a ‘‘Mole’’ and ‘‘Proxy’’ system to perform a
practical relay attack against an ISO 14443 type-A contactless smartcard [7]. In this
experiment, the distance of the relay attack is shown to be as far as 50 m.
The MiFare microprocessor [48] from Philips, a leading manufacturer of ISO 14443 chips,
contains a crypto-coprocessor capable of processing 3DES algorithms in hardware.
3DES is a variant of the DES encryption algorithm originally proposed by IBM [49],
which avoids brute force attack vulnerabilities of DES and meet-in-the-middle vulnerabil-
ities of double DES.
33.2.4.4
ICAO Extension to ISO 14443
Personal information contained within a travel document, credit card, driver’s license, or
other identiﬁcation is often extremely sensitive and results in concerns about information
privacy. One of the applications that employs the ISO 14443 standard is electronic pass-
ports (E-passports). As this application raises a signiﬁcant privacy concern, efforts have
been made to add additional security to ISO 14443 speciﬁcally for this application.
Juels et al. [50] employ basic access control to prevent the RFID chip from being accessed
by an unfamiliar reader unless the reader can prove it is authorized. To accomplish this,
they employ a digital signature cryptographic technique based on public key crypto-
graphic algorithms [38]. However, as these devices are passively powered, the power
budget for operating the tag is limited, which also limits the strength of authentication
that can be employed. In this implementation the key length is very small, making it
relatively easy to defeat. Additionally, the key is hard wired into the device, making
it quickly obsolete.
E-passport cryptography is further addressed in the Machine Readable Travel
Documents (MRTDs) speciﬁcation published by the International Civil Aviation Organ-
ization [51]. The ICAO requires a baseline security technique of passive authenti-
cation based on RSA, DSA, or a similar variant. It also goes further to describe
techniques for active authentication, basic access control, extended access control, and
data encryption.
The passive and active authentication measures ensure that the content of the RFID chip
in the E-passport has not been modiﬁed or that the RFID tag has been improperly replaced
or forged. Extended access control is a protection protocol to prevent unauthorized access
to biometric information. Data encryption prevents against a third party listening to the
transmitted biometric information.
33.2.4.5
ISO 18185
The ISO 18185 standard [52] describes RFID tags that can be used for electronic container
seals. Electronic container seals allow the tracking of a container all the way through a
supply chain to verify that the items have not been opened, or tampered with. When the
container is initially ﬁlled with cargo and sealed the ISO 18185 compliant tag controls a
locking bolt that is put in place. After the container has been sealed it may not be resealed.
Once the container reaches its destination it is opened by breaking the bolt and the RFID
tag moves to the ‘‘opened’’ state, where it remains and cannot be changed. After use the
tag is disposed of.
The container seal tags contain no signiﬁcant security features; data, such as cargo
contents, is transmitted in clear text. The only form of authentication is the use of a unique
tag identiﬁer to avoid replication. The 18185 tag is susceptible to a snooping and spooﬁng
attack. For example, an attacker can listen to a tag access to get the unique information.
Layers of Security for Active RFID Tags
613

Then they can break the seal and replace it with a spoofed tag that uses the same unique ID
as the tag placed prior to tampering.
33.2.4.6
ANSI NCITS 256
The American National Standards Institute (ANSI) published a standard for active RFID
systems (ANSI NCITS 256) [53]. It deﬁnes an equivalent air interface characteristics
and speciﬁcations to the ISO 18000 Part 7 standard, including the same preamble signal
and data format. The differences from ISO 18000 Part 7 deal with the types of RFID
commands. Except the collection command, there are 13 data commands in ANSI 256
standard. However, none of them is used for access control, authentication, or data protec-
tion. ANSI NCITS 256 is vulnerable to eavesdropping, tag cloning, data disclosure, and
other standard attacks.
33.2.5
Conclusions about Existing Techniques
Based on the study of existing standards and security techniques, we can conclude that the
state of security in RFID systems has several key problems that must be addressed.
Security in existing standards is fairly minimal, when it exists at all. Often, it is left to
designers of standard compliant systems to integrate their own security methods as they
see ﬁt. Additionally, the cost and power requirements of RFID tags often make it difﬁcult
to incorporate strong security in the tags. As a result, many techniques propose light-
weight authentication or encryption, which may be broken relatively easily. Stronger
authentication and encryption are suggested, but often have high power budgets or area
requirements (increasing cost) that exceed what is possible for RFID.
In the next section, we describe a security alternative called layers of security that addresses
the strength of security and the power budget issue for a passive active hybrid RFID tag
system. This tag does tradeoff an increase in area for savings in power and improvements in
performance. However, in comparison of active tags, which typically are signiﬁcantly more
expensive, this increase in cost is nominal. This approach differs with the existing
approaches described here as it leverages details of how the RFID tag communicates to
ﬁnd low power consumption security extensions that protect the data and tag access.
33.3
Layers of Security
Our approach for securing RFID transactions is to employ security at multiple levels
during the RFID transaction. These levels are applied to different layers in the communi-
cation scheme similar to the layers in the Open System Interconnection (OSI) Model. As
such, our system assumes as the baseline architecture the passive active RFID tag (PART)
[54] described in Chapter 11 and the use of a design automation technique to program the
architecture [55–57] described in Chapter 3. Thus, our approach provides layers of security
in the ﬁnal RFID system, including (1) the passive activation layer (burst switch), (2) the
active communication encoding (physical layer), (3) the use of encrypted data in the
communication primitives (speciﬁed with the RFID design automation), and (4) physical
security protection.
33.3.1
Passive Activation Layer Security
The burst switch alone is not sufﬁcient to replace the active receiver for RFID tags. The
simple presence of RF energy such as noise or a communication with other wireless
614
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

systems or even a malicious reader can cause the tag to wake up the active transceiver. To
solve this problem we have developed a signal encoding methodology using both hard-
ware and software prototypes. The RFID reader generates bursts of energy of different
durations like those shown in Figure 33.1. In the example from Figure 33.1, the reader
generates four pulses with lengths of 2, 12, 3, and 9 time units. The tag must detect a unique
code from these bursts so as to activate the remainder of the tag. The software-based
system is implemented with a PIC microprocessor [58]. The hardware-based system is
designed for implementation in an ASIC or SoC. The strength of the encoding is related to
two components: the number of bursts in the sequence n and the unique number of
different burst lengths detectable by the receiver b. Thus, the resulting number of unique
codes is nb_. The main components of the detection circuit, shown in Figure 33.2, are two
counters and a comparator. The ﬁrst counter detects the value of the burst determined by
the burst length requiring [lg b] bits and the second to track which burst is being checked in
the sequence requiring [lg n] bits.
The clock speed of the circuit depends on the detection precision of the burst switch. For
example, if we consider the detection of a 6 ms burst with a granularity of 1 ms we clock our
circuit at 10 MHz. However, as shown in Figure 33.3 with the solid line, a 6 ms burst was
detected with nonzero probability for bursts ranging from 5.1 to 6.9 ms. This can be
Burst-detecting
circuit
6 s, 12 s, 3 s, 9 s
If  match
2 s
3 s
12 s
9 s
FIGURE 33.1
Example encoding for the burst switch. The wake-up signal contains four bursts of 2, 12, 3, and 9 time units,
respectively.
1st Burst value
i th Burst value 
nth Burst value
Register
file
 
MUX
Status register 
(counter)
Length sampling
(counter)
==
All bursts 
detected
Yes
Yes
No
Enable
No
Reset
Burst width (no. of bits)
(Represented by b)
No. of bursts
(represented by n)
Reset
Burst signal input
System clock
Enable
active tag
System clock
FIGURE 33.2
Architecture of the burst sequence detection circuit.
Layers of Security for Active RFID Tags
615

corrected by oversampling of 103 (e.g., clocking at 100 MHz instead of 10). Unfortunately,
increasing the clock speed by 103 also increases the power consumed dramatically.
However, only at 6.0 ms does detection occur with 100% probability.
Thus, rather than oversample, we consider the impact of increasing the number of pulses
in the sequence. The heavy dashed line from Figure 33.3 shows the impact of placing four
bursts together with the same deviations. Interestingly, the false positives drop off much
more quickly than predicted (dotted line), which still predicts as high as 40% false positives
after the actual number of false positives have already dropped to zero. By including a
small amount of oversampling (2–33) and breaking the burst detection into multiple bursts,
it is possible to see negligible false positives and keep our power budget at a minimum.
Once the proper burst switch encoding has been received, the active transceiver is
wakened to begin the active stage of communication. The encoded burst switch prevents
a malicious reader from executing a denial of service attack on the passive–active tag to
dramatically drain the battery.
33.3.1.1
Results
To determine the minimum time increment for differentiating a different length pulse,
we prototyped the digital portion of the hardware with Spartan 3 FPGAs and connected
the generator and detector with a wire. Figure 33.3 shows the percent of reads
that were detected as 6 ms for values ranging from 5 to 7 ms. In this experiment the
deviation was 1 ms. By considering four pulses, this deviation drops to 0% for 0.3 ms.
When testing with the Lynx transmitter and receiver we found that the clock speed should
be reduced signiﬁcantly below 1 MHz as the resolution of the transceiver is at least an
order of magnitude (100 kHz) slower [59].
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
−1.0
−0.9
−0.8
−0.7
−0.6
−0.5
−0.4
−0.3
−0.2
−0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Burst duration deviation
Positive detections
One burst;
Four bursts;
Four bursts (predicted)
FIGURE 33.3
Percentage of false positives for one burst and four bursts detection between 1 ms and granularity of 0.1 ms.
616
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

The burst switch detector was implemented in ASIC hardware using Synopsys Design
Compiler targeting 0.16 mm Oki cells and examined for power consumption using
Synopsys PrimePower at 10 MHz, 1 MHz, and 100 kHz system clock rates. The number
of unique representations for each burst was represented using 2, 4, 8, 16, and 32 bits and
for each experiment the number of bursts was held constant at four. The area and power
results are shown in Table 33.1. For comparison, the same functionality was implemented
in a Microchip PIC12F635 8 bit ultra low power microprocessor requiring 200 mW of power
[58]. Even operating at the highest clock speed of 10 MHz, the power consumption for the
largest design is less than 30% of the PIC. However, a 100 kHz clock speed design, closer to
matching the capability of the transceiver, requires 3003 less power than the PIC when
processing. Interestingly, at such low clock speeds, the clock gated circuit provides little
power advantage.
33.3.2
Physical Layer Security
Active RFID tags generally communicate using some form of Manchester encoding.
Manchester encoding combines data communication with a synchronization clock. Each
bit is contained within a window in the signal that contains a transition in the middle. If the
transition goes from high to low (falling edge), the bit is a ‘‘0.’’ Similarly, if the transition
goes from low to high (rising edge), the bit is a ‘‘1.’’ Differential Manchester encoding
considers the same window, while again, there is always a transition in the middle.
However, the bit value is determined if there is a transition between the end of one
window and the beginning of the next. If there is a transition, the bit is a ‘‘0,’’ and if
there is no transition the bit is a ‘‘1.’’
Figure 33.4 provides an example of Manchester and Differential Manchester encoding of
the bit vector ‘‘011001.’’ The interesting thing about these two different encodings is that
they appear superﬁcially the same; however, unless you know which code is being used, it
is impossible to determine the encoding just by examining the data itself. For example, in
Figure 33.4, if a Differential Manchester encoding of ‘‘011001’’ is read as Manchester code,
it appears to be ‘‘101110,’’ which is entirely unrelated to the original value.
To further protect data in our system, we mix the use of Manchester and Differential
Manchester encoding in the same data sequence. A key will be used to specify the encoding
employed, for example, a ‘‘0’’ would imply Manchester encoding while a ‘‘1’’ would
suggest Differential Manchester encoding.
TABLE 33.1
Hardware Burst Switch Detection Circuit Implemented in 0.16 mm
Technology at 1.8 V
2 bit
4 bit
8 bit
16 bit
32 bit
Area (no. of cells)
42
52
78
120
205
Area (mm2)
124
149
235
327
566
10 MHz Clock
Power (mW)
14.95
17.82
24.33
33.96
53.45
1 MHz Clock
Power (mW)
1.78
2.21
2.85
3.84
5.86
100 kHz Clock
Power (mW)
0.17
0.22
0.28
0.38
0.58
Gated Clock
Power (mW)
0.11
0.17
0.22
0.32
0.55
Layers of Security for Active RFID Tags
617

To convert Manchester or Differential Manchester code into bit-vectors, the signal is
sampled so as to detect the transition in the middle or beginning of the window, respect-
ively. To extract the values from a signal that combines Manchester and Differential
Manchester code in the same signal it is necessary to sample for transitions at both the
beginning of the window and the middle of the window, simultaneously. This requires
doubling the sampling rate over either encoding alone. Additionally, it will be necessary to
create logic to detect the existence or absence of a transition at the beginning of the window
and the direction of the transition in the middle of window to determine the value.
However, the key can be used as an enable signal to these blocks, so the inactive block
does not consume power.
The architecture of the decoder is described in Figure 33.5. The input signal is sampled to
detect the Manchester value and Differential Manchester value for the same window.
The Manchester circuit keeps the decoder in synchronization as it detects the transition
that occurs in the middle of the window with the direction of this transition dictating the
‘‘Manchester’’ value. It also sends a synchronization signal to the Differential Manchester
FIGURE 33.4
Example of the bit-vector ‘‘011001’’ encoded
as Manchester encoding, Differential Man-
chester encoding,andDifferentialManchester
encoding read as Manchester encoding.
Manchester encoding
Differential 
Manchester encoding
Differential
Manchester read as  
Manchester encoding
0
0
1
1
1
1
0
0
1
1
0
0
1
1
1
0
0
1
Edge detection circuit
Decoding key for n byte data (n = 1)
1
0
0
1
1
0
0
1
msb bit7 ∗n
Isb bit0
MUX
Positive 
transition
Negative
transition
 
Manchester decoder
@ the middle
of the bit
window 
No
transition
Transition
Differential Manchester decoder
@ the edge 
of the bit 
window
Input signal
Synchronization 
signal
0
1
Serial to parallel 
(n byte)
Rotated for each bit
Output decoded 
data
Q
Q
SET
CLR
D
Input
Edge
FIGURE 33.5
Encoder and decoder block for combining Manchester and Differential Manchester encodings using a key.
618
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

decoder to tell it when to sample for the beginning of the next window. This is necessary as
there is no guarantee for a transition between the windows. The existence or lack of a
transition dictates the ‘‘Differential Manchester’’ value. The transition detection is com-
pleted by some variation of the edge detection circuit. This circuit compares the current and
previously sampled value and generates a ‘‘1’’ if there is an edge or a ‘‘0’’ if there is not an
edge. The direction of the edge can be detected by checking the current or previously
sampled value.
The ﬁnal decoded value is selected by the key, where a ‘‘0’’ means select the Manchester
value and a ‘‘1’’ means select the Differential Manchester value, indicated with the
multiplexer in the ﬁgure. The bits arrive serially and are grouped into bytes for processing
in the tag controller. Keys may be updated by adding new primitives into the RFID system
using the design automation approach described in Chapter 3.
33.3.2.1
Results
We built a Manchester decoder in 0.16 mm Oki cell-based ASIC hardware synthesized with
Synopsys Design Compiler and proﬁled for power with Synopsys PrimePower. The design
was analyzed by simulating the design at 500 kHz. The selected appropriate sampling rate
for a 27.7 kHz signal is 500 kHz, which is the standard data rate for ISO 18000 Part 7 [41].
This design is based on the Manchester decoder developed for a power saving smart buffer
for active tags described in Ref. [55]. The design was extended as shown in Figure 33.5 to
include concurrent Differential Manchester decoding and selection based on a key. The
results of these two designs are summarized in Table 33.2. The overhead of adding
Differential Manchester decoding increases the design area by 42% and the power
consumed by 38%.
33.3.3
Encrypted Data Transmission with AES
Once the correct encoding has been received by the burst switch and the physical
layer has been successfully decoded creating a packet comprised of several bytes of
data, the data must be decrypted. The AES algorithm from the National Institute of
Standards and Technology (NIST) was selected for our third layer of security. Our
implementation goal for AES was to create an implementation that was low-energy to
allow the longest battery life possible for the tag. As a result, we employed the Super-
CISC compiler [60] to assist with the hardware generation for the encryption and
decryption completed in the tag.
The SuperCISC compiler generates extremely energy-efﬁcient hardware descriptions
from C applications. The primary concern for active tags is battery life. It is often incon-
venient or impossible to change a battery. Additionally, active tags are typically much
more expensive than passive tags, costing on the order of $100, compared with several
cents for passive tags. Silicon area in the tag controller design impacts the per part cost of
TABLE 33.2
Overhead for Adding Differential Manchester Decoding Using a Key
to a Manchester Decoder
Area
(No. of cells)
Area
(mm2)
Power
(mW)
Manchester Decoder alone
466
3780
2.886
With Differential Manchester
664
5386
3.996
Layers of Security for Active RFID Tags
619

the chip that goes into the tag. The SuperCISC approach often trades area increases for
energy savings. However, with the cost of active tags being so high, a slight increase in tag
cost versus a longer battery life is easily acceptable.
An overview of the AES implementation approach is shown in Figure 33.6. A total of ﬁve
blocks for the C implementation of AES were synthesized using SuperCISC. For encryp-
tion, AES requires 12 rounds of computation with four functions occurring back to back:
SubByte (), ShiftRows (), MixColumns (), and AddRoundKey (), with
AddRoundKey () being executing prior to these rounds and all functions with the
exception of MixColumns () being executed once after the rounds. Thus for encryption,
three blocks were synthesized: AddRoundKey (), which is primarily a Galois Field Adder,
the combination of SubByte () and ShiftRows (), which simplify to table lookups and
routing, and MixColumns (). Using a simple ﬁnite state machine (FSM), the resulting
encryption block is shown in Figure 33.6a. Decryption requires complementary functions
InvMixColumns () and the combination of InvSubByte () and InvShiftRows () in
addition to the AddRoundKeys () block from encryption. Decryption is implemented in a
similar manner to encryption, as shown in Figure 33.6b.
Figure 33.7 shows core synthesized hardware for the MixColumns () block. For ease of
visualization, only a single iteration is shown here. MixColumns and its decryption
complement InvMixColumns () are the most complex blocks in the AES algorithm.
Even this function is built from relatively simple computations, constant modulus, constant
increment, compare against zero and select, table lookups, and exclusive OR. The Super-
CISC compiler provides a low latency combinational implementation of all these blocks to
avoid the power overheads of a highly pipelined implementation with a possible increase
in area. However, the performance of these blocks far exceeds the relatively slow commu-
nication speeds of 30 kHz employed by active tags.
Round
AddRoundK ey()
MUX
1
0
MixColumns()
SubByte()
ShiftRows()
MUX
0
1
Original 
cipher key
array
FSM
Plain text
Cipher text
Round register
(a) 
Inverse round
AddRoundKey()
MUX
1
0
InvMixColumns()
InvSubByte()
InvShiftRows()
MUX
1
0
Original 
cipher key
array
FSM
Cipher text
Plain text
MUX
1
0
Round register
(b) 
FIGURE 33.6
AES architectural overview: (a) encryption and (b) decryption.
620
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

load Logtable
Convert_UtoU_8to9
b00 
load Logtable
Convert_UtoU_8to9
b10 
load Logtable
Convert_UtoU_8to9 
b20
load Logtable
Convert_UtoU_8to9
b30 
!=
mux
S
a00
1
!=
1
^
2
^
1
0
2
^
1
load Alogtable
1
mod
+
1
25 
1
255
2
0
2
!=
mux
S
 ^ 
1
load Alogtable
1
mod
+
1
!=
mux
S
^
1
load Alogtable
1
mod
+
1
!=
mux
S
^
1
load Alogtable
1
 mod 
 + 
1
mux
S
2
load Alogtable
1
mod
+
1
!=
mux
S
2
load Alogtable
1
mod
+
1
!=
mux
S
2
load Alogtable
1
mod
 + 
1
!=
mux
S
2
load Alogtable
1
mod 
+
1
 ^ 
1
^
2
b00
 ^ 
1
2
b10
 ^ 
1
2
b20
 ^ 
1
^
2
b30
a30
1
1
2
0
2
25
1
255
2
0
2
a20
1
1
1 2
0
2
25
1
255
2
0
2
a10
1
2
1
0
2
25
1
255 
2
0
2
0 
2
1
1
255 
2
0
2
0
2
1
1
255
2
0
2
0
2
1 
1
255
2
0
2
0
2
1 
1
255
2
0
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
1 1
FIGURE 33.7
One loop iteration of the MixColumns () function from AES encrypt.
Layers of Security for Active RFID Tags
621

33.3.4
Physical Security
RFID tags are often deployed in environments that do not provide physical security for the
device. This opens the RFID tag to a class of attacks that involve analysis of the tag power
consumption to determine the secret key stored in the device. These types of power attacks
have been effective for breaking the encryption of smart cards [20]. The ﬁrst class of attack
is SPA, which involves correlating the power consumption of the device to the input
provided [9]. The second class of attack is DPA, which uses statistical analysis to help
discover the secret key [10]. While both SPA and DPA require knowledge of the encryption
algorithm’s behavior, SPA is only effective when the algorithm has a control ﬂow that
depends on the secret key, where DPA is effective (independent of whether the control
ﬂow depends on the secret key [17]), making it a much more powerful attack. As a result,
we consider the effectiveness of DPA attacks on the RFID tag and discuss methods to
protect against these attacks.
DPA attacks attempt to discover the secret key by subdividing the key into subgroups of
a limited number of bits and examining power traces for all the combinations of each of
these subgroups. For example, in 128-bit AES, the 128-bit key is subdivided into 32 groups
of 4 bits each. During DPA, a subgroup is examined between ‘‘0000’’ and ‘‘1111,’’ with all
the remaining groups set to a ﬁxed value. The power analysis compares a known imple-
mentation, that is, using the guessed key value with the system to be broken where the
internal value of the key is unknown. DPA takes the difference between these two
implementations (averaged over the course of many input text samples) for each guessed
key value where on average the power differences cancel out; however, there are spikes
when key values match between the two systems.
A more rigorous explanation is based on the descriptions in Refs. [10,20]. The AES
algorithm is executed with N values of plain-text input for each guessed key.
A discretized power output signal Si[j] is recorded for each of the guessed keys, where i
is a particular plain-text input and j is a particular key. For AES, 0  i < N, with N typically
being 512, and 0  j < 32, where the upper bound is the product of the number of discrete
keys per group and the number of groups. Using the partitioning function D(), the power
traces are subdivided into sets where the guessed key contains a ‘‘0’’ or ‘‘1’’ as follows:
S0 ¼ fSi[j]jD(  ) ¼ 0g,
S1 ¼ fSi[j]jD(  ) ¼ 1g:
(33:3)
The average power for each guessed ‘‘0’’ and ‘‘1’’ is computed as Ai[ j] as follows:
A0[j] ¼ 1
jS0j
X
Si[j]2S0
Si[j],
A1[j] ¼ 1
jS1j
X
Si[j]2S1
Si[j]:
(33:4)
The DPA bias signal, T[j], is the difference of the average power:
T[j] ¼ A0[j]  A1[j]:
(33:5)
T[j] is the value that shows spikes when the correct secret key is guessed.
622
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

33.3.4.1
Results
The AES encryption and decryption components were implemented in 0.16 mm Oki cell-
based hardware synthesized using Synopsys Design Compiler and simulated at different
speeds with Mentor Graphics Modelsim. The power consumption was analyzed using
Synopsys PrimePower. The results are reported in Table 33.3. The results show that while
there is a large variation in power consumption dependent on the speed, the energy
consumption for the entire AES operation is relatively similar varying between 4.18 and
5.17 nJ for encryption and 6.16 and 7.76 nJ for decryption. If the minimal energy solution
was selected, it would be the 500 kHz speed allowing a throughput of 5 Mb/s, which
matches the clock speed for the Manchester decoder. However, for line speeds of 27.7 kHz
as is deﬁned by the ISO 18000 Part 7 standard for active tags, the 10 kHz clock yielding a
throughput of 106 Kb=s is more than sufﬁcient.
This design may also be possible for passive tags, which operate on a very strict power
budget. Typically, passive tags consume a few microwatts of power. The AES design at
10 kHz is already in the microwatt range, and if the speed is reduced to 30 kHz, the
power may be reduced by as much as 3.5–4 times to 1–2 mW.
33.3.4.2
Resistance to the DPA Attack
It has been shown that the predominant power consuming component of the AES algo-
rithm is the Galois Field Adder, GF(2n), which is typically implemented as an XOR
function. The GF(2n) adder is from the AddRoundKey () function, and the SDFG for
this function is shown in Figure 33.8 as parallel XOR gates. To ensure that our RFID tag is
not susceptible to DPA, it is necessary to mask the power signature of this component so
that it does not change in the predicted manner dependent on the key.
The standard technique to accomplish the power signature obfuscation is to calculate
each bit of the GF(2n) (XOR) calculation as if the bit is a ‘‘0’’ and a ‘‘1’’ and then use
the actual key value to select which result is actually used in the computation. While this
method obfuscates the power consumption, it does require twice as much work increasing
the area and power consumption of the device. Our goal is to protect the implementation
from DPA while minimizing the area and power increase.
The DPA technique presented by Kocher [9,10] assumes that the encryption algorithm is
run on a microprocessor and that based on the output testing, the test can determine when
the application is processing the portion of the key containing the 4-bit window currently
being tested. By using the SuperCISC technique for our implementation, the entire key
TABLE 33.3
Power, Energy, Throughput, and Area of the AES Hardware Block Implemented
in Oki 0.16 mm Cell-Based ASIC Design
AES Mode
Clock Speed
Power
Energy (nJ)
Rate
Encryption
Area, 0.46 mm2
10 MHz
4.62 mW
5.08
1 Gb/s
500 kHz
0.19 mW
4.18
5 Mb/s
100 kHz
0.047 mW
5.17
1 Mb/s
10 kHz
4.056 mW
4.46
106 Kb/s
Decryption
Area, 0.72 mm2
10 MHz
7.05 mW
7.76
1 Gb/s
500 kHz
0.28 mW
6.16
5 Mb/s
100 kHz
0.069 mW
7.59
1 Mb/s
10 kHz
7.031 mW
7.73
106 Kb/s
Layers of Security for Active RFID Tags
623

Basic Block 0 
b00
^
b00
1
rk00
2
b01
^ 
b01
1
rk01
2
b02
^
b02
1
rk02
2
b03
^
b03
1
rk03
2
b10
^
b10
1
rk10
2
b11
^
b11
1
rk11
2
b12
^
b12
1
rk12
2
b13
^ 
b13
1
rk13
2
b20
^ 
b20
1
rk20
2
b21
^ 
b21
1
rk21
2
b22
^ 
b22
1
rk22
2
b23
^ 
b23
1
rk23
2
b30
^ 
b30
1
rk30
2
b31
^ 
b31
1
rk31
2
b32
^ 
b32
1
rk32
2
b33
^
b33
1
rk33
2
FIGURE 33.8
AddRoundKey () SDFG, which is basically a 2n Galois Field Adder.
624
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

is operated on in parallel, making it impossible to distinguish the operations on the 4-bit
window from the other 124 bits of the key.
The DPA attack was applied to our AES design holding the secret key 0x2B7E151628AE-
D2A6ABF7158809CF4F3C. Table 33.4 shows the DPA analysis (power difference) between
our design and a reference design. In the table the rows represent the differences for a
particular 4 bit window of the key. The bold values represent the maximum power
difference with a particular key and the asterisk number is the actual key. Based on the
results, the predicted key would be 0x4B33D3CD2112179A628B3A11672FB053, which is
different from the actual key.
To prove that there is no relationship between the actual key and the predicted key we
performed a t-test between the maximum difference magnitude and the difference magni-
tude when the key matched the secret key. For our test, we used an a value of 0.05 and the
resulting p-value was <0.01, which shows that there is sufﬁcient resolution for the max-
imum difference and that the maximum difference is unrelated to the difference from
guessing the correct key. We also calculated the number of bits that differ between the key
with the maximum difference and the correct key. The average number of bits that differ is
TABLE 33.4
Differences for Each 4 Bit Window of the 128 Bit Key
Difference in mW for the Guessed Key
Window
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
A
B
C
D
E
F
0
1
6
5*
1
12
5
1
6
1
0
7
2
1
4
1
3
1
5
4
6
1
4
0
12
100
3
1
5
108*
1
3
6
1
2
7
8
5
9
2
1
0
4
2
3
4
0
4
3
1*
4
3
7
8*
5
9
2
1
0
4
2
3
4
0
4
3
1
4
4
1
3*
1
4
2
1
0
1
4
3
4
6
4
9
2
1
5
7
8
5
9
2
1*
0
4
2
3
4
0
4
3
1
4
6
7
8*
6
4
2
1
1
0
2
3
4
8
9
6
1
4
7
1
4
9
5
4
1
2*
4
2
3
3
7
1
8
7
5
8
1
1
6*
3
2
1
5
4
4
3
0
3
4
5
1
4
9
7
8
5
1
2
1
0
4
2*
3
4
0
4
3
1
4
10
2
9
1
0
4
7
0
3
8
7
3*
4
6
4
1
2
11
6
8
9
8
4
5
7
5
5
7
4
3
4
9
6*
7
12
7
8
8
3
2
3
0
4
2
3
4
0
4
3*
1
4
13
7
8
5*
4
2
1
2
9
1
2
4
0
3
1
3
4
14
2
2
1
5
8
8
5
2
0
9
5*
4
2
2
0
5
15
1
1
1
0
3
2
6*
2
0
6
9
6
7
5
2
3
16
6
4
2
1
2
3
9
2
1
3
7*
7
3
0
2
1
17
2
8
10
4
2
0
5
1
1
2
1
6*
1
7
1
6
18
1
1
5
4
3
1
0
5
9
3
1
1
7
3
1
1*
19
2
4
10
1
5
7
2
9*
2
4
1
12
4
1
5
7
20
9
5*
6
11
0
2
7
2
4
8
1
5
1
6
3
2
21
2
8
1
2
1
1*
1
6
2
5
10
6
6
1
10
1
22
3
11
9
4
2
6
4
0
2*
1
8
0
6
4
3
3
23
3
8
4
5
0
2
1
4
3*
0
3
4
1
2
1
8
24
3*
4
5
6
5
3
11
3
4
9
6
8
8
0
3
1
25
6
2
7
5
4
5
1
11
0
5*
5
2
1
0
2
3
26
1
0
7
6
4
2
4
2
1
1
6
6
0*
3
2
4
27
1
0
6
0
3
5
3
7
4
1
3
1
6
2
2
7*
28
2
3
4
2
5*
1
3
5
1
1
2
6
3
3
2
2
29
9
4
2
7
1
0
1
0
4
5
1
2
1
7
3
1*
30
5
2
2
1*
7
8
0
1
2
0
8
6
3
1
1
5
31
2
5
6
9
2
2
1
0
7
2
2
5
2*
1
1
4
Note:
Maximum difference is in bold and correct key is denoted with a *.
Layers of Security for Active RFID Tags
625

2.00, with a standard deviation of 0.95. The median is 2. This shows that even considering
the deviation the result is a positive number of bits typically ranging from 1 to 3 bits that
differ between the correct and maximum difference guess. This conﬁrms that the guess
from DPA of our AES design is truly unrelated to the actual correct key.
33.4
Conclusions
In this chapter we have described an overview of the state of the art of security in RFID
systems. In particular we have outlined the classes of security applied to RFID, including
various classes of authentication and encryption. We have also described the types of
attacks employed on RFID systems and the facilities and extensions for securing RFID
standards.
In this light, we have presented a secure transmission methodology for PART, where our
primary concern is functionality and power (battery lifetime). Our technique provides
layers of security as multiple levels of defense against attack. The passive activation
layer is encoded to prevent a malicious reader from continuously activating the tag to
drain its battery or to attempt to issue malicious commands. The physical layer is
encrypted using a mixture of Manchester and Differential Manchester encoding. Finally,
the data itself is encrypted using the AES implemented to avoid the key from being broken
using DPA.
These security modiﬁcations are implemented with a minimal power overhead from the
actual RFID transaction power required. The burst switch detection circuit requires <1 mW
when operating at 100 kHz even for 32-bit values (0.58 mW). The modiﬁed Manchester,
Differential Manchester decoder requires 1 mW of additional power (1.11 mW). Finally,
the AES operation requires a maximum of 7 mW at 10 kHz (7.031 mW), which is more
than sufﬁcient for the data transmission speed. Based on the active tag primitive logic
controller implemented in the same hardware, depending on the number of primitives
included (up to 40), the power consumed is 63–65 mW [57]. Thus, the overhead for the
security is just under 9 mW (8.721 mW), which is 13.4% increase over the active tag
logic alone.
References
1. S.E. Sarma, S.A. Weis, and D. Engels, ‘‘Radio-frequency-identiﬁcation security risks and
challenges,’’ CryptoBytes, 6(1): pp. 2–9, 2003.
2. J. Mandel, A. Roach, and K. Winstein, ‘‘MIT proximity card vulnerabilities,’’ Tech. Rep.,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, March 2004.
3. S. Bono, M. Green, A. Stubbleﬁeld, A. Juels, A. Rubin, and M. Szydlo, ‘‘Security analysis of a
cryptographically-enabled RFID device,’’ Proceedings of the USENIX Security Symposium, pp. 1–16,
2005.
4. M. Burmester and B. de Medeiros, ‘‘RFID security: Attacks, counter-measures and challenges,’’
Proceedings of the RFID Academic Convocation, The RFID Journal Conference, 2007.
5. S. Kumar, C. Paar, J. Pelzl, G. Pfeiffer, and M. Schimmler, ‘‘Breaking ciphers with COPACO
BANA—A cost-optimized parallel code breaker,’’ CHES, pp. 101–118, 2006.
6. K. Kﬁr and A. Wool, ‘‘Picking virtual pockets using relay attacks on contactless smartcard
systems,’’ Proceedings of SecureComm, 2005.
7. G. Hancke, ‘‘A practical relay attack on ISO 14443 proximity cards,’’ Tech. Rep., University of
Cambridge, 2005.
626
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

8. J. Coron, D. Naccache, and P. Kocher, ‘‘Statistics and secret leakage,’’ ACM Transactions on
Embedded Computing Systems, 3: 492–508, August 2004.
9. P. Kocher, ‘‘Timing attacks on implementations of Difﬂe-Hellman, RSA, DSS and other systems,’’
Proceedings of the International Advances in Cryptology Conference (CRYPTO), pp. 104–113, 1996.
10. P. Kocher, J. Jaffe, and B. Jun, ‘‘Differential power analysis,’’ Proceedings of the International
Advances in Cryptology Conference (CRYPTO), Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 1666,
pp. 388–397, Springer-Verlag, 1999.
11. E. De Mulder, P. Buysschaert, S.B. Ors, P. Delmotte, B. Preneel, G. Vandenbosch, and
I. Verbauwhede, ‘‘Electromagnetic analysis attack on an FPGA implementation of an Elliptic
Curve Cryptosystem,’’ The International Conference on Computer as a Tool, 2005, EUROCON 2005,
Vol. 2, pp. 1879–1882, 2005.
12. K. Gandolﬁ, C. Mourtel, and F. Olivier, ‘‘Electromagnetic analysis: Concrete results,’’ CHES ’01:
Proceedings of the Third International Workshop on Cryptographic Hardware and Embedded Systems
(London, UK), pp. 251–261, Springer-Verlag, 2001.
13. S. Mangard, N. Pramstaller, and E. Oswald, ‘‘Successfully attacking masked AES hardware
implementations,’’ Proceedings of Cryptographic Hardware and Embedded Systems (CHES) (J.R. Rao
and B. Sunar, eds.), Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 3659, pp. 157–171, Springer, 2005.
14. D.D. Hwang, K. Tiri, A. Hodjat, B.-C. Lai, S. Yang, P. Schaumont, and I. Verbauwhede, ‘‘AES-
based security coprocessor IC in 0.18-mm CMOS with resistance to differential power analysis
side-channel attacks,’’ IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits, 41: 781–792, April 2006.
15. S.B. Örs, E. Oswald, and B. Preneel, ‘‘Power-analysis attacks on FP-GAs—First experimental
results,’’ Proceedings of Cryptographic Hardware and Embedded Systems (CHES) (C.D. Walter, Çetin
Kaya Koç, and C. Paar, eds.), Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 2779, pp. 35–50, Springer, 2003.
16. F.-X. Standaert, S.B. Örs, J.-J. Quisquater, and B. Preneel, ‘‘Power analysis attacks against FPGA
implementations of the DES,’’ Proceedings of Field-Programmable Logic and its Applications, Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 3203, pp. 84–94, 2004.
17. L. Benini, A. Macii, E. Macii, E. Omerbegovic, F. Pro, and M. Poncino, ‘‘Energy-aware design
techniques for differential power analysis protection,’’ Proceedings of the Design Automation Con-
ference (DAC), pp. 36–41, 2003.
18. C. Gebotys, ‘‘A table masking countermeasure for low-energy secure embedded systems,’’
IEEE Transactions on Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) Systems, 14: 740–753, July 2006.
19. P. Rakers, L. Connell, T. Collins, and D. Russell, ‘‘Secure contactless smart-card ASIC with DPA
protection,’’ IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits, 36: 59–565, March 2001.
20. T.S. Messerges, E.A. Dabbish, and R.H. Sloan, ‘‘Examining smart-card security under the threat of
power analysis attacks,’’ IEEE Transaction on Computation, 51(5): 541–552, 2002.
21. I. Vajda and L. Buttyan, ‘‘Lightweight authentication protocols for low-cost RFID tags,’’ Proceed-
ings of Ubiquitious Computing (UBICOMP), 2003.
22. P. Peris-Lopez, J.C. Hernandez-Castro, J. Estevez-Tapiador, and A. Ribagorda, ‘‘LMAP: A real
lightweight mutual authentication protocol for low-cost RFID tags,’’ Workshop on RFID Security
(RFIDSec), 2006.
23. L. Bolotnyy and G. Robins, ‘‘Physically unclonable function-based security and privacy in RFID
systems,’’ Fifth Annual IEEE International Conference on Pervasive Computing and Communications,
2007. PerCom ’07, pp. 211–220, March 2007.
24. B. Gassend, D. Clarke, M. van Dijk, and S. Devadas, ‘‘Silicon physical random functions,’’
Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Computer and Communications Security, 2002.
25. B. Gassend, D. Clarke, M. van Dijk, and S. Devadas, ‘‘Controlled physical random functions,’’
Proceedings of the Computer Security Applications Conference, pp. 149–160, 2002.
26. D. Lim, J. Lee, B. Gassend, G. Suh, M. van Dijk, and S. Devadas, ‘‘Extracting secret keys
from integrated circuits,’’ IEEE Transactions on Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) Systems, 13:
1200–1205, October 2005.
27. K. Yuksel, ‘‘Universal hashing for ultra-low-power cryptographic hardware applications,’’
Tech. Rep., Worcester Polytechnic Institute, 2004.
28. P.-K. Leung, C.-S. Choy, C.-F. Chan, and K.-P. Pun, ‘‘An optimal normal basis elliptic curve
cryptoprocessor for inductive RFID application,’’ Proceedings of the IEEE International Symposium
on Circuits and Systems (ISCAS), pp. 309–312, 2006.
Layers of Security for Active RFID Tags
627

29. S.A. Weis, S.E. Sarma, R.L. Rivest, and D.W. Engels, ‘‘Security and privacy aspects of low-cost
radio frequency identiﬁcation systems,’’ Security in Pervasive Computing, Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, Vol. 2802 pp. 201–212, 2004.
30. S.A. Weis, ‘‘Security and privacy in radio-frequency identiﬁcation devices,’’ Master’s thesis,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2003.
31. Y. Cui, K. Kobara, K. Matsuura, and H. Imai, ‘‘Lightweight asymmetric privacy-preserving
authentication protocols secure against active attack,’’ Proceedings of the Pervasive Computing and
Communications Workshop, pp. 223–228, 2007.
32. H. Niederreiter, ‘‘Knapsack-type cryptosystems and algebraic coding theory,’’ Problems of Control
Information Theory, 15(2): 159–166, 1986.
33. M. Feldhofer, S. Mominikus, and J. Wolkerstorfer, ‘‘Strong authentication for RFID systems using
the AES algorithm,’’ Proceedings of CHES 2004, Lecture Notes on Computer Science, Vol. 3156,
pp. 357–370, 2004.
34. I. Verbauwhede, P. Schaumont, and H. Kuo, ‘‘Design and performance testing of a 2.29Gb/s
rijndael processor,’’ IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits, 38: 569–572, March 2003.
35. D.J. Wheeler and R.M. Needham, ‘‘TEA, a tiny encryption algorithm,’’ Proceedings of the Workshop
Fast Software Encryption, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 1008, pp. 363–366, 1994.
36. P. Israsena, ‘‘Securing ubiquitous and low-cost RFID using tiny encryption algorithm,’’
International Symposium on Wireless Pervasive Computing, 2006.
37. M. Kim, J. Ryou, Y. Choi, and S. Jun, ‘‘Low-cost cryptographic circuits for authentication in radio
frequency identiﬁcation systems,’’ IEEE International Symposium on Consumer Electronics (ISCE),
pp. 1–5, 2006.
38. W. Stallings, Cryptography and Network Security. Pearson Prentice Hall, 2006.
39. L. Batina, J. Guajardo, T. Kerins, N. Mentens, P. Tuyls, and I. Verbauwhede, ‘‘An elliptic curve
processor suitable for RFID-tags.’’ Cryptology ePrint Archive, Report 2006/227, 2006.
40. L. Batina, J. Guajardo, T. Kerins, N. Mentens, P. Tuyls, and I. Verbauwhede, ‘‘Public-Key
Cryptography for RFID-Tags,’’ Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Pervasive Com-
puting and Communications Workshops (PerComW), pp. 217–222, 2007.
41. International Standards Organization, ‘‘ISO/IEC FDIS 18000–7:2004(E).’’ Standard Speciﬁcation,
2004.
42. International Standards Organization, ‘‘ISO/IEC FDIS 18000–6:2004/Amd 1:2006(E).’’ Standard
Speciﬁcation, 2006.
43. EPCglobal, Inc., EPC Radio-Frequency Identity Protocols: Class-1 Generation-2 UHF RFID Protocol for
Communications at 860 MHz – 960 MHz, version 1.0.9 ed., January 2005.
44. A. Juels, ‘‘Strengthening EPC tags against cloning,’’ WiSe ’05: Proceedings of the 4th ACM Workshop
on Wireless Security (New York, NY, USA), pp. 67–76, ACM Press, 2005.
45. International Standards Organization, ‘‘ISO/IEC 14443–4:2001.’’ Standard Speciﬁcation, 2001.
46. International Standards Organization, ‘‘ISO/IEC 7816–3:2006.’’ Standard Speciﬁcation, 2006.
47. K. Finkenzeller, RFID Handbook: Radio-Frequency Identiﬁcation Fundamentals and Applications.
Wiley, 1999.
48. NXP/Philips, MiFare DESﬁre: Contactless Multi-Application IC with DES and 3DES Security MF3 IC
D40, 3 ed., 2002.
49. D. Coppersmith, ‘‘The data encryption standard (DES) and its strength against attacks,’’ IBM
Journal of Research and Development, 30(3): 243–250, 1994.
50. A. Juels, D. Molnar, and D. Wagner, ‘‘Security and privacy issues in E-passports,’’ Proceedings of
Security and Privacy for Emerging Areas in Communications Networks, pp. 74–88, 2005.
51. International Civil Aviation Organization, PIK for Machine Readable Travel Documents offering ICC
Read-Only Access, 1.1 ed., October 2004.
52. International Standards Organization. ‘‘ISO/IEC FDIS 18185–1,4:2006.’’ Standard Speciﬁcation,
2006.
53. American National Standards Institute, ‘‘ANSI NCITS 236:2001.’’ Standard Speciﬁcation, 2002.
54. A.K. Jones, S. Dontharaju, S. Tung, P.J. Hawrylak, L. Mats, R. Hoare, J.T. Cain, and M.H. Mickle,
‘‘Passive active radio frequency identiﬁcation tags (PART),’’ International Journal of Radio
Frequency Identiﬁcation Technology and Application (IJRFITA), 1(1): 52–73, 2006.
628
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

55. A.K. Jones, R. Hoare, S. Dontharaju, S. Tung, R. Sprang, J. Fazekas, J.T. Cain, and M.H. Mickle,
‘‘An automated, FPGA-based reconﬁgurable, low-power RFID tag,’’ Journal of Microprocessors and
Microsystems, 31(2): 116–134, March 2007.
56. A.K. Jones, R.R. Hoare, S.R. Dontharaju, S. Tung, R. Sprang, J. Fazekas, J.T. Cain, and M.H.
Mickle, ‘‘A ﬁeld programmable RFID tag and associated design ﬂow,’’ Proceedings of the
14th Annual IEEE Symposium on Field Programmable Custom Computing Machines, pp. 165–174,
2006.
57. A.K. Jones, R. Hoare, S. Dontharaju, S. Tung, R. Sprang, J. Fazekas, J.T. Cain, and M.H. Mickle,
‘‘An automated, FPGA-based reconﬁgurable, low-power RFID tag,’’ Proceedings of the 43rd Design
Automation Conference (DAC), pp. 131–136, ACM, July 2006.
58. P.J. Hawrylak, L. Mats, J.T. Cain, A.K. Jones, S. Tung, and M.H. Mickle, ‘‘Ultra low-power
computing systems for wireless devices,’’ International Review on Computers and Software
(IRECOS), 1(1): 1–10, 2006.
59. A.K. Jones, S. Dontharaju, S. Tung, L. Mats, P. Hawrylak, R. Hoare, J.T. Cain, and M.H. Mickle,
‘‘Radio frequency identiﬁcation prototyping,’’ ACM Transactions on Design Automation for
Electronic Systems (TODAES) (in press).
60. A.K. Jones, R. Hoare, D. Kusic, G. Mehta, J. Fazekas, and J. Foster, ‘‘Reducing power while
increasing performance with SuperCISC,’’ ACM Transactions on Embedded Computing Systems
(TECS), 5(3): 1–29, August 2006.
Layers of Security for Active RFID Tags
629


34
Cryptographic Approaches to RFID Security
and Privacy
Koutarou Suzuki, Miyako Ohkubo, and Shingo Kinoshita
CONTENTS
34.1
Introduction...................................................................................................................... 631
34.2
Security and Privacy of RFID ........................................................................................ 632
34.2.1 Authenticity and Privacy................................................................................... 633
34.2.2 Forward Security ................................................................................................ 633
34.2.3 Restriction and Delegation of Traceability...................................................... 634
34.2.4 Proof of Existence ............................................................................................... 634
34.2.5 Low-Level Layer Security.................................................................................. 634
34.2.6 Security of Total System .................................................................................... 634
34.3
Physical and Low-Level Layer Approaches ................................................................ 635
34.4
Cryptographic Approaches to Privacy......................................................................... 636
34.4.1 Approaches Using Hash Function ................................................................... 636
34.4.2 Approaches Employing Rewriting................................................................... 637
34.5
Cryptographic Approaches to Authenticity ................................................................ 638
34.6
Implementation................................................................................................................ 639
34.7
Conclusion ........................................................................................................................ 640
References.................................................................................................................................... 640
34.1
Introduction
Radio frequency identiﬁcation (RFID) is an auto-identiﬁcation technology that utilizes
wireless communications, and is considered to be the next-generation bar code. The
RFID system consists of wireless tags and wireless readers.
A tag consists of an IC chip and antenna, and sends information to the reader via a
wireless channel. A reader receives the information sent by a tag via a wireless channel,
and determines the ID of the tag from the received information.
Wireless communications between the tag and the reader usually employ the LF
(Low Frequency) band (124–135 KHz), HF (High Frequency) band (13.56 MHz), or
UHF (Ultra High Frequency) band (860–960 MHz), depending on the tag and reader
speciﬁcations.
631

EPCglobal [1] establishes the speciﬁcations for the ID code called the EPC (Electronic
Product Code) and the total RFID system called the EPCglobal network, which includes
the tags, readers, ONS (Object Name Service), and EPCIS (EPC Information Service).
EPCglobal also works on standardization, promotion, and administration of the EPC and
the EPCglobal network.
RFID has the potential to be used widely in supply-chain management instead of bar
codes. There are, however, several barriers to the widespread use of RFID tags. One is the
privacy problem and another is the high cost of current units.
The privacy problem occurs due to the basic properties of RFID tags:
. Each tag can be identiﬁed freely using a wireless probe.
. Each tag has a unique ID enabling tag-by-tag identiﬁcation.
Because of these properties, a speciﬁc consumer or object can be identiﬁed and tracked
over wide areas. Because this issue is becoming a wide public concern [2–4], addressing
the privacy problem is essential to the success of RFID tags. Hence, many investigations
have been conducted in recent years concerning RFID privacy protection. In this chapter,
we survey the studies pertaining to the security and privacy of RFID tags, especially in the
context of cryptography. The cost limitation of a tag unit yields another basic property of
RFID tags: each tag has weak computational power.
Because RFID tags have only weak computational power, commonly used public key
cryptographic primitives cannot be used in RFID tags. Therefore, the main and speciﬁc
concern of these studies is how to address the security and privacy problems in the light of
these weak computational tags. The security and privacy problems of RFID tags appear in
various scenarios. These are some examples.
Leakage of information: People have items that are quite personal and do not want
anyone to have information related to these products, e.g., books, money, and medicine. If
such items are tagged, various types of personal information can be obtained through
illegal scanning of the wireless tags.
Tracing a user: People have objects that they always carry with them, e.g., a watch,
glasses, and shoes. If such things are tagged, personal movements can be tracked through
illegal tracing of the wireless tags.
We discuss these security and privacy issues in detail in Section 34.2, and present
deﬁnitions for RFID security and privacy. Various countermeasures are overviewed in
Sections 34.3 through 34.6, as well as the existing studies concerning physical approaches
and cryptographic approaches for privacy, authenticity, and implementation of crypto-
graphic primitives.
There is another survey of studies on RFID security and privacy in [5], and a biblio-
graphic list of studies in [6].
In Section 34.7, we present our conclusions.
34.2
Security and Privacy of RFID
In this section, we discuss security and privacy requirements and issues pertaining to the
RFID system from various viewpoints.
632
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

34.2.1
Authenticity and Privacy
To identify a tag, which represents the most basic function of the tag, the RFID tag scheme
should have authenticity. On the other hand, to protect user privacy, the RFID tag
scheme should have indistinguishability. The harmonization of authenticity and indistin-
guishability is an important topic in cryptographic research pertaining to RFID security
and privacy.
In this section, we give the deﬁnition of authenticity and indistinguishability for RFID
tags. To identify and check the validity of the tags, the tag scheme should incorporate
authenticity, i.e., the reader accepts the output only from a valid tag. To avoid ID leakage
and ID tracing of the RFID tag, the tag scheme should incorporate indistinguishability, i.e.,
one cannot distinguish two tags by observing the output of the tags.
Avoine [7] proposes indistinguishability for RFID tags, Juels and Weis [8] propose
indistinguishability for a case involving correlated secrets, and Damgård and Østergaard
[9] propose authenticity. Intuitive deﬁnitions for these properties are given hereafter.
Further information and detailed deﬁnitions are given in the respective papers.
The security deﬁnition consists of an attack environment and attack goal, i.e., an
adversary tries to achieve the attack goal utilizing the attack environment. We call this
the attack game. First, we describe the attack environment for both the authenticity and
indistinguishability games. There are n tags T1, . . . ,Tn and a reader R. Each tag Ti contains
secret si, and communicates with reader R. Reader R contains n secrets s1, . . . , sn, commu-
nicates with the ith tag Ti, and outputs ‘‘reject’’ or ‘‘accept the ith tag.’’ In the attack
environment, the adversary can (1) communicate with reader R, (2) communicate with tag
Ti, and (3) corrupt tag Ti to obtain secret si, multiple times and in any order.
The attack goal of the authenticity game is for the adversary to communicate with reader
R and make reader R output ‘‘accept the ith tag,’’ providing tag Ti is not corrupted and tag
Ti is not involved in the session, i.e., a man-in-the-middle attack is not allowed.
The attack goal of the indistinguishability game is for the adversary to communicate
with tag Ti and Tj without seeing indices i and j and to distinguish these two tags, provided
tag Ti and Tj are not corrupted.
We say an RFID scheme has authenticity/indistinguishability if and only if achieving the
attack goal of the authenticity/indistinguishability game in the attack environment is
computationally infeasible, respectively.
The secure RFID tag scheme must have at least authenticity to avoid impersonation, and
should have both authenticity and indistinguishability to protect user privacy.
34.2.2
Forward Security
After a tagged item is thrown away, it is easy to retrieve the tag from the trash and tamper
with the tag to obtain the secret information stored in the tag. Moreover, because of the cost
limitation, a tamper resistant implementation cannot be expected for RFID tags. Therefore,
we need to be mindful of the leakage of secret information stored in the tag, and its impact
on the security and privacy of RFID tags.
Ohkubo et al. [10] point out that if the secret key in a tag is leaked due to tampering, the
history of the tag can be traced using the secret key and the output records of the tag. They
propose the concept of forward security for the privacy of RFID tags, i.e., even if the secret
key in a tag is leaked due to tampering, the history of the tag remains untraceable. This
corresponds to allowing the adversary to corrupt tags Ti and Tj, only after communicating
with these two tags, in the indistinguishable game described in the previous subsection.
Moreover, Ohkubo et al. propose a scheme that satisﬁes forward security using the hash
chain technique.
Cryptographic Approaches to RFID Security and Privacy
633

34.2.3
Restriction and Delegation of Traceability
If we reuse a tag, we encounter another issue, i.e., after a tag is transferred to a new owner,
the previous owner should not be able to trace the tag.
Molnar et al. [11] point out the above issue of ownership transfer, and discuss the
requirements for restricting the ability to trace a tag within a certain period, to prevent
the previous owner from tracing the tag after the tag is transferred to the new owner. They
propose a scheme where the ability to trace the tag can be restricted to a period of time and
delegated to readers.
34.2.4
Proof of Existence
The main application of RFID tags is supply-chain management, i.e., each product is
tagged and traced via readers along a distribution route. Hence, another important security
requirement is to guarantee the existence of a speciﬁc tag in a speciﬁc location, at a speciﬁc
time, and with other speciﬁc tags.
Juels [12] proposes a protocol called the yoking-proof that provides proof that two tags
are scanned by a reader simultaneously. This can be applied, e.g., to pharmaceutical
distribution where medicine and the description of that medicine should be distributed
together.
34.2.5
Low-Level Layer Security
In the previous sections, we focused on the security and privacy of only the high-level layer
of communications between the RFID tag and reader. However, we must consider low-
level layer security and privacy in a practical application.
Avoine and Oechslin [13] points out that communication between an RFID tag and a
reader has multiple layers, i.e., application, communication, and physical layers, and that
we need to consider all these communication layers to avoid tracing. Let us consider a
situation in which a person carries 10 tags where 2 tags respond in the LF (Low Frequency)
band, 3 tags respond in the HF (High Frequency) band, and 5 tags respond in the UHF
(Ultra High Frequency) band. These kinds of characteristics of wireless signals from a
person can be used to identify and trace the person, even if the privacy of the ID of the tags
is protected in the high-level layer.
Oren and Shamir [14] propose the power analysis of RFID tags in which secret informa-
tion stored in a tag is obtained by observing the ﬁeld strength of the wireless signals
from the tag. The attack can be performed without physical contact with the tag, so the
attack can be implemented easily and detection of the attack is difﬁcult. We need to
implement carefully a security mechanism inside the tag considering this kind of side-
channel analysis.
34.2.6
Security of Total System
In the previous sections, we focused on the security and privacy of only the RFID tag and
reader. However, in practice, we need to consider the security and privacy of the total
RFID system.
Fabian et al. [15] point out the security and privacy issues concerning ONS (Object
Name Service) of the EPC-global network [EPC]. When the reader requests the ONS
with the ID of the tag, the ONS responds with the location of a database that contains
information pertaining to the tag. The ONS is constructed based on DNS (Domain
Name Service) technology. Fabian et al. point out issues pertaining to conﬁdentiality and
634
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

integrity of the communications between the reader and ONS and the availability of the
ONS service. For instance, the query from the reader to the ONS can be tapped and/or
modiﬁed to obtain the ID and information of the tag. They also propose solutions for these
ONS issues.
Rieback et al. [16] demonstrate the possibility of transmitting a virus via an RFID tag.
They construct a virus code that can be stored in the memory of the tag. The virus code is
read and executed by a server using a security ﬂaw in the server system. The virus writes
copies of itself into other tags to spread the infection. This shows that tags can be a new
route for viruses.
34.3
Physical and Low-Level Layer Approaches
In this section, we discuss the physical and low-level layer approaches to security and
privacy for the RFID system. By covering a tag with metal ﬁlm, which is called a Faraday
cage, wireless communications between the tag and a reader can be blocked. With the
Faraday cage, we can maintain privacy by preventing the illegal scanning of a wireless tag.
However, it is difﬁcult to cover all tags that a person may carry, as that person may
carry many tags, regarding some of which the person may not be aware. A jamming signal
can also be used to block wireless communications between a tag and a reader to
maintain privacy. However, this is not practical, since a jamming signal can affect other
wireless devices.
An EPCglobal tag [1] is equipped with a kill command to protect user privacy. A kill
command can be sent to a tag to deactivate the tag forever. To avoid the illegal use of this
function, a kill password should be sent to the tag with the kill command and the kill
command should be executed only if the kill password is correct. Since the tag never
responds to a reader after the kill command is executed, privacy is perfectly protected
thereafter. However, the permanent deactivation removes the possibility of using the tag
thereafter.
Juels et al. [17] propose a blocker tag that is a special tag that blocks the access to
readers in the vicinity of the tag. The blocker tag interferes with the anticollision protocol
of the RFID system that is established between tags and the reader to block the access of
the reader. This is accomplished in the following manner. To avoid collision of commu-
nications with many tags, the reader performs the following anticollision protocol. First,
the reader requests all the tags in the vicinity to transmit the ﬁrst bit of the ID. If the
reader receives 0 as the answer, the reader knows that there are tags in the vicinity that
have an ID with 0 as the ﬁrst bit. Then, the reader requests all the tags that have an ID
with 0 as the ﬁrst bit in the vicinity, to transmit the second bit of the ID. If the reader
receives 1 as the answer, the reader knows that there are tags in the vicinity that have an
ID with 0 as the ﬁrst bit and 1 as the second bit. By iterating this process the reader can
identify the IDs of all the tags in the vicinity. To interfere with the anticollision protocol,
the blocker tag always responds with 0 and 1 to reader requests. From the viewpoint
of the reader, there exists an exponentially large number of tags, e.g., 296 tags in the case
of a 96 bit ID. This causes the reader to make an exponentially large number of inquiries,
so the reader cannot complete the anticollision protocol, and the access of the reader to
the tags is blocked, i.e., the blocker tag performs a kind of DoS (Denial of Service) attack
on the reader.
Weis et al. [18] propose a secure communication channel between the tag and reader that
utilizes the difference in distance that the signals of the tag and reader can reach. A passive
tag is not equipped with a power supply, so the distance from the tag that the signal can
Cryptographic Approaches to RFID Security and Privacy
635

reach is short, e.g., approximately 50 cm. On the other hand, the distance from the reader
that the signal can reach is much longer than that for the tag, e.g., approximately 50 m.
Hence, an eavesdropper who cannot approach the tag and reader, e.g., within 1 m, cannot
tap the communications from the tag to the reader, even though the eavesdropper can tap
the communications from the reader to the tag. By using this fact, a secure communication
channel from the reader to the tag is achieved as follows. First, the tag sends random r to
the reader, then the reader sends encryption r  m of message m with the random r to the
tag. Since the eavesdropper cannot tap random r, he cannot know message m even though
he can tap encryption r  m.
34.4
Cryptographic Approaches to Privacy
In this section, we discuss the cryptographic approaches to privacy for the RFID system.
34.4.1
Approaches Using Hash Function
In this subsection, we discuss RFID privacy protection schemes that use a hash function,
which is a light weight cryptographic function, and can be computed inside the RFID tag.
In these schemes, a tag computes the hash function inside it to protect privacy.
Sarma et al. [19] mention RFID security beneﬁts and threats in the very early period of
research of RFID security and privacy, and propose a privacy protection scheme at a low
cost as all it requires is a hash function. In the scheme, the validity of the tag reader is
checked using the following procedure to avoid illegal ID scanning and ID leakage.
The reader has key k for each tag, and each tag holds hash value h ¼ H(k), called a meta-ID,
where H is the hash function. A tag receives a request for ID access and then sends
meta-ID h in response. The reader sends key k that is related to the meta-ID h received
from the tag. The tag then calculates the hash function from the received key k and checks
the relation of h ¼ H(k) with meta-ID h held in the tag. The tag responds with its own ID to
the reader only if the relation holds.
However, the scheme is still susceptible to tracing, since the meta-ID is ﬁxed and the
adversary can trace the tag via the meta-ID, while the scheme offers protection against Id
leakage at low cost. To avoid this, the meta-ID should be changed repeatedly. This
requirement may become a problem in practical use.
Weis et al. [18] propose a randomized hash scheme that is an extension of the hash
lock scheme. In this scheme, the tag is required to have key k, a hash function circuit, and a
random generator. Each tag calculates hash function H with the inputs of key k and
random r, i.e., c ¼ H(kjr). The tag then sends c and r to the reader. The reader maintains
the database for key k and the tag ID. The reader checks relation c ¼ H(kjr) of received key
c and r for all keys k, and ﬁnds the ID of the tag from the database. The tag output changes
with each access, so this scheme deters tracing.
However, this scheme allows the location history of the RFID tag to be traced if key k in
the tag is exposed, i.e., this scheme cannot satisfy the concept of forward security. More-
over, the cost imposed by the random generator is signiﬁcant.
Ohkubo et al. [10] describe the new security concept called forward security, and
propose a forward secure scheme using a hash chain. Forward security means that even
if the adversary acquires the secret data stored in the tag, the adversary cannot trace the tag
back to past events in which the tag was involved. To achieve forward security, Ohkubo
et al. use the hash chain technique to renew the secret stored in the tag. More precisely, in
the ith transaction, the tag (1) sends answer ai ¼ G(si) to the reader, (2) renews secret
636
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

siþ1 ¼ H(si) as determined from previous secret si, and (3) erases previous secret si where H
and G are hash functions. The reader maintains the database for initial secret s0 and the tag
ID. The reader then checks relation ai ¼ G(Hi(s0)) of the hash chain for all initial secrets s0,
and ﬁnds the ID for the tag from the database.
However, the reader must search for all indices i and all tags that are relatively heavy,
although computation of the tag is sufﬁciently efﬁcient since the tag performs only hash
operations that require a small gate. Thus, the scheme is practical, while still ensuring
privacy even in the face of tampering.
Molnar et al. [11] propose a privacy protection scheme employing tree structured keys
that are efﬁcient and can delegate the ability to identify tags. In this scheme, keys are
generated using a hash tree, and the root value of the hash tree is stored in the tag. At each
session with a reader, the tag generates its output by computing the hash tree from the root
value. This can be done efﬁciently by virtue of the tree structure. The ability to identify a
tag restricted within a period of sessions can be delegated to another person by providing
the root value of the subtree that corresponds to the period. By using this delegation
function, the ownership of the tag can be transferred to another person without violation
of privacy. The new owner makes the tag update its output a sufﬁcient number of times
when ownership of the tag is transferred, so that the previous owner can no longer identify
the tag since the identiﬁcation ability of the previous owner is restricted within a certain
number of times.
Juels [20] proposes a signiﬁcantly light scheme that requires only XOR calculations, and
is therefore of very low cost. In this scheme, the reader and tag share a common list of
random keys, and in some interactions they conﬁrm that the partner has the common list.
If it passes the check, the tag sends its ID. This scheme does not require any heavy
calculations and the tag need only perform the XOR operation. This scheme requires
several interactions between the tag and reader, and the common list should be overwrit-
ten completely as needed to ensure security.
34.4.2
Approaches Employing Rewriting
In this section, we discuss an RFID privacy protection scheme that rewrites the label stored
in the tag to protect privacy. In these schemes, a tag is required to have only a rewritable
ROM. The reader receives the label from a tag, updates it, and rewrites the updated label in
the tag, to protect privacy.
Inoue and Yasuura [21] propose an ID rewriting scheme (that does not use crypto-
graphy) to maintain user privacy. When a user purchases a tagged item, the user writes
a random label in the tag. The tag responds with the random label thereafter, so no
information of the tagged item is leaked. However, the user must maintain a table of the
random labels and the tagged items.
Juels and Pappu [22] propose an encrypted ID scheme employing the ElGamal encryption
and re-encryption technique. ElGamal encryption is a public key encryption with secret key
x, public key (g, y ¼ gx), and ciphertext E(m,r) ¼ (gr, myr), where m is the message and r is a
random value. It can be randomized by multiplying (gr 3 gs, myr 3 ys) using only a public
key (g, y); this is called re-encryption. In the scheme, the ElGamal encryption of ID E(ID, r),
is stored in the tag. The reader can update the ElGamal encryption of ID E(ID, r) by
randomizing it without decryption and secret key x. Thus, readers are not required to
have a secret key.
Ishikawa et al. [23] propose an encrypted ID scheme with any encryption scheme. In the
scheme, the encrypted ID E(ID, r) is stored in the tag, where E is a probabilistic encryption
and r is a random value. The reader receives the encrypted ID E(ID, r), and decrypts it to
obtain the ID of the tag. After this, the reader again encrypts ID E(ID, r0) with a different
Cryptographic Approaches to RFID Security and Privacy
637

random r0, and rewrites the new encrypted ID E(ID, r0) in the tag. Since the new encrypted
ID E(ID, r0) looks totally different, the encrypted ID E(ID, r) cannot be linked to the new
encrypted ID E(ID, r0), and so tracing the tag is prevented. A scheme that utilizes the
ElGamal re-encryption technique is also proposed in this paper.
However, we need to use a single key for a group within which tags are indistin-
guishable, as we cannot determine which key corresponds to a ciphertext if we use
multiple keys.
Golle et al. [24] propose an encrypted ID scheme with universal ElGamal re-encryption.
In this scheme, the public key (g, y) and ElGamal encryption of ID E(ID, r) are stored
in the tag. The reader can update them by randomizing both the public key and
encryption. Thus, multiple public keys can be employed and readers do not need to
maintain public keys, since the corresponding public key is stored with the ciphertext in
the tag.
However, the ciphertext stored in a tag can be subverted if the adversary replaces the
ciphertext of the message with his own public key. Later, the adversary can decrypt the
output of the tag using his own secret key to trace the tag.
Ateniese et al. [25] propose an encrypted ID scheme with insubvertible encryption.
In this scheme, the certiﬁcate from a CA (Certiﬁcate Authority), public key, and encryp-
tion of ID are stored in the tag. The reader can check the validity of the certiﬁcate and
update it by randomizing the certiﬁcate, public key, and encryption of ID. Thus, the
stored ciphertext cannot be subverted since the adversary cannot forge the certiﬁcate
from the CA.
34.5
Cryptographic Approaches to Authenticity
In this section, we discuss cryptographic approaches to the authenticity of the RFID
system.
Hopper and Blum [26] present an authentication scheme called the HB protocol based on
the LPN (Learning Parity with Noise) problem. The scheme uses only XOR and requires
only two moves. The details of the scheme are given hereafter. In the initialization phase,
reader R holds secret x, tag T holds secret (x, h), and v 2 {0, 1jProb[v ¼ 1] ¼ h} is a biased
random bit, where 0 < h < ½. Then, tag T and reader R iterate the following steps: (1) R
selects random a 2 {0, 1}k and sends a to T as a challenge, (2) T calculates z ¼ (a  x)  v and
sends z to R as a response, and (3) R accepts, if a  x ¼ z. Here, we denote the inner-product
of the vectors over the ﬁnite ﬁeld by .
However, the HB protocol is only secure against passive eavesdroppers, and it is not
secure against an active adversary with the ability to query tags. If an active adversary
repeats the same challenge a multiple times, he can learn the error-free value of a  x with
very high probability.
Juels and Weis [27] present an extended authentication scheme to the HB protocol, called
the HBþ protocol, that is secure against an active adversary. The scheme uses only the XOR
calculation and requires three moves. The details of the scheme are given hereafter. In the
initialization phase, reader R holds secret (x, y), tag T holds secret (x, y, h), and v 2 {0, 1jProb
[v ¼ 1] ¼ h} is a biased random bit. Then, tag T and reader R iterate the following steps: 0) T
selects random b 2 {0, 1}k and sends b to R as a blinding factor, (1) R selects random a 2 {0, 1}k
and sends a to T as a challenge, (2) T calculates z ¼ (a  x)  (b  y)  v and sends z to R as a
response, and (3) R accepts, if (a  x)  (b  y) ¼ z. By selecting its own random blinding factor
b, tag T effectively prevents an active adversary who tries to extract x or y with a nonrandom
challenge.
638
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

However, more precise analyses against HBþ protocol have been presented recently.
Gilbert et al. [28] present a man-in-the-middle attack against the HBþ protocol.
The attack is performed as follows to obtain secret x. The adversary selects a constant
d 2 {0, 1}k and perturbs challenge a sent by reader R to tag T to a  d in all rounds of the
HBþ protocol. If the authentication process is successful, then it means that d  x ¼ 0 with
overwhelming probability. Hence, the adversary can obtain partial information concerning
secret x, and by repeating this with different d, he can obtain secret x. Once x is derived,
the adversary can immediately impersonate the tag with blinding factor b ¼ 0. Another
side effect of the disclosure of x is that the privacy of the tag ID is compromised. To avoid
this attack, we can set an alarm to go off when a threshold for the number of failed
authentications is exceeded.
Katz and Shin [29] analyze the HBþ and HB protocol, and show that the HBþ protocol is
secure under concurrent and parallel composition if 0 < h < ¼. Moreover, Katz and Smith
[30] provide analysis in the case ¼  h < ½.
34.6
Implementation
In this section, we discuss light implementations of the cryptographic primitives for
RFID tags.
Tuyls and Batina [31] implement an elliptic curve computation that has the possibility to
achieve a public-key based protocol for RFID tags. In their paper, as an example, the
Schnorr identiﬁcation scheme is implemented based on an elliptic curve for the RFID tag
authentication. Batina et al. [32] implement the Okamoto identiﬁcation scheme based on an
elliptic curve.
McLoone and Robshaw [33] implement a public-key based authentication protocol for
the RFID tag authentication. In the protocol, by utilizing precomputation, the required
calculation load in the on-line phase is sufﬁciently light for a tag to calculate. The protocol
is based on an elliptic curve version of the GPS identiﬁcation scheme, which is a public-key
three move Schnorr-like identiﬁcation scheme proposed by Girault, Poupard, and Stern. In
the precomputation phase, the ﬁrst message of the three move proof is computed, and the
result, called a coupon, is stored in the tag. The on-line phase is efﬁcient and the tag
requires no elliptic scalar multiplication. However, there is a storage cost for coupons for
each tag.
Feldhofer et al. [34] implement AES so that AES can be embedded in small devices,
e.g., in RFID tags. The AES implementation requires 3595 gates and 8.15 A consumption
at a frequency of 100 KHz. The number of clock cycles to encrypt 128 bits is 1000.
They implement the AES algorithm as an 8-bit architecture, which is different from
the usual implementation as a 32-bit architecture. By implementing the AES algorithm as
an 8-bit architecture, the number of S-boxes is reduced from 4 to 1 to conserve silicon
resources, and the consumed power is lower than that required by the 32-bit operations.
On the other hand, the number of clock cycles for encryption is increased by more than
10 fold.
Poschmann et al. [35] present a new light weight block cipher DESL based on DES,
which is compact and requires only light calculations. In the DESL, the eight original DES
S-boxes are replaced by a single S-box, which is repeated eight times. The construction
implies a lightweight implementation, which requires 50% smaller chips, 85% fewer clock
cycles, and 90% less energy than the best AES implementations with regard to RFID
applications [34]. As a detailed example, DESL requires 144 clock cycles to encrypt one
64-bit block of plaintext. For one encryption at 100 KHz the average power consumption
Cryptographic Approaches to RFID Security and Privacy
639

is 0.89 mA, and in the case of 500 KHz it is 4.45 mA. The throughput reaches 5.55 KB=s at
100 KHz and 27.78 KB=s at 500 KHz.
Vaudenay [36] presents a new lightweight public-key encryption scheme for the RFID
tag authentication, which requires only a small computation load that a tag can calculate.
Moreover, he describes new security deﬁnitions and their relationships. The new public-
key encryption scheme is based on the problem of ﬁnding a sparse polynomial that is a
multiple of the public key. To encrypt a block of messages, only a computation of LFSR
(Linear Feedback Shift Register) and the generation of a biased random string are required.
So, the new public-key encryption scheme can be implemented with a small gate size
making it suitable for RFID tags.
34.7
Conclusion
In this chapter, we have surveyed studies pertaining to the security and privacy for RFID
tags, especially from the context of cryptography. We have presented deﬁnitions for
RFID security and privacy from various viewpoints. We have also overviewed the existing
studies concerning physical approaches, cryptographic approaches for privacy, authenti-
city, and implementation of cryptographic primitives.
References
1. EPCglobal. EPCglobal web site. http:==www.epcglobalinc.org.
2. CASPIAN (Consumers Against Supermarket Privacy Invasion and Numbering). http:==www.
nocards.org, 2002.
3. Associated Press. Benetton undecided on use of ‘smart tags,’ 8 April 2003.
4. CNET. Wal-mart cancels ‘smart shelf’ trial. http:==www.cnet.com, 9 July 2003.
5. Ari Juels. RFID security and privacy: A research survey. IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in
Communications, 24(2), pages 381–394. IEEE Computer Society Press, 2006.
6. Gildas Avoine. Bibliography on security and privacy in RFID systems. Available online, 2006.
7. Gildas Avoine. Adversary model for radio frequency identiﬁcation. Technical Report LASEC-
REPORT-2005-001, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology (EPFL), Security and Cryptography
Laboratory (LASEC), 2005.
8. Ari Juels and Stephen Weis. Deﬁning strong privacy for RFID. IACR Cryptology ePrint Archive,
2006/137, 2006.
9. Ivan Damgård and Michael Østergaard. RFID security: Tradeoffs between security and efﬁciency.
IACR Cryptology ePrint Archive, 2006/234, 2006.
10. Miyako Ohkubo, Koutarou Suzuki, and Shingo Kinoshita. Cryptographic approach to ‘‘privacy-
friendly’’ tags. In RFID Privacy Workshop, 2003.
11. David Molnar, Andrea Soppera, and David Wagner. A scalable, delegatable pseudonym protocol
enabling ownership transfer of RFID tags. In Selected Areas in Cryptography—SAC 2005, Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 3897, pages 276–290. Springer-Verlag, 2005.
12. Ari Juels. ‘‘yoking-proofs’’ for RFID tags. In International Workshop on Pervasive Computing and
Communication Security—PerSec 2004, pages 138–143. IEEE Computer Society, 2004.
13. Gildas Avoine and Philippe Oechslin. RFID traceability: A multilayer problem. In Financial
Cryptography—FC 2005, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 3570. pages 125–140.
Springer-Verlag, 2005.
14. Yossi Oren and Adi Shamir. Power analysis of RFID tags. Panel discussion in RSA Conference
2006, 2006.
640
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

15. Benjamin Fabian, Oliver Günther, and Sarah Spiekermann. Security analysis of the object name
service for RFID. In International Workshop on Security, Privacy and Trust in Pervasive and Ubiquitous
Computing—SecPerU 2005. IEEE Computer Society Press, 2005.
16. MelanieRieback, Bruno Crispo, and Andrew Tanenbaum. Isyourcat infected with a computer virus?
In Pervasive Computing and Communications—PerComm 2006, pages 169–179. IEEE Computer Society
Press, 2006.
17. Ari Juels, Ronald Rivest, and Michael Szydlo. The blocker tag: Selective blocking of RFID tags for
consumer privacy. In Conference on Computer and Communications Security—ACM CCS 2003, pages
103–111. ACM Press, 2003.
18. Stephen Weis, Sanjay Sarma, Ronald Rivest, and Daniel Engels. Security and privacy aspects
of low-cost radio frequency identiﬁcation systems. In International Conference on Security in
Pervasive Computing—SPC 2003, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 2802, pages 454–469.
Springer-Verlag, 2003.
19. Sanjay Sarma, Stephen Weis, and Daniel Engels. RFID systems and security and privacy impli-
cations. In Cryptographic Hardware and Embedded Systems—CHES 2002, Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, Vol. 2523, pages 454–469. Springer-Verlag, 2002.
20. Ari Juels. Minimalist cryptography for low-cost RFID tags. In International Conference on Security
in Communication Networks—SCN 2004, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 3352, pages
149–164. Springer-Verlag, 2004.
21. Sozo Inoue and Hiroto Yasuura. RFID privacy using user-controllable uniqueness. In RFID
Privacy Workshop, 2003.
22. Ari Juels and Ravikanth Pappu. Squealing euros: Privacy protection in RFID-enabled banknotes.
In Financial Cryptography—FC 2003, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 2742, pages 103–121.
Springer-Verlag, 2003.
23. Toshiharu Ishikawa, Yukiko Yumoto, Michio Kurata, Makoto Endo, Shingo Kinoshita, Fumitaka
Hoshino, Satoshi Yagi, and Masatoshi Nomachi. Applying auto-id to the japanese publication
business. White Paper KEIAUTOID-WH-004, Auto-ID Center, 2003.
24. Philippe Golle, Markus Jakobsson, Ari Juels, and Paul Syverson. Universal re-encryption for
mixnets. In The Cryptographers’ Track at the RSA Conference—CT-RSA 2004, Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, Vol. 2964, pages 163–178. Springer-Verlag, 2004.
25. Giuseppe Ateniese, Jan Camenisch, and Breno de Medeiros. Untraceable RFID tags via insubver-
tible encryption. In Conference on Computer and Communications Security—ACM CCS 2005, pages
92–101. ACM Press, 2005.
26. Nicholas J. Hopper and Manuel Blum. Secure human identiﬁcation protocols. In Advances in
Cryptology—ASIACRYPT 2001, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 2248, pages 52–66.
Springer-Verlag, 2001.
27. Ari Juels and Stephen Weis. Authenticating pervasive devices with human protocols. In Advances
in Cryptology—CRYPTO 2005, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 3126, pages 293–308.
Springer-Verlag, 2005.
28. Henri Gilbert, Matthew Robshaw, and Hervé Sibert. An active attack against HBþ—a provably
secure lightweight authentication protocol. In IEE Electronic Letters 41(21), pages 1169–1170, 2005.
29. Jonathan Katz and Ji Sun Shin. Parallel and concurrent security of the HB and HBþ protocols. In
Advances in Cryptology—EUROCRYPT 2006, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 4004, pages
73–87. Springer-Verlag, 2006.
30. Jonathan Katz and Adam Smith. Analyzing the HB and HBþ protocols in the ‘‘large error’’ case.
IACR Cryptology ePrint Archive, 2006=326, 2006.
31. Pim Tuyls and Lejla Batina. RFID-tags for anti-counterfeiting. In The Cryptographers’ Track at the
RSA Conference—CT-RSA 2006, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 3860, pages 115–131.
Springer-Verlag, 2006.
32. Lejla Batina, Jorge Guajardo, Tim Kerins, Nele Mentens, Pim Tuyls, and Ingrid Verbauwhede.
Public-key cryptography for RFID-tags. In Pervasive Computing and Communications Workshops—
PerComm Workshops 2007, pages 217–222. IEEE Computer Society Press, 2007.
33. Máire McLoone and Matthew J.B. Robshaw. Public key cryptography and RFID tags. In The
Cryptographers’ Track at the RSA Conference—CT-RSA 2007, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol.
4377, pages 372–384. Springer-Verlag, 2007, available at http:==www.springerlink.com=content=
554p55777q2181w7=
Cryptographic Approaches to RFID Security and Privacy
641

34. Martin Feldhofer, Sandra Dominikus, and Johannes Wolkerstorfer. Strong authentication for
RFID systems using the AES algorithm. In Workshop on Cryptographic Hardware and Embedded
Systems—CHES 2004, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 3156, pages 357–370. Springer-
Verlag, 2004.
35. Axel Poschmann, Gregor Leander, Kai Schramm, and Christof Paar. New light-weight crypto
algorithms for RFID. Circuits and Systems—ISCAS 2007, pages 1843–1846. IEEE Computer Society
Press, 2006.
36. Serge Vaudenay. RFID privacy based on public-key cryptography (abstract). In Information
Security and Cryptology—ICISC 2006, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 4296, pages 1–6.
Springer-Verlag, 2006.
642
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

35
RFID Authentication: Reconciling Anonymity
and Availability
Breno de Medeiros and Mike Burmester
CONTENTS
35.1
Introduction...................................................................................................................... 643
35.2
Characteristics of RFID Systems.................................................................................... 644
35.3
RFID Communication Model......................................................................................... 645
35.3.1 RFID Security at the Protocol Layer ................................................................ 646
35.4
The Threat Model for RFID............................................................................................ 646
35.4.1 Byzantine Adversaries ....................................................................................... 647
35.4.2 Handling Multiple Security Requirements ..................................................... 647
35.5
Aspects of RFID Security................................................................................................ 647
35.5.1 Authentication and Integrity............................................................................. 648
35.5.2 Privacy.................................................................................................................. 648
35.5.3 Availability........................................................................................................... 649
35.6
Conﬂicts between Anonymity and Availability Requirements................................ 650
35.6.1 Tag Identiﬁcation and Server Authentication ................................................ 651
35.6.2 Resynchronization .............................................................................................. 651
35.6.3 Exhaustive Key Search....................................................................................... 651
35.6.4 Future Directions ................................................................................................ 652
35.7
Resources Available for RFID Security Mechanisms ................................................. 652
35.7.1 Transient Storage ................................................................................................ 653
35.7.2 EPROM and EEPROM....................................................................................... 653
35.7.3 Time-Out Mechanisms....................................................................................... 653
35.7.4 Asymmetric Cryptographic Primitives............................................................ 653
35.7.5 Symmetric Cryptographic Primitives .............................................................. 653
35.7.6 Other Primitives.................................................................................................. 654
35.8
Conclusion ........................................................................................................................ 655
References.................................................................................................................................... 655
35.1
Introduction
This chapter explores the issues attending to the provision of two security services, namely
privacy and availability, in context of RFID applications.
643

Since the word privacy is used in different settings with distinct meanings, it is necessary
to provide its scope within the RFID context. Automatic identiﬁcation is the primary
functionality provided by RFID, enabling recognition of tagged objects and supporting
applications such as resource tracking. Consequently, RFID-tagged objects or persons can
be easily recognized and located, and their movements and whereabouts can be monitored
and recorded using relatively inexpensive readers and without necessity of human inter-
vention. This information being available in digital form, inference and correlations can be
drawn using information retrieval and understanding technologies. Such ease of acquisi-
tion of location data from RFID-tagged objects, and the potential for abuse of the derived
information motivate the provision of location privacy services in RFID.
Availability concerns in RFID are related to the ability of the system to function correctly
through its projected lifetime. It is compromised when parties can perform unauthorized
actions that render components of the RFID system either temporarily or permanently
incapable of exercising its proper role. Disabling attacks can involve jamming the communi-
cation medium, targeting battery consumption rates (against active or semi-active tags), or
corruptingtag-storeddataorothermanipulation oftagstateleadingtoitbecomingunusable.
35.2
Characteristics of RFID Systems
A typical deployment of an RFID system involves three types of legitimate entities: tags,
readers, and a back-end server (Sharma et al., 2001). When referring to an object or person
that is identiﬁed by carrying one or more RFID tags, we may use the term RFID host, or
simply host.
The tags, also called transponders, are attached to, or embedded in, objects to be identiﬁed
(hosts). They consist of a microchip and an RF coupling element and antenna that enables
communication via radio waves. The microchip component of a tag can include features
such as a CMOS integrated circuit, ROM, RAM, and nonvolatile EEPROM. Tags may also
have a source of autonomous power, typically a battery. In case the battery is absent, the
coupling element is conﬁgured so as to capture power and clock pulses from the electro-
magnetic ﬁeld of the radio waves received at the antenna. The type of power source in the
tag has great impact in deﬁning constraints on the availability of overall resources, and in
particular of those that can be used to implement security features. The possibilities with
regard to power source are:
. Passive tags: Power captured from reader’s radio waves through induction at the
antenna.
. Active tags: Power supplied autonomously (usually a battery).
. Semi-passive tags: Autonomous power provides for an onboard clock and=or
powers the tag circuitry, but does not supply the radio interface. Communication
is powered by induction as in the passive case.
The readers (also called transceivers) include a radiofrequency module, a control unit,
and a coupling element to scan for, and communicate with tags. Some readers are strictly
stand-alone, units—for instance, handheld readers may be carried to facilitate the work of
human monitors in verifying the arrival of shipped goods. Other readers have an interface
for communication with a back-end server.
The back-end server is typically a PC-type device, hosting business applications, e.g., a
database server augmented with RFID-speciﬁc middleware for communication with the
readers. Custom applications are also typically deployed that interface with the middleware
644
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

or the database to implement speciﬁc business logic—including support of security func-
tions. There are, however, alternative scenarios. As an example, RFID readers have been
integrated with cell-phone devices, and in this case the back-end functionality is properly
described as being a distributed computing application that includes custom software in the
cell phone, and other components in remote databases accessed through the cell network
(Pering et al., 2005; Want, 2006). This variant scenario could become a commonplace if
consumer-oriented RFID deployments are embraced by the public.
35.3
RFID Communication Model
Communication in RFID is modeled in three distinct layers, which are the lowest, or
physical layer, involving the RF coupling element; the data link or communication layer,
including the collision-avoidance protocols, and the protocol or application layer, wherein
higher-level mechanisms such as authentication protocols can be implemented (Sharma
et al., 2001).
At every layer of this communication model there are issues that affect RFID security. At
the physical layer, powerful attacks against some RFID architectures have been described
that directly recover the internal tag state (Oren and Shamir, 2006). These attacks analyze
the reﬂected electromagnetic emanations from passive RFIDs. Since passive RFIDs must
draw their power from the antenna, they tend to dampen the reﬂected emanations when
performing a computation that requires more power, and this can be used to derive the
values of bits under manipulation in the RFID internal circuit. From this data, information
about cryptographic secrets can be gleaned. New RFID designs—perhaps including
Faraday cage* coatings or larger capacitors—will be needed to eliminate the possibility of
such physical-observation attacks. US e-passports incorporate Faraday shielding pages.
More broadly, it is necessary to consider physical attacks that go beyond observation,
and manipulate the amount of energy available to passive tags for computation. Smart
cards, which are power-assisted, have been successfully attacked through the exploitation
of subtle faults that can be triggered by manipulation of the power source feed. After a
fault is induced—for instance, a state reset that forces the card to reuse randomness or
other one-time parameters—the attacker can compare the outputs produced in each case
and perform differential-type attacks. It is likely that some RFID cryptographic implemen-
tations will be vulnerable to similar attacks, unless the design process takes this type of
threat into consideration and develops speciﬁc approaches to counter it.
At the communication layer, it is also possible to achieve security violations (and in
particular location privacy exploits) by abuse of some mechanisms, such as the singulation
protocol in the EPC Gen2 standard (EPCglobal, 2005). Since multiple tags may be simul-
taneously within reach of a reader, singulation protocols are used to allow the reader to
identify (isolate or singulate) speciﬁc tags, establishing listening channels for each (Sharma
et al., 2001). By keeping the singulation protocol in open stage, it is possible for a reader to
continuously track a tag that remains within reach, even if the tag were to implement
privacy-preserving protocols at higher layers.
To achieve security (or any particular security service, such as location privacy) in RFID,
therefore, it is necessary to consider this issue at each layer, and to properly compose the
results. In this chapter, however, we focus on the protocol layer exclusively.
* Enclosures made of electrically conducting material, named after physicist M. Faraday. They block external
electrostatic ﬁelds, and if sufﬁciently thick can also dampen magnetic ﬁelds.
RFID Authentication: Reconciling Anonymity and Availability
645

35.3.1
RFID Security at the Protocol Layer
From an engineering perspective, the deﬁnition of RFID technology follows from what is
commonly agreed to constitute their physical layer (principally) and the communication
layers—increasingly deﬁned by common standards, such as the EPC Gen2 standard by
EPC Global (EPCglobal, 2005)—and this approach makes the deﬁnition of the RFID
domain incontrovertible. However, taking a protocol-layer only view introduces concep-
tualization issues and obscures the boundaries of the RFID domain.
From the viewpoint of security protocols, what are the differences between RFID
systems and other constrained-resource or ubiquitous architectures, such as sensor net-
works, mobile ad hoc networks (MANETs), or vehicular ad hoc networks? It would be
difﬁcult to claim a well-deﬁned RFID security research area if the resources provided by
RFID technology (at the protocol layer) were to substantially overlap with those charac-
terizing other constrained devices.
In practice, it has become common among researchers that focus on security at the
protocol layer to restrict their attention to the passive RFID tags. This empirical rule-of-
thumb provides a useful distinction, as passive RFIDs are strongly restricted in their
maximum circuit area by the amount of voltage provided by electromagnetic energy
captured by the antenna. This restriction provides an envelope of a few thousand gates
of circuitry available for the implementation of all protocol-layer services. Additionally,
passive RFIDs are not vulnerable to battery-depletion denial-of-service attacks that affect
other constrained settings, such as sensor networks.
Semipassive tags also represent a unique security domain, though one that has not been
widely studied. Semipassive tags do not present concerns about minimization of the
communication cost (as their radio interface is powered by the readers) nor such strong
restrictions on circuit area (as the battery can power comparatively larger circuits). On the
other hand, they are susceptible to battery-depletion denial-of-service attacks of a special
type (computational-intensive approach). Although battery-depletion attacks have been
studied in the context of other constrained devices, the situation with semipassive RFID is
markedly different as they are vulnerable only through computation cost, not (the typically
larger) communication cost. Therefore, the types of strategies useful to counter battery-
depleting DoS attacks against semipassive RFID tags should differ from those applicable to
the protection of other constrained devices, such as sensors.
From the perspective of security at the protocol layer, it may not be necessary to consider
active tags separately from sensor networks and related technologies. Only when discussing
security at the physical and communication layers do such distinctions become signiﬁcant.
35.4
The Threat Model for RFID
Providing strong security assurances for RFID is challenging due to the constraints of
the technology. Accordingly, it is rarely suitable to employ standard security protocols
for other domains in this setting. Yet, the robustness and security requirements for RFID
applications can be quite signiﬁcant. Ultimately, security solutions for RFID applica-
tions must take as rigorous a view of security as other types of applications. In
particular, whenever departure from standard practice is adopted, a rationale for any
simpliﬁcations should be given, grounding all arguments on recognizable particularities
of the RFID domain.
For instance, some solutions assume a bound on the communication complexity available
to attackers, limiting the number of messages exchanged between successive interactions of
646
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

a tag with legitimate readers (Juels, 2004a). Such an assumption should be validated against
the projected threats in each speciﬁc deployment scenario.
35.4.1
Byzantine Adversaries
Since RFID is a wireless networking technology, it is natural to consider traditional threat
models for the communication, and to assume a Byzantine adversary (Dolev and Yao,
1983). In this approach, all legitimate entities (tags, readers, the back-end server), as well as
the adversary, have polynomial-bounded resources. The adversary controls the delivery
schedule of the communication channels, and may eavesdrop into, or modify, their
contents. The adversary may instantiate new channels and directly interacts with honest
parties. Only recently such strong adversarial models have been advocated as feasible for
the RFID setting (Burmester et al., 2006; Juels and Weiss, 2006).
35.4.2
Handling Multiple Security Requirements
It is a common practice to except the channels between the readers and the back-end
servers from the security model. This is justiﬁable, since that communication can use
standard protocols for establishment of secure channels. One result is that RFID security
models capture only partial aspects of the entire system. Taking also into account that
RFID components are designed for concurrent communication,* RFID security models
have been proposed that provide security guarantees in the presence of concurrent execu-
tions and modular composition of protocols (Burmester et al., 2006; van Le et al., 2007).
To achieve harmonization of the multiple security requirements of RFID authentication
protocols, and in particular to capture the tension between the privacy and availability
requirements, it is useful to have a uniﬁed security model. Recently, a model has been
formulated that simultaneously captures (forward-) secure authentication and anonymity,
for both RFID entity authentication and key exchange, but that model does not address
availability requirements (Juels and Weiss, 2006). An independent, and concurrent formal-
ization captures authenticity, anonymity, and additionally supports availability for RFID
entity authentication (Burmester et al., 2006). Later it was extended to include forward-
security considerations attending both entity authentication and key exchange (van Le
et al., 2007).
35.5
Aspects of RFID Security
Some types of attacks and threats against RFID are classical strategies such as replay
attacks (authenticating values are captured and replayed later for impersonation, com-
promising authenticity), and interleaving attacks (authentication ﬂows from different
transactions are combined to create new, valid authentication transcripts). Others exploit
unique features of the RFID setting, such as mobility and promiscuity, i.e., the common
circumstance of tags being always available to respond to queries. This feature, proble-
matic in view of privacy concerns, can be attenuated by introducing a temporary deacti-
vation mechanism—which may introduce its own set of vulnerabilities, e.g., threatening
availability—or via physical mechanisms such as a switch. The latter strategy is only
reasonable for tags carried by persons.
* Standard-compliant RFID readers are capable of simultaneous communication with large numbers of tags
(EPCglobal, 2005).
RFID Authentication: Reconciling Anonymity and Availability
647

Among the various security interests in RFID technology, authenticity of identiﬁcation
and data, (location) privacy, and availability are arguably the most critical.
35.5.1
Authentication and Integrity
RFID-facilitated identiﬁcation is being used to improve the performance of secure identity
veriﬁcation. For instance, RFIDs have been added to the new international passport
standard (ICAO, 2004), to enhance the security and efﬁciency of database-driven checks
at ports of entry. It is useful to consider this example in some detail to appreciate the real-
world consequences of the adoption of RFID as a security mechanism. In this case, while
RFIDs are not supposed to replace manual veriﬁcation by the agent=ofﬁcer, documents
guiding its adoption in the United States indicate an intention to reduce the time taken to
process passports, including eliminating the need to use optical scanning to verify them
(Juels et al., 2005; U.S. Department of State, 2005). Focus on processing time may lead to
RFID-based identiﬁcation becoming the primary mechanism providing passport authenti-
city guarantees, such as protection from forgery.
It is claimed that the additional difﬁculty of forging an RFID tag will make the passport
and ID systems more secure in the face of terrorism threats. However, research has shown
that the RFID tags used in the e-passport system may not be difﬁcult to forge, in particular
for countries that do not adopt active authentication measures (Juels et al., 2005).
Secure facilities have adopted RFID for controlled access to restricted areas, and RFID is
being deployed to increase the efﬁciency of container shipping tracking, including sup-
porting international initiatives on counter-terrorism, and on combating drug and
weapons smuggling (Willis, 2005). In this case, containers are inspected, tagged, and sealed
at the point of origination. Upon arrival at the local destination (or perhaps a trans-
shipment site), secondary inspections and opening of the container by authorities may be
dispensed with if the RFID reader can verify the tag’s identity.
In each of these examples, the RFID system substitutes for other security systems,
providing more convenience and potentially more security by increasing the ability to
consistently apply security checks (for instance, shipping containers are currently only
inspected by sampling). However, integrity of these RFID-based veriﬁcation systems is
entirely dependent on the (frequently false) assumption that tag cloning is not easily
accomplished.
The use of strong authentication mechanisms in RFID tags is one element of making such
systems more resilient against cloning attacks. At the physical layer, protection against
extraction of authentication keys through observation of the reﬂected electromagnetic ﬁeld
must also be addressed.
Authentication and integrity are also important in connection with privacy concerns, to
be considered next. For instance, tags that do not support authentication of readers and
allow for arbitrary writes into their data ﬁelds are vulnerable to attacks that introduce
markers in the tags.
35.5.2
Privacy
RFID tags have low intrinsic value, and even any data they carry may itself be of low
relevance. However, such tags are attached to resources that are worth monitoring. As
standard RFID technology dictates that tags must satisfy interrogation requests by arbi-
trary readers, it is possible for covert and unauthorized readers to be deployed (Sharma
et al., 2003). An adversary could use a network of such readers to automatically acquire
information from circulating tags, accumulating transit information (location=times) of
RFID hosts.
648
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

If an individual carries an RFID or RFID host object, this person’s location information is
at risk from being compromised by covert means. If, on the other hand, the RFID tags are
used in their typical functions of automated shipment veriﬁcation and inventory control,
an attacker’s ability to monitor RFIDs using unauthorized readers provides a threat to the
conﬁdentiality of the enterprise’s logistic operation—facilitating industrial or military
espionage of a tactical asset.
Note that simply hiding the identity of the tag, for instance, via pseudonyms, is not
sufﬁcient, because the identiﬁer embedded in the tag may be of little value to an observer.
Instead, anonymity of the identiﬁer must provide for unlinkability, i.e., must prevent an
observer from correlating two instances of interaction=communication by the same tag. In
this chapter, whenever we refer to location privacy, or to anonymity, we refer to unlinkable
anonymity.
RFID tags may contain auxiliary data as needed by the particular application (EPCglobal,
2005). This transport of related data provides a secondary channel that can be exploited
by information gathering efforts. If such auxiliary data is stored in plaintext in the tag, the
target of an attack may be simply reading it to use in combination with location information
for data-mining purposes. Alternatively, even if the information is encrypted with a key
unbeknownst to the attacker, if the enciphered value is constant between successive read-
ings, it can serve as a pseudo-identiﬁer that enables the attacker to violate the location
privacy of the RFID host. This threat to privacy through exploitation of hidden channels
may also utilize unauthorized readings, for instance, of counters or other data structures
that change in predictable ways between instances of the communication protocol involving
a particular tag.
In addition to considering the threat of privacy compromises by outsiders, one must also
evaluate the potential for abuse by system operators. Such privacy concerns are referred to
as Big Brother privacy concerns. They involve considerations of a different nature, includ-
ing legal aspects, individual privacy expectations, and other public policy matters. For
instance, in the United Kingdom, RFID tags are being embedded in license plates (e-Plates).
Police ofﬁcers furnished with readers may be able to ascertain such facts as whether a
license plate is legitimate or forged, and if it is attached to the vehicle for which it was
issued. In the absence of adequate safeguarding measures, this infrastructure is exploitable
by outsiders (e.g., private eyes). It may also give unscrupulous parties access to a wealth of
information about activities of members of the public. A good discussion on Big Brother
issues in RFID is given in (Sharma et al., 2003).
At a ﬁner granularity, one may exempt the back-end server from suspicion, and
consider insider threat risks coming only from corrupt readers. Such threats are certainly
worthy of evaluation, since the frequently mobile readers may be as vulnerable as the
tags themselves.
35.5.3
Availability
Availability refers to the security guarantee that system resources will be accessible when
needed. Clearly, availability implies some preexisting level of expectation for performance
parameters, and it is both a security as well as a reliability and performance concern.
Concentrating on security aspects, it is possible to enumerate a number of different attacks
against availability and=or available counter-measures:
. Killing attacks: Some RFID tags support a kill functionality or kill key (EPCglobal,
2005). If a particular value is broadcast to a tag, it will be de-activated, either
temporarily (until an enabling value is received) or permanently. For instance, the
kill-key feature is available in RFID tags used to prevent shoplifting; these are
RFID Authentication: Reconciling Anonymity and Availability
649

disabled at the point-of-sale to allow for handling and reuse without raising false
alarms. If the kill functionality is available, the system may be vulnerable to
unauthorized disabling attacks that defeat its security functions. To prevent
against such attacks, the kill functionality should require the disclosure of a secret
by the back-end server to the tag. The secret should be tag-speciﬁc and unpredict-
able to an eavesdropper that has witnessed previous kill sessions with different
tags, or perhaps even with the same tag, if the system allows for temporary tag
de-activation.
. Disabling attacks: This generic class of attacks exploits state synchronization
requirements of authentication mechanisms for tags. Some existing and proposed
protocols for secure RFID authentication require tags to maintain state information
that should match with other information available to the readers or (more com-
monly) to the back-end server. Disabling attacks interfere with the communication
between tag and authorized reader to cause divergence between the state infor-
mation among the parties, preventing further use of the tag. To prevent against
such attacks, either mechanisms must be provided for recovery of a convergent
state, or mutual authentication must be used to ensure integrity of exchanged
messages before a state update is performed.
. Jamming attacks: The communication frequencies can be ﬁlled with noise by a reader
(or other broadcasting device) that does not comply with accepted standards. If the
level of introduced noise is high, it may be difﬁcult or impossible to prevent against
such attacks. Available techniques to tolerate (some level of) jamming attacks have
been described in (Engels, 2001; Sharma et al., 2001; EPCglobal, 2005). Naturally,
these solutions involve mechanisms at the communication layer.
35.6
Conﬂicts between Anonymity and Availability Requirements
In RFID technologies, anonymity and availability appear often to conﬂict. For instance, a
privacy preserving technique can be created from an availability threat (jamming), as
exempliﬁed by the blocker tag proposed in a seminal paper on RFID privacy (Juels et al.,
2003). In the following, we discuss how privacy techniques lead to availability risks.
Of the earlier-mentioned classes of attacks against availability, disabling attacks repre-
sent a particularly difﬁcult challenge to address, particular in conjunction with location
privacy requirements. Privacy implies that tags must change the values they use to
authenticate or identify themselves to the system, to prevent from recognition and tracking
by unauthorized parties. This implies that some form of changeable shared state must be
maintained between tags and server.
Consider the case of single-side authentication, i.e., the tag authenticates itself to the
reader but not conversely. In some protocols, this is achieved through the use of a shared-
state, such as the seed for generating an unpredictable sequence. One of the ﬁrst protocols in
this class was introduced in Ohkubo et al. (2003). Disabling attacks against such protocols
involves impersonating a reader to lead the tag in stepping the sequence, reaching the next
state. Typically, as tag authentication protocols are designed to take a few hundred milli-
seconds, the fake reader has ample opportunity to cause the tag to become signiﬁcantly
desynchronized from the back-end server, by repeated application of this attack. Since there
is no obvious bound on the number of state updates that an adversary could force on a tag,
there is accordingly no guarantee that the back-end server will recognize the tag after
speculatively stepping the state for every tag in its database a ﬁxed number of times.
650
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

In general, protecting the exchanges between tags and the other system components to
prevent faulty state changes is difﬁcult. Passive tags do not maintain a clock and cannot
use (even loosely synchronized) timing information as a security mechanism; they allow
for implementation of only a limited set of cryptographic operations and have limited
transient and permanent storage, therefore being less capable of detecting attacks. We now
consider some strategies that are available to prevent against such desynchronization
attacks.
35.6.1
Tag Identiﬁcation and Server Authentication
It may be possible to use back-end server (or reader) authentication to reconcile anonymity
and availability, by allowing the tag to detect malicious queries. Intuitively, one would
have the tag generate a fresh (pseudo-) random challenge. After receiving a recognizable
response authenticating the server, it could update its state and perform authentication
without fear that the state might become desynchronized with the server.
However, there are difﬁculties with the mutual authentication approach as described. If,
as we assume, the tag is incapable of performing public-key cryptographic operations, it
can only authenticate the server based on shared, unique secrets. As a result, prior to
identifying the tag, the back-end server has no ability to authenticate because it does not
know which secret to use in computing the response to the tag’s challenge. Therefore,
server authentication must follow tag identiﬁcation. Since identiﬁcation is a weaker
requirement* than authentication, if the former were amenable to a solution reconciling
availability and privacy, then by following an identiﬁcation step with mutual authentica-
tion, it may be possible to eliminate the threat of disabling attacks altogether. In the
following, several strategies to tag identiﬁcation are discussed.
35.6.2
Resynchronization
This is used by optimistic protocols (Burmester et al., 2006; van Le et al., 2007). When an
attacker performs a desynchronization attack, these protocols revert to exhaustive search
among the valid keys. Once the key is found, the server automatically resynchronizes with
the tag. The advantage of this approach is that it requires no additional circuitry or
computational capabilities in the tag, with the entire recovery process transparently han-
dled by the server.
However, this strategy suffers from scalability issues. More precisely, to desynchronize n
tags, the attacker needs to perform a number of computations proportional to n, whereas
the work required by the server to recover is proportional to the product mn, where m is the
number of tag keys currently valid (recognizable by the server). At the limit when the
capacity of the system is tested, timing information (in the form of server delays) may
allow for (partial) identiﬁcation of tags, threatening privacy as well.
35.6.3
Exhaustive Key Search
A different approach to tag identiﬁcation is to exploit the fact that the key-space to be
exhausted by an adversary is much higher than the set of valid keys. In particular the latter
may be easily exhaustable by the server in a full database search.
To facilitate the work of the back-end server during exhaustive key search, it is possible
to use two or more keys in a hierarchical fashion. If t keys are used, then the search space
* Identiﬁcation does not guarantee freshness: In an identiﬁcation mechanism, it may be possible to impersonate the
tag by capturing the contents of its transmission and replaying them later.
RFID Authentication: Reconciling Anonymity and Availability
651

for the server is reduced to m1=tn to identify n tags in a database containing m entries. This
approach was put forward by Molnar et al. (2005), and has the beneﬁt of making the attack
more scalable, as the ratio between the back-end server identiﬁcation workload and the
attacker desynchronization workload, m1=t, can be reduced to a constant by choosing t of
order log(m). However, even if relatively smaller values for t are used—say, t ¼ 2 or 3—this
implies a signiﬁcant increase in the complexity of the tag computations, for instance, the
tag will require logic to rekey its cryptographic function several times during one transac-
tion. Another difﬁculty of this method is that the higher levels of the hierarch include keys
that are shared among many tags, leading to privacy risks, in particular if key compromise
(known-key attacks) are considered as part of the threat model.
A different approach involves using time-memory trade-offs to speed up key search at
the back-end server (Avoine and Oeschlin, 2005). The approach reduces the back-end
server workload to identify a single tag from O(m) to O(m2=3). Although a signiﬁcant
improvement, this method requires expensive precomputation steps.
A different strategy to private identiﬁcation that does not require cryptographic oper-
ations, and instead uses only rotations (bit shifts and selections) was described in (Juels,
2004a). However, that minimalist solution assumes a bound on the number of interactions
between the tag and reader. Under such assumption, the resynchronization approach as
described earlier is scalable and provides information-theoretic security if the tags can
afford to compute pseudo-random functions.
Recently, a process has been described that strengthens the minimalist approach, to
include also bit complementation (Castelluccia and Soos, 2007). To discover the key after
a number of (rotated and potentially complemented) bit disclosures, the back-end server (or
an adversary) must ﬁrst solve a set of linear constraints, which can be shown to be equivalent
to solving a SAT instance. The security therefore depends on the difference between
the hardness of solving SAT instances with prior knowledge of a relatively small set of
possible solutions—i.e., the set of valid keys (known to the back-end server)—versus solving
the same instances without such special knowledge, as in the case of a would-be attacker.
This approach, however, does not scale as it requires search through all valid keys.
35.6.4
Future Directions
The earlier-mentioned solutions represent different compromises. They suffer from various
scalability issues, may present secondary privacy threats, or may have drawbacks such as
requiring more complex tags or extensive precomputation. Indeed, at the time of the
writing of this chapter, the authors are not aware of scalable solutions that fully reconcile
anonymity and availability requirements, while using only efﬁcient and simple symmetric-
key constructions. However, at the pace with which new ideas and strategies are being
introduced, further research is likely to provide practical and elegant solutions to this issue
in the not distant future.
35.7
Resources Available for RFID Security Mechanisms
Having discussed the remaining challenges attending the simultaneous provision of ano-
nymity and availability in RFID authentication protocols, we now describe the set of tools
that are available to their solution. This section describes capabilities available to RFID tags
for security measures, considering primarily the requirements of passive tags.
652
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

The minimal circuit area used by each feature, in terms of NAND gate-equivalents (GE),
is a crucial measure of their feasibility for RFID implementations, with the lowest gate-
count being preferred. This is because current technology can only provide a few thousand
GEs for security in the higher-end tags. A common rule-of-thumb is that developers will
count with no more than 1=3 of the circuitry to be devoted to security operations.
An even more signiﬁcant concern than the circuit area is the power demand of the RFID
tag’s circuit pipeline. Passive RFIDs are powered by inductance, and the lower the wattage
that their operation requires, the longer the distances from which they can be scanned.
Since reader reach is a crucial measurement of usability for RFIDs, both the per-cycle
maximum power and the per-cycle average power required by RFID circuits are restricted
(Feldhofer and Rechberger, 2006).
35.7.1
Transient Storage
Transient storage is implemented using latches, and, therefore, is nothing less than addi-
tional circuitry. The cost of one bit of transient storage is estimated as approximately 8 gate
equivalents (Feldhofer and Rechberger, 2006).
35.7.2
EPROM and EEPROM
Both require higher resources and higher power utilization than transient storage. There-
fore, they should be used sparingly for security features. Among the types of measures that
become available through the use of EPROM and EEPROM are key updates to provide
forward-security, and key changes to deal with revocation of tags without need for
issuance of new ones.
35.7.3
Time-Out Mechanisms
RFID passive tags do not maintain clocks or keep time. However, the activity time span of
a tag during a single session can be limited using techniques such as measuring the
discharge rate of capacitors (Juels, 2004b).
35.7.4
Asymmetric Cryptographic Primitives
The use of special architectural constructions (digit-serial multipliers) may make it possible
to achieve elliptic curve cryptography (ECC) implementations in as few as 6300 GEs
(Batina et al., 2007), though the numbers get worse if such constructions are not available
(approx. 11,446 GE). These numbers indicate at least the possibility that ECC may eventu-
ally be available in high-end, passive tags. Still, taking into consideration pricing pressures
and the current state of the art in passive tag technology, it appears unlikely that RFID
deployments based on public-key cryptography will be common in the next few years.
35.7.5
Symmetric Cryptographic Primitives
Among the symmetric key primitives, not all are equally amenable to implementation.
. Block ciphers—Block ciphers suitable for RFID implementations are those that have
been designed to achieve highly efﬁcient hardware optimizations under con-
strained memory conditions. In particular, substantial work has been done that
validates the suitability of AES for RFID tags (Feldhofer and Rechberger, 2006),
with full implementations requiring as few as 3300–3400 GE.
RFID Authentication: Reconciling Anonymity and Availability
653

. Pseudo-random number generators—PRNGs are a ﬂexible primitive, and can be build
from block ciphers in counter mode, from stream ciphers (the key stream is
pseudo-random), and independently using other technologies, such as LFSR-
based generators (Coppersmith et al., 1994), providing ﬂexible trade-off opportuni-
ties between security and efﬁciency needs.
. Stream ciphers—Choices of stream ciphers for RFID are made more complex due to
the lack of standardized choices. This situation could improve soon with the
conclusion (projected for May 2008) of the stream cipher selection process
(project eSTREAM), which is part of the European Network of Excellence for
Cryptology (ECRYPT) research initiative. Several candidate stream ciphers have
been selected for the ﬁnal phase of the evaluation process on the basis of their
performance characteristics in hardware implementations. An evaluation of the
candidate ciphers shows a count of fewer than 1300 gates for Grain80 up to
approximately 4760 gates for F-FCSR-H among ciphers claiming 80-bit security,
and a low of fewer than 1860 gates for Grain128 up to approximately 5040
gates for Mickey128 for 128-bit security ciphers. Considering the number of ﬁnal-
ists which have so far resisted cryptanalysis and the good miniaturization charac-
teristics of several of the project ﬁnalists, it looks like the promise of a
standardized, RFID-suitable stream cipher will be fulﬁlled in the near future
(Good and Benaissa, 2007).
. Pseudo-random functions—One advantage in designing PRF-based security for
RFID is the amount of choice available in the construction of PRFs. They can be
composed using the strategy of cascading a PRG, which while being a relatively
slow method, results in little gate-count and per-cycle power overhead over the
underlying PRG (Goldreich et al., 1986). Block ciphers also provide ready imple-
mentations of the PRF primitive.
. Hash functions—Counter to intuition, hash functions seem at the moment to be less
suitable for RFID implementation than the most efﬁcient block ciphers. The reason
is that the design of many collision-resistant hash functions uses an underlying
block cipher with a large block length—which optimizes the software performance
of the hash function by allowing it to process large chunks of data at a time, but
makes it inefﬁcient to implement under constrained-memory settings. Their use is
discouraged in favor of other primitives whenever collision-resistance is not a
requirement (Feldhofer and Rechberger, 2006).
. Message authentication codes—Implementations based on block ciphers, e.g., CBC-
MAC, or on universal hashing, are preferred to those based on hashes, such as
HMAC, due to the earlier-mentioned disadvantages of implementing hashes in
RFID tags.
35.7.6
Other Primitives
Some RFID protocols, in particular those devoted to identiﬁcation—as opposed to
authentication—employ noncryptographic primitives, such as XOR operations, ﬁxed-
precision arithmetic operations, bit shifts, or linear-feedback shift registers. The entire reason
for proposing such primitives is that they can be implemented with a low number of gates
and within the per-cycle power envelope available for typical RFID architectures. Accord-
ingly, their suitability is dependent on whether they possess the characteristics demanded
by their role in supporting security, and must be assessed in each protocol speciﬁcation.
654
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

35.8
Conclusion
RFID is a recent technology, and its attending security concerns have only recently been
recognized, starting with the seminal work of the Auto-ID Labs at MIT (Sharma et al.,
2001). Since then, it has attracted the attention of several imminent researchers who
proposed innovative and creative security approaches. Important security issues are still
at the forefront of research, and as RFID security applications increase, this research area is
guaranteed to remain a fertile and relevant ﬁeld of study.
References
Avoine, G., and Oechslin, P. 2005. A scalable and provably secure hash-based RFID protocol. In IEEE
International Conference on Pervasive Computing and Communications (PerCom 2005), Kauai,
Hawaii, March 2005, IEEE Press, pp. 110–114.
Batina, L., Guajardo, J., Kerins, T., Mentens, N., Tuyls, P., and Verbauwhede, I. 2007. Public-key
cryptography for RFID-Tags. IEEE International Conference on Pervasive Computing and Commu-
nications Workshops, New York, March 2007, pp. 217–222.
Burmester, M., van Le, T., and de Medeiros, B. 2006. Provably secure ubiquitous systems: Universally
composable RFID authentication protocols. 2nd IEEE=CreateNet International Conference on
Security and Privacy in Communication Networks (SECURECOMM 2006), Baltimore, Maryland,
August 2006.
Castellucia, C. and Soos, M. 2007. Secret shufﬂing: A novel approach to RFID private identiﬁcation.
International Conference on RFID Security, Malaga, Spain, July 2007.
Coppersmith, D., Krawczyk, H., and Mansour, Y. 1994. The shrinking generator, Advances in Crypto-
logy—CRYPTO’93, LNCS, Springer-Verlag, pp. 22–39.
Dolev, D. and Yao, A. 1983. On the security of public key protocols. IEEE Transactions on Information
Theory, 29(2): 198–208.
Engels, W.D. 2001. The reader collision problem. Whitepaper. #MIT-AUTOID-WH-007, Auto-ID
Center,
Massachusetts
Institute
of
Technology.
http:==autoid.mit.edu=whitepapers=MIT-
AUTOID-WH-007.PDF.
EPCglobal. 2005. Class 1 generation 2 UHF air interface protocol standard. http:==www.epcglobalinc.
org=standards=uhfc1g2=.
Feldhofer, M. and Rechberger, C. 2006. A case against currently used hash functions in RFID
protocols. On the move to meaningful internet systems: OTM 2006 workshops. Lecture Notes
in Computer Science, 4277: 372–381.
Goldreich, O., Goldwasser, S., and Micali, S. 1986. How to construct random functions. Journal of the
ACM, 33(4): 792–807.
Good, T. and Benaissa, M. 2007. Hardware results for selected stream cipher candidates. eSTREAM
Phase 3, ECRYPT Network of Excellence within the Information Societies Technology (IST)
Programme of the European Commission. http:==www.ecrypt.eu.org=stream=papersdir=2007=
023.pdf.
ICAO. October 2004. Document 9303, Machine readable travel documents.
Juels, A. 2004a. Minimalist cryptography for low-cost RFID tags, in Blundo, C. and Climato, S. (eds.),
International Conference on Security in Communication Networks, Amalﬁ, Italy, September 2004,
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 3352, pp. 149–164.
Juels, A. 2004b. ‘‘Yoking-proofs’’ for RFID tags. IEEE Conference on Pervasive Computing and Commu-
nications Workshops, Orlando, March 2004, pp. 138–143.
Juels, A., Molnar, D., and Wagner, D. 2005. Security and privacy issues in e-passports. First Inter-
national Conference on Security and Privacy for Emerging Areas in Communications Networks
(SecureComm), Athens, Greece, September 5–9, pp. 74–88.
Juels, A., Rivest, R.L., and Szydlo, M. 2003. The blocker tag: selective blocking of RFID tags for
consumer privacy. ACM Conference on Computer and Communication Security, pp. 103–111.
RFID Authentication: Reconciling Anonymity and Availability
655

Juels, A. and Weiss, S. 2006. Deﬁning strong privacy for RFID. International Association for Crypto-
logic Research, Technical report # 2006=137. http:==eprint.iacr.org=2006=137.
van Le, T., Burmester, M., and de Medeiros, B. 2007. Universally composable and forward-secure
RFID authentication and authenticated key exchange. ACM Symposium on Information, Com-
puter, and Communications Security (ASIACCS 2007), Singapore, March 2007, ACM Press,
pp. 242–252.
Molnar, D., Soppera, A., and Wagner, D. 2005. A scalable, delegatable pseudonym protocol enabling
ownership transfer of RFID tags, Workshop on selected areas in cryptography, Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, Vol. 3897, pp. 276–290.
Ohkubo, M., Suzuki, K., and Kinoshita, S. 2003. Cryptographic approach to ‘‘privacy-friendly’’ tags,
RFID Privacy Workshop, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, November 2003.
Oren, Y. and Shamir, A. 2006. Power analysis of RFID tags. Advances in Cryptology, CRYPTO Rump
Session.
Pering, T., Ballagas, R., and Want, R., 2005. Spontaneous marriage of mobile devices and interactive
spaces. Communications of the ACM, 48(9): 53–59.
Sharma, S.E., Weiss, S.A., and Engels, W.D. 2001. RFID systems, security and privacy implications.
Whitepaper #MIT-AUTOID-WH-014, Auto-ID Center, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
http:==autoid.mit.edu=whitepapers=MIT-AUTOID-WH-014.PDF.
Sharma, S.E., Wang, S.A., and Engels, D.W. 2003. RFID systems and security and privacy implica-
tions. Proceedings of the Workshop on Cryptographic Hardware and Embedded Systems (CHES 20002).
LNCS, Vol. 2523, pp. 454–469.
U.S. Department of State. 2005. 22 CFR Part 51, Public Notice 4993, RIN 1400-AB93, Electronic
Passport. Federal Register, 70(33), Proposed Rule (18 February 2005). http:==a257.g.akamai-
tech.net=7=257=2422=01jan20051800=edocket.access.gpo.gov=2005=05-3080.htm.
Want, R. 2006. An introduction to RFID technology. IEEE Pervasive Computing, 5(1): 25–33.
Willis, H.H. 2005. Evaluating the security of the global containerized supply chain, TR-214-RC,
RAND Corporation.
656
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

36
Security and Privacy of RFID for Biomedical
Applications: A Survey
Ellen Stuart, Melody Moh, and Teng-Sheng Moh
CONTENTS
36.1
Security and Privacy of RFID for Biomedical Applications...................................... 657
36.1.1 Biomedical Applications of RFID Systems—Subdermal Tags..................... 658
36.1.1.1 Chipping Humans............................................................................... 659
36.1.1.2 Cardiac Monitoring=Electrocardiography....................................... 659
36.1.1.3 Pacemaker Augmentation.................................................................. 659
36.1.1.4 Seizure Disorder Monitoring and Treatment.................................. 660
36.1.1.5 Infant and Pediatric Thermometry, Data Reporting...................... 660
36.1.1.6 Continuous Blood Pressure and Glucose Monitoring ................... 660
36.1.1.7 Infant and Pediatric Sleep Apnea Monitoring................................ 660
36.1.1.8 Prosthetic Control—Implantable Myoelectric Sensors (IMES)..... 661
36.1.1.9 RFID with Muscle Paralysis .............................................................. 661
36.1.2 Security Issues in Biomedical RFID Systems.................................................. 662
36.1.2.1 Considerations and System Vulnerabilities..................................... 662
36.1.2.2 Personal Privacy.................................................................................. 663
36.1.2.3 Interference........................................................................................... 663
36.1.3 Biomedical Security Solutions........................................................................... 665
36.1.3.1 Layer 2 Privacy Control ..................................................................... 665
36.1.3.2 Proxy ..................................................................................................... 665
36.1.3.3 Encryption ............................................................................................ 666
36.1.3.4 Centralized Authority......................................................................... 667
36.1.3.5 Update Algorithms ............................................................................. 667
36.1.3.6 More Challenge–Response Protocols ............................................... 668
36.1.4 Summary.............................................................................................................. 672
References.................................................................................................................................... 673
36.1
Security and Privacy of RFID for Biomedical Applications
Implantable RFID tags are a commercially available technology, used for implantation in
animals since the 1980s and more recently approved by the FDA for use in humans. Troyk
describes the development of this class of RFID tags, citing a patent application in 1979 for
657

an RFID type device intended for subdermal implantation designed to be used to locate
and track pets, livestock, and migratory and endangered animals (Troyk, 1999). Garﬁnkel
also describes the evolution of these devices, originating with a series of patent applications
in 1986 for a syringe-implantable identiﬁcation transponder to be used for identifying
horses (Garﬁnkel, 2002). This section will describe possible applications of RFID techno-
logy within the ﬁeld of biomedical engineering and discuss the applicability of various
security-enabled protocols to these scenarios.
36.1.1
Biomedical Applications of RFID Systems—Subdermal Tags
Literature on implementations of RFID technology within the medical industry focuses on
identiﬁcation and tracking use cases that are common in the supply chain management
arena. RFID shows promise in reducing not only the losses due to lost pharmaceuticals and
medical equipment, but also the mistakes due to forgotten equipment and treatment
miscommunications (www.drugresearcher.com, 2004a,b). The biomedical applications
detailed here will move away from the use of typical RFID tags and protocols into
implementations that utilize RFID tags to transcutaneously return sensory information or
receive commands that initiate action after receiving power in a similar transcutaneous
manner.
Both Troyk (Troyk, 1999) and Garﬁnkel acknowledge the ﬁrst patented device, applied
for in 1991 and issued in 1993 to Destron=Identiﬁcation Devices Inc. and Hughes Aircraft.
Over the past decade, this RFID tag footprint has been reduced to the size of a grain of rice,
allowing for subdermal placement using a 12-gauge needle (Garﬁnkel, 2002). Researchers
have also managed to increase the functionality and transmission capabilities of the tags,
making marked improvements in both speed and distance. In 1999 Troyk described the
RFID equipped injectable micromodule with a cylindrical hermetically sealed glass capsule
about 2–3 mm in diameter, 1–1.5 cm in length, and containing a microcoil antennae,
capacitor, and a chip (Figure 36.1).
Currently, Applied Digital Solutions (ADS) manufactures implantable tags, with
intended functions such as subdermal GPS personal location devices (PLD), for identiﬁca-
tion and authentication. VeriChip, a subsidiary of Applied Digital, has the only patented
implantable RFID tag that is cleared by the FDA for use with humans. The tag operates at a
frequency of 125 kHz and measures 11.1 3 2.1 mm and can be implanted using local
anesthesia and either 12-gauge needle or a very small incision.
The VeriChip tags are similar to other RFID tags, but are designed to be inserted just
below the skin and have a very limited reading range because of the limited power and
lower operational frequencies. Current research indicates that implantable RFID tag tech-
nology is completely limited to the passive tag systems that have been described in this
work. The passive tag devices, because of their lack of a battery, lack the power capabilities
of active tags, but have a superior life span because they are not limited by an internal
battery life span.
FIGURE 36.1
Example of an implantable RFID tag, also referred to as
a micromodule. (From Troyk, P.R., Ann. Rev. Biomed.
Eng., 1, 177, 1999.)
Encapsulated
silicon chip
Microcoil
1 cm
658
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

Troyk also introduces an enhanced version of the implantable RFID micromodule, the
microstimulator (Figure 36.2), which supplements the traditional RFID micromodule tag
with electrodes that are used to stimulate muscle tissue when given instruction from the
extracorporeal reader. Applications for this RFID system would include functional neuro-
muscular stimulation (FNS) (stimulation of paralyzed muscle), treatment of foot-drop in
hemiplegic stroke patients with damage to the peroneal nerve, joint instability, post-
operative rehabilitation, sleep apnea, and other neuromuscular conditions. Potential and
partially realized applications include the following.
36.1.1.1
Chipping Humans
The practice of chipping, inserting an RFID tag below the surface of the skin, has a diverse
set of applications, such as those marketed by VeriChip and Digital Angel Corporation.
These applications include systems that would prevent elderly members of our society
from being lost and babies from being accidentally switched or intentionally stolen by
integrating RFID tags with automated door locks. The systems would prevent the tag,
either worn by an elderly patient wandering around a care facility or held by a kidnapper
carrying a tagged-baby, from leaving a building. RFID tag devices have already been
implemented into some of the prison systems, used to identify and monitor inmates.
36.1.1.2
Cardiac Monitoring=Electrocardiography
A proposed RFID-enabled Holter monitor would utilize a personal RFID system reader to
transmit event data to a store-and-forward application host device that would store
irregular EKG events and forward the event data to the hospital at regular intervals. This
version of the Holter monitor would provide patients with a wireless wearable tag and
reader system, allowing them to be more mobile while potentially providing them with
enhanced sensory and reactive functions. More advanced RFID systems could include
chips programmed to recognize the patterns corresponding to severe heart events and
automatically trigger an emergency request for paramedics (Weiss, 1998).
36.1.1.3
Pacemaker Augmentation
Digital Angel Corporation recently introduced BioThermo, a new temperature sensing
implantable RFID tag device (www.adsx.com). These advances in sensory enabled tagging
show promise for sensory enabled applications of RFID systems. Sensory enabled RFID
microstimulators could potentially replace the wired architecture of current systems.
Ta electrode
Alumina substrate
Ir electrode
Glass-Ta-seal
each end
Cu microcoil
Au-plated
elgiloy spring
Space for
moisture getter
1 cm
FIGURE 36.2
Example of a microstimulator. (From Troyk, P.R., Ann. Rev. Biomed. Eng., 1, 177, 1999.)
Security and Privacy of RFID for Biomedical Applications: A Survey
659

Implanted passive tags would have a longer life span and readers either could be worn
externally or could continue to be placed subdermally. A wireless transdermal system
could provide longer, more efﬁcient recording of heart activity and the absence of wiring
would result in a less invasive pacemaker implantation procedure.
36.1.1.4
Seizure Disorder Monitoring and Treatment
Similar to the pacemaker system described earlier, sensory enabled RFID tags have the
potential for integration into devices to monitor other electrical abnormalities in the
neurosystem. Utilizing Electroencephalography (EEG) monitoring, abnormal electrical
activity can be localized and can guide treatment efforts for seizure causing disruptions.
Cyberonics, Inc. developed a product called the NeuroCybernetic Prosthesis (NCP), a
battery-powered transmitter, which treats depression and seizures by sending timed
electrical impulses to the brain (CNN, 1999; Koren and Holmes, 2006). This pacemaker
for the brain has been available since 1997. Potential implanted sensory microstimulators
could report data and respond to external sources with increased processing capacities.
Using RFID, NCP could reach a longer life span and would again eliminate the
wired solutions currently used. In his paper Implications of Silicon Monolithic RFICs for
Medical Instrumentation and Telemetry, Weiss proposes a device that can detect and treat
seizures. Despite Weiss’ commentary regarding the speculative state of the proposed
implementation, concurrent developments by Cyberonics provided the proof of concept.
36.1.1.5
Infant and Pediatric Thermometry, Data Reporting
The recent developments by Digital Angel Corporation also allow for growth in the ﬁeld of
thermometry devices. Doctors might use these systems in cases such as those involving
hypothermic exposure, where changes in temperature require immediate diagnosis and
treatment.
36.1.1.6
Continuous Blood Pressure and Glucose Monitoring
Currently, blood pressure is measured and monitored using a computer to analyze meas-
urements from an arterial line ﬁxed with a transducer, a hollow bore needle that gauges
pressure changes. With a wireless RFID implementation, doctors and patients would not be
a hindered by connections when attempting to relocate or position themselves around
patients. Similarly, diabetic patients require continual monitoring of blood glucose levels,
especially for a new onset diabetic. Weiss describes RFID sensor technology (Figure 36.3) as
ideally suited for utilization with chemical analysis applications for the human body. Weiss
presents an implantable monitoring system, placed directly onto the wall of an artery. The
system would alleviate the current need to withdraw blood to complete the test. The
implanted sensor would detect changes in blood glucose levels by measuring the change
in oscillation of the acoustic wave generated by a surface acoustic wave resonator (SAW).
36.1.1.7
Infant and Pediatric Sleep Apnea Monitoring
Weiss cites the monitoring of infants with sleep apnea as another possible implementation
of RFID technology. Independent of actual causes of sudden infant death syndrome
(SIDS),itseemsreasonabletobelievethatsometypeofportablemonitoringsystem,notneces-
sarily invasive, could be developed as an enhanced baby monitor (www.sleepfoundation.
org).
660
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

36.1.1.8
Prosthetic Control—Implantable Myoelectric Sensors (IMES)
Weir, Troyk, DeMichele, and Kuiken describe their preliminary work in the creation of an
upper limb prosthetic control system that offers up to eight degrees-of-freedom, integrating
myoelectric sensors and RFID technology to provide a more seamless sequential control,
eliminating intermediate steps and greatly increasing control of more reﬁned movements
(Weir et al., 2003). The reader relays data to a controller that processes and interprets the
information into commands for desired movement (Weir et al., 2003). The resulting system
would provide mobility in range of movement and in the lack of connected wires. Although
Weir and his colleagues had only proposed and conducted preliminary tests for an RFID-
enabled prosthetic arm and hand system, their results indicate such a system is indeed
possible. Recent work with monkeys and humans has shown promise in the further
advancement of prosthetic limb control (==news.bbc.co.uk=1=hi=health=4275245.stm).
36.1.1.9
RFID with Muscle Paralysis
One of Troyk’s earlier papers (Troyk, 1999) details the use of RFID in creating an FNS
system for patients with permanent muscle paralysis (Figure 36.4). Troyk proposes using
“Inert”
case
RFIC
Circuit
board
Artery
Seal
Blood flow
SAW resonator
with monoclonal
antibody
film coating
Sensor/ Transmittar RFIC
ADC
XMTR
Battery
Loop
antenna
(seen on edge)
SAW resonator
with monoclonal
antibody
film coating
Loop
antenna
FIGURE 36.3
A blood glucose RFID diagram. (From Weiss, F.G., Topical Meeting on Silicon Monolithic Integrated Circuits in RF
Systems, Digest of Papers, Ann Arbor, Michigan, September 17–18, 1998, pp. 195–204.)
Microstimulators
(not to scale)
External coil
Transmitter
Controller
FIGURE 36.4
General concept proposed by Troyk to
address muscle paralysis. (From Troyk,
P.R., Ann. Rev. Biomed. Eng., 1, 177, 1999.)
Security and Privacy of RFID for Biomedical Applications: A Survey
661

implanted microstimulators to respond to control signals emitted from an external trans-
mitter by emitting a charge from the electrodes and consequentially stimulating a para-
lyzed muscle. In his description of the FNS system, the communication from the reader
signals action by the transponder, but the RFID microstimulator has no mandated reverse
telemetry exchange, contrary to mainstream RFID applications that focus on data sent from
tag to reader. When an activation signal is received by the microstimulator, the stimulating
electrode is activated, emulating a neurological signal sent to the muscle, and causes the
muscle to contract. Systems using wired transdermal connections are already in place, but
because of the intent of the system, to create movement, wireless solutions provide an
obvious advantage.
36.1.2
Security Issues in Biomedical RFID Systems
RFID enhancement of existing biomedical systems offers many beneﬁts to patients and to
the medical industry. System life span can be extended, maintenance reduced, and monit-
oring systems more automated. With this come certain drawbacks, many of them analo-
gous to the vulnerabilities created when moving from a wired network solution to wireless
access. This section will examine considerations, risk factors, and security and privacy
issues associated more speciﬁcally with biomedical applications.
36.1.2.1
Considerations and System Vulnerabilities
36.1.2.1.1
Health Risks of Implant
Prior to clearing the VeriChip tag for subcutaneous applications in humans, the FDA
completed a risk assessment in which it identiﬁed the potential health risks of the implants.
The FDA cites adverse tissue reaction, transponder migration, transponder failure, elec-
tromagnetic interference, electrical hazards, MRI interaction, and needle stick=trauma
(Nsanze, 2005). In a study of microstimulator implants, Walter et al. analyze the short-
term effects of implantation into cats (Walter et al., 1997). In this study, inactive implants
were attached to the bladder wall lining for eight weeks, during which all of the cats
appeared healthy. The bladder tissue surrounding the implants was removed and the
implants were found to be attached, encapsulated by a thin layer of connective tissue
without any apparent defects, physical damage, migration, or inﬂammation beyond what
was considered to be in range of the normal reaction to implantation of a foreign body.
Further studies by Cameron et al. noted the variation of inﬂammatory responses
depending on the placement of microstimulator devices implanted for up to 3 months
(Cameron, 1998). She compares the reaction to other types of implanted foreign bodies,
noting the progression of healing, tissue development, and the effectiveness of stimulation
in producing a stable desired muscle contraction, noting that damage to muscles tissue
caused by the improper or overuse of a stimulator was present, but also present with
vigorous exercise.
Lamberg studied the effects of MRI on implanted medical devices containing metal,
focusing on the VeriChip RFID tag device cleared by the FDA and organizing his study
into four test categories: device movement, device heating, image distortion, and device
operation (Lamberg, 2004). He determines the likelihood of device migration by measuring
the worst-case scenario of forces exerted on the device against the force needed to tear the
VeriChip device away from connective tissues. It resulted in a slight ‘‘tugging’’ sensation,
not considerable enough to cause pain, but enough to require caution and further testing,
before placing them near large vessels or organs, given the severity of possible side effects.
The device showed no noticeable heating, but resulted in a loss of signal around the
662
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

antenna area and a distortion of more than 10% around the barrier of the device within the
image testing. However, these effects were not enough to obscure the reading of the image
and, depending on the implant location, would not likely cover up relevant information.
After completing the three previous tests, Lamberg retested the VeriChip devices and
found that one of the two devices did not produce a signal.
36.1.2.1.2
Weak Encryption
In many of the more common applications, RFID system vulnerabilities have serious risks
to personal privacy. For biomedical applications of RFID technology; however, comprom-
ises to an implanted tag can be life threatening, causing serious bodily harm or possibly
death. System weaknesses described in the typical large-scale supply chain and tracking
systems are due in part to the limitations of RFID Cryptosystems, a result of the inadequate
length of the key, reusing of key between different owner entities, and the limited resources
that constrain algorithm improvement.
As with other cryptosystems, it is important to implement proven, industry standards
using sufﬁciently long keys. While this does not seem feasible in systems that are strictly
regulated by the difference in tag cost of a penny, the relatively small, closed systems that
characterize the biomedical applications lack these severe restrictions on tag cost. Moore’s
Law seems to hold weight in systems where the reduction of the tag footprint and the
advancement of integrated functionality far out-weigh any cost restriction. Proven indus-
try cryptographic standards and long key lengths do not appear to be out of reach given
this pace of development.
Possible compromise to one of these systems is completely unacceptable and should
deter implementation. The trade-off made in replacing the use of a proven cryptographic
that might reveal traceable signals with the use of a protocol that sacriﬁces system security
in order to create obscurity in terms of tracking, does not seem reasonable.
In the examples provided in the previous section, the RFID system is limited to a set
membership of tags and readers. Except in the subdermal information systems example,
the tag is owned by a single or set group of readers. The readers in turn have a set group of
tags. Security protocols determined to be unrealistic in large-scale systems that require
brute force processing might be more plausible in these limited systems.
The subcutaneous placement of tags in these systems prevents the tags from being
available for tampering. Because tags in these systems are in reasonably ﬁxed locations
relative to their readers, transmission range of the tags can be speciﬁed to allow for
increased security. Conversely, tags may still receive transmissions from foreign readers
and faraday cage solutions are not a feasible solution.
36.1.2.2
Personal Privacy
Monitoring and tracking of implanted devices outside of the designed purpose is a critical
issue, as it not only describes ownership of a marked item but the actual person. A trackable
tag communication system can result in the direct identiﬁcation and monitoring of an
individual with an implanted medical device. This might be especially compromising
with the identiﬁcation of tag communication associated with a given medical device. This
issue seems is addressed using the combination of privacy ensuring protocols and strictly
tuned transmission ranges for all system devices.
36.1.2.3
Interference
Any devices operating at the same frequency can interfere with each other. Depending on
the speciﬁc implementation, RFID systems might experience interference from other RFID
Security and Privacy of RFID for Biomedical Applications: A Survey
663

devices, cell phones, automatic door openers, microwaves, and other consumer devices
that operating mainly in the 900 MHz band (commercial RFID operates mainly in the 900
and 13.56 MHz frequency bands). Also, as expected, devices operating within the same
system often interfere with each other. This is especially true in biomedical applications
where multiple tags are implanted in close proximity under the control of a single reader.
Solutions for interference among RFID tags and other devices must be addressed in anti-
collision or singulation layer 2 MAC protocols.
36.1.2.3.1
RF Exposure
Although there is no proven association between prolonged exposure to radio frequency
electromagnetic radiation (RFR) sources and cancer, the proliferation of cell phones in our
society has generated considerable debate regarding the health effects of exposure to RFR
and discussion of various transmission levels (RFR covers the frequency range of 3 kHz–
300 GHz). One of the systems described by Troyk utilized the 2 MHz band with tag
stimulus amplitude ﬁxed at a constant current of 10 mA. Relative to Table 36.1, the various
microstimulators used in Troyk’s studies appear to be well within the safety levels deﬁned
by IEEE (IEEE, 1999).
TABLE 36.1
Effectiveness of Referenced Security Protocols
Method
Mechanism
Suitable for Biomedical
Applications
Rieback, Crispo, & Tanenbaum
Proxy—RFID Guardian
Yes, implemented at the reader
Juels, Rivest, & Szydlo
Blocker tag
No, detrimental to surrounding
systems
Feldhofer, Dominikus,
& Wolkerstorfer
AES variation
Yes, must be coupled with other
mechanism to protect privacy
Ayoade, Takizawa, & Nakao
Centralized authority
Inefﬁcient
Sarma
Centralized authority
Inefﬁcient
Sarma
Update algorithm using meta-id
Not secure
Dimitriou
Update algorithm, shared secret
No, highly susceptible
to desynchronization
Dimitriou
Update algorithm, shared secret,
mutual authentication
No, susceptible to
desynchronization (although
more challenging, would render
system useless)
Molnar & Wagner (library
check out)
Challenge–response using
updated meta-id
No, not secure
Molnar & Wagner (enhanced
version)
Mutual authentication challenge–
response using PSF generated
nonce
Yes, implanted tags are not
susceptible to tampering
without notice
Ohkubo, Suzuki, & Kinoshita
Hash chain protocol
Precomputation and rebuilding of
the hash chain is a deterrent in
time sensitive systems
Avoine, Dysli, & Oechslin
Mutual authentication using hash
chains
Precomputation and rebuilding of
the hash chain is a deterrent in
time sensitive systems
Molnar, Soppera, & Wagner
Centralized authority
No, temporary access does not
provide additional security and
requires increased processing
Hopper & Blum
Challenge–response rounds
No, not secure against active
attack
Juels & Weis
Challenge–response rounds using
random binding factors
No, not secure against active
attack
664
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

36.1.3
Biomedical Security Solutions
This section will assume a biomedical system model: a functional electrical stimulation
system, such as the one described by Troyk containing between 10–20 tags placed into
muscles tissue and a single external reader (Troyk, 1999). This model is designed to
represent the general requirements and constraints of these and other biomedical RFID
systems in the discussion of the applicability of proposed RFID protocols and security
mechanisms to this application area.
While RFID systems include substantial communication between the reader and the
application host, we will focus our study in this chapter on the protocols involving tag-
reader communications utilized with passive devices. The security and privacy solutions
presented will include proposals of that implement one or more of the following mechan-
ism to achieve a security or privacy solution:
. Layer 2 privacy control
. Proxy—the use of an intermediary device to prevent direct interaction between a
reader and the tags it is assigned to
. Encryption—depending on tag, may or may not be feasible
. Centralized authority—grants and restricts access to time sensitive key; allows for
items to pass between different owners while preventing residual ownership
. Challenge–response authentication protocols
. Update algorithm for secret keys—perhaps based on shared secret; related to use
of centralized authority
36.1.3.1
Layer 2 Privacy Control
As Molnar and Wagner cite in their study of library-based RFID systems (Figure 36.5),
much of the current RFID hardware is hard coded to the degree that tracking of the
individual items and their associated owners could not be prevented (2004). This lack of
privacy stems from the implementation of layer 2 anticollision MAC protocols that use a
unique identiﬁer to determine the computed wait time. While systems that utilize these
practices need to be reevaluated, a possible patch to this weakness would be the use of
either a Faraday cage type of shield or the implementation of some other type of proxy
system that shields tag transmissions from outside readers.
36.1.3.2
Proxy
Rieback, Crispo, and Tanenbaum present a solution in the form of an intermediary
personal device that shields interaction between member tags and inquiries from a foreign
environment (Rieback et al., 2005). The platform they suggest, the RFID Guardian, is a
portable, battery-powered device that would provide a centralized entity, with a higher
Reader
Tag
s ∈ {0,1}h
r ∈R {0,1}h
HELLO
cmd,  p  = r ⊕ s
check that  p ⊕ r  = s
r
FIGURE 36.5
Protocol for Library System Checkout Scen-
ario. (From Molnar, D. and Wagner, D., in
Computer and Communications Security, Pﬁtz-
mann, B. and McDaniel, P., eds., ACM Press,
2004.)
Security and Privacy of RFID for Biomedical Applications: A Survey
665

capacity for processing and communication between tag and reader. It would be a secure,
singly authorized proxy for tags within the head to toe range of an individual that would
be portable and owner-activated. The Guardian would not only be used to monitor and
regulate all tag communications for all tags within range that it has access to, but also to
perform direct communication in response to readers’ queries.
This solution would utilize RFID functionalities within a secure location (e.g., a person’s
home) but prevent use once outside of the secure location. The development of this
technology must coexist with development of a mechanism for extended control over tag
devices, speciﬁcally, the ability for owners to interact with tags, authenticating readers and
providing information to items such as laundry, doors, refrigerators, and such, while
restricting unauthorized readers. The idea of a personal shield around RFID communica-
tions seems like a feasible concept for consumer and other user-based applications, with
promising beneﬁts to systems that interact with multiple readers and have a pressing need
for authentication resources.
A predecessor to the Guardian, Juels et al. (2003) describe the use of another physical
mechanism that acts as a shield rather than a proxy. This blocker tag would be used to
prevent a reader from effective querying and identifying tags within a given range. While
these types of devices might provide some security, Juels calls attention to the potential for
this type of instrument to be misused to block legitimate RFID systems in denial-of-service
(DoS) attacks (unintentional and intentional) and to circumvent other systems.
In the model system, Rieback’s RFID Guardian would function as an intermediary
personal device, shielding interaction between subdermal member tags and inquiries
from the surrounding environment. This Guardian could be implemented with the reader
associated with the system, and enforced using MAC protocols and authentication
schemes. The reader would be the logical centralized authority as it is consistently located
within range of the tags.
In the model system, however, the majority of information should be blocked from
reaching the tags, as there should be no access by other devices, exchanges should be limited
to the closed reader and tag system. The application of a proxy device in the model system
either would most likely resemble the blocker tag idea (Juels et al., 2003) or, if implemented
at layer 2, would result in a less disruptive reader response to outside queries of silence.
Since the blocker tag might create denial-of-service attack in surrounding systems and the
reader cannot be reasonably shut-off for intervals when the patient enters an RFID-rich
environment, a separate MAC layer solution would be necessary to implement the silencer.
This solution most likely would not implement an owner controlled deactivation switch
except to disable the reader to enable testing, tuning, or updates by another authority.
36.1.3.3
Encryption
With current supply chain systems, emphasis is placed on reducing implementation cost of
the new, often mandated systems. The lack of adequate security available to the lower cost
tags does not seem to deter the push to minimize cost. In medical devices such as the model
system, the limited number of tags, importance of their function, expected lifetime, and
effect of their failure leads to an emphasis on quality and functional capability. The
limitation in terms of functionality and security is generated by the restricted size of
implantable tag devices.
Following Moore’s Law at our rate of development, the complexity of the integrated
circuit embedded in the RFID tag, with respect to minimum component cost, will double
approximately every 18 months. With supply chain systems, the resulting decrease in cost
is not necessarily an incentive to upgrade functionality, but more promise of reduced
implementation costs, making widespread acceptance more feasible. In medical systems,
666
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

this does not translate to reduced cost, but increased functionality and an increased
allotment of resources for security enhancement.
The challenge–response based authentication protocol developed by Feldhofer et al.,
which implements a variation of the Advanced Encryption Standard (AES), is achievable
for RFID tags meeting the hardware requirement of 3595 gates (Feldhofer, 2004). This
would be plausible for the less cost sensitive medical system model being considered.
36.1.3.4
Centralized Authority
The use of a centralized authority has been suggested in various RFID security schemes.
Although these systems might prove impractical in a broad supply chain implementation,
the approach might prove relevant for the closed model system.
Ayoade et al. (2005) present a framework that uses a centralized authority to provide
decryption keys to registered readers. This authority contains decryption keys for regis-
tered tags. When a registered reader receives an encrypted response from a tag, it queries
the authority for the decryption key, and the central authority determines the access rights
for the reader. While this protects the information contained within the tag, Ayoade’s
system does not protect the privacy of the owner of the tag.
In the framework that Ayoade presents, the reader in our model system would have
access to the decryption keys and because of the limited amount of keys, could easily store
speciﬁc information for all of the tags. Because the system involves a single, seldom
changing reader, a protocol that would require the reader to continually refresh authority
over the tags, is inefﬁcient.
Sarma proposes a minimalist tracking system involving the EPC code, an Object Name
Service (ONS), the Savant, and tags that implement password protected self-destruct
commands (Sarma et al., 2002). The system uses the ONS (similar idea to domain name
system (DNS)) to map the EPC to an IP address where tag information can be accessed.
The Savant is the management system used to process reader captured data, retrieving
more detailed information regarding the tag. The system was designed to reduce the
processing, power, and memory requirements on the tags and create more stability and
scalability. Using the IP mapping might instead limit the scalability by creating the need for
a centralized ownership of the tags, an undesirable quality in supply chain systems, but
possibly favorable for other types of centralized wholly owned systems. Since the owner-
ship in the model system remains constant, the added communication involved in access-
ing tag information would not produce beneﬁts while also presenting vulnerability to
attack. The concept of a centralized authority, while relevant to the model system, is most
likely to be integrated into the single reader device.
36.1.3.5
Update Algorithms
Sarma notes that, in addition to the goals listed in the beginning of this section, designers of
RFID protocols need to be especially mindful that the RFID system be tolerant of lapses in
power. He suggests a protocol that uses a one-way hash function to authenticate the reader
to the tag, effectively unlocking and locking the tag. The system uses a periodically
changing meta-id, supplied by a hash value created at random by the owner (authorized
reader). This meta-id is used to respond to inquiries while the tag is in its locked state. The
tag may only be unlocked by the key that was used to create the hash value, created by the
authorized reader. The tag defaults to a locked state in the event of power loss, and has a
physical self-destruct mechanism to eliminate tracking past a signaled event. This would
prevent some level of tracking over the life span of the tag, but similar to Dimitriou’s
enhanced protocol (Dimitriou, 2005), tracking between authorized interactions would
Security and Privacy of RFID for Biomedical Applications: A Survey
667

be unprotected. This vulnerability could be addressed by the implementation of a periodic
refresh on the meta-id that is transmitted by the tag while in a locked state, but might be
challenging given possible limitations on the resources of the tag.
The implementation of a scheme such as Sarma’s, preventing the tracking of a single tag
or a group of tags, would be beneﬁcial to the model system. By obscuring the tag signature
and limiting both forward and reverse telemetry channels, tracking by foreign readers is
limited to periods between the authorized reader updates. Depending on the frequency of
authorized reader interaction with the tag, this could allow extended tracking with readers
within range.
36.1.3.6
More Challenge–Response Protocols
Dimitriou further develops this practice of using one-way hash functions to secure RFID
communications (Dimitriou, 2005). He presents two versions of a challenge–response
protocol that utilizes hashing algorithms to provide for authentication based on shared
secret. The ﬁrst version is a simpliﬁed two-step algorithm that provides for authentication
of the tag, after which the tag and the reader update their shared secret to deter tracking
from transaction to transaction. Dimitriou points out that this protocol is very susceptible
to simpler unsophisticated attacks, such as the possible unintentional event where a single
unauthorized reader interrogates a tag. The tag would be rendered completely useless
once it increments its secret, losing its synchronization with the authorized reader and
associated data system.
Since the ﬁrst of Dimitriou’s two challenge–response protocols that utilizes shared
secrets and hashing algorithms to provide for authentication is very susceptible to simple
unsophisticated attacks, it is clearly unsuitable for any practical implementation.
Implanted systems would quickly lose synchronicity once any outside query was received.
Dimitriou’s algorithm is similar to Sarma’s in that queries between legitimate reader
attempts will be constant and traceable. Again, because of the limited range of tag
device transmissions, this may or may not be feasible. The issue of synchronization is the
primary concern for this system. If the last transmission from reader to tag is somehow
disrupted, the tag is effectively disabled until, if it is possible, the reader and tag can be
reinitialized.
In the revised algorithm, the tag authenticates the reader before updating the secret,
avoiding the desynchronization resulting from the previous version. Between these legiti-
mate inquiries, the tags will however exhibit traceable signals. Although this protocol does
protect the tag from being traced over the life span of the tag, it is susceptible to privacy
attacks within the timeframe between legitimate reads.
Dimitriou’s algorithm prevents unsophisticated attempts to desynchronize the tag and
database, but is still open to more involved, complex attacks that would block communi-
cation at critical points in order to desynchronize the system. Dimitriou discredits this
category of attack, citing the physical weakness of electromagnetic tagging system as more
easily broken in such a situation, maintaining the relative security of this enhanced
protocol. Compared to more common, extracorporeal systems where tags are vulnerable,
the tags in the model system are secure against tampering without known disturbance to
the device. Because the owner would most likely be aware of any compromise to the tag,
there would be a clear signal of system vulnerability.
Additionally, because the model system is not limited by the resources of the low cost
tags used in supply chains and other large-scale tracking systems, the brute force attack
would not be feasible with adequate key length and hash function. The man-in-the-middle
style of attack described by Dimitriou (resulting in desynchronization) and common in
many wireless systems would not be an issue in an environment such as the model system
668
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

where an attacker would have to block communications between the legitimate reader and
tag, while still receiving and transmitting to both.
Molnar and Wagner present a simple library check-out=in procedure that includes a
simple three-step challenge–response protocol that is intended to prevent the most passive
form of attack (2004). This simple three-step approach does not support the security require-
ments for privacy or security for biological systems. During the check-out phase, the
authorized reader generates a unique random number r, reads the tag data D (not explained
how), stores the record (r, D) in a library database, erases D from the tag, and writes r to
the tag. During the check-in phase, the library reader sends the tag a hello, receives r from the
tag, looks up R in the library database to retrieve the corresponding D, and writes D back to
the tag. Figure 36.5 depicts the check-in identiﬁcation procedure.
Molnar and Wagner attempt to exploit the relative difﬁculty of eavesdropping on tag to
reader by making the tag to reader communication contain the cipher information (r).
While this provides some measure of increased security, an unauthorized reading device
could retrieve information between check-out and check-in by making an inquiry. Given
the opportunity that checked out book is within range of an unauthorized device, the
algorithm presents a solution that is one computation away from a system that sends its
identiﬁcation in the clear.
Molnar and Wagner then present an enhanced algorithm that provides for mutual
authentication of tag and reader, as well as privacy (shown below).
This algorithm uses nonce (r) as input to a pseudo-random function that generates a
single use value to create the cipher. Molnar and Wagner accompany this communication
protocol with a tree-based reader authentication scheme for reduced time complexity in
retrieving the (s, ID) record where ID ¼ s  fs(0, r1, r2), from O(n) to O(log n). Each tag
would require the capacity to store its secret information, the path from the base of the tree
to the location where the tag information is stored.
Molnar and Wagner’s enhanced algorithm provides for mutual authentication of tag
and reader, as well as privacy. Avoine et al. (2005) identify the weaknesses in
Molnar and Wagner’s Pseudorandom Function-Based Private Authentication Protocol
(Figure 36.6), describing the vulnerability of their authentication scheme to tracing when
a tag is susceptible to tampering and the increased weakness when additional devices are
compromised. As was previously identiﬁed, the implanted tags in the model system
are reasonably protected against tampering making this weakness irrelevant.
Avoine et al. (2005) also analyze hash chain protocol of Ohkubo et al. (2003) (Figure 36.7)
and present an enhanced version of the protocol (see later) (Figure 36.8).
The original protocol uses the hash chain mechanism to prevent tracking. Upon each
query request, the tag updates its identiﬁer to the hashed value of the previous identiﬁer,
until reaching a maximum threshold and recomputing the hash tables. Per query, the
Reader
Tag
check that ID = r ⊕ fs (1,r1, r2)
HELLO, r1
ID = s ⊕ fs (0,r1,r2)
find (s, ID) ∈D s.t.
r1 ∈R {0,1}h
r2, s  = ID ⊕ fs (0,r1,r2)
r  = ID ⊕ fs (1,r1,r2)
s ∈{0,1}h
r2 ∈R {0,1}h
FIGURE 36.6
PRF-Based Private Authentication Protocol. (From Molnar, D. and Wagner, D., in Computer and Communications
Security, Pﬁtzmann, B. and McDaniel, P., eds., ACM Press, 2004.)
Security and Privacy of RFID for Biomedical Applications: A Survey
669

system would be required to build hash chains for each of the n initial values until it ﬁnds
the returned value of the tag or the reaches the threshold for maximum chain length.
Ohkubo, Suzuki, and Kinoshita’s protocol requires a signiﬁcant amount of precomputa-
tion, yielding an equivalent order of time complexity to that of Molnar and Wagner’s,
while additionally enforcing forward privacy. However, given the limited scale of the
RFID model system, this time complexity would be within reason.
Avoine, Dysli, and Oechslin suggest the addition of a third message in Ohkubo’s
protocol (see later) from system to tag containing the hash of the new id and public
identiﬁer.
This last step would require the reader to send a hashed value of the updated id value
combined with a public identiﬁer, resulting in the authentication of the reader to the tag.
Avoine, Dysli, and Oechslin present another modiﬁcation to the Ohkubo, Suzuki, and
Kinoshita protocol, intended to prevent replay attacks by altering the generic reader-to-tag
request to a random identiﬁer to be used in the hash calculation. Avoine’s resulting
protocol necessitates an increase of required memory for the precomputation of all of the
tables for the hash chains, taking into account all of the random identiﬁers.
While Avoine details how to achieve the time complexity of Molnar’s results with
precomputation, he emphasizes the time memory trade-off that exists and acknowledges
the limiting factors on his algorithm, ending by citing the advantage of Molnar and
Wagner’s algorithm in the lack of required precomputation and suggesting the use of
larger branching values within their tree structure to limit the effect of a compromised tag.
Avoine’s modiﬁed version of the Ohkubo, Suzuki, and Kinoshita protocol, necessitates
an increase of required reader memory for the precomputation of all of the tables for the
hash chains, taking into account all of the random identiﬁers. As in the original version,
because the system size is limited, this requirement would most likely be within reader
capabilities. The time required in precomputation is not as signiﬁcant as the time required
for tag-reader communication cycles, but might be unfeasible because both the Avoine and
Ohkubo algorithms require that the hash chains and the hash chain tables be periodically
refreshed, rendering the model system temporarily inactive and delaying delivery of tag
instruction.
Molnar, Soppera, and Wagner present two protocols based on the use of a centralized
authority. They describe their RFID tag pseudonym protocol as an improvement to the
Avoine, Dysli, and Oechslin protocol and the Ohkubo, Suzuki, and Kinoshita protocol in
time complexity, designed to protect privacy against attackers and through the change of
FIGURE 36.7
Ohkubo, Suzuki, and Kinoshita’s Hash Chain Proto-
col. (From Avoine, G., Adversarial model for Radio
frequency identiﬁcation; Cryptology ePrint archive,
Report 2005, http:==eprint.iacr.org.)
System
Request
G (si
k )
Tag
si
k+1 = H (si
k )
FIGURE 36.8
Modiﬁed Protocol. (From Avoine, G., Adver-
sarial model for Radio frequency identiﬁca-
tion; Cryptology ePrint archive, Report 2005,
http:==eprint.iacr.org.)
System
G (si
k⊕r )
Tag
si
k+1 = H (si
k )
r
670
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

ownership (Molnar et al., August 2005). Utilizing a trusted center, access to a time sensitive
pseudonym is granted and restricted, allowing items to pass between different owners
while preventing residual ownership.
Molnar’s system implements an updating pseudonym system where the centralized
authority may be queried by the reader, and may authorize the reader with updated tag
information. The reader maintains a list of possible updated values and queries the central
authority for extended access when this list is surpassed. While their protocol once again
uses a tree structure to store tag information (that again may be susceptible to privacy
attack once a tag is compromised, improved with higher branching factor), this informa-
tion is controlled by an additional entity in the RFID system.
Although Molnar, Soppera, and Wagner describe their pseudonym protocol as provid-
ing for the transfer of ownership, their claim is qualiﬁed by the assumption of a central
authoritative entity. This Trusted Center, while appropriate in systems involving various
access rights to tag information within an internal organization (such as that of a hospital
system that differentiates between departments), might not provide the ﬂexibility required
to be effective across supply chain systems that span various independent organizations.
Because reader authorization in the model system is comprised of a more limited set of tag
devices that are constant, the granting and expiring of access to tags would be unnecessary.
Juels and Weis introduce another symmetric key-based challenge authentication proto-
col (Juels and Weis, 2005) based on the ideas introduced by Hopper and Blum in their
human identiﬁcation protocols (Hopper and Blum, 2001) (Figure 36.9). Juels draws a
comparison between the human-to-computer authentication scenario introduced by Hop-
per and Blum and the problem of tag-reader authentication.
Hopper and Blum supply deﬁnitions of identiﬁcation protocols and secure identiﬁcation
protocols and present two round-based protocols that attempt to provide secure authen-
tication appropriate for human executable computation. Their ﬁrst solution is a repeated
challenge–response exchange based on a shared secret with noise added to prevent
Gaussian elimination. It is acknowledged secure against passive attacks, but insecure in
the situation where an attacker is able to disturb the communication between tag and
reader (susceptible to Gaussian elimination). They advocate their solution as a practical
solution (within or not too far out of the range of computation for humans) for achieving
reasonable security and as an invitation for improvement.
Juels and Weiss cite earlier works that propose human authentication protocols, but
focus on the algorithm described by Hopper and Blum. They advocate Hopper and Blum’s
solution as a practical solution for low cost devices, safe from passive eavesdropping, but
HB protocol round
Reader(x)
a ∈R {0,1}k
n ∈ {0,1| Prob[n = 1] = h}
Challenge
z = (a ⋅ x ) ⊕ n
Response
Accept if a ⋅x = z
Tag(x,h)
z
a
FIGURE 36.9
One round of the Hopper and Blum Human
Identiﬁcation Protocol. (From Juels, A. and
Weis, S., in Advances in Cryptology, Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, Santa Barbara, CA,
USA, 2005.)
Security and Privacy of RFID for Biomedical Applications: A Survey
671

also identify its vulnerability to active attacks. Juels and Weiss deﬁne an enhanced version
of this protocol, HB þ (Figure 36.10), which they claim is secure against active attacks such
as skimming, swapping, and DoS attacks. They offer an interesting comparison between
humans and inexpensive tagging devices, describing both as having a lack of complex
computational abilities, and suggest the adoption of human authentication protocols for
tags.
Following Hopper and Blum’s suggestion, Juels and Weis extend the application of the
HB protocol beyond the arena of human protocols and deﬁne the HB þ protocol using a
challenge–response mechanism that is enhanced using an additional independent secret
and a binding factor. This is implemented similarly to the HB protocol using multiple
rounds of the challenge–response cycle. The added security is in the randomness that the
tag guarantees by sending the random binding factor and calculating its response to the
reader using the XOR-ed value of the secret, binding factor, challenge and weight vector.
This added layer of security prevents an attacker from ﬁnding the value of the original
shared secret.
Hopper and Blum’s symmetric key authentication protocol, only secure against passive
attacks, would not be appropriate for the model implanted RFID system. Although Juels
and Weiss claim that their enhanced version of Hopper and Blum’s symmetric key-based
challenge authentication protocol, HB þ , is secure against active attacks such as skimming,
swapping, and DoS attacks (Juels and Weis, 2005), Gilbert, Robshaw, and Sibert describe a
simple and feasible linear time attack on the HB þ RFID protocol (Gilbert et al., 2005). This
modiﬁed MiM attack uses a false reader and tag to decipher the shared secret. In each
round, the reader might work with the false tag to intercept both the binding vector from
the tag and the challenge from the reader. Using a constant vector to alter the challenges
and responses, the attacker is able to learn the secret, bit by bit from each round. Once the
tag is compromised, it can be cloned and impersonated, compromising the system. As
noted previously, because the model system has a set number of tags that are bound within
close proximity to the reader, the feasibility of a man-in-the-middle style of attack is
questionable.
36.1.4
Summary
As sensor technology continues to improve, the applications of RFID seem limitless.
The security and privacy issues at hand make it imperative that the development of
FIGURE 36.10
One round of the HB þ Protocol. (From
Juels, A. and Weis, S., in Advances in
Cryptology, Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, Santa Barbara, CA, USA, 2005.)
HB+ protocol round
Reader(x,y)
a∈R {0,1}k
b∈R {0,1}k
n∈{0,1|Prob[n = 1] = h}
Challenge
Blinding factor
Response
Accept if (a • x) ⊕ (b • y) = z
 z = (a • x) ⊕ (b • y) ⊕ n
Tag(x, y, h)
z
a
b
672
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

communication protocols continue to be considered for these systems as they are being
spearheaded in other arenas. A summary of security schemes surveyed, along with their
suitability, is presented in Table 36.1. With the growing presence of RF communications, it
is vital that the effects of ubiquitous RFID are studied when designing communication
schemes for these sensitive systems, as well as the large-scale tracking systems that will
surround them.
References
Avoine, G. Adversarial model for Radio frequency identiﬁcation; Cryptology ePrint archive, Report
2005, http:==eprint.iacr.org.
Avoine, G., Dysli, E., and Oechslin, P. Reducing time complexity in RFID Systems. In Preneel,
Bart and Tavares, Stafford, editors, Selected Areas in Cryptography—SAC 2005, Lecture Notes in
Computer Science; Vol. 3897; pp. 291–306; August 2005; Kingston, Canada; Springer-Verlag.
Ayoade, J., Takizawa, O., and Nakao, K. A prototype system of the RFID authentication processing
framework, Proceedings of the 3rd International Workshop in Wireless Security Technologies;
London, U.K.; April 2005.
Cameron, T., Liinamaa, T.L., Loeb, G.E., and Richmond, F.J.R. Long-term biocompatibility of a
miniature stimulator implanted in feline hind limb muscles. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Engng.,
45:1024–1035, 1998.
CNN News website (1999). Retrieved March 2005 from http:==www.cnn.com=HEALTH=9908=
25=brain.pacemaker=.
Dimitriou, T. A lightweight RFID protocol to protect against traceability and cloning attacks,
Conference on Security and Privacy for Emerging Areas in Communication Networks—SecureComm;
September 2005; Athens, Greece; IEEE.
FDA clears RFID chip for humans (October 18, 2004a). Retrieved February 2005 from http:==www.
drugresearcher.com=news=news-NG.asp?n¼55448-fda-clears-rﬁd
http:==montekids.org=
healthlibrary=peds=neuro=glossary.htm.
Feldhofer, M. Strong authentication for RFID systems using the AES algorithm, Cryptographic hard-
ware and embedded systems—CHES 2004; Proceedings of the 6th International Workshop; August
2004; Cambridge, MA; pp. 357–370.
Garﬁnkel, S. Adopting fair information practices to low cost RFID Systems. Presented at Ubiquitous
Computing 2002 Privacy Workshop; Gotenborg, Sweden; September 29, 2002.
Gilbert, H., Robshaw, M., and Sibert, H. An active attack against HBþ—A provably secure light-
weight authentication protocol; Manuscript; July 2005; France Telecom.
Hopper, N.J. and Blum, M. Secure human identiﬁcation protocols, In Boyd, C., editor, Advances in
Cryptology—Asiacrypt ’01, Lecture Notes in Computer Science; Vol. 2248; pp. 52–66; 2001; Springer-
Verlag, Berlin=Heidelberg.
IEEE,
IEEE
Standard
Safety
Levels
with
Respect
to
Human
Exposure
to
Radio
Frequency
Electromagnetic Fields, 3 KHz to 300 GHz. Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers,
16-Apr-1999, 76 pages.
Implantable RFID chip decision draws criticism (October 20, 2004b). Retrieved February 2005 from
http:==www.drugresearcher.com=news=news-ng.asp?n¼55533-implantable-rﬁd-chip.
Juels, A., Rivest, R., and Szydlo, M. The blocker tag: Selective blocking of RFID tags for
consumer privacy; 2003; http:==www.rsasecurity.com=rsalabs=staff=bios=ajuels= publications=
blocker=blocker.pdf.
Juels, A. and Weis, S. Authenticating pervasive devices with human protocols. In Advances in
Cryptology, Lecture Notes in Computer Science; Vol. 3126; pp. 293–308; August 2005; Santa
Barbara, California, USA; IACR.
Koren, M. and Holmes, M. (2006). Vagus nerve stimulation does not lead to signiﬁcant
changes in body weight in patients with epilepsy; Epilepsy Behaviour; 8(1):246–249. Epub 2005
December 15.
Security and Privacy of RFID for Biomedical Applications: A Survey
673

Lamberg, J. Magnetic resonance imaging & verchipTM (RFID human implant at 1.5 tesla. MRI and
RFID human implants; December 2004. Retrieved February 2005, from http:==www.rﬁdjournal.
com=whitepapers=download=23.
Molnar, D., Soppera, A., and Wagner, D. A Scalable, Delegatable pseudonym protocol enabling owner-
ship transfer of RFID tags; Selected areas in cryptography—SAC 2005, Lecture Notes in Computer
Science; Volume 3897=2006; pp. 276–290; August 2005; Kingston, Canada; Springer-Verlag.
Molnar, D. and Wagner, D. Privacy and security in library RFID: Issues, practices, and architectures,
In Pﬁtzmann, B. and McDaniel, P., editors, Computer and Communications Security; ACM Press,
New York; pp. 210–219; 2004.
Nsanze, F. ICT implants in the human body—A review, Ethical Aspects of ICT Implants in the Human
Body, Opinion No 20, European Group on Ethics in Science and New Technologies to the
European Commission, 2005.
Ohkubo, M., Suzuki, K., and Kinoshita, S. Cryptographic approach to ‘‘privacy-friendly’’ tags. In
RFID Privacy Workshop; November 2003; MIT, MA, USA.
Rieback, M., Crispo, B., and Tanenbaum, A. RFID guardian: A battery-powered mobile device for
RFID privacy management, Australasian Conference on Information Security and Privacy—
ACISP’05, Lecture Notes in Computer Science; Vol. 3574; pp. 184–194; July 2005; Brisbane,
Australia; Springer-Verlag.
Sarma, S.E., Weis, S.A., and Engels, D.W. RFID Systems and Security and Privacy Implications,
Lecture Notes in Computer Science; Vol. 2523; Revised Papers from the 4th International Workshop
on Cryptographic Hardware and Embedded Systems; pp. 454–469; 2002.
Troyk, P.R. (1999). Injectable electronic identiﬁcation, monitoring, and stimulation systems; Annual
Reviews Biomedical Engineering; 1:177–209.
Walter, J.S., Reidy, L., King, W., Dunn, R., Wheeler, J.S., Najaﬁ, K., and Dokmeci, M. Histological
response to implantation of microstimulators on the bladder wall: Short term results, Proceed-
ings of the 19th International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society,
Chicago, Illinois, October 1997, pp. 1796–1798.
Weir, R.F., Troyk, P.R., DeMichele, G., and Kuiken, T. Implantable myoelectric sensors (IMES) for
upper-extremity prosthesis control—Preliminary work, Proceedings of the 25th Annual Conference
of the IEEE EMBS; Cancun, Mexico; September 2003; pp. 1562–1565.
Weiss, F.G. (1998). Implications of silicon monolithic RFICs for medical instrumentation and
telemetry, Topical Meeting on Silicon Monolithic Integrated Circuits in RF Systems, 1998. Digest
of Papers. September 17–18 1998; Ann Arbor, Michigan; pp. 195–204.
674
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

Index
A
AAL, see Application adaptation layer
ABS protocol, see Adaptive binary splitting
protocol
Abstract Data Model Layer, 30
Accelerometer, triaxial, 273–274
Active receiver and transmitter, 4
Active tags, 4
Adaptive binary splitting protocol,
140, 149
performance evaluation of, 151, 162
Adaptive query splitting protocol,
140, 145
performance evaluation of, 151
for reducing search space of current
identiﬁcation process, 166
tag identiﬁcation of, 146
Adaptive tag anticollision protocols, 185
ADA, see Americans with Disabilities Act
ADC, see Analog-to-digital converter
Ad hoc network, 96
Advanced Encryption Standards (AES)
encrypted data transmission, 619
encryption and decryption, 620
Advanced road information system (ARIS)
architecture, 406
vs. GPS system, 405–406
Advance shipping notice, 290
AES, see Advanced Encryption Standards
AIDC, see Automatic identiﬁcation
and data capture
Air-cored solenoidal antenna, 244
ALE, see Application Layer Events
Allocated-slot counter, 149, 167
ALOHA-based protocols, 140, 169
Ambulance terminal, 336–337, 342
Americans with Disabilities Act, 355
Ampere’s law, modiﬁed, 233
Amplitude modulation, 266
Amplitude shift keying
(ASK), 264
Analog-to-digital converter, 267
ADS5231, 103
antenna signal, 97
dynamic range, 98
Antenna
air-cored solenoidal, 244
bow tie, 246
classiﬁcation of, 14
dipole, 264, 274
directivity and gain, 13–14
electromagnetic coupling volume of, 245
gain, 5–6, 184, 187
impedance matching, 5
interrogator, 243–244
label, 243–244
maximum energy transfer, 5
monopole, 246
multiple reader, 187
omnidirectional and directional, 4
orientation of, 197
placement in implementation of RFID
technologies, 181
polarization of, 6, 8–10, 197
powering region with single reader, 186–187
power transmitted by, 6
radiation patterns of, 184
reﬂection, 13
Anticollision protocol, 162
performance of, 171
Anticollision scheme, 475, 480
API, see Application program interface
Application adaptation layer, 509–510
Application Layer Events
client of, 29
interface, 28
Application program interface (API),
382–384, 503
Application programming language (APL), 440
Application service provider (ASP), 506
AQS protocol, see Adaptive query splitting
protocol
ASC, see Allocated-slot counter
ASK, see Amplitude shift keying (ASK)
ASN, see Advance shipping notice
ASP, see Application service provider
Authentication and data integrity, in RFID
systems
digital signatures
control, applicability, and beneﬁts,
547–548
675

public key cryptography, 547
public key infrastructure (PKI), 549
weaknesses of, 549
keyed-hash message authentication codes
(HMAC)
applicability and beneﬁts, 547
control, 546
secure hash algorithms (SHA), 546
weaknesses, 547
password authentication
control and applicability, 545
weaknesses of, 546
Auto-ID Center, 18
Auto-ID Labs, see Auto-ID Center
Automated receiving system, RFID
effective radiated power, 303
electronic product code network, 300
RFID readers
ﬁxed and mobile, 301
handheld, 302
RF propagation, 301
semiautomated receiving process, 303
smart labels, 300
tag shadowing, 301
Automated RFID-scanning process, 182
Automatic identiﬁcation and data
capture, 280
Automatic vehicle management, 402–403
Automotive RFID Systems
architecture, 406
car networking systems, 407
modern telematics devices
architecture, 410
technologies and standards used,
408–409
Automotive services
car key system
in advertisement ﬁelds, 404–405
RKE and RKI systems, 399–400
user recognition system, 400–401
in-car appliances, 398–399
user-oriented services, 397–399
Average slot delay analysis, 171
B
Backscatter communication
impedance matching, 5
radio waves, reﬂection of, 4
Backscatter radiation, 266
Band gap, electromagnetic, 258
Bar code-based identiﬁcation mechanisms, 139
Beam break detector, 372
Bill of lading, 298
Binary tree (BT) protocol, 140, 142, 168
Biomedical RFID systems
applications
blood pressure and glucose
monitoring, 660
cardiac monitoring, 659
disorder monitoring and treatment, 660
implantable chip applications in humans,
659, 661
with muscle paralysis, 661–662
pacemaker augmentation, 659–660
pediatric sleep apnea monitoring,
660–661
authentication protocols, 668–672
Dimitriou's algorithm, 668
Hopper and Blum (HB) algorithm,
671–672
Molnar and Wagner's algorithm, 669–671
pseudo-random function algorithm, 669
secuirty and privacy solutions
centralized authority applications, 667
encryption, 666–667
layer 2 privacy control, 665
proxy, 665–666
updated algorithms, 667–668
security issues
device interference, 663–664
health risks, 662–663
privacy ensuring protocols, 663
RF exposure, 664
weak encryption, 663
Biometric passport, 396
Bit window period, 44
Blob, 464–465
Block ciphers
in lightweight cryptography, 583
in mobile RFID systems, 511
Blocker tag, in RFID, 487, 591, 635, 653
BoL, see Bill of lading
Bow-tie antenna, 68
conﬁgurations, 87
design, 84
radiation pattern of, 89
with series tuning inductor, 86–90
equivalent circuit for, 81–82
input impedance characteristics, 86–87
properties of, 246
radiation pattern of, 89
radiation resistance, 81–82
reactance of, 84
BPR, see Business process reengineering
Build to order strategy (BTO), 282
Burst switch, see Passive activation layer security
Business logistics, 110
Business process re-engineering (BPR),
282–283, 305, 308
676
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

C
CAL-IT2 building, 465
CAN, see Controller area network
Case tag (c-Tag), 289
CDFG, see Control and data ﬂow graph
Chevyshevs inequality, for tag estimation, 169
Ciphertext, 637–638
Circularly polarized antenna, 184
electric ﬁeld of, 10
reader=tag antenna orientations, 12
Class 1 and Class 2 tags, 3–4
Class 1 Generation 2 Speciﬁcation
modulation schemes, 21
RFID readers and tags, communication
between, 20
Class 3 type devices, 15
Clipped tag, 479
close() routine, 106
Code generation, 51–52
Coding schemes, V1.3, 23
coff2hex, 102–103
ColdFire network processor, 99
Collision query, 146
Collision resolution algorithms, 140
Common object ﬁle format (COFF), 102–103
Communication robots, RFID Tag
elementary school
humanoid robot, 419–420
interactive behaviors, 420
multi-person identiﬁcation system, 420
Robovie interaction, 420–425
science museum
environment, 427–428
humanoid robots, 428
locomotive robot, 429–430
sensors in, 428–429
Complexity classes, in lightweight
cryptography, 578
Complex programmable logic devices
(CPLD), 103
Control and data ﬂow graph, 52
Control channel, 28
Controller area network, 407–408
Core Capture Operations Module, 30; see also
Service Layer
Cryptography, 478
lightweight, 576
quantum and quasar, 584
Cryptosystems, 607; see also decryption;
encryption
Custom hardware-based tags
ISO 18000 Part 6C standard for, 59–60
ISO 18000 Part 7 standard for, 56–57
ISO 18185 Part 1 standard for, 61
D
DAC, see Digital-to-analog converter
Data Deﬁnition Layer, 30
Data logging, 94, 98
Decryption, 582, 585, 637
Dedicated short range communication (DSRC),
397–398
Demodulator diode, 266
Denial of service (DoS), 666; see also Blocker tag
Design Research & Informatics Laboratory, 358
Dewey decimal systems, 358
Differential power analysis, 607, 622–623
attack and resistance, 623–625
Differential Manchester coding, 619
Differential Manchester encoding
textual description of, 41
waveform for, 39–40
Diffusion, in lightweight cryptography, 579
Digital signal processors, 100
Digital signature transponder, 478
Digital-to-analog converter, 97
Dipole antennas, 264, 274
linearly and circularly polarized, 9
radiation patterns, 10, 14
Discretization algorithms, computation
complexity of, 192
Discretization of orientations, RFID, 191–193
Dispersal volume vs. coupling volume, 244–245
Distribution Centers (DC), focal ﬁrm, 283
DoD construct identiﬁer, 25
Domain name service (DNS) technology,
524–526, 634
Domain name system security extensions
(DNSSES), 529–530
DPA, see Differential power analysis
Drill down approach, 298
DRIL, see Design Research & Informatics
Laboratory
Drug Pedigree Standard, 31
DSP, see Digital signal processors
DST, see Digital signature transponder
Dynamic slot allocation, 169
E
EAN International and Uniform
Code Council, 523
EBG, see Electromagnetic band gap
ECC, see Elliptic curve cryptography
Edge detection circuit
schematic representation of, 45
system cycle, 44
EEG, see Electroencephalography
EEPROM, 653
Index
677

Effective isotropic radiated power (EIRP),
128, 265
Effective permeability, relative, 244
Effective radiated power, 127
EISC processor, energy consumed by, 55–56
E-learning requirements, RFID; see also RFID
education
instructional strategies and axioms
critical success factors (CSFs), 113
event management, 114
self-assessment processes, 115
Electric conductor, 251
Electric dipoles, 252
Electric ﬁeld-sensitive antennas, 239–240
ﬁgure of merit for, 68, 72
Electric ﬁeld vector, 233
Electroencephalography, 660
Electromagnetic band gap, 258
Electromagnetic compatibility and radio
spectrum matters, 126
Electromagnetic coupling relations
ﬁeld creation structures, 237–238, 242
ﬁeld measurement, 241
near and far ﬁelds, 240–241
near ﬁeld–electric ﬁeld, 243–244
power-matching, 243
Electromagnetic coupling volume,
antenna, 245
Electromagnetic ﬁeld antennas, 68, 240
Electromagnetic theory
boundary conditions, 234–235
depolarizing and demagnetizing
factors, 235
laws of, 233
retarded potentials, 236
source and vortex interpretation, 233–234
Electromagnetic wavelength, 237, 241
Electromagnetic waves
boundary conditions, 250
electric conductor, 251
metallic surfaces, 250–251
Electronic data interchange (EDI)
learning scenario for, 117–118
and productivity, 110
standards, 116
Electronic Product Code (EPC), 478, 523,
611–612, 632
standard, 262
Electronic Product Code Information Services
(EPCIS), 506, 524
ElGamal encryption, 637–638
Elliptic curve cryptography (ECC), 578, 583,
609, 653
Encoding identity, 23
Encrypted data transmission, 619–621
Encryption
insubvertible, 638
multivariate polynomials, 584
operation, 585
probabilistic, 637
strings, 582
Enterprise resource planning (ERP), 280, 298,
303–304
Environmental memory, RFID
application, 450
implementation methods, 442–444
Linda model, 441
localization infrastructure, 448
pebbles, 449
privacy and security, 445
reliability and performance, 444–445
tags, 439–441
EPC, see Electronic product code
EPC formalism, 286
EPC Gen2, 645
EPC Generation 1 Tag Data Standards Version
1.1 Rev 1.27, 22
EPCglobal Architecture Framework
speciﬁcation, 19
EPCglobal Inc., 17
member organizations, 18
work groups, 18–19
EPCglobal Network, 645–646, 649–650
advantages of, 525, 528
application layer events speciﬁcation, 28–29
Drug Pedigree Standard, 31
EPC Information Services (EPCIS), 29–30
EPCIS Discovery, 32
hardware speciﬁcations, 19
inﬂuence of, 524
Low-Level Reader Protocol (LLRP), 27–28
Object Naming Service (ONS), 31
Reader Management speciﬁcation, 28
reader protocol speciﬁcation, 26–27
Security Certiﬁcate Proﬁle, 30
Standards Development Process, 19
Tag Data Standards Version 1.3
coding schemes, 23
comparison with V1.1, 22
header and value ﬁelds, 23
translation, 26
EPC Information Services (EPCIS)
data sharing, 29
event data and master data, 30
EPCIS discovery, 32
EPCIS, see Electronic Product Code Information
Service
EPC memory, 22
EPC Radio-frequency identiﬁcation
protocols, 128
678
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

EPC software module, 107
E-plates, see License plates
EPROM, 653
Equivalent isotropic radiated power, 254
ERM, see Electromagnetic compatibility and
radio spectrum matters
ERP, see Effective radiated power; Enterprise
Resource Planning
Event data, 30
Event-driven process chains formalism, 286
eXtensible access control markup language
(XACML), 460
F
FAO, see Food and Drug Administration
Faraday cage, in wireless communications,
635, 645
Faraday's law, 233
Far-ﬁeld passive RFID tags, 3
Field generator, 464
Filter capacitor, 266
First In First Out (FIFO) method, 308
First triage terminal, 336–338, 342
Fixed-bit-window encoding scheme, 39
FM0 encoding
continuous waveform for, 41
physical layer encodings for, 41
textual description of, 42
FNS, see Functional neuromuscular stimulation
Food and Drug administration, 481
Frequency Agile operation, 21
Frequency bands, 20
Frequency hopping spread spectrum (FHSS), 127
Friis equation
l of, 7
energy transmission estimation, 5–6
impedance matching, 13
Friis model, 270
Friis’ transmission equation
evaluations of, 193
for path loss model, 183
signal propagation powering region, 186
FSM controller
generation of, 47
timer signals and sampling registers, 44
Functional neuromuscular stimulation, 659, 662
G
Gauss’ laws, 233
General Identiﬁer (GID-96), 24
Generic connection framework (GCF), 383
Geographic information system (GIS), 409–410
GIAI, see Global Individual Asset Identiﬁer
Global Individual Asset Identiﬁer, 25
Global positioning system (GPS),
397–398, 404, 406
Global Returnable Asset Identiﬁer (GRAI), 25
Graphical user interface (GUI), 316, 325
Gray-code, in RFID tag, 371
H
Half-wave dipole antennas, 184
HAL, see Handset adaptation layer
Handset adaptation layer (HAL), 409, 509
Hardware-based edge detector, 43
Hardware speciﬁcation, 19–20
Hash-based schemes, in RFID systems
Avoine's scheme, 492
classiﬁcation of, 493
communication cost vs. data, 496
comparison of, 492–493
hash-chain scheme, 490–491
K-steps ID matching scheme
ID conﬁguration, 491
protocol, 491–492
memory vs. time, 495
randomized hash lock scheme, 490
security
forward, 494
prevention of reply attacks, 494–495
unlinkability, 493–494
smart tag method, 488–489
Yeo's scheme, 492
Hash functions, 608, 654
Hidden ﬁeld equations (HFE), 584
High frequency (HF), 313
High frequency (HF) band, 631, 634
HMAC, see Keyed-hash message
authentication codes
Hopping channel bandwidth, 127
Hospital terminal, 336–338, 342
Host port interface (HPI)
boot process
bootloader code, 101
host address bus, 102
communication, 102
and host processors, 100
Humanoid robots, 419–420, 428
I
Identiﬁcation number (ID), of RFID, 139
Idle query, 146
IMES, see Implantable myoelectric sensors
Impedance modulation, 266
Index
679

Implantable myoelectric sensors (IMES), 661
Industrial, scientiﬁc, and medical
(ISM) band, 126
Infrared cameras, 429
Instructional frameworks, RFID=smart labels,
112–113; see also RFID education
Insubvertible encryption, 638
Intelligent human–computer interaction
systems, 115
Intelligent transportation system (ITS), 408
International Organization of Standardization
(ISO), 313, 480
Interrogator antenna
demagnetization factor, 244
dispersal volume, 243
Interrogator patch antenna, orientation of, 7
ioctl call, 106
ISO=IEC 18000-6, advantages, 296
ISO 18000 Part 7 standard
collection command and response format
from, 54
super data ﬂow graph for, 55
ISO 18000-6 speciﬁcation, 174
ISO, see International Organization of
Standardization
Item-level tracking, 183
J
Java speciﬁcation requests (JSR)
generic connection framework (GCF), 383
Java virtual machine (JVM), 383
NDEF records, 384
Java virtual machine (JVM), 383
K
Keyed-hash message authentication codes
(HMAC), 545
Knowledge-mediated e-learning, 115
L
Label antenna
coupling volume, 244
design (see Tag antenna design)
ﬁgure of merit, 243
radiation resistance, 246
LBS, see Location based service
LBT sensor, positioning of, 130–131
Learning parity with noise (LPN), 581, 638
LF band, see Low frequency band
LFSR, see Linear feedback shift registers
License plates, RFID-enabled, 649
Lightweight crptography, low cost RFID
complexity theory, 578
computational model, 577
design principles of, 579–580
hardware developments, 583
LFSR and XOR cryptography, 585
MCQ and HFE, 584
primitives development
minimalist cryptography, 580–581
ultra wide band modulation, 580
protocol developments
Hopper and Blum (HB) protocol, 581
noisy tag protocol, 581–582
one-time codes, 582
quantum and quasar cryptography, 584
security level of, 577
Lightweight public-key encryption, 640
Linear feedback shift registers, 585, 640
Linearly polarized antennas
comparison with circularly polarized
antennas, 12
orientation of, 11
power capabilities of, 13
Living lab approach, 297
Local buffer, 331, 335
Location based service (LBS), 290, 408–409
Locomotive robot, 429–430
Longitude–latitude–grid discretization
method, 192
Lorenz reciprocity theorem, 236, 242
Low frequency band, 631, 634
Low-Level Reader Protocol (LLRP)
data units and operation, 28
features of, 27
Low-threshold radio frequency (RF) Schottky
diodes, 265
LPN, see Learning parity with noise
M
Magnetic ﬁeld-sensitive antennas, 238
equivalent circuit for, 72
for HF ISM band, 66
sensitivity of, 67
Magnetic ﬁeld vector, 233
Manchester coding, 618
Manchester encoding
textual description of, 41
waveform for, 39–40
Manufacturing execution system, 280
Master data, 30
Maxwell's equations, 232
MCQ, see Multivariate quadratic residue
quotient systems
Memory banks, deﬁnition of, 22
680
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

Memory capacity
memory block design, 205
model inputs, 204
passive RFID systems
banking approach signiﬁcance, 207
HSPICE simulation, 206
power consumption, 206–207
system architecture and
banking memory blocks, 204
burst switch use, 204
power-enabled PMOS device, 201
power-gating technique, 202
power-on reset PMOS transistor, 203
Message authentication codes, 654
Message channels, 27–28
Messaging layer, 26; see also Reader Protocol
Speciﬁcation
Messaging=transport binding (MTB), 26–27
MES, see Manufacturing execution system
Metallic objects, 249
Microcontroller, 264
components of, 99
ﬂash, 266
high-level tasks, 100
power consumption of, 267
Micromodule, RFID-enabled, 658–659
Microprocessor-based tag, 54
power consumption of, 56
Microprocessor, operational power cycle of, 268
Microstimulator
RFID-enabled, 659, 662, 664
sensory-enabled RFID, 659–660
Middleware, RFID, 280
Miller encoding, modiﬁed
continuous waveform for, 43, 46
near ﬁeld communication, 41
textual description of, 43
Mobile object information service (mOIS), 514
Mobile RFID service system
architecture for security
privacy infringements, 504–505
RFID tag identiﬁer, 505–506
block ciphers in, 511
code resolution process, 504
communication scenario of, 503–504
crypto algorithms
features of, 511
in mobile terminal platform, 510–511
data communication model of, 501
deﬁnition of, 500, 502
device authentication of, 506
implementations of, 501
interface structure of, 502
middleware, 503, 509–510
network architecture of, 502–503
object information service
(OIS) module, 514
requirements for security, 506–507
secure mobile RFID application portal
(SMAP), 513–514
security threats of, 505–506
types of, 500
UHF-band, advantages of, 501
Mobile telecommunications services,
RFID-based, 499–500
Modulation, 266
Motionless tags, identiﬁcation of, 175
Motion sensors, 464
MPEG-4, 465
MQ, see Multivariate quadratic equations
MSP430 microcontroller, 264
level shifter, 266
power requirements of, 267–269
programmable, 267
Multiple reader antennas, 182, 187
Multiple reader coverage
enumeration scheme for, 191
integer programming formulation for,
189–191
Multivariate quadratic (MQ) equations, 584
Multivariate quadratic residue quotient systems
(MCQ), 584
N
Name authority pointer (NAPTR), 524
National Institute of Standards and Technology
(NIST), 619
NCP, see Neurocybernetic prosthesis
NDEF (NFC data exchange format)
for NFC forum, 380
payloads, 378–379
smart posters, 381–382
Near Field Communication (NFC)
payload encapsulation, 378
record, types of, 379–380
smart poster, 381–382
speciﬁcations, 377
standard, 263
URI (uniform resource identiﬁer)
forum, 380
Near-ﬁeld inductive coupling, 183
Neurocybernetic prosthesis (NCP), 660
Nokia, NFC uses, 385
Nonvolatile RAM (NVRAM), 488
Notiﬁcation channel, 27–28; see also Message
channels
NSIT, see National Institute of Standards
and Technology
Index
681

O
Object Directory Service (ODS), 502
Object Information Service (OIS), 502–503
Object Naming Service (ONS), 31, 409,
632, 634, 667
risk factors
integrity and availability, 527, 531
mitigation, 528–530
security, 526–527
risk mitigation, 528–530
DNS security extensions, 529–530
network design, 528
routing, 529
VPN and Extranets, 528–529
speciﬁcation, 524
Object Traceability Service (OTS), 502
Object tracker, 464
Object-tracking system, 126
Open database connection (ODBC), 316
open() routine, 106
Operation point terminal, 337–338, 342
Opt-in agreement, 18–19
Over-The-Air Reconﬁguration (OTAR), 96
P
PADoC system, 465
Pallet-level retailer applications, 191
Pallet tag (p-Tag), 289
Passive activation layer security, 614–616
Passive active RFID tag (PART) system
air interface unit, 225
architecture operation, 213
broadcast RFID and P2P commands,
use of, 217
burst switch
capability veriﬁcation, 215
energy consumption evaluation, 216
low-power circuit (ﬁlter), 215
Markov model, 216
receiver enabled input pin, 214
ZigBee network, testing with, 216
command control and interrupt process
unit, 222
Manchester decoder, 220
Manchester encoder, 224
Markov process model, 226–227
packet analysis unit, 221
power dissipation analysis, 225, 227
power estimation results, 225
preamble generator, 224
preamble removal unit, 220
RF transceiver coprocessor
algorithm, 218
architecture, 219
Passive RFID tags, 252
antenna, 4
Patch antennas
gain, 185
for RFID readers, 184
PCSP, see Proactive computationally secure
protocol
Peer to peer component sharing, 96
Personal information protection schemes, in
RFID systems
output method, 488
classiﬁcation, 487
comparison of, 489
output method
rewritable tag approach, 488
smart tag approach, 488–489
physical blocking method, 487
Phase locked loop (PLL), 103–104
Photosensor, 369–370
Physical layer security, 617–619
Physical layer synthesis
FSM controller, 47
sampling point selection, 46
Physical layer waveform feature library
bit window period, 44
hardware based components of, 43
Picking process, warehouse activity, 288–290
PIE, see Pulse-interval encoding
PISP, see Proactive informational secure protocol
Point of sales (POS), 297
Polarization loss factor (PLF), 184
Portal space resolution, 191
Power accumulator capacitor, 266
Power macromodeling, RFID protocols
framework, 208–209
power consumption impact, 208, 212
power estimation
energy calculation, 211–212
process, 211
technique, 208–209
power proﬁles library, 210
synthesis tools, need for, 208
SystemC simulator
advantages, 209
construction, 211
Power source, onboard, 4
Poynting vector, 241
Privacy-preserving video surveillance
system, 455
Proactive computationally secure protocol
(PCSP)
pseudocode, 596–597
XOR calculation, 597–598
Proactive informational secure protocol (PISP)
description of, 594
operation, 596
682
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

pseudocode, 594–595
XOR calculation, 595–596
Probabilistic encryption, 637
Probabilistic tag anticollision protocols, 168
Procter and Gamble, 283
Product life cycle (PLC) management, 308
Progressed slot counter (PSC), 149, 167
Pseudo-random bit generators (PRBG), 585
Pseudo-random functions (PRF), 654
Pseudo-random number generators (PRNG),
165, 489–491, 654
Pulse-interval encoding (PIE), 21
continuous waveform for, 41
periods for, 40–41
physical layer characteristics of, 40
sampling points, 47
textual description of, 42
Pure identity, 23; see also Coding schemes, V1.3
Q
Q protocol
anticollision commands, 22
reply period and round size, 21
Quality factor (Q), 243
Quantum cryptography, 584
Quasar cryptography, 584
Query command
comparison with Collection command, 60
super data ﬂow graph (SDFG) for, 52–53
template generated for, 50–51
Query deletion procedure, 147–148, 166
Query insertion procedure, 145
Query tree (QT) protocol, 140, 142–143
search method of, 166
R
Radiation pattern, antenna, 6–7
Radiation resistance, 256
Radio frequency electromagnetic radiation, 664
Radio frequency identiﬁcation, 232, 249, 296
applications of, 263, 296
library project, 359–361
smart home project, 362–363
wireless LAN, 356, 358
architectural design aspects of, 363–365
automated receiving system, 299
externalities, 308
in gray-code, 371
grid system, conventional, 356
interrogators
ﬁxed, 357
smart home, 363
transient, 358
middleware, 304
passive, 369
portal, 301
primary components, 312
reader simulator, 315–316
readers, tag, 342, 355–356, 428–429, 432
with sensor networking, 317–325
smart environments, design, 354–356
supply chain management, 296
tags, 354 (see Radio frequency
identiﬁcation tags)
teleports, 356
triage system
advantages, 335
architecture, 336–337
current workﬂow, 338–339
workﬂow, 336
ubiquitous computing in, 352
ubiquitous sensing, 261–262
ultrahigh frequency (UHF), 273
uplink packet errors, 272
vs. HF and UHF, 313
Radio-frequency identiﬁcation
decision rules of, 286–287
middleware
connectors, role of, 289
picking process, 288
role of, 280
shipping operation, 289
retail industries, use in, 283
sample industry, research data
and sites, 284
tag (see Radio frequency identiﬁcation
tags)
technology, 279–280
Radio frequency identiﬁcation=Near ﬁeld
communication, see RFID=NFC
Radio frequency identiﬁcation
(RFID) security
algorithms, 579
authentication algorithms
M2M, 592–593
PCSP, 596–598
PISP, 594–596
authentication and integrity of, 648
availability, 649–650
backscatter mechanism, 589
blocker tag in, 591
computational, 577
cryptography for, 591–592
cryptosystem, 579
factors affecting, 645
privacy, 648–649
protocol Layer, 646
quantiﬁcation, 575–576
tag reader, 589
Index
683

tag singulation
principle of multiple, 599
reader-side, 598–599
tag-side algorithm, 599–600
Radio frequency identiﬁcation (RFID) system
access control model framework
authorization rules, 461–462
hardware implementation, 463–464
security condition of, 460
speciﬁcations, 460
anonymity vs. availability, 650
antenna design for, 185
antenna positioning for, 131–132
applications of, 36
attack systems
brute force, 606
eavesdropping, 605
relay attack, 606
side channel, 607
spooﬁng, 605
authentication techniques
asymmetric and symmetric protocols, 609
lightweight protocols, 608
strong protocols, 610
back-end server
authentication, 651
exhaustive key search, 651–652
characteristics of, 644–645
chips, 470–473
communication, components of, 38–48
communication model, 645
controversies associated with
anticollision protocol support, 480
implants in humans, 481
privacy violations, 480
religious views, 481
spychips, 479
data interception protection, 481–482
encryption techniques
asymmetric key, 611
symmetric key, 610
half-wave dipole antennas usage in, 187
hash-based schemes, 490–495
identiﬁcation number of, 139
implementation of, 130
interleaving attacks, 647
pallet-level applications, 197
performance characterization of, 38
personal information protection schemes,
487–489
portal designs for, 196
power optimization, importance of, 53
privacy guidelines, 477
privacy management service (RPS), 503
problems associated with
electromagnetic spectrum, 475
privacy, ethics, 475
technology, 474–475
usage, 477–478
properties of, 486
pseudo-random number generator, 489–491
reader, 463
collision problem, 126, 475
synchronization, 126
regulations for
ETSI 302 208, 127
FCC Title 47 Part 15.247, 127–128
RFID protocols standardization, 128
replay attacks, 647
resources for security, 652–654
RFID macros, 37
security concerns, 476, 478
security standards
container seal tags, 613
e-passport cryptography, 613
Gen 2 tags, 611–612
passively powered devices, 612
password protection, 611
in supply chain and logistics applications, 182
for supply chain management, 125
synchronization
channels, rearrangement of, 134
external sensors usage, 134
output power reduction, 133–134
reader talking time reduction, 134
RF opaque or RF absorbing materials, 134
in United States, 136
variation of, 135
tag collision, 475
taxonomy of tag anticollision protocols, 163
technical controls, 544–545
Radio frequency identiﬁcation tags
active and passive tags, 200
antennas
design consideration (see Tag antenna
design)
directivity, 13–14
gain of, 7, 13–14
power transmitted by, 6
types of, 66–68
anticollision protocols, 140, 171
blocker tag, 635
classes of, 3–4
closed loop applications, 36
collision arbitration protocol, 140, 143
communication overhead, 151
compiler generated program for, 51–52
components, 644
components of, 631
cryptographic approaches, authenticity
684
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

eavesdroppers communication, 638
Hopper and Blum (HB) protocol, 638–639
cryptographic approaches to privacy
hash function approach, 636–637
rewriting approach, 637–638
cryptographic primitives implementation
for, 639–640
data
standards for, 22–25
translation, 26
design automation
code generation, 51–52
macros speciﬁcation, 48–50
RFID primitives implementation, 52–53
design methodologies, comparison of, 36
education of
instructional framework for, 112–113
social networks, 111–112
strategy for, 115
tightly and loosely coupled processes, 111
encryption of data at rest, 557
extensible, 36–37
identiﬁcation of, 651
identiﬁcation process, 162
identiﬁcation, tree search of, 145
interrogator antenna of, 11
ISO 18000 Part 6C protocol for, 48
kill feature, 557
lightweight public-key encryption, 640
load impedance of, 13
marketing opportunities for, 112
memory access control, 556
modulation schemes, 21
movement, impact of, 153–155
orientation issue in, 12
passive, 4, 646
physical layer decoder and encoder blocks
waveform feature library, 43–45
waveform speciﬁcation, 39–43
polling, 555
power consumption, 200
powering of, 6
press-to-activate switch, 555
production cost, 200
radio frequency waves for
dipole antennas, 9–10
sinusoidal waveforms, 8
resynchronization of, 651
security and privacy requirements
authenticity and privacy, 633
low-level layer security, 634–636
physical layer approach, 635
total system security, 634–635
semipassive, 646
space and orientations, 193
space resolution, 193
standards
ISO 18000 Part 7, 54–57
ISO 18185 Part 1, 60–61
ISO 18000 Part 6C, 57–60
issues associated with, 38
starvation problem, 140
tamper resistance, 558
temporary deactivation, 554
transmission control, 149
unfavorable orientation for, 8
uses of
supply-chain management, 632, 634
wireless communications, 631, 634–635
Radio frequency identiﬁcation technology, 458
Radio frequency identity and geometry (RFIG)
transponder, 371–373
Radio frequency interface protection
cover-coding
control, applicability, beneﬁts, 550–551
EPC global Class-1 Generation-2, 550
minimalist cryptography, 550
trivial encryption algorithm, 550
weaknesses of, 551
electromagnetic shielding
control, applicability, beneﬁts, 552–553
metallic antiskimming material, 552
encryption of data in transit
control, applicability, beneﬁts, 551
weaknesses of, 552
radio frequency selection
control, applicability, beneﬁts, 553
weaknesses of, 553–554
transmission characteristics, adjustment of
control, applicability, beneﬁts, 554
weaknesses of, 554
Radio frequency subsystem, 545
Radio receiver, 96
Radio transmitting antennas, 11
Radio waves
backscatter communication, 4
and tags, 5
Readable query, 146
Read accuracy powering region, 183
Reader antennas
coupling with tag antenna, 77
designs, 65–66
placement problem for, 190
Reader layer, 26; see also Reader Protocol
Speciﬁcation
Reader Management Speciﬁcation, 28
Reader Protocol Speciﬁcation, 26
layers of, 26
message channels, 27
second-generation, 27–28
Index
685

Readers, components of, 644; see also RFID reader
Reader synchronization in RFID
concept of, 129
development of, 137
in European countries, 137
Reﬂection coefﬁcients
deﬁnition of, 13
expression for, 5
Relative effective permeability, 244
Relative intrinsic permeability, 244
Remote keyless entry and ignition system, 399
RFID-Access Control model
framework of
authorization rules, 461–462
speciﬁcation, 460
hardware implementation, 463–464
security condition of, 460
RFID baseband processor, 411
RFID compiler, 48
commands, 60–61
control and data ﬂow graph (CDFG), 52
generated RFID tag program, 51–52
primitives, 56–57
prototype targets, 53–54
speciﬁcation methodology and compilation
ﬂow, 48
RFID controller, see RFID tags
RFID education
challenges, 121
critical success factors (CSFs) in, 114–115
social networks, 111–112
strategy for
business (value) propositions, 115–116
electronic data interchange (EDI)
standards, 116–118
marketing critical success factors
(CSFs), 118
operational=management requirements,
119–120
process technology integration issues,
120–121
RF spectrum, 118–119
tightly and loosely coupled processes, 111
RFID-enabled micromodule, 658–659
RFID label antennas
electric ﬁeld-sensitive and electromagnetic
ﬁeld, 68
magnetic ﬁeld-sensitive
for HF ISM band, 66
sensitivity of, 67
RFID laboratories, 18
RFID macros, 37
speciﬁcation of, 48–51
RFID=NFC
applications of, 385–390
Infolab 21 MobHunt, 387–388
PAC-LAN game, 386–387
with mobile phone combination, 377
uses of, 376
RFID, pervasive computing
infrastructure, 438
radio transceivers and RFID
readers, 437
workﬂow management subsystem, 451
RFID primitive
assembly-like instructions, 48
command code of, 49
decode instructions, 51
and response formats from ISO 18000
Part 6C, 50
RFID reader, 463
frequency of transmissions of, 20
hardware chain of, 97
operating status and health monitoring,
protocol for, 28
RF ﬁeld, 21
software-based
characteristics of, 95
RFID, see Radio frequency identiﬁcation
RFID standards
ISO 18185, 60–61
ISO 18000 Part 6C standard, 57–60
ISO 18000 Part 7 standard, 54–57
multiple, issues associated with, 38
transmission protocols, 43
RFID tag antenna
aluminum metallic plane, 254, 256
Ansoft HFSS simulation program, 253
effects of metallic surfaces on, 251–253
microstrip lines, 253–254
parameters, 252
radiation patterns of, 257
small and rectangular loop, 255–256
ultrahigh frequency, 251
RFID tags, see Radio frequency
identiﬁcation tags
RFID techniques
applications, 394–396
EPC Gen2 protocol, 393
RFID-barcode cases
vs. PC-calculator, 394
tag's price prediction, 393
vs. barcodes, 392–394
RFID technology, commercial deployment
of, 35–36
RFIG transponder, see Radio frequency identity
and geometry transponder
RFR, see Radio frequency electromagnetic
radiation
Robovie, see Humanoid robots
686
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

Robovie interaction
childrens’ behavior, 422–424
in learning English, 424–426
long-term, 424
time, 425
variance results for, 425–426
Robovie-M, 428
Rolling code, 478
S
SAE, see Society of Automotive Engineers
classiﬁcation
Sampling counter, 43
Sampling registers circuit
data sampling, 44–45
schematic representation of, 46
SAW, see Surface acoustic wave resonator
SC, see Supply chain
Schmitt trigger inverter, 266
Schottky diodes, low-threshold radio frequency
(RF), 265
SCM, see Supply chain management
SDFG, see Super data ﬂow graph
SDLR, see Software data logging reader;
Software-deﬁned RFID reader
Second triage terminal, 336
Secure mobile RFID application portal
(SMAP), 513
Secure mobile RFID services
application portal, 513
in mobile terminal platform, 510–511
policy-based privacy protection
privacy level, 516–517
security level, 517–519
recoding scheme of, 513
security-enhanced middleware, 508–510
tag access control, 511
tag password data management, 512
wireless internet platform for interoperability
(WIPI)
core functions of, 509
mobile RFID middleware, 503
Security Certiﬁcate Proﬁle, 30
Security layers
passive activation, 614–616
physical layers, 617–619
Self-capacitance (C), 245
Self-inductance (L), 243–244
Semipassive tags, 3–4
Sensor networks, with HF=UHF RFID
application mote software
base station mote software, 321–322
medicine mote software, 322–323
patient mote software, 323
base station software
data fusion algorithm module, 324–325
graphic user interface (GUI) module,
324–325
for elder patients, 317, 319
prototype system, 327
base station subsystem, 319–320
medicine monitoring subsystem, 318–319
patient monitoring subsystem, 319
system component conﬁguration,
320–321
Sensors, low power, 273
Serialized Global Location Number, 24
Serialized Global Trade Identiﬁcation
Number, 523
Serialized Global Trade Item Number, 24
Serial Shipping Container Code, 24, 298
Serial-to-parallel circuit
direction of shifting, 45
schematic representation of, 47
Server, 336–338, 342–348
Service Layer, 30
Session initiation protocol (SIP), 524
SGLN, see Serialized Global Location Number
SGTIN, see Serialized Global Trade Identiﬁcation
Number
SGTIN Electronic Product Code, 523–524
SHARE, see Swiss house for advanced research
and education
Shipping order, warehouse activity, 290
Shrinking generator, 585
SIDS, see Sudden infant death syndrome
Signal noise ratio (SNR), 607
Sim-panalyzer, 54
SimpleScalar simulator, 54
Simulated RFID reader
communication module, 315
mote software components
base station mote, 316–317
base station PC, 315–316
with sensor networking, 315–317
Single reader antenna, powering region with,
186–187
SIP, see Session initiation protocol
Situated learning, 115
SMAP, see Secure mobile RFID application portal
Smart poster NFC record, 381–382
Society of Automotive Engineers
classiﬁcation, 407
Software data logging reader
EPC software module, 107
hardware design of
analog-to-digital converter, 103
digital signal processor (DSP), 100
microcontroller block, 99–100
Index
687

transmit and receive chain, 104
UHF module, 103–104
host port interface (HPI), 100–101
HPI boot process, 101–102
software description, 102–103
software design of
device drivers, 105–106
routine and call, 106–107
Software-deﬁned RFID reader
advantages of, 98
characteristics of, 95
hardware and software chain of, 96–97
modulation scheme, automatic change
of, 95–96
peer to peer component sharing, 96
Software radio architecture, see Software
radio reader
Software radio reader, 98
Spectrum management, 129
Spread Spectrum Frequency Hopping, 20–21
Spychips, 479
SSCC, see Serial Shipping Container Code
Standard electronic envelope format, 31
Station transmitting antennas, 11
Stokes’ laws, 233
Subscriber Authentication, 32
Sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS), 660
SuperCISC compiler, 52
Super data ﬂow graph, 52
Supply chain, 296, 300
Supply chain applications, 182
Supply chain management (SCM), 501
Surface acoustic wave resonator (SAW), 660
Swiss house for advanced research and
education, 355
Symmetry key ciphers, in lightweight
cryptography, 583
Synchronization signal, 45
T
Tag antenna design
antennas suitable for
maximum power transfer
requirements, 71
UHF RFID label IC, 69–70
environmental constraints
dielectric insulation, 75
liquids and metals, 74
label antenna equivalent circuits, 72
for labeling cases
antenna type, 81–83
bow-tie antenna, 83–89
requirements for, 81
methodology, 78–80
performance measurement
interrogator’s receiver, 77
read range measurements, 75–76
requirements, 78
RFID Chip
bandwidth, 74
impedance matching, 72–73
Tag Data Standards
General Identiﬁer (GID-96), 24
levels of identity, 23
SGTIN-96, 25
V1.1 and V1.3, difference between, 22–23
Tag Data Translation, 26
Tag readers, 432
Tags, see Radio frequency identiﬁcation tags
Tag singulation
principle of multiple, 599
reader-side, 598–599
tag-side singulation algorithm, 599–600
TalusRFID
layer architecture, 411–412
processor architecture, 412
Talus virtual machine, 411–412
Technological forecasting techniques, 110
Teleports, in RFID, 356
Terminated slot counter (TSC), 150
TID memory, 22
Timer circuit
sampling time control, 44
schematic representation of, 46
TLS, see Transport layer security
T-Money RFID card, 391, 394–395
TMS, see Transport management system
Traktags, 463
Transceivers, see Readers, components
Transmitting and receiving channels, separation
of, 135–136
Transmitting antenna
circularly polarized, dipole, 12
gain of, 7
station and radio, 11
vertically polarized, 11
Transponders, see Radio frequency identiﬁcation
tags
Transport layer, 26; see also Reader Protocol
Speciﬁcation
Transport Layer Security (TLS), 526
Transport management system (TMS), 280
Tree-based multiple access channel, 172
Tree-based tag anticollision protocols, 141–142
problems in, 143
Triage
input time comparison, 339–341
pervasive computing, 334–335
tag, 329–330
688
RFID Handbook: Applications, Technology, Security, and Privacy

technical requirements, 334
workﬂow, 332–333
Triaxial accelerometer, 273–274
Tuple-based co-ordination model, 436
TVM, see Talus Virtual Machine
U
Ubiquitous computing, 352
Ubiquitous sensor, 261–262
UHF band, see Ultra high frequency band
UHF module, software data logging
reader, 103
UHF RFID, see Ultrahigh frequency RFID
Ultra high frequency band, 481, 631, 634
Ultrahigh frequency RFID, 251
Ultrahigh frequency (UHF), 261–262, 296, 313
Uniform Resource Identiﬁer (URI)
categories of, 23
communicating and storing capabilities
of, 26
Unique identity (UID), 313
Universal Product Code (UPC), 312–313, 476
UN World Summit on the Information Society
(WSIS), 481
V
Video cameras, 429
Video processing subsystem, 458–459
Video surveillance system
architecture of, 457–458
utility vs. privacy, 456
Virtual private networks (VPN), 528–529
Vocabularies, EPCIS, 30
Vogt1 protocol, 171
VPN, see Virtual private networks
W
Wal-Mart, 280, 283
WAP, see Wireless application protocol
Warehouse activity
picking process, 288–290
RFID technology, 284
shipping order, 290
Warehouse management system, 280, 298, 304
Waveform detection circuit, general, 44–45
Waveform variables, 44
Wireless application protocol (WAP), 503
Wireless communications, 631, 634–635
Wireless identiﬁcation and sensing platform
(WISP)
analog front end, 265
analog to digital converter
(ADC), 267
conﬁguration of, 263–264
energy consumption of, 270–271
features of, 261
Friis equation, 269–270
light level measurement of, 272
low power sensors for, 273–274
modulation and demodulation, 266
performance harvested voltage, 271
power consumption of, 267–269
programming software for
decoding and encoding, 267–268
power requirements of, 268
sensor data, 268–269
temperature measurement, 273
triaxial accelerometer on, 273–274
Wireless Internet Platform For Interoperability
(WIPI)
application program interface (API), 503
core functions of, 509
mobile RFID middleware, 503
Wireless LAN, 342, 356, 358
Wireless readers, 631
Wireless system signals, 130
Wireless tags, 631
applications of
3D path planning=guiding, 373–374
obstruction detection, 372
ordered placement and orientation,
372–373
warehouse management, 371–372
geometry
photosensor, 369–370
tag-RF-reader, 369
radio frequency identiﬁcation (RFID)
tags, 369
working mechanism, 370–371
WISP, see Wireless identiﬁcation and sensing
platform
WMS, see Warehouse management system
X
XACML, see eXtensible access control markup
language
X.509 authentication framework, 30
XML Schemas, 31
XOR cryptography, 585
Index
689



