
ON THE HISTORICITY OF }ESUS 
WHY WE MIGHT HAVE REASON FOR DOUBT 
Richard Carrier 
SHEFFIELD PHOENIX PRES 
2014 

Copyright© 2014 Sheffield Phoenix Press 
Published by Sheffield Phoenix Press 
Department of Biblical Studies, University of Sheffield 
45 Victoria Street, Sheffield 53 7QB 
www.sheffieldphoenix.com 
All rigltts reserved. 
No part of tlris publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any 
means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording or any information 
storage or retrieval system, wit/rout tire publisher's permission in writing. 
A CIP catalogue record for this book 
is available from the British Library 
Typeset by the HK Scriptorium 
Printed by Lightning Source 
ISBN 978-1-909697-35-5 (hbk) 
ISBN 978-1-90%97-49-2 (pbk) 

CONTENTS 
Preface 
I . THE PROBLEM 
I. Isn't This Just Bunk? 
2. The Debate Today 
3. Myth versus History 
4. Mythicists versus Historicists 
5. The Aim of This Book 
6. Summary of Remaining Chapters 
7. Applying Bayes's Theorem 
8. Elements and Axioms 
2. THE HYPOTHESIS OF HISTORICITY 
1 .  Myth from History 
2. The Basic Problem 
3. Hypothesis Formation and Prior Probability 
4. The Minimal Theory of Historicity 
3. THE HYPOTHESIS OF MYTH 
1 .  From Inanna to Christ 
2. The Basic Problem 
3. The Minimal Jesus Myth Theory 
4. BACKGROUND KNOWLEDGE (CHRISTIANITY) 
1 . A Romulan Tale 
2. Background Knowledge 
3. Elemental Definitions 
4. Elemental Background Knowledge 
5. Elements of Christian Origin 
6. Elements of Christian Religion 
7. Elements of Christian Development 
5. BACKGROUND KNOWLEDGE (CONTEXT) 
l. Elements of Political Context 
2. Elements of Religious and Philosophical Context 
IX 
1 
3 
7 
8 
13 
14 
14 
1 6  
1 8  
18 
21 
27 
3 1  
36 
36 
48 
52 
56 
56 
58 
60 
65 
65 
96 
146 
1 53 
153 
1 64 

VI 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
3. Elements of Literary Context 
4. Conclusion 
6. THE PRIOR PROBABILITY 
1. Heroes Who Never Existed 
2. Determining Prior Probability 
3. Using the Rank-Raglan Reference Class 
4. The Causal Objection 
5. The Alternative Class Objection 
6. The Complexity Objection 
7. Rapid Legendary Development 
8. Conclusion 
7. PRIMARY SouRcEs 
I. What Counts as Evidence? 
2. Breaking Down the Evidence 
3. The Epistles 
4. The Gospels 
5. Acts 
6. Extrabiblical Evidence 
7. The Problem of Compromised Evidence 
8. The Role of Consequent Probabilities 
9. Conclusion 
8. EXTRABIBLICAL EVIDENCE 
1 .  Jesus When? 
2. The Socrates Analogy 
3. Missing Evidence 
4. Missing Christian Evidence 
5. Clement of Rome 
6. Ignatius of Antioch 
7. Papias ofHierapolis 
8. Hegesippus 
9. Josephus and the Testimonia Flaviana 
10. Pliny and Tacitus 
11. Suetonius and Thallus 
12. Missing Evidence: Contra Myth 
13. Weighing the Evidence 
9. THE EviDENCE oF AcTs 
1 .  Acts as Historical Fiction 
2. What Happened to the Body? 
214 
234 
235 
235 
238 
239 
244 
245 
246 
248 
252 
254 
254 
256 
260 
264 
270 
271 
275 
278 
279 
281 
281 
289 
293 
306 
308 
3 1 5  
323 
326 
332 
342 
346 
349 
356 
359 
359 
368 
Ƨ71 

Contents 
vu 
4. The 'Trial Transcripts' of Paul 
375 
5. Stephen's Trial Speech 
381 
6. The Possibility of 'Aramaic' Sources 
383 
7. Weighing the Evidence 
385 
10. THE EVIDENCE OF THE GOSPELS 
387 
1. How to Invent a Gospel 
387 
2. What Is Myth? 
389 
3. Examining the Gospels 
396 
4. The Mythology of Mark 
402 
5. The Mythology of Matthew 
456 
6. The Mythology of Luke 
469 
7. The Mythology of John 
487 
8. Weighing the Evidence 
506 
11. THE EVIDENCE OF THE EPISTLES 
51 0 
1. The Passion of Pliny the Elder 
510 
2. The Peculiar Indifference of Paul and his Christians 
514 
3. EpistJes from the Pillars? 
528 
4. The Earliest Gospels 
531 
5. The Gospel in Hebrews 
538 
6. Things Jesus Said 
553 
7. The Eucharist 
557 
8. Things Jesus Did 
563 
9. Women and Sperm 
575 
10. Brothers of the Lord 
582 
11. Weighing the Evidence 
592 
12. CONCLUSION 
596 
1. The Final Calculation 
596 
2. On Trying to Avoid the Conclusion 
60 I 
3. What We Should Conclude 
606 
4. The Last Desperate Objection 
61 0 
5. What Now? 
616 
Bibliography 
619 
Scripture Index 
661 
Author Index 
6 72 
Subject Index 
681 


LIST OF TABLES AND fiGURES 
Figures 
1 .  From Homer to Virgil 
2. Bayes's Theorem, Odds Form 
Tables 
392 
598 
1. From Psalm 22 to Mark 15 
408 
2. The Structure of the Sea Narrative in Mark 
413 
3. The 2 x 5 Miracle Sequence in Mark 
415 
4. Reversal of Mark 1 in Mark 1 6  
421 
5. Reversal of Mark I in Mark 1 5  
422 
6. Parallels of Jesus 'Christ' with Jesus ben Ananias 
430 
7. Allegorical Hypothesis for Simon of Cyrene 
450 
8. Baptism Narrative Paralleled in Transfiguration Narrative 
462 
9. Brodie Thesis for Luke 7 Adapting I Kings 1 7  
476 
10. Structure of the Cana-to-Cana Sequence in John 
495 
1 1 .  Competing Embarrassment: Artis Cult versus Jesus Cult 
615 


PREFACE 
This book is the second of two volumes examining a daring question: 
whether there is a case to be made that Jesus never really existed as a his­
torical person. The alternative is that the Jesus we know originated as a 
mythical character, in tales symbolically narrating the salvific acts of a 
divine being who never walked the earth (and probably never existed at all). 
Later, this myth was mistaken for history (or deliberateJy repackaged that 
way), and then embellished over time. Though I shall argue it's likely this 
alternative is true and that Jesus did not in fact exist, I cannot assume it has 
been conclusively proved here. In fact, it may yet be proved false in future 
work, using the very methods I employ (which were proposed and defended 
in my previous volume, Proving History: Bayes's Theorem and the Quest 
for the Historical Jesus). 
Hence the point of this book is not to end the debate but to demonstrate 
that scholars need to take this hypothesis more seriously before dismiss­
ing it out of hand, and that they need much better arguments against it 
than they've heretofore deployed. A better refutation is needed, and a better 
theory of historicity, which, actually, credibly explains all the oddities in 
the evidence. If this book inspires nothing else, I'll be happy if it's that. But 
this book may do more. It might inspire more experts to agree with the pos­
sibility at least that Jesus Christ was born in myth, not history. And their 
continuing examination of the case may yet result in a growing consensus 
against the grain of current assumptions. 
Either outcome would satisfy me. For my biases are such as to make 
no difference what the result should be. I only want the truth to be settled. 
Nevertheless, all historians have biases, and only sound methods wi11 pre­
vent those from too greatly affecting our essential results. No progress 
in historical knowledge, in fact no historical knowJedge at all, would be 
possible without such methods. Hence my previous volume developed a 
formal historical method for approaching this (or any other) debate, which 
will produce as objectively credible a conclusion as any honest historian 
can reach. One need merely plug all the evidence into that method to get 
a result. However, because this volume can't address every single item of 
evidence (it merely addresses the best evidence there is), its conclusion may 
yet be brought down, even with its own method, simply by introducing 
something it omits. If so, I welcome it. 

xii 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
Though I already discussed my biases and background, and the origin 
of this project, in the preface to Proving History, for the reader's conve­
nience I shall repeat that here. I am a marginally renowned atheist, known 
across America and many other corners of the world as an avid defender 
of a naturalist worldview and a dedicated opponent of the abuse of history 
in the service of supernaturalist creeds. I am a historian by training and 
trade (I received my PhD in ancient history from Columbia University) and 
a philosopher by experience and practice (I have published peer-reviewed 
articles in the field and am most widely known for my book on the subject, 
Sense and Goodness without God: A Defense of Metaphysical Naturalism). 
I have always assumed without worry that Jesus was just a guy, another 
merely human founder of an entirely natural religion (whatever embellish­
ments to his cult and story may have followed). I'd be content if I were 
merely reassured of that fact. For the evidence, even at its best, supports 
no more startling conclusion. So, I have no vested interest in proving Jesus 
didn't exist. It makes no difference to me if he did. I suspect he might not 
have, but then that's a question that requires a rigorous and thorough exam­
ination of the evidence before it can be confidently declared. Most secular 
scholars agree-even when they believe Jesus existed, they do not need 
to believe that. Believers, by contrast, and their apologists in the scholarly 
community, cannot say the same. For them, if Jesus didn't exist, then their 
entire worldview topples. The things they believe in (and need to believe 
in) more than anything else in the world wil1 then be under dire threat. It 
would be hard to expect them ever to overcome this bias, which makes bias 
a greater problem for them than for me. They need Jesus to be real, but I 
don't need Jesus to be a myth. 
Most atheists agree. And yet so much dubious argument has appeared 
on both sides of this debate (including argument of such a technical and 
erudite character that laymen can't decide whom to trust) that a consid­
erable number of atheists approached me with a request to evaluate the 
arguments on both sides and tell them whose side has the greater merit or 
whether we can even decide between them on the scanty evidence we have. 
That's how my involvement in this matter began, resulting in my mostly 
(but not solely) positive review of Earl Doherty's The Jesus Puzzle. My 
continued work on the question has now culminated in over forty philan­
thropists (some of them Christians) donating a collective total of $20,000 
for Atheists United, a major American educational charity, to support my 
research and writing of a series of books, in the hopes of giving both lay­
men and experts a serious evaluation of the evidence they can use to decide 
who is more probably right. 
The first step in that process was to assess the methods so far employed 
on the subject and replace them if faulty. I accomplished that in the previ­
ous volume, in which I demonstrated that the most recent method of using 

Preface 
XIII 
'historicity criteria' in the study of Jesus has been either logically invalid 
or factually incorrect, and that only arguments structured according to 
Bayes's Theorem have any chance of being valid and sound. Here I apply 
that method to the evidence for Jesus and show what results. 
Though this is a work of careful scholarship, the nature of its aims and 
funding necessitate a style that is approachable to both experts and laymen. 
By the requirements of my grant, I am writing as much for my benefac­
tors as my fellow scholars. But there is a more fundamental reason for my 
frequent use of contractions, slang, verbs in the first person, and other sup­
posed taboos: it's how I believe historians should speak and write. Histori­
ans have an obi igation to reach wider audiences with a style more attractive 
and intelligible to ordinary people. And they can do so without sacrific­
ing rigor or accuracy. Indeed, more so than any other science, history can 
be written in ordinary language without excessive reliance on specialized 
vocabulary (though we do need some), and without need of any stuffy pro­
tocols oflanguage that don't serve a legitimate purpose. As long as what we 
write is grammatically correct, accurate and clear, and conforms to spoken 
English, it should satisfy all the aims of history: to educate and inform and 
advance the field of knowledge. This very book, just like the last, has been 
written to exemplify and hopefully prove that point. 
The support I received for this work has been very generous. As before, 
I must thank Atheists United for all their aid and assistance, and all those 
individual donors who gave so much, and for little in return but an honest 
report. No one (not even Atheists United, who provided me with the finan­
cial grant in aid, nor any donor to that fund) was given any power to edit or 
censor the content of this work or to compel any particular result. They all 
gave me complete academic freedom. That also means I alone am respon­
sible for everything I write. Atheists United wanted to see what I came up 
with, and trusted me to do good work on the strength of my reputation and 
qualifications, but they do not necessarily agree with or endorse anything I 
say or argue. The same follows for any individual donors. 
More particular thanks are in order for them, who made this work possi· 
ble. Benefactors came not only from all over the United States but from all 
over the world-from Australia and Hong Kong to Norway and the Nether­
lands, even Poland and France. Not all wanted to be thanked by name, but 
of those who did (or didn't object), my greatest gratitude goes to the most 
generous contributors: Jeremy A. Christian, Paul Doland, Dr Evan Fales, 
Brian Flemming, Scott and Kate Jensen, Fab Lischka, and most generous 
of all, Michelle Rhea and Maciek Kolodziejczyk. Next in line are those who 
also gave very generously, including Aaron Adair, John and Susan Baker, 
Robert A. Bosak Jr, Jon Cortelyou, Valerie Mills Daly, Brian Dewhirst, 
Karim Ghantous, Frank 0. Glomset, Paul Hatchman, Jim Lippard, Ryan 
Miller, Dr Edwin Neumann, Lillian Paynter, Benjamin Schuldt, Vern 

XIV 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
Sheppard, Chris Stoffel, James Tracy, Stuart Turner, Keith Werner, Jona­
than Whitmore, Dr Alexander D. Young, Frank Zindler and Demian Zoer. 
But I am grateful even for the small donors, whose gifts collectively added 
up to quite a lot, including the generosity of David F. Browning, David 
Empey, Landon Hedrick, Gordon McCormick and many others. 
This book would never have been written without all their support. 
Many even provided valuable advice toward improving it. It is very reward­
ing to present this book, as I did the last, to those who respect and enjoy 
my work enough to keep me employed just to educate themselves and the 
public about what many consider an obscure issue, and above all, who have 
patiently waited so long for the payoff. Special thanks also go to David 
Fitzgerald (author of The Mormons and Nailed: Ten Christian Myths That 
Show Jesus Never Existed at All) for his help, advice and friendship. And to 
Earl Doherty (author of The Jesus Puzzle and Jesus: Neither God nor Man) 
and Evan Fales (who may one day come out with Reading Sacred Texts: An 
Anthropological Approach to the Gospel of St. Matthew), for their partic­
ular assistance and perspective. I don't always agree with them, but their 
often-brilliant work did influence me, even if not always in the direction 
they may have hoped. 

1 
THE PROBLEM 
There is a widespread view that it is futile to go back and dig up old foun­
dations, to go back over matters that were established long ago. Why not 
accept the sound results of a century's worth of good scholarship and get 
on instead with building on those pillars of scholarly wisdom?1 
1. lsn 't This Just Bunk? 
In 1999 I wrote an expose for Skeptical Inquirer on a then-recent FOX 
documentary about ancient Egypt.2 I had never been interested in the crazy 
theories going around about the pyramids, but when a major television net­
work started presenting them as credible news, and with suspect tactics at 
that, it offended me as a historian. So I investigated the claims in the docu­
mentary, contacting some who were interviewed for it, and wrote on what 
I found. The show's editors had quoted interviews out of context, conflated 
credible with ridiculous claims, mixed serious scholars with lay theorists 
as if there were no difference in their credibility, made several claims that 
were highly dubious if not outright false (while rarely presenting any criti­
cism, and then only a token), and sometimes even misrepresented (or didn't 
honestly reveal) to those being interviewed what the actual intent of the 
documentary was and how their interviews would be used. Some of those 
interviewed were rightly outraged at what FOX had done. 
Thanks to that article, however, I had sealed my fate. Ever since, I've 
been the target of countless emails from kooks some call 'pyramidiots', 
people who passionately advocate bizarre and often (let's be honest) stupid 
theories about the pyramids. They were built in 20,000 BCE. Their builders 
I .  Mark Goodacre, The Case against Q: Studies in Markan Priority and the 
Synoptic Problem (Harrisburg, PA: Trinity Press, 2002), p. 6. He is, of course, speaking 
rhetorically. 
2. Richard Carrier, 'Flash! Fox News Reports That Aliens May Have Built the 
Pyramids of Egypt!', Skeptical Inquirer 23 (September-October 1999), pp. 46-50 (see 
www.csicop.org/si/9909/fox.htm 1). 

2 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
must have used lasers and levitation rays. Psychics have predicted archae­
ological discoveries in them. Their configuration proves the existence of 
extraterrestrial civilizations, or the preternatural wisdom of the ancients, 
or the existence of God and the Intelligent Design of the universe. And so 
on. They typicaJiy have some thousand-page treatise they want me to read 
that, they insist, proves their new outlandish claim, and ifl don't read it, I'm 
participating in 'the conspiracy' to suppress their research. 
Yet I will never live long enough to examine and fact-check all the the­
ories, books and papers these people have tried to send me, even if I made 
it my single purpose in life to try. So I don't waste even a minute on any 
of them. I dismiss them all out of hand. Their emails and treatises go right 
in the trash. I will, however, send them one email in reply, with a simple 
rule: get even one of their novel claims published in a peer-reviewed jour­
nal specializing in Egyptology or archaeology, or in a book published by 
a respected academic or peer-reviewed press, and then I'll read it. They 
will insist they can't, because of some conspiracy by 'the establishment' to 
prevent acceptance of any such paper (either for some ordinary or paranoid 
reason, it differs with each one). But as a professional in the field, I know, 
first-hand, that's just bunk. If you really have the evidence and can prove 
it, the scholarly community will usually publish it. Our conversation ends. 
This isn't the only subject on which I get this kind of crank email. It was 
just for a time the most pronounced and continuous-and silly, since I'm 
not an Egyptologist and have no interest in the field. I only published on 
the subject as a journalist, and that only once, long ago. But I've published 
more widely on numerous other subjects and built a reputation as a skeptic 
and expert in various other areas, which inevitably attract similar people, 
from creationists to UFOlogists and everything in between. My response is 
always the same. After all, I have no choice. If I can't examine every pyra­
midiot scheme in a lifetime, I certainly can't examine every nutty scheme 
in hundreds of other fields besides. Hence my rule: unless they get some­
thing published properly, I'm not warranted in spending any time on it. 
That's the way it has to be. 
So when I was approached by people claiming Jesus didn't exist, I sim­
ply assumed this was more of the same. Since I'm an expert in ancient 
history, and particularly in historical methods and the origins of Christi­
anity, it at least made more sense why advocates of that crazy idea would 
start sending me things. But more than that happened. A growing number 
of skeptics, not just advocates, started approaching me and asking about 
these claims. They said the arguments sounded pretty convincing, and they 
hadn't seen any credible debunking of them, yet weren't qualified them­
selves to know if they were being duped by sloppy or dishonest scholar­
ship. I responded to these sincere inquiries with the same general reply: the 
non-existence of Jesus is simply not plausible, as arguments from silence in 

1. The Problem 
3 
the matter aren't valid, nor could they ever be sufficient to challenge what 
is, after all, the near-universal consensus of well-qualified experts. I would 
briefly explain why, but then more questions would come. Occasionally I 
would point out what was wrong with this or that ridiculous claim, either 
factually or methodologically. There is certainly plenty of nonsense going 
around from deniers of Jesus' historicity, so it's never hard to find some­
thing too silly to credit. But eventually enough people in the atheist and 
skeptical community, people whose judgment I trusted, were asking me 
to at least read The Jesus Puzzle by Earl Doherty and report on its mer­
its (published by Canadian Humanist Press in 2000, with a sequel, Jesus: 
Neither God Nor Man, published in 2009). He wasn't the only or the first 
author to argue the point, but everyone agreed he was the one who made 
the most convincing case. 
Normally, as with all crank claims, I wouldn't acquiesce, but instead 
insist that Doherty get at least one peer-reviewed paper published before l 'd 
bother. He had, in the Journal of Higher Criticism, but as that journal has 
the specific agenda of publishing essentially those kinds of argument, an 
appearance there wasn't an entirely convincing reason to pay more atten­
tion. But once the number of requests from respectable people reached a 
tipping point, I decided I'd give his book a go, hoping that would be the 
end of it, and I would at least get a good article out of it, which I could then 
direct everyone to once and for all. I resolved to essentially 'peer review' 
his book, the way I would any paper submitted to a journal. 
But the result surprised me. I found his book well-researched, compe­
tently argued, devoid of any of the ridiculous claims I'd heard from other 
historicity deniers, and more convincing than I'd thought possible. In my 
critical review I pointed out the merits and flaws of his book (including the 
sorts of things I would insist upon as a peer reviewer before accepting it 
for academic publication), but on balance the merits were greater.3 He had 
a good case. I wasn't entirely convinced. But I was convinced the subject 
deserved more research. And so my journey began. 
2. The Debate Today 
Jesus Christ is the standard appellation for the man who either founded or 
inspired the Christian religion. There were many men named Jesus back 
then. In fact it was among the most common of names (the name is actu­
ally Joshua; 'Jesus' is just a different way to spell it now: see Chapter 6, 
§3). Adding 'Christ' thus designates the particular Jesus who, one way or 
3. Richard Carrier, 'Did Jesus Exist? Earl Doherty and the Argument to 
Ahistoricity', The Secular Web (2002) at www.infidels.org/library/modern/richard_ 
carrier(jesuspuzzle.html. 

4 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
another, intentionally or not, got the whole movement called 'Christianity' 
started, a religion that worshipped this Jesus as 'the Christ' (which simply 
means 'Anointed', the very thing meant by 'Messiah'). Hence the Jesus 
we're concerned with here is Jesus Christ, as now understood. 
Many scholars believe that 'Christ' is a name or label attached to Jesus 
after his death, beginning a pattern of increasing legendary development 
upon a humbler story of some real man named Jesus. But not all scholars 
agree. In fact, there is no identifiable consensus about who or what Jesus 
was, or when or why he acquired the moniker of Christ. And while all these 
scholars debate (or even ignore) one another in all this, for over a hundred 
years now some scholars (and not just cranks) have argued there was no 
Jesus Christ in any real sense at all. They maintain the Christian religion 
began with the idea of a mythical man, not a historical one. The 'historical' 
Jesus, on their account, was entirely a legendary development, eclipsing the 
original myth and leaving us with the mistaken impression that there must 
have been a real Jesus who was later known as Christ. 
For this book I'll dub those who maintain there was a real 'Jesus' of 
some relevant sort historicists, and those who argue this Jesus was mythi­
cal, mythicists. Though there have been many valid criticisms ofmythicists, 
many of the same objections apply to historicists as well (who have often 
made just as many mistakes of fact and method), and if we allow histori­
cism to become respectable by limiting its claims to what can be reasonably 
proved, leaving aside all speculation and conjecture and error as simply 
that and nothing more, we should give mythicism the same opportunity. Yet 
in practice there is no consensus even among historicists as to what is his­
torical about Jesus and what not, and what is instead legendary or mythical 
or merely erroneous.4 Indeed, these unresolved disagreements extend to 
almost every significant question about Jesus. Nevertheless, most scholars 
agree some elements of the things said about Jesus aren't historically true, 
and many even conclude most are. Mythicists just continue going in the 
same direction other scholars have already been heading. But do they go 
too far? 
In Jesus Outside the New Testament, Robert Van Voorst lists seven gen­
eral counter-arguments against mythicism, and this constitutes a typical 
summary of the case usually made against it. 5 But that case is rather weak. 
Van Voorst says mythicists tend to overstate the strength of their arguments 
from silence. Yet, as I'll show in coming chapters, those arguments don't 
4. I document this lack of consensus in Richard Carrier, Proving History: Bayes's 
Theorem and the Quest for the Historical Jesus (Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 
2012), pp. 1 1-14. 
5. Robert Van Voorst, Jesus Outside the New Testament (Grand Rapids, MI: 
Eerdmans: 2000), pp. 13-16. 

1 .  The Problem 
5 
have to be overstated to be compelling. Van Voorst says mythicists tend to 
date all the Gospels unreasonably late (after 100 CE). Yet mythic ism doesn't 
require this-and even mainstream scholars are starting to agree some of 
the Gospels might indeed be that late. Van Voorst says mythicists overstate 
the implications of the widely acknowledged mythic elements, legendary 
developments and contradictions in the Gospels. Yet he acknowledges these 
elements exist, which can still support a mythicist theory without being 
overstated. Van Voorst says mythicists tend to be far too skeptical of the 
authenticity of the earliest non-biblical (and even many biblical) passages 
about Jesus. Yet mythicism does not require such excessive skepticism­
and some of it is not excessive. 
Van Voorst also objects that mythicists often have an anti-Christian 
agenda, which is certainly true, but that is not relevant to the merit of their 
work. He further objects that no ancient critic of Christianity challenged 
the historical reality of Jesus. But that's not quite true (as even Van Voorst 
admits in a footnote-and as I'll show later, he misses yet more examples: 
see Chapter 8, §§6 and 12), and it's impertinent anyway, since we have no 
criticisms of Christianity of any sort until well into the second century, 
far too late for such critics to know the real truth of the matter, especially 
if Christians themselves had forgotten (or weren't telling).6 Hence if the 
idea of a historical Jesus was already developing in the latter half of the 
first century, then Van Voorst's own objection to overstating an argument 
from silence turns against him, for we cannot argue from the silence of 
documents we don't have, and we don't have any first-century documents 
from critics of Christianity. Hence we cannot know what such critics were 
saying-because no one tells us. 7 
Finally, Van Voorst says mythicists 'have failed to advance other, cred­
ible hypotheses to account for the birth of Christianity and the fashioning 
of a historical Christ' and, as a result, 'biblical scholars and classical his-
6. For Van Voorst's admitted exception: Jesus Outside the New Testament, p. 15 
n. 35. 
7. Some will claim Mt. 28.1 1 -15 is the one exception, but that's still a Christian 
source that can't be usefully dated or traced to anyone who actually knew the facts 
of the matter (rather than was merely gainsaying a gospel they heard), even if it was 
based on fact, and it isn't: it is in fact a Christian fabrication (it only makes sense in 
the context of Matthew's unique story, which is obviously fictional, and is a response 
to Mark's story, which is probably just as fictional) and thus cannot actually be linked 
to any real critics of Christianity (much less critics who would be in any position to 
know there was no Jesus). See Chapter 8 (§12), Chapter 10 (§§4 and 5) and Carrier, 
Proving History, pp. 199-204, updating Richard Carrier, 'The Plausibility of Theft', 
in The Empty Tomb: Jesus Beyond the Grave (ed. Robert Price and Jeffery Lowder; 
Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 2005), pp. 349-68 (358-59). 

6 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
torians now regard [mythicism] as effectively refuted'.8 Yet that conclusion 
depends on the merits of his use of the word 'credible'. Most mythicists in 
fact start by constructing hypotheses for the origin and development of 
Christianity and then argue that the evidence fits their scenario better than 
any other. Whether these efforts are 'credible' remains to be determined. 
For it is not demonstrated by anything Van Voorst argues, and whether 
it is demonstrated by anything anyone else argues we can only begin to 
ask after reading the present book-or other more recent books, since Van 
Voorst wrote before he could examine the superior work of more recent 
mythicists such as Earl Doherty or Thomas Thompson or Thomas Brodie, 
and no one of Van Voorst's calibre has yet addressed their arguments prop­
erly either. 9 
In other words, the case against mythicism (at least as represented by 
Van Voorst) consists of arguing that there are flaws (mostly flaws of exag­
geration) in the scholarship of mythicists, yet without demonstrating that 
any of those flaws are actually relevant. That scholars err does not auto­
matically disqualify the rest of their work or their conclusions. And the 
fact that exaggerated premises are unwarranted does not entail that the 
same conclusion cannot be reached from more moderate premises instead . 
Thus his every argument is a non sequitur. Only one of Van Voorst's argu­
ments bears on the actual evidence rather than its abuse, and that argu­
ment isn't logically valid, either-for his argument from silence stands 
refuted by his own reasoning. 
Yet that doesn't mean mythicism is vindicated. It's still a fallacy to 
declare a conclusion true merely because arguments against it are falla­
cious. Just because Van Voorst identifies no valid objection to mythicism 
8. Van Voorst, Jesus Outside the New Testament, p. 16. 
9. Bart Ehrman, in Did Jesus Exist? The Historical Argument for Jesus of Nazareth 
(San Francisco, CA: HarperOne, 2012), attempted to provide one, but is essentially a 
careless and poorly researched popular market book and not a proper scholarly critique. 
You can review my demonstrations of this on my blog: a summary (with I inks to my more 
detailed discussions) is available in Richard Carrier, 'Ehrman on Historicity Recap'. 
Richard Carrier Blogs (July 24, 2012) at freethoughtblogs.com/carrier/archives/1 794 
(for a complete list of my blog entries on Ehrman's work see freethoughtblogs.com/ 
carrier/archives/category/bart-ehrman). For a published summary (with expanded 
evidence) see Richard Carrier, 'How Not to Argue for Historicity', in Bart Ehrman and 
the Quest of the Historical Jesus of Nazareth: An Evaluation of Ehrman's Did Jesus 
Exist? (ed. Frank Zindler and Robert Price; Cranford, NJ: American Atheist Press. 
2013), pp. 15-62. Maurice Casey has just published his own defense of historicity. 
Jesus: Evidence and Argument or Mythicist Myths? (Edinburgh: T. & T. Clark, 2014). 
too late to be addressed in this volume; but for a critical review see Richard Carrier. 
'Critical Review of Maurice Casey's Defense of the Historicity of Jesus', Richard 
Carrier Blogs (March 3, 2014) at http://freethoughtblogs.com/carrier/archives/4282. 

1 .  The Problem 
7 
does not mean mythicism has merit. After all, it might be possible to expand 
or qualify his objections into a successful refutation (and Van Voorst cites 
various scholars who have attempted this, and in many other respects his 
section on this topic remains required reading). But that has to actually be 
done before anyone can claim it has been. And merely refuting one theory 
(such as Doherty's) won't suffice at that, any more than refuting a single 
conception of a historical Jesus is sufficient to refute all conceptions of a 
historical Jesus. 
Therefore, it's necessary to test a minimal theory of historicity (such that 
if even that theory isn't true, then none are) against a minimal theory of 
myth (such that if that theory isn't true, then no other is likely to be). And 
this test must be logically valid, and give the best possible opportunity to 
either theory, before whatever conclusion we reach can be considered fair. 
3. Myth versus History 
As I demonstrated in the first chapter of Proving History, many contra­
dictory theories of a historical Jesus are defended today. Some joke that 
there are as many theories of Jesus as there are scholars to propose them. 
Each different conception of the historical Jesus and his relationship to the 
origins of the Christian religion will here be called a theory of historicity. 
Such a theory aims to explain all extant evidence by proposing that certain 
things are true of the historical Jesus and his influence and that certain 
things are not true (or not known to be true) of the historical Jesus and his 
influence. 
The latter cannot be separated from the former. For proposing to explain 
any evidence as a later development in the church entails that that evidence 
was not caused by anything Jesus said or did (or had said or done to him). In 
practice, of course, an honest historian has to admit she often doesn't know 
how some particular development in the evidence carne about, and thus 
doesn't know whether it's in any way causally linked to a historical Jesus 
or not. But even then she will be saying, in effect, that the probabilities are 
roughly equal either way, which still entails taking a particular position 
as to what's possible or likely. Anyone who examines the literature of the 
present generation of scholars will find that, indeed, by this standard there 
are almost as many theories of historicity as there are experts to pronounce 
them, and there is no apparent consensus as to whose theory is more prob­
ably correct, nor any indication of such a consensus developing any time 
soon. 
But just as there are countless theories of historicity, there are also 
countless Jesus myth theories. Indeed, just as with historicism, there are 
almost as many Jesus myth theories as there are experts to pronounce them. 
And the range of these theories is truly marvelous, from the more ridicu-

8 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
lous ('the bulk of the New Testament is a hoax perpetrated by the Roman 
Senatorial elite') to the less ridiculous ('the original Jesus stories were a 
clever political metaphor against the ruling elite'), to the least ridiculous 
(which I shall explore here), that 'the earliest Christians preached a celes­
tial being named Jesus Christ, then later this godlike figure was fictionally 
placed in a historical setting just as other gods were, and the original con­
cept eventually forgotten, dismissed, or suppressed'. I think most scholars, 
once informed of the underlying facts, would agree only the latter has any 
plausibility (if there is any plausibility to be had), so any Jesus myth theory 
that entails rejecting even that is probably a theory of no likelihood worth 
considering. I'll have more to say about this (and what the minimal theory 
of historicity must be to compete against it) in the next two chapters. 
But even then, whatever theory is proposed, it is often immediately 
weighed down with an enormous array of elaborations, which are often sig­
nificantly Jess defensible than the core theory alone would have been. Yet 
one should never propose more than is necessary to explain the evidence. 
The more complex a theory has to be, the less I ikely it is to be true. Hence 
I'll assume for convenience that what I just suggested is the most plausible 
theory is the only plausible theory, and attempt to explain and present it 
as simply as possible with no unnecessary elaborations. For if even that 
theory cannot be shown to be more credible than historicity, it's unlikely 
any other theory will succeed where it failed. However, I do allow that I can 
be proven wrong about that, on this matter as in anything else, if someone 
ever presents evidence presently unknown to me that adequately supports 
some other theory. And in Proving History I laid out a sound method by 
which that could be done. The same method I will use here. 
4. Mythicists versus Historicists 
Though many mythicists may seem as crazy as their theories, the proposal 
of mythicism itself is not crazy. A model example is King Arthur. Like 
Jesus, many detailed historical narratives and biographical facts about this 
'great king' are on record (along with a widespread belief that, like Jesus, 
he wil l one day return). Yet after considerable inquiry it seems almost cer­
tain no such man ever existed. Michael Wood provides a good survey of 
how myths like this arise and why, and how the Arthur legend incorporates 
old stories and elements from various cultures and times, and persons (both 
real and fictional), which were all co-opted and incorporated into Arthur's 
story, including elements from British, Scottish, Welsh and French tradi­
tions, and from both Christian and Celtic pagan religions. King Arthur was 
essentially created by assembling pieces from numerous facts and myths, 
into a new unified-and unifyi ng-myth that had great cultural resonance, 

I. The Problem 
9 
persisting even to this day. 10 This myth essentially became historicized by 
a culture-wide application of an affective fallacy: the more powerfully a 
story affects a people, emotionally and morally, the more it is believed to be 
real. Eventually the truth of what the story symbolized was confused with 
the truth of the story itself. 
There is nothing crazy or bizarre about that. Mainstream historians are 
entirely comfortable with King Arthur being a mythical hero historicized, 
by some such process, even if they debate the exact details or confess the 
details can't be known. Of course, the King Arthur legend developed over 
centuries. But centuries are not required, as I'll show in Chapter 6. One 
prominent example studied of late is the rapid historicization of the myth­
ical Ned Ludd. As the supposed founder of the Luddite movement, Ned 
Ludd had many contradictory traditions arise about him, quite rapidly-in 
fact, within forty years of his alleged techno-sabotage in 1779, an event that 
historians have failed to find any evidence of. Nor have they discovered 
any evidence of the man at all, despite a vastly better survival of books 
and records than is enjoyed for any period of antiquity (we even have daily 
newspapers). And yet already by 1810 he was a revered hero and imagined 
founder of a movement of anti-technocrats (known as the Luddites), and 
all manner of stories were circulating about him, letters were forged in his 
name, and eventually biographical novels about him written. Though Ned 
Ludd's non·existence cannot be decisively proved, this is true of almost 
any myth. But in this case, the evidence for the man being a myth seems 
as compelling as it could ever be expected to be. 11 Yet, again, mainstream 
historians are not shocked by this. The notion that Ned Ludd is a myth is 
not considered crazy. 
The King Arthur legend sold a particular product: a unified England. 
Anyone who believed dearly in that goal was likely to believe dearly in 
King Arthur. The message and the story were eventually regarded as one 
and the same, the symbolism so powerful and passions so high that to deny 
the one was to deny the other. Likewise, the Ned Ludd myth fueled a pro­
test movement by providing a hero and a mission to rally behind, again with 
the aim of generating unity. In fact, there were many separate movements 
that co-opted the Ned Ludd story each in their own way, and a unified 
story about him only evolved later. The same thing happened in Melanesian 
10. Michael Wood, In Search of Myths and Heroes: Exploring Four Epic Legends 
of the World (Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 2005), pp. 206-60. 
1 1 .  See Kevin Binfield (ed.), Writings of the Luddites (Baltimore, MD: Johns 
Hopkins University Press, 2004), though Binfield remains agnostic. A.J. Droge has 
compared Ludd's case to Jesus in 'Jesus and Ned Lud[d]: What's in a Name?', CAESAR: 
A Journal for the Critical Study of Religion and Human Values 3 (2009), pp. 23·25, 
with a useful bibliography on the subject. 

10 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
Cargo Cults, which still revere completely mythical heroes who were 
nevertheless quite rapidly placed in history and believed to be real (most 
famously 'Tom Navy' and 'John Frum'), again within mere decades of their 
supposed appearance, and again serving the aim of creating unity and a 
moral authority to commend (see sources and discussion in Chapter 5, Ele­
ment 29). Much the same could be claimed of Christianity, with different 
movements co-opting the Jesus story to promote their own ideals, and a 
unified church arising only later. 
The aim would always be the same: to promote unity within the move­
ment and (it would be hoped) society by promoting a popular myth to rally 
behind and believe in. And often success at that depended on selling the 
myth as true. As with King Arthur or Ned Ludd, so with Jesus Christ: to 
deny the historicity of these men or their stories would quickly become 
tantamount to denying the unifying message their stories were crafted and 
employed to sell. Promoting their historicity also made it easier to effect 
moral reform, by attaching the authority for that reform to a historical per­
son. Because a 'made-up man' was not generally considered capable of 
having any moral authority at all. 
Even in biblical studies there is nothing new or crazy about this idea. The 
patriarchs are safely assumed now to be nonhistorical, and thus entirely 
mythical. This is no longer considered radical or fringe, but is in fact the 
most widespread mainstream view among scholars (see sources and discus­
sion in Chapter 5, Element 44). Thus Moses is now regarded as fictional, yet 
like Jesus he performed miracles, had a whole family and huge numbers of 
fol lowers, gave speeches and had travels, and dictated laws. No mainstream 
historian today believes the book of Deuteronomy was even written in the 
same century as Moses, much less by Moses, or that it preserves anything 
Moses actually said or did-yet it purports to do so, at extraordinary length 
and in remarkable detail. No real historian today would accept as valid an 
argument like 'Moses had to have existed, because so many sayings and 
teachings were attributed to him!' And yet if this argument is invalid for 
Moses, it's invalid for Jesus. 
Similarly, it's now the mainstream view that the book of Daniel was 
written in the second century BCE and is a complete fiction, representing 
the elaborate adventures and speeches of the sixth-century prophet Daniel 
as if they were a fact (see sources and discussion in Chapter 4, Element 7). 
Historians doubt even the existence of Daniel. But even if he existed, his­
torians are certain the book of Daniel does not contain anything he authen­
tically said or did. Rather, this Daniel, and everything he is supposed to 
have said and done, was invented to create a historical authority for a new 
vision of society, to inspire a new unity and a new moral order against the 
immoral rule of dominating foreigners. We must accept that the same is at 
least possible for Jesus. 

1. The Problem 
I I  
So the idea that Jesus was originally mythical, like King Arthur or Ned 
Ludd or Moses or Daniel, is not inherently crazy. It could only be called 
crazy if the evidence for a historical Jesus were substantially more impres­
sive than the evidence for the historicity of the likes of King Arthur or Ned 
Ludd (or Moses or Daniel). Whether that's the case is what the present 
book will examine. But an increasing number of mainstream scholars are 
starting to at least reconsider the question. A conference sponsored by the 
Center for Inquiry's Committee for the Scientific Examination of Religion 
in Amherst, New York, in December of2008 gathered numerous reputable 
historians to begin debating how much we could even claim to know about 
the historical Jesus-and most agreed the answer was very little, or even 
nothing. In fact a growing number of mainstream experts are expressing 
doubt that much of anything can be reliably known about the historical 
Jesus, as I showed in the first chapter of Proving History. And as I'll show 
in Chapter 3 here, more are coming to the side of doubt. 
Nevertheless, this book won't defend any particular mythicist, whether 
the experts I name in Chapter 3 or the many amateurs who've published 
their own cases. In my observation, the mythicist case has often been mired 
in or mixed up with poor, questionable or obsolete scholarship, therefore 
giving the impression that it isn't worth looking at, because in such a state 
it doesn't look either strong or valid. Until mainstream scholars start seri­
ously examining their arguments in proper detail, and only dismissing the 
bad, instead of the good along with the bad, they won't even know if the 
case is strong or valid. But the fault here largely falls on the mythicists, who 
have failed to police the bad scholarship among their ranks with appropri­
ate criticism, have failed to develop or employ any clear methodology in 
defense of their own conclusions, and have failed to distinguish the core of 
their argument from the excesses of speculation they pile upon it. 
But this chief failing of the mythicists is much the same as the chief fail­
ing of the historicists. It's inordinately easy to make any theory fit the facts, 
or to make the facts fit any theory. Consequently, as I demonstrated in the 
first chapter of Proving History, historicists defend dozens of completely 
contradictory theories of the historical Jesus, and yet all are accepted as 
plausible by mainstream academia, even though such acceptance should be 
a scandal. A field that generates dozens of contradictory conclusions about 
the same subject is clearly bereft of anything like a reliable method. But 
the very same flaw befalls the mythicists, whose community is likewise 
plagued by dozens of completely contradictory theories of the Jesus myth. 
If such a state is a scandal for historicity (and it should be), it is equally a 
scandal for mythicism. The passionate certainty with which every histor­
icist and mythicist defends their own theory of the evidence is far out of 
proportion to what the evidence could ever support. All the more so, since 
logic entails that, even at most, only one of them can be right, and therefore 

1 2  
On the Historicity of Jesus 
almost all of them must be wrong-in fact, it's entirely possible all ofthem 
are wrong. 
The first conclusion this should impress upon you is that even if you are 
convinced (perhaps by this very book) that Jesus probably didn't exist, you 
should not then simply trust that any additional claims supporting that con­
clusion are true or sound. There is a lot of bad scholarship on this subject, 
which advances claims with far more confidence than is at a11 warranted, or 
rests on assumptions that are anything but established, or relies of facts that 
simply aren't true. In short, if you are a layperson in this matter, exercise 
extreme caution when reading or listening to myth advocates. What I dis­
cuss here, throughout this book, about proper methodology should always 
be applied to them. But for the very same reasons, if you are an expert, 
don't let the existence of bad scholarship defending this same conclusion 
lead you to believe that good scholarship could never get the same result. 
The second conclusion all this should impress upon you is that even 
if you are not convinced that Jesus probably didn't exist, you should not 
then simply trust that historicity has been we11 defended. Historicists have 
a lot of work to do before they can claim to have their house in order. 
Their sins are many. They have far too quickly assumed that various fun­
damental conclusions in the field are settled, which in fact are not, such 
as the dating of New Testament documents (as I'll discuss in Chapter 7). 
They have routinely overstated what the evidence can actually prove, con­
flating conjectures with demonstrable facts almost as often as mythicists 
do, and they lack anything like a coherent methodology (both of which I 
extensively demonstrated in Proving History). They have also frequently 
ignored, denied or somehow remained ignorant of key facts. I've met many 
historians of Jesus who didn't know many of the things I will survey in this 
book, almost none of which should be controversial anymore. They also 
tend to dismiss criticism far too quickly, without addressing it or even pay­
ing attention to it. And they often simply mishandle the evidence, such as 
assuming the Gospels are historical narratives rather than symbolic myths 
(despite conclusive evidence of the latter, as I'll prove in Chapter 10), or 
overlooking what is obviously missing from the book of Acts which we 
should expect to be there if Jesus existed (as I '11 show in Chapter 9), or 
vastly overplaying the value of the extrabiblical evidence (as I'll demon­
strate in Chapter 8), or overestimating how much they can honestly explain 
away. 
But all that still does not entail the mythicists are right, any more than 
the similar failings of the mythicists entail they are wrong. It only entails 
that historicists are wrong to simply dismiss all the challenges posed by 
mythicists-because the historicists still have a great deal of work to do 
that, so far, they are only pretending has been done. But since both houses 

1 .  The Problem 
1 3  
are in a mess, both have a great deal of work to do. Admitting this is the 
first step toward progress. 
5. The Aim of This Book 
This book will advance the debate in two respects. It will survey the most 
relevant evidence for and against the historicity of Jesus, and it will do so 
with the fewest unnecessary assumptions, testing the simplest theories of 
historicity and myth against one another. 
But one thing this book is not is a comprehensive survey of all evidence, 
theories and arguments of mythicists and historicists alike. Though one can 
begin to explore the history of this debate, and the many different theories 
of both sides, by following some of the references throughout this book (in 
Chapters 2 and 3 especially), my aim is not to attack or defend any partic­
ular scholar or work, but rather to construct the most defensible version 
of each position (which in either case will be a sirnvler and less ambitious 
theory than any heretofore defended), and test their relative merits against 
the most pertinent evidence. 
But since this book intends only to begin, not end, a proper debate, I 
hope to see it carefully critiqued by experts in the field. I want to see a 
scholarly and constructive debate develop that will advance the entire dis­
cussion, resolving matters of methodology if nothing else (such a debate 
should already have begun over the release of Proving History), but hope­
fully also making a clear, objectively defensible case either for or against 
the historicity of Jesus, one that all reasonable experts can agree is sound. 
In his own excellent book on the origins of Christian myth traditions, Bur­
ton Mack provides a list of scholars and their recent diverse work that needs 
to be synthesized and applied to reconstructing the origins of Christianity, 
which provides a major example of the kind of work that really does need to 
be done.12 Like Mack, throughout this book I will cite many scholars whose 
work also needs to be synthesized and applied to the same result. Above all, 
historians need to apply serious energy to resolving the issues of dating and 
authorship surveyed in Chapter 7. 
Since the theories I will compare here are the minimal ones, the simplest 
possible theories that I think have any chance of explaining the evidence, 
many on both sides of the debate will want to do one better and defend 
more elaborate theories of historicity or mythicism. But if rnythicists want 
to expand on my minimal theory at all (or, conversely, if historicists want 
12. Burton Mack, The Christian Mytk· Origins, Logic, and Legacy (New York: 
Continuum, 2006), pp. 76-78 (although his entire book is in effect a call for further 
work to be done, and thus well worth reading). 

1 4  
On the Historicity of Jesus 
to defend any more elaborate theory of historicity than I present), I ask that 
they do so responsibly, with sound methodology, according to the standards 
set out in Proving History. Even if you reject those methods, you must 
replace them with methods more defensible. So you have to defend those 
alternative methods, which means you must demonstrate that they are in 
fact a more defensible means of getting at the truth (in other words, that 
they will produce reliable results that we can all trust). And above all, to 
advance beyond the present work, mythicists need to be as restrained in 
their claims and as rigorous in their dependence on evidence as they expect 
historicists to be-and vice versa. 
Finally, however, one last remark is needed on mistaking Christian apol­
ogetics for objective (or even mainstream) scholarship (a point I'll briefly 
revisit in the next chapter). It will not be the aim of this book to debunk 
apologetic reconstructions of the historical Jesus or the origins of Christi­
anity. I take only secular scholarship seriously-which doesn't mean sec­
ular scholars (since a great deal of secular scholarship is produced by the 
devout), but rather scholars who rely on secular methods and principles 
of scholarship (a good example being the late Raymond Brown). Because 
apologetics differs from scholarship. Apologists ignore methodological dis­
ti nctions between the possible and the probable in order to maintain the 
defensibility of a religious dogma. But that isn't how objective scholars 
behave. If it is realistically possible that Jesus didn't exist, then it is no 
longer possible to argue that we know he existed. We can only argue that 
he may have existed, or probably did. This would not be an unusual result 
in the field of history. But on this specific subject it presents a threat to 
traditional religion, a threat recognized by Christian apologists, who will 
disregard facts and logic in opposing it if they have to. 
This threat to religion is also recognized by many mythicists who do 
indeed have an agenda against Christianity-some perhaps spiteful, though 
most simply out of ire against apologists whom they perceive as having lied 
to them and manipulated the evidence in defense of completely untenable 
theories of historicity. Some mythicists thus conflate what apologists argue 
(a triumphalist theory ofthe historical Jesus) with what is far more defen­
sible (a far more mundane theory of the historical Jesus), and in justified 
outrage against the former, unjustifiably attack all historicity, even the most 
defensible kind. This approach must be discarded, as must also the apolo­
getical kind. Neither should be accepted as legitimate. Both are driven by 
agendas to exclude credible and objective methods and claims. 
6. Summary of Remaining Chapters 
The argument of this book can be summarized as follows. A Bayesian argu­
ment requires attending to the question of applicable background knowl-

1 .  The Problem 
1 5  
edge, constructing therefrom a prior probability for all competing hypoth­
eses, and then evaluating the consequent probabilities (the likelihoods) of 
all the evidence on each hypothesis. In accordance with this method, I must 
formally define the hypotheses to be compared: that of historicity (in Chap­
ter 2) and that of myth (in Chapter 3). In each case I wil1 define the sim­
plest possible theory, which shall thus encompass all other more complex 
theories that have any claim to plausibility. 
Then I must set out all the applicable background knowledge that will 
affect our estimates of prior and consequent probability for these hypothe­
ses, first from the established history of Christianity and its origins (Chap­
ter 4), and then everything else pertaining to its historical context and 
comparable phenomena in other contexts (Chapter 5). This is unfortunately 
necessary, I have found, because even the most erudite scholars in the field 
are unaware of most of it. Yet the origins and development of Christianity 
can only be understood in I ight of it. 
With all that background work done, then I must determine the relative 
prior probabilities of each hypothesis, by ascertaining the clearest and most 
applicable reference class for which we have sufficient data (Chapter 6). 
Then I must determine the consequent probability of all the evidence on 
each hypothesis, which I will do by breaking the evidence down into cat­
egories and treating each separately but cumulatively, after first attending 
to questions of dating and authorship (Chapter 7). The four categories I 
develop will then each receive a chapter, in the order of latest to earliest: 
the extrabiblical evidence, both secular and non-canonical (Chapter 8); the 
canonical Acts (Chapter 9); the canonical Gospels (Chapter 10); and finally 
the canonical Epistles (Chapter I I). I will then tie everything together and 
argue for a conclusion (Chapter 12). 
Readers who want to cut to the chase may wish to skip Chapters 4 
through 9, and instead read on from here to the end of Chapter 3 and then 
jump directly to Chapters 10 through 12, then go back to read Chapters 4 
through 9 if you want to see the relevance of that material to the rest. Other­
wise, if you want to build up to the conclusion in logical order, being made 
aware first of all the evidence that relates to the rest of the book, you should 
read all the chapters in their given order. 
7. Applying Bayes's Theorem 
I explained all the mechanics and technicalities of applying Bayes's 
Theorem (or BT) to historical questions in Proving History, where I also 
answered every typical objection to this notion. Here I will only summarize 
the key points that will come up often in the present volume. 
To know whether any theory is the most probably true, you must com­
pare it with all other viable theories (no theory can be defended in isolation). 

16 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
To effect such a comparison you must establish four premises: (I) the prior 
probability that the theory you are testing is true, (2) the converse of which 
is the prior probability that some other theory is true instead, and then (3) 
the consequent probability that we would have all the evidence we actually 
have if your theory is true, and (4) the consequent probability that we would 
have all that same evidence if some other theory is true instead. From these 
four premises a conclusion follows with logical necessity, which is simply 
the probability that your theory is true. 
To ascertain these probabilities with the kind of vague, problematic and 
incomplete data typically encountered in historical inquiry, you must esti­
mate a11 four probabilities as being as far against your most preferred the­
ory as you can honestly and reasonably believe them to be. A nd you must 
present sufficient reasons and evidence for this conclusion in each case. 
This will produce a conclusion a fortiori, which you can assert with as high 
a confidence level as could ever be obtained on the available data-because 
any adjustment of your estimates toward what they truly are will then only 
make your conclusion even more certain. That way, since each premise 
consists of as unfavorable a probability as is reasonably defensible, you 
will know with logical certainty (if you have accounted for all the available 
evidence and done so correctly) that the probabil ity your theory is true 
will be the probability you calculate or higher (and often much higher). 
Conversely, you can be certain it is that probability or lower if you instead 
input estimates as far in favor of your theory as you can honestly believe. 
That conclusion only follows, of course, given all the knowledge and 
evidence available to you at the time. Hence newly uncovered evidence 
can change your conclusion-which possibility is already accounted for by 
stating your conclusion as a probability. For example, if your conclusion is 
that your hypothesis h is true to a probability of 95%, and then some new 
evidence effectively proves h false, that possibility was already accounted 
for by your original allowance of a So/o chance h was false even before the 
new evidence appeared. And of course even that new conclusion that h is 
false will be stated as a probability-that could be overturned again if yet 
more evidence arises. 
8. Elements and Axioms 
Essential to a successful use of BT in historical analysis is a transparency 
of assumptions and inferences. First of all, I shall rely on the twelve rules 
and twelve axioms of historical method that I laid out in the second chap­
ter of Proving History. Here, I shall also state my assumed background 
knowledge (in Chapters 2 through 7), which shall often consist of num­
bered elements, each being a particular cJaim to fact that requires an empir­
ical defense (plus a set of basic definitions of terms I wiJI frequently use), 

I .  The Problem 
17 
but once thus defended will be employed as an assumption of fact for the 
remainder of the book. This will allow my critics to more easily identify al l 
of my assumptions for examination and challenge. 
Finally, the present work should be regarded as superseding all my prior 
work. Since my research for this book changed many of the views and con­
clusions I voiced in various places and publications before this, wherever 
contradictions may result with anything I have previously said or written, 
what I say in this book should be taken as my current opinion on the matter, 
and any previous claims or arguments of mine now contradicted should be 
regarded as revised or abandoned. 
That said, I first must turn to defining the two hypotheses that wil1 be 
subjected to the following inquiry: the basic historicity hypothesis and the 
basic myth hypothesis. 

2 
THE HYPOTHESIS OF HISTORICITY 
1 .  Myth from History 
It's quite common for historical persons to become surrounded by a vast 
quantity of myth and legend, and very rapidly, too, especially when they 
become the object of religious veneration. Thus, the fact that this has hap­
pened never in itself argues that the person in question didn't exist. One 
relatively recent example is the elevation of the Ethiopian emperor Haile 
Selassie to the status of a god . . .  by people he never asked this favor from 
and even repeatedly begged to stop. His deification (and continued worship 
to this day) is the foundation of the modern Rastafarian faith, which claims 
hundreds of thousands of adherents worldwide. It's te1ling that we know 
he professed to his death his own Christian faith and his continual despair 
at the fact that he had been elevated into a revered divinity so quickly­
despite his protests (and one would think if your own god protested your 
worshiping him, you'd listen-and yet here we are). Myths and legends 
about him quickly grew-even within his own lifetime, and all the more 
rapidly in the two decades after his death in 1975. And yet none had any 
basis i n  fact. At all. Yet stil1 they remain the central affirmations of a living 
faith. 
The parallel with Jesus ought to be cautionary: if this could happen to 
Selassie, it could even more easily have happened to Jesus, there being no 
universal education or literacy, or even media per se in the ancient world. 1 
Perhaps Jesus himself continually begged his followers not to worship him. 
Yet they did anyway. We wouldn't know, because unl ike Selassie, the only 
records we have of Jesus are written by his devoted worshipers. So perhaps 
everything told about Jesus is just as made up as everything now told about 
Selassie. Yet it's told anyway. And not just told, but believed completely by 
1 .  On the differences between antiquity and modernity and the significance ofthis 
for legendary growth see Richard Carrier, Not the Impossible Faith: Why Christianity 
Didn't Need a Miracle to Succeed (Raleigh, NC: Lulu.com, 2009), pp. 161-218 (also 
329-68, 385-405). 

2. Hypothesis of Historicity 
19 
every adherent of the faith, even in the face of overwhelming evidence to 
the contrary. 
But not merely the cautionary, but the factual parallels are numerous, 
too. Edmund Standing summarizes this point elegantly: 
Looking at the status of Haile Selassie in the Rastafari religion we find 
the following: (I) The coming to earth of a messianic figure who was proph­
esied in the Old Testament; (2) a birth accompanied by miracles; (3) a child 
with immense divinely given wisdom who possessed miraculous powers; 
(4) a messiah whose actions were prefigured in Old Testament writings; 
(5) a man who could perform miracles and in whose presence miracles 
occurred; (6) a man who was worshiped and held to be divine by thousands 
who had not even met him; (7) a man who was the incarnation of God and 
who continues to live on despite evidence of his death; (8) a man who is 
prayed to and communicated with by his followers; (9) a savior who will 
one day return to gather up a chosen people who will live under his rule in 
a kingdom of God. Despite the facts related to the actual historical figure of 
Selassie, as we see, Rastafarians have built an extensive religious mythol­
ogy around him, and even did so within his lifetime. 
Imagine if, at some point in the future . . .  the vast bulk of the historical 
record was lost . . .  [and] that the only records ofSelassie's existence that 
had survived were the devotional accounts of Rastafarians. [Then . . .  ) 
the only story historians would have to work with would be made up of 
layers of mythology. The story of Selassie, a man who arose in a time 
in which Ethiopians were excitedly awaiting the coming of a Messiah, 
would be filled with references to the fulfillment of Old Testament proph­
ecies, stories of miracles, tales of God walking the earth, and the denial 
of the reality of the Messiah's death. They would read that Selassie is still 
alive and that part of the proof of this is that followers can 'communicate 
in spirit' with him. As a result of this, surely there would be some who 
would adopt a 'mythicist' position with regard to the historical Selassie. 2 
And yet, of course, if they did, they would be wrong. Because there really 
was a Selassie. He just wasn't anything even remotely like the 'narra­
tives' his worshipers wrote and told about him. In the scenario Stand­
ing imagines, the truth about the 'historical' Selassie would have been 
completely lost. Fragments of the truth would remain in the surviving 
devotional texts of his worshipers, but without any independent sources 
to check them against, we would have no way to know which details 
were historical and which mythical. We are hardly in any better position 
with respect to Jesus, for whom all direct sources (if ever there were any) 
have been completely lost, and all we have are the devotional claims and 
2. From Edmund Standing, 'Against Mythicism: A Case for the Plausibility of a 
Historical Jesus', Think 9 (Spring 2010), pp. 13-27. 

20 
On the Historicity ©f Jesus 
tales of his fanatical worshipers. This means reconstructing the historical 
Jesus may simply be impossible.3 But that in no way means there was no 
historical Jesus. 
There are significant differences, however, that break down Standing's 
analogy. First are the letters of Paul, which actually precede the Gospels 
by decades and are the nearest evidence we have to the original Jesus (if 
such there was), yet these letters only know a cosmic man and contain no 
real history of him at all (as I will demonstrate in Chapter 1 1). Second are 
the methods of the Gospels' construction, which are so thoroughly mytho­
symbolic that their composition actually argues against their containing 
any true historical data at all (a point l will examine in Chapter 10). And 
finally, Standing's assumption that we can expect independent records 
to have vanished in the case of Jesus is actually not quite as likely as he 
thinks. I f  Jesus was as famous as Selassie, it would be strange to hear noth­
ing about him-almost as strange as it would be in Selassie's case now (as 
I'll explain in Chapter 8). 
To avoid this oddity we must conclude that the real Jesus was a vir­
tual nobody. But there are still problems with the evidence that suggest 
he wasn't even that (as I'll explain in Chapters 8, 9 and 10). Nevertheless, 
Standing's methodological proposals are sound: only if the differences I 
allege are actually there will the comparison fail. Otherwise, it's perfectly 
possible that a real Jesus underlies all the extant myths about him. Just as is 
the case for Haile Selassie. It's happened before in Christian tradition, both 
to real, and to fictional persons (as I suspect any survey of the plethora of 
saints worshiped in late antiquity and the Middle Ages would discover).4 So 
which was it for Jesus? 
3. As I demonstrated in Chapter 5 of Proving History, all attempts to do this so 
far have failed to maintain any logical val idityȡ and as I also show in Chapter 1 there, 
every scholar who has seriously examined the methodologies involved agrees with me 
on that. 
4. For discussion of different kinds of 'myth-making' phenomena that quickly 
envelop historical characters in Christian tradition (whether they were ever real or 
not) see Bart Ehrman, Peter, Paul, and Mary Magdalene: The Followers of Jesus in 
History and Legend (New York: Oxford University Press, 2006); Rose Jeffries Peebles, 
The Legend of Longinus in Ecclesiastical Tradition and in English Literature. and its 
Connection with the Grail (Baltimore, MD: J.H. Furst Company, 191 1); Thomas Hahn, 
'Judas: The Medieval Oedipus', Comparative Literature 32 (Summer 1980), pp. 225-
37; and Paul Franklin Baum, 'The Medireval Legend of Judas lscariot', Proceedings 
of the Modern Language Association of America 31 (1916), pp. 481-632; and Dennis 
MacDonald, 'A Conjectural Emendation of 1 Cor 15.31-32: Or the Case of the M i splaced 
Lion Fight'. Harvard Theological Review 73 (January-April 1980), pp. 265-76. 

2. Hypothesis of Historicity 
21 
2. The Basic Problem 
The historicity of Jesus Christ is currently the default consensus. Several 
respectable books have defended the thesis against detractors.5 But they 
all suffer from two fatal flaws: by soundly debunking weak versions of 
mythicism, they fallaciously conclude strong ones needn't even be exam­
ined; and they defend the historicity of Jesus by defending the historicity 
of particular claims about Jesus using the very methods I and others have 
proven to be logically invalid across the board.6 By using invalid methods 
to establish their premises, they thereby arrive at an invalid conclusion, 
which they then use to invalidly reject alternative theories. This is not the 
way to defend the historicity of Jesus. 
A greater gaffe in defense of Jesus' historicity is to make claims that are 
conspicuously opposite the truth of the matter, as when E.P. Sanders boasts 
that 'the sources for Jesus are better . . .  than those that deal with Alexander 
[the Great]'. 7 A more suicidal remark for his case could hardly be imag­
ined. Unlike Jesus, we have over half a dozen relatively objective histori­
ans discussing the history of Alexander the Great (most notably Diodorus, 
Dionysius, Rufus, Trogus, Plutarch and more). These are not romances or 
propagandists, least of all fanatical worshipers, or anyone concerned about 
dogma, but disinterested historical writers employing some of the recog­
nized skills of critical analysis of their day on a wide body of sources they 
S. Most importantly, R.T. France, The Evidence for Jesus (Downers Grove, I L: 
lnterVarsity Press, 1986); and Gerd Theissen and Annette Merz, The Historical Jesus: 
A Comprehensive Guide (Minneapolis, MN: Fortress Press, 1996), in which pp. 90-118 
tackle objections direct1y (but no more correct1y than Van Voorst in Jesus Outside the 
New Testament: see my discussion of the latter in Chapter 1, §2). France's work has 
been somewhat updated in F.F. Bruce and E. Gilting, Ausserbiblische Zeugnisse uber 
Jesus und das fruhe Christentum: einschliesslich des apokryphen Judasevangeliums 
(Basel: Brunnen Verlag, 2007). On Bart Ehrman's poor treatment of the subject in Did 
Jesus Exist?, and now Maurice Casey's, see note in Chapter I (§2). 
6. See in particular Chapters I and 5 of Proving History; my conclusions are 
corroborated in Chris Keith and Anthony LeDonne (eds.), Jesus, History and the 
Demise of Authenticity (New York: T. & T. Clark, 2012); Dale Allison, 'The Historians' 
Jesus and the Church', in Seeking the Identity of Jesus: A Pilgrimage (ed. Beverly 
Roberts Gaventa and Richard Hays; Grand Rapids, Ml: William B. Eerdmans, 2008), 
pp. 79-95; Hector Avalos, The End of Biblical Studies (Amherst. NY: Prometheus 
Books, 2007), pp. 185-217; Gerd Theissen and Dagmar Winter, The Quest for the 
Plausible Jesus: The Question of Criteria (Louisville. KY: John Knox Press, 2002); 
Stanley Porter, The Criteria for Authenticity in Historical-Jesus Research: Previous 
Discussion and New Proposals (Sheffield: Sheffield Academic Press, 2000); and so on. 
7. E.P. Sanders, The Historical Figure of Jesus (London: Penguin Press, 1993), 
p. 3. 

22 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
had available that we do not. Which doesn't mean we trust everything they 
say, but we still cannot name even one such person for Jesus, and 'none' is 
not 'more' than half a dozen. 
Lest one complain that these historians wrote 'too late', this is actually 
of minor significance because, unlike Jesus, they stil l  had contemporary 
and eyewitness sources to work from. In fact, our best historian of Alexan­
der is Arrian, who though he wrote five hundred years later, nevertheless 
employed an explicit method of using only three eyewitness sources (two 
of them actual generals of Alexander who wrote accounts of their adven­
tures with him). He names and identifies these sources, explains how he 
used them to generate a more reliable account, and discusses their relative 
merits. That alone is quite a great deal more than we have for Jesus, for 
whom we have not a single named eyewitness source in any of the accounts 
of him, much less a discussion of how those sources were used or what their 
relative merits were. Not even for the anonymous witness claimed to have 
been used by the authors of the Gospel of John, which claim isn't even cred­
ible to begin with (that source is almost certainly fabricated, as I'll show in 
Chapter 10, §7), but in any case we're not told who he was, why we should 
trust him or what all exactly derives from him. 
And that's not aiL We have mentions of Alexander the Great and details 
about him in several contemporary or eyewitness sources still extant, 
including the speeches of !socrates and Demosthenes and Aeschines and 
Hyperides and Dinarchus, the poetry of Theocritus, the scientific works of 
Theophrastus and the plays of Menander. We have not a single contempo­
rary mention of Jesus-apart from, at best, the letters of Paul, who never 
even knew him, and says next to nothing about him (as a historical man), 
or the dubious letters of certain alleged disciples (and I say alleged because 
apart from known forgeries, none ever say they were his disciples), and 
(again apart from those forgeries) none ever distinctly place Jesus in history 
(see Chapters 7 and 11). The eyewitness and contemporary attestation for 
Alexander is thus vastly better than we have for Jesus, not the other way 
around. And that's even if we count only extant texts-if we count extant 
quotations of lost texts in other extant texts, we have l iterally hundreds of 
quotations of contemporaries and eyewitnesses that survive in later works 
attesting to Alexander and his history. We have not even one such for Jesus 
(e.g. even Paul never once quotes anyone he identifies as an eyewitness or 
contemporary source for any of his information on Jesus). 
And even that is not all. For Alexander we have contemporary inscrip­
tions and coins, sculpture (originals or copies of originals done from life), 
as well as other archaeological verifications of historical claims about him. 
For example, we can verify the claim that Alexander attached Tyre to the 
mainland with rubble from Ushu-because that rubble is still there and 
dates to his time; the city of Alexandria named for him dates from his 

2. Hypothesis of Historicity 
23 
lifetime as expected; archaeology confirms Alexander invaded Bactria; 
etc. We also have archaeological confirmation of many of his battles and 
acts, including the exact time and day of his death-because contempo­
rary records of these exist in the recovered clay tablet archives of Persian 
court astrologers. None of this is even remotely analogous to Jesus, for 
whom we have absolutely zero archaeological corroboration (e.g. none of 
the tombs alleged to be his have been verified as such), much less (as we 
have for Alexander) actual archaeological attestation (in the form of coi ns, 
inscriptions and statues-claims to the contrary are generally bogus, as I'll 
discuss in Chapter 7, §2). 8 
It's ridiculous to claim the source situation is better for Jesus than for 
Alexander the Great (or indeed any comparably famous person of antiq­
uity). The exact reverse is the case, by many orders of magnitude. This is 
not the way to defend the historicity of Jesus.9 
We still can't make the opposite inference from this, though, because 
obviously Alexander the Great was far more famous and influential in his 
lifetime than Jesus, even by the most grandiose reports in the Gospels­
and their claims in that regard are surely hugely exaggerated as it is (they 
8. On all these points see discussion and sources referenced throughout Krzysztof 
Nawotka, Alexander the Great (Newcastle upon Tyne: Cambridge Scholars, 2010); 
Waldemar Heckel and Lawrence Tritle, Alexander the Great: A New History (Malden, 
MA: Wiley-Blackwell, 2009); and Joseph Roisman (ed.), Brill's Companion to 
Alexander the Great (Leiden: Brill, 2003); with: Georges Le Rider, Alexander the 
Great: Coinage, Finances, and Policy (Philadelphia, PA: American Philosophical 
Society, 2007); Carmen Arnold-Biucchi, Alexander's Coins and Alexander's Image 
(Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Art Museums, 2006); Frank Holt, Alexander the 
Great and Bactria: The Formation of a Greek Frontier in Central Asia (Leiden: Brill, 
1988); A.B. Bosworth, From Arrian to Alexander: Studies in Historical Interpretation 
(New York: Oxford University Press, 1988); and A.J. Heisserer, Alexander the Great 
and the Greeks: The Epigraphic Evidence (Norman, OK: University of Oklahoma 
Press, 1980). On the Babylonian archives: Bert VanderSpek, 'Darius III. Alexander 
the Great and Babylonian Scholarship', Achaemenid History, Vol. XIII (Leiden: 
Nederlands lnstituut voor het Nabije Oosten, 2003), pp. 289-346; Bert VanderSpek, •The 
Astronomical Diaries as a Source for Achaemenid and Seleucid History', Bibliotheca 
Orienta/is SO (1993), pp. 91-101; Leo Depuydt, 'The Time of Death of Alexander the 
Great: 1 1  June 323 BC, ca. 4:00-5:00 PM', Die Welt des Orients 28 ( J 997), pp. 1 17-35. 
9. A similar argumeṉ even more ridiculous, is that we have more evidence for 
Jesus than we have for Emperor Tiberius (who would have been Jesus' most famous 
contemporary). This is thoroughly refuted (fruitfully revealing the same points as I 
made for Alexander) by historian Matthew Ferguson in 'Ten Reasons to Reject the 
Apologetic 10/42 Source Slogan', AdversusApologetica (October 14, 2012) at http:// 
adversusapologetica.wordpress.com/2012/10/14/ten .. reasons-to-reject-the-apologetic-
1042-source-slogan. That argument appears to have originated in Christian apologetics: 
se Gary Habermas and Mike Licona, The Case for the Resurrection of Jesus (Grand 
Rapidݮ Ml: Kregel Publications, 2004), p. 233. 

24 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
certainly must be, or else we have a problem, as I'll explain in Chapter 8). 
Thus, that we have vastly more evidence for Alexander in no way argues 
Jesus didn't exist. It only argues that Jesus was many orders of magnitude 
less significant in his contemporary historical impact. It entails he was a 
relative nobody. But plenty of relative nobodies nevertheless existed. And 
yet that point does not permit the inference that he did exist, either. Possibly 
is not probably. 
Another wrong way to argue the case for a historical Jesus is to simply 
make things up. We find, for example, Bruce Chilton declaring, in a stan­
dard reference in the field no less, that 'Jesus is acknowledged as a figure 
of history' now more than ever due to 'the unearthing of new information' 
consisting of 'both literary documentation and archaeological evidence'. 
Yet not even a single item of that new evidence pertains to the historical 
Jesus-it consists solely of background evidence, such as the Dead Sea 
Scrolls, almost none of it mentioning or attesting to Jesus (or even, in fact, 
early Christianity), while the rest consists only of obviously late fictions 
about him (like the Gospel of Judas). So Chilton's remark is disingenuous 
at best, and deceitful at worst (as he does not tell his readers what I just did, 
thus leaving the uninformed reader to think we've discovered new sources 
mentioning or attesting to Jesus). That is certainly not the way to defend 
the historicity of Jesus. 
Even worse, Chilton then invents an elaborate biography for Jesus involv­
ing miraculous knowledge of his private personal and intellectual devel­
opment, and events and choices in his life, based on nothing but a naive 
acceptance of uncorroborated claims made in the Gospels, combined with 
gratuitous assumptions of what 'must' have been the case. 10 Thus he asserts 
as if it were a known fact that Jesus was 'marginalized' in Nazareth during 
his youth because he was an illegitimate child, that on childhood trips to 
Jerusalem Jesus emotionally experienced 'an excited sense of the vastness 
of the Israel he was a part of, that 'he ran away from his family' in a fit of 
religious passion, that after becoming a 'disciple' of John the Baptist 'he 
learned this master's kabbalah, the mystical practice of ascent to the divine 
Throne', which became 'a guiding force for the rest of his life', and sundry 
other speculations declared as facts, including: Jesus fled to Syria to avoid 
the clutches of Herod Antipas; Jesus seized the temple with a private army 
('with a large crowd and i n  force'); and Jesus experienced a temptation 'in 
the wilderness' near 'Caesarea Philippi' at the end of his ministry in which 
he was tempted to raise an armed rebellion against Rome. This last is par-
10. Bruce Chilton, 'Historical Jesus', in Dictionary of Biblical Criticism and 
Interpretation (ed. Stanley Porter; New York: Routledge, 2007), PP· 159-62 (161). That 
this is an official entry on the topic of 'the historical Jesus' is a good example of what's 
wrong with Jesus studies today. 

2. Hypothesis of Historicity 
25 
ticularly strange, as Chilton seems confused between the transfiguration, 
which in the Gospels takes place near Caesarea Philippi (and late in Jesus' 
ministry) but involved no temptation, and the Temptation, which in the GosǙ 
pels takes place in a diametrically opposite time and place-and in neither 
case is there any mention of raising an armed rebellion against Rome. 
This is almost the shoddiest method of doing history conceivable. Yet 
Chilton insists 'a historical picture of Jesus . . .  involves the literary infer­
ence of what he must have taught and done to have generated that move­
ment and its literature'. But such an 'inference' as he draws is not history. 
It's historical fiction. History concerns not what scholars subjectively think 
'must' have happened, but what the evidence allows us all to claim actually 
did happen. It should not surprise historians that there are so many who 
are ready to doubt the historicity of Jesus, when they see a historical Jesus 
being defended as speciously as this, even by bonafide experts, in official 
reference books no less. This only makes the case for (or assumption of) 
historicity look delusional, not well established. So this is not the way to 
defend the historicity of Jesus either. 
What's particularly damning about this example is that it's so myopically 
foolish. As Helmut Koester observes (ironically in a book edited by Bruce 
Chilton), 'the vast variety of interpretations of the historical Jesus that the 
current quest has proposed is bewildering', which ought to humble Chil­
ton into seriously doubting his account can be correct, when every expert 
similarly situated is just as confident in a completely different account.11 
Indeed, the diversity and disagreement among bona fide experts on every 
detail of Chilton's 'reconstruction' of Jesus are broad and profound. That 
is what an entry on the 'historical Jesus' should say. It's shocking to see 
the same tendentious presumption, and substitution of speculation for fact, 
among historicists as historicists claim to find in mythicists. Historicists 
have a huge plank to remove from their own eye before they can complain 
of the splinter in anyone else's. They need to get their own house in order, 
and scold the likes of Chilton every bit as fervently as they scold mythicists 
who succumb to the same presumptions and fallacies. His entry should 
never have passed peer review-at least without requiring an explicit dec­
laration that it's all tendentious speculation with which almost all scholars 
would substantially disagree. 
Indeed, a common failure in the historicist community is a lack of a cau­
tionary sense of irony. Among the many Jesuses imagined and defended by 
11. Helmut Koester, 'The Historical Jesus and the Historical Situation of the Quest: 
An Epilogue', in Studying the Historical Jesus: Evaluation of the State of Current 
Research (ed. Bruce Chilton and Craig Evans; Leiden: Brill, 1994), pp. 535-45 (544). 
I summarize the diversity and disagreement Koester observes (and the scores of other 
experts who have observed exactly the same thing) in Chapter 1 of Proving History. 

26 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
historians, currently the most popular is the view that Jesus was an apoca­
lyptic prophet (a detail notably nowhere to be found in Chilton's account). 
But judging by the book of Daniel, Daniel was an apocalyptic prophet, too, 
yet we know that book is complete fiction. Thus, finding evidence that the 
character of Jesus depicted in the Gospels was an apocalyptic prophet is no 
more a guarantee of his historicity than it is of Daniel's. Which is to say, 
no guarantee at all. When we know many of Jesus' apocalyptic predictions 
were learned from (perhaps even faked) hallucinations of a bizarre and 
monstrous Jesus-double in heaven (written up as the book of Revelation), 
the idea that he 'must' have been historical in order to have issued apoc­
alyptic prophecies simply goes out the window. He didn't even have to be 
historical to dictate whole letters (Rev. 1 . 10-3.22), or issue pithy sayings 
(Rev. 14.13; 19. 9; and 21.5). So why are we to assume the Gospels are any 
more historical than the book of Daniel-which is substantially similar, 
being a col1ection of sayings and narratives, involving miracles and inter­
actions with historical persons? Why are we to assume that the sayings 
attributed to Jesus in the Gospels didn't come from the very same origin as 
the sayings attributed to Jesus in the book of Revelation? Yes, we cannot 
presume they did. But neither can we simply presume they didn't. A case 
has to be made. And that case has to be logically valid and sound. 
Ultimately, the basic problem is as stated by Rudolf Bultmann in 1941: 
'the Jesus Christ who is God's Son, a preexistent divine being, is at the 
same time a certain historical person, Jesus of Nazareth', the teasing apart 
of which makes for a complicated task.12 This is the basic problem of his­
toricity: we have no source (none whatsoever) on the latter Jesus. We only 
have the former. From which we must 'extract' the latter by some device. 
Which has resulted in two general categories of theory: those that hold that 
the equation between them is true (Jesus of Nazareth really is the preexis­
tent son of God), whose advocates I call the triumphalists, and those that 
hold that this cosmic Jesus was a legendary development, from the mere 
man (Jesus of Nazareth) to the more fabulous myth (that the same Jesus is 
also the Preexistent son of God), whose advocates I call the reductivists. 
Mythicists, of course, seek to explain the same fact (of the equation of these 
two persons) by reversing the order of causation, proposing there was a leg­
endary development from the original myth (of a preexistent son of God) 
to the more earthly man (Jesus ofNazareth). But in either case, whether for 
the mythicist or the reductivist, the fundamental question is, 'How did that 
happen?' 
How each reductivist answers that question is what becomes his or her 
theory of historicity. And as long as any such theory is true, mythicism is 
12. Schubert Ogden (ed.), New Testament and Mythology and Other Basic Writings 
by Rudolf Bultmann (Philadelphia, PA: Fortress Press, 1984), p. 32. 

2. Hypothesis of Historicity 
27 
false. Likewiseޏ how each mythicist answers that question is what becomes 
his or her theory of myth. And as long as any such theory is true, histori­
cism is false. So how do we test the one against the other? 
3. Hypothesis Formation and Prior Probability 
As we saw in Chilton's case, and can see in the case of any other scholar 
claiming to know things about the historical Jesus, many theories of his­
toricity are too speculative, some even more so than theories of myth, and 
most are as much as or nearly so. That so many historians defend theories 
that 'could' be true, but for which not enough evidence survives to really 
know, exposes a serious methodological problem in the field, which 1 dis­
cussed and demonstrated in Proving History. There I (and other scholars 1 
cite) find dozens of contradictory Jesuses proposed. They can't all be true. 
And that means odds are none are. That there are so many theories like 
this is a testament to how easy it is to construct a theory that looks seduc­
tively tantalizing and explains all the evidence. Which means the ease of 
constructing such a theory counts against any such theory being true, not 
in favor of it. Because the prior probability that any such theory is correct 
must necessarily be very small-until we can reliably eliminate all com­
peting theories. 
To quantify the point, if scholars of equal competence defend from the 
same exact evidence ten different Jesuses, the initial odds that any one of 
them is correct can be no better than I in 10 (and almost certainly worse 
than that, since it's entirely possible none of those Jesuses is correct). This 
is because a prior probability is the probability we must assign before look­
ing at specific evidence for and against each theory. What happens when 
we do look at that evidence is accounted for in the consequent probabilities 
(the probability that we would have the evidence we do if that particular 
theory were true, in contrast to what that probability would be if some other 
theory were true). But before we do that, all we have are the competing 
proposals of roughly equally competent observers from the same body of 
evidence. 
That means it's not wise to defend the historicity of Jesus by defending 
a particular theory of historicity. It makes far more sense to class together 
several (or hopefully all or nearly all) theories of historicity by claims they 
make in common. For example, if all ten contradictory theories of histo­
ricity all make the same claim (e.g. that a man named Jesus who was later 
called Christ was crucified under Pontius Pilate), then the prior probability 
of 'historicity' per se would not be 1 in 10 but nearly 100%-if, that is, 
the prior probability of mythicism, and other theories of historicity, were 
nearly zero. Because the fuiJ 100% (the full probability-space) must be 
apportioned among all logically possible theories. But that means even if 

28 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
the prior probability of myth were as high as, say, 25%, we would still have 
in this case a prior probability of historicity of 75% (because 100% - 25% 
= 75%), as long as we stick with that minimum historical claim about Jesus. 
Otherwise, for each of the ten competing theories of historicity, unless we 
can demonstrate otherwise, the prior probability of any one of them being 
true is at best a paltry 7.5% (1110th of the full 75%), far less than the 25% 
prior probability for myth (though again, only in this hypothetical sce­
nario). If we classed 3 of the 10 theories together (by, let's say, the claim that 
Jesus was an apocalyptic prophet) and insisted on defending only that, then 
(all else being equal) we'd still have a prior probability of only maybe 25% 
(l/3rd of the whole 75%), which leaves us with equal odds against myth. 
So it may be better to drop unnecessary claims like that (no matter how 
well evidenced they may be) and focus only on what all or most theories 
of historicity assert in common. Because that will stand the best chance of 
showing the inadequacy of mythicism (if such can be done). 
But trade-offs may be necessary. A simpler theory will always have 
a higher prior probability, but will be less successful at explaining prob­
lematic evidence. To explain such evidence (to make that evidence highly 
probable on your theory) you often have to add elements to the theory. 
For example, as I discuss in Proving History, all the ancient accounts we 
have of how and why Jesus came to be crucified are historically unintelli­
gible.13 Thus, the hypothesis 'there was a man named Jesus, who was later 
called Christ, who was crucified under Pontius Pilate', does not make this 
evidence very probable at all. Such a fact, had it occurred, would sooner 
have produced much more intelligible accounts of the how and why of it. 
Indeed, it should have produced apologetic accounts of those facts in the 
very Epistles, yet nary a word on this is to be found there (as I'll show in 
Chapter 1 1). Thus, historicists need to 'dress up' their theory with a whole 
series of elaborations, 'assumptions' that serve to explain these oddities in 
the evidence, making them probable again. And these are assumptions­
since such details are not present in the sources. Indeed, that's precisely the 
problem these assumptions are meant to solve. And as I discuss extensively 
in Proving History, this procedure of adding ad hoc assumptions to a the­
ory is not illegitimate. It simply has to be accounted for correctly when 
combining and dividing probabilities. 
There are two ways this procedure can go. 14 If you have no evidence 
whatsoever that an assumption you are adding is true (that is, independently 
of the oddity you are inventing it to explain), but also no evidence it's false, 
then you must halve the prior probability. I explain the mathematical rea­
son for this in Proving History, but in short if there is no evidence for or 
13. Carrier, Proving History, pp. 1 39-41. 
14. Carrier, Proving History, pp. 80-81. 

2. Hypothesis of Historicity 
29 
against a claim, then its probability is 50%, which means the probability­
space shared by all theories, those with this assumption and those with­
out it, is half occupied by theories with this assumption and half occupied 
with theories without it. So if our total prior were 75%, the prior probabi 1-
ity of a theory with this added assumption being true can only be 37.5% 
(half of 75o/o). Which is unlikely to permit the new assumption to make 
any improvement in the final probability (and thus such assumptions are 
often not worth adding). On the other hand, if you have evidence that an 
assumption you are adding is true (again, independently of the oddity you 
are inventing it to explain), then you're in a better situation. For example, if 
given certain background evidence (such as regarding the way early Chris­
tians can be independently established to have behaved, or regarding the 
documented psychology of religious fanatics in general) an assumption is 
already highly probable, then that probability is substituted for the halving 
of probability just discussed. 
For instance, if it can be independently proven that early Christians 
interpreted the Old Testament (OT) allegorically 90% of the time in a given 
context, then a theory that depends on their doing so in a specific case 
(assuming nothing in that case argues for or against this otherwise) will 
share 90% of the probability-space with theories that exclude this assump­
tion-not 50%. Hence in the hypothetical scenario at hand, such a theory 
would have a prior probability of67.5% (9/lOths of75%). Or if this subordi­
nate probability were as near to 100% as makes all odds (like the assump­
tion that Christians were human beings essentially biologically the same 
as other human beings), then the prior probability would effectively just 
be the full 75%. Conversely, implausible fringe theories, which depend on 
assumptions that are extremely improbable to begin with, are of such low 
prior probability that they don't even show up in the math (also for reasons 
I explain in Proving History). 
This is in effect the role that background knowledge plays in determin­
ing probabilities: things that are established as basically certain can safely 
be assumed without lowering your prior probabilities. Of course this works 
the other way around, too. I fan assumption you propose is actually demon­
strably improbable, then you actually lower your theory's prior probability 
by less than half. That's why implausible additions to a theory meant only 
to rescue that theory from failing to fit the evidence can never logically 
succeed at that-because they will always lower the prior probability more 
than they will increase the consequent probability, and thus they will actuǚ 
ally lower the posterior probability (the actual probability that your theory 
is true), instead of raising it as such an addition was supposed to do. In 
other words, such desperate theories simply become increasingly improba­
ble, and thus unbelievable. 

30 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
Accordingly, all triumphalist theories can be shown to have vanishingly 
small prior probabilities. They also happen to do a poor job of explaining 
the evidence.15 Hence, none are worth any objective historian's consider­
ation. Perhaps such a hypothesis can still be rationally maintained on evi­
dence other than the historical, but that is of no relevance to historians, who 
are tasked with determining only what the historical evidence supports. 
And that will be the only question asked here. That leaves reductivist and 
mythicist hypotheses. 
In Proving History I demonstrated that we can parcel out the entire prior 
probability-space to just four classes of hypothesis altogether: 
- 'Jesus was a historical person mythicized' 
- 'Jesus was a mythical person historicized' 
'Jesus was a historical person not mythicized' (triumphal) 
'Jesus was a mythical person not historicized' (postmodern) 
As I argued there, the latter two classes of hypothesis, even collectively. 
consume a vanishingly small piece of the prior-probability-space (certainly 
less than a one in a million share).16 They can therefore be ignored. That 
leaves us with bare historicism and bare mythicism. However, both must 
be more developed than this, not only to make our job easier by ruling out 
all implausible variations of them, but also to leave us with hypotheses that 
make more substantial predictions. This will give us in each case a mini­
mal theory, one that does not entail any ambitious or questionable claims 
(thus keeping its prior probability relatively high), but still leaves us with a 
theory substantial enough to test (thus keeping its consequent probability 
relatively high as well). 
The minimal Jesus myth theory I will develop in the next chapter. Here 
I will develop the minimal theory of historicity. It's important to take note 
of this step. For it must be made to avoid a common error on both sides of 
the debate, that of conflating plausible with implausible theories. In general 
we have those two theories of historicity, the reductive theory (Jesus was an 
ordinary but obscure guy who inspired a religious movement and copious 
legends about him) and the triumphalist theory (the Gospels are totally or 
almost totally true). Either side of the historicity debate will at times engage 
in a fallacy here, citing evidence supporting the reductive theory in defense 
of the triumphalist theory (as ifthat were valid), or citing the absurdity of 
the triumphalist theory as if this refuted the reductive theory (as if that 
15. As I show, e.g., in Richard Carrier, 'Christianity's Success Was Not Incredible·. 
in The End ofChristianity (ed. John Loftus; Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books. 201 1). 
pp. 53-74, 372-75. 
16. Carrier, Proving History, pp. 204-205. 

2. Hypothesis of Historicity 
3 1  
were valid). The same error occurs the other way around: citing evidence 
against a hyperbolic theory of myth as refuting a reasonable one, or defend­
ing a hyperbolic theory by citing evidence in support of a reasonable one. 
Both procedures are again invalid. 
4. The Minimal Theory of Historicity 
There were thousands of men named Jesus in Judea in any given genera­
tion, so obviously countless historical men of that name 'existed' in a triv­
ial sense. It's even statistically certain that several men of that name were 
crucified by Romans, even by Pontius Pilate. It's also statistically likely that 
several men named Jesus participated in the early Christian movement. If 
1 in 26 Jewish men of that time were named Jesus (as the data indicates is 
close to likely), 17 and a hundred men were crucified in Judea in any given 
year (a number that is arguably unreasonably low), we can be certain Pilate 
alone (governing ten years) crucified dozens of men named Jesus (unless, 
of course, crucifixion was actually rare). And if the first Christian congre­
gation consisted of merely two dozen people, probably at least one of those 
original Christians was named Jesus. Indeed, if we were to believe Acts 
and accept there were at the cult's origin 120 followers of Jesus (Acts 1.15), 
we could be certain there were four or five Jesuses among them. 
But none of these men would be Jesus Christ, the man whose existence 
we are trying to locate. Conversely, it's very easy to show that the man 
depicted in the Gospels didn't exist, not only because they each present 
quite different men of rather different characters (the Synoptic Jesus is sim­
ply nothing like the Johanine Jesus), but also because the Jesus of the Gos­
pels doesn't behave like a real person at all, nor rarely do any of the people 
around him in the narrative, nor does much of what he does correspond to 
things that really happen (as if walking on water were to be believed; or that 
he could transmute water to wine, but never saw fit to transmute lead to gold 
for the benefit of the poor), oddities I'll take more note of in Chapter 10. But 
showing that the Gospel Jesus didn't exist does not show Jesus Christ didn't 
exist, because it could still be the case that the real Jesus Christ is the one 
who inspired these unrealistic narratives about him, and that some actual 
facts about him really are hidden in there somewhere (even if we can never 
find out which facts those are). We also can't pick some specific details 
(like that he employed himself as a faith healer and exorcist), then refute 
them, and then declare he didn't exist, because some Jesus Christ might 
still remain without those specific things being true of him. 
17. Richard Bauckham, Jesus and the Eyewitnesses: The Gospels as Eyewitness 
Testimony (Grand Rapids, Ml: William B. Eerdmans, 2006). p. 85. 

32 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
For example, there are twelve 'facts' about the historical Jesus that are 
widely regarded as 'almost' indisputable: 
(1) Jesus was baptized by John the Baptist, (2) he was a Galilean who 
preached and healed, (3) he called disciples and spoke oftwelve of them, 
(4) he confined his activity to I srael, (5) he engaged in a controversy 
about the Temple, (6) he was crucified outside Jerusalem by the Roman 
authorities, (7) his followers continued as an identifiable movement after 
his death, and (8) some Jews persecuted some members of this new 
movement . . .  [and (9)] Jesus was probably viewed as a prophet by the 
populace, [10] he often spoke of the kingdom of God, [1 1] he criticized 
the ruling priests as part of his Temple controversy, and [12] he was cru­
cified as 'king of the Jews' by the Romans.18 
But this is not a minimal Jesus, since taking some of these facts away 
would not result in any scholar concluding that Jesus did not exist. Indeed, 
many scholars already conclude some of these aren't true facts about Jesus, 
yet they still maintain Jesus existed, just as a different kind of fellow than 
this portrait maintains. Indeed, apart from (7) and (8), which could be true 
even of a mythical Jesus, every single one of these elements has no sup­
port whatever except in the Gospels (and later Christian literature based on 
them)-and if the Gospels can't be trusted on any facts (and I'll show in 
Chapter 10 they can't), then they can't be trusted in these. We should doubt 
them all. 
Indeed, in Chapter 5 of Proving History I demonstrated several ofthese 
'indisputable' facts to be very doubtful indeed, and showed how the usual 
scholarly arguments in defense of all of them are logically invalid. They 
are all the more questionable given that many (if not all) of them should 
have been remarked upon in the (authentic) Epistles, but are bizarrely 
and entirely absent there. No mention is even made there of his having 
appointed disciples (a problem I'll explore in Chapter 1 1). At most we could 
perhaps get some indirect support for (though nothing like a proof of) item 
{10) from the Epistles (that Jesus spoke of the kingdom of God), but even 
that runs into the problem of where it came from-a real Jesus, or a hal­
lucinated one (the problem of Revelation once again), or a fabricated one 
(like the book of Daniel). This is very much a problem, because the Epistles 
themselves (apart from those we know are forgeries) do not mention any 
source but revelation (and claims teased out of the Old Testament), if they 
ever mention any sources at all for any of the information they convey by 
or about Jesus (again as 1'11 show in Chapter I I). 
That leaves only (7) and (8) as having any credible evidence behind them 
(both directly from the Epistles, and from the whole history of the cult 
generally), and yet (8) isn't really a fact about Jesus at all, and (7) can just 
18. Porter, Criteria for Authenticity, p. I l l  (esp. n. 28). 

2. Hypothesis of Historicity 
33 
as well support a hallucinated celestial Jesus as a historical earthly one. 
From the Epistles we might be able to get back (6) and (10) only by reducing 
them to the much less ambitious 'he was crucified (most likely in Roman 
occupied Judea)' and 'he preached something controversial', both of which 
we might loosely infer from statements made in the Epistles. But even that 
would be a stretch, given the ambiguity of what is actually said there. At 
the very least, he was certainly said to have been killed by the powers that 
be and hung on a stake. By whom and when then wouldn't matter so much, 
nor would it matter whether it was actually he or some of his followers who 
preached whatever it was that inspired his subsequent deification. 
But notice that now we don't even require what is considered essential in 
many church creeds. For instance, it is not necessary that Jesus was cruci­
fied under Pontius Pilate. Maybe he was. But even if we proved he wasn't, 
that still does not vindicate mythicism. Because the 'real' Jesus may have 
been executed by Herod Antipas (as the Gospel of Peter in fact claims), 
or by Roman authorities in an earlier or later decade than Pilate (as some 
early Christians really did think). Some scholars even argue for an earlier 
century (and they have some real evidence to cite). I'll say more about these 
possibilities in Chapter 8 (§I). My point at present is that even if we proved 
the founder of Christianity was executed by Herod the Great (not even 
by Romans, much less Pilate, and a whole forty years before the Gospels 
claim), as long as his name or nickname (whether assigned before or after 
his death) really was Jesus and his execution is the very thing spoken of as 
leading him to the status of the divine Christ venerated in the Epistles, I 
think it would be fair to say Jesus existed, that his historicity is established 
and the mythicists are then simply wrong. I would say this even if Jesus was 
never really executed but only believed to have been. Because even then it's 
still the same historical man being spoken of and worshiped.19 
19. Thus we get no advantage from an even more ambitious list than Porter's, of 
'fifteen minimal facts' developed earlier by E.P. Sanders, as summarized in Mark 
Strauss, Four Portraits, One Jesus: An Introduction to Jesus and the Gospels (Grand 
Rapids, MI: Zondervan, 2007), p. 372: 
(I) Jesus was born about 4 ac near the time of the death of Herod the Great; 
(2) he spent his childhood and early adult years in Nazareth, a Galilean 
village; (3) he was baptized by John the Baptist; (4) he called disciplesݯ (5) 
he taught in the towns, villages. and countryside (but apparently not in the 
cities) of Galilee; (6) he preached •the kingdom of God'; (7) about the year 
30 he went to Jerusalem for Passover; (8) he created a disturbance in the 
temple area; (9) he had a final meal with the disciples; ( 10) he was arrested 
and interrogated by Jewish authorities, specifically the high priest; (I I) he 
was executed on the orders of the Roman prefect, Pontius Pilate; (12) his 
disciples at first fled; (13) they saw him (in what sense is not certain) after 
his death; (14) as a consequence, they believed he would return to found the 

34 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
This gets us down to just three minimal facts on which historicity rests: 
1. An actual man at some point named Jesus acquired followers in life 
who continued as an identifiable movement after his death. 
2. This is the same Jesus who was claimed by some of his followers to 
have been executed by the Jewish or Roman authorities. 
3. This is the same Jesus some of whose followers soon began worship­
ing as a living god (or demigod). 
That all three propositions are true shall be my minimal theory of historic­
ity. As occasion warrants I might add features on to test the merits of more 
complex theories, but unless I explicitly say otherwise, the above is the 
theory I shall be testing against the minimal Jesus myth theory. Because if 
any one of those premises is false, it can fairly be said there was no histor­
ical Jesus in any pertinent sense. And at least one of them must be false for 
any Jesus myth theory to be true. 
One thing that will become clear in the course of this book is that this 
minimal theory is unsustainable. Which means the only chance historicity 
kingdom; (15) they formed a community to await his return and sought to 
win others to faith in him as God's Messiah. 
As with Porter's list, none of these facts are attested anywhere outside the Gospels 
and literature derivative thereof (and what is here added is even more dubious than what 
Porter included), except (6), which is Porter's (10), and (13) through (15), which expand 
on Porter's (7), but these are not facts about Jesus per se, but about his subsequent 
followers, which could be just as true of an ahistorical, mystically perceived Jesus, so 
their being true would not in itself support historicity. Strauss also mentions a smaller 
list (Four Portraits, pp. 356-57): 
[According to many scholars] what can be known about Jesus can be 
summarized in a few short statements: [1] he came from Nazareth; [2] he 
was baptized by John; [3] he preached and told parables about the coming 
of the kingdom of God; [4] he viewed this kingdom as coming in the near 
future and (perhaps) as already present in some sense; [5] he performed, or 
was believed to have performed, exorcisms and healings; [6] he gathered a 
group of Disciples around him; [7] he associated with outcasts and sinners; 
[8] he challenged the Jewish leaders of his day; [9] he was arrested and 
charged with blasphemy and sedition; and [10] he was crucified by the 
Romans. 
Here again nothing is attested outside the Gospels and Gospel-dependent literature 
(as I explain in Chapter 8), except (3) and (4) insofar as this is just Porter's (10). And 
none of these is a sine qua non for a historical Jesus. Indeed for any one of them we can 
easily find scholars who doubt or deny it (and several certainly are not well founded: for 
instance, see my discussion of (1), (2) and (5) in Chapter 5 of Proving History). 

2. Hypothesis of Historicity 
35 
will have of being more likely than a minimal mythicism is if a theory 
of historicity is developed that is sufficiently elaborate to overcome mini­
mal mythicism in overall consequent probability. But as mentioned earlier, 
such elaboration necessarily lowers historicity's prior probability, indeed 
far below that of myth-unless such elaborations can be shown to be nec­
essarily the case or very probably the case, independently of the evidence 
they are invented to explain. 
Nothing like that has been done. Hence anyone who will wish to con­
tinue denying the claim that Jesus never really existed will have to advance 
the field of Jesus studies with a theory of historicity that not only somehow 
maintains a high enough prior probability to have any chance of being trueސ 
but also successfully explains all the evidence, including a lot of evidence 
that is not so easy to explain (surveyed in Chapters 8 through I I). If such 
a theory can be successfully developed, I welcome it. But until one is, as 
the second half of this volume will show, the historicity of Jesus does not 
appear to have the merit it is presumed to. 
Before this can be demonstrated, howeverޑ I must define the minimal 
Jesus myth theory that presents any challenge to historicity. And to that we 
now turn. 

3 
THE HYPOTHESIS OF MYTH 
1. From Inanna to Christ 
There survives a strange early Christian text hardly anyone knows about 
called the Ascension of Isaiah. Like the book of Daniel, it is a forgery, 
purporting to derive somehow from the ancient prophet Isaiah, recounting 
his mystical ascent into the heavens, where he saw and learned in advance 
the secret things of the Christian gospel. The original version of this text 
doesn't survive. We have later redactions, complete with a kind of 'pocket' 
gospel tacked in. Though extant manuscripts date from the fifth to the 
twelfth century, all the evidence we have for this text and within it indi­
cates it was originally composed sometime in the first or second century 
CE.1 The earliest version in fact was probably composed around the very 
1. The final redaction of this appears to unite two separate texts (the 'Martyrdom 
of Isaiah' and the actual 'Ascension of Isaiah'), the latter being the text of which I 
am speaking here, which consists of chaps. 6-1 1 of the united whole. For this I have 
excerpted and adapted the translation provided in Willis Barnstone, The Other Bible 
(San Francisco, CA: Harper Collins, 1984), pp. 517-31. For scholarly analysis see 
Jonathan Knight, The Ascension of Isaiah (Sheffield: Sheffield Academic Press. 1995). 
and Disciples of the Beloved One: The Christology, Social Setting and Theological 
Context of the Ascension of Isaiah (Sheffield: Sheffield Academic Press, 1996), with 
additional collation, translation and commentary in Corpus christianorum: series 
apocryphorum, 7 and 8 (1995). However, contrary to the assumptions of Knight, there 
is no way the 'Martyrdom' was originally a part of the 'Ascension': even though the 
former came to comprise chaps. 1-5 of the now-combined text, it ends with Isaiah's 
death and refers 'back' to the 'Ascension' tale as if it had been written before it (in 
Ascension of Isaiah 3); then suddenly a completely new story begins in chap. 6, with 
a new introduction, and no mention or awareness ofthe preceding material (much less 
that Isaiah had just died in the previous chapter). Knight's only arguments for unity are 
that the unified text is more elaborate (yet that could be from subsequent embellishment. 
exactly as happened to the epistles of lgnatius, or simply because the Latin translation 
was briefer) and he can explain why the 'pocket gospel' was deleted (in the Latin and 
Slavonic) by supposing an anti-Docetic motive (but he has no actual evidence of either 
that motive or that the material was deleted rather than added). The one argument is 

3. Hypothesis of Myth 
37 
same time as the earliest canonical Gospels were being written. 2 It thus 
includes some very early Christian belief, almost as early as anything in 
the New Testament. 
In this text, Isaiah goes into a trance before all the king's court and says 
he was taken up into the heavens, where at each stage he sees and hears 
particular things, and the angel lifting him up tells him various secrets. I 
have here removed all the extraneous material (a lot of which is repetitive) 
and quote just the features of the story I want to draw attention to: 
THE VIsioN THAT IsAIAH BEN AMoz SAw 
[6.1] In the twentieth year of the reign ofHezekiah, king of Judah, Isaiah 
the son of Amoz came to Hezekiah. . . .  [6. I 0] And there while Isaiah 
was speaking by the Holy Spirit in the hearing of all . . .  he saw a vision. 
[6.13] And the angel who was sent to make him behold that vision came 
neither from the firmament, nor from the angels of glory of this world, 
but from the seventh heaven . . . .  [6.15] And the vision which the holy 
Isaiah saw was not from this world but from the world which is hidden 
from the flesh. [6.16] And after Isaiah had seen this vision, he narrated 
it to Hezekiah, and to Josab his son and to the other prophets who had 
come, [7.1] . . . saying: 
[7.2] I saw a sublime angel . . .  [7.3] and he took hold of me . . . [7.9] 
and we ascended to the firmament, I and he, and there I saw Sammael 
[i.e., Satan] and his hosts, and a great struggle was taking place there, 
and the angels of Satan were envious of one another. [7. 1 0] And as it is 
above, so is it also on the earth, for the likeness of that which is in the 
logically invalid, and the other is a speculation and not an argument-but it is also 
illogical: an anti-Docetist would have fixed the account, not deleted the whole thing, 
and in fact what the pocket gospel is replaced with in the manuscripts lacking it is even 
more Docetic than what was removed. All the other evidence is against Knight (see 
following notes, and even his own observations in Disciples, 68-69). 
2. That the 'Ascension' text cannot date later than the early second century is 
evidenced by the fact that the text of the 'Martyrdom' assumes the legend of 'Nero's 
return' is still an imagined threat (in Asc. Is. 4, so that must have been written within 
decades ofhis death), and is unaware of any other emperor having persecuted Christians, 
two facts that place it nearer the same time as the book of Revelation (with which it 
has a lot else in common besides that: see Chapter 7, §3), and since the 'Martyrdom' 
refers back to the 'Ascension' (see previous note), the latter must have been written 
even earlier. See Knight, Ascension, pp. 9-10; Disciples, pp. 33-34 and 205-208; and 
F. Crawford Burkitt, Jewish and Christian Apocalypses (London: H. Milford, 1914), 
p. 46. Knight's argument that the 'Martyrdom' seems aware of the pocket gospel in 
the 'Ascension' (Asc. Is. 3.13-18 parallels 1 1.2-22) would at best only confirm that the 
interpolation of that pocket gospel occurred sometime in between (or was actually 
produced by the author of the 'Martyrdom'). 

38 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
firmament is also on the earth . . . .  [7.13] And after this the angel brought 
me up above the firmament, into the first heaven . . . .  [and so on repeti­
tively all the way to the sixth heaven, seeing ever more glorious beings 
at each level] . . .  [8.18] and all the angels [in the sixth heaven] cried out 
to the primal Father, and his Beloved the Christ, and the Holy Spirit, all 
with one voice . . . .  
(8.25] And the angel who conducted me saw what I was thinking and 
said, 'If you rejoice already in this light of the sixth heaven, how much 
more will you rejoice when in the seventh heaven you see that light where 
God and his Beloved are . . .  who in your world will be called 'Son'. 
[8.26] Not yet is he revealed, who shall enter this corrupted world, nor 
the garments, thrones, and crowns which are laid up for the righteous, 
those who believe in that Lord who shall one day descend in your form.' 
[9.1] And he conveyed me into the air of the seventh heaven . . .  [9.5] 
And the angel said unto me, 'He who gave permission for you to be here 
is your Lord, God, the Lord Christ, who will be called 'Jesus' on earth, 
but his name you cannot hear until you have ascended out of your body . 
. . . [9.12] And this Beloved wil1 descend in the form in which you will 
soon see him descend-that is to say, in the last days, the Lord, who will 
be called Christ, will descend into the world. [9.13] . . .  And after he has 
descended and become like you in appearance, they will think that he 
is flesh and a man. [9.14] And the god of that world will stretch forth 
his hand against the Son, and they wilt lay hands on him and crucify him 
on a tree, without knowing who he is. [9. 15] So his descent, as you will 
see, is hidden from the heavens so that it remains unperceived who he is. 
[9. 16] And when he has made spoil of the angel of death, he will arise on 
the third day and will remain in that world five hundred and forty-five 
days (i.e., one and a half years]. (9. 17] And then many of the righteous 
will ascend with him.' . . .  
[9.26] And then the angel said to me, 'Here are prepared heavenly gar­
ments that many from that world receive, if they believe in the words of 
that one who, as I have told you, shall be named, and if they observe those 
words and trust them, and believe in his cross' . . . .  
[9.27] And l saw someone standing by, whose glory surpassed that of 
all . . .  [9.29] and all the angels drew near and worshipped him and gave 
praise . . . .  [9.31] Then the angel who conducted me said to me, ·worship 
this one', and I did. [9.32] And the angel said unto me, •This is the Lord 
of All Glory whom you have seen' . . . .  
(10.7] And I heard the words of the Most High, the Father of my Lord, 
as he spoke to my Lord Christ who shall be called Jesus, (10.8) •Go and 
descend through all the heavens, descend to the firmament and to that 
world, even to the angel in the realm of the dead, but to Hell you shall not 
go. [10.9] And you shall become like the form of all who are in the five 
heavens. [10.101 And with carefulness you shall resemble the form of 
the angels of the firmament and the angels also who are in the realm 
of the dead. [10. 1 1] And none of the angels of this world shall know 
that you, along with me, are the Lord of the seven heavens and of their 

3. Hypothesis of Myth 
angels. [10.12] And they will not know that you are mine until with the 
voice of Heaven I have summoned their angels and their lights, and my 
mighty voice is made to resound to the sixth heaven, that you may judge 
and destroy the prince and his angels and the gods of this world, and the 
world which is ruled by them. [10.13] For they have denied me and said, 
"We are alone, and there is none beside us". [10.14] And afterwards you 
will ascend from the angels of death to your place, and this time you 
will not be transformed in each heaven, but in glory you will ascend and 
sit on My right hand. [10.15] And the princes and powers of this world 
will worship you.' . . .  
(10.17] Then I saw that my Lord went forth from the seventh heaven 
to the sixth heaven [the angel then tells Isaiah to watch how Jesus trans­
forms as he descends] . . .  [10.19] And when the angels who are in the 
sixth heaven saw him they praised and extolled him, for he had not yet 
been transformed into the form of the angels there . .
. . [10.20] But then 
1 saw how he descended into the fifth heaven, and there took the appear­
ance of the angels there, and they did not praise him, for his appearance 
was like theirs . . . . [and likewise the fourth heaven; and the third heaven, 
where he now must also give a password to the doorkeepers to enter 
through the gate of that heaven; and likewise the second heaven; and 
then the first] . . .  [10.29] And then he descended into the firmament 
where the prince of this world dwells, and he gave the password . . .  
and his form was like theirs, and they did not praise him there, but 
struggled with one another in envy, for there the power of evil rules, and 
the envying of trivial things. [10.30) And I beheld, when he descended to 
the angels of the air and he was like one of them. (10.31) Then he gave 
no password, for they were plundering and doing violence to one another. 
[1 1.1] After this, I beheld. and the angel who talked with me and con­
ducted me said unto me, 'Understand, Isaiah, son of Amoz, because for 
this purpose have I been sent from God' . . . .  
39 
At this point several paragraphs have been inserted summarizing a lost 
non-canonical Gospel bearing some similarities with the New Testament 
Gospels, with a birth to Joseph and a virgin Mary, and a great deal else. 
That 'pocket gospel' is overly elaborate and completely unlike the rest of 
the text, either in style or content (e.g. evincing an oddly sudden zeal for 
specific details), and it does not correspond at all to what (in chaps. 9 and 
10) Isaiah was told he would later see (in chaps. 10 and 1 1). This pocket 
gospel is also missing from several manuscripts-in fact, it is missing from 
all manuscripts that lack chaps. 1-5 as well, thus signifying an earlier state 
of the text.3 With that pocket gospel removed, the text continues: 
3. Both Latin (L2) and Slavonic (S) manuscripts not only omit the 'Martyrdom' 
(and thus only know of a text of Asc, Is. that begins at chap. 6) but also omit l 1.3-22, 
the whole pocket gospel (see Corpus christianorum: series apocryphorum, 7 [Ascensio 

40 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
[1 1.23] And then I saw him and he was in the firmament but he had not 
changed to their form, and all the angels of the firmament and Satan saw 
him, and they worshipped him. [1 1.24] And great sorrow was occasioned 
there, while they said, 'How did our Lord descend in our midst, and we 
perceived not the glory which was upon him?' .
.
.
 (And this Lord con­
tinues ascending thus through the first five heavens, and then the sixth] 
[11.32] And I saw how he ascended into the seventh heaven, and all the 
righteous and all the angels praised Him. And then I saw how he sat down 
on the right hand of God .
. . . [I 1.37] Both the end of this world [1 1.38] 
and all of this vision will be consummated in the last generations. 
[1 1.391 And then Isaiah made him swear that he would not tell this 
to the people of Israel, nor permit any man to write down these words. 
[1 1.40] 'As far as you understand from the king what is said in the proph· 
ets, so far shall you read and that's all'. 
That Isaiah refused to allow this prophecy to be written down begs the 
question of how the reader is supposed to have come upon a text of it. But 
I'll set that aside. 
Key to understanding this text is the evidence that it's been tampered 
with. Even apart from the manuscript evidence confirming this, the text 
itself confirms it. In the first part we're told that high above in the firma­
ment of this world there are copies of all the things on earth, and there 
the 'rulers of this world' fight over who will control the earth below. As 
I'll demonstrate in Chapter 5 (Elements 34-38) this was a popular belief, 
and one accepted by Paul and the author of the anonymous Epistle to the 
Hebrews-both in the New Testament. And with this in mind God com­
mands his Son (here a preexistent divine being called Lord Christ, and 
soon to be dubbed Lord Jesus Christ) to descend 'to the firmament and to 
that world, even to the angel in the rea1m of the dead' (10.8) and to take 'the 
form of the angels of the firmament and the angels also who are in the realm 
of the dead' (10.10) so 'none of the angels of this world shall know' who he 
is (1 0.11 ), and thus (Isaiah's guiding angel explains) 'they will think that he 
is flesh and a man' (9.13, a line not present in all versions, see below), in a 
'form' like Isaiah's (8.26, likewise not present in all versions), and then 'the 
god of that world will stretch forth his hand against the Son, and they will 
lay hands on him and crucify him on a tree, without knowing who he is' 
(9.14). And then 'he will arise on the third day and will remain in that world' 
for one and a half years (9.16)-thus fulfilling the predictions of Daniel (see 
Chapter 4, Element 7), although in no way conforming to any account in 
the New Testament (even in Acts 1.3 Jesus sticks around after his resur-
/saiae], pp. 231 and 315), replacing it with a new version of 1 1.2 (which I will discuss 
shortly). 

3. Hypothesis of Myth 
41 
rection barely more than a month).4 Indeed, that Jesus hung around after 
his resurrection for a whole year and a half would have sounded patently 
absurd even then, begging the question: what is really being said here? 
Notice that up to this point in the story nothing is ever said about Jesus 
visiting earth or being killed by Jews or Romans-or conducting a min­
istry for that matter (of any sort at a11).5 The 'they' who will think he is a 
man and not know who he is and kill him are only ever said to be Satan and 
his angels. No other subject is mentioned for that pronoun, nor is any other 
implied. God clearly intends Jesus to do nothing more than go to the firma­
ment, and for no other reason than to be killed by Satan and his sky demons, 
then rise from the dead and conduct affairs there for over a year (doing 
what, it's not said), and then ascend to heaven. In other words, instead of 
conducting a ministry on earth, Jesus is commanded to go straight to the 
firmament and die, and rise from the dead, and then remain where he had 
died for a year and a half(9.16; cf. 10.12-14; although the duration is omitted 
from some versions), and then ascend to the heavens. The 'tree' on which 
he is crucified (9.14) is thus implied to be one of the 'copies' of trees that 
we're told are in the firmament (7.10).6 Certainly no mention is made here 
of this happening in or anywhere near Jerusalem. 
Likewise, it's only said 'none of the angels of this world shall know' who 
he is (10.1 1), not 'none of the Jews' or 'none of the authorities in Israel' or 
any such thing (which is essentially just what Paul himself says in I Cor. 
2.6-10). The text also does not identify any further stage of descending 
from the firmament to earth before entering the realm of the dead (not even 
in chap. 1 1-the redactors made no effort to connect their later insertion 
of a completely out-of-place 'gospel' narrative to the sequential 'descent­
by-stages' storyline of the previous chapters). In 10.30 it's implied Jesus 
descends to a lower part of the firmament (where he finds he needs no 
password to get in), but he is sti11 then among 'the angels of the air'. He 
goes no further. Back in 10.8 it was said he shall descend 'even to the angel 
in the realm of the dead' (though specifically not to Hell), but as we'll see 
in Chapter 5 (e.g. in Plutarch's account in On the Face That Appears in the 
Orb of the Moon), many theologians of this period regarded the 'realm of 
4. lrenaeus, Against All Heresies 1.3.2 reports that Christians who claimed the 
Gospels were allegories for celestial events also claimed Jesus continued speaking to 
his disciples for a year-and-a-half after his resurrection, which must mean that Jesus 
continued appearing in revelations for that span of time. 
S. My perspective on this document has been inspired by the analysis in Earl 
Doherty, Jesus: Neither God nor Man (The Case for a Mythical Jesus) (Ottawa: Age of 
Reason, 2009), pp. 119-26, which is well worth reading, even if I don't always concur 
with it. 
6. Although to be more precise it is the things on earth that are the •copies' of their 
'truer' versions in the heavens (Element 38). 

42 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
the dead' to be up in the sky, not in an underworld (see Chapter 5: Element 
37), and there is no indication here that anything else was meant. 
In fact, of his killers God specifically says, 'they will not know that you 
are mine until with the voice of Heaven I have summoned their angels and 
their lights, and my mighty voice is made to resound to the sixth heaven' 
(10.12), in other words the truth will be revealed to Christ's murderers by 
God's resounding voice that will be heard across all the seven levels of 
heaven, which of course is not what happens in the New Testament Gos­
pels (no divine voice is heard across the world revealing Jesus's true iden­
tity, least of all to those who killed him), yet here 'they' become aware of 
who he is almost right away (11.23). What can only be meant here are the 
demons and demon princes who kill him in the firmament (as 11.23 says), 
since they are the only ones who can be expected to hear this voice, along 
with 'their angels and lights', their subordinates (since men don't have 
'angels and lights' under them to summon). Nor did the killers of Jesus ever 
'know' Jesus was a divine being, yet here we are told they did: once God 
told them. This cannot mean the Jews and Romans. It can only mean Satan 
and his angelic princes. Therefore, 10.12 clearly says those are his killers, 
not the humans interpolated into the story in chap. 11. At any rate, before 
the final chapter, no one else but these demons is ever mentioned as being 
at all involved in this event, and no mention is ever made of Jesus going 
anywhere else but to the firmament to die. 
Only in the final chapter is the story suddenly changed and elaborated 
with all manner of details that are never even a component of God's orig­
inal orders (as described in chap. 10), nor in the angel's account of God's 
plan to Isaiah (in chap. 9), nor even plausibly concordant with them-both 
in terms of plot and literary style, 1 1.2-22 clearly do not derive from the 
same author as the rest of chaps. 6 through 11 (as many experts conclude). 
That this is confirmed in manuscript evidence only makes it all the more 
conclusive. This eleventh chapter thus appears to have been redacted to 
'include' a complete earthly 'gospel' story, as if it were what was being 
referred to in chaps. 9 and 10, when that hardly makes sense-the two 
accounts don't fit each other at all. 
In line with this, two other key phrases also appear to have been i nterpo­
lated: 'they will think that he is flesh and a man' (9.13) and he shall 'descend 
in your form' (8.26) are both missing from the Latin version. Although the 
Latin text is frequently abbreviated, that is unlikely to explain the coinci­
dental omission of these specific phrases, the only statements outside the 
pocket gospel that refer to Jesus becoming like a man. Nevertheless, those 
statements would still be compatible with a celestial event (as human sor­
cerers could fly into the air and be met with there, and earliest Christian 
belief certainly held that Jesus had assumed the form of a man), so we 
needn't rule them out. 

3. Hypothesis of Myth 
43 
But if we conclude that the original text of the Ascension of Isaiah did 
not include most of the material currently found in chap. 11, but that the 
original text ended instead in a manner consistent with what is said in 
chaps. 9 and 10 (and indeed the repetitive nature of the text up to that point 
entails we should expect the conclusion to conform closely and repetitively 
to what chaps. 9 and 10 say will happen), then we should first look to the 
manuscripts that omit this pocket gospel to see if there are any clues to what 
originally was there. This is what we see (translating from the Latin text): 
[11.1] After this, the angel said to me, 'Understand, Isaiah, son of Amoz, 
because for this purpose have I been sent from God, that everything be 
revealed to you. For before you no one ever saw, nor after you will anyone 
be able to see, what you have seen and heard'. [11.2] And I saw one like 
a son of man, dwelling among men, and in the world, and they did 
not know him. [11.23] And I saw him ascend into the firmament but he 
did not change himself into another form, and all the angels above the 
firmament saw him, and they worshipped him. 
This new version of 11.2 describes a kind of earthly sojourn, but in an 
absurdly brief fashion. This actually looks like a rewrite of the Jewish scrip­
ture of Bar. 3.38, where God himself was 'seen on earth and conversed with 
men', which would sooner suggest a revelatory experience was going to be 
described. Hence it's notable how this Ascension text transforms Baruch: 
it does not have Jesus converse with men or seen by men, but has him only 
among men yet completely unknown to them. Ascension Isaiah 11.2 also 
rewrites Dan. 7.13, saying that what Isaiah saw was 'one like a son of man', 
the one who in Daniel appears among the clouds and will receive an eternal 
kingdom over the whole universe (Dan. 7.14). 
But there is still something missing-and it's not the gospel that was 
later inserted. I suspect this version of 1 1.2 is closer to the original, but 
that it was followed by a more detailed explanation of what this meant and 
what happened (all as anticipated in chaps. 9 and 10). That is now miss­
ing. Instead, in this version of the text, Jesus descends to the firmament 
(10.29), then to the lower air (10.30), and then is suddenly in 'the world 
among men' (11.2), where he at last takes the form of a man, but no one 
knows him there. He then suddenly rises into the firmament in 11.23, in his 
original form, and is only then seen-by angels. Notably missing is what 
happened in between. Where is his execution, for example? Something has 
been removed. Not only are we missing the original story (of Satan and his 
angels killing him, as we're told to expect in 9.14), but we also expect to 
hear an account of 'God's resounding voice' across the heavens, since Isa­
iah had heard he would see that, too (10.12), likewise an account of 'many 
of the righteous' ascending with Jesus (9.17; or in the Latin, being sent by 
Jesus) and Jesus hanging around for over a year (9.16, although this detail 
seems to have been abbreviated out of the Latin). Notably, none of these 

44 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
things are in the pocket gospel that was later inserted either. So that clearly 
was not what was removed from the original. 7 What had to have been in 
the original is the original gospel foretold in chaps. 9 and IO. But that is 
not what is in any manuscript of the Ascension of Isaiah in chaps. IO and 
I I  now. Whatever was originally in the text at this point is lost to history 
(though possib'y not entirely: see Chapter 8, §6). 
Further evidence lies in the fact that in this version of the text (which is 
the same in the Latin and in the Slavonic), it is the angels 'above' the firma­
ment who first see Jesus in I 1 .23-24, with no mention of the angels in the 
firmament-whereas all other manuscripts have Satan and his angels see 
him in the firmament (as we should expect). That has to be a mistranslation, 
since 'above the firmament' defines the 'first heaven', yet even in this text 
the angels in the first heaven will worship him in I 1 .25-26, so the text as 
written is confusing two different orders of angels. This also does not cor­
respond to what God says Isaiah will see (in IO.l l-15 and 10.29-JI). And of 
course it makes no sense to skip over Satan and his angels at this point, as if 
suddenly they didn't exist (when we're told in IO.I I to expect a description 
of their surprise at this point). 
It would appear the redactor who produced this version of the text was 
trying to erase an account of Satan's reaction, and likewise that of the 
warring angels of the air and the firmament. He has likewise removed the 
account of God's celestial voice summoning the stars, and what Jesus did 
in the year and a half (or whatever period) before he ascended and was 
recognized (as we were told to expect in 10.12-1 5). Also deleted is any 
mention of the men Jesus was supposed to bring with him (9.17; or in the 
Latin, his 'sending' of'heralds' throughout the earth). Undeniably, a lot has 
been removed-probably because it could not be gelled with the historiciz­
ing account embraced by later Christians who were preserving this text. 
A Jesus who is killed by Satan in the sky and then only appears to men in 
revelations (as the citation of Bar. 3.38 implies was going to happen) had to 
be erased. One redactor just deleted it and tinkered a little with the then-ad­
joining verses (the text that appears in the Latin and the Slavonic), while 
another just replaced it with a more desirable and orthodox gospel (which 
is the text that appears everywhere else). 
Given widespread evidence of Christian fabricating and tampering with 
texts, this should not be surprising (see Chapter 4, Element 44; and Chapter 
7, §7). But even if we imagine that the prior probability of either version 
of the eleventh chapter of the Ascension of Isaiah being authentic is as low 
as one in a thousand (an a fortiori rate of interpolation in Christian texts: 
see note in Chapter I I, §8), the evidence is so overwhelmingly improbable 
7. Even Knight agrees something from 'the lost Greek original' is missing from all 
extant manuscripts at this point (Disciples, p. 69). 

3. Hypothesis of Myth 
45 
on the assumption of authenticity (a million to one at best) that we can be 
certain what we have in that chapter now is not what was in the original. 
The original text cannot have been either (a) the elaborate pocket gospel, 
which fails to correspond with the preceding material in too many ways 
to be even remotely likely, or (b) the version that lacks that (but has in its 
place a completely different 1 1.2 and a revised 11 .23), which not only flubs 
the sequence of events (by deleting Jesus' expected glorious appearance to 
the angels of the firmament), and is implausibly brief(given the verbosity of 
the rest of the text), but also fails to contain any of the events that previous 
chapters told us would be recounted here. 8 
Whether you share that conclusion or not, what is undeniable is that this 
text provides all the elements of a plausible theory: the narrative goes out of 
its way to explain that the firmament contains copies of everything on earth 
(which implies this fact is relevant to the subsequent narrative somehow, 
just as we shal1 see the same remark is in Hebrews: see Chapter 1 1, §5); it 
indisputably places Satan and his demons, the only 'princes and authorities 
and rulers and powers' of which it speaks, in outer space (yet still 'in this 
world', distinctly below the first heaven, and thus in the recognized realm 
of flesh and corruption: see Element 35); and for two whole chapters it 
belabors exclusively and at length the role and actions of these (and only 
these) 'powers' in the crucifixion of Jesus on an unidentified 'tree'. If we 
didn't have Chapter I I (and certainly if this were also the only document 
describing Christian belief), we would conclude nothing else but that this 
Jesus Christ was being described as a preexistent divine being descending 
below the moon to be killed by sky demons in outer space. Because it then 
says nothing else. 
We have even more reason than that to be suspicious here. For the initial 
story told of Jesus in the Ascension of Isaiah sounds a lot like a story of 
another descending-and-ascending, dying-and-rising god, originating over 
a thousand years before the Christian era. In the Descent of Inanna, we 
are given a similarly repetitious account of a goddess (lnanna, variously 
otherwise known as Ishtar or Astarte), the very 'Queen of Heaven' (and 
daughter of God), who descends 'from the great above'. Thus 'abandoning 
8. The defects of the inserted gospel are even greater than the defects of the 
version that fails to mention what we expect (and which not only fails to explain what 
happens after 1 1.2 but flubs 1 1 .23). and thus the one is even less probable on a theory 
of authenticity than the other. Yet in either case the likelihood of having the text in the 
given state we have, if what we have is an unaltered text, is in my opinion no better 
than a million to one against. With a prior probability of a thousand to one the other 
way, that gets us odds of a thousand to one infavor of my conclusion-that the text in 
both traditions is missing what it originally contained. Using the odds form of Bayes's 
Theorem (see Chapter 12, §1): P(MtsstNole)/P(-.MtsstNale) = 1/1000 x 1,000,000/1 = 
1000/1. 

46 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
heaven' she descends from outer space all the way past earth into the realm 
of the dead below it, fully intending to be killed there and then resurrected 
three days later. Just like in the Ascension of Isaiah, the narrative relates 
her plans in advance to ensure this, and then relates how it happens exactly 
to plan. And like the 'Jesus' figure in the the Ascension of Isaiah, Inanna is 
crucified (nailed up), and notably not on earth, but in a non-earthly realm 
(the sub-world, in accordance with Sumerian lore of the time), and not 
by people, but by demons-and their godly overlords, who happen to be 
the gods of death, yet another coincidence with the Ascension (and like 
the narrative that ends up in the Gospels, Inanna is also humiliated and 
condemned to death in a kind of kangaroo court). Most importantly, just 
as Jesus must descend through seven levels of heaven, shedding layers of 
his glory at each stage and thereby humbling his appearance (which the 
Ascension of Isaiah repeatedly equates with garments), so Inanna descends 
through seven levels of the underworld, shedding layers of her regalia at 
each stage and thereby being humbled in her appearance-until at last she 
is naked (the most mortal and vulnerable state of all), and that's when she 
is killed. 
This is an extremely unlikely coincidence, particularly given the highly 
repetitious nature of both texts. It cannot be believed that the author of 
the Ascension just 'by coincidence' ended up telling almost the very same 
story, right down to its characteristic repetitions, seven-stage descent and 
disrobing, crucifixion by demons, and resurrection. Inanna, like Jesus, 
was also God's child; and like the Ascension, in the Descent her plans are 
explained before being described. There are many differences in these 
two tales, certainly. For instance Inanna escapes the realm of the dead by 
trading places with her (apparently haughty) husband, Tammuz, who is 
dragged into hell by its demons. But the skeletal structure of the story in 
the Ascension clearly derives from this pre-Christian religion-whether by 
circuitous route or not. We know the Jews were long familiar with this 
sacred story of Inanna's descent. Jeremiah 7.18 and 44.15-26 complain of 
the prevalence of Inanna-cult among Palestinian Jews, even in the heart of 
Jerusalem itself, and Ezek. 8.14 explicitly mentions women in Jerusalem 
weeping for the fate of Tammuz (which would be his dragging into hell 
at the behest of the resurrected Inanna), which ceremony is also known 
to have preceded a rejoicing at his own resurrection.9 Clearly the tale has 
9. That Tammuz himself was also believed to have been resurrected is attested by 
Origen, Selecta in Ezechielem, in J.-P. Migne, Patrologiae cursus completus: series 
graeca 13.800; see also Apostolic Constitutions 5.12 and further discussion and sources 
in Carrier, Not the Impossible Faith, pp. 17-18 (with n. 1, p. 45). Possibly this cult of 
Inanna and Tammuz was an early form of the seasonal exchange of dying-and-rising 
known for other pairs of gods, such as Castor and Pollux. See Element 31 in Chapter 5. 

3. Hypothesis of Myth 
47 
instead been co-opted and 'improved' by folding into it particularly Jewish 
and more 'modern' religious notions. For instance, Jesus acts at the behest 
of the God Most High to ultimately overthrow Satan, and the descent is 
accomplished through levels of Heaven rather than levels of Hell. But that 
the story was changed to suit new and different sensibilities and purposes 
is precisely how rei igious syncretism works. 
Insufficient evidence survives to ascertain whether this is the route from 
which Christianity itself derived, but with this text the evidence is unde­
niable that Christianity had merged its own myth with this pre-Christian 
dying-and-rising god concept very early and very thoroughly. Because the 
Ascension of Isaiah itself is unmistakably influenced by, and in outline 
derived from, the lnanna descent myth, whether directly or indirectly. 
And yet that myth already contains two elements supposedly distinctive of 
Jesus Christ as a dying-and-rising god: the humiliation, trial and crucifix­
ion of the worshiped divinity, and the resurrection in three days. And this 
is definitely what happens in their respective stories. After she is stripped 
naked and judgment is pronounced against her, I nanna is 'turned into a 
corpse' and 'the corpse was hung from a nail' and 'after three days and 
three nights' her assistants ask for her corpse and resurrect her, and 'lnanna 
arose' according to her plan, because she knew her father 'will surely bring 
me back to life', exactly as transpires.10 Indeed, there is a third parallel: 
Inanna's resurrection is secured by a ritual involving the divine 'food of 
life' and the divine 'water of life'. The Eucharist is only a few steps away. 
If all those elements are removed from Christianity, it's hard to think what 
could possibly remain that makes Jesus' historicity at all likely. If the Jesus 
of the Gospels wasn't humiliated, tried and crucified, if he didn't originate 
the Eucharist (which is just another resurrection-securing ritual of food and 
drink), then the depth of mythmaking that very rapidly surrounded him is 
truly extreme-and if it can be that extreme, why would we balk at the idea 
that the rest is myth, too? 
In one of the earliest Christian texts we have, the apostle Paul says 
God's plan of Christ's death-defeating sacrifice was a 'secret' kept 'hidden' 
(1 Cor. 2.7) and only recently known by 'revelation' (I Cor. 2.1 0), such that 
'none of the rulers of this world knew; for had they known it, they would 
not have crucified the Lord of Glory' (1 Cor. 2.8). This looks like a direct 
paraphrase of an early version of the Ascension of Isaiah, wherein Jesus is 
10. Translation and background: Samuel Noah Kramer, History Begins at Sumer: 
Thirty-Nine Firsts in Man's Recorded History (Philadelphia. PA: University of 
Pennsylvania Press, Jrd rev. edn, 1981), pp. 154-67 (quoted excerpts from p. 162. lines 
1-3; p. 160, line 3; and p. 163, Jines 10-12 and 15-22). See also Pirjo Lapinkivi, The 
Neo-Assyrian Myth of/star's Descent and Resurrection (Helsinki: Neo-Assyrian Text 
Corpus Project, 201 0). 

48 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
also the 'Lord of Glory', his descent and divine plan is also 'hidden' and the 
'rulers ofthis world' are indeed the ones who crucify him, in ignorance of 
that hidden plan (see the Ascension of Isaiah 9.15; 9.32; 10.12, 15). It even 
has an angel predict his resurrection on the third day (9.16), and the Latin/ 
Slavonic contains a verse (in 1 1.34) that Paul actually cites as scripture, in 
the very same place (1 Cor. 2.9).11 
So is Paul here referring to the demonic execution of Jesus in outer 
space? That would certainly explain why he would say this cannot have 
been seen by anyone, but is known only by revelation (1 Cor. 2.9-10; cf. 
Rom. 16.25-26). That this makes particular sense-in fact, more sense than 
what's usually assumed-is what I shall argue in Chapter 11. Here my aim 
is not to argue that this theory is true, but to explain what this theory is. 
2. The Basic Problem 
There is a large array of books and scholars who have advanced various 
Jesus myth theories over the last two centuries. A historicist might com­
plain that there are too many different theories advanced, but that would 
only be the pot calling the kettle black. As discussed in the previous chapter 
(and in Chapter 1 of Proving History), there are 'too many different the­
ories' of historicity as well, and if those are taken seriously, the fact that 
mythicism finds the same diversity of disagreement can be no objection to 
it any more than it would be a valid objection to historicity. We must agree 
that most theories of historicity are false (since only one of the hundreds 
defended can actually be correct), yet historicity might still be true. So, too, 
mythicism. 
I won't explore the many flawed or ridiculous Jesus myth theories that 
have gone around or still circulate. I will only mention here the most credi­
ble defenses ofmythicism, ranked in order of the extent to which they hold 
to the 'rules' and 'axioms' I summarized in Chapter 2 of Proving History. 
At the top of that list is Earl Doherty's The Jesus Puzzle: Did Christian­
ity Begin with a Mythical Christ? and Jesus: Neither God nor Man (The 
Case for a Mythical Jesus), complete with an extensive Website in support 
of both Uesuspuzzle.humanists.net). I recommend a reader start with the 
1 1 .  This same scriptural quotation (verbatim or nearly) appeared in other 
apocalypses as well, yet (as in the Asc. Is.) not as a citation of scripture but simply what 
an angel says (see Corpus christianorum: series apocryphorum 8 [Ascensio /saiae], pp. 
590-92). Paul thus is not only using a lost Apocalypse for his information about Jesus 
in 1 Corinthians 2 (and thus for his crucifixion), but he assumes his fellow Christians 
are intimately familiar with that Apocalypse as weJJ, and revered it as scripture (see 
Element 9 in Chapter 4). We can rightly wonder what relationship that Apocalypse had 
to the Ascension of Isaiah. May it have been an earlier redaction of it? 

3. Hypothesis of Myth 
49 
first of these, and treat the other as an appendix to it. Meanwhile the most 
prestigious support for myth, coming from renowned doctors of biblical 
studies, are Thomas Thompson's The Messiah Myth: The Near Eastern 
Roots of Jesus and David, and Thomas Brodie's Beyond the Quest for the 
Historical Jesus: A Memoir of a Discovery. Whether some very insignifi­
cant Jesus might still lay at the origin of Christianity is a question Thomp­
son considers unanswerable, but he still argues that the Gospels are fiction 
top to bottom, leaving nothing left that we can consider a 'historical' Jesus. 
Arthur Droge, professor of early Christianity at the University of Califor­
nia, San Diego, and Kurt Noll, associate professor of religion at Brandon 
University, agree with that agnostic assessment.12 Brodie only takes this to 
its natural conclusion, that originally there was no Jesus at all. So Doherty 
is not alone. 
Another PhD in the field making the case is Robert Price, with a whole 
series of books on the matter, from Deconstructing Jesus and The Incredi­
ble Shrinking Son of Man to Jesus Is Dead and The Case against the Case 
for Christ, and most recently (and most valuably) The Christ-Myth Theory 
and its Problems. Price's efforts have been more controversial and are often 
more debatable, but nevertheless much of what he says has enough merit to 
at least consider, even if you reject it in the end. Among the controversies 
he has created is his tendency to advance and defend multiple contradictory 
accounts of the evidence, although that's in many ways more honest than 
what historicists do, since Price fully acknowledges the evidence is insuffi­
cient to confirm only one theory, and therefore many compete for viability. 
And in effect this is what historicists tacitly assume in accepting, even if 
themselves rejecting, the many contradictory theories of their colleagues 
without scandal. 
Before this new vanguard of scholars arose, the most famous recent 
defender of the Jesus myth was George Wells, with over half a dozen books 
spanning forty years, from Did Jesus Exist? in 1975 to Cutting Jesus Down 
to Size in 2009. His approach has evolved into essentially the position of 
Thompson, that there may yet be a historical Jesus behind it all but there 
simply isn't sufficient evidence to know, as everything claiming to be about 
him is fiction. I place Wells near the bottom of my list of worthies because 
his competence in ancient history is not overly strong, and thus, although 
he has a lot of sound points to make, some of his premises and conclusions 
become untenable in light of background facts unknown to him. Before 
12. A.J. Droge, 'Jesus and Ned Lud[d]: What's in a Name?', CAESAR: A Journal 
for the Critical Study of Religion and Human Values 3 (2009), pp. 23-25; Kurt Noll, 
'Investigating Earliest Christianity without Jesus', in 'Is This Not the Carpenter?' The 
Question of the Historicity of the Figure of Jesus (ed. Thomas Thompson and Thomas 
Verenna; Sheffield: Equinox 2012), pp. 233-66. 

50 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
Wells, the very best outdated defense of the Jesus myth concept is Arthur 
Drews's The Christ Myth, published in 1910, which despite its flaws still has 
many sound points to make that are as true today as they were then. I could 
name other advocates now and in the past who may have worthwhile things 
to say in the matter, but as they often fall below acceptable bars of reli­
ability or scholarly qualifications they cannot contribute as much toward 
changing the scholarly consensus at this point. 
As with the historicists, I do not believe any one of the scholars I've 
named is 'right', but that the truth lies somewhere among them all. Just as 
one would not read, say, Robert Eisenman's James the Brother of Jesus: 
The Key to Unlocking the Secrets of Early Christianity and the Dead Sea 
Scrolls and conclude 'this is erudite and interesting, but complete bollocks, 
therefore Jesus didn't exist'. so one should not read any particular myth­
icist and likewise conclude 'this is erudite and interesting, but complete 
bollocks, therefore Jesus did exist'. We all accept that every historicist is 
probably wrong about something, possibly quite a lot of things (they must 
be-as they all disagree), but we do not then conclude historicity is bunk. 
We conclude the truth lies somewhere among them all. We should approach 
mythicism the same way. 
Historicists will usual1y agree that once we trim away everything that's 
wrong or too speculative or inadequately demonstrated, we'll have some­
thing that can be reliably affirmed about the historical Jesus (even if it's 
literally nothing more than that he existed). And if this is how we behave 
in reaction to the contradictions and errors among historicists (and we 
must-as otherwise only a complete agnosticism about the historical Jesus 
would logically remain), we are obligated to behave the same in reaction 
to the contradictions and errors among mythicists. As for historicists, so 
for them: once we trim away everything that's wrong or too speculative or 
inadequately demonstrated, we may yet have something that can be reliably 
affirmed about the historical Jesus (even if only that he didn't exist-or that 
we can't reliably know he did). 
The same point can be expanded beyond the mainstream. For there are 
as many absurd theories of historicity as there are absurd Jesus myth the­
ories. That Jesus toured India, or flew to North America, or exchanged 
letters with King Abgar, or convinced King Agrippa to back him on state 
currency as the Messiah, or that Jesus fathered a royal dynasty with Mary 
and then his kin had to dodge imperial attempts to eliminate their blood­
line, or that he staged all his miracles, including faking his death and res­
urrection simply to set himself up as King of the Jews (which plan then 
failed), or that the canonical Gospels are literally and entirely true down 
to the smallest detail are all theories of historicity that I must honestly say 
are extraordinarily untenable. Yet all have been advanced and defended by 

3. Hypothesis of Myth 
5 1  
scholars somewhere at some time-the last of these especially, which even 
today has whole colleges pledged to defending it. So finding equally absurd 
theories among the mythicists is no more a strike against mythicism as 
the above theories are against historicity. We simply set them aside as not 
worth even considering, leaving only the tenable theories to entertain. As 
for historicity, so for myth. 
To avoid the monstrous task of a complete fact-check of every mythicist 
book I've I isted (which books I consider to be advancing tenable theories­
just not necessarily the correct ones), I will take the obvious shortcut. I 
won't bother defending any of the elaborations or specific but unnecessary 
claims of any author. I will instead construct the most minimal, plausible 
Jesus myth theory and see how it holds up. As with the minimal theory of 
historicity (defined in the previous chapter), there may yet be much else we 
can show to be true, but before we can proceed down that path we must 
first settle the basic question of whether we ought to be interpreting the 
evidence with the assumption that a historical Jesus existed, or that he did 
not. Hence I'll pit minimal historicity against minimal mythicism and see 
which has the greater merit in the final analysis. Other scholars can then 
build on that conclusion. Which is what should have been done in the first 
place. Indeed, I see this as one of the greatest methodological mistakes of 
mythicists: instead of first convincing the establishment of the basic mer­
its of their interpretational framework and then recruiting the scholarly 
community in developing further conclusions therefrom, they immediately 
launch with elaborate conclusions about everything, making their theory 
all too easy to straw-man into the dustbin. 
And that's essentially what has happened. In Chapter 1 I already dis­
cussed Van Voorst. who in a few pages directly rebuts mythicism (though 
really just Drews and Wells), and cited Theissen and Merz, who summa­
rize a lengthier case against many generic mythicist claims, but only the 
weakest premises, and they never directly interact with any specific mythi­
cist thesis. Other examples of recent criticism likewise touch only on some 
aspects of mythicism, and often inaccurately.13 And yet these are the only 
scholarly attempts to refute mythicism worth reading, with the exception 
of several very outdated but still noteworthy works, which reveal (in their 
13. For example. see the quasi debate between Robert Price and a gamut of 
historicists in The Historical Jesus: Five Views (ed. James Beilby and Paul Rhodes 
Eddy; Downers Grove, IL: IVP Academic, 2009), esp. pp. 55-103, 133-37, 178-82, 226-
32, 282-87, and the very limited exchange between G.A. Wells ('The Historicity of 
Jesus') and Morton Smith ('The Historical Jesus') in Jesus in History and Myth (ed. 
R. Joseph Hoffmann and Gerald Larue; Buffalo, NY: Prometheus Books, 1986), pp. 
25-54. For Bart Ehrman's and Maurice Casey's recent attempts at joining the debate, 
see note in Chapter 1 (§2). 

52 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
very efforts to rebut it) how popular was the idea, even among some experts 
of the time, that Jesus was a myth. 14 
All are examples of the inadequacy of scholarly responses even from 
the earliest days of the controversy. In fact, the assumption that mythicism 
has been 'refuted' rests entirely on a series of fallacious rebuttals merely 
assumed to have been decisive. Shirley Jackson Case, for instance, soundly 
rebuts only certain mythicist arguments. That Case (and everyone after­
ward) concluded mythicism itselfhad thus been soundly rebutted is simply 
incorrect (see Chapter 1 1, §I I). Early mythic ism of the sort Case documents 
was launched from many sound intuitions that remain forceful, but was 
often flawed and naive, and certainly methodologically unsound, as is a 
lot of myth advocacy still today (and aU the early-twentieth-century critics 
remain quite right about that). 
Accordingly, we need to wipe the slate clean and start over, using a hum­
bler, more informed and more methodologically sound approach. Only if 
that effort then fails (without being made into a straw man all over again) 
can it be concluded that mythicism tout court has been refuted. And then 
we can get on with the study of the historical Jesus. 
3. The Minimal Jesus Myth Theory 
Despite countless variations (including a still-rampant obsession with 
indemonstrable 'astrological' theories of Gospel interpretation that you 
won't find much sympathy for here), the basic thesis of every competent 
mythicist, then and now, has always been that Jesus was originally a god, 
just like any other god (properly speaking, a demigod in pagan terms; an 
archangel in Jewish terms; in either sense, a deity), 15 who was later his­
toricized, just as countless other gods were, and that the Gospel of Mark 
(or Mark's source) originated the Christian myth familiar to us by build-
14. John E. Remsberg, The Christ: A Critical Review and Analysis of his Existence 
(Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 1994 [orig., 1909]); Thomas James Thorburn, The 
Mythical Interpretation of the Gospels: Critical Studies in the Historic Narratives 
(New York: Scribner, 1916); Maurice Goguel, Jesus the Nazarene: Myth ur History? 
(New York: D. Appleton, 1926); and most importantly Shirley Jackson Case, The 
Historicity of Jesus: A Criticism of the Contention That Jesus Never Lived; A Statement 
ofthe Evidence for his Existence; An Estimate of his Relation to Christianity (Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 2d edn, 1928). There is also an important discussion of 
mythicism in the special second edition of Schweitzer's Quest of the Historical Jesus, 
which was for a long time available only in German (since 1913), and only recently 
in English as Albert Schweitzer, The Quest of the Historical Jesus (tr. John Bowden; 
(London: SCM Press, 2000). 
15. On the Jewish use of angelology and demonology to speak of what pagans 
regarded as gods (and what even we today would call gods), see my discussion in 
Chaoter 4 (§3) and Element 11. 

3. Hypothesis of Myth 
53 
ing up an edifying and symbolically meaningful tale for Jesus, drawing 
on passages from the Old Testament and popular literature, coupled with 
elements of revelation and pious inspiration. The manner in which Osiris 
came to be historicized, moving from being just a cosmic god to being 
given a whole narrative biography set in Egypt during a specific histor­
ical period, complete with collections of wisdom sayings he supposedly 
uttered, is still an apt model, if not by any means an exact one. Which is 
to say, it establishes a proof of concept. It is in essence what all myth icists 
are saying happened to Jesus. 
Distilling all of this down to its most basic principles we get the follow­
ing set of propositions: 
1 .  At the origin of Christianity, Jesus Christ was thought to be a celestial 
deity much like any other. 
2. Like many other celestial deities, this Jesus 'communicated' with his 
subjects only through dreams, visions and other forms of divine inspi­
ration (such as prophecy, past and present). 
3. Like some other celestial deities, this Jesus was originally believed to 
have endured an ordeal of incarnation, death, burial and resurrection 
in a supernatural realm. 
4. As for many other celestial deities, an allegorical story of this same 
Jesus was then composed and told within the sacred community, 
which placed him on earth, in history, as a divine man, with an earthly 
family, companions, and enemies, complete with deeds and sayings, 
and an earthly depiction of his ordeals. 
5. Subsequent communities of worshipers believed (or at least taught) 
that this invented sacred story was real (and either not allegorical or 
only 'additionally' allegorical). 
That all five propositions are true shall be my minimal Jesus myth theory. 
As occasion warrants I might add features on to test the merits of more 
complex theories, but unless I explicitly say otherwise, the above is the 
theory I shall be testing against the minimal theory of historicity. Because 
if any one of the first four premises is false, it can fairly be said Jesus 
did not begin his life in myth (he just ended up there), and at least one of 
those premises must be false for 'Jesus was a real historical man' to be a 
relevantly true statement. The fifth premise, however, is uncontroversially 
a given, being already compatible with historicity, and well enough con­
firmed in the evidence as to not be in doubt. 
Unlike the minimal theory of historicity, however, what I have just said 
is not strictly entailed. If 'Jesus Christ began as a celestial deity' is false, 
it could still be that he began as a political fiction, for example (as some 
scholars have indeed argued-the best examples being R.G. Price and 

54 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
Gary Courtney).16 But as will become dear in following chapters (espe­
cially Chapter 11), such a premise has a much lower prior probability (and 
thus is already at a huge disadvantage over Premise 1 even before we start 
examining the evidence), and a very low consequent probability (though it 
suits the Gospels well, it just isn't possible to explain the evidence in the 
Epistles this way, and the origin of Christianity itself becomes very hard 
to explain as well). Although I leave open the possibility it may yet be vin­
dicated, I'm sure it's very unlikely to be, and accordingly I will assume its 
prior probability is too small even to show up in our math. This decision 
can be reversed only by a sound and valid demonstration that we must 
assign it a higher prior or consequent, but that I leave to anyone who thinks 
it's possible. In the meantime, what we have left is Premise 1, such that if 
that is less probable than minimal historicity, then I would be convinced 
historicity should be affirmed (particularly as the 'political fiction' theory 
already fits historicity and thus is not really a challenge to it-indeed that's 
often the very kind of fiction that gets written about historical persons). 
This same conclusion follows for Premise 2, which could also be false 
and mythicism still be true, but only on the alternative hypothesis that 
everything said about (and said to have been said by) Jesus was an outright 
and deliberate fabrication (or the product of such a deranged reading of 
scripture as to beg every question of why the movement would even have 
found followers), which again has a very low prior probability (certainly 
much lower by far than Premise 2), and a very low consequent probability 
(given, again, all the evidence in the Epistles, as well as the background 
knowledge to be surveyed in Chapters 4 and 5). Of course, by Premise 2 
I do not mean to assert that this celestial Christ really did communicate 
with people by such supernatural means, only that this is what the original 
Christian founders sincerely believed was happening-or at the very least 
claimed was happening.17 Likewise, I am not here saying there wasn't a lot 
that was deliberately (and thus deceitfully) made up about what Jesus said 
and did. As most mainstream scholars would agree, a lot certainly was. But 
that all of it would be is what I deem too improbable to credit. 
Premises 3 and 4 could similarly be denied and mythicism still be true. 
so long as we posited that the founders of Christianity hallucinated the 
entire life and fate of an earthly Christ, or outright lied about it ever having 
16. R.G. Price, Jesus: A Very Jewish Myth (n.p.: RationaiEvolution.net. 2007)੠ and 
R.G. Price, The Gospel of Mark as Reaction and Allegory (n.p.: Rational Evolution. net. 
2007); Gary Courtney, Et Tu, Judas? Then Fall Jesus! 2nd ed. (Lincoln, NE: iUniverse. 
2004). 
17. On how fine the line really was between the two see Carrier, Not the Impossible 
Faith, pp. 281-85 (and sources there cited). See also Richard Carrier. 'Why the 
Resurrection Is Unbelievable', in Christian Delusion: Why Faith Fails (ed. John 
Loftus; Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 2010), pp. 291-315 (300-301, 305-307). 

3. Hypothesis of Myth 
55 
occurred.18 But again, either possibility has an extremely low prior prob­
ability, and though it may command a high consequent probability (since 
lies and hallucinations often look exactly the same as the truth-that's in 
fact why they are ever believed in the first place), I suspect it would entail a 
lower consequent probability than Premises 3 and 4, or at best none better. 
Perhaps such a theory can still claim a higher consequent probability than 
historicity, but I doubt that, and in any case that's someone else's business 
to prove. More to the point, even if such a theory were sustained, I suspect 
it would still end up with a lower posterior probability than would result 
from Premises 3 and 4, so the merits of such a theory would be moot. It 
would still be false, and the theory here defended true instead. In any 
case, it's the extremely small prior probability of these 'alternatives' that 
matters for the moment, because that means they take up so little of the 
prior-probability-space that we can safely ignore them. 
Finally, Premise 5 is already an effective certainty, as it is true even if 
historicity is true, and is so well verified in background evidence that its 
prior probability is as near to IOOo/o as makes all odds. So the possibility 
of its being false will not be an issue. Since Premise 5 is certainly true, 
and the prior probability of any of Premises I through 4 being false and 
historicity still not being true is vanishingly small (certainly less than a 
tenth of one percent by any reasonable estimate}, if I assign ... h to be the 
theory defined by Premises I through 5, I can safely assume that h entails 
historicity (given my minimal definition of historicity as a hypothesis in 
Chapter 2) and that these exhaust all relevant possibilities, and therefore I 
have a proper binary test, h and -.h, just two hypotheses to compare against 
each other, such that if one is false, the other is true. 
Certainly, when framed like this, technically -·h (non-historicity) must 
also include all Jesus myth theories not defined by Premises I through 5 
(that is, all theories of the evidence for Jesus that entail historicity is false 
and at least one of Premises I through 5 is false), but since their prior 
probability (even collectively) is surely less than a tenth of one percent (as I 
just reasoned), and their posterior probability not sufficiently high to make 
enough of a difference (especially in relation to minimal historicity), these 
theories share such a small portion of the probability-space occupied by -.h 
that they can simply be ignored.19 In other words, if -.h (as I have minimally 
defined it) is false, it's simply the case that historicity is probably true. 
With both the hypotheses of historicity and myth duly defined, now we 
must turn to a survey of the essential background knowledge governing 
their comparison. 
18. The only alternatives to it taking place in a 'supernatural realm'. But the latter 
could have been imagined to be in outer space or on earth and still conform to minimal 
mythicism as I have defined it: see note in Chapter 1 1  (§8). 
19. On this methodological point see Carrier, Proving History, pp. 70-71, 86, 205. 

4 
BACKGROUND KNOWLEDGE (CHRISTIANITY) 
1 .  A Romu/an Tale 
In Plutarch's biography of Romulus, the founder of Rome, we are told he 
was the son of god, born of a virgin; an attempt is made to kill him as 
a baby, and he is saved, and raised by a poor family, becoming a lowly 
shepherd; then as a man he becomes beloved by the people, hailed as king, 
and killed by the conniving elite; then he rises from the dead, appears to 
a friend to tell the good news to his people, and ascends to heaven to rule 
from on high. Just like Jesus. 
Plutarch also tells us about annual public ceremonies that were still 
being performed, which celebrated the day Romulus ascended to heaven. 
The sacred story told at this event went basica11y as follows: at the end 
of his life, amid rumors he was murdered by a conspiracy of the Senate 
Uust as Jesus was 'murdered' by a conspiracy of the Jews-in fact by the 
Sanhedrin, the Jewish equivalent of the Senate), the sun went dark Uust as 
it did when Jesus died), and Romulus's body vanished Uust as Jesus' did). 
The people wanted to search for him but the Senate told them not to, 'for 
he had risen to join the gods' (much as a mysterious young man tells the 
women in Mark's Gospel). Most went away happy, hoping for good things 
from their new god, but 'some doubted' Uust as all later Gospels say of 
Jesus: Mt. 28.17; Lk. 24.1 1; Jn 20.24-25; even Mk 16.8 implies this). Soon 
after, Proculus, a close friend of Romulus, reported that he met Romulus 
'on the road' between Rome and a nearby town and asked him, 'Why have 
you abandoned us?', to which Romulus replied that he had been a god all 
along but had come down to earth and become incarnate to establish a 
great kingdom, and now had to return to his home in heaven (pretty much 
as happens to Cleopas in Lk. 24.13-32; see Chapter 10, §6). Then Romulus 
told his friend to te11 the Romans that if they are virtuous they will have all 
worldly power. ' 
1. Luke converts this glorious appearance tale into a hidden god narrative (a 
reversal that befits how Christianity was also inverting the message of Romulus: 

4. Background (Christianity) 
57 
Plutarch tells us that the annual Roman ceremony of the Rom ulan ascent 
involved a recitation of the names of those who fled his vanishing in fear, 
and the acting out of their fear and flight in public, a scene suspiciously 
paralleling the pre-redacted ending of Mark's Gospel (at 16.8).2 Which 
would make sense of his otherwise bizarre ending-we are then to assume 
what followed his story is just what followed the story he is emulating: an 
appearance of the Lord, delivering the gospel, which is then proclaimed to 
the people (the very thing Mark tells us to anticipate: 14.28 and 16.7). In 
fact, Livy's account, just like Mark's, emphasizes that 'fear and bereave­
ment' kept the people 'silent for a long time', and only later did they pro­
claim Romulus 'God, Son of God, King, and Father', thus matching Mark's 
'they said nothing to anyone', yet obviously assuming that somehow word 
got out. 
·It certainly seems as if Mark is fashioning Jesus into the new Romulus, 
with a new, superior message, establishing a new, superior kingdom. This 
Romulan tale looks a lot like a skeletal model for the passion narrative: a 
great man, founder of a great kingdom, despite coming from lowly origins 
and of suspect parentage, is actually an incarnated son of god, but dies as 
a result of a conspiracy of the ruling council, then a darkness covers the 
land at his death and his body vanishes, at which those who followed him 
flee in fear Uust like the Gospel women, Mk 16.8; and men, Mk 14.50-52), 
and like them, too, we look for his body but are told he is not here, he has 
risen; and some doubt, but then the risen god 'appears' to select followers 
to deliver his gospel.3 
promising, at least in the meantime, a hidden spiritual kingdom rather than a visible 
earthly one: 2 Cor. 4.18; Rom. 14. 17), but otherwise the details are essentially the same 
(in fact, the similarities are even more numerous than proposed here, as I'll show in 
Chapter 10, §6੡ and in Element 47). See also Richard Carrier, 'The Spiritual Body of 
Christ and the Legend of the Empty Tomb', in Empty Tomb (ed. Price and Lowder), pp. 
105-232 (180·84. 191). 
2. Mark also happens to be one of the recited names of those who fled the vanishing 
of Romulus-as is a cognate of Luke ('they shout out many local names, like Marcus, 
lucius, and Gaius'. Plutarch. Romulus 29.2). These were very common names, 
however; and Lukas was a contraction of Lucanus, not Lucius (though the names are 
related). So the fact that Mark and Luke are the two Gospels that most conspicuously 
emulate the story of Romulus is perhaps just a coincidence. 
3. This tale is widely attested as pre-Christian: in Romulus 27-28, Plutarch, though 
writing c. 80-120 cE, is certainly recording a long-established Roman tale and custom, 
and his sources are unmistakably pre-Christian: Cicero, Laws 1.3, Republic 2.10; Livy, 
From the Founding of the City 1.16.2-8 (1.3-1.16 relating the whole story of Romulus); 
Ovid, Fasti 2.491-512 and Metamorphoses 14.805-51; and Dionysius ofHalicarnassus, 
Roman Antiquities 2.63.3 ( l .71-2.65 relating the whole story of Romulus); see also 
a later reference: Cassius Dio. Roman History 56.46.2. The story's antiquity was 
acknowledged even by Christians: Tertullian, Apology 21. 

58 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
There are many differences in the two stories, surely. But the similari­
ties are too numerous to be a coincidence-and the differences are likely 
deliberate. For instance, Romulus's material kingdom favoring the mighty 
is transformed into a spiritual one favoring the humble. It certainly looks 
like the Christian passion narrative is an intentional transvaluation of the 
Roman Empire's ceremony of their own founding savior's incarnation, 
death and resurrection (see Element 47). Other elements have been added 
to the Gospels-the story heavily Judaized, and many other symbols and 
motifs puHed in to transform it-and the narrative has been modified, 
in structure and content, to suit the Christians' own moral and spiritual 
agenda. But the basic structure is not originaL 
There were, in fact, numerous pre-Christian savior gods who became 
incarnate and underwent sufferings or trials, even deaths and resurrec­
tions.4 None of them actually existed. Neither did Romulus. Yet all were 
placed in history, and often given detailed biographies. Just like Plutarch's. 
2. Background Knowledge 
We cannot claim to understand the Christian religion and its documents if 
we ignore such background knowledge as this. We cannot estimate what 
was likely or typical unless we know everything relevant we can know 
about the context of the time, including comparative evidence, from reli­
gions and movements of that time and place and religions and movements 
throughout history. 
Knowing the background of the Romulus myths and rituals drastically 
changes what we will consider possible or likely in the case of Jesus, and 
yet that's just one single item. Think how much difference will be made 
by knowing a hundred such items. We also cannot arrive at accurate judg­
ments if we ignore all the data we actually have from Christianity's earliest 
documents, yet many scholars ignore a surprising amount of that data when 
formulating theories and estimates of likelihood. We can't do that. We need 
to attend to as complete and secure a body of background knowledge as 
possible so we can correctly condition all our probability estimates on it as 
Bayes's Theorem requires.5 
4. Most certainly Osiris, Zalmoxis, Dionysus, Inanna, and others: see Carrier, Not 
the Impossible Faith, pp. 17-19, 85-1 13 (more will be said on this point here and in 
following chapters: Elements 14, 31, and 46-48). 
5. We also have to take into account how much we don't know about antiquity 
(because assuming we know everything is itself a fallacy that undermines many 
theories and estimates); see Carrier, Proving History, pp. 129-34, and Carrier, 'Spiritual 
Body', in Empty Tomb (ed. Price and Lowder), pp. 180-82. 

4. Background (Christianity) 
59 
Background knowledge should consist of facts beyond reasonable dis­
pute. Some of these facts are theoretical, but are so well established from 
the facts available that we can treat them as tantamount to established 
facts. Most of this body of material is not specific to Christianity (e.g. 
the laws of physics), and most that is specific to Christianity is (or ought 
to be) already well known by experts in Jesus studies. Which is why 
experts are more qualified to judge theories in ancient history: a thorough 
knowledge of the evidence and contextual background is necessary to 
make credible estimates of likelihood (I've already said enough about 
this in Chapter 2 of Proving History). But no one can be an expert in 
everything. And evaluating claims about Jesus requires understanding 
the modern science of hallucination and psychosomatic illness, as well 
as the established findings of modern sociology, psychology and cultural 
anthropology. But even some of the historical material is surprisingly 
not known to many experts. I have selected the most important of those 
elements to present here, which will play a significant part in evaluating 
the remaining evidence in following chapters. In fact, everything here to 
follow is what any theory of the origins of Christianity must fit and take 
into account. For what follows is true regardless of whether Jesus existed 
as a historical person or not. Hence even a historical Jesus can only be 
understood in this context. 
As I explained in Proving History, in science, usually background 
knowledge (or b) includes all previous data while evidence (or e) is limited 
to new data (from a single experiment or study). History only occasion­
ally gets new data. What historians are keen to know is not just whether 
new data changes what we should believe, but more often what a partic­
ular body of evidence warrants believing. And historians examine both 
questions in terms of causal explanation: determining what happened (the 
events of history) is a function of determining what caused the evidence 
we now have, and determining why that happened requires determining 
what caused the events thus discerned (I provided all the logical demon­
strations and explanations of these points in Proving History). Thus what 
goes in e is ordinarily what historians believe stands in need of a causal 
explanation ('How did that evidence come about?'). Everything else goes 
in b. Data can be moved between these two sets however you desire as 
long as you are consistent (e.g. what you put in e stays in e throughout 
a single equation). That this demarcation is arbitrary makes no differ­
ence to the method, since the mathematics must work out the same (if it 
doesn't, you've made a mistake somewhere). Thus some of what follows 
could be moved from b to e if you so desired, but doing so can make no 
difference to the final outcome. 

60 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
3. Elemental Definitions 
I must first define some terms I will frequently use. Other terms I define as 
I present them, including a few already in Chapter 1, presenting each word 
in bold where it is defined. These definitions are not intended to be norma­
tive. So there is no sense in arguing whether my definitions are 'right' or 
'wrong'. They merely specify what I mean when I use those terms, regard­
less of what anyone else might mean, or what any dictionaries say, or any 
other conventions. As long as you treat my definitions as nothing more than 
explanations of what I mean, confusion will be forestalled. 
I shall use god to mean any celestial being with supernatural power, 
and God to mean a supreme creator deity. Though by this definition angels 
and demons are indeed gods, rn sometimes (but not always) use angel or 
archangel to refer to 'gods' that are believed to be acting as messengers 
or servants of God and demon to refer to 'gods' who are believed to be 
acting in opposition to God (the terminology was already this fluid even 
among early Christians: e.g. 2 Cor. 4.4; I Cor. 8.5; Gal. 4.8-9), although I 
will also on occasion use 'demon' more neutrally in the context of pagan 
belief(in which there were both good and evil demons, aJI of whom gods).6 
I shaH mean by Jesus Christ the name given by the earliest known Chris­
tians to a man who was believed to have historically existed (whether on 
earth or only in heaven-or both) and to have in some sense originated the 
Christian religion (for the meaning of his name see Chapter 6, §2). I shall 
mean by Christianity (and all cognate terms) any cult venerating this Jesus 
Christ as a divine being. And by cult, of course, I do not mean the pejora­
tive but the standard anthropological term for any community of worship 
distinguished by a system of religious rituals and doctrines. 
I shall mean by messiah (the Hebrew word of which 'Christ' is a transla­
tion) any man in fact, myth, or prophecy who is (a) anointed by the Hebrew 
God to (b) play a part in God's plan to liberate his Chosen People from 
their oppressors and (c) restore or institute God's true religion. This means 
'anointed' in any sense then understood (literally, figuratively, cosmically 
or symbolically), 'liberate' in any sense then claimed (physically or spiri­
tually), 'oppressors' in any sense then identified (whoever or whatever they 
may be) and 'religion' in the fullest sense (cult, mores, sacred knowledge, 
and the resulting social order)-and I specify only 'play a part', not neces­
sarily bring to fruition. All Jewish kings and high priests were, of course, 
'messiahs' in the basic sense of being anointed to represent God. But here 
I shall mean a messiah conforming to (a) through (c). Yet I do not assume 
6. For more on the terminology of celestial beings see Elements 1 1 .  36 and 37. 

4. Background (Christianity) 
61 
there must be only one messiah of that kind. Neither did the Jews (see 
scholarship cited in Elements 3 and 4). 7 
I've seen some scholars question or deny that the Jews had any prior 
notion of a messiah before the advent of Christianity. But such a denial is 
accomplished only by proposing an implausibly hyper-specific definition 
of 'messiah', then showing no such thing was previously imagined, and 
concluding 'the Jews had no prior notion of a messiah'. This is a textbook 
fallacy of equivocation: start with a term defined one way, then end with 
the same term defined in a completely different way, often without noticing 
a switch has been made. To avoid this, I shall stick to my minimal defini­
tion, since I am certain anyone meeting criteria (a), (b) and (c) would have 
been regarded by at least some ancient Jews or Judaizers as a messiah. I 
attach no other baggage to the term-no particular eschatology or scheme 
of liberation. Jews of antiquity were clearly quite flexible in all such details, 
as everyone agrees (see Element 2). 
I shall mean by crucifixion (and 'being crucified' and all other cognate 
terms and phrases) as any hanging up of the living or dead as a punishment, 
regardless of the exact details of how. The shape of the cross or fixture, the 
position of the body, whether the victim is killed first or hung while alive 
and left to die, even the manner of hanging, whether nailing or lashing, or 
whether to a rock or tree or stake or doorway or anything else, all of that 
can (and certainly did) vary, and yet the act still constitutes crucifixion if 
(a) a body is hanged by anything other than a noose around the neck and (b) 
this hanging is a punishment. Even the ancient terminology was no more 
specific than that (in fact it was less so), hence I see no valid reason ours 
should be.8 For example, the Bible described one method of execution as to 
'hang in the sun' (in the Septuagint, literally, exeliazo = ex heliou, 'out in 
the sun', or apenanti lou hlliou, 'against the sun'), which implies the intent 
was for the hanged to die from exposure (Num. 25.4 and 2 Sam. 21.6, 9, 
13). That is essentially a form of crucifixion, however it was effected. Like­
wise, when Joshua hung on trees the king of Ai and the kings of the Amor­
ites (Josh. 8.29 and 10.26-27), and when the Law of Moses calls for the 
executed to be hanged on trees or planks (xu/on in the Greek) even when 
already dead (Deut. 21.22-23), or when Haman and his sons are hung on a 
giant pole (xu/on again in Greek translations of Est. 5.14; 7.9-10; and 8.7, 
these are all forms of crucifixion. Many scholars of Jewish antiquity agree.9 
7. Matthew Novenson, Christ among the Messiahs: Christ Language in Paul and 
Messiah Language in Ancient Judaism (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 201 2). 
8. This and what follows have already been thoroughly demonstrated in Gunnar 
Samuelsson, Crucifixion in Antiquity: An Inquiry into the Background of the New 
Testament Terminology ofCrucifixion (Ttlbingen: Mohr Siebeck, 201 1). 
9. See Richard Carrier, 'The Burial of Jesus in Light of Jewish Law', in Empty Tomb 

62 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
In using the term 'crucifixion' this way I do not mean to rule out finer 
distinctions for those who want to make them. Someone else, for example, 
may want to restrict the term to an actual means of killing, thus including 
only those hung up alive to die, rather than the hanging of corpses. But 
since I see no contradiction in the idea of crucifying a corpse (and the 
ancient terminology does not exclude it), I think such a restriction is too fas­
tidious. Since there was no standard practice of crucifixion even among the 
Romans (we can't be sure if everyone they crucified was nailed or merely 
tied up or even impaled, or exactly where or how or to what), if we are too 
particular we will anachronistically exceed the ideas and vocabulary of 
the period. The Greek word for crucify (stauroO) literally means 'staked' 
or 'palisaded', and frequently meant not just crucified but also impaled, or 
even setting up spiked walls around a fort. Hence 'to stake (stauroo) some­
one on a pole (xu/on)' is what happens in the early Greek translation of Est. 
7.9 using the exact same verb used of the crucifixion of Jesus in the New 
Testament, as well as the exact same word for 'post' or 'tree' used in the 
Septuagint text of the old Torah Law (that passage in Deuteronomy), which 
is also the same word used for the cross and crucifixion of Jesus in the New 
Testament. Thus, as the ambiguity existed then, I preserve it myself. 
I shall mean by resurrection (and all similar terms) any restoration of 
1 ife to the dead (whether permanent or not), though I shall distinguish when 
the term is used literally or figuratively. Merely the survival or ascension of 
an already-immortal soul does not count as a 'restoration' in this sense and 
thus is not a resurrection, but abandoning the corpse altogether and rising 
to life in a completely new body does count and thus is a resurrection. As 
with the term 'messiah', I've seen recent attempts to claim that pagans had 
no notion of resurrection, again by producing a hyper-specific definition of 
one particular kind of resurrection, proving they didn't have or accept it, 
then concluding they had no notion of resurrection at all. But such specific­
ity did not exist in ancient vocabulary. Many different Jewish and Christian 
sects believed in many different kinds of resurrection, and all were called 
'resurrection'. 10 And there were yet more kinds of resurrection imagined 
among the pagans, and considerable overlap between their ideas and those 
of the Jews and Christians." I shall thus avoid any fallacy of anachronistic 
precision by using all words for 'resurrection' to mean just what they meant 
(ed. Price and Lowder), pp. 369-92 (esp. pp. 375-79)ˠ with D.J. Halperin, 'Crucifixion, 
the Nahum Pesher and the Rabbinic Penalty of Crucifixion', Journal of Jewish Studies 
32 (1981), pp. 32-46; and J.A. Fitzmyer, 'Crucifixion in Ancient Palestine, Qumran 
Literature, and the New Testament', Catholic Biblical Quarter/y 40 (1978), pp. 493-513. 
10. Carrier, 'Spiritual Body', in Empty Tomb (ed. Price and Lowder), esp. pp. 107-
13, 126, 137-38. 
11. Carrier, Not the Impossible Faith, pp. 85-127. 

4. Background (Christianity) 
63 
to everyone in antiquity, whether pagan, Jew, or Christian: rising from a 
state of death to be alive again. Nothing more. 
I shall mean by outer space everything above the atmosphere as pres­
ently known. In ancient understanding this included (a) everything in or 
under the 'firmament' (also known as the aer or 'sublunar sphere') extend­
ing above the highest visible clouds all the way to the orbit of the moon, 
and (b) all the heavens beyond (also then known as the ތether' or 'ethereal 
realm'). The notion that any of this region may have been a vacuum did 
exist at the time. but only as a controversial theory rejected by most reli­
gious cosmologists, and only embraced typically by atomists and others 
generally hostile to the supernatural. Most people of the time thought the 
air extended all the way to the moon (while everything beyond that was 
filled with a breathable 'ether'), when in fact (as we now know) the real 
atmosphere extends only a minuscule fraction of that distance. 
So when they spoke of beings and events 'in the air', they were often 
speaking of what we mean by outer space. This is even more obvious when 
they spoke of beings and events in the spheres of heaven above the moon. 
Accordingly, if an ancient author was speaking of what we call outer space, 
I will say 'outer space'. This does not mean I attribute to them a modern 
knowledge of the extraterrestrial vacuum. lt only means they were thinking 
of realms beyond the terrestrial domains of mountains, clouds, and birds. 
For it was already common knowledge among the educated of the time that 
the moon's distance from the earth was hundreds of thousands of miles (see 
Element 34). So when they used terms that we often translate as 'air', they 
were often not referring to what we mean by 'the air' today but a far more 
vast and frightening realm of fantastic possibilities, which many thought 
was trafficked by gods and filled with strange animals or spirits (see Ele­
ments 36-38). 
I shall use gospel for the general idea of the 'good news' or 'sal vi fie mes­
sage' that any group of Christians (or other savior cult) may have preached 
(and which may have varied in content from group to group), and Gospel for 
the actual written books of that title or genre (which attempted to convey ލa 
gospel' in some fashion or other). In accordance with growing convention, 
I shall also use Septuagint or the abbreviation LXX to mean, in fact, the 
translation of the OT into Greek made by the Jewish scholar Theodotion in 
the second century (whereas previous to Christianity was the similar but 
not always identical Old Greek translation, which is no longer completely 
extant); and I'll use NT and OT for New Testament and Old Testament, 
respectively. I shall also use church to mean any Christian congregation 
(regardless of sect or state of organization) and the church as a stand-in for 
the whole Christian movement (in all its diversity), and Church to mean 
any major regional Christian institution (or all of them collectively) that 
had the political power to force compliance and suppress heresy among 

64 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
its own adherents. By this definition the Coptic, Eastern Orthodox, and 
Cat hoi ic Churches became the most prominent and powerful Churches, but 
Churches in this sense didn't likely exist anywhere until the second century 
at the earliest. Before that 'the church' only consisted of diverse and loosely 
affiliated 'churches'. 
I shall use orthodox or orthodoxy to refer to all the churches, literature, 
and institutions (and their ideologies and interpretations) that eventually 
evolved over the course of the fourth century CE into the politically victo­
rious sects that we now call Churches or the Church. I shall use heretical 
(and all related terms) for all other churches. Though no church of those 
later periods much resembled any churches of the first and second centu­
ries (as most scholars agree, Christian ideology, institutions and beliefs had 
by then changed considerably}, the consolidated sects that would later call 
their view 'orthodoxy' (and all others 'heresy') did each evolve from one 
particular lineage of the era (albeit with continual cross-fertilization with 
other Christian sects and pagan cults), and then kept or altered documents 
from that era that supported that, and destroyed or abandoned documents 
that did not, creating a selection bias in the preservation of literature that 
bears a particular (albeit anachronistic and often inconsistent) sectarian 
stamp (see Elements 20-21 and 44). 
So when I speak of an orthodox sect in the first two centuries, I do not 
mean the sect that was closer or more faithful to the originating traditions 
of the religion. I believe all sects deviated from the original religion and 
innovated freely and in equal measure, and the victorious Churches of the 
early Middle Ages looked nothing at all like the original faith of Peter or 
even Paul. Rather, I mean the sects that evolved into those later Churches, 
bearing the closest ancestral relationship to them, in ideology and institu­
tional continuity. Thus, I am not endorsing any Church's claim to 'ortho­
doxy' ('right doctrine'), nor am I using terms like 'heretical' pejoratively, 
but rather acknowledging that a small handful of Churches (such as the 
Orthodox, Coptic, and Catholic) gained dominance in certain regions and 
then called themselves 'orthodox'. None of these Churches sprang out of 
nowhere, but all evolved from earlier sects that bear a closer resemblance 
to them than other sects did, and their selection, modification and endorse­
ment of documents reflects what they chose to call 'orthodoxy'. Hence, for 
convenience, so shall I. 
Finally, my publisher requires me to employ BCE eBefore the Common 
Era') and cE ('Common Era') in lieu of ofec ('Before Christ') and AD ('Anno 
Domini' = 'In the Year of the Lord'), even though in my own opinion the 
original notation is more familiar and there is no good reason to change it. 1 2  
12. For my editorial on this subject see Richard Carrier, 'B.C.A.D.C.E.B.C.E', 
Richard Carrier_ Blogs (January 16, 201 2), at http://freethoughtblogs.com/carrier/ 

4. Background (Christianity) 
65 
4. Elemental Background Knowledge 
To make my assumptions more transparent, I will survey the often less­
well-known background knowledge I shall be relying on in later chapters, 
and break it down into units or 'elements' that can be tested or debated 
individually. When elements agree with the near-universal consensus of 
contemporary scholarship I won't exhaust any effort to survey the evi­
dence but merely present them as given. I do not assume such elements 
are beyond any possibility of debate, only that the evidence is such that the 
burden must be on anyone who would deny them. The remaining elements 
I will demonstrate to be true with an adequate citation of evidence and 
scholarship, only because I keep encountering experts who deny them or 
don't know of them (even when a majority of experts already agree with 
me)Y More elements will be enumerated in the next chapter (and we must 
add to all these the background facts already presented in the three chapters 
before and the six chapters after). 
As I explained in Chapter 1, some readers might prefer to skip the rest 
of this and the next chapter, and only return to them later. Alternatively, 
you may be content to read only the first paragraph of every element-con­
tinuing only if you disagree with what is asserted there or want to see why 
I conclude it's true (otherwise moving on to the next numbered element). 
Crucially, none of these elements assume or entail historicity is true or 
false, they are all compatible with both. They simply must all be taken into 
account when evaluating either. 
5. Elements ofChristian Origin 
Element 1: The earliest form of Christianity definitely known to us origi­
nated as a Jewish sect in the region of Syria-Palestine in the early first cen­
tury CE. Some historians would challenge this, but their theories have yet to 
archives/166. 
13. In every case, the argument I develop for each element could be reproduced in 
formal Bayesian terms, but to keep things simple I present them in colloquial terms. 
As background knowledge, the procedure for each would be to assign a neutral prior 
probability (which for each simple binary true/false statement is 0.5) and then ask 
how probable the total body of human knowledge is on h (that the claim is true) and 
how probable it is on -.h (that the claim is false), especially the evidence specifically 
enumerated here (the evidence most directly determinative of h or --h), and then stating 
the posterior probability that results, which in some cases is 'maybe' (meaning: more 
than merely possible, but still not certain) and in others is 'certainly' (meaning: not 
absolutely certain, but certain to a very high probability), or some degree in between. 1 
have carefully worded my claims in each element to reflect this. 

66 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
survive peer review or persuade anything near a consensus agreement among 
experts. Rather than prove it true here, I will simply state it as a given fact of 
our background knowledge, to be revised only if it is clearly disproved. 
Element 2: When Christianity began, Judaism was highly sectarian and 
diverse. There was no 'normative' set of Jewish beliefs, but a countless 
array of different Jewish belief systems vying for popularity. We know 
of at least ten competing sects, possibly more than thirty, and there could 
easily have been more. But we know very I ittle about them, except that 
they differed from one another (sometimes radically) on various political, 
theological, metaphysical, moral and other issues. In fact the evidence we 
do have establishes that, contrary to common assumption, innovation and 
syncretism (even with non-Judaic theologies) was actually typical of early­
first-century Judaism, even in Palestine, and thus Christianity looks much 
less like an aberration and more like just another innovating, syncretistic 
Jewish cult.14 Further support for this point is provided in E1ements 30 and 
33. No argument, therefore, can proceed from an assumption of any univer­
sally normative Judaism. 
Element 3: (a) When Christianity began, many Jews had long been 
expecting a messiah: a divinely chosen leader or savior anointed (literal ly 
or figuratively 'christened', hence a 'Christ') to help usher in God's super­
natural kingdom, usually (but not always) by subjugating or destroying 
the enemies of the Jews and estab1ishing an eternal paradise (see previous 
definition in §3, and following discussion in Elements 4 and 5). (b) We 
14. For a summary of the evidence and sources collectively establishing this 
element see Carrier, 'Spiritual Body', in Empty Tomb (ed. Price and Lowder). pp. 107-
13, with support in James Charlesworth and Petr Pokorny (eds.), Jesus Research: An 
International Perspective (Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans. 2009), pp. 58-59. Indeed. 
there, primarily only Palestinian sects are considered; when considering Judaism of the 
Diaspora, Jewish sects and views diverge even more: see Erich Gruen, Diaspora: Jews 
amidst Greeks and Romans (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 2002): and 
Erich Gruen, Heritage and Hellenism: The Reinvention of Jewish Tradition (Berkeley. 
CA: University of California Press, 1998); J. Andrew Overman and Robert MacLennan 
(eds.), Diaspora Jews and Judaism (Atlanta, GA: Scholars Press, 1 992): with Margaret 
Williams, The Jews among the Greeks and Romans: A Diasporan Sourcebook 
(Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1998). But even in Palestine. 
diversity and Hellenization was a common reality: see Morton Smith, 'Palestinian 
Judaism in the First Century', in Israel: Its Role in Civilization (ed. Moshe Davis: Nev.· 
York: Seminary Israel Institute of the Jewish Theological Seminary of America. 1956). 
pp. 67-81; Alan Segal, 'Jesus and First-Century Judaism', in Jesus at 2000 (ed. Marcus 
Borg; Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1997), pp. 55-72; and James Charlesworth et a/. 
(eds.), Qumran-Messianism: Studies on the Messianic Expectations in the Dead Sea 
Scrolls (Tiibingen: Mohr Siebeck, 1998), pp. 25-27. 

4. Background (Christianity) 
67 
can reasonably infer that if those 'enemies' were ever considered to be 
invisible demons (rather than the actual Roman legions, for example) the 
way would have been open to imagine a messianic victory over Israel's 
enemies that could only be perceived spiritually (see Element 28). Other­
wise the messiah was typically expected to achieve a transparent military 
victory. Sometimes (as in the Enochic literature) it was both. (c) That Jew­
ish expectations of some kind of messiah in the early Roman Empire were 
widespread, influential, and very diverse (and thus incapable of being 
fixed to any single view) has been well established by experts on ancient 
messianism.15 
Element 4: (a) Palestine in the early first century CE was experiencing a 
rash of messianism. There was an evident clamoring of sects and individu­
als to announce they had found the messiah. (b) It is therefore no oddity 
or accident that this is exactly when Christianity arose. It was yet another 
messiah cult in the midst of a fad for just such cults. (c) That it among them 
would alone survive and spread can therefore be the product of natural 
selection: so many variations of the same theme were being tried, odds are 
one of them would by chance be successful, hitting all the right notes and 
dodging all the right bullets. The lucky winner in that contest just happened 
to be Christianity. 16 
This element is often denied, or its basis not well understood, so I will 
pause to establish it before moving on. 'Messiah', 'Son of Man', 'the Righ­
teous One', and 'the Elect [or Chosen] One' were all popular titles for the 
expected messiah used by several groups in early-first-century Judaism, 
as attested, for instance, in the Book of the Parables of Enoch, a Jewish 
15. Stanley Porter (ed.), The Messiah in the Old and New Testaments (Grand 
Rapids, MI: William B. Eerdmans, 2007); Markus Bockmuehl and James Carleton 
Paget (eds.), Redemption and Resistance: The Messianic Hopes of Jews and Christians 
in Antiquity (New York: T. & T. Clark, 2007); Magnus Zetterholm (ed.), The Messiah 
in Early Judaism and Christianity (Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 2007); Charlesworth 
et a/. (eds.), Qumran-Messianism; Craig Evans and Peter Flint (eds.), Eschatology, 
Messianism, and the Dead Sea Scrolls (Grand Rapids, MI: Wi11iam B. Eerdmans, 
1997); James Charlesworth (ed.), The Messiah: Developments in Earliest Judaism 
and Christianity (Minneapolis, MN: Fortress Press, 1992); Jacob Neusner, Messiah 
in Context: Israel's History and Destiny in Formative Judaism (Philadelphia, PA: 
Fortress Press, 1984); and Jacob Neusner et a/. (eds.), Judaisms and their Messiahs 
at the Turn ofthe Christian Era (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1987). See 
also C. A. Evans, 'Messianism', in Dictionary of New Testament Background (ed. Craig 
Evans and Stanley Porter; Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity Press, 2000), pp. 698-707. 
16. On this being the case see Richard Carrier, 'Christianity's Success Was Not 
Incredible', in The End of Christianity (ed. John Loftus; Amherst, NY: Prometheus 
Books, 201 1). pp. 53-74, 372-75, along with Carrier, Not the Impossible Faith. 

68 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
text composed before 70 CE. 17 The Dead Sea ScroJJs attest to one or several 
such cults around that same time. Indeed, messianic apocalypticism was 
intense at Qumran, where the keepers of the scrolls were already expect­
ing the imminent end of the world, and attempting different calculations 
from the timetable provided in the book of Daniel (see Element 7) to pre· 
diet when the first messiah would come-and many of their calculations 
came up 'soon'. The early first century CE was in their prediction window. 18 
And many of their texts were used by other cults of the time. A copy of 
the so-called Damascus Document, for instance, turns up a thousand years 
later in a stash of Jewish texts at Cairo Geniza.19 
Even the early-first-century Jewish philosopher Philo of Alexandria 
wrote an apocalyptic text sharing and adapting the messianic expectations 
of his generation.20 The Gospels likewise assume (or, depending on how 
much you trust them, report) that 'messiah fever' was so rampant in Judea 
then that countless people were expecting Elijah to be walking among them, 
some even believed that Jesus, or John the Baptist, was that very man, risen 
from the dead, which many Jews believed presaged the imminent coming 
of a messiah and the ensuing end of the present world order (which many 
believed had become corrupted beyond human repair), because this had 
been predicted in Mal. 4.5-6, the very last passage of the traditional OT.21 
The only surviving historian of early-first-century Palestine confirms 
this picture. Josephus records the rise and popularity of several false messi­
ahs in the same general period as Christianity was getting started. He does 
not explicitly call them messiahs-he probably wanted to avoid remind­
ing his Gentile audience that this was the product of Jewish ideology, and 
instead claimed it was the product of fringe criminals and ruffians (he like­
wise catalogues various other rebel bandits and demagogues as well). But 
the descriptions he provides belie the truth of the matter. As David Rhoads 
17. See M. Black, 'The Messianism of the Parables of Enoch: Their Date and 
Contribution to Christological Origins', in The Messiah (ed. Charlesworth), pp. 145-68; 
J.C. YanderKam, 'Righteous One, Messiah, Chosen One, and Son of Man in I Enoch 
37-71 ', in The Messiah (ed. Charlesworth), pp. 169-91; and in Neusner et a/., Judaisms 
and their Messiahs. In the NT Jesus is of course 'the Messiah' (Christ), but is also 
called 'the Chosen One' (Mt. 12.18; Lk. 9.35; 23.35), 'the Righteous One' (Lk. 23.47; 
Acts 3.14; 7.52; 22. 14; 1 Jn 2. 1; Rev. 16.5) and 'The Son of Man' (countless instances, 
e.g., Mt. 12.30; Mk 14.41 ; Lk. 22.48; Acts 7.56ޥ Jn 1.51; etc.), among a great many other 
epithets, both familiar and strange. 
18. See John Collins, 
'The Expectation of the End in the Dead Sea Scrolls', in 
Eschatology (ed. Evans and Flint), pp. 74-90 (esp. 76-79, 83). 
19. See Lawrence Schiffman and James VanderKam (eds.), Encyclopedia of the 
Dead Sea Scrolls (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000), I, pp. 166-70. 
20. Philo, On Rewards and Punishments 79-172 (esp. § 95). 
21. See Mk 9.9-13; 8.27-28; 6.14-16; Mt. 17.10-13; 16.13-14; Lk. 9.18-19; 9.7-9. 

4. Background (Christianity) 
69 
put it, "Josephus tends to avoid messianism when he relates the history of 
the first century'; in fact he deliberately 'suppressed the religious motiva­
tions of the revolutionaries by ascribing [to them] evil and dishonorable 
intentions' instead. But their messianic basis remains unmistakable. Schol­
arly analysis confirms this.22 Josephus recounts at least four messianic fig­
ures of the early first century, and documents how enormously popular they 
were, compelling the Romans to mass military action to suppress them.23 
'The Samaritan' gathered followers and said he would reveal the lost 
relics of the true Samaritan temple on Mount Gerizim-an act with obvi­
ous messianic meaning (the Samaritans believing themselves to be the true 
Jews; this is alluded to even in Jn 4.20-26, which attests the Samaritans 
also expected an imminent messiah). The original Jewish congregation led 
by Joshua had stood at God's command 'upon Mount Gerizim to bless the 
people' after crossing the Jordan (Deut. 27.12), which is to say, when Joshua 
(the original Jesus-the names are identical: see Chapter 6, §3) crossed the 
Jordan on the day the nation of Israel was conceptually begun. Thus, the 
original Joshua inaugurated the nation of Israel by crossing the Jordan and 
congregating at Gerizim; and since the last messiah (the new Joshua) was 
to reconstitute Israel, he, too, could expect to begin the task by a blessing 
on Mount Gerizim. 
'Theudas' gathered followers and said he would part the Jordan­
another act with obvious messianic meaning: Joshua (the original Jesus) 
had also miraculously parted the Jordan upon beginning his conquest of 
Israel (Joshua 3), so this was another obvious symbolic starting point for 
the re-conquest of Israel. Similarly, the Christian Jesus (again, 'Joshua') 
22. See D. Mendels, 'Pseudo-Philo's Biblical Antiquities, the 'Fourth Philosophy', 
and the Political Messianism ofthe FirstCenturyCE', in The Messiah(ed. Charlesworth), 
pp. 261-75 (quote from Rhoads: p. 261 n. 4); which is thoroughly supported by Craig 
Evans, 'Josephus on John the Baptist and Other Jewish Prophets of Deliverance', in The 
Historical Jesus in Context (ed. Amy-Jill Levine, Dale Allison, Jr and John Dominic 
Crossan; Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2006). pp. 55-63, which contains 
all the relevant references in Josephus. 
23. Which may have been a key to Christianity's success: by avoiding mass 
territorial action (and focusing instead on spiritual combat), they avoided armed 
conflict and thus survived. by gaining more converts over a wider area than were lost 
to sporadic persecutions. See Carrier, Not the Impossible Faith, pp. 219-45, with pp. 
147-60, 259-96. This may even have been a Jesson learned from observing the fate of 
other movements. But natural selection alone would determine it: agitative cults would 
be wiped out, leaving more pacifist cults to dominate the market (then it became simply 
a competition among products for sale). A non·existent messiah (whose lordship and 
victory were known only spiritually and thus never a worldly militaristic threat) would 
thus have an enormous competitive advantage at these earliest stages (see Elements 
23·28). 

70 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
is depicted as beginning his messianic career by symbolically parting (or 
passing through) the Jordan, in the form of his baptism. 
'The Egyptian' (possibly a Jewish cult leader from Alexandria) also 
gathered followers and preached from the Mount of Olives Gust as Jesus 
Christ does in the Gospels), claiming he would topple the walls of Jerusa­
lem-an obvious aBusion to the miraculous felling of the walls of Jericho, 
another deed of the first Jesus (the biblical Joshua), in fact in the first battle 
that followed his crossing of the Jordan, making this another symbol of 
beginning the conquest of Israel. Preaching from the Mount of Olives could 
also imply messianic pretensions-as it was commonly believed a messiah 
would stand there in the last days (Zech. 14.1-9). Thus, the Egyptian was 
preaching another metaphor for the re-conquest of Israel, again the very 
task only the Christ was expected to accomplish. Indeed, as Craig Evans 
argues, even the very name ގEgyptian' evokes the out-of-Egypt path of the 
original Joshua (hence 'Jesus'). 
Another (unnamed) 'impostor' mentioned by Josephus ('impostor' being 
obvious code for 'false messiah'-who else would he be pretending to be?) 
gathered followers and promised them salvation if they followed him into 
the wilderness-an obvious reference to Moses, and, as Craig Evans shows, 
this 'impostor' created symbolic allusions to the temptation narrative in 
Exodus, promising rest in the wilderness and deliverance from evil. So just 
as those who tempted God in the wilderness lost their God-promised rest, 
those who ritually reversed this behavior could expect to see the restoration 
of God's promise. 24 The messianic intentions are evident here. 
This means all four of these messiahs, as reported by Josephus, were 
equating themselves with Jesus (Joshua) and making veiled claims to be 
the Christ (messiah). In other words, here we have in Josephus four Jesus 
Christs. Ours simply makes five. The Gospel character of Jesus thus fits 
right into the trend documented by Josephus. 25 
24. Evans, 'Josephus on John the Baptist', whose analysis is corroborated by 
Rebecca Gray, Prophetic Figures in Late Second Temple Jewish Palestine: The 
Evidence from Josephus (New York: Oxford University Press, 1993). See Exod. 17.1-7; 
Num. 20.1-13; and Ps. 95.7b-11, a passage that Evans notes is cited and commented on 
in the NT as well (in Heb. 3.7-4.13). The temptation narrative in the Gospels bears the 
same connection (see Chapter 10, §4). 
25. We should at least consider the possibility that all these stories are fiction (the 
fact that all emulate Joshua but each, conveniently, in a different way could suggest 
literary or parabolic fabrication), but if so, this story-cluster can have only two origins: 
the Jewish public (i.e., oral lore picked up by Josephus) or Josephus himself (or some 
other Jewish author he is using as a source, most likely in this case Justus of Tiberias, 
or some lost Jewish apocryphon). In the one case we still have confirmation of the same 
messianic fad (in this case creating popular tales and rumors of messiahs), and in the 
other case we have an improbability (that a single Jewish author invented a messianic 

4. Background (Christianity) 
71 
Even 'John the Baptisf (at least as depicted in the Gospels) was a mes­
sianic figure (e.g. Jn 1 .20; Lk. 3.15), or otherwise telling everyone the mes­
siah would arrive in his lifetime (Mt. 3.1-12; Mk 1.1-8; Lk. 3.1-20; Jn 1.15-
28). And he was enormously popular (the Gospels and Acts claim so, and 
Josephus confirms it), thus further exemplifying the trend of the time. This 
messianic Baptist cult may even have influenced or spawned Christianity 
itself(see Element 33). The cult of Simon Magus might likewise have been 
promoting its own messiah. Acts certainly depicts Simon Magus as a mes­
sianic pretender (Acts 8.9-1 1), again with enormous popularity, just like 
the others in Josephus. The historicity of this Simon has been questioned, 
but the historicity of his worship as a divine being has not.26 1fthe biblical 
account of him reflects the truth (of the historical man or the celestial demi­
god he once was) he would be another example confirming the same trend. 
Even skeptical scholars agree there were many pretenders who: 
[D]o not simply announce the will of God but (a) lead actions of deliv­
erance (b) involving 'revolutionary changes' (c) in accord with God's 
'design' and (d) corresponding to one of the great historical formative 
acts of deliverance led by Moses or Joshua. 27 
fever with remarkable coincidence precisely when the messianic cult of Christianity 
arose and messianic cults were composing the texts stashed at Qumran, yet this same 
author doesn't position Christianity among them or mention the cults of Qumran, and 
is even too coy to identify the fad he thus invented as messianic). The most probable 
fabrication hypothesis is that Josephus (or Justus of Tiberias?) took actual rebel 
movements and mapped onto them this 'new Joshua' motif himself, yet that would 
mean the idea of inventing miracle-working, popular-movement-style 'Jesus Christs' 
readily occurred to him. The improbabil ity of this coinciding (in time and concept) 
with an 'actual' Jesus Christ (which the author completely fails to connect with them 
by the same motifs) would then argue in favor of our Jesus Christ being as fabricated as 
these. But note also how most of them also die at the hands of the Romans. If they were 
historical, then these figures might have even been trying to get themselves killed, 
so as to fulfill the prophecy of Dan. 9.26 and thereby usher in the end of the world as 
promised in Daniel 12. God had promised that the Jews would rule the universe (Zech. 
14), but their sins kept forestalling his promise (Jer. 29; Dan. 9), which would also 
create a motive for would-be messiahs to perform atonement acts, which could include 
substitutionary self-sacrifice (see Element 43), out of increasing desperation (Elements 
23-26). Christianity almost becomes predictable in this context. 
26. See Stephen Haar, Simon Magus: The First Gnostic? (New York: Walter de 
Gruyter, 2003), pp. 11-15; challenging this Simon's historicity is Gerd LUdemann, 
Untersuchungen zur simonianischen Gnosis (GOttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht. 
1975). 
27. R.A. Horsley, .. 'Messianic" Figures and Movements in First-Century Palestine', 
in The Messiah (ed. Charlesworth), pp. 276-95 (282). Horsley still insists these are 
not messianic movements, but that assertion depends on an implausibly specific 
definition of 'messiah' (or an excessively irrational denial of obvious inferences): see 
my discussion of definitions (§3). Similarly in Sean Freyne, 'The Herodian Period', in 

72 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
There were other messianic pretenders after the first Jewish War as well. 
But already across the whole generation before that war numerous self­
proclaimed 'messiahs' were gathering followers and making claims of 
miraculous powers and the coming end of the world-order at this very time. 
and we have no reason to assume Josephus has given us accounts of them 
all, only the most famous or a representative sample. Notably, again, all 
whom he recorded accounts of were pretending to be a new Jesus ('Joshua'). 
Jesus would thus be symbolically recognized as a messianic name (see 
Chapter 6, §3; and Element 6). And all of them reenact Exodus-like events. 
Even John the Baptist is exploiting Exodus symbolism by baptizing in the 
Jordan: the waterway crossed from death to life (from the slavery of Egypt 
to the paradise of the Holy Land-by way of 'the wilderness' in between), 
using in his own case a baptismal re-birthing ceremony. In everyone's view 
the messiah was to free the Jews from slavery. The Exodus narrative was an 
obvious and popular model for that. Hence the fact that the Exodus is often 
a key motif in the NT suggests similar thinking. 
It is reasonable to infer that once the literal, militaristic versions of this 
idea had been seen to fail (or indeed to be impossible, given the unstoppa­
ble might of the legions), it would not be unthinkable to adapt the same idea 
to being freed from the slavery not of the Romans or the corrupt Jewish 
elite, but the slavery of invisible demons (and death itself) instead. Anyone 
who took that step would essentially end up with a movement Jike Chris­
tianity (see Elements 23-28). For the 'gospel' of Jesus was already seen as 
the symbolic Exodus ritual and narrative for every Christian's escape from 
exactly that kind of spiritual slavery (e.g. Romans 7-8; 1 Corinthians 10). 
The only question is whether this Jesus was a real messianic pretender just 
like all these others, part of an established widespread trend (into which 
he would fit very well), who also failed just as they did, being killed by the 
authorities just as they were, but whose surviving followers merely came 
up with a successful way to repackage and sell his ideas, turning him into 
a spiritually victorious messiah, after his superficially material defeat-or 
whether Jesus was a spiritually conceived messiah right from the begin­
ning.28 
Redemption and Resistance (ed. Bockmuehl and Paget), pp. 29-43: like Horsley, Freyne 
is only skeptical in respect to an over-restrictive definition of 'messiah': whereas given 
my definition, his evidence completely confirms my conclusion. The same can be said 
of Martin Goodman, 'Messianism and Politics in the Land of Israel, 66-135 c.E.', in 
Redemption and Resistance (ed. Bockmuehl and Paget), pp. 149-57. 
28. If Jesus did exist, his followers may have repackaged the dead Jesus into a 
spiritual one consciously or not-that is, by merely claiming to have been visited by 
his risen spirit or by their subconscious minds constructing that experience for them 
(see Element 15). 

4. Background (Christianity) 
73 
Regardless, all the evidence is clear enough on the general fact of the 
matter: the first century had exploded with messianic fervor, to the point 
that it's not at all surprising one of these countless new messianic cults 
would become more successful than the rest (the others being wiped out 
or not adopting the right mix of popular attributes), even standing a fair 
chance of becoming a world religion (as any successful cult has a shot at 
doing). And Christianity is exactly such a messianic cult (as later elements 
establish), arising exactly when such cults were popular, and in the very 
same place. 
Element S: Even before Christianity arose, some Jews expected one of 
their messiahs heralding the end times would actual1y be killed, rather than 
be immediately victorious, and this would mark the key point of a timeta­
ble guaranteeing the end of the world soon thereafter. Such a concept was 
therefore not a Christian novelty wholly against the grain of Jewish think­
ing, but already exactly what some Jews were thinking-or could easily 
have thought. This is the most controversial element in our background 
knowledge, many scholars being so intent on denying it. So I must discuss 
the evidence at some length, although I shall do this more thoroughly else­
where.29 
First, the Talmud provides us with a proof of concept at the very least 
(and actual confirmation at the very most). It explicitly says the suffer­
ing servant who dies in Isaiah 53 is the messiah (and that this messiah 
will endure great suffering before his death).30 The Talmud likewise has a 
dying-and-rising 'Christ son of Joseph' ideology in it, even saying (quoting 
Zech. 12.10) that this messiah will be 'pierced' to death.31 Modern schol­
ars are too quick to dismiss this text as late (dating as it does from the 
fourth to sixth century), since the doctrine it describes is unlikely to be. 
For only when Jews had no idea what Christians would do with this con­
nection would they themselves have promoted it. There is no plausible way 
later Jews would invent interpretations of their scripture that supported and 
vindicated Christians. They would not invent a Christ with a father named 
Joseph who dies and is resurrected (as the Talmud does indeed describe). 
They would not proclaim Isaiah 53 to be about this messiah and admit that 
29. Richard Carrier, 'Did Any Pre-Christian Jews Expect a Dying-and-Rising 
Messiah?' [in review]; see also Carrier, Not the Impossible Faith, pp. 34-49 (with a 
correction: p. 34 arguably misreads lsa. 49.7 [cf. p. 49 n. 30]; as had already been 
suggested on p. 37). Essentially the same conclusion is argued by rabbinical scholar 
Daniel Boyarin, The Jewish Gospels: The Story of the Jewish Christ (New York: New 
Press, 2012), pp. 129-56. 
30. b. Sanhedrin 98b and 93b. 
31 . b. Sukkah 52a-b. 

74 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
Isaiah had there predicted this messiah would die and be resurrected. That 
was the very biblical passage Christians were using to prove their case. 
Moreover, the presentation of this ideology in the Talmud makes no men­
tion of Christianity and gives no evidence of being any kind of polemic or 
response to it. So we have evidence here of a Jewish belief that possibly 
predates Christian evangelizing, even if that evidence survives only in later 
sources. 
The alternative is to assume a rather unbelievable coincidence: that 
Christians and Jews, completely independently of each other, just happened 
at some point to see Isaiah 53 as messianic and from that same passage 
preach an ideology of a messiah with a father named Joseph (literally or 
symboJica11y), who endures great suffering, dies and is resurrected (a11 in 
accord with the savior depicted in Isaiah 53, as by then understood). Such 
an amazing coincidence is simply improbable. But a causal connection is 
not: if this was a pre-Christian ideology that influenced (and thus caused) 
both the Christian and the Jewish ideologies, then we have only one ele­
ment to explain (the rise of this idea once, being adapted in different ways), 
instead of having to believe the same idea arose twice, purely coinciden­
tally. Two improbable events by definition are many times less likely than 
one.32 That means the invented-once theory is many times more likely than 
the invented-twice one. Conversely, if we choose instead to fall on this 
sword of improbability and insist, against all likelihood, that yes, the same 
ideas arose twice independently of each other within Judaism, then this 
entails the idea was very easy for Jews to arrive at (since rabbinical Jews, 
independently of Christians, clearly arrived at it), which then entails it was 
not an improbable development in the first place. And thus neither will it 
32. We might have evidence of a strand of that prior tradition in the early-first­
century Targum of Jonathan ben Uzziel on Isaiah 53 (a kind of paraphrastic commentary 
in Aramaic; Jonathan ben Uzziel was traditionally a student of Hillel, who died c. 10 
CE, and a contemporary of Shammai, who died c. 30 CE), which explicitly identifies 
the suffering servant there as the Christ-but otherwise transforms the narrative to 
suppress or downplay the element of his dying. But anyone who read this Targum, and 
then the original Hebrew (or Greek), could put two and two together: 'this servant is the 
messiah' plus 'this servant dies and is buried and then exalted' = 'the messiah dies and 
is buried and then exalted', the very doctrine we see in the Talmud, which just happens 
to be the same doctrine adopted by Christians. This Targum was multiply tampered 
with over the years, however (see Bruce Chilton, The Glory of Israel: The Theology 
and Provenience of the Isaiah Targum [Sheffield: JSOT Press, 1982], e.g., p. 94), so 
nothing conclusive can be decided by it (even though, again, it is unlikely Jews would 
change the Targum to make Isaiah 53 messianic after Christianity started using Isaiah 
53 to support their cause), although Jintae Kim makes a case for the reading being 
early in 'Targum Isaiah 53 and the New Testament Concept of Atonement', Journal of 
Greco-Roman Christianity and Judaism 5 (2008), pp. 81-98. 

4. Background (Christianity) 
75 
have been improbable for Christians (or their sectarian predecessors among 
the Jews), any more than it was for Talmudic Jews. Clearly dying messiahs 
were not anathema. Rabbinical Jews could be just as comfortable with the 
idea as Christians were (more on this point in Chapter 12, §4). 
This dying-messiah doctrine is not only found in the Talmud but is more 
considerably spelled out in the seventh-century Apocalypse of Zerubba­
bel (Sefer Zerubbabel), which likewise prophesies that there will be two 
messiahs, a Messiah ben David and a Messiah ben Joseph, and that the 
latter messiah (the Son of Joseph) would come first and be killed by an evil 
tyrant named Armilus (whom some scholars conjecture is a Hebraicism for 
Romulus, i.e., Rome). But al l would not be lost, because the second messiah 
(the Son of David) would soon appear and resurrect him, and the end of the 
world would soon follow. 33 
Quite simply, if anyone were to merge these two messiahs into a single 
person (the Son of Joseph and the Son of David, one who dies and rises and 
one who returns to bring victory), we would have Christianity: a messiah 
fathered by a Joseph who is killed by an evil power and is then resurrected 
and anointed 'the Son of David', destined to return triumphant. It is far 
more likely that Christians united two figures already imagined in earlier 
Jewish apocalyptic thought than that rabbinical Jews took a novel messiah 
from the heretical sect of Christianity and elaborately split it into two mes­
siahs, with otherwise all the same attributes (and then make no mention of 
how this responds to Christianity or why they would even do that).34 
33. See translation in John Reeves, Trajectories in Near Eastern Apocalyptic: A 
Postrabbinic Jewish Apocalypse Reader (Atlanta, GA: Society of Biblical Literature, 
2005), pp. 40-66, where the Messiah ben Joseph appears (p. 57), is killed (pp. 59-60), 
then resurrected (pp. 60-61 )  by the Messiah ben David, after which the apocalypse 
follows. The narrative in this text was adapted to contemporary political circumstances 
of the later Middle Ages. but it is clear from the Talmud that the outline of it long 
predated that period, and thus long predates this redaction of it. 
34. The Dead Sea ScrolJs also speak of two messiahs, one "Messiah of Aaron'. 
who would be the "true high priest', and a 'Messiah of Israel', who would be a kingly 
warlord figure. See Evans and Flint (eds.). Eschatology, pp. 5-6; and Peter Flint, ·Jesus 
and the Dead Sea Scrolls'. in Historical Jesus in Context (ed. Levine, Allison and 
Crossan), pp. 1 10-31; and Florentino Garcia Martinez and Eibert J.C. Tigchelaar (eds.), 
Qumranica minora, Vol. II (Boston: Brill, 2007), pp. 13-32. But it's debated whether 
these are actually two messiahs, or what kind of messiahs they are: see L.D. Hurst. 
'Did Qumran Expect Two Messiahs?'. Bulletin for Biblical Research 9 ( 1999), pp. 
1.S7·80 (although note that his conclusion is reversed when we adopt my definition of 
messiah rather than his). It's also debated whether one of the Qumran fragments says 
one of these messiahs 'will be pierced' and killed. or whether he will pierce and kill 
someone else, and I consider that question presently unresolvable (the manuscript is 
too damaged to tell). See Helmut Koester, 'The Historical Jesus and the Historical 
Situation of the Quest: An Epilogue', in Studying the Historical Jesus: Evaluation 

76 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
But the Talmud and the Apocalypse ofZerubbabel are not our only evi­
dence of a pre-Christian dying-messiah theme. The book of Daniel (writ­
ten well before the rise of Christianity) explicitly says a messiah will die 
shortly before the end of the world (Dan. 9.2; 9.24-27; cf. 12.1-13). This is 
already conclusive. Given my definition of 'messiah' (in §3), Christianity 
looks exactly like an adaptation of the same eschatological dying-messiah 
motif in Daniel. And the Wisdom of Solomon, an important scripture to the 
first Christians, presents a son of God who is despised, killed, resurrected 
and crowned as a king in heaven (cf. 2.12-22; 5.1-23), a narrative that could 
easily have been taken by some as referring to the messiah-and even if 
not, it certainly established a heroic model that one could adapt into a dying 
messiah already within pre .. Christian Judaism, which would thus already 
be intelligible to Jews. This Wisdom of Solomon archetype could even have 
been associated with the despised-and-dying servant of Isaiah 53, as they 
sound quite similar (innocent righteous men humiliated and killed by the 
wicked, but exalted and made triumphant). Isaiah 53 was already under­
stood to contain an atonement-martyrdom framework applicable to dying 
heroes generally.35 And the whole concept of a suffering, martyred hero 
was an established Jewish archetype (see Element 43). 
But of the more specific notion of a dying messiah, we also have other 
pre-Christian evidence in the form of a Dead Sea Scroll designated 11Ql3, 
the Melchizedek Scroll. 36 This is an apocalyptic pesher, a document attempt­
ing to discover hidden messages in the scriptures by finding secret links 
of the State of Current Research (ed. Bruce ChiJton and Craig Evans; Leiden: BriJJ, 
1994), pp. 535-45; and Craig Evans, 'The Recently Published Dead Sea Scrolls and the 
Historical Jesus', in Studying the Historical Jesus (ed. Chilton and Evans), pp. 547-65 
(553-54); and the debate between Hershel Shanks, 'The "Pierced Messiah" Text-An 
Interpretation Evaporates', Biblical Archaeology Review 18 (July/August 1992), pp. 
80-82; and James Tabor, '4Q285: A Pierced or Piercing Messiah?-The Verdict Is Still 
Out', Biblical Archaeology Review 18 (November/December 1992), pp. 58-59; as well 
as the discussion and scholarship cited in Martin Abegg, 'Messianic Hope and 4Q285: 
A Reassessment', Journal of Biblical Literature 113 (Spring 1994), pp. 81-91. 
35. Jarvis Williams, Maccabean Martyr Traditions in Paul's Theology of 
Atonement: Did Martyr Theology Shape Paul 's Conception of Jesus 's Death? (Eugene, 
OR: Wipf & Stock, 2010), pp. 53-63, 72-84. 
36. 1 1QI3 = l lQMelch ii.IS-20. For the scroll's text, translation and notes, see Alex 
Jassen, Mediating the Divine: Prophecy and Revelation in the Dead Sea Scrolls and 
Second Temple Judaism (Leiden: Brill, 2007), pp. 90-95; John Sietze Bergsma, The 
Jubilee from Leviticus to Qumran: A History of Interpretation (Leiden: Brill, 2007), 
pp. 277-91, with Geza Vermes, The Complete Dead Sea Scrolls in English (New York: 
Penguin Press, 7th edn, 2011), pp. 532-33; and Christian Metzenthin, Jesaja-Auslegung 
in Qumran (Zurich: TVZ, 2010), pp. 314-23; see also Abegg, 'Messianic Hope and 
4Q285', pp. 89-90; and Lara Guglielmo, '1 1Q13, Malchi Sedek, Co-Reference, and 
Restoration of 2 18', Henoch 33 (2011), pp. 61-72, with a somewhat weak rebuttal by 

4. Background (Christianity) 
77 
among disparate and previously unrelated verses (see Elements 8 and 16), 
which together communicate GodÄs plan, most commonly (and certainly in 
this case) his plans for the coming messiah, the defeat of evil and the end of 
the world. There are many such pesherim at Qumran. But this one tells us 
about the 'messenger' ofisaiah 52-53 who is linked in Isaiah with a 'servant' 
who will die to atone for everyone's sins (presaging God's final victory), 
which (as we have already seen) later Jews definitely regarded as the messiah. 
At Qumran, IIQ13 appears to say that this messenger is the same man as the 
'messiah' of Daniel 9, who dies around the same time an end to sin is said to 
be accomplished (again presaging God's final victory), and that the day on 
which this happens will be a great and final Day of Atonement, absolving the 
sins of all the elect, after which (11Ql3 goes on to say) God and his savior 
will overthrow all demonic forces. And all this will proceed according to the 
timetable in Daniel 9. Thus, 1 1Q13 appears to predict that a messiah wi11 die 
and that this will mark the final days before which God's agent(s) will defeat 
Belial (Satan) and atone for the sins of the elect. 
Not all scholars have recognized this in 1 1Q13 or conceded it. Though 
I find no sound basis for rejecting it, I'll endeavor to prove it elsewhereY 
Regardless of how one chooses to understand the text of 1 1Q13, we still 
have Dan. 9.24-27, which is already unmistakably clear in predicting that 
a messiah will die shortly before the end of the world, when all sins wilJ 
be forgiven; and Isaiah 53 is unmistakably clear in declaring that all sins 
will be forgiven by the death of God's servant, whom the Talmud identi­
fies as the messiah. So there is no reasonable basis for denying that some 
pre-Christian Jews would have expected at least one dying messiah, and 
some could well have expected his death to be an essential atoning death, 
just as the Christians believed of Jesus (Element 10). 
Even apart from 1 IQ13 there is evidence the Dead Sea community may 
have already been thinking this, since one of their manuscripts of Isaiah 
explicitly says the suffering servant figure in Isaiah 53 shall be 'anointed' 
by God and then 'pierced through for our transgressions'.38 Contrary to 
Darrell Bock, 'Is That All There Is? A Response to Lara Guglielmo's I IQJ3, Malchi 
Sedek, Co-Reference, and Restoration of 2 18', Henoch 33 (201 1), pp. 73-76. 
37. In Carrier. 'Did Any Pre-Christian Jews Expect a Dying-and-Rising Messiah?' 
38. For this and the following points see the discussion of the pre-Christian 
interpretation of Isaiah 53 in Martin Hengel, 'The Effective History of Isaiah 53 in 
the Pre-Christian Period', in The Suffering Servant: Isaiah 53 in Jewish and Christian 
Sources (ed. Bernd Janowski and Peter Stuhlmacher; Grand Rapids, Ml: William B. 
Eerdmans, 2004), pp. 75-146; see pp. 103-105 on the divergent text of IQisa•, where 
the suffering servant figure of Isaiah 52-53 is 'pierced' rather than 'bruised' in Jsa. 
53.10 and correspondingly in Isa. 53.5 he is 'pierced through for our transgressions' 
rather than merely •wounded' for them; likewise in that same scroll, lsa. 52. 14 has 
God declare of him that he shall have 'anointed his appearance beyond that of any 

78 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
modern rhetoric, there is no actual evidence that Jews would have rejected 
such a notion (as I explain in Chapter 12, §4). Neither was such a thing 
incompatible with expectations of a victorious messiah, since God's righ­
teous were always expected to be resurrected, which included the mes­
siah, and accordingly the earliest Christians expected their dying messiah 
to soon return victorious, even imagining his resurrection had already 
occurred to signal the end was nigh, being in fact 'the firstfruits' of the 
apocalyptic resurrection of the whole world (1 Cor. 15.20-23) and signaling 
his messianic victory over the powers of darkness (Element 37). 
This should not surprise us. Even the original forgers of Daniel 9 were 
already imagining something along these lines. Modern scholars are gen­
erally agreed that its authors were saying that the then-high-priest Onias Ill 
was a Messiah (a Christ), and his death would presage a universal atone­
ment, after which would come the end of the world-effected by the com­
ing of the angel MichaeP9 That's already just one or two tweaks away from 
the Christian gospel. One of those tweaks would be simply equating the 
messiah who dies with the savior who returns to complete God's plan (in 
other words, once again, combining the two figures into one): the second of 
which in Daniel is, again, the archangel Michael, called 'the great prince' 
in Dan. 12.1, whom a later interpreter could easily read as being the same 
'prince' of Dan. 9.26-27 (the words are not identical but have a correspond­
ing meaning), because the events of Dan. 12.9-12 are the same events, yet 
are assumed to follow the event of Michael's 'rising' in 12.1 (which in the 
LXX employs exactly the same word used of Jesus' resurrection in Mk 9.31 
and 10.34). So it could appear Michael was meant to be the 'prince' in Dan. 
9.26-27. Because in Dan. 12.9-12 Michael is the one doing the things the 
'prince' does in Dan. 9.26-27. 
That this Michael is 'the resurrected messiah' would thus have been 
an easy inference for a later interpreter to make, in which event 9.25-26 
could easily be read as being not about a Christ and a Prince but a Princely 
man, and his form beyond that of the sons of man', which Hengel considers allusive to 
the anointing of high priests in Lev. 21.10 and 16.32, which would make this figure a 
messiah in the broadest sense-therefore anyone who saw this figure's atoning death 
as eschatological would also regard him as a messiah in the narrower sense that I have 
defined (in §3). 
39. As explained in Danie1 12; Michael is not there called a messiah. but plays the 
role of what many Jews expected ofthe final messiah. Both Michael and Melchizedek 
were regarded as God's celestial high priest in Jewish writings generally, thus they 
would have commonly been equated: Joseph Fitzmyer, 'Further Light on Melchizedek 
from Qumran Cave 11', in Essays on the Semitic Background of the New Testament 
(London: Geoffrey Chapman, 1971), pp. 245-67 (254-55). This would further l ink these 
figures to the pre-Christian Jewish theology of God's Logos and celestial firstborn son. 
also named Jesus (Element 40). 

4. Background (Christianity) 
79 
Christ, all one and the same person, who dies (9.26) and then rises from the 
dead (9.26-27 and 12.1). The Christian gospel is thus already right there in 
Daniel, the more so if Daniel 9 had been linked with Isaiah 52-53, which 
is exactly what 11QI3 appears to do. But even without such a connection 
being made, the notion that a Christ was expected to die to presage the 
end of the world is already clearly intended in Daniel, even by its origi­
nal authors' intent, and would have been understood in the same way by 
subsequent readers of Daniel. The notion of a dying messiah was therefore 
already mainstream, well before Christianity arose. That this messiah did 
not correspond to any specific definition of any specific kind of messiah is 
not relevant, since we know the Jews had many diverse notions of a mes­
siah, and frequently innovated. 
Once the idea was out there, there would be no getting that cat back 
into the bag. In Daniel's originally intended case, the end of the world did 
not come (in fact everything after the death of its intended messiah did 
not occur as the forgers' prophecy predicted), so later Jews had only two 
options: either reject Daniel as a false prophecy (and we know the Jews who 
initiated Christianity had not done that) or conclude 'Daniel' wasn't talking 
about Onias III but some other messiah in the future (necessitating attempts 
to reinterpret the 490-year timetable in Dan. 9.24 to figure out what time 
in history Daniel was actually talking about), which is clearly what many 
Jews did-the author of 1 1Ql3 in particular. In other words, the authors of 
Daniel were plainly saying, and by many were read as saying, that the last 
Christ was to die-shortly before the final end when God's chosen agent 
(in Daniel, the archangel Michael; in 1 1QI3, Melchizedek) would descend 
from heaven, defeat the forces of evil once and for all, and resurrect the 
dead. This means many Jews were expecting a dying messiah, as a sign the 
end was nigh. 
I believe the force of all these arguments is strong, and resistance to them 
can only at this point be blindly dogmatic. But even if scholars remain obsti­
nate against an established fact of a pre-Christian dying-christology, in the 
face of the same evidence they can no longer insist upon its implausibility. 
Because even if you are uncertain of the fact of it, this same evidence still 
conclusively proves that the proposition 'Christianity arose from a sect of 
Jews that came to expect a dying messiah' is a plausible hypothesis, even 
if we can't prove such a sect existed, because (a) we know there were many 
diverse sects of Jews with many diverse notions against the leading ortho­
doxy, and we know nothing about most of them (Element 2); therefore (b) 
an argument from silence to the conclusion 'no such sect existed' cannot be 
sustained;40 whereas (c) the scriptural inspiration and logic for such an idea is 
40. On the facts and logic of this point, and other scholars making it, see Carrier, 
Proving History, pp. 129-34 (with PP· 1 17-19). 

80 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
easily discerned (so easy, in fact, that Talmudic Jews also discerned it)-and 
ifit's easy for us, it would have been easy for at least someone to have noticed 
it during centuries of hundreds of Jewish scholars and sectarians scrambling 
to look for God's secret messages in scripture (Element 8). That later Talmu­
dic Jews hit upon essentially the same conclusions verifies the point. 
This means that in logical terms, 'Christianity arose from a sect of Jews 
that came to expect a dying messiah' is a plausible hypothesis that we can 
then test against the evidence. Because there is no evidence against that 
hypothesis or its plausibility. So if it explains the evidence better than alter­
natives, then it is more probably true than alternatives (and as a hypothesis 
it's already more likely than, e.g., 'Christians only started believing this 
because Jesus actually rose from the dead'). We therefore do not require 
direct evidence of 'there was a sect of Jews that came to expect a dying 
messiah'. Because if all other evidence is better explained by that propo­
sition, then that other evidence is evidence for that proposition. Such indi­
rect inference is routine in historical argument. That Henry assassinated 
William II is a hypothesis, which we can argue for from whether it better 
explains the evidence of what subsequently happened, without requiring a 
confession by Henry or an eyewitness to the deed.41 
Since we lack evidence detailing the beliefs of dozens of Jewish sects, 
and no evidence at all naming (much less describing in detail) which sect 
Christianity grew out of (e.g. what sect Peter was most enamored with or 
devoted to before he joined or launched the movement; or, on a historicist 
thesis, what sect or sects Jesus originally came from or was educated in; 
or even what sects Paul was influenced by, if any before the Christian sect, 
that led him to abandon the Pharisee sect). So we know it's very likely we 
won't have evidence of such a thing as that the sect Christianity grew out 
of was already expecting a dying messiah.42 Thus, whether it was or not 
is either unknowable (in which case it can't be denied as a possibility nor 
even declared an improbability) or can be inferred from evidence we do 
have: such as that the crucifixion of the Christian messiah was always said 
to have been discovered in scripture (1 Cor. 15.3-4 and Rom. 16.25-26), 
combined with all the evidence we have surveyed here, from the book of 
Daniel, the Talmud, the Sefer Zerubbabel, and the Melchizedek Scroll. 
I believe this amounts to ample evidence that at least some pre-Chris­
tian Jews were expecting a dying messiah to presage the end of the world; 
and even should anyone reject that conclusion, it still cannot be denied 
that the hypothesis (that some pre-Christian Jews were expecting a dying 
messiah to presage the end of the world) is at least plausible enough to take 
41 . See discussion of this example in Carrier, Proving History, pp. 273-75. 
42. That this eliminates the strength of any argument from silence, see previous 
note. 

4. Background (Christianity) 
81 
seriously, given all that same evidence. Its prior probability simply cannot 
be established as low, and from the evidence here surveyed, it looks more 
likely to be high. 
Element 6: The suffering-and-dying servant of Isaiah 52-53 and the mes­
siah of Daniel 9 (which, per the previous element, may already have been 
seen by some Jews as the same person) have numerous logical connections 
with a man in Zechariah 3 and 6 named 'Jesus Rising' who is confronted by 
Satan in God's abode in heaven and there crowned king, given all of God's 
authority, holds the office of high priest, and will build up 'God's house' 
(which is how Christians described their church)Y 
In the Septuagint text, Zechariah is commanded in a vision to place the 
crown of kingship upon 'Jesus' (Zech. 6.1 1) and to say immediately upon 
doing so that 'Jehovah declares' that this Jesus is 'the man named ''Rising" 
and he shall rise up from his place below and he shall build the House 
of the Lord'. The key noun is anatole, which is often translated 'East' 
because it refers to where the sun rises (hence 'East'), but such a translation 
obscures the fact that the actual word used is the noun 'rising' or 'rise' (as 
in 'sunrise'), which was not always used in reference to a compass point, 
and whose real connotations are more obvious when translated literally. In 
fact by immediately using the cognate verb 'to rise up' (anatelei, and that 
explicitly 'from his place below') it's clear the Septuagint translator under­
stood the word to mean 'rise' (and Philo echoes the same pun in his inter­
pretation, and thus also understood: see Element 40). We know Zechariah 
meant this in some way to be Jesus ben Jehozadak, the legendary first high 
priest of the second temple (as I'll discuss shortly). But by implying this 
event may have occurred in heaven, interpreters could think differently. 
And we know some did (Element 40). 
If this 'Jesus Rising' were connected to the dying servant who atones 
for all sins in Isaiah (and perhaps also with Daniel or I IQI 3), it would be 
easy to read out of this almost the entire core Christian gospel. Connecting 
the two figures in just that way would be natural to do: this same 'Jesus' 
who is named 'Rising' (or, in both places, 'Branch' in the extant Hebrew, 
as in 'Davidic heir', or so both contexts imply) appears earlier in Zechariah 
3, where 'Jesus' is also implied to be the one called 'Rising' (in 3.8). Both 
are also called 'Jesus the high priest' throughout Zechariah 3 and 6, hence 
clearly the same person. And there he is also called God's 'servant'. And 
it is said that through him (in some unspecified way) all sin in the world 
43. God's house is, of course, God's temple, which is what Christians sometimes 
called their church (each member was God's temple, but also collectively they were 
each a part of a single body and thus collectively God's temple): 1 Cor. 3. 16·17; 6.16-20; 
10. 17; 1 2.12-27; 2 Cor. 6.16; Rom. 12.4-5. See Element 1 8. 

82 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
will be cleansed 'in a single day' (Zech. 3.9). Both concepts converge with 
Isaiah 52-53, which is also about God's 'servant', whose death cleanses the 
world's sins (I sa. 52.13 and 53.1 t), which of course would thus happen in a 
single day (as alluded in Isa. 52.6). And as we saw earlier, Jews may have 
been linking this dying 'servant' to the dying 'Christ' killed in Daniel 9 (in 
t1Qt3), whose death is also said to correspond closely with a conclusive 
'end of sin' in the world (Dan. 9.24-26), and both figures (in Daniel and 
1 1Qt3) were linked to an expected 'atonement in a single day' after a period 
of 490 years, whose starting point one needed only to discover in order to 
predict the end of the world (see Element 5). 
These dots are so easily connected, and with such convincing force for 
anyone enamored of the thought process generating the Jewish pesherim as 
a literary genre, that it would be astonishing if no Jews had thought of this. 
Not ever, by anyone, in the whole of their fevered composition ofpesherim? 
(See Element 8.) That seems quite improbable. Nevertheless, I am not here 
declaring Christianity was born from making this connection, only that it 
is certainly plausible to hypothesize it was.44 l will provide further evidence 
for that being the case in Element 40, where Christian and Jewish theology 
also coincide at exactly this point, but here I am concerned only with the 
existence of the scriptural coincidences, which definitely predated Christi­
anity in public documents used as sacred scripture by all Jews, and thus by 
all would-be founders of Christianity. 
As I mentioned, an 'exoteric' reading of Zechariah 3 and 6 would con­
clude the author originally meant the first high priest of the second temple, 
Jesus ben Jehozadak (Zech. 6.11; cf. Hag. 1.1), who somehow came into 
an audience with God, in a coronation ceremony (one would presume in 
heaven, as it is in audience with God and his angels and attended by Satan) 
granting him supreme supernatural power over the universe (Zech. 3.7). 
But such a scene hardly seems descriptive of any living person, and would 
more readily be 'esoterically' read as being about a celestial being named 
Jesus (as in fact we know it was, Philo of Alexandria having made exactly 
this inference: see Element 40), who was given by God supreme authority 
over the universe in defiance of Satan (Zech. 3.1-2). As it happens, the name 
Jehozadak means in Hebrew 'Jehovah the Righteous', so one could also 
read this as 'Jesus, the son of Jehovah the Righteous', and thereby conclude 
this is really 'Jesus, the son of God'. 
This is notable considering the evidence we have of a preexistent son 
of God named Jesus in pre-Christian Jewish theology, connected with this 
44. That Zechariah 3 was a seminal scripture in the founding of Christianity has 
been argued before: see Daniel St6kJ ben Ezra, The Impact of Yom Kippur on Early 
Christianity: The Day of Atonement from Second Temple Judaism to the Fifth Century 
(Tnbingen: Mohr Siebeck, 2003), pp. 194-97. 

4. Background (Christianity) 
83 
very passage (discussed in Element 40). The fact that in his coronation 
scene his dirty rags are replaced with magnificent raiment in heaven (Zech. 
3.3-5) could also have been read as a resurrection metaphor, such a change 
of garments being a common metaphor for that at the time.45 But even with­
out that assumption, if this Jesus had ever been connected in previous (but 
now lost) pesherim with the dying Christ figure in Isaiah and Daniel (by 
linking them all through Zech. 3.8-9), then we would have a man who dies 
and is then named Rising and said to 'rise' (just like Michael the Prince in 
Daniel) in order to be given alJ power and authority (which would imply a 
resurrection more than sufficiently to almost any Jew of the day) and who 
somehow conclusively atones for all sins in a single day. 
The significance of this is that if such a connection had been made, the 
connector would have before him, in a simple pesher of Jewish scripture, a 
celestial being named Jesus Christ Rising, a high priest of God, in opposi­
tion to Satan, who is wrongly executed even though innocent, and dies to 
atone for all sins, is buried and subsequently 'raised', exalted to the highest 
station in heaven, appointed king with supreme heavenly power by God, 
and who will then build God's house (the church). That sounds exactly like 
Christianity. And all from connecting just three passages in the OT that 
already have distinctive overlapping sim ilarities. Such a coincidence can­
not be ignored; it must be included in our background knowledge. Would 
Christians really have been that lucky, that all this connected so obviously? 
Or are we seeing here where the whole idea of the Christian gospel came 
from in the first place? 
Element 7: (a) The pre-Christian book of Daniel was a key messianic text, 
laying out what would happen and when, partly inspiring much of the very 
messianic ferver of the age, which by the most obvious (but not originally 
intended) interpretation predicted the messiah's arrival in the early first 
century, even (by some calculations) the very year of 30 CE. (b) This text 
was popularly known and widely influential, and was known and regarded 
as scripture by the early Christians. 
This fact is already attested by the many copies and commentaries on 
Daniel recovered from Qumran,46 but it's evident also in the fact that the 
4S. See Carrier, 'Spiritual Body', in Empty Tomb (ed. Price and Lowder), pp. 1 14-
15, 132-47, IS7, 212 (n. 166). The heavenly ascent narrative known to Ignatius, lrenaeus 
and Justin Martyr (see Chapter 8, §6) may have alluded to this passage in Zechariah, 
if this is what is intended by mentioning the lowly state of Jesus' attire when he enters 
God's heavenly court in Justin Martyr, Dialogue with Trypho 36. 
46. On the numerous copies of Daniel among the Dead Sea Scrolls, including 
fragments of commentaries on it, see Peter Flint, 'The Daniel Tradition at Qumran', 
in Eschatology (ed. Evans and Flint), pp. 41-60, and F. F. Bruce, 'The Book of Daniel 

84 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
Jewish War itself may have been partly a product of it. As at Qumran, the 
key inspiring text was the messianic timetable described in the book of 
Daniel (in Dan. 9.23-27). By various calculations this could be shown to 
predict, by the very Word of God, that the messiah would come sometime 
in the early first century cE. Several examples of these calculations survive 
in early Christian literature, the clearest appearing in Julius Africanus in 
the third century.47 The date there calculated is precisely 30 cE; hence it was 
expected on this calculation {which was simple and straightforward enough 
that anyone could easily have come up with the same result well before the 
rise of Christianity) that a messiah would arise and be killed in that year (as 
we saw Daniel had 'predicted' in 9.26: see Element 5), which is an obvious 
basis for setting the gospel story precisely then {1"11 revisit this point later 
on here and in Chapter 8), or else a basis for believing that, of all messianic 
claimants, 'our' Jesus Christ was the one for real. 
For all of this to be coincidence is unlikely. Different calendars and cal­
culations might have given slightly different years, but every straightfor­
ward calculation falls around the same period. And the Christian calcu­
lation was the most obvious, and therefore the most likely to have been 
arrived at before the fact. This kind of messianic math was very possibly 
the cause of the whole explosion of messianic claims and expectations in 
that very century (Element 4). Josephus even implies that this prophecy 
caused the Jewish War-certain Jewish factions being so convinced by it 
that they were certain God's messiah would descend to defeat the Romans. 
Which didn't happen, of course, resulting in their crushing defeat. But mes­
sianic fever remained so great it had thus led to a suicidal war. Arguably 
only a belief in a supernaturally backed messianic event could have mobi­
lized armies among the Jews. Several other historians near to the event 
confirm it was indeed this belief that inspired that revolt.48 
and the Qumran Community', in Neotestamentica et semitica: Studies in Honour of 
Matthew Black (ed. E. Earle Ellis and Max Wilcox; Edinburgh: T. & T. Clark. 1969). 
pp. 221-35. 
47. Julius Africanus, in his lost History of the World, which excerpt survives in 
the collection of George Syncellus, Excerpts of Chronography 18.2. Other examples 
of this kind of calculation survive in Tertullian, Answer to the Jews 8, and Clement of 
Alexandria, Miscellanies 1.21.(125-26). 
48. Josephus, Jewish War 6.312-16; verified in Suetonius, Lifo of Vespasian 4.5. 
and Tacitus, Histories S.13.2. Josephus's discussion does not here identify Daniel 
by title but he does elsewhere (in Josephus, Jewish Antiquities 10.276), and here he 
clearly intends no other text given his description (of two rulers who would come. 
and the presence of an actual timetable, two features not found together in any other 
passage of the Bible). Josephus himself correctly interprets the Danielic prophecy to 
have been regarding the Maccabees (Josephus, Jewish Antiquities 12.321-22), yet also 

4. Background (Christianity) 
85 
If Daniel was behind much or all of the first-century craze for messi­
ahs, it could have inspired Christianity as well (with or without a historical 
Jesus), Christianity being just another messianic cult like all the others. 
And we can verify this at least as far as the Gospels. Mark quotes a passage 
from the Danielic timetable (Mk 13.14), and Matthew provides the attribu­
tion (Mt. 24.15). Thus the earliest texts that place Jesus's death in Palestine 
around 30 CE were clearly aware of the very prophetic text placing a mes­
siah's appearance and death around 30 CE. And that's a fact, whatever we 
decide to make of it. (Personally, I think if Jesus just 'happened' to die in 30 
CE, then that would be a rather convenient coincidence; whereas if the year 
of the crucifixion was fudged or fabricated to match the prophecy, even for 
a historical death, then no lucky coincidence is required. It is therefore the 
more probable hypothesis.) 
The irony in all of this is that Daniel 9 was an attempt to fix a failed 
prophecy in Jeremiah (Dan. 9.2, responding to Jer. 25.11-12), yet this 'fix' 
also failed, prompting later Jews to try and salvage this double failure by 
'reinterpreting' Daniel this time and thus doing to Daniel what Daniel had 
unsuccessfully attempted to do to Jeremiah. Christianity was the most suc­
cessful result. Of course, then the Christians had to spoil it by creating their 
own prophesy that the end of the world would come within the lifetimes 
of those hearing the good news. Which prophesy also failed.49 It would be 
comical if it wasn't sad. But the cognitive dissonance caused by those ear­
lier failures would explain the eventual success of a 'reinterpretation' that 
couldn't be falsified: a messiah who triumphs in heaven, and reveals this 
fact from heaven, in secret, to a select few. 
This is essentially Christianity in a nutshell (whether Jesus existed or 
not). The need to innovate an ironclad solution to the failure of God's scrip­
ture (in Jeremiah, as patched up by Daniel) would certainly inspire both 
creativity to that end and its passionate acceptance-and with a 'spiritual' 
solution there could be no evidence against it (even in principle) and thus 
no more cognitive dissonance over it (see Element 28). The only thing left 
to cope with was the continuing failure of Christian prophets to get straight 
acknowledges (in 10.276) that it was about the Roman sack of Jerusalem, imagining the 
prophecy as having been twice fulfilled. 
49. And this cycle of predicting the end, followed by failure, then revising of the 
prediction, has continued ever since. See John Loftus, •At Best Jesus Was a Failed 
Apocalyptic Prophet', in Christian Delusion (ed. Loftus), pp. 316-43. That Christians 
taught that Jesus had predicted the imminent end is undeniable: Heb. 1.10-2.5; 10.36-
37; I Cor. 1.28; 6.13; 7.29-31; I Thess. 4.15; 2 Pet. 3.5-13; I Jn 2.15-18; and of course 
Mark 13 and Matthew 24. On the continuing cycle of fai lure after that, see Bernard 
McGinn et a/., The Continuum History of Apocalypticism (New York: Continuum, 
2003); and Jonathan Kirsch, A History of the End of the World (San Francisco, CA: 
Harper, 2006). 

86 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
when the world would end, but history proves that has never been a diffi­
culty. A heavenly victory simply made it easier. 4Ves, the world didn't end 
today as we thought, but at least we're still saved'. That's the mantra Chris­
tians have sustained the faith with for two thousand years. 
But it all began with Jeremiah-and the book of Daniel. Experts agree 
Daniel was forged in the second century in part to 4explain' the death of the 
high priest Onias III in 171 seE, who was at the time believed to be the (or 
a) messiah (he is most likely the 'Christ' who is killed in Dan. 9.26), and to 
support the subsequent (and otherwise technically illegitimate) Maccabean 
regime by 'predicting' God's defeat of their opponent, Antiochus IV, in 164 
seE and then the coming end of the world (which didn't happen-in fact, 
much of what Daniel predicts after Chapter 9 didn't go to plan, providing a 
clue as to when it was written). 5° This original meaning required a partic­
ular method of calculating years according to the timetable, using overlap­
ping rather than sequential periods, the only way to get Jeremiah's numbers 
to fit actual history up to Onias's death (and thereby 'predict' this mes­
siah would die in 171 seE). Obviously that was more awkward than simply 
counting sequentially. So subsequent reinterpreters, certain the 'inspired' 
Daniel could not have made a mistake, summed these years sequentially 
(the more obvious way), and chose different starting points (whatever could 
count as a 'word concerning the restoration of Jerusalem'), which (depend­
ing on what calendar you use) gets various dates for the messiah's death in 
the early first century cE. 
The Christian religion could thus in a sense be explained as an attempt 
to explain away Daniel's failed prediction of a divinely supported mili­
tary victory for Israel over its Gentile oppressors (which continually didn't 
happen), by imagining (unlike Daniel) a 'spiritual' kingdom instead of an 
actual one, and repeatedly postponing the actual one to an ever-receding 
future. Among the Dead Sea Scrolls, for example, in what's called 'The 
Son of God' text (4Q246), we have a redaction of Daniel in which it is pre­
dicted that one day a great and righteous man will be born and be called the 
son of God and rule an eternal kingdom. Though here it was still imagined 
as a kingdom achieved by conquest, followed by an eternal reign of peace, 
it's an easy thing to explain the failure of this to happen time and again by 
relocating that conquest into the spiritual realm (see Elements 23 through 
28). And that's exactly what the Christians did: they imagined a righteous 
man was born and was called the son of God and now rules an eternal 
kingdom-a kingdom that no one can see. And they imagined this hap-
50. A good discussion of all of this is provided for Daniel 9 in Andre Lacocque, 
The Book of Daniel (Atlanta, GA: John Knox Press, 1979); but any professional 
commentary on Daniel 9 will make the same point, for example John Collins, Daniel: 
A Commentary (Minneapolis, MN: Fortress Press, 1993). 

4. Background (Christianity) 
87 
pened exactly when Daniel appears to have predicted it would. And they 
imagined it followed the death of their Christ exactly as Daniel had said it 
would. A nd their own Gospels cite this passage in Daniel as confirmation. 
So the book of Daniel was clearly a seminal text in the development of 
Christianity, influencing the core of the gospel itself, including belief in 
the crucifixion and its prophetic importance. This is al l the case whether 
Jesus existed or not, so this does not answer whether he did; it only entails 
he didn't have to. 
Element 8: (a) Many messianic sects among the Jews were searching the 
scriptures for secret messages from God about the coming messiah, in 
both the Hebrew Bible and the Septuagint (and beyond: see Element 9). 
The Christians were thus not engaging in novel activity when they did the 
same. (b) Since countless Jews were already doing this, and had been for 
a century or more, we must conclude the Jews who would become the first 
Christians had already been doing it long before they became Christians 
(since it would be extremely bizarre if they weren't). Thus it is incorrect to 
assume Christians only started doing this after the fact; for we know they 
and their sectarian predecessors were already doing it before the fact. 
Indeed this was a fad of the time, evident throughout the Dead Sea 
Scrolls and the Tal muds and Jewish literature elsewhere. The whole pesher 
genre is devoted to this activity.51 The Dead Sea pesher possibly linking 
the dying messiah of Daniel to the dying servant of Isaiah is an example 
(Element 5). Everyone was feverishly searching the scriptures to find secret 
messages about the messiah and God's eventual plan for the Jews, and often 
finding these messages in the weirdest places. Indeed the Christians took 
it to a level of veritable lunacy (the book of Hermas, e.g., would peg any­
one who wrote it today as al l but insane), and the authors of the Dead Sea 
Scrolls seem not too far from it themselves. 
Many doctrines originated from this search, each community's search 
finding something different. Any pattern would be considered inspired­
due to the routine fallacy of assuming a consistent pattern is too much a 
coincidence to be there by chance (when in fact many coincidentally con-
51. On the genre of the pesherim and how they constructed hidden meanings 
from past scripturesݬ see Shani Tzoref, 'Qumran Pesharim and the Pentateuch: 
Explicit Citation. Overt Typologies, and Implicit Interpretive Traditions', Dead Sea 
Discoveries 16 (2009)" pp. 190-220 (with scholarship cited therein)ݭ and Bruce Chilton, 
'Commenting on the OJd Testament (with Particular Reference to the Pesharim, Philo 
and the Mekilta', in It Is Written-Scripture Citing Scripture: Essays in Honour of 
Barnabas Lindars, SSF (ed. Barnabas Lindars, D.A. Carson and H.G.M. WiJiiamson; 
New York: Cambridge University Press, 1988), pp. 122ߪ40. The practice is praised in 
Philo, On the Contemplative Life 3.28-29. 

88 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
sistent patterns will be there by chance, owing to the vast size and complex­
ity of the scriptures and the inherent ambiguity and multivalent meaning 
of words). Hence countless different sectarian 'discoveries' were possible, 
each colored by the moral, political, theological, or other assumptions and 
expectations brought to the text. And it is because of this that countless 
different sects and interpretations of God's plan arose, with Christianity 
among them. 52 In fact, so many Jews were engaged in looking for these 
kinds of hidden meanings, for so long, that we can be nearly certain that all 
the most obvious patterns would inevitably have been discovered. 
Element 9: What in the early first century were considered the inspired 
scriptures of God consisted of a larger network of texts than are now col­
lected in the OT, including texts outside the canon and texts that no longer 
exist and also variants of texts that do exist (even canonical texts) but which 
often said different things then than extant versions now do. In other words, 
anyone trying to construct their picture of the messiah from hidden mes­
sages in the 'Bible' (per the previous element) would have been using texts 
and variants not in any current Bible today, and Christianity can be under­
stood only in light of this fact. 
Jewish authorities did not establish a canon until the second century CE, 
so no actual 'Old Testament' existed at the dawn of Christianity, just a sea 
of scriptures, from which different sects selected their own collections. The 
earliest Christians clearly held in their sacred collection books no longer in 
the Bible, including the Wisdom of Solomon and the Book of Enoch (which 
show their influence throughout the NT), and others. Codex Sinaiticus, for 
example, one of the earliest surviving Christian Bibles, includes in its OT 
'canon' 2 Esdras, Tobit, Judith, I Maccabees, 4 Maccabees, Wisdom of 
Solomon, and Sirach (otherwise known as the 'Book of the All-Virtuous 
Wisdom of Jesus ben Sira'). These and other texts influenced everything 
the earliest Christians said or believed about Jesus. Jude 14, for example, 
explicitly cites Enoch as scripture, and Jude 9 quotes another scripture 
52. In addition to the evidence already surveyed (such as for the use of Daniel), see 
also Alison Salvesen, 'Messianism in Ancient Bible Translations in Greek and Latin', in 
Redemption and Resistance (ed. Bockmuehl and Paget), pp. 245-61; Joachim Schaper, 
Eschatology in the Greek Psalter (Ttlbingen: J.C.B. Mohr [Paul Siebeck], 1995), esp. 
pp. 93-94, 101-107; and the other works cited in previous notes on ancient messianism. 
For Christian examples, see Craig Evans and James Sanders (eds.), Early Christian 
Interpretation of the Scriptures of Israel: Investigations and Proposals (Sheffield: 
Sheffield Academic Press, 1997); O.K. Beale and D.A. Carson (eds.), Commentary 
on the New Testament Use of the Old Testament (Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Academic, 
2007); the latter also discusses other Jewish interpretations of the same messianic 
passages (thus confirming Christianity's creative use of the Bible to this end was part 
of a wider trend and not itself novel). 

4. Background (Christianity) 
89 
now lost (which has been tentatively identified as the Revelation of Moses). 
Enoch was also a part of the scriptures collected at Qumran (e.g. 4Q204), 
along with many other books found in Codex Sinaiticus, and others known 
from nowhere else. Other texts they may have used include the Apocalypse 
of Moses, or any of the lost Danielic or Ezekiel literature we have pieces 
of from Qumran, where we have found fragments of many scriptures that 
have not survived anywhere else. 53 
Another important scripture of the period was the apocryphal Psalms 
ofSolomon, which established many of the standard beliefs about the mes­
siah, including his roles as king, judge, and shepherd, his designation as 
'Son of David' (even though one would presume that that could not be 
meant literally, David having been dead for many centuries: although see 
Chapter 11, §9), as well as his assuming the title of Christ and Lord ('Lord 
Messiah'). s4 Many other connections between the Psalms of Solomon and 
Christianity are evident, including the messiah's freedom from sin (17.36) 
and empowerment by the Holy Spirit (17.37). Though the Psalms describe 
this messiah in the manner of a military conqueror (e.g. 17.21-26), it is still 
somewhat circumspect, saying 'he shall destroy the godless nations with 
the word of his mouth' (17.24, 17.35-36) and that he will use no weapons or 
armies (17.33). It also says God wiU 'raise him up for the house of Israel to 
educate him' (17.42), which could easily inspire proto-Christian thinking: 
for 'raise him up' (anastisai auton) is identical in wording to 'resurrect 
him', and can even be read as saying God will resurrect this messiah to 
educate Israel. I am not arguing here that Christians got this idea of a spiri­
tual dying-and-rising messiah from this scripture, only that we have to take 
seriously the possibility that they in part did, because this text was widely 
regarded as scripture at the time, and Jews everywhere were searching their 
scriptures for hidden meanings just like this. 
Since, like all Jews, proto-Christians would have been searching this 
scripture (and others) for secret messages about the messiah, anyone who 
interpreted this chapter in light of Dan. 9.26, for instance, could easily 
derive the core Christian gospel therefrom, yet again (see Elements 6 and 
17). It's certainly not improbable to see in the Psalms of Solomon a predic­
tion of a metaphorically victorious messiah, who uses no armies or weap­
ons but conquers solely through the power of his words (in other words, his 
teachings), especially for Jews who were convinced that scriptures like this 
were not to be taken at what they appeared to say, but as concealing their 
.53. For example, 4Q385·391 contain lost writings of Ezekiel and Jeremiah: 
fragments of lost writings of Daniel are discussed in Bruce, •sook of Daniel and the 
Qumran Community', pp. 223·25. 
54. See discussion in Joseph L. Trafton, •The Psalms of Solomon', in Historical 
Jesus in Context (ed. Levine, A11ison and Crossan), pp. 256-65. 

90 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
true meaning, as a great many Jews of that time thought (Element 8). And 
if you were already convinced the last Christ must die as Daniel predicted 
(Elements 5 and 7), a verse seeming to say he will be resurrected is avail­
able here as well. 
There were also evidently several scriptures early Christians were using 
that we don't have and don't even know the titles of. Clement of Rome, for 
example, quotes as scripture texts we know nothing about, and yet which 
clearly influenced earliest Christianity.55 But not only did now-lost scrip­
tures and non-canonical scriptures influence early Christianity, but so did 
canonical scriptures that said different things than the versions we now 
have. Early Christians even claimed the Jews had erased passages from the 
scriptures that predicted things about the Christ. In reality, the Christians 
probably just had textual variants and interpolated passages in their manu­
scripts-which can only have predated Christianity (and thus were Jewish 
in origin) unless they were forged by Christians to ފcreate' prophetic verifi­
cation of their religion. For example, Paul quotes a now-lost variant reading 
of Isaiah in Rom. 9.33 (see Chapter II, §8). Likewise, lrenaeus reports that 
in Jeremiah there was a passage saying, 'and the Lord, the Holy One of 
Israel, remembered his dead, which aforetime fell asleep in the dust of the 
earth, and he went down unto them, to bring the tidings of his salvation, 
to deliver them'. No such passage exists in Jeremiah now, and it's hard to 
think where it could have been. But Irenaeus is fully confident it was there. 56 
This and several other passages Christians insisted had been removed by 
the Jews from their copies of 'the Bible', but were clearly present in the 
copies of 'the Bible' the Christians were relying on. Earlier, Justin Martyr 
had documented a whole slew of such passages, now missing from extant 
Bibles but which he was sure existed in his. 57 Origen later commented on 
this sort of thing being commonplace.58 We can even see examples in the 
first epistle of Clement (see Chapter 8, §5). How many other examples were 
there that we don't have a surviving reference to? 
Likewise, Christians often trusted the Septuagint over the Hebrew text 
of the Bible. The infamous case of the 'virgin' birth prediction is well 
known. 59 But Irenaeus also says Ps. 119.120 says, 'nail my flesh out of fear', 
55. See Chapter 8 (§5). There may have been many texts like that: see. e.g .. Matthias 
Henze (ed.), Hazon Gabriel: New Readings of the Gabriel Revelation (Atlanta. GA: 
Society of Biblical Literature, 2011). 
56. Irenaeus, Demonstration of the Apostolic Preaching 78. 
57. Justin Martyr, Dialogue with Trypho 71-73. 
58. Origen, Letter to Africanus 2-9. 
59. See Tim Callahan, Bible Prophecy: Failure or Fulfillment? (Altadena. CA: 
Millennium Press, 1997), pp. 1 15-16; and Raymond Brown, The Birth ofthe Messiah: 
A Commentary on the Infancy Narratives in the Gospels of Mall hew and Luke (Garden 
City, NY: Doubleday, 1993), §5 83. 

4. Background (Christianity) 
91 
and therefore predicts the crucifixion, which is true only in the Greek; the 
Hebrew says, 'my flesh trembles from fear of you', which is certainly the 
original reading. The Greek translation Irenaeus used literally reads, 'nail 
my flesh from fear of you, as I am afraid of your judgments', which makes 
no sense really, yet differs from the perfectly sensible Hebrew by only a 
single word. Nevertheless, Christians trusted this erroneous variant, and 
based their religious beliefs thereon.60 lrenaeus likewise says his copy of 
the Psalms said, 'spare my soul from the sword, fasten my flesh with nails, 
for the assemblies of the wicked have risen up against me', which in fact is 
an entirely different verse than appears in either the Hebrew or the Greek 
that we now have. He was thus using a different version of the Bible than 
survives today in any form at all. And Irenaeus is not an aberration here. 
Exactly the same thing is said in the Epistle of Barnabas, which was once 
a part of some early Christian Bibles. 61 
We know these kinds of deviant manuscripts were all over the place even 
before Christianity began. Greek versions of the scriptures were found (and 
thus evidently used and studied) among the Dead Sea Scrolls in Palestine, 
so Greek-based interpretations could easily pre-date Christianity. Even a 
Hebrew copy of Isaiah at Qumran, for example, replaces the word 'bruised' 
with the word 'pierced' in both Isa. 53.5 and 53.10. That's the very passage 
we previously discussed as predicting the messiah's death when connected 
with Dan. 9.25-26, and here now we see this variant also linking Isaiah 53 
with Psalms 22, a connection the Christians also made, as we see in Mark's 
construction of the crucifixion narrative (see Chapter 10, §4). Thus it can't 
always have been Christians doctoring texts to conform to the crucifix­
ion-for here we have a variant text that could readily evoke an expected 
crucifixion for the atoning servant of Isaiah 53 long before there even were 
Christians. 62 
Thus Christians were not relying on the biblical texts we have. They 
had different versions to work from, as well as books now no longer in the 
Bible at all. Which means whenever a Christian text claims there was (or 
60. Irenaeus, Demonstration of the Apostolic Preaching 19. 
61. Epistle of Barnabas 5. This is in the Codex Sinaiticus, one of the oldest Bibles 
in the world (transcribed in the early fourth century CE), and the epistle itself was 
probably written in the early second century CE and thus half a century at least before 
the time oflrenaeus (see note in Chapter 8, §6). 
62. Again, the Qumran version of Isaiah (IQisa•) says 'he was wounded for our 
transgressions, he was pierced for our iniquities . . .  it pleased Jehovah to pierce him 
. . .  to make his life an offering for sin' (which in effect means the same thing in English 
as 'he was nailed up for our iniquities . . .  it pleased Jehovah to nail him him up'). For 
examples of other variant readings of otherwise-known scriptures found at Qumran 
. 
' 
see John Collins and Cratg Evans (eds.), Christian Beginnings and the Dead Sea 
Scrolls (Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Academic, 2006), p. 10. 

92 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
indeed even quotes) a scripture that we can't find in the Bible (e.g. Jn 7.38; 
Lk. 24.46-47; Mt. 2.23; Mk 9.12; even 1 Cor. 2:9), we should presume they 
were looking at a textual variant we no longer have (and thus the scripture 
was there, and probably there before Christianity, at least in some of the 
manuscripts available to them), or were citing a book other than any now 
in the OT (such as any of those mentioned earlier, although there were also 
others we no longer even know about). Likewise, Christians didn't always 
say they were citing or deriving an idea from scripture, yet we can identify 
where they got it from ourselves, which means there must also have been 
many more cases where they also derived a text or idea from a variant 
scripture now lost to us or no longer in the canon, without telling us that is 
what they were doing.63 
Element 10: Christianity began as a Jewish messianic cult preaching a 
spiritually victorious messiah. This means that (a) sometime in the early 
first century at least one of the many diverse sects of Jews came to believe 
and preach that (b) a certain Jesus was an eschatological Christ, (c) despite 
his having been crucified and buried by the powers that be (whether tem­
poral or supernatural), (d) because (or so they preached: 1 Cor. 15.3-8 and 
Gal. 1.1 1-1 2) he had afterward appeared to certain favored people and con­
vinced them he was this Christ and (e) had to die in atonement for all sins 
but (f) had risen from the dead to sit at the right hand of God in order to 
begin the work (through the sect he was thus founding) of preparing for 
God's kingdom until (g) the time when this Christ would descend from 
heaven to complete his mission of destroying God's enemies, resurrecting 
the dead, and establishing an eternal paradise (e.g. Romans 8; 1 Cor. 10.11 
and 1 5.23-26; I Thess. 4.14-17). (h) At this time Jesus was already believed 
to be a preexistent being (1 Cor. 8.6; 10.1-4; Phil. 2.6-8; and Rom. 8.3; see 
also Element 40), but (i) was not believed to be identical to God, but to be 
his appointed emissary and subordinate, not God himself but given God's 
authority, being God's 'son' in the same sense as angels and kings tradition­
ally were (see my discussion of the resulting linguistic ambiguity in §3). 
None of this should be controversial. 64 Some scholars might challenge 
the notion that the earliest Jesus cult regarded the death of Jesus to be 
63. On this and many other of the points made here see Magne Sreb0 (ed.), Hebrew 
Bible, Old Testament: The History of its Interpretation. Volume 1: From the Beginnings 
to the Middle Ages (until 1300). Part 1: Antiquity (GOttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht. 
1996), esp. Oskar Skarsaune, 'The Question ofOid Testament Canon and Text in the 
Early Greek Church', pp. 443-50, which documents many more examples. 
64. This is all undeniably expl icit in later texts sueh as Heb. 1 .1 -4 and Col. 1.1 2-
20 (and elsewhere, e.g., Heb. 2.10, which echoes I Cor. 8.6), but I shall proceed to 
demonstrate these claims are already in the earliest letters of Paul and even pre-

4. Background (Christianity) 
93 
an atonement sacrifice, but the fact of the matter is our earliest Christian 
documents widely attest this was a standard, fundamental, and pervasive 
Christian belief, and affords no evidence of any prior version of Christian­
ity (l Cor. 15.3; Rom. 3.23-26; 5.6-11; 2 Cor. 5.18-19). This is particularly 
clear in Galatians 1-2, where Paul emphatically insists 'preaching another 
gospel' is enough to condemn anyone as cursed and shunned (Gal. 1.6-9), 
but that his gospel was in accord with that of the 'pillars' Peter, James and 
John (Gal. 2.6-10), whom he implies are the founders of Christianity (he 
certainly here treats them as the ultimate authorities whose blessing any 
Christian apostle required; and he again confirms their primacy in 1 Cor. 
15.3-8, although the reliability of the text on this point has been questioned: 
see note in Chapter 1 1 ,  §2). Since the 'pillars' and their 'gospel' were thus 
not condemned as 'anathema' by Paul, they cannot possibly have been 
preaching anything so radically different from him as a Jesus who hadn't 
atoned for anyone's sins (much less a Jesus who hadn't been crucified!). 
Any challenge to this conclusion cannot be a disagreement as to the evi­
dence, but only in respect to theory, that is, one might propose the theory 
that there was a previous version of the religion upon which Paul innovated 
the atoning death, and then test that theory against the evidence. I just here 
predict it won't test well. Hence I am rejecting it. The only dispute evident 
throughout Galatians 2 is over the matter of the observance of the specific 
strictures of the Jewish law, the doing away of which very clearly was an 
innovation of Paul (see Element 20). But that was only an interpretation of 
the gospel, not the gospel itself (e.g. this abolition of the Law is nowhere 
stated in Paul's matching declaration of the gospel that was revealed to him 
in 1 Cor. 15.3-8 or anywhere else), therefore an agreement could be reached 
without either side declaring the other anathema (Gal. 2.6-1 0). 
Some scholars might also challenge the assumption that apocalyptic 
hopes were innate to Christianity from the beginning. But this really can 
no longer be doubted. The Epistles are rife with no other view (again, see 
Romans 8; 1 Cor. 10.11; 15.23-26; 1 Thess. 4.14-17), and they long predate 
the Synoptic Gospels. The Synoptic Gospels are rife with no other view (as 
everyone agrees), and they long predate the Gospels of John and (almost 
certainly) Thomas, and only there do we first see the replacement of an 
Pauline creeds. On the related 'high Christology' debate see Andrew Chester, 'High 
Christology-Whence, When and Why?', Early Christianity 2 (201 1), pp. 22-50; 
his results corroborate mine. and are further supported by the evidence I adduce for 
Elements 36 and 40-42. See aJso Jonathan Knight, Disciples of the Beloved One: 
The Christology, Social Setting and Theological Conte:xt of the Ascension of Isaiah 
(Sheffield: Sheffield Academic Press, 1996), pp. 135-39 and 296-303. 

94 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
actual apocalypse with a metaphorical one that had already transpired.65 
Thus the idea of an immanent ދinvisible kingdom' replacing the imminent 
physical kingdom that was previously expected to arrive (but disturbingly 
hadn't) was a later development in Christianity and not a founding belief.66 
Far more foundational was the belief that the resurrection of Jesus had been 
the firstfruits (and therefore a positive sign) of the general apocalyptic res­
urrection very soon to come (1 Cor. 15.20-24).67 
And finally, some (though mostly fundamentalist Christians) might 
challenge the claim that at this stage Christians did not regard Jesus as 
identical to God.68 But this is undeniably clear. Jesus is the power of God 
and the wisdom of God, but not himself God (I Cor. 1.24), only the image 
of God (literally, 'God's icon', 2 Cor. 4.4; though compare I Cor. 11.7, where 
the same is said of ordinary men, but there only through their unity with 
Christ); he was made by God (1 Cor. 1.30). He sits at the right hand of God 
and pleads with God on our behalf (Rom. 8.34). All things were made by 
God, but through the agency of Christ (1 Cor. 8.4-6). Christ is given the 
form of a god, but refuses to seize that opportunity to make himself equal 
to God, but submits to incarnation and death instead, for which obedience 
God grants him supreme authority (Phil. 2.5-11). And Christ will in the 
6S. 'The kingdom of the Father is already spread upon the earth and men do not see 
it', Gos. Thom. 1 13, which is compatible with the Synoptic idea of a spiritual kingdom 
soon to be followed by a physical one (brought on clouds of glory) but still conspicuous 
for lacking any such notion here; the Gospel of John is full of similar sentiments (which 
likewise erases from the story all the mentions of a coming apocalypse, as are found 
throughout the Synoptic Gospels and the Epistles). 
66. This is well enough argued in Bart Ehrman, Jesus: Apocalyptic Prophet of 
the New Millennium (New York: Oxford University Press, 1999). That the Gospel 
of Thomas is far more certainly a late text (of the early to mid-second century), see 
the thorough discussions of Nicholas Perrin, Thomas and Tatian: The Relationship 
between the Gospel of Thomas and the Diatessaron (Leiden: Brill, 2002); and Klyne 
R. Snodgrass, 'The Gospel of Thomas: A Secondary Gospel', in The Historical Jesus: 
Critical Concepts in Religious Studies, Vol. IV: Lives of Jesus and Jesus outside the 
Bible (ed. Craig Evans; New York: Routledge, 2004); and now Mark Goodacre, Thomas 
and the Gospels: The Case for Thomas s Familiarity with the Synoptics (Grand Rapids, 
Ml: William B. Eerdmans, 2012). I find attempts to argue the contrary too weak to rest 
any conclusion on; and they still cannot reliably date Gos. Thorn. even if correct. 
67. See Carrier, 'Why the Resurrection Is Unbelievable', in Christian Delusion (ed. 
Loftus), pp. 291-315 (306). 
68. Some scholars challenge the converse claim, that Jesus was thought from the 
start to be a preexistent being of any sort. Chester, •High Christology', demonstrates 
the implausibility of the claim that Christianity began without a notion of Jesus being 
a preexistent being. There is simply no evidence to support that conjecture, and all the 
evidence we do have indicates otherwise (e.g. I Cor. 8.6 and Phil. 2.5-1 1, which are 
corroborated by the implications of Rom. 8.3). 

4. Background (Christianity) 
95 
end deliver the kingdom to God, who only gave Christ the authority to 
rule and wage war on Go<fs behalf; and in the end Christ will give that 
authority back to God (1 Cor. 15.24-28). Thus in our earliest sources Jesus 
was always distinguished as a different entity from God, and as his sub­
ordinate.69 Even in Colossians he is the image of God, not God himself; in 
fact, he is 'the firstborn of all creation' (and thus a created being), and 'God 
dwelled within him', in the same sense as was imagined for Jewish proph­
ets, priests and kings (Col. 1.15-19). Thus in Rom. 1.4 (and al l of Hebrews 
1) Jesus is only appointed the 'Son of God'. This was precisely how the 
phrase 'Son of God' and the concepts of divine 'incarnation' and 'indwell-
69. Rom. 1.7-8; 2.6; 5.1, 1 1 ;  6.1 1, 23; 7.25; 8.39; 10.9; 15.6, 30; 16.27, etc.; 1 Cor. 
1.3-4; 6.1 1; 15.57, etc.; 2 Cor. 1.2-3; 1 1.31; 13.14, etc.; Gal. 1.1; 1.3, etc.; Phil. 1.2, II; 
3.3, 14; 4.19, etc.; 1 Thess. 1.1; 3.1 1-13; 4.14; 5.9, etc.; and so on. In contrast to all this 
evidence, Rom. 9.5 is often cited as saying Jesus was identical to God (it would then 
be the only passage in Paul that ever says this), but many early Christians punctuated 
the text differently, and accordingly modern translations disagree on the meaning, 
some holding that it was meant to distinguish a spontaneous praise of God with a 
statement about Jesus coming in the flesh. See A.W. Wainwright, 'The Confession 
"Jesus is God" in the New Testament', Scottish Journal of Theology 10 ( 1957), pp. 
278-82; W.L. Lorimer, 'Romans IX. 3-5', New Testament Studies 13 (1967), pp. 385-86; 
and Bruce Metzger, 'The Punctuation of Rom. 9:5', in Christ and the Spirit in the New 
Testament (ed. B. Lindars and S. Smalley; Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
1 973), pp. 9S-1 12. From the other passages in Pau I it is clear he did not believe Jesus 
was 'the' God over all, so at most he can only have meant here 'a' god (a subordinate 
god, in the henotheistic sense: see Element I 1; notably, in accord with this, the passage 
does not say Christ is necessarily ho theos, 'the God', but just theos, '(a] god'). But I 
think it's far more likely (on the evidence of the whole Pauline corpus) that the text has 
become corrupted. In Rom. 1.2S Paul says something almost identical. that the Creator 
is 'blessed forever. Amen' (eulogltos eis tous aionas amen, word-for-word identical 
to the conclusion of Rom. 9.S), and in 2 Cor. 11.31 Paul says God is the 'father' of 
Christ and therefore 'the one who is blessed forever' (ho Ѡn eu/ogitos eis tous aionas), 
which is very similar to the phrase in Rom. 9.5; likewise in 2 Cor. 1.3 Paul says God 
is "blessed' because he is the father of Christ, not because he is the Christ. It is far 
more likely that Rom. 9.5 originally repeated this sentiment than that it said something 
radically new that outright contradicts it. I would thus expect that the phrase ho patlr 
originally appeared before the ho on in Rom. 9.5, which would create an apt parallel 
with the preceding 'whose are the fathers' in the same line, in which case Paul wrote 
'my brethren are the Israelites . . .  whose are the fathers [i.e., the patriarchs] and out of 
whom is Christ in the flesh, whose father is the blessed God over all. Amen'. Indeed, 
Christ's divine paternity is otherwise conspicuous for its absence in this sentence, 
which (in light of the other identical 'blessing' passages in Paul) strongly indicates 
that it was originally present here. For additional bibliographies on this problem see 
Douglas Moo, The Epistle to the Romans {Grand Rapids, MJ: William B. Eerdmans, 
1996), pp. 565-68, and Robert Jewett, Romans: A Commentary (Minneapolis, MN: 
Fortress Press, 2007), pp. 566-69 (although neither Moo nor Jewett consider the 
reconstruction of the text I just proposed, nor the evidence I advanced for it). 

96 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
ing' were then understood by the Jews. 70 This was therefore not a radical 
idea but entirely in accord with popular Jewish theology. This would still 
make Jesus a god by my terminology (and in common pagan parlance), but 
not in the usual vocabulary of Jews (who would sooner cal1 such a divine 
being an archangel or celestial 'lord'). 
6. Elements of Christian Religion 
Element 11: The earliest definitely known form of Christianity was a 
Judeo-Hellenistic mystery religion. This is also beyond any reasonable 
doubt, yet frequently denied in the field of Jesus research, often with a sus­
piciously intense passion. So I shall here survey a case for it. 71 
To say Christianity was a mystery religion is not to say that Christi­
anity is exactly like any other mystery religion, any more than any mys­
tery religion was 'exactly like' any other. Often when scholars deny that 
Christianity was a mystery religion, they rea11y mean it wasn't just one of 
the already-existing mystery religions superficially overhauled with Jewish 
concepts. Christianity wasn't 'Osiris Cult 2.0'. Which is certainly true. But 
that's all that anyone's evidence can prove. If instead we define a mystery 
religion as any Hellenistic cult in which individual salvation was procured 
by a ritual initiation into a set of 'mysteries', the knowledge of which and 
participation in which were key to ensuring a blessed eternal life, then 
Christianity was demonstrably a mystery religion beyond any doubt. 
If we then expand that definition to include a set of specific features 
held in common by all other mystery religions of the early Roman era, then 
Christianity becomes even more demonstrably a mystery religion, so much 
70. See my discussion in Carrier, Not the Impossible Faith, pp. 247-57; and Carrier. 
Proving History, pp. 145-49; and more extensively, Adela Yarbro Collins and John 
Collins (eds.), King and Messiah as Son of God: Divine, Human, and Angelic Messianic 
Figures in Biblical and Related Literature (Grand Rapids. Ml: Eerdmans. 2008)੟ and 
Charles Gieschen, Angelomorphic Christology: Antecedents and Early Evidence 
(Boston: Brill, 1998). See also Craig Evans, 'The Recently Published Dead Sea Scrolls 
and the Historical Jesus', in Studying the Historical Jesus: Evaluations of the State 
of Current Research (ed. Bruce Chilton and Craig Evans; Leiden: Brill, 1994), pp. 
563-65; and Margaret Barker, The Great High Priest: The Temple Roots of Christian 
Liturgy (New York: T. & T. Clark, 2003), pp. 60-62, 210·12. On pagan equivalents 
(from which one can see Jesus was assigned all the royal titles associated with Greco­
Roman kings and emperors), see Erwin Goodenough, 'The Political Philosophy of 
Hellenistic Kingship', Yale Classical Studies 1 (1928), pp. 55-102. 
71. See also Marvin Meyer (ed.), The Ancient Mysteries: A Sourcebook of Sacred 
Texts (Philadelphia, PA: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1987), pp. 225-27 (with 
bibliography pro and con) and pp. 252-54; with Jaime Alvarez, Romanising Oriental 
Gods: Myth, Salvation and Ethics in the Cults of Cybe/e, Isis and Mithras (Leiden: 
Brill, 2008), pp. 396-97, 420-21, etc. 

4. Background (Christianity) 
97 
so, in fact, that it's impossible to deny it was deliberately constructed as 
such. Even the earliest discernible form of Christianity emulates numerous 
cultic features and concepts that were so unique to the Hellenistic mys­
tery cults that it is statistically beyond any reasonable possibility that they 
all found their way into Christianity by mere coincidence. They formed a 
coherent, logical and repeatedly replicated system of ideas in every other 
mystery cult. It would be irrational to conclude the same wasn't so of Chris­
tianity. Christianity cannot be understood apart from this fact. And any 
theory of historicity that fails to account for it cannot be credible.72 
That Christianity taught eternal salvation for the individual cannot be 
denied. That it taught that this salvation was procured by initiation ritu­
als (such as undergoing baptism and partaking of the Eucharist) cannot be 
denied. And that these rituals involved an induction into a set of'mysteries', 
the knowledge of which and participation in which were key to ensuring 
a blessed eternal life, is explicitly stated throughout the authentic epistles 
of Paul-and nearly everywhere else in the NT. In Paul's letters essential 
Christian doctrines are routinely called mysteries. 73 The NT evinces other 
common vocabulary of mystery cult, used with the same peculiar conno­
tations, not just mysterion (divine secret), but teleios (mature [as higher 
ranking initiates]), nepios (immature [as lower ranking initiates]), skene 
(body [as discardable and unneeded for salvation]), epoptȩs (witness [to the 
mysteries]), etc.74 
72. The oft-cited article to the contrary by Bruce Metzger, 'Considerations of the 
Methodology in the Study of the Mystery Religions and Early Christianity', Harvard 
Theological Review 48 (January 1955), pp. 1-20, is so profoundly inept in its analysis 
that it must be rejected. The argument 'it was different from x, therefore it wasn't 
influenced by x
' (which describes more than half the arguments Metzger deploys) 
is fallacious to the point of ridiculous: this, as well as nearly every other argument 
Metzger constructs, would rule out every mystery religion as being a mystery religion 
(e.g. the argument, on p. II, that certain terms are not found in Paul's letters: that is 
true of most mystery religions, by Metzger's own admission, pp. 6-7), which of course 
is so absurd a conclusion as to refute his entire case. His remaining arguments (e.g. 
that Jews never syncretized their religion with surrounding religions) are simply false, 
or irrelevant to explaining the origins of Christianity (like the fact that Christianity 
underwent even more syncretism in later centuries). The same mistakes uniformly 
plague the analysis of Devon Wiens, 'Mystery Concepts in Primitive Christianity and 
in its Environment', Aufstieg und Niedergang der rlJmischen Welt 11.23.2 (New York: 
W. de Guyter, 1980), pp. 1248-84. 
73. Collectively in the plural in 1 Cor. 4.1 and 13.2 (and 14.2); individually in the 
singular in Rom. 11 .25-26; 16.25І26; 1 Cor. 2.7; 15.51 (and I Cor. 2.1 in some mss.; 
replaced with the more contextually inappropriate martyrion in others). Pseudo­
Paulines use the same terminology: Eph. 1.9; 3.3-4, 9; 5.32; 6.19; Col. 1.26, 27; 2.2; 4.3; 
2 Thess. 2.5-10 (cf., e.g., Rev. 17.5-7); I Tim. 3.9, 16. 
74. See Rom. 16.25-26; 1 Cor. 2-3; 2 Cor. 5; Eph. 3.1-10; Col. 1.26-28; 2 Pet. 1.16; 
Mk 4.1 1-12; etc. 

98 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
In fact, 'in the Pauline epistles we have more than isolated terms and 
ideas of the type in question. In certain contexts, as, e.g., 1 Corinthians [2.1-
3.2], we light upon groups of conceptions which have associations with the 
Mystery-Religions. This cannot be accidenta1.'75 This concept framework 
is found in other places as well (e.g. 2 Cor. 5; 1 Cor. 4.1; Heb. 5.1 1-14, etc.). 
This does not require Christianity to have used these concepts identically 
to any other mystery cu1t, any more than any other cult did. It only entails 
some influence and employment of mystery-cult themes, and that Christi­
anity was constructed in a fashion similar to those cults, even while, like 
each of them, it remained distinct, with each borrowed element altered by 
receiving an appropriate Jewish twist.76 We should thus concur with Jaime 
Alvarez, who proposes what he calls a 'commensality' approach of 'com­
plex transfers' among mystery cults, Christianity included, such that instead 
of Christianity being a direct reworking of a specific preceding mystery 
cult (which it is not), we should see it as the reworking of a Jewish cult 
from a 'common trough of current ideas', including those co11ectively shared 
among the mystery cults of its day, transforming them in the process. 77 And 
yet even transformed, certain fundamental elements remain in common. 
All mystery religions centered on a central savior deity (literally called 
the s(}ter, 'the savior', which is essentially the meaning of the word 'Jesus', 
as explained in Chapter 6, §3), always a son of god (or occasionally a 
daughter of god), who underwent some sort of suffering (enduring some 
sort of trial or ordeal) by which they procured salvation for all who partic­
ipate in their cult (their deed of torment having given them dominion over 
death). These deaths or trials were litera11y ca11ed a 'passion' (patheon, lit. 
'sufferings'), exactly as in Christianity.78 Sometimes this 'passion' was an 
75. Harry Angus Alexander Kennedy. St. Paul and the Mystery-Religions 
(London: Hodder & Stoughton, 1913), p. 121 (on mystery religion vocabulary: pp. 1 15-
98). Despite being out of date. Kennedy's study remains correct in many respects. as 
verified and reinforced in Hugo Rahner, Greek Myths and Christian Mystery (New 
York: Harper & Row, 1963). and by the scholarship cited in coming notes. I should 
also note that Samuel Angus, The Mystery-Religions and Christianity: A Study in the 
Religious Background of Early Christianity (London: J. Murray, 1925) is also obsolete, 
but still contains a lot of useful data, and like Kennedy, some of his arguments have 
been confirmed and are now mainstream (though others have been refuted and are 
now regarded as quaint). By contrast. though often cited, Joscelyn Godwin. Mystery 
Religions in the Ancient World (New York: Harper & Row, 1981) is only to be used 
with caution, being occasionally under-sourced or overstating the facts. Far better 
references are to follow. 
76. Alvarez, Romanising Oriental Gods, pp. 396-97. 
77. Alvarez, Romanising Oriental Gods, pp. 420-21. 
78. For Christianity: Heb. 2. 10; 9.26; Phil. 3. 10; 2 Cor. 1.5; Mk 8.31; etc. For other 
mystery cults see. e.g., Herodotus, Histories 2.171.1 (on the mysteries of Osiris); 

4. Background (Christianity) 
99 
actual death and resurrection (Osiris); sometimes it was some kind of terri­
ble labor defeating the forces of death (Mithras), or variations thereof. All 
mystery religions had an initiation ritual in which the congregant symbol­
ically reenacts what the god endured (1ike Christian baptism: Rom. 6.3-4; 
Col. 2.12), thus sharing in the salvation the god had achieved (Gal. 3.27; 
1 Cor. 12.13), and all involve a rituaJ meal that unites initiated members in 
communion with one another and their god (I Cor. 1 1 .23-28). All of these 
features are fundamental to Christianity, yet equally fundamental to all the 
mystery cults that were extremely popular in the very era that Christianity 
arose.79 The coincidence of all of these features together lining up this way 
is simply too improbable to propose as just an accident. 
Plutarch, On Isis and Osiris (== Mora/ia) 17.357f. 20.358f (on Osiris and others); 
Euripides, Bacchae 492, 500, 786, 801, 1377 (on the Bacchic mysteries). 
79. Kennedy, St. Paul and the Mystery-Religions, pp. 229-55 (baptism as a universal 
ritual in the mystery cults), pp. 256-79 (sacred meals). Recent scholarship confirms 
the basic picture. On the Bacchic and Eleusinian mysteries: Radcliffe Edmonds III, 
Myths ofthe Underworld Journey: Plato, Aristophanes, and the 'Orphic ' Gold Tablets 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004); Martin Nilsson, The Dionysiac 
Mysteries of the Hellenistic and Roman Age (Lund: Gleerup, 1957); M.L. West, The 
Orphic Poems (New York: Oxford University Press, 1983). pp. 1-38; for some practices 
and terminology: Richard Seaford, 'Dionysiac Drama and the Dionysiac Mysteries', 
The Classical Quarterly 31 (1981), pp. 252-75. On the Mithraic mysteries: Manfred 
Clauss, The Roman Cult ofMithras: The God and his Mysteries (New York: Routledge, 
2000), cf. esp. pp. 14-15 (with 174 n. 30) and 108-13 on the features it shares with 
other mystery cults (including the ritual of symbolically emulating the god's labors to 
achieve personal salvation in the hereafter, and the ritual of sharing a sacred meal with 
other initiates); see also Marvin Meyer, 'The Mithras Liturgy', in The Historical Jesus 
in Context (ed. Levine, Allison and Crossan), pp. 179-92; Gary Lease, 'Mithraism 
and Christianity: Borrowings and Transformations', Aufstieg und Niedergang der 
romischen Welt 11.23.2 (New York: W. de Gruyter, 1980), pp. 1306-32 (1309 for the 
generic features Christianity shares with all mystery cults; the specific influence of 
Mithraism on early Christianity is unlikely, however-they instead arose around the 
same time, in a parallel phenomenon of creating mystery cults from major ethnic cults, 
Persian in the one case. Jewish in the other-they are therefore separate instances of 
the same phenomenon); Roger Beck. Beck on Mithraism (Burli ngton, VT: Ashgate, 
2004); and Roger Beck, The Religion of the Mithras Cult in the Roman Empire: 
Mysteries of the Unconquered Sun (New York: Oxford University Press, 2006), the 
latter works correcting or superseding David Ulansey's The Origins of the Mithraic 
Mysteries (New York: Oxford University Press, 1989)߫ see also Richard Gordon, 
Image and Value in the Graeco-Roman World: Studies in Mithraism and Religious Art 
(Brookfield, VT: Ashgate. 1 996). On Isis-Osiris cult: Malcolm Drew Donalson, The 
Cult of Isis in the Roman Empire: Isis lnvicta (Lew iston, NY: E. Mellen Press, 2003); 
SaroJta Takacs, Isis and Sarapis in the Roman World (Leiden: Brill, 1995); Reinhold 
Merkelbach, Isis Regina, Zeus Sarapis: Die griechisch-tlgyptische Religion nach den 
Que/Jen dargestellt (Stuttgart: B.G. Teubner, 1995); Sharon Kelly Heyob, The Cult 
of Isis among Women in the Graeco-Roman World (Leiden: Brill, 1975); and Robert 

100 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
Notably all the mystery religions were products of the same sort of cultural 
syncretism. The Eleusinian mysteries were a syncretism of Levantine and 
Hellenistic elements; the mysteries of Attis and Cybele were a syncretism of 
Phrygian and Hellenistic elements; the mysteries of Jupiter Dolichenus were 
a syncretism of Anatolian and Hellenistic elements; Mithraism was a syn­
cretism of Persian and Hellenistic elements; the mysteries of Isis and Osiris 
were a syncretism of Egyptian and Hellenistic elements. Christianity is sim­
ply a continuation of the same trend: a syncretism of Jewish and Hellenistic 
elements. Each of these cults is unique and different from all the others in 
nearly every detail-but it's the general features they all share in common 
that reflect the overall fad that produced them in the first place, the very fea­
tures that made them popular and successful within Greco-Roman culture. 
Unfortunately we know very much less about these other cults than 
Christianity, because Christians chose not to preserve any of their sacred 
literature-sometimes deliberately destroying it, as we might infer from 
the fate of books 2 and 3 of Hippolytus's Refutation of All Heresies (in 
which, according to what he says at the end of book 1, he exposed all the 
secrets of the mystery religions, yet these chapters were mysteriously 
removed and remain lost to this day). But our ignorance is also due to the 
fact that much of what the mystery cults taught was kept secret, being so 
sacred that only initiates sworn to secrecy would be told the true content of 
the mysteries of each cult (the same was true of Christianity: see Element 
Wild, Water in the Cultic Worship of Isis and Sarapis (Leiden: Brill, 1981). On the 
Samothracian mysteries: Susan Guettel Cole, Theoi Megaloi: The Cult of the Great 
Gods at Samothrace (Leiden: Brill, 1984), which surveys evidence of baptisms (31-
33), passion plays (48), ritual meals (36-37) and a duo of resurrected gods (1-7). On 
the mysteries of Attis and Cybele: Lynn Roller, In Search of God the Mother: The 
Cult of Anatolian Cybele (Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 1999); Giulia 
Sfameni Gasparro, Soteriology and Mystic Aspects in the Cult of Cybele and Attis 
(Leiden: Brill, 1985); and Maria Grazia Lancellotti, Attis, between Myth and History: 
King, Priest, and God (Leiden: Brill, 2002). Note that all of the above literature 
confirms moral teachings were linked to every mystery cult (a fact still often denied). 
The Thracian deity Zalmoxis was also anciently believed to have died and risen from 
the dead, procuring salvation for all who share in his cult (including a ritual eating 
and drinking), as attested by Herodotus in the fifth century BCE, which also suggests 
an early mystery cult: cf. Herodotus, Histories 4.94-96; Plato, Charmides 156d; and 
discussion and sources in Carrier, Not the Impossible Faith, pp. 86, 100-105; and 
Mircea Eliade, Zalmoxis the Vanishing God: Comparative Studies in the Religions and 
Folklore of Dacia and Eastern Europe (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1972). 
On the Sumerian dying-and-rising gods lnnana and Tammuz (Astarte and Adonis) and 
others like them see Element 31. There were probably many other mystery cults that we 
know nothing or next to nothing about: see Origen, Against Celsus 6.22 and Michael 
Cosmopoulos (ed.), Greek Mysteries: The Archaeology and Ritual of Ancient Greek 
Secret Cults (New York: Routledge, 2003). 

'c< 
4. Background (Christianity) 
1 0 1  
13).so But enough evidence survives to reconstruct all the common features 
I've mentioned, and more. 
There is one notable exception, the Golden Ass of Apuleius (also known 
as the Metamorphoses), which is a kind of Acts for the Isis cult (recorded in 
the fashion of a novel, thus in a sense disguising its sacred nature), which 
medieval Christians preserved intact. This tells us many things about the 
religion, including its initiation ritual: the initiation, Apuleius tells us, 
resembles a 'voluntary death' (instar voluntariae mortis), after which one 
is 'reborn' (renatus). After you were baptized into the cult (literally, with 
an ablution of water), the day of initiation became a new 'birthday' and the 
priest who initiated you became your new father. As Apuleius describes 
it, 'I approached the border of death, and once the threshold of Proserpina 
[Lady Death] was crossed, I was conveyed through all the elements, and 
came back' to life (all of which he again calls a 'rebirth').81 Christiani· 
ty's initiation ritual also involved a baptism, and was conceptually identi· 
cal: you symbolically underwent death and resurrection, and are thereby 
'reborn' with a new 'father' (in this case, God-see Element 1 2ވalthough, 
just like in the Isis cult, in earliest Christianity the one who initiated you 
could also be called your father: I Cor. 4.15). 
Mithras cult also involved an initiatory baptism.82 As did the Eleusinian 
cult, which even practiced substitutionary baptism on behalf of the dead 
80. That there nevertheless were 'gospels' in other mystery cults recounting their 
myths and teachings is certain, as they are referred to in extant texts: for example, 
for Isis-Osiris cult, Apuleius, Metamorphoses 1 1.22-23 (cf. 1 1.28-30) mentions such 
sacred writings, as does Plutarch, On Isis and Osiris (= Moralia) 80.383e (there 
called hiera grammata, 'sacred writings') also 5.351f, 352b; the Egyptian Manetho 
had allegedly written that cult's Holy Bible (Hiera biblos) sometime before the end of 
the third century BCE (notably the very time the Hebrew 'Holy Bible' was supposedly 
being translated into Greek); cf. J. Gwyn Griffiths, Plutarch 's De !side et Osiride 
(Cardiff: University of Wales Press, 1970), p. 80. The Dionysiac mysteries also appear 
to have had a set of gospels no longer extant: Nilsson, The Dionysiac Mysteries, pp. 
1 16·18, 133; West, Orphic Poems, pp. 25-29. Similarly, recovered paraphernalia of the 
Mithras cult include the equivalent of 'graphic novels' (painted or carved in stone) 
recounting the narrative of the Mithras gospel. No text survives to tell us what stories 
the scenes illustrate, but there clearly must have been such a text. The tauroctony or 
'bull-slaying' is only the most climactic scene, abundantly represented, but there was a 
whole sequence of 'story cells', including a miraculous nativity, Mithras dragging the 
bull to a cave, life springing from its blood, Mithras eating of its flesh, his ascension or 
exaltation, and various scenes featuring Mithras and the Supreme God (probably Sol 
lnvictus, 'The Invincible Sun'). 
81. Apuleius, Metamorphoses 1 1.21-25; 11.16. 
82. Tertullian, On Baptism 5. Per Beskow, in 'Tertullian on Mithras', in Studies in 
Mithraism: Papers Associated with the Mithraic Panel Organized on the Occasion of 
the XV/th Congress of the International Association for the History of Religions. Rome 

102 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
(to bring salvation to those who hadn't yet been baptized in life), centu­
ries before Christians adopted the same practice, as evident already in 
the earliest known churches (I Cor. 15.29), which is yet another unlikely 
coincidence. 83 In many if not all the mystery cults, these baptisms effected 
salvation in part by washing away sins, exactly the same function claimed 
of Christian baptism.84 Which is another unlikely coincidence (although 
predating Christianity, Judaism did not have this element unti I after contact 
with Hellenism; before that, only blood sacrifice could remove sin). 
In Apuleius's account of the Isis cult, initiation was also 'consummated' 
with a 'sacred meal' on 'the third day' of the completed rites, implying the 
meal fully united him to his savior god or goddess and his fellow initiates. 
the very thing accomplished by the Eucharist within Christianity. And just 
as for Christians, by undergoing these rites the Isis initiate procured eternal 
life for himself in the hereafter. In other words, personal salvation. There 
appears to have been a similar sacred meal securing eternal life in the mys­
teries ofMithras.85 Thus, for all these reasons, Christianity is certainly in 
essentials a Hellenistic mystery religion, differing from others only in its 
1990 (ed. John Hinnells; Rome: L'Erma di Bretschneider, 1994), pp. 51-60, argues that 
the Mithraic 'baptism' was only an anointing of the forehead, but that is not a relevant 
difference. How a baptism was performed would naturally be highly variable from cult 
to cult Oust as it is from sect to sect in Christianity today). 
83. See Hans Conzelmann, I Corinthians: A Commentary on the First Epistle to the 
Corinthians (Philadelphia, PA: Fortress Press, 1975), pp. 275-76; with Plato. Republic 
364e-365a. For evidence that Bacchic and Attis cults also regarded their baptisms as 
'rebirthing' ceremonies, see Peter Kingsley, Ancient Philosophy, Mystery, and Magic: 
Empedocles and Pythagorean Tradition (New York: Oxford University Press. 1995). 
p. 264-69; that a Dionysian (i.e., Bacchic) ritual washed away sins (inherited over 
many generations): Kingsley, Ancient Philosophy, p. 261 n. 37 (cf. Plato, Phaedrus 
244d-245a and 265b), the ritual in question most likely the baptism (per the evidence 
in Conzelmann). That baptism was conceived as part of a 'rebirthing' ceremony in 
Mithras cult as well: Hans Dieter Betz, The 'Mithras Liturgy': Text, Translation. and 
Commentary (Tiibingen: Mohr Siebeck, 2003), p. 51 (lines 505-1 1). 
84. That Jesus through one's baptism awarded liberation from sins (Rom. 6.20-
23; Col. 1.13-14) just like Bacchus does in his mystery cult (see previous note). and 
apparently as baptisms do in the mystery cults generally, see Tertullian, Prescription 
against Heretics 40 and On Baptism 4-5. In the Osiris cult (as evinced in the Book of 
the Dead and elsewhere), it was your sins that weighed your soul down in the afterlife. 
dooming you to a bad outcome (your soul, in the form of your heart, being weighed on 
a scale against a feather: if your soul is heavier, it is devoured by a monster: lighter. you 
move on to eternal life); so the fact that baptismal rebirth into communion with Osiris 
freed you from this outcome entails that this cult, too, held some equivalent concept 
of washing away or forgiving sins through baptism. See W.B. Ober. 'Weighing the 
Heart against the Feather of Truth', Bulletin of the New York Academy of Medicine 55 
(July-August 1979), pp. 636-51. 
85. Justin, Apology 1.66; Tertullian, Prescription against Heretics 40. 

4. Background (Christianity) 
103 
Jewish details and framework, just as Mithraism differs from all others 
in its Persian details and framework, and Isis-Osiris cult differs from all 
others in its Egyptian details and framework, and so on. 
Christianity also conforms to four universal trends distinctive of the 
Hellenistic mystery religions, and is therefore unmistakably a product of 
these same cultural trends: 
1 .  syncretism of a local or national system of religious ideas with dis­
tinctly Hellenistic ideas (and the ideas of other nations and localities 
whose diffusion was facilitated by Hellenism); 
2. a monotheistic trend, with every mystery religion evolving from 
polytheism (many competing gods) to henotheism (one supreme god 
reigning over subordinate deities), marking a trajectory toward monoމ 
theism (only one god); 
3. a shift to individualism, placing the religious focus on the eternal sal­
vation of the individual rather than the welfare of the community as 
a whole; 
4. and cosmopolitanism, with membership being open and spanning all 
environments, provinces, races, and social classes (and often genders). 
That all four features were universal to all the known mystery religions has 
been abundantly demonstrated in current scholarship, as has the enormous 
popularity of these new religions, and the rise of these features and their 
popularity centuries before Christianity. Christianity fits exactly within 
this trend and in that respect looks exactly like every other mystery religion 
developed during this period-indeed, it is a relative latecomer. It is thus 
an expected phenomenon of its time and evinces an unmistakable transfor­
mation of the very different Jewish religion into something more palatably 
identical to popular pagan religious movements arising from every other 
'foreign' culture under the Roman Empire.86 To understand this we must 
take a closer look at each element in turn. 
(I) Syncretism is the creative merging of religious ideas, borrowing and 
adapting elements from several religions to create something new. This 
trend is evident in all the mystery religions, 87 as well as Christianity. This 
trend indeed parallels the rise of eclecticism in science and phi Iosophy (the 
merging of different philosophical ideas into a new superior whole, rather 
86. See Petra Pakkanen, Interpreting Early Hellenistic Religion: A Study Based 
on the Mystery Cult of Demeter and the Cult of Isis (Helsinki: Suomen Ateenan­
Instituutin Saatio, 1996); in which see esp. pp. 65-83 for a survey of various pagan 
mystery religions and their identifiable features. See also Marvin Meyer (ed.), The 
Ancient Mysteries: A Sourcebook of Sacred Texts (Philadelphia, PA: University of 
Pennsylvania Press, 1987); and Alvarez, Romanising Oriental Gods. 
87. See Pakkanen, Interpreting Early Hellenistic Religion, pp. 85-100, 129-35. 

104 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
than dogmatically adhering to one school of thought), and is thus repre­
sentative of the entire cultural matrix of the time (which, of course, never 
ceased: later Christians adopted pagan holidays, such as Christmas, and 
absorbed pagan gods, in both fact and concept, in the guise of a cult of 
saints, and a great deal else besides).88 We'll see more evidence of how this 
syncretism produced Christianity as we go along. But in general, this so 
routinely occurred, it would be improbable for Christianity to not also have 
been a product of it (I answer the usual objections to this in Elements 30-38, 
but of course it. must be noted that syncretists themselves never claim they 
are borrowing; they always portray what they borrowed as a natural devel­
opment of their native cult-so hostility to borrowing would produce no 
barrier to actually doing it). 
(2) Christianity's monotheism was also not original. Indeed, it was 
entirely parallel to the henotheism already popularly promoted by the 
mystery cults.89 Within those cults is a clear trend toward a focus on one 
supreme god and the demotion of other gods to the status of either minions 
(becoming the equivalent of angels and demons) or 'aspects' of the one 
God, thus folding numerous gods into one, each being thought a different 
guise of the same god. This trend is already evident in Herodotus, and 
thus began even before the Hellenistic period. Christian rhetoric hardly 
conceals the fact that it is identically henotheistic, with not just the one God 
(to whom was later assimilated and originally subordinated the additional 
gods of the Lord Christ and the Holy Spirit), but many other subordinate 
gods, including a 'god of this world' (i.e., Satan: 2 Cor. 4.4) and a panoply of 
angels (divine 'messengers') and demons (literally, daimones or daimonia, 
88. On eclecticism in science and philosophy: Richard Carrier, 'Christianity Was 
Not Responsible for Modern Science', in Christian Delusion (ed. Loftus), pp. 396-419 
(405-406Ї with p. 416 n. 26). On Christmas (both its date and rituals) being originally 
pagan: Francis James and Miriam Hill (eds.), Joy to the World: Two Thousand 
Years of Christmas (Portland, OR: Four Courts, 2000). On the cult of saints being a 
syncretization (not a direct adoption) of pagan polytheism: Peter Brown, Cult of the 
Saints: Its Rise and Function in Latin Christianity (Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 1981), with James Howard-Johnston and Paul Antony Hayward (eds.), The Cult 
of Saints in Late Antiquity and the Middle Ages: Essays on the Contribution of Peter 
Brown (New York: Oxford University Press, 1999): and that there remained also a 
definite Jewish background to this process of syncretism in creating the Christian 
cult of saints: William Horbury, 'The Cult of Christ and the Cult of the Saints', New 
Testament Studies 44 (1998), pp. 444-69. 
89. See Pakkanen, Interpreting Early Hellenistic Religion, pp. 100-109. 136; 
Hendrik Simon Versnel, Ter Unus: Isis. Dionysos. Hermes: Three Studies in 
Henotheism (Leiden: Brill, 1990); and for subsequent development of this trend: 
Polymnia Athanassiadi and Michael Frede (eds.), Pagan Monotheism in Late Antiquity 
(New York: Oxford University Press. 1999). 

4. Background (Christianity) 
105 
'divinities') possessed of al l the same roles, attributes, and powers of pagan 
gods (see my definitions in §3). That they were not called gods is merely 
semantics, a rather transparent attempt to deploy doublespeak to conceal 
what was really a syncretism of Jewish monotheism and pagan polytheism, 
producing a system of theology that was conceptually identical to pagan 
henotheism, differing only in the superficial use of words-which differ­
ence was ilself a product of that syncretism, it being the Jewish contribu­
tion; the multiplication of divinities being the pagan one.90 
This had already been occurring within Judaism before the rise of Chris­
tianity, which merely continued the process to its logical conclusion.91 Thus 
when Paul says, 
We know an idol is nothing in the cosmos. and that there is no God except 
the one, for although there are ones called gods, either in heaven or on 
earth (as there are indeed many gods and many lords), yet for us there 
is the one God, the Father (from whom all things come, and we come to 
him) and the one Lord, Jesus Christ (through whom all things come, and 
we come through him) ( I  Cor. 8.4-6). 
Here we have a plain declaration of henotheism: yes, there are many gods, 
but we worship only two of them, and the second of them we only worship 
as a subordinate of the other (and thus call that subordinate divinity not 
'God' himself but by one of that God's titles, Lord). Spoken like a true 
henotheist. The only thing unique about it is its restrictions on worship 
(and a corresponding use of titles)-which derives from Judaism. The rest 
ts pagan. 
(3) The third trend was the rise of religious individualism.92 Under the Hel­
lenistic mystery cults, religion became a personal individual choice to join 
or not to join (in contrast with old-style paganism in which a public cult was 
simply maintained regardless of whether anyone participated or believed); 
and the motivation to participate became an individual reward (personal 
salvation) rather than a communal reward (such as successful crops and, 
thereby, the survival of the community). Thus the mystery religions co-opted 
what had once been agricultural deities (whose dying and rising or descent 
90. See Larry Hurtado. 'Monotheism, Principal Angels, and Christology', in The 
Oxford Handbook of the Dead Sea Scrolls (ed. Timothy Lim and John CollinsЈ Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 2010), pp. 546-64Љ and the scholarsh ip on Judeo-Christian 
•principalities and powers' (see Element 37). 
91. See, e.g., Margaret Barker, The Great Angel: A Study of Israel s Second God 
(Louisville, KY: Westminster/John Knox Press, 1992); Larry Hurtado, One God, 
One Lord: Early Christian Devotion and Ancient Jewish Monotheism (Philadelphia: 
Fortress Press, 1988); and A tan Segal, Two Powers in Heaven: Early Rabbinic Reports 
about Christianity and Gnosticism (Leiden: Brill, 1977). 
92. Pakkanen, Interpreting Early Hellenistic Religion, pp. 109-2 1, 130, 136-37. 

106 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
and ascent originally corresponded to the seasonal fertility of the earth) 
and reinterpreted their narratives as metaphors for personal salvation (each 
individual literally sharing in the demigod's dying and rising or descent and 
ascent, with eternal life as the end product, rather than continued agricultural 
fertility in the here and now). So the fact that Christianity also turned what 
was originally a communal aim (the resurrection and salvation of Israel as a 
whole) into an individualistic one (the resurrection and salvation of individ­
ual Christians, hence of only those who individually chose to join the faith­
and indeed creating a cultic model for this in the individual resurrection of 
Jesus) is entirely parallel with what the mystery religions were doing, and 
thus again fully reflective of the same cultural trend. 
(4) Finally, cosmopolitanism was part of the same trend. Each mystery 
religion explicitly created a new group identity transcending all traditional 
borders and distinctions. Members of the cult became universal brothers 
and sisters regardless of their actual family ties or geographical, national, or 
social origins. Mystery cults were thus no longer restricted to a single city, 
state, or race, or even social status, but spread everywhere and accepted 
everyone (whether slave or free, rich or poor, citizen or foreigner; in most 
cases even male or female), thereby uniting all classes, races, and peoples 
in a new common humanity.93 So when Paul writes that 'for in one spirit 
were we all baptized into one body, whether Jews or Greeks, whether bond 
or free' and thus we are all brothers (1 Cor. 12.12-13; cf. also Gal. 3.26-29; 
Rom. 12.4-5; and 1 Cor. 10.17; 12.12-25) he is echoing an ideology that 
had already been popularized by the Hellenistic mystery religions. Indeed 
he is here pulling Christianity even more into the orbit of this trend, by 
doing away with the requirement of initiates to first become Jews through 
circumcision and other rites (Rom. 10.4-9; Philippians 3; Galatians 2, 5, 6). 
This reflected a parallel trend in the rise of associations, guilds, burial 
clubs and fraternities that also allowed people to explore new group identi­
ties.94 This included the development of'fictive kinship language', in which 
members of a religious cult or fraternity would call one another 'brother' 
and 'sister' (and sometimes elders of the group 'fathers' and 'mothers'), 
exactly as Christians did.95 This was a common practice in mystery cults, 
too, so again to see it in earliest Christianity is more evidence of it being 
part of the same trend. In all these cults and fraternities, key to maintaining 
93. Pakkanen, Interpreting Early Hellenistic Religion, pp. 121-28, 130, 137. 
94. Pakkanen, Interpreting Early Hellenistic Religion, pp. 48-49, 52-54. 
95. John Kloppenborg, 'Associations in the Ancient World', in Historical Jesus in 
Context (ed. Levine, Allison and Crossan), pp. 323-38 (esp. 329). That Christians called 
one another 'brothers' is evident throughout the Epistles (e.g. 1 Cor. 7.12; 15.6, 31; see 
Element 12). Paul considers himselfthe 'father' ofthose he converted (I Cor. 4. 15; cf. 
also Phlm. 10), just as was the practice in Isis cult. 

4. Background (Christianity) 
107 
this fictive kinship was the sharing of sacred meals dedicated to their patron 
god (in which bread, wine and fish were the most common components).96 
Indeed, we know these groups set up rules to keep them reverent, and from 
degenerating into disrespectful partying or other bad behavior, exactly as 
Paul seeks to accomplish for the Christian equivalent (in 1 Cor. I 1 .20·34).97 
Likewise in the mystery cults, sharing in the Lord's meal or baptism or 
other ritual often united members in a common family by adoption as the 
sons of their supreme God, thereby making them immortal demigods in the 
afterlife, like their Savior Lord,98 which is essentially the view Christians 
held of their own salvation, as they gained in every respect the glorious, 
immortal, invincible bodies otherwise only gods enjoyed (1 Cor. 15.35-54; 
2 Corinthians 5), and similarly achieved this through adoption as the sons 
of their supreme God (see next element). 
It is therefore undeniable that Christianity was a Judeo·Hellenistic mys­
tery religion, exactly conforming to the trends in religious development 
that befell nearly every other national culture within the Roman Empire, 
from the Egyptians to the Persians. Christianity was simply the result of 
this trend finally befalling the Jews. There may well have been precedents 
for this already, if Josephus is to be believed in his report that the Essene 
sect of the Jews conducted itself like a mystery religion, complete with four 
levels of initiation, including a baptism at the first of them, a communal 
meal, and swearing to keep the secret of their mysteries even under pain 
of death (and, of course, a belief in their persona) salvation through resur­
rection}.99 There is also evidence of such mysteries within other varieties 
of pre-Christian Judaism, which were kept secret from the public.100 We 
96. See J. Gwyn Griffiths, The Isis-Book: Metamorphoses, Book XI (Leiden: Brill, 
1975), pp. 318-19; and following note. 
97. Evidence of the same rule-making for other cult's sacred meals: Kloppenborg, 
·Associations', pp. 335-36. 
98. Edmonds, Myths of the Underworld Journey, pp. 82-108, 198-201. See also 
Jean-Pierre Vemant, •Mortals and Immortals: The Body of the Divine', Mortals and 
Immortals: Collected Essays (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1991). pp. 
27-49. 
99. Josephus, Jewish War 2.137-42 and 2.150-53. 
100. Explicitly stated in the Qumran text 'Hymns of the Just', esp. in 1.1; 3.5; 3.8-12; 
4.1; 11.34ਜ਼36; 13.8-12, 28; 14.21; 15.1-2; 16.22; 18.3; 19.15; 20.9; 21.1-2; 22.13-14; see 
Robert M. Price, The Pre-Nicene New Testament: Fifty-Four Formative Texts (Salt 
Lake City, UT: Signature Books, 2006), pp. 887-928. See also James Scott, 'Throne­
Chariot Mysticism in Qumran and in Paul', in Eschatology, Messianism, and the Dead 
Sea Scrolls (ed. Craig Evans and Peter Flint: Grand Rapids, Ml: William B. Eerdmans, 
1997), pp. 101-19 (esp. 105-106); and Margaret Barker, The Great High Priest: The 
Temple Roots of Christian Liturgy (New York: T. & T. Clark, 2003), pp. 1-33 and On 
Earth as [t is in Heaven: Temple Symbolism in the New Testament (New York: T. & T. 
Clark, 1995), pp. 59-60. 

108 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
just know too little about any of these precedents to know how much they 
may have led to or influenced Christianity. 
Element 12: From as early as we can ascertain, Christians believed they 
became 'brothers' of the Lord Jesus Christ through baptism (Rom. 6.3-
10), which symbolized their death to the world and rebirth as the 'adopted 
sons of God', hence they became the brothers of the Lord, the son ofGod.101 
Thus Jesus was only 'the firstborn among many brethren' (Rom. 8.29). 
Element 13: Like all mystery cults, Christianity had secret doctrines that 
initiates were sworn never to reveal, and that would be talked about and 
written about publicly only in symbols, myths and allegories to disguise 
their true meaning (see Element 14). 102 
Clement of Alexandria, though writing in the early third century, 
explains: 
Now it is not wished that all things should be exposed indiscriminately 
to all and sundry, nor should the benefits of wisdom be communicated 
to those who have not even in a dream been purified in soul (for it is not 
allowed to hand to every chance comer what has been procured with such 
laborious efforts); nor are the mysteries of the Word to be expounded 
to the profane. 103 •
•
•
 Those who instituted the mysteries, being philoso­
phers, buried their doctrines in myths, so as not to be obvious to all. Did 
they not then, by veiling human opinions, prevent the ignorant from han­
dling them? And was it not more beneficial for the holy and blessed con­
templation of realities, that they be concealed?104 •
•
•
 So these [secrets] we 
shall find indicated by symbols under the veil of allegory.105 
This feature of all the mystery religions of antiquity is well known, 106 but 
here Clement is saying this was a good practice, even a necessary practice, 
101. There are numerous passages that confirm this: Rom. 8. 15-29: 9.26: Gal. 
3.26-29; 4.4-7; and Heb. 2.10-18; Eph. 1.5; 1 Jn 5.1-4 (and likewise 1 Jn 2.28-3.10: 
4.8; 5.18-20); with Rom. 6.3-10; Col. 2.12. See also Irenaeus. Demonstration of the 
Apostolic Preaching 3 and 8; with Carrier, 'Spiritual Body', in Empty Tomb (ed. Price 
and Lowder), pp. 142-47. The notion could easily be derived from Ps. Sol. 17.27. 
102. See Guy Stroumsa, Hidden Wisdom: Esoteric Traditions and the Roots of 
Christian Mysticism (Leiden: Brill, 1996). 
103. Clement of Alexandria, Miscellanies 5.9 (§57.2-3). 
104. Clement of Alexandria, Miscellanies 5.9 (§58.4-5). 
105. Clement of Alexandria, Miscellanies 5.9 (§58.6). 
106. As Philo of Alexandria put it, as quoted in John of Damascus, Parallels 
533c, 'It is not lawful to speak of the sacred mysteries to the uninitiated'. See Thomas 
Harrison, Divinity and History: The Religion of Herodotus (New York: Clarendon 
Press, 2000), pp. 182-89, especially with regard, e.g., to Herodotus, Histories 2. 170-71 : 
1 
Euripides. Bacchae 20· 54, 4 70-74; and PI utarch, The Obsolescence of Oracles 14.417b-
 

4. Background (Christianity) 
109 
and that Christianity likewise adheres to it. Earlier Clement had outright 
said there is a secret understanding of the gospel that he is forbidden to tell 
his readers.107 But here he goes on to explain: 
For the prophet says, 'Who shall understand the Lord's parable but the 
wise and understanding, and he that loves his Lord?' It is but for few to 
comprehend these things. For, they say, it is not out of envy that the Lord 
passed on in a certain Gospel, 'My mystery is for me, and for the sons 
of my house'. 108 
Clement further explains that the Epistles confirm this same division, of 
some teachings reserved only for insiders; and then'even within the church 
there was another special set of knowledge and teachings reserved only 
for 'mature' believers (teleioi, 'the perfected'), who were distinguished 
from lower-ranking initiates called 'children' (nlpioi, 'babes', the newly 
baptized being newly born). These were well-recognized code words in 
the mystery cults, which meant the same thing there as they clearly do 
for Clement here: 'babes' were Christians not yet inducted into the higher 
mysteries, while the 'mature' had been, and thus knew teachings that other 
Christians did not. But Clement also indicates in the above quotes that there 
were also teachi ngs that 'babes' were privy to that non-Christians (the 'pro­
fane') were not to be told. 
Obviously the only way any of this could have been maintained is if 
initiates at each level were sworn to secrecy, and as we know this was the 
case in all other mystery cults, and Christianity was likewise a mystery cult 
(see Element 12), we can be certain this was the case there, too. Thus, when 
Clement quotes Rom. 16.25-26, which says 'the mystery' of Christianity 
was a secret hidden within scripture but now revealed and taught 'to all 
nations for the obedience of faith', Clement says this means 'that is, to those 
from "all nations" who are believers', and not, in fact, indiscriminately to 
everyone. Clement then adds, 'But even only to a few of them [meaning, 
Christian believers] is shown what those things are which are contained in 
the mystery'. 109 Clement says this was rightly so, as Plato himself had said, 
when discussing God in a letter (sent on a tablet), 'We must speak in enig­
mas, so that, should this tablet come by any mischance on its leaves either 
by sea or land, he who reads may remain ignorant'.U0 
Clement then says: 
c; and On Isis and Osiris 9.3S4c-11.355d; 58.374e; 78.382e-f. See also Clauss, Roman 
Cult of Mithras, p. 14. 
107. Clement of Alexandria, Miscellanies 1.12. 
108. Clement of Alexandria, Miscellanies 5.10 (§63.6-7). 
109. Clement of Alexandria, Miscellanies 5.10 (§64.6). 
1 10. Clement of Alexandria, Miscellanies 5.10 (§65.1-2). 

1 1 0 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
Akin to this is what the holy apostle Paul says, preserving the prophetic 
and truly ancient secret (from which the teachings that were good were 
derived by the Greeks): 'But we do speak wisdom among the mature 
[teleioi]-not the wisdom of this world, or of the princes of this world, 
who will be done away with, but we speak the wisdom of God, hidden in 
a mystery' [I Cor. 2.6-7]. Then proceeding, he thus inculcates the cau­
tion against the divulging of his words to the multitude in the following 
terms: 'But I, brethren, could not speak to you as spiritual men, but as 
carnal men, as babes [nlpioi] in Christ. I have fed you with milk, not 
with solid food: for you could not receive it; even now you can't receive 
it. For you are still carnal men' [I Cor. 3.1-3]. If, then, 'the milk' is said 
by the apostle to belong to the babes, and 'solid food' to be the food of the 
mature, then 'milk' will be understood to be catechetical instruction­
the first food, as it were, of the soul-and 'solid food' is beholding the 
highest mysteries. 111 
That last phrase, 'beholding the highest mysteries', is in Greek epoptike 
theoria, terminology very specific to mystery cult. This is corroborated by 
others. Origen explains there were different ranks of initiation, with secrets 
in the church withheld until each rank was achieved, and the lowest rank 
were the babes, fed only milk.112 
It's evident that their reading of Paul is correct. Paul very clearly does 
say that there is some teaching he can't impart to his Corinthian readers 
because they are not of sufficient rank in the church, and he very clearly 
uses the particular terminology of mystery cult, distinguishing initiates 
(newborn babes) from the teleioi, those who presumably have 'completed' 
all the mysteries. He says the truth (the 'wisdom' that is not of men or 
angels) that the teleioi are taught is a secret and 'hidden in a mystery', and 
thus he explains he can't tell them what it is. One has to have a more mature 
spiritual understanding first (I Corinthians 2, throughout which the 'us' 
and 'we' he is referring to must be the apostles and teleioi, not the whole 
congregation), because without that the truth will seem ridiculous to them 
(mlJria) and they won't be able to understand it (I Cor. 2.14-3.3). That is 
how he says the advanced teachings would seem even to baptized initiates, 
just as the introductory teachings seem ridiculous to outsiders but can still 
be understood by the babes in Christ (1 Cor. 1.17-31 ;  3.18-19). 
I l l .  Clement of Alexandria, Miscellanies 5.10 (§65.4-66.2); but all of 5.4-11 
illustrates the point. 
J l2. Origen, Against Celsus 3.51-61. See also Hippolytus, Apostolic Tradition 
15-21, who describes the process of ascending from outsider to insider (first initiation), 
then from babe to mature (second initiation) as typically taking years to complete (and 
his manual does not even cover the teaching of the mature, nor ascending into the 
priesthood for that matter, which would by then have been yet another stage). 

4. Background (Christianity) 
I l l  
The mysteries the beginners are taught, Paul says, are 'nothing other 
than Jesus Christ and him crucified' (1 Cor. 2.2), the most basic gospel 
(outlined in 1 Cor. 15.3-5). But there is also a special 'wisdom', he says, that 
was taught to advanced members (the teleioi), which Paul sees as the root 
of the problem he is addressing at Corinth: because those he is speaking 
to have not yet been initiated into the highest mysteries, they are splitting 
into factions (e.g. some declaring themselves for Paul, some for Apollos: 1 
Cor. 3.3-4), not being aware of that 'higher' teaching that (Paul is assum­
ing) would sort them out and resolve their dispute. Indeed, Paul implies 
that Apollos imparted to them some new mysteries that weren't among 
those taught them by Paul, and Paul explains Apollos was only building on 
what Paul taught (I Cor. 3.5-24), suggesting that Paul is saying their dif­
ferent teachings don't really contradict each other, but rather that Apollos 
was imparting a second tier of deeper understanding (the mystery cults 
generally had more than two levels of mysteries to enter; so Christianity 
may have, too: see below). Hence, he says, 'this is how one should regard 
us [i.e., the apostles], as servants of Christ and stewards of the mysteries 
of God' (I Cor. 4.1 ). Paul elsewhere mentions there being many mysteries 
(which together constituted complete 'knowledge') and implies only the 
most advanced knew them all (1 Cor. 13.2). Thus, Paul assumes through­
out 1 Corinthians 8 that Christians with certain secret knowledge can par­
take of pagan-sacrificed meat but that this might mislead Christians not yet 
privy to that knowledge, and therefore higher-ranking Christians should 
not encourage this by setting a bad example (thus he develops the compro­
mise in I Corinthians 10), all of which entails there were levels of teaching 
kept hidden from lower ranks of Christians. 113 
We see something similar in the Dead Sea Scrolls, one of which men­
tions secrets held by insiders of differing rank, using the same distinctions 
between 'babes' and 'adults' and 'milk' versus 'meat'.114 All of this is con­
firmed for Christianity in the book of Hebrews, which also speaks of 'milk' 
and 'solid food' and the distinction between those in the church who are not 
ready to receive the latter, who again are called 'babes', and those who are 
able to receive it, because of their more advanced spiritual training, who 
are again called the 'mature' (Heb. 5.1 1-6.3). It likewise speaks of more 
1 13. Note that Paul also at one point uses a technical term from the mystery cults 
that meant induction into the mysteries: mueil whose principal meaning was 'initiate 
into the mysteries', which Paul uses in Phil. 4. 12, but metaphorically, and in too 
ambiguous a way to be certain if his metaphor was to Christian mysteries or pagan 
mysteries (the former, I think. is more likely, but unprovable from this datum alone). 
1 14. Qumran •Hymns of the Just' 4 (with 13.8-12, 28; 16.22; 'babes' and 'adults· 
and 'milk' and 'meat' distinction in 14.21 and 21.1-2). See Price, Pre-Nicene, pp. 887-
928. 

1 1 2  
On the Historicity of Jesus 
basic principles of Christ (the 'first principles'), which are enumerated as 
'repentance from dead works; faith toward God; the doctrine of baptisms; 
and of laying on of hands; and of resurrection of the dead; and of eter­
nal judgment'. This is evidently the litany of what would be imparted by 
the 'initial' mysteries, or possibly several ranks of mysteries (since there 
is more to this list than Paul said one's first initiation began with), and 
this is all distinguished from the final mysteries, by which one is 'per­
fected', which this author implies is contained in what follows (in Hebrews 
6 through 13). 
It's worth noting that these hints of there being more than just two lev­
els of initiation (first becoming newborn babes, then becoming perfected) 
accords with other mystery cults, which typically had three or four levels. 
In the second century, the letters of Ignatius also suggest there were mul­
tiple levels, when he says he can't tell the Trallians some of the Christian 
mysteries because they are still 'babes' and thus not able to receive the 
secrets he is hinting at (which from context seem to be something about the 
nature of Satan, his role in attacking the church, and its connection with 
esoteric knowledge about the heavenly realms and the names of various 
angels and celestial powers), but that there are still other teachings even he 
has not received yet (which he knows will involve more knowledge of the 
structure of heaven and some sort of detailed angelology). 115 That entails 
at least three levels of initiation were known to him and his fellow congre­
gants. This may have been the case in Paul's time as well. 
Clement himself describes four levels of initiation in the church of his 
own day, consisting of 'faith' (pistis), 'knowledge' (gnosis), 'love' (agape) 
and 'inheritance' (kleronomia).116 One ascends through these stages to 
achieve immortality: 
Which takes place whenever one is held up by the Lord through faith, 
then through knowledge, then through love, and then ascends along with 
him to where the God and watcher of our faith and love resides. Whence 
at last it is that knowledge is passed down to those fit and selected for it, 
because immense preparation and previous training is necessary in order 
to hear what is said, and to live a life of restraint, and to advance intelli­
gently to the fullness of righteousness that is according to the law. It leads 
us to the endless and perfect end, teaching us beforehand the future life 
that we shall lead, according to God, and with gods . . . .  
After which redemption, the reward and the honors are assigned to 
those who have become perfect [I it. 'to those who have become teleioi'], 
when they will be done with purification, and ceased from an service 
(though it be holy service, and among saints). Then they become pure in 
1 15. Ignatius, Epistle to the Trallians 5. 
1 16. Clement of Alexandria, Miscellanies 7.10 (§55.7-56.1). See Robin Lane Fox, 
Pagans and Christians (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1987), pp. 316-17, 733 (n. I I). 

4. Background (Christianity) 
heart, next to the Lord, where they await their return to eternal contem­
plation. Then they are called by the appellation of 'gods', being destined 
to sit on thrones with the other gods that have been first put in their places 
by the Savior.117 
1 13 
Clement's previous designation of that final rank as the 'inheritance', and 
then here describing it as reaching the status of 'god', placed 'next to the 
Lord', destined to sit on a throne in heaven and eternally contemplate real­
ity, might be an important clue to what it meant to be a teleios, a Christian 
admitted to the highest mysteries: full inheritance as God's son, something 
more than by mere adoption, but complete equivalence to God's firstborn. 
This could be the underlying idea when Paul says those in the church of his 
own rank 'have the mind of Christ' and thus can properly judge a1 1 things 
because they have full knowledge of all the mysteries (I Cor. 2.16). Paul 
elsewhere hints at a secret doctrine in 2 Cor. 12.3, where he says a man 
he knows (most scholars believe he is speaking of himseiO experienced 
a spiritual ascent 'into the third heaven' where he heard teachings he was 
forbidden to tell (thus again evincing a secret mystery teaching), a notion 
of ascent that accords with Clement's description of the highest mysteries 
in Christianity. 118 
Whether either of those last points is correct or not, Paul clearly ref­
erences secret doctrines kept from the public, plus more secret doctrines 
kept even from most Christians and reserved instead for those who were 
'mature'. Clement fully confirms this.119 As does Origen, Ignatius and 
117. Clement of Alexandria, Miscellanies 7.10 (§56.1-7); the whole of7.10 describes 
these levels and the knowledge requisite to ascend each. It need not be assumed that 
Clement is saying that lower ranking church members were not saved, since Clement 
and every other Christian, from Paul onward, declares that baptism (into 'faith') was 
sufficient; rather, those inducted but not yet fully ascended would still get eternal life, 
because they could ascend the remaining ranks in heaven (e.g. Origen, On the First 
Principles 2.11.4-7, which is in accord with Origen, Against Celsus 1.9-10). 
118. See James Tabor, Things Unutterable: Paul 's Ascent to Paradise in its Greco­
Homan, Judaic, and Early Christian Contexts (Lanham, MD: University Press of 
Americੜ 1986), p. 122. 
119. Though we do not have conclusive evidence that Clement's four-stage system 
was already in place under Paul, I believe it is not unreasonable to suspect that it was, or 
something approaching it. That is not necessary to my point (since we do have conclusive 
evidence of at least two stages in Paul's time and that's sufficient to establish this 
element as fact), but the existence from the very start of the system Clement describes 
should be seriously considered. Not only because such systems might already have 
been employed in earlier Jewish sects (and thus simply been adapted to the new gospel), 
but also because this is how religions develop: their originators elaborate systems and 
hierarchies within a matter of years, not centuries. Hence I should not have to respond 
to the objection that developed systems and hierarchies within Christianity didn't arise 
for another century. That assumption has always been implausible o੝ its face. Any 

1 14 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
Hebrews. This evidence is only supported further by the more general point 
that this was a standard feature of all mystery cults, and Christianity clearly 
was one (as shown in Element 1 1), so we should expect it shared this feature 
as well, especially as even pre-Christian Judaism had similar traditions of 
secret doctrines. 120 
Element 14: Mystery cults spoke of their beliefs in public through myths 
and allegory, which symbolized a more secret doctrine that was usually 
rooted in a more esoteric astral or metaphysical theology. Therefore, as 
itself a mystery religion with secret doctrines, Christianity would have 
done the same. 
The most explicit discussion of this fact can be found in Plutarch's book 
on the myths and teachings of the mystery cult of Isis and Osiris, which 
he wrote and dedicated to a priestess of that cult, Clea.121 Plutarch says 
the highest aim of any religion is to learn the truth behind its stories and 
rituals, the truth about the gods. And part of that consisted in realizing that 
the stories and narratives of the gods were only allegories for higher truths: 
Clea, whenever you hear the mythical stories told by the Egyptians about 
their gods-of their wanderings, dismemberments, and many experi­
ences like these-you must remember what I said earlier and not think 
that any of these things is being said to have actually happened like that 
or to have actually come to pass. 122 
He then goes on to summarize what is essentially the 'gospel' of Isis and 
Osiris, a typical mythic narrative of events transpiring on earth leading 
community that organizes and expands over three continents (as Paul's letters show 
Christianity already had) will rapidly need a clear hierarchy and organization within a 
matter of years. To assume that no one thought of this or saw any need for it for a whole 
century (much less three) is absurd. Likewise, since Paul reveals there were already 
at least two levels of initiation in the cult, there is no reason to assume there were not 
more. If there were already two, there could just as easily have been four (as Josephus 
attests the Essenes already had). Paul's letters just never had an occasion to discuss the 
details of this. 
120. For further support of this last point see the analysis of Margaret Barker. 'The 
Secret Tradition', Journal of Higher Criticism 2 (Spring 1995), pp. 31-67: and Margaret 
Barker, 'The Temple Roots of the Christian Liturgy', in Christian Origins: Worship. 
Belief and Society (ed. Kieran O'Mahony; Sheffield: Sheffield Academic Press. 2003). 
pp. 29-51. On secrets and initiations in Judaism see previous notes. 
121. Plutarch, On Isis and Osiris 1.351c and 35lf (this Clea was also the dedicatee 
of his book on The Bravery of Women 1.242e-f). Another discourse on this topic 
was delivered by Maximus of Tyre, in his fourth oration, 'Poetry and Philosophy on 
the Gods' (sometime in the second century), which also explicitly links allegorical 
mythmaking to mystery cult practice. 
1 22. Plutarch, On Isis and Osiris 1 1.355b. 

4. Background (Christianity) 
1 15 
to Osiris's death and resurrection.123 He then closes by repeating the point 
that Clea knows better than to really believe these stories, that 'in fact, you 
yourself detest' those who take them literally, and that she (like all true 
believers) sees them as 'but window dressing' that points us to something 
else more profound. 124 
Plutarch then goes on to survey what this underlying truth might actu­
ally be. He first brings up the theory of Euhemerus that all such tales are 
the mythification of past kings into current gods, but then he rejects this 
as impious and absurd.125 Instead, 'better', he says, is the theory that these 
earthly tales are of the 'sufferings' (pathȩmata) not of gods or men, but 
of 'great divinities' (daimonon mega/on, 'great demons' in Christian ver­
nacular), divine beings with incarnate bodies capable of suffering and 
corruption. This, he says, was just as in other mystery cults (he alludes 
definitely to those of Dionysus and Demeter, meaning the Bacchic and Ele­
usinian mysteries, of which Clea was also a participant), where there are 
also 'mythical stories' told of the wanderings and sufferings of those gods, 
but 'all is concealed behind mystic sacraments and initiations, not spoken 
or shown to the multitude', thereby preserving the truth. P1utarch says the 
stories of Isis and Osiris 'have the same explanation'.126 Hence it's import­
ant to note that Paul also speaks of 'the sufferings' (pathemata) of Christ, 
just as Plutarch says 'the sufferings' of other savior gods were spoken of in 
other mystery cults. 127 As Plutarch explains, the true story is that Isis and 
Osiris are celestial gods engaged in a war in outer space between good and 
evil demons. 128 The tales that relate their adventures on earth are just an 
allegory for this higher reality, which is actually going on in heaven (see 
Element 37). 
Plutarch also explores another explanation, in which a god's narrative 
myth is reduced to purely naturalistic and mystical allegories, and thus not 
about actual beings at all-but he indicates this is not the view he shares. 129 
He prefers the demonological theory, and accepts the other more thorough­
going allegorization as only a supplemental explanation at best, concluding 
that 'individually these theorists are wrong, but collectively they are right' 
because all the things they describe are a part of the gods in question, not 
123. Plutarch, On Isis and Osiris 12.355d-19.358e. 
124. Plutarch, On Isis and Osiris 20.358e-359a. 
125. Plutarch, On Isis and Osiris 2l.359c-24.360d. 
126. Plutarch, On Isis and Osiris 25.360d-f. 
127. 2 Cor. 1.5 and Phil. 3.10. Likewise 1 Pet. 1.11; 4.13; 5.1 (on which see Chapters 
7 and 1 1). 
128. Plutarch, On Isis and Osiris 26.36lb-27.361e. 
129. Plutarch, On Isis and Osiris 32.363d-46.369e; 49.371a-80.384c. 

1 1 6  
On the Historicity of Jesus 
identical to those godsY0 He says these demigods control aiJ the things 
their myths are said to allegorize; in fact, those who think the gods simply 
are these natural forces and mystical truths he denounces as atheists or 
idolators.131 Thus, Plutarch continually returns to and defends the demon­
ological theory (in which cosmic good and evil beings, and their struggles 
and battles, lie behind it all) as being 'the wisest' view Uust as Paul calls 
the secret teachings of Christianity the real wisdom, a wisdom not of this 
world, in 1 Corinthians 2).132 Plutarch cannot, of course, come out and tell 
us what the initiates to the lsiac mysteries are actually told. If he knew 
he would have been sworn to secrecy, and in any event would not offend 
Clea by exposing them to the public. But we can read between the lines: he 
would of course prefer of all explanations the one actually in accord with 
what the highest ranking initiates like Clea were taught. Thus we can infer 
it accorded most closely with his demonological theory. And as he says all 
other mystery religions have 'similar explanations', we can infer this was 
the common trend among them all. 
It was common in fact to see all sacred literature (even revered poetry 
about the gods) as allegorical, not meant literally, such that one had to 'lift 
the veil' through interpretation to reveal the true meaning of a text, much 
as Paul says Christians must approach the OT (2 Cor. 3.12-4.6). Though 
Paul could imagine actual historical events being arranged to convey the 
allegory (I Cor. 10.1-1 1) it's obvious (as with Plutarch) that this would not 
always be a necessary understanding, even among Christians. For instance, 
Paul clearly does not regard the historicity of the tale of Sarah and Hagar 
to be relevant to his atlegoricar understanding of it, which he assumes his 
Christian congregations will readily accept (Gal. 4.22·31: see Chapter I I, 
§9). And anyone who welcomed the reading of sacred stories as allegory 
would welcome the writing of sacred stories as allegory. Obviously, since 
Paul believed the OT was so written and endorsed as such by God. 
The same had already occurred among the pagans. Homer, for exam­
ple, came to be increasingly read (even from as early as the time of Plato) 
as allegorically representing deeper cosmic truths through his superficial 
narratives of the gods, and as such Homer was treated as divinely inspired 
scripture.133 The Jews had already caught the same bug and were treating 
130. Plutarch, On Isis and Osiris 45.369a-d. 
131. Plutarch. On Isis and Osiris 64.376f-67.378a (see also 70.379b-71.379e). 
132. Plutarch, On isis and Osiris 46.369d. 
133. See Robert Lamberton. Homer the Theologian: Neoplatonisl Allegorical 
Reading and the Growth of the Epic Tradition (Berkeley, CA: University of California 
Press, 1986). For broader analysis of this whole trend among pagans see J. Gwyn 
Griffiths, Plutarch 's De /side et Osiride (Cardiff: University of Wales Press, 1970), 
pp. 100-101 and 419-20, and Luc Brisson, How Philosophers Saved Myths: Allegorical 

4. Background (Christianity) 
1 1 7 
their scriptures the same way before Christianity arrived on the scene. And 
as Paul attests, Christians adopted the same practice. All simply embraced 
the same way of reading divine secrets out of sacred texts. The Jewish 
theologian Philo, for example, a contemporary of Paul, interprets the tale 
of Lot's wife turning into a pillar of salt as an allegory for spurning a teach­
er's instruction and locking one's gaze instead on what one knew before.134 
Thus such a story did not have to be historical to be 'true'. 
Not all myths and interpretations had merit. Philo could simultaneously 
denounce 'cleverly devised fables' while himself interpreting a biblical text 
as symbolic allegory and calling that the 'real truth'. It depended, he argues, 
on whether one saw correctly, being in the right state of mind as one read: 
'as many as are able to contemplate the facts related' in the stories of the 
Bible while they are 'in their incorporeal and unclothed state, living rather 
in the soul than in the body', will see that the true meaning lies in the alle­
gory, not 'what are contained in the plain words of the scriptures'.135 Philo 
thus says the tales of Eve and the Serpent 'are not mere fabulous inventions, 
in which poets and sophists delight, but are rather types shadowing forth 
some allegorical truth, according to some mystical explanation', and thus 
the story is symbolic. 136 He regards Abraham's father, Terah, as nonhistori­
cal, merely an allegory, in contrast to Socrates, 'who really existed', and he 
I ikewise deems Sarah and Hagar as not real people but just allegorical sym­
bols Uust as Paul apparently did)Y7 Accordingly, Philo composed entire 
books about how to read the scriptures allegorically, and frequently relies 
on this procedure for understanding what the scriptures 'really' meant. 138 
If Philo respects reading sacred stories that way, he would have to 
respect composing them that way. Indeed, as historical events never in fact 
work out so neatly as an allegory requires, even if someone believed an 
allegorical story 'had' to also be superficially true (though it is clear Paul 
Interpretation and Classical Mythology (trans. Catherine Tihanyi: Chicago: University 
of Chicago Press, 2004)ਖ਼ for pagans, Jews. and Christians see Annewies van den Hoek, 
'Allegorical Interpretation'. in Dictionary of Biblical Criticism and Interpretation 
(ed. Stanley Porter; New York: Routledge, 2007), pp. 9-12; and Jean Pepin, Mythe et 
altegorie: les origines grecques et les contestations judeo-chretiennes (Paris: Etudes 
Augustiniennes, 1976). See also Chilton, 'Commenting on the Old Testament'. 
134. Philo, On Flight and Discovery 22.121-22. 
135. Philo, On Abraham 41.236 and 41.243. See also Philo. On the Descendants of 
Cain 7 and On Abraham 98-102. 
136. Philo, On the Creation 55.157. 
137. Philo, On Dreams 1 .58 and On Mating with the Preliminary Studies 6-7. 
138. We have three of his books On Allegorical interpretation; for other examples 
of his reliance on the procedure, see On the Change of Names 28.152, On Dreams 
1.27.172, etc. See Jean Pepin (ed.), La tradition de l 'al/egorie de Phi/on d'Alexandrie a 
Dante: Etudes historiques (Paris: Etudes Augustiniennes. 1 987). 
. 

1 18 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
and Philo didn't), an allegorical tale would still have to be invented and then 
passed off as superficially true. And as Plutarch explained for the mystery 
religions, this same thing would also be done to conceal the true meaning 
from the public. He describes the result of this as the multitude 'supersti­
tiously' believing the stories are true, while initiates like Clea and himself 
knew better. For instance: 
There is a doctrine which modern priests hint at to satisfy their con­
science, but only in veiled terms and with caution: namely that the god 
Osiris rules and reigns over the dead, being none other than he whom the 
Greeks call Hades or Pluto. The truth of this statement is misunderstood 
and confuses the masses, who suppose that the sacred and the holy one, 
who is in truth Osiris, lives in the earth and under the earth, where are 
concealed the bodies of those who appear to have reached their end. He 
is actually very far removed from the earth [i.e., in outer space], being 
undefiled, unspotted, and uncorrupted by any being which is subject to 
decay and death. 139 
In fact, Plutarch believes, the souls of the dead ascend into outer space, 
where Osiris will preside over them as their heavenly king.140 This much 
Plutarch can reveal. The more sacred details he omits. 
What the priests were doing by speaking this way was not deemed lying. 
For instance, Philo says Moses (whom Philo, like many Jews, believed 
wrote the Torah) tells no fable when he says 'there were giants on the 
earth in those days' (Gen. 6.4), but meant only allegorically that there were 
men of heavenly wisdom. Philo then says Moses would never tell a fable, 
because he only tells the truth, so, just like Plutarch, anyone who takes 
that statement about giants literally Philo compares to idolaters and men 
deceived.141 Thus, for Philo 'the truth' is the allegorical meaning of the text, 
not its literal meaning. We have to appreciate the significance of this. For 
us, even as Philo explains it, 'Moses' told a lie, plainly saying what is not 
true, that giants once walked the earth. But for Philo, as long as this state­
ment has a higher symbolic meaning that is true, Moses isn't lying. Those 
who don't have the holy spirit of wisdom and understanding will only think 
he's lying-or believe the literal meaning and thus believe what is false. 
Take note of this. Because people who think this way will both read and 
write books differently than we expect.142 
139. Plutarch, On Isis and Osiris 78.382e. 
140. Plutarch, On Isis and Osiris 78.382f-383a (and see Elements 31 and 34-38). 
141 . Philo, On the Giants 58-60. See also Philo, On Providence 2.40-41 (translated 
and discussed in Lamberton, Homer the Theologian, pp. 49-51). 
142. For discussion of this point see Peter Struck, Birth of the Symbol: Ancient 
Readers and the Limits of their Texts (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2004); 
Bruce Malina, Tջ Social Gospel of Jesus: The Kingdom of God in Mediterranean 

4. Background (Christianity) 
1 19 
The gospel story found in Mark, for example, could have begun as a 
set of mythic models for common Christian rituals and realities such as 
baptism and the Eucharist and facing persecution and martyrdom and per­
forming miracles of healing, exorcism and prophecy. If that were so (and 
we'll see how likely it is in Chapter 10), then we would have to conclude it 
also establishes a model for initiation into the secret teachings of the Chris­
tian mysteries (in Mk 4.1 1-12): 
And [Jesus Christ] said unto (his closest followers], 'Unto you is given 
the mystery of the kingdom of God: but to outsiders, everything is given 
in parables, so that seeing they may see, but not know; and hearing they 
may hear, but not comprehend; lest they should turn and be forgiven.' 
Within the narrative Jesus is speaking of his parables (paraphrasing, or 
quoting a lost variant of, Isa. 6.9-10). But insiders might have been taught 
that the narrative itself is constructed the same way, and thus the notion 
that Jesus is speaking only of his parables is what outsiders are meant to 
think. Indeed, that the Gospel actually tells the secrets behind his parables 
suggests the real secrets lie elsewhere in the text, as otherwise they were 
here being revealed, which defeated the purpose of concealing them in the 
first place. We'll see evidence of all this in Chapter 10. But here I mean only 
to establish its plausibility. 
In his early-third-century rebuttal to the pagan critic Celsus (who wrote 
in the late second century), the Christian teacher Origen says an allegorical 
understanding of sacred writings is common to pagans, Jews and Chris­
tians, and that in fact Christians frequently understand the scriptures alle­
gorically, including their own Gospels. 'The historical parts' of the Bible, 
Origen declares, 'were written with an allegorical purpose, being most 
skillfully adapted not only for the multitude of the simpler believers, but 
also for the few who are willing or even able to investigate matters intel­
ligently'. Indeed, he says, 'what other inference can be drawn than that 
they were composed so as to be understood allegorically in their chief sig-
Perspective (New York: Routledge, 2000); and Bruce Malina, The New Jerusalem 
in the Revelation of John: The City as Symbol of Life with God (Collegeville, MN: 
Liturgical Press, 2000), with Bruce Malina and John Pilch, Social Science Commentary 
on the Book of Revelation (Minneapolis, MN: Fortress Press, 2000). See also John 
Dominic Crossan, The Power of Parable: How Fiction by Jesus became Fiction about 
Jesus (New York: HarperOne. 2012); Thomas Thompson, The Messiah Myth: The 
Near Eastern Roots of Jesus and David (New York: Basic Books. 2005); Thomas 
Brodie, The Birthing of the New Testament: The lntertextual Development of the New 
Testament Writings (Sheffield: Sheffield Phoenix Press, 2004); and Randel Helms, 
Gospel Fictions (Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 1988). 

120 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
nification?' Գ43 Those who approach the text literally, he says, have 'a vei l 
of ignorance' upon them and thus 'read but do not understand the figura­
tive meaning', whereas this veil 'is taken away by the gift of God' from 
those who have achieved sufficient philosophical perfection. 144 Origen thus 
echoes what is said by Paul in 2 Corinthians 3, that readers of the Bible 
have a veil over their hearts which prevents them from understanding its 
true meaning-which, Paul makes clear, is the allegorical meaning. Origen 
even says that the Jewish and Christian narratives are better because they 
have been designed to be more morally edifying than the licentious fables 
of the pagans. Thus 'our narratives keep expressly in view the multitude of 
simpler believers', just as Plato had commanded be done, as Origen says. 
by purging all immoral tales from the poets and crafting only acceptable 
myths in their place (a leading theme of Plato's Republic). 
Origen is clear in meaning that the Gospels were likewise al legorically 
constructed and not to be taken literally as Celsus was doing.145 Origen 
cannot mean all the stories were 'also' literally true, as Celsus was arguing 
that they are in that case absurd, and Origen is responding by saying they 
are not absurd because they have a sublime allegorical meaning. But that 
only cancels their absurdity if they are not also literally true. At most, some 
of them may be true, while for the others their literal meaning only had 
use i n  edifying the 'simpler' believers in the way Plato had meant: false 
tales told in order to trick the masses into doing the right thing. Origen 
cites Plato's very argument to that effect in his own defense, so he clearly 
meant the Bible (the NT included) served the same role. Elsewhere he is 
explicit: when it comes to the actual meaning of what the Gospels say, 
'mature' believers are taught one thing, but 'simpler' believers are taught 
another, and in result, he says, many passages in the Gospels are literally 
false and only allegorically true; as Origen put it, 'the spiritual truth was 
often preserved, as one might say, in a material falsehood'. 146 And indeed, 
from extensive analyses of his writings, Joseph Trigg and Gunnar Hall­
strԲm have each found that Origen did indeed believe it was better for the 
143. Origen, Against Celsus 4.48-49 (see also 1 .42). Origen is not alone. The pagan 
critic Porphyry observed that all Christians and Jews treated their text this way. and 
Eusebius concurs: Eusebius, History of the Church 6.19.4 (quoting Porphyry, Against 
the Christians 3). 
144. Origen, Against Celsus 4.50. See also Justin Martyr, Dialogue with Trypho 90. 
145. Origen, Against Celsus 4.51-52. Thus, Origen asks that Celsus 'seek the help 
of one who is capable of initiating him into the actual meaning of the narratives' before 
judging their veracity: Origen, Against Celsus 6.23; that is, he asks that Celsus become 
a Christian, as then he will be taught these secrets. 
146. Origen, Commentary on the Gospel according to John 1 .9-1 1  and 10.2-6. 

4. Background (Christianity) 
121 
'simpleton' to believe literally in what the Bible says even when that literal 
meaning isn't true. 147 
This reasoning is most explicitly endorsed by Eusebius (in the early 
fourth century), who argues that it was necessary to lie like this for the 
cause of Christianity, and that the Bible thus contained many such lies­
Eusebius even claims Plato got this edifYing ideafrom the Bible. In fact, 
Eusebius's entire treatise on God's Preparation for the Gospel argues that 
every good idea the Greeks had actually came from Moses. And among 
those 'good ideas' Eusebius includes the following, under the heading 'that 
it is necessary sometimes to use falsehood as a medicine for those who 
need' it: 
[As was said by the Athenian in Plato's Laws] 'And even the lawmaker 
who is of little use . . .  if he dared lie to young men for a good reason, then 
can't he lie? For falsehood is something even more useful than [the truth], 
and sometimes even more able to bring it about that everyone willingly 
keeps to all justice.' [fhen is said by Clinias] 'Truth is beautiful, stranger, 
and steadfast. But to persuade people of it is not easy.' You would find 
many things of this sort being used even in the Hebrew scriptures, such 
as concerning God being jealous or falling asleep or getting angry or 
being subject to some other human passions, for the benefit of those who 
need such an approach. 148 
To understand what Eusebius means, it is important to know how the 
Platonic dialogue he quotes continues: 
Athenian: Be it so; yet it proved easy to persuade men of the Sidon ian fairy­
tale, incredible though it was, and of numberless others. 
Clinias: What tales? 
Athenian: The tale of the teeth that were sown, and how armed men sprang 
out of them. Here, indeed, the lawgiver has a notable example of how 
one can, if he tries, persuade the souls of the young of anything, so that 
the only question he has to consider in his inventing is what would do 
most good to the State, if it were believed; and then he must devise all 
possible means to ensure that the whole of the community constantly, 
so long as they live, use exactly the same language, so far as possible, 
about these matters, alike in their songs, their tales, and their discourses. 
If you, however, think otherwise, I have no objection to your arguing in 
the opposite sense. 
147. Joseph Trigg, 'Divine Deception and the Truthfulness of Scripture', in Origen 
of Alexandria: His World and his Legacy (ed. Charles Kannengiesser and William 
Peterson; Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre Dame Press, 1988), pp. 147-64; Gunnar 
HIUlstrom. Fides simpliciorum according to Origen of Alexandria (Helsinki: Societas 
Scientiarum Fennica, 1984). 
148. Eusebius, Preparation for the Gospel 12.31. The passage he quotes is Plato, 
Laws 663e. Note that the sectioਫ਼ heading could possibly be by a later editor, though I 
doubt it, and it accurately descnbes the argument Eusebius makes nevertheless. 

122 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
Clinias: Neither of us, I think, could possibly argue against your view.149 
Plato had already had the Athenian argue that justice is the only real 
road to happiness, and therefore by this argument people can be persuaded 
to be good. But he then addresses the possibility that the truth will not suf­
fice, or that justice is not in fact the only real road to happiness, by arguing 
that lying is acceptable, and in fact even more effective in bringing about 
what is desired-that the people will be good-and thus teachers should 
employ lies for the benefit of the community. 
The added significance here is the distinction being made between the 
'young' as the targets of this manipulation: here we have the conceptual 
parallel to the 'babes' in Christ who need 'milk' because they are not yet 
ready to receive the real food (the true teaching) of the Christian religion 
(see Element 13). This is the very point Plato makes, saying that one thing is 
to be told to 'the mature' of understanding, and another thing told to 'chil­
dren' (including adolescents, but metaphorically he means anyone philo­
sophically immature), and from the latter the real truth will be kept, such 
that, he says, only after an initiation into the appropriate mysteries can they 
receive it.150 The second-century pagan orator Maximus of Tyre attests the 
same concept, even evoking the 'milk' metaphor.'51 Eusebius agrees, as 
did Origen. This same attitude could thus have been ingrained within the 
church from its very inception. 
As we saw before (in Element 1 3), in the early third century Clement 
of Alexandria also referred approvingly to the letters of Plato in which 
he makes the same argument, that the common people aren't prepared to 
understand the truth and thus must be told a superficial lie to conceal it 
from them, and that it would be concealed within riddles and myths only 
symbol izing or pointing to the truth.152 Centuries later Augustine would 
condemn this widely held principle (that 'it is expedient to deceive the 
people in matters of religion', a view he suggests was also endorsed by 
the Roman scholar Varro in the early first century BCE), yet at the same 
time still defends allegorical readings ofthe Bible when the literal meaning 
clearly could not be true (as when. e.g., it contradicted established science, 
149. Plato, Laws 663e-664b. See also Plato, Republic 2.414-17. 
150. Plato, Republic 2.378a-e. 
151. Maximus ofTyre, Orations 4.3. 
152. Plato, Letters 2.312d; 2.314a-14c. See Julius Elias, Plato's Defense of Poetry 
(Albany, NY: State University ofNew York Press, 1984); Radcliffe Edmonds Ill, Myths 
of the Underworld Journey: Plato, Aristophanes, and the 'Orphic' Gold Tablets (New 
York: Cambridge University Press, 2004), pp. 161-71 (in context, pp. 159-220); Kathryn 
Morgan, Myth and Philosophy from the Presocratics to Plato (New York: Cambridge 
University Press, 2000). 

4. Background (Christianity) 
123 
a specific problem Augustine was apologetically addressing).153 Today we 
call that hypocrisy. At any rate, even Augustine, for all his protests, only 
confirms that the view was entrenched and widely embraced-even by 
himself. 
Origen gives us the most candid discussion of this doctrine within the 
church: 'Each person understands the Scriptures according to his capacity. 
One takes the sense from them more superficially, as if from the surface 
of a spring. Another draws up more deeply as from a well.' 154 Though Ori­
gen thinks literal interpretations can be 'helpful' for edifying the 'simple' 
believer, they are not the actual truth, which can sometimes even be exactly 
the opposite. Sometimes Paul himself, Origen says, 'wanted to conceal the 
forbidden meaning of a passage as something not appropriate for simple 
folk or for the common hearing of those who are led only by faith to what 
is better', and yet, 'so we would not mishear his words, he was then com­
pelled' to give clues to the real meaning of what he said, so that we would 
know 'there was something forbidden and secret in that passage'. As for 
example, when Paul says, 'Behold, I tell you a mystery' about the nature of 
the resurrection, Origen says, 'this is his way of introducing things deeper 
and more secret which are appropriately kept hidden from the multitude'. 
Origen concludes, 'as is even written in Tobit, "It is good to keep the king's 
mystery a secret", but respectable and fitting "to honorably reveal the 
works of God" to the multitude with what is conveniently true'.155 Thus, 
there is a gospel for the simpleton (the 'babes' in Christ) and a gospel for 
'grown ups', and Origen explains that the latter is concealed from the 'sim­
pleton' because it might turn him away from the faith and thus away from 
salvation, while only a few people of sufficient maturity are really fit to 
understand the truth.156 Clement of Alexandria makes the same argument, 
using Paul's own language of 'carnal' vs. 'spiritual' understanding of the 
Gospel text.157 
It is in this context that we might better understand Paul's claim that the 
gospel preached in public appeared to be 'foolishness' to outsiders, a 'stum­
bling block' to their understanding (1 Cor. 1.18-25; see Chapter 12, §4), but 
was not such to those who understood its secret meaning-the gospel not 
preached in public, but only to insiders (1 Cor. 2.4-3.3). This was quite the 
same in other mystery cults: when in his own mythic narrative Dionysus 
speaks in riddles and is called foolish, he responds, 'One will seem to be 
153. Augustine, City of God 4.27 vs. Augustine, Confessions 5.14. See also 
Augustine, On Lying 7 and 24-26. 
154. Origen, Homilies on Jeremiah 18.4.2. 
155. Origen, Against Ce/sus 5. 19 (see also 5.14-16). 
1 56. Origen, Against Celsus 1 .9-10 and 3.45-46. 
157. Clement of Alexandria, Who Is the Rich Man That Shall Be Saved 5. 

124 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
foolish if he speaks wisely to an ignorant man'.158 Paul is in effect saying 
the same thing. So, too Origen. Thus it is plausible that, like other mystery 
cults, Christianity also came to be packaged with a set of earthly tales of its 
savior that were not meant to be taken literally, except by outsiders-and 
insiders of insufficient rank, who were variously called even by their own 
leaders 'babes' or 'simpletons'. 
Element 15: Christianity began as a charismatic cult in which many of its 
leaders and members displayed evidence of schizotypal personalities. They 
naturally and regularly hallucinated (seeing visions and hearing voices), 
often believed their dreams were divine communications, achieved trance 
states, practiced glossolalia, and were (or so we're told) highly suscepti­
ble to psychosomatic illnesses (like 'possession' and hysterical blindness, 
muteness and paralysis).159 These phenomena have been extensively docu­
mented in modern charismatic cults within numerous religious traditions, 
and their underlying sociology, anthropology and psychology are reason­
ably well understood (in addition to what follows, see also Element 29). 
For example, we know the first Christians regularly practiced glosso­
lalia. Acts 2 mythologizes this phenomenon, depicting the first Christians 
'speaking in tongues' in the middle of Jerusalem as if this actually meant 
miraculously speaking foreign languages fluently that they were never 
taught, when in fact we know 'speaking in tongues' actually meant (as it 
does now) babbling in random syllables, which no one could really under­
stand except special interpreters who were 'inspired' by the holy spirit to 
miraculously understand and translate for their congregation. We know 
this because Paul tells us so (in 1 Corinthians 14; in fact the phenomenon is 
addressed throughout 1 Corinthians 12-14). Thus Acts has taken this real 
phenomenon and exaggerated it into a legendary power. But we know from 
Paul it operated differently. And in fact, the phenomenon Paul describes 
is known across the world, in countless cultures and religious traditions, 
158. Euripides, Bacchae 479-480. 
159. I wilt discuss the other phenomena shortly, but the phenomenon of 
psychosomatic illness and its cultural framing is discussed in Edward Shorter, From 
Paralysis to Fatigue: A History of Psychosomatic lllness in the Modern Era (New 
York: Maxwell Macmillan International, 1992), and in the Journal of Psychosomatic 
Research (e.g. J. Stone et al., 'Conversion Disorder: Current Problems and Potential 
Solutions for DSM-5', Journal of Psychosomatic Research 71 [201 1], pp. 369-76). 
For its connection to hallucinators and 'possession' phenomena in modern cults, see 
Horst Figge, •spirit Possession and Healing Cult among the Brasilian Umbanda', 
Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics 25 (1975), pp. 246-50; and E.D. Wittkower, •spirit 
Possession in Haitian Vodun Ceremonies', Acta psychotherapeutica et psychosomatica 
12 (1964), pp. 72-80. 

4. Background (Christianity) 
125 
and has been extensively studied. 160 When we see in antiquity a phenom­
enon we've documented scientifically as commonly occurring in various 
cultures, it's far more likely to be the same phenomenon than something 
entirely new yet coincidentally identical. We must therefore conclude the 
first Christians had some social and anthropological similarities to other 
cults that practice glossolalia. 
Acts represents this as a recurring practice in the church: Acts 10.46; 19.6 
(confirmed in Mk 16.17); and in 1 Cor. 14.18, Paul himself says he spoke in 
tongues more than anyone, and throughout that chapter makes clear it was 
so commonly happening to others in his churches that he had to set up rules 
to govern it. And as for glossolalia, so for the other phenomena Paul reports 
as regularly practiced by the first Christians. The most important of which 
for our purposes was hallucination (visual and auditory). Humans are actu­
ally biologically predisposed to hallucinate. The neurophysiology of hallu­
cination is built-in and thus must have evolved for some useful function (or 
as a side-effect of something else that did). Studies of shamanism and the 
cultural role of prophets and holy men have found evidence that hallucina­
tors were often given positions of religious authority across the world, pos­
sibly even as far back as prehistoric times.161 The propensity to hallucinate 
160. Felecitas Goodman, Speaking in Tongues: A Cross-Cultural Study in 
Glossolalia (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1972); Watson Mills, Speaking in 
Tongues: A Guide to Research on Glossolalia (Grand Rapids, Ml: William B. Eerdmans, 
1986); Gerald Hovenden, Speaking in Tongues: The New Testament Evidence in Context 
(London: Sheffield Academic, 2002). On this and the other 'signatory' behaviors of the 
original cult (including visions and hearing voices) see Gordon Fee, The First Epistle to 
the Corinthians (Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans, 1987), pp. 590-99, 652-713; and Ronald 
Kydd, Charismatic Gifts in the Early Church (Peabody, MA: Hendrickson Publishers, 
1984). For a good and accessible summary of the scientific literature on glossolalia see 
Scott Semenyna and Rodney Schmalz, 'Glossolalia Meets Glosso-Psychology: Why 
Speaking in Tongues Persists in Charismatic Christian and Pentecostal Gatherings', 
Skeptic 17 (2012), pp. 40-43. 
161. See Miranda Aldhouse-Green and Stephen Aid house-Green, The Quest for 
the Shaman: Shape-Shifters, Sorcerers and Spirit-Healers of Ancient Europe (London: 
Thames & Hudson, 2005); and I.M. Lewis, Ecstatic Religion: A Study of Shamanism 
and Spirit Possession (New York: Routledge, 1989). For Mediterranean antiquity see 
Peter Green, Alexander to Actium: The Historical Evolution of the Hellenistic Age 
(Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 1 990), pp. 408-13, 594-95; Robin Lane 
Fox, 'Seeing the Gods', in Pagans and Christians (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1987), 
pp. 102-67; E.R. Dodds, 'Dream-Pattern and Culture-Pattern', in The Greeks and the 
Irrational (Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 1951), pp. 102-34 (with more 
on prophetic trances and ecstasies in 'The Blessings of Madness', pp. 64-101). Crucial 
context is also provided by A.D. Nock, Conversion: The Old and the New in Religion 
from Alexander the Great to Augustine of Hippo (Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins 
University Press, 1933). On the role of dreams as authoritative communications 

126 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
is molded by cultural context (people hallucinate frequently in cultures that 
promote and accept it, but suppress their capacity to hallucinate in cultures 
that denigrate and reject it), but also exists on a biological spectrum, from 
almost no capacity to a crippling capacity-and everything in between.162 
Schizophrenia results when your biological propensity to hallucinate is 
ramped up to such an extreme that it interferes with your ability to func­
tion. This is how most mental disorders originate. For example, a natural 
and necessary brain function that prompts us to remember whether we have 
completed a necessary task (and to clean and organize things, and to build 
mental lists of what we have to do or have already done, and so on), when 
overactive leads to a disability called OCD (obsessive-compulsive disor­
der). Depression is likewise an extreme and hasty activation of otherwise 
normal emotions. Thus many functions appear in populations along a spec­
trum. In the case of behaviors such as organizing, cleaning, double-check­
ing, some people have weak motivators (people who routinely forget things 
and don't care about being disorganized); most have normal motivators of 
varying degree (from carefree to fastidious), and some have strong moti­
vators (and those people we say have OCD). Likewise with hallucination: 
some people have no capacity for it, some have a normal capacity for it in 
varying degrees (further modulated by their culture), and some have an 
overriding capacity for it (and become disabled by schizophrenia). Those 
in the middle are called 'normals' or 'neurotypicals'. 
from the gods: John Hanson, 'Dreams and Visions in the Graeco-Roman World and 
Early Christianity', Aufstieg und Niedergang der r(Jmischen Welt II 23 (New York: 
W. de Gruyter, 1980), pp. 1395-1427 and William Harris, Dreams and Experience in 
Classical Antiquity (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2009). 
162. The role of hallucination in world religion is discussed from both a historical 
and scientific perspective in John Horgan, Rational Mysticism: Dispatches from 
the Border between Science and Spirituality (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 2003): 
Robert Buckman, Can We Be Good without God? Biology. Behavior, and the Need 
to Believe (Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 2002)ਗ਼ Eugene D'Aquili and Andrew 
Newberg, Why God Won't Go Away: Brain Science and the Biology of Belief (New 
York: Ballantine, 2001); and Eugene D'Aquili and Andrew Newberg, The Mystical 
Mind: Probing the Biology of Religious Experience (Minneapolis. MN: Fortress 
Press, 1999); Pascal Boyer, Religion Explained: The Evolutionary Origins of Religious 
Thought (New York: Basic Books, 2001); and Joseph Giovannoli, The Biology of 
Belief How our Biology Biases our Beliefs and Perceptions (Rosetta Press, 2000). See 
also: William James, The Varieties of Religious Experience: A Study in Human Nature 
(London: Longmans, Green, 1902), with Charles Taylor, Varieties of Religion Today: 
William James Revisited (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2002); and Ernst 
Arbman, Ecstasy, or Religious Trance, in the Experience of the Ecstatics and from the 
Psychological Point of View (3 vols.; Stockholm: Bokf6rlaget 1963-70). For surveys of 
the modern science of hallucination generally, see later note (e.g. Sacks, etc.). 

4. Background (Christianity) 
127 
Normals can hallucinate when exposed to triggers. The most common 
of which is sleep paralysis (where normals hallucinate at the threshold 
between being asleep and awake); but the most familiar are pharmaceuti­
cals (many drugs induce hallucination, including several that were not only 
available in antiquity but known in antiquity), while the most culturally 
transmitted are trance behaviors.163 Extreme fatigue, heat, illness, fasting, 
grief and sleep or sensory deprivation ('incubation') can all induce halluci­
nation in normals. And by the time of Christianity, cultural practices had 
long developed to intentionally trigger hallucination, including fasting and 
sensory or sleep deprivation, but more typically rhythmic prayer or chant­
ing or the use of music or dance to induce an ecstatic state (Paul alludes to 
singing and prayer as likely trance-inducing behaviors in his congregations 
in 1 Cor. 14.12-15; see also Acts 16.25; Eph. 5.19; and Col. 3.16; which 
might suggest also dance, as in other cultures whirling or spinning are 
known triggers). Fasting (i.e., starving) is also attested within the church. 164 
But with increasing experience, a normal can hallucinate more easily, with 
minimal use of triggers, depending on their biological propensity.165 Such 
trance-inducing behaviors had already become a standard feature of Jewish 
religion by the time Christianity began.166 
163. On sleep paralysis and hallucination (from which many UFO abduction 
claims originate, for example), see Bruce Bower, 'Night of the Crusher: The Waking 
Nightmare of Sleep Paralysis Propels People into a Spirit World', &ience News 168 
(July 9, 2005), pp. 27-29; and A. Mavromatis, Hypnagogia: The Unique State of 
Consciousness between Wakefulness and Sleep (London: Routledge, 1987). For my 
own experience with this phenomenon see Carrier, 'Spiritual Body', in Empty Tomb 
(ed. Price and Lowder), pp. 184-88. I assume the reader is already well enough familiar 
with the ability of natural chemicals to induce hallucination as well (from cannabis 
and hemp to ergot and mushrooms), but for that and other causes see Oliver Sacks, 
Hallucinations (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 2012). 
164. Mt. 9.15; Mk 2.18-20; Lk. 5.33-35 (also, e.g., 2.37; 18.12); Acts 13.2-3; 14.23; 
27.21-23; I Cor. 1.5; 2 Cor. 6.5; 1 1.27. On early Christian visionary tradition and its 
possible link to rituals of fasting see Andrew Lincoln, 'The "Philosophy" Opposed in 
the Letter [to the Colossians]', in The New Interpreter's Bible: New Testament Survey 
(ed. Fred Craddock; Nashville, TN: Abingdon Press, 2005), pp. 242-47. 
165. For my own experience with this see Richard Carrier, Sense and Goodness 
without God: A Defonse of Metaphysical Naturalism (Bloomington, IN: AuthorHouse, 
2005), pp. 11-14. 
166. See Alan Segal, 'Religiously-Interpreted States of Consciousness: Prophecy, 
Self-Consciousness, and Life After Death', Life after Death: A History of the Afterlife 
in the Religions of the West (New York: Doubleday, 2004), pp. 322-50; and Alan Segal, 
'Heavenly Ascent in Hellenistic Judaism, Early Christianity and their Environment', 
Aufstieg und Niedergang der riJmischen Welt 11.23.2 (New york: W. de Gruyter, 1980), 
pp. 1333-94; and James Tabor, Things Unutterable: Paul's Ascent to Paradise in its 

128 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
In fact, normals with a high propensity for hallucination have been iden­
tified as schizotypal, meaning they hallucinate nearly as easily as schizo­
phrenics do but are not so prone to it as to be disabled. A schizotypal is 'a 
relatively well-adjusted person who is functional despite, and in some cases 
even because of, his or her anomalous perceptual experiences'.167 Hallu­
cination in schizotypals in fact has been shown to reduce their anxiety 
and thus has a positive personal function. In modern cultures a prevalent 
hostile attitude toward hallucinatory behavior still often drives schizotyp­
als to become loners (because they are characterized as weirdos or insane 
and there is no recognized place for them), but in cultures that embrace 
hallucinators we see the opposite. For example, where we find cults that 
socially integrate schizotypals or even elevate them to positions of leader­
ship, we find that schizotypals begin to congregate and socialize.168 In fact, 
Greco-Roman, Judaic, and Early Christian Contexts (Lanham, MD: University Press 
of A me rica, 1986 ). 
167. Gordon Claridge and Charles McCreery, 'A Study of Hallucination in Normal 
Subjects', Personality and Individual Diferences 2 (November 1996), pp. 739-47; see 
also Gordon Claridge, 'Schizotypy and Schizophrenia', in Schizophrenia: The Major 
Issues (ed. Paul Bebbington and Peter McGuffin; London: Heinemann Professional, 
1988), pp. 187-200; Gordon Claridge (ed.), Schizotypy: Implications for Illness and 
Health (New York: Oxford University Press, 1997); and: L.C. Johns et a/ 
.. 'Prevalence 
and Correlates of Self-Reported Psychotic Symptoms in the British Population', British 
Journal of Psychiatry 185 (2004), pp. 298-305; and Maurice M. Ohayon, 'Prevalence 
of Ha11ucinations and their Pathological Associations in the General Population'. 
Psychiatry Research 97 (December 27, 2000), pp. 153-64; Charles McCreery and 
Gordon Claridge, 'Healthy Schizotypy: The Case of Out-of-the-Body Experiences', 
Personality and Individual Diferences 32 (January 5, 2002), pp. 141-54; C.A. Ross, S. 
Joshi and R. Currie, 'Dissociative Experiences in the General Population', American 
Journal of Psychiatry 147 (1990). pp. 1547-52; Richard Benta11, Gordon Claridge and 
Peter Slade, 'The Multi-Dimensional Nature of Schizotypal Traits: A Factor Analytic 
Study with Normal Subjects', British Journal of Clinical Psychology 28 (1989), pp. 
363-75; T.B. Posey and M.E. Losch, 'Auditory Hallucinations of Hearing Voices i n  375 
Normal Subjects', Imagination, Cognition and Personality 3 (1983), pp. 99-1 13. See 
also Arbman, Ecstasy. 
168. See S. Day and E. Peters, 'The Incidence of Schizotypy in New Religious 
Movements'. Personality and Individual Differences 27 (July 1999), pp. 55-67; Mike 
Jackson and K.W.M. Fulford, 'Spiritual Experience and Psychopathology', Philosophy, 
Psychiatry, and Psychology 4 (1 997), pp. 41-65 (with discussion, same issue, pp. 
66-90); Roland Littlewood, 'From Elsewhere: Prophetic Visions and Dreams among 
the People of the Earth', Dreaming 14 (June-September 2004), pp. 94-106; Felicitas 
Goodman, Jeanette Henney and Esther Pressel, Trance, Healing, and Hallucination 
(New York: Wiley, 1974). On culture making the difference between isolation vs. 
integration of schizotypals: Richard Castillo, 'Trance, Functional Psychosis, and 
Culture', Psychiatry 66 (Spring 2003), pp. 9-21. On schizotypals gaining leadership 
roles in contemporary cults see Figge, 'Spirit Possession', and Wittkower, 'Spirit 

4. Background (Christianity) 
129 
culture determines how easily and frequently even normals will halluci­
nate, as well as how accepted and revered schizotypals will be.169 Modern 
'first world' cultures are actually profoundly atypical among world cultures 
in stigmatizing and suppressing hallucinatory tendencies.l7° As scientific 
observers have concluded, 'the folk theory of visions and voices adopted 
by a culture may be important in determining whether a hallucination is 
viewed as veridical or as evidence of insanity', which in turn greatly affects 
the commonality and acceptance of hallucination within a population.171 
Accordingly, in antiquity, where schizotypals would routinely be 
regarded as prophets and holy men (and not seen as insane, as they are in 
modern cultures), we can expect schizotypals will actually gravitate into 
religious cults that socially integrate them or even grant them influence and 
status. The availability of niches of strong social support for schizotypals 
would explain why in antiquity there were few reported cases of psychosis 
(and why hallucination was not regarded as a major index of insanity except 
when wholly crippling or conjoined with fever), and why miracles and 
visions (not just Christian and Jewish, but pagan as well) were so frequently 
reported and widely believed to be genuine. Obviously schizotypals would 
prefer the company of people who take them seriously. As a result, they 
will tend to be found in religious movements that did not originate within 
the governing elite (where Greek ideals of scientific rationalism largely 
prevailed). In fact, we should expect the leaders and originators of revela-
Possession', with Alexander Moreira-Aimeida, Francisco Lotufo Neto and Bruce 
Greyson, 'Dissociative and Psychotic Experiences in Brazilian Spiritist Mediums', 
Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics 16 (2007), pp. 57-58. 
169. See Bruce Bower's excellent summary article on all of this in 'Visions for 
All', Science News 181 (April 7, 2012), pp. 22-25, which summarizes the state of the 
latest research on normal hallucination in religious communities, especially in light 
of its recent examination by Tanya Luhrmann in When God Talks Back (New York: 
Alfred A. Knopf, 2012). See also Ethan Watters, Crazy Like Us: The Globalization of 
the American Psyche (New York: Free Press, 2010), for evidence of the fact that many 
'mental illnesses' are socially constructed, and often what is 'insane' in one culture is 
welcomed as 'normal' in another, often without detriment. 
170. See my discussion in Carrier, 'Spiritual Body'. in Empty Tomb (ed. Price and 
Lowder), pp. 184-88. This is also discussed in Goodman. Henney and Pressel, Trance, 
Healing, and Hallucination. 
171. Peter Slade and Richard Bentall, Sensory Deception: A Scientific Analysis 
of Hallucination (Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1988), pp. 69-108 
(80). See also Leonard Zusne and Warren Jones, Anomalistic Psychology: A Study 
of Extraordinary Phenomena of Behavior and Experience (Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum 
Associates, 1982); Fred Johnson, The Anatomy of Hallucinations (Chicago: Nelson­
Hall, 1978); and the recent popular summary of the science of hallucination in Sacks, 
Hallucinations. 

1 30 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
tory movements such as Christianity to have commonly been schizotypal. 172 
After all, where else would we find them? 
And yet even non-schizotypals can become regular trance hallucinators 
within cults and cultures that encourage and develop their capacities in this 
regard. Even in hostile cultures (like our own), normals find themselves 
hallucinating with remarkable frequency, particularly within the context 
of religious assumptions and expectations (Christians hallucinate Christ; 
Buddhists hallucinate Buddha), and psychological priming (UFO enthusi­
asts hallucinate encounters with aliens; the bereaved hallucinate encoun­
ters with the recently deceased). 173 In cultures that encouraged, rewarded 
and facilitated this phenomenon, normals would be even more prone to 
hallucinate, and their hallucinations would even more closely conform to 
priming, anchoring, suggestion and cultural framing.174 I have elsewhere 
172. For example, schizotypals appear to have held positions of respect or authority 
in both Bacchic and Jewish fringe sects of the time: Joan Taylor, Jewish Women 
Philosophers of First-Century Alexandria: Philo's 'Therapeutae' Reconsidered (New 
York: Oxford University Press, 2003), pp. 339-40 (which becomes especially poignant 
i n  light of the work of Evan Fales on St. Teresa: see later note). See also Harry Angus 
Alexander Kennedy, St Paul and the Mystery-Religions (London: Hodder & Stoughton, 
1913), pp. 31-67, and scholarship cited in a previous note (e.g. E.R. Dodds, etc.). 
173. Phj])ip Wiebe, Visions of Jesus: Direct Encounters from the New Testament to 
Today (New York: Oxford University Press, 1997); John Cornwell, The Hiding Places 
of God: A Personal Journey into the World of Religious Visions, Holy Objects, and 
Miracles (New York: Warner Books, 1991); C. Green and C. McCreery, Apparitions 
(London: Hamish Hamilton, 1975); Katharine Holden and Christopher French, 'Alien 
Abduction Experiences: Some Cues from Neuropsychology and Neuropsychiatry', 
Cognitive Neuropsychiatry 7 (2002), pp. 163-78; W.D. Rees, 'The Hallucinations of 
Widowhood', British Medica1Journal4 (1971), pp. 37-41; Vaughan Bell, 'Ghost Stories: 
Visits from the Deceased', Scientific American Online (December 2, 2008), http:// 
www.scientificamerican.com/article.cfm?id=ghost-stories-visits-from-the-deceased. 
See also Nicholas Spanosa, Cheryl Burgessa and Melissa Faith Burgessa, 'Past-Life 
Identities, UFO Abductions, and Satanic Ritual Abuse: The Social Construction of 
Memories', International Journal of Clinical and Experimental Hypnosis 42 (1994), 
pp. 433-46. 
174. As one can learn from reference works in psychology: priming is where recent 
exposure (even subconsciously) to ideas, words, images and other perceptual context 
will influence what is hallucinated; anchoring is when someone focuses on particular 
concepts (such as a set of expectations or things they were told) and then all subsequent 
memories and perceptions are anchored to that focus (hallucinations can thus become 
structured by and around that anchor); suggestion is where something a respected 
friend or leader says you remember or experience becomes in fact what you remember 
or experience (and people are highly susceptible to suggestion when in a trance 
state); and cultural framing is the obvious effect of one's upbringing and background 
knowledge and expectations structuring what one hallucinates (e.g. in antiquity 
people routinely hallucinated journeying up through seven levels of heaven, because 
culturally that's how everyone believed the cosmos was organized). Cultural framing 

4. Background (Christianity) 
1 3 1  
discussed the anthropology of prophets and how their deepest, most rev­
erent plans or desires will manifest in their visions, as will solutions to 
cognitive dissonance. In fact, there I also discuss how the esteem in which 
hallucinators were held could easily inspire motivated leaders to pretend to 
be schizotypa1.175 This is ironic, as in our culture we would expect people 
to pretend not to be schizotypal, as being such is stigmatized rather than 
esteemed. But this only illustrates how very different ancient culture was 
from our own, a fact we must take into account when explaining the origins 
of Christianity. At any rate, this anthropological fact entails the first apos­
tles may have only pretended to have visions and spirit communications, 
although we lack the kind of data we would need to distinguish pretense 
from reality in their case.176 
Among the ways that social pressures and constructs can mold collec­
tive hallucination and limit hallucinatory content, social hierarchy and haz­
ard is a major factor relevant to cults like Christianity.177 If acceptance in 
does not prevent innovative ideas from appearing in hallucinations, not only because 
of the other factors that can be overriding (priming, anchoring and suggestion), but 
also because halJucinations can be highly desire-driven: to resolve certain anxieties 
or cognitive dissonance, or to express certain creative thoughts, revisions to the status 
quo can even be what someone wants most to hallucinate, and so they will (e.g. if ever 
it became socially or politically important that there be only four heavens, a percipient 
might hallucinate that and report it as confirmation that previous beliefs had been 
wrong, or were even the cause of social problems the percipient wants most to solve). 
For some of the conditions under which hallucination is facilitated and guided, and its 
susceptibility to suggestion and cultural framing, in both normals and schizotypals, 
see Alfred Heilbrun Jr, 'HaiJucinations', in Symptoms of Schizophrenia (ed. Charles 
Costello; New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1993), pp. 56·91 . 
175. See Carrier, Not the Impossible Faith, pp. 259·96, and 'Burial of Jesus', in 
Empty Tomb (ed. Price and Lowder), pp. 387·88 (and notes there on p. 392). 
176. But for an anthropologically informed defense ofthat possibility, see Evan Fales, 
'The Road to Damascus', Faith and Philosophy 22 (2005), pp. 442-59, supported by the 
referenced discussions in the preceding note, and by Evan Fales, 'Scientinc Explanations 
of Mystical Experiences, Part I: The Case of St. Teresa', Religious Studies 32 (1996), pp. 
143-63; and Evan Fales, 'Scientific Explanations of Mystical Experiences, Part II: The 
Challenge to Theism', Religious Studies 32 (1996), pp. 297-313; and Evan Fales, 'Can 
Science Explain Mysticism?', Religious Studies 3S ( 1999), pp. 213-27. Note that Fales 
believes pretense might not even be required, that persons can convince themselves that 
they have seen or heard what they claim, or that their own inner thoughts and feelings 
can legitimately be described in terms of seeing and hearing more substantive things 
than mere thoughts and feelings. Sometimes no distinction was made between dreams 
and waking visions (e.g. compare the Greek text of Longus, Daphnis and Chloe 2.8.4 
with I Cor. IS.S-8). See William Harris, Dreams and Experience in Classical Antiquity 
(Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2009). 
177. The following points derive from the analyses of Goodman, Henney and 
Pressel, Trance. Healing. and Hallucination (on Shaker and other modern cults) 

132 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
a group requires shared experience and affirmation of shared beliefs and 
perceptions, people will be inclined to hallucinate what the group expects 
(or even claim to have done so, when in fact they didn't).178 Thus 'mass 
hallucination' occurs in various cults not in the sense that everyone objec­
tively hallucinates exactly the same thing, but in the sense that everyone 
subjectively hallucinates what they believe is the same thing. And that can 
occur when a whole congregation simultaneously engages trance-indue-
and other studies of hallucination in social and religious contexts. See also Carrier. 
'Spiritual Body', in Empty Tomb (ed. Price and Lowder), pp. 194-95. 
178. It's much more difficult to scientifically study pretenders, but we know enough 
in psychology to confirm that people do engage in conforming behaviors, arguably far 
more often than hallucinatory behaviors, so this wiJI also have been a factor in early 
Christianity, no less than in any other cult in history. This means actual hallucination 
is often not even necessary. Many members of a cult will claim to have seen or heard 
things, when in fact they didn 't, and pretend to go along, because (a) they want to 
belong (and this is the only way to fulfill their desire to fit in), or they need the benefits 
the community provides (such as food, shelter, love, companionship), or (for reasons 
of dysphoria or dissonance outside the cult) they want to believe its claims are true 
because they are ultimately comforting (such as giving their lives hope or meaning that 
they did not previously have), or they want the power and influence that being a revered 
spiritual leader affords them (if they can be adequately convincing and also effective 
at winning support). These psychological motivations can be quite powerful, and have 
certainly been documented to compel people to engage in conforming behavior in other 
contexts, so it can surely happen in this context as well. These members will pick up all 
the social cues and simply agree with everyone, to both fit in and convince themselves. 
which if sustained can even alter their memory so that they honestly believe they saw 
or heard things they didn't (or else they will delusionally refuse to acknowledge, even 
to themselves, that they didn't). 
On these and other psychological features of cults see Christopher Partridge (ed.). 
UFO Religions (New York: Routledge, 2003); Marc Galanter. Cults: Faith, Healing. 
and Coercion (New York: Oxford University Press, 1989); and Marc Galanter. 
'Cults and Charismatic Group Psychology', in Religion and the Clinical Practice 
of Psychology (ed. Edward Shafranske; Washington, DC: American Psychological 
Association, 1996), pp. 269-96; Philip Zimbardo and Robert Vallone (eds.), Persuasion. 
Coercion, Indoctrination and Mind Control (Lexington, MA: Glenn Custom. 1983): 
Leon Festinger, Henry Riecken and Stanley Schachter, When Prophecy Fails: A Social 
and Psychological Study of a Modern Group That Predicted the Destruction of the 
World (Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press, 1956); also relevant are the 
more general analyses of the psychology of belief: Robert Cialdini, Influence: The 
Psychology of Persuasion (New York: William Morrow, 1993); Richard Petty and 
John Cacioppo, Attitudes and Persuasion: Classic and Contemporary Approaches 
(Dubuque, lA: William C. Brown, 1981); and Muzafer Sherif and Carl Hovland, Social 
Judgment: Assimilation and Contrast Effects in Communication and Attitude Change 
(New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1961). On the relevant memory science (and 
how we can change and fabricate our own memories through suggestion, habituation 
and wishful thinking), see scholarship cited in Carrier, Proving History, P· 322 n. 104. 

4. Background (Christianity) 
133 
ing triggers and a common experience is sought-perhaps at the behest of 
a charismatic leader anchoring everyone to the same experience through 
the power of suggestion. They don't check every detail, because if they 
report the same things in rough outline, then the differences (if any are 
even reported) will be overlooked (as a result of our innate tendency toward 
verification bias) or even adopted by others through memory contamina­
tion, such that experiences are remembered as even more similar the more 
they are discussed. This contamination can occur even during the process 
of hallucination, as what one member, especially an anchoring leader, says 
then influences others to have the same experience. These effects will man­
ifest when hallucinating subjects are pressured or socialized to conform 
to the group (or desire to so conform) and when what one 'experiences' in 
trance states is regarded as a major test of such belonging, as was the case 
in earliest Christianity.179 
This role of social pressure can also set constraints based on social hier­
archy. In modern Shaker cults, for example, if in your visions and hal­
lucinations of heavenly beings you claim Jesus Christ appeared to you, 
this is understood as claiming apostolic election-you are claiming God is 
choosing you for leadership status within the church. If the existing leader­
ship hierarchy or even members of the congregation do not agree with this 
appointment, whether out of disapproval or envy (or simple practicality: not 
everyone can be in charge), they would accuse the person of lying or hav­
ing been misled by a false or deceiving spirit (a tactic we know the earliest 
Christians employed).180 If enough members and leaders backed this play, 
the person would either have to recant, be exorcised or expelled. 
The mere knowledge that this can happen (plus the understanding of the 
hardships and responsibilities that attend even successfully becoming an 
apostle) thus suppresses hallucinations of Jesus. Members will consistently 
hallucinate other beings instead (or only ever report having done so), sim­
ply to avoid conflict or denunciation (or to avoid a missionary or leadership 
role altogether). We should expect this same social phenomenon in the orig­
inal church, which is why only apostles 'saw the Lord', as that is what it was 
to be an apostle: to be one whom the Lord chose to reveal himself (1 Cor. 
9.1; 15.5-8; Gal. 1.11-12; note how Gal. 1.8 indicates that revelations from 
lesser divinities couldn't make one an apostle). This also explains why their 
number was limited. The Lord might still communicate to lower ranking 
members through intermediaries (angels and benevolent spirits), but you 
dare not claim to have 'seen the Lord' unless you were ready to fight (and 
179. So I John 4; Gal. 1.6-12; I Thess. 5.19-24; 2 Cor. 13 and 10.3-6; I Timothy 6; 
2 Thess. 2.1I; 1 Tim. 4.1 and 2 Tim. 3.5. 
180. For evidence of Christians 'thought-policing' themselves in just this way: 
Carrier, Not the Impossible Faith, pp. 385-406. 

1 34 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
were likely to win) the ensuing socio-political battle for acceptance as an 
apostle (a status Paul had to labor greatly to achieve for himself, as revealed 
in Galatians 1-2). 
A II of this provides considerable background support to what sev­
eral scholars have already argued: that the origin of Christianity can be 
attributed to hallucinations (actual or pretended) of the risen Jesus. The 
prior probability of this conclusion is already extremely high, given the 
background evidence just surveyed; and the consequent probabilities 
strongly favor it as well, given the evidence we can find in the NT.181 Chris­
tian fundamentalists are really the only ones who do not accept this as 
basically an established fact by now. But it is important to acknowledge the 
broader point as well, that Christian leaders, and many congregants, were 
either schizotypal or normal trance-induced hallucinators (or pretended to 
be), and they routinely engaged in hearing voices and seeing visions from 
heaven (or pretended to), and moreover regarded anything their subcon­
scious mind hit upon during an ecstatic state as an inspired communication 
through the holy spirit. 182 
There are many reasons not to trust Acts as a faithful record of much that 
went on in the early church (as I'll show in Chapters 7 and 9), but it may 
contain hints and reflections of historical reality, as in the case of speak­
ing in tongues: a real phenomenon widely practiced in the church, but in 
Acts so mythologized that at best only the skeletal core of the story can be 
trusted, not any of the details. Just as in this case, we also have confirma­
tion in Paul that Christian leaders and congregants regularly hallucinated 
visions and voices; so when we find similar reports in Acts we can expect 
this reflects, and thus confirms. the same underlying reality, such that some 
181 . See Jack Kent, The Psychological Origins ofthe Resurrection Myth (London: 
Open Gate, 1999); James Crossley, 'Against the Historical Plausibility of the Empty 
Tomb Story and the Bodily Resurrection of Jesus', Journal for the Study of the Historical 
Jesus 3 (June 2005), pp. 171-86; Michael Goulder, 'The Baseless Fabric of a Vision', 
in Resurrection Reconsidered (ed. Gavin D'Costa; Oxford: Oneworld Publications, 
1996), pp. 48-61 ; and Michael Goulder, 'The Explanatory Power of Conversion 
Visions', in Jesus ' Resurrection: Fact or Figment: A Debate between William Lane 
Craig and Gerd Ludemann (ed. Paul Copan and Ronald Tacelli; Downers Grove, IL: 
InterVarsity Press, 2000), pp. 86-103. For an argument supporting this conclusion from 
the overall nature of how Christianity began and developed see Carrier, 'Christianity's 
Success Was Not Incredible', in End ofChristianity (ed. Loftus); and from the evidence 
for the 'resurrection' specifically: Carrier, 'Why the Resurrection Is Unbelievable', in 
Christian Delusion (ed. Loftus). 
182. On the belief that one's intuition can have the authority of the Holy Spirit (a 
belief held by many Jews and Christians) see Jn 14.26; Wis. 9.13-18; Dan. 2.19-22; and 
Exodus 31; see Philo, On the Giants 19-27, for an attempt at supplying an underlying 
theory. 

4. Background (Christianity) 
135 
of these reports might derive from the skeletal core of a true story, and 
even those that don't (but are instead wholly fabricated to suit the author's 
purpose) still likely reflect a phenomenon in general that was familiar to 
the author and his Christian readers. 
Thus, in Acts 2, we see the entire church hallucinating floating tongues 
of fire and then babbl ing in tongues in a mass ecstatic trance. In Acts 7, 
in the middle of the Sanhedrin court, Stephen halluci nates Jesus floating 
up in the sky, but no one else there sees it. In Acts 9, Paul hallucinates a 
booming voice and a beaming light from heaven (and suffers hysterical 
blindness as a result); and Ananias hallucinates an entire conversation with 
God. In Acts 10, Cornelius hallucinates a conversation with an angel, and 
Peter falls into a trance and hallucinates an entire cosmic dinner scene in 
the sky. In Acts 16, Paul hallucinates a revelation of a man who tells him 
where to travel (this story probably drawing in one way or another on Paul's 
own mention of receiving such a revelation in Gal. 2.2). In Acts 27, Paul 
hallucinates a conversation with an angel. Many Christians receive spirit 
communications ('prophesy'), as indicated in Acts 19.6 and 21.9-10-and 
Acts 2.17, which quotes Joel 2.28-3 1 as being fulfilled in the church: ' I  will 
pour out my Spirit upon all flesh, and your sons and your daughters shall 
prophesy, and your young men shall see visions, and your old men shall 
dream dreams'. 
Paul confirms this general picture first-hand. In Gal. 1 . 1 1-12, Paul says 
he learned the gospel only from a hallucinated encounter with Jesus (a 'rev­
elation') whom he experienced 'within' himself (Gal. 1 .16). He confirms 
this in Rom. 16.25-26, where Paul says, 'My gospel and the preaching of 
Jesus Christ is according to a revelation'. 183 The other apostles received 
their information from revelations as well. 'Unto us', Paul says (meaning 
the apostles), 'God revealed [the secrets of the gospel] through the Spirit' 
(1 Cor. 2.10). And in 1 Cor. 1 5.1-8 Paul says, 'the gospel I preached' (which 
in Galatians and Romans he confirms came only by revelation) is the same 
gospel Peter and the others preached (this is the whole gist of Galatians 
1 and 2: see discussion in Chapter 1 1), who also experienced special iso­
lated visions of the Christ just like Paul's, which again was the qualifying 
requirement to be an apostle (1 Cor. 9.1: 'Am I not an apostle? Have I not 
seen Jesus our Lord?'). In Gal. 2.2, Paul mentions having another revelation 
that gave him instructions on where he should go and what he should do, as 
if there were nothing remarkable about this, indicating he had revelations 
often, and his congregants accepted this as normal. 
Likewise, in Rom. 12.6, Paul says Christians in all congregations 'have 
gifts differing according to the grace that was given to us; if it be proph-
183. On the authenticity of this passage. see following note. 

136 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
ecy, let us prophesy according to the proportion of our faith' (and Paul 
indicates that these prophets were communicating with spirits, which 
were under the prophet's control: 1 Cor. 14.19-32). Thus, in 1 Cor. 1 1.4-5, 
Paul sets rules for 'every man praying or prophesying' in the churches 
and 'every woman praying or prophesying', and in 1 Corinthians 14, Paul 
sets rules to prevent a problem arising in the church of so many people 
describing their hallucinations and spirit communications and speaking 
in tongues that they were talking over one another (on hallucinations in 
particular: 1 Cor. 14.26, 30). 
In 1 Cor. 12.10, Paul elaborates on the gifts the holy spirit had given 
members of the church, and they include 'to some, prophecy; to others, 
the discerning of spirits; to another the power of speaking in tongues; and 
to another the interpretation of those tongues'. In 1 Cor. 12.28, Paul ranks 
the members of the church in order of authority: 'God has set some in the 
church, first apostles, secondly prophets, thirdly teachers, then those with 
powers [he most likely means exorcists], then charismatic healers, then 
aids, administrators, and speakers in tongues', indicating a whole gamut of 
behaviors in the church that make original Christianity even more similar 
to modern cults engaged in the same (see also Eph. 1.17; 3.2-5; 4.11; and 
Hebrews 2). The ability to 'discern spirits' meant an intuitive (they would 
say 'inspired') judgment of whether a spirit communicating with a member 
is of God or the Devil, which further confirms the frequency of auditory 
hallucinations (and the readiness with which 'intuition' was interpreted 
as divinely inspired). We see this in 1 Thess. 5.20, where Paul says they 
should not shun prophesying in the church but test the spirits that commu­
nicate with them (see also 1 Jn 4.1-5.13, e.g., 'do not believe every spirit that 
communicates with you').184 
In 2 Corinthians 12, Paul says he and others have many glorious 'visions 
and revelations of the Lord', and among these he includes hallucinated trips 
to heaven where the hallucinator hears and sees strange things, much like 
the entire book of Revelation, which is a veritable acid trip, an extended 
hallucination of the bizarrest kind, an example of the kind of thing going on 
all the time in the early churches (even despite the fact that that particular 
example is probably wholly fabricated). Paul then goes on to relate in that 
same chapter a whole two-way conversation he had with God, demonstrat­
ing that he not only heard voices but conversed with them; he also says he 
experiences an 'abundance of revelations' (2 Cor. 12.7). And in 1 Cor. 14.6, 
Paul says 'what use am I to you, unless I speak to you by way of a revela-
184. I discuss this reliance on inspired thoughts, visions and spirit communications 
in forming beliefs in the early church in Carrier, Not the Impossible Faith, pp. 385-406. 
See also Hanson, 'Dreams and Visions', pp. 1421-25. 

4. Background (Christianity) 
1 37 
tion, or knowledge [gn6sis, meaning spiritual knowledge], or prophesying, 
or teaching?' which entails hallucination was both respected and expected 
of him; it was also desired and sought after in the church among all the 
congregants (I Cor. 14.1, 'earnestly desire these spiritual gifts', and I Cor. 
14.12, 'you are eager for them'). 
Similarly, the fact that Christians regarded as inspired scripture such 
books as Daniel, which depict authoritative information coming from God 
through both visions and dreams, entails that Christians believed authori­
tative information came from God through visions and dreams (otherwise 
they would not deem such books as honest or reliable, much less scripture). 
They could therefore see their own visions and dreams as communications 
from God, too. Thus, even if books such as Revelation are fabricated, as 
symbolic discourses on the times, they still represent themselves as genuine 
hallucinatory experiences. As Rev. 1.1-2 says, the whole book describes: 
the revelation of Jesus Christ, which God provided to show to his ser· 
vants what must soon take place, and he made it known by sending his 
angel to his servant John, who bore witness to the word of God and to the 
testimony of Jesus Christ, even to all that he saw. 
Which means even as a fabrication this book stil1 demonstrates the esteem 
with which even the wildest hallucinatory experiences were held, which 
were believed so fervently to be genuine experiences that an author could 
gain authority for what he was writing by claiming to have hallucinated it. 
This is a radically different cultural context than we live in now. 
As we'll see in the next chapter (Element 29), earliest Christianity can 
be characterized as a revitalization movement. It is thus notable that 'trance 
behavior\ including the regular mission-oriented hallucination among 
leaders and members, 'looms large in the descriptive data of most of the 
revitalization movements known from the historical and the ethnographic 
record', which movements also frequently practice glossolalia, prophesy, 
'faith healing', possession and exorcism. 185 Earliest Christianity thus per­
fectly aligns with known anthropological models, and can only be under­
stood in that context. 
Element 16: The earliest Christians claimed they knew at least some (if not 
all) facts and teachings of Jesus from revelation and scripture (rather than 
from witnesses), and they regarded these as more reliable sources than 
word-of-mouth (only many generations later did Christian views on this 
point noticeably change). As Paul says in Rom. 16.25-26: 
185. Goodman. Henney and Pressel, Trance, Healing, and Hallucination, p. 351. 

138 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
My gospel and the preaching of Jesus Christ (is] according to the revela­
tion of the mystery which was kept secret for long ages. but now is made 
visible through the prophetic scriptures and is made known to all nations. 
according to the command of the eternal God, for the obedience offaith.1R6 
And in Galatians 1 he swears up and down, repeatedly, that he did not learn 
the gospel from oral tradition, but revelation alone, thus iJiustrating the 
order of values: he and his congregations respected revelations far more 
than human traditions (see Chapter 1 1 ,  §§2 and 6). 187 
That some teachings and sayings of the Lord came by reve1ation, not 
from a living Jesus, has been noted before.188 The entire book of Revelation 
establishes this happened: not only in that book do new teachings come 
from a (supposedly) hallucinated Jesus, but this imaginary Jesus even dic­
tates entire letters (Rev. 1 .17-3.22). Paul's belief that Jesus preached that 
we can abandon the Torah law and still be saved likewise came to him 
by revelation (as Galatians 1-2 establishes: see Elements 19 and 20). Paul 
even credits his knowledge of the inauguration of the Eucharist meal (what 
Jesus said and did on that occasion) as coming to him directly 'from the 
Lord', which means the content of 1 Cor. 1 1.23-27 was learned in a vision 
(see Chapter 1 1, §7). Otherwise he would cite his actual authority (who­
ever it was who told him of this), and not 'the Lord', since otherwise it's 
obvious the words to follow come from the Lord, so that would not have 
to be stated unless to indicate that that's where Paul learned of them (as he 
says: '/received this from the Lord', not someone else). Paul likewise says 
in Rom. 16.25-26 that Jesus' kɤrygma, the 'message he preached', came 
by revelation. In Rom. 8.2, Paul says 'Jesus Christ will reveal these things 
to you, that I speak truly. He is the mouth altogether free from falsehood. 
by which the Father has truly spoken', which confirms that people often 
received communications from Jesus via revelation (even if indirectly: i.e .. 
through intuited feelings attributed to the holy spirit, or visions or pro­
phetic messages communicated through angels or subordinate spirits), and 
no one thought this was unusual or inferior to any other source. To the 
contrary, Paul's argument in Galatians 1 entails Christians had the opposite 
186. I am, of course, presuming the authenticity of this passage (as I shall continue 
to do): see Chapter 7 (§7). It may be of the Pauline school rather than by Paul himself 
(since much the same is said in Eph. 3). But as such it would still represent the thinking 
of Pauline Christianity. Its sentiments are well enough corroborated elsewhere in 
Paul's writings (see Element 15). 
187. I further demonstrate this aspect of early Christian 'faith-based' epistemology 
in Carrier, Not the Impossible Faith, pp. 281-85 and 385-406 (with support in pp. 329-
68). 
188. Se੖ e.g., D.E. Aune, 'Christian Prophecy and the Messianic Status of Jesus·. 
in The Messiah (ed. Charlesworth), pp. 404-22. 

4. Background (Christianity) 
139 
view: that information derived by revelation was more authoritative and 
trustworthy than any human tradition (again, see Chapter II, §§2 and 6). 
Thus, Paul frequently rests on the authority of things Jesus said, and yet 
in 2 Cor. 13.3 he says 'you desire proof that Christ is speaking in me' (per 
Gal. 1.16) which entails he received at least some of these teachings of Jesus 
through revelation-and some among his congregations dared question if 
he really had or if they were really coming from Jesus, rather than a false 
spirit. Confirming this is the fact that in I Cor. 14.37, Paul says his rules of 
order for the commotion in the church (of a mass of people talking over and 
interrupting one another announcing revelations, prophesying, speaking in 
tongues, and interpreting them: see Element 15) are 'a command of the 
Lord' (in contrast to occasions where he says he has no command of the 
Lord to cite: e.g. 1 Cor. 7.25). But it is very improbable that a living Jesus 
would have foreseen the complex discipline problem going on in Paul's 
churches, so as to have pronounced rules for it (long before the problem 
ever existed or even could have existed), and it is clear no one at Corinth 
had heard of these rules before; because they were newly created to deal 
with the occasion-yet, Paul says, they should obey them, because 'the 
Lord commands it'. Paul was therefore still receiving teachings from the 
celestial Jesus. 
And of course anything Jesus taught after his 'resurrection' (and indeed 
the very fact of his resurrection) came to the earliest Christians by rev­
elation. This is confirmed by I Cor. 15.1-8, where the 'gospel' that Paul 
'received' and 'preached' came by revelation, not a transmitted human tra­
dition, and that the risen Jesus only 'appeared' in visions to everyone just 
as to himself. The first point is confirmed by identical wording: 'I would 
have you know, brethren, that the gospel I preached . . .  I did not receive 
it from a man, nor was I taught it, but it came through a revelation of Jesus 
Christ' (Gal. 1.1 1-12), which corresponds to, 'I would have you know, 
brethren, that the gospel I preached . . . I delivered to you in the first place 
what I also received' (1 Cor. 15.1, 3). No other conclusion is possible: the 
facts following this declaration are the very facts he claims to have learned 
only by revelation (even if on different occasions), and those facts are 'that, 
according to the scriptures, Christ died for our sins, and that he was buried, 
and that, according to the scriptures, he rose again on the third day, and that 
he appeared' to various apostles at various times (1 Cor. 15.4-8). I'll discuss 
this further in Chapter 1 1  (§§2 and 4). 
Paul always assumes there was no difference between the Lord's appear­
ance to him and the Lord's appearances to others (Paul makes no distinc­
tion in 1 Cor. 9.1, where 'seeing the Lord' makes you an apostle, with no 
special status being imagined for those who saw the Lord in any way other 
than he did), and he never has to make any apology for it being otherwise 
(he simply assumes everyone accepts that his authority is equal to any other 

140 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
apostle's: see Chapter 1 1, §2). And this conforms to natural probability (i.e., 
it is vastly more likely that these appearances were hallucinated, in reality 
or pretense, than that anyone actually rose from the dead). Above al1, the 
sequence of appearances in I Cor. 15.5-8 entails singular, isolated events 
that lasted only briefly. Clearly Jesus was not hanging around during it all. 
He appeared only momentarily, to one or another apostle or group, and then 
others had to await another event to see him. This is explicit when Paul says 
Jesus appeared 'at the same time' only once to a large number of brethren, 
but not on any other of the occasions listed. This fits hallucinatory encoun­
ters, not a leader alive again rallying his followers. 
A II of the above confirms that some Christians could claim to know 
some teachings by and things about Jesus by revelation. But second to this, 
some facts about and teachings and sayings from the Lord were known by 
finding them 'hidden' in scripture. Again, Paul said that 'my gospel and 
the preaching of Jesus Christ' does not just come from revelations but is 
also 'now made visible through the prophetic scriptures' (Rom. 16.25-26). 
Accordingly, Paul says we must resort to the scriptures to 'teach us' things 
about Jesus (Rom. 15.3-4), and that we should not 'go beyond' the scrip­
tures in our claims about Jesus (I Cor. 4.6). In Rom. 1.1-6, Paul says 'the 
gospel' of Jesus was written 'beforehand through the prophets in the holy 
scriptures'. And thus, of course, it is outright stated in Jn 20.9 that 'they 
knew not the scripture, that he must rise from the dead' and in Lk. 24.25-27 
and 24.44-47, where Jesus declares that 'everything written about me in the 
law of Moses and the prophets and the psalms must be fulfilled' such that 
when you understand the scriptures properly you will see 'it is written that 
the Christ should suffer and on the third day rise from the dead, and that 
repentance and forgiveness of sins should be preached in his name to all 
nations' (essentially what Paul himself means in Gal. 3.1). 
Such statements suggest that when Paul says in 1 Cor. 15.3-4 that 'accord­
ing to the scriptures' Jesus died for our sins, was buried and rose on the third 
day, he might not mean these things happened in accordance with prophecy, 
but that in fact the scriptures are where we learn ofthem. The same exact 
phrase 'according to x' is how sources were cited in antiquity (e.g. 'accord­
ing to Herodotus, the Greeks defeated the Persians'). Thus Paul appears to 
be saying what Jesus is made to say in Luke, that these facts are learned 
about Jesus from the scriptures, and that extracting that information from 
the scriptures requires proper divine inspiration (Lk. 24.45). Thus Rom. 
16.25-26 could be saying that a hallucinated Jesus taught Paul (and other 
apostles) exactly what the risen Jesus teaches them in Luke 24: that certain 
facts about him can be found in the scriptures, and how to find them. 
I do not claim to have proved that point here, but only to have established 
its plausibility, from all the remaining evidence (likewise in the next ele­
ment). Fully confirming that plausibility is the fact that pre-Christian Jews 

4. Background (Christianity) 
141 
were already doing this. They, too, were finding Աhidden messages' in the 
scriptures and thereby learning 'facts' about their present reality and God's 
plans and deeds.189 The entire pesher genre was devoted to that very thing 
(see Element 8; and for an example, Element S). lf Jews were already doing 
this in droves before Christianity, and then Christians suddenly appeared 
preaching that they, too, had found 'secret messages' in the Bible, we must 
concJude they may well have been getting their information from the Bible, 
in the very same way other Jews were. In other words, we cannot declare 
this to be too improbable to propose. Because there is sufficient background 
evidence to lend it credence. Likewise claiming revelation as a source of 
information. That is clear from the book of Revelation, for example, but 
again from Jewish precedent, where revelation was a routine source of 
information about earthly and heavenly beings and events and God's plan 
for them. Like the Ascension of Isaiah discussed in Chapter 3 (§I), and the 
book of Daniel, and the Enochic literature (which the earliest Christians 
regarded as scripture). 
The precedent is thus well established. A living, earthly Jesus was sim­
ply not the only available source for receiving sayings and teachings from 
and about him. 
Element 17: The fundamental features of the gospel story of Jesus can be 
read out of the Jewish scriptures. The influence of the OT on the NT has 
been much written on, 190 but here I mean to say that this fact, in conjunction 
with the evidence of previous elements (e.g. the pre-Christian pesher litera­
ture, Christian claims to have found hidden information in the scriptures, 
etc.), makes it plausible to ask whether the gospel was actually discovered 
and learned from the scriptures, rather than the scriptures being consulted 
after the fact as a merely defensive reinforcement for key claims Christians 
were making supposedly on other grounds. For this point it's enough to 
illustrate how easy it would have been to do this, even beyond what was 
already shown in Element 6.191 
189. Aune. ·christian Prophecy'. 
190. For example. G.K. Beale and D.A. Carson (eds.), Commentary on the New 
Testament Use of the Old Testament (Grand Rapids, Ml: Apollos. 2007)θ Craig Evans 
(ed.), From Prophecy to Testament: The Function of the Old Testament in the New 
(Peabody, MA: Hendrickson Publishers, 2004); Steve Moyise (ed.), The Old Testament 
in the New Testament (Sheffield: Sheffield Academic Press, 2000): John Court (ed.), 
New Testament Writers and the Old Testament: An Introduction (London: SPCK, 
2002); Stanley Porter (ed.), Hearing the Old Testament in the New Testament (Grand 
Rapids, Ml: William B. Eerdmans. 2006). 
191. See also Earl Doherty, Jesus: Neither God nor Man (The Case for a Mythical 
Jesus) (Ottawa: Age of Reason, 2009), pp. 83-96. 

142 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
As I've already noted, the Wisdom of Solomon declares that the wicked 
wi11 'condemn to a shameful death' the holiest man of God (which in the 
first century would entail a crucifixion, in contrast to an honorable death 
like decapitation), because they are 'blinded by their wickedness' and 'do 
not know the secret purposes of God' (Wis. 2.20-22; compare 1 Cor. 2.7-9); 
this righteous man they kill will be the 'son of god' (Wis. 2.18), who criti­
cizes the current religious order and promotes strange teachings (Wis. 2.12-
16); those who kill him will scorn and reject him, and mock him during his 
torture and execution, saying surely God will come to rescue him (which, 
to an interpreter looking for hidden connections, links this text with the 
same man in Ps. 22.7-8, which Psalm is heavily drawn upon to construct 
the crucifixion scene in Mark 15: see Chapter 10, §4); and this righteous 
man will be killed but then restored to life and exalted by God to stand 
again and judge those who killed him (Wisdom 5). 
Earlier I demonstrated the links some Jews had likely made between 
the 'messiah' killed in Daniel 9 and the 'righteous servant' killed in Isa­
iah 52-53 (Element 5). The 'righteous man and son of God' killed in 
Wisdom of Solomon (who is, like the innocent righteous man killed in 
Isaiah, scorned and rejected of men, executed, and then exalted by God) 
could easily have been linked to the same network of passages and thus 
believed to have been prophetical of the same messiah, which then (as 
just noted above) ties into that network also Psalm 22, which gives us the 
three-day cycle: first Psalm 22, execution and mockery (v. 16 even imply­
ing crucifixion specifically, especially in variants known at Qumran); 
then Psalm 23, burial and sojourn among the dead (the funeral psalm); 
and then Psalm 24, ascension and exaltation 'on the first day of the week', 
where the very same unusual phrasing found in Mk 16.1 is found in Ps. 
24.1 in the LXX (thus Mark is clearly quoting, and therefore alluding to, 
that Psalm), which altogether gives us the entire gospel spelled out by 
Paul in 1 Cor. 15.3-4.192 
Tying all of this in to Isaiah is what gives us the strongest evidence of 
this: the particular, and peculiar, concept of this messiah dying 'for our sins' 
(which notion is only reinforced by linking this to Dan. 9.24, which would 
then imply the same thing). The relevant material in Isaiah describes an 
itinerant preacher whose beautiful feet walk the land 'bringing the gospel' 
and 'announcing salvation' (lsa. 52.7). This preacher God 'will reveal' to all 
nations, but possibly only through an elect few (52.10, using apokalypsei, the 
term for revelation; that he is revealed only to an elect few, and then reported 
to others, is implied in 53.1; just as Clement appears to have thought of 
Jesus: see Chapter 8, §5). This preacher is 'God's servant' ('God's child' 
192. See Proving History, pp. 131-34 and 139-41, and Carrier, 'Spiritual Body', in 
Empty Tomb (ed. Price and Lowder), pp. 158-61. 

I 
r -
؏ 
. v 

·
ϣ­
i. 
4. Background (Christianity) 
143 
in the Septuagint) who will 'deal wisely and be exalted and raised up very 
high' (52.13) even though he will be 'despised, and rejected of men, a man of 
sorrows, and acquainted with grief' (53.3). In fact, 'he has borne our griefs 
and carried our sorrows' (in the Septuagint 'he bears our sins and suffers for 
us') and though we thought he was being punished by God (53.4), in fact 'he 
was wounded for our sins, he was bruised for our iniquities' or even pierced 
for our iniquities in some pre-Christian manuscripts (see note in Element 9). 
Indeed, 'with his stripes we are healed' (53.5) because 'the Lord gave him 
up for our sins' (53.6; the word is paradidomi in the Septuagint, identical to 
the word often translated as 'he was betrayed' in I Cor. 1 1.23, even though 
referring to exactly the same event, his being delivered up to die for our 
sins; and likewise this is the same word used for that event throughout the 
Gospels: see Chapter 1 1, §7). Explicitly, he is killed even though innocent, 
and killed specifically 'because of the sins' of God's people (53.8-9), for God 
'shall make his life an offering for sin' (53.10) because he 'bears their sins' 
(53.11). And this servant wi11 then be exalted by God and his days prolonged 
(and also in reward he shall be shown the light of understanding, receive an 
inheritance, and divide all spoils with the mighty) 'because he poured out 
his life unto death, and was numbered with the transgressors, yet bore the 
sin of many, and made intercession for the transgressors' (53 .1 1-12) That a 
later second temple Jew would readily take to mean he would be resurrected 
(as the only obvious way you can die yet be rewarded for this death with a 
prolonging of your days, and receiving wisdom and inheritance and spoils, 
is to be made alive again). All just from Isaiah 52-53. Connecting this to 
the nearly identical figure described in the Wisdom of Solomon would only 
make this all the more obvious, likewise the figures in Psalms 22 and Daniel 
9 and 12 (as well as Zechariah 3 and 6). 
All of this is not itself a proof that Christians did find every key element 
of their gospel by scouring scripture for secret messages, producing their 
gospel like a pesher (with assistance from 'revelations' and ecstatic 'inspi· 
ration'). But the evidence above is sufficient to establish that they could 
have. The usual claim, of course, is that Christians sought out Isaiah 53 
after the fact (and all scholars agree it was a key text employed by Chris­
tians as a prophecy of their Christ), and not as inspiration (i.e., finding the 
passage first, and then concocting a savior to match). But we don't really 
know it was the one and not the other (see Element 16). Prior to any specific 
evidence either way, the one is as likely as the other. The ease with which 
we can produce the Christian gospel solely by constructing a messianic 
pesher out of the OT scriptures (and other scriptures the Christians used) is 
therefore something we must include in our background knowledge . 
Element 18: Jesus Christ was regarded as having fulfilled (and thereby 
replacing) by his death the two greatest annual sacrifices in the Jewish reli-

144 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
gion, Passover and Yom Kippur (see Element 10), and thereby had replaced 
the temple as a relevant religious institution (see Element 28). 
Passover celebrated the Jews' rescue from death, which began their 
exodus from Egypt to the Promised Land (Exodus 12). The angel of death 
'passed over' their houses, sparing their Jives, on account of the blood 
of the sacrificed lamb (or goat: 12.5) smeared across their door frame 
(sides and crossbeam}, whose flesh they also ate in communal household 
meals (12.7-13, 22-23). The Passover sacrifice was kil1ed and eaten 'in 
the night' (12.6, 8), just as the Eucharist was (1 Cor. 11 .23-26), and many 
commentators have noted the similarities between them (see Chapter 1 1 , 
§7). Yom Kippur cleansed the whole congregation of Israel of all its sins 
for one year, and so this sacrifice had to be repeated every year to main­
tain its salutary effect (Lev. 16}, and in between various lesser sacrifices 
had to be performed for specific sins committed since the last general 
atonement. That atonement sacrifice, procuring a general forgiveness of 
sins, was called the Day of Atonement (Lev. 23.27). Two goats were cho­
sen and lots were cast (Lev. 16.7-10), choosing one to 'carry the sins' of 
Israel and be driven into the wilderness (16.8- 10, 21-22), while the other 
was killed and its blood sprinkled on the altar to atone for Israel's sins 
(16.15-16, 30-34). 
Paul declared that 'Christ is our Passover sacrifice' (I Cor. 5.7) and 
therefore God will 'pass over' our sins (Rom. 3.25; see also evidence 
in Element 43), while at the same time preaching that Christ was the 
definitive atonement sacrifice (and therefore the definitive Yom Kippur).19·1 
Hebrews 9 lays this out in detail (see Chapter 1 1, §5). Although Paul is not 
its author and its date is disputed (see Chapter 7, §3), nevertheless, Paul 
clearly taught this, too, frequently saying Jesus' death atoned for all sins 
once and for all (1 Cor. 1 5.3; Gal. 1.4; 3.13; 2 Cor. 5.18-19; Rom. 3.24-26; 
5.6-1 1), which was the function of the Yom Kippur sacrifice (except that 
that had to be repeated every year, whereas Christ's was final, for reasons 
explained in Hebrews). Thus the earliest gospel combined the two major 
Jewish rituals of salvation: from death (as the angel 'passed over' the 
households protected by the lamb's blood) and from all other wages of 
sin (the annual cleansing of Israel's sins by the ritual ofthe goats at Yom 
193. 1 Corinthians 5 implies the Lord's Supper is the Passover, which would mean 
the role of 'remembrance' in 1 Cor. 11.23-26 is intended to reflect the same role of 
remembrance in Exod. 12.14, and therefore I Cor. 11.23-26 also confirms that Christ's 
death was understood as a Passover sacrifice (the body of both sacrifices was eaten to 
procure salvation from death, and both involve a ritual use of the blood from the same 
body being eaten: see Chapter 11, §7). And of course the Gospels unanimously link 
the two. 

4. Background (Christianity) 
145 
Kippur), thereby connecting atonement with salvation and eternal life. 
(Further reason why the death of Jesus was connected with Passover and 
not just Yom Kippur is provided in Element 43, which shall more directly 
survey the Jewish background.) 
Per Element 10, the earliest known Christian 'gospel' preached that 
Jesus' death had atoned for all sins and procured salvation for all adher­
ents. Christians therefore had no need for the Jewish temple or any of its 
rituals, which existed for the purpose of maintaining a conduit to God and 
cleansing Jews of their sins (e.g. Lev. 4 and 16). Christians now had their 
own conduit to God (Jesus Christ 'in us') and were permanently cleansed 
of all sins (by Jesus' death) and therefore had no need of priests to act as 
intermediary. Accordingly, as the Epistles make clear, priests had no more 
role to play in Christian worship, communion with God, or salvation. 
Therefore, a distinguishing element of the earliest Christian sect of 
Judaism was that Christians themselves are now the temples of god (Gal. 
6.14-17) and thus God dwells in them (I Cor. 3.16; 6.19; 2 Cor. 6.16). Like­
wise Eph. 2.19-22 and 3.16-19 and 1 Peter 2 (e.g. 'like living stones be your­
selves built into a spiritual house, to be a holy priesthood, to offer spiritual 
sacrifices acceptable to God through Jesus Christ', I Pet. 2.5). In the words 
of the earlier redaction of the letter of Ignatius to the Ephesians (15.3), 'Let 
us do all things as those who have Him dwelling in us, that we may be His 
temples, and He may be in us as our God, which indeed He is, and wil1 
manifest Himself before our faces'. And as Clement of Alexandria would 
later put it, 'This is in reality righteousness: not to desire other things, but 
to wholly be the consecrated temple of the Lord.'194 Indeed, the Eucharist 
meal would have brought God into oneself by actually consuming (symbol­
ically) the body of his appointed Lord, in whom God's spirit resided Uust 
compare I Cor. 1 1.23-27 with 10.16-22). 
Because God now dwelled in each person, then he did not dwell only in 
the holy of holies as mainstream Judaism held. And if all one's sins were 
thereby cleansed, there was no need of further rituals or sacrifices. There 
was therefore no need of priests or the temple. Replacing not just Yom Kip­
pur but also Passover, the two great temple sacrificial rituals, was essential 
to accomplish that end (see Element 43), and had the obvious connotation of 
not just procuring forgiveness of sins (the role of Yom Kippur) but procur­
ing salvation from death (the role of Passover). Which two facts completed 
the Christian system of salvation. 
]94. Clement of Alexandria, Miscellanies 4.25. This was a logical progression in 
ancient cultic thinking, from an occasional to a permanent state ofholiness (see Carrier 
Not the Impossible Faith, P· 137), and from a proximate to a direct communion with 
God: see Carrier, 'Spiritual Body', in Empty Tomb (ed. Price and Lowder), pp. 145-47. 

146 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
7. Elements of Christian Development 
Element 19: The apostle Paul is the earliest known Christian writer, yet 
he did not know a 1iving Jesus but was converted by revelation some time 
after Jesus is said to have died, and did not begin writing anything we know 
of until many years after his conversion (Galatians, e.g., was written about 
seventeen years after: 1 .18; 2.1 ). 
Element 20: (a) The earliest known Christians proselytized Gentiles but 
required them to convert to Judaism. (b) Paul is the first known Christian to 
discard that requirement (having received a special revelation instructing 
him to), and he had to fight the earl iest known leaders of the cult for accept­
ance of that radical idea. (c) But some books in the NT are from the sect 
that did not adopt this innovation but remained thoroughly Jewish (most 
obviously Matthew, the letters of John and James, and Revelation). 
Most scholars concede this. The primary evidence is Galatians 1-2, 
and supporting that is the fact that in his extended defense of this novelty 
in Romans, Paul is unable to cite the authority of a historical Jesus even 
once (see, e.g., Rom. 14. 14).195 This entails that if Jesus lived, then he never 
taught anything other than a Jewish re1igion for Jews, and countenanced 
admitting only those Gentiles who first became Jews through circumcision 
and adherence to Torah law (such as Jewish dietary requirements and Sab­
bath observance, although possibly all rituals pertaining to the temple had 
been replaced by the cult paid to Christ: e.g. see I Jn 2.3-4 vs. 5. 16), as such 
a procedure for converting Gentiles was already in accordance with Torah 
law (Exod. 1 2.48). 
Element 21: (a) Paul and other NT authors attest that there were many rival 
Christian sects and factions teaching different gospels throughout the first 
century. In fact, evidence of such divisions and disagreements date as far 
195. See Alan Segal, 'Conversion and Messianism: Outline for a New Approach', 
in The Messiah (ed. Charlesworth), pp. 296-340; W.D. Davies, 'The Jewish Sources of 
Matthew's Messianism', in The Messiah (ed. Charlesworth), pp. 494-5 11; David Sim, 
The Gospel of Matthew and Christian Judaism: The History and Social Setting of the 
Matthean Community (Edinburgh: T. & T. Clark, 1998); and my discussion of this same 
point in Carrier, Proving History, pp. 170-72. The Pseudo-Pauline letters of Ephesians 
(3.3-12) and Colossians (1.24-29) also report that Paul originated this innovation. The 
original sect survived for a few centuries but never significantly grew; for example, 
Epiphanius, in Panarion 29, discusses a sect called 'the Nazoreans', which we know to 
have been the original name for the Christians (Acts 24.5੘ Jerome, Letters 1 12.13), 'who 
confess that Christ Jesus is Son of God, but all of whose customs are in accordance 
with the [Torah] Law' (on these Christians see Chapter 8, §1). 

4. Background (Christianity) 
147 
back as extant records go. Yet we know very little about these other versions 
of Christianity (and in some cases nothing at all). And (b) of these only a 
few amalgamated sects survived the process of competition to remain in 
the Middle Ages, and those sects controlled nearly all choices as to what 
texts to preserve into the present, and which texts to ignore or abandon; 
and for the former, they also had complete custody of those texts for over a 
thousand years of hand-copying and editing.196 
Of course Paul mentions factions sometimes advocating one apostle's 
teaching over another, and argues Christians should accommodate them all 
and not make divisions. Paul names himself, Apollos and Cephas [Peter] 
(1 Cor. 1 . 12; 3.4-22), although supposedly Paul and Apollos regarded them­
selves as teaching roughly the same thing (1 Cor. 4.6; 16.12), and Paul and 
Peter came to a somewhat uneasy detente, with Peter accepting Paul's inno­
vative Torah-free gospel and Paul accepting Peter's continuing adherence 
to a Torah-observant gospel (Galatians 2). But Paul also frequently refers 
to gospels of Jesus Christ so alien to his own that they must be declared 
anathema and shunned (Gal. 1.6-10; 2 Cor. 11.4-15; Rom. 16.17-18) and 
many other NT texts likewise allude to various early Christian sects being 
condemned (but almost never described).197 
We therefore cannot simply assume surviving texts report what was nor­
mative for the original or earliest sects of Christianity. There is a great deal 
we just don't know, and we have to factor that ignorance into our reasoning, 
as many scholars have pointed out.198 The epistles written during the first 
generation of Christians (from the 30s to the 60s CE) reveal a highly frag­
mented church already from the earl iest recorded time, rife with fabricated 
new gospels and teachings effectively beyond the control of any central 
authority. And if this much divergence had already occurred in Paul's gen­
eration, the amount of divergence in later generations would have been 
even greater. There is no guarantee that all the beliefs originally touted by 
Paul, for example, would even be those to survive the ensuing competition 
among rival factions. We already know (per Element 20) that the teachings 
196. This last point hardly needs defense, but does require qualification: there are 
comparatively few exceptions of texts ( I )  preserved by Jews and Muslims, but none 
of those both date prior to the fourth century and pertain (in any direct sense) to the 
origins and development of Christianity; and (2) recovered archaeologically (e.g. in 
papyri, inscriptions, coins), but almost none of those pertain (in any direct sense) to 
the origins and development of Christianity, while those that do are extremely few, 
extremely sparse in content, and late (mid-second century at the earliest, and most 
much later). 
197. For example, Heb. 13.8-9; 2 Thess. 2.2-15; I Tim. 1.3-7; 4.1-16; 2 Tim. 3.5; Tit. 
3.9; 1 Jn 2.18-26 and 4.1; 2 John 7; 3 John 9-10; Jude 3-4, 8-16; 2 Pet. 1.15-21 ; 3.16; Rev. 
2.2, 6, 14, 15, 20; Acts 20.29-30; Mk 13.22; Mt. 7.15-23; 24.11, 24; etc. 
198. See my discussion ofthis problem in Carrier, Proving History, pp. 129-34. 

148 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
of the original apostles did not survive that competition (Jewish Christian­
ity stagnated and died out, and we have almost no texts from it). And we 
know the teachings of even 'orthodox' Christianity in the second century 
deviated considerably from the simpler faith taught by Paul (for whom there 
was no trinity, e.g., nor was Jesus identical to God; and a great deal else 
besides). And yet the 'orthodox' Christianity of that century was no more 
likely to be closer to original Christianity than any of the countless other 
sects its adherents deemed 'heretical', and we can easily see how incredibly 
diverse and bizarre they were. 199 (See my definitions in §3.) 
Thus, if Christian sectarian divergence was already considerable in the 
early first century, and very considerable in the following century, we must 
assume it was somewhere in between in the late first century, which entails 
there must have been quite a lot of practically unknown divergence and 
development in that period, far more even than indicated in the letters of 
Paul for the generation preceding it. 
Element 22: (a) We have no credible or explicit record of what happened 
within the Christian movement between 64 and 95 CE (or possibly even 
as late as 1 10 cE). And (b) unlike almost any other cult we might consider 
for comparison, we know the leadership of the Christian church had been 
catastrophically decimated by the beginning of that period. 
Given that Acts is not a paragon of reliability (see Chapter 9) one might 
doubt whether we even have a reliable record of what went on before 64 
(the 'authentic' letters of Paul [see Chapter 7, §3] would then be all we 
really had, and they all date generally to a single late decade, that of the 
50s). Likewise, the evidence of ecclesial events for the whole three or 
four decades after 95 is not what one would characterize as robust, either. 
Indeed, the fact that 1 Clement was written in 95 is really a traditional date 
and not actually secured by any trustworthy evidence; in fact, I am fairly 
certain it was written in the 60s (see Chapter 7, §6, and Chapter 8, §5). But 
even if we set all that aside and look on what we have with as rosy a view 
as we can stomach, then we can still say that nothing we have says anything 
about what happened between 64 (the year of the Neronian persecutions 
as reported in Tacitus and Suetonius) and 95 (the year that 1 Clement was 
'traditionally' written). This is effectively a dark age in the early church, a 
thirty-year black box in which we can't reconstruct what happened. In fact 
199. See, e.g., David Brakke, The Gnostics: Myth, Ritual, and Diversity in Early 
Christianity (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2010); and Marvin Meyer, 
The Gnostic Discoveries: The Impact of the Nag Hammadi Library (San Francisco, 
CA: HarperSanFrancisco, 2005). A lot of this weirdness was already catalogued by 
the early third century: Tertullian, Prescription against Heretics; Irenaeus, Against 
Heresies; Hippolytus, Refutation of All Heresies. 

4. Background (Christianity) 
149 
we can barely reconstruct what happened in the ten years either side of that, 
which makes for fifty years (half a century) of largely untracked develop­
ment within the movement. Back then, that was an average human lifetime. 
Even texts that may have been written in that thirty-year zone (like per· 
haps some of the Gospels) do not discuss any developments or events in 
that period. The only record of events in the church that has any chance 
of being other than fictional comes centuries later (since wildly implausi­
ble hagiographies and legends in the interim are hardly credible: see, e.g., 
discussion in Chapter 8 of Papias and Hegesippus, §§7 and 8). And that is 
only the succession of bishops recorded in Eusebius, which is devoid of 
any historical information but the names and offices. Such succession lists 
are typically untrustworthy anyway, as gaps in succession lists (such as 
for philosophical schools) were always intolerable and thus would be filled 
by fabrication if necessary, and Eusebius exhibits a reliance on unreliable 
sources for his list (e.g. Hegesippus), which only confirms our suspicions.200 
In contrast, in the sources we have before Eusebius tried to smooth things 
over, we see much less certainty about what happened. For example, the 
inconsistent lists of apostles scattered across the four Gospels demonstrates 
that 'by the time the gospels were composed, which disciples belonged to 
the twelve was no longer known', and thus fundamental facts about the 
cult's own history and leadership had been lost already in the course of the 
first century.201 This was surely the one detail that should have been easily 
and consistently remembered for generations, unless some major disrup· 
tion in the cult's traditions had occurred. Instead, already by the second 
half of the first century the leadership council of 'the twelve' (if such there 
was) no longer existed and left no identifiable heirs, and no one could even 
remember who all was on it, or even what had happened to them. Indeed, 
for most of them there are no historical accounts at all, beyond very late and 
obviously fabricated legends, and for the rest, the accounts we have (such as 
in Acts) either assume or establish their early deaths, or don't seem aware 
of what happened to them at all (see Chapters 8 and 9). 
By contrast, we have a lot of scattered information about the people, 
events and schisms within Christianity in the middle and later decades of 
the second century-but near total silence for the thirty to fifty years of 
the latter first to early second century. Acts presents us with a 'history' 
of the church movement from its origins in the 30s to around 60 or 62 
CE (although still omitting a great deal; e.g. it says almost nothing about 
Egyptian or North African Christianity, or Christianity east of the Empire, 
200. Eusebius, History of the Church 3. 
201. Robert Funk, 'Do the Gospels Contain Eyewitness Reports?', in Finding the 
Historical Jesus: Rules of Evidence (ed. Bernard Brandon Scott; Santa Rosa, CA: 
Polebridge, 2008), pp. 31-39 (38). 

1 50 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
or even Christianity in Italy and points west; it tells us little about the rival 
factions of Christianity, such as that of Apollos; etc.). But oddly nothing 
else like this was ever again produced for over two centuries-unless, of 
course, Acts is as bogus as the many apocryphal 'Acts' generated in the sec­
ond century (see Element 44; and Chapter 7, §5), and if that's the case, then 
we don't really even have the history of the church to the year 62. Because 
apart from Acts we have only the letters of Paul, al1 produced during the 
end of that same period (the last authentic Jetter of Paul is unlikely to date 
much later than where Acts ends). 
The only thing we next hear is that the Neronian persecution wiped out 
Christianity at Rome, possibly after Rome burned in 64 CE.202 Although no 
Christian ever recorded any information about this event; it is known (even 
to medieval Christian writers) only through Tacitus, which suggests either 
the story is a fiction or that the event produced a rather complete destruction 
of all Christian witnesses at Rome.203 And then the Jewish War between 
66 and 70 cE wiped out Christianity at Jerusalem, home of the original 
church (Gal. 1.18; 2.1 ). 204 Again, no Christian record of what happened to 
any Christians or their churches in Judea during this event was ever made 
(at least none known to us), suggesting again a rather thorough eradication. 
A decade or two before that (most likely around 47 cE), a famine had also 
ravaged the Middle East, the main proving grounds of Christian evange­
lism at the time, which would also have considerably reduced the normal 
life expectancy of the church membership, especially its leaders, insofar as 
leadership always tended to be elderly.205 Though it's possible some of the 
202. Tacitus, Annals 15.44 (which claims perhaps hundreds were captured and 
confessed to arson and executed). Although that might have suffered interpolation (sec 
following note), Suetonius, Nero 16.2, corroborates a Neronian purge of Christianity­
unless that, too, is an interpolation, although by the second century, Christians 
certainly believed Nero had purged the Christian leadership at Rome (in apocryphal 
Christian legend, Nero executed Peter and Paul and their peers at Rome. as told in the 
Acts of Peter and the Acts of Paul). We have no conclusive evidence of any Christians 
surviving this. 
203. Of course, if this event never happened (and I suspect it didn't: see Chapter 
8, §10), then we are even more in the dark about the fate and progress of Christianity 
at Rome. 
204. Josephus, Jewish War 6.420-34 and book 7 relates the destruction of Jerusalem 
and its inhabitants. 
205. Acts 1 1.27-30; Josephus, Jewish Antiquities 20.50-53; it may have lasted 
several years and affected even the food supply of the city of Rome: Suetonius. Life 
ofClaudius 18; Dio Cassius, Roman History 60. 11.1-5. On Christianity's slow growth 
in this period (vs. exaggerated numbers in Christian propaganda) see Carrier, Not the 
Impossible Faith, pp. 407-48. There were probably of course additional persecution 
events (in this early period mostly led by Jewish authorities) that we should also add as 
factors increasing mortality beyond the average. Although we mustn't exaggerate that 

4. Background (Christianity) 
1 5 1  
leadership escaped all these events, we actually have no evidence any did. 
From 60 to 95 all (authentic) letter writing within the church ceases for the 
whole thirty years (a chilling sign), and no one writing after that period 
(Clement of Rome? See Chapter 8, §5) indicates that anyone survived those 
events. Certainly neither Peter nor Paul nor any other apostle from their 
time is known to have survived beyond the year 70. 
There are some claims to be found that the disciple John survived into 
the second century, but Eusebius reveals this to be mistaken, as that John 
was often being confused with a different and later John.206 The odds are 
already hundreds or even thousands to one against anyone having lived 
from the early 30s CE into the reign of Trajan (c. 100 CE), as was being 
claimed of John (and that only in unreliable sources many generations 
later). In fact, life expectancy in the ancient world was already short, even 
in times of plenty, much less when a massive war, persecution and famine 
are added to further cull numbers. 207 
Even in the best of times, no more than one in three people made it to 
55 or above. Yet if anyone started in the apostolate at, for example, age 15 
in the year 30, they would be 55 in the year 70. And it is far more likely 
the first apostles were in their 20s or 30s, not teenagers, which would make 
them around 65 or 75 in the year 70. Teenagers would have incredible dif­
ficulty earning the respect or deference of those in their 20s or 30s, much 
less of elder folk, and therefore would be ineffective as evangelists. So it is 
very unlikely the first apostles were of teen age. Indeed, such a thing would 
be so remarkable it could not have failed to have been remarked upon in 
the sources we have. Yet only one in five teenagers would reach age 65, 
and barely one in twenty would make it to age 75-and that's without wars, 
famines and persecutions reducing their survival rate. Factor those in, and 
we can expect none of the original 'twelve' (if I Cor. 15.5 is to be trusted) 
will have made it much beyond the year 75 (to which age the chances of a 25 
year-old surviving are one in eight in normal conditions). Combine these 
factor: see Candida Moss, The Myth of Persecution: How Early Christians Invented a 
Story of Martyrdom (New York: HarperOne, 2013). 
206. Read Eusebius, History of the Church 3.23 in light of his more critical 
observations at 3.39. 
207. On this and following statistical remarks I follow the data provided in T.G. 
Parkin, Demography and Roman Society (Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University 
Press, 1992), p. 144. You can see some calculations for survival odds at http://www. 
richardcarrier.infollifetbl.html ('Estimated Life Expectancy in the Ancient World'). If 
John was around 15 when he was made an apostle, he would be around 85 by the year 
100, which has a probability of survival less than 1 in 200; if John was 25 at the start, 
then he would be 95 by year 100, which would have odds of thousands to one against; 
the odds only decline exponentially from there. And again, this is without factoring in 
the war, famine and persecutions. 

152 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
prior expectations with the lack of any reliable evidence of anyone so sur­
viving, and the silence of evidence against it (such as the complete absence 
ofletters or writings from, to, or about these or any other leaders composed 
in that period), and we must conclude that in all probability all the original 
leaders were by then dead. 
The significance of all this is that in that period (from 64 to 95 CE) we 
have no clear idea who was in charge or which churches they controlled or 
what schisms developed or what disputes arose or how they were resolved, 
or even whether they were resolved. We cannot know if the secret oral 
knowledge known to Paul and reserved for 'mature' members of the church 
was accurately or devotedly passed on-or if it was, to whom, or in what 
ways it was altered. And we cannot identify anyone who was in a position 
to prevent the development of novel interpretations and beliefs-even when 
Peter and Paul were still alive, the Epistles reveal their inability to prevent 
such schismatic developments (Element 21), so control of dogma must have 
been even less efficacious when no clear authority remained. And with no 
clear authority in control for thirty years-an entire generation-there is 
no limit to what can happen to an institution and its teachings, especially 
one built (at least in substantial part) on myths and secrets, two things that 
are the easiest to change (hence see Chapter 6, §7). 

5 
BACKGROUND KNOWLEDGE (CONTEXT) 
The previous chapter surveyed the background knowledge directly relating 
to the Christian religion (origins, beliefs and development) that we must 
take into account when evaluating any hypothesis regarding the historical 
existence of Jesus. This chapter will survey the most important background 
knowledge regarding the context in which Christianity began (political, 
religious and literary), as well as its most pertinent scientific and historical 
analogs. 
1 .  Elements of Political Context 
The origin of Christianity makes sense only within the peculiar political 
context that produced it, and in I ight of analogous movements throughout 
history.1 
Element 23: The Romans annexed Judea to the imperial province of Syria 
in 6 CE, bringing the center of the Holy Land under direct control of the 
Roman government, ending Jewish sovereignty over Jerusalem and the 
temple of the Most High God, along with most of the Holy Land that had 
been promised by God to the Jews. 2 
In fact, God had promised that the Jews would not only rule their own 
land, city and temple, but subjugate all peoples and rule the whole world as 
the chosen people of God (Zech. 14.9-18; Psalm 2), which was also a com­
mon feature of messianic belief(Eiements 3 and 4), one timetable for which 
1 .  See, in general, Richard Ascough, 'Historical Approaches', in Dictionary of 
Biblical Criticism and Interpretation (ed. Stanley Porter; New York: Routledge, 2007), 
pp. 157-59; with Stephen Hunt, 'Anthropology and Interpretation', in Dictionary (ed. 
Porter), pp. 12-14, and Stephen Hunt, 'Socio-Scientific Approaches', in Dictionary (ed. 
Porter), pp. 337-40. 
2. Jewish sovereignty was briefly returned to Herod Agrippa I by Emperor Claudius 
between 41 and 44 CE. But between 6 and 36 CE there was no evident prospect of this 
happening. and even when it did, it was so short lived as to be inconsequential. 

154 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
predicted this outcome was imminent (Element 7). The Roman annexation 
contradicted all of this, which would have inevitably produced cognitive 
dissonance between what Jews expected (the fulfillment of God's promise) 
and what happened (the Jews lost their sovereignty and became a subject 
people). The result was a permanent state of violent tension between the 
Roman occupation and Jewish rebellion that concluded in three devastat­
ing wars (against Nero in 66-70 CE, against Trajan in 1 1 5-117 and against 
Hadrian in 1 32-136) and countless smaller rebellions (beginning with 
Judas the Galilean in 6 cE), all of which the Jews consistently lost. 
Element 24: (a) Owing to their vastly greater resources (in materials, money 
and manpower) and superior technical ability (in the training, equipping 
and supplying of their armies) the Romans were effectively invincible and 
could never be expelled from Judea by force or diplomacy. (b) This fact 
was so empirically evident and publicly tested and demonstrated on such a 
wide scale that it had to have been evident to at least some Jews, even while 
many either didn't see it, denied it even when seen, or imagined celestial 
aid would redress the imbalance. 
In other words, the traditional messianic hope (of a conclusive military 
victory over all of Israel's neighbors) was a doomed hope, and that would 
have been obvious to at least some Jews. History would of course deci­
sively prove this, as messianic movements were either wiped out quickly 
(Element 4) or led to the utter defeat and destruction of Jerusalem and the 
entire Jewish polity (already in the Neronian War of the 60s; even more 
so in the subsequent wars under Trajan and Hadrian: Element 23). This 
had happened before, most infamously to both Carthage and Corinth in 
the same year (146 seE), which any educated observer would know about. 
In fact, up to the time Christianity began, Roman victory was always the 
outcome, without exception, for every nation that ever stood against any 
concerted Roman conquest and occupation. 
For example, even the infamous defeat of Varus by the Germans in 9 CE 
was decisively redressed by Germanicus only a few years later, illustrating 
the futility even of a victory against the Romans. This was a phenomenon 
so consistently repeated that it had already become a popular joke by the 
time of Christ, which is called even still a 'Pyrrhic victory', from the leg­
end, widely circulated in antiquity, that in the third century BCE the Greek 
upstart Pyrrhus had won his victories against the Romans at such cost that 
he declared 'one more victory and I'm done for' (or words to that effect), 
which prophecy was fulfilled in short order. After centuries of history 
repeating itself like this without fail, only a fool would bank on a future 
rebellion against the Romans having any other outcome. And though fools 
were always to be found, not all men are fools. 

5. Background (Context) 
1 55 
It would therefore be extremely improbable if no early-first-century Jews 
could foresee this {even if most, evidently, did not). Predicting this out­
come would have been all the easier for anyone aware of recent analogous 
events, from the fates of Carthage and Corinth to the early Jewish rebel­
lions described by Josephus, which were so quickly and easily suppressed 
that the reality must have become apparent to some. It would have been 
a simple matter to put two and two together: Roman military might plus 
Jewish military messianism equals the inevitable destruction of the Jews. 
Element 25: The corruption and moral decay of the Jewish civi I and temple 
elite {regardless of to what extent it was actual or merely perceived) was 
a widespread target of condemnation and often a cause of factionalizing 
among Jewish sects. This is evident throughout the narrative of Josephus 
regarding the causes and outcomes of the Jewish War, as well as in the lit­
erature recovered at Qumran (e.g. 4Q500), and in much of the apocryphal, 
apocalyptic and pseudepigraphical literature produced or popularized by 
first-century Jews.3 It is also a persistent theme in the Christian Gospels, 
which in that context do not seem aberrant in this respect but in fact typi­
cal.4 
Element 26: For many Jews in the early first century {in accord with the 
previous element) the Jewish elite became the scapegoats for God's failed 
promises (in accord with Elements 23 and 24): the reason God withheld 
their fulfillment (and instead allowed the Romans to rule) was imagined 
to be the Jewish elite's failure to keep God's commandments and govern 
justly (already a common theme throughout the OT, e.g., Jeremiah 23 and 
25, the latter being the very prophecy whose 'mystery' is decoded in Daniel 
to produce the timetable that was now indicating the messiah would arrive 
in the early first century: Element 7). God would come through only when 
all sin had ended and been atoned for {Dan. 9.5-24). 
The Dead Sea Scrolls, for example, repeatedly denounce the Jewish civil 
and temple elite as responsible for the evil that has befallen the land, in 
terms similar to those found in the Christian Gospels. And since the sins of 
the Jews are what kept God from holding back his promised judgment (as 
3. See, e.g., George Nickelsburg, 'First and Second Enoch: A Cry against 
Oppression and the Promise of Deliverance', in The Historical Jesus in Context 
(ed. Amy-Jill Levine, Dale C. Allison Jr and John Dominic Crossan; Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press, 2006), pp. 87·109. 
4. See. e.g .• Jonathan Klawans, 'Moral and Ritual Purity', in The Historical Jesus 
in Context (ed. Levine, Allison and Crossan), pp. 266-84 (which corroborates some of 
the following elements as well). 

156 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
explained in Jeremiah 23 and 25, and Daniel 9), any plan that would cancel 
those sins would be seen as removing that obstacle and thus ushering in 
God's promise. The fact that Daniel and Isaiah both connect the death of a 
messiah or savior with a final cancellation of lsrael's sins (see Elements 4 to 
7) thus would have made those texts of primary interest to any apocalyptic 
Jew. A messiah's atoning death (Elements 5, 10 and 18) therefore would 
have an obvious apocalyptic significance and function. The end of the 
world (and a fulfillment of God's promises) could not occur without some­
thing like it, and scripture was practically handing it to them (Element 17). 
Element 27: (a) The temple at Jerusalem was the central focus of most Jew­
ish messianic hopes (as, for the Samaritans, was Mount Gerizim), which 
entailed that as long as the 'corrupt' Jewish elite controlled it, God would 
continue Israel's 'punishment' (in accord with Elements 25 and 26); and 
as long as the Romans remained in power, they would maintain the cor­
rupt Jewish elite's control of the temple. Accordingly, (b) Jewish religious 
violence often aimed at seizing physical control of the temple and its per­
sonnel.5 
Element 28. A spiritual solution to the physical conundrum of the Jews 
would have been a natural and easy thing to conceive at the time. Those 
Jews who believed they could physically retake control of the temple nat­
urally pinned their hopes on military messianism (as exemplified by the 
Zealots and the Sicarii, and everyone who Jed actual rebellions against 
Rome, from Judas the Galilean to Bar Kochba). But if any Jews had real­
ized that such a reconquest was impossible (as some must, in accord with 
Element 24) but still sought a means to escape their cognitive dissonance 
(in accord with Element 23) without denying the evident facts or abandon­
ing deep-seated religious beliefs (and it is reasonable to assume at least 
some Jews did seek such means without going to such ends), then for them 
only one solution remained: to deny the physical importance of the temple 
at Jerusalem itself. 
5. See R.G. Hamerton-Kelly, 'Sacred Violence and the Messiah: The Markan 
Passion Narrative as a Redefinition of Messianology', in The Messiah: Developments 
in Earliest Judaism and Christianity (ed. James Charlesworth; Minneapolis, MN: 
Fortress Press, 1992), pp. 461-93; and Margaret Barker, The Great High Priest: The 
Temple Roots ofChristian Liturgy (New York: T. & T. Clark, 2003). Although I don't 
agree with Barker's every theory, such as that Jesus was an actual high priest (since he 
could more easily have been a Platonic ideal of one, as Hebrews 9 imp I ies: see Chapter 
11, §5), she collects considerable evidence of interest on the subject of the temple's 
importance and Christianity's solution to the problem it posed. 

5. Background (Context) 
157 
That would require replacing it, and not with another temple (as that 
would only recreate the same problem all over again and thus not in fact 
solve it, as was evident in the fate of the Samaritan messianic uprising 
at Gerizim: Element 7), but with something intangible, which neither the 
Romans nor the corrupt Jewish elite could control (as the intangible can­
not be seized or occupied), and which required neither money nor mate­
rial power to bring about or maintain {the two factors perceived to have 
corrupted the original temple cult-and to always favor the Romans, who 
alone had boundless quantities of both), and whose ruler was himself inca­
pable of corruption {and there was only one who was truly incapable of 
corruption: God). 
This does not entail that anyone did think this, only that it would have 
been an easy and natural progression of thought from problem to solution, 
and therefore not implausible. It fits the political and religious context and 
our understanding of human nature and ingenuity. Therefore, if any rei i­
gious innovator had proposed that God had arranged a supreme sacrifice 
capable of cleansing all sins once and for all (such as, e.g., through the ritual 
atoning sacrifice of his firstborn son: Element 10), and further arranged that 
God's spirit would, as a result, dwell forever within each individual who 
pledged himself to him (and thus no longer dwell, or dwell only, within the 
temple at Jerusalem: Element 18), then his message would resonate among 
many Jews as an ingenious and attractive solution to the problem of Jewish 
elite corruption and Roman invincibility (Elements 23-26), by eliminating 
the relevance of the temple to messianic hopes, and thus eliminating the 
basis for any doomed military conflict with Rome, and further eliminating 
the problem of the corrupt Jewish elite by simply disinheriting them from 
God's kingdom and removing them as middlemen between the people and 
their God-all without requiring the deployment of any physical or mili­
tary resources. One simply had to declare that it had been done. God's will. 
Sorted. 
The basic Christian gospel-imagining that the death of a messiah had 
conclusively atoned for all sins (as the OT could already be understood 
to say, per Elements 5, 6, and 17), and that by joining with him (through 
adoption by baptism, in accord with Element 12; and through symbolic 
consumption of his body and blood, in accord with Element 18) God would 
dwell in us (instead of the temple)-would thus be recognized by many 
Jews as an ingenious and attractive idea. 6 Especially since the end result 
6. It should not have to be stated, but the objection that no Jew would countenance 
the drinking of blood is of no relevance to the symbolic drinking of blood; symbolic 
cannibalism is not really cannibalism. By analogy, Christian baptism was a symbolic 
death (e.g. Rom. 6.4 and Col. 2.12}, and yet no Jews objected to it on the grounds that 
it was murder. 

1 58 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
would be that instead of taking orders from the Jewish elite, we would have 
as our sovereign no fallible men but Christ himself, God's appointed Lord, 
directly speaking to his subjects from the right hand of God in heaven (by 
spirit and angelic communication, and secret messages planted in scripture, 
in accord with Elements 8 and 15).7 Thus the problem of elite corruption 
is seemingly removed without requiring violence or money or diplomacy 
or military victory. God has his victory; and all cognitive dissonance is 
resolved. 
The only sacred space this doctrine required one to physically control 
was one's own body, a notion already popularized by philosophical sects 
such as the Stoics, who taught that nothing external can conquer a man who 
in his wisdom remains internally free. Not death, nor imprisonment, nor 
torture represented any victory over him. This was therefore a battle one 
could always win, even against the 'invincible' Romans. One merely had to 
believe it, to feel it was true, that God now lived in you. No other evidence 
was required. Thus it should not surprise us that Christianity converted 
all the military imagery of popular messianism into spiritual metaphor, 
to represent what we would now call a culture war.8 This aligns perfectly 
with the notion of a spiritual transfer of authority to the people, negating 
the relevance of the temple and the Jewish elite, while retaining the most 
fundamental requirements of being Jewish (namely, faith and obedience 
to the commandments of God; though even that would later be done away 
with, per Element 20). 
The relevance of this observation is that the earliest Christian gospel 
makes far more sense as a product of its political context than it does when 
completely divorced from that context, and in consequence, theories of his­
toricity that ignore that fact are unlikely to have any objective merit. The 
centrality of the temple was a continual problem for the Jews. A physical 
location requiring political control entailed military domination. So long 
as the Romans had the latter, the Jews would never have the former. The 
Zealots took the logical option of attempting to remove the Romans and 
restore Jewish control. But the Christians took the only other available 
option: removing the temple from their entire soteriological (or 'salvation') 
scheme.9 
7. The need of an immortal, incorruptible 'high priest' to replace the existing 
priestly class is expressed in Heb. 7.25-27 and Hebrews 9 (see Chapter 1 1, §5). 
8. See my discussion in Carrier, Not the Impossible Faith, pp. 225-30 (to which 
can be added such examples as Ignatius, To Polycarp 6, and the logic behind Wis. 5. 17-
22, which clearly influenced 1 Thess. 5.8-9 and Eph. 6.1 2-17). 
9. Many elements of this are supported by Mark Strauss, Four Portraits, One 
Jesus: An Introduction to Jesus and the Gospels (Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan, 
2007), pp. 366, 368-70, 376; Marcus Borg, Jesus: Uncovering the Life, Teachings, and 

5. Background (Context) 
1 59 
Christians could then just await God's wrath to come from heaven (in 
accord with Element 10), while in the meantime, God's promise could be 
delivered unto the kingdom they had spiritually created (Rom. 14.17-18; 
1 Cor. 4.19-20), first in an anticipatory way (in the moral and 'supernatural' 
success ofthe Christian community), and then in the most final way (in the 
apocalypse itself: e.g. 1 Cor. 15.24, 50; 6.9-10; Gal. 5.19-25; 1 Thess. 4.10-
5.15). That the Christians and the Zealots both may have come from the 
same sectarian background, and pursued collectively the only two possible 
solutions to the problem facing the Jews at the time, reveals Christianity to 
be more akin to something inevitable than something surprising.10 
Element 29: Further supporting the previous element is the fact that what 
are now called 'Cargo Cults' are the modern movements most culturally 
and socially similar to earliest Christianity, so much so that Christianity is 
best understood in light of them. For not only are their attributes remark­
ably similar, but so are the socio-political situations that created them; and 
it is this distinct parallel of both cause and effect that makes the comparison 
illuminating. In the words of I.C. Jarvie: 
One of the most remarkable things about apocalyptic millenarian move­
ments [like the Cargo Cults] is that, despite the fact that they crop up at 
all periods of history, in all parts of the world, and in all sorts of different 
social set-ups, we can find remarkable similarities between them.11 
Indeed. 
Relevance of a Religious Revolutionary (San Francisco, CA: HarperSanFrancisco, 
2006), pp. 225-60; and Bruce Malina, The Social Gospel of Jesus: The Kingdom of God 
in Mediterranean Perspective ( Minneapolis, MN: Fortress Press, 2001); and Bruce 
Malina, The New Testament World: Insights from Cultural Anthropology (Atlanta, GA: 
John Knox Press, 3rd edn, 2001), as well as his Social Science Commentary series on 
the NT-although caution in employing Malina is warranted, as he over-simplifies a 
great deal, but as long as you allow for unstated complexities and exceptions at every 
point, most of what he argues can be validly applied to the origins of Christianity, and 
corroborates the analysis given here. 
10. D. Mendels, 'Pseudo-Philo's Biblical Antiquities, the "Fourth Philosophy", and 
the Political Messianism of the First Century C.E.', in The Messiah (ed. Charlesworth), 
pp. 261-75, argues the authors of the Biblical Antiquities rewrote and expanded various 
OT stories in order to commun icate values contrary to those of the Zealots regarding 
the solution to Judea's social problems, illustrating that Christians weren't the only 
ones looking for an alternative. That Christians and Zealots might both stem (at least in 
significant part) from the same sect (the Essenes, who were in turn regarded as deriving 
their views from the Samaritans), see Carrier, 'Spiritual Body', in Empty Tomb (ed. 
Price and Lowder), pp. 109, 200 n. 23, 201 nn. 26-28, 31, and Element 33 below. 
1 1 .  LC. Jarvie, The Revolution in Anthropology (London: Routledge & K. Paul, 
1964), p. 50. 

160 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
These cults rocked numerous small Melanesian island nations in the 
early twentieth century, producing a variety of savior religions often sur­
rounding mythical (but fully historicized) messiahs, from John Frum to 
Tom Navy, men who never really existed but were believed to have been 
real persons who visited the islands and would return messianically one 
day with ships or planes full of marvelous 'cargo', including the resurrected 
dead ofthe island peoples. Some of these cults did worship real people, yet 
who had nothing to do with founding the cult and are quite perplexed at 
having been deified (like Prince Philip, the current husband, 'royal con­
sort', of the Queen of England, who is worshiped as the savior deity in one 
of these cults). Notably, in no case was the savior god, despite being con­
ceived from the start as a historical person, ever an actual founder of any of 
these religions, yet they are always portrayed as such in their sacred stories, 
issuing teachings and prophecies and establishing 'their' church. 
The earliest documented of these uprisings was the Vailala Madness 
in the Territory of Papua.12 But all subsequent cults had similar features: 
they are all charismatic apocalyptic cults (in this case arising in Melane­
sia), characterized by glossolalia and mass hysteria, prophesying, receiving 
secret communications from God (who thus provided instructions on form­
ing the religion and its teachings), and experiencing powerful and convinc­
ing visions (thus cargo cults were schizotypal cults: Element 15). In fact, in 
several documented cases things that were seen in visions or merely proph­
esied were later believed to have historically happened, within just fifteen 
years (some such ideas originating in 1919 became fully historicized beliefs 
by 1934), demonstrating rapid legendary development.13 Cargo cults were 
also characterized by radical reform (abandoning old traditional cult and 
instituting a new), apocalyptic expectations (preaching a coming end of the 
world in which all injustices would be redressed, the dead raised, and the 
12. Peter Worsley, The Trumpet Shall Sound: A Study of 'Cargo' Cults in Melanesia 
(London: MacGibbon & Kee, 2nd edn, 1968), treats the entire Cargo Cult phenomenon 
(see pp. 75-92 for the 'Vailala Madness'). For a more first-hand account of that: F. E. 
Williams, 'The Vailala Madness in Retrospect', in Essays Presented to C.G. Seligman 
(ed. E. E. Evans-Pritchard et a/.; London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner, 1934), pp. 369-
79. On other Cargo Cults see G.W. Trompf, Cargo Cults and Millenarian Movements: 
Transoceanic Comparisons of New Religious Movements (New York: Mouton de 
Gruyter, 1990); Peter Lawrence, Road Belong Cargo: A Study of the Cargo Movement 
in the Southern Madang District, New Guinea (Manchester: Manchester University 
Press, 1964); Kenelm Burridge, Mambu: A Study of Melanesian Cargo Movements and 
their Ideological Background (New York: Harper & Row, 1960). Wikipedia maintains 
an informative page on the cargo cults, both individually and collectively: http:// 
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cargo_cult. There are also some relevant similarities in modern 
UFO cults: Christopher Partridge (ed.), UFO Religions (New York: Routledge, 2003). 
13. Worsley, The Trumpet Shall Sound, pp. 90-91. 

5. Background (Context) 
1 6 1  
faithful rewarded), and a strong moral dimension-as well as new diver­
sions of charity from which the movement's leaders benefitted, similar to 
what the letters of Paul show happened in early Christianity.14 
Peter Worsley's study of cargo cults (and related millenarian movements 
such as the Native American 'Ghost Dance' movement of the late nine­
teenth century) found that they arise in one of three conditions-though 
sometimes more than one condition is present, and notably all three were 
present at the origin of Christianity: 
I. First in racially and culturally fragmented societies; 'the main effect 
of the milJenarian cult is to overcome these divisions and to weld previously 
hostile and separate groups together into a new unity' against the ruling 
power; and 'the social necessity which produces this drive towards integra­
tion is the subjection of all the separate units to a common authority', like a 
foreign imperial power (and, of course, the local elite who support it, who 
are then seen as in collusion with it).'5 Christianity, too, arose in a racially 
and culturally fragmented society under the thumb of a foreign power. 
The first Christians sought to resolve this tension by recruiting Gentiles to 
become Jews, but very soon Paul saw (consciously or not) that Christianity 
had to relax that requirement to achieve its goal of unity, making this an 
almost inevitable development, since the need of it would have been all but 
obvious, while the alternative was certain to fail, as in fact it did.'6 
2. And 'the second major type of society in which millenarian cults 
develop is the agrarian, and especially feudal, state' where 'the cults arise 
among the lower orders-peasants and urban plebeians-in opposition 
to the official regimes\ because 'due to the material conditions of their 
lives, they lack any organization which could give practical expression to 
their common interests, and they do not see their common interests except 
in times of social crisis', so they must then create such an organization.'7 
Christianity likewise originated in an agrarian society, with an effectively 
feudal structure (with powerful landholders controling economic and polit­
ical institutions and exploiting a peasantry), and among the lower orders, 
in a condition of growing social crisis (see Elements 22-25 and Element 
4), where no political organization for expressing their concerns was made 
available, thus necessitating that they create one. This would explain Chris­
tianity's rapid organization into 'churches' with a hierarchy and rules of 
14. See J. Duncan M. Derrett, 'Financial Aspects of the Resurrection', in Empty 
Tomb (ed. Price and Lowder), pp. 393-409. 
15. Worsley, The Trumpet Shall Sound, p. 228. 
16. See Element 20. That Paul's variant would inevitably prevail over the original 
one by making this unifying goal easier to achieve is a fact I discuss in Carrier, Not the 
Impossible Faith, pp. 51-52. 
17. Worsley, The Trumpet Shall Sound, pp. 228-29. 

162 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
order (1 Cor. 11-14 and 6; cf. Rom. 16.1; I Cor. 1.2; 1 2.28; 16.19; etc.), and 
its steady move toward control of orthodoxy through an increasingly orga­
nized political system independent of the imperial government. This same 
pattern is observed in other cases: most millenarian movements begin with 
a 'terrific release of emotional energy' and 'the overthrow or reversal of the 
present social order' and 'the promise of heaven on earth-soon', but this 
revolutionary aspect has a brief life; if the movement survives, it does so 
only by becoming an institutionalized expression of a more distant future 
promise, with more muted emotional energy, and more socially conserva­
tive. 18 Just as happened to Christianity. 
3. And 'there is a third type of social situation in which activist millenar­
ian ideas are likely to flourish', which is 'when a society with differentiated 
political institutions is fighting for its existence by quite secular military­
political means, but is meeting with defeat after defeat', such that 'when the 
political structure of a society is smashed by war or other means, or fai Is 
to answer the needs of a people who wish to carry on the struggle, then 
a prophetic, often millenarian, leadership is likely to emerge'. 19 In other 
words, when 'the military solution' to oppression and social disfunction 
so consistently fails and is so obviously unlikely to succeed, social pres­
sures produce apocalyptic, non-militarized grassroots movements instead, 
which arise from a retooling of the dominant native religion. Apocalypti­
cism (both its eager expectation and its florid description through revela­
tion and pronouncement) becomes a way to passively voice discontent with 
the ruling powers and re-envision a better society, proclaiming that God 
himself will bring it upon us soon-rather than taking up arms to bring 
it about directly, a solution already seen to be incapable of success; and 
since it 'must' happen, as God would not abandon his people, God must be 
waiting in the wings. 
This so appositely describes the situation and solution of early Christi­
anity (Elements 22-25) that it is again a conspicuous match. So the socio­
logical situation that spawned Christianity had all three conditions for gen­
erating millenarian cults exactly like Christianity. In fact, these are now 
recognized as the common conditions giving rise to all martyrdom move­
ments, from Islamic to Buddhist to pagan, Jewish, and Christian: a subject 
people, in relative poverty, powerless, effectively dominated by a foreign 
people (either directly or through collusion with an unresponsive local 
elite) who are racially and cultural1y different from themselves, and whose 
economic and military capability is so awesome it cannot be overcome.20 
18. Jarvie, The Revolution, pp. 51, 72. 
19. Worsley, The Trumpet Shall Sound, p. 230. 
20. See my discussion of this fact, and the relevant scholarship confirming it. in 
Carrier, Not the Impossible Faith, pp. 219-45. 

5. Background (Context) 
163 
Anthropology thus teaches us that Christianity is exactly the sort of 
thing one would expect to arise in those conditions.21 And we should also 
expect it to take on the characteristics typical of those conditions: it would 
arise from an oppressed natives' religion (Judaism) in a time of escalating, 
unresolvable crisis (as in early-first-century Palestine), and it would promi­
nently adopt matryrdom, apocalyptic ism, a program of social-moral reform 
and its own internal political organization separate from the established 
political and religious institutions. It will also syncretically merge (per Ele­
ment 1 1) its local faith with useful or admired elements of the cultural and 
religious ideas of their oppressors in order to 'co-opt' them and produce a 
'greater' religion than either the failed local cult or the illegitimate alien 
cult-as all these other millenarian movements did.22 When the conditions 
are added that strongly support schizotypal cult behavior (Element IS), the 
features thereof will be integrated as well (as happened with the Cargo 
Cults).23 And when the further condition is added of a rising popularity of 
syncretic unification movements such as the Hellenistic mystery religions 
(Element 1 1), we could again have described what Christianity would look 
like without ever having heard of it. Can that really be a coincidence? 
21. Essentially the same conclusion is reached by James Crossley, Why Christianity 
Happened: A Sociohistorica/ Account ofChristian Origins (26-50 CE) (Louisville, KY: 
Westminster John Knox Press, 2006). 
22. Cargo Cults integrated elements of Christianity and otherwise secular but 
'Western' cultural objects and ideas (Jarvie, The Revolution, pp. 64-66); even modern 
apocalyptic Islamic extremism integrates Western (often fascist) political philosophy, 
tactics and technologies, as well as mythologies (e.g. conspiracy theories), to become 
something new. This is always claimed to be a 'return' to the 'true' faith, in defiance of 
historical fact. Thus, what is actually new could always be sold as old: see Carrier, Not 
the Impossible Faith, pp. 129-34. Notably, the availability of guns and explosives has 
made it seem like military victory is still possible (because immediate engagements 
produce terrorizing results that seem to vindicate the perpetrators' righteousness) 
and therefore Islamic extremists remain militarized. I suspect if it were not for those 
technologies, they would have become demilitarized, like early Christianity, the Cargo 
Cults and other millenarian movements in the same mold, except where it has actually 
succeeded (e.g. Iran). 
23. In connection with this fact, I discuss how this element caused such movements 
to be led by prophets rather than 'politicians' (or philosophers) in Carrier, Not the 
Impossible Faith, pp. 259-96. I would add a final necessary causal ingredient, that of a 
cultural framework in which such movements make sense (such as has been provided 
by Middle Eastern cultures, Jewish and pagan, since long before the rise of Christianity, 
and long since: Element 10, and the remaining elements in this chapter). By contrast, 
e.g., Tibet has no comparable cultural framework, and thus (to my knowledge) has not 
developed a millenarian movement of this Western type (but martyrdom movements 
of a different kind), despite otherwise being locked in nearly the same socio-political 
conditions. 

164 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
2. Elements of Religious and Philosophical Context 
Element 30: Early-first-century Judea was at the nexus of countless influ­
ences, not only from dozens of innovating and interacting Jewish sects 
(Elements 2 and 33), but also pagan religions and philosophies (Elements 31 
and 32). The influence of the latter is sometimes denied, but cannot be, not 
only because pagans lived, traveled, and traded all throughout Judea (with 
significant populations in cities throughout the Holy Land, from the pagan 
quarters of Caesarea, Gaza, Ptolemais, Tiberias and Sepphoris to the ten 
cities of the Decapolis and major port cities such as Tyre and Ashkelon, and 
likewise in Samaria, which was right in the center of the Holy Land, with 
ongoing interactions with the surrounding districts through pilgrimage and 
trade)/4 but even more so because Jerusalem, and all Judea, was frequented 
24. See Zeev Safrai, 'The Gentile Cities of Judea: Between the Hasmonean 
Occupation and the Roman Liberation', in Studies in Historical Geography and Biblical 
Historiography (ed. Zecharia Kallai, Gershon Galil and Moshe Weinfeld; Leiden: E.J. 
Brill, 2000), pp. 63-90; Louis Feldman, Judaism and Hellenism Reconsidered (Leiden: 
Brill, 2006); Jonas Greenfield, 'The Languages of Palestine, 200 BCE-200 c. E.', in AI 
Kanfei Yonah: Collected Studies of Jonas C. Greenfield on Semitic Philology, Vol. I 
(ed. Shalom Paul, Michael Stone and Avital Pinnick; Leiden: Brill, 2001). pp. 376-87; 
D. Flusser, 'Paganism in Palestine', in The Jewish People in the First Century, Vol. I I  
(ed. Shemuel Safrai and Menahem Sternੑ Assen: Van Gorcum, 1974-76), pp. 1065-
1100, and (in the same volume) G. Mussies, 'Greek in Palestine and the Diaspora', 
pp. 1040-64; Martin Hengel, Judaism and Hellenism: Studies in their Encounter in 
Palestine during the Early Hellenistic Period (Philadelphia, PA: Fortress Press, 1974); 
Morton Smith, Palestinian Parties and Politics That Shaped the Old Testament (New 
York: Columbia University Press, 1971); and Morton Smith, 'Palestinian Judaism in 
the First Century', in Israel: Its Role in Civilization (ed. Moshe Davis; New York: 
Harper, 1956), pp. 67-81. 
Even Mark Chancey, in The Myth of a Gentile Galilee (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 2002), confirms there were plenty of Gentiles in Galilee as well 
(predominately in its cities and cities adjacent), just not 'as many' as some scholars 
have claimed (note, e.g., his discussion of pagans in Samaria, pp. 153-55, and his 
overall conclusion, pp. ISS-82). But influence only requires a presence, not a huge one. 
Contact is contact. Likewise, see discussion of the Gentile presence in Judea before 
and after the Hasmoneans (and one must remember that influences that had already 
been integrated with various sects of Judaism before the Hasmoneans would have 
remained after them) in Jack Pastor, Land and Economy in Ancient Palestine (New 
York: Routledge, 1997). 
Ironically, attempts to deny this also confirm it: in the Christian apologetic 
treatise by Paul Eddy and Gregory Boyd, The Jesus Legend: A Case for the Historical 
Reliability of the Synoptic Jesus Tradition (Grand Rapids, Ml: Baker Academic, 2007), 
pp. 101-32 extensively documents and thus concedes the vast presence of foreign 
influences throughout the whoJe of Palestine; the authors then try to insist that all Jews 
in Palestine were completely resistant to all these influences in almost every respect, 

5. Background (Context) 
1 65 
by millions of pilgrims from the diaspora every year, many (such as Philo 
of Alexandria) thoroughly Hellenized, who brought with them ideas and 
teachings from the foreign communities they came from. Acts 2.5-1 1 and 
6.9 are thus reflecting the reality, and that in Jerusalem itself. 
These latter ideas would have infiltrated Palestinian society in two 
ways. Some would arrive by simple report: pagans and Jewish pilgrims 
retelling what they heard and knew and what they thought about it; and 
likewise bringing books with them, to loan, sell or read aloud; it would 
also be incredible to think that none of the cities in Palestine had public 
libraries, which were otherwise a standard feature of major cities of the 
time, and surely a feature of every city with a large Gentile presence, such 
as Caesarea or Tyre.25 But others would arrive through prior syncretism: 
diaspora Jews combined pagan religious and philosophical ideas with their 
own Jewish faith (as Philo of Alexandria did-and just as what were then 
'mainstream' Palestinian Jews had done before when they adopted notions 
of hell and resurrection, and the Devil as a supernatural enemy of God, all 
from their pagan Zoroastrian overlords centuries before), and then came to 
Judea and promulgated their new ideas as Jewish ideas rather than pagan.26 
Paul himself is an example: a diaspora Jew, from either Tarsus (Acts 9.1 1; 
21.39; 22.3) or Damascus (Gal. 2.17; 2 Cor. 1 1 .26), whose own version of 
Christianity, ultimately accepted even by the founders (the 'pillars' of Gal. 
2), was laden with ideas from pagan philosophy, literature and mystery 
cult.27 
which is an absurd notion, and a conclusion they completely fail to prove (the fallacies 
of argument from ignorance and false generalization are rife throughout, especially 
in repeatedly leaping from premises about 'most' to conclusions about 'all', and in 
mistaking opinions for facts). 
25. See Konstantinos Staikos, The History of the Library in Western Civilization, 
Vols. I and II (Athens: Kotinos Publications, 2004). I will discuss Greco-Roman 
libraries as standard urban features in Richard Carrier, Science Education in the Early 
Roman Empire (in review). 
26. On the previous Jewish syncretism with Zoroastrianism see Carrier, Not the 
Impossible Faith, pp. 85-99. On other examples of ongoing Jewish syncretism: Lars 
Hartman, 'Into the Name of the Lord Jesus ': Baptism in the Early Church (Edinburgh: 
T. & T. Clark, 1997), pp. 3-8; M.L. West, The Orphic Poems (New York: Oxford 
University Press, 1983), pp. 33·35; and Carl Holladay, Fragments from Hellenistic 
Jewish Authors, Volume IV: Orphica (Atlanta, GA: Scholars Press, 1996); Stanley 
Rosenbaum, Understanding Biblical Israel: A Reexamination of the Origins of 
Monotheism (Macon, GA: Mercer University Press, 2002); and Mark Smith, The 
Origins of Biblical Monotheism: Israel 's Polytheistic Background and the Ugaritic 
Texts (New York: Oxford University Press, 2001). 
27. On the influence of pagan mystery religion see Element 10; on the influence of 
pagan philosophy see Element 32. Note that early Christian (as also Jewish) art was also 
highly syncretistic. adopting pagan and Jewish motifs as Christian symbols, or merging 

166 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
Two common objections to this conclusion are (1) that the ideas exhib­
iting influence (as in Philo or Paul) are in many ways diferent from their 
ideological sources, and (2) we do not have direct archaeological con­
firmation of the presence of such ideas (e.g. in the form of pagan books 
or references to same). But neither objection is logically valid, because 
(1) syncretism always changes the adopted ideas by plucking them out of 
their original system and combining them with other ideas, and therefore 
differences are expected, and thus cannot argue against the existence of 
influence, and (2) almost nothing survives from ancient Palestine that 
would be relevant to determining what 'wasn't' there in the first century 
(certainly in terms of books, much Jess in terms of orally transmitted texts 
and cultural knowledge), therefore this is simply not a valid argument 
from silence.28 In contrast, the evidence of transmission vectors heavily 
transiting and residing in Palestine (as surveyed above) is conclusive, and 
to suggest that all those transmission vectors were there year in and year 
out for centuries and not transmitting anything is to argue against all 
human probability. 
Likewise, though someone like Philo or Paul could light upon one idea 
or two that was only accidentally similar to pagan counterparts, it is mas­
sively improbable that they could do this dozens of times over. Such a 
pagan, Jewish and Christian motifs into new hybrid symbols: Thomas Mathews, The 
Clash of Gods: A Reinterpretation of Early Christian Art (Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press, 1993); Fred Albertson, 'An Isiac Model for the Raising of Lazarus 
in Early Christian Art', Jahrbuchftir Antike und Christentum 38 (1995), pp. 123-32; 
Robin Margaret Jensen, Understanding Early Christian Art (New York: Routledge, 
2000). On syncretism in Jewish art: Joseph Gutmann, Ancient Synagogues (Chico, 
CA: Scholars Press, 1981); Othmar Keel and Christoph Uehlinger, Gods, Goddesses, 
and Images of God in Ancient Israel (trans. Allan Mahnke; Minneapolis, MN: Fortress 
Press, 1996); Leonard Rutgers (ed.), What Athens Has to Do with Jerusalem: Essays 
on Classical, Jewish, and Early Christian Art and Archaeology in Honor of Gideon 
Foerster (Leuven: Peeters, 2002); Steven Fine, Art and Judaism in the Greco-Roman 
World: Toward a New Jewish Archaeology (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
2005). 
28. On the requirements of a valid argument from silence see Carrier, Proving 
History, pp. 1 17-19. The premise is also dubious, since we actually do have archaeo­
logical evidence of pagan influence on Second Temple Judaism in the Dead Sea 
Scrolls. See, e.g., Matthew Goff, 'Gilgamesh the Giant: The Qumran Book ofGiants' 
Appropriation of Gilgamesh Motifs', Dead Sea Discoveries 16.2 (2009), pp. 221-53; 
and John J. Collins, Daniel: A Commentary (Minneapolis, MN: Fortress Press, 1 993), 
pp. 395-97, where clear pagan influences on the book of Enoch are identified-and 
yet nearly a dozen manuscripts of Enoch were recovered from Qumran: Jozef Milik 
(ed.), The Books of Enoch: Aramaic Fragments of Qumran Cave 4 (Oxford: Clarendon 
Press, 1976). And Enoch was a seminal text in the origin of Christianity. 

5. Background (Context) 
167 
coincidence has only one plausible explanation: influence.29 Moreover, as 
both wrote in excellent Greek-as did the authors of several of the books 
found at Qumran, and numerous persons in Palestine transcribing (and thus 
also evidently reading) Greek inscriptions and grave markers-and Greek 
could then only be learned in pagan-style schools based on pagan models of 
pagan literary classics and commentary (which would undeniably transmit 
pagan religious and philosophical knowledge)-to suggest there was no 
transmission of pagan knowledge and ideas there is to suggest the absurd.30 
29. Some people have a hard time grasping the fact that parallels can entail influence 
even when many differences remain. One of my readers suggested I make this point 
with West Side Story: it's 'nothing' like Romeo and Juliet, taking place in twentiethι 
century America, with Latin gangs fighting Anglo gangs, who fight with fists and 
knives and not swords, and they aren't families, just gangs, and no one is named Romeo 
or Juliet-yet to claim West Side Story was not influenced by Romeo and Juliet would 
be absurd: it's a deliberate emulation! This is the case with all acts of mythmaking 
and syncretism: the variants of a theme will obviously differ in countless ways, but 
the parallels that remain are too specific and numerous to exist by coincidence. Direct 
emulation and borrowing are simply by far the most likely hypothesis in such a case 
(see Carrier, Proving History, pp. 192-204). 
30. On the inevitably pagan nature of all Greek education in antiquity (and the 
failure of any group, Jews and Christians included, to develop any sanitized alternative), 
see Raffaella Cribiore, Gymnastics of the Mind: Greek Education in Hellenistic and 
Roman Egypt (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2001), with Harry Gamble, 
Books and Readers in the Early Church: A History of Early Christian Texts (New 
Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1995}, pp. 6-7; Gerard Ellspermann, The Attitude of 
the Early Christian Latin Writers toward Pagan Literature and Learning (Washington, 
DC: Catholic University of America Press, 1949), pp. 1-3; Henri Marrou, A History of 
Education in Antiquity (New York: Sheed & Ward, 3rd edn, 1956), pp. 314-29; Yun Lee 
Too (ed.), Education in Greek and Roman Antiquity (Boston: Brill, 2001), pp. 405-32; 
see also my discussion in Chapter 9 of my forthcoming Science Education in the Early 
Roman Empire. 
Though very conservative Jews (who should not be conflated with all Palestinian 
Jews) distinguished learning Greek from studying Greek philosophy (b. Sotah 49b; see 
E.A. Judge, 'The Reaction against Classical Education in the New Testament', Journal 
ofChristianEducation 77 (1983), pp. 7-14 [9]), some philosophy and religion inevitably 
were taught when studying under an ordinary grammarian (who used pagan books 
to instruct by and gave commentary and glosses on their content, such as a passage's 
meaning and significance); thus, avoiding the philosophy schoo]s could not have 
prevented exposure to philosophy. And not all Palestinian Jews were archconservatives 
anyway. Even at Qumran we have undeniable evidence of advanced Greek writing 
and education: see Matthew Richey, 'The Use of Greek at Qumran: Manuscript and 
Epigraphic Evidence for a Marginalized Language', Dead Sea Discoveries 19 (2012), 
pp. 177-97. Considerably more evidence of this has been recovered from Masada and 
Jericho (180). 

168 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
Finally, one might concede the knowledge existed but that 'the Jews' 
would never adopt ideas from foreign cultures and rei igions. That is a dubi­
ous premise (history does not support it), but even if granted, what con­
servative or elite Jews would do can have no bearing on what desperate, 
radical or fringe Jewish sects would do. And Christianity did not originate 
within conservative or elite Judaism but from the radical fringes, as a pro­
test movement against conservative elite Judaism, and thus represents the 
very kind of heresy conservatives were always combating (Element 2). By 
the very fact of their being heretical, any innovations such an embattled 
sect might resort to in order to 'reform' the Judaism of their day would not 
be confined to what conservative Jews would allow. In fact, anthropolog­
ical precedent tells us syncretism in that case is actually likely (Element 
29). And ultimately, such adaptations, even if we can see their pagan roots, 
would always have been marketed as Jewish, not pagan (exactly as hap­
pened to Jewish adaptations from Zoroastrianism). 
Element 31: Incarnate sons (or daughters) of a god who died and then rose 
from their deaths to become living gods granting salvation to their worshi­
pers were a common and peculiar feature of pagan religion when Christi­
anity arose, so much so that influence from paganism is the only plausible 
explanation for how a Jewish sect such as Christianity came to adopt the 
idea (again, Element 1 1). For example, you won't find this trend in ancient 
China. No such gods are found there. If Christianity had begun in China, 
its claims would indeed have been unique and astonishing. Yet in its actual 
Greco-Roman context it was neither unique nor astonishing. Thus it cannot 
be a coincidence that Christianity arose with an idea matching a ubiquitous 
pagan type unique to the very time and place it was born. Any theory of 
historicity, to be plausible, must take this into account.31 
In the middle of the second century, Justin Martyr wrote the following: 
When we say that the Logos, who is the firstborn of God, Jesus Christ 
our teacher, was produced w ithout sexual union, and was crucified and 
died, and rose again, and ascended to heaven, we propound nothing new 
or different from what you believe regarding those whom you call Sons of 
God. [In fact] . . .  if anybody objects that [our god] was crucified, this is 
in common with the sons of Zeus (as you call them) who suffered, as pre­
viously listed. Since their fatal sufferings are all narrated as not similar 
but different, so his unique passion should not seem to be any worse-
31. For this and other aspects of Christianity that only make sense as localized 
cultural diffusion, see Carrier, 'Christianity's Success Was Not Incredible', in End 
of Christianity (ed. Loftus). For the entire background of pagan resurrected gods and 
heroes-not all of whom were paid cult as savior gods, but still refuting any notion 
that 'resurrection' was a novel or foreign concept in pagan culture, see Carrier, Not the 
lm ossible Faith, pp. 85-127. 

5. Background (Context) 
indeed I will show, as I have undertaken, and as the argument proceeds, 
that he was better; for Jesus is thus shown to be better by his actions.n 
169 
Thus even Christians acknowledged the ubiquity of the dying-and-rising 
son-of-god theme in their surrounding pagan culture, and recognized it as a 
common theme even when every story differed in details from every other 
(on that being how syncretism works, see again Element 1 1).33 
The dying-and-rising son (sometimes daughter) of god 'mytheme' orig­
inated in the ancient Near East over a thousand years before Christianity 
and was spread across the Mediterranean principally by the Phoenicians 
(Canaanites) from their base at Tyre (and after that by the Carthaginians, 
the most successful Phoenician cultural diffusers in the early Greco-Ro­
man period), and then fostered and modified by numerous native and 
Greco-Roman cults that adopted it. The earliest documented examples are 
the cult of Inanna and Dumuzi (also known as Ishtar and Tammuz), the 
cult of Baal and A nat, and the cult of Marduk (also known as Bel or Baal, 
which basically meant 'the Lord'), all of whose resurrection stories are told 
in Sumerian, Ugaritic and Assyrian tablets (respectively) long predating 
the advent ofChristianity.34 That in pre-Christian belieflnanna was indeed 
killed and her corpse resurrected I already demonstrated in Chapter 3 (§I), 
providing the most indisputable example. 
These cults then influenced the development of others in the Greco­
Roman era, including the cult of a resurrected Adonis. Although too few 
pre-Christian texts about this specific Adonis cult survive to reconstruct 
its liturgy, in the third century the Christian scholar Origen says in his 
Comments on Ezekiel that Tammuz is still worshiped in his day under the 
name Adonis, and as such 'certain rites of initiation are conducted' for him, 
'first, that they weep for him, since he has died; second, that they rejoice for 
32. Justin Martyr, Apology 1.21, 22. 
33. See, for another example, Tertullian, Prescription against Heretics 40. 
34. Previous attempts to deny that these were dying-and-rising gods have been 
thoroughly refuted by Tryggve Mettinger in The Riddle of Resurrection: 'Dying and 
Rising Gods' in the Ancient Near East (Stockholm: Almqvist & Wiksell International, 
2001); and Tryggve Mettinger, 'The Dying and Rising God: The Peregrinations of 
a Mytheme', in Ethnicity in Ancient Mesopotamia (ed. W.H. van Soldt; Leiden: 
Nederlands lnstituut voor het Nabije Oosten, 2005), pp. 198-210. For Inanna specifically 
(and likely Tammuz as well), see Carrier, Not the Impossible Faith, pp. 17-20; and Pirjo 
Lapinkivi, The Neo-Assyrian Myth of /star's Descent and Resurrection (Helsinki: 
Neo-Assyrian Text Corpus Project, 2010). For Baal specifically, see M.S. Smith, The 
Ugaritic Baal Cycle, Vol. I (Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1994); and M.S. Smith and W. Pitard, 
The Ugaritic Baal Cycle, Vol. II (Leiden: E.J. Brill, 2009). For Marduk specifically, see 
Tikva Fryrner·Kensky, 'The Tribulations ofMarduk: The So-Called "Marduk Ordeal 
Text 
.... Journal of the American Oriental Society 103 (January-March 1983), pp. 131-
41, but only in light of the further analysis and evidence in Mettinger. 

1 70 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
him because he has risen from the dead' [apo nekron anastanti], by way 
of explaining the reference in Ezekiel to women 'weeping for Tammuz' 
at the gates of Jerusalem (Ezek. 8.14}, which Ezekiel was denouncing as 
pagan.35 We know that refers to the resurrection story of lnanna, which we 
have on clay tablets long predating Christianity, and there is evidence of a 
corresponding resurrection story for Tammuz-already widely known in 
Jerusalem long before Christianity, as Ezekiel was attesting.36 
It is far more likely the resurrection of this Adonis (in the cult to which 
Origen refers; not all Adonis cults were necessarily the same) had been 
celebrated Jong before Christianity began than that it would be a recent 
innovation. Surely Origen would know ifit were and make obvious sport of 
the fact; it would likewise be incredible that even at this early stage major 
pagan cults would fundamentally change their entire religion in emula­
tion of Christianity, which was a little known, wholly uninfluential cult 
that was rarely likedY And indeed Lucian directly attests to there being 
a resurrection myth for the Syrian Adonis half a century before Origen, 
and it's clear Lucian is relating an ancient ceremony of its celebration, not 
some recent nove1ty.38 So it is far more likely a resurrected Adonis cult 
was not new. The more so as we can confirm several other examples of 
35. Zechariah 12.11 also mentions 'the mourning of Hadad-Rimmon in the valley 
of Megiddo', this being a known epithet of the Ugaritic Baal at the time, who became 
the resurrected savior god of the Greco-Roman-era mystery cult of Jupiter Dolichenus. 
36. It has long been suspected that the complete cycle traded resurrections between 
Inanna and Dumuzi (as Origen's comment implies), and recent discoveries have 
supported this conclusion: see Be੒jamin Foster, 'Descent oflshtar to the Netherworld', 
in Before the Muses: An Anthology of Akkadian Literature (Bethesda, MD: CDL 
Press, 3rd edn, 2005), pp. 498-505, where recovered fragments imply a period of 
rejoicing after mourning the death of Dumuzi (Tammuz), which would indicate he, 
too, recovered from his death. A similar cycle of mourning and rejoicing over the death 
and 'revival' of the god Attis would develop later (see later note). 
37. Contrary to claims that Christianity was booming in its first two centuries, it 
was in fact an extremely small fringe cult until the later third century: I survey the 
evidence and scholarship on this point in Carrier, Not the Impossible Faith. pp. 407-47, 
to which can now be added the analysis of Adam Schor. 'Conversion by the Numbers: 
Benefits and Pitfalls of Quantitative Modeling in the Study of Early Christian Growth'. 
Journal of Religious History 33 (December 2009). pp. 472-98 (and note that Schor's 
models even presume the incredibly implausible starting point of one thousand 
Christians in 40 CE, and yet still don't get a significantly different result). 
38. Lucian, On the Syrian Goddess 6 (written c. 160 CE), which records, like 
Origen, that national ceremonies of mourning for his death are followed the next day by 
celebrations of his returning to life and ascending into outer space. For pre-Christian 
evidence of this same Adonis cult see Stephanie Lynn Budin, The Myth of Sacred 
Prostitution in Antiquity (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2008), pp. 94-99. 

5. Background (Context) 
171 
clearly pre-Christian dying-and-rising gods well known across the Roman 
Empire: the savior cult of the resurrected Zalmoxis (of Thracian origin) is 
clearly attested in Herodotus centuries before Christianity; the imperial 
cult of the resurrected Romulus is likewise attested in several pre-Christian 
authors (see Chapter 4, § 1 ); and the Egyptian savior cult of the resurrected 
Osiris is likewise undeniably ancient.39 
Well before Christianity, inscriptions among the Egyptian pyramids had 
long declared of Osiris (usually in the voice of his sister-wife Isis): 
I have come to thee . . .  that I may revivify thee, that I may assemble for 
thee thy bones, that I may collect for thee thy flesh, that I may assemble 
for thee thy dismembered limbs . . .  raise thyself up, king, Osiris; thou 
livest!40 
Raise thyself up; shake off thy dust; remove the dirt which is on thy face; 
loose thy bandages.41 
39. For Romulus and Osiris, see Chapter 4 (§1 and Element I I, respectively); for 
the antiquity of Osiris as a dying-and-rising savior god, see Bojana Mojsov, Osiris: 
Death and Afterlife of a God (Oxford: Blackwell, 2005), pp. 38-53 and S.G.F. Brandon, 
The Savior God: Comparative Studies in the Concept of Salvation (Westport, CT: 
Greenwood Press, 1963), pp. 17-36 (with an introductory discussion of the role of Isis 
on pp. 1-16); this is undeniably confirmed in pre-Christian texts: see following notes. 
For Zalmoxis, see Herodotus, Histories 4.94-96, with Carrier, Not the Impossible Faith. 
pp. 86-87, 100-105. For many other examples of resurrected gods and heroes in pagan 
tradition see Carrier, Not the Impossible Faith, pp. 85-90. Dionysus (aka Bacchus) was 
likewise killed (torn apart) and resurrected ("born again' from a piece of his corpse), 
but as a baby: Justin Martyr, Apology 1.69; Plutarch, On Isis and Osiris (= Moralia) 
35.364f; Diodorus Siculus, Library of History 5.75.4; see also Richard Seaford, 
'Dionysiac Drama and the Dionysiac Mysteries', Classical Quarterly 31 (1981), pp. 
252-75 (260-68); and M.L. West, The Orphic Poems (Oxford University Press. 1983), 
pp. 140-43, 161-63. There is no evidence that Mithras was a 'resurrected' savior (his 
'passion' procuring salvation probably involved some other ordeal than his death; for 
discussion and scholarship on Mithraism see Chapter 4, Element 11; although some 
form of resurrection belief was involved in the cult: Tertullian, in Prescription against 
Heretics 40, mentions 'an image of a resurrection' being featured in it). It is difficult 
to reconstruct the belief system of early Attis cult. The evidence is either scattered or 
late; and from what we do have. it seems his ordeal might have been the periodic return 
to life of an eternally preserved corpse, which would be an example of a variant ofthe 
same mytheme. but one too far removed from the norm to make an ideal example: see 
Giulia Sfameni Gasparro, Soterio/ogy and Mystic Aspects in the Cult of Cybele and 
Attis (Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1985), pp. 26-63੓ and Maria Grazia Lancellotti, Attis, between 
Myth and History: King, Priest, and God (Leiden: Brill, 2002), pp. 142-64. 
40. Pyramid Texts l684a-1685a and 1700 (= Utterance 606; cf. also Utterance 670). 
Translation (here and following) from Samuel Mercer, The Pyramid Texts (London: 
Longmans, Green, 1952). 
41 . Pyramid Texts 1363a-b (= Utterance 553). 

172 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
Osiris, collect thy bones; arrange thy limbs; shake off thy dust; untie thy 
bandages; the tomb is open for thee; the double doors of the cofftn are 
undone for thee; the double doors of heaven are open for thee . . .  thy soul 
is in thy body . . .  raise thyself up!42 
It is absurd to insist there is no parallel in concept here to what would 
later be claimed for Jesus. Jesus is clearly very much like Osiris: both die 
and both get raised in improved bodies and both end up living as lords in 
heaven (not on earth). 
As surveyed for Element 14, Plutarch is explicit about the cosmic ver­
sion of the Osiris myth: he says Osiris actually incarnates and actually 
dies (albeit in outer space; but he dies, too, as Plutarch admits, also in the 
myth that places his death on earth at a single time in history) and is actu­
ally restored to life in a new supernatural body Gust as Jesus was, as Paul 
thoroughly explains in I Cor. 15).43 Plutarch has this event repeated only 
annually (as was also likely the case for lshtar and Tammuz), but that's 
not a relevant difference, since syncretism with Jewish apocalypticism 
fully explains the replacement of a cyclical with a one-time resurrection 
(in fact the peculiarly Jewish logic of that modification is fully explained 
in Hebrews 9; see Element 43, and Chapter 1 1 ,  §5). Similarly, the resur­
rections of Romulus and Zalmoxis were and remained singular events in 
history (and likewise, in public myth, that of Dionysus), demonstrating the 
flexibility of the mytheme in just this respect. I already discussed the exam­
ple of Romulus in Chapter 4 (§1). 
Speaking of the entire genre of incarnated dying-and-rising gods, 
Plutarch writes: 
Now we hear the theologians affirming and reciting, sometimes in verse 
and sometimes in prose, that God is deathless and eternal in his nature, 
but due to some predestined design and reason, he undergoes transfor­
mations of his person, and at one time enkindles his nature into fire and 
makes it entirely like everything else, and at another time he undergoes 
all sorts of changes in his forms and his passions and powers, even as 
the universe does today, but he is still called by the best known of his 
names. The more enlightened, however, concealing from the masses this 
transformation into fire, call him Apollo because of his solitary state, and 
42. Pyramid Texts 207b-209a and 2010b-20l la (= Utterance 676). 
43. Plutarch uses cognates of anabiosis ('return to life') and paliggenesis ('born 
again') in On Isis and Osiris (= Moralia) 35.364f, which are undeniably clear in their 
meaning (other tales as well, Plutarch says, agree with 'what is said of the dismember­
ments, returns to life and rebirths of Osiris'). On Paul's view of the resurrection of 
Jesus, as being in a different body than was buried, see Carrier, 'Spiritual Body', in 
Empty Tomb (ed. Price and Lowder), pp. 105-55 (see in particular I Cor. 15.35-38 in 
conjunction with 2 Cor. 5.1-4). 

5. Background (Context) 
Phoebus because of his purity and stainlessness. And as for his turning 
into winds and water, earth and stars, and into the generations of plants 
and animals, and his adoption of such guises, they speak in a decep­
tive way of what he suffers in his transformation as a tearing apart, as it 
were, and a dismemberment . . . .  They give him the names of Dionysus, 
Zagreus, Nyctelius, and Isodaetes, and they narrate deaths and vanish­
ings, followed by returns to life and resurrections-riddles and myths 
quite in keeping with his transformations.44 
1 73 
Thus Plutarch attests to there being many historical narratives of pagan 
gods becoming incarnate and dying, their corpses vanishing, and rising 
from the dead, which are meant to allegorize what is really going on, which 
(as he implies here and explains elsewhere) is more cosmic in nature (see 
Element 14). But the myths were still there, and everywhere known.45 The 
public ubiquity of dying-and-rising god myths, always the divine sons or 
daughters of a supreme god, and often being worshiped as personal sav­
iors, is therefore beyond dispute, and could not have failed to play a major 
role in the origins of Christianity-otherwise we must posit an extremely 
improbable coincidence. 
Element 32: By whatever route, popular phi losophy (especially Cynicism, 
and to some extent Stoicism and Platonism and perhaps Aristotelianism) 
influenced Christian teachings.46 
44. Plutarch, On the E at Delphi (• Moralia) 9.388f-389a. 
4S. The component of vanishing corpses as a mytho-type for translation to heaven 
is demonstrated to have been a commonplace in pagan literature of the time in Richard 
C. Miller, 'Mark's Empty Tomb and Other Translation Fables in Classical Antiquity', 
Journal of Biblical Literature 129 (2010), pp. 759-76. He shows this theme was so 
distinctive of pagan tradition (as opposed to Jewish literature) that it is unlikely to have 
come from anywhere else. That translation to heaven was almost a/ways understood 
by pagans to be bodily (typically by the assumption of a new, indestructible, divine 
body) see Carrier, 'Spiritual Body', in Empty Tomb (ed. Price and Lowder), pp. 110-13, 
137-39, 212 nn. 169-70, particularly in regard to Philo, who often uses words such as 
'incorporeal' to refer to what he actually means are physical bodies of astral material. 
46. Popular philosophy's influence on Paul: Stephen Finlan, The Apostle Paul 
and the Pauline Tradition (Collegeville, MN: Liturgical Press, 2008), pp. 26-28; and 
Troels Engberg-Pedersen, Cosmology and Self in the Apostle Paul: The Material Spirit 
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2010), along with the debate between Engberg­
Pedersen, John Levison and John Barclay in the Journal for the Study of the New 
Testament 33 (2011), PP· 406-43, which collectively only confirms the influence 
of pagan philosophies, debating only to what extent Paul modified their ideas by 
combining them with Jewish ones (to create something new and different, the very 
definition of syncretism). 

174 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
The influence of Cynicism has been particularly argued and debated in 
recent scholarshipY But most of this debate talks past the point. It is not 
necessary to suppose that Q (discussed in Chapter 7, §4, and Chapter 10, 
§6) or any of the sayings of Jesus directly emulate Cynic sources (although 
that is a hypothesis deserving consideration). Rather, there could have also 
been influence from Cynics and Cynic philosophy on the Jewish sects that 
later influenced or grew into Christianity (possibly even just orally through 
itinerant Cynic preachers, but still also possibly by written sources). And it 
is this influence that cannot reasonably be denied. Even apart from whether 
or not such concepts and teachings originated with a historical Jesus, there 
are undeniably Cynic elements in the Gospels. These could be simple bor­
rowings from Cynic teachings circulating everywhere, by adopting those 
that were attractive and merging them with Jewish moral values similarly 
selected from those commonly available, to produce a more ideal hybrid. 
Much of this may already have preceded Christianity, through other Jewish 
sects, and some of it may have come together as the Christian movement 
formed, and some possibly introduced after. 
By the nature of syncretism, again, the differences (the Cynic ideals that 
were 'not' adopted, or were modified, or even rejected and replaced with 
contrary Jewish ideals) do not argue against adoptions and adaptations. 
Just as their many differences from other Jewish sects did not mean the 
Christians were not influenced by Judaism, so also their differences with 
the Cynics did not mean they were not influenced by Cynics. As in religion, 
47. Francis Gerald Downing, Cynics and Christian Origins (Edinburgh: T. & T. 
Clark, 1992); and Francis Gerald Downing, Cynics, Paul and the Pauline Churches 
(London: Routledge, 1998); and L.E. Vaage, 'Jewish Scripture, Q and the Historical 
Jesus: A Cynic Way with the Word?', in The Sayings Source Q and the Historical 
Jesus (ed. A. Lindemann; Leuven: University Press, 2001), pp. 479-95ߩ all in light ot: 
e.g., Strauss, Four Portraits, One Jesus, pp. 366-68; and William Arnal, The Symbolic 
Jesus: Historical Scholarship, Judaism and the Construction of Contemporary 
Identity (London: Equinox, 2005), pp. 17-25 (who makes the quite correct point 
that being influenced by Cynicism does not make someone a Cynic, much less non­
Jewish, and therefore most criticisms of the Cynic-influence hypothesis are based on 
fallacious black-and-white thinking that has no place in serious scholarship); see also 
William Arnal, Jesus and the Village Scribes: Galilean Conflicts and the Setting of Q 
(Minneapolis, MN: Fortress Press, 2001), pp. 52-59 (whose criticism is not against there 
having been Cynic influence, but against certain implausible theories that have been 
built on this premise). On Cynicism in general: William Desmond, Cynics (Berkeley, 
CA: University of California Press, 2008); and William Desmond, The Greek Praise 
of Poverty: Origins of Ancient Cynicism (Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre Dame 
Press, 2006). On what 'Cynic influence' looked like in other movements, useful for 
finding and understanding the same influence within Christianity and Judaism: James 
Francis, Subversive Virtue: Asceticism and Authority in the Second-Century Pagan 
World (University Park, PA: Pennsylvania State Universit Press, 1995). 

5. Background (Context) 
175 
so in philosophy: eclecticism, the combining and melding of philosophies 
and the picking and choosing of ideas and ideals to produce unique com­
binations more or less favoring yet still differing from one sect or other, 
was the norm (Elements 2, 1 1  and 30). The first-century Stoic philosopher 
Musonius Rufus, for example, shows clear signs of having been influenced 
by Cynicism, and in result taught things very similar to Jesus, concerning, 
for example, charity, pacifism, forgiveness and brotherly love. And if that 
can be so for him, it can be so for Jesus, or anyone in the Christian tradition 
after him, or the Jewish tradition before him.48 And so, too, any other pop­
ular philosophy of the age. 
Element 33: In addition to its pagan influences, Christianity was also 
(obviously) influenced by several Jewish sects (see, in general, Elements 
1-5), and can be understood only in this context, too. This means the role 
must be considered not just of the OT and many other Jewish scriptures 
then revered (see Elements 6-9), but of specific Jewish sects and their dis­
tinctive ideologies and innovations, many of which we do not in fact know 
much or anything about (such as the so-called Galilean sect, whose par­
ticular beliefs, apart from being somehow opposed to the Pharisees, are 
otherwise unknown).49 
Christianity is a syncretism of pagan and Jewish salvation ideology, 
and as such differs from each precisely in what it borrows from the other. 
Therefore both must be understood, or at least be 'on our theoretical radar'. 
Even considering what is known, influences have been detected from the 
Pharisees (especially the liberal branch associated with the pre-Christian 
R. Hillel), the Essenes (and/or the sect[s] represented at Qumran), and cer­
tainly the Baptists-the pre-Christian Jewish sect led (if not founded) by 
John the Baptist around the assumed time of Christianity's birth-and pos­
sibly the Therapeutae (or whatever sectarian influence they and Christian-
48. For translations of the extant lectures of Rufus see Cora Lu੗ Musonius Rufus: 
The Roman Socrates (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1947); and Cynthia Ann 
Kent King, Musonius Rufus: Lectures and Sayings (Charleston, SC: Createspace, 201 1). 
For some of the similarities (and differences) between Rufus and Jesus see Richard 
Carrier, 'On Musonius Rufus: A Brief Essay•, at The Secular Web (1999), http://www. 
infidels.org/library/modern/richard_carrier/musonius.html. His teachings on charity, 
pacifism, forgiveness, and brotherly love are surveyed in Discourses 10, 14 and 19, and 
exemplified in stories told about him by others (collected in Lutz). 
49. On this general problem of ignorance, see Carrier, Proving History, pp. 129-34. 
For sources on the Galilean sect: Carrier, 'Spiritual Body', in Empty Tomb (ed. Price 
and Lowder), pp. 109, 200-201 n. 24. 

1 76 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
ity share in common), or even the Samaritans. 5° The more these influences 
are examined, the less original Christianity appears. 
50. Connections with the Pharisees: Harvey Falk, Jesus the Pharisee (New York: 
Paulist Press, 1985); Hyam Maccoby, Jesus the Pharisee (London: SCM Press, 2003). 
Connections with the Essenes and/or Qumran sect (which are far too numerous to be 
coincidental): James Charlesworth (ed.), Jesus and the Dead Sea Scrolls (New York: 
Doubleday, 1992); Joseph Fitzmyer, The Dead Sea Scrolls and Christian Origins 
(Grand Rapids, Ml: William B. Eerdmans, 2000); C. D. Elledge, The Bible and the Dead 
Sea Scrolls (Atlanta, GA: Society of Biblical Literature, 2005); James Charlesworth 
(ed.), The Bible and the Dead Sea Scrolls, Vol. III [= The Scrolls and Christian Origins) 
(Waco, TX: Baylor University Press, 2006). 
Note that the association of the Dead Sea Scrolls with a community at Qumran 
has been questioned (and with it the conclusion that they all derive from a single 
sect) but the scrolls appear coherent enough that they likely derive from the same 
sect even if stashed there by refugees and not by inhabitants of Qumran (on the 
ongoing controversy see wikipedia: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Qumran). Likewise 
the similarities between the Qumran sect and what is independently known of the 
Essene sect have been questioned, but we know there were at least six and possibly nine 
different sects of Essenes (and therefore no such thing as a 'normative' Essene sect), 
and the sim ilarities at Qumran are sufficient to adduce a high probability that the sect 
represented at Qumran was either Essene or heavily influenced by Essenes: on both 
points see sources and scholarship cited in Carrier, 'Spiritual Body', in Empty Tomb 
(ed. Price and Lowder), pp. 109, 200-201 nn. 23, 25, 27. 
The Therapeutae sect also bore similarities to both Christians and Essenes: Carrier, 
'Spiritual Body', pp. 109, 200 n. 22; with Joan Taylor, Jewish Women Philosophers 
of First-Century Alexandria: Philo's 'Therapeutae ' Reconsidered (Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 2003), esp. pp. 31-32. And as the Essenes were then regarded as a sect 
of the Samaritans (Carrier, 'Spiritual Body', pp. 200-201 nn. 23, 27, and 28), we might 
also find connections between Samaritanism and Christianity: see R.T. Anderson, 
'Samaritan Literature', in Dictionary of New Testament Background (ed. Craig Evans 
and Stanley Porter; Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity Press, 2000), pp. 1052-56; and in 
the same volume, H.G.M. Williamson and C.A. Evans, 'Samaritans', pp. 1056-61. On 
the Baptist cult (also known as the Hemerobaptists) see sources and scholarship cited 
in Carrier, 'Spiritual Body', pp. 108, 199 n. 18; and Joan Taylor, The lmmerser: John 
the Baptist within Second Temple Judaism (Grand Rapids, Ml: William B. Eerdmans, 
1997); on this sect's possible connections with Christianity: Clare Rothschild. Baptist 
Traditions and Q (TUbingen: Mohr Siebeck. 2005); and Lars Hartman, 'Into the Name 
of the Lord Jesus :· Baptism in the Early Church (Edinburgh: T. & T. Clark, 1997), 
pp. 9-35. On possible links between Essenes, Zealots and Christianity: S.G.F. Brandon, 
Jesus and the Zealots (New York: Scribner, 1967); and now Reza Asian, Zealot: The 
Lifo and Times of Jesus of Nazareth (New York: Random House, 2013). 
On the myriad links claimed between Christianity and Judaism in general (and some 
sects in particular) see John Meier, A Marginal Jew: Rethinking the Historical Jesus 
(4 vols.; New York: Doubleday, 1991-2009); Geza Vermes, Jesus the Jew (London: 
Collins, 1973); Geza Vermes, The Religion of Jesus the Jew (Minneapolis, MN: 
Fortress Press, 1993), and Geza Vermes, Jesus in his Jewish Context (Minneapolis, 
MN: Fortress Press 2003 · Bruce Chilton Rabbi Jesus New York: Doubleday, 2000 · 

5. Background (Context) 
177 
The beatitudes, for example, are barely more than a redaction of 
pre-Christian beatitude literature recovered from Qumran.51 And the col­
lection at Qumran by no means represents all the literature that would have 
been available to the first Christians. Indeed even what was there survives 
now only in scraps and fragments-in other words, we barely have a frac­
tion of what was at Qumran. Think of all the new ideas, scriptures, con­
cepts, interpretations, variants, genres and precedents we have discovered 
just in these fragments, and then realize what must be the number of other 
ideas, scriptures, concepts, interpretations, variants, genres and precedents 
there were in those times that we have not discovered (hence Element 9). 
This makes it impossible to argue that anything now thought peculiar to 
Christianity did not derive from some preexisting Jewish precedent (in one 
of the well-known sects, or one of the lesser-known), which has simply 
become lost in the scarce transmission of evidence from the past (hence 
Element 2). 
It must also be considered that Jewish sectarianism was often not asso­
ciated with formal institutions or control hierarchies and would therefore 
have been extremely fluid. For example, a sect of Essenes could adopt many 
of the teachings of the Pharisee Hillel and then go on to see itself as the 
genuine expression of the Baptists, and thereby look like all three sects. 
Which would make classification challenging, but ultimately unnecessary, 
since it really doesn't matter whether we identified it as an Essene sect or a 
Pharisee sect or a Baptist sect-no matter what we chose to call it, it would 
still be a hybrid of them all, and we would still need to attend to how it 
was influenced by each. As I've mentioned, this kind of eclecticism was a 
cultural fad of the time, characterizing philosophical schools as well as the 
sciences (Element 11); so it would be natural to see it anywhere experimen­
tation and innovation were especially rampant, and this was certainly the 
case in first-century Judaism (Element 2). 
E.P. Sanders, Jesus and Judaism (Philadelphia, PA: Fortress Press, 1985); Donald 
Hagner, The Jewish Reclamation of Jesus: An Analysis and Critique of Modern Jewish 
Study of Jesus (Grand Rapids, Ml: Academic Books, 1984); and James Charlesworth 
(ed.), Jesus· Jewishness: Exploring the Place of Jesus within Early Judaism (New 
York: Crossroad, 1991). 
51. See. e.g .. the analysis of 4Q525 and others in Craig Evans, 'The Recently 
Published Dead Sea Scrolls and the Historical Jesus', in Studying the Historical Jesus: 
Evaluatioࡨ of the State of Current Research (ed. Bruce Chilton and Craig Evans; 
Leiden: Brill, 1994), pp. 559-61; and in Craig Evans, "Jesus and the Dead Sea Scrolls 
from Qumran Cave 4', in Eschatology, Messianism. and the Dead Sea Scrolls (ed. Craig 
Evans and Peter Flint: Grand Rapids, Ml: William B. Eerdmans, 1997), pp. 91-100. For 
other examples see Peter Flint, 'Jesus and the Dead Sea Scrolls', in Historical Jesus tn 
Context (ed. Levine, Allison and Crossan), pp. 1 10-31. 

178 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
Element 34: Popular cosmology at the dawn of the Common Era in the 
Middle East held that the universe was geocentric and spherical and divided 
into many layers (see Chapter 3, §1), with the first layer of 'heaven' often 
called the 'firmament' (being the foundation holding up all the others) and 
consisting of all the air between the earth and the moon (or sometimes the 
same term only meant the topmost part of this: the sphere traveled by the 
moon). This expanse was known even then to extend hundreds of thousands 
of miles (see discussion in Chapter 4, §3).52 Above that were several more 
levels of heaven, the number varying depending on the scheme adopted, 
but the most commonplace view was that there were seven in all, one for 
each major celestial body: the region from the moon to Mercury being the 
first, then on to Venus, the Sun, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn (not always in that 
order), and finally the sphere of the stars (astronomers tended to regard the 
stars as distant suns; theologians tended to favor the theory that the stars 
comprised a single layer of lights at the top of heaven). 
This view was particularly popular with Jewish theologians, and readily 
accepted by the earliest Christians. 53 This model had already been read out 
of scripture even before the explosion of scientific discoveries that began 
in the classical period (the sixth and fifth centuries BCE) and took off in the 
Hellenistic (the fourth through second centuries BCE). As Genesis said, 'In 
the beginning God created the heavens and the earth', and 'the earth was 
without form and void, and darkness was upon the face of the deep, and the 
Spirit of God was moving over the face of the waters'; then God creates and 
separates light and darkness, producing the first evening and day, and then 
'God said, "Let there be a firmament in the midst of the waters, and let it 
separate the waters above from the waters below"', and so it was done, 'and 
God called the firmament Heaven', and that was the second day. Then 'God 
said, "Let the waters under the heavens be gathered together into one place, 
and let the dry land appear." And it was so. God called the dry land Earth, 
and the waters that were gathered together he called Seas' (Gen. 1.1-10). 
52. That the distance to the moon had to be in the hundreds of thousands of miles 
was argued (then famously) by Aristarchus and later proved by the (equally famous) 
astronomers Hipparchus and Posidonius over a century before the dawn of Christianity 
(as reported in, e.g., Cleomedes, On the Heavens 1.7; 2.1; and 2.3; and Pliny the Elder, 
Natural History 2.21.85). On this kind of knowledge being routine among the well­
educated of the time, see my future books Science Education in the Early Roman 
Empire and The Scientist in the Early Roman Empire. 
53. See James Tabor, Things Unutterable: Paul 's Ascent to Paradise in its Greco­
Roman, Judaic, and Early Christian Contexts (Lanham, MD: University Press of 
America, 1986), pp. 63-68, 1 16-21. 

5. Background (Context) 
179 
In this account God does not create ex nihilo. There were primordial 
waters, and a formless and empty earth. 54 God began creation by separat­
ing the primordial waters, which he did by forming a solid dome (in later 
cosmology, a sphere) called the 'firmament', raqia in Hebrew, or slereoma 
in Greek (a 'solid body', often the foundation or framework of a building). 55 
In this account, the firmament is called heaven, but it's clear what is meant 
is the .floor or basement of heaven, heaven itself being the 'waters above' 
the firmament. The rest is the world below, including the earth and its seas. 
In Gen. 1.20 birds are allowed to fly above the earth, but kala to stereoma 
lou ouranou, 'across the firmament of heaven'; so the 'firmament' was not 
just the roof of the first heaven but the whole sky holding up the heavens, 
the place where birds fly. The term could thus refer to the region of the air, 
or its cei I i ng, depending on the context. 
At the time Genesis was written, it was thought all the stars and planets 
and sun and moon were located on the same level, and thus Genesis says 
God attached them all to the firmament (1.14-17), so there would be the 
atmosphere up to the firmament (the place of clouds and air), the firmament 
itself (with all its stars and sun and moon), then the heavens above (the 
place of the celestial waters), effectively a three-level system. But by the 
time Christianity began, astronomy had been well established and its basic 
findings more widely known, and thus it was known that the moon is on 
one level, the sun on another, the planets on yet other levels, and the stars 
beyond (as Paul was aware: I Cor. 15.41 ), which is what expanded the levels 
imagined for heaven to at least seven. 
The structure of heaven is debated in the Talmud. 56 But the general opin­
ion resolved there is that there are either two heavens (the firmament and 
the 'heaven of heavens' above it) or seven heavens, which were interpreted 
in different ways. In one scheme, the first heaven is just the sky (or the 
lower part thereof); the second is the firmament separating that sky from 
the other heavens and containing all the stellar objects (such as moon, sun, 
and stars); the third is where millstones grind heavenly grain into manna; 
the fourth contains 'the heavenly Jerusalem and the Temple and the Altar', 
where the archangel Michael ('the great Prince') pays cult to God; the fifth 
54. Genesis 1.1 ('In the beginning God created the Heavens and the Earth') is a 
summary heading of what's about to be described, not the first action God took, as is 
clear from the fact that God does not name the Heavens until he separates it out of the 
primordial waters (in Gen. 1.2-8), and God does not name the Earth until he makes it 
appear (in Gen. 1.9-10) out of material already present (Gen. 1.2). See following note. 
55. On the cosmology of Genesis and its cultural background see Edward Babinski, 
'The Cosmology of the Bible', in Christian Delusion (ed. Loftus), pp. 109-47 (1 19-33 
for the biblical account). 
56. b. Uagigah 1 2b. 

180 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
is where the angelic host resides; the sixth contains warehouses of hail and 
snow and rain; and the seventh is where reside the souls of the righteous 
dead and the souls of those yet to be born, as well as a magic water that 
resurrects the dead. 
So says the Talmud. But the actual contents of each heaven could 
vary from account to account. 1 Enoch and 2 Enoch both incorporate a 
seven-level heaven in their accounts; as did the Ascension of Isaiah (as we 
saw in Chapter 3, §1), where again there are seven heavens, and the fir­
mament is beneath them {holding them up), consisting of all the air above 
the earth and its ceiling (7.9-13; 10.27-31), and the distance between the 
earth and the top of this firmament is vast (7.28). Likewise among the Dead 
Sea Scrolls, the 'Songs of the Sabbath Sacrifice' (4Q400-407 and 1 1Q17) 
also describe seven ascending levels of heaven, with different temples and 
thrones and angels in eachY Similarly, the first-century Testament of Levi 
(the third book of the Testaments of the Twelve Patriarchs) gives a different 
account of the seven heavens and what's in them. Yet that's just another 
example of a great many narratives that can be found in early Christian and 
Jewish literature. 
So this notion of seven heavens, with the heavenly firmament at the bot­
tom separating the earth from the higher heavens, had certainly become 
a fundamental Christian doctrine. 58 It was clearly a component of Chris­
tian belief even from earliest times. Paul assumes Jesus will descend 'from 
heaven' (ouranos) and then snatch us up 'into the clouds' (nephelai) to meet 
him in the 'air' (aer, meaning the terrestrial part of the atmosphere, i.e., the 
firmament); thus he distinguishes heavens above from air below (1 Thess. 
4. 16-17). And Paul mentions (without assuming anyone would challenge 
him or even think twice about it) that he knows a man (probably himself) 
who traveled up to 'the third heaven' (2 Cor. 1 2.2-4), where he says the 
garden of Eden was located (a common belief in Jewish cosmology of the 
time: Element 38). 
Element 35: Popular cosmology of the time also held that the sub-heaven, 
the firmament, was a region of corruption and change and decay, while 
the heavens above were pure, incorruptible and changeless. This view was 
most widely popularized by Aristotle and then by philosophers after him 
who adopted it, though many did not, and it remained a debated topic in 
science well into the Roman era. Nevertheless, it was such a good fit for 
57. See Daniel Stokl ben Ezra, The Impact of Yom Kippur on Early Christianity: 
The Day of Atonement from Second Temple Judaism to the Fifth Century (TObingen: 
Mohr Siebeck, 2003), p. 85. 
58. For example, Clement of Alexandria, Miscellanies 4.25 and 7.10 (§57.5); Origen. 
On the First Principles 2.11.6-7; Irenaeus, Demonstration of the Apostolic Preachin 9. 

5. Background (Context) 
1 8 1  
religious beliefs of the time that theologians clung to Aristotle's original 
scheme. 59 
This was especially popular among those who favored Platonism in their 
construction of the universe. For example, Plutarch confidently asserts that 
'this terrestrial universe', or the perigeios ['the stuff around the earth'], 
'and the moon along with it is irregular and variable and ever changing', 
whereas 'this is not true' of the rest of the universe (the regions above the 
moon).60 The same view of things is affirmed by the famous pre-Chris­
tian author Cicero, Paul's predecessor, and by the Jewish theologian Philo, 
Paul's contemporary.61 It is repeated or assumed in countless cases across 
pagan, Jewish and Christian literature of the period. 
Paul clearly embraced this view himself, and assumed his Christian 
congregations did as well. For example, in I Cor. 1 5.40-50, Paul divides 
the world into the region of decay (the 'terrestrial' world, the epigeia, the 
'earthly' places, meaning 'on or above the earth') and the region of indecay 
(the 'celestial' world, the epourania, the 'heavenly' places, meaning 'in 
the heavens'), which distinction is also reflected in 2 Cor. 5.1-5. This is the 
same division of worlds that Plato, Philo and Plutarch described. As Philo 
attests, this notion had already been assimilated in pre-Christian Jewish 
thought.62 
Element 36: Because of this division between the perfect unchanging heav­
ens and the corrupted sublunar world, most religious cosmologies required 
intercessory beings, who bridge the gap between those worlds, so God need 
not descend and mingle with corruption. This concept can already be seen 
in the cosmology ofPiato.63 It only became increasingly popular thereafter. 
Thus, Plutarch tells us that there are 'holy demons [daimones], guardians 
of men' which 'interpret and serve, being intermediary between gods and 
men, since they send up above the prayers and requests of men, and take 
back down to us revelations and gifts of blessings', and thus act as interme· 
59. Aristotle, On the Heavens 1.2 (see also 1.3.270b) and Meteorology 1.2-1.3; 
etc. Plato had already voiced something like it before Aristotle turned it into a more 
intelligible theory (e.g. Plato, Phaedrus 246d-247d). 
60. Plutarch, On Isis and Osiris 45.369c-d and 48.370f-49.371c. The same is 
assumed throughout his astrophysical treatise On the Face That Appears in the Orb 
ofthe Moon. 
61 . Cicero, On the Republic 6.17; Philo, On the Lifo of Moses 2.118-27; and Philo, 
On the Creation of the World 36. 
62. Besides the evidence in elements to follow (36 through 39), se Margaret 
Barker, The Great High Priest: The Temple Roots ofChristian Liturgy (New York: T. 
& T. Clark, 2003), pp. 207-10. 
63. Plato, Symposium 202e-203a. 

182 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
diaries, intercessory beings, between men and gods.64 Plutarch also says, 'it 
is not the gods . . .  but demons [daimones], the ministers of the gods, who 
are in charge of oracles' in temples, because the gods themselves are too 
lofty to descend and deal with men.65 
This view had become fuiJy assimilated by many sects in Judaism. 66 
Thus, in the Ascension of Isaiah (see Chapter 3, § 1 ), we also hear of medi­
ator beings who had to travel up and down through the heavens to carry 
gifts and communications between men and God, even needing passwords 
to 'open' the gates from one heaven to the next. The very same concept 
was taught in Mithraism.67 The Jewish theologian Philo provides the obvi­
ous explanation: God does not condescend to lower himself to the sublu­
nar world, so he sends angels and intermediaries to help and communicate 
with mankind, and it is these beings who deliver revelations and command­
ments, and the most important of these intermediary beings was the 'divine 
Logos' (see Element 40; see also my discussion of the equivalence of angels 
and mediary gods in Chapter 4, §3; and in Element I 1).68 
Thus, as Origen says of Jacob's dream in Gen. 28.12, 'a divine vision was 
presented to the view of our prophet Jacob-a ladder stretching to heaven, 
and the angels of God ascending and descending upon it, and the Lord 
supported upon its top', which he says tells us there are indeed many heav­
ens and beings that travel between God and man.69 This is the same view 
reflected in Jn 1.51, 'And he said to him, "Truly, truly, l say to you, you shall 
see the heaven opened, and the angels of God ascending and descending 
upon the Son of man"'. The same notion is represented again in the fact that 
it is the Holy Spirit that descends at Jesus' baptism (Mk 1.10), while God 
does not deign to descend himself, but only shouts from his station above 
(Mk 1.1 1). Jesus was clearly regarded as one of those beings. Romans 8.34; 
1 Jn 2.1; and He b. 7.25 all establish that Jesus' role was to advocate on our 
behalf in the presence of God, one ofthe common roles of an intermediary 
deity; in 1 Thess. 4.16 Jesus (not God himself) 'descends' from heaven to 
collect us; in Heb. 4.14 (with 8.1-5 and 9.1 1-24) we're told Jesus 'passed 
64. Plutarch, On Isis and Osiris 25.360d-27.361e (especially 25.360d-e and 
26.361 b-e). 
65. Plutarch, On the Obsolescence of Oracles 16.418e. 
66. See Jonathan Knight, Disciples of the Beloved One: The Christology. Social 
Setting and Theological Context of the Ascension of Isaiah (Sheffield: Sheffield 
Academic Press, 1 996), pp. 91-127. 
67. See Marvin Meyer, "The Mithras Liturgy', in The Historical Jesus in Context 
(ed. Amy·Jill Levine, Dale Allison Jr and John Dominic Crossan; Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press. 2006), pp. 184-85. 
68. Philo, On Dreams 1.68-71. This is also the consistent thesis of Philo's treatise 
On the Giants. 
69. Origen, Against Celsus 6.21. 

5. Background (Context) 
1 83 
through the heavens' for us, descending to effect his death and ascending 
to accomplish its effects, which is also affirmed in Eph. 4.8-1 0. For similar 
reasons Mithras was called the 'Mediator' (mesites).70 Accordingly, Jesus 
was also called the 'Mediator' (mesites).11 
Irenaeus further explains Jesus' role as a mediator deity: 
The baptism of our resurrection proceeds through these three points: 
God the Father, bestowing on us resurrection through His Son, by the 
Holy Spirit. For as many as carry the Spirit of God are led to the Logos, 
that is to the Son; and the Son then brings them to the Father; and the 
Father then causes them to possess incorruption. Without the Spirit it 
is not possible to behold the Logos of God. nor without the Son can any 
draw near to the Father-for the knowledge of the Father is the Son, and 
the knowledge of the Son of God is through the Holy Spirit; and, accord­
ing to the good pleasure of the Father, the Son ministers and dispenses 
the Spirit to whomsoever the Father wills and in whatever way He wills.72 
This was not out of line with Jewish theology of the time, which had many 
similar notions of mediator beings negotiating between earth and heaven 
and God and man.73 In the Ascension of Isaiah, for example, a mediator 
being (an angel) must descend to carry Isaiah through the many heavens 
and back again, and another mediator being, Jesus, must descend and 
reascend to accomplish his tasks on God's behalf. 
As Paul regarded Jesus to have been a preexistent being who humbled 
himself, died and then was exalted 'very high' (Phil. 2.6-8), he clearly 
understood Jesus in the same sense as the intermediary beings common 
throughout Jewish and pagan theology. It was through Jesus that God 
accomplished all things, even creation itself (I Cor. 8.6), and now our pres­
ent salvation (see again Element 10). Jesus is thus the intermediary agent of 
God's will from above. And this was a common concept in both pagan and 
Jewish religious thought. 
70. Plutarch, On Isis and Osiris 46.369e. 
71. I Timothy 2.5 ('there is one God, and one Mediator between God and men, 
himself man, Christ Jesus'): Heb. 8.6 ("But now has [Christ] obtained a more excellent 
ministry, given that he is also the Mediator of a better covenant. which hath been 
enacted upon better promises'); 9.15 (Christ "is the Mediator of a new covenant'); 12.24 
("and to Jesus the Mediator of a new covenant'). The 'Mediator' mentioned in Gal. 
3.19-20 might also mean Jesus (if the unspoken assumption, or perhaps secret teaching 
being hinted at, is that Jesus was secretly the Lord who communicated the first law to 
Moses), but in any event that passage entails belief in mediator beings generally. 
72. Irenaeus. Demonstration of the Apostolic Preaching 1. 
73. Alex Jassen, Mediating the Divine: Prophecy and Revelation in the Dead Sea 
Scrolls and Second Temple Judaism (Boston: Brill, 2007); and Loren Stuckenbruck, 
Angel Veneration and Christology (TUbingen: J.C.B. Mohr, 1995). 

184 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
Element 37: The lowest heaven, the firmament, the region of corruption and 
change, was popularly thought to be teeming with invisible spirits (pneu­
mata or psychai) and demons (daimones or daimonia), throughout the whole 
space, who control the elements and powers of the universe there, meddle in 
the affairs of man, and do battle with one another. In pagan conception some 
of these demons were evil and some were good, and the good demons were 
often intermediary deities (per the previous element). In Jewish conception 
all the demons were evil, defying the will of God; and they did the bidding 
of fallen angels who also set up residence in the firmament, who were once 
intermediary deities serving God but who were cast down and took up resi­
dence in the lower realm. And the leader of these fal len angels was Satan, 
also known by many other names (e.g. the Devil, Belial, Beelzebul, Lucifer, 
Sammael, or just the Adversary, the literal meaning of the word Satan). 
Satan had once been God's servant but was often at odds with him (e.g. 
Job 1.6-2.7; Zech. 3.1-2; 1 Chron. 21.1). Then in the intertestamental liter­
ature, under influence from Zoroastrianism, which also had an Adversary, 
who represented evil and darkness and waged war against the God of good 
and light, Jewish theology began to convert their Adversary into the same 
role. Stories were then developed of a time when Satan rebelled and was 
cast down from heaven by God, trapped in the lower realm, where he then 
set up dominion. Many of these stories stemmed from associating the Ser­
pent with Satan and then interpreting the Genesis story of the Serpent's 
fall (Gen. 3.1-19) as the story of Satan's fall. For example, Wis. 2.24 says, 
'it was by the envy of the Devil that death came into the world', a reference 
to the Genesis tale (in which it is by the wiles of the 'Serpent' that death 
comes into the world). Christians adopted this view (Heb. 2.14). This led to 
'reinterpreting' Satan's role in stories such as that of Job, which in cosmic 
history occurred after Satan's fall.74 
Many angels were cast down along with Satan, who then took sexual 
liberties with the first human women (the progeny of Adam and Eve), and 
one of the products of these unions were the demons (malevolent spirits), 
a notion arising from the interpretation of a curious story told in Gen. 6.1-
8. These demons and fallen angels then brought abundant evil into the 
world, requiring God to drown everyone in the great flood. A version of 
this story is told in 1 Enoch and 2 Enoch, for example, and another in the 
book of Jubilees, and different versions appear in various other places (e.g. 
it is assumed in Philo's treatise On the Giants that the angels mating with 
human women in the Genesis tale are demonic beings, and we likewise hear 
of the same in lrenaeus, Demonstration of the Apostolic Preaching 18). But 
74. See, e.g., Michael Stone, 'The Fall of Satan and Adam's Penance: Three Notes 
on the "Books of Adam and Eve'", Journal ofTheological Studies 44 (April 1993), pp. 
143-56. 

5. Background (Context) 
1 85 
the flood only destroyed all flesh, not the demons or fallen angels. Thus, 
the firmament still came to be dominated by countless demons, invisible 
malevolent spirits, who were ruled in turn by the fallen angels, who had 
set up their own thrones, dominions and principalities in the firmament in 
mockery of the heavenly thrones, dominions and principalities occupied 
by obedient angels appointed by God (as, e.g., those arrayed in the fourth 
heaven according to the Testament of Levi). And these 'demonic' angels 
were ruled in turn by Satan, the 'prince [archon] of demons' (Mk 3.22; Mt. 
12.24; and Lk. 11.15).75 
As we hear in the books of Enoch: 
One from the order of the archangels deviated, together with the division 
that was under his authority. He thought up the impossible idea that he 
might place his throne higher than the clouds which are above the earth, 
and that he might become equal to my power. And I hurled him out from 
the height, together with his angels. And he was flying around in the air, 
ceaselessly, above the abyss. 
And so, likewise, the division of angels under his command who rebelled 
with him (2 Enoch 29.4-5). 76 
This demonological view of the universe was fundamental to Christi­
anity's understanding of why the world needed Christ's sacrifice and how 
that event functions soteriologically. Everything that was wrong with the 
world was due to these demonic beings and their influence and power in the 
15. Evidence of this pre-Christian Jewish demonology is surveyed extensively in 
Dale Basil Martin, 'When Did Angels Become Demons?', Journal ofBiblical Literature 
129 (2010), pp. 657-77; Martin may be a little over-fastidious in his treatment of the 
vocabulary (I believe the language and concepts were more fluid than he assumes), but 
that won't matter for our purposes, since in English we can define 'demon' to mean any 
of these dark powers without distinction (see Chapter 4, §3), unless greater precision 
is, for whatever reason, both possible and necessary. At any rate, that this demonology 
of fallen angels and their progeny was a doctrine prevalent in the Dead Sea Scrolls 
is demonstrated in J.A. Sanders, 'Dissenting Deities and Philippians 2.1-1 1 ', Journal 
of Biblical Literature 88 (September 1969), pp. 279-90. For additional evidence and 
discussion of this intertestamental development see Archie Wright, The Origin of Evil 
Spirits: The Reception of Genesis 6:1-4 in Early Jewish Literature (Tubingen: Mohr 
Siebeck, 2nd edn, 2013), and George Nickelsburg, 'The Experience of Demons (and 
Angels) in l Enoch, Jubilees, and the Book of Tobit', PSCO Minutes [Philadelphia 
Seminar on Christian Origins] (March 10, 1988), http://ccat.sas.upenn.edu/psco/ 
year25/8803a.shtm I. 
76. This is an example of reading Satan's fall out of lsa. 14.12-15, which speaks 
of 'Lucifer' trying to set up his abode in heaven and being cast down by God. This is 
probably the verse being referenced in Lk. 10.18 (implying Jesus was present when that 
happened). Tertullian, Against Marcion 2.10, also read the vision regarding the king of 
Tyre in Ezek. 28.11-19 as being in fact about Satan and his faiJ from the Garden. See 
also Origen, On the First Principles 1.5.5 and Against Celsus 6.44. 

186 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
sublunar realm, separating man from God (particularly by infecting and 
corrupting the Jewish and pagan elite, among whom were the very priests 
charged with mediating between man and God).77 So these forces had to 
be magically defeated, and God had to be reconnected with men directly 
through a new backchannel that bypassed aH demonic and angelic power 
and influence. 
These were not novel ideas. The pagan world was awash with similar 
thinking. It was commonly thought that 'the whole air [a؍r] is full of[invis­
ible] souls which are called demons [daimones] and [some of these are] 
heroes', that is demigods, and these are the beings that send men dreams and 
revelations (i.e., intermediary beings: see Element 36). 78 Thus, for exam­
ple, Plutarch tells us that Isis and Osiris were originally 'great demons· 
[daimones], which he explains are neither gods nor men but something in 
between, being divine but also incarnate, which come in varying degrees 
of good and evil. As a result, 'there are great and strong beings in the atmo­
sphere' (the periechon, 'the surrounding (air)'] that are evil and delight in 
blasphemies and other perversions of religion and are the cause of al1 man­
ner of bad things that happen from the forces of nature, but there are also 
'holy demons, guardians of men' which serve men and gods as intermedi­
aries. 79 And these beings, though usually immortal, are capable of suffer­
ing and dying (because of their dual nature).80 Accordingly, for their heroic 
service (enduring suffering and trials), Plutarch says, 'Isis and Osiris were 
transformed through their virtue from "good demons" into "gods", just as 
later Hercules and Dionysus were', and now they have supreme power over 
all domains, above and below. But to renew and maintain his control over 
the universe, periodically Osiris descends into the firmament, where he 
acquires a body that is then killed (in a struggle with the demons there), and 
with the assistance of Isis he is resurrected and reascends to heaven in his 
immortal divine body (see again Elements 11 and 31).81 
In the popular cosmology of the educated, which was more informed 
by the sciences of the time, the realm of the dead was also transferred 
from an 'underworld' (which made less sense now that it was known that 
the earth is a sphere) to the 'firmament'. Plutarch, for example, explains 
that 'Hades' is actually the region between the earth and the moon, which 
77. See my analysis in Carrier, Not the Impossible Faith, pp. 148-54. 
78. Diogenes Laertius, Lives of Eminent Philosophers 8.32 (8.30 for the invisibility 
of these souls and of the aither, 'ether', above the firmament). 
79. Plutarch, On Isis and Osiris 25.360d-27.361e (especially 25.360d-e and 
26.361b-c). On some demons being good and others evil. see also Plutarch, On the 
Obsolescence ofOracles 16.418e and l7.419a. 
80. Plutarch, On the Obsolescence ofOracles 17.419b-e and 19.420a-b. 
81 . Plutarch, On Isis and Osiris 27.36le and 30.362e. 

5. Background (Context) 
187 
is filled with all manner of souls and spirits, includ;ing the souls of the 
dead, which ascend as high as their virtue allows-sbns being imagined as 
weighing souls down (as in Egyptian mythology, discussed in Element 11); 
while virtuous souls, accordingly, were so light that they float all the way 
to the top; some even live on the moon (like a cosmic Isle of the Blessed).s2 
The heavy souls, meanwhile, weighed down by their sins, become (in this 
scheme) evil demons.83 This is why the sublunar realm was peopled with 
demons. Evil beings could not even ascend as high as the moon, much less 
to realms above. 84 
Jewish demonology was structured similarly, but was more faithful to 
the original Zoroastrian picture of a cosmos at war between sons of light 
and sons of darkness, with a supreme evil deity (Satan) in charge of the lat­
ter. As we saw in chapter 3 (§1), the Ascension of Isaiah 7.9-10 says Isaiah 
was carried up by an angel and together they 'ascended to the firmament' 
where they saw Satan and his hosts 'and a great struggle was taking place 
there, and the angels of Satan were envious of one another'. And likewise 
10.29-31 says, 'the firmament' is 'where the prince of this world dwells' 
along with countless demons, which he calls 'the angels of the air', which 
all 'struggle with one another in envy . . .  plundering and doing violence to 
one another'. 
Another version of this pre-Christian Jewish demonology is articulated 
by Philo: 
Those beings, whom other philosophers call demons, Moses usually calls 
angels. And they are souls hovering in the air. And let no one suppose 
that what is here stated is a fable, for it is necessarily true that the uni­
verse must be filled with living things in all its parts, since every one of 
its primary and elementary portions contains its appropriate animals and 
such as are consistent with its nature-the earth containing terrestrial 
animals, the sea and the rivers containing aquatic animals, and the fire 
such as are born in the fire (but it is said, that such as these last are found 
chiefly in Macedonia), and then also the heaven containing the stars: for 
82. Plutarch, On the Face That Appears in the Orb ofthe Moon 27.942fand 27.943c. 
For further evidence of the widespread nature of this view and its origins see Plutarch, 
Moralia, Volume XII (trans. Harold Cherniss and William Helmbold; Loeb Classical 
Library; Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1957), pp. 195-96 (note d) and 
201 (note c). 
83. Plutarch, On the Face That Appears in the Orb ofthe Moon 29.944a-30.944e; 
see also Mora/ia, Volume XII (1957), pp. 211 (note/) and 212 (note b). 
84. On Plutarch's demonology and its ultimate origins in Zoroastrian demonology 
(which was the same source from which Jewish demonology developed) see J. Gwyn 
Griffiths, Plutarch's De lside et Osiride (Cardiff: University of Wales Press, 1970), pp. 
18-33, 56, 383-87 (Griffiths traces it to the syncretism of Xenocrates, a pupil of Plato 
and Aristotle and eventual head of Plato's Academy). 

1 88 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
there are entire souls pervading the universe, being unadulterated and 
divine . . . .  It is therefore necessary that the air also should be full of liv­
ing beings. And these beings are invisible to us, inasmuch as the air itself 
is not visible to mortal sight. But it does not follow, because our sight is 
incapable of perceiving the forms of souls, that for that reason there are 
no souls in the air. But it follows of necessity that they must be perceived 
by the mind, in order that like may be seen by like . . . .  
Some of these souls have descended into bodies, and others have not 
thought it worthwhile to approach any one of the portions of the earth, 
and these, when hallowed and surrounded by the ministrations of the 
Father, the Creator has been accustomed to employ as hand-maidens 
and servants in the administration of mortal affairs. But those having 
descended into the [lower world] as into a river, at one time are carried 
away and swallowed up by the voracity of a most violent whirlpool, and 
at another time, striving with all their power to resist its impetuosity, they 
at first swim on the top of it, and afterwards fly back to the place from 
which they started . . . .  
lf, therefore, you consider that souls, and demons, and angels are 
things differing not only in name, but also in reality, you will then be 
able to discard that most heavy burden, superstition. But as men in gen­
eral speak of good and evil demons, and in like manner of good and evil 
souJs, so also do they speak of angels, looking upon some as worthy of a 
good appellation, and calling them ambassadors of man to God, and of 
God to man, and sacred and holy on account of this blameless and most 
excellent office. But others, again, you will not err if you look upon as 
unholy and unworthy of any address. 
11 
Thus we have a scheme of intermediary beings (per Element 36) and invis­
ible creatures of varying kinds, in which some have become corrupted by 
their interaction with the world below, becoming unholy angels, or demons, 
or evil spirits. 
It is in the context of all the above that Christianity in general, and pas-
sages in the NT in particular, must be understood. As Paul says: 
The things which the Gentiles sacrifice, they sacrifice to demons 
[daimonia], and not to God. And I would rather you not have commu­
nion with demons. You cannot drink the cup of the Lord, and the cup of 
demons. You cannot partake of the table of the Lord, and of the table of 
demons (1 Cor. 10.20-21). 
For Paul, these demons were real beings meddling in the world and cor­
rupting and misleading mankind. Those called 'gods' and 'lords' and wor­
shiped as such by the pagans were all in fact evil demons (1 Cor. 8.5). This 
notion was pervasive in early Christianity. For example, 'some shall fall 
away from the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits [pneumata) and the 
teachings of demons [daimonia]' (I Tim. 4.1), and those who 'believe God 
85. Philo, On the Giants 6-16. 

5. Background (Context) 
1 89 
is One do well; for the demons [daimonia] also believe, and shudder' (Jas 
2.19). Thus we are told we must shun the 'wisdom that is not a wisdom 
that comes down from above, but is earthly, sensual, demonic' (Jas 3.1 5), 
where the term for 'demonic', daimoniodes ('of demons') is chosen pre­
cisely because it is assumed that demons reside in the realm of the earthly, 
and not in the realm 'above' it from where true wisdom descends. 
In Rom. 8.38, we also hear that Christians are opposed by and must 
overcome 'angels' [aggeloi] and 'principalities' [archai] and 'powers' 
[dunameis], which does not mean temporal human powers (those threats he 
already enumerated in v. 35), not only because 'angels' clearly are no such 
thing, but also because human powers are not typically described in these 
terms. There was no such office in the Roman Empire as a 'principality' 
(archl), and the term was at that time rarely used in that way; and 'powers' 
for Paul typically meant supernatural powers, powers over the universe, not 
political power (e.g. 1 Cor. 12.28-29; 2 Cor. 2.12; Gal. 3.5). We also know 
these terms were widely used in Jewish apocrypha to refer to the demonic 
powers holding the sublunar wor1d in thrall.86 These terms were also used 
for God's authorities as well (e.g. Col. 1 .16; Eph. 1.20-21). Thus, 'princi­
palities' meant angels assigned certain domains by God, or fallen angels 
assigned certain domains by Satan (or having seized those domains, by one 
device or another; for the world of the fallen was not as orderly and obedi-
86. See G.H.C. MacGregor, 'Principalities and Powers: The Cosmic Background 
of Paul's Thought', New Testament Studies I (1954), pp. 17-28; Bo Reicke, 'The Law 
and This World according to Paul', Journal of Biblical Literature 70 (1951), pp. 259-76. 
Though this interpretation was opposed by Wesley Carr, Angels and Principalities: 
The Background, Meaning, and Development of the Pauline Phrase hai archai kai 
hai exousiai (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1981), he is pretty much alone, 
and could only reach his conclusions by engaging in specious argumentation that 
ignores the rest of Jewish and Christian literature and relies on assuming all passages 
arguing against him are conveniently 'interpolations'. Accordingly, his methods and 
analysis were thoroughly refuted by Walter Wink, Naming the Powers: The Language 
of Power in the New Testament (Philadelphia, PA: Fortress Press, 1984). The current 
view is best represented by Wink and by George H. van Kooten, Cosmic Christoiogy 
in Paul and the Pauline School: Colossians and Ephesians in the Context ofGraeco­
Roman Cosmology, with a New Synopsis of the Greek Texts (TObingen: Mohr Siebeck, 
2003), pp. 95-103. See also Alan Segal, 'Ruler ofThis World: Attitudes about Mediator 
Figures and the rmportance of Sociology for Self-Definition', in Jewish and Christian 
Self-Definition, Vol. II, Aspects of Judaism in the Graeco-Roman Period (ed. E.P. 
Sanders; Philadelphia, PA: Fortress Press, 1981), pp. 245-68, 403-13; and Alan Segal, 
Two Powers in Heaven: Early Rabbinic Reports about Christianity and Gnosticism 
(Leiden: Brill, 1977). Also of interest is Clinton Arnold, Powers of Darkness: 
Principalities and Powers in Paul 's Letters (Downers Grove, IL: lnterVarsity Press, 
1992). Although Arnold and Wink are true believers (they think demons are real), their 
scholarship remains apt. 

1 90 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
ent). Many other angels were then subordinate to those princes. 'Powers' 
then meant spirits with control over the forces of the universe, which could 
again mean holy spirits (or simply the Holy Spirit), which were the 'pow­
ers' by which Christians effected miracles (most commonly, power over 
demons, to expel them from their abodes), or unclean spirits, demons, who 
similarly could effect miracles, also having seized power over aspects of 
the sublunar world (or been assigned such power by fallen angelic princes). 
As Plutarch explains (see Element 14), in the common demonological 
worldview, the 'elements' and powers of the universe were not identical 
to the demons (the 'divinities') named after them, but the demons were 
the cosmic beings in control ofthose elements and powers-unlike what 
the 'scientists' say, which (Plutarch explains) is that these personifications 
are mere allegorical fictions, and all that really exist are the mindless ele­
ments and forces of nature (a view too atheistic for Plutarch). Anyone who 
accepted a demonological theory (as Plutarch did) was by definition reject­
ing that scientific worldview. The Christians were most definitely demonol­
ogists. Thus, when Paul says Jesus must destroy 'every principality' [arche] 
and 'every authority' [exousia] and 'power' [dunamis], the most important 
of which is Death itself [Thanatos], he does not mean human government 
officials but the demonic powers that were in a state of rebellion against 
God, and thus were Christ's 'enemies' (1 Cor. 15.24-28}.87 This for the same 
reason as in Romans, but all the more so as Paul elsewhere says all human 
authorities are God's ministers, and thus not his enemies (Rom. 13.1-7}, so 
he clearly cannot mean human authorities here (see Chapter 1 1, §8). 
The only term used to describe these 'enemies' that Paul ever uses to 
refer to human authorities is the generic 'authority' [exousia]. Otherwise 
when he speaks of human leaders he uses archon, 'principal', as in 'first in 
rank', not arche, 'principality', and he never speaks of them as 'powers'. In 
Rom. 13.1-7, for example, Paul is certainly speaking of human authorities, 
which he says Christians should always obey. The terms he uses here are 
exousiai hyperechousai, 'those holding higher authority', and archontes, 
'principals' (or 'princes'), and he says none would have authority [exousia] 
if God had not put them there-in fact, he says, they should be regarded 
as the ministers of God, and so opposing 'the authorities' is tantamount 
to opposing God. But we know the same terms could also be used to refer 
to the demonic kingdom. It simply depended on context. Likewise, since 
angels could be assigned 'authority', just as human officials could (e.g. 
1 Pet. 3.22), again which kind of 'authority' you meant depended on con­
text. 
87. So, e.g., lrenaeus, Demonstration of the Apostolic Preaching 85 and 96. A 
similar line-up appears in 1 Pet. 3.22, where Jesus is put in charge of a celestial array 
of 'angels [aggeloi], authorities [exousiai], and powers [dunameis)'. 

5. Background (Context) 
1 9 1  
The same follows for archon, 'principal, prince, headman'. This is evi­
dent in Eph. 2.2, which was forged in Paul's name but clearly by someone 
of his sect, and relatively early in the development of the church. There we 
have the statement that before baptism each Christian 'once walked accord­
ing to the fashion [ai«5n] of this world [kosmos houtos], according to the 
prince [archon] of the domain [exousia] of the air [aer], the spirit [pneuma] 
who is now working in the sons of disobedience'. Here, just as 'authority' 
is clearly being used of a supernatural dominion and not a human office, 
so also the word arch؎n is used to refer to a celestial being, Satan. Thus 
it, too, could be used of nonhuman authorities without need of explana­
tion. And here we also have a clear expression of common Judeo-Christian 
demonology: Satan rules over the firmament, the entire 'domain of the air', 
which was considered 'this world' (as opposed to the other, heavenly world 
above). 
We should understand the same when Paul speaks of 'this world' as that 
which 'we ought not conform ourselves to' (Rom. 12.2), which is soon to 
'pass away' (1 Cor. 7.31), and from which comes a 'wisdom' that is 'folly 
to God' (1 Cor. 3.19), and in which sinners live (I Cor. 5.9-11). We can be 
certain of this, because Paul himself said that this part of the universe was 
under the dominion of Satan, whom he calls 'the god of this world', who, 
Paul says, is actively blinding mankind so they can't see the divine light 
radiating from Jesus (2 Cor. 4.4). 88 Paul frequently references Satan as their 
principal enemy, who presently ruled all flesh but whom God would one 
day destroy.89 Satan likewise has his own angels, which he sends down to 
torment us (2 Cor. 12.7). 
This was always how Christians understood Paul. As Origen explains, 
when Paul uses these terms in such contexts, he means demonic pow­
ers. For there are 'spirits of wickedness, or malignant spirits, or unclean 
demons' who have made themselves into 'principalities' and 'powers' and 
'rulers of the darkness of the world'.90 The Acts of John (v. 98) likewise says 
that among 'the devils and Satan' and their violent deeds plaguing us there 
are 'powers [dunameis], authorities [exousiai], principalities [archai]', and 
88. Paul could also mean 'the god of this age', the word aion meaning 'era', but often 
indicating the temporal realm; but since Paul certainly does not mean Satan ruled over 
the heavens, he clearly is referring to the sublunar domain (which would be dissolved 
in the end); Ignatius, Ephesians 11 and 19; Magnesians I; Tra/lians 4; and Romans 7 
also call Satan 'the prince of this world' (combining the language of Ephesians and 
2 Corinthians). The same term is used for Satan in Jn 12.31; 14.30; and 16.11. 
89. Rom. 16.20; I Cor. S.S; 1.5; 2 Cor. 2.1 1; 1 1.13-1 S; 1 Thess. 2.18. See also 2 Thess. 
2.3-10; Eph. 4.27; 6.11; I Tim. 1.20; 3.6-7; S.15; 2 Tim. 2.26; Jas 4.7; I Pet. S.8; I Jn 
3.10, 5.19; Jude 9; and of course this is the standard doctrine throughout the Gospels 
and Revelation. 
90. Origen, On the First Principles 1.8.4. 

192 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
'demons' [daimones] (presumably without special powers or dominion). 
as well as 'feats [energeiai], boasts [apeilai], and spirits [thumoi]', which 
terms probably all refer to different kinds of spirits (miracle-working spir­
its, boastful or threatening spirits-and angry spirits, the thumos being 
typically regarded as the seat of anger). And in the Christian expansion 
of the Ascension of Isaiah we hear again of 'the prince of this world, and 
of his angels, authorities and powers' (1.4) and that 'Beliar, the angel of 
lawlessness, is the ruler of this world' (2.4), and 'Beliar the great ruler, the 
king of this world, will descend, having ruled the world since it came into 
being; indeed, he will descend from his firmament in the likeness of a man' 
to kill and persecute (4.2), along with other 'princes and powers of that 
world' (10.15).91 
Accordingly, we read in Eph. 6.1 1-12 that we need the 'armor of God' 
to resist the 'wiles of the Devil', because 'we wrestle not against flesh and 
blood, but against principalities [archai], against authorities [exousiai], 
against the rulers [kosmokratores] of the darkness of this [world], against 
spiritual wickedness in the heavenly places [epourania]'. Likewise, Eph. 
3.10 says the success of the church will demonstrate the wisdom of God 'to 
the principalities [archai] and powers [dunameis] in the heavenly places'. 
Here, in both passages, these terms are certainly referring to demonic 
princes and authorities, not human ones. Another forgery in the name of 
Paul, but again from the same sect and period, says Christ has 'cast off the 
principalities [archai] and authorities [exousiai] and made a public exam­
ple of them, freely triumphing over them' (Col. 2.15), again using this ter­
minology for demonic agents.92 
In Gal. 4.3-9, we also hear of 'elements of the cosmos' [stoicheia tau 
kosmou] enslaving people (before baptism freed them), and these 'cosmic 
elements' we're told are 'in their nature not gods', because they are 'poor 
91. Note that (as I've abundantly shown) at this point in history Satan and his 
demons were thought to live in the sky (hence in outer space); the notion of either 
inhabiting (and ruling) a subterranean hell would not arise for many more centuries: 
that notion began originally as a doctrine about their ultimate fate after .Jesus returns 
(e.g. Rev. 20), which later became conflated with a separate tradition that God's own 
angels (not demons) will carry out future punishments in a subterranean hell (e.g. 
Apocalypse of Peter). 
92. The word apekduomai, 'take off from oneself'. is frequently translated here 
as 'despoil, disarm' in modern Bibles, but that actually makes little sense. In normal 
use, that word would mean 'take offjor oneself', which would have to mean he took 
the principalities and powers for himself, but this sentence is about the beings, not their 
offices, so that translation cannot be correct; it confuses what is actually being said 
here. This word usually refers to undressing oneself (e.g. Col. 3.9), and thus is surely 
meant here to say that Christ freed himself from their power (casting off their authority 
over h im). 

5. Background (Context) 
193 
and weak', yet some people want to turn back and be their slaves again 
even after knowing the true god. It is generally agreed that Paul does not 
mean here mindless elements but elemental spirits, those who, as Plutarch 
explained, control and rule over the elements and whom philosophers mis­
takenly think are mere allegories for the elements, but as Plutarch insists, 
are actually the demons in control of those elements. 93 This is fairly clear 
from Paul's language, since one does not become a 'slave' of mindless 
natural elements or consider them 'gods', nor does one say they are 'not 
gods by nature' merely because they are poor and weak-rather than, say, 
because they are in fact mindless forces. 
So likewise we can understand Col. 2.8-10, where we are warned not 
to be deceived or live according to the 'elements of the cosmos' [stoicheia 
tou kosmou] but to live instead 'according to Christ'. Again, the elemental 
spirits are here understood to be the beings opposed to Christ, who deceive 
us (and thereby deceived men into promoting 'philosophies' and 'tradi­
tions' that are not according to Christ), because Christ alone 'is the head of 
all principality [arche] and authority [exousia]'. Deception, after all, is the 
particular activity of Satan and his hosts (e.g. 2 Cor. 1 1.3, 14; Gal. 1.8-9), 
who tempt us thereby to sin (e.g. 1 Cor. 7.5; 2 Cor. 2.11). That Colossians 
associates subservience to the 'elements of the cosmos' (2.8, 20) with the 
'worship of angels' and the receiving of visions (2.18) verifies the point.94 
Learning all of this was once a component of the secret teaching given 
to Christians of varying ranks (Element 13).95 It's unlikely that Paul came 
to be completely reinterpreted by all later Christians. We have seen enough 
evidence that Paul does in fact mean supernatural powers and princes when 
he speaks thereof, inhabiting and traversing the firmament, and all later 
Christian interpreters understood him to mean that. It was clearly a fun­
damental component of Christian teaching in all documents post-dating 
Paul. And from the preponderance of evidence here, we should conclude 
it was certainly a fundamental component of Christian teaching in Paul­
and therefore in the original Christian church as a whole, as he clearly felt 
it required no defense or explanation in his correspondence. 
93. See Reicke, 'The Law and This World according to Paul'. See Testament of 
Solomon 34 for a later example of demons referring to themselves as 'elements' (we 
would now say 'elementals'). 
94. See the analysis of Andrew Lincoln, •The "Philosophy" Opposed in the Letter 
[to the Colossians]', in The New Interpreter's Bible: New Testament Survey (ed. Fred 
Craddock; Nashville, TN: Abingdon Press, 2005), pp. 242-47. 
95. For example, Ignatius, Tra/lians 5; Smyrnaeans 6; and the Syriac Ephesians 
3.9. And in Origen's introductory textbook for new initiates. although by his time much 
of the doctrine seems to have been lost (as he professes not to know certain things that 
were clearly known to Paul and his congregations): Origen, On the First Principles 
1.5.2. 

1 94 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
Element 38: (a) In this same popular cosmology, the heavens, including the 
firmament, were not empty expanses but fi lled with all manner of things, 
including palaces and gardens, and it was possible to be buried there. (b) 
In this worldview everything on earth was thought to be a mere imperfect 
copy of their truer forms in heaven, which were not abstract Platonic forms 
but actual physical objects in outer space. 
This cosmological view is explicit in Hebrews: 
According to the law almost everything is cleansed by blood, and apart 
from the shedding of blood there is no forgiveness. So it was necessary 
that the copies of the things in the heavens should be cleansed with these 
[i.e., with Jewish blood rites]; but the heavenly things themselves with 
better sacrifices than these. For Christ entered not into a holy place made 
with hands built to look like the true one, but into heaven itself, now to 
appear before the face of God on our behalf(9.22-24). 
Here we have multiple heavens (plural) in which reside the true versions of 
everything (including the temple itself), and of which the things on earth 
are only imperfect copies. The celestial temple is 'not made with hands' 
because it was made by God, just like our celestial bodies will be (2 Cor. 
5.1). We see this already in the Dead Sea Scrolls, where the 'Songs of the 
Sabbath Sacrifice' (4Q400-407 and IIQ17) describe seven ascending levels 
of heaven, several of which have more perfect 'copies' of the temple and 
the holy of holies (the inner chamber of the temple), and in yet higher ones 
'angels offer pure and perfect sacrifices'. There are even versions of earthly 
things in the firmament, as we learn in the Ascension of Isaiah 1.10, which 
says, 'as it is above, so is it also on the earth, for the likeness of that which 
is in the firmament is also on the earth'. Although those things would not 
be the perfect models, which resided only in the perfect heavens above, 
but half-corrupt imitations, in between the models above and their earthly 
copies below. 96 
Thus, Heb. 12.21-22 says that when Moses ascended the mountain to 
receive the commandments he beheld the true 'Mount Zion and the city of 
the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem' inhabited by 'innumerable angels 
in festal gathering' and 'the assembly of the firstborn who are enroHed in 
heaven' and 'the spirits of just men made perfect' (the teleioi, the same 
term used for higher ranking Christians: Element 10) and, of course, God. 
And God told Moses to make everything in the earthly temple according 
to the pattern of the true version he saw in heaven (Exod. 25.40). Thus 
Heb. 8.5 says the earthly priests 'serve a copy and a shadow of the heav-
96. For examples of other objects and structures in the heavens (roads, houses, 
pens, scrolls, chariots) see, again, Babinski, 'Cosmology', in Christian Delusion 
(ed. Loftus) along with Jaco Gericke, "Can God Exist if Yahweh Doesn't?', in End of 
Christianity (ed. Loftus), pp. 131-54 (esp. pp. 144-49). 

5. Background (Context) 
195 
enly sanctuary, for when Moses was about to erect the tabernacle, he was 
instructed by God, saying, "See that you make everything according to the 
example that was shown to you on the mountain"'. It is therefore in this 
context that we must understand sayings such as 'whatever you bind on 
earth shall be bound in heaven, and whatever you loose on earth shall be 
loosed in heaven' (Mt. 16.19; again in 18.18). This is a reference to every­
thing having its (superior) double in heaven. 
We know Paul shared this view. In 2 Cor. 12.2-4, he says a man (possibly 
Paul himself) 'was taken as far up as the third heaven', where 'Paradise' 
(paradeisos) was located. The notion that Paradise (meaning the Garden of 
Eden) was located in the third heaven is also explained in the apocryphal 
Revelation of Moses, and likewise assumed in 2 Enoch, and is a part ofthe 
same cosmological tradition.97 As lrenaeus says, Paradise was 'a place bet­
ter than this world, excelling in air, beauty, light, food, plants, fruit, water, 
and all other necessaries of life'.98 ln other words, the perfect versions of all 
these things, of which their counterparts in the earthly realm were but poor 
imitations. The OT describes only one singular 'Paradise' (the same word 
used by Paul, according to the Septuagint text of Gen. 2.8-3.24) and that 
was 'in Eden', and in that Paradise God specially made its own trees and 
plants and a river and angelic beings, all in its own soil, and also versions 
of every animal. Many later texts of the Bible use the same word to refer 
generically to gardens, but these would be examples of imperfect attempts 
to copy the original Garden. 
This worldview is also described by Philo, who explains that the air 
extends from the earth to the moon, and the earth, air, and water all move, 
mix, and change below the moon, while above all that are the unchanging 
heavens (see again Element 35), where reside the true models and forms of 
all things, including the true animals, of which all things below the moon 
are just imperfect copies. He further explains that the elements below the 
moon are the perceptible ones, the rest are invisible to the senses, but are 
seen with the eye of the mind. 99 And these perfect versions in heaven are 
themselves copies of the even-more-perfect ideas of them in the mind of 
God. Because God made perfect invisible copies of everything in heaven 
first (including a perfect invisible earth, and a perfect invisible star of which 
all other stars are copies, and so on), which were themselves copies of their 
97. Revelation of Moses 37.4M5; 40.1-2. This text is otherwise known as the Greek 
edition of the Life of Adam and Eve, an early-first-century Jewish document, possibly 
translating an even earlier account in Hebrew or Aramaic. See also 2 En. 8.1-9.1 
[redaction A and 8] and 42.3 [redaction A]. 
98. Irenaeus, Demonstration of the Apostolic Preaching 11. 
99. Philo, On the Life of Moses 2.118-27. 

196 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
even-truer forms in the mind of God; then God made the material (and thus 
inferior) copies of all these things, the versions that we know and see.100 
For example, Philo says, 'from the model of the cosmos, perceptible only 
by the intellect, the Creator made an incorporeal heaven, and an invisible 
earth, and the form of air and of empty space', and the latter 'he called the 
abyss, for empty space is very deep and yawning with immense width', and 
'then he created the incorporeal substance of water and of air' and then 
from 'a model of the sun, perceptible only to the intellect' God then made 
'a star above the heavens, the source of those stars which are perceptible 
by the external senses', a 'universal light', of which our sun is but a copy.101 
The true copies that were first created can only be seen by the mind, in 
fact only a pure and reverent mind. Philo goes on to explain that the true 
heaven is incorporeal, but the visible heaven is corporeal and called the 
firmament. Thus the firmament itself is a copy of the heavens above it. A 
mind that is separated from the body can rise on wings into the 'air' (the 
region subject to chaos and change) and then to the 'higher' firmament, and 
then to the heavenly bodies (moon, sun and stars), then to the true incorpo­
real heavens above, where the true versions of all things can be seen; and of 
these heavens there are many levels, at the top of which is the Great King.102 
There were even two Adams, the perfect celestial Adam, and the copy of 
him, the Adam made of earth who fathered mankind (see Element 39). So 
'the incorporeal world was already completed, having its seat in the divine 
Logos' (see Element 40), 'and the world perceptible by the external senses 
was made on the model of it'; and the first part of that 'was the heaven that 
is more correctly called "the firmament", because it is corporeal'. 103 The 
idea of a11 this goes at least as far back as Plato, 104 but by Philo's time it 
had become more sophisticated, with at least three levels of creation: the 
perfect ideas in God's mind, then perfect quasi-physical celestial forms of 
those ideas, then earthly copies thereof. 
This meant there were things in heaven. The Testament of Abraham, for 
example, says Abraham was shown structures in heaven, including gates 
and roads and thrones and halls and tables and linens and books with ink 
and quill and so on, as well as an (apparently) resurrected Adam and Abel 
observing and judging the souls of the dead. And in fact the Revelation of 
Moses says Adam was buried in Paradise, literally up in outer space, in the 
100. Philo, On the Creation of the World 29-31, 36, 70-71. 
101. Philo, On the Creation ofthe World 29, 31. 
102. Philo, On the Creation of the World 70-71. 
103. Philo, On the Creation of the World 36. 
104. Plato, Phaedrus 246d-247d. 

5. Background (Context) 
1 97 
third heavenΠ complete with celestial linen and oils.105 Thus human corpses 
could be buried in the heavens. Because there was obviously soil up in 
Paradise-in factȩ not only is all manner of celestial vegetation planted in 
itȩ but when Adam is buried in itΡ he is buried in the same place from which 
God took the clay of which Adam was made. In many other Jewish apoc­
rypha there are accounts of all manner of solid structures in all other levels 
of heaven, too, so tombs and graves obviously can exist there as well. Thus, 
according to the Revelation of Moses, Adam is cast down from Paradise, 
residing on earth below for the remainder of his life; but in death his body 
is carried back up to the heavens for burial. Abel is likewise buried there, 
and later so is Eve, and many others among the righteous dead.106 This also 
means the original Tree of Life is in outer space (being in the very Paradise 
which is located in the third heaven), just as the true Temple and Altar of 
God are in outer space. 
Element 39: (a) In this cosmology there were also two Adams: one perfect 
celestial version, of which the earthly version (who fathered the human 
race) is just a copy. And (b) the first Christians appear to have connected 
their Jesus Christ to that original celestial Adam. 
In Philo's scheme, the first Adam was an invisible perfect man, having 
no gender and being immortal and imperishable, and this is what explains 
there being two creation accounts in Genesis (Gen. 1-2.3 vs. Gen. 2.4-25): 
the first related to the creation of the true man, and the second related to 
the creation of his mortal copy.l07 Although Philo thinks a lot of the cre­
ation account is allegorical (for him there was no Paradise and no Serpent, 
for example),108 it is clear other Jewish theologians disagreed with him (as 
we've seen ample evidence of: see Elements 37 and 28). And as we saw, 
even Philo clearly imagines a real cosmos with a real heavens with perfect 
versions of things, of which the things below are imperfect copies-and the 
things in the heavens can be seen only by higher, spiritual senses (the pure 
intellect), unlike ordinary 'material' things that are seen by our 'external' 
(material) senses. 
In response to the question of why God put the 'material' Adam in 
Paradise but didn't do the same for the perfect heavenly Adam, Philo 
answers that 'some persons have said, when they imagined that Paradise 
105. Revelation of Moses 32-41 (esp. 32.4, 37-40); se also Tabor, Things 
Unutterable, p. 116. Obviously the canonical NT book. of Revelation likewise depicts 
heaven as full of places. structures and objects. 
106. Revelation of Moses 21.6. 
107. Philo, On the Creation of the World 134-36. 
108. Philo, On the Creation ofthe World 153-65. 

198 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
was a garden, that because the man who was created was endowed with 
senses, therefore he naturally and properly proceeded into a sensible place', 
whereas 'the other man, who is made after God's own image, being appre­
ciable only by the intellect, and invisible, had all the incorporeal species for 
his share'; but Philo thinks rather that all this Paradise stuff is allegorical 
and not literally meant.109 However, it's clear that Philo was dissenting from 
a view other Jews held, and the view of those others was that there were 
two Paradises, the material one and the heavenly one, or possibly more than 
two, many levels or 'emanations', from the perfect Paradise on high, to the 
more material Paradise in the third heaven, to the many gardens on earth, 
which are all copies of those. 
Of the two Adams, Philo also says, 'there are two kinds of men, the one 
made according to the image of God, the other fashioned out of the earth', 
because 'the image of God is the mold for all other things, and every i m i­
tation aims at this, of which it is an imitation'.110 And, therefore, 'the races 
of men are twofold: for one is the heavenly man, and the other the earthly 
man' and 'the heavenly man, as being born in the image of God, has no 
participation in any corruptible or earthlike essence', whereas 'the earthly 
man is made of loose material . . .  a lump of clay'.111 
This doctrine obviously predates Philo, and Philo has simply made his 
own modifications to it, because the same tradition was also shared by Paul 
and thus evidently influenced the earliest Christian theology.112 Philo's lan­
guage of 'the heavenly man' and 'the earthly man', 'the first man' and 'the 
second man', and the idea of there being two Adams, is paralleled in (but 
adapted differently by) Paul.113 We see this, for example, in l Cor. 15.45-49 
(to be read with 15.21-24). Philo says the heavenly man is imperishable and 
immortal and the earthly man is 'by nature' mortal and perishable, exactly 
in agreement with Paul. Both also call the earthly Adam the 'first man'. 
Paul then calls Jesus the 'last Adam', but describes him in terms identical to 
Philo's 'second' man (who in order of creation was really the first). 114 Nota­
bly, Philo's 'celestial' Adam can be seen only by the eye of the intellect, just 
as Origen says the body of the resurrected Jesus was invisible to the exter-
109. Philo, Questions and Answers on Genesis 1.8. 
1 10. Philo, Allegorical Interpretation 2.4-5. 
I l l .  Philo, Allegorical Interpretation 1.31. 
1 12. See Stephen Hultgren, 'The Origin of Paul's Doctrine of the Two Adams in 
1 Corinthians 15.45-49', Journal for the Study of the New Testament 25 (2003). pp. 
343-70 (note that even Hultgren misses some of the evidence I include here); and Stefan 
Nordgaard, 'Paul's Appropriation of Philo's Theory of "Two Men" in I Corinthians 
15.45-49', New Testament Studies 57 (201 1), pp. 348-65. 
113. See Carrier, 'Spiritual Body', in Empty Tomb (ed. Price and Lowder). pp. 1 10-
50. 
1 14. Hultgren, 'The Origin of Paul's Doctrine', pp. 344-46. 350. 

5. Background (Context) 
199 
nal senses and could be seen only with spiritual vision.115 Origen also says 
that this invisible resurrection body was the original 'mold' for the body 
of flesh that Jesus had previously worn, and thus his fleshly body was only 
an earthly copy of his true, original (and final) body. Paul describes similar 
notions in 2 Corinthians 5, where it appears our true bodies (of which our 
present bodies are copies) already await us in heaven. 
We have already seen that Paul's Jesus was a preexistent celestial being 
(Element 10). And here we see that this idea of a preexistent heavenly man 
predates even Christianity. So when Paul describes Jesus as the 'man of 
heaven', he likely has in mind the same cosmic being. As Philo explains, 
the perfect celestial man created in Gen. 1.27 is the actual 'image' of God 
(and the earthly Adam is just a copy of that image), and this sounds exactly 
like Jesus, who was also the 'image' of God (of whom the Christians them­
selves are copies: Rom. 8.29; I Cor. I5.49; 2 Cor. 3.18; thus qualifying 
I Cor. 1 1.7). Paul flat out says Christ 'is the image of God' (2 Cor. 4.4); and 
another Pauline author says Christ 'is the image of the invisible God' and 
'the firstborn of all creation' (CoL LI5), which explicitly connects Paul's 
Christ with Philo's primordial Adam, the celestial one, who was in fact the 
firstborn of all creation. We must conclude Paul agreed, since he clearly 
understood Jesus to be the first created being: as it is through Jesus that 
God created everything else (1 Cor. 8.6), and Paul explicitly calls Jesus 
God's firstborn (in Rom. 8.29). 
So even if Paul is identifying this preexistent being with a historical 
person, he is clearly adding onto that person the identity of a celestial being 
already conceived by Jews before Christianity began. One might even sug­
gest that the simpler explanation is that Paul is talking about the same celes­
tial man, and adding onto that other ontological identities (like 'messiah'), 
rather than starting with a historical man and equating him with a preex­
istent heavenly being. But we cannot conclude on this evidence alone as to 
which hypothesis is the more likely. What distinguishes Christianity's talk 
of the 'two Adams' from Philo's talk of the 'two Adams', apart from Philo's 
own Platonizing tendencies, is that Christianity claimed a special fate for 
the celestial Adam (he descended from the heavens to die and rise from the 
dead), and placed it as a historical event-
· presumably a recent historical 
event, portending that the 'end was nigh' (since Christ's resurrection was 
imagined by Paul to be the 'firstfruits' of the general eschatological resur­
rection: I Cor. 15.20). But apart from that, the Christians appear to have 
been working from the same core Jewish doctrine that there was a perfect 
celestial Adam, firstborn of all creation, and (somehow) that man turned 
out to be Jesus. 
115. Origen, Against Celsus 2.64ࡦ67. 

200 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
Element 40: In fact, the Christian idea of a preexistent spiritual son of God 
ca11ed the Logos, who was God's true high priest in heaven, was also not a 
novel idea but already held by some pre-Christian Jews; and this preexist­
ent spiritual son of God had already been explicitly connected with a celes­
tial Jesus figure in the OT (discussed in Element 6), and therefore some 
Jews already believed there was a supernatural son of God named Jesus­
because Paul's contemporary Philo interprets the messianic prophecy of 
Zech. 6.1 2  in just such a way.116 This is the prophecy about a high priest 
crowned king in heaven named 'Jesus Rising', God's 'servant', who will 
'rise' from below and be given godly authority and somehow be involved 
in cleansing the world of sin. 
As discussed in Element 6, in Zechariah 6 we have a man named Jesus 
being crowned king, 'rising' from his place below, and building up God's 
house, which is a feasible description of our Jesus; and this same Jesus 
appearing in Zechariah 6 also appears in Zechariah 3, where he is given 
supreme authority over God's domain (just as our Jesus was), and somehow 
ends all sins in a single day Uust as our Jesus does), and this same Jesus 
is in both passages called a high priest (as was our Jesus). Discussing this 
Jesus figure in Zechariah, Philo argues: 
'Behold, the man named Rising!' is a very novel appellation indeed, if 
you consider it as spoken of a man who is compounded of body and sou I. 
But if you look upon it as applied to that incorporeal being who is none 
other than the divine image, you will then agree that the name of 'Rising' 
has been given to him with great felicity. For the Father of the Universe 
has caused him to rise up as the eldest son, whom, in another passage, 
he calls the firstborn. And he who is thus born, imitates the ways of his 
father.117 
In the same book, Philo says that even if no one is 'worthy to be called a 
Son of God', we should still 'labor earnestly to be adorned according to 
his firstborn Logos, the eldest of his angels, the ruling archangel of many 
names'.118 Elsewhere Philo adds that 'there are two Temples of God, and 
one is this cosmos, wherein the High Priest is his Firstborn Son, the divine 
Logos' (whom Philo elsewhere identifies asthe primordial 'image ofGod').119 
1 16. Philo, On the Confusion ofTongues 62-63. 
1 17. Philo, On the Confusion ofTongues 63. 
118. Philo, On the Confusion ofTongues 146-47. 
119. Philo, On Dreams 1.215੔ see also Philo, On the Giants 52. That the 'divine 
Logos' is the 'image of God' is also explicitly declared in Philo, On the Creation 31 as 
well as in Phi lo, On the Confusion ofTongues 62, 97 and 147; On Dreams 1.239; 2.45੕ 
The Special Laws 1.81; On Flight and Finding 101. That this is an intermediary being 
(per Element 36), see Philo, Who Is the Heir of Things Divine? 205-206. For more 
sources on this Jewish doctrine of the 'Logos' as a divine being, which Christianity 

5. Background (Context) 
201 
And Philo also says this 'divine Logos' is the being whom God used 'as an 
instrument' to create the universe, and the one whom God appointed the 
Lord over all creation.120 We know Jesus was also called the firstborn of 
God, the Logos, and God's high priest in the heavens, and the one through 
whom all things were made, and who was appointed Lord of the universe, 
and was the true image of God; and Christians were also called upon to try 
and emulate him and adorn themselves like him, just as Philo is calling us 
to do.12, This is far too improbable to be a coincidence. Philo and Christian­
ity must have this notion from a common tradition preceding both.122 
Of course, our Jesus is only explicitly called 'the Logos' in Jn 1 .1, a 
very late document (see Chapter 7, §4). But he is recognized by Paul as 
the 'firstborn' son of God (Rom. 8.29), and the 'image of God' (2 Cor. 4.4), 
through whom God created all things (1 Cor. 8.6), and therefore a preexis­
tent being (evident also in Phil. 2.6-8 and 1 Cor. 10.1-4). 123 It's likely Paul 
simply co-opted, see Daniel Boyarin's commentary in Amy-Jill Levine and Marc 
Zvi Brettler (eds.), The Jewish Annotated New Testament (Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 201 1 ), pp. 546-49. 
120. The one through whom the universe was created: Philo, On Allegorical 
Interpretation 3.96 and The Special Laws 1.81. That over all the universe 'God put 
in charge his own true Logos, his firstborn Son, who is to take charge of his sacred 
flock, like the prefect of a great king', see Philo. On Agriculture 50-52. Curiously, Philo 
immediately goes on to say that we can know this is true because "it is written, •Behold, 
I am he and I will send my messenger [lit. "my angel"] into your presence, who shall 
guard you on the road', which is a partial quotation of Exod. 23.20 (concluding •and 
bring you to the place which I have prepared'), which happens to be the very scripture 
with which Mark begins his Gospel: 'The beginning of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, 
the Son of God: as it is written in the prophets: "Behold, I send My messenger into 
your presence, who shall prepare the road for you"' (Mk 1.2), which Mark alters at 
the end to mean John the Baptist. but the original scripture clearly indicates (just as 
Philo understood it to) that the messenger (lit. 'angel') is the one who will protect us 
and bring us to salvation (and, according to Philo, that was the 'firstborn son of God', 
the Logos), not the one who will 'prepare' the way for him. I can only speculate, but 
must wonder: is it possible that in the original text (whatever may have been Mark's 
source), the Gospel began with this verse referring to Jesus (and thus quoting Exodus 
correctly), and that this was altered by Mark so as to fit John the Baptist into the story 
(where evidently he had not been before)? Unfortunately we cannot know for sure. 
121 . That we ought to imitate Christ: I Cor. 1 1.1; Rom. 8.29; 1 Cor. 15.49; 2 Cor. 
3.18. 
122. See Hultgren, 'Origin of Paul's Doctrine', pp. 350-54. 
123. See Sean McDonough, Christ as Creator: Origins of a New Testament Doctrine 
(New York: Oxford University Press, 2009). McDonough provides a considerable 
survey of relevant background knowledge establishing the very early development of 
the Christian doctrine of Christ as the agent of Creation (which is only corroborated 
by the evidence I survey here and in Element 10), although I believe his analysis ofthe 
Gospels has things the wrong way around (e.g. Mark was not inspired to believe Jesus 

202 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
just never had occasion to use the title of 'Logos' to describe Jesus (just 
as Philo doesn't trouble himself to mention it every time he speaks of the 
same being). Because otherwise these certainly appear to be the same man. 
Just because this one connection is first explicitly stated in the Gospel of 
John does not mean its authors introduced it. Likewise, in Hebrews Jesus 
is not only the firstborn son of God, but also God's high priest in the heav­
ens and again the image of God, the supreme of all angels, a preexistent 
being through whom God created all things (Hebrews I and 8}, all just like 
Philo's celestial Jesus. 124 And Col. 1.12-20 says its Jesus is the firstborn of 
all creation, the image of God, through whom God created all things, too. 
So it cannot be a coincidence that Philo says his 'Logos', 'the firstborn son 
of God', God's incorporeal high priest in outer space, is also none other 
than 'the image of God', and God's agent of creation, again connecting this 
'Logos' creature to Paul's Christ, who is also the 'image' of God and God's 
'firstborn son' and also a preexistent being of the highest rank-since Paul 
says it is Christ, and no other being, through whom God created all things. 
This also suggests Philo is saying this firstborn Logos is in fact the true 
Adam (as discussed in Element 39), which is corroborated by Philo's expla­
nation elsewhere that the earthly Adam was made in the image of the sec­
ond Adam in heaven, the divine Logos, who was in turn the image of God; 
and we know (from the previous element) that this celestial man who was 
the image of God and of whom the earthly man is a copy is indeed that first­
created Adam.125 Likewise, Philo calls this high priest and divine Logos 
'the man for real' of whom the earthly priests are but a copy, again con­
necting this divine being with the ΢true Adam' in outer space.126 This also 
explains why this firstborn celestial son is called the Logos (meaning 'Rea­
son'). I n  every passage where Philo explains that the first-created Adam is 
the 'image' of God, he further explains that this is because the image of 
God is not the human body but the intellect-hence 'reason' is the image 
of God. Therefore it would be obvious that any incorporeal being created 
as the true 'image' of God would be called (indeed would be) Reason, and 
therefore the Logos. We cannot therefore see this as a late development in 
Christology, but as in fact already a pre-Christian feature of Jewish theol­
ogy. If it was known to Philo, it had to have been known to Paul. 
is the Creator by any actual historical reports; rather, Mark is inventing narratives that 
cast Jesus in the role of Creator: see, e.g., on how this would have originated the idea 
that he was a carpenter or the son of a carpenter, in Chapter 10, §4). 
1 24. Jesus is God's 'eternal high priest' in later Christian thought as well (e.g. 
Polycarp, Philippians 12). 
125. Philo, Questions and Answers on Genesis 2.62. 
126. Philo, On Dreams 1.215 (ho pros alltheian anthropos). 

5. Background (Context) 
203 
Jesus therefore must have been known as the Logos even in Paul's time. 
It's clear in Paul that the first Christians regarded Jesus to be the preexistent 
'image of God' through whom God created all things (2 Cor. 4.4; 1 Cor. 
8.6); and that can only ever have been understood to be the Logos, not only 
as the Reason which was and necessarily had to be the 'image' of God 
(unlike the human body, which obviously could not), but also as the Word 
(the second meaning of Logos) by which God created all things (Gen. 1.3, 
6, 9, 1 1 ,  14, 20, 24, 26). Even on these considerations the probability that 
Paul would understand Jesus in any other way is vanishingly small. But the 
fact that Paul also understood Jesus to be the firstborn son of God as well 
as the preexistent image of God only further lines this creature up with 
Philo's Logos, who is similarly identified. It is even further in support of 
this conclusion that pagan theology had a similar concept-the savior god 
Osiris was also called the Logos and the one through whom all was created 
and governed-thus demonstrating the notion was ubiquitous (and might 
even have been a common element of mystery re1igion).127 
I have heard doubts whether Philo (or his source) was aware of the whole 
sentence he quotes from Zechariah and thus of the name 'Jesus' being in it. 
But such doubts are unwarranted. Nearly the whole sentence in Zechariah, 
in the Greek translation quoted by Phi to, reads: 
You shall make crowns, and set them upon the head of Jesus the son of 
Jehovah the Righteous, the high priest, and say to him, 'Thus says the 
almighty Lord, "'Behold, the man whose name is Rising lanatol.)" and 
he shall rise up [anatelei] from his place below and shall build the house 
of the Lord, and receive power, and sit and rule upon his throne' (Zech. 
6.1 1-13). 
The whole sentence (of which Philo quotes only the part here in bold thus 
identifies the man spoken of as both God's son and high priest, and in the 
very same sentence names him Jesus. This creates a series of coincidences 
far too improbable to imagine on any other conclusion than that Philo and 
Paul were talking about the same figure: Jesus the Son of Jehovah the Righ­
teous, the image of God, God's agent of creation, God's high priest and 
firstborn son (see Elements 6 and I 0). 
Paul identifies his Jesus with all the same attributes (except the detail 
of his being high priest, which we find in Hebrews), which is a very 
unlikely coincidence: two cosmic men named Jesus assigned all the 
same unusual attributes; and two of those attributes (sonship and high 
127. Plutarch, On Isis and Osiris 54.373b; 67.377f (Osiris is also called 'the first' 
and 'the lord', 2.351f-352a). The idea of a divine 'Logos' was a widespread cross­
cultural theological meme in antiquity: see Glenn Chesnut, 'The Ruler and the Logos 
in Neopythagorean, Middle Platonic, and Late Stoic Political Philosophy', Aufstieg und 
Niedergang der romischen Welt 11.16.2 (New York: W. de Gruyter, 1978), pp. 1310-32. 

204 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
priesthood) are stated in the same sentence in Zechariah that Phi1o quotes 
from, a quote about a man Philo himself then links to Philo's own notion 
of God's firstborn son and high priest, another improbable coincidence­
unless Philo (or his source) was well aware of the rest of the sentence 
and taking it into account in his interpretation. Philo even makes use of 
the same pun (between the noun and verb forms of anatole) in his (or his 
source's) interpretation that the sentence in Zechariah plays on. Indeed. 
it ought to be absurd to suggest that Philo, a very erudite biblical scholar. 
had never read Zechariah and thus didn't know the remaining content of 
this passage, or where the line even came from. Thus we can safely con­
clude Philo (or his source) was aware of the fact that this cosmic firstborn 
son was named Jesus. Because denying that (no matter by what excuse) 
requires asserting a series of improbable coincidences, whereas affirming 
it does not. 
There is another significance to all this. Philo says of the earthly high 
priest that he wears 'an emblem of that Logos which holds together and 
regulates the universe, for it is necessary that [the earthly high priest] who 
is consecrated to the Father of the Universe should have as his paraclete His 
son, the most perfect in virtue, to procure forgiveness of sins'.128 Notably 
the Gospel of John, which explicitly calls Christ the Logos, also calls the 
Holy Spirit the 'paraclete' whom Christ will send (Jn 14.6, 26; 1 5.26; 16.7). 
The word parakletos most commonly meant a 'legal advocate', and so in 
the epistle I John we're told that 'if any man sin, we have an Advocate with 
the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous' (1 Jn 2.1 ), this time calling Christ 
himself a paraclete, and also connecting him to the 'Father' of the Universe 
and with supreme virtue and with his role in 'procuring' forgiveness of 
sins (Paul also calls Jesus our 'advocate' in Rom. 8.34, but using a different 
word). 
From Philo we can see that there is nothing novel about any of this. 
Philo's remarks prove that some Jews already believed that God had a first­
born son in heaven, a preexistent being through whom God created the 
universe, the very image of God, the supreme of all beings next to God. 
whose name could already be identified as Jesus (per Philo's explanation 
of Zechariah 6), and who advocates on our behalf to procure forgiveness 
of sins, and that all earthly priests were but a copy of him. Not only is this 
128. Philo, On the Life of Moses 2.134-35. In On the Lifo of Moses 2.99, Philo also 
says God has two 'powers', the one that is called God (the Creator), and the one that 
is called Lord (the king and judge); it's reasonable to see how God could assign the 
second power to a subordinate (Jesus), thereby making him Lord. There are numerous 
passages in Paul that would confirm this theological model, but it's not important to 
the present discussion. 

5. Background (Context) 
205 
clearly the same deity as Jesus in Christian documents such as the canoni­
cal book of Hebrews (see Chapter 1 1, §5), 129 but it is clearly the same deity 
worshiped by Paul and all Christians he had any communication with. It is 
therefore, so far as we can tell, the same deity Christianity began with. Any 
theory of the origins of Christianity must take this into account. 
Element 41: (a) The 'Son of Man' (an apocalyptic title Jesus is given in 
the Gospels) was another being foreseen in the visions of Enoch to be a 
preexistent celestial superman whom God will one day put in charge of the 
universe, overthrowing all demonic power, and in a text that we know the 
first Christians used as scripture (1 Enoch).130 (b) According to that scrip­
ture, this 'Son of Man' will in the appointed day reveal divine secrets to 
mankind, when also his name will be revealed; and it is implied that he may 
be the Christ (Jesus likewise was regarded as holding the divine secrets and 
revealing them).131 (c) But his identity has been kept secret so evildoers will 
not know him when the time comes (just like Jesus).132 (d) Yet he already 
sounds in many respects like the same being as the primordial Adam (Ele­
ment 39) and Logos (Element 40). The fact that at Qumran he was already 
129. As Hugh Anderson concludes for the book of Hebrews, its 'author shared 
the same thought world as Philo, and that he drew on the same Greek rhetorical and 
philosophical sources for much of his vocabulary and many of his ideas is irrefutable': 
Hugh Anderson, 'The Jewish Antecedents of the Christology in Hebrews', in The 
Messiah: Developments in Earliest Judaism and Christianity (ed. James Charlesworth; 
Minneapolis, MN: Fortress Press, 1992), pp. 512-35 (518). 
130. 1 Enoch 39, 45-46, 48-49, 51-53, 55, 61-62, 69, 71. See Carrier, Proving 
History, pp. 150-51; and for detailed inquiry into the apocalyptic Son of Man concept 
and its Jewish origins see (and compare): Maurice Casey, 'Son of Man', in The 
Historical Jesus in Recent Research (ed. James Dunn and Scot McKnight; Winona 
Lake, IN: Eisenbrauns, 2005), pp. 315-24; Thomas Kazen, 'The Coming of the Son of 
Man Revisited', Journal for the Study of the Historical Jesus 5 (June 2007), pp. 155-74; 
Mogens MOller, The Expression 'Son of Man' and the Development ofChristology: A 
History of Interpretation (Oakville, CT: Equinox, 2008); Larry Hurtado and Paul Owen 
(eds.), Who Is This Son of Man? The Latest Scholarship on a Puzzling Expression of 
the Historical Jesus (New York: T. & T. Clark, 2011); Leslie Walck, The Son of Man 
in the Parables of Enoch and in Matthew (London: T. & T. Clark, 201 1). See also John 
Gager, 'The Gospels and Jesus: Some Doubts about Method', Journal of Religion 54 
(July 1974), pp. 244-72 (264-66); Edwin Broadhead, 'Reconfiguring Jesus: The Son 
of Man in Markan Perspective', in Biblical Interpretation in Early Christian Gospels. 
Vol. 1, The Gospel of Mark (ed. Thomas R. Hat ina; New York: T. & T. Clark, 2006), pp. 
18-30; and Daniel Boyarin, The Jewish Gospels: The Story of the Jewish Christ (New 
York: The New Press, 2012). 
131 . 1 Enoch 46; 48.5-6, 11; 68.38. Jesus: Ignatius, Philadelphians 9; Col. 2.2-3. 
See also Rom. 16.25-26; 1 Cor. 2.7-10 and 4.1; Eph. 1.3-10 and 3.1-S; Col. 1.26-27. 
132. 1 Enoch 61.10-18. Jesus: Phil. 2.5-11 (cf. 1 Cor. 2.7-9). 

206 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
fully equated with Melchizedek (see following element) only confirms all 
these figures were at times thought to be the same.133 
Element 42: There is a parallel tradition of a perfect and eternal celestial 
high priest named Melchizedek, which means in Hebrew 'Righteous King'. 
We have already seen that a celestial Jesus was already called Righteous 
and King by some pre-Christian Jews. And a connection between the Christ 
and the Melchizedek figure was probably made before Christianity, as the 
very Dead Sea scroll that appears to link the dying Christ of Daniel 9 to the 
dying servant of Isaiah 52-53 is specifically a pesher on this Melchizedek 
figure, and by the most obvious interpretation it states that its dying Christ 
(the Anointed in the Spirit) is Melchizedek. (See Elements 40 and 41, with 
Elements 5 and 6.) 
Unfortunately this scroll is so badly damaged we can't be certain if the 
Christ spoken of there (the one who was probably imagined as dying to 
atone for the sins of the elect: see Element 5) is meant only to be someone 
who prepares the way for Melchizedek or is said to be Melchizedek, who 
would then come and judge all creation.134 Scholars are divided on that. I'm 
fairly certain that they are the same figure, but making the case for that 
involves too lengthy an argument for too uncertain a conclusion for my 
present purposes. Either way, in I IQ13 Melchizedek is certainly a savior 
figure, a divine being of some kind, who lives in outer space, presumably 
visits earth in some capacity, and defeats Satan and his angels. He is also 
somehow involved in 'liberating the captives' and forgiving the sins of the 
elect through some special (and final) Day of Atonement. 
What else do we hear about this mysterious Melchizedek figure? Philo 
tells us 'God made Melchizedek, the King of Peace', into 'his own high 
priest', referring to Gen. 14.18, where the mysterious Melchizedek, 'king 
of Salem' (which means 'King of Peace'), is also a 'priest of the Most 
High God', and appears and brings to Abram 'bread and wine' and blesses 
133. J. Harold Ellens, 'The Dead Sea Scrolls and the Son of Man: An Assessment 
of 1 1Q13', Henoch 33 (201 1), pp. 77-87. 
134. I IQMelchizedek (11Q13); for text, translation and notes see John Sietze 
Bergsma, The Jubilee from Leviticus to Qumran: A History of Interpretation (Boston: 
Brill, 2007), pp. 277-91; and Alex Jassen. Mediating the Divine: Prophecy and 
Revelation in the Dead Sea Scrolls and Second Temple Judaism (Boston: Brill, 2007), 
pp. 90-95; on the debate over whether Melchizedek is the Christ in this passage, see 
Lara Guglielmo. 'I IQI3. Malchi Sedek, Co-Reference, and Restoration of2 18', Henoch 
33 (2011), pp. 62, as well as Jassen, p. 93 n. 31; and Bergsma, p. 289; Guglielmo and 
Bergsma make far more convincing arguments. See also Florentino Garcia Martinez 
and Eibert J.C. Tigchelaar (eds.), Qumranica minora, Vol. II (Boston: Brill, 2007), pp. 
18-20 and 98-108 (esp. pp. 100-102. with the note in Element 5 on the two-messiah 
tradition at Qumran). 

5. Background (Context) 
207 
him. 135 We never hear about this Melchizedek otherwise, neither before this 
nor after (apart from one mysterious reference implying he was an eter­
nal priest in Ps. 110.4), which inspired esoteric speculation in the Jewish 
apocrypha about who he might be, and how there could have been a priest 
of Jehovah before there were even Jews (Abram does not get circumcised 
nor christened 'Abraham' nor even begin to father the Jewish people until 
Genesis 17). The general theme of most speculations and traditions was 
that Melchizedek must have been a supernatural being who, as the ultimate 
high priest (serving in heaven for all eternity), was in some fashion the 
ultimate agent of atonement.136 For exampleΣ in 2 Enoch, Melchizedek is 
'miraculously born before the flood and would come again at the end of 
time', and the Melchizedek pesher says that when he does come he will 
cancel all sins in a single day, and possibly do so by his death (or through 
the death of some other Christ). 137 
Of course, in Jewish understanding, all kings (e.g. I Sam. 15.17) and all 
high priests were Christs (Lev. 4.5, 16; 6.22), thus, being both, Melchizedek 
would be understood as a Christ, and thus passages about 'the' Christ could 
easily be connected to him in the pesherim, particularly once he evolved 
into a salvific, apocalyptic figure, as he clearly had become by the time 
of the Dead Sea Scrolls. Once you see him as having the attributes of the 
Christ, the fact that he was already a Christ would automatically warrant 
linking him to messianic passages in the scriptures, and this is exactly what 
the scribes at Qumran appear to be doing. And the Christians seem to have 
done so as well. Crispin Fletcher-Louis, for example, argues that there is 
evidence in the Gospel of Mark indicating that 'Jesus' thought he was the 
high priest Melchizedek.n8 Yet we could just as easily use all his same evi­
dence to argue that Mark is depicting Jesus as such, in his characteristically 
veiled way. 
However, unlike I IQIJ. the book of Hebrews argues that Jesus is 
Melchizedek's replacement. In this account we're told Melchizedek 'is first, 
by translation of his name, King of Righteousness, and then he is also King 
135. Philo, Allegorical Interpretation 3.79-89; §82 seems to imply that Melchizedek 
is the Logos (particularly in light of 80-81 before it) but not explicitly enough to be 
certain. See also Clement of Alexandria, Miscellanies 4.25; and Josephus, Jewish 
Antiquities 1.180. 
136. StOkl ben Ezra, Impact of Yom Kippur, pp. 90-92. 
137. Charles Gieschen, 'The Different Functions of a Similar Melchizedek 
Tradition in 2 Enoch and the Epistle to the Hebrews', in Early Christian Interpretation 
of the Scriptures of Israel: Investigations and Proposals (ed. Craig Evans and James 
Sanders: Sheffield: Sheffield Academic Press, 1997), pp. 364-79 (378-79). 
138. Crispin Fletcher-Louis, 'Jesus as the High Priestly Messiah: Part 1' and 'Part 
2', Journal for the Study ofthe Historical Jesus 4 (2006). pp. 155-75 and S (2007), pp. 
157-79. 

208 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
of Salem, that is, King of Peace', just as Philo said, but more importantly, 'he 
is without father or mother or genealogy, and has neither beginning of days 
nor end of life, but being like the Son of God, he continues a priest forev­
er'. 139 The author then goes on to explain that Melchizedek was the eternal 
high priest of the old covenant, and Jesus is the eternal high priest of the 
new covenant. Thus we're told that 'when another priest arises in the like­
ness of Melchizedek, one who has become a priest not according to a legal 
requirement concerning bodily descent but by the power of an indestructible 
life' (7.15-16) then 'a former commandment is set aside because of its weak­
ness and uselessness (for the law made nothing perfect)' and 'a better hope 
is introduced' in its place, which, unlike other priestly appointments, came 
about by a divine oath, as (we're reminded) scripture has said, 'The Lord 
has sworn and will not change his mind, "Thou art a priest forever"' (Heb. 
7.18-22; 5.6), quoting Ps. 1 10.4 ('The Lord has sworn and will not change his 
mind, "Thou art a priest forever, after the order of Melchizedek"'). 
We have already seen that an eternal high priest in the heavens was also 
known as the Logos, named Jesus, the firstborn son of God, and God's 
agent of creation (see Element 40). And our Jesus seems to do all the things 
that Melchizedek does in 1 1Q13. So they seem to be the same creature. That 
contradicts the notion of Jesus replacing him. There cannot be two high 
priests in the celestial temple, so ifMelchizedek 'continues a priest forever' 
and never dies, how can he have been replaced? Where did he go? Perhaps 
there were esoteric answers to those questions at one point. We might note 
that Melchizedek is not called the high priest forever, just a priest forever. 
Perhaps, then, his replacement was only a demotion, becoming Jesus' sub­
ordinate in the celestial temple hierarchy. 
The most we can make out is that Hebrews says we needed a new eter­
nal high priest in the heavens, even though we had one already, because a 
switch at the helm was needed in order to inaugurate a new covenant. So 
to accomplish that, all the roles and properties assigned to Melchizedek 
were transferred to Jesus, one way or another. However, existing tradition 
already declared Jesus, the eternal firstborn son of God, high priest. So the 
sect that became Christianity must have adopted a doctrine whereby that 
appointment hadn't happened yet, but was something yet to happen. Before 
that, the Logos was the agent of creation but otherwise without assign­
ment, waiting for the day God could bring his secret plan to fruition. In the 
139. Hebrews 7.1-3 (in its full context: 7.1-9.28). Earlier in Hebrews (Heb. S-6) 
the authors explain that what they mean by connecting Jesus to Melchizedek involves 
matters crossing too much into secret teachings that the Jetter's recipients might not 
be ready to hear; it's possible this latter part of the letter constitutes that advanced 
teaching (which only those of sufficient rank would proceed to), unless something else 
even more esoteric was being hinted at there. 

5. Background (Context) 
209 
meantime, Melchizedek held the post of celestial high priest. Otherwise we 
would have to suppose Hebrews is concealing a secret doctrine that Jesus 
actually was Melchizedek and was either hiding under that name until his 
resurrection or was then renamed 'Jesus' and given new powers (see Chap­
ter 1 1, §4). Only one or the other can explain what Hebrews says, given 
what we know of prior Jewish Melchizedek tradition. 
Element 43: (a) Voluntary human sacrifice was widely regarded (by both 
pagans and Jews) as the most powerful salvation and atonement magic 
available. (b) Accordingly, any sacred story involving a voluntary human 
sacrifice would be readily understood and fit perfectly within both Jewish 
and pagan worldviews of the time. 
Of course, Jews and pagans both embraced a value for martyrdom as a 
morally praiseworthy end of a just man.140 The most beloved martyr in pagan 
imagination was Socrates, unjustly executed by the state on a false charge of 
challenging state religion (but in reality, for preaching wisdom that would 
lead to the salvation of the community as well as individual souls); and he 
voluntarily went to his death, to prove he was a just man. Judaism also had 
a tradition of beloved martyrs well before Christians, and pagans had their 
own martyr tradition as we11.141 The Acts of the Pagan Martyrs (or Acts of 
the Alexandrians), for example, is a collection of pagan martyrologies dating 
from the early Roman Empire. Thus, self-sacrifice was not a shameful end 
but a heroic one that could inspire admiration and emulation, and execution 
by the state was often the cause of death for these beloved heroes. And in 
accord with this, the 'suffering righteous man', even to the extent of being 
humiliated and executed though innocent, was also a beloved hero-type in 
Jewish literature and imagination. 142 Many pagans held a similar view (see 
Element 46). All of which is important, because that which was regarded as 
heroic would never be regarded as embarrassing. 
Even more importantly, 'substitutionary sacrifice' was also a well­
known religious concept within both pagan and Jewish theology. The idea 
of a hero standing in for his nation or people (and thus 'substituting' for it 
or them) and voluntarily exchanging his death for their salvation (he dies so 
140. See Carrier, Not the Impossible Faith, pp. 24-34, 221-31, 240-45 and following 
note. 
141. Robert Doran, 'Narratives ofNoble Death', in The Historical Jesus in Context 
(ed. Levine, Allison and Crossan), pp. 385-99, esp. 389-92 (Jewish martyrs) and 392-
99 (pagan martyrs); and Jarvis Williams, Maccabean Martyr Traditions in Paul 's 
Theology of Atonement: Did Martyr Theology Shape Paul 's Conception of Jesus 's 
Death? (Eugene, OR: Wipf & Stock, 2010), pp. 27-63. 
142. See Carrier, Proving History, pp. 131-34, 141. 

210 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
they may live) was a common motif in Greco-Roman culture.143 A promi­
nent example in Roman patriotic history was the legendary general Publius 
Decius Mus, who fulfilled a formal religious ritual in Roman culture called 
the devotio, in which a hero is anointed to sacrifice himself in a battle in 
exchange for the victory of his army (and hence, in consequence, the vic­
tory, liberty and survival of the Roman people collectively), which is basi­
cally what Jesus does (or was understood to have done).144 Decius gave his 
life 'as though sent from heaven as an expiatory offering for all the wrath 
of the gods, who would avert the disaster from his own troops and take it 
to the enemy'.145 Ancient Greek myth had its equivalent: Codrus, King of 
Athens, voluntarily gave his life to ensure the salvation of his people in 
fulfillment of a prophecy that if he gave his life, they would be saved; and 
'so the Athenians, by the power of a leader offering himself to death for 
the salvation of the fatherland, were freed from war'. 146 The Jews embraced 
the same value system-the Maccabean literature, for example, includes a 
tale of the seven martyrs who, by giving their lives, save the land, literally 
atoning for the sins of Israel, and thus becoming a 'ransom for the sin of 
our nation'.147 In fact, Jewish use of human sacrifice as atonement magic 
appears several times in the OT. 148 
143. Several examples are documented in Doran, 'Narratives of Noble Death·. 
pp. 385-99 (387-88 on Decius); and Walter Burkert, Structure and History in Greek 
Mythology and Ritual (Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 1979), pp. 59-77 
(and its connection with animal sacrifice: pp. 54-55). 
144. Hendrik Simon Versnel, 'Two Types of Roman devotio', Mnemosyne 29 
(1976), pp. 365-410; and Hendrik Simon Versnel, 'Self-Sacrifice, Compensation and 
the Anonymous Gods', in Le sacrifice dans l'antiquite (ed. Jean Pierre Vernant et a/.: 
Geneva: Fondation Hardt, 1980), pp. 1 35-94. 
145. Doran, 'Narratives ofNoble Death', p. 388; Livy, From the Foundation of the 
City 8.9-8.10. 
146. Doran, 'Narratives ofNoble Death', p. 387; Justin Trogus, Epitome ofPompeius 
Trogus 2.6.16-21. There were apparently many other examples then widely known: see 
StOkl ben Ezra, Impact of Yom Kippur, pp. 171·73; and Jennifer K. Berenson Maclean. 
'Barabbas, the Scapegoat Ritual, and the Development of the Passion Narrative·. 
Harvard Theological Review 100 (July 2007), pp. 309-34 (esp. 313·16). 
147. 4 Maccabees 17.20-22; see StOkl ben Ezra, Impact of Yom Kippur. pp. 115-
17; Burton Mack, 'The Christ and Jewish Wisdom', in The Messiah: Developments in 
Earliest Judaism and Christianity (ed. James Charlesworth; Minneapolis. MN: Fortress 
Press, 1992), pp. 192-221 (206); and Jintae Kim, 'The Concept of Atonement in the 
Fourth Servant Song in the LXX', Journal ofGreco-Roman Christianity and Judaism 8 
(201 1-2012), pp. 21·33; and Jintae Kim, 'The Concept of Atonement in Early Rabbinic 
Thought and the New Testament Writings', Journal of Greco-Roman Christianity and 
Judaism 2 (2001-2005), pp. 117-45. That this thinking had influenced the development of 
early Christianity is argued in Jarvis Williams, Maccabean Martyr Traditions. 
148. King David resorted to human sacrifice, crucifying the sons of Saul at the 

5. Background (Context) 
2 1 1  
In this system of understanding, the more awful and shameful the man­
ner of death, the more heroic and powerful it was. This thinking dates at 
least as far back as Plato, who confronts the logic of the nihilist Glaucon in 
relating the legend of Gyges, who upon acquiring a ring of invisibility was 
able to do anything without detection and thus seized supreme power by 
murder and other sins. And so, Glaucon argued, no one is really just; they 
only wish to seem just, because that's all that is useful. Glaucon then argues 
that the only way to know if a man is truly just is to take everything away 
from him and treat him completely as an unjust man, despised by everyone, 
and punished to the utmost, including torments and, finally, crucifixion (the 
Jewish model for the very same notion appears in the book of Job). If a man, 
after all this, remains just to the end, only then will we know he was a just 
man-although Glaucon argues that such a man would by the end conclude 
justice was something not worth all that he suffered, and therefore one 
ought to be un-just, and, like Gyges, merely conceal one's crimes. 
The answer then made to Glaucon is that the gods will always know, and 
therefore the just will have their reward. That this misses his point is not 
addressed in the dialog, illustrating that sometimes theoretical analysis in 
antiquity was not always very sophisticated. And in the same way, in the 
final analysis Jesus' sacrifice on the cross was not awesome at all but trivial, 
as he knew all along he would be resurrected and glorified (and thus he was 
not in fact sacrificing anything); so the fact that Christians never noticed 
this flaw in their logic should thus not surprise us, as Plato never noticed it 
either. They were as philosophically naive as he was, and remained so for 
nearly two thousand years. So we cannot object to this argument by claim­
ing they would have noticed its flaw; because they didn't. 
To fully understand the point, Glaucon's argument should be read in full: 
The just man would be a simple and noble man, who . . .  does not wish to 
seem but actually be good. So we must deprive him of the seeming. For 
if he is going to be thought just he will have honors and gifts because of 
that esteem. We cannot be sure in that case whether he is just for justice's 
sake or for the sake of the gifts and honors. So we must strip him bare 
beginning of the harvest, to appease the Lord and atone for the sins of Israel in order 
to persuade Jehovah to end a famine (and it worked: 2 Sam. 21.1-14; it might not be 
a coincidence that the 'seven sons' here slain correspond to the 'seven sons' slain 
in 4 Maccabees; notably in 2 Samuel the atonement sacrifice occurs the day after 
Passover, exactly when Jesus is killed; that being the day when the barley harvest 
begins, the first of the harvests: Deut. 16.9-10; Lev. 23.1 1). A plague had similarly 
been lifted by Aaron and Moses by performing a human sacrifice to appease Jehovah 
(spearing an interracial couple and crucifying apostate leaders: Num. 25.1-8), an act 
which again atoned for the sins of Israel (Num. 25.13). On human sacrifice in the OT 
and ancient Israelite religion generally see End of Christianity (ed. Loftus). pp. 146-47, 
186-88; Christian Delusion (ed. Loftus), pp. 226-27. 

2J2 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
of everything but justice and make his state the opposite of his imag­
ined counterpart. Though doing no wrong, he must have the repute of 
the greatest injustice, so that he may be put to the test as regards justice, 
by not softening because of this ill repute and the consequences thereof. 
But let him hold on his course unchangeable even unto death, seeming 
all his life to be unjust though being just, that so, both men [i.e., this man, 
and another who gets to merely seem just] having reached the limit, the 
one of injustice, the other of justice, we may pass judgement which of 
the two is the happier . . . .  What they will say is this: that such being his 
disposition, the just man will have to endure the lash, the rack, chains, the 
branding-iron in his eyes, and finally, after every extremity of suffering, 
he wi II be crucified, and so will learn his lesson that not to be but to seem 
just is what we ought to desire.149 
This, of course, is the opposite logic embraced by the Christians; it's the 
kind of 'human wisdom', the wisdom of clever words, that Paul vehemently 
denounces. So we can expect someone of his disposition to flip Glaucon's 
argument upside down: if a man remained just all the way to that horrible 
end, all the way to the cross, and still he deemed that outcome best, then 
Glaucon's nihilistic reasoning would be refuted, and by his very own prem­
ises. And then Glaucon's intellectual opponents would be 'vindicated', as 
this just man is rewarded after death by God, being exalted to the highest. 
This completely explains the moral logic of the Christian creed that 
Paul repeats to the Philippians (see Chapter I I, §4): in perfect accord with 
the lesson Plato was teaching in his dialogue (which lesson later became a 
stock element of Stoic philosophy), Jesus is given the opportunity to seize 
all power ('equality with god'), just like Gyges, but unlike Gyges, Jesus 
rejected it (Phil. 2.6), and took the other path: he became nothing, a slave to 
the elements, a mortal, accepting humiliation (tapeinoo) and death, 'even 
death on a cross' (Phil. 2.7-8; see also Gal. 3.13), and 'therefore God highly 
exalted him' (Phil. 2.9). This is Plato's moral philosophy in a nutshell: this 
is a stock example of the just and wise man known throughout pagan phi­
losophy-not always accepted, but known; and among those yearning most 
for morality and justice, it was not just known but admired and praised. It 
was therefore not a radical idea. In fact, it is simply a merging of a popular 
philosophical idea (the just man enduring the cross) with a popular reli­
gious idea (the suffering savior god). It was already the standard trope in 
all the mystery religions that it was by suffering some ordeal (often death) 
that the god procured salvation for his adherents (Element 31). And as we 
saw earlier, legendary kings and generals and martyrs readily volunteered 
to fulfill that role, too. And they were valorized for it. 
149. Plato, Republic 2.361b-362a. 

5. Background (Context) 
213 
In Jewish religion, the sacrificial narrative of Abraham and Isaac was a 
primary model: the firstborn son being sacrificed, but a substitute is made 
available instead, explaining why animals and not people are sacrificed to 
god. Thus 'almost a11 the law codes in the Pentateuch include a law con­
cerning sacrifice or redemption of the first-born of humans and animals'. '50 
In this matrix of reasoning, Jesus' crucifixion and atoning death was a 
natural extension of both Jewish and pagan traditions of human sacrifice, 
of 'beloved sons' in particular, to procure salvation for the nation or kin 
group.151 Jesus' sacrifice, in fact, is based on the Isaac story, which had 
already been rabbinically li nked with Passover. In legend both events occur 
on the same day, and the Isaac narrative is explicitly represented as the 
original Passover in texts such as Jubilees 17-18. 152 Thus, in Galatians 3 
and 4, Paul links Jesus with both Isaac and the Passover lamb.153 And we 
know that Paul (and later Christians) explicitly linked Christ's death with 
the Passover sacrifice (see Element I 8). 
Both narratives involve substitutionary sacrifice, but the Jesus sacrifice 
reverses the Isaac sacrifice. In the Isaac story, in place of the singular sac­
rifice of Abraham's beloved firstborn son, animals must be slain every year 
in perpetuity. The one equals the other. Logically, therefore, a singular sac­
rifice of God's beloved firstborn son would be a sufficient substitute for all 
animal sacrifices in perpetuity. Therefore, if you wanted to be rid of those 
animal sacrifices (in other words, if you wanted to be rid of the otherwise 
divinely ordained temple cult and all the corrupt political and economic 
150. Karin Finsterbusch, 'The First-Born between Sacrifice and Redemption in 
the Hebrew Bible', in Human Sacrifice in Jewish and Christian Tradition (ed. Karin 
Finsterbusch, Armin Lange and K.F. Diethard Romheld; Leiden: Brill, 2007), pp. 
87-108 (87); see, e.g., Deut. 15.19-22 and 14.22; Num. 18. 16; Exod. 13; 22.29-30; etc. 
The underlying religious logic of sacrificing people or animals manifested a primitive 
concept of 'redirected vengeance' to expiate divine anger: see Rene Girard, Violence 
and the Sacred (trans. Patrick Gregory; Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University 
Press, 1977); and Yitzhaq Feder, Blood Expiation in Hittite and Biblical Ritual: 
Origins, Context, and Meaning (Atlanta, GA: Society of Biblical Literature, 201 1). 
151. Jon Levenson, The Death and Resurrection of the Beloved Son: The Trans­
formation of Child Sacrifice in Judaism and Christianity (New Haven, CT: Yale 
University Press, 1993). 
152. Levenson, Death and Resurrection, pp. 176-77 (with much more evidence 
throughout pp. 173-99). 
153. Levenson, Death and Resurrection, pp. 210-19. The connections with the Isaac 
narrative are more obvious (e.g. Gal. 3.16; 4.28, etc.); the connections with the Passover 
narrative appear by allusion in Paul's slavery and freedom metaphor (vs. turning back 
to the material world: cf. Exod. 16.1-3; Num. 14. 1-4), in Gal. 4.3, 8-9; in the contrast 
made between Sinai and Jerusalem (Gal. 4.25·26); and being saved because you are 
'known' by God (Gal. 4.9), just as the Israelites are 'known' by the Lord and thus 
passed over (Exod. 12.11-14. 23). 

214 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
powers that controlled it, as many Jews did: Element 28), logic would com­
pel you to look for a singular human sacrifice to accomplish that, and it 
would have to be the most powerful sacrifice imaginable, which to any Jew 
would be the sacrifice of God's firstborn son, which we've already seen 
some Jews already believed existed (Element 40) and was already named 
Jesus (Element 6). The problem of the temple cult that the Jews faced there­
fore entailed a solution that is essentially the core teaching of Christianity. 
It would therefore not be a wholly radical step for any Jew to propose that 
solution, but in fact entirely in accord with much Jewish thinking at the 
time.154 
3. Elements of Literary Context 
Element 44: In Jewish and pagan antiquity, .in matters of religious persua­
sion, fabricating stories was the norm, not the exception, even in the pro­
duction of narratives purporting to be true. In fact, the persuasive power of 
representing a story as true was precisely why fabricated stories were often 
represented as true. We therefore must approach all ancient religious lit­
erature from an assumption of doubt, and must work to confirm any given 
story or account as true, not the other way around. Because prior probabil­
ity always favors fabrication in that genre. 
That this is true becomes obvious the moment all ancient religious litera­
ture is examined together as a complete set: the number of fictional treatises 
posing as factual in that set is vast; the number of honest factual narratives 
is comparatively few. This is already provable from Christian literature 
alone. But first I will focus on Jewish and pagan literature-in other words, 
everything besides Christian literature-in order to establish the literary 
context in which Christian literature must be understood. Then I will show 
how Christian literature fits exactly the same trend. 
First, the Jewish apocrypha: even the Maccabean literature contains 
a lot that is dubious and is hardly trusted as more than historical fiction; 
but collections like the Enochic literature are obvious wholesale fabrica­
tion.155 The book of Tobit, the Ascension of Isaiah, the Revelation of Moses 
1 54. Similarly, 'if Jesus is the true Isaac, and the Church is the body of Jesus' (as 
Paul argues in, e.g., Rom. 12.4-5; I Cor. 12.27, etc.), then 'it follows . . .  that the Church 
. . .  must see itself in the role of Isaac, that is, as the promised son of the freeborn 
woman' in Galatians 4 (Levenson, Death and Resurrection, pp. 212, 217). Jesus 
therefore is the Iamb substituted for Isaac, thereby sparing Isaac, in other words the 
church. Thus the salvation logic of earliest Christianity made perfect sense within the 
Jewish worldview no matter which way one looked at it. 
155. The fictionality of the Enochic literature is self-evident. On the Maccabean 
literature as historical fiction: Sara Raup Johnson, Historical Fictions and Hellenistic 
Jewish Identity: Third Maccabees in its Cultural Context (Berkeley, CA: University 

5. Background (Context) 
215 
(and countless other Revelation texts-the Jews invented a vast library of 
apocalyptic literature), Joseph and Aseneth, the Testimonies of the Twelve 
Patriarchs, the haggadic midrashim (such as, but not only, the Midrash 
Rabbah)-are all fiction posing as fact. And that's pretty much the whole 
of Jewish faith literature.156 It's long been known that most of the OT is 
fiction (Exodus, Job, Ruth) or forgery (Daniel, Deutero-Jsaiah, Deutero­
Zechariah).157 Indeed, it's not like any non-fundamentalist scholar thinks 
the Elijah-Elisha narrative in the Kings literature is more than minutely 
factual at best, as if anyone actually had reliable sources for any of it.'58 
Likewise Philo's biographies of biblical characters (e.g. Life of Moses; On 
Joseph; etc.), or stories added (or perhaps even invented) by Josephus about 
of California Press, 2004); in fact, Johnson concludes, not only is 'the historical 
truth of the events' recorded in 3 Maccabees 'simply irrelevant' to its author, except 
insofar as to make his story seem true (p. 218), but the 'juxtaposition of history and 
fiction, combining historical verisimilitude with a remarkable disregard for historical 
accuracy, [is] characteristic of a wide variety of Jewish Hellenistic texts' (p. 217). 
156. See, e.g., Esther Chazon, Michael Stone and Avital Pinnick (eds.), 
Pseudepigraphic Perspectives: The Apocrypha and Pseudepigrapha in Light of the 
Dead Sea Scrolls (Leiden: Brill, 1999); the Sheffield Academic Press series Guides 
to Apocrypha and Pseudepigrapha (1995-); David Aune, The New Testament in 
its Literary Environment (Philadelphia, PA: Westminster Press, 1987); James 
Charlesworth (ed.), The Old Testament Pseudepigrapha (2 vols.; Garden City, NY: 
Doubleday, 1983-1985); George Wesley Buchanan, Jewish Documents of Deliverance 
from the Fall of Jerusalem to the Death of Nahmanides (Dillsboro, NC: Western 
North Carolina Press, 1978); and so on. See also Craig Evans (ed.), The Interpretation 
of Scripture in Early Judaism and Christianity: Studies in Language and Tradition 
(Sheffield: Sheffield Academic Press, 2000); and Lawrence Wills (ed.), Ancient Jewish 
Novels: An Anthology (New York: Oxford University Press, 2002). 
157. See, e.g., Israel Finkelstein and Neil Silberman, The Bible Unearthed: 
Archaeology's New Vision of Ancient Israel and the Origin of its Sacred Texts (New 
York: Free Press, 2001); and Israel Finkelstein and Amihai Mazar, The Quest for the 
Historical Israel: Debating Archaeology and the History of Early Israel (Atlanta, GA: 
Society of Biblical Literature, 2007); Thomas Thompson, The Mythic Past: Biblical 
Archaeology and the Mythoflsraei(New York: Basic Books, 1999); Thomas Thompson, 
Early History of the Israelite People: From the Written and Archaeological Sources 
(New York: Brill, 1992); and Thomas Thompson, The Historicity of the Patriarchal 
Narratives: The Quest for the Historical Abraham (New York: W. de Gruyter, 1974); 
William Dever, What Did the Biblical Writers Know, and When Did They Know It? 
What Archaeology Can Tell Us about the Reality of Ancient Israel (Grand Rapids, Ml: 
William B. Eerdmans, 2001); Hector Avalos, The End of Biblical Studies (Am hers̱ 
NY: Prometheus, 2007). See also The New Interpreter's Bible: Old Testament Survey 
(Nashville, TN: Abingdon Press, 2006). 
158. In fact most of it is probably complete fabrication, stories added century after 
century as new points needed to be made: see Susanne Otto, •The Composition of the 
Elijah-Elisha Stories and the Deuteronomistic History', Journal for the Study of the 
Old Testament 27 (June 2003), pp. 487-508. 

216 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
them (in the Jewish Antiquities). One of the most astonishing examples is 
the first-century collection called the Biblical Antiquities, once attributed 
to Philo, but whose actual authors are unknown. This is basically a whole 
second Bible, in which often minor characters in the OT are picked out and 
given embellished background stories and adventures, none of which based 
on a lick of fact. 159 This is essentially identical to what Philo and Josephus 
do for the more famous figures; and so, too the haggadic midrashim-from 
the Midrash Rabbah to the often wild legends scattered throughout the 
Talmud, not just about biblical characters, but about rabbis as well, only 
some of which are likely to be true.160 It's all of the same piece: this is what 
Jewish faith literature looked like. Fake stories, passed off as fact. That was 
the norm.161 
This was equally true of pagan faith literature (already partly explored 
in Element 14). Of course the so-called novels were all rel igious narratives 
(and they do not actually say they are fiction), as were all the tragedies dra­
matizing mythology, and even some comedies poking fun at religion; yet 
all these texts were fiction. The entire corpus of mythology (stories of gods, 
heroes and sages) and paradoxography (collections of incredible tales) in 
antiquity was certainly not based in fact (hardly at all). Yet these were the 
standard modes of writing faith literature in pagan cultures. In Hebrew 
culture the standard model for the same thing was the historical narrative: 
Exodus, Daniel, Ruth, Job, the Elijah-Elisha narrative in 1 and 2 Kings­
this was what Jewish 'mythology' looked like, which is why it is fallacious 
to assume all mythology looks the way Greeks and Romans wrote it, since 
every culture has its own way of composing its myths. But myths they are. 
And the models can even change over time. As pagan literature came to 
revere the historical narrative as well, the trend of representing mythology 
159. Frederick Murphy, Pseudo-Philo: Rewriting the Bible (New York: Oxford 
University Press, 1993). There are interesting parallels between this work and the 
canonical book of Acts, the case for which is unfortunately still only accessible in 
German: Eckart Reinmuth, Pseudo-Philo und Lukas: Studien zum Liber Antiquitatum 
Biblicarum und seiner Bedeutung fir die Interpretation des lukanischen Doppelwerks 
(TUbingen: Mohr, 1994). 
160. See, e.g., Alan Avery-Peck, 'The Galilean Charismatic and Rabbinic Piety: 
The Holy Man in the Talmudic Literature', in The Historical Jesus in Context (ed. 
Levine, Allison and Crossan), pp. 149-65. 
161. See, e.g., Jo-Ann Brant, Charles Hedrick and Chris Shea (eds.), Ancient 
Fiction: The Matrix of Early Christian and Jewish Narrative (Atlanta, GA: Society 
of Biblical Literature, 2005); A.J. Droge, "'The Lying Pen of the Scribes": Of Holy 
Books and Pious Frauds', Method and Theory in the Study of Religion 15 (2003), pp. 
1 17-47; and Bruce Metzger, •Literary Forgeries and Canonical Pseudepigrapha'. in 
New Testament Studies: Philological, Versional, and Patristic (Leiden: Brill. 1980), 
pp. 1-22. 

5. Background (Context) 
217 
in poetry and drama began to decline and in its place arose a new trend 
of representing mythology in prose history and biography, which looked 
exactly like actual history and biography, yet was complete fabrication (see 
my discussion of 'myth' as a quasi genre in Chapter 10, §2). 
A classic example of this trend is seen in the phenomenon of euhemeriza­
tion (Element 45). Thus, 'lives' of nonhistorical demigods were written, as 
if they actually existed and could be placed in history, and one could argue 
about which stories about them were true and which false, even though in 
fact they never existed at all (and so all the stories about them were false). 
A good example of this is Plutarch's biography of Romulus: this was a 
Roman adoption of a Greek demigod who later was associated with some 
of the founding legends of the Roman people (his Greek origins by then 
completely forgotten: Element 47). Yet Plutarch saw fit to write a straight­
forward historical biography about him, in which he ponders what stories 
are true and what false, and includes this alongside biographies of actual 
persons such as Alexander the Great or Julius Caesar, written in exactly the 
same style. In the same fashion, historians like Livy or Dionysius would 
include mythological figures in their otherwise straightforward histories 
as if they actually existed. In fact, representing myth as fact became so 
popular, a trend arose of Τinventing' sources to cite as one's authorities, thus 
completing the representation that myths were actual histories. This is how 
myth began to look under the Roman Empire. When we collect all of this 
pagan faith literature together, we see exactly the same outcome: almost all 
of it is fabricated, yet passed off as true. This was the norm. 162 
Even outside of faith literature, standards and practices were not as we 
would wish them to be. What were represented as sober histories were not 
consistently honest or reliable. A good story often trumped any interest 
in what actually happened. 163 And speeches and sayings were routinely 
162. On all of the above see Alan Cameron, Greek Mythography in the Roman 
World (New York: Oxford University Press, 2004); and Justin Meggitt, 'Popular 
Mythology in the Early Empire and the Multiplicity of Jesus Traditions', in Sources of 
the Jesus Tradition: Separating History from Myth (ed. R. Joseph Hoffmann; Amherst, 
NY: Prometheus, 2010), pp. 55-80. 
163. Even the ancients themselves knew this, and complained about it constantly; 
and modern historians have long known it and articulated the point extensively. See, 
e.g., my analysis in Carrier, Not the Impossible Faith, pp. 161-81; and Carrier, 'Why 
the Resurrection Is Unbelievable', in Christian Delusion (ed. Loftus), pp. 291-96; 
and the surveys in Charles Fornara, The Nature of History in Ancient Greece and 
Rome (Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 1983); Colin Herner, 'Ancient 
Historiography', in The Book of Acts in the Setting of Hellenistic History (TObingen: 
J.C.B. Mohr, 1989), pp. 63-100; Averil Cameron (ed.), History as Text: The Writing of 
Ancient History (Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina Press, 1990); Michael 
Grant, Greek and Roman Historians: Information and Misinformation (New York: 

218 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
invented for historical figures (and obviously for nonhistorical figures as 
well), based on the reasoning that 'it's what they must have said'.164 Or. of 
course, what an author wants them to have said. Much of the development 
in the Gospel tradition exemplifies this; but it's evident also in the Jewish 
apocrypha, and even the later Jewish canon: Deuteronomy was not written 
by Moses nor were the words in it spoken by either him or God; and Daniel 
is likewise a total fabrication (Element 7). Pagans, not embracing the same 
concept of authoritative 'scripture', had less pressing need to 'attribute' 
sayings to authorities in this way, although they did so. This is almost cer­
tainly the case for the many collections of sayings attributed to particular 
'sages' in Diogenes Laertius's Lives of Eminent Philosophers (in the first 
half of Book I), but it is most clearly exemplified in the practice of forgery: 
attempting to give authority to a system of statements by attributing them 
to a respected philosopher (such as Aristotle) or scientist (such as Ga1en).165 
Letters were similarly forged often enough to become their own genre.166 
As were fake histories and documents of all kinds. 167 So when Christians 
started doing the same, they were taking up a venerable tradition. 
Finally, the most startling example of this problem is that the standard 
method of constructing biographies of revered men was intrinsically fab-
Routledge, 1995); John Marincola, Authority and Tradition in Ancient Historiography 
(New York: Cambridge University Press, 1997). 
164. See in particular (besides the scholarship in the previous note) F.W. Wallbank, 
'Speeches in Greek Historians', in Selected Papers: Studies in Greek and Roman History 
and Historiography (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1985), pp. 242-61; A.B. 
Bosworth, From Arrian to Alexander: Studies in Historical Interpretation (Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 1988), pp. 94-134; Ronald R. Newell, 'The Forms and Historical 
Value of Josephus' Suicide Accounts', in Josephus, the Bible, and History (ed. Louis 
Feldman and Gohei Hata; Leiden: Brill. 1989), pp. 278-94; Conrad Gempf, 'Public 
Speaking and Published Accounts', in The Book of Acts in its First Century Setting: 1: 
Ancient Literary Setting (ed. Bruce Winter and Andrew D. Clarke; Grand Rapids, Ml: 
Eerdmans, 1993), pp. 259-303. See also Fornara, Nature of History, pp. 142-68; Herner. 
Book of Acts. pp. 63-100; Grant, Greek and Roman Historians, pp. 44-53; etc. 
165. This phenomenon as a whole is surveyed well in Bart Ehrman. Forged (New 
York: HarperOne, 201 1), and Forgery and Counterforgery: The Use of literary Deceit 
in Early Christian Polemics (New York: Oxford University Press, 2014). For the 
pagan context in particular. see pp. 13-42: the rest surveys countless examples in early 
Christian history. 
166. C.D.N. Costa, Greek Fictional Leuers (New York: Oxford University 
Press, 2001); Patricia Rosenmeyer, Ancient Epistolary Fictions: The Letter in Greek 
Literature (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2001). 
167. See. e.g., Erich Gruen, •fact and Fiction: Jewish Legends in a Hellenistic 
Context', in Hellenistic Constructs: Essays in Culture, History, and Historiography 
(ed. Paul Cartledge, Peter Garnsey and Erich Gruen; Berkeley, CA: University of 
California Press, 1997), pp. 72-88. 

5. Background (Context) 
219 
ricatory. A great deal of ancient biography, even of real people, was con­
structed of myth and fiction, frequently telescoping things a person said 
(or wrote) into entire fake stories about things they did (or that were done 
to them), even in the most incredible ways. This has been shown for the 
ancient biographies of historical poets and philosophers, whose entire biog­
raphies are almost wholly made up, based loosely on their writings, rather 
than any kind ofbiographical sources. For example, Euripides' marital trou­
bles were invented based on things different characters say about marriage 
in his plays, and not on anything that had anything to do with the actual 
Euripides or sources about his life. Most biographies of philosophers and 
poets in antiquity were of this type: inventions passed off as facts.168 And 
in the case of non-existent persons (like Romulus or Moses), this was again 
the norm. They would get complete biographies, with origins and deaths 
and adventures and quips and teachings and family and friends, including 
siblings with names, a home town, the whole shebang. All invented. There 
was nothing exceptional or unusual about this at all. This is what typically 
happened. It therefore cannot be regarded as improbable. 
Thus we must heed, and can now understand the serious force, of the 
words of James Crossley on this matter: 
People could in fact create stories grounded in lives of figures who may 
have been deemed historical actors who really did live, breathe and die 
(e.g .• [Jubilees], [Genesis Apocryphon], [Joseph and Aseneth], Midrashic 
and haggadic literature, etc.), yet such stories could hardly be said to 
give genuine historical insight as to what really happened millennia ago 
when Moses was supposed to receive the Law, when Abram went down 
to Egypt, or when Joseph wed Aseneth (etc.), if indeed these events did 
happen. To give another particularly relevant example, the traditions sur­
rounding the book of Esther are chaotic, going off in all kinds of direc­
tions and are frequently contradictory. These are not assimilated into 
one Jewish theology and the inconsistencies are not the reason they are 
168. Mary Lefkowitz, The Lives of the Greek Poets (Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins 
University Press, 1981); and Mary Lefkowitz, 'Biographical Mythology', in Antike 
Mythen: Medien, Transformationen und Konstruktionen (ed. Ueli Dill; New York: 
Walter de Gruyter, 2009), pp. 516·31; Janet Fairweather, 'Fiction in the Biographies of 
Ancient Writers'. Ancient Society 5 (1974), pp. 231-75; and Janet Fairweather, 'Traditional 
Narrative, Inference, and Truth in the Lives ofthe Greek Poets', Papers ofthe Liverpool 
Latin Seminar 4 (1983), pp. 315-69; Barbara Graziosi, Inventing Homer: The Early 
Reception of Epic (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2002); Ava Chitwood, 
Death by Philosophy: The Biographical Tradition in the Lifo and Death of the Archaic 
Philosophers Empedocles, Heraclitus, and Democritus (Ann Arbor, MI: University 
of Michigan Press, 2004). See also Bruno Gentili and Giovanni Cerri, History and 
Biography in Ancient Thought (Amsterdam: J.C. Gieben, 1988). This fact is conceded 
all too briefly by Richard Burridge, What Are the Gospels? A Comparison with Graeco­
Roman Biography (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1992), pp. 138-39. 

220 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
assumed to be historically inaccurate. But historically inaccurate they 
are and it is hardly going too far to assume something similar was hap­
pening in the Gospel traditions, a point that should not have to be made. 
Moreover these Jewish stories continued to have a powerful emotive 
effect and needed to be defended in the light of different contexts. 
Thus, Crossley concedes, people often invented these things because they 
needed to believe them (or needed others to believe them), and therefore 
had to represent them as factual.169 This is obvious in 'the expanded Jew­
ish stories of, for example, Moses, Abraham, Joseph, Elijah and numerous 
rabbis'. In some cases the reasons for fabrication are unclear, seeming only 
to make great heroes seem greater, or to teiJ stories through them that then 
carried more telling weight, or simply because it sounded right. But many 
examples 'which cannot be historically accurate, rewrite stories of figures 
in the past to justify a belief in the present'. Indeed, that was a routine 
practice. Hence, 'it follows that it is perfectly possible for the Gospel writ­
ers to do the same'. They are certainly in the same boat, because often 
'historically inaccurate storytelling was done for fairly recent figures', too. 
'Stories of rabbis are one example', and another 'is the rapid emergence of 
miraculous and legendary traditions surrounding pagan figures, such as 
Alexander or Augustus, even within their own life times'. 
Thus, Crossley concludes: 
It [should] seem blindingly obvious that people invent stories and the 
sifting of fact from fiction or fiction from fact has been one of the most 
notable features in the history of critical biblical scholarship . . . .  [So] if 
we are going to take Christianity seriously in its Jewish and pagan con­
texts then we must expect the Gospel writers to make up stories just as 
Jews and pagans did. Historically speaking it is extremely unlikely that 
the Christians behind the Gospel traditions were immune to this standard 
practice. 170 
He is entirely correct. In fact, our conclusion must be even stronger than 
this: for when we look at all faith literature together, most of it by far was 
fabricated to a great extent, and most was fabricated in its entirety. This 
leaves us with a very high prior probability that Christian literature wi11 be 
the same. 
And we can confirm this to be the case. If we exclude devotional and 
analytical literature (e.g. apologies, commentaries, instructionals, hym­
nals) and only focus on 'primary source documents' about earliest Christi-
169. On why passing myths off as facts always conferred a rhetorical advantage 
and thus would almost always inevitably occur and win out, see Chapter 8 (§12). 
170. James Crossley, 'Against the Historical Plausibility of the Empty Tomb Story 
and the Bodily Resurrection of Jesus', Journal for the Study ofthe Historical Jesus 3 
(June 20051 pp. 171-86 (178-82). 

5. Background (Context) 
22 1 
anity, we find that most Christian faith literature in its first three centuries 
is fabricated-indeed, most by far. We'll see some examples in Chapter 8. 
But the most obvious category is the Christian apocrypha and pseudepigra­
pha: hundreds of forged documents, from faked letters of Paul to Seneca, 
to faked letters of Clement of Rome (and by that I mean beyond 1 Clement, 
if that is even authentic), more faked letters from Peter and Paul than are 
even in the NT (e.g. 3 Corinthians, 3 and 4 Peter, etc.; for the fact that there 
are already forged letters in the NT, see Chapter 7, §3), even faked letters 
from Jesus (several in Revelation already; another, from Jesus to Abgar, is 
reproduced in Eusebius), and fabricated Gospels and Acts and Apocalypses 
far outnumbering the canonical ones, as well as countless legends and tales 
passed off as fact (in the commentaries of Papias and Hegesippus, e.g.: see 
Chapter 8, §§7 and 8), and countless other fictions (the Epistle of Barnabas, 
e.g.; or the Decree of Tiberi us, cited as authoritative proof that Emperor 
Tiberius converted to Christianity).171 
There were in fact over forty different Gospels written, of which even 
fundamentalists agree only the canonical four are in any way authentic 
(while most mainstream scholars entertain the possibility that only one or 
two of those are, at best), plus over half a dozen different Acts.172 Exam-
171 . Many examples are collected, discussed or listed in Bart Ehrman, Lost 
Scriptures: Books That Did Not Make It into the New Testament (New York: Oxford 
University Press, 2003); and Bart Ehrman, Lost Christianilies: The Ballles for 
Scripture and the Faiths We Never Knew (New York: Oxford University Press, 2005); 
Price, Pre-Nicene New Testament (e.g. pp. 841-49 [3 and 4 Peter], pp. 885-86 (Letter of 
Jesus to Abgar], pp. 1 141-44 [3 Corinthians]); John Loftus, Why I Became an Atheist: 
A Former Preacher Rejects Christianity (Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 2008), 
pp. 167-76; David Trobisch, 'Who Published the Christian Bible?', CSER Review 2.1 
(2007), pp. 29-30; and, most extensively, F. Lapham, Introduction to the New Testament 
Apocrypha (London: T. & T. Clark International, 2003); Wilhelm Schneemelcher and 
R. MeL. Wilson (eds.), New Testament Apocrypha, Vols. I and II (Louisville, KY: 
Westminster/John Knox Press, 1991); and James H. Charlesworth (ed.), The New 
Testament Apocrypha and Pseudepigrapha: A Guide to Publications with Excursuses 
on Apocalypses (Chicago: American Theological Library Association, 1987). For the 
'Decree ofTiberius' see Tertullian, Apology 5. The Shepherd of Hermas, which along 
with Barnabas was once in the orthodox Christian canon, was also likely forged or 
redacted over time (Price, Pre-Nicene New Testament, pp. 1001-89). 
172. Christopher Tuckett, 'Forty Other Gospels', in The Written Gospel (ed. 
Markus Bockmuehl and Donald Hagner; Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
2005), pp. 238-53; Charles Hedrick, 'The 34 Gospels: Diversity and Division among 
the Earliest Christians', Bible Review 18 (June 2002), pp. 20-31, 46-47; Helmut Koester, 
'Apocryphal and Canonical Gospels', Harvard Theological Review 73 (January-April 
1980), pp. 105-30. None of these lists are complete. See, e.g., Rodolphe Kasser et al., 
The Gospel of Judas: From Codex Tchacos (Washington, DC: National Geographic, 
2006); R. Blackhirst, 'Barnabas and the Gospels: Was There an Early Gospel of 

222 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
pies of this fabricatory activity in early Christian faith literature are vast 
in quantity.173 This was clearly the norm, not the exception. Most of what 
Christians wrote were lies. We therefore should approach everything they 
wrote with distrust. (See also Chapter 7, §7; and Chapter 8, §§3 and 4.) 
Element 45: A popular version of this phenomenon in ancient faith litera­
ture was the practice of euhemerization: the taking of a cosmic god and 
placing him at a definite point in history as an actual person who was later 
deified. We already noted Plutarch's criticism of the trend (which he frowns 
upon, but in so doing concedes its popularity) in Element 14.174 
Euhemerus was a Greek writer of the early third century BCE, who wrote 
a book called The Sacred Scriptures in which he depicted an imaginary 
scholar discovering that Zeus and Uranus were once actual kings. In the 
process Euhemerus invents a history for these 'god kings', even though we 
know there is no plausible case to be made that either Zeus or Uranus was 
ever a real person. Yet the idea caught on; biographies and histories of non­
existent people proliferated, and ancient literature flowered with attempts 
to assign mythic heroes and gods to real historical periods and places. 175 
Even before that there were attempts to develop a 'historical' Hercules to 
justify territorial disputes in the Peloponnesus. and afterwards the origin 
of Rome was explained by appealing to an eponymous godman named 
'Romulus'. And many other uses were found for the procedure, as we saw 
for i nventing King Arthur, Ned Ludd, Abraham, Moses, and other national 
heroes I explored in Chapter 1 (§4). There was nothing at all unusual about 
doing this. 
Element 46: Ancient literature also proliferated a variety of model 'hero' 
narratives, some of which the Gospel Jesus conforms to as well, and one 
of these hero-types was widely revered among pagans: the pre-Christian 
Barnabas?', Journal of Higher Criticism 7 (Spring 2000), pp. 1-22. Among the 'other" 
Acts are the Acts of Peter, Acts ofPhilip, Acts of John. Acts of Paul, Acts of Thomas. 
Acts of Pilate and the Acts of Andrew. Note that if we are to presume that four out of 
forty Gospels were authentic, then the prior probability that any specific Gospel is 
authentic will be only one in ten at best. For any given Acts, those chances are one in 
eight. In other words, probably not. 
173. Besides the countless examples referenced in the sources in the previous note. 
see, in general, D.A. Carson, 'Pseudonymity and Pseudepigraphy'. in Dictionary of 
New Testament Background (ed. Evans and Porter), pp. 857-64. 
174. See, again, Plutarch, On Isis and Osiris 22.359e-24.360c and 29.362c. 
175. See Jacob Stern, 'Heraclitus the Paradoxographer: Peri Apistlm, "'On 
Unbelievable Tales'", Transactions of the American Philological Association 133 
(Spring 2003), pp. 51-97 (who treats the entire genre as well as the specific work in 
the title). 

5. Background (Context) 
223 
narratives of the life and death of Socrates and Aesop. These match those 
of Jesus in the following respects: 
1. They all came from a humble background (Socrates was the son of a 
stonemason; Aesop was a slave). 
2. Yet all were exalted as a moral hero and an exemplary man, who was in 
the right, and whose teachings one ought to follow. 
3. And that despite all of them having opposed and denounced the estab­
lished religious authorities and having challenged the received wisdom 
of their people. 
4. All attacked the sin and greed of the religious and political elite. 
5. All attended the parties of sinners and ate and drank with them. 
6. Yet all consistently denounced sinners, and sought to reform them. 
7. All taught with questions, parables and paradoxes. 
8. All taught to love truth, despise money and have compassion on others. 
9. All taught that they wanted to save everyone's soul. 
10. All were despised by some and beloved by others for their teachings. 
II. All were publicly mocked in some way. 
12. All were renowned to be physically ugly or deformed.176 
13. All were executed by the state for blasphemy, a crime they did not com­
mit. 
14. All were actually executed for speaking against the sin and greed of the 
authorities. 
15. All voluntarily went to their deaths, despite all having had the power 
to escape. 
16. All prophesied God's wrath would befall their killers; and all were right. 
17. All were subsequently revered as martyrs. 
18. And all at the outset had been given a gift of the spirit from God.177 
The fact that this was a recognized and widely revered hero narrative puts 
the lie to any claim that Christians were in any way radical in conforming 
their Jesus to it. In fact, even if Jesus existed, we still must worry about how 
176. That this was believed about Jesus: Justin Martyr, Dialogue with Trypho 88; 
Tertullian, On the Flesh of Christ 9; Clement of Alexandria, The Instructor 3.1; Origen, 
Against Celsus 6.75; cf. Isa. 52.14; 53.2-3. For Aesop: Lawrence Wills, 'The Aesop 
Tradition', in Historical Jesus in Context (ed. Levine, Allison and Crossan), pp. 222-37 
(223); for Socrates: Kenneth Lapin, 'Picturing Socrates', in A Companion to Socrates 
(ed. Sara Ahbel-Rappe and Rachana Kamtekar; Oxford: Blackwell, 2006), pp. 110-55. 
177. Aesop was given a spirit that gave him a supernatural power of speaking; 
Socrates was given a spirit that spoke to him and counseled him toward wisdom; and 
Jesus, of course, was given the Holy Spirit. 

224 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
much of his narrative is being forced into this model for that very reason, 
and therefore still not historically true. 
We can add to all this that 'Socrates, like Jesus, turned the other cheek 
and forgave the enemies who had caused his death'.178 We can likewise add 
that Aesop and Jesus were both itinerant preachers in a peripheral region 
who ended up in a central holy city and were both plotted against and exe­
cuted by its priests (Delphi for Aesop; Jerusalem for Jesus). Likewise, for 
Aesop a 'gospel' was written about his birth, life, teachings and death, and 
many different redactions were then made of it, just as happened for Jesus. 
We've also noted already the connections between the Gospel Jesus and 
the Cynics (Element 32). It is therefore significant that Socrates was the 
spiritual founder of the Cynics, Diogenes the Cynic having been the stu­
dent of one of Socrates' pupils, Antisthenes, and Cynicism remaining more 
faithful to the original teachings of Socrates than any other subsequent sect 
(including Platonism), and Diogenes in fact believing this was the case.179 
And Aesop fulfilled in his life and death many of the values espoused by 
Socrates and the Cynics. It is therefore not likely an accident that a Jewish 
religion espousing values well in tune with the Cynics would revere as their 
founding hero someone who corresponds exactly to the Aesop-Socratic 
dying-hero type that was also promoted and revered by the Cynics. 
Socrates we can be certain was a historical person (see Chapter 8, §2). 
But Aesop is not likely to have been.180 There is no strong evidence that 
Aesop ever actually lived (he is supposed to have flourished in the seventh 
178. Emily Wilson, The Death of Socrates (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press, 2007), p. 141. Discussing the parallels between Jesus and Socrates: Paul Gooch, 
Reflections on Jesus and Socrates: Word and Silence (New Haven, CT: Yale University 
Press, 1996), pp. 12·16: James Hankins, 'Socrates in the Italian Renaissance', in A 
Companion to Socrates (ed. Sara Ahbei·Rappe and Rachana Kamtekar; Oxford: 
Blackwell, 2006), pp. 337-52 (348); and Wilson, Death ofSocrates, pp. 141-69. 
179. Socrates' Jinks to Cynicism: Susan Prince, 'Socrates, Antisthenes, and the 
Cynics', in Companion to Socrates (ed. Ahbel·Rappe and Kamtekar), pp. 75·92; and 
Luis Navia, Socrates: A Life Examined (Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 2007). 
180. B.E. Perry, Studies in the Text History of the Life and Fables of Aesop 
(Haverford, PA: American Philological Association, 1936). See the earliest redaction 
of the Life of Aesop 1-19 for Aesop's nativity story, and Life of Aesop 91-142 for his 
passion story (concluding in his death). See also Anton Wiechers, Aesop in Delphi 
(Meisenheim: A. Hain, 1961): B.E. Perry, 'Demetrius of Phalerum and the Aesopic 
Fables', Transactions and Proceedings of the American Philological Association 93 
(1962), pp. 287-346; Leslie Kurke, 'Aesop and the Contestation of Delphic Authority', 
in The Cultures within Ancient Greek Culture: Contact, Conflict, Collaboration (ed. 
Carol Dougherty and Leslie Kurke; New York: Cambridge University Press, 2003), 
pp. 77-100; Wills, 'The Aesop Tradition'; and David Watson, 'The Life of Aesop and 
the Gospel of Mark: Two Ancient Approaches to Elite Values', JournQ/ of Biblical 
Literature 1 29 (2010)੐ pp. 699-716. 
· 
·' .. 

5. Background (Context) 
225 
century seE), much less wrote the fables attributed to him.181 But even if 
either is true, the biographies written about him are still unlikely to have 
any basis in fact, and no historian today believes they are. Aesop was more 
likely invented to place a name to a growing collection of fables passed 
down from numerous oral sources. Historical facts were then invented 
about him, and then detailed biographies were written, in some respects 
similar to the Gospels. If that's what happened, then Aesop would be an 
example of a mythical person who 'became' the historical author of a col­
lection of parables he didn't in fact write (which are often simi lar in moral 
and symbolic purpose to the parables of Jesus), and then about whom fic­
tional biographies were written, which were then passed off as fact. It's 
easy to see how this could happen for Aesop. So in principle the same could 
have happened for Jesus. 
Element 47: Another model hero narrative, which pagans also revered and 
to which the Gospel Jesus also conforms, is the apotheosis, or 'ascension 
to godhood' tale, and of these the one to which the Gospels (and Acts) 
most conform is that of the Roman national hero Romulus. I discussed this 
already in Chapter 4 (§1), and the points made there should be considered a 
component of the element here. 
The more general point is that this narrative concept of a 'translation to 
heaven' for a hero (often but not always a divine son of god) was very com­
monplace, and always centered around a peculiar fable about the disappear­
ance of their body. All these fables were different from one another, and 
therefore those differences are irrelevant to the point: all still shared the 
same core features (see my discussion of how syncretism works in Element 
I I). And when it comes to the Romulus fable in particular, the evidence is 
unmistakable that Christianity conformed itself to it relatively quickly­
even if all these attributes were accumulated over time and not aU at once. 
Romulus, of course, did not exist. He was invented, along with legends 
about him (largely put together from previous Greek and Etruscan mythol-
181. All references to him are centuries late and based on legendary assumptions 
that stem from his later faith narrative, not contemporary documents or witnesses. See 
previous note for scholarship on the evidence for Aesop and what can be said regarding 
his historicity. The best case for his historicity is attempted in Nikoletta Kanavou, 
·Personal Names in the Vita Aesopi (Vita G or Perriana)', Classical Quarterly 56 
(May 2006). pp. 208-19, but even she is uncertain of the strength of her case, and she 
overlooks the fact that her only real argument, that Aesop was a common Thracian 
slave name (pp. 218-19), could in fact be how the mythic name was assigned to 
previously anonymous fables: a common slave-type was drawn up, assigned a common 
slave-name, assigned to the fables, and then a biography built up around the figure thus 
created. 

226 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
ogy), much later in Roman history than he is supposed to have lived. 182 His 
name was eponymous (essentially an early form of the word 'Roman'), 
and his story was meant to exemplify ideal Roman aspirations and values, 
using a model similar to Greek tragedy, in which the hero sins in various 
ways but comes to self-understanding and achieves peace by the time of 
his death. He otherwise exhibits in his deeds the 'exemplary qualities' of 
Rome as a social entity, held up as a model for Roman leaders to emulate, 
such as ending 'the cycle of violence' initiated by his sin and pride by reli­
giously expiating the sin of past national crimes in order to bring about a 
lasting peace.183 His successor, Numa, then exemplified the role of the ideal, 
sinless king, a religious man and performer of miracles whose tomb was 
found empty after his death, demonstrating that he, too, like his predeces­
sor Romulus, rose from the dead and ascended to heaven. 184 
The idea of the 'translation to heaven' of the body of a divine king was 
therefore adaptable and flexible, every myth being in various ways differ­
ent but in certain core respects the same. But the Gospels conform to the 
Romulus model most specifically.185 There are twenty parallels, although 
not every story contained every one. In some cases that may simply be the 
result of selection or abbreviation in the sources we have (and therefore the 
silence of one source does not entail the element did not then exist or was 
not known to that author); and in some cases elements might have been 
deliberately removed (or even reversed) by an author who wanted to pro­
mote a different message (see discussion in Chapter 10, §2, of how myth­
making operated in antiquity). For example, the 'radiant resurrection body' 
(probably the earlier version of Christian appearance narratives) was later 
182. Gary Forsythe, A Critical History of Early Rome (Berkeley, CA: University 
of California Press, 2005), pp. 93-102; Robin Hard and H.J. Rose, The Routledge 
Handbook of Greek Mythology (New York: Routledge, 2004), pp. 600-602; Timothy 
Wiseman, The Myths of Rome (Exeter: University of Exeter Press, 2004), pp. 1 38-48; 
Dylan Saylor, 'Dirty Linen, Fabrication, and the Authorities of Livy and Augustus', 
Transactions of the American Philological Association 136 (Autumn 2006), pp. 329-
88. 
183. Rex Stem, 'The Exemplary Lessons of Livy's Romulus', Transactions of the 
American Philological Association 137.2 (Autumn 2007), pp. 435-71. 
184. Hans Dieter Betz, 'Plutarch's Life of Numa: Some Observations on Graeco­
Roman "Messianism"', in Redemption and Resistance: The Messianic Hopes of Jews 
and Christians in Antiquity (ed. Markus Bockmuehl and James Carleton Paget; New 
York: T. & T. Clark, 2007), pp. 44-62. 
185. See the extensive treatment of this point (and discussion of all the heroes who 
match the type) in Richard Miller, 'Mark's Empty Tomb and Other Translation Fables 
in Classical Antiquity', Journal of Biblical Literature 129 (2010), pp. 759-76. In the 
following I have adapted his table of parallels from pp. 772-73, but changing their 
order. 

5. Background (Context) 
227 
transformed into a 'hidden-god narrative' (another common trope both in 
paganism and Judaism) as suited any given author. 186 
But when taken altogether the Romulus and Jesus death-and-resurrec­
tion narratives contain alJ of the following parallels; 
1 .  The hero is the son of God. 
2. His death is accompanied by prodigies. 
3. The land is covered in darkness. 
4. The hero's corpse goes missing. 
5. The hero receives a new immortal body, superior to the one he had. 
6. His resurrection body has on occasion a bright and shining appearance. 
7. After his resurrection he meets with a follower on a road from the city. 
8. A speech is given from a summit or high place prior to ascending. 
9. An inspired message of resurrection or 'translation to heaven' is deliv-
ered to a witness. 
10. There is a 'great commission' (an instruction to future followers). 
1 1. The hero physicaHy ascends to heaven in his new divine body. 
12. He is taken up into a cloud. 
13. There is an explicit role given to eyewitness testimony (even naming 
the witnesses). 
14. Witnesses are frightened by his appearance and/or disappearance. 
15. Some witnesses flee. 
16. Claims are made of 'dubious alternative accounts' (which claims were 
obviously fabricated for Romulus, there never having been a true 
account to begin with). 
17. All of this occurs outside of a nearby (but central) city. 
18. His followers are initially in sorrow over the hero's death. 
19. But his post-resurrection story leads to eventual belief, homage and 
rejoicing. 
20. The hero is deified and cult subsequently paid to him (in the same man­
ner as a god). 
Romulus, of course, was also unjustly killed by the authorities (and came 
from a humble background, beginning his career as an orphan and a shep­
herd, a nobody from the hil1 country), and thus also overlaps the Aesop­
Socratic type (see Element 46), and it's easy to see that by combining the 
two, we end up with pretty much the Christian Gospel in outline (especially 
when we appropriately Judaize the result: Elements 3 .. 7, 17-20. and 39-43). 
Some of the parallels could be coincidental (e.g. resurrected bodies being 
associated with radiance was itself a common trope, both within Judaism 
186. See first note in Chapter 4, §I, and my discussion in Carrier, 'Spiritual Body', 
in Em t Tomb (ed. Price and Lowder), pp. 182-84 (with pp. 154, 190-93). 

228 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
and paganism), but for all of them to be coincidental is extremely improba­
ble.187 The Christian conception of Jesus' death and resurrection appears to 
have been significantly influenced by the Roman conception of Romulus's 
death and resurrection. 
187. A mathematical objection is sometimes raised here using the Lincoln­
Kennedy coincidences as a counter-example (see the analysis at Snopes.com: http:// 
www.snopes.com/history/american/lincoln-kennedy.asp). The reasoning being that 
clearly there is no causal relation in that case, therefore large lists of coincidences can 
occur by chance (an example of the multiple comparisons fallacy). However, this is an 
invalid analogy for two reasons: first, the coincidences in the Lincoln-Kennedy case 
are all trivial and meaningless and most have no conceptual connection with each other 
(moreover, some are actually false; the number of 'true' coincidences is only fifteen): 
second, the amount of available data on Lincoln and Kennedy is vast compared to 
that on Romulus and Jesus or any other ancient person. mythical or historical (due to 
the enormous disparity in survival of sources and documents from the two periods). 
Combine those two conditions and the likelihood of a long list of parallels occurring 
purely by chance is high (since no rules govern which parallels 'count' and there are 
so many data points, so the frequency of random parallels is high). But when neither 
condition obtains, the frequency is not high. I n  the Romulus-Jesus case, the probability 
is extremely low that the filter destroying almost all data about them would just 'by 
coincidence' preserve twenty meaningful and substantial parallels conceptually 
connected to each of their death-and-resurrection accounts. The Lincoln-Kennedy 
coincidences, e.g., are often highly likely to occur between any two people (millions 
of people have the same number of letters in their name, for example): whereas the 
Romulus-Jesus parallels are not (how many people are hailed son of god? How many 
have the world covered by a supernatural darkness at their deaths? How many have 
their corpses conspicuously vanish? How many visit their friends on the road from 
their city in a resurrected body to commission them to spread their gospel? Etc.). Thus. 
even with a large database, twenty such parallels would be unlikely; it is only the more 
so with so small a database. Most of the Lincoln-Kennedy coincidences have. again. 
no conceptual connection to each other (what has the year of a man's birth to do with 
the nature of his death?); but the Romulus-Jesus parallels do (all relate to describing 
the narratives of their deaths, and the religious aftermath directly connected thereto). 
Thus, the ability to find connected data points unconstrained by any parameters does 
not obtain in the latter case, greatly reducing the probability of even trivial parallels. 
much less substantial ones (e.g. ifl get to count any coincidences between two people. 
I can always find some; but if I am required to find only coincidences pertaining to 
the accounts of their death, not so much-except insofar as I am counting things that 
are frequently true of deaths in general, but none of the Romufus-Jesus parallels are 
such). When we get to the next element (Element 48), the probabiHty of coincidence as 
explanation plummets (as to get many parallels between any two people is one thing. 
but to find them across a dozen people is wholly another), and yet in that instance the 
fact that that probability is extremely low won't even matter (as I'll explain in Chapter 
6). On the matter of discerning meaningful coincidences generally, see discussion in 
Carrier, Proving History, pp. 192-204. 

5. Background (Context) 
229 
Even if we discounted that for any reason, the Romulus parallels defi­
nitely establish that all these components were already part of a recognized 
hero-type, and are therefore not surprising or unusual or unexpected. The 
story of Jesus would have looked familiar, not only in the same way all 
translation stories looked familiar even when different in many and pro­
found ways, but also in the very specific way that among all such tales it 
looked the most like the story of Romulus, which was publicly acted out in 
passion plays every year. And this was the national founding hero of the 
Roman Empire. What better god's tale to emulate or co-opt? 
Element 48: Finally, the most ubiquitous model 'hero' narrative, which 
pagans also revered and to which the Gospel Jesus also conforms, is the 
fable of the 'divine king', what I call the Rank-Raglan hero-type, based 
on the two scholars who discovered and described it, Otto Rank and Lord 
Raglan.188 This is a hero-type found repeated across at least fifteen known 
mythic heroes (including Jesus)-ifwe count only those who clearly meet 
more than half of the designated parallels (which means twelve or more 
matches out of twenty-two elements), which requirement eliminates many 
historical persons, such as Alexander the Great or Caesar Augustus, who 
accumulated many elements of this hero-type in the tales told of them, yet 
not that many. 
The twenty-two features distinctive of this hero-type are: 
1. The hero's mother is a virgin. 
2. His father is a king or the heir of a king. 
3. The circumstances of his conception are unusual. 
4. He is reputed to be the son of a god. 
5. An attempt is made to kill him when he is a baby. 
6. To escape which he is spirited away from those trying to kill him. 
7. He is reared in a foreign country by one or more foster parents. 
8. We are told nothing of his childhood. 
9. On reaching manhood he returns to his future kingdom. 
10. He is crowned, hailed or becomes king. 
11. He reigns uneventfully (i.e., without wars or national catastrophes). 
12. He prescribes laws. 
13. He then loses favor with the gods or his subjects. 
14. He is driven from the throne or city. 
15. He meets with a mysterious death. 
16. He dies atop a hill or high place. 
188. Alan Segal (ed.), In Quest of the Hero (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University 
Press 1990 . 

230 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
17. His children, if any, do not succeed him. 
18. His body turns up missing. 
1 9. Yet he still has one or more holy sepulchers (in fact or fiction). 
20. Before taking a throne or a wife, he battles and defeats a great adversary 
(such as a king, giant, dragon or wild beast). 
and 
21. His parents are related to each other. 
22. He marries a queen or princess related to his predecessor. 
Many of the heroes who fulfill this type also either (a) performed miracles 
(in life or as a deity after death) or were (b) preexistent beings who became 
incarnated as men or (c) subsequently worshiped as savior gods, any one 
of which honestly should be counted as a twenty-third attribute.189 Of these 
qualifying features, Jesus shares all three. Likewise, many who fit this hero 
type 'fulfilled prophecy', and although that was commonly the case for 
heroes generally (far beyond the specific hero-type described here), it is 
another feature Jesus shares in common with them, and which honestly 
should be counted as a twenty-fourth attribute. 190 But I shall work from the 
traditional twenty-two. 
The fifteen people who score more than half of those twenty-two fea­
tures, in order of how many they score (from most to least) is as follows: 191 
189. See, e.g., Charles Talbert. What Is a Gospel? The Genre of the Canonical 
Gospels (Philadelphia, PA: Fortress Press, 1977). Unquestionable miracle workers 
on the following list are Moses, Jesus, Theseus (who returned from the dead to fight 
supernaturally in wartime), Dionysus, Hercules (apart from his own supernatural feats 
in life, as a deity he answered prayers), Zeus, Osiris and Asclepius (the latter three were 
celebrated miracle-bringing gods), which already is more than halfthe list (eight in all). 
Others on the Rank-Raglan list may also have miracle legends associated with them. 
190. I thank Loren Petrich and Aaron Adair for pointing this out and providing 
research confirming it. Those who share this element would include (besides obviously 
Jesus): Moses (Exod. 1.8-10, 22, and Josephus, Antiquities of the Jews 2.205-208); 
Oedipus (Sophocles, Oedipus the King 705-25, 785-99, 849-59); Perseus (Apollodorus, 
The Library 2.4.1-4); Romulus (Livy, From the Founding ofthe City 1.3-1.5); Theseus 
(David Kovacs, 'And Baby Makes Three: Aegeus' Wife as Mother-to-Be of Theseus 
in Euripides' Medea', Classical Philology 103 [July 2008], pp. 298-304); Jason 
(Apollonius of Rhodes, Argonautica 1.5); Pelops ('Pelops' and 'Hippodamia'. Oxford 
Classical Dictionary (ed. Simon Hornblower and Antony Spawforth; Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 3rd edn, 1995], pp. 1 134. 711); and Hercules (Marco Fantuzzi and 
Richard Hunter. Tradition and Innovation in Hellenistic Poetry [New York: Cambridge 
University Press, 2004], pp. 125, 205-207). Which is again more than half the list (nine 
in all). It is entirely possible others on the Rank-Raglan list also met this criterion. 
191. These scores are taken from Segal (ed.), Quest, pp. 138-44; except the scoring 
for Osiris is my own, based on the information in Plutarch's On Isis and Osiris; and I 
have reduced some scores based on my own examination of the evidence (applying the 

5. Background (Context) 
23 1 
I. Qed ipus (21) 
2. Moses (20) 
3. Jesus (20) 
4. Theseus (19) 
5. Dionysus (19) 
6. Romulus (18) 
7. Perseus (17) 
8. Hercules (17) 
9. Zeus (15) 
10. Bellerophon (14) 
1 1. Jason (14) 
12. Osiris (14) 
13. Pelops (13) 
14. Asclepius (12) 
15. Joseph [i.e., the son of Jacob] (12) 
This is a useful discovery, because with so many matching persons it 
doesn't matter what the probability is of scoring more than half on the 
Rank-Raglan scale by chance coincidence. Because even if it can happen 
often by chance coincidence, then the percentage of persons who score that 
high should match the ratio of real persons to mythical persons. In other 
words, if a real person can have the same elements associated with him, 
and in particular so many elements (and for this purpose it doesn't matter 
whether they actually occurred), then there should be many real persons 
on the list-as surely there are far more real persons than mythical ones. 
The number of real persons in the course of antiquity must number in the 
hundreds of millions, whereas the number of mythical persons invented 
over that same course of time will be in the thousands at most. Certainly, 
by any calculation the latter could not possibly outnumber the former-and 
even ifthey were equally numerous, then half the names on the list should 
be actual persons. But this is not the case. No known historical persons are 
on the list.192 Only mythical people ever got fitted to this hero-type.193 Yet 
criteria must be reasonably rigorous to be meaningful: see earlier note on the Lincoln­
Kennedy case). 
J 92. For Moses and Joseph, see references in earlier note. The others hardly need a 
reference. They've been recognized as mythical throughout the last century of classical 
scholarship. Any inquiry into their origins ends the same: they began as deities long 
before they were translated into men and placed into history (e.g. Hercules. Dionysus. 
Osiris) or they began as heroic characters in absurdist supernatural dramas that have 
no plausible claim to historicity (e.g. Jason, Perseus. Bellerophon). 
193. Alexander the Great and Mithradates of Pontus are the only historical figures 
who come close: Alexander scoring items 2-4, 9-10. 12, 16-17 and 22, for only 10 
oints; Mithradates. items 1-2. 10, 12-14, 16-17, 20 and 22, for likewise 10. They 

232 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
every single one of them was regarded as a historical person and placed in 
history in narratives written about them. 
Therefore, whether fitting more than half the Rank-Raglan criteria was 
always a product of chance coincidence or the product of causal influence, 
either way we can still conclude that it would be very unusual for any his­
torical person to fit more than half the Rank-Raglan criteria-because if 
it were not unusual, then many historical persons would have done so. But 
not even one did. We might not know the cause of this fact, but a fact it 
is nonetheless, and a fact we can make use of (as I will in §3 of the next 
chapter). 
Jesus scores twenty out of twenty-two, according to Matthew's Gos­
pel (and whether these attributes were original or lately appended to his 
legend won't matter, as I'll explain in §4 of the next chapter; but note that 
even in Mark's Gospel, Jesus scores a 14, and even that would place him 
well above the bottom of the list). The first nineteen hardly require defense 
(e.g. his father is the heir of King David; he is seized by the authorities, 
abandoned by his followers, and driven from Jerusalem to his execution; 
strange things happen at his death, and the death itself is a strangely sudden 
expiration; he dies atop the hill named Golgotha; etc.).194 The remaining 
can only be grossly overscored by an inappropriately loose assignment of criteria. 
One might propose Alexander rates 13, e.g., by scoring items 13, 15, and 18 but (a) 
Alexander only dealt with occasionally disobedient troops, assassins and rebellions 
by conquered peoples and he was never in any significant way 'abandoned' by the 
gods or the Macedonians; (b) his cause of death was disputed, not mysterious (and it 
involved nothing supernatural); (c) his body didn't vanish, but was taken to Egypt by 
his general Ptolemy where it remained to be viewed for centuries. In the same respect, 
contra Adrienne Mayor (The Poison King: The Life and Legend of Mithradates, 
Rome 's Deadliest Enemy [Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2010], pp. 371-
76), stories of attempts to assassinate Mithradates during his childhood and teen years 
do not correspond to attempting to kill him 'as a baby', and at once disqualify him 
from the criterion 'we are told nothing of his childhood'. He was also not explicitly 
identified as the son of a god; there is no actual evidence his parents were related; 
a comet corresponding with his conception and birth does not relate to how he was 
conceived; he was not actually spirited away as a baby or raised in a foreign land (but 
merely traveled his own land incognito as a teen); having never left his kingdom as a 
child, he can't have 'returned' to it; wars during his reign disqualify him from 'reigns 
uneventfully', and do not correlate with battling a single great foe before ascending 
his throne; there was nothing actually mysterious or supernatural about his death; his 
body never vanishes; and not having vanished, his body can't 'yet still have' a tomb (it 
is just simply entombed). 
194. Note that crucifixion was supposed to take days to kill; thus Jesus' rapid death 
is itself mysterious: even Pilate is surprised by it (Mk 15.44), and the centurion amazed 
by it (Mt. 27.54). It also is accompanied by an abundance of prodigies, establishing it 
as mysterious and supernaturally potent. 

5. Background (Context) 
233 
hit (number 20) may not be as obvious, but he scores it: just as Oedipus 
confronts and defeats the riddling Sphinx, Jesus confronts and defeats the 
temptations of the Devil (also known as the Adversary, and as a Serpent 
or Dragon, and 'Prince of the World'), in both cases before going to claim 
their kingdom (of course, even in earliest Christian tradition Satan is the 
power whom Jesus most decisively defeats so as to effect the salvation of 
the faithful ever after). 195 
The only two elements Jesus does not score are the last I've listed: we 
cannot establish (21) that his parents were originally imagined as related or 
(22) that he ever married (much less the daughter of his predecessor). How­
ever, the peculiar absence of that last element practically advertises the fact 
that he does merit that element allegorically: from the earliest time Jesus 
was imagined to have taken the 'church' as his bride, which was indeed 
understood to be the 'daughter' of his predecessor (the nation of lsrael).196 
So in all honesty we could assign him that element as well. But as it is not 
'literal' I will leave his score at twenty. 197 Nevertheless, even then he is 
nearly the highest scoring person in history, next only to Oedipus; and if we 
granted that last element, he would be tied even with him for highest score. 
Jesus might even have outranked Oedipus. A later tradition held that 
indeed his parents were relatives, and it is possible that had been a tradition 
from very early on that just wasn't recorded in our Gospels. 198 However, by 
1 95. For Satan as adversary, serpent, and prince of the world, see Element 37; 
For Satan as dragon: Rev. 12.9; 20.2; Satan as devouring beast: I Pet. 5.8; as prince 
or ruler, and metaphor of 'doing battle' with Satan': Eph. 2.2; 6. 11-12. Satan has a 
'kingdom' (which would make him a king): Lk. 4.5-6; 11.18. Jesus 'doing battle' with 
Satan: 'and he was there in the wilderness forty days, tempted by Satan, and was with 
the wild beasts, and the angels ministered unto him' (Mk 1.13) is expanded into a more 
elaborate spiritual battle in Mt. 4.1-1 1 and Lk. 4. 1-13; Satan has power over death, and 
'death' is the last enemy Jesus will defeat: Heb. 2. 14; 1 Cor. 15.25-26; 15.54-57. 
196. 2 Cor. 2.2; Eph. 5.22-25; Mk 2.19-20; Mt. 9.1 5; 25.1-13 (also perhaps 22.1-10); 
Lk. 5.34-35; Jn 3.27-30; Rev. 19.7-9 and 21.2; and perhaps also implied in Rom. 7. 1-6 
and Rev. 22.17. Origen explained this concept at length: see R.P. Lawson, Origen: The 
Song of Songs. Commentary and Homilies (Ancient Christian Writers, 26; London: 
Longmans, Green, 1957). 
197. Attempts to deny this always devolve into specious apologetics. For example, 
in Richard Horsley, The Liberation of Christmas: The Infancy Narratives in Social 
Context (New York: Crossroad, 1989), pp. 162-72 (163), it is claimed Jesus can't be 
considered a 'king' because 'Jesus explicitly refuses to become a king' (no citation is 
given for that assertion), ignoring Mt. 2.2; 21.5; 25.34; 27.1 1, 29, 37, 42. This is simply 
denialism. Horsley's other rejections of the Raglan criteria are similarly baseless. And 
yet even he concedes Matthew's nativity account corresponds to the Rank hero type 
(166-72). 
198. The Protevangelion of James explicitly says Mary is, like Joseph, a descendant 
of David (§ 10.1). 

234 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
the time we hear of this detail, Jesus was being transformed into a differ­
ent character. For example, Infancy Gospels were then being written about 
him, introducing narratives of his childhood. If we scored on attributes 
all the way into the late second century, this would remove one element 
('we hear nothing of his childhood'), and add another ('his parents were 
related to each other'), keeping his score the same. 199 However, since the 
Infancy Gospels clearly are discordant with the early mythology of Jesus 
and are an entirely new phenomenon, whereas the possibility of his par­
ents being related might actually have been imagined much earlier/00 he 
might have scored the full twenty-two points, making him a better fit for 
the Rank-Raglan hero-type than any other man in history. And even with­
out these assumptions, he still ranks among the highest. That is a stunning 
fact, which must be considered, and accounted for. 
4. Conclusion 
The point of this and the previous chapter has been to summarize all the 
facts we must take into account, as being in our total background knowl­
edge, when assigning all probabilities going forward. In my experience, 
a great deal of what has been surveyed up to this point remains unknown 
even to many experts in the study of Jesus. This is why I took the trouble 
to survey so much. Because all of it must be taken into account by anyone 
who wishes to reconstruct the historical Jesus or the origins of Christianity. 
It is equally crucial to understanding how to evaluate and interpret the evi­
dence for or against the historicity of Jesus-and how to estimate the prior 
probability of either. And to that question I now turn. 
199. It is sometimes suggested that Luke's introduction of Jesus after his twelfth 
year counts as a narrative from his childhood (Lk. 2.40-42). But that is most I ikely 
intended to be the eve of his bar mitzvah (or its ancient equivalent), which would have 
occurred upon his thirteenth birthday (the end of his twelfth year), and thus is actually 
a story about introducing him as a man. See Ivan Marcus, The Jewish Life Cycle: Rites 
of Passage from Biblical to Modern Times (Seattle, WA: University of Washington 
Press, 2004), pp. 84-105. But counting this as a story of his childhood anyway would 
still only reduce his score from 20 to 19. 
200. Luke has Mary connected by family to a priest and a daughter of Aaron (Lk. 
1.5, 36; with Num. 18.1-7}, and includes two men named Levi in the ancestry of Joseph 
(Lk. 3.24, 29), which could imply both were descendants of Levi and therefore relatives. 

6 
THE PRIOR PROBABILITY 
1. Heroes Who Never Existed 
In 1945 Betty Crocker was rated in a national survey as the second most 
admired woman in America, and to this day a street is named after her 
in Golden Valley, Minnesota, where she still lives. Her father was Wil­
liam Crocker, a successful corporate executive in the food industry, and she 
started her career answering letters on cooking questions for her father's 
company, then acquired her own national radio show where she delivered 
cooking advice for twenty-four years. Later she had her own television 
show, while making appearances on other TV shows and in TV commer­
cials to promote her products. I've seen actual video tapes of her cooking 
and speaking, and her picture still adorns various General Mills baking 
products. She has also pub I ished several cookbooks, and now has her own 
Website. All that is I 00 percent true. And yet she doesn't exist. She was 
never born, never lived, never spoke, never appeared on TV, and never 
wrote a word. Others simply wrote or appeared in her name. Welcome to 
the world of the mythical corporate mascot.1 
If we were examining the question of whether a corporate mascot 
existed, what would we initially suspect? Would we assign that a high prior 
probability? Probably not. And rightly. What might the ratio be of modern 
corporate mascots who are historical vs. pseudohistorical? Not counting, of 
course, impossible beings like talking animals and cartoon heroes, whose 
ahistoricity is automatically assumed even without investigation, based on 
prior probabilities alone. After all, the prior probability that a talking tiger 
really exists and shills for breakfast cereal is sufficiently small that we don't 
bother investigating the evidence; we simply assume Tony the Tiger doesn't 
exist. But what about Betty Crocker, Aunt Jemima, Ronald McDonald? We 
1 .  Susan Marks, Finding Betty Crocker: The Secret Life of America's First Lady of 
Food (New York: Simon & Schuster, 2005). For a similar analogy see Diane Roberts, 
The Myth of Aunt Jemima: Representations of Race and Region (New York: Routledge, 
1994 . 

236 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
are usually familiar enough with the practice of modern corporations not 
to assume a heavily marketed corporate spokesperson really exists. Some 
do. But most don't. 
And because of this, some of us have to actually check before being 
certain there really was a Colonel Sanders, and even those of us who don't 
need to, already knew-so even we didn't just assume. And we wouldn't. 
We know better. The mere fact of being a corporate mascot is in and of 
itself enough to warrant a somewhat lower prior probability of their histo­
ricity, though not so low that it requires much evidence to overcome it. Just 
one look on Wikipedia and I'm convinced Colonel Sanders existed. But 
where would we be if all our records and documents were destroyed, and 
a whole generation gone by (much less ten of them), and all that remained 
were some random scraps attesting to the details of Betty Crocker as I 
I isted above? We would then think it certain she really existed, even though 
she didn't. Now what if there was a fanatical cult of Betty Crocker worshi­
pers who didn't preserve any documents calling her existence into question 
(because they alone decided what documents to collect and save and what 
to ignore and let rot), and instead they wrote and preserved elaborate biog­
raphies about her, giving her a whole family and a captivating life story, 
interweaving her 'sayings' throughout (based on her 'newspaper column' 
and 'television appearances'), even depicting her performing wondrous 
miracles before crowds of thousands? Could this happen? Yes. In those 
conditions, it would be surprisingly easy. Is there any way we could find 
out the truth? In most cases, probably not. And yes, that should worry you.2 
There were no corporate mascots in antiquity, of course. But a close 
equivalent were religious mascots: the demigods, the most popular 'front 
men' for the Supreme Beings (Elements 31 and 36). Betty Crocker was 
created in a unique environment of modern business marketing-unlike, 
say, ancient savior gods. But the similarity is that the created person and 
their fictional biography symbolize and communicate a message the com­
pany wants to sell, and the fictional spokesperson becomes a reliable way 
to sell the product attached to and advocated by them. And if we see that a 
religion's products are certain moral and social structures and reforms (and 
the cosmological and metaphysical foundations they rest upon), then an 
analogy holds. Whether he was historical or not, the 'Jesus of worship' was 
also 'created' in a unique environment of ancient religious marketing, to 
promote a social agenda (the product being 'sold'), and just as Betty Crock­
er's ahistoricity makes sense against a background of similar fabrications 
for similar ends (like Aunt Jemima, Uncle Ben, or Ronald McDonald), so 
Jesus' ahistoricity makes sense against a background of similar fabrica-
2. Although for the converse example of Haile Selassie, see chapter 2 (§I). 

6. The Prior Probability 
237 
tions for similar ends (like Romulus, Dionysus, or Theseus). Exactly as for 
King Arthur, Ned Ludd, Moses, or Daniel (as I explained in Chapter I, §4): 
people seek to create unity by creating a historical founder and then rally­
ing around his sayings and deeds. 
Their actual existence was not a requirement, and indeed was often a 
detriment (since it's much easier to make up things about a person who never 
existed than about one who actually did: see §7). But beliefin their existence 
was a requirement (for their story to have real authoritative impact). Yet this 
could be procured by simply creating evidence. Outside of fundamental­
ism, few scholars believe the resurrection account in John 20 has any basis 
in fact; to the contrary, its every detai I was obviously invented 'so that you 
would believe Jesus is the Christ' (Jn 20.31). If that could be done to create 
belief in the event it describes, it could be done to create belief in the man. 
The purpose is the same. And anyone wil ling to tell the one lie will be just 
as willing to tell the other. The more so if the liar himself has already been 
fooled into believing these things, and thus thinks he is merely reinforc­
ing a belief that surely 'must' be true (so, e.g., if Jesus 'must' have existed, 
he 'must' have been born somewhere, and 'must' have had a family, who 
'must' have had names; and so on it goes). Yet not even that would be neces­
sary, since one always had to feed converts milk before they could handle 
the meat (Element 13). Sometimes you just have to get people to believe 
something in order to save them. You just have to get them to go along with 
the program, which 'surely' is really best for them in the end. 
Religion at the time was, after all, a real, heartfelt, and very profit­
able business. In fact, the need to promote a brand was more important 
to religious institutions and communities precisely because they believed 
their mascots were real. Accordingly, completely mythical persons ended 
up with their own historical narratives, such as Plutarch's biographies of 
Romulus and Theseus, mixed in among biographies of real leaders and 
generals, without any distinction. Fabricating biographies and biographi­
cal data for non-existent people was a common fad of the time (Elements 
44 and 45). School children in antiquity would have to memorize the gene­
alogy and family relations of Ajax; even though Ajax never existed and 
thus had no genealogy or family relations.3 And as I noted in Chapter I 
(§4), everything we know about the prophet Daniel, from what he did to 
what he said, to his basic life story, comes from a book that was wholly 
fabricated; so even if he existed, the 'Daniel' of Daniel is a complete fic­
tion. This book even got expanded over time, adding even more fabricated 
tales, like Bel and the Dragon. That's what religious believers do with their 
heroes: make things up. 
3. For this general phenomenon see Raffaella Cribiore, Gymnastics of the Mind 
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press? 2001). pp. 198-99. 

238 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
So how do we tell the difference? How do we determine whether the Gos­
pels are like the book of Daniel or the life of Romulus . . .  or an account of a 
real person based on some real facts instead? Looking at the evidence is part 
of the required task, and that we will do in coming chapters. But step one is 
determining the most defensible prior probability in the matter, just like fig­
uring the prior probability that either Ronald McDonald or Colonel Sanders 
is real, before checking any facts in the matter. Drawing on the concluding 
hypotheses of Chapters 2 and 3, what's the prior probability that Jesus was 
a euhemerized mythical hero rather than a mythologized historical man? 
2. Determining Prior Probability 
We could ask what the prior probability is that any person about whom sto­
ries are told is historical or not. And certainly, if we picked anyone out of 
a hat who was claimed to be historical, the odds would be respectably high 
that they are historical. Because usually that's the case; made-up people 
are comparatively less common. However, we must always apply the rule 
of greater knowledge: if we know more about the person we are inquiring 
about, enough to know that he belongs to a narrower reference class than 
'just anyone' claimed to be historical, then we must take that knowledge 
into account.4 The information that we use to identify the narrowest refer­
ence class for which we have usable frequency data is information we must 
then move from e into b (from evidence into background knowledge), and 
therefore we cannot bring it up again when asking about consequent prob­
abilities later. But as long as we obey that rule, the outcome will remain 
logically valid, and that's all we need. 
All of this I have already explained in Chapters 3, 4 and 6 of Proving 
History. So I won't revisit the logical point. What matters at present is that 
we know Jesus belongs to the Rank-Raglan hero class (Element 48), and 
we have good frequency data for that class (at least 'good' by the standards 
of ancient history), and there is no narrower class for which we can say the 
same; therefore we must take that knowledge into account when assigning 
a prior probability of historicity to Jesus. And if we do that, then any of 
the details we are using to place him in that class have thereby been 'used 
up' to generate a prior probability, and they cannot affect any further prob­
abilities going forward. So we might see some of them again in Chapter 10 
(by way of exam pie), but when we assign consequent probabilities there, we 
will be taking other elements of the Gospels i nto account. 
In a sound Bayesian formula, prior probability is based on the general 
expectations produced by our background knowledge, as distinct from what 
4. See Carrier, Proving History, p. 233. 

6. The Prior Probability 
239 
we consider the evidence that needs to be explained by our hypothesis. This 
is the way historians divide those two sets of information, which can differ 
from what scientists typically do, but the result is the same.5 We do not have 
to explain how or why Jesus became a Rank-Raglan hero in order to see 
that he did (whatever the reason and however it happened); so the resulting 
correlation data can be used without presuming anything about how that 
correlation came about. And that means we can put that specific data (the 
Rank-Raglan-assigning data) in our background knowledge and see what 
it gets as an expected frequency: how often are people in that class histori­
cal vs. ahistorical? Because, given the fact that Jesus belongs to that class, 
the prior probability that Jesus is historical has to be the same as the prior 
probability that anyone we draw at random from that class is historical. 
This is a logically necessary fact. 
Just as 'the prior probability that Jesus was raised from the dead by a 
supernatural agency is the same as the prior probability that a supernatural 
agency raised Romulus from the dead, or Asclepius [etc.]', so, too, the prior 
probability that Jesus is historical is the same as the prior probability that 
Romulus is historical, or Moses or Hercules or anyone else in the same 
class.6 Again, as with the resurrection claim, the evidence in the case of 
Jesus can be much stronger than for any of the others; but that is accounted 
for with the consequent probabilities. Here we're only talking about the 
prior probability. We'll get to the evidence later. The prior probability is 
not the posterior probability, and only the latter is the probability that Jesus 
existed. But we have to start somewhere, and this is the best starting point, 
because here the frequency data are sufficiently clear and there is no nar­
rower reference class we can say the same for. 
It won't really matter what you start with to determine prior probability, 
however, because whatever you don't use for that will become a part of e 
(the evidence) anyway, which you will then have to deal with later, and 
when you do you will get the same mathematical result regardless. 7 I wi II 
demonstrate that for this case later in this chapter. But for now, we have 
a clear .. cut reference class to draw a prior from. And so our analysis can 
begin. 
3. Using the Rank-Raglan Reference Class 
The name 'Jesus Christ' literally means 'Savior Messiah', which actu­
ally just means 'Anointed Savior'. The author of the Gospel of Matthew 
5. See Chapter 4 (§4); with Carrier, Proving History, p. 301 (n. 10), and 'background 
knowledge vs. evidence', p. 333. 
6. Carrier, Proving History, pp. 242-45. 
7. Carrier, Proving History, pp. 239-42. 

240 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
was well aware of this, and even made a point of it. 8 Jesus is an English 
derivation from the Greek spelling of the Hebrew name Joshua (Yeshua), 
which means 'Yahweh saves'. Christ is from the Greek christos, meaning 
'anointed', which in Hebrew is masiab, 'messiah'. 
That should make us suspicious from the start. Isn't his name abnor­
mally convenient? The 'Christ' part was assigned by those who believed 
he was the messiah, and thus not accidental. But what are the odds that his 
birth name would be 'Savior', and then he would be hailed as the Savior? 
Are historical men who are worshiped as savior gods usually so conveni­
ently named? No, not usually. Are mythical men who are worshiped as 
savior gods usually so conveniently named? Surely more often than histori­
cal men are.9 Obviously it's more likely that a mythical godman would be 
conveniently named than that a historical one would be. Indeed, I would 
expect the ratio must surely exceed 2 to 1. That is, for every deified man 
who is conveniently named, there are surely at least two mythical god­
men with convenient names. And that even looks too generous to me-the 
actual ratio must surely be higher than 2 to 1 .  So if we settle on 2 to I. any 
adjustment of the odds toward what they truly are will only make the his­
toricity of Jesus less probable. And that would leave us with a prior prob­
ability of 33% that Jesus was historical, and-67% that he was not. 
This remains the conclusion even if we start with a neutral prior of 50% 
(by assuming no historical facts in our background knowledge at all), and 
then start our analysis by introducing the fact of Jesus being a conveniently 
named deity, and all the background data pertaining to that, and work each 
item of evidence in individually, using the posterior probability from each 
as the prior probability in the next.10 To show what I mean, I will pick num­
bers at random just to illustrate how it won't matter in the end what those 
numbers are. First, we would find the reference class of al1 men, which 
would be divided between all mythical and all historical men. Suppose 
there were 5,000 historical men and 1,000 mythical men (obviously these 
are huge undercounts, but again, I just made these numbers up; as we'll 
see in a moment, it won't matter very much in the end what they actually 
are). The prior probability of being mythical would then be 1,000 I 6,000 
(one thousand divided by the sum of that same one thousand and the other 
8. Mt. 1.20-21. 
9. Analogously, the mythical Abraham is conveniently named ('father of many') 
in Gen. 17.5 (and his original name, Abram, 'exalted father'. is no less convenient). 
similarly anticipating what he would become in the future. which doesn't tend to 
happen in the real world. 
10. For this method, see Carrier, Proving History. p. 168, and 'iteration, method 
of', p. 337. 

6. The Prior Probability 
241 
five thousand) which equals 1/6, or about I7%; and the prior probability of 
being historical would be 5,000 I 6,000, which equals 5/6, or about 83o/o. 
We would then add the evidence that Jesus was a godman (a man wor­
shiped as divine). Suppose I in 4 mythical men are godmen and I in 2 
historical men are godmen (that's absurd, of course, and makes Jesus even 
more likely to be historical, when surely it would be the other way around, 
but I'm going with this just to make my point that these numbers don't 
matter). The probability that Jesus would be a godman, given that he was 
a mythical man, would then be 1/4; and the probability given that he was 
a historical man would be 1/2. The posterior probability that Jesus was 
historical would then be 240/264 (which reduces to 60/66), or about 91o/o. 1 1  
We could then use that as our updated prior probability that Jesus is 
historical, and add the next item of evidence: that Jesus was conveniently 
named. In the imaginary scenario so far there are 250 mythical godmen 
(1/4 x I,OOO) and 2,500 historical godmen (1/2 x 5,000); if IO mythical 
godmen are conveniently named, and twice as many mythical godmen are 
conveniently named as historical godmen are, then there are 5 historical 
godmen who are conveniently named. The probability, therefore, that Jesus 
would be conveniently named, given that he was a mythical god man, would 
be 10/250, which is 1/25; and the probability given that he was a historical 
godman would be 5/2500, which is 1/500. The posterior probability that 
Jesus was historical would then be l/3, or the same 33% we started with­
back when we just skipped all this and went straight to the reference class 
'all conveniently named godmen', in which 1/3 were historical and 2/3 not 
(because, we concluded, at least twice as many mythical godmen must 
have convenient names than historical godmen do). 12 Change the ratio how­
ever you please, and the same reasoning will follow. So there is no getting 
around the fact that if the ratio of conveniently named mythical godmen to 
conveniently named historical godmen is 2 to 1 or greater, then the prior 
probability that Jesus is historical is 33% or less. 
But this is a hypothetical reference class ('all conveniently named god­
men'). We don't have any clear or statistically solid data about the frequency 
of historical to nonhistorical persons in that class; I merely guessed (albeit 
reasonably, based on our total background knowledge that coincidences 
are rarer in actual fact than in human invention) that the ratio of mythical 
persons to historical persons in that class is 2 to 1 or greater, and therefore 
1 1 .  (516) x (112) I [(516) X (112)] + [(116) x (114)] = (5112) I (5112) + (1 124) = (1 0124) I 
(10124) + (1124) = (10124) I (11124) = (2401264) = 0.9091 (rounding to the fourth decimal 
place). 
12. (2401264) X (1/500) I [(240/264) X (1/500)] + [(241264) X ( 1125)] = (2401132.000) I 
(2401132,000) + (2416600) 
== (2401132,000) I (2401132,000) + (480/132,000) 
(240/132,000) I (7201132,000) = (11550) I (3/550) = (55011650) = 113. 

242 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
the prior probability that a person in that class is historical is 1 in 3 or 
less. One might still question my intuitions here. Are coincidences of name 
really rarer in actual fact than in human invention? And even if rarer, how 
much rarer? And so on. In reality 1 don't think these cha11enges are at all 
plausible. The fact is, it's simply less likely that a historical man would be 
conveniently named Savior and then become a savior, than that a mythical 
man created to be a savior would be conveniently named Savior. 
Even if we tried to work the question from the probability of any Jew 
actually being named Jesus (which is roughly 1 in 26), 13 in comparison to 
the probability of any savior god being named Savior (among that god's 
many names, and Jesus also had many names, from Christ to Lord to 
Emmanuel), we'd end up even worse off. Because probably most savior 
gods were called Savior (soter in Greek), I'd say that ratio is closer to I in 
2, and that is over ten times more likely than 1 in 26, not just two times 
more likely as we were suggesting before. But again, we don't have clear or 
reliable data to build this result from; we'd just be working again from plau­
sible but stiiJ hypothetical datasets. We could even avoid these conclusions 
altogether by retreating to the hypothesis that 'Jesus', like Christ, was never 
his real name but a name assigned to him (even if by himself) and thus not 
a coincidence after aJ I, but intentional. We can easily imagine this having 
happened to any of the 'Jesus Christs' surveyed in Josephus (Element 4), 
none of whom were named Jesus (so far as we know), but all of whom were 
casting themselves in the role of Jesus (i.e., Joshua). And there are other 
things one could argue. So either way, I think this approach is shaky. 
Not so for the Rank-Raglan reference class. That works just like a 'cor­
porate mascot' reference class would today. Counting as the Rank-Raglan 
reference class all heroes who score above half the total criteria, we have 
fourteen members (besides Jesus, who makes fifteen); we can ascertain 
that those are the only members (or at least, there are no other known his­
torical persons who are members; and adding mythical persons would only 
make the ensuing argument stronger, by reducing the prior probability that 
any member of the class was historical); and we can conclude with reason­
able certainty that none of those fourteen members were ever historical 
persons-all of them are mythical. That means a historical Jesus is lit­
erally unique among all Rank-Raglan heroes. So to assume he was the 
sole exception in human history would be a rather extraordinary claim. But 
13. For a handy table of name frequencies among ancient Jews see Richard 
Bauckham, Jesus and the Eyewitnesses: The Gospels as Eyewitness Testimony (Grand 
Rapids, Ml: William B. Eerdmans, 2006), pp. 85-88 (counts for male names are against 
a total of2,625, so divide any number in the first column by that to get the overall name 
frequency; the numbers given are sti II rough estimates, being generated from disparate 
sources, but they are close enough for our purposes). 

6. The Prior Probability 
243 
since we cannot assume Jesus is nonhistorical, the probability that he is 
must be based on the law of succession from the uniform experience of the 
other fourteen persons in the same class, which is (s+l)/(n+2) = (0+1)/(14+2) 
== 1/16 = 0.0625, or barely 6%.14 That would be my lower bound for the prior 
probability that Jesus existed. 
Of course. fundamentalists would refuse to accept that Moses and Joseph 
are mythical (two of the fourteen in that class); but that they are not histori­
cal is accepted by al most all secular experts in biblical antiquities and even 
most religious experts (Jewish and Christian), and is pretty hard to deny on 
the evidence we have (Element 44). Nevertheless, because I want to pro­
duce a prior probability as far against myth as I can reasonably believe it to 
be, so as to produce an argument a fortiori to my eventual conclusion, I will 
'grant' the fundamentalists their unwarranted assumption, even against our 
background evidence. and count Moses and Joseph as historical persons.15 
Since it would be special pleading to assume that only Jewish heroes are 
'special' that way, we should balance the scales and say that up to two of 
the pagans on the list may be historical as well (I am fairly certain that's 
not true, but again, I'm arguing a fortiori; and since only the count mat­
ters, it doesn't matter who the two are). That gives us 4 historical persons 
out of 14, which means the 1 5th member has a prior probability of being 
historical of (s+1)/(n+2) = (4+1)/(14+2) :: 5/16 = 0.31 25, or around 31%. I'll 
be additionally generous and just bump that up to an even 33% (I in 3), the 
same probability I came up with from the coincidence of Jesus Christ's 
name. I cannot reasonably believe the prior probability is any higher than 
that, nor do I think anyone else can reasonably believe that. And so that is 
my upper bound, which I will use as the prior probability that Jesus existed 
as a historical person from here on out. 
Again, even if we started from a neutral prior of 50% and walked our 
way through 'all persons claimed to be historical' to 'all persons who 
became Rank-Raglan heroes', we'd end up again with that same probabil­
ity of I in 3. For example, if again there were 5,000 historical persons and 
1,000 mythical persons, the prior probability of being historical would be 
516; and of not being historical, 1/6. But if there are 10 mythical men in the 
Rank-Raglan class and 5 historical men (the four we are granting, plus one 
14. See 'Laplace's Rule of Succession•, in Carrier, Proving History, p. 337. The 
variable s equals the number of confirmed cases of what we are looking for in the set 
of decided cases (in this case, zero, as none of the fourteen known cases are known to 
be historical), and the variable n equals the total number of cases in that set (regardless 
of whether any are historical there are fourteen known Rank-Raglan heroes), prior to 
adding the one not yet decided (Jesus). 
15. On this method of argument see Carrier, Proving History, pp. 85-88, and 'a 
fortiori, method of'. p. 333. 

244 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
more, who may or may not be Jesus), then the probability of being in that 
class given that someone was historical would be 5/5000, which is 111000; 
and the probability given that they were mythical would be 10/1000, which 
is 1/100. This gives us a final probability of 1/3, hence 33%.16 No matter 
how you chew on it, no matter what numbers you put in, with these ratios 
you always end up with the same prior probability that Jesus was an actual 
historical man: just 33% at best. 
4. The Causal Objection 
Doesn't this presuppose that Jesus began as a Rank-Raglan hero? No. Even 
if his story was rebui It so that he would only belong to that class later (for 
example, if Matthew was the first ever to do that), it makes no difference. 
Regardless of how anyone came to be a Rank-Raglan hero, it still almost 
never happened to a historical person (in fact, so far as we can actua1ly tell, 
it never happened to a historical person, ever). Many of the heroes in that 
class may well have also begun very differently and only been molded into 
the Rank-Raglan hero type later. Thus, being conformed to it later has no 
bearing on the probability of this happening. The probability of this hap­
pening to a historical person, based on all the evidence of past precedent 
that we have, is sti ll practically zero. Even at our most generous it can be 
no better than 6%. Unless we reject the data we have and suppose that there 
were more historical persons in that class than the evidence suggests. But 
even when we do that, it goes beyond reason to estimate the number of such 
persons at any more than 113 of those in the class (and even that is beyond 
reason in my opinion). Which entails a maximum 33% prior probability that 
any member of that class was historical. 
We can imagine two possibilities: (1) the elements added to Matthew 
were already around from the beginning (and were perhaps even known 
to Mark, who chose not to use them so he could sell a different theology) 
or (2) they were invented later (perhaps by Matthew himself, and thus not 
known to Mark, even if some were invented by Jesus himself during his 
own lifetime). Option (2) would entail that the legend of Jesus was fabri­
cated and hero-typed very early and very rapidly (decisively refuting any 
claim that this couldn't have happened: see §7), while option (1) would 
entail Jesus himself was probably fabricated, being hero-typed from the 
very start. Certainly, if Jesus started as a Rank-Raglan hero, the probabil­
ity that he was a historical man who just 'happened' to match every point 
on the scale is extremely small. Clearly, the overwhelming odds in that case 
16. (516) X (l/1000) I ((516) X (111000)] + [(116) X (11100)] = (516000) I (516000) + 
(11600) = (111200) I (5/6000) + (1016000) = (111200) I (15/6000) = (111200) I (11400) = 
(40011200) = 113. 
\ 

6. The Prior Probability 
245 
would favor his being fabricated out of whole cloth (since getting away with 
claiming such wild fabrications so soon after a real man's death, when the 
less glamorous truth would be known to too many witnesses, would be 
even more difficult). So we cannot object to the assigned prior of 33% by 
proposing (I). If anything, (I) would entail a much lower prior probability 
that he was historical, much nearer to zero in fact. We should in that case 
adopt the lower bound of 6o/o. 
So anyone who wants to resist this conclusion has only one option: 
(2) that Jesus was remade in the image of a Rank-Raglan hero later on, and 
was never such originally. But you cannot embrace (2) without also embrac­
ing the general principle that massive, rapid legendary development is pos­
sible, and not only that, but you must also accept the specific conclusion that 
it undeniably occurred in the case of Jesus (so this completely eliminates 
any recourse to the last objection examined in this chapter, in §7: that rapid 
legendary development is improbable). Given the evidence of how often that 
kind of massive and rapid legendary development happened to historical 
persons, versus how often it happened to non-historical persons, we must 
surely conclude it happens to the latter far more often; and when it happens 
in such a way as to generate a Rank-Raglan hero, it appears never to have 
happened to historical persons. But it perhaps could; that's at least more 
likely to happen then than in condition (1). So we should perhaps in that case 
adopt the upper bound of 33o/o. That percentage simply represents the high­
est possible frequency with which that ever happened to historica\ persons 
(relative to those in the same class who weren't historical). 
5. The Alternative Class Objection 
What if we decided instead to use the 'Jesus Christs' surveyed by Josephus 
as a reference class? Wouldn't that give us a different prior, one more sup· 
portive of historicity? There were four of them, and all (we might presume) 
were historical (it raises an interesting question if they were not, but I will 
set that aside). The prior probability that Jesus was historical could then be 
imagined to be (4+1)/(4+2) = 5/6, or 83o/o. But how many of those men are 
also in the Rank-Raglan hero class? None, so far as we know (and thus we 
cannot assume any were or ever came to be). We can therefore all but rule 
this option out. The probability of a Rank-Raglan hero also belonging to 
the Josephan Christ class is low (as we have no instances of it happening 
on record), whereas Jesus definitely belongs to the Rank-Raglan hero class. 
The rule of greater knowledge thus requires us to derive our prior from the 
latter. The former can't override it. The Rank-Raglan class is also a larger 
class with more data points in it, thus it affords us better evidence to esti­
mate frequencies from. When we combine both facts (that 'historical' Jose­
phan Christs tend not to be Rank-Raglan heroes; and we have a lot better 

246 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
evidence for Rank-Raglan heroes), we cannot warrant using the Josephan 
class over the Rank-Raglan class. 
But it really wouldn't matter anyway. Even if we used the Josephan 
Christ class, the fact that Jesus is also in the Rank-Raglan class would still 
have to be accounted for, and that would go into the remaining evidence. As 
shown earlier, even if we did use the 83% probability as our starting prior, 
once we introduced the Rank-Raglan evidence we would end up with a new 
prior of33o/o al1 over again. Remember, before, we imagined 5,000 historical 
persons per total of 6,000 persons to get an 83% initial prior. Suppose we 
have similar numbers for Josephan Christs, five of them historical for every 
one that is mythical, which would produce the same probability (and this 
is just what we are assuming when we derive an 83% probability of being 
historical from the four instances of historicity in Josephus). We still know 
that twice as many Rank-Raglan members are not historical as are, so we 
will still have numbers in ratio to each other like 10 mythical members to 
5 historical members, and this ratio will still hold, so far as we know, for 
all Josephan Christs. Therefore, being a Josephan Christ will make no dif­
ference. We will still end up with a 33% prior probability that a member of 
both classes (Josephan Christs and Rank-Raglan heroes) will be historical. 
That prior would be much higher for someone who was a Josephan Christ 
but not a Rank-Raglan hero, but Jesus is not such a person. Instead, for 
someone who is both, for all we know, they are as likely to be historical as 
any Rank-Raglan hero. Therefore, that is the reference class we should start 
with. Because there is no avoiding the consequences of its contents anyway. 
The same will follow for any other 'alternative' reference class pro­
posed. So no objection can be made from the prospect of alternative refer­
ence classes. The fact that Jesus is a Rank-Raglan hero simply always has 
the same mathematical consequence, no matter what you try to replace it 
with. Only if we had different data than we do, or much more data, could 
we come to any different conclusion than that. 
6. The Complexity Objection 
The 'minimal myth' hypothesis developed in Chapter 3 is not simply 'Jesus 
began as a mythical person'. It has five separate components, and as such 
could possibly have a much lower prior than nonhistoricity does generally. 
This is because adding elements to a theory always reduces its prior. 17 For 
example, if the prior probability of 'myth' is 67% but the prior probabil ity of 
a 'celestial deity' is only twice that of a 'political fiction' (see Chapter 3, §3). 
and these were the only viable kinds of 'myth', then the prior probability 
17. See Carrier, Proving History, pp. 80-81, and 'gerrymandering', p. 336. 

' 
=· 
6. The Prior Probability 
247 
of the hypothesis I will be testing against historicity will be only 45o/o (vs. 
22% for 'political fiction'), and not the full 67% (67% being the converse 
of the 33% prior probability of historicity). Each additional element could 
reduce it further. This would not entail historicity is more likely to pre­
vail, since it would remain the case that it's twice as likely that some myth 
theory is true than that any theory of historicity is (unless the evidence we 
then examine alters those odds, of course}.18 But having to account for both 
theories of myth would make our analysis more complicated. 
In Chapter 3, however, I already argue why the effect of conjoining all 
five elements is so minimal that we can mathematically ignore it. Because 
even in conjunction they still occupy nearly all the probability-space 
reserved for 'myth', so we can treat that theory as equivalent to 'nonhis­
toricity' altogether. First, the 'celestial deity' element is, on background 
evidence alone, 19 at least hundreds of times more likely than any alterna­
tive account of the mythical origin of belief in Jesus. Anyone who believes 
18. See Carrier, 'Plausibility of Theft', in Empty Tomb (ed. Price and Lowder), 
p. 368 n. 38; although the point made there I explain more clearly in the last part of the 
first section of Richard Carrier, 'Stephen Davis Gets It Wrong' (2006) at http://www. 
richardcarrier.info/Carrier--ReplyToDavis.html, which I here quote: 
In his critique of Martin, Davis suggests that even if 'the probability of 
the falsity of [a hypothesis] H is .6', i.e. 60%, it would still be rational 
to believe H if each of the only four other possibilities has a mere .15 
or 15% probability of being true. This is unsound reasoning. In the sce­
nario he describes, there would be a 60% chance that some one of the 
other explanations is true (which he labels A, B, C and D), so it would 
not be rational to believe H. What would be rational is to conclude that 
you don't know which explanation is true. For example, if Alexander [the 
Great] died and the only options available were all natural causes except 
H, which was 'murder', then there would be a 60% chance that Alexander 
died of natural causes, and therefore it would not be rational to believe he 
was murdered. Though it would make sense in a gambling scenario to bet 
on H, that would only be the case if you had to bet, or could afford to lose. 
But history is not gambling. If you get to bet your life on A, B, C, D, or H, 
or not bet anything at all, in Davis' scenario the rational choice would be to 
refrain from betting, since no matter which bet you placed, the odds would 
always favor your death. In such a case it would never be rational to say 
'I believe H will be a winning bet' even if it's the best bet on the table . . . .  
As far as sound historical argument goes, it would never be rational to say 
'I believe H is true' when you know H more probably than not is false. 
This conclusion is all the more so if we have the option to bet on either H or 'A B c 
' 
' 
' 
or D' as a unit. As then rejecting H would even be the best bet. 
19. For example, the precedents of mystery religions (Element 13); schizotypal 
cults (Element 15); and Jewish pre-Christian belief in a celestial Son of God named 
Jesus (Elements 6 and 40); and so on. 

248 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
otherwise will have to demonstrate an alternative differential in prior prob­
abil ity, and until that happens 1 will stick with my estimate. Even just two­
hundredths of 67% is a mere 0.33% (a mere third of a percent), too little to 
make any visible difference to the math (since I will always round up to 
the nearest whole percentage point; and 33.33% minus 0.33% is still 33%). 
And recall that we are very much under-estimating the prior probability of 
myth, and the amount by which we are underestimating it is many whole 
percentage points, more than enough to wash out any fraction of a percent. 
So we needn't concern ourselves with fractions of a percent at this stage.20 
The same follows for all the other elements, only with even greater force. 
The evidence we have and all our background knowledge (e.g. Elements 15, 
16 and 29) render the hallucinatory (and/or pseudo-hallucinatory) origin of 
Christianity vastly more likely than any non-hallucinatory origin, within 
the context of all mythic origins (i.e., among all theories of myth, those that 
don't posit a hallucinatory origin, feigned or actual, are extremely unlikely 
on prior considerations alone; this may be different among theories of his­
toricity, but here the question is how to divide up the probability space for 
myth). Similarly, any theory of myth that requires a vastly greater scale 
of lying and/or hallucination than the theory I am positing will for that 
very reason be vastly less probable than it. Fina11y, that subsequent Chris­
tians believed Jesus was historical is an established fact in our background 
knowledge, and therefore the probability that it is false is virtually zero; 
and therefore it consumes effectively all the probability-space reserved for 
myth. In other words, any theory of myth that denied this would have an 
absurdly low prior. It therefore can be ignored as well. 
In result, a1ternative theories of myth all collectively (even when summed 
together) have a prior probability less than a percentage point and therefore 
can be ignored (unless the evidence very strongly and clearly supported one 
of them, but if it did, it would already have become the mainstream view by 
now). That leaves the remainder of the probability-space (the whole 67o/o) 
occupied by the minimal theory I outline in Chapter 3, which I will test 
against historicity for the remainder of this book. 
7. Rapid Legendary Development 
That leaves one common objection: if Jesus was a celestial deity already 
euhemerized by the time the Gospels were written, then that supposedly 
suggests an extraordinarily rapid pace of legendary development, which 
must surely be very improbable. But this is not a valid objection, for three 
decisive reasons. 
20. On washing out insignificant priors, see Carrier, Proving History, pp. 85-88. 

•, 
6. The Prior Probability 
249 
First, a deity can easily be euhemerized from day one. It does not 
require any time lag at all. Especially if that deity is euhemerized to cre­
ate an exoteric allegory for both the public and new initiates, whose eso­
teric meaning is explained only to more advanced members (Elements 13 
and 14). Although the deities and heroes in the Rank-Raglan class were 
either euhemerized centuries after they were first worshiped as deities 
(like Osiris), or at the moment of their invention they were placed centuries 
in the past (like Jason), this was not because either was necessary for the 
process to work. Rather, it was because euhemerization had not become 
popular until centuries after these gods had become popular (in the case 
of preexistent deities), or because a cultural trend had already been estab­
lished of placing all heroes in the same imagined Age of Heroes (around 
the assumed time of the Trojan War), as if nothing exciting ever happened 
in any other century of history (or, in the case of Romulus, because leg­
end required that he be placed in the already-traditional century of Rome's 
founding-so he would have been placed there no matter when his tale was 
created). We can therefore draw no conclusions about what was possible 
simply from what early Greeks and Romans chose to do. 
Second, we have ample background evidence that such rapid legendary 
development is possible and indeed common, therefore its being improb­
able is not a conclusion derived from our background knowledge but a con­
clusion firmly against it.21 We saw this already in the case of Haile Selassie 
21 . For more discussion and examples of rapid legendary development see Carrier, 
'Why the Resurrection Is Unbelievable', in Christian Delusion (ed. Loftus), pp. 291-
96; 'Spiritual Body', in Empty Tomb (ed. Price and Lowder), pp. 168-82; Carrier, 
'Plausibility of Theft', in Empty Tomb (ed. Price and Lowder), pp. 355-59; and Richard 
Carrier, Sense and Goodness without God: A Defense of Metaphysical Naturalism 
(Bloomington, IN: AuthorHouse, 2005), pp. 227-41; as well as Kris Komarnitsky, 
Doubting Jesus' Resurrection: What Happened in the Black Box? (Drapper, UT: Stone 
Arrow Books, 2nd edn, 2014); Matt McCormick, 'The Salem Witch Trials and the 
Evidence for the Resurrection', in End of Christianity (ed. Loftus), pp. 195-218; Chris 
Hallquist, UFOs, Ghosts, and a Rising God: Debunking the Resurrection of Jesus 
(Cincinnati, OH: Reasonable Press, 2008), pp. 68-87; Robert Price, 'Is There a Place 
for Historical Criticism?', Religious Studies 27 (1991), pp. 371-88; and Robert Price, 
'Jesus: Myth and Method', in Christian Delusion (ed. Loftus), pp. 273-90. Another 
good example of vast and rapid legendary development is the weaving of fabulous tales 
about St Genevieve within a mere ten years of her death: see Jo Ann McNamara and 
John Halborg, Sainted Women of the Dark Ages (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 
1992), pp. 17-37 (cf. 'Text A', §§19-20, 23, 32-34, 36, 39, 44-47, 50·51 ). Also relevant to 
this conclusion is the fact that in antiquity 'fact checking' was not commonly valued 
and rarely possible: see Carrier, Not the Impossible Faith, pp. 161-218, 329-68, 385-406 
(with Carrier, Sense and Goodness, pp. 246-47). This would greatly increase the rate 
and scale of legendary development possible compared to modern times. And yet even 
in modern times that rate can be high (as the cases of Roswell and Selassie prove). 

250 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
in Chapter 2 (§1). Even the Roswell myth evolved from tinfoil in the desert 
to a whole flying saucer with autopsied alien bodies recovered from it, all 
in just forty years. And that was in one of the most modern and educated 
societies in history, with mass media and even extensive debunking in 
print.22 And yet, as I noted for Haile Selassie, if we had only the writings 
of Roswell believers, and none mentioning what any early critics said (the 
exact situation we are in for Jesus), we would be none the wiser. 
In fact, it's actually far easier to invent stories about a non-existent 
person than about one who recently lived. Because then there are no wit­
nesses to gainsay or correct you, and no living traditions to compete with 
(assuming either made any difference at all). And yet, as we've seen, Jesus 
underwent vast legendary development very rapidly, becoming a Rank­
Raglan hero, complete with absurd mythical biographical elements (e.g. 
the nativity tales, the confrontation with the Devil in the wilderness, the 
supernatural global darkness at his death), within the space of only a few 
decades.23 Either this happening to a historical person is therefore highly 
probable (and therefore 'rapid legendary development' cannot be regarded 
as improbable), or it didn't happen to a historical person (and therefore this 
'rapid legendary development' argues against Jesus having existed, rather 
than the other way around). Either way, no valid objection remains. 
Third, the corollary claim that Christians would have had institutions 
in place to reverently preserve the truth and thus prevent any legendary 
embellishment or invention is not only contrary to fact (all the evidence 
we have argues against, and none for, the existence of any such institutions 
within early Christianity, and the ubiquitous divergences and contradic­
tions among the Gospels alone prove no such institution was operating), but 
also moot. Such an institution, had it existed, would just as readily preserve 
a fabrication. The issue is not whether a tradition was preserved reverently 
(although the many contradictory Gospels prove it was not), but whether 
the tradition being 'reverently preserved' was based on fact or an allegori­
cal fiction in the first place.24 The fact that divergent Gospels were prolifer-
22. See Philip J. Klass, The Real Roswell Crashed Saucer Coverup (Amherst, NY: 
Prometheus Books, 1997); and Karl T. Pflock, Roswell: Inconvenient Facts and the 
Wil to Believe (Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 2001). 
23. On the specific example of the sun being darkened over the whole earth 
(already in Mark) as proof of rapid legendary development and the absence of any 
eyewitness check on same, see Carrier, Proving History, pp. 41-45, and 'eyewitness 
check', p. 336. On the additional example (in Matthew) of a massively embellished 
empty tomb narrative (including a public mass resurrection of countless holy men in 
Jerusalem), see Carrier, 'Why the Resurrection Is Unbelievable', in Christian Delusion 
(ed. Loftus), pp. 294-96. 
24. On how this crucial distinction is generally ignored by defenders of oral 
tradition, and how oral tradition actually still changes over time (and quite rapidly) in 
deliberate, history-eclipsing ways even in the presence of preserving institutions, see 

•, 
6. The Prior Probability 
251 
ating beyond anyone's control already in Paul's lifetime (Element 21), and 
that reliance on secret traditions and allegorical storybuildi ng would have 
prevented nearly any check on the development of new traditions (Elements 
13 and 14), and that there were tremendous disruptions in Christianity's 
leadership and literary activity in its earliest period and the Gospels appear 
around the very time the original founders would most likely have been 
dead (Element 22), effectively refutes any argument that completely new 
traditions could not have been developed in the course ofthe first century.25 
This problem can be illustrated with a mock analogy. Imagine in your 
golden years you are accused of murdering a child many decades ago and 
put on trial for it. The prosecution claims you murdered a little girl in the 
middle of a public wedding in front of thousands of guests. But as evidence 
all they present is a religious tract written by 'John' which lays out a narra­
tive in which the wedding guests watch you kill her. Who is this John? The 
prosecution confesses they don't know. When did he write this narrative? 
Again, unknown. Probably thirty or forty years after the crime, maybe 
even sixty. Who told John this story? Again, no one knows. He doesn't 
say. So why should this even be admissible as evidence? Because the nar­
rative is filled with accurate historical details and reads like an eyewitness 
account. Is it an eyewitness account? Well, no, John is repeating a story 
told to him. Told to him by an eyewitness? Well . . .  we really have no way of 
knowing how many people the story passed through before it came to John 
and he wrote it down. Although he does claim an eyewitness told him some 
of the details. Who is that witness? He doesn't say. I see. So how can we 
even believe the story is in any way true if it comes from unknown sources 
through an unknown number of intermediaries? Because there is no way 
the eyewitnesses to the crime, all those people at the wedding, would have 
allowed John to lie or make anything up, even after thirty to sixty years, so 
there is no way the account can be fabricated. 
If that isn't obviously an absurd argument to you, then you didn't under­
stand what has just been said and you need to read that paragraph again 
the extensive and excellent analysis of an important case study by Theodore Weeden 
in 'Kenneth Bailey's Theory of Oral Tradition: A Theory Contested by its Evidence', 
Journal for the Study of the Historical Jesus 7 (January 2009), pp. 3-43. See also Paul 
Foster, 'Memory, Orality, and the Fourth Gospel: Three Dead-Ends in Historical Jesus 
Research', Journal for the Study of the Historical Jesus 10 (July 2012), pp. 191-227. By 
contrast, all recent attempts to argue for a reliable oral tradition behind the Gospels 
are mired in naivete and possibiliter fallacies (on such fallacies see Carrier, Proving 
History, pp. 26ࡧ29). 
2S. On all these points see Carrier, Proving History, pp. 121-206 (especially p. 179); 
H.W. Shin, Textual Criticism and the Synoptic Problem in Historical Jesus Research: 
The Search for Valid Criteria (Dudley, MA: Peeters, 2004), p. 144; and the entire issue 
of the Journal for the Study oft he Historical Jesus 6 (2008). 

252 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
until you do. Because seen in this more neutral context, that last argument 
is monumentally absurd. As any judge or lawyer in this country will tell 
you, the evidential value of 'John's' account is exactly nil, and the value of 
the 'eyewitness check' defense of his account's reliability is less than nil. 
So why would we suddenly do a complete reversal on this point as soon as 
it's a story about Jesus? There is really no sane answer to that question. In 
this hypothetical trial, your obvious defense would be that the prosecution 
can't even prove the allegedly murdered girl ever even existed (much less 
that you killed her, even if anyone did). That entails far more than a reason­
able doubt. The prosecution's inability to offer any evidence even for the 
girl's existence other than 'John's' book about her murder would get you 
acquitted faster than any jury could even sit to deliberate. Historians cannot 
behave differently.26 
The objection that 'someone would have said something', however, is 
actually an appeal to the role of evidence in changing our conclusion for 
Jesus compared to other Rank-Raglan heroes, and therefore it cannot affect 
our prior probability anyway. If that is a problem at all, if it makes any dif­
ference at all, then it will do so when we estimate the consequent probabili­
ties of the surviving evidence on either the theory that Jesus existed or that 
he did not. It does not affect the prior, which is the probability before we 
take evidence like that into account. And that is what subsequent chapters 
will do. So this also cannot be an objection to the prior probability arrived 
at here. Hence I will revisit it where it belongs, in Chapter 8 (§12). 
8. Conclusion 
Therefore, the prior probability [or P(hlb)] that Jesus was historical can be 
no more than I in 3 or 33% (which translates into prior 'odds' against h 
of 2 to 1). That does not mean the probability that Jesus was historical is 
33%. For we still have to look at all the evidence pertaining to the various 
hypotheses for how Jesus became a member of both the Rank-Raglan hero 
class and the set of all other celestial savior deities. And when we do, we 
could find that the evidence is so improbable, unless Jesus really existed, 
that even a prior probability as low as 1 in 16, or 6.25% (which entails prior 
odds against h of 15 to 1 ), would be more than overcome. 
For example, even if Caesar Augustus had a Rank-Raglan score of 20, 
we also have a vast array of evidence supporting his existence, each piece 
of which is highly improbable unless there really was a Caesar Augustus, 
and all of it combined would be even more improbable. So if _,h is any 
26. See my even closer analogy to the same conclusion (the imaginary case of • Hero 
Savior of Vietnam') in Richard Carrier, Why I Am Not a Christian: Four Conclusive 
Reasons to Reject the Faith (Richmond, CA: Philosophy Press, 201 1), pp. 48-52. 

6. The Prior Probability 
253 
variation of 'Caesar Augustus did not really exist', then the actual evidence 
we have of his existence would entail a P(el-.h.b), the consequent prob­
ability of the evidence, hundreds if not thousands or millions of times less 
than 6%, yet with a corresponding P(elh.b) very nearly equal to 1 .  Such a 
combination would produce a P(-.hje.b), the probability that Caesar Augus­
tus didn't exist, of very well near zero. So we would still be fully justified 
believing in his historicity-even with a prior probability of it of only 6%. 
That's why we need to look at the evidence for the existence of Jesus. Is 
it as strong as the evidence for the existence of Caesar Augustus? And even 
if not that strong (and we already know it isn't, as I discussed in Chapter 2, 
§2), is it still strong enough to make historicity more probable than ahisto­
ricity, no matter what Rank-Raglan score Jesus has? To that question we 
now tum. 

7 
PRIMARY SouRcEs 
The surviving evidence does not provide an unproblematic entry into the 
historical Jesus ofNazareth and to his role in the process ofthe formation 
of Christian beg inn i ngs.1 
1 .  What Counts as Evidence? 
When exam ining the evidence for a claim about ancient history, what that 
means in practice is the relevant primary source material. That would be 
the evidence, which survives for us to see it, that's earliest in the chain of 
causation. This chapter will discuss what the relevant primary source mate­
rial is for the historicity of Jesus, what we know about that evidence, and 
how we will break that evidence down in coming chapters. 
For something to count as 'relevant primary evidence', it must meet two 
criteria: it must be plausibly capable of being causally connected with the 
facts (persons, properties or events) whose existence is in question, and it 
must be relevantly independent of all other primary evidence.2 An example 
of failing to meet the first condition would be a book written by a psychic 
who claims to have supernaturally viewed the past. That doesn't count as 
evidence, because it is not plausible that what they saw (or claim to have 
seen) is actually causally connected in any relevant way to what happened.3 
By contrast, a medieval manuscript of Lucian's account of his interactions 
with Proteus Peregrinus (in Lucian's Death of Peregrinus) is evidence of 
what happened to Peregrinus, because more than plausibly it is causally 
I .  Helmut Koester, 'The Historical Jesus and the Historical Situation of the Quest: 
An Epilogue', in Studying the Historical Jesus: Evaluation of the State of Current 
Research (ed. Bruce Chilton and Craig Evans; New York: Brill, 1994), pp. 535-45 (541). 
2. For the mathematical definition of 'plausibility' see Carrier, Proving History, 
pp. 83, 101-102. 
3. In Bayesian terms, the consequent probabilities for this item of 'evidence' are 
the same on any plausible hypothesis, and therefore this 'evidence' has no effect on the 
probability of any of those hypotheses being true. 

7. Primary Sources 
255 
connected to that: the best explanation (or at the very least a definitely plau­
sible explanation) of the manuscript's existence is that it sits at the end of a 
chain of causally connected copies of an original book written by Lucian 
(either literally, in his own hand, or by a scribe at his dictation and correc­
tion), which in turn was causally connected to what happened to Peregrinus 
by the fact that Lucian actually saw what happened to Peregrinus. Or so 
Lucian claims, of course-but even if that claim is false, the text could still 
be causally connected to what happened by another chain of causation of 
several intermediaries passing information on, at the start of which is some 
witness who actually did see it. If not, then of course the account is bogus, 
and is no longer evidence of what happened to Peregrinus-unless its con­
tent (or even mere existence) still entails something about that (for instance, 
if Peregrinus more likely didn't exist if Lucian fabricated such an account 
of him, in which case the evidence is in that respect causally connected to 
the fact of Peregrinus not existing).4 
Disputes over the validity of evidence thus often focus on how securely 
that evidence is actually causally connected to what is being claimed about 
the past (such as that some person existed, or some event occurred). In the 
most basic terms, a historical claim (such as that 'Peregrinus existed and 
burned himself alive to prove a point') is ultimately a hypothesis about how 
that evidence came about (that evidence being, in this case, Lucian's book; 
but there can sometimes be a lot of other evidence besides: see examples in 
Chapter 2, §2). I discussed all of this already in Proving History, so I won't 
revisit the logic of historical argument any further here, except to reiterate 
the general conclusion that what we want to know is how likely it is that 
we would have a given piece of evidence (like the text of Lucian's Death 
of Peregrinus) if h is true (the hypothesis we are testing), and how likely 
it is that we would have that same evidence if h is false (and some other 
hypothesis is true instead, which means any one of al l other hypotheses 
exclusive of ours). 
So for the first criterion. But meeting the second criterion is just as impor­
tant: evidence must be independent. If someone wrote something about Per­
egrinus for which their sole source of information was Lucian's Death of 
Peregrinus, then only the latter counts as evidence. A fact or quotation taken 
from that book can be evidence of that book's existence (or of its content at a 
particular point in time), but it is not evidence of what happened to Peregri-
4. As. e.g 
.• by supporting an argument from silence (Carrier, Proving History, 
PP- 117-19) or making Peregrinus's existence more absurd (Carrier, Proving History, 
pp. 1 14-17). On the causal logic of evidence in historical reasoning generally, see 
Carrier, Proving History, pp. 45-49, 51-57, 229-31, and 'causal reasoning', p. 334; 
on proving non-existence: pp. 204-205 (see also Chapters 1 through 3 in the present 
volume). 

256 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
nus, as long as we have the earlier (which is in our case the primary) source, 
which is the text of Lucian's book. In Bayesian terms, the probability of 
having information taken from a book if that book's content is unknowingly 
false (and no other sources consulted) is the same as the probability if the 
content is true. Therefore, having the secondary source can have no effect 
on the epistemic probability that the claim in question is true. Having a copy 
of someone's letter, for example, does not make the original letter any more 
likely to be genuine or its contents any more likely to be true. Being depend­
ent evidence, the copy is useless, and should simply be ignored (unless it 
contains or entails unique information, but then only that unique informa­
tion is evidence of something; e.g. that a copy was made). 
Unfortunately this conclusion still follows even if we merely can­
not establish that a source is independent. For example, if someone after 
Lucian, whom we know likely had access to Lucian's book (whether they 
used it or not), says things about Peregrinus that are things Lucian already 
said about him, then that later source still can no longer count as relevant 
evidence for Peregrinus (though it does count as evidence of a more wide­
spread knowledge of the story ofPeregrinus, but that's not the same thing). 
Of course it's possible this later author had a source independent of Lucian; 
but 'possibly, therefore probably' is a fallacy.5 Accordingly, we can make 
nothing of it-such evidence is no more likely to exist on a claim's being 
true than its being false (since the information is just as likely to come from 
Lucian as from anywhere else, whether the claim is true or false), and there­
fore can make no mathematical difference to the probability that the claim 
is true. Our only relevant evidence in that case would just be Lucian's book. 
This is significant because almost all the evidence 'for Jesus' cannot be 
established as independent of earlier evidence we already have (such as the 
canonical Gospels). Therefore almost all evidence 'for Jesus' must be dis­
carded. Likewise all evidence that is not plausibly connected to the actual 
truth of the matter (such as 'feeling in your heart' that Jesus existed). When 
all that evidence is properly excluded, we are left with very little. And that 
is a problem, one we will revisit as we proceed through the following chap­
ters. But first we must identify and describe what little evidence is left. 
2. Breaking Down the Evidence 
For any claim about antiquity the evidence we might have can come in 
many forms-original documents, tombstones, coins, excavated buildings 
(or indeed anything physically recovered from the past, from dolls to door­
knobs), astronomical or geographical facts, graffiti on an ancient wall; in 
5. Carrier, Proving History, pp. 26-29. 

7. Primary Sources 
257 
short, all kinds of things. However, in the case of Jesus, there is no directly 
relevant archaeological evidence.6 And no indirect evidence is relevant to 
6. Many claims to the contrary exist but all are unfounded: The Shroud of Turin, 
e.g., is a medieval fake: Walter McCrone, Judgment Day for the Shroud of Turin 
(Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, rev. edn, 1999); Harry Gove, Relic, leon or Hoax? 
Carbon Dating the Turin Shroud (Philadelphia, PA: Institute of Physics,1996); Joe 
Nickell, Inquest on the Shroud of Turin: Latest Scientific Findings (Amherst, NY: 
Prometheus Books, 1998). See also Steven Schafersman's 'Skeptical Shroud of Turin 
Website' (http://freeinquiry.com/skeptic/shroud); and the Skeptic's Dictionary entry on 
the 'Shroud of Turin' (http://www.skepdic.com/shroud.html). 
Likewise the so-called James ossuary (which supposedly once contained the brother 
of Jesus Christ) is inconclusive as evidence for any particular Jesus (its inscription fails 
to mention that he is the brother of the Jesus regarded as the Messiah, as opposed to 
some other Jesus), and is also probably a fake (or rather, part of the inscription on it 
is): Ryan Byrne and Bernadette McNary-Zak (eds.), Resurrecting the Brother of Jesus: 
The James Ossuary Controversy and the Quest for Religious Relics (Chapel Hill, NC: 
University of North Carolina Press, 2009). See also the Wikipedia page on the 'James 
Ossuary' (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/James _Ossuary). 
By the same reasoning the Talpiot Tomb almost certainly has no connection to 
Jesus Christ (nor do any of the other tombs alleged to have been 'the' tomb of Jesus): 
Stephen Pfann and James Tabor, 'Forum: The Talpiot ''Jesus' Family Tomb"', Near 
Eastern Archaeology 69 (September-December 2006), pp. 116-37; Charles Quarles, 
Buried Hope or Risen Savior: The Search for the Jesus Tomb (Nashville, TN: B & H 
Academic, 2008); Don Sausa, The Jesus Tomb: Is It Fact or Fiction? Scholars Chime In 
(Fort Myers, FL: Vision Press, 2007). See also the Wikipedia page on 'The Lost Tomb 
of Jesus' (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Lost_Tomb_of_Jesus). The claim that the 
name cluster there is too improbable otherwise is refuted by none of those claims taking 
into account the fact that there were more than a dozen and as many as twenty bodies 
in that same tomb, greatly increasing the frequency of chance name combinations. 
For example, another startling chance combination of Jesus-related names had already 
been found elsewhere in the nineteenth century: Carl Kraeling, 'Christian Burial 
Urns?', Biblical Archaeologist 9 (February 1946), pp. 16-20. Jesus' family can't have 
been buried in two places at once. These kinds of finds are statistically inevitable and 
therefore meaningless. See the discussions of this point in Pfann and Tabor, 'Forum'; 
with Randall Ingermanson, 'Discussion of: Statistical Analysis of an Archaeological 
Find', Annals of Applied Statistics 2 (2008), pp. 84-90. 
Similarly, coins and inscriptions claimed to provide evidence for Jesus actually 
contain no such information: Richard Carrier, 'Pseudohistory in Jerry Vardaman's 
Magic Coins: The Nonsense of Micrographic Letters', Skeptical Inquirer 26 (March­
April 2002), pp. 39а41, 61; and Richard Carrier, 'More on Vardaman's Microletters', 
Skeptical Inquirer 26 (July-August 2002), pp. 60-61, both reproduced in Richard 
Carrier, Hitler Homer Bible Christ: The Historical Papers of Richard Carrier /995-
2013 (Richmond, CA: Philosophy Press, 2014), pp. IS5-S6. 
And so on. I needn't tour through all the forgeries and dubious claims in this 
category, like fragments ofthe true cross and all that rubbish: see Joe Nickell, Relics of 
the Christ (Lexington, K Y: University Press of Kentucky, 2007). 

258 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
detennining historicity.? Nor will I address 'negative archaeology', that 
is, claims that archaeological evidence is missing, since none of that has 
any relevant effect on the probability of minimal historicity (as defined in 
Chapter 2). 8 There is only one kind of evidence left: texts (books, letters, 
etc.), which are reconstructed (by modern scholars) from a variety of manu­
scripts (which are copies of copies of copies of even earlier originals now 
lost). 
I will consider only texts that are known to have been written (or prob­
ably written) before 1 20 CE (or that record information from an identifiable 
source before that date), as after that time we can't reasonably expect there 
to have been any surviving witnesses to the original decade of the cult's 
7. For example, the fact that we have archaeological evidence that Pontius Pilate 
existed (and we do) makes no significant difference to the probability of either 
hypothesis, since myth can incorporate real historical facts as easily as histories do 
(using real people, places and customs, because narrative context and background were 
common in fiction of the time, and a common feature of faith literature: see Elements 
44 and 45; and could be got from reference books, histories and common knowledge: 
see Carrier, Proving History, p. 176). Only an extreme non-confirmation could have 
made a difference (see following note). That does mean the probability of historicity 
would have been greatly reduced by not having any ancillary evidence (or by having 
contrary evidence, e.g., proof that Pilate was a fictional person), and it is therefore 
greatly increased by having that evidence, but only relative to historicity without that 
evidence, which is of no interest to us. Since we shall assume as a given that ancillary 
evidence exists, we needn't survey it (since its effect on the consequent probabilities 
will be the same no matter what that evidence is). 
8. For example, arguments like 'Nazareth or Capernaum didn't exist in the time of 
Jesus, therefore Jesus didn't exist' are fallacious (with respect to minimal historicity) 
even if their premises are true; and their premises can rarely be proven anyway. As 
to the fallacy: on a hypothesis of myth, all locations were necessarily invented for 
Jesus (whether using actually existing locations or not), which can be just as likely 
on a (minimal) theory of historicity (i.e., on which most of Jesus' story is still just as 
mythical); ergo, even if Nazareth didn't exist (or in fact even if it did), this is just as 
likely if Jesus existed as if he didn't, or near enough as to make no notable difference 
(this argument only ceases to be fallacious if the 'invented' elements are too extensive 
to explain as a product of mythic development over a historical person, which for 
Jesus is not the case: see Chapter 6). As to the premises, see 'Capernaum', in The 
Archaeological Encyclopedia of the Holy Land (ed. Avraham Negev and Shimon 
Gibson; New York: Continuum, rev. and updated edn, 2001), pp. 1 1 1-14: likewise in 
the same volume, 'Nazareth', pp. 362-63, along with Carrier, Proving History, pp. 142-
4S, and the debate in Bulletin of the Anglo-Israel Archaeological Society 26 (2008). 
pp. 9S-135, which was initiated by Rene Salm over the contents of Stephen Pfann. 
Ross Voss and Yehudah Rapuano, 'Surveys and Excavations at the Nazareth Village 
Farm (1997-2002): Final Report', Bulletin of the Anglo-Israel Archaeological Society 
25 (2007), pp. 19-79. The results are similar for every other 'negative' claim (except 
perhaps claims regarding geographical error in Mark, but those are vague enough that 
I shall set them aside: see Chapter I 0, §5). 

7. Primary Sources 
259 
creation (in the 30s CE), due to the limits of life expectancy (Element 22); 
and also because after that time the quantity of bogus literature about Jesus 
and early Christianity exploded to an immense scale, making the task of 
sorting truth from fiction effectively impossible (Element 44). It should be 
noted that this fact entails that the origin of Christianity is historically in a 
different c1ass from other more mundane historical questions: other events 
simply did not generate nearly the same explosion of forgery and redaction; 
in fact, few events generated much of any, and therefore the survival and 
detection of accurate information is more frequently possible on other ques­
tions of history, but radically less so for the question we are here to examine. 
The remaining relevant texts can be divided into two general categories: 
things written by Christians and things not written by Christians. In the 
latter category we have almost nothing. We do have some such material, but 
most of it cannot be established as independent of things we already have 
that were written by Christians (like the canonical Gospels), and there­
fore almost all of it must be exc1uded as irrelevant. What little we have 
any plausible reason still to consider will be examined in the next chapter. 
There we will also examine what little we have of 'independent' and 'caus­
ally relevant' Christian texts that are not already in the NT. Again, most 
Christian literature is irrelevant, either not being demonstrably independ­
ent (e.g. statements based on the Gospels) or not being plausibly connected 
to anything actually true about Jesus (e.g. the Infancy Gospels). But all 
the evidence in these categories that is relevant, whether Christian or non­
Christian, is generally the latest primary evidence we have, chronologically 
speaking. I will therefore address it first (in the next chapter), and work 
back in time to the earliest surviving evidence. 
That leaves the NT. Whether any Christian documents that we presently 
have date earlier than or even to the same period as the documents in the 
NT is a vexed question that has never been answered with certainty. And 
not being able to date a document is often the death knell for establishing 
relevance. Because if we can't even prove something was written in the first 
century, then we often can't prove its independence or its causal link to any 
actual facts of the matter. 'Speculating' earlier dates does not get around 
this problem, because only a speculative conclusion can be reached with 
a speculative premise. Since there is no Christian document pertaining to 
Jesus that we can confidently date earlier than the NT, any such evidence 
will be examined, if at all relevant, in the next chapter along with all other 
'extrabiblical' evidence. 
As for the NT itself, it can be divided into five categories: authentic 
letters, inauthentic letters, uncertain letters, the Gospels and Acts. I distin­
guish Acts from the Gospels because Acts, unlike the Gospels, is a history 
of the spread of Christianity after the death of Jesus, and thus could have 
different sources than the Gospels and covers a different subject of inquiry. 

260 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
It also comes later than the earliest of the Gospels we have, and thus is also 
among the latest evidence we have. I therefore will treat it second (Chapter 
9), after the extrabiblical evidence (Chapter 8). Then I will treat the four 
canonical Gospels (Chapter 10). And finally the Epistles (Chapter 1 1), the 
authentic ones being the earliest, the nearest to the origins of Christianity 
of any evidence we have. The inauthentic letters date later, in some cases 
much later. Likewise the book of Revelation. The uncertai n letters can't be 
reliably placed in time at all. But any of these worth a look will nevertheless 
be treated in that chapter. 
There is a great deal wrong with how a 'consensus' has been reached 
on the dates and authorship of all these Christian materials, and the con­
clusions usually cited as established tend to be far more questionable than 
most scholars let on. Nevertheless, as I found the task of trying to sort this 
out impossible, I will mostly rely on the majority consensus for no other 
reason than that I haven't anything better to work with. I projected it would 
take a minimum of seven years of full-time research to adequately exam­
ine and analyze all the evidence and arguments regarding the dating and 
authorship of these materials, and that with no actual prospect of any clear 
resolution for any of it, since it is not simply a given that we actually know 
the answers to any debated question.9 I think there is a lot of work here that 
needs to be properly redone in NT studies, and I'm not alone in thinking 
that.10 That caveat aside, this is what we 'know'. 
3. The Epistles 
The current consensus in regard to the canonical Epistles is best summa­
rized in Bart Ehrman's Forged}1 Seven letters are commonly agreed to be 
9. See my lament (and calculation) in Richard Carrier, 'lgnatian Vexation', Richard 
Carrier Blogs (October 1, 2008) at http:/lrichardcarrier.blogspot.com/2008/09/ 
ignatian-vexation. htm I. 
10. One of the things that needs to happen is a system for organizing and cataloguing 
the state of fact-claims in the field and what has been written on each specific one better 
than the haphazard, incomplete, low-utility databases presently in play: see, e.g., Frank 
Zindler, •Prolegomenon to a Science of Christian Origins', in Sources of the Jesus 
Tradition: Separating History from Myth (ed. R. Joseph Hoffmann; Amherst, NY: 
Prometheus. 2010), pp. 140-56 (excepting 143-49, much of whose content I disagree 
with). For another, more extensive argument on how NT studies should reform itself, 
see Burton Mack, The Christian Myth: Origins, Logic, and Legacy (New York: 
Continuum, 2001). 
I I .  Bart Ehrman, Forged (New York: HarperOne, 201 1). See also Bart Ehrman, 
Forgery and Counterforgery: The Use of Literary Deceit in Early Christian Polemics 
(New York: Oxford University Press, 2014); and the relevant chapters in The New 
Interpreter 's Bible: New Testament Survey (Nashville, TN: Abingdon Press, 2006). I 

7. Primary Sources 
261 
authentically written by the apostle Paul in or around the 50s CE.12 Those 
are 1 and 2 Corinthians, Galatians, Romans, Philippians, 1 Thessalonians 
and Philemon. With the possible exception of Philemon (which has no rel­
evant content for our purposes), 13 I think that assessment is probably cor­
rect-although we know that even these seven letters have been meddled 
with.14 The remaining letters do indeed deviate too greatly from Pauline 
shall rely on these for all that follows, except where noted. See also L. Michael White, 
From Jesus to Christianity (San Francisco, CA: HarperSanFrancisco, 2004), pp. 169-
214, 261-90, 314-23. 
12. This dating is perhaps too gullibly based on Acts; but Paul certainly wrote 
before the Jewish War, which began in 66, and probably before the Neronian persecution 
of64 (if such there was), as neither are ever mentioned in his letters; and he wrote well 
after Aretas assumed control of Damascus (which he mentions in 2 Cor. 1 1.32), which 
was between the years 37 and 40; and most (if not all) of his literary activity came 
fourteen to seventeen years after his conversion (Gal. 1.15-18; 2. 1 ;  possibly also 2 Cor. 
12.2); all of which argues for his letters being written in the 50s. Gerd LUdemann, Paul, 
the Founder of Christianity (Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 2002), details why we 
should trust a chronology derived only from Paul's letters and not from Acts. 
13. There is a plausible case to be made that Philemon is a forgery, based in 
part on the fact that it looks a lot like a letter written by Pliny the Younger almost a 
century later (Letters 9.21): Robert Price, The Pre-Nicene New Testament: Fifty-Four 
Formative Texts (Salt Lake City, UT: Signature Books, 2006). pp. 467-69 (however, 
Price's assumption, in note c on p. 469, that a self-referencing inscription is telltale of 
forgery, is refuted by the fact that I have seen such things in actual letters recovered 
from the sands of Egypt, but even with that argument removed, a case for forgery 
remains, even if not a conclusive one). However that may be, Philemon contains no data 
relevant to the historicity of Jesus, so it can be disregarded anyway. 
14. Examplesof'meddling' with the authentic Paulinesarethemany textual variants, 
interpolations and rearranged passage sequences (e.g. in Romans 16). Philippians is 
the poster child for the latter: see Philip Sellew, '"Laodiceans" and the Philippians 
Fragments Hypothesis', Harvard Theological Review 87 (January 1994), pp. 17-28. 
I discuss the two most well-known interpolations (1 Thess. 2.14-16 and l Cor. 14.34-
35) in Richard Carrier, 'Pau1ine Interpolations', Richard Carrier Blogs (June 1, 2011) 
at http:/lrichardcarrier.blogspot.com/201 1/06/pauline-interpolations.html. For more: 
William Walker, Interpolations in the Pauline Letters (London: Sheffield Academic 
Press, 2001); Rainer Reuter, 'Introduction to Synoptic Work on the New Testament 
Epistles', Journal of Higher Criticism 9.2 (Fall 2002), pp. 246-58; and E. Randolph 
Richards. Paul and First-Century Letter Writing: Secretaries, Composition, and 
Collection (Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity Press, 2004), pp. 99-121. The Gospels, 
Acts, and other Epistles have been subject to all the same phenomena. See Bart 
Ehrman, Daniel Wallace and Robert Stewart, The Reliability of the New Testament 
(Minneapolis, MN: Fortress Press, 201 1); Bart Ehrman, The Orthodox Corruption of 
&ripture: The Effoct of Early Christo/ogical Controversies on the Text of the New 
Testament (New York: Oxford University Press, 1993); Bruce Metzger, The Text of the 
New Testament: Its Transmission, Corruption. and Restoration (New York: Oxford 
University Press, 3rd edn, 1992). 

262 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
style to be by his hand or even his dictation.15 That would mean 2 Thessalo­
nians, Ephesians and Colossians are forgeries (although they could include 
pastiches or edits or redactions of Pauline letters, and are close enough in 
outlook and content to be of the Pauline Ѭschool', perhaps from the latter 
half of the first century), and 1 and 2 Timothy and Titus are even more cer­
tainly forgeries (definitely not from a Pauline 'school', and of significantly 
later date). 16 As forgeries, none of those letters can provide any evidence for 
the historicity of Jesus, because any evidence in them is then by definition 
'made up'. They could even have been forged to promote that historicity, or, 
by superficially following the Gospels, simply taken it for granted. 17 They 
might provide evidence against historicity, however, since if such they do, 
it cannot have been by design or presumption, but would have to reflect real 
evidence known to their authors, who would surely not invent evidence 
against historicity. (But if anyone wishes to argue otherwise in any particu­
lar case, they are welcome to try.) 
Of the other Epistles, some are of uncertain authorship (1, 2 and 3 John, 
Jude, James, and Hebrews) and therefore of uncertain date and reliability. 
They could have been composed anywhere between the 30s to 130s cE (or in 
some cases even later), and they could have been written by anyone of those 
names (none of the authors identify themselves as the apostles of the same 
names, or as relatives of Jesus, or anyone else in particular; and Hebrews 
1!5. Richards, in Paul and First-Century Letter Writing, attempts to argue against 
this consensus (while in the process usefully surveying all the evidence in the matter), 
but his premises are ultimately implausible (e.g. Paul did in fact use various co-authors 
for all his letters [Rom. 16.22; 1 Cor. 1.1; 2 Cor. 1.1; Phil. 1.1; Phlm. 1; Gal. 1.1-2; 
1 Thess. 1.1], yet all of his authentic letters maintain a consistent style; thus the fact 
of his employing co-authors would not explain the huge deviations in the other letters, 
whereas there are better explanations of them as the product of later redactional 
activity-see following note). 
16. Note that Ephesians is widely regarded as a redaction of Colossians and some of 
the other letters: James Hering, The Co/ossian and Ephesian Haustafe/n in Theological 
Context: An Analysis of their Origins, Relationship, and Message (New York: Peter 
Lang, 2007); with Price, Pre-Nicene New Testament, pp. 439-!53. 2 Thessalonians is 
likewise regarded as a redaction of 1 Thessalonians, and 2 Peter and Jude as each in 
a different way a redaction of I Peter: Reuter, 'Introduction to Synoptic Work'. But in 
every case these are still redactions made by someone later than Paul: Thomas Brodie, 
Dennis MacDonald and Stanley Porter, The Intertextuality of the Epistles: Explorations 
of Theory and Practice (Sheffield: Sheffield Phoenix Press, 2006). Several scholars 
have also argued that 1 and 2 Timothy (and possibly Titus) were forged by the author or 
redactor of Luke-Acts: see Price, Pre-Nicene New Testament. pp. 497-98. 
17. So keen to deceive were the forgers of 2 Thessalonians. by the way, that they 
even have Paul in it denounce forged letters! (2 Thess. 2.2-3; 3.17. probably meaning in 
fact the authentic letter. 1 Thessalonians). This illustrates the importance Christians 
placed on convincing readers that their forgeries were genuine. 

7. Primary Sources 
263 
is anonymous). The preponderance of evidence suggests the Johannines 
(1, 2 and 3 John, none of which actually says they were written by anyone 
named John) are late (perhaps early second century), whereas the others 
could be earlier, but we have no definite proof of that. We just don't know. 
The best case to be made is that Hebrews was written in or near Paul's 
lifetime (see Chapter 11, §5). As such, apart from Hebrews perhaps, these 
letters cannot provide evidence for historicity (because in such a capacity 
they cannot be established as either reliable-and thus causally connected 
to the facts-or as independent of other sources already 'promoting' histo­
ricity, like the Gospels), but they could provide evidence against it (if such 
they do), for the same reasons as the forged letters (as noted above). 
Finally, I and 2 Peter are regarded as forgeries. 2 Peter most definitely 
was not written by the same author as 1 Peter (they are far too divergent 
stylistically), and therefore we can certainly place 2 Peter with all the other 
forgeries (in fact, its author certainly knew the Gospels and was therefore 
not writing independently of them), so we must therefore draw the same 
conclusions regarding its value as evidence.18 However, 1 Peter could be 
authentic, and if so it should be included with the authentic Pauline letters, 
because it would be of roughly the same date, and by the very man who 
may have founded the entire Christian religion (having received the first 
revelation of Jesus Christ that started it all, if we're to trust I Cor. 15.5). 
Few scholars would agree with this position, but I personally believe it 
has more merit than is supposed. For the only reason given to assume it's 
a forgery is that Peter was an illiterate fisherman, but that is information 
only the Gospels produce, and they have every reason to invent or exag­
gerate the humble origins of the cult's founder (so as to make their appeal 
to the masses and their subsequent brilliance look all the more miracu­
lous), whereas based on every precedent in history, prior probability heav­
ily favors any religious leader and founder of the period being educated 
(whatever stories he then told his congregations later). 
Analogously, Muhammad is often claimed to have been illiterate, and 
so his production of the Qur'an 'must be' miraculous; yet as the son of 
one of the wealthiest mercantile families in Arabia, he could not plausibly 
have been illiterate or even uneducated. The same trend may be evident in 
the treatment of Peter, especially if the Gospel authors wanted to reify the 
'least shall be first' doctrine of the gospel by embodying it in the apostles 
themselves.19 It's otherwise quite unlikely that the highly educated Paul 
would defer to the authority of an illiterate Peter (Galatians 1-2) or never 
18. See, e.g., Jerome Neyrey, 'The Apologetic Use of the Transfiguration in 2 Peter 
1.16-21 ', Catholic Biblical Quarterly 42 (October 1980), pp. 504-19. 
19. See Carrier, Not the Impossible Faith, pp. 312-15; and Carrier, 'Spiritual Body', 
in Empty Tomb (ed. Price and Lowder), pp. 163-65. 

264 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
mention the disparity in their educations (and thus, their knowledge of the 
scriptures) in his disputes over who should be in charge. Accordingly, I 
think assuming Peter was actually 'an illiterate fisherman' requires consid­
erable gullibility. Nevertheless, I have by no means proven the contrary. So 
I will treat this item of evidence (the epistle of 1 Peter) as uncertain. 
There are also letters from Jesus in the NT, included within the book 
of Revelation, which purports to record an extensive hallucination of the 
celestial Jesus by an unknown person named John, who composed this 
book like an extended epistle to various churches of his time. Accordingly, I 
shall treat Revelation as an epistle. Its date and authorship are still debated, 
as well as whether it has gone through several redactions. But the version 
we have most likely dates from the early 90s CE and is by some unknown 
author named John, and is almost certainly an elaborate fiction.20 With such 
a late date, we cannot establish its independence from the Gospels. So it has 
little evidential value. 
4. The Gospels 
The 'usual' consensus on the four canonical Gospels is that Mark was writ­
ten around 70, Matthew around 80, Luke around 90, and John around 100.21 
Those are all arbitrary ballpark figures, which don't really have much basis 
in fact. Of course, fundamentalists want all those dates to be earlier, whi le 
many well-informed experts are certain they are later, and I find the argu­
ments of the latter more persuasive, if inconclusive. As to authorship, none 
of the Gospels was written by the person they were named after, or in fact 
by any known person. We know they were not written by the disciples of 
Jesus or anyone who knew Jesus. The titles of the Gospels conspicuously 
assign them as 'according to' the names given (Mark, Matthew, Luke and 
20. Revelation 17.10-11 describes a sequence of eight emperors that most suitably 
fits Domitian as the eighth of them, and the whole of Revelation reads like a veiled 
commentary on his reign; as such the 80s or early 90s are its most likely date. See Adela 
Yarbro Collins, Crisis and Catharsis: The Power of the Apocalypse (Philadelphia, PA: 
Westminster Press, 1984); and now Elaine Pagels, Revelations: Visions, Prophecy. 
and Politics in the Book of Revelation (New York: Viking, 2012). Irenaeus, Against 
Heresies S.30.3, corroborates this conclusion. 
21. For a summary of the consensus on the Gospels see Bart Ehrman, Jesus. 
Interrupted: Revealing the Hidden Contradictions in the Bible (and Why We Don't 
Know about Them) (New York: HarperOne, 2009), pp. 102-12: and White. From Jesus 
to Christianity, pp. 231-314; and again the relevant chapters of the New Interpreter 's 
Bible: New Testament Survey. But for a possible new direction in identifying dates and 
authors for this evidence (Gospels and Epistles) see David Trobisch, The First Edition 
of the New Testament (Oxford: Oxford University Press. 2000); and David Trobisch. 
'Who Published the Christian Bible?', CSER Review 2.1 (2007), pp. 29-32. 

7. Primary Sources 
265 
John), which designation in Greek was not used to name the author of a 
work, but its source, the person from whom the information was received 
or learned, as in 'according to [the tradition of] Mark'.22 And none of the 
Gospels says who these people are (nowhere is the titular Matthew or John 
ever called a disciple, e.g., or identified in any way). I have used and will 
continue to use these names as if they were the authors, merely for con­
venience's sake. Although it must also be noted that all of the Gospels have 
undergone redactional activity after their original composition, so really 
they've been meddled with by multiple authors.23 
Mark was certainly written after 70 (the year the Jerusalem temple was 
destroyed), but how long after is an open question (some attempts have 
been made to argue it was written earlier, but on grounds far too specula­
tive to consider here).24 We really have no evidence that Mark was written 
22. Ben Witherington, The Gospel of Mark: A Socio-Rhetorical Commentary 
(Grand Rapids, Ml: William B. Eerdmans, 2001), pp. 65-66. 
23. In addition to the general sources cited in a previous note, and the examples 
in Ehrman, Jesus, Interrupted, see also Wayne Kannaday, Apologetic Discourse and 
the Scribal Tradition: Evidence of the Influence of Apologetic Interests on the Text of 
the Canonical Gospels (Atlanta, GA: Society of Biblical Literature, 2004); and C.S.C. 
Williams, Alterations to the Text of the Synoptic Gospels and Acts (Oxford: Basil 
Blackwell, 1951). The most infamous example is the long ending of Mark, which was 
added later, after all the other Gospels had been written: see Richard Carrier, 'Mark 
16:9-20 as Forgery or Fabrication', Errancy Wiki (2009) at http://www.errancywiki. 
com/index.php?title=Legends2. The Gospel of John was likewise reorganized and 
expanded by someone subsequent to the original author (see this section; and Chapter 
10, §7). We also have parallel redactions of Luke-Acts (to be mentioned shortly). 
24. Some scholars do still try to argue earlier dates for Mark, but only by rejecting a 
lot of evidence, such as how pervasively Mark assumes the Jewish War has passed and 
that God has abandoned the temple cult (these facts do not just feature in Mark 13: see, 
e.g., Chapter 10, §4). Mark also includes an apologetic for the failure of the apocalypse 
to have come yet, which entails he wrote many decades after Jesus predicted the end 
was nigh (Mk 13.28-37; see Carrier, Proving History, pp. 148-49), which can't be any 
earlier than the 60s. The fact that Mark has Jesus say several 'wars' had to pass first 
entails Mark knew the Jewish War had not only passed, but hadn't brought about the 
apocalypse, and therefore he had to have his Jesus explain this (Mk 13.7-8). Likewise, 
Paul knows nothing of the stories in Mark (see Chapter I I), so Mark can hardly have 
been circulating before the 60s. Even Hebrews and 1 Clement are unaware of the 
content of Mark (see Chapter II, §S, and Chapter 8, §51 and insofar as we know those 
books were written after Paul died, that leaves almost no room for Mark to have been 
composed before the War. Much discussion hovers around Mark's Jesus claiming a 
pagan shrine would be erected where the Jewish temple once stood, and though (as far 
as we know) that did not come to pass (until the Bar Kockhba revolt: see note on the 
Epistle of Barnabas in Chapter 8, §6), Mark sti II had to know the temple was destroyed 
to have such an expectation in the first place (and post-war rumors that Rome would do 
-\ 
this would not be an improbability; it is, after all, what Rome eventually did). Because 

266 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
any earlier than 100, in fact, so it's simply presumption really that puts his 
Gospel in the first century. I suspect Mark was written in the 70s or 80s, but 
only because its author seems to have the Jewish War still in mind as a rela­
tively recent event, but that's a largely subjective judgment. Nevertheless, 
I will leave it at that unti I someone proves otherwise. Nothing is known 
of the author. Late tradition claims he was Peter's secretary, but there is 
no reason to trust that information, and it seems most unlikely. Mark is 
advocating against Torah-observant Christianity (see Chapter 10, §5) and 
thus would have been Peter's opponent, not representative. 
There is no evidence really that Matthew was written in the 80s. He cer­
tainly wrote after Mark (as everyone knows he copies Mark, often verbatim, 
and is in fact polemically redacting Mark, as I'll show in Chapter 10). But it is 
by no means a given that he would only redact Mark near to when Mark was 
written; and we don't know when Mark was written anyway. Likewise, any 
assumption that Jewish Christianity faded after the 80s has no basis in evi­
dence either. That sect's existence continues to be attested for centuries (see 
§1 of the next chapter), and though it certainly declined in size and influence 
in the second century, that is no help in dating Matthew. I will conclude that 
Matthew was written in the 80s or 90s simply to err on the side of the earliest 
likely period, and for no other reason.25 Nothing is known of the author. We 
Mark assumes this desecration would follow the Jewish War (Mk 13.7-8) and the 
preaching of the gospel worldwide (Mk 13.10), so he cannot be referring to the threat 
of Caligula in the 40s (which came to nothing, and was far too early for the gospel to 
already have been preached to all nations, much less for several wars of 'nation against 
nation' to have passed, much less such wars as Jesus would have to apologize for as 
not ending the world). Since the event of Mk 13.14 (which predicts the desecrating 
shrine) was to begin a phase of worldwide doom (Mk 13.15-20) accompanied by false 
messiahs (Mk 13.21-22), concluding with the end of the world (Mk 13.24-27), Mark 
was not retrofitting recent history into the prophecy of Jesus in Mk 13. 14; rather, he 
is conceiving a future apocalyptic sequence of events-but one that presupposes the 
Jewish temple no longer stood. Mark is thus writing after. For the best attempt to argue 
otherwise (and in the process citing and discussing the whole gamut of scholarship on 
dating Mark) see James Crossley, The Date of Mark 's Gospel: Insight from the Law in 
Earliest Christianity (New York: T. & T. Clark International, 2004). In addition to the 
refutation this note already provides, Crossley's argument from Aramaic is multiply 
flawed (see Chapter 10, §4, and the scholarship challenging Casey, on whom Crossley 
partly relies, in a note for Element 41). 
25. For the best (but still occasionally flawed) analysis of the evidence for dating 
Matthew, see David Sim, The Gospel of Matthew and Christian Judaism: The History 
and Social Setting of the Matthean Community (Edinburgh: T. & T. Clark, 1998), pp. 
31 -40, 257-87. Sim argues there for dating Matthew between 70 and JOO, with 85-95 
most likely; but he has since argued a date in the early second century is more likely 
than he once thought: David Sim, 'Reconstructing the Social and Religious Milieu of 
Matthew: Methods, Sources, and Possible Results', in Matthew, James, and Didache: 

7. Primary Sources 
267 
know 'Matthew' was not an eyewitness, because he copies Mark verbatim 
and just modifies and adds to him (and much of what he adds is ridiculous 
and literarily crafted, not eyewitness material, as I'll show in Chapter 10), 
which is not the behavior of a witness, but of a late literary redactor. 
Luke also wrote after Mark (as Luke also copied from Mark), and 1 am 
increasingly convinced that in fact Luke is also a redaction of Matthew and 
therefore postdates Matthew (see Chapter 10, §6). The evidence that Luke 
used the Jewish Antiquities of Josephus for some of his material is also 
convincingly strong, and that would place this Gospel after 93 CE.26 Many 
experts have argued for Luke-Acts postdating I 1 5  CEY I will conclude that 
most likely Luke wrote between the 90s and 130s, and then arbitrarily side 
with the earlier of those dates. Nothing is known of the author. Late tradi­
tion claims he was a doctor and Paul's companion, but there is no reason to 
Three Related Documents in the;r Jewish and Christian Settings (ed. Huub van de Sandt 
and JUrgen Zangenberg; Atlanta, GA: Society of Biblical Literature. 2008), pp. 13-32 
(15-19). One could argue that Matthew was written before the 90s because Matthew is 
repeatedly echoed in the book of Revelation, which we know was written around then 
(see end of §3), but all those correspondences might be explained the other way around. 
by Matthew knowing and echoing Revelation. On those correspondences see the list 
in Dennis MacDonald, Two Shipwrecked Gospels: The Logoi of Jesus and Papias's 
Exposition ofLogia about the Lord (Atlanta, GA: Society of Bibl ical Literature, 2012), 
p. 555 n. 2. For another survey of positions on dating Matthew and the arguments for 
and against, see W.O. Davies and Dale All ison, A Critical and Exegetical Commentary 
on the Gospel according to Saint Matthew. vol. I (Edinburgh: T. & T. Clark, 1988), pp. 
127-38. 
26. Richard Pervo, Dating Acts: Between the Evangelists and the Apologists (Santa 
Rosa, CA: Polebridge, 2006); Barbara Shellard, New Light on Luke: Its Purpose, 
Sources, and Literary Context (New York: Sheffield Academic, 2002), pp. 31-34; 
Steve Mason, 'Josephus and Luke-Acts', Josephus and the New Testament (Peabody, 
MA: Hendrickson Publishers, 1992), pp. 185·229; Gregory Sterl ing, Historiography 
and Self-Definition: Josephos, Luke-Acts and Apologetic Historiography (Leiden: 
Brill, 1992); Heinz Schreckenberg, 'Flavius Josephus und die lukanischen Schriften'. 
in Wort in der Zeit: Neutestamentliche Studien (ed. Karl Rengstorf and Wilfrid 
Haubeck; Leiden: Brill, 1980), pp. 179-209; Max KrenkeL Josephus und Lucas: Der 
schriftstel/erische Einjluss des jiidischen Geschichtschreibers auf den Christ/ichen 
(Leipzig: H. Haessel, 1894). 
27. For example, Joseph Tyson, Marcion and Luke-Acts: A Defining Struggle 
(Columbia. SC: University of South Carolina Press, 2006); and Joseph Tyson, 'Why 
Dates Matter: The Case of the Acts of the Apostles', in Finding the Historical Jesus: 
Rules of Evidence (ed. Bernard Brandon Scott; Santa Rosa, CA: Polebridge, 2008), 
pp. 59-70; Richard Pervo, Dating Acts, and Richard Pervo, Acts: A Commentary 
(Minneapolis, MN: Fortress Press, 2009), pp. 5-7; Trobisch, 'Who Published the 
Christian Bible?'; and now MacDonald, Two Shipwrecked Gospels, pp. 43-67. See also 
Carrier, Not the Impossible Faith, pp. 174-76; and Price, Pre-Nicene New Testament, 
pp. 481-99. 

268 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
trust that information, and it seems most unlikely. Luke explicitly says he 
is not an eyewitness and doesn't appear to know anyone who was.28 And 
certainly if he had Paul as an authority he would have trumpeted those cre­
dentials in his preface. The scattered 4We' passages in Acts are sometimes 
offered as evidence the author was Paul's companion, but there are other, 
more plausible explanations for those abrupt changes of narrative pose. 29 
There is also evidence that Luke-Acts has undergone editing over time, 
and even now there are two different versions of them (only one of which 
was canonized).30 
John wrote after Luke-as almost everyone agrees, but as I will demon­
strate in Chapter 10, John is almost certainly a polemical redaction of Luke 
Uust as Matthew is of Mark; only John employs a freer, less verbatim style), 
making John the last of all.31 External evidence placing the Gospel of John's 
appearance in history is also the scarcest. It could have been written as late 
28. Carrier, Not the Impossible Faith, pp. 178-82. 
29. See note in Chapter 9 (§ 1 ). 
30. For example, Thomas Brodie, 'Re-Opening the Quest for Proto-Luke: The 
Systematic Use of Judges 6-12 in Luke 16:1-18:8', Journal of Higher Criticism 2 
(Spring 1995), pp. 68-101; W.A. Strange, The Problem of the Text of Acts (New York: 
Cambridge University Press, 1992); and Pervo, Acts. See §5 of this chapter. 
31. That John is responding to Luke is actually a growing consensus in Johannine 
studies; likewise that John has been multiply redacted, such that our version is not the 
one originally written. On both points see Herman Waetjen, The Gospel of the Beloved 
Disciple: A Work in Two Editions (New York: T. & T. Clark, 2005); C.K. Barrett, The 
Gospel according to St. John (Philadelphia, PA: Westminster Press, 2nd edn, 1978), pp. 
15-26; F.L. Cribbs, 'St. Luke and the Johannine Tradition', Journal of Biblical Literature 
90 (1971), pp. 422-50, expanded in 'A Study of the Contacts That Exist between St. 
Luke and St. John', in Society of Biblical Literature 1973 Seminar Papers (ed. George 
MacRae; Cambridge, MA: Society ofBiblical Literature, 1973), II, pp. 1-93; C. H. Dodd, 
Historical Tradition in the Fourth Gospel (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
1963); P. Parker, 'Luke and the Fourth Evangelist', New Testament Studies 9 (1963), pp. 
317-36; John Bailey, The Traditions Common to the Gospels of Luke and John (Leiden: 
E.J. Brill, 1963); and Raymond Brown, An Introduction to the Gospel of John (New 
York: Doubleday, rev. edn, 2003); and Raymond Brown, The Gospel according to John 
(Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1966-1970). These studies are reinforced by Manfred 
Lang, Johannes und die Synoptiker: Eine redaktionsgeschichtliche Analyse von Joh 
18-20 vor dem markinischen und lukanischen Hintergrund (GOttingen: Vandenhoeck 
& Ruprecht, 1999); G. van Belle, 'Lukan Style in the Fourth Gospel', in Luke and 
his Readers (ed. R. Bieringer, G. van Belle and J. Verheyden; Dudley, MA: Peeters, 
2005), pp. 351-72; and Andrew Gregory, 'The Third Gospel? The Relationship of John 
and Luke Reconsidered', in Challenging Perspectives on the Gospel of John (ed. John 
Lierman; TObingen: Mohr Siebeck, 2006), pp. 109-34 (although Gregory argues the 
reverse thesis, he nevertheless summarizes the scholarship arguing the authors of 
John knew the Gospel of Luke; likewise Shellard, New Light on Luke, pp. 200-88; and 
Thomas Brodie, The Birthing of the New Testament: The lntertextual Development of 

7. Primary Sources 
269 
as the 140s (some argue even later) or as early as the 100s (provided Luke 
was written in the 90s). I will arbitrarily side with the earlier of those dates. 
John was redacted multiple times and thus had multiple authors. 32 Noth­
ing is known of them. John's authors (plural) claim to have used a written 
source composed by an anonymous eyewitness (21.20-25), but that witness 
does not exist in any prior Gospel, yet is conspicuously inserted into John's 
redaction of their narratives (e.g. compare Jn 20.2 with Lk. 24.12) and so is 
almost certainly a fabrication (as I show in Chapter 1 0, §7). 
Finally, you will often see cited as a source for early Christianity a docu­
ment called 'Q', for Quelle, which is German for 'source'. But this actually 
doesn't exist. It is a hypothetical document, whose contents, redactional his .. 
tory and even nature (whether written or oral) are endlessly debated in the 
scholarship. There are serious methodological flaws in the defenses made of 
the existence and contents ofQ, and it looks far more likely to me that what 
we call 'Q' was nothing more than additions made to Mark by Matthew, 
which were then redacted into Luke.33 I see no merit in assuming otherwise 
without very good evidence, and the evidence presented even by staunch 
the New Testament Writings [Sheffield: Sheffield Phoenix Press, 2004}, pp. 267-70). 
See also Chapter JO (§7). 
32. I'll discuss some of the evidence for this in Chapter 10. but this is already the 
consensus of Johannine experts; in addition to the scholarship cited in the previous 
note, see White, From Jesus to Christianity, pp. 305-14; and Mark Strauss, Four 
Portraits, One Jesus: An Introduction to Jesus and the Gospels (Grand Rapids, MI: 
Zondervan, 2007), pp. 334-35. 
33. The best case yet made for there being no Q source at all is in Mark Good acre, 
The Case against Q: Studies in Markan Priority and the Synoptic Problem (Harrisburg, 
PA: Trinity Press International. 2002). See also Mark Goodacre, The Synoptic 
Problem: A Way through the Maze (London: Sheffield Academic Press, 2001); Mark 
Goodacre, Thomas and the Gospels: The Case for Thomas's Familiarity with the 
Synoptics (Grand Rapids, Ml: Eerdmans, 2012), and his supplementary Website http:// 
www.markgoodacre.org/Q, as well as Mark Goodacre and Nicholas Perrin (eds.), 
Questioning Q: A Multidimensional Critique (Downers Grove, IL: lnterVarsity Press, 
2004). His conclusion is well corroborated by Shellard, New Light on Luke, pp. 58·84б 
Michael Goulder, 'Is Q a Juggernaut?', Journal of Biblical Literature 115 (1996), pp. 
667-81' and Michal Goulder, Luke: A New Paradigm (2 vols.; Sheffield: JSOT, 1989); 
Allan MacNicol (ed.), Beyond the Q Impasse: Luke's Use of Matthew: A Demonstration 
by the Research Team of the International Institute for the Renewal of Gospel Studies 
(Valley Forge, PA: Trinity Press International, 1996); John Drury, Tradition and 
Design in Luke's Gospel: A Study in Early Christian Historiography (London: Darton, 
Longman & Todd, 1976), pp. 120-73; N. Turner, 'The Minor Verbal Agreements of 
Mt. and Lk. against Mk', Studia Evangelica 1 (1959), pp. 223-34; and most famously 
A.M. Farrer, 'On Dispensing with Q', in Studies in the Gospels: Essays in Memory of 
R.H Lightfoot (ed. D.E. Nineham; Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1955), pp. 55-88 (even 
the last of these remains required reading for anyone still enamored with Q). See also 
Stanley Porter, The Criteria for Authenticity in Historical-Jesus Research: Previous 

270 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
advocates of Q cannot honestly be described as even 'good'. Whereas the 
evidence for Luke using Matthew is very good (see Chapter 10, §6).34 
The best case for anything like Q proposed so far is Dennis MacDon­
ald's theory that there was a whole lost Gospel, which was also used as 
a source by Mark, but his reconstruction of it is highly speculativeѭ and 
even if such a text existed he concedes it was mostly if not wholly fictional 
(essentially just a rewrite of Deuteronomy with Jesus in place of Moses).35 
And in any event, even if Q existed in the traditional sense, it was clearly 
just another Gospel no different in character from the Gospels we have 
(complete with narratives and conversations, such as narratives about John 
the Baptist and Jesus' interactions with the centurion of Capernaum), and 
not just a list of sayings as Q is sometimes described; and since we don't 
have it (and thus don't know all of what it said or even the whole context of 
what we might infer it did say) we can draw no usable conclusions about its 
date or reliability. Accordingly, when I treat the Gospels (the only actual 
evidence we have), I will only regard as reliable what is in the Gospels. I am 
thereby dismissing all other 'hypothetical' sources as we11 (such as the so­
called Signs Gospel or the speculated sources behind the unique material in 
Matthew, and so on) as being mere speculation, and therefore not evidence. 
5. Acts 
Acts is essentially the 'sequel' to the Gospel of Luke, covering the origins 
and early development of 'the church' (as Luke wanted to represent it) from 
the 30s up to around the year 60. There is considerable debate (still) as to 
Discussion and New Proposals (Sheffield: Sheffield Academic Press. 2000), pp. 87-88: 
and Brodie, Birthing of the New Testament, pp. 260-67. 
34. For the best attempt to rehabilitate the Q hypothesis in the face of this 
overwhelming evidence against it see John Kloppenborg, 'On Dispensing with Q?: 
Goodacre on the Relation of Luke to Matthew', New Testament Studies 49 (2003), pp. 
210-36. His case is wholly unpersuasive, ignoring all the positive evidence of definite 
borrowing (only some of which I survey in Chapter 10, §6), and then arguing solely 
from what he insists Luke 'should' have done, relying on arbitrary 'psychic' knowledge 
of the methods and intentions of Luke in using and adapting Matthew, which is no 
more reliable than any alternative set of assumptions about Luke's designs, and there 
are more such alternatives that dispense with Q than require it. And yet Kloppenborg 
concedes that Q's existence is only 'at least as plausible' as its absence (236) and that 
defenders of Q are far too confident in their assertions (214-18). In other words. even 
Kloppenborg admits we don't really know there was a Q. 
35. MacDonald, Two Shipwrecked Gospels, esp. pp. 69-89. Against using his 
thesis to argue for historicity see my discussion in Richard Carrier, 'Historicity News: 
Notable Books', Richard Carrier Blogs (October 17, 2012) at http://freethoughtblogs. 
com/carrier/arch ives/2669. 

7. Primary Sources 
271 
whether the same author wrote both or, even if he did, whether many dec­
ades separate their composition. But the overall consensus (and my own 
opinion) is that the same author wrote both around the same time, but that 
they might have undergone subsequent editing by later redactors (as many 
experts agree they have). We have two versions of Luke-Acts, for exam­
ple, and one is 10 to 20 percent longer than the other. The 'canon' contains 
the shorter text. But both are equally ancient, and scholars cannot agree 
which is the original. 36 Even the shorter text could be a· redaction of some 
earlier version we no longer have. Still, I will accept a date for Acts in the 
90s (because it certainly was written after the Gospel of Luke), merely for 
convenience, still recognizing that it could date several decades later than 
that Gust as Luke's Gospel could). 
6. Extrabib/ical Evidence 
For everything in this category, on matters of dating and authorship I will 
follow Van Voorst (who collects and analyzes all the relevant extrabiblical 
evidence in one place), except where I state otherwise.37 
There is a variety of largely undatable Christian literature, such as the 
Didache (Didachi) or 1 Clement, that could have come anywhere from 
the mid-first to late second century. For example, 1 Clement, a letter to the 
Corinthian church by Clement of Rome in (supposedly) the generation after 
Paul, is traditionally dated to around the year 95, but in fact we have no 
secure reason to trust that it was actually written then, or even by Clement 
of Rome. It's just 'assumed'. The year 95 puts this securely later than the 
Paulines and (by any usual estimates) the earlier Gospels. And this is the 
earliest extrabiblical Christian document we have (among those for which 
we can assign dates at all). 
However, I must say I find this traditional date implausible.38 Apart from 
later tradition, there is no evidence in the letter that would suggest it was 
36. A translation of the longer (non-canonical) version of Acts is available in Price, 
Pre-Nicene New Testament, pp. 563-634 (but alas, not the longer version of Luke). For 
a discussion of the two versions of Acts and their textual history see Strange, Problem 
of the Text of Acts. 
37. Robert Van Voorst, Jesus Outside the New Testament (Grand Rapids, 
Ml: William B. Eerdmans, 2000). See also Gerd Theissen and Annette Merz, The 
Historical Jesus: A Comprehensive Guide (trans. John Bowden; Minneapolis, MN: 
Fortress Press, 1998), pp. 17-124; Craig Evans, 'Jesus in Non-Christian Sources', in 
Studying the Historical Jesus (ed. Chilton and Evans), pp. 443-78; and David Wenham 
(ed.). Gospel Perspectives: Studies of History and Tradition in the Four Gospels, vol. 
V. The Jesus Tradition outside the Gospels (Sheffield: JSOT Press, 1984). 
38. I'm not alone; see White, From Jesus to Christianity, pp. 335-40 (he doesn't 
entertain an earlier date-instead putting it between 100 and 120 CE-but he does not 

272 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
written in or anywhere near the year 95. Instead, the letter says Peter's and 
Paul's deaths were among those 'happening most recently' (tous eggista 
genomenous. 1 Clem. 5.1), being of Clement's 'own generation' (tes geneas 
hemtJn), and that some of the elders who were deposed had been appointed 
by the very apostles themselves (which would mean in this case, by Paul: 1 
Clem. 44.1-5). That would sooner suggest it was written in the 60s. There 
is no evidence in the letter to contradict that conclusion.39 Clement refers 
to 'sudden and repeated misfortunes and setbacks' (tas aiphnidious kai 
epallelous . . .  sumphoras kai peripttJseis) in the church at Rome that have 
delayed his writing to them (1 Clem. 1.1). But that is so vague it can refer to 
any period, particularly as we don't know what happened in the churches 
from the 60s to the 90s (Element 22)-and are not well informed as to what 
really happened even in the 90s or for many decades after that. More telling 
is the fact that Clement shows no knowledge of any extant Gospel (not even 
when he certainly would have mentioned any that existed, e.g. in 43.1 or 45; 
see §5 of the next chapter), which would also mean he wrote before the 70s, 
unless the Gospels were written very much later than the consensus now 
assumes (in §4). He is also completely unaware of the fact that the temple 
at Jerusalem was destroyed and the liturgical rites are no longer performed 
there (1 Clement 40-41), or even that the Jews were or had ever been at war 
with Rome (which would have been a model example of the consequences 
of disobedience that would be hard for Clement not to make use of, not least 
in his chap. 51}, both of which in my estimation should definitely place this 
letter before the year 70. 
Possibly by the 'recent' series of setbacks and calamities Clement is 
referring hyperbolically to internal dissensions such as those at Corinth, 
perhaps in conjunction with other ordinary problems, such as the natural 
deaths of important church leaders, sporadic persecutions, financial losses, 
famine. Given the fact that his phrasing means several unexpected setbacks, 
consider the arguments I present here). 
39. It is sometimes claimed that when Clement calls the Corinthian church 
'ancient' this must mean he is writing a very long time after its founding, but the term 
archaios frequently just means venerable. early-begun, or original: for instance, in 
Acts 21.16, Mnason. who accompanied an embassy, is called an archaios mathetls, 
an •early disciple', which doesn't even imply he was old (much less •ancient'), just that 
he was with the movement from very early on (and even insofar as he was old, the 
Corinthian church was in the same sense •old' by the 60s, even some of its first elders 
having already died: I Clem. 44.2, 4). Likewise, Clement sent to the Corinthians an 
embassy of elderly Christians who had lived •blamelessly among us' since their youth 
(neotis), a term that meant the period after childhood up to the age of thirty, but he does 
not say they were converted to Christianity in their youth, only that they were known 
personally to members of the church at Rome since their youth and in all that time had 
lived morally upright lives. This is fully consistent with a time period of the 60s. 

7. Primary Sources 
273 
and not a singular catastrophic burning of the city followed by a purge of 
nearly the whole church (an event so enormous it would surely warrant 
more comment from him than this), the author does not likely mean Nero's 
persecution in 64. In fact, Clement does not exhibit any awareness of that 
event (e.g. in his survey of Christian martyrs, in 1 Clement 5-6, those sup­
posedly burned by Nero in Clement's own city don't get any mention). Nor 
does he likely mean any great persecution under Domitian, since there is 
actually no evidence of there having been one, outside late Christian legނ 
ends, which took a documented persecution of Jews and later rewrote it as 
a persecution of Christians, which ensures the latter is a fabrication.4° For 
all that, this letter looks like it was written in the early 60s (or else its author 
wants us to believe it was), a few years after the deaths of Peter and Paul. 
Nevertheless, I will not rely on this conclusion, but I will treat it as if it were 
written either in the early 60s (as I think is most probable) or in the mid 90s 
(as is traditional and most generally assumed). 
Since this is well the earliest datable Christian text outside the NT, our 
conclusion regarding all other extrabiblical Christian texts must be the 
same: since they can't be established as early, they can't be established as 
independent, and few of them can be established as tracing back to any 
early-first-century sources. None of them contains anything either different 
from what's found in the NT or that's believable even if different (e.g. the 
Infancy Gospels or the Acts of Peter or the bizarrely improbable sayings 
attributed to Jesus in the Gospel of Thomas). One can speculate that some 
of it did, but that's insufficient to build an argument from, because all quali­
fiers in an argument's premises commute to its conclusion; in other words, 
'speculation in, speculation out'. 
Which means none of this can argue for historicity, precisely because 
none of it can be established as both independent and reliable, and without 
40. The claim that Clement was bishop of Rome between 93 and 96 and wrote 
this letter during the reign of Domitian comes only from Hegesippus a century later, 
whom we shall see is not a reliable source (in Chapter 8, §8; see Eusebius, History of 
the Church 3.16-20; notice how Eusebius has no sources to cite anywhere near the time 
of Clement). That the Domitianic persecution is fabricated, compare Eusebius, History 
ofthe Church 3.19 with the original story as preserved in Cassius Dio, Roman History 
67.14 and Suetonius, Domitian 10 (both of whom knew very well what Christians were, 
yet neither of whom mention Christians being involved in this event at all: see Carrier, 
Not the Impossible Faith, pp. 156-57). Christians were fond of rewriting history to 
place Christians in stories they were not previously in; see the example of the •rain 
miracle' of Marcus Aurelius, in which a story about pagan magic with no Christians 
in it was quickly transformed into a story about a whole Christian legion, completely 
replacing the original pagan sorcerer in the story (Carrier, Sense and Goodness, pp. 
228-31; with, now, Peter Kovacs. Marcus Aurelius' Rain Miracle and the Marcomannic 
Wars [Leiden: Brill, 2009]). 

274 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
confirming both, the mathematical effect on the probability of historicity is 
zero-unless one of those items contains evidence against historicity, as in 
the case of the Epistles (as I explained in §3). Accordingly, I will select only 
a few key examples to examine in the next chapter (1 Clement, Ignatius and 
Papias, as being possibly early; and Hegesippus, as being possibly informa­
tive), and I will discuss some additional problems with assigning dates and 
authors to these sources there. Everything else dates later than the year 1 20, 
long after any eyewitnesses would have died (Element 22). 41 
Of non-Christian extrabiblical evidence there is very little that can be 
established as independent and reliable. In fact, in the next chapter I will 
conclude that none can. But the 'usual' view is that some can. This includes 
one very ]ate source, the Babylonian Talmud, completed in the fifth century 
(the early Middle Ages), which I will consider only because it says things 
very different from what the NT does and therefore would appear to be 
independent of the NT-unless the things it says are polemical inventions 
created in response to the NT (or some other Gospels outside the canon). 
In fact, a common conclusion scholars reach is that because it is so late, its 
contents don't in fact trace back to any actual first-century source at all; 
41. So, e.g., I rule out Aristides and Quadratus: even though both are said to have 
written their quoted texts in 124 ce (Eusebius, History of the Church 4.3; neither of 
their original texts survives), making them among the earliest surviving extrabiblical 
Christian authors, that still falls outside my cut-off date, and modern scholars dispute 
that date anyway (all recent scholarship on Aristides or Quadratus argues that the texts 
attributed to them may well date decades later). Since we have no way to authenticate 
their texts, quotes, sources or dates, we cannot use them as evidence. Moreover, 
although both appear to argue for a historical Jesus, the surviving quotations we have 
from them lack any apparent sources for their claims beyond the Gospels (and perhaps 
Acts). I also rule out the Gospel of Thomas, which claims to relate sayings that Jesus 
secretly told 'Didymus Judas Thomas', since I suspect that's a fictional character 
invented by the authors of the Gospel of John, which would mean Gospel of Thomas 
post-dates even John; and even if not, for all we actually know, the contents of Gospel 
of Thomas derive from Matthew, Mark and Luke (with additions thereto), possibly 
through oral or other intermediaries: Mark Goodacre, Thomas and the Gospels: The 
Case for Thomas Ӻ Familiarity with the Synoptics (Grand Rapids, MI: W.B. Eerdmans, 
2012); Klyne Snodgrass, 'The Gospel of Thomas: A Secondary Gospel', Second 
Century 7 (1989-1990), pp. 19-38; Raymond Brown, 'The Gospel of Thomas and St. 
John's Gospel', New Testament Studies 9 (1963), pp. 155-77; Price, Pre-Nicene New 
Testament, pp. 969-88. It therefore cannot be established as independent. This does 
mean I disagree with Gregory Riley, Resurrection Reconsidered: Thomas and John 
in Controversy (Minneapolis, MN: Fortress Press, 1995), pp. 2-5: some of the ideas in 
Gospel ofThomas may predate John (to which John may be responding), but I think 
it's more likely Gospel of Thomas itself is a response to John, not the other way around. 
That John was redacted several times (see previous note) complicates such relative 
dating anyway. 

7. Primary Sources 
275 
although, as l will show, that would make its contents very hard to explain. 
I suspect it reflects (and responds to) a first-century non-canonical Gospel 
(as I will explain in the next chapter). Its relevance, either way, is limited 
but not lacking. 
All other non-Christian extrabiblical sources do not say anything sub­
stantially different from known Christian literature, and therefore (being 
also late) cannot be established as independent. And some of it doesn't 
even exist (contrary to it often being cited as if it does). Accordingly, I will 
include only the earliest examples. These begin with the Jewish Antiquities 
of Josephus, completed in or shortly after 93 CE, the extant text of which 
contains two references to Jesus. Next is a letter of Pliny the Younger writ­
ten around 1 12 cE about his interrogation of some local Christians in what 
is now northern Turkey. Then a passage in the Annals of Tacitus (about the 
Neronian persecution at Rome in the year 64), completed around 1 16 CE. 
Then a passage in the Lives of the Caesars ofSuetonius, completed around 
I 19 CE, about a certain 'Chrestus' instigating a riot in Rome, whom some 
take to mean Christ. And finally an alleged reference in the Histories of 
Thallus, which is undatable with any certainty but probably comes from 
the late second century (as I will discuss in § 1 1  of the next chapter). Every 
other author is much too late to be relevant--Celsus, Lucian and Mara bar 
Serapion, e.g., all wrote in the 150s or later, and no other non-Christian text 
mentioning Jesus predates them.42 
That's it. That's all there is. 
7. The Problem ofCompromised Evidence 
Everyone agrees all the Christian documents so far mentioned have been 
selected, forged, meddled with or edited. In fact the NT underwent a con­
siderable amount of editing, interpolation and revising over the course of 
its first two centuries, and not merely as a result of transcription and scribal 
error, but often with specific dogmatic intent.43 Extra-biblical literature often 
underwent even more of the same, with quite blatant forgery and revision 
not uncommon (as we'll see in the case of Ignatius in the next chapter, §6; 
42. Van Voorst, Jesus Outside the New Testament, pp. 56-57 (for Mara), pp. 58-59 
(for Lucian), p. 64 (for Celsus); attempts to date Mara bar Serapion to the first century 
depend on fallacious reasoning, which simply doesn't survive scrutiny in the face of 
the analysis in Van Voorst. See Earl Doherty, Jesus: Neither God nor Man (The Case 
for a Mythical Jesus) (Ottawa: Age of Reason, 2009), pp. 652-56. I am also excluding 
Dio Cassius, Roman History 67.14. about the persecution of some converts to Judaism 
under Domitian (in the 90s). not only because it's late (early third century) but also 
because it mentions neither Jesus nor Christians and was only presumed to be about 
Christians in later Christian legend (see earlier note). 
43. See earlier notes for examples and references. 

276 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
we saw it already in the Christian 'redacting' of the Ascension of Isaiah in 
Chapter 3, §1, and of Christian 'fabrication' generally in Element 44). This is 
not something to sweep under the rug. It makes a real difference in how we 
estimate probabilities. Unlike most other questions in history, the evidence 
for Jesus is among the most compromised bodies of evidence in the whole 
of ancient history. It cannot be said that this has no effect on its reliability. 
This does not entail or require any particular 'conspiracy theory', how­
ever. Of course, the fact of it is so firmly in evidence it cannot be disputed 
(only its degree); so even if a conspiracy theory were required, it would be 
more than amply established by the evidence we have. But it isn't needed, 
because all that one does need is a sect of fanatical believers who (a) have a 
common dogma to promote (e.g. that Jesus really lived and really said and 
did certain things conducive to the doctrines they wanted to promote), as 
we know the 'orthodox' sect did, and (b) have no qualms against destroy­
ing evidence (or just not mentioning or preserving it), forging evidence and 
doctoring evidence, as we again know the 'orthodox' sect did (i.e. these are 
not mere hypotheses, but established facts in our background knowledge).44 
Any such community will organically produce the same effect as a conspir­
acy, without ever having to conspire to do anything. They do not require 
any top-down instރuctions or orders to follow, nor any collusion. If each 
independently did what made sense to him, each on his own initiative, the 
effect on the evidence that survives for us now wi II have been the same. 
For example, no one 'colluded' to forge an ending to Mark. It was not 
an order issued from the pope or some cabal of archbishops. Someone just 
did it.45 It then so agreed with what everyone wanted to be there that they 
increasingly preserved it at the expense of other versions of Mark. In this 
case, the evidence of this survived for us to detect it. But this will not have 
been the case for everything. In actual fact, most corruptions and forger­
ies occur early in a text's history, when it is far easier to eclipse earlier 
drafts (there being fewer copies of them, less widely distributed) and avoid 
detection (as the more time passes, the more suspicious a remarkable new 
discovery becomes); and yet that is precisely the period of a text's develop­
ment that we know the least about (because we have few to no manuscripts 
or fragments to judge from). From the interpolations we have detected. 
for example, projecting the same rate of meddling back into the period for 
which we have no manuscripts with which to detect such things (roughly 
50-150 CE), I calculate there must be at least twenty significant interpola-
44. Besides the scholarship referenced in previous notes. see again Element 44. 
45. Quite possibly they 'appended' a paragraph from a commentary (not 
itself intended as a forgery), passing it off as being by the hand of Mark (and thus 
'manufacturing' a forgery): see my analysis in Carrier. 'Mark 16:9-20 as Forgery or 
Fabrication'. 

7. Primary Sources 
277 
tions in the text of the NT that we will have no way of detecting (except 
when we are lucky enough that internal evidence gives us a clue). And 
again, the actual rate would not then have been the same as in subsequent 
centuries, but substantially higher. So twenty is a definite undercount.46 
The same goes for deletions, harmonizations, alterations and destroyed or 
suppressed documents. 
That some text has been forged, or interpolated, or altered by Christians 
even outside the canon is a caveat I encounter in scholarly analysis of docu­
ment after document, to the point that it becomes frustrating; and it would 
be alarming in any other field. And yet, it's so common to this field that it 
is now simply taken for granted and thus often shrugged off. Already the 
fact that half the letters in the NT are recognized forgeries warns us against 
ever implicitly trusting any of the evidence we have. The fact that we can 
see the same and worse across the whole early history of Christian litera­
ture and textual tradition only reinforces that conclusion. And that must 
effect our estimates of probability. 
Nevertheless, throughout this book I shall assume that any passage in 
the NT is not an interpolation, unless I cite or present a specific argument 
for it, or there is already unanimous agreement among experts (and thus 
no argument need be made). For example, there are many arguments for 
interpolations in Paul's letter to the Romans, including 1.3-4 (which is often 
cited in support of historicity) and 16.25-27 (which is often cited in support 
of mythicism). I do not find those arguments entirely convincing. But nei­
ther do I find them wholly without merit. Yet I shall assume these passages 
are authentic, because no conclusive case can be made otherwise. 47 
46. See my debate with J.P. Holding: Richard Carrier and J.P. Holding, 'The Text 
of the New Testament: Do We Have What They Had?', at the Amador Christian Center 
in Plymouth, California, on April 9, 201 1 (for video see Richard Carrier, 'Debates & 
Interviews', Richard Carrier Blogs [February 24, 2012] at http://freethoughtblogs.com/ 
carrier/archives/389; and for my accompanying slideshow: http://www.richardcarrier. 
info/NTReliabilitySiideshow.pdt). On the whole problem of detecting interpolations in 
the Epistles see Winsome Munro, 'Interpolation in the Epistles: Weighing Probability', 
New Testament Studies 36 (1990), pp. 431-43; and WilHam Walker, 'The Burden of 
Proof in Identifying Interpolations in Pauline Letters', New Testament Studies 33 
{1987), pp. 610-18; and William Walker, 'Text-Critical Evidence for Interpolation in 
the Letters of Paul', Catholic Biblical Quarterly 50 (1988), pp. 622-31, which are all 
required reading on the subject. 
47. See Robert Jewett, Romans: A Commentary (Minneapolis, MN: Fortress Press, 
2007), pp. 4-18, 99-108, 997-1011. Jewett surveys claims that these two passages are 
not only interpolations but have both undergone multiple redactions as well (Jewett 
himself concludes in favor of Paul editing the first and a later redactor inserting the 
second). That seems needlessly complicated and overly speculative to me. In each case, 
concluding an interpolation has occurred depends on several improbable assumptions, 
e.g.: (a) that Romans is a unified letter (when in fact it is probably a mashup of several: 

278 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
8. The Role ofConsequent Probabilities 
The way evidence affects the probability of a hypothesis is by comparing the 
consequent probabilities of that evidence on every viable hypothesis. If an 
item of evidence (its existence, its content) is more likely on one hypothesis 
than on another, then it increases the probability of the former hypothesis 
against the latter. But that alone does not render the supported hypothesis 
the more probable. First, all evidence must be considered (because even if a 
single item of evidence supports a hypothesis, the remaining evidence might 
still support an alternative more). Second, even after all evidence is consid­
ered, any prior probability against a hypothesis must be overcome. These 
points I have already explained in Proving History. Here all that we need 
remember are the questions we have to ask of each piece of evidence: 
I. How likely is it that we would have this evidence if our hypothesis is 
true? (Is this evidence expected? How expected?) 
2. How likely is it that the evidence would look like it does if our hypothesis 
is true? (Instead of looking differently; having a different content, for 
example.) 
3. Conversely, how likely is it that we would have this evidence if the other 
hypothesis is true? (Again, is this evidence expected? How expected?) 
4. And how likely is it that the evidence would look like it does if that other 
hypothesis is true? (Instead of looking differently; having a different 
content, for example.) 
And when asking these questions, the 'evidence' includes not just what we 
have, but also what we don't have.48 Does the evidence-what we have and 
what we don't, what it says and what it doesn't-make more sense on one 
hypothesis than the other? How much more? That's the question. And the 
see note in Chapter 11, §2); (b) that these two passages are not inherited or stylized 
creedal statements like the Philippians hymn (when in fact they probably are); and (c) 
that Rom. 16.25-27 says God has abandoned the Jews and only sent his salvation to the 
Gentiles (when in fact it says no such thing). That last assumption Jewett bases on the 
fact that it says the gospel has been made known 'to all the nations' without mention 
ofthe Jews, but the exact same thing is said in Mt. 24.14; 25.32; and 28.19, which by no 
stretch of the imagination can be saying what Jewett imagines. In Rom. 16.26 likewise 
the phrase does not imply exclusion of the Jews, but furtherance of such scriptural 
promises as Ps. 82.8; Gen. 26.4; lsa. 52.10; and Jer. 3.17. It is indeed repeated in Rom. 
1.5. necessitating an assumption of double interpolation. That it agrees with the overall 
point of Romans 15 confirms that Paul is saying God meant the gospel to be universal 
(and thus inclusive of the Gentiles), which some Jewish Christians were questioning; 
he does not thereby imply the Jews were being excluded. 
48. On the logic and importance of an argument from silence in history see Carrier, 
Proving History, pp. 1 17-19. 

7. Primary Sources 
279 
answer, in conjunction with the prior probability (in this case developed in 
Chapter 6), determines which hypothesis is more likely true. 
The two hypotheses we are comparing are (a) that Jesus was minimally 
historical (Chapter 2) and (b) that Jesus was originally a cosmic being known 
only by revelation who was later set in history through the production of 
allegorical myths that were later taken or intended literally (Chapter 3). The 
former shall be our h, while the latter is effectively -.h. When estimating 
probabilities, I shall use the method of arguing a fortiori: in each case I will 
settle on the probability that is the furthest in favor of h that l can reason­
ably believe it to be, just as I did when determining the prior (in Chapter 6). 
I will also run the numbers for what I think the actual probabilities are more 
likely to be, but the conclusion of this book will argue mainly from the other 
result, because ultimately I do not believe any reasonable person will be able 
to disagree with it. I will explain and complete the equation in Chapter 12. 
9. Conclusion 
In truth, the only evidence that Jesus really existed as a historical person, as 
opposed to merely being believed to have existed by the dawn of the second 
century, lies in the contents of the NT. There is no other source, document 
or artifact that independently corroborates the historical reality of Jesus. In 
most cases this is obvious, but in some it is disputed, and those cases I will 
take up in the next chapter. The remaining chapters deal with the NT. 
Independent or not, all extrabiblical mentions of Jesus come later than 90 
CE, by which time a belief that Jesus was historical will already have arisen. 
Even the contents of the NT did not begin to be written until twenty or so 
years after Jesus is supposed to have lived, and most of it was written half a 
century or more after, some of it nearly as much as a century after. And all of 
it was written by fanatical believers, not neutral observers, while all the evi­
dence we have from neutral parties was dependent on these fanatical Chris­
tians as their source. The NT itself was assembled in the middle of the second 
century, by obvious devout historicists. who thus selected (and in some cases 
even modified) the contents of the NT specifically to support their agenda.49 
We do not have any first-century documents from other sects of Christi­
anity, and no second-century collections arranged by them either. Thus, for 
example, if Paul wrote a letter that more clearly identified Jesus as solely 
49. Harry Gamble. ·canonical Formation of the New Testament', in Dictionary of 
New Testament Background (ed. Craig Evans and Stanley Porter; Downers Grove, IL: 
lnterVarsity Press, 2000), pp. 183·95; Bruce Metzger, The Canon ofthe New Testament: 
Its Origin, Development, and Significance (New York: Oxford University Press, 1987); 
Lee Martin McDonald and James Sanders (eds.), The Canon Debate (Peabody, MA: 
Hendrickson Publishers, 2002): Trobisch, First Edition ofthe New Testament. 

280 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
a cosmic being, we cannot expect to have it-because the sect that chose 
which letters of his to preserve dogmatically rejected that view (as we shall 
see in the next chapter), and therefore would not have preserved any such 
letters, but only those that could be interpreted to favor their view, rather 
than what the earliest Christians may have really believed. It is therefore 
more than a little significant that we know of several letters by Paul that 
have not been preserved-begging the question why. 5° What did they say? 
I shall have more to say about this in Chapters 1 1  and 12. 
Therefore, though the whole range of extrabiblical evidence constitutes 
our fourth category, and the first we shall examine, we shall find (in the next 
chapter) that it argues very little in favor of historicity and even somewhat 
against, leaving our primary focus on the probability that the NT would con­
tain the text it does if h is true (and Jesus did exist) and the probability that it 
would contain that text if h is not true (and Jesus didn't really exist). Yet, as 
we've seen, this evidence is enormously compromised by a legacy of selec­
tive preservation, doctoring, interpolation, and forgery, is worryingly late for 
our needs (all of it dating decades to half a century after the fact, or later), and 
almost all of it is useless (because we can't establish its independence from 
earlier material that we have, or its reliability even if independent). These 
facts must be taken into account when estimating probabilities. 
No argument can follow from the premise that any disciple or eyewitness 
wrote the Gospels or Epistles, for example. If by an 'eyewitness' record we 
mean a record actually written by an eyewitness, we simply have no eyewit­
ness record of Jesus ever existing, much less of anything that Jesus said or 
did. That alone proves nothing, of course, because it's as true of countless 
other historical persons. But they do not have an initially low probability of 
existing, whereas Jesus does (see Chapter 6), being, unlike most everyone 
else, a worshiped savior and celestial demigod already in our earliest evi­
dence. The evidence for Jesus, therefore, has to be substantially better than 
usual to overcome that low prior. In fact, we'll find it is generally worse, 
being more likely to exist in the state it does if Jesus didn't exist than if he 
did. But that has yet to be demonstrated. So to that we now turn. 
50. 1 Corinthians 5.9, 11 (referring to the original 'first' letter to the Corinthians; 
our first Corinthians is actually the second, which in fact assumes the reader has 
already read the first one, now missing). Colossians 4.16 also refers to a letter 'from 
Laodicea' that the author of Colossians wants read in the churches; we don't have 
that letter (although one was later forged in its place). Fragments of these lost letters 
might survive 'inside' the letters we have, insofar as any of them are edited pastiches 
of choice parts of several letters combined into new, effectively fictional letters: see 
Reuter, 'Introduction to Synoptic Work'. But fragments do not entail a whole, and we 
cannot know what Paul wrote that was not preserved by this process (and we know 
some parts are missing: see, e.g., Chapter 11, §10). There were also letters written to 
Paul, which he is responding to ( l  Cor. 7.1), yet those were not preserved either. 

8 
EXTRABIBLICAL EVIDENCE 
1 .  Jesus When? 
Jesus was born around the time of either Herod the Great's death (4 acE) 
or the Roman annexation of Judea (6 CE), then preached in Galilee and 
was crucified under Pontius Pilate (26-36 CE) during the reign of Emperor 
Tiberius (14-37 CE). Right? Well, we're not really sure. Because Christians 
weren't really sure. Some Christians believed Jesus died during the reign of 
Emperor Claudius (41-54 cE). Others believed he was executed by a Herod, 
not Pilate. And still others were certain he was born and died in the reign 
of King Alexander Jannaeus (103-76 BeE). That's right. Some Christians 
believed Jesus had lived and died a hundred years earlier than our Gospels 
claim. 
In the late fourth century the Christian scholar Epiphanius compiled an 
extensive dossier on all the 'heresies' he knew of, calling it the Panarion, 
'Medicine Chest'. One of these 'heresies' he covers is that of the 'Nazori­
ans', who were still practicing Jews; as Epiphanius says, these 'Nazorians 
confess that Christ Jesus is the Son of God, but all their customs are in 
accordance with the Law'.1 This would mean a sect that descended directly 
from the original Christian sect founded by Peter, John and James (the 'pil­
lars' of Galatians 2), before Paul's innovation eliminated Torah observance 
(Element 20). These Nazorians were still Torah observant, and still called 
themselves by their original name (Acts 24.5; Jerome, Letters 1 12.13), the 
name they held before the sects we are more familiar with came to be called 
Christians (Acts 11.26).2 
Epiphanius then says a curious thing: these Christians say Jesus had 
lived and died in the time of Alexander Jannaeus. This is what he says they 
preach: 
I. See Epiphanius, Panarion 29. 
2. In Epiphanius and Acts the word is identical: the Nazoraioi (Acts 24.5), which 
in English corresponds to 'Nazorian'. by analogy with Athlnaioi, 'Athenian' (see 
discussion in Chapter 10, §3). 

282 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
The priesthood in the holy church is [actually] David's throne and kingly 
seat, for the Lord joined together and gave to his holy church both the 
kingly and the high-priestly dignity, transferring to it the never-failing 
throne of David. For David's throne endured in line of succession until 
the time of Christ himself, rulers from Judah not failing until he came 'to 
whom the things kept in reserve belonged, and he was the expectation of 
the nations'. With the advent of the Christ the rulers in line of succession 
from Judah, reigning until the time of the Christ himself, ceased. For the 
line fell away and stopped from the time when he was born in Bethle­
hem of Judea under Alexander, who was of priestly and royal race. From 
Alexander onward this office ceased-from the days of Alexander and 
Salina, who is also called Alexandra, to the days of Herod the king and 
Augustus the Roman emperor.3 
The Babylonian Talmud not only confirms this, but its Jewish authors 
appear to have known no other form of Christianity. This means the Jews 
east of the Roman Empire (where this Talmud was compiled, assembled 
from the third to fifth centuries) were reacting to this Nazarian Christian­
ity. As one passage declares, 'when King Jannaeus was killing our rab­
bis, R. Jesus ben Periah and Jesus [the Nazarene] escaped to Alexandria. 
Egypt; and when peace was restored', they returned (echoes here of Mat­
thew's nativity account, in this case told of Jesus rather than his parents). 
and this Jesus, who is explicitly identified as 'Jesus the Nazarene', was 
condemned for immorality, sorcery and worshiping idols, and eventually 
executed because he 'practiced magic and led Israel astray'.4 
3. Epiphanius, Panarion 29.3. 
4. Babylonian Talmud, Sanhedrin 107b; So!ah 47a: Jerusalem Talmud. /fagigah 
2.2 (cf. Jerusalem Talmud, Sanhedrin 23c; the latter includes only part of this story 
and omits the name of Jesus, but such deletions of Jesus' name are typical in surviving 
manuscripts of the Talmud). See Robert Van Voorst, Jesus Outside the New Testament: 
An Introduction to the Ancient Evidence (Grand Rapids. MI: William B. Eerdmans. 
2000), pp. 104-22 (111-12), although note that his data is inaccurate: more references 
exist in the Talmud than he collects, and many of the passages he cites actually have 
had references to Jesus expunged from them by Christian scribes. When we look at 
more reliable manuscripts, 'Jesus of Nazareth' is repeatedly and explicitly identified 
as 'Jesus ben Pantera' and 'Jesus ben Stada', leaving no such doubts as Van Voorst 
voices about their equivalence. See Craig Evans, 'Jesus in Non-Christian Sources'. in 
Studying the Historical Jesus: Evaluation of the State of Current Research (ed. Bruce 
Chilton and Craig Evans; New York: Brill, 1994), pp. 443-78; Graham Twelftree. •Jesus 
in Jewish Traditions', in Gospel Perspectives: Studies of History and Tradition in the 
Four Gospels, Vol. V. The Jesus Tradition outside the Gospels (ed. David Wenham: 
Sheffield: JSOT Press, 1984), pp. 289-341 (310-41): Peter Schafer. Jesus in the 
Talmud (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2007), cf. esp. pp. 131-44; and the 
Wikipedia entry for 'Jesus in the Talmud' (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jesus_in_the_ 
Talmud), which is becoming a valuable point of reference. 

8. Extrabib/ical Evidence 
283 
Elsewhere we learn that this 'Jesus' who 'practiced magic and led Israel 
astray' was stoned and crucified 'on the day before the Passover' (in some 
manuscripts of the Talmud, it even says 'on a Sabbath eve', in both respects 
corresponding to the timeline in the Gospel of John, which actually agrees 
with Jewish law; the other Gospels depict an impossible event: an execu­
tion on a high holy day).5 This Jesus was also known as 'Ben Stada', mean­
ing 'Son of the Unfaithful', a woman named Mary, who committed adul­
tery with her lover Pandera (most likely that means Panthera, 'Panther', a 
popular nickname for Roman soldiers, as this was the Jewish polemic as 
reported in the second century) and thus gave birth to Ben Stada, who was 
thus also known as 'Ben Pandera', which may be a pun on ben Parthenos, 
'Son of the Virgin', a pun that was already part of Jewish anti-Christian 
polemic in the second century (based on the legend of a Roman soldier 
named Panther being the real father of Jesus), as confirmed by Celsus and 
Origen-and therefore Ben Stada is indeed our Jesus.6 Although in the 
Talmudic account he is tried and executed in Lydda, not Jerusalem. 
Van Voorst insists 'Ben Stada' is not our Jesus, but none of his argu­
ments are va1id.7 The stoned were always crucified ('hanged') under Jewish 
law; thus there are not two different executions being described.8 Nor does 
the account of Jesus' stoning (the one Van Voorst agrees is about Jesus) 
say he was not stoned in Lydda or not tried before the Beth Din (Jewish 
court). So there is no contradiction between these accounts, as Van Voorst 
claims. And the fact that these accounts contradict the canonical Gospels 
is precisely the point. Even the passages Van Voorst agrees are about Jesus 
contradict the Gospels we have, so he doesn't even obey his own logic. But 
5. That it was illegal even for Romans to perform executions on Jewish holy days 
in Judea at that time: Carrier, 'Burial of Jesus', in Empty Tomb (ed. Price and Lowder), 
p. 373-75, 377-78, 382-85 (with Mishnah, Sanhedrin 4. lk-l and 5.5a). See also Carrier, 
Proving History, pp. 1 39-41, 154, and 317 n. 68. That some manuscripts of the Talmud 
include 'on the Sabbath eve' see Schafer, Jesus in the Talmud, pp. 131-44, which also 
shows they also included the phrase 'Jesus the Nazarene' in many of the passages Van 
Voorst presents as lacking it, because it was later deleted by Christian scribes from the 
manuscripts Van Voorst derives his texts from. 
6. Babylonian Talmud, Shabbat l04b (Tosefta, Shabbat 1 1.15); Babylonian Talmud, 
Sanhedrin 43a, 64a and 67 (Tosefta, Sanhedrin 7.16; 10.1 1); Babylonian Talmud, Gittin 
S6bʅ57a. Other passages are collected in Van Voorst and Schflfer etc. (see previous 
note). On Origen and Celsus on the ben Panthera polemic see Origen, Against Celsus 
1.32. 
7. Van Voorst, Jesus Outside the New Testament, p. 1 16; hq almost immediately 
contradicts himself and says (without explanation) that the passages about Ben Stada 
are about Jesus (p. 120). I can only assume he changed his mind and didn't edit the text 
to reflect which position he held at the time of publication. A confusing error indeed. In 
any event, his first opinion is wrong. 
8. Carrier, 'Burial of Jesus', in Empty Tomb (ed. Price and Lowder), pp. 375ʅ79. 

284 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
the point is that here we have knowledge of a completely different gospel 
tradition placing Jesus the Nazarene, apostate, 'son of the virgin Mary', 
under Alexander Jannaeus, with a different crucifixion account. occurring 
in a different location. 
That Ben Stada is Jesus the Nazarene is further entailed by the fact that 
he is explicitly called Ben Pandera, and described as the son of Mary who 
cheated on her husband with Pandera, facts that are explicitly part of known 
Jewish polemic about Jesus and make no sense in any other way. That he 
was also executed 'on the day before Passover' (indeed, 'on the Sabbath 
eve') and condemned for sorcery and leading Israelites astray (which latter 
crime was allegedly confirmed, at least in Jewish polemic, by spies, possi­
bly those called 'false witnesses' in our Gospels) only confirms the conclu­
sion that this is the same person. Van Voorst sees a contradiction between 
the one Talmudic account of there being witnesses for the prosecution and 
the other Talmudic account claiming no witnesses could be found for his 
defense, but it should be obvious that that entails no contradiction. 
Not that it matters. What is said about Ben Stada could be ignored 
entirely. The apostate 'Jesus' under Jannaeus is still explicitly identified as 
'Jesus the Nazarene' and as being stoned and crucified 'on the day before 
the Passover' (on 'a Sabbath eve' even) for 'practicing magic and leading 
Israel astray'. So we clearly see that the Jews who compiled the Babylo­
nian Talmud only knew of a Jesus executed under Jannaeus, not any Jesus 
executed under Pilate.9 And Epiphanius confirms that some Torah-obser­
vant Christians, from the original sect of Christianity, actually did preach 
that. So there was some sort of Gospel circulating in the East, from a more 
conservative and faithful descendant of the original Christian sect, that 
narrated a Jesus born of the virgin Mary (as the Jewish polemic in the 
Talmud entails these Christians were claiming) in Bethlehem (according to 
9. This also became the tradition used in the Middle Ages to construct the polemical 
anti-Christian tract. the sefer Toledot Yeshu (cf. 2.1. 31-32). Note that Schafer, Jesus in 
the Talmud (e.g. pp. 122-29) thinks the Talmudic accounts derive from the canonical 
Gospels (the Gospel of John especially), but he has no good evidence for this-he just 
tries to force the evidence there is to fit that hypothesis. The most pertinent example is 
his speculation that the Jannaeus-period tale was not originally about Jesus (pp. 36-39), 
but he has no actual evidence of that, and it is illogical: there is no way medieval Jews 
would produce the contradiction of placing Jesus under the Jewish king Jannaeus if 
they knew he had been crucified by Pilate during the Roman occupation a hundred 
years later; and there is simply no evidence they had any knowledge of Pilate or Roman 
involvement at all. Schafer's thesis is therefore untenable. Moreover, Epiphanius 
confirms the Jews did not invent the association of Jesus with the period of Jannaeus: 
Christians in the very region were already preaching that. 

8. Extrabiblical Evidence 
285 
the Christians themselves who adopted this version of events) and executed 
under Jannaeus for working miracles and 'leading people astray'.10 
How can the descendants of the original sect of Christians have come 
to believe Jesus lived and died a hundred years before our Gospels say he 
did? It is nearly impossible to imagine how such a doctrine could have 
developed. Unless there was no historical Jesus. Then he could be placed in 
history wherever each sect desired. In other words, if originally Jesus was 
not placed in history, then when he was placed in history-after the sects 
had split, ideologically and geographically-each sect could place him dif­
ferently, developing their own myths in accord with their own needs and 
creativity. That would then influence neighboring sects and daughter sects 
connected with them, but if this was done twice, in separate regions, once 
inside the Roman Empire and once outside, those could have become the 
seeds of two different traditions spreading and developing independently 
of each other. 
Even in the West there was not an established date or narrative for Jesus. 
Already, of course, no one could agree on when Jesus was born, Matthew 
placing his birth under Herod the Great; Luke, under Quirinius, more than 
ten years Jater.11 And they also couldn't agree in what year he was killed, 
John placing the event the day before the Passover of either 30 or 33 cE; 
10. In making these observations I am not endorsing any particular theory that 
has been built on them by other scholars (who have also noted these same facts, but 
then developed elaborate theories from them). I shall rely solely on the singular facts 
here stated and established from primary sources, nothing more. But if anyone wants 
to pursue the many strange theories developed out of these facts, such speculations 
began as early as the work of theosophist G.R.S. Mead in his Did Jesus Live 100 B.C.? 
An Enquiry into the Talmud Jesus Stories, the To/doth Jeschu. and Some Curious 
Statements ofEpiphanius (London: Theosophical Publishing Society, 1903); after that, 
Hugh Schon field, According to the Hebrews: A New Translation of the Jewish Lifo of 
Jesus (the To/doth Jeshu), with an Inquiry into the Nature of its Sources and Special 
Relationship to the Lost Gospel according to the Hebrews (London: Duckworth, 1937); 
more recently, Alvar Ellegard, Jesus: One Hundred Years before Christ (Woodstock, 
NY: Overlook, 1999); and Michael Wise, The First Messiah: Investigating the Savior 
before Christ (New York: HarperSanFrancisco, 1999); as well as Frank Zind1er, The 
Jesus the Jews Never Knew: Sepher To/doth Yeshu and the Quest of the Historical 
Jesus in Jewish Sources (Cranford. NJ: American Atheist Press, 2003); and John Marco 
Allegro, The Dead Sea Scrolls and the Christian Myth (Buffalo, NY: Prometheus 
Books, 1984), which he summarizes in 'Jesus and Qumran: The Dead Sea Scrolls', in 
Jesus in Myth and History (ed. R. Joseph Hoffmann and Gerald Larue; Buffalo. NY: 
Prometheus, 1986 ), pp. 89-96. 
1 1 .  See my summary of these facts (and attempts to deny them by Christian 
apologists) in Richard Carrier, 'Luke vs. Matthew on the Year of Christ's Birth', Hitler 
Homer Bible Christ: The Historical Papers of Richard Carrier 1995-2013 (Richmond, 
CA: Philosophy Press, 2014), pp. 213-30. 

286 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
the Synoptics, during the Passover of 27 or 34 CE.12 But those kinds of 
confusions or distortions would not be too surprising even for a histor­
ical man, about whom such confusions or distortions could arise. A bit 
more surprising is the fact that they couldn't agree on who executed Jesus: 
the Romans, at the command of Pontius Pilate (as the canonical Gospels 
claim), or the Jews, at the command of King Herod Anti pas (as the Gospel 
of Peter claims, e.g., 1.2; 6.3; and all of 1 .1-7.1; and as some hints even in 
canonical sources could be taken to suggest, e.g., Acts 5.30 in combination 
with Gal. 3.13 and the interpolation in 1 Thess. 2.15-16). Curiously, Luke 
alone inserts this Herod into the story (by adapting a story originally told 
about Pilate in Mark: Mk 15.15-20 becoming Lk. 23.1 1). A Herod is not in 
any way involved in Jesus' trial or death in any other Gospel account (see 
Mark 14-15; Matthew 26-27; and John 18-19). But in the Gospel of Peter 
not only is he as involved as Luke imagines, but he is the one who executes 
Jesus, not Pilate. And yet this Gospel was popular in the East, before our 
fam i I iar canon came to replace it. 13 
Also surprising is the fact noted earlier, that many early Christians 
thought Jesus died in the reign of Emperor Claudius rather than Emperor 
Tiberius (between whom reigned Caligula from 37 to 41; Claudius reigned 
41 to 54). They mistakenly thought Pontius Pilate was governing Judea at 
the same time (even though he had been deposed by Tiberius in 36), but 
they were sure it was in the 40s that Jesus was killed, not the 30s, and their 
reasons are telling. Irenaeus says that it was in accordance with prophecy 
that 'King' Herod and 'Caesar's' man Pilate would do this: 
For Herod the king of the Jews and Pontius Pilate, the governor of 
Claudius Caesar, came together and condemned him to be crucified. For 
Herod feared, as though [Jesus really] were to be an earthly king, lest he 
should be expelled by him from the kingdom. But Pilate was constrained 
by Herod and the Jews that were with him against his will to deliver him 
to death, [for they threatened him, asking] if he should not rather do this, 
than act contrary to Caesar by letting go a man who was called a king.14 
12. Jack Finegan, Handbook of Biblical Chronology: Principles ofTime Reckoning 
in the Ancient World and Problems of Chronology in the Bible (Peabody, MA: 
Hendrickson Publishers, rev. edn, 1998; orig. edn, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University 
Press, 1964), pp. 359-65 (§ 615-24). 
13. Serapion (Bishop of Antioch) discovered the Gospel of Peter was a principal 
text used in some Eastern churches, but when he ftnally read it, he deemed it heretical 
and had the text banned, sometime near the end of the second century, according to 
Eusebius, History ofthe Church 6.12. 
14. Irenaeus, Demonstration of the Apostolic Preaching 14 (citing Ps. 2.1-2; which 
is cited to similar effect in Acts 4.25-27). 

, .
. 
8. Extrabiblical Evidence 
287 
Notably this does not correspond to any known Gospel. In the canonicals, 
Herod does not threaten Pilate with this argument (although 'the Jews' in 
general do, but only in Jn 19.12); and Herod never expresses any such fear 
(although Herod the Great did, forty years earlier: Mt. 2.1-19), and never 
condemns Jesus to be crucified at all, much less 'together' with Pi1ate, as 
if in the same court (though something similar occurs in the Gospel of 
Peter). Thus, even such an orthodoxist as Irenaeus could not agree on the 
narrative. 
More importantly, Irenaeus was doing 'scriptural math' here, not his­
tory. His reasoning was that Jesus had to have been nearly fifty when he 
died (because Jn 8.57 said so), and yet was around thirty in the year 29 CE 
(because Lk. 3.1-2 and 3.23 said so), so he 'had' to have died in the 40s 
CE, and therefore in the reign of Claudius.15 But this is precisely the kind 
of methodology that generates myths and legends. If similar calculations 
determined that scripture declared the Christ had to have died in the time 
of Pilate (as we know they easily could: Element 7), then that is where 
myth would place him. Matching that math differently to the facts would 
produce a different period to place him in (as we saw the original authors 
of Daniel intended, and there were yet other ways the same calculations 
could be run). 
But the problem of 'where to put him' in history, which was just as eas­
ily answered for every other euhemerized demigod in antiquity (Element 
45), could also be solved by the obvious logic of placing him at the imag­
ined founding of the city or institution that worships him. That is why the 
mythical Romulus was placed in history 'at the founding of Rome'. Jesus, 
then, would most naturally fit into history 'at the founding of the Church'. 
From the letters of Paul we know that that was most likely the late 30s cE. 16 
Paul's new sect was certainly launched then; but so was the original Torah­
observant sect not long before, if that is indeed when the first 'revelations' 
of Jesus occurred (which is what I Cor. 15.3-8 claims; Peter, i.e., Cephas, 
being the first revelator, contemporary with Paul: 1 Cor. 1.12; 3.22; 9.5; 
Gal. 1.18; 2.9-14), and indeed those revelations might themselves have been 
inspired by calculations from Daniel, producing an exuberant expectation 
that something new would be revealed about this mysterious dying Christ 
'any time now'. In that scenario, the revelations came first; the euhemer­
izing myth later. 
Why another offshoot of the original Christian sect decided to place him 
instead a hundred years earlier we cannot so easily deduce, because we 
don't have their Gospels and Epistles, and thus we can't reconstruct their 
logic the way we can for the sect whose texts we do have. All we know is 
15. lrenaeus, Against All Heresies 2.22.5-6. 
16. See note in Chapter 7 (§3). 

288 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
that they did, indeed, place him a hundred years earlier. Epiphanius may 
be providing us a clue, however, since in his account their 'scriptural math' 
appears to have been based on the assumption that somehow scripture 
ordained that the messiah would come when the last king died who could 
claim descent from David (see Chapter 11, §9, for a likely scriptural basis). 
They had concluded that that was Alexander Jannaeus, therefore Jesus 
'had' to have appeared then (either actually, or allegorically for the pur­
poses of their exoteric myth). They might also have been deriving the date 
from Daniel (Element 7), employing a different scheme than Christians 
in the West did. Either would reflect a similar mindset to lrenaeus. And a 
similar disinterest in actual facts. 
Of course, if Jesus actually lived in the 30s, then that would also explain 
why our Gospels place him there. But it would not explain why another 
branch of Christianity, which stayed closer to its original teachings, placed 
him a hundred years before that. The hypothesis that Jesus didn't exist, 
however, can explain both facts, and with more ease. As a general rule, 
it must surely be more common for a mythical man to be placed in dif­
ferent historical periods than for this to happen to a historical man, for 
whom there would only be one core tradition originating from his own 
time, well known to his worshipers and tradents. I have no data on the rela­
tive frequency of this phenomenon (How many people do we know to have 
been set in different historical periods? How many of them never existed 
to begin with? What would those numbers then be in a hypothetical infi­
nite repetition of history?).ބ' But it must surely beg all credulity to believe 
that this happens to historical persons exactly as often as non-historical 
ones-even for the simple reason that it is so much easier to do this to non­
historical persons. As I noted before, if there is no actual set of historical 
events anchoring that person to reality, then they can easily be inserted 
into history wherever any given mythographer wants. This must surely be 
harder to do for a man already solidly linked to his actual historical context, 
and widely known to be so among all who worship him. 
In mathematical terms, this would mean the ratio must be greater than 2 
to l-in other words, being placed in different historical periods must hap­
pen to mythical persons twice as often as it happens to historical persons. 
In fact, more than twice, surely. But I am committed to erring as far against 
the mythicist hypothesis as is reasonably possible, so I will assume this 
ratio to be 2 to 1.18 That means the consequent probability of this fact (of 
17. On building hypothetical reference classes like this see Carrier. Proving 
History, pp. 257-65 (example on pp. 272-75). 
18. For example, if this happens to one in a mill ion historical persons. I 'm saying 
we'll find it happens to at least two in a million mythical persons, for consequent 
probabilities of O.OOOOOl and 0.000002, respectively (which gives an odds ratio of 2/1 

8. Extrabiblical Evidence 
289 
Jesus being placed in both the 30s cE and the 70s seE) on the hypothesis of 
myth is twice the consequent probability of this same fact on the hypothesis 
of historicity, and so we can treat the consequent probability on historicity 
as 0.5 and the consequent probability on myth as 1. In fact, to argue even 
more a fortiori, I'll allow (even against all reason) that there could be as 
much as an 80% probability that this would happen to a historical Jesus 
(which makes the odds 4 to 5), even though I think that's absurd. Either 
way, this fact is evidence against the historicity of Jesus. Not conclusive 
evidence. But it counts against, by at least as much as just stated. 
2. The Socrates Analogy 
To understand the rest of this chapter, it will help to grasp the analogy of 
Socrates. He is comparable to Jesus in being a famous sage whose influ­
ence was profound and everlasting (he is the father of what we now mean 
by Philosophy, in essentially the same way Jesus is of Christianity) with­
out having written anything himself, his influence being entirely through 
his 'disciples', who each developed communities that then fragmented and 
modified his teachings into many competing sects. 
And yet Socrates' existence is not in any doubt, nor plausibly doubt­
able. Why? Because very much unlike Jesus, we know the names of over 
a dozen eyewitnesses who wrote books about Socrates; in some cases we 
even know the titles of these books, and a number of paraphrases and quo­
tations from them survive in other sources. And in two of those cases, the 
books even survive: we have the many works of Plato and Xenophon, each 
in favor of myth). We can reduce those consequents to 1 and 0.5 by canceling out the 
coefficient of contingency (Carrier, Proving History, pp. 215-19, and 'coefficient of 
contingency', p. 334): if n - 0.000002, then P(elhistorical) = 0.5n and P(el..,historical) 
= ln; n then cancels out in any full BT equation, leaving P(elhistorical) = 0.5 and 
P(el..,historical) = 1. This does not mean the probability that e on h is literally 50% 
(as if every other historical person were placed in different periods of history), or that 
the probability that e on -.h is literally 100% (as if every mythical person were placed 
in different periods of history), rather this is simply their relative probabilities, after 
a mathematical reduction. No matter what the consequent probabilities actually are 
(i.e. no matter how many historical or mythical persons this actually happens to), they 
will always reduce to 0.5 and 1 ,  if it happens twice as often to mythical persons as 
historical. Therefore, if that ratio is a warranted belief, then we don't need to know the 
actual frequencies. Because whatever they are, they will always reduce to that same 
ratio. Another way to think of it is that being placed in different periods of history is the 
sort of thing we expect of a mythical person more than of a historical one (see Carrier, 
Proving History, pp. 77-81, 214-28), such that ifwe cancel out the common contingency 
between them, it is then 100% expected on ..,h but only 50% expected on h (or, as will 
soon be suggested, 100% and 80%, respectively, if arguing a fortiori). 

290 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
of whom was an eyewitness and disciple to Socrates, who each recorded his 
teachings and reported stories and other information about him. We have 
nothing at all like this for Jesus. Even more unlike Jesus, we also have an 
eyewitness account of Socrates from a relatively unfriendly source as well: 
The Clouds of Aristophanes is a comic play specifically written to poke fun 
at Socrates and his teachings and disciples, written by an eyewitness con­
temporary to both; Socrates even sat in the audience ofits first production! 19 
What we knew of Jesus would be vastly more credible and quantifiable if 
we had anything even remotely like this for him. Yet we have none of the 
above: we have no eyewitness records at all, much less from neutral or hosޅ 
tile parties; we don't even know of any written eyewitness accounts ever 
having existed (much less dozens upon dozens of them), and we certainly 
don't have anything like identifiable quotations from them or their titles 
and authors. 
So why do we have so much better a historical record of what Socrates 
said and did, than we have for Jesus? It is not as if the first century was 
'underrepresented' by writers interested in Judean affairs (see the next sec­
tion). The unusually high rate of survival of texts from classical Athens is 
a product of medieval selection, not of any discernible difference in vol­
ume of literature produced. And yet if Socrates had immediately become 
worshiped as the resurrected Son of God, and his every pronouncement 
the founding principles of a great Church, which went on centuries later 
to survive as the only institution with means and interest in preserving 
19. See Luis Navia, Socrates: A Lift Examined (Amherst, NY: Prometheus. 
2007), pp. 29-31. We have other contemporaries attesting his historical existence in 
Athens (e.g. Aristotle: Navia, Socrates, pp. 139-58) who knew and cite his personal 
acquaintances; and we know the names of at least sixteen pupils of Socrates who wrote 
books about him. Principal examples: Aeschines Socraticus. Ameipsias. Antisthenes. 
Aristippus of Cyrene. Cebes of Thebes [not the author, however. of the extant Socratic 
dialog forged in his name], Chaerephon, Crito, Euclides, Teleclides, Simmias, Simon 
the Cobbler [whose shoe shop we've even excavated], Polycrates and Phaedon-see 
entries for each in the Oxford Classical Dictionary (ed. Simon Hornblower and Antony 
Spawforth; Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1995). Historians also quickly took notice 
of Socrates and wrote about him (e.g. '[domeneus (2)', Oxford Classical Dictionary, 
p. 746, wrote On the Followers of Socrates about a century after Socrates' death). 
Even now the surviving attestations and quotations of Socrates and his witnesses 
fill four volumes: Gabriele Giannantoni, Socratis et socraticorum reliquiae (4 vols.; 
Naples: Bib I iopol is, 1990). See also Luis Navia and Ellen Katz, Socrates: An Annotated 
Bibliography (New York: Garland. 1988); Thomas Brickhouse and Nicholas Smith, 
The Trial and Execution of Socrates: Sources and Controversies (Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 2002); Debra Nails, The People of Plato: A Prosopography of Plato 
and Other Socratics (Indianapolis, IN: Hackett, 2002); and Sara Ahbel-Rappe and 
Rachana Kamtekar (eds.), A Companion to Socrates (Oxford: Blackwell, 2006). Jesus 
scholars could only dream of having this much information about Jesus. 

8. Extrabiblical Evidence 
291 
materials into the future, we would surely have nearly everything written 
about him-which would consist of many hundreds of volumes of material: 
, dialogues, discourses, biographies and memoirs from eyewitnesses, as well 
as numerous organizational documents such as wills and deeds and let­
ters among his disciples (which even the illiterate could produce, through 
recourse to hired scribes, who were ubiquitously avai I able specifically to 
serve such a market; in fact, even in the case of Jesus we can hardly assume 
no such scribes became disciples or followers soon enough after the mis­
sion began to put themselves precisely to such use). 
A viable theory of historicity for Jesus must therefore instead resemble a 
theory ofhistoricity for Apol1onius ofTyana or Musonius Rufus or Judas the 
Galilean (to list a few very famous men who escaped the expected record in 
more or less the same degree Jesus did). And yet unlike for them, that the­
ory cannot involve the claim that records of Jesus existed but weren't pre­
served out of disinterest, since such records were exactly the sorts of things 
the many first-century churches would preserve, and most such records 
would certainly still have existed to be preserved by the time of the assem­
bly of Origen's library (at the very least), and many would still be around, 
through continual copying, even in the fourth century or beyond, when the 
Church had increasingly vast resources at its command-situations that 
never obtained for Apollonius or Musonius or Judas (or even Socrates). So 
where are all these texts and documents for Jesus? 
There are really only two options available to the historicist that have 
any plausibility: (1) that Jesus was not at all famous but in fact so insig­
nificant and uninfluential that he inspired almost no following whatever 
and was completely unnoticed by any literate person of the age (until-and 
except-Paul, though even he didn't know Jesus, and showed next to no 
interest in his actual teachings and story: see Chapter I I); or (2) massive 
quantities of documents were deliberately destroyed or allowed to rot away 
unnoticed and unread (somehow no Christian of the second century hav­
ing any access to them or showing any interest in them). Neither is a par­
ticularly attractive hypothesis. A conspiracy to suppress vast quantities of 
information is perhaps least attractive of all; yet the alternative must be that 
Jesus was an uninfluential, unimpressive, unknown rabbi whom no one of 
any note noticed, and who made no significant impression on any literate 
person who ever saw or met him, and attracted no literate person into his 
circle of disciples or admirers-a person of such actual insignificance as 
not to resemble in the least the Jesus portrayed in the Gospels. An unsavory 
conclusion indeed. Yet, what else can we suppose? 
On the other hand, this vastly peculiar absence of documents is readily 
explicable if there was no historical Jesus about whom any such documents 
would be written, but instead only a small mystery cult targeting primar­
ily illiterate converts and aiming to keep the bulk of its teachings secret 

292 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
(and thus 'off the books' as it were), from whom later churches diverged so 
greatly in aims and ideology that they had no desire to preserve more than 
a minuscule selection of the original documents (a mere handful of letters) 
from the movement's earliest missions, then forged a great many more to 
suit their needs instead (Elements II to 14, and 44). 
Or we could resort in either case to noting again the great disruption 
in the church's transmission of authority and information in the middle of 
the first century (Element 22), and posit a third option for the historicist: 
(3) that this great disruption resulted in the loss of nearly all the documents 
there may have been. But that requires granting that so awesome a destruc­
tion and loss of records really did occur, and was really that incredibly 
pervasive, even spanning three continents and dozens of cities. Which I 
suspect scholars will find even more unsavory than options (I) and (2). All 
of these options-whether (1), (2), or (3), or the denial of historicity-have 
consequences that must be accepted and not ignored. You have to pick one; 
because if you don't like the consequences of it, you can only avoid them by 
picking another. And that is going to pin you down, hemmed in on all sides 
by undesirable consequences. 
The most desperate and implausible move is (4) to explain the absence 
of such writing among the disciples and apostles of Jesus as an apocalyptic 
disinterest in creating a written record (on which I'll have more to say in 
Chapter 1 1). Because if we grant such a disinterest, then we cannot explain 
the letters of Paul (which not only in their very existence refute such dis­
interest, but whose contents betray on every page the continuing need for 
writing things down and transmitting and preserving them in physical 
rather than oral form), which likewise leaves us unable to plausibly explain 
why only Paul wrote letters. No other missionary for the whole first three 
decades of the cult's spread ever wrote any letter to anywhere or anyone? 
What about the letters we know that churches wrote to Paul? (1 Cor. 7.1) 
We would then also have to dispense with the idea that there was any 
effort to preserve the story of Jesus orally, either. For any interest in the 
latter would entail an interest in the former. If preserving his sayings and 
narratives accurately was at all valued by anyone, they would have been 
recorded in writing early and often, so that missionaries would have aids 
to memory (and church leaders a means to control doctrine, a key need 
evinced throughout the letters of Paul: Element 21) as well as a means of 
leaving communities and congregations with accurate information to rely 
upon and meditate on after their departure (since, as Paul's letters attest, the 
apostles were not always present among every active congregation, yet dis­
putes and questions constantly arose). These needs would be just as press­
ing in the face of a looming apocalypse-as again, Paul's letters attest (as 
well as simple common sense). In other words, historicists cannot claim the 
Christians strove to accurately preserve information, while simultaneously 

8. Extrabib/ical Evidence 
293 
claiming that they saw no need to accurately preserve information. It can 
only be one or the other. 
Thus, there are only a few possibilities with any respectable chance of 
being true. Either all the evidence of the first decades of Christianity was 
actively (and very successfully) suppressed, or it was uncontrollably (and 
very thoroughly) lost despite every desire to preserve it, or Christianity was 
so small, insignificant and pervasively illiterate that such evidence never 
existed (and Paul was a lone educated freak in a sea of illiterate country 
hicks spinning yarns far and wide). You may choose the one you prefer. 
But you must then accept the actual consequences of that being true. First 
among them is the fact that we simply cannot claim to know the story and 
teachings of Jesus even the minutest fraction as reliably or well as we do 
those of Socrates-and yet even for Socrates every expert concurs that 
we do not know his story and teachings with superlative reliability. Plato's 
dialogues, for example, are universally regarded as predominately a fiction 
promoting the views of Plato rather than Socrates; indeed Plato himself 
entitles those dialogues a Peirastikos, 'Fiction'. If such is the state of our 
knowledge of Socrates, our knowledge of Jesus must be regarded a thou­
sand times less. 
3. Missing Evidence 
The obvious, and usually cited, writers on first-century Judean affairs 
are Nicolaus of Damascus (d. c. 10 CE), official court historian of Herod 
the Great (although of course all he could have attested to are any famous 
events relating to the birth of Jesus, which pretty much everyone already 
agrees aren't historical) and Justus of Tiberias, King Agrippa's personal 
secretary (the same Agrippa of Acts 25-26, before whom we're told Paul 
goes on trial and procures an appeal to Nero in Rome), and commander of 
armies in the Jewish War of 66-70, who then wrote a history of that war, 
including the century of Judean affairs leading up to it. He was a primary 
source for Josephus's own account of that war (and thus is the most likely 
source for his accounts of messiahs in this period: Element 4), yet we know 
from a later Christian reader that he never mentioned Jesus or Christianity. 20 
We do not have the works of Nicolaus or Justus, but we have the works of 
Josephus, who used them as sources, and we can safely conclude that if 
either author had mentioned anything about Christ, Christians or Christi­
anity, later Christian authors would have preserved at least mention of it, if 
at the very least to rebut it or make note of their attestation to Jesus or early 
Christians or Christianity. And these would not have been the only writers 
20. Photius, Library 33. On Justus see Josephus, Life 9, 12, 17, 35, 37, 54, 65, 70, 
74, etc. 

294 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
covering Judean affairs at the time. They are just the ones we happen to 
have mention of, because Josephus employed them. 
There were numerous other writers we know about from that same cen­
tury who could plausibly have mentioned Christianity and its claims-and 
such texts or mentions, we would normally expect, would surely have 
been preserved by later Christians, even if only to rebut or correct them.21 
Philo is the most obvious example, a prolific Jewish author who wrote in 
Alexandria, Egypt, at the very time Christianity was taking root there. My 
bookshelf copy of his complete works in English extends to nine hundred 
pages of multi-columned small type, which isn't even complete (many of 
his works were not preserved), and though what we have is most1y the­
ology and exegesis, he commented a lot on Jewish sects and Jerusalem 
and Judean interests. Philo made pilgrimages to Jerusalem and knew about 
Palestinian affairs and wrote about the Herods and Pontius Pilate.22 And 
Christians must have begun evangelizing the Jewish community in Alex­
andria almost immediately: it was the single largest population center, with 
a large and diverse Jewish community, almost directly adjacent to Judea, 
along a well-established trade route well traveled by Jewish pilgrims. So 
it's not as ifPhilo would not have heard of their claims even if he had never 
left Egypt; and yet we know he did, having traveled to Judea and Rome. 
Moreover, Philo just happens to be the one Jew of the period whose work 
Christians bothered to preserve. He would not have been alone. 
There was also all manner of other first-century Jewish literature and 
apocrypha-most not preserved, or not discussing the first century, but 
there surely had to have been Jewish writing about Christians or early 
Judea, even if we no longer know of it. It cannot be claimed Jews were 
uninterested in writing about their own places and times. And it's outright 
contradictory to suppose Jews showed such sustained, even international 
interest in suppressing Christianity from its very beginning (if we trust 
Acts at all on this point), and were its first principal targets for evangeliza­
tion in Judea and all across the diaspora (as again Acts claims, depicting 
Christians preaching in its synagogues everywhere), yet never saw occa­
sion to ever once write anything about it (contrary to what we're told in 
Acts 9.1-2, where Paul is said to have had, and to have sent. letters from 
the Jewish elite explaining why Christians were outlaws). And yet, we have 
not one surviving citation. We must conclude Christians actively avoided 
preserving any of it, not even rebuttals of it, not even so much as a mention 
of it. 
21. The following survey relies on the corresponding entries for each author in the 
Oxford Classical Dictionary (ed. Hornblower and Spawforth; 3rd edn). 
22. See, e.g., Philo, Embassy to Galus and Against Flaccus, and On Providence 
2.64 (Eusebius, Preparation/or the Gospel 8.14.64). 

8. Extrabiblical Evidence 
295 
We know of countless pagan writers who might have written some­
thing on all this, too. Marcus Ve11eius Paterculus sketched a history of the 
Romans from their mythic past up to the year 29 (of which parts survive) 
and King Juba of Mauretania did the same up to around the year 20 (none 
of which survives), although these weren't as likely to mention anything 
pertinent as Marcus Servilius Nonianus (2 BCE to 59 CE), who we know 
wrote a dedicated history of the first century up to at least the year 41. We 
also know Pamphila ofEpidaurus wrote thirty-three volumes of Historical 
Notes up to her own time (c. 60 CE). We know Aufidius Bassus (d. c. 60 
cE), then a much-admired writer, wrote a history up to at least the year 31; 
and Pliny the Elder (d. 79 CE) had written a monumental thirty-one-volume 
history continuing where Bassus left off, hence from around the year 31 to 
at least beyond Nero's reign (so, roughly an entire volume for each year), 
which could hardly have omitted mention of Christians (such as their sup· 
posedly rather public persecution under Nero in 64; see Element 22) unless 
they were truly insignificant (and thus not even prominently known as the 
victims of Nero in 64); which in turn means he would surely have made 
note of Christian beliefs, or any 'famous' or 'amazing' claims surrounding 
Jesus (if there realty were any). And yet we can be fairly certain Pliny did 
not mention Christians at all (see §10). 
We also know that Cluvius Rufus, ex-consul and Nero's personal herald 
in the mid-first century, having served in the Senate since the 30s, wrote 
a detailed history of events during the reign of Nero, beginning with the 
reign of Caligula in the year 37, and continuing past Nero up to the reign 
of Otho in the year 69. This surely would have discussed Nero's persecu­
tion of Christians in 64, which would have required a digression on Jesus 
and Christianity, which in turn would likely touch on the relevant details 
of the appellate case of Paul before Nero in 62 (if that even happened) and 
what was claimed in that case, and how it degenerated into the execution of 
scores if not hundreds of Christians just a couple years later for the crime 
of burning the city of Rome, surely the single most famous event of that or 
any adjacent year (see my following discussion of the Testimonium Taci­
teum, §9). 
There were also the memoirs of Julia Agrippina (Nero's mother, Calig­
ula's sister, and Claudius's wife), which Tacitus employed as a source. She 
was assassinated by Nero in 59, too early to report on events of 64, but her 
work must have covered events up to at least 54 (Nero's accession). She was 
born in 15, and her close position to Caligula and Claudius makes it reason­
able to expect she might have mentioned Christianity if it were at all sig­
nificant (e.g. if the Chrestus event under Claudius really did have anything 
to do with Christ: see §1 1). We know Petronius wrote in 66 cE (just before 
his own death) a treatise against Neroކs entire reign, which could not have 
failed to ignore the fire and persecution of 64 and any necessary digressions 

296 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
on the Christian story that that would have required. We know Fabius Rus­
ticus wrote a history during Nero's reign that covered events up to his own 
time, which may have gotten as far as his death or at least the persecution, 
and at any rate covered events under Augustus and Tiberius (and Claudius) 
and thus would very likely have noticed Christianity ifit was notable at all. 
If any of these authors I've surveyed up to this point had mentioned any 
of these things, it's hard to believe that no Christian would ever know of 
it, neither quoting nor citing it, not even to rebut anything it may have said 
that was unfavorable to them; and equally hard to believe that no pagan 
critic of Christianity ever noticed it either, nor made any use of it, not even 
to answer it or attack it if it was at all favorable to Christians, or to use it 
against them if it wasn't. To the contrary, we should expect Christians or 
their critics to have made notice of anything these authors said about Christ 
or Christianity, whether to use it or to rebut it. So did none of these authors 
even notice Christianity at all? Or was everyone in antiquity, Christians 
and their critics alike, wholly disinterested in what they said about it? It has 
to be one or the other. Take your pick. 
We know emperors Vespasian and Titus published commentaries on 
their government service, including their prosecution of the Jewish War 
(these being among the sources, again, that Josephus used). So if Chris­
tians ever significantly came up in their invasion and conquest of Judea, 
or in their government of Rome, they would have mentioned it, too. We 
know Seneca the Elder wrote a History of Rome that covered events from 
the first century BCE to around 40 CE. Then Seneca the Younger wrote a 
treatise On Superstition sometime between 40 and 62 CE that lambasted 
every known cult at Rome, even the most trivial or obscure-including 
the Jews-but never mentioned Christians, an omission Augustine later 
struggled to explain.23 And that despite the fact that this Seneca was the 
brother of the same Gallio whom Christians are brought on trial before in 
Greece according to Acts 18.12-17 (he was the governor of that province in 
the early 50s). (Likewise, the Jewish historian Josephus was the personal 
friend of the same Agrippa before whom Christians went on trial according 
to Acts 25-26.) 
Works in later centuries are relevant as well, for they could have cited 
or quoted sources from the first century (but as we know, none did-or at 
least none that we have do). We know that just after the dawn of the sec­
ond century, for example, Pliny the Younger's friend Pompeius Saturninus 
23. Augustine, City o[God 6.10-1 1 (Seneca 'also found fault' with the Jews but 'the 
Christians, however . . .  he did not dare to mention, either for praise or blame, lest, if he 
praised them, he should do so against the ancient custom of his country, or, perhaps, if 
he should blame them, he should do so against his own will', each a rather lame excuse 
for his silence). 

8. Extrabiblical Evidence 
297 
wrote histories that Pliny highly regarded, which likely covered the first 
century. And in the middle of the second century was Au Ius Claudius Cha­
rax, author of a universal history, still known and read into Byzantine times 
(but no longer extant). Since he had an infamous penchant for digressions 
on the fabulous, we should expect him to have mentioned Jesus or Chris­
tianity (and thus, perhaps, quoting or referencing earlier sources on them), 
but if he did, no Christian ever noticed, not even in the whole of the Byzan­
tine era when his works were widely read by Christians for centuries. And 
we know in the third century Marius Maxim us wrote biographies of all the 
emperors in the second century, in which he notoriously included extensive 
quotations of official documents; so in a century that saw several imperial 
engagements with Christianity, it is astonishing he never had occasion to 
mention or digress on the origins or treatment of Christianity. 
Also in the third century we know Publius Herrennius Dexippus wrote a 
history of the world from mythical times to his own day, and Gaius Asinius 
Quadratus wrote a history of Rome from its founding in the eighth century 
BCE also up to the third century CE (he also wrote a History ofParthia, which 
could have covered notable events in Edessa or Damascus). The only thing 
comparable that survives is the sweeping History of Rome by Dio Cassius, 
who likewise covered the history of the whole Roman Empire from the 
city's founding to his own time (the early third century CE). His material 
for the years Jesus lived includes discussion of Judean affairs, but no Jesus 
or Christians or Christianity. Granted, those sections are sometimes either 
abridged or fragmentary, but a complete abridgment was made by Chris­
tians (who thus would have preserved, even if to alter or correct, any nota­
ble information about Jesus or Christianity),24 and his history meticulously 
proceeds year by year. So its silence is certainly significant (even more so 
considering what Christians may have deleted from it: see below). 
Of perhaps lesser significance but still illustrative of the kind of litera­
ture being produced in the first century (of which we now have only a 
small fraction) is Valerius Maxim us, whose Memorable Deeds and Sayings 
(which we have), written around the year 32, compiles records of memo­
rable deeds and sayings, usually of Romans, sometimes of foreigners, to 
show how Romans were more impressive. Anything amazing about Jesus 
being popularized at the time could have been entered as a memorable deed 
or saying, even if he tried to one-up it with a Roman story. It's unlikely 
he would have known of any, but how many other authors in the first and 
24. For example, in his epitome, Xiphilinus pauses to complain about the fact that 
Dio doesn't mention Christians being responsible for the 'rain miracle' of Marcus 
Aurelius and rectifies this oversight by inserting the Christian version of the legend as 
known to Xiphilinus, then resuming his abridgment: see Dio Cassius, Roman History 
71.9 (see note on dating Clement of Rome in Chapter 7, §6). 

298 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
second century were compiling similar collections of amazing stories? 
We know Phlegon did, in the mid-second century, and he even mentions 
Jesus (or so we're told) although his information was apparently vague 
and confused. 25 But there were a lot of collections of amazing stories then, 
including a whole genre of literature called paradoxography. The several 
we know about date all the way from the third century BCE (e.g. Callima­
chus, Philostephanus, Antigonus of Caristus, Archelaus of Egypt, Myrsilus 
of Methyma) to the second and third centuries cE (e.g. Phlegon, Isigonus, 
Aelian}, including many early forged collections (e.g. from Aristotle, Theo­
pompus, Ephorus), all of which would have been only a small fraction of 
those written, including many satires of the same genre (e.g. by Lucian).26 
Tales of Jesus evidently didn't find their way into any first-century produc­
tions of this genre. Nor did they appear in any of the .florilegia of the first 
two centuries, collections of random commentaries and stories about life, 
religion and philosophy in the empire, extant examples of which include 
(from the late first and early second century) the Moralia of Plutarch, and 
(from the second century) the Attic Nights of Aulus Gellius and the Florida 
of Apuleius, and (from the early third century) the Dinnersages of Ath­
enaeus. Again, these would have been but a fraction of the genre. 
Nor does any mention survive from any first-century collection of let­
ters. For example, we have all of Seneca's Moral Epistles, written in the 
early 60s, and his collection wouldn't have been the only one made. This 
represents what was in fact a commonplace literary publishing activity; it 
just happens to be the only one from the first century that medieval Chris­
tians chose to preserve Gust as Cicero's many volumes of letters is the only 
collection preserved from the previous century, yet was certainly not the 
only one published from that period either). Nor is there any mention in any 
of what would have been countless volumes of published speeches from the 
era. For example, we have the collected speeches of Maxim us of Tyre (the 
same Tyre Jesus supposedly visited: Mk 3.8; 7.24-31) from the m id-sec­
ond century, but he was certainly not the only literate orator in Tyre even 
then, much less for all preceding centuries; it's just that his happens to be 
the only collection from Tyre that medieval Christians chose to preserve. 
There would have been many published orators there in the first century. 
Likewise in every major metropolis-for Tyre was not the only city with a 
25. Origen, Against Celsus 2.14 (Phlegon did not connect Jesus with an eclipse 
and earthquake, however: Origen, Against Celsus 2.33 and 2.59; see my discussion 
ofThallus in §II; nor did he relate a resurrection appearance: Origen, Against Celsus 
2.59, continues with a quotation from Celsus, not Phlegon, citing Phlegon only for the 
eclipse and earthquake). 
26. See •paradoxographers' in the Oxford Classical Dictionary (ed. Hornblower 
and Spawforth), p. 1 1 12 (as welJ as entries for each author named). 

&. 
8. Extrabiblical Evidence 
299 
literary elite publishing books on diverse topics every year. The quantity of 
literature produced in antiquity was vast, far beyond the minuscule fraction 
that we now have. And speeches on popular topics were among the genres 
frequently published, as well as histories and paradoxographies and episto­
laries and florilegia (not to forget also poetry, encyclopedias, medical and 
technical literature, and so on). 
Satire was also a huge and popular genre at the time. Lucian, for exam­
ple, mocked or satirized several religions (including Christianity), and 
though he wrote in the late second century, there would have been many 
satirists like him in the preceding century, even earlier than Juvenal, who 
in the early second century satirized numerous religious and philosophical 
targets, but never found cause to mention Christians (unless he did so in a 
section now deleted: see below). In the first century we have the fragmen­
tary remains of the Satyricon of Petroni us, which mocks several religions 
in its narrative, even poking fun at crucifixion, but never finds occasion to 
mention Christ, Christians or Christianity. In fact none of the early pagan 
religious novels mentions Christians, despite involving adventures across 
the whole empire with frequent encounters with religious cultsY But sat­
ires were even more common. Aulus Persius Flaccus was a Roman satirist 
under Nero, from whom nothing survives, but it's possible he would have 
found opportunities for satire of, if not Christians, then Nero's treatment of 
them. Lucillius also wrote satirical poems under Nero, including lampoons 
of religious practices, and once on how Nero burned a robber alive in an 
amphitheater, so again he might have had opportunity to lampoon Chris­
tians or Nero's treatment of them. Turnus was likewise a late-first-century 
satirist who could have lampooned Christians if ever he noticed any. And 
again, these are just among the authors we know about. 
For any single one of these authors I've named in this whole survey, there 
is surely some probability that they just happened not to mention either 
Christ, Christians or Christianity (though in some cases, as I've noted, that 
probability might be low). But the probability that none of them would is 
quite low. For example, if the probability of any one of them mentioning 
Christ, Christians or Christianity is a mere 1 in 20, then the probabi1ity that 
27. See Bryan Reardon (ed.), Collected Ancient Greek Novels (Berkeley, CA: 
University of California Press, 1989); and Susan Stephens and John Winkler, Ancient 
Greek Novels: The Fragments (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1995); 
with Niklas Holzberg, The Ancient Novel: An Introduction (New York: Routledge, 
1995); Gareth Schmeling, The Novel in the Ancient World (Leiden: BrilJ, 1996); and 
Tim Whitmarsh (ed.), The Cambridge Companion to the Greek and Roman Novel 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2008). 

300 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
none of them would do so is less than 1 in 3.28 Yet these are only the authors 
we know about. In fact, not even that: these are only the authors who just 
happen to have received entries in the Oxford Classical Dictionary, which 
certainly does not catalogue more than a small fraction of all the authors we 
have surviving evidence of. And the number of actual authors and books 
written in that period is at least an order of magnitude (if not many orders 
of magnitude) greater than the number we have any surviving reference 
to, and the latter will already be several times the number of authors I just 
enumerated. So the probability that none of what must have been at least 
two hundred relevant first-century writers would mention anything, if each 
had only a I in 20 chance of doing so, is nearly 30,000 to 1 against. 29 Pretty 
long odds. 
Of course, it could be claimed that there were indeed many such men­
tions but none were preserved. And that may even be true (in the case of 
Jewish and Neronian literature, it almost has to be true). It's certainly true 
for countless other people, fads and events in the Roman Empire. But none 
of those people, fads or events had a massive Church devoted to preserving 
records of its resurrected God, which then became almost solely responsi­
ble for preserving all literature whatever. This is why we have a hundred 
times more faith literature from Christians about Christianity (even just 
from the first to fourth centuries) than we do from any other faith group 
of the period. Only Judaism comes anywhere near a (very) distant second. 
and that only because Christians also avidly preserved a lot of Judaica. and 
because apart from Christianity, Judaism is the only religious community 
28. P(no mention in any) = 0.9520 (for twenty authors) and 0.9530 (for thirty authors) 
= 0.358 and 0.215 = 36% and 22%, respectively. 
29. P(no mention in any) = 0.95200 (for two hundred authors) = 0.000035  I in 
28,500. Two hundred is only my estimated count of first-century authors writing 
books that have a relevant possibility of mentioning Christ, Christians or Christianity 
(i.e. with an odds of a mention equal to I in 20), based on the list I just enumerated 
and how much of an undercount it must be of comparable works written in the same 
period. By contrast, the actual number of authors in the first century would have been 
in the thousands. For example, if in the Roman Empire there were a hundred major 
cities with a literary elite (and there were at least that many, as will be evidenced 
throughout Richard Carrier, Science Education in the Early Roman Empire [in review]: 
the number of cities in which Christians had established congregations by the year 100 
has likewise been estimated at seventy, which was by no means all the major cities 
in the empire; cf. Carrier, Not the Impossible Faith, pp. 420-25) and only ten authors 
published in each city every ten years (an enormous undercount, being only one book 
each year per city), then for any given century there would be 10,000 published authors 
in that century, producing an average of some 100,000 titles. And again. even that may 
be an enormous undercount. It's often not appreciated how much literature we have lost 
from the ancient world. 

8. Extrabib/ical Evidence 
301 
to continuously survive from the Roman Empire to the present. 30 Many 
Christian scholars such as Origen and Eusebius were particularly keen 
on referencing or quoting authors who attested to Jesus or Christianity, 
or rebutting unsavory things said about either. Mentions of Jesus in first­
century pagan or Jewish literature would therefore have had the highest 
probability of preservation of anything written in the whole of antiquity­
either outright (as, e.g., some have suggested that the works of Tacitus and 
Josephus were preserved by medieval Christians simply because they con­
tained references to Jesus) or in quotation, paraphrase or rebuttal. Even 
then, of course, not everything would be certain to survive; maybe even a 
lot of it would still have been lost. But it seems very unusual that absolutely 
nothing survived. 
A clue to this strange silence lies in the treatment of the few critical 
writings about Christians we do know about: every single one of them was 
destroyed. The only reason we know anything about them is that in each 
case Christian authors either refer to them or wrote a rebuttal (and later 
Christians liked those rebuttals so well that they kept them). But these cri­
tiques cannot possibly have been the only ones written, and are unlikely 
to have been the earliest ones written. And in any event, they were not 
preserved; they were replaced instead with Christian propaganda. These 
known cases include an extensive treatise by the Epicurean philosopher 
Celsus (a friend ofLucian's) in the mid-second century (his attack on Chris­
tianity was jokingly entitled The True Logos), inspiring Origen's extensive 
rebuttal.31 Around the same time, Fronto, the teacher, friend and corre­
spondent of Emperor Marcus Aurelius, wrote something like a 'Discourse 
against the Christians' (we're unsure of its exact title), which inspired the 
Christian Minucius Felix to write the propagandistic Octavius in response. 
A century later Hierocles wrote The Lover of Truth, summarizing several 
critical treatises on Christianity up to his time, including a chapter compar­
ing Jesus to Apollonius of Tyana using the then-recent publication of the 
Life of Apollonius by Philostratus. Notably this one chapter is the only part 
that Eusebius bothers to attack in his Treatise against Hierocles (which 
in turn is pretty much the only reason we know Hierocles' book existed). 
Eusebius even says he ignored the rest of Hierocles' book as being deriva-
30. Even papyrological finds are hugely skewed by this fact, as papyri pertaining 
to Christianity or Judaism are worth a great deal more on the black market and thus 
are far more likely to surface or gain any attention. Just contrast the money, time 
and resources that have been devoted to the Nag Hammadi and Qumran caches, of 
Christian and Jewish texts respectively, with that devoted to recovering the pagan 
library at Herculaneum, which after two hundred years still remains almost entirely 
unexcavated. 
31. On this Celsus see Carrier, Not the Impossible Faith, p. 120 n. 7. 

302 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
tive of 'previous' Christian critics. Whom, of course, excepting Celsus and 
Fronto, we know next to nothing about. 
Later in the third century the Neoplatonist Porphyry wrote his own fif­
teen-volume treatise Against the Christians, which again does not survive, 
except for diverse scattered quotations in later Christian authors. A century 
after that Emperor Julian (the last pagan emperor, himselftaking the throne 
only after a long line of Christian emperors) wrote Against the Galileans, 
his own critique of the religion that had transformed the empire he inher­
ited. Once again, this does not survive; aiJ we have are portions of Cyril of 
Alexandria's treatise Against Julian. Eunapius then wrote in the year 414 a 
History against the Christians (perhaps not literally named that, but it was 
regarded as such by later Christians), an extensive critique of Christian 
'versions' of historical events from 270 to 404 CE. This, too, does not sur­
vive; his otherwise inoffensive Lives of the Sophists was preserved instead. 
The only reason we know of his anti-Christian work is that before it faded 
into oblivion, many later historians, including Christians, employed it as a 
source. 
Again, these are just the ones we know about. Which would be a fraction 
of what there was. AIJ of it was tossed out or destroyed. Instead, we get to 
read only what medieval Christians wanted us to read. Another example of 
this phenomenon is that of the 'mysterious lacuna'. Several texts that were 
preserved have sections removed. Sections whose disappearance seems 
convenient for Christians. Now, a lot of ancient literature, indeed arguably 
most, has missing material. This is typically a result of carelessness and 
accident, multiplied by time. But in some cases the precision and location 
of what was lost is a bit more peculiar than chance accident would suggest. 
For example, the Christian scholar Hippolytus in the early third century 
wrote his Refutation of All Heresies in ten volumes. At the end of the first 
of them he says he will next explain the secret doctrines of the several 
mystery religions (which would have included the Passion Narratives of 
the different savior gods, including miraculous births, deaths and resurrec­
tions, and their sacred meals and baptisms: see Elements 1 1-14 and 31) and 
what they teach about the things in outer space (which would have included 
such material as in Elements 34-38), and then he would describe the teach­
ings of the astrologers. But the second and third volumes are missing. The 
text skips directly to volume 4, which begins his discourse on astrology. 
This does not look like an accident. Some Christian or Christians decided 
to destroy those two volumes-for some reason fearing their contents. The 
resulting loss in our knowledge of the mystery religions is beyond consid­
erable. 
Another strange loss concerns the annual festival of Romulus in which 
his death and resurrection were reenacted in public passion plays (see 
Chapter 4, §I). That festival was held on the 7th of July. At the beginning of 

8. Extrabiblical Evidence 
303 
the first century Ovid wrote an elaborate poem, the Fasti, describing all the 
festivals throughout the year at Rome and what went on in them and why. 
This only survives in its first half, covering January to June, the remain­
ing months are lost. It seems strange that the text cuts off precisely before 
the month in which a passion play is described that was the most similar 
to that of Jesus Christ. The fact that we have other descriptions of this fes­
tival (albeit none as complete as Ovid's would have been) does mean there 
was no organized conspiracy to doctor the record (except when it came to 
controlling faith literature, for which we have clear evidence of Christians 
actively eliminating disapproved Gospels, for example), but this along with 
all the other cases (above and below) indicates a common trend among indi­
vidual Christians to act as gatekeepers of information, suppressing what 
they didn't like. Which collectively destroyed a lot of information. 
Another example along similar lines is a mysterious gap in the text of 
Plutarch's Moralia, a huge multivolume 1ibrary of treatises on diverse sub­
jects. In one of these, the Tabletalk, Plutarch is discussing the equivalence 
of Yahweh and Dionysus, and linking Jewish theology to the mystery reli­
gions, when suddenly the text is cut off. We have no idea how much is 
missing, although the surviving table of contents shows there were several 
sections remaining on other subjects besides this one. If an accident, this 
seems like a very convenient one. 
A similar mysterious gap is found in the Annals of Tacitus. The text of 
the Annals survives in only two manuscript traditions, one containing the 
first half, the other the second half, with a section in between missing­
and thus its loss is explicable. But there is another gap in the text that is 
harder to explain: two whole years from the middle of29 CE to the middle 
of 31. That the cut is so precise and covers precisely those two years is too 
improbable to posit as a chance coincidence. The year 30 was regarded 
by many early Christians as the year of Christ's ministry and crucifixion 
(see Element 7). Robert Drews analyzed all the gaps in the Annals and 
concluded that this one has no more plausible explanation than that Chris­
tians excised those two years out of embarrassment at its omission of any 
mention of Jesus or associated events (like the world darkness reported in 
the Synoptic Gospels).32 Tacitus digresses on Christianity in his coverage 
of the year 64, in such a way that guarantees he made no mention of it 
earlier {if the passage there is authentic: see §10)-although Tacitus surely 
must have discussed other events under Pontius Pilate. So we can be certain 
Christians weren't trying to hide anything embarrassing said about Jesus. 
But the embarrassment of saying nothing was evidently enough to motivate 
their targeted destruction of the corresponding text. 
32. Robert Drews, 'The Lacuna in Tacitus' Annales Book Five in the Light of 
Christian Traditions', American Journal of Ancient History 9 (1984), pp. 112-22. 

304 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
A similar mysterious gap exists in the Roman History of Cassius Dio: 
all the years from 6 to 2 BCE are gone. There is evidence from remarks else­
where that Dio discussed Herod's death in this period. 33 A Christian would 
have expected Dio to discuss the slaughter of the innocents and the miracu­
lous star and other amazing events surrounding the birth of Jesus, and Dio's 
silence on all of these might have been just as embarrassing as the silence 
of Tacitus. That this loss might be no accident is suggested by the fact that 
it is quite thorough-even subsequent epitomes exclude it-combined with 
the coincidence of date: the gap beginning exactly two years before Herod's 
death, in accordance with Mt. 2.16, and ending two years after it for good 
measure (there being at the time some uncertainty among Christians as 
to when exactly Herod died). What about Dio's treatment of the year 30? 
Yes, something is mysteriously missing around there, too. In the middle of 
volume 58, covering the years 29 to 37 CE, we have a reference to an event 
(in 58.17.2) that was evidently described in a section that had to have been 
deleted somewhere between 57.17.8 (the year 15) and 58.7.2 (the year 30). 
Might it have been a section also mentioning Judean affairs, whose silence 
was again considered too embarrassing to retain? 
Another strange Joss are certain volumes of Philo of Alexandria. Despite 
Christians having saved vast quantities of the writings of Philo, the ones 
that would most have occasion to mention Jesus or Judean affairs under 
Pontius Pilate are missing or mangled. According to Eusebius, Philo wrote 
five books about his embassy to Caligula (after the year 36) and the events 
precipitating it, only two of which survive.34 What happened to the other 
three? We know they covered three other subjects, each a major persecution 
of Jews under Tiberius: one volume on Pilate (in Judea), another on Sejanus 
(at Rome), the ones we have (on Flaccus in Egypt; then one on Caligula), 
and a final volume showing what happened to Caligula after all this.JS All 
of these may have embarrassingly omitted mention of any Christians at 
Rome (such as was claimed in the apocryphal but popular Acts of Pilate) 
33. Peter Michael Swan, The Augustan Succession: An Historical Commentary on 
Cassius Dio's Roman History Books 55-56 (9 B.C.-A.D. 14) (Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 2004), pp. 36-38, 188. 
34. These being the books now separately titled Against Flaccus and Embassy to 
Gaius (Eusebius, History ofthe Church 2.5.1). 
35. Philo, Against Flaccus 1, assumes that the preceding volume discussed Sejanus's 
persecution of the Jews in Rome; Philo, Embassy to Gaius 8, assumes that the troubles 
under Tiberius had all just been covered (so that now, the troubles under his successor 
Caligula would be), and Embassy to Gaius 373 says the next volume would be an 
account of Caligula's repentance and death. Eusebius, History of the Church 2.5.7, 
then says another treated Pilate (which would have been under Tiberius). Thus, the five 
volumes were either (1) Pilate, (2) Sejanus, (3) Flaccus, (4) Caligula, (5) Conclusion; or 
(1) Sejanus, (2) Flaccus, (3) Pilate, (4) Caligula, (5) Conclusion. 

8. Extrabib/ical Evidence 
305 
or in Jerusalem or Alexandria. But the most important volume would have 
been the one on Pilate's persecution of the Jews in Judea. Christians would 
surely expect that volume to mention Pilate's execution of Jesus in some 
respect; but as it probably did not, again its silence would have been as 
embarrassing as all the others surveyed so far.36 
It's also curious that treatises against popular religion were not pre­
served, even though they would have been invaluable to Christian opposi­
tion to paganism and heresy. We have the rather brief On Superstition by 
Plutarch, but not the detailed On Superstition by Seneca (mentioned earlier) 
or that of Porphyry. There is also a strange lacuna in Juvenal's rant against 
superstition in his Satires 6.5 1 1, where scholars can't make sense of the 
sentence and the subject-transition here, and conclude there is an extended 
deletion, right where he passes onto the subject of attacking popular reli­
gions. The surviving text jumps into the middle of a discussion of the cults 
of Cybele and Isis and eventually the Jews. What material was deleted? 
Why? Once again our desire to know more about the religious context of 
Christianity appears thwarted by an editor with something to hide. 
We can add to these the complete 'excision' of the history of first-century 
Judea by Justus ofTiberias and the interpolation that 'corrected' the silencއ 
of Josephus (the Testimonium Flavianum: §9), as well as all the losses we 
don't know about but which must have occurred (as surveyed previously). 
That leaves us with a string of evidence of historicizing Christians seek­
ing to alter the record to hide the embarrassing absence of Jesus in secular 
history. Any one of these examples might just be a coincidence. But all of 
them? That seems unlikely. Again, this doesn't demonstrate any organ­
ized conspiracy, but there seems to have been a zeitgeist motivating many 
Christian scholars and scribes, independently of one another, to remove 
embarrassingly silent sections of secular histories, or to remove embarrass­
ingly silent histories altogether (by simply not preserving them). 
There are many other mysterious gaps in ancient literature, which I 
won't bother listing as they are not as ominous, but there is no telling what 
was in them, or conspicuously not in them, that may have motivated Chris­
tians to remove them, or that would have changed our conclusions about 
the origin and nature of early Christianity and its religious environment if 
we still had them.37 
36. See Gregory Sterling, 'Philo of Alexandria', in The Historical Jesus in Context 
(ed. Amy-Jill Levine, Dale Allison, Jr, and John Dominic Crossan; Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press, 2006), pp. 296-308 {298). 
37. On this more general problem (which is caused even by the extent of accidental 
losses), see Carrier, 'Spiritual Body', in Empty Tomb (ed. Price and Lowder), pp. 180-
82. 

306 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
4. Missing Christian Evidence 
However you choose to deal with the peculiar silence of secular, pagan and 
Jewish literature throughout the first and most of the second century (I sur­
veyed your options in §2), we at least have the few things that Christians 
did choose to preserve. And that starts with their own literature. Yet even 
there the selection is strange: among the dateable, nothing at all from Chris­
tianity's entire first sixty years except what later became canonized as the 
NT-and that represents what can only have been a fraction of what existed, 
even just counting only the letters that must have been written across all 
those decades (see, again, Element 22). After that the first thing we get is 
a single, very long letter from Clement of Rome written to the church in 
Corinth, supposedly in or near the year 95, or in any event, after the deaths 
of Peter and Paul. Then, supposedly, a co11ection of letters from Ignatius to 
various churches in what is now Turkey, traditionally dated around 1 10 (but, 
as we'll see, more probably dating decades later). And nothing else until 
after the year 120 (see previous chapter), almost a century after the religion 
began. It's hard to imagine how a church can thrive across three continents 
for almost a hundred years and produce almost no letters or I iterature. 
Of all the second-century Christian writings we know about, the most 
helpful might have been the 'histories' of the church written sometime 
between 120 and 180 by Papias and Hegesippus. We otherwise know of no 
historical treatments of early Christianity except Acts and writings after 
the second century, which are so rife with legend and dogma as to be use­
less for our purposes (see previous chapter; we shall soon see that Papias 
and Hegesippus were actually very much worse in this regard: see §§7 and 
8). I will therefore discuss what we know about those books after treating 
1 Clement and the lgnatian epistles. Because Hegesippus and Papias evi­
dently represent the 'best' historical research that Christians were bother­
ing with in that century. 
But we can't proceed without also noting what we don't have. Again, 
we should have the hundreds of letters that must have been written in the 
first century, possibly dozens by Paul alone. Yet we have only seven of his, 
though we know there were more; although the seven we have might actu­
ally be pasted-together excerpts of more than seven letters, there sti II is a lot 
missing.38 When it comes to other first-century authors, we have either no 
letters or only a handful at most. Yet we should have letters from numerous 
apostles, and letters communicating between churches, in great quantity, 
from every decade beginning with Paul. As to why we don't, there are no 
verifiable explanations to be had (as noted in §2). It can be presumed only 
that they were destroyed or tossed aside without mention or explanation. 
38. See, e.g., Chapter 7 (§3). 

8. Extrabiblical Evidence 
307 
It cannot be presumed that none were written. That would defy all com­
mon sense and all probability. For example, are we to think only Paul ever 
wrote doctrinal letters for the whole first three decades of the cult? That 
after Paul's many letters (of which we now have only a fraction), no one 
ever once wrote another doctrinal letter for over thirty more years? Then 
suddenly, out of the blue, after all that time, Clement decided to write just 
one really long letter, and that's it? These are all extreme improbabilities. 
We could also have church records and family records. To argue that 
family documents were not preserved because Jesus' family died out, or 
lost their files, or no one else considered such records important until a 
century or more later (when they might have long since been tossed into the 
trash), is entirely plausible only if you assume that no one at first thought 
Jesus was the Son of God and Savior and therefore the most important his­
torical person ever to walk the earth. But if you start with the assumption 
that people did think this from the start (and the letters of Paul certainly 
must indicate this if Jesus existed), then it becomes harder to explain the 
lack of interest in keeping his family records. It's not impossible that they 
would still all be abandoned or ignored, but that's not exactly what we 
would expect to happen, is it? 
Families of the time could receive census and tax receipts from the gov­
ernment, documenting their family relations, births, property, place of resi­
dence, and taxes paid, among other things. They would have deeds for any 
properties they owned; they would have written copies of any contracts 
they entered into; they would have documents pertaining to any trials they 
were involved in (civil or criminal); they would have copies of any letters 
they received (which they surely would have received if they were at all 
involved in the church administration and mission after Jesus' death). It's 
hard to imagine these would be of no interest at all.39 Likewise church 
records: homeowners who offered their buildings for services and meetings 
would have to have kept around all deeds and contracts and tax receipts 
related to them (that was the purpose of having such documents in the first 
place, to guarantee legal title and prove to the government that all taxes had 
been properly paid). What happened to all those? 
39. See, e.g., J.R. Alexander, 'GraecoвRoman Papyrus Documents from Egypt', 
Athena Review 2 (1999), available at www.athenapub.com/egypapl.html. For more 
detail see Charles Hedrick, Ancient History: Monuments and Documents (Oxford: 
Blackwell, 2006), pp. 89г107; Hannah Cotton, Walter Cockle and Fergus Millar, "The 
Papyrology of the Roman Near East: A Survey', Journal of Roman Studies 95 (1995), 
pp. 214д35; Rafael Taubenschlag, The Law ofGreco-Roman Egypt in the Light ofthe 
Papyri, 332 B.C.-640 A.D. (Warsaw: Paiistwowe Wydawnictwo Naukowe 1955); E.G. 
Turner (ed.), Greek Papyri: An Introduction (New York: Oxford University Press, 2nd 
edn, 1980), pp. 74-96, 127-53; Roger Bagnall, Reading Papyri, Writing Ancient History 
(New York: Routledge, 1995); etc. 

308 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
Perhaps Christians changed homes and locations so often, perhaps per­
secution or apostasy created so much confusion, that no one could keep 
track of any church's location or legal or business affairs for hundreds of 
years. Perhaps we can imagine no one was interested in them, that these 
things were just considered too boring or obsolete. Perhaps conflicts among 
the churches led to getting rid of records that might have proved embarrass­
ing to this or that faction. Perhaps they expected they'd all be burned up in 
the apocalypse anyway. Or whatever. Explain it all away as you wish. We 
still don't have them. Yet they certainly would have existed. What was in 
them? We have to accept the fact that we really don't know. 
But that still leaves the vast deletion of what must have been dozens 
if not hundreds of doctrinal letters in the first century, including several 
penned by Paul himself. That Christians preserved seven of his letters (or 
seven mishmashes of them) proves that they had the means and an interest 
in preserving letters-it therefore also proves they had the means and an 
interest in suppressing letters: all the letters that they chose not to preserve. 
Compared to Socrates, who inspired a vast quantity of literary activity 
immediately upon his death (in fact already during his life), Jesus inspired 
none (or none that we have any knowledge of), and once literary activity 
definitely did begin (evidenced by the letters of Paul), later Christians dis­
carded almost all of it. 
This can be explained on a theory of historicity, but only by adding ad 
hoc elements to it ('additional' add-ons to the theory that explain why all 
this evidence did not accumulate for the Church to preserve to us, as we 
would normally expect); and any explanation you accept has consequences 
you must also accept. No theory of historicity that does not address this can 
be credible; likewise the loss or absence of pagan and Jewish discussions 
of Christianity (entirely from the first century, and almost entirely from 
the second). But as this is also true for mythicism, I will regard minimal 
historicity to be as capable of predicting this state of affairs as well as mini· 
mal mythicism, and therefore this silence does not affect the probability of 
either. But others might find that decision far too generous to historicity. 
5. Clement of Rome 
Tradition has it that thirty or forty years after the letters of Paul, twenty 
years after the Gospel of Mark, maybe ten years after the Gospel of Mat­
thew, perhaps around the very time Luke-Acts was being composed, Clem­
ent of Rome (supposedly then bishop of Rome, or at any rate the highest 
ranking man of that church at the time; in fact the letter never gives his 
rank or name) decided to write a massive letter (of we11 over ten thousand 
words) to the church at Corinth to resolve a troubling sedition there, in 
which younger men deposed their elders and took over (we're not told why). 

8. Extrabiblical Evidence 
309 
Clement asks that things be put back the way they were, in an elaborate 
letter about humility and submission and patience and obedience. Further 
letters and homilies were later forged in this Clement's name, but here we 
are only concerned with what presumably is his only surviving authentic 
letter, supposedly written around 95 cE (but possibly written as early as the 
60s, as argued in §6 of the previous chapter). 
What does this letter tel1 us about the historical Jesus? Nothing. It never 
once places Jesus in history or ever tells any stories about him, never uses 
his stories as an example for anything (despite the letter being a long series 
of arguments by example), nor ever quotes anything Jesus says in the Gos­
pels. Apart from his death, it never mentions any event in his life, any fact 
about his life, or anything narrated in the Gospels. And this despite the fact 
that this letter is supposed to end a major rebellion in the church (for which 
citing the example of Jesus would be of inestimable value) and is almost as 
long as both of Paul's letters to the Corinthians combined (and each of those 
is quite a long letter in itself), over ten thousand words or so. How can this 
be? Can you imagine a church official writing such a massive admonition to 
a backsliding church without ever mentioning anything about Jesus? (Other 
than that he is a dying-and-rising godman in outer space whose revealed 
teachings they an follow?) 
What we find instead is this: Clement praises the Corinthians, telling 
them, 'you were satisfied with the things Christ provided you and carefully 
held to his words, taking them to heart, and his sufferings were before 
your eyes' (2.1, ta pathɤmata autou en pro ophthalmon human). Which 
means 'witnessing' the suffering of Christ was something one could do 
metaphorically, inwardly, in the imagination (since obviously none of these 
Corinthians can possibly have been physically present at the crucifixion, 
much less all of them, and especially not the younger ones he is specifical ly 
writing to). Thus, he says, 'let us gaze intently upon the blood of Christ' 
(7.4), with obviously the same meaning; he likewise says that through 
faith in Christ we can behold all manner of amazing things, including the 
'heights of heaven', even the face of Jesus himself (36.2). Obviously, then, 
this 'Christ's' words could have come by similar means: inwardly, by rev­
elation (as we know they could: see Elements 16 and 19); and the possibility 
ofthis is aH but admitted in 1 Clem. 8.1 and 59.1.40 
Clement reports that Paul was recently killed (in 'their' generation: 5.2, 
7) at the hands of state officials ('by those in charge', epi ton hegoumenon) 
at the 'end of the western world' (epi to Ierma tes duseos), which means 
Spain (Rome was not the 'terminus' of where the 'sun sets'; that was uni­
versally recognized as the Spanish coast). The fact that this contradicts all 
40. And perhaps elsewhere. See the analysis of Earl Doherty, Jesus: Neither God 
nor Man (The Case for a Mythical Jesus) (Ottawa: Age of Reason, 2009), pp. 462-64. 

310 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
later legend (which has Paul executed by Nero in Rome) suggests, first, that 
that was indeed only a later legend and, second, that Paul did in fact die in 
Spain-as otherwise there would be no reason for Clement to make this 
up, unless Clement invented that fate by merely conjecturing that that is 
where Paul is last heard to have been. According to Paul himself, he was to 
venture on to Spain after he stopped at Rome (Rom. 15.24-28; notably, Paul 
clearly was not going to Rome in chains when he wrote that-contrary to 
the narrative in Acts-but was simply planning to go there on his own and 
only stop by 'briefly' on his way to Spain). But if Clement is doing that, 
then no knowledge existed as to Paul's actual fate-not even the bishop of 
Rome himself knew. Either way, Paul's martyrdom at Rome is proved to be 
a myth (that tale either not existing yet, or it being known at Clement's time 
that in fact Paul was martyred in Spain).41 
Clement does not say why Paul was killed, only that it was a result of 
some sort of envy and its resulting betrayal. He mentions Peter having been 
martyred for the same reason, but not where or when. He then mentions 
other recent Christian martyrs in general (naming no one in particular). 
Notably absent is any mention of James having been martyred-despite 
that supposedly happening around the same time as Peter and Paul, and 
despite his supposedly being the very brother of Jesus (and in later legend 
a major leader of the church). I n  fact, Clement does not appear to have any 
knowledge of Jesus having had brothers. 
Clement does say Jesus was a 'gift' of Jacob (i.e. Israel) 'according to 
the flesh' (32.2), suffered a passion (2.1; as alJ savior gods did: Elements 
11 and 31), that his blood was poured out as a sacrifice (7.4; 21.6; 49.6), 
and that he was resurrected (24.1). But these things would be just as true 
on minimal mythicism (see Chapter 3; and for Jesus being a Jew, Chapter 
11, §9). He also says 'the Holy Spirit' tells us that Christ 'did not come in 
the pomp of pride or arrogance . . .  but in a lowly condition' (16.2), but as 
evidence all he cites is Isaiah 53. Not any actual story about or witness 
to Jesus. Clement thus doesn't appear to have any 'evidence' that Christ 
came humbly, except that the OT said so (16.17) and that the Holy Spirit 
told them so (either directly, as in 8.1, or through the scriptures, as in 45.2). 
Likewise, when Clement wants to cite numerous 'sayings' of their 'Lord' 
41. The so-called Muratorian Canon (a fragment discussing the books in the NT, 
variously dated to the late second or even the fourth century) curiously says, 'The Acts 
of all the Apostles . . .  evidently relates the death of Peter and also Paul's departure 
from the city as he was proceeding to Spain' (§§ 23-25), which could suggest there is 
a missing chapter to our copy of Acts (which otherwise never mentions either of those 
things), but more Jikely this remark confuses the Acts of the Apostles with the Acts of 
Peter and Paul (late-second-century forgeries that do relate those things). These were 
evidently unknown to the author of I Clement. 

8. Extrabiblical Evidence 
3 1 1 
and 'master' in support of a point (such as that God will save the penitent: 
1 Clement 8; or that God will raise the dead: 1 Clement 24-26; or that we 
must not succumb to pride and hypocrisy: 1 Clement 30), he quotes the 
OT (and that extensively), not Jesus, and gives examples (of repentance, 
forgiveness, resurrection) only from the OT, never from the Gospels (or 
any tradition they supposedly record). And when Clement says the Lord 
adorned himself with good works and rejoiced (33.7), he is not referring to 
Jesus, but to God the Creator: He is the one rejoicing, and the 'good works' 
he is rejoicing at are the whole of creation (see 33.2, then 33.7, then review 
the material in between: 33.3-6).42 
The only time Clement 'quotes' Jesus himself, he either simply quotes 
the OT or he says something that fits no Gospel narrative we have. For 
example, Clement once quotes commandments not matching any Gospel­
and even though in that one instance each commandment on his list is 
expanded into more elaborate teachings, parables and stories in the Gos԰ 
pels, Clement appears to be unaware of any of those (13.2). Instead, he only 
knows of 'the words Jesus spoke' as being a quick series of declarations of 
reciprocity more akin to an updated book of proverbs, and he says these are 
the words we are to obey (13.3). It would appear there may have been only a 
collection of very brief sayings attributed to Jesus (all of which could have 
been learned by revelation), which the Gospels then expanded into narra­
tives and discourses. Because the latter are all unknown to Clement (one 
of the reasons I suspect 1 Clement was written in the 60s and not the 90s: 
see Chapter 7, §6). 
Similarly, at another point Clement says to the Corinthians (while clearly 
assuming they know what he is referring to): 
Remember the words of our Lord Jesus, for he said, 'Woe to that man! 
It would have been good for him not to be born, rather than cause one of 
my chosen to stumble. Better for him to have a millstone cast about his 
neck and be drowned in the sea than to have corrupted one of my chosen' 
(I Clem. 46.7-8). 
42. 1 Clement 33 as a whole appears to paraphrase elements of Proverbs 8, in which 
Wisdom is the one rejoicing at creation, which might incline one to suspect Clement is 
here attributing to Jesus this speech in Proverbs 8, but on that interpretation it is still 
creation itself Jesus was rejoicing at, as dec1ared in Proverbs 8.38, not any historical 
event in his life-which would make this a reference to Jesus as a preexistent divine 
being (in fac̱ it would make him the Wisdom of God, the one speaking in Proverbs 
8, as if in accordance with a literal reading of I Cor. 1.24), which would argue against 
the historicity of Jesus. I think the full language of I Clem. 33.2-7 is clear in referring 
to 'the creator and master of all', i.e. God, not Jesus. But anyone who turns away from 
that interpretation falls on the horns of the only other remaining: that Clement is saying 
Jesus was a preexistent being who helped God create the world and rejoiced at what 
he,d done. There is no evidence for historicity here. 

3 12 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
This is clearly represented here as a quotation of one unified saying, yet 
in the Gospels it is two completely unrelated ones: one part spoken dur­
ing Jesus' ministry, in the presence of a group of children, about people 
tempting his followers to sin ('Whoever causes one of these little ones who 
believe in me to sin, it would be better for him if a great miJistone were 
hung round his neck and he were thrown into the sea', Mk 9.42, echoed in 
Lk. 17.1-2 and expanded in Mt. 18.3-7), another part spoken about Judas at 
the Last Supper ('Woe to that man, by whom the Son of Man is betrayed! 
It would have been good for that man not to be born', Mk 14.18-21 and Mt. 
26.23-25, abbreviated in Lk. 22.22-23). Clement clearly does not know of 
the Judas story, and the phrase 'Woe to that man! It would have been good 
for him not to be born' was evidently never originally anything Jesus said 
about Judas, but a generic statement about those who lead the Lord's 'chil­
dren' to sin, meaning Christians (Jesus' 'chosen ones': see Mt. 18.3-7 and 
Element 13). Which means Jesus almost certainly never said this-because 
it reflects the concept of a church community, of 'believers' in Jesus that 
did not exist until after he had died. Which makes this a good candidate for 
a post-mortem revelation (Element 16), or once again some pre-Christian 
scripture that Clement is quoting but we no longer have (Element 9). 
Apart from perhaps those two instances, for Clement the words of Jesus 
always come from scripture. When Clement says, 'Christ himself calls to 
us through the Holy Spirit', and then quotes 'Christ' at length, what we find 
in fact is simply a quotation ofthe Psalms (1 Clem. 22.1-8, which matches 
Pss 34.11-17, 19; and 32.10). Thus Clement assumes that Jesus 'speaks' to 
us through the scriptures (hence again Element 16). Clement didn't even 
have to say this. He simply assumes that a quotation of scripture can be 
described as a quotation of 'Christ' without explanation or citation-the 
fact that the Corinthians don't need this to be explained to them entails this 
was routinely understood within the churches of the time: that Jesus speaks 
through scripture, rather than human tradition. Likewise, when Clement 
says Jesus is their 'high priest' (36.1; see also 58.2; 61.3; 64.1) he quotes 
or paraphrases either Hebrews or some lost scripture that was also used 
in Hebrews, which (like Hebrews) declared Jesus to be their high priest, 
appointed to a higher office than all the angels (compare 1 Clem. 36.2 with 
Heb. 1.3-4), securely identifying him as a celestial being.43 
Which leads us to wonder if in fact the list of reciprocity proverbs he 
quoted earlier (in 1 Clem. 13.2-3) is a quotation of a lost scripture (see Ele-
43. Clement and Hebrews could be paraphrasing or loosely quoting each other 
(which means Hebrews either pre-dates 1 Clement or vice versa), but it's also possible 
some lost scripture is being consulted by both. There are also parallels between 
Clement and Ephesians (compare 1 Clem. 46.6 with Eph. 4.4-6), which could stem 
from any of the same three options. 

8. Extrabiblical Evidence 
313 
ment 9, and of course Element 8) and not even a revealed saying of Jesus, 
much less actually spoken by a historical Jesus. For example, in 23.3-4 and 
46.2 Clement quotes from what he explicitly calls 'scripture' passages that 
do not exist in any known scripture. Thus, clearly he was using scriptures 
we now no longer have, lost scriptures which all Christians regarded as the 
word of God, in fact even the word of Christ, through the Holy Spirit (per 
8.1). So might not the reciprocity proverbs (of 13.2-3) come from this same 
lost scripture, a different passage of which is being quoted in 23.3-4? And 
likewise the millstone woe (of 46.7-8)? 
Either way, the 'commandments' of Christ ( 49.1) appear to come by rev­
elation or scriptures; Clement mentions no other source-except through 
apostles as proxies for both. Thus, where Clement says the apostles learned 
'through our Lord Jesus Christ' that they must establish offices and rules 
of succession in the church (44.1), even though most scholars would doubt 
that that is true (it's a concern most scholars regard as having arisen later), 
nevertheless Clement seems to imagine the apostles learning this from 
Jesus, through scripture (42.5; 43.1-6). He again never mentions any other 
source on this point (e.g. despite making an extensive scriptural defense 
of it, Clement never quotes any words of Jesus, which surely would have 
been more important to his argument). We might imagine the apostles were 
warned by revelation, and then sought and found the scriptural support 
they needed. But either way there is no evidence here of a Jesus having 
taught them this while ever alive and walking among them. 
When Clement says that 'concerning His Son the Lord said, "Thou 
art my Son, today have I begotten Thee"', he quotes only the Psalms; he 
doesn't mention this also being said by God at Jesus' baptism or any other 
·event (36.5, echoed in 59.2, 3, 4; cf. Mt. 3.16-17). When he says God prom-
ised that Jesus would sit at his right hand (36.5), Clement doesn't seem to 
know that Jesus also said this (Mk 14.62) or that a witness saw Jesus seated 
there (Acts 7.55). When he says that everyone should accept their place 
and serve one another and not try to be exalted (37-38), he doesn't think 
to tell the story about how Jesus admonished James and John on that very 
same point (Mk 10.35-45). It's the same all throughout the letter. He never 
tells any story about Jesus, not from the Gospels nor from any tradition 
that came to be recorded in the Gospels nor from any tradition not in the 
Gospels. As far as Clement appears to be concerned, there simply are no 
stories about Jesus. 
Clement cannot even adduce any story of Jesus' humility and submis­
sion to include among his examples admonishing the Corinthians to be 
humble and submissive (1 Clement 14-15); he can only assure them that the 
OT says Jesus was humble and submissive (1 Clement 16). When he wants 
to prove that all things are obedient to God, not a single instance of Jesus 
exorcising demons or doing miracles is mentioned as evidence (1 Clement 

314 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
27), nor any of Jesus' sayings in the Gospels that made the same point. 
When he needs examples of men of honor being killed by unjust authori­
ties, the crucifixion of Jesus doesn't make the list, nor the beheading of 
John the Baptist, nor the stoning of Stephen (1 Clement 45-46). Likewise in 
his list of 'betrayals' born of envy in chaps. 4 to 6 (beginning with Cain and 
Abel), in which Judas's betrayal of Jesus would naturally belong (through 
envy of money: Mk 14.10-1 1; and as the vehicle for the envy of the Phari­
sees: Mk 15.10), the Judas example, the very best example he could have, 
is conspicuously not mentioned. Instead, when he says he will move from 
'ancient' examples to those more recent (5.1), he skips immediately to the 
deaths of Peter and Paul. In fact, of all the dozens of stories Clement sum­
marizes as examples for Christians to follow, all come from the OT, none 
from any Gospel or anything in the life of Jesus (not just in 1 Clement 4-5, 
but also 9-12, 15-18, etc.). 
When Clement does get to telling the story of Jesus, this is all he has to 
relate: 
The apostles received the gospel for us from the Lord Jesus Christ; and 
Jesus Christ was sent from God. And so Christ is from God, and the 
apostles from Christ. Each occurred in an orderly way from the wi II of 
God. And so having received their orders and being fully reassured by 
the resurrection of our Lord Jesus Christ and persuaded in the word of 
God, with the full assurance of the holy spirit, they went out spreading 
the good news that the kingdom of God was at hand (1 Clem. 42.1-4). 
This account of what happened looks a lot more like the mythicist thesis, 
in which Jesus came to the apostles by revelation and convinced them 
of his death and resurrection, proving it by appeal to the scriptures and 
through gifts of the holy spirit. There is no mention here of Jesus being 
born, preaching a ministry in Galilee, teaching the gospel to thousands 
(as opposed to only the apostles having received it), performing miracles 
or signs that proved who he was, being executed by Pilate or any detail at 
all that would connect Jesus to a historical narrative. Instead, Jesus is sent 
directly from God only to the apostles. And the apostles are the only ones 
who could tell us about it. 
If we had no other sources on Christianity but 1 Clement, we would 
conclude that Jesus was some sort of divine emissary in heaven, a supreme 
archangel, who communicated to the apostles through visions and secret 
messages in various holy scriptures (some of which we no longer have but 
that the early Christians regarded as inspired), and who underwent some 
sort of ordeal of incarnation, death and resurrection like other mythical 
demigods. It would never occur to us that he was a human man who con­
ducted a ministry, performed great deeds among the people, and was rail­
roaded in a Jewish trial and eventually crucified by Pontius Pilate. The fact 
that this lengthy document fully agrees with the expectations of minimal 

8. Extrabiblical Evidence 
3 1 5  
mythicism, but looks very strange on any version of historicity, makes this 
evidence for the former and against the latter. 
The fact that the content of this letter is in many ways unexpected on 
historicity, even minimal historicity, entails it cannot have a consequent 
probability on h anywhere near IOOo/o. But the fact that on minimal mythi­
cism this is exactly the kind of letter we would expect to be written in the 
first century entails that its consequent probability on mythicism is 100% 
(or near enough). By contrast, I cannot believe there is even a SOo/o chance 
minimal historicity would cause a letter like this to be produced (of such 
great length, filled with so many opportunities to reference the facts of 
Jesus' life but never doing so, and with scripture and revelation the only 
mentioned sources for Jesus' deeds and sayings), which means as evidence, 
the content of 1 Clement is at least twice as likely on mythicism as on 
historicism. This makes another factor of 2 to 1 in favor of myth (which, 
as before, can be represented as a consequent probabil ity of 50% for h and 
lOOo/o for ..,h). But again, to argue a fortiori, I'll say there is as much as an 
80o/o probability that the letter of 1 Clement would look like this if Jesus 
existed (which makes the odds 4 to 5), even though I think that's absurd. 
6. Ignatius of Antioch 
Tradition has it that in the reign of Trajan (98-117 CE) a prominent church­
man, Ignatius of Antioch, was arrested by the Romans and taken to Caesar, 
over a long circuitous route from the Middle East to Rome, in which his 
Roman jailers (implausibly) allowed him to meet with other illegal Chris­
tian church congregations and write and exchange letters with yet more 
illegal Christian churches across the region as he went, all without arrest­
ing or disbanding any of them on the way. 
Those letters survive. If tradition were correct about how they were pro­
duced, then this would be the next earliest datable Christian writing after 
1 Clement (outside the NT).44 However, almost every single element of this 
44. The Epistle of Barnabas (which assumes the historicity of Jesus) could 
conceivably date around this same time, but it has not been any more precisely dated 
than 70-130 CE, and in my opinion it surely dates to the period 130-132 CE. Barnabas 
16.4 says the Jewish temple •was pulled down by their enemies and now the very 
servants of their enemies shall build it up' again, which can only refer to Hadrian's 
construction of a pagan temple over its ruins (dedicated to Jupiter, Father ofthe Gods, 
a frequently assumed parallel to Yahweh), since otherwise at no time were pagans ever 
·rebuilding the Jewish temple'. Hadrian actually started planning this shortly before 
the Bar Kokhba revolt in 132 (and in fact this plan was said to have caused that revolt: 
Cassius Dio, Roman History 69.12), and then he built it as planned after the revolt was 
put down in 135 cE. Barnabas seems to know of the plan but not its completion or the 
rebellion in between, so he was most likely writing between 130 and 132. W hat few 

316 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
tradition has been challenged by modern scholars, many of whom do not 
believe Ignatius wrote these letters, or that they were written so early, or 
even in the circumstances assumed.45 There are also several forged Igna­
tian letters, fabricated by someone who also rewrote the authentic ones by 
inserting a large number of interpolations into them, but that version of 
the Ignatians (combining the expanded and forged letters) is universally 
rejected as inauthentic. Here we are only concerned with the 4authentic' 
lgnatian letters, and those only in their shorter, more authentic versions. 
Whether these letters were written by a man named 'Ignatius' or whether 
they were written around 110 cE or 160 CE or anywhere in between, even 
whether they describe an actual captivity or a metaphorical one, won't mat­
ter for our present purposes, so I will leave those questions aside. For the 
sake of arguing a fortiori, let's just assume the traditional account of them 
is correct.46 Whether that's the case or not, they still have three features 
pertinent to determining how they affect the consequent probability of 
things Barnabas says about Jesus are rarely specific and never sourced anyway-its 
content thus can't be ascertained as having any source independent of the Gospels 
or Christian tradition influenced by the Gospels. It could reflect an early example of 
historicist theology, but as such it is no less expected on myth as on historicity and thus 
makes no difference to their consequents. 
45. See Timothy D. Barnes, 'The Date of Ignatius', Expository Times 120 (2008), 
pp. 1 19-30; Roger Parvus, A New Look at the Letters of Ignatius of Antioch and Other 
Ape/lean Writings (New York: iUniverse, 2008); L. Michael White, From Jesus to 
Christianity (San Francisco, CA: HarperSan Francisco, 2004), p. 346 (with n. 50 on 
p. 480). These (and other scholars they cite) date the 'middle recension' of the lgnatian 
letters to the 140s or 160s CE (everyone agrees the 'longer recension' dates to the fourth 
century and that the 'shorter recension' of a few of them, which we have in Syriac 
translation, is an abbreviation of the middle recension, despite some scholars once 
having argued those were the original versions). Even most other scholars now agree 
the original Ignatian letters could have been written anytime between 105 and 140 
cE: see survey in Richard Pervo, The Making of Paul: Constructions of the Apostle 
in Early Christianity (Minneapolis, MN: Fortress Press, 2010), pp. 134-35 (esp. p. 
329 nn. 130 and 135). Pervo himself dates them at the end of that range; entertaining 
similar thoughts (and citing additional scholarship on the subject): David Sim, 
'Reconstructing the Social and Religious Milieu of Matthew: Methods, Sources, and 
Possible Results', in Matthew, James, and Didache: Three Related Documents in their 
Jewish and Christian Settings (ed. Huub van de Sandt and Jiirgen Zangenberg; Atlanta, 
GA: Society of Biblical Literature, 2008), pp. 13-32 (17-18). 
46. I do not include here the letter ofPolycarp to the Philippians, which would more 
likely date to the mid-to-later second century, yet came to be included as a preface to 
the Ignatian letters. This letter doesn't in fact mention Ignatius or his letters until the 
penultimate section (§ 13), which many scholars believe to be an interpolation (and 
even if authentic, it only attests to some form of the letters existing and being revered 
a generation or two •tater'). There is also a supposed lgnatian letter to Polycarp, but it 
contains no information pertaining to the historical Jesus. 

8. Extrabiblical Evidence 
3 17 
myth or historicity: (I) their author is very definitely, and very adamantly, 
a historicist; (2) their author is desperate to defend that fact against cer­
tain unnamed Christians who were apparently denying elements of it; and 
(3) these letters contain one key passage that looks more like it originated 
in a gospel about a cosmic Jesus than an earthly one, which a modern his­
toricist will have to explain. 
That a Christian writer of 1 10 CE would be a convinced historicist pre­
sents no challenge to minimal mythicism, since that theory entails such 
Christians certainly existed by then, already having had their own his­
toricist Gospels for decades. And nothing in the letters of Ignatius can be 
shown to be independent of the Gospels, or to have any other source but 
the Gospels, except material that agrees as much (or more) with myth as 
historicity. What is peculiar is not that Ignatius is convinced of the historic­
ity of Jesus, but that he is very concerned to insist upon this fact, against 
fellow Christians who were apparently denying some form of it. The exist­
ence of Christians denying the historicity of Jesus would be more expected 
on myth than historicityY Of course, such Christians would have believed 
there really was a Jesus, but that he was only a cosmic actor, and not some­
one who conducted a ministry in Galilee or died on earth at the hands of 
Romans or Jews (see Chapter 3). 
However, it is not certain that Ignatius is contending with such Chris­
tians. Ignatius insists that his fel1ow Christians 'stop their ears' from hear­
ing alternative forms of the Christian gospel, such that: 
. . .  when anyone speaks to you without the Jesus Christ who was 
descended from David, who was from Mary, who really was born, and 
ate and drank, and really was persecuted under Pontius Pilate, and really 
was crucified and died, as seen by those in heaven and on earth and under 
the earth. He was also truly raised from the dead.48 
Because, he says, if these 'godless unbelievers' say that Jesus only 'seemed' 
to suffer, then Ignatius is living a lie, and dying for nothing.49 (Note that 
this fallacy is his only argument in defense of the historicity of Jesus-he 
47. In technical terms, the existence of mythicist Christians in the early second 
century is not guaranteed-those ideas could well have died out by then. It is only more 
likely that there would be such Christians if Jesus never existed than if he did. Because 
it is less likely Christians would later start to deny the reality of a Jesus who did exist. 
But conversely, less likely does not mean impossible: that some Christians would 
later start to deny the reality of a Jesus who did exist is also not guaranteed-that 
development could well have occurred, too. It's just less likely that a historical Jesus 
would spawn faithful deniers of his historicity than that a non historical Jesus would. 
Thus the existence of such Christians is evidence for myth, but not thereby a proof of it. 
48. Ignatius, To the Tra/lians 9. See also Ignatius, To the Magnesians I I, 18 and 20. 
49. Ignatius, To the Trallians 10. 

3 1 8  
On the Historicity of Jesus 
does not actually cite any evidence or source anywhere in his letters.) This 
appears to be an attack on Docetists, a diverse group of Christians who 
argued that Jesus never really became a man but only sent an illusion, and 
that it was this illusory body that was crucified (or at least, this is how their 
opponents represented their view, as we don't actually have any writings 
from the Docetists of this early period). But the word for 'seeming' (dokeo) 
can also mean 'was thought or imagined or pretended'. If these Christians 
were teaching that these things were allegories for what was really a cosmic 
drama (or that these things were only experienced in allegorical visions, 
as in the book of Revelation), then Ignatius's remarks would apply just as 
well. For example, if these things were presented in revelations that some 
might doubt (for example, if Paul saw Jesus 'taking bread and wine' in a 
vision and not in real life, as appears to be the case in 1 Cor. 1 1.23-26: see 
Chapter 1 1, §7), this could have been what the earliest Docetists were really 
claiming. 
Whatever these other Christians were saying, Ignatius says against them 
that real Christians are: 
. . .  ful ly persuaded when it comes to our Lord: that he really was 
descended from David 'according to the flesh', and the Son of God 
according to the will and power of God; that he really was born of a 
virgin, and baptized by John, in order that 'all righteousness might be 
fulfilled' by him; and that he really was nailed up under Pontius Pilate 
and Herod the Tetrarch on our behalf, in the flesh. 5° 
In other words, he goes on to say, Jesus 'really suffered' and raised himself 
from the dead, and it is only 'certain unbel ievers who maintain that he only 
"seemed" to suffer', just as 'they themselves only "seem" to be' Christians, 
and will thus not get their bodies back in the resurrection. 51 
It is this last point that reveals the reason Ignatius is so desperate to deny 
the Docetist thesis: 
For I know that even after his resurrection [Jesus] was in flesh, and I 
believe that he is so now. When, for instance, he came to those who were 
with Peter, he said to them, 'Lay hold, handle me, and see that I am not 
a bodiless demon'. And immediately they touched him, and believed. 
being convinced both by his flesh and by the spirit. And this is why they 
thought nothing of dying, and were found to be above death. After his 
resurrection he even ate and drank with them, as one of flesh, although 
spiritua11y he was united to the Father. 52 
50. Ignatius, To the Smyrnaeans 1. 
51. Ignatius, To the Smyrnaeans 2 (see also §§ 4 and 5; and Ignatius, To the Mag­
nesians 9). 
52. Ignatius, To the Smyrnaeans 3. 

. •
. 
8. Extrabiblical Evidence 
3 1 9  
Ignatius cannot abide the view (even though it appears to have been origi­
nal to earliest Christianity) that our bodies of flesh will be discarded and 
replaced with entirely new bodies of cosmically superior material. 53 Will­
ingness to die, and thus the glory of martyrdom, only makes sense to him 
if we will live again in the flesh (this thinking is evident as well in his letter 
to the Ephesians, as we saw). Thus Docetism, if true, would destroy every­
thing Ignatius needed to be true. 
Ignatius is therefore not rejecting Docetism because he knows of any 
evidence that argues against it. Apart from 'the prophets' his only source 
of information appears to be some Gospel or Gospels (possibly Matthew 
and Luke, or some other Gospel based on them that we don't have). Instead, 
he is rejecting Docetism simply and only because it has consequences he 
doesn't like. But this would have been equally true of the gospel of a cos­
mic Jesus, in which Jesus assumes a body of flesh in outer space and then 
discards it, rising again into a superior divine body, a gospel that would 
also be known only by revelation, and thus more easily doubted whether it 
was genuine. 
Consequently, the very reason Ignatius has to hold onto his anti-Docetist 
mythology would have been as good a reason to invent that mythology in 
the first place. And that would have required relocating Jesus to earth and 
having him born and live and eat and drink and be touched by the first 
apostles (this development had other advantages as well, as I'll explore in 
§12). Historicity or not, this mythology had certainly been developed before 
Ignatius's time (complete with the fabricated story of Jesus appearing after 
his death and letting the disciples handle his body and dining with them to 
prove he is real, facts surely Paul would have made note of in 1 Corinthians 
15 had any such story then existed, yet not even Matthew or Mark knew of 
it). 54 He is therefore not an independent source. He is simply relying on the 
Gospels for his information, and the most unreliable ones at that. 
Unfortunately we cannot tell what manner of Docetists the Ignatians 
are attacking, whether a revelatory Docetism (teaching the events of Jesus' 
life were seen only in visions) or a historicist Docetism (teaching the 
events of Jesus' life were witnessed in the normal way, but were neverthe­
less illusions). ss And that there would be historicist Docetists in the early 
53. See 1 Corinthians 1 5  and 2 Corinthians 5, especially in light of my more 
extensive analysis in Carrier, 'Spiritual Body', in Empty Tomb (ed. Price and Lowder), 
and Carrier, Not the Impossible Faith, pp. 109-12. This two-body view of resurrection 
is also evident in the Ascension of Isaiah. 
54. On this last point see my full analysis in Carrier, 'Spiritual Body', in Empty 
Tomb (ed. Price and Lowder), pp. 115-39. 
55. An argument for reve)atory Docetists is developed in Doherty, Jesus: Neither 
God nor Man, pp. 295-304 . 

320 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
second century is no more probable or improbable on historicity than on 
myth, given that this is in a period well after the Gospels had started cir­
culating and Christians had begun to believe in a historical, earthly Jesus. 
Indeed, if 1 Clement dates from the 60s and not the 90s, then we have no 
evidence that any Christian by the year 100 actually knew whether Jesus 
really existed or not, apart from what the Gospels claimed, which by then 
had been around for a whole generation. Once Jesus had been euhemer­
ized or mythologized, a natural theological transformation of that mythol­
ogy, like historicist Docetism, is not unexpected, whether Jesus ever really 
existed or not. At most, these letters demonstrate that there were by then 
no known sources of information about Jesus except the Gospels (whether 
ours or some others related to them), which confirms the futility of relying 
on any Christian writings after this period-even as early as 1 10 or 1 15 CE, 
if these letters really were written so early (though I doubt they were). So 
this information has no effect on the consequent probabilities. 
But there is another peculiarity in Ignatius, one thing that doesn't fit. 
While scholars have had a hard time determining if he was really aware of 
or relying on any specific Gospel that we have (as opposed to some other 
based on them), there is one passage where Ignatius clearly references a 
narrative in a Gospel that he revered as an authoritative source, yet it is 
certainly not any Gospel we know. This is what he tells us: 
Now the virginity of Mary was hidden from the Prince of this World, 
as was also her offspring, and the death of the Lord; three mysteries 
of renown, which were wrought in silence by God. How, then, was he 
manifested to the world? A star shone forth in heaven above all the other 
stars, the light of which was inexpressible, while its novelty struck men 
with astonishment. And all the rest of the stars, with the sun and moon, 
formed a chorus to this star, and its light was exceedingly great above 
them all. And there was agitation felt as to whence this new spectacle 
came, so unlike everything else above. Hence every kind of magic was 
destroyed, and every bond of wickedness disappeared. ignorance was 
removed, and the old kingdom abolished. when God appeared in human 
form for the renewal of eternal life.56 
Note that this is very definitely not a reference to the Gospel of Matthew. 
Ignatius does not appear to know Matthew's story about a nativity star. He 
56. Ignatius, To the Ephesians 19. Note that 'appeared in human form' uses 
phaneroumenos, "become visible', which means 'was seen' (in some way or other), 
and anthr+pin+s. 'humanly', an adverb, not a noun or adjective, which thus describes 
the verb. hence 'was humanly seen' or 'was seen humanly'. The meaning is either 
"appeared to be a man' or 'appeared in a way perceptible to men'. Perhaps Ignatius 
meant 'in a human body', since he himself was so certain Jesus had such a body even 
after his resurrection. Or perhaps his source meant the alternative. and Ignatius was 
being del iberately ambiguous. It's not clear. 

8. Extrabib/ica/ Evidence 
32 1 
makes no reference to magi. nor any star rising in the east and settling over 
the manger, no Herod, no Bethlehem. And in Matthew the star is but a sign, 
not the Savior himself. Instead, Ignatius knows some very different story: 
one in which a star illuminates the whole of heaven, brighter even than the 
sun, astonishing men the world over, and in which this star was the maniϧ 
festation of Jesus himself, and not a mere sign of his birth or birthplace. 
In fact, this star is not said to accompany his birth. To the contrary, 
Ignatius appears to be saying this is how Jesus manifested to the world: not 
as a Ga1ilean preacher but as a bright light in heaven. And at that moment 
all the powers of darkness were defeated and a new kingdom begun, feats 
traditionally accomplished by the death and resurrection. and not the birth 
of Jesus (see Elements 18 and 37). This 'Gospel' that Ignatius is describ­
ing has the very birth and death of Jesus being hidden from the world and 
revealed only in the bright light demonstrating his triumph (which could 
only be at his resurrection), and that was the event that granted men eternal 
1ife. Such a spectacle could hardly have been kept Ϩhidden' from the Prince 
of This World; it therefore must have followed and not preceded the death 
of Jesus. Also in this mysterious Gospel not only the virginity of Mary 
but even the identity of Jesus was also kept from both public and demonic 
knowledge until after his death-a fact that doesn't even fit the narrative of 
Mark, much less the other Gospels we know. 
In the mythicist thesis, it was originally bel ieved the Prince of This 
World killed Jesus not knowing who he was (1 Cor. 2.8), because every­
thing about him was kept hidden (1 Cor. 2.7), and only revealed spiritu­
ally, by revelation to his elect (1 Cor. 2.10). Here that story has become 
transformed into a myth in which the revelation is accomplished by an 
incredible celestial event witnessed by the whole world-a claim obviously 
completely fabricated (illustrating how easy it then was to believe com­
pletely fabricated claims of wildly public facts). Notably, Paul's encounter 
with the risen Christ had been so described: Acts says Jesus appeared to 
him as 'a light from heaven brighter than the sun' (Acts 26.13).57 And the 
Jewish theology of God's firstborn son (the preexistent Logos named Jesus: 
see Element 40) also pictured him as a supreme star that shines with a light 
brighter than the sun; though perceptible only to the eye of the mind, it was 
nevertheless 'surpassingly beautiful' and 'far more brilliant and splendid' 
than the sun or any other star in the universe, so overwhelmingly bright in 
fact that it would 'bewilder the eyes' of anyone so fortunate as to see it. 58 
Remember, too. the Ascension of Isaiah (Chapter 3, §1): there, in its ear­
lier recension, Jesus will descend to the orbit below the moon, take on a 
57. See also Lk. 1.78-79 (in light of the Septuagint text ofZech. 3.9); 1 Pet. 2.9; Heb. 
1.3; Jn 1.4-5; etc . 
., 
58. Philo, On the Creation 31 (cf. §§ 30 and 71). 

322 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
body of flesh, and be killed by the Prince of This World and his demonic 
minions 'without knowing who he is', because that fact is kept 'hidden 
from the heavens'. But when he rises from the dead and reveals who he 
really is, he shall be seen to have a 'glory surpassing that of all' and 'with 
the voice of Heaven' God will 'summon the angels and their lights'. Then 
who Jesus is will be manifest, and he will be victorious over the Prince 
of This World and his demonic minions. The lgnatian gospel sounds very 
similar: the birth and death of Jesus is kept hidden, then he is revealed with 
the most glorious light, and all the 'lights' of the heavens in chorus with it, 
at which he overpowers the forces of darkness. 
Irenaeus also knew of such a narrative. He reports that even orthodox 
Christians were reading Psalm 24 as referring to Christ's hidden descent, 
unknown to the 'powers' in the 'firmament', and then his glorious ascent, 
after his resurrection, through the various 'gates' of heaven (odd details 
also found in the Ascension of Isaiah), which was seen and witnessed by 
all the creatures of the lower heavens.59 Justin Martyr also appears to have 
known the same narrative.60 Something similar might lie behind 1 Tim. 
3.16, where Jesus is said to have been only 'seen by angels' and then people 
on earth were told about him. But just as the Ascension of Isaiah was doc­
tored by inserting a standard historicist gospel narrative in the middle of it, 
we can presume the Gospel that Ignatius, Irenaeus and Justin were using 
had similarly been modified to tack-in the details involving Pontius Pilate, 
Herod the Tetrarch, and John the Baptist and other such elements. But like 
the Ascension of Isaiah, this clearly did not completely hide the fact that the 
original narrative was in accord with the earlier redaction of the Ascension 
of Isaiah, in which Jesus never dwells on earth, but is born and dies secretly 
in heaven, and then reveals himself after his resurrection, as a brilliant light 
surpassing all. This timing is also in accord with 1 Cor. 15.3-8, where again 
Jesus seems only to 'appear' to anyone after his resurrection (see Chapter 
1 1, §2). 
There are certainly other ways one could try to explain this strange 
lgnatian gospel narrative. But it must be admitted that it is at least some­
what more likely that we would see this here if the gospel he was using did 
indeed begin as a tale of a cosmic Jesus Uust like the earlier redaction of 
the Ascension of Isaiah), and was converted into an earthly Jesus later on, if 
awkwardly. Because on any other explanation, its content makes no sense. 
That this strange cosmic gospel would be invented afterward (and lgna-
59. Irenaeus, Demonstration of the Apostolic Preaching 84. See discussion in 
Jonathan Knight, Disciples of the Beloved One: The Christology, Social Setting and 
Theological Context of the Ascension of Isaiah (Sheffield: Sheffield Academic Press, 
1996), pp. 163-66. 
60. Justin Martyr, Dialogue with Trypho 36. 

8. Extrabiblical Evidence 
323 
tius stiH regard it as authoritative) is, by comparison, somewhat less likely. 
Thus this one passage affords some support for the mythicist thesis, which 
makes its content a bit more likely than minimal historicity does.61 This odd 
detail therefore provides some small support to myth. 
For Ignatius to cite stories about the manifestation of Jesus that match 
the mythicist thesis and not the historicist one is at least somewhat less 
probable on h than on --h. For _,h it is 100% expected that such narratives 
existed, although not that any evidence of them would survive for us to 
see them now (since the low probability of their survival has no significant 
effect on whether -.h is true).62 To be honest, the very existence of such 
narratives at an is improbable on h, but not at all improbable on -·h. So we 
should combine this fact now with the similar facts attested in the Ascen­
sion of Isaiah (surveyed in Chapter 3, §1), which also has (even clearer) 
traces of an earlier, similar narrative of a cosmic Jesus suffering a cosmic 
death. Neither is expected to exist on h; but on -.h, there is nothing unex­
pected about either. Here I wi11 be very generous and say the odds are 4 
to S that we would still have both (the curious cosmic Jesus material in 
Ignatius, and the curious cosmic Jesus material in the Ascension of Isaiah; 
and their corroboration in lrenaeus and Justin) if h were true rather than 
..,h, which can be translated into a 100% chance on -·h and an 80% chance 
on h. Though I personally believe these odds are closer to 1 in 2, as I think 
there could hardly be more than a 50% chance both these dues would exist 
if Jesus did. 
7. Papias of Hierapolis 
According to lrenaeus (who most likely wrote between 180 and 200 CE), 
Papias ofHierapolis was a companion of Polycarp, and wrote when he was 
an old man.63 According to Eusebius, Polycarp died in the 160s CE at the age 
61. And any attempt to make minimal historicity more complex (so as to better 
exp1ain the strange content of this passage) will reduce its relative prior probability, 
thuݫ making no effective difference in the effect this evidence has on its posterior 
probability-unless the required additions to the theory can be shown to be (very 
probably) true if Jesus existed, independently of their ability to explain this one text. 
See Carrier, Proving History, pp. 80-81. 
62. On the contingency of evidence survival and its effect on consequent 
probabilities see Carrier, Proving History, pp. 220-26. 
63. For these and following details see lrenaeus, Against All Heresies 5.33.4; and 
Eusebius, History of the Church 3.39.1-2 and 4.14-15. The passage in lrenaeus survives 
only in Latin translation and in Greek quotation in Eusebius, but in both it is stated that 
he 'bore witness in writing as an old man' (vetus homo per scripturam testimonium 
perhibet I archaios anџr eggreaphfJs epimarturei). This is sometimes translated as 'a 
man of old', i.e. of a long time ago, but that is the least likely intended meaning here: 

324 
On the Historicity f Jesus 
of eighty-six, having been a Christian all his I ife. If we assume this is all 
true, then Polycarp would have been an elder in the church since the 130s, 
and Papias himself would have been an 'old man' sometime between then 
and the 160s. Thus his one known book, Explanations of the Stories of the 
Lord (in five volumes), is usually (and most plausibly) dated between 1 30 
and 150 CE. 64 
We do not have that book. We only have various brief quotations from 
and descriptions of it (mainly in lrenaeus and Eusebius), in which Papias 
himself says he lived when none of the original apostles still did, but con­
temporary with some men who claimed to have known them-a claim that 
was not necessarily true; from the quotations we have, we can tell Papias 
was a very gullible fellow, so much so that even Eusebius called him 'a man 
of very little intelligence'.65 Papias also said he rejected what books said and 
instead relied only on hearsay, because he considered that to be more relia­
ble.66 He was thus clearly the least reliable sort of source we could possibly 
want. Yet apart from the author of Acts, Papias is the earliest 'historian' 
of early Christianity we have, writing a hundred years after the religion 
began. 
As expected, the things he tells us are ridiculous. For instance, one 
excerpt we have (from the fourth volume of Papias's book, as quoted by 
Apollinaris of Laodicea in the fourth century) tells us this story about 
Judas: 
His body bloated to such an extent that, even where a wagon passes with 
ease, he was not able to pass. No, not even his bloated head by itself 
could do so. His eyelids, for example, swelled to such dimensions. they 
say, that neither could he himself see the light at all, nor could his eyes be 
detected even by a physician's instrument, so deep had they sunk below 
(1) lrenaeus would just say he wrote long ago, not that he was an 'old man'. a phrase 
that more readily indicates the man himself was old, not his writings; and (2) a friend 
of Polycarp's would more likely be a contemporary of Polycarp, and thus have lived a 
generation before lrenaeus, as Polycarp did (hardly ancient times). 
64. Eusebius, History of the Church 3.39. 1 :  Logion kuriakon exegeseos. lit. 
'Exegesis ofthe Lordly Logia'. Some scholars really want Papias to have written earlier. 
perhaps in the reign of Trajan (c. 1 10-1 15 CE), but if that were so (as we shall see) 
this would make his testimony worse for historicity, as it would mean that the loss of 
knowledge about Jesus, and the growth of absurd fictions about him, was even earl ier 
and more rapid, and that even at that early date no one knew any correct information 
about the Gospels or how they came to be written. Nevertheless, for the best attempt to 
date Papias to around 1 10 CE, see Dennis MacDonald, Two Shipwrecked Gospels: The 
Logoi of Jesus and Papias 's Exposition of Logia about the Lord (Atlanta, GA : Society 
ofBiblical Literature, 2012). 
65. Eusebius, History ofthe Church 3.39.13. 
66. Eusebius, History ofthe Church 3.39.3-4. 

' 
8. Extrabiblical Evidence 
the surface. His genitals, too, grew bigger and more disgusting than all 
that is horrid, and, to his shame, out of them oozed pus and worms from 
all throughout his body whenever he relieved himself. After suffering an 
agony of pain and punishment, he finally went, as they say, to his own 
place. And owing to the stench the ground has been deserted and unin­
habited until now. In fact, even to the present day no one can pass that 
place without holding one's nose, so abundant was the discharge from his 
body and so far over the ground did it spread. 67 
325 
Papias also said Jesus promised us vast clusters of gigantic grapes, and 
other nonsense. Clearly the legends and fabricated sayings had gotten out 
of hand by the time Papias wrote, and he just believed whatever he chanced 
to hear. This is illustrative of the state of Christian knowledge about Jesus 
by mid-second century-and the state of Christian fabrications about Jesus. 
Does Papias come anywhere near to telling us anything useful? Not 
really. He says Mark was Peter's secretary and faithfully recorded his 
teachings (producing the Gospel according to Mark), but that can't be true 
because Peter was a Torah-observant Christian, and Mark's Gospel advo· 
cates against that and in favor of Pauline Christianity (that Paul and Peter 
were at odds on this point is clear throughout Galatians 2; see Element 20). 
Mark's Gospel also evinces possibly a poor understanding of the geogra­
phy of Palestine (e.g. Mk 7.31 has Jesus simultaneously traveling north and 
south), which also makes no sense if he was faithfully recording the teach­
ings of Peter. 68 That Mark composed his Gospel in Greek also makes less 
sense on that account, as Peter would more likely have preached in Hebrew 
or Aramaic and expected his Gospel to be recorded likewise (unless Peter 
preached only to Greek-speaking diaspora Jews, but even then his Gospel 
would not need to explain basic Jewish legal principles to its readers, e.g., 
Mk 7.3-4). Papias then says Matthew was composed in Hebrew and then 
translated various times into Greek, but that also can't be true, because 
Matthew copies extensively from Mark's Greek, frequently verbatim, and 
thus can't possibly have composed in Hebrew. 69 It's clear that Papias had 
67. Quotation of Papias in Apollinaris of Laodicea, Comments on Matthew 136 
(regarding Mt. 27.S). Most of this translation is from Bruce Metzger, The Canon of the 
New Testament: Its Origin, Development, and Significance (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 
1987), p. 53 n. 23, but he omitted some material, which I restored, translating it myself 
from the original Greek. 
68. On the (often poor or confused) geographical knowledge of the four Gospels, 
and the attempted (and sometimes failed) 'fixes' of Mark by Matthew, see C.C. 
McCown, 'Gospel Geography: Fiction, Fact, and Truth', Journal of Biblical Literature 
60 (March 1941), pp. 1-25, although much research since has revised his results. 
69. And if Matthew employed a Q source for the remaining material shared with 
Luke (see Chapter 7, §4), he also copied that verbatim in Greek (because Luke then 
also copied from Q, and often shows identical wording, so Q itself, or the version they 

326 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
no idea what he was talking about, and had no reliable sources of informa­
tion about the first century of Christianity. Correct information about that 
century of the church had evidently become completely lost by his time. 
It therefore can't likely have survived after his time, either. Which means 
everything claimed about that period after this point is most likely fabri­
cated. 
It is also curious that these five volumes of Papias were not preserved by 
medieval Christians. Such an early and extensive collection of contempo­
rary lore about Jesus and the Gospels and apostles as this should have been 
cherished. What else must it have said to so offend medieval Christians that 
they threw the whole thing away? We'll never really know. What we can 
say is that from what we do know, nothing in Papias supports the historic­
ity of Jesus. It confirms only that in the second century many Christians 
were assuming the historicity of Jesus, and were relying on written Gos­
pels for that, and felt at liberty to invent any stories about him that suited 
them, while some were even claiming to have known someone who knew 
Jesus, to lend authority to whatever they invented about him.70 This is fully 
expected on the Jesus myth theory, and perhaps no less expected on histo­
ricity. So Papias has no effect on the consequent probability of either. 
8. Hegesippus 
Near the end of the second century (c. 180 cE) the Christian scholar Hege­
sippus wrote a five-volume Memoirs that discussed various legends about 
the early churches and apostles (including the first succession lists of bish­
ops), making this the third closest thing to a history of Christianity that 
existed up to then (the second being the Explanations of Papias, which we 
discussed above, and the first being the book of Acts, which we shall dis-
employed, must have been in Greek). That's moot, of course, if there was no Q and 
Luke just copied Matthew's Greek. 
70. That these claims were false should be obvious (because we just saw the stories 
they were telling are unbelievable); in the same fashion, some were also claiming to 
have known those who had been the very people resurrected by Jesus (just as some 
Jews claimed to be descendants of those resurrected in Ezek. 37.1 -14, even while other. 
more reasonable Jews, insisted that that story was just an allegory and never really 
happened : Babylonian Talmud. Sanhedrin 92b; cf. also 90b). Phi lip of Side reports that 
Papias had said, 'those resurrected by Christ from the dead lived until Hadrian'. which 
was also claimed by Quadratus (so possibly Philip has confused them), according to 
Eusebius, History of the Church 4.3; on Philip's report, see James Kleist. The Didache. 
The Epistle of Barnabas, The Epistles and The Martyrdom of St. Polycarp, The 
Fragments of Papias, The Epistle to Diognetus ( Westminster, MD: Newman Press, 
1948), pp. 122-23. 

8. Extrabib/ical Evidence 
327 
cuss in the next chapter).71 Once again, we do not have this book. We only 
have scattered references to and quotations from it. Again, why was such a 
valuable work not preserved? We may never know. 
This work is so very late, and written in a period of such rampant fabri­
cation and hearsay (see Element 44), that it cannot have any claim to reli­
ability on the matter of first-century Christianity. Nevertheless, I discuss 
it because (a) it is the last known attempt at collecting historical data about 
first-century Christianity that we know of from the second century, (b) it 
discusses the fate of 'James the brother of Jesus', and (c) it is representative 
of all the Christian 'historical' literature we have any fragment of from the 
second century, and thus our conclusions regarding it can be understood as 
applicable to all. 
The most important passages to survive from Hegesippus involve tales 
about the family of Jesus. But they are so obviously fictional we can place 
no value in them as history. Of these, the following story about James is the 
most extensive we have, and it reads just like any of several examples of 
fabricated 'Acts' (such as we have telling wild tales about Peter and John): 
Hegesippus, who lived immediately after the apostles, gives the most 
accurate account in the fifth book of his Memoirs. He writes as follows: 
James. the brother of the Lord, succeeded to the government of the 
Church in conjunction with the apostles. He has been called the Just by 
all from the time of our Savior to the present day: for there were many 
that bore the name of James. He was holy from his mother's womb; and 
he drank no wine nor strong drink, nor did he eat flesh. No razor came 
upon his head; he did not anoint himself with oil, and he did not use the 
bath. He alone was permitted to enter into the holy place; for he wore not 
woolen but linen garments. And he was in the habit of entering alone into 
the temple. and was frequently found upon his knees begging forgiveness 
for the people, so that his knees became hard like those of a camel, in 
consequence of his constantly bending them in his worship of God. and 
askipg forgiveness for the people. Because of his exceeding great justice 
he was called the Just, and Oblias. which signifies in Greek, •Bulwark of 
the People' [actually, no such word exists in Greek-ed.], and Justice, in 
accordance with what the prophets declare concerning him. 
Now some persons belonging to the seven [Jewish] sects existing 
among the people. which have been before described by me in these 
Memoirs, asked James: 'What is the door of Jesus?' And he replied 
that He was the Savior. In consequence of this answer. some believed 
71. '[Hegesippus] records in five books the true tradition of apostolic doctrine'. 
Eusebius, History ofthe Church 4.8, which passage, plus 4.11 and 4.21-22. are all we 
really have to date the man by, their content indicating that Hegesippus may have been 
alive in 130 cE (when Hadrian deified Antinous) but wrote after 174 (that being the year 
of the last datable event mentioned in the 'memoirs' of Hegesippus). 

328 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
that Jesus is the Christ. But the sects before mentioned did not believe, 
either in a resurrection or in the coming of one to requite every man 
according to his works; but those who did believe, believed because 
of James. So, when many even of the ruling class believed, there was 
a commotion among the Jews, and scribes, and Pharisees, who said: 
'A little more, and we shall have all the people looking for Jesus as the 
Christ'. 
They came, therefore, in a body to James, and said: 'We entreat you, 
restrain the people: for they are gone astray in their opinions about 
Jesus, as if he were the Christ. We entreat you to persuade all who 
have come here for the day of the Passover, concerning Jesus. For we 
all listen to you; since we, as well as all the people, bear you testimony 
that you are just, and show partiality to none. Therefore, persuade the 
people not to entertain erroneous opinions concerning Jesus: for all the 
people, and we also, listen to you. Take your stand, then, upon the sum­
mit of the temple, that from that elevated spot you may be clearly seen, 
and your words may be plainly audible to all the people. For, in order 
to attend the Passover, all the tribes have congregtted here, and some 
of the Gentiles also.' 
The aforesaid scribes and Pharisees accordingly set James on the sum­
mit of the temple, and cried aloud to him, and said: '0 just one, whom 
we are all bound to obey, forasmuch as the people are in error, and follow 
Jesus the crucified, do tell us what is the door of Jesus the crucified'. And 
he answered with a loud voice: 'Why ask me concerning Jesus the Son of 
Man? He Himself sits in heaven, at the right hand of the Great Power, and 
shall come on the clouds of heaven.' 
And, when many were fully convinced by these words, and offered 
praise for the testimony of James, and said, 'Hosanna to the son of 
David', then again the Pharisees and scribes said to one another, 'We 
have not done well in procuring this testimony to Jesus. But let us go up 
and throw him down, that they may be afraid, and not believe him.' And 
they cried aloud, and said: 'Oh! Oh! The just man himself is in error.' 
Thus they fulfilled the Scripture written in Isaiah: 'Let us away with the 
just man, because he is troublesome to us: therefore shall they eat the 
fruit of their doings'. So they went up and threw down the just man, and 
said to one another: 'Let us stone James the Just'. And they began to stone 
him: for he was not killed by the fa11; but he turned, and kneeled down, 
and said: 'I beseech Thee, Lord God our Father, forgive them; for they 
know not what they do'. 
And, while they were thus stoning him to death, one of the priests, 
the sons ofRechab, the son ofRechabim, to whom testimony is born by 
Jeremiah the prophet, began to cry aloud, saying: 'Stop! What are you 
doing!? The just man is praying for us.' But one among them, one of the 
fullers, took the staff with which he was accustomed to wring out the 
garments he dyed, and hurled it at the head of the just man. 
And so he suffered martyrdom; and they buried him on the spot, and 
the pillar erected to his memory still remains, close by the temple. This 

8. Extrabiblical Evidence 
man was a true witness to both Jews and Greeks that Jesus is the Christ. 
And immediately Vespasian besieged them. 72 
329 
The historical and narrative implausibilities in this tale are so numerous we 
can be certain the story is in every respect a fabrication. The description of 
James is transparently mythical; the notion that 'he alone' was allowed into 
the temple's inner sanctum is obvious nonsense; that the Jewish authorities 
would have a Christian evangelist stand at the pinnacJe of the temple to 
dissuade the crowds from adopting his teachings is obvious myth; and that 
James could survive a fall from there is impossible; in fact, the behavior 
of almost everyone in the whole narrative is not at all realistic (a major 
hallmark of fiction); the execution of James as described is in no way legal 
(and would thus have been murder under Jewish law); and a burial not only 
inside the city walls but beside the very temple itself is not only a guaran­
teed falsehood, it betrays the complete ignorance of the narrative's author 
of even the most basic facts of Jerusalem law and culture. In short, nothing 
in this story can possibly be true. 
But what is notable is that nowhere in the story itself is this James ever 
said to be the brother of Jesus. Hegesippus describes him as such when 
introducing the narrative, but the assumption that this story, about a certain 
James the Just, is a story about James the brother of Jesus, appears to be 
an assumption introduced by Hegesippus. It is not supported by anything 
in the story. Indeed, this James is described as if he were a priest (doing 
service in the temple and even entering the Holy of Holies), not a carpenter 
or fisherman from distant Galilee. There is also no reference to a historical 
Jesus in this narrative. Jesus is called 'the crucified', but Jesus was celes· 
tially crucified on minimal mythicism, so that does not distinguish this 
narrative as historicist. To the contrary, nowhere is any reference made to 
witnesses or reports of Jesus having performed deeds or delivering teach­
ings while on earth, or having even been on earth. Instead, James speaks 
only of a Jesus in outer space, who would descend to earth in the future. 
And the story assumes that no one thought Jesus was the Christ unti I James 
(not Jesus, nor anyone else) began preaching that he was. And this led to 
people looking for Jesus and following him-obviously that cannot mean 
following the living Jesus (who in this narrative was not then on earth), but 
the celestial Jesus declared by James. 
The controversy at the heart of this narrative also centers around the 
bizarre question, 'What is the door of Jesus?' The answer to which was that 
'he is the Savior' (the name ҰJesusұ of course meaning 'savior'), implying 
that confessing Jesus is the Christ is the doorway to eternal life. The theo-
72. Eusebius, History ofthe Church 2.23.4·18. Translation adapted from NPNF'-. 
I, 207-208. 

330 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
logical point may have had something to do with Jesus being the celestial 
high priest, who controlled access to the doors of heaven (which even some 
pre-Christian Jews might already have believed: Element 40). For example, 
Ignatius says Jesus 'is the door of the Father, by which enter' the holy and 
faithful into heaven, and that he had this power because he was given the 
secrets of God and controlled the Holy of Holies-which must mean that of 
the celestial temple, there being no other when Ignatius wrote.73 
The material about James in Hegesippus confirms our conclusion from 
Papias, that true historical information about the early church no longer 
existed and had been replaced with absurd fabrications like this, which 
were believed without any doubt or question by such authors as this. But 
this narrative also joins the early redaction of the Ascension of Isaiah and 
the Star Narrative of Ignatius in further support of the hypothesis that there 
had been a sect of Christians who did not believe in a Galilean Jesus but 
only a cosmically crucified one, and that these Christians had their own 
tales and narratives, which other Christians could borrow and adapt to their 
own purposes. From such a sect we can expect this tale to lack any ref­
erence to a historical Jesus, most especially any reference to this James 
being his brother, despite it going on a great deal about his qualifications 
as a witness in being superlatively pious and just-conspicuously omitting 
from that list of qualifications his family connection and eyewitness status. 
These appear to have been unknown to the story's original author. 
Such a complete absence of the historical Jesus in this James narrative 
could perhaps be explained away as just a happenstance omission, assum­
ing that the author who made it all up just didn't think or see the need of 
including any such detail, or perhaps already having included it in sections 
not quoted by Hegesippus. But such an omission also fits minimal mythi­
cism even more perfectly. Whereas the historicist's explanation requires 
positing something that is less than 100% certain to be the case, the mythi­
cist's explanation does not require positing anything (beyond minimal 
mythicism itself, and established background knowledge, including Ele­
ments 21-22 and 44). This means this narrative in Hegesippus supports 
mythic ism over historicity, at least slightly. I wi II be as generous to historic­
ity as I can and posit a 90% chance a historicist author could compose the 
narrative as we have it, against a 100% chance that a mythicist could, for 
9110 odds. Although I believe 4 in 5 is closer to the truth (meaning an 80o/o 
chance a historicist author could compose the narrative I ike this). 
Hegesippus recorded at least one other apocryphal tale about the fam­
ily of Jesus, which can confirm neither historicity nor myth: the story that 
the grandchildren of his brother Jude (whom on1y 'some said' had been the 
73. Ignatius, Philadelphians 9. Other references to Jesus being 'the door' or 'the 
gate' can be found in Jn 10.6-19 and I Clement 48 (based on Ps. 1 17.19-20). 

8. Extrabib/ica/ Evidence 
331 
brother of Jesus) were hauled into the court of Domitian (in the 80s or 90s 
cE), because Domitian was afraid of the Second Coming of Christ (histori· 
cally, a wholly implausible motive) and had commanded that all Davidic 
heirs be slain (even though the very notion that anyone thought there would 
be Davidic heirs to slay by then is not believable).74 This story contains a 
number of implausibilities and does not look like anything we would credit 
as true. It also looks like it wasn't originally a story about Christians, but 
messianic Jews. In the core of the tale itself, no Jesus is ever mentioned, 
and the 'Judeans' hauled into court are never said to be anything but Jews 
expecting a messiah to come at the end of the world. This had apparently 
been converted into a story about Domitian persecuting, and then ending 
the persecution, of Christians. But from other sources we know only of 
Domitian persecuting Jews, and only those in his own household.'5 
Whatever the case may be, Hegesippus tips his hand when we learn 
from Eusebius that he told all these narratives in order to 'prove' that there 
had been no heresy before the reign of Trajan, because up until then the 
family of Jesus and his disciples had everywhere ensured a faithful adher­
ence to the 'virgin' gospel, and only after they had passed away did false 
sects arise. 76 Such a fantasy is not only certainly false (the Epistles of Paul 
already attest to numerous schisms, including his own, and there had surely 
been countless further splits all through the first century), it is also an obvi· 
ous motive for inventing tales of family and eyewitnesses to Jesus.77 And 
from the details we find in the stories he told, we can tell they are unbeliev­
able. Nor is any source given for them. So no reliable support for historicity 
can be had here. The probability of there being such tales is the same on 
either theory. 
74. Eusebius, History of the Church 3.19-20 (Eusebius wrote in the early fourth 
century). Vespasian is supposed to have slain all the Davidic heirs already (3.12), which 
is almost as implausible; 3.1 1 also mentions the family of Jesus, with details that might 
derive from Hegesippus, such as that the Gospel figure of Clopas was the brother of 
the Joseph who was the father of Jesus; nothing is said of how Hegesippus would have 
known this-probably it is just an interpretation of Jn 19.25, which itself is probably 
fabricated. It's possible, as well, that the entire succession narrative Eusebius surveys 
came from Hegesippus, indeed much of it could be the latter's own invention (cf., 
e.g., Eusebius, History of the Church 3.32), the same way rabbinical authors invented 
haggadah for the various persons named in the OT; here, Hegesippus was composing 
haggadah for the persons named in the Gospels. 
75. Suetonius, Domitian 10; and Dio Cassius, Roman History 67.14 (both authors 
certainly knew the difference between Christians and Jews). It was only later Christian 
legend that converted this event into a persecution of Christians. See Carrier, Not the 
Impossible Faith, p. 154. 
76. Eusebius, History ofthe Church 3.32. 
77. Confirming the Noll thesis (see §12). 

332 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
9. Josephus and the Testimonia Flaviana 
There are two passages in the Jewish Antiquities (or Ant.) of Josephus, 
originally published shortly after 93 CE, that (in the present text we have) 
mention Jesus Christ as a historical person.78 However, both are almost 
certainly interpolations made by Christian scribes.79 ln fact Josephus never 
mentioned Jesus Christ or Christians. We can therefore exclude these pas­
sages from our evidence. This is a somewhat controversial conclusion, so I 
will summarize the very reasonable basis for it. 
The first passage in question is called the Testimonium Flavianum (TF). 
It now reads as fol1ows: 
And there was about this time Jesus, a wise man, if we really must call 
him a man, for he was a doer of incredible deeds, a teacher of men who 
receive the truth gladly, and he won over many Jews, and also many of 
the Greeks. This man was the Christ. And when, on the accusation of the 
leading men among us, Pilate had condemned him to a cross, those who 
had first loved him did not cease to. For he appeared to them on the third 
day, alive again, the divine prophets having spoken these and countless 
other marvels about him. And even until now the tribe of the Christians, 
so named from this man, has not failed.80 
Of course, even at a glance anyone can see this would be an absurd para­
graph from the hand of a devout Jew and sophisticated author who other­
wise writes far more elegant prose, and usually responsibly explains to his 
readers anything strange. This passage is self-evidently a fawning and gul­
lible Christian fabrication, in fact demonstrably derived from the Emmaus 
narrative in the Gospel of Luke, inserted into the text at a point where it 
does not even make any narrative sense. apart from being in a survey of 
the crimes of Pontius Pi late that contributed (in the long run) to inciting 
78. The year the Antiquities was published can be inferred from remarks in Ant. 
20.267. 
79. I demonstrate this conclusively in Richard Carrier, 'Origen, Eusebius, and 
the Accidental Interpolation in Josephus, Jewish Antiquities 20.200', Journal of 
Early Christian Studies 20.4 (Winter 2012), pp. 489-54. For another extensive critical 
discussion see Doherty, Jesus: Neither God nor Man, pp. 533-86. For a crucial and 
extensive survey of scholarship examining these passages see James Carleton Paget, 
'Some Observations on Josephus and Christianity', Journal of Theological Studies 
52.2 (October 2001), pp. 539-624 (most of which treats the longer passage; pp. 546-54 
treats the shorter passage); with Alice Whealey, Josephus on Jesus: The Testimonium 
Flavianum Controversy from Late Antiquity to Modern Times (New York: P. Lang, 
2003); Van Voorst, Jesus Outside the New Testament, pp. 81-104; and Theissen and 
Merz, The Historical Jesus, pp. 64-74. 
80. Josephus, Ant. 18.63-64. 

. ; 
8. Extrabiblical Evidence 
333 
the Jews to war.81 There is no plausible way the above narrative fits that 
context: the Christians are not being connected with the war in any such 
way, and the Jewish elite are not outraged by the execution of Jesus but in 
fact endorse it. 
Historians have tried to rescue this passage by 'rewriting' it, remov· 
ing everything that Josephus would surely never say, and then claim ing he 
surely said what's left and Christians just changed it up. But this is such an 
extraordinarily improbable thesis it must be rejected outright. For exam· 
pie, Josephus must have mentioned 'Christ' because he presumes it when 
he explains the name 'Christian' in the last line, but there is no plausible 
way Josephus would say this (or even 'he was believed to be the Christ', as 
some later quotations have it) without explaining to his intended Gentile 
8 I. This paragraph is so heavily indebted to the Gospel of Luke we can be certain 
that that is its source: G.J. Goldberg, 'The Coincidences of the Testimonium of Josephus 
and the Emmaus Narrative of Luke', Journal for the Study of the Pseudepigrapha 13 
(1995), pp. 59-77. Goldberg demonstrates nineteen unique correspondences between 
Luke's Emmaus account and the Testimonium Flavianum, all nineteen in exactly the 
same order (with some order and word variations only within each item). There are 
some narrative differences (which are expected due to the contexts being different 
and as a result of common kinds of authorial embellishment), and there is a twentieth 
correspondence out of order (identifying Jesus as 'the Christ'). But otherwise, the 
coincidences here are very improbable on any other hypothesis than dependence. 
Goldberg also shows that the Testimonium contains vocabulary and phrasing that 
is particularly Christian (indeed, Lukan) and un-Josephan. He concludes that this 
means either a Christian wrote it or Josephus slavishly copied a Christian source. and 
the latter is wholly implausible (Josephus would treat such a source more critically, 
creatively and informedly). Supporting the un-Josephan character ofthe language and 
phrasing of this paragraph is Ken Olson. 'Eusebius and the Testimonium Flavianum', 
Catholic Biblical Quarterly 61.2 (April 1999), pp. 305-22; whose conclusions are 
only tempered a bit by Paget. 'Some Observations'. pp. 572-78; and Alice Whealey, 
'Josephus, Eusebius of Caesarea, and the Testimonium Flavianum', in Josephus 
und das Neue Testament: wechselseitige Wahrnehmungen (ed. Christfried Bottrich 
and Jens Herzer; Ttlbingen: Mohr Siebeck, 2007), pp. 73-116. Although I remain 
undecided, Olson has made an increasingly strong case that Eusebius is the forger 
of the TF, and even famed Josephus expert Louis Feldman agrees that's plausible: 
see Ken Olson, 'A Eusebian Reading of the Testimonium Flavianum', in Eusebius 
of Caesarea: Tradition and Innovations (ed. Aaron Johnson and Jeremy Schott; 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2013), pp. 97-1 14: and Louis Feldman, 
·on the Authenticity of the Testimonium Flavianum Attributed to Josephus', in 
New Perspectives on Jewish Christian Relations (ed. Elisheva Carlebach and Jacob 
Schechter; Leiden: Brill, 2012), pp. 14-30. In fact, the most common arguments for 
its authenticity are actually among the best arguments for Eusebian forgery: see Ken 
Olson, 'The Testimonium Flavianum, Eusebius, and Consensus', Historical Jesus 
Research (August 13, 2013) at http:/lhistoricaljesusresearch.blogspot.com/2013/08/ 
the-testimonium-flavianum-eusebius-and.html . 

334 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
readers what a 'Christ' was and what it meant for Jesus to have been one, 
and thus why Josephus is mentioning it or how Jesus even came to acquire 
the moniker. 82 So we can strike those two sentences. Josephus cannot have 
written them. He also would not have written such fawningly unintelligible 
things as 'if we really must call him a man' or 'doer of incredible deeds' 
or 'teacher . . .  of the truth' without explaining to his Gentile readers what 
he meant-or giving examples, as Josephus normally would. So those sen­
tences must be struck. He cannot have written them. Nor would Josephus 
say things like 'he won over' many Jews and Greeks, without explaining 
exactly to what he won them over-and thus what defined someone as a 
Christian, what doctrines they held. Josephus does this for every other sect 
he discusses (such as the Sadducees, Pharisees, Essenes, and, under the 
rubric of 'the fourth philosophy', the Zealots). So he certainly would do 
so here, the more so as his remarks would be unfathomable to most of his 
readers without that explanation. So we can strike that sentence. He cannot 
have written it. 
Nor would Josephus give his readers a mysteriously truncated summary 
of what can only mean the Gospel story of 'leading men' accusing Jesus 
and getting him executed-without explaining what any of that meant. 
What leading men? What accusations? Why? Why did Pilate accede to 
them? Was Jesus guilty? Why did Pilate conclude he was? Why didn't the 
Jews execute Jesus themselves? And if he was such a wonderful, truth­
telling, miracle-working wise man whom many loved, how did he end 
up being convicted of a capital crime? The failure to explain these things 
makes the paragraph intolerably maddening to any reader, and would have 
been likewise to Josephus. He could not possibly have written this. So that 
sentence must go. 
Likewise why does Josephus mention Jesus 'appearing' on 'the third 
day', which is a Christian credal statement that Josephus would not pos­
sibly employ without explaining why, or what he thought this meant-did 
Jesus escape his execution? Was he therefore a fugitive on the run? What 
happened to him after this? Or did he appear in a dream or as a phantom? 
Or was he resurrected from the dead, a concept Josephus explains several 
times elsewhere in his work, so surely he would make a point of it here, 
if this is what he meant (or thought his source meant). So he cannot have 
written this, either. And surely it is absurd to think Josephus agreed (much 
less would just so casually say) that Jesus fulfilled biblical prophecy-at 
all, much less in these specific details (as well as 'countless others'), as this 
passage says. So he certainly did not write that sentence, either. That leaves 
us with only one sentence left over: 'and there was about this time Jesus, a 
82. That the Antiquities was written specifically for a Gentile audience: Josephus, 
Ant. l.pr.5-10. 

8. Extrabiblica/ Evidence 
335 
wise man'. After which no story follows. We can conclude Josephus didn't 
write this, either. He discusses several men named Jesus throughout his 
works, so he would certainly either identify this one (as we'll see, e.g., 
he identifies another Jesus as 'the son of Damneus'), or explain why he is 
suddenly interrupting his narrative to talk about this one. Otherwise this 
transition is simply too abrupt and bizarre for Josephus. 
All these improbable sentences stack up to an enormous improbability 
that Josephus wrote any of this. And that's just from examining its content 
alone.83 The paragraph is simply unsalvageable. Nor should anyone desire 
to salvage it. It is obviously much too brief and much too obviously a sim­
plistic Christian production based on the Gospel of Luke. Moreover, no 
other author had ever heard of this passage until Eusebius in the fourth cen­
tury-not even Origen, who otherwise cites and quotes Josephus several 
times, so surely Origin would have mentioned this passage had it existed 
in his copy of the Antiquities. The probability of his silence is very low 
otherwise, and that probability reduces even further when we consider the 
silence of every other Christian and pagan author, even if (and even collec­
tively) their silence is not as improbable as Origen's.84 
Considering just Origen alone, there are several passages where it's 
almost certain he would have remarked upon this paragraph, even quoted 
it, had he known of it. For example, in his treatise Against Ce/sus Origen 
is tasked with proving there was any near-contemporary attestation to the 
affairs of Jesus.85 Yet all he can present in said proof are passages in Jose­
phus attesting John the Baptist and (supposedly) James (see below).86 Like­
wise, at many other turns in his contest with Celsus, Origen would surely 
have had irresistible use of the fact that this same Josephus attested to the 
ministry of Jesus, declared him wise (and thus did not think him a char­
latan, as Celsus persistently argues), corroborated his resurrection on the 
third day (a fact Celsus insists only Christians affirm), and confirmed that 
he fulfilled prophecy (a major point Origen struggles to establish, and for 
which the agreement of a Jew would have been priceless). 
All attempts to explain away Origen's silence require adopting one or 
more ad hoc hypotheses for which there is no evidence, such as that Jose­
phus had written something wildly different, which the TF then replaced; 
or are illogical-for instance, even if an original TF had treated Christians 
negatively, that would even more have demanded a response, not less so, as 
83. On this general point see Paget, 'Some Observations', pp. 581-603 and 606-19. 
84. That no writer before Eusebius references it, Origen most conspicuously: Paget, 
'Some Observations', pp. 555-65; and Whealey, Josephus on Jesus, pp. 6-18. 
85. This is the very task he sets forth in Origen, Against Celsus 1.42, in response to 
the several challenges made by Celsus as noted in Against Celsus 1.37-41 . 
86. Origen, Against Celsus 1.47. 

336 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
the last thing Origen could allow is Celsus {or any other critic) citing Jose­
phus, the very source whose authority Origen praises, against him, without 
a preemptive apologetic. So the silence of Origen is simply very improb­
able unless there was no TF at all. The silence of all the rest of Christian 
and anti-Christian literature only adds to that improbability. And the obvi­
ous improbability of the content of every single sentence (as just surveyed) 
adds even more. So we are already looking at an extremely low probabi I ity 
that this passage, or anything even remotely like it, existed in the original 
Antiquities. 
And yet there are two more reasons that are even more decisiveҲ sinking 
this probability well toward impossibility: (1) since the very next paragraph 
begins 'about the same time also another terrible thing threw the Jews into 
disorder' (Ant. 18.65), Josephus clearly had just ended with the sedition 
resulting in a public massacre (described in Ant. 18.60-62), leaving no logi­
cal place for the unrelated digression on Jesus and the Christians (in Ant. 
1 8.63-64)-the original text obviously went directly from the massacre to 
the following scandal, with no digression in between; and (2) the fact that 
his very next story, also about a religious controversy (involving Judaism 
and Isis cult), is told at great and elaborate length (in Ant. 18.65-80, a narra­
tive eight times longer than the TF, and yet on a much more trivial affair). 
The latter demonstrates that Josephus would have written a great deal more 
about the Jesus affair if he had written anything about it at all, whereas a 
forger would have been limited by what may have then been the remaining 
space available on a standard scroll for volume 18 (or by the space available 
in the margin, if that is where the passage began its life), hence explaining 
its bizarre brevity, in comparison with the preceding and following narra­
tives, and in light of its astonishing content, which normally, as I've noted. 
would require several explanations and digressions which are curiously 
absent. I believe these two facts alone combine to argue conclusively that 
there cannot have been here any reference to Jesus in the original Antiqui­
ties, even one differently worded than we now have. When combined with 
the preceding considerations, the overall probability of any other conclu­
sion approaches zero. 
It is sometimes claimed that we have an Arabic version of this passage 
that comes from an earlier manuscript of Josephus than is quoted by Euse­
bius, and its content is closer to what a Jewish author might write, and 
therefore this 'confirms' Josephus wrote something close to the TF after all. 
However, it has since been proved that this Arabic quotation is of a Syriac 
quotation of a manuscript of Eusebius, and thus represents a text that does 
not precede Eusebius but derives from him.81 Its content was simply aJtered 
87. See Paget, 'Some Observations', pp. 554-624 (and pp. 568-71 for further reasons 
to reject the conclusion); Olson, 'Eusebius and the Testimonium Flavianum', pp. 319-

8. Extrabiblical Evidence 
337 
in transmission to sound more plausibly Jewish. But it most definitely does 
not come from Josephus. 88 There is therefore no basis whatever for believ­
ing any mention of Jesus Christ occurred at this point in the Antiquities. 
That leaves one other passage in Josephus, where it is said, 'The brother 
of Jesus (who was called Christ), the name for whom was James, and some 
others' were tried and stoned by the high priest Ananus for unspecified 
crimes and in defiance of proper criminal procedure. 89 Obviously, if Jesus 
Christ had a brother, then Jesus Christ existed. So Josephus is here said 
to confirm the historicity of Jesus, by knowing details about his family. 
However, I have elsewhere demonstrated that the phrase 'who was called 
Christ' is an accidental interpolation and was never written by Josephus.90 
It entered the manuscripts of Josephus sometime in the late third century. 
22; and most importantly, Alice Whealey, 'The Testimonium Flavianum in Syriac and 
Arabic', New Testament Studies 54 (2008), pp. 573-90. 
88. The scholar who demonstrated this (Alice Whealey) has tried to argue that it 
nevertheless represents an original version of Eusebius's quote of the TF and thus, 
in turn, represents the actual wording of Josephus-e.g. reading 'he was believed to 
be the Christ' rather than 'he was the Christ', thus sounding more like something a 
devout Jew might say (even though Josephus would then be compelled to explain what 
a 'Christ' was, yet doesn't). However, Whealey's theory requires the extraordinarily 
improbable assumption that all subsequent manuscripts of the Antiquities were 
emended to agree with the corruption (to 'he was the Christ', because all extant 
manuscripts now so read), and likewise all manuscripts of Eusebius, in all the places 
where he repeats this quote (because he repeats it several times, not just once). 
That all extant manuscripts of the Antiquities would so perfectly agree with a later 
corruption that somehow simultaneously occurred in all the works and manuscripts 
of Eusebius (which corruption by Whealey's argument must have occurred after the 
fourth century) is simply too improbable to be plausible. More likely some early 
copy of Eusebius's History alone was 'improved' by a scribe thinking to restore a 
more plausible quotation from a Jew (thus producing, e.g., 'he was believed to be 
the Christ'), and it is quotations of this that we see in Whealey's cited examples. 
Because it is inherently less likely that all manuscript traditions of all the works of 
Eusebius and all manuscript traditions of Josephus were conspiratorially emended 
the same way than that only one manuscript tradition of a single work of Eusebius 
was emended the other way and thus (as one would then expect) only occasionally 
evidenced in quotation (which, as Whealey shows, is what we observe). Her argument 
for authenticity is therefore to be rejected. Add to that the fact that even the altered 
TF that Wheeley defends is wholly implausible from Josephus (as I show from my 
survey of its content here), the total silence of all other authors (especially Origen) 
before Eusebius, and the two facts of its position in the text (that it interrupts the text 
as we have it, and is far too short to be a plausible insertion from Josephus), and there 
is simply no credible case to be made in defense of the TF whatever. It simply wasn't 
there, and we need to give up trying to rescue it. 
89. Josephus, Ant. 20.200. 
90. In Carrier, 'Origen, Eusebius, and the Accidental Interpolation'. 

338 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
We know this because Origen never quotes this passage, even where 
scholars claim he does. In fact Origen shows no knowledge of this passage 
as we have it, or the story it relates, or where it was located in the works 
of Josephus; whereas Eusebius is the first to actually quote the passage we 
have in the present text of Josephus. He is thus the first to have known of 
it. Where Origen is now claimed to be citing this passage, he can be shown 
to have confused a story written by the Christian hagiographer Hegesippus 
(whom we just examined in §8) as being in Josephus. At that time, the orig­
inal text of Josephus probably read either 'the brother of Jesus, the name 
for whom was James, and some others' or 'the brother of Jesus the son of 
Damneus, the name for whom was James, and some others', either way 
only later accidentally incorporating a Christian marginal or interlinear 
note (by insertion or replacement, to correct what a later copyist mistook 
as an error), thereby eclipsing the original meaning of the passage, which 
was that Ananus was punished for the offense of extralegally executing the 
brother of 'Jesus ben Damneus' by being removed from office and replaced 
by that same Jesus ben Damneus (as the narrative goes on to relate). 
There are six arguments for this conclusion, which together establ ish 
such an extremely low probability that any Christ was originally mentioned 
here that we can dismiss this evidence as of no value to determining the 
historicity of Jesus. 91 
First, 'who was called Christ' is exactly the kind of thing a scholar or 
scribe would add as an interlinear note here-to remind him and future 
readers that (or so the annotator believed) the Jesus here mentioned is Jesus 
Christ, as we would do today with an informative footnote or marginal 
note. Indeed these kinds of marginal 'passage identifiers' are common 
in extant manuscripts. For example, one manuscript of Tacitus has simi­
lar comments in the margins identifying the passage mentioning Christ 
there, for the benefit of Christian readers skimming the text for passages 
of interest. And in this case, the idiom and vocabulary of 'who was called 
Christ' is a well-established Christian idiom (derived from the Gospels), 
commonly used by Origen, yet wholly alien to Josephus (who never other­
wise uses the word 'Christ').92 In fact the complete phrase 'Jesus, who was 
91 . Evidence and scholarship on all these points is provided in Carrier. 'Origen, 
Eusebius'. 
92. The same idiom appears not only in Mt. 1.16, but also in Mt. 27. 17 and 27.22: 
Jn 4.25; in the Clementine Homilies 18.4.5 and Justin Martyr, Apology 1.30.1 (as 
well as Dialogue with Trypho 32.1, although there perhaps derogatorily). The phrase 
is frequently quoted from the Gospels throughout Origen 's works (e.g. Against 
Celsus pr.2.12; Commentaries on the Gospel of John 1.5.29; 1.21.126; 13.26; Series 
of Commentaries on the Gospel of Matthew 255; Scho/ia on Matthew 17.308) and 
is used in a related fashion in Origen, Homilies (on Jeremiah) 16.10 and Against 
Ce/sus 4.28. And of course in every case where Origen paraphrases Hegesippus and 

8. Extrabiblical Evidence 
339 
called Christ' is (apart from a necessary change of case) identical to that of 
Mt. 1.16 (which happens to be a passage about Jesus' family), which is thus 
a phrase Josephus would not be as likely to use as a Christian annotator 
would. Though such a phrase would not be impossible for Josephus to con­
struct on his own, such a coincidence is less probable than if it originated 
from a Christian hand. 
Second, the words and structure chosen here are indeed the ones that 
would commonly be used in an interlinear note, essentially just a particip­
ial clause-remarkable brevity for something that would sooner otherwise 
spark a digression or cross-reference, had Josephus actually written those 
words. Obviously there would almost certainly be a reference to the TF, if it 
existed (perhaps even identifying the book in which it appeared, so readers 
would know what scroll to pick up to find out or remind themselves who 
or what this 'Christ' is and why he's being mentioned, or at the very least 
mentioning that he had previously discussed this person), especially since 
the reference is so obscure. The more so as the extant TF does not mention · 
Jesus having a brother, nor explains why his brother would be a target of 
prosecution, much less defense by other leading Jews; indeed it mentions 
no persecution of Christians at all but instead emphasizes their unimpeded 
thriving 'to this day'. Thus, there would be much to explain here even if 
the TF had existed. For example, in this very same narrative about James, 
Josephus refers back to his previous discussion of the Sadducees when he 
mentions them, and explains why mentioning them is relevant to his present 
story.93 Yet surely 'Christ' would rate at least the same treatment, being the 
more obscure (as Sadducees were already mentioned several times previ­
ously, even in the very same book: e.g. Ant. 18.16), and an explanation or 
cross-reference to the TF would be even more natural (e.g. 'the one called 
Christ whom I mentioned before')-after all, for the Sadducees he gave us 
both a reference and an explanation of relevance; likewise when he men .. 
tions Judas the Galilean in Ant. 20.102, we get an 'as I mentioned before' 
and an explanation besides. 
Or if there was no TF (and as we just saw, surely there wasn't), certainly 
we'd find here an explanation of why this Jesus was called 'Christ', what 
that word even meant (at the very least explaining its connection to Chris­
tians and James's being one, if that is even what is meant-since James 
is not said to be a Christian here, or in the TF, thus the text as we have it 
here requires an assumption only a Christian would make, further arguing 
against this being from the hand of Josephus), and why Josephus thought it 
mistakenly attributes the material to Josephus: Origen, Against Celsus 1.47 and 2.1 3; 
and Commentary on Matthew 10.17. By contrast, of course, Josephus never elsewhere 
uses it. 
93. Josephus. Ant. 20. 199 (probably referring to Ant. 13.293-98). 

340 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
important to mention either, since the passage as written leaves no stated 
reason for either Jesus or his moniker Christ even to be mentioned at all­
and any inferences to such a reason would only occur to a Christian, not 
to Josephus or his intended readers, who would not know anything about 
the obscurities of Jewish laws or religion, which is why he always explains 
such things when they come up elsewhere.94 In short, such omissions here 
are far more probable if 'called Christ' is an accidental i nterpolation, than 
if they are the words of Josephus. 
Third, the story as we have it makes no sense as being the execution of 
Christians, not only because no such basis for the executions is mentioned, 
but also because many influential Jews are outraged by the execution of 
this James and his men and seek the punishment of Ananus (and the Jewish 
and Roman authorities fully concur and duly punish him), which makes 
little sense if he was executing members of the hated (if not actually ille­
gal) sect of Christians. Indeed, writing for a Roman audience in the era of 
Domitian, Josephus would be describing an inexplicable course of events, 
where the execution of Christians was considered a legal matter of course, 
not an act warranting outrage and dismissal from office.95 In fact we get no 
sense from the way the story is told that there was any popular animosity 
toward this James and his affiliates. To the contrary, all the animosity in the 
story is against their killers. Regardless of what Josephus himself may have 
thought about Christians, it's more likely he would feel a need to explain 
this strange course of events to his Roman audience than simply gloss over 
it-whereas if this wasn't a passage about Christians, then its content is not 
improbable at all. 
Fourth, apart from the execution being a stoning (the most common 
form of execution employed by the Jews, and therefore not at all peculiar to 
or indicative of Christian victims), this story does not agree with any other 
account of the death of James 'the brother' of Christ. It therefore is not 
likely to actually be an account of the death of James the brother of Christ. 
94. Josephus otherwise never uses the word 'Christ' (even where it appears 
in the TF it is widely regarded as an interpolation even by scholars who accept the 
authenticity of the TF: Van Voorst, Jesus, pp. 91-92; and as explained in an earlier note, 
I find Whealey's attempt to defend it implausible). That Josephus often refers readers to 
his previous discussions of obscure persons and subjects: Paget, 'Some Observations', 
pp. 553-54. These and other considerations against this passage are further discussed 
in Olson, 'Eusebius', pp. 314-19. 
95. See the comparable course of events, and elite reaction to it, in Pliny the 
Younger, Epistles 10.96-97; and of course Tacitus's remarks about popular sentiment 
in Annals 15.44 (if you accept that passage as authentic). and the representation of elite 
Jewish reaction to Christianity in Acts (if we are to trust its account at all). 

8. Extrabiblica/ Evidence 
341 
It certainly was not known to be such by any Christian who composed 
those later accounts of that legendary figure's death (as we saw in §8). 
Fifth, the book of Acts shows no knowledge of this event. And it is nigh 
impossible for a Christian of the time to know less than Josephus about 
the fate of 'James the brother of Jesus Christ' (particularly a Christian 
claiming to have researched the history of his church: Lk. 1.1-4). In fact 
Luke makes a point of always depicting the Romans protecting or rescu­
ing Christians from the excesses of Jewish persecution or other dire fates 
(e.g. Gallio: Acts 18.12-23; Lysias and Festus: Acts 23-24; Roman guards: 
Acts 16.19-40; 27.42-44), and of depicting some among the Jewish elite 
as being less negatively disposed toward Christians (Gamaliel: Acts 5.34-
42; even Herod Agrippa: Acts 25-26). ln its present form, Ant. 20.200 has 
all of this. Indeed it hands Luke a rhetorical coup: Romans (and Herod 
Agrippa himseiO punishing Jews for persecuting Christians. There is no 
possible way Luke would have passed up an opportunity to include this in 
his account. The onJy explanation for why he didn't that has any probability 
is that this event never happened-yet it is wholly improbable that Jose­
phus would fabricate it. In fact, as Luke appears to have used Josephus as 
a source (Chapter 7, §4), Luke could not have found any story about James 
'the brother of Christ' in Josephus. Therefore, it wasn't there. 
Sixth, and most conclusively, Origen has no knowledge of this passage, 
despite being intimately familiar with Josephus and citing him often. We 
can therefore be certain Origen's copy did not contain a reference to Christ, 
here or anywhere. This has commonly been denied, but in ignorance: 
where scholars claim Origen is quoting this passage, he is demonstrably 
not. Meanwhile all other arguments against an interpolation occurring here 
are only against deliberate interpolation, but that is not what happened; the 
interpolation of 'called Christ' was more likely an accident. So we already 
have five arguments for, and none against, with a great weight of improb­
ability ruling this passage out of consideration. But this sixth argument 
settles it: all passages where it is claimed Origen is attesting to Josephus's 
mention of Christ as the brother of James actually paraphrase a completely 
different story found only in Hegesippus, a story that is a patent Christian 
hagiography and thus cannot have originated with Josephus. Origen was 
simply misattributing it to him. 
In each case Origen quotes nothing from Josephus, except the words 'the 
brother of Jesus who was called Christ', but that's just the combination of 
two phrases, 'the brother of Jesus' and 'who was called Christ', the former 
entirely common (and thus not distinctive of Josephus or Christianity) and 
the latter the accidental interpolation that did not originate with Josephus 
(for all the reasons already surveyed), but is instead (as I already noted) a 
well-established Christian idiom, commonly used by Origen. By contrast, 

342 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
Josephus never otherwise uses the word 'Christ', and if he ever did, he 
would have explained what it meant and why he was using it. That he 
didn't entails he didn't write those words here. That Origen kept claiming 
he was paraphrasing Josephus, when instead he was actually paraphrasing 
Hegesippus, was simply a product of an error of memory, which Origen is 
known for; in fact Hegesippus and Josephus were known to be confused by 
others, too, so it was evidently an easy mistake to make.96 
I n  summary, there is no evidence Josephus ever mentioned Jesus Christ. 
There is therefore no evidence here to consider. 
10. Pliny and Tacitus 
We can see Josephus is a wash. That leaves only two other authors who 
wrote before 120 CE that actually mention Jesus (or at least, Christ): Pliny the 
Younger and Tacitus.97 These authors are particularly significant because 
they were not only contemporaries but best friends, who frequently cor­
responded and exchanged information for writing their histories, and were 
governing adjacent provinces at the very time Pliny first discovered what 
Christians preached.98 Pliny tells us that he had no idea what Christians 
were or believed until he interrogated some of them and discovered it was 
some sort of base superstition involving the worship of a certain 'Christ' 
who was something like a God (quasi deo), but he gives no further details 
96. A good example ofOrigen making errors of memory is very much like this one: 
he confused something he had read in the Protevangelium of James (specifically Pro/. 
Jas. §23) as having been in Josephus, and thus incorrectly cites Josephus as his source: 
see Paget, 'Some Observations', pp. 550-51; and Whealey, Josephus on Jesus, p. 18. 
The authors Josephus and Hegesippus were also confused in some later manuscripts 
(thus it is an established error other readers of the time made), and some scholars have 
already suspected that this is what happened here: Paget, 'Some Observations·. pp. 
550-51 n. 43. 
97. Pliny, Letters 10.96; and Tacitus, Annals 15.44. See, e.g., Van Voorst, Jesus 
Outside the New Testament, pp. 23-29 and 39-53; Theissen and Merz, Historical Jesus. 
pp. 79-83; and R.T. France, The Evidence for Jesus (Downers Grove, IL: JnterVarsity 
Press, 1986), pp. 21-23 and 42-43; Howard Clark Kee, Jesus in History: An Approach 
to the Study ofthe Gospels (New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 2nd edn. 1970). 
pp. 45-47; and also Bradley Peper and Mark DelCogliano. 'The Pliny and Trajan 
Correspondence', in The Historical Jesus in Context ( ed. Levine, A IIi son and Crossan). 
pp. 366-71. For extensive critical discussion see also Doherty, Jesus: Neither God nor 
Man, pp. 587-630 and 637-42. 
98. On their being best friends, see evidence summarized in Richard Carrier, Hitler 
Homer Bible Christ: The Historical Papers of Richard Carrier /995-2013 (Amherst. 
NY: Prometheus, 2014), p. 372 n. 6. 

8. Extrabiblical Evidence 
343 
about him (not even the name 'Jesus'), and says nothing pertinent to estab­
lishing historicity.99 
At best, we might assume these Christians repeated to Pliny mate­
rial from the Gospels (at least some of those had been in circulation by 
then), but as such this is not independent evidence and therefore useless. 
Pliny's procedure involved no independent fact-checking, and from his 
behavior and attitude, we can conclude his effort would have been typi­
cal, and thus Tacitus is unlikely to have done any better. Pliny had been 
governor of Bithynia (now northern Turkey) for over a year already before 
even learning there were any Christians in his province, and before that 
he held the post of consul (the highest possible office in the entire Roman 
Empire, short of actually being emperor). He had also been a lawyer in 
Roman courts for several decades, then served in Rome as praetor (the 
ancient equivalent of both chief of police and attorney general), and then 
served as one ofTrajan's top legal advisors for several years before he was 
appointed to govern Bithynia. And yet, he tells us, he had never attended a 
trial of Christians and knew nothing of what they believed or what crimes 
they were guilty of. This confirms that his father, Pliny the Elder, never 
f 
discussed Christians in his account of the Neronian fire-despite having 
been an eyewitness to those events and devoting an entire volume to that 
year (though his account is now lost). For if he had, h.is devoted admirer, 
nephew and adopted son Pliny the Younger would surely have read it and 
thus would not have known 'nothing' about Christians as he reports in his 
letter to Trajan. 
' 
We can therefore assume Tacitus would have been no better or otherwise 
informed when he wrote that Nero scapegoated the Christians for burning 
down the heart of Rome in 64 CE. The present text of Tacitus reads: 
Nero found culprits and inflicted the most exquisite tortures on those 
hated for their abominations, whom the people called Chrestians [sic]. 
Christ, the author of this name, was executed by the procurator Pontius 
Pilate in the reign of Tiberius, and the most mischievous superstition, 
checked for the moment, again broke out not only in Judea, the source of 
99. For my complete analysis of this passage see Carrier, Not the Impossible Faith, 
pp. 418-22; see also Knight, Disciples of the Beloved One, pp. 34-36 and 209-12. Note 
that Pliny's hesitant phrase 'as if to a God' (quasi deo) could reflect his response to the 
exoteric myth (if his Christian informants were simply repeating the Gospels to him, 
in which Jesus is allegorically presented as a historical man) or the esoteric one (Jesus 
then being confusingly explained to him as a celestial archangel or demigod whom 
they pray to, but not exactly equal to 'God'). It could also be a textual corruption, as 
there is some external evidence that Pliny may have originally written Christo et Deo, 
'to Christ and God', or Christo ut Deo, 'to Christ as God'. See Doherty, Jesus: Neither 
God nor Man, p. 640. 

344 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
this evil, but even in Rome, where al1 things hideous or shameful flow in 
from every part of the world and become popular. 
Accordingly, arrests were first made of those who confessed; then, 
upon their information, an immense multitude was convicted, not so 
much for the crime of burning the city as because of the hatred of man­
kind. Mockery of every sort was added to their death . . . .  [Tacitus here 
describes their torments.) Hence, even for criminals who deserved the 
most extreme punishments, there arose a feeling of compassion; for it no 
longer appeared that they were being destroyed for the public good, but 
rather to glut the cruelty of one man. 
They key line here is 'Christ, the author of this name, was executed by 
the procurator Pontius Pilate in the reign of Tiberius'. This is the first-ever 
reference to a historical Jesus outside the NT, dating to around 116 CE (very 
near our cut-off date for usable evidence). 100 
If the passage is authentic. I elsewhere demonstrate (following the argu­
ments of scholars before me who have argued the same) that this line is 
probably an interpolation, and that Tacitus in fact originally described 
not the Christians being scapegoated for the fire, but followers of the Jew-
· 
ish instigator Chrestus first suppressed under Claudius (as reported by 
Suetonius: see §1 1). The line about Christ being executed by Pilate was 
added sometime after the mid-fourth century. Before then, no one, Chris­
tian or non-Christian, ever heard of this persecution event under Nero, 
or of any reference to Christians in Tacitus; this event is not mentioned 
even when second-century Christians told stories of Nero persecuting 
Christians! 101 However, we need not rely on that conclusion for the present 
analysis, and to demonstrate that I will simply assume for the sake of argu­
ment that this passage is entirely authentic as received. 
If we instead assume the passage has not been tampered with, then where 
would Tacitus have learned of this? Not likely from government records. 
His report contains no distinctive information that one would expect from 
such a source, and Tacitus would not have wasted countless hours of his 
life hunting through obscure archives just to verify a single embarrassing 
anecdote the Christians themselves were already admitting to. Moreover, it 
is very unlikely any such records would have survived in Rome for Tacitus 
to consult, the capitol's libraries having burned to the ground at least twice 
in the interim, once under Nero, and again under Titus.102 
100. On dating the text: in Tacitus, Annals 2.61 and 4.4-5, references are made to 
Trajan's annexation of Parthian territories in 1 16 CE but not their loss a year or two later. 
101 . See Richard Carrier, 'The Prospect of a Christian Interpolation in Tacitus. 
Annals 15.44', Vigi/iae christianae 68 (2014), pp. 1-20. 
102. The fire of 64 CE is of course being recorded by Tacitus himself (and Cassius 
Dio, Roman History 62.16-18; also Pliny the Elder, Natural History 17.1.5, who was 

8. Extrabib/ical Evidence 
345 
It's also unlikely Tacitus learned of this from earlier historians of Nero 
(such as Pliny the Elder, as discussed in §3), since had they written about 
Christians we would probably know of this, from their histories having 
been preserved (precisely because they mentioned Christ) or quoted (by 
Christians or their critics). Likewise, that Christians appear to have had no 
knowledge of the Neronian persecution having any connection whatever 
with the burning of Rome further entai ls no earlier historian is likely to 
have made such a connection either (as otherwise such pervasive ignorance 
even by the Christians themselves is nearly inexplicable). If Tacitus really 
made such a connection, he was apparently the first, and possibly by mis­
take (conflating some other persecution of Christians, or even a Christian 
legend about a persecution that never really happened, with the burning of 
Rome; for as we shall see, Suetonius had no knowledge of such a connec­
tion, either). 
But we know Tacitus asked Pliny for information to include in his histor­
ical books. Thus the fact that Pliny discovered what Christians preached in 
110 CE, right when Tacitus was governing an adjoining province and writ­
ing his histories, and just a few years before Tacitus completed his Annals 
before 117 CE, suggests the most likely chain of information was Chris­
tians telling Pliny about the Gospels, then Pliny telling Tacitus, and Tacitus 
then reporting (what would be to him) the most embarrassing details in his 
Annals. That would explain why his information matches what was already 
reported in the Gospels by that time and gives no further detail. At the 
very least, this cannot be ruled out. Accordingly, we cannot verify that the 
information in Tacitus comes from any source independent of the Gospels. 
And non-independent evidence carries zero weight. 
So either Tacitus never mentioned Christ or his mention of Christ cannot 
be shown to be independent testimony. Either way, his information has no 
effect on the probability of myth or historicity. And neither does the infor­
mation recorded by Pliny. 
living in Rome at the time); the fire of 80 cE is reported in Suetonius, Titus 8.3 (and 
Domitian was tasked with rebuilding the libraries: Suetonius, Domitian 20). Officially 
published records that we know Tacitus reHed upon, like the acts of the Senate, would 
have survived in libraries elsewhere in the empire, but those would not mention an 
obscure execution in Judea. However, we must dismiss the argument that Tacitus 
can't have been citing government records because he gets the office of Pilate wrong, 
mis-identifying him as a procurator when in fact he was a prefect, because Pilate was 
both a procurator and a prefect (as most equestrian governors were), and Tacitus had 
particular rhetorical reasons to prefer mentioning the procuratorial office in a passage 
like this (it was more embarrassing, and more appalling, to be executed by a mere 
business manager). See Carrier, Hitler Homer Bible Christ. pp. 103-40. 

346 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
Indeed, even if we blow past all probability and imagine that some­
how Tacitus is paraphrasing or adapting a story from an earlier historian 
of Nero, Christians could already have been preaching the exoteric myth 
(some form of proto-Mark, for example) in 64, as an allegory (an extended 
parable) whose real meaning (it's esoteric meaning, that of a cosmic event) 
would be explained only to initiates (see Elements 13 and 14). Thus even a 
mention of Christ being crucified by Pilate at that date, if such a detail was 
only learned from Christians, would not strongly confirm historicity. And 
even if Christians hadn't yet gelled this exoteric myth by then, their claims 
that Jesus was celestially crucified by the 'rulers of this world' during the 
reign of Pilate could easily be misunderstood by a half-interested Roman 
audience as crucified by Pilate. Thus, even the 'cosmic crucifixion' of mini­
mal mythicism could so easily be misreported in a historicist fashion that 
our inability to rule that possibility out further complicates third-hand evi­
dence such as this. 
And that only compounds the fact that, as I've shown, Tacitus almost 
certainly had no such Neronian-era source, was most likely just report­
ing information relayed to him from Pliny (who in tum learned it from 
second-century Christian informants), or taking his information directly 
from Christians himself. If he originally even mentioned Christians at all. 
This passage therefore has zero effect on the probability of either history 
or myth. 
11. Suetonius and Thallus 
Two other authors used as 'evidence' for a historical Jesus provide no evi­
dence for a historical Jesus. The first of these is Suetonius; the second, 
Thallus. 103 
As for Thallus, I have already demonstrated elsewhere that he never 
mentioned Jesus.104 The passage in the third book of the otherwise-lost His­
tories of Thallus, which was referenced by Julius Africanus (in another lost 
work, quoted by the medieval chronologer George Syncellus), almost cer-
103. See, e.g., Van Voorst, Jesus Outside the New Testament, pp. 20-23 and 29-39; 
Theissen and Merz, The Historical Jesus, pp. 83-85; Dale Allison, Jr, 'Thallus on the 
Crucifixion', in The Historical Jesus in Context (ed. Levine, Allison and Crossan), pp. 
405-406; and France, Evidence for Jesus, pp. 24 and 40-42; Kee, Jesus in History, pp. 
45-48. For extensive critical discussion see also Doherty, Jesus: Neither God nor Man, 
pp. 616-18, 630-36 and 643-52. 
104. Richard Carrier, 'Thallus and the Darkness at Christ's Death', Journal of 
Greco-Roman Christianity and Judaism 8 (201 1-2012), pp. 185-91. For an alternative 
argument that Thallus never mentioned Jesus: Jobjorn Boman, 'Comments on Carrier: 
Is Thallus Actually Quoted by Eusebius?', Liber Annuus 62 (2012), pp. 319-25. 

8. Extrabib/ical Evidence 
347 
tainly said nothing more than that for the year 32 cE, 'the sun was eclipsed; 
Bithynia was struck by an earthquake; and in the city of Nicaea many 
buildings fell', with no mention even of Judea, much less Jesus. For we can 
reliably deduce that we have this direct quotation of Thallus in several sur­
viving fragments of Eusebius. 105 Which means when Africanus connected 
this entry in Thallus to Jesus, he was making that assumption, not Thallus. 
As for Suetonius, there are only two relevant passages. The first is a 
reference to Jewish rioters, not Christians: Suetonius says of the emperor 
Claudius that 'since the Jews constantly made disturbances at the instiga­
tion ofChrestus, he expelled them from Rome'.106 We have reason to doubt 
Suetonius has his story straight, since such an expulsion of all Jews from 
Rome would have been a near impossibility. There would have been tens of 
thousands of Jews in Rome at that time, complete with extensive real estate, 
synagogues, businesses, as well as countless Jewish slaves in both private 
and public hands that would have been indispensable to the urban economy, 
not to mention an enormous challenge to locate and drive out. In fact, we 
learn from Cassius Dio that 
As for the Jews, who had again increased so greatly that by reason of 
their multitude it would have been hard without raising a tumult to bar 
them from the city, Claudius did not drive them ouޡ but ordered them, 
while continuing their traditional mode of life, not to hold meetings . 
. . . which is a far more plausible report.107 It's still possible some select 
Jews were expelled, as Suetonius does not actually say all Jews were 
105. This same evidence indicates that Thallus wrote after Phlegon (whose work 
is usually dated between 120 and 140 CE), as the line Eusebius apparently quoted from 
Thallus appears to be an abbreviation of Phlegon (whose entry on the same events 
Eusebius explicitly quotes, and it too makes no mention of Judea or Jesus), because 
Thallus gives the exact same information in the exact same order, only with much less 
detail. 
106. Suetonius, Claudius 25.4. 
107. Dio Cassius, Roman History 60.6.6. The fifth-century Orosius, in A History 
against the Pagans 7.6.15-16, claims Josephus reported this expulsion, but there is no 
mention of this in Josephus's extant works (Orosius is probably confusing this with 
an expulsion incident under Tiberius, which is mentioned by Josephus); see Leonard 
Rutgers, 'Roman Policy towards the Jews: Expulsions from the City of Rome during 
the First Century c.E.', Classical Antiquity 13.1 (April 1994), pp. 56-74. Orosius also 
reads Christus instead of Chrestus in his quotation of Suetonius, and thus assumes 
he was speaking of Christianity. One might still ask why Josephus omits not only 
any mention of Claudius's edict against the Jews over the Chrest us affair or the riots 
that inspired it but a] so any mention of the burning of Rome or of any Jewish faction 
(whether Christians or Chrestians) being involved in it, despite the fact that Josephus 
was in Rome at the time, as a close acquaintance of Nero's wife (see Paget, 'Some 

348 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
expelled, but only that Jews were. But a total expulsion cannot really be 
believed. 108 
Neither Suetonius nor Dio have any knowledge of this decree (or the 
riot inspiring it) being in any way connected to Christians. In fact not even 
Acts (cf. 18.2) shows any awareness of this expulsion being connected to 
Christians, yet the author of Acts would certainly have made use of the fact 
that the Jews were making trouble for Christians in Rome and were duly 
punished for it by the emperor, so we can be fairly certain no such thing 
occurred (and thus no such rhetorical coup was available to the author of 
Acts). Suetonius clearly wrote that the riots were instigated by Chrestus 
himself (impulsore Chresto means 'because of the impulsor Chrestus', an 
impulsor being the person who instigates something, not the reason for 
instigating it), and so it cannot plausibly be argued that this meant Jesus, 
who was neither alive nor in Rome at any time under Claudius}09 Acts 
28.17-30 likewise depicts Jews at Rome knowing little about Christianity 
beyond distant rumors, which hardly makes sense if the whole Jewish pop­
ulation of Rome had rioted over it just a decade before. Paul's entire letter 
to the Romans likewise exhibits no knowledge of such a thing. 
Moreover, if the second passage in Suetonius has been soundly trans­
mitted (see below), Suetonius knew the difference between Christians and 
Jews, and would have commented on the fact had Christians (much 1ess 
Christ) been in any way the cause of these riots. Many scholars nevertheless 
try to press this evidence in that direction, but it's simply not able to bear 
any weight. Even supposing Suetonius is wild1y wrong about Jesus being in 
Rome under Claudius and starting a riot there, that would entail his infor­
mation was so hopelessly confused he cannot be attesting to any reliable 
evidence concerning the historicity of Jesus. Suetonius could just as easily 
have confused a report that Christ as a revelatory archangel 'instigated' 
the riots. Or if 'a belief in' or 'a preaching of' Christ had done so (even if 
Observations', pp. 606-607). These omiSsions are probably deliberate: Josephus 
generally aimed to suppress any discussion of Jewish messianism, to downplay or 
diminish Jewish complicity in major incidents, and to paint Claudius as uniformly 
favorable to the Jews. So I think these events would have ruined his preferred storyline. 
108. Acts 18.2 is alone in saying 'all the Jews' were expelled, but its reliability on 
this point is doubtful: see Richard Pervo, Acts: A Commentary (Minneapolis, MN: 
Fortress Press, 2009), pp. 446-47. 
109. The use of 'Chresto' to mean 'Christo', though a linguistic possibility, is 
nevertheless not a necessary conjecture, Chrestus being a common name at the time 
(likewise we need not posit a textual corruption). See Stephen Benko, 'The Edict of 
Claudius of A.D. 49 and the Instigator Chrestus', Theologische Zeitschrift 25 (1 969). 
pp. 407-408; and Dixon Slingerland, 'Chrestus: Christus?', in New Perspectives on 
Ancient Judaism, Vol. IV: The Literature of Early Rabbinic Judaism (ed. A.J. Avery· 
Peck Lanham MD: Universit Press of America, J989), pp. 133-44.

8. Extrabiblical Evidence 
349 
Gospel-based), this, too, would be entirely compatible with minimal mythi­
cism and therefore not a confirmation ofhistoricity.1 10 
The second passage in Suetonius is simply a casual and uninformative 
remark that during the reign of Nero 'punishments were inflicted on the 
Christians, a class of men given to a new and mischievous superstition'.m 
Which tells us nothing pertinent to the historicity of Jesus. It's even pos­
sible this sentence originally read Chrestians (later 'corrected' in transmis­
sion), and thus referred to the Jewish rioters whom, as we saw, Suetonius 
reported had begun to make trouble under Claudius (the same possibility 
we discussed for Tacitus). It's also possible that this line was an acciden­
tal interpolation of a marginal note summarizing the passage in Tacitus, 
although arguments made to that effect are not as strong as they sound. 112 
But neither debate is relevant to our present purpose. Even as is, the prob­
ability that there were Christians for Nero to persecute is the same on either 
historicity or myth, making this evidence of no use to us. 
12. Missing Evidence: Contra Myth 
That ends our survey of all the relevant evidence outside the NT. As you 
can see, it is not only dismal, but overall it actually counts against histo­
ricity. One final objection that might be attempted is that surely someone 
would have gainsaid the invention of a historical Jesus. But who? Do we 
have writings from them? We cannot make an argument from the silence of 
documents we don't have or from the silence of persons we can't identify. 1 13 
Since Christianity, like all mystery religions, would likely have 
employed exoteric myths to conceal secret esoteric doctrines from outsid­
ers (Elements 13 and 14), and there is a significant decades-long gap in the 
110. For the suggestion that Christ as a deity (and not an actually present historical 
actor) inspired these riots see Edouard Will's review of Helga Botermann's Das 
Judenedikt des Kaisers Claudius: Romischer Staat und Christiani im 1. Jahrhundert, 
in Gnomon 71 (1999), pp. 610-16. 
111. Suetonius, Nero 16.2. 
112. Stephen Dando-Collins, The Great Fire of Rome: The Fall of the Emperor 
Nero and his City (Cambridge, MA: Da Capo Press, 2010), p. 6. To which one might 
add that the language ofthe line as we have it is also not in Suetonian style and reflects 
a Latin idiom that arose after the time of Suetonius, according to K.R. Bradley, 
'Suetonius, Nero 16.2: ''ajjlicti suppliciis Christiani'", Classical Review 22.1 (March 
1972), pp. 9-10; and although Bradley argues that this means the text was corrupted 
by emendation and should be restored to align with the paraphrase of Orosius and 
the known style of Suetonius, that is not the only available explanation of the same 
evidence. 
1 13. For what is required to make a valid argument from silence, see Carrier, 
Provin Histo 
. 1 17-19. 

350 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
early history of the cult where we cannot determine who survived or con­
trolled the course of doctrine by the time the exoteric myths represented in 
the Gospels began circulating (Element 22), we cannot know what anyone 
was saying about them, how they were first being used, or who would be 
in a position to know they weren't really true (or even if they would say 
so if they knew). Indeed, nothing was preserved from this period even 
from sects we know disagreed with the communities that produced the 
Epistles and Gospels that we have. Yet we know there were many such 
sectarian schisms (Element 21). Since nothing they wrote or said was pre­
served, we have no way to know what those sectarian opponents gainsaid, 
or what arguments they deployed to gainsay it, because we don't have 
any of their critiques of what later became the 'orthodox' sect. Indeed, we 
almost never have writings gainsaying mythical people when they are his­
toricized (see, again, the examples of Moses, King Arthur, and Ned Ludd 
in Chapter 1 ,  §4). 
And yet we do have hints that some sectarian Christians were indeed 
gainsaying the new historicist reliance on the exoteric myths as actual his­
tories. A hint of the existence of doubters of Jesus' historicity appears in the 
character of the Jewish opponent created by Justin Martyr in his fictional 
Dialogue with Trypho in the mid-second century: 
But the Christ, if he has indeed been born, and exists anywhere, is 
unknown, and doesn't even yet know himself, and has no power until 
Elijah comes to anoint him, and make him appear to all. But you, on the 
basis of groundless hearsay, invent a Christ for yourselves, and for his 
sake you are now irresponsibly doomed. 114 
This could simply reflect a natural second-century Jewish criticism, not too 
unlike that found in the pagan critic Celsus of the same period, who argued 
(i n his now-lost anti-Christian treatise that Origen critiques in Against 
Celsus) that the Gospels were the only evidence of historicity the Chris­
tians had, and yet were at best groundless hearsay. Celsus argues from the 
unproven assumption that they embellish a real story, while Justin's Trypho 
takes it one step further and suggests they might have been wholly fabri­
cated. 
Notably, Justin's reply to this suggestion is simply that 'we have not 
believed empty fables [kenois mythois], or stories without any proof [ana­
podeiktois logois], but stories filled with the Spirit of God, and bursting 
with power, and flourishing with grace', which merely gainsays the charge 
1 14. Justin Martyr, Dialogue with Trypho 8.4. On which see the important remarks 
of Doherty, Jesus: Neither God nor Man, pp. 696-98. 

8. Extrabiblical Evidence 
35 1 
without any proof offered. Indeed, the dialogue depicts Justin threatening 
to leave in a huff, rather than actually presenting any evidence that Trypho 
was in any way wrong; they change the subject instead. 115 More importantly, 
this looks very much like the response given to follow Christians (of some 
opposing sect) in 2 Peter 1-2. This is a second-century forgery, passed off 
as written by the apostle Peter, an example of how readily Christians fabri­
cated not only their own history but the documents attesting it (see, again, 
Element 44).116 There we see an attack upon certain fellow Christians who 
were actually teaching that the story of Jesus was (as Justin also denies) a 
'cleverly devised myth' [sesophismenois mythois] and who were thereby 
creating a 'destructive heresy'. Similar hints can be found in other forged 
Epistles (e.g. I Tim. 1.3-4; 4.6-7; 2 Tim. 4.3-4; 1 Jn 1.1-3; 4.1-3; 2 Jn 7-1 1 ;  
etc.). I n  2 Peter we also see a related anxiety over the strange celestial Jesus 
found in Paul's letters-to the extent that now only the properly 'informed' 
were authorized to interpret them (2 Pet. 3 .15-17). 
Obviously the forgers of 2 Peter would have to represent these Chris­
tians as introducing a novel heresy. But in reality, these may have been 
Christians still connected to the original mysteries who knew the exoteric 
myths were only cleverly constructed allegories. The fact that this is all 
we ever hear of them demonstrates that we cannot expect to have heard 
more-for here, clearly, 2 Peter is attacking some Christian heresy we 
know nothing else about and have no documents from. Instead, we get a 
forged 'eyewitness testimony' cleverly designed to refute the claim that the 
Gospel was a myth-refuting it, that is, with a fabricated historical report. 
This letter is therefore a decisive proof-of-concept for the entire transition 
from the original Christian mysteries to a historicizing sect fabricating its 
own historical testimonies to 'prove' its claims. 
The Ascension of Isaiah is another example of this: we can tell the origi­
nal redaction had Jesus die in outer space (it therefore was composed by a 
Christian sect who clearly adopted what I am calling minimal mythicism), 
but later, some historicizing Christians inserted a section that had Jesus 
incongruously die on earth at the hands of Pilate in a summary of their own 
1 15. Justin Martyr, Dialogue with Trypho 9.1. Note that the only reason Justin offers 
here is the affective fallacy: the Gospels are so moving and inspiring, they 'must' be 
true. I extensively demonstrate the defective epistemology of early Christians such as 
Justin, which indicates they were simply incapable of actually testing or investigating 
their own claims for any real truth value, in Carrier, Not the Impossible Faith, pp. 385-
406. Likewise, that fact-checking their own claims was largely impossible anyway, and 
that Christians showed no evident interest in even trying: Carrier, Not the Impossible 
Faith, pp. 161-218 and 329-68. 
116. See Bart Ehrman, Forged (San Francisco, CA: HarperOne, 201 1), pp. 43-78. 

352 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
fabricated Gospel (see Chapter 3, § 1 ). This appears to be what typically 
happened to the evidence. It was erased, doctored or rewritten to support 
a historicist party line against a mythicist one (see, again, Element 44; as 
well as Chapter 7, §7). 
That this would inevitably happen, and that the eventually successful 
sects would typically be the ones who started treating the exoteric myths 
as historical fact, has been logically demonstrated by Kurt Noll. 111 Using 
the development of false claims of the historicity of certain figures and 
tradents in early Islam, Noll shows that this is a common trend in the pres­
ence of intense sectarian competition over control of resources and ideol­
ogy. An earthly Jesus known in the flesh would be a more effective tool 
for marketing a dogma than a revelatory cosmic Jesus would be. Therefore 
as churches competed for authority, there would have been an inevitable 
pressure to invent an earthly Jesus known in the flesh. The cult thus moved 
away from revelation as primary toward placing mythical 'traditions' as 
primary, which does indeed appear to be what happened (see Chapter 10, 
§8, and Chapter 1 1, §2). 
As Noll concludes: 
[T]he data betray a clear evolutionary process from the proclamation 
of the so-called Jerusalem pillars, through the teachings of Paul, and 
ultimately into several competing varieties of post-Pauline Christian­
ity. Earlier Christian doctrinal modes went extinct as later ones evolved. 
The doctrinal mode favoured by the Jerusalem pillars was extinct by the 
late first century. Although Paul's doctrinal mode was able to survive, it 
could do so only by evolving significantly new traits, including a con­
ceptualization of a 'historical' Jesus guaranteed by allegedly eyewitness 
testimonies. This newly invented 'historical' Jesus effectively replaced 
Paul as the authority behind Paul's doctrinal mode.H8 
In short, it is more rhetorically effective to claim Jesus was a historical 
person and that your doctrine can be traced back to him through a line of 
living witnesses and tradents than to admit that everything known about 
Jesus came by revelation, which entails further revelations by upstarts 
and challengers could carry the same value and thus could undermine the 
1 17. Kurt Noll, 'Investigating Earliest Christianity without Jesus', in 'Is This Not 
the Carpenter?' The Question of the Historicity of the Figure of Jesus (ed. Thomas 
Thompson and Thomas Verenna; Sheffield: Equinox, 201 2), pp. 233-66. Additional 
functions for the historicizing of myth are explored in Thomas Hatina, 'From History 
to Myth and Back Again: The Historicizing Function of Scripture in Matthew 2', in 
Biblical Interpretation in Early Christian Gospels, Vol. 2: Gospel of Matthew (ed. 
Thomas Hatina; London: T. & T. Clark, 2008), pp. 98-1 18. See also my discussion of 
the examples of King Arthur and Ned Ludd, and Daniel and Moses, in Chapter 1 (§4). 
1 18. Noll, 'Investigating', pp. 265-66. 

8. Extrabiblical Evidence 
353 
power of any growing church elite or the cohesion of any social mission. If 
Jesus was known only by revelation, one could preach anything, and claim 
it was revealed. But if one claimed to be the keeper of a verified historical 
tradition stemming from a real historical Jesus, one could argue against 
any 'new' revelation that 'that is not what Jesus said', because we have 
documents from 'men who were there and heard him' and we have men 
who claim to have 'known' men who knew those men, and thus guarded 
the tradition (hence Lk. 1.1-4 and Jn 21.24). 
That this was indeed a later evolutionary development in the rhetorical 
battles among Christian sects is proved by Galatians I ,  where Paul not 
only makes exactly the opposite argument (that human traditions were 
worthless and only direct revelations from the risen Jesus held any author­
ity), but clearly feels compelled by his fellow Christians to say that (see 
Chapter 1 1, §2). It was evidently so commonly held at the time that human 
traditions were worthless and only direct revelations of value that Paul 
had to go out of his way to deny relying on human traditions and insist 
he had received his information by direct revelation instead. His audience 
in Galatia would accept no other argument from him, and were evidently 
alarmed by some accusations that Paul had (gasp!) relied on oral tradition, 
forcing Paul to remind them that he would do no such thing, and certainly 
never did; that in fact he relied only on direct revelations of the risen Jesus, 
the only source they evidently respected. But by the time 2 Peter was writ­
ten, at least one major sect had completely reversed course on that point 
and was warring against any continued use of direct revelation by insist­
ing upon verifiable human tradition. A human tradition it freely fabri­
cated-as that letter itself is an example of. We have already seen Origen 
admitting that this tactic had utility in mobilizing the obedience of the vast 
majority of'simpletons' in the Christian movement who (he claimed) were 
not sophisticated enough to grasp allegory but needed to rest their faith on 
literal truths (see Element 14). 
So there evidently was 'gainsaying' after all. We just weren't allowed to 
hear much about it. Hence the objection that we would have more evidence 
of it does not have merit. Clearly the probability of that is too low to credit; 
it was all erased or destroyed or left to crumble into dust. This objection 
is also already refuted in principle: inordinately public events are fabri­
cated in the Gospels (such as a darkness covering the whole world for three 
hours; a wandering star that troubled the entire population of Jerusalem; a 
mass of resurrected saints invading the city; the triumphal entry of Jesus; 
a city-wide earthquake shattering the very rocks; a very public, necessarily 
violent, large-scale vandalizing and clearing of the temple square; multiple 
miraculous feedings of thousands of people; the mass murder of two thou­
sand pigs, and a whole town of babies and toddlers), which are obviously 

354 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
false, yet we have no extant document from anyone gainsaying any of it 
('Hey, I was there, and I didn't see that!').119 Therefore, evidently, we cannot 
expect there to be any. 
In fact Jesus was said to have been famous all across not just Judea but 
the whole province of Syria (Mt. 4.24; 9.26, 31; Lk. 4.14). Yet we have no 
surviving record of anyone from those regions challenging this. Remarks 
like this create a logical conundrum for the historicist. For it is much eas­
ier to invent a man than to invent a famous man, yet Jesus is depicted as 
incredibly famous in the Gospels. But if he were so famous, then the silence 
of other writers and historians about him, indeed the lack of any litera­
ture about him being generated by any of the thousands of contemporaries 
impressed or intrigued by his fame (see the survey again in §2), is all but 
impossible. That is, extremely improbable. The consequent probability of 
this pervasive and thorough silence on the hypothesis that Jesus actually 
was that famous (much less that any of the incredibly famous events associ­
ated with him in the Gospels actually occurred-and I gave only a select 
list of examples) is extremely small. 
So if the historicist wishes to maintain Jesus was really that famous. 
then historicity is refuted by the complete silence of all other literate per­
sons of that age and region and of all who wrote about that region or about 
any famous persons and events like those. The consequent probabi lity of 
that evidence (of silence) is so small that it guarantees historicity will also 
have a very small posterior probability, and must therefore be rejected as 
improbable. Just as for the darkening of the sun, as I have demonstrated 
before: we can be sure that never happened, because if it did, someone 
would have mentioned it (other than just the Synoptic Gospels). 120 It can­
not be argued that 'someone would have gainsaid it', since that argument 
requires demonstrating someone existed who knew the truth, and knew 
the Gospels, and cared enough to even bother gainsaying the wild claims 
in the fawning hagiographical texts of an obscure rei igious cult, and did 
1 19. See discussion of this point in Carrier, Proving History, pp. 41-45 (with 
'eyewitness check', p. 336). On Matthew's massively embellished empty-tomb 
narrative, see Carrier, 'Why the Resurrection Is Unbelievable' in Christian Delusion 
(ed. Loftus), pp. 294-96. Three-hour eclipse of the sun: Mk 1S.33; Mt. 27.45; Lk. 
23.44-45. Wandering star disturbing all Jerusalem: Mt. 2.3. Mass of resurrected saints 
invading the city: Mt. 27.52-53. Devastating earthquake: Mt. 27.Sl. Triumphal entry 
of Jesus: Mk 1 1.8-1 1; Mt. 21.8-11; Lk. 19.35-40; Jn 12.12-19. Clearing the temple: Mk 
1 1. 15-18; Mt. 21.12-13; Lk. 19.45-47; Jn 2.13-16. Miraculous feeding of thousands of 
people: M k  6.3 1-44; 8.1-9; Mt. 14.13-21; 15.32-39; Lk. 9.10-17; Jn 6.5-15. Mass murder 
oftwo thousand pigs: Mk 5.13-14 (cf. Lk. 8.33-37; Mt. 8.32-34). Mass murder of a whole 
town of babies and toddlers: Mt. 2.16. 
120. Again, in Carrier, Proving History, pp. 41-45. 

8. Extrabib/ical Evidence 
355 
so in writing, and that this writing would have been preserved (by medi­
eval Christians, remember) for us to know of it now. We can identify 
no such person, and have no reason to expect the survival of any such 
record. Indeed, we know there surely must have been people who would 
gainsay the Gospels even with lies, yet none of their texts were preserved 
either, not even in quotation or rebuttal. The first we hear of anyone tak­
ing any notice of Christianity and taking any trouble to gainsay its claims 
is Celsus, who wrote in the latter half of the second century, well over a 
hundred years after the fact, half a century (then a whole lifetime) after 
any Gospels began circulating. And we know about that only because 
we have the rebuttal of Origen. The actual critique itself was not even 
preserved. 
Since no earlier responses to Christianity from any eyewitness critics 
have been preserved, not even in quotation, nor even by a mere mention, 
the probability that we would hear of an eyewitness gainsaying anything 
in the Gospels is effectively zero. 121 We don't even have the Gospels saying 
that the very Gospels they are contradicting had it wrong; they just rewrite 
the story, hoping no one would notice. For example, John doesn't say the 
other Gospels were mistaken in placing Jesus' clearing of the temple at the 
end of his ministry rather than the beginning (much less cite any witness 
gainsaying it), he just rewrites the story so that it occurs at the beginning of 
his ministry and not the end. 
Therefore we must reject the argument that 'we would have witnesses 
gainsaying it'. Obviously, we wouldn't. From all the considerations above, 
the probability of that is extremely low. We have no direct witnesses at all, 
gainsaying or not. It's already uncertain whether many would even have been 
alive by the time the exoteric myths gained anything like wide circulation 
(Element 22), especially if the myth began as an in-house secret symbolicalJy 
representing a private revealed religion (Elements 13 and 14). But regardless, 
we have no texts or quotations of anyone 'present at the time' who says any­
thing whatever about the 'incredibly famous events' declared in the Gospels, 
121. The one instance of Matthew claiming the Jews were spreading tales that the 
Christians stole the body of Jesus cites no source, no text. no name of anyone telling such 
a story (much less that they were present at the time, rather than from a later generation 
making up a skeptical explanation for what the Christians were by then claiming), 
and appears in an elaboration of the story in Mark that is certainly a fabrication and 
therefore never happened: see Carrier, •Plausibility of Theft', in Empty Tomb (ed. Price 
and Lowder), pp. 359 and 363, with Carrier, Proving History, pp. 199-204. In fact, as 
Mark shows no awareness at all that any such accusation of theft was being made, that 
accusation (if it even was made) appears to have been a response to Mark's invention 
of a missing body and not to anything being claimed during the previous forty years of 
Christian evangelizing across three continents: Carrier, Proving History, p. 128. 

356 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
pro or con. We therefore cannot argue from what they would have said. With­
out them (or any references at all to them), we just don't know. 
The converse argument prevails: such famous events would have been 
broadly attested (anϦ Christians would surely have gleefully preserved such 
attestations); yet they are not attested at all. So the historicist must accept 
that the reports of Jesus' incredible fame and all the incredibly famous 
things he was uniquely involved with are fabrications, legendary develop­
ments mapped onto what can only have been in actual fact a very obscure, 
barely known figure, who did nothing that won any attention among the lit­
erary elite. Hence minimal historicity, as explained in Chapter 2, is the only 
viable hypothesis. But that entails accepting massive legendary develop­
ment had occurred, as 1 already explained in Chapter 6 (§7). Which entails 
we cannot argue that no one could invent a historical existence for Jesus. 
Since it is necessarily harder to get away with inventing a man's great and 
extraordinary fame than to invent a mere man. And the Gospels clearly 
succeeded in inventing a man's great and extraordinary fame (whether 
Jesus existed or not). So there would have been no obstacle whatever to 
their inventing the man altogether. 
Getting away with inventing an actual man's extraordinary fame without 
being gainsaid is indeed no harder than getting away with wholly inventing 
an extraordinarily famous man without being gainsaid. Because inventing 
an obscure man is easy and thus getting away with that would be not at all 
improbable; but to then embellish his story into incredible fame requires no 
more luck or effort than embellishing the story of an actual man into incred­
ible fame. The two outcomes are equally likely to succeed. This means the 
consequent probability of 'inventing an actual man's extraordinary fame 
without being gainsaid' on h (minimal historicity) is essentially the same 
as 'inventing an extraordinarily famous man without being gainsaid' on _,h 
(minimal myth). Since these two probabilities are essentially identical, they 
cancel out, and thus add nothing to the argument for historicity (or against). 
13. Weighing the Evidence 
When it came to the pervasive silence in other external documents (Chris­
tian and non-Christian), and the lack of many otherwise expected docu­
ments, I assigned no effect either way (although sterner skeptics might 
think that far too generous to minimal historicity). Conversely, as I just 
explained, no argument from silence can argue against minimal mythi­
cism, either. But the peculiar existence of two separate traditions about 
when Jesus lived (placing him a century apart) leaves us with a factor of 
2 to 1 against historicity (or 50% against 100%), or at least 4 to 5 (80o/o 
against 100%). I also found the same for the content of 1 Clement. I also 

8. Extrabiblical Evidence 
357 
found that the content of Ignatius and the Ascension of Isaiah was slightly 
more likely on mythic ism than on historicity (by a factor of 4 to 5 at least, 
which is the same as saying there's an 80o/o chance we'd have material like 
that on historicity if it had a 100% chance on myth; or at worst I in 2, 
which corresponds to 50% against 100%); and likewise, albeit less so, for 
the content of Hegesippus (by a factor of at least 9 to IO, for a 90% chance 
that that's what we'd find on historicity when there's a 100% chance of it on 
myth; although I think 4 in 5, or 80o/o against 100o/o, is closer to the truth).122 
Everything else was found to be no more likely on historicity than on myth 
and is therefore useless. 
These estimates and the total odds they form are represented on the fol· 
lowing table (measuring the odds of the evidence on h, minimal historicҳ 
ity, against -·h, minimal mythicism), which you can use to input your own 
estimated odds and run your own calculations: 
Twin traditions 
Documentary silence 
1 Clement 
Ignatius and Ascension of Isaiah 
Papias 
Hegesippus 
Josephus 
Pliny 
Tacitus 
Suetonius 
ThaJlus 
Lack of gainsaying witnesses 
For total odds of 
best 
4/5 
111 
4/5 
4/5 
1/1 
9/1 0  
Ill 
Ill 
1/1 
1/1 
I /1 
Ill 
576/1 250 
288/625 
:::; 112.2 
= 0.4608 
worst 
1 /2 
1 /2 
1 /2 
415 
4/40 
1110 
1/10 
0.1000 
:::: 46% 
10% 
122. Note. again, that these estimates discount random evidence-loss. That is, 
when I say there is a '100% chance we'd have' something on mythicism. I mean. 'if 
it chanced to survive at all', not that it certainly would have survived. The probability 
of its survival m ight be extremely low; but not the probability of its having existed, 
or something sufficiently like it; and it is the latter probabilities we are concerned 
With. On the validity of discounting the probability of survival (because all coefficients 
of contingency cancel out) see Carrier, Proving History, pp. 219-24. On the validity 
of using the probability of having something sufficiently like x, as opposed to the 
probability of having exactly x, see Carrier, Proving History, pp. 11·19, 214-28. 

358 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
The probabilities here estimated assume that nothing about the extrabibli­
cal evidence is unexpected on minimal mythicism. So the consequent prob­
ability of all this extrabiblical evidence on -.h (minimal mythicism) can be 
treated as I 00% across the board, whereas the probability of the same evi­
dence looking this way on h (minimal historicity) is 46% at best, and lOo/o 
at worst.123 Either way, as a whole, the extrabiblical evidence argues against 
a historical Jesus. It's simply hard to explain all its oddities on minimal 
historicity, but not hard at all on minimal mythicism. 
123. Mathematically, if we reduce the consequent probability on -.h below 100%, 
we must reduce the consequent probability on h as well, since the ratios tabulated are 
the ratios between the consequent on h and the consequent on ...,h (regardless of what 
those probabilities are). 

,., 
9 
THE EviDENCE OF Acrs 
1. Acts as Historical Fiction 
The book of Acts has been all but discredited as a work of apologetic his­
torical fiction.1 Nevertheless, its author (traditionally Luke, the author of 
the Gospel: see Chapter 7, §4) may have derived some of its material or 
ideas from earlier traditions, written or oral. But the latter would still be 
extremely unreliable (note, for example, the condition of oral tradition 
under Papias, as discussed in Chapter 8, §7) and wholly unverifiable (and 
not only because teasing out what Luke inherited from what Luke chose to 
compose therefrom is all but impossible for us now). Thus, our best hope 
is to posit some written sources, even though their rei iability would be 
almost as hard to verify, especially, again, as we don't have them, so we 
cannot distinguish what they actually said from what Luke added, left out, 
or changed. 
1. See Richard Pervo, The Mystery of Acts (Santa Rosa, CA: Polebridge, 2008); 
and Richard Pervo, Acts: A Commentary (Minneapolis, MN: Fortress Press, 2009), 
for the most thorough accounting of this fact (see especially the latter, pp. 17-18), 
with substantial support in Thomas Brodie, The Birthing of the New Testament: The 
lntertextua/ Development of the New Testament Writings (Sheffield: Sheffield Phoenix, 
2004), esp. pp. 377-445 (on Acts specifically); Dennis MacDonald, Does the New 
Testament Imitate Homer? Four Cases from the Acts of the Apostles (New Haven, 
CT: Yale University Press, 2003); and John Dominic Crossan, The Power of Parable: 
How Fiction by Jesus Became Fiction about Jesus (New York: HarperOne, 201 2), 
pp. 196-217. See also Clare Rothschild, Luke-Acts and the Rhetoric of History: An 
Investigation of Early Christian Historiography (TDbingen: Mohr Siebeck, 2004); 
Loveday Alexander, 'Fact, Fiction and the Genre of Acts', New Testament Studies 44 
(1998), pp. 380-99; and P.E. Satterthwaite, 'Acts against the Background of Classical 
Rhetoric', in The Book of Acts in its Ancient Literary Setting (ed. Bruce Winter and 
Andrew Clarke; Grand Rapids, Ml: William B. Eerdmans, 1993), pp. 337-80. There are 
conservatives who protest, but not with logicaJiy valid arguments. 

360 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
But that project has not gone well. Really only one underlying historical 
source has been confirmed with any probability, and that's Josephus,2 who 
said nothing about Christ or Christianity (see Chapter 8, §9). Luke simply 
used him for background material. All the other sources we can discern in 
Luke are literary, not historical. Those include what may have been a now­
lost hagiographical fabrication, essentially a rewrite of the Elijah-El isha 
narrative in the OT Kings literature, but now casting Jesus and Paul in the 
principal roles. That is not what we would call a historical account-its 
sources are not eyewitnesses or historical memory, but the OT (as a liter­
ary model) and the imagination of the author reworking it. Thomas Brodie 
argues that this evident reworking of the Kings narrative starts in the Gos­
pel of Luke and continues to Acts 15, indicating either that Luke wove this 
literary construct into his story or used an underlying source text, a previ­
ous Gospel, that covered both the acts of Jesus and the acts of apostles in 
one book. So Luke took either this source text or his own literary idea (or 
perhaps an early draft) and inserted more stories, thereby expanding it into 
two books, using material from Mark, Matthew, and perhaps other now­
lost Gospels (see discussion in Chapter 10, §6), as well as some of the Epis­
tles of Paul, and then continued the story from Acts 15 to 28 (which portion 
may have its own similar source-text or may be Luke's own invention).3 
The remaining sources we can discern are not hypothetical, because we 
actually have them. For example, Dennis MacDonald has shown that Luke 
also reworked tales from Homer, casting them with new characters and giv­
ing them new outcomes as it suited him. For example: 
The shipwrecks of Odysseus and Paul share nautical images and vocabu­
lary, the appearance of a goddess or angel assuring safety, the riding of 
planks, the arrival of the hero on an island among hospitable strangers. 
the mistaking of the hero as a god, and the sending of him on his way [in 
a new ship]-4 
2. That Luke used Josephus as a source to fill his account with various items 
of historical color, see note in Chapter 7 (§4). That simi lar details also appear in his 
account of apostolic travels outside Judea suggests Luke may have used other historians 
(of those regions) to color those accounts as well (those historians were simply not 
preserved for us to detect their influence now). 
3. If Luke did not use a source text (a 'Kings Gospel') for the material equating 
Jesus and Paul to Elijah and Elisha, then Luke obviously had to have invented that 
material himself. That Luke knew and used (mainly to subvert) the Pauline Epistles 
see Dennis MacDonald, Two Shipwrecked Gospels: The Logoi of Jesus and Papias 's 
Exposition of Logia about the Lord (Atlanta, GA: Society of Biblical Literature, 2012). 
pp. 50-52; and Richard Pervo, Dating Acts: Between the Evangelists and the Apologists 
(Santa Rosa, CA: Polebridge Press, 2006). 
4. Dennis MacDonald, •The Shipwrecks of Odysseus and Paul', New Testament 
Studies 45 1999 
. 88-107 (88); with Vernon Robbins, ·The .. We" Passa es in Acts 

9. Acts 
361 
Paul himself says he was shipwrecked three times, and at least once spent a 
day and a night adrift (2 Cor. 1 1.25). Luke may have been inspired by this 
remark to invent a story about it, borrowing ideas from other famous ship­
wreck narratives (including those in Jonah, the Odyssey and the Aeneid). 
Acts rewrites Homer several other times. Paul's resurrection of the fallen 
Eutychus is based on the fallen Elpenor.5 The visions of Cornelius and Peter 
are constructed from a similar narrative about Agamemnon.6 Paul's fare­
well at Miletus is constructed from Hector's farewell to Andromache.' The 
lottery of Matthias is constructed from the lottery of Ajax. 8 Peter's escape 
from prison is constructed from Priam's escape from Achilles.9 And so on. 
The author of Acts used many other literary sources as welL For exam­
ple, the prison breaks in Acts share themes with the famously miraculous 
prison breaks in the Bacchae of Euripides. 10 But the source Acts employs 
the most is the Septuagint. For example, while MacDonald shows the over­
all structure of the Peter and Cornelius episode is based on a story in Homer, 
Randel Helms has shown that other elements are borrowed from the book 
of Ezekiel, merging both models into one: both Peter and Ezekiel see the 
heavens open (Acts 10.11; Ezek. 1.1); both are commanded to eat something 
and Ancient Sea Voyages', Papers of the Chicago Society of Biblical Research 20 
(197S), pp. 5-18; and Henry Cadbury, '"We" and "I" Passages in Luke-Acts', New 
Testament Studies 3 (19S6-1957), pp. 128-32. It is sometimes argued that the 'we' 
pasages (portions of Acts where the author inexplicably switches from third person 
to first person plural and back again, without ever explaining why, or who 'we' are) 
indicate an actual source. Some even argue these prove the author was an actual 
companion of Paul, but few scholars believe that's likely-it isn't what the author 
himself ever says, yet it was standard practice of the time to say so, if that is what the 
author meant to be understood. But fabricating a fictional narrative using 'I' or 'we' is 
already evident in the pre-Christian book of Jubilees, a made-up rewrite ofOT history 
adapted from Genesis, passed off as a revelation given directly to Moses, even though 
it was actually composed around the second or first century seE So the motif has an 
established precedent in historical fiction. A more famous model for writing fiction in 
the first person is the Odyssey of Homer, and notably (as MacDonald demonstrates) the 
'we' sections in Acts all center on sea travel. 
5. Dennis MacDonald, The Homeric Epics and the Gospel of Mark (New Haven, 
Cf: Yale University Press, 2000), pp. 9-14. 
6. MacDonald, Does the New Testament Imitate Homer?, pp. 44-65 (with pp. 
19-43). 
7. MacDonald, Does the New Testament Imitate Homer?, pp. 74-102 (with pp. 
69-73). 
8. MacDonald, Does the New Testament Imitate Homer?, pp. 107-19 (with pp. 
105-106). 
9. MacDonald, Does the New Testament Imitate Homer?, pp. 137-45 (with pp. 
123-36). 
10. Euripides, Bacchae 440-49 (miraculous unlocking of chains), and 585-94 
(escaoe due to an earthquake). Compare Acts 12.6-7 and 16.26. 

362 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
in their vision (Acts 10.13; Ezek. 2.9); both twice respond to God, 'By no 
means, Lord! (using the exact same Greek phrase, medamos Kurie: Acts 
10.14 and 1 1.8; Ezek. 4.14 and 20.49); both are asked to eat unclean food, 
and both protest that they have never eaten anything unclean before (Acts 
10.14; Ezek. 4.14). 11 Obviously the author of Acts is not recording historical 
memory here. He's assembl ing a story using literary structure and motifs 
from sources that have little or nothing to do with what actually happened 
to Peter or Paul. And he is doing this all to sell a particular (historically 
fabricated) account of how early Christianity abandoned the requirement of 
Torah observance, one that made it seem approved even by Peter all along, 
complete with the confirming approval of divine revelation-when in fact 
we know from Paul (in Gal. 2) that Paul was for a long time its only advo­
cate and was merely tolerated by Torah observers like Peter, often conten­
tiously. In just the same way, Acts 15.7-11 'pretty much puts Paul's speech 
from Gal. 2.14-21 into Peter's mouth', the exact opposite of what Paul tells 
us actually happened.12 
Every other story in Acts is like this: a fictional creation, woven from 
prior materials unrelated to any actual Christian history, to sell a particu­
lar point Luke wanted to make. Maybe there was some authentic source 
material behind some of what appears in Acts, somewhere. But how can 
we find it? From beginning to end Acts looks like a literary creation, not a 
real history. It was written to sell a specific idea of how the church began 
and evolved.13 It is clear 'the author of Acts wanted to stress the continu­
ity of Judaism and Christianity, Paul's close relation to the other apostles, 
and the unity of the first believers' and thus had to 'subvert' the Epistles 
of Paul, especially Galatians. 14 For example, we know Paul 'was unknown 
by face to the churches of Judea' until many years after his conversion 
(as he explains in Gal. 1.22-23), and after his conversion he went away to 
Arabia before returning to Damascus, and he didn't go to Jerusalem for 
at least three years (as he explains in Gal. 1.15-18); whereas Acts 7-9 has 
him known to and interacting with the Jerusalem church continuously from 
the beginning, even before his conversion, and instead of going to Arabia 
immediately after his conversion, in Acts he goes immediately to Damas-
1 1 .  See Randel Helms, Gospel Fictions (Amherst, NY: Prometheus, 1988), p. 21. 
12. Robert Price, The Pre-Nicene New Testament: Fifty-Four Formative Texts 
(Salt Lake City, UT: Signature. 2006). p. 841. 
13. For a survey of Luke's methods as a historian compared to his contemporaries: 
Carrier, Not the Impossible Faith, pp. 173-87. 
14. Joseph Tyson, 'Why Dates Matter: The Case of the Acts of the Apostles'. in 
Finding the Historical Jesus: Rules of Evidence (ed. Bernard Brandon Scott; Santa 
· P I brid e 2008 
. 59-70 (67). 

9. Acts 
363 
cus and then back to Jerusalem just a few weeks later, and never spends a 
moment in Arabia. And yet we have the truth from Paul himself. 
Clearly the author of Acts was not writing actual history but revision­
ist history. Which we call pseudohistory. He simply made things up, with 
little real care for historical accuracy or fact. Besides what we've already 
seen, the most obvious example of this is Luke expanding Jesus' post­
resurrection stay on earth to an incredible forty days of hanging out with 
his disciples and more than a hundred other believers in secret the whole 
while, teaching them daily-even more, apparently, than he could think to 
teach them whi1e alive-and then flying up into outer space to the accom­
paniment of angels (Acts 1 .3-12). This is myth, not history. 
Burton Mack gives another example of how Luke's version of the his­
tory of early Christianity in Acts is wholly unrealistic: 'Luke says that the 
standard sermon was preached to the Jews on the day of Pentecost and 
often thereafter, whereupon hundreds converted and the world became the 
church's parish overnight', but this is 'a story that does not make sense as 
history by any standard'. Not only in respect to its absurdly hyperbolic 
growth, but even just in the context of how people would really behave.15 
As Mack puts it: 
No Jew worth his salt would have converted when being told that he was 
guilty of killing the messiah. No Greek would have been persuaded by 
the dismal logic of the argumentation of the sermons. The scene would 
not have made sense as history to anyone during the first century with 
first-hand knowledge of Christians. Jews, and the date of the temple in 
Jerusalem. So what do we have on our hands? An imaginary reconstruc­
tion in the interest of aggrandizing an amalgam view of Christianity 
early in the second century. Luke did this by painting over the messy 
history of conflictual movements throughout the first century and in his 
own time. He cleverly depicted Peter and Paul as preachers of an identi­
cal gospel. . . .  That is myth making in the genre of epic. There is not the 
slightest reason to take it seriously as history. 16 
In short, the narrative we have in Acts is so unrealistic, it cannot have been 
based on anything that actually happened. It's what Luke wishes to have 
happened, maybe what he wants people to believe happened; but it's cer­
tainly not what happened, even in outl ine. And as for this instance, so for 
all others in Acts. 
IS. On the rate of Christian expansion and growth almost certainly being nothing 
like what is depicted in Acts, see Carrier. Not the Impossible Faith, pp. 407-48. 
16. Burton Mack, 'Many Movements, Many Myths; Redescribing the Attractions 
of Ear\y Christianities. Toward a Conversation with Rodney Stark'. Religious Studies 
Rev· 
A ril 1999), pp. 132-36 ( 134). 

364 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
This conclusion should not surprise us, since all other Acts literature 
written by Christians was wholly fabricated as well. The Acts of Peter, the 
Acts of Paul, the Acts of Andrew, the Acts of John and the Acts of Thomas 
all look substantially like the Acts of the Apostles in the NT, yet are obvi­
ously not based on any kind of history. They are literary creations, telling 
stories the authors wanted, using known legendary characters (the various 
apostles after which they are named, plus in each its own cast of characters, 
some historical, some mythical, some invented to the purpose). There is 
really no reason we should privilege the Acts in the NT as somehow more 
historical or more reliable than any of these others, which were all written 
within decades of each other. Indeed for this very reason we should have 
presumed Acts to be fiction all along, albeit historical fiction, just like the 
Maccabean literature before it and other purported works of religious his­
tory (see, again, Element 44). Prior probability favors no other conclusion. 
The literary coincidences in Acts are also too numerous to be believable 
history, and reflect the deliberate intentions of the author to create a narra­
tive that served his purpose. For example, as Robert Price observes: 
Peter and Paul are paralleled, each raising someone from the dead (Acts 
9.36-40; 20.9-12), each healing a paralytic (3.1-8; 14.8-10), each healing 
by extraordinary, magical means (S.lS; 19.11-12), each besting a sorcerer 
(8. 18-23; 13.6-1 1), each miraculously escaping prison (12.6-10; 16.2S-26). 
Similarly, just as Peter is sent by God to save Cornelius when Cornelius 
sends for him after a vision (Acts 10}, Paul is sent by God to save the Mac­
edonians 'when a certain Macedon ian man' sends for him in a vision (Acts 
6.9-10}.17 Luke makes Paurs story parallel Christ's as well: 'both under­
take peripatetic preaching journeys, culminating in a last long journey 
to Jerusalem, where each is arrested in connection with a disturbance in 
the temple', then 'each is acquitted by a Herodian monarch, as well as by 
Roman procurators'.18 Both are also plotted against by the Jews, and both 
are innocent of the charges brought against them. Both are interrogated by 
'the chief priests and the whole Sanhedrin' (Acts 22.30; Lk. 22.66; cf. Mk 
14.55; 15.1), and both know their death is foreordained and make predic­
tions about what will happen afterward, shortly before their end (Lk. 21.5-
28; Acts 20.22-38; cf. also 21 .4). 
But Paul does almost everything bigger than Jesus: his journeys encom­
pass a much larger region of the world (practically the whole northeastern 
Mediterranean); he travels on and around a much larger sea (the Mediter­
ranean rather than the Sea of Galilee); and though, like Jesus, on one of 
these journeys at sea he faces the peril of a storm yet is saved by faith, 
17. Price, Pre-Nicene New Testament, p. 484. 
18. Price, Pre-Nicene New Testament, p. 483. 

9. Acts 
365 
Paul's occasion of peril actually results in the destruction of a ship. Like­
wise, Paul's trial spans years instead of a single night, and unlike Jesus, 
veritable armies plot to assassinate Paul, and actual armies come to rescue 
him (Acts 23.20-24). While Jesus stirs up violence against himself by read­
ing scripture in one synagogue (Lk. 4.16-30), Paul stirs up violence against 
himself by reading scripture in two synagogues (Acts 13.14-52 and 17.1-5).19 
However, whereas Christ's story ends with his gruesome death (which had 
a grand salvific purpose, which could not be claimed for Paul's ultimate 
death, and which to end wel1 had to be followed by a once-and-final resur­
rection, something that could also not be claimed for Paul), Paul's story 
ends on a conspicuously opposite note: 'and he abode two whole years in 
his own hired dwelling, and received al1 that went to him, preaching the 
kingdom of God, and teaching the things concerning the Lord Jesus Christ 
with all boldness, none forbidding him', something even Jesus could not 
accomplish when he was in Roman custody (Acts 28.30-31). Thus Paul out­
does Jesus even in that. 
Paul and Jesus also both die and rise again from the dead, yet unlike 
Jesus, Paul actually stomps right back into the city unmolested and contin­
ues to publicly preach throughout the land, winning many more disciples 
for Jesus (Acts 14.19-21 and thereafter). In contrast, Jesus wins no new 
disciples after his resurrection and doesn't even try. And all this occurs 
immediately after Paul, also just like Jesus, is hailed as a god (Lk. 22.70)­
and yet again Paul outdoes Jesus by humbly denying the claim (Acts 
14.11-18). And in the end Paul, unlike Jesus, is sent to meet the emperor of 
Rome, something even Jesus did not accomplish. In other words, by Luke's 
account, Paul was vastly more famous and successful than Jesus. 
The extent of the parallels drawn between Peter and Paul, and between 
Paul and Jesus, are altogether improbable as history. Likewise, the account 
of Paul's conversion in Acts 9.1-20 is simply a rewrite of the Emmaus nar­
rative in Lk. 24.13-35 (which, as we'll see in Chapter 10, §6, is obviously 
mythical): (1) Both stories feature a journey on a road from Jerusalem to 
another city (Emmaus: Lk. 24.13; Damascus: Acts 9.1-3); (2) both stories 
feature a revelation of Christ; (3) in Luke the revelation came as 'they drew 
near (eggizein)' the city where 'they were going (poreuein)' (Lk. 24.28), 
while in Acts the revelation came as Paul 'drew near (eggizein)' the city 
where 'he was going (poreuein)' (Acts 9.3); (4) in both stories Jesus appears 
and rebukes the unbeliever and instructs him, and as a result they become 
believers and go on to preach their newfound faith; (5) in both stories there 
are at least three men on the road together and yet only one of them is 
19. The parallels among these three synagogue incidents are even more numerous 
· 
intentional: see Crossan, Power o Parable 
. 205-207. 

366 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
named (Paul [as Saul] in Acts; Cleopas in Lk. 24.18);20 (6) in both stories 
'the chief priests' of Jerusalem are the named enemies of the church (Lk. 
24.20; Acts 9.1, 14); (7) in Luke God says Jesus had to suffer (Lk. 24.26). 
while in Acts God says Paul had to suffer (Acts 9.16); (8) both stories fea­
ture blindness (Paul is blinded by the divine light of his vision in Acts 9.8; 
Cleopas and his companion's eyes are blocked from seeing that their fel­
low traveler is Jesus in Lk. 24.16); (9) both stories end with this blindness 
being lifted (Acts 9.17-18; Lk. 24.31); (10) in Luke the visitation occurs on 
the third day (Lk. 24.21), in Acts the visitation is followed by a blindness of 
three days (Acts 9.9); and (1 1) in Luke the blindness ends after a meal com­
mences (Lk. 24.30-31), while in Acts a meal commences after the blindness 
ends (Acts 9.18-19). 
The author of Acts also uses features of the John the Baptist narrative to 
construct Paul's conversion story: (I) the names of John (the Baptist) and 
Ananias (who restores Paul's sight) mean the same thing in Aramaic (John 
= i،-annɤs = yahu-/:lanan = 'Yahweh Is Gracious'; Ananias = anan-ias = 
/:lanan-yahu = 'Gracious Is Yahweh'); (2) John says 'prepare the way [hodos] 
of the Lord, make his paths straight [euthus]' (Lk. 3.4), and so Paul takes 
shelter on Straight Street (euthus: Acts 9.1 1) after attempting to destroy 'the 
way' (hodos: Acts 9.2), but instead sees the Lord in the way (hodos: Acts 
9.27) and takes up the cause of preaching the way; (3) and finally, the initial 
order of events is almost exactly reversed: God speaks to Paul in a vision 
from heaven (Acts 9.3-8), then Paul prays (Acts 9.11), and is baptized (Acts 
9.18), then goes on to teach the gospel (Acts 9.20); Jesus is baptized, then 
prays, then God speaks to him in a vision from heaven (Lk. 3.21-22), and 
then (in this case just like Paul) goes on to teach the gospel (Lk. 3.23). 
Luke has also taken elements from the book of Tobit. When Paul is 
healed after his blinding vision, by A nanias acting on God's orders, we're 
told 'immediately [the blindness] fell from his eyes like scales [Iepides]. 
and he saw again and rose and was baptized' (Acts 9.18). In Tob. 3.17. the 
angel Rafael is told by God to 'scale away' (lepisai, the verb of Iepides) 
Tobias's blindness. Literally the text in Tobit says, 'to scale away the white­
ness', as Tobias's eyes had become clouded with white (Tob. 2.10), so here 
scaling away the whiteness makes sense, whereas there is no intelligible 
reason why Paul's blindness should be described as like scales, except as 
an allusion to the tale in Tobit, which also involves a story of traveling on 
a road with a divine being in disguise (in this case an angel), on a mission 
that would result in saving lives. And just as Paul is given letters from the 
high priest authorizing him to arrest Christians in Damascus (Acts 9.1-2). 
20. Though in Luke the third man on the journey is Jesus walking along in 
disguise (Lk. 24.15) he never tells anyone his name; whereas in Acts Jesus appears as 
a li ht from heaven, but Paul is accompanied by at least two unnamed men (Acts 9.7). 

9. Acts 
367 
Tobias was given a letter from his father authorizing him to claim a deposit 
of money-also, like Paul, in a foreign city (Tob. 5.1-3). More tellingly, the 
angel accompanying Tobias poses as 'the son of Ananias' (Tob. 5.12), and 
provides the means to cure the blindness of Tobias, just as in Acts the anal­
ogous divine being (the Lord Christ) provides the means to cure the blind­
ness of Paul through a man named Ananias (Acts 9.10-17). Other descrip­
tive elements of Paul's encounter on the road also derive, more loosely and 
creatively, from Ezekiel and Daniel. 21 
For this to be history, one has to posit all these agreements and paral­
lels are historical coincidences, which is far less probable than that they 
are inventions, intelligently designed to reflect each other. And when you 
remove them all, you have no real story left to call authentic. Any one or 
two or even three of these parallels or coincidental details could be histori­
cal (at a stretch), but not all of them together. Maybe there is some historical 
core to either or both tales that has been dressed up with all these fabricated 
symbols and coincidences and tall tales, but we have no way of knowing 
what that core might be, or even if there is one. Therefore these stories can­
not be relied upon as evidence of any historical fact, beyond the vaguest 
of generalizations, such as that Jesus may have originally appeared as a 
divine heavenly light, or that Christians may have believed God could visit 
them in the guise of an ordinary stranger; but such conclusions are neither 
certain nor helpful to the present purpose. 
The same kind of analysis repeatedly destroys every narrative in Acts. 
I've presented only a few examples.22 But even in general, Acts shares too 
many features with popular adventure novels of the same period to war­
rant trusting it as a genuine history: (1) they all promote a particular god or 
religion; (2) they are all travel narratives; (3) they all involve miraculous or 
amazing events; (4) they all include encounters with fabulous or exotic peo­
ples (e.g. 'bull-sacrificing pagans ofLycaonia in Acts 14.8-19, superstitious 
natives of Malta in 28.1-6, and philosophical Athenian dilettantes in chap­
ter 17', as well as fanatical pagan silversmiths of Ephesus in 19.23-41, and 
so on); (5) they often incorporate a theme of chaste couples separated and 
then reunited (a token nod to this element exists in PauPs chaste interaction 
with Lydia in Acts 16.13-40 and his many women followers, named and 
unnamed); (6) they feature exciting narratives of captivities and escapes (as 
in Acts 12, 16, 21 and 26); and (7) they often include themes of persecu-
21. Ezek. 1.26-2.3. Alan Segal, 'Conversion and Messianism: Outline for a New 
Approach', in The Messiah: Developments in Earliest Judaism and Christianity (ed. 
James Charlesworth; Minneapolis, MN: Fortress Press, 1992). pp. 296-340 (331-35). 
Similarly, Dan. 10.2-21. 
22. For many more, see the scholarship cited in earlier notes (esp. n. 1). For 
Ʀ-
example. Pervo. Mystery of Acts, pp. 55ӹ91, 101-40. 

368 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
tion, (8) scenes involving excited crowds (who become a character in the 
story, as in Ephesus and Jerusalem, in Acts 18-19 and Acts 6-7 and 21-22), 
(9) and divine rescues from danger; and (10) divine revelations are always 
integral to the plot (through oracles, dreams and visions, all of which fea­
ture in Acts)Y In fact, Acts looks far more like a novel than any historical 
monograph of the period.24 If Acts looks exactly like an ancient novel (and 
it does), are we really going to chalk this up to coincidence? 
2. What Happened to the Body? 
So the canonical Acts is not real ly to be trusted any more than any of the 
other apocryphal Acts that Christians produced. But let's at least suppose 
that its author started with some sort of bare outline of what happened in 
the early years of the spread of Christianity, and maybe even some actual 
historical sources, or semi-historical sources (perhaps something with a 
historical core embel lished with legends and tall tales), even if he didn't 
use them very much. At the very least, let's assume such materials and 
information were known to him, even if he didn't use them at all, surely 
even then, he would take them into account and be inspired by their content 
when constructing his own story of what happened. 
Whether we grant such assumptions or not, Luke obviously constructed 
tales affirming the historicity of Jesus. as well as the physical resurrection 
of his corpse, which left behind a conspicuously empty tomb, got touched 
by the disciples, slept and dined with them during a secret forty-day closed­
door conference and then flew off into outer space before their very eyes 
(Luke 24 and Acts 1). This is all obviously nonsense.25 Notably, no wit­
nesses are claimed for any of this but fanatical followers. No one else is 
reported to have verified any of it. Instead, the public history of the Chris­
tian mission begins only in Acts 2, which depicts the first time Christians 
publicly announced their gospel. 
But something very strange happens at that point. In Acts' history of 
the movement, from the moment the flock first goes public, in the very 
city of Jerusalem itself, at no point in the story (anywhere in all subse­
quent 27 chapters spanning three decades of history) do either the Romans 
23. Price. Pre-Nicene New Testament. pp. 492-93. 
24. See the table in Pervo. Mystery of Acts. pp. 168-70, where he enumerates ten 
different respects in which Acts is notably unlike ancient historiography (yet all ten are 
commonly encountered in ancient fiction). 
25. I've more than adequately demonstrated this in Carrier, 'Why the Resurrection 
Is Unbelievable' in Christian Delusion (ed. Loftus); Carrier, 'Christianity's Success 
Was Not Incredible', in End ofChristianity (ed. Loftus); Carrier, 'Spiritual Body', in 
Empty Tomb (ed. Price and Lowder); and Carrier. Not the Impossible Faith. 

9. Acts 
369 
or the Jews ever show any knowledge of there being a missing body. Nor 
do they ever take any action to investigate what could only be to them a 
crime of tomb robbery and desecration of the dead (both severe death pen­
alty offenses), or worse.26 The Gospel of Matthew even claims the Jewish 
authorities accused the Christians of such crimes before Pilate himself(Mt. 
27.62-66; 28.4, 1 1-15). Although that is certainly fiction (as I have argued 
elsewhere, external and internal evidence confirms Matthew's story is a 
poetic and apologetic fabrication), it does reflect what could not fail to have 
happened-if any body had actually gone missingY 
Since Christians were supposedly capitalizing on this fact (i.e. a missing 
body as evidence of a risen Jesus), they would be the first suspects-or at 
least the second, if (as the Gospels claim) Joseph of Arimathea was really 
the last person known to have had custody of the body (Mk 1 5.43-46; Mt. 
27.57-60; Lk. 23.5 1-56; Jn 19.38-42). In that case he would be the first man 
hauled in for questioning. Yet he vanishes completely from this (the earli­
est) history of the church, as if no one knew anything about him-or he 
didn't exist at all. Yet unless he was found and confessed to getting rid 
of the body, the Christians would be next in the dock. And yet, though 
Christians would certainly be suspects in a capital crime of grave robbery, 
and though Acts records case after case of them being interrogated at trial 
before both Jews and Romans on other offenses (e.g. Acts 4, 5, 6-7, 1 8. 12-
17, 23, 24, 25, 26, etc.), never once in this entire history of the church are 
they suspected of or questioned about grave robbery. It's as if there was 
no missing body to investigate; no empty tomb known to the authorities. 
Which means the Christians can't really have been pointing to one. If they 
had, they would have been questioned about it (and possibly convicted for 
it, innocent or not). Yet Acts shows there were no disputes at all regarding 
what happened to the body, not even false accusations of theft, or even 
questions or expressions of amazement. 
The Romans would have had an even more urgent worry than body­
snatching: the Christians were supposedly preaching that Jesus (even if 
with supernatural aid) had escaped his execution, was seen rallying his 
followers, and then disappeared. Pilate and the Sanhedrin would not likely 
believe claims of his resurrection or ascension (and there is no evidence 
they did), but if the tomb was empty and Christ's followers were reporting 
that he had continued preaching to them and was still at large, Pilate would 
26. On the ancient crime of graverobbing see the sources and scholarship surveyed 
in Richard Carrier, •The Nazareth Inscription', Hitler Homer Bible Christ, pp. 315-26. 
27. On Matthew's invention of the guarded tomb and associated accusations of 
theft: Carrier, 'Plausibility of Theft', in Empty Tomb (ed. Price and Lowder), pp. 358-
64; with Carrier, Proving History, pp. 1 28 and 199-204. 

370 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
be compe11ed to haul every Christian in and interrogate every possible wit­
ness in a massive manhunt for what could only be in his mind an escaped 
convict (not only guilty of treason against Rome for claiming to be God and 
king, as all the Gospels allege [Mk 15.26; Mt. 27.37; Lk. 23.38; Jn 19.19-22] 
but now also guilty of escaping justice). And the Sanhedrin would feel the 
equally compel1ing need to finish what they had evidently failed to accom­
plish the first time: finding and killing Jesus. 
Yet none of this happens. No one asks where Jesus is hiding or who 
aided him. No one is at all concerned that there may be an escaped convict, 
pretender to the throne, thwarter of Roman law and judgment, dire threat 
to Jewish authority, alive and well somewhere, and still giving orders to his 
followers. Why would no one care that the Christians were claiming they 
took him in, hid him from the authorities and fed him after his escape from 
justice (especially according to Acts 1), unless in fact they weren't claim­
ing any such thing? This is enough to confirm Acts' account of events is a 
fabrication, and a rather unrealistic one at that. 
Thus, either Acts deliberately suppresses the truth about what happened 
to the body and what was really being argued, said and done about it (which 
eliminates Acts as being of any historical value), or there was no missing 
body and no one was claiming there was. The fact that Acts fails to mention 
any debate or investigation or discussion about any tomb being empty or 
any body being missing (it never even occurs as an argument or a defense 
in any of the trials or debates that Acts records, for instance), or likewise 
about an executed convict being reported alive and well, would agree with 
the theory that the original Christians were in fact preaching that Jesus rose 
in an entirely new body, not the old one he discarded and left behind in the 
grave. As Paul wrote, the body that dies 'is not the body that is to come', 
but rather the buried body is left to be destroyed, while a superior 'replace­
ment' body is already stored up in heaven awaiting us (1 Cor. 15.35-50; 
2 Cor. 5.1-4).28 
So Acts' account could perhaps be rescued on minimal historicity: a real 
historical Jesus could still have been in his grave (which would not really 
have been a private grave owned by Joseph but the graveyard owned by 
the court for the burial of convicted criminals), and Acts' source materi­
als could for that reason lack any mention of inquests or disputes over the 
28. For a thorough defense of this theory, with extensive citation of primary 
evidence and scholarship in agreement, see Carrier, 'Spiritual Body', in Empty Tomb 
(ed. Price and Lowder), with its associated FAQ: http://www.richardcarrier.info/ 
SpiritualFAQ.html. Note that even Peter's street sermon in Acts 2, which references 
David's tomb, fails to make any appeal to the actual emptiness of Jesus' tomb, nor does 
anyone present affirm its emptiness or challenge it. It simply doesn't even come up. See 
Carrier Not the Im ossible Faith, pp. 343-46. 

9. Acts 
37 1 
missing body, because there wasn't one.29 (Of course, these omissions could 
instead be because the author of Acts, in fabricating his story, simply didn't 
think about having the authorities or even the evangelists behave realisti­
cally.) 
That could well be why those claims are dismissed as mere madness (Acts 
26.24), involving no possible criminal charge of any kind under Roman law 
(as we're told was repeatedly said: Acts 18.12-17; 23.26-35). Otherwise, the 
crime of either robbing graves or aiding and abetting an escaped felon and 
royal pretender would certainly have been obvious grounds for an inquest 
or trial. Yet neither occurs. Thus, if Acts records any truth about the history 
of the first church, its narrative all but entails there was no empty tomb, 
the body of Jesus was not missing, and that the earliest Christians, includ­
ing Paul, were instead preaching a resurrection by transfer to a new body, 
now in heaven, a fact known only by private revelations and interpretations 
of scripture. Which would be dismissed by Roman and Jewish authorities 
alike as nothing but vain superstition at best, idle madness at worst. 
So, evidentially, this detail is a wash. Both historicists and mythicists 
can adduce equally plausible explanations of it (though only by assuming 
the first Christians were not preaching an empty tomb). But there is some­
thing even stranger missing from Acts. 
3. The Mysterious Vanishing Acts 
The second peculiar thing about Acts is how thoroughly all the people asso­
ciated with a historical Jesus (as opposed to a cosmic, 'revealed' Jesus) 
disappear from the historical record entirely. This a historicist cannot plau­
sibly explain. Not only do Pontius Pilate and Joseph of Arimathea imme­
diately vanish from Christian history (Pilate alone gets mentioned only as 
the crucifier of Jesus and only in speeches by Christians echoing Luke's 
Gospel), as do Simon of Cyrene and his sons (Mk 15.21 ; Lk. 23.26), and 
Martha (Lk. 10.38-42Ұ Jn 1 1.1-12.2), and her brother Lazarus (Jn ll-1 2), 
and Nicodemus (Jn 3.1-9; 7.50; 19.39), and Mary Magdalene (from Acts 2 
on, none of these people is ever mentioned, or ever does or says anything, 
nor is their departure or lack of involvement ever noted or explained), but 
so does the entire family of Jesus. 
Even though Jesus' mother, Mary, and his brothers are explicitly said to 
have joined the church congregation in Acts 1.14, as soon as Christianity 
becomes public news they immediately vanish from history-completely. 
As does Jesus' father, Joseph, though his omission in Acts 1 .14 could be 
29. That Jesus would ultimately have been interred in a public grave managed by 
the Sanhedrin and not a private tomb: Carrier, 'Bur;al of Jesus', in Empty Tomb (ed. 
r .  

372 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
taken to imply he had died (although it is at least a bit strange that that 
fact never gets mentioned anywhere); likewise, we might explain away the 
disappearance ofhis sisters (which he is supposed to have had: Mk 6.3; Mt. 
13.56) by supposing their insignificance. But his mother and brothers? 
The disappearance of some characters can readily be accepted by a his­
toricist as being a consequence of their never having existed. Joseph of 
Arimathea, for example, could readily be dispensed with without impugn­
ing the historicity of Jesus. The absence of major characters introduced 
by John (Lazarus and Nicodemus, who already don't appear in any prior 
Gospel, much less Acts) can be explained away even more readily as inven­
tions of John-their importance and connection with Jesus is so prominent 
in his Gospel that their absence even in prior Gospels is already sufficiently 
inexplicable (and there is other evidence of their non-existence even more 
decisive, likewise for other named characters, as I show in Chapter 10, §7). 
But Pilate's absence cannot be explained in that way. Certainly, if Pi late 
never had anything to do with the death of Jesus, his absence from Acts" 
sources for the early Jerusalem church is easily explained; somewhat less 
so otherwise. So this disappearing act agrees fully with minimal mythi­
cism; but is at least slightly unexpected on minimal historicity. 
It's the complete disappearance of Jesus' family that is really hard to 
explain on minimal historicity. After the report of her being with the con­
gregation in Acts 1 .14, mother Mary is never mentioned again. She never 
says or does anything, is never spoken to or heard of again, and nothing 
ever happens to her. We aren't even told when or why or where she I ived 
or died. She literally disappears from history-as if she never existed. 
Though Acts 1 .14 also says Jesus' brothers were present just weeks before 
the Pentecost announcement recorded in Acts 2, all of his brothers then 
disappear. They are never mentioned again. According to Acts, they had no 
role at all to play in the history of the church, and are never heard from. No 
one even seems to be aware they exist. This includes, most conspicuously. 
his brother James, who is supposed to have been one of the most important 
leaders of the movement, one of three pillars on which the new church was 
founded-if that is what we are to understand Gal. 1.19; 2.9 or 1 2  to mean. 
or 1 Cor. 15.7, as many scholars insist or suppose (I will discuss whether 
that is what Paul actually meant in Chapter 1 1, §10). Later legend certainly 
had Jesus' brother James lead the church in precisely the time covered by 
Acts. So why is he not in it? 
The entirety of Luke-Acts mentions only two men by the name of James. 
yet identifies neither as the brother of Jesus. To the contrary, it specifically 
distinguishes both ofthem from his brothers (Acts 1.13-14). One ofthem is 
indeed one of the three pillars named by Paul (Peter, James and John: Gal. 
2.9, in light of Mk 3.16-17; 5.37; 9.2; 14.33; Lk. 5.10; 8.51; 9.28; etc.; see 
Chapter 11, §3), who was clearly not the brother of Jesus (as all the Gospels 

9. Acts 
373 
agree), but the brother of the other pillar, John. Acts says this James was 
beheaded by Herod Agrippa (12.1-2). The only other James in Luke-Acts 
is James the son of Alphaeus (Lk. 6.15; Acts 1 .13), who must therefore be 
the James still around after the first one is killed (Acts 12.17; 15.13; 21.18), 
although Acts has so egregiously toyed with the chronology (contradicting 
the firsthand accounts of Paul in almost every particular) that we might 
guess Luke has accidentally transposed a story actually about James the 
Pillar to a later period, forgetting he had killed him off earlier. After all, 
Luke does not otherwise explain why this second James is suddenly and 
consistently treated as the leader of the church in Jerusalem, which James 
the Pillar is known to have been. Later Christian legend (first attested only 
late in the second century, a whole lifetime or two after Acts was written) 
replaced this James ben Alphaeus with James 'the brother of the Lord', but 
Luke clearly has no knowledge of this connection (nor, we must conclude, 
did any sources he may have had). Nor do any of the other Gospels show 
any awareness that any brothers of Jesus ever had a role in the church at all, 
much less as a leader. Mark had already suggested none of Jesus' family 
entered the church, as he has Jesus essentially disown them.30 
So after the first chapter of Acts, the moment Christianity's history 
becomes public record, it suddenly appears as if Jesus had no family what­
ever. That is certainly more likely if there was no Jesus in the first place. 
For if Jesus didn't exist, then our author's genuine historical sources, inso­
far as he had any, would only have begun with the origin of the church 
under Peter (as represented from Acts 2 on), and these sources would never 
mention any of the family of Jesus (or Pontius Pilate, or anyone who buried 
Jesus, or carried his cross), because no such people existed. Or else they 
had nothing to do with a historical Jesus. Minimal historicity, by contrast, 
cannot as easily explain this. 
One might shoot from the hip and argue that Luke had some motive for 
erasing the family of Jesus from the history of the church, but that is refuted 
by the fact that he didn't: he includes them in the original congregation 
(Acts 1 .14); it is also rendered intrinsically improbable by the fact that if 
later legend were true, and James the brother of Jesus was a major leader 
and key figure in the early church, erasing him from the history of the early 
church should have been impossible (any Christian aware of the legends 
would want to know how Luke could erase so important a figure from his 
account and still be trusted as a historian). It also has no plausible motive. 
If Luke wanted to downplay the role of Jesus' family in favor of Peter and 
Paul, for example, he would far sooner invent accounts of them explicitly 
doing so; he would not simply forget they existed. Just compare how Luke 
30. Mk 3.31-34 (repeated in Mt. 1 2.46-50 and Lk. 8.19-21; echoed less directly in 
_ 7 . See Chapter 10 (§4). 

374 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
rewrote the entire history of Paul's interaction with Peter and the Jerusalem 
church in Galatians t-2: that's what he does with historical facts he doesn't 
like. He doesn't just delete people. He makes them say and do the things he 
wants (indeed, needs).31 
I must conclude that the history of the early church as recounted in Acts 
looks very much unlike what we would expect on minimal historicity. Con­
tortions are required to get what we have to tit (such as assuming ad hoc 
that in fact Jesus had no family, or that strange motives were available to 
erase them from history completely, motives that would not sooner moti­
vate a rewrite of what they said and did or what happened to them). Even 
the point about there being no missing body (the narrative simply makes 
no sense on the supposition that there was one; but makes perfect sense on 
the supposition that there wasn't, which agrees with there being no Jesus 
to bury) and the disappearance of Pilate (as if he would be wholly uncon­
cerned that a man he executed was reported to have escaped) are exactly 
what we expect on minimal mythicism, but not exactly what we expect on 
minimal historicity. But there at least we can retreat to combining minimal 
historicity with an early resurrection doctrine that did not require a missing 
body. Though I think that is much less ad hoc (since a strong, independent 
case can be made that that is probably in fact what the original Christian 
resurrection doctrine was), it is not 1 OOo/o guaranteed. 
Or we can retreat to supposing Acts is almost complete fiction, and thus 
al l of its strange omissions are just the result of Luke being an insufficiently 
imaginative writer. On that theory, having inherited no material about the 
early church other than perhaps the letters of Paul, Luke had no knowledge 
of Jesus' family, and so didn't think to include them in his tale. Likewise 
everything else that makes no historical sense. This entails a dilemma: one 
must either reject Acts entirely as evidence (being so wholly fabricated that 
it cannot be trusted as reliably attesting to anything), or one must accept 
that its omissions are improbable on minimal historicity but exactly to be 
expected on minimal myth. This does not mean impossible, just improb­
able. So we must assign some probability less than lOOo/o. This is true even 
if Luke is wholly fabricating, since even then it is not 100o/o likely he would 
forget these things. Those omissions are unlikely even in fiction, requiring 
an explanation, which requires a supposition not in evidence, which lowers 
the probabi I ity of any explanation we muster. 
My most generous estimate would be a 4 in 5 chance (roughly an 80% 
chance) that Luke would write Acts 2-28 as we have it, ifhe used or was 
aware of any kind of genuine sources for the early history of Christianity. 
31. The argument in James Tabor, The Jesus Dynasty (London: HarperElement, 
2006), pp. 247-54, that Luke is deliberately erasing Jesus' brothers (and mother) is for 
all these reasons wholl untenable. 

9. Acts 
375 
Which is the same as saying there is only a 20o/o chance he would have 
included material about the brothers of Jesus or any of the other missing 
people in his life (and thus an 80% chance he wouldn't). Yet 1 think an 80% 
chance Luke would completely omit Jesus' family from the whole public 
history of the church, as well as other things we should otherwise expect 
to be there, is being absurdly generous.32 My more realistic estimate of this 
probability would be 2 in 5 (or a 40% chance he'd leave all this stuff out; 
hence a 60% chance that he would have said something about these missing 
people and events). If, however, Luke neither used nor knew any real stories 
or sources, but just made it all up (or adapted sources that did), and given 
that he himself was clearly a historicist (or certainly was selling that dogma 
with these books, whatever he personally may have believed), then there is 
no longer any logical connection between these bizarre omissions and any 
actual absences in the history of the church. But even then these omissions 
would not have 1 to 1 odds. as if they were equally mysterious on h or -.h, 
because they would still be at least a little weird, requiring a supposition 
(not in evidence) that Luke was not a sufficiently imaginative writer to real­
ize what he was leaving out. 
I think it's improbable that Luke had no lore to work from, no infor­
mation about the earliest missions or the family of Jesus. Regardless of 
whether he used any of it or not, it's surely more likely that at least a basic 
outline of what happened was known to him. I think there had to be by 
his time tales about the role and fate of Jesus' family (especially Mary and 
James, or even Jude), if such people existed; and likewise what happened 
in Jerusalem the first time it was announced that an executed convict had 
risen from the dead. So was Luke writing in total ignorance or from a start­
ing point of at least some knowledge? I'll assume the latter (on what to do 
if you disagree, see §7). 
4. The 'Trial Transcripts' of Paul 
Another curious thing about Acts is that when the trials of Paul are exam­
ined (rather than his sermons elsewhere or the speeches of others), the 
historical Jesus himself mysteriously disappears. Surely this is at least 
somewhat less likely on h than on -.h, since on the latter hypothesis we 
32. Note that anyone who attempts to bypass this estimate by claiming Jesus had 
no brothers (or none ever connected with the church) must also agree that Paul could 
never have referred to brothers of Jesus holding prominent positions in the church in 
that case, which means you then cannot cite his doing so as evidence for historicity (see 
Chapter 1 1, §10). As long as you can accept that consequence, then you can change the 
estimate here from 2/3 to 1/1 (since the non-mention of non-existent brothers is always 
1000/o likelv. and thus would be so on h as well as -.h). 

376 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
can expect that in any actual trials Paul was in, only a cosmic, 'revealed' 
Jesus was attacked, defended and debated (and that appears to be what Acts 
reports to have happened), whereas on the former hypothesis many issues 
and facts pertaining to the actual deeds and sayings and fate of the histori .. 
cal Jesus would come up as pertinent or even essential. 
Again, what we make of this strange omission depends on whether the 
author of Acts is making it all up, in ignorance of what actually happened, 
or whether he is adapting, reworking or rewriting some earlier source that 
portrayed what happened at those trials. That source need not be historical. 
It could itself be a complete fabrication, perhaps itself an earlier Acts of 
Paul, telling tall tales of how he stood up to the authorities in legal contexts 
and won, but still written by people more in the know (whether the actors 
themselves, or those who knew them), and thus building on assumptions 
held at the time about what would occur in such trials or what would make 
sense to them given what the first Christians such as Paul actually believed. 
For example, if this proposed source-text were written by a companion of 
Paul who had no conception of a historical Jesus recently executed by Pon­
tius Pilate (because that exoteric myth hadn't been invented yet), then even 
his made-up accounts of the trials would reflect that. 
One argument for this being the case is the remarkable disparity between 
these trial accounts, and speeches and sermons that take place elsewhere. 
If Luke were simply fabricating the whole thing, these accounts should be 
consistent: the actors would say the same things when asked to pronounce 
and defend the gospel, regardless of where they were. But strangely, they 
are not. Everywhere else, the speeches and sermons in Acts are conspicu­
ously historicist; but when Paul is on trial, where in fact historicist details 
are even more relevant and would even more certainly come up, they are 
suddenly completely absent. That is very strange; which means, very 
improbable. The best explanation of this oddity is that Paul's trial accounts 
were not wholesale Lukan fabrications but came from a different source 
than the speeches and sermons Luke added in elsewhere-a source that did 
not know about a historical Jesus. 
In Acts, Paul faces two trials: one brief encounter in Greece and an 
extended period of hearings in Judea. The first occurs before Gallio, then 
the Roman governor of Greece, on a charge of 'persuading men to worship 
god contrary to the Jaw' (Acts 18.13). But Gallio dismisses the case. His 
bench decision reads: 
If there were any wrongdoing or violent crime here, then it would be 
reasonable to pay attention to you. But if this concerns questions about 
words and names and your own laws, then see to the matter yourselves. 
I'm not interested in being ajudge ofthese matters (Acts 18.14-15). 

9. Acts 
377 
This is all too vague to be of any help, since nothing about Jesus even comes 
up. It's the next series of hearings in Judea that are more conspicuous. 
This is the story of it as told in Acts: after Paul inadvertently causes a 
riot throughout the whole of Jerusalem (21. I 7-31 ), the Roman garrison com­
mander, Claudius Lysias, intervenes (21.31-39), calms things down, and lets 
Paul give a public speech essentially summarizing his story up to that point 
(21.39-22.21), which for some unexplained reason outrages the crowd and 
they start rioting again, calling for his death (22.22-23), at which Lysias 
takes him back into custody and retreats to interrogate him to find out what 
is going on, when he discovers Paul is a Roman citizen (22.24-30, a detail 
Paul himself never mentions in his letters. In fact, in 2 Cor. 1 1 .25 he says 
he was caned three times, which contradicts Luke's depiction of Paul as 
touting his citizenship to avoid a beating)Y In Paul's speech to the people 
during this episode, he makes no mention of a historical Jesus, only a Lord 
known by revelation (22.6-15, 17-18). Indeed, Paul has another revelatory 
encounter with Jesus shortly thereafter (23.11 ). 
Lysias then brings Paul to a meeting of the Jewish elite to find out why 
the riot occurred. At this inquest, the Pharisees present concluded, 'we find 
nothing wrong in this man; maybe a spirit spoke to him, or an angel' (Acts 
23.9), but then they get into a fight with their Sadducee peers over religious 
differences, and a riot breaks out again. So Lysias takes Paul out of there 
(23.10). Lysias then learns a small army of Jews was forming a plot to assas­
sinate Paul on his next day in court, at which he immediately ships Paul off 
to the Roman governor under massive guard-nearly a hundred horsemen 
and two hundred infantry (23.12-24). To explain this extraordinary action, 
Lysias wrote an official letter to the governor explaining the disposition of 
Paul's case, and that letter reads as follows: 
Claudius Lysias, to Felix, the most excellent governor, greetings. This 
man was seized by the Jews and they were about to kill him. And so I 
set out with an army and took him out of there, having learned he is a 
Roman. Since I wanted to know what they accused him of, I brought him 
into their court, where I found he was accused regarding questions of 
their law, but there was nothing in the charge worthy of death or prison. 
When a secret plot against the man was revealed to me, I sent him to you 
33. Roman citizens were immune to being caned without a trial (and even after a 
trial had the right to appeal all the way to the imperial court at Rome), and although one 
could be illegally caned or choose to accept caning rather than appeal, Acts 22.25-30 
shows Paul readily resorting to an appeal (and in general, Pliny the Younger didn't even 
wait for citizen Christians to appeal, he just immediately exempted them from local 
punishment and shipped them off to Rome for trial: Pliny the Younger, Letters 10.96.4). 
On the legalities: Brian Rapske, The Book of Acts and Paul in Roman Custody (Grand 
Ra ids MI: William B. Eerdmans, 1994), pp. 47-56. 

378 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
at once and ordered his accusers to charge him before you. Farewell (Acts 
23.26-30). 
This cannot be an authentic document as presented, since it lacks features 
a real one would necessarily have, such as Paul's full Roman name and 
indeed the full names of Claudius and Felix, and the date, for example. 
But whether a fabrication or a literary abbreviation of a real letter, it still 
conspicuously lacks any mention of a historical Jesus. Yet the fact that Paul 
was advocating the worship of an executed convict would certainly have 
been pertinent information for Lysias to mention to Felix. The more so if 
that convict was believed escaped and still at large and giving orders to his 
co-conspirators. Even just the fact that Paul's case was connected to the 
execution of an accused insurrectionist and pretender to the throne could 
not fail to be essential information here, considering that Paul was advocat­
ing the worship of that pretender to the throne, which would surely put Paul 
under suspicion of being an insurrectionist or a traitor. Instead. the letter 
says his case only had to do with obscure matters of Jewish religion, and 
involved no violation of Roman law. 
Paul is then brought under that massive guard to Felix (Acts 23.31 -35). 
His accusers are then brought in and allowed to plead their case (24.1-9). 
They accuse him of fomenting insurrection and defiling the temple (nei­
ther of which, of course, Paul was guilty of, nor did they have any evidence 
to back up those charges). Yet again, no mention is made of his worship­
ing a convicted felon who was executed on suspicion of declaring himself 
king-yet surely, in reality, his accusers would have made a great deal of 
hay out that. Paul is then a) lowed to respond (24.1 0-21 ). He also makes no 
mention of Jesus, only that they have no evidence to convict him on, and 
that he is only really being accused because he agrees with the Pharisees 
that there will be a resurrection of the dead. Felix ends the inquiry, makes 
no judgment and keeps Paul locked up for two years, for no explicable 
reason (and somewhat against the law protecting the rights of Roman citi­
zens). During this illegal imprisonment, Felix has Paul over for dinner 
on occasion, where Paul scares him with talk about future apocalyptic 
judgment (24.22-27), but still never a word about a historical Jesus. Even 
though he tells them a1J about 'the faith in Jesus Christ' (24.24), we're not 
told what that means. 
A new governor moves in, named Festus, and the Jews try to get him to 
ship Paul back to Jerusalem, but instead he holds an inquiry (Acts 24.27-
25.12), at which nothing changes (the same vague charges are advanced. 
which Paul simply denies), except that Paul appeals to be sent before Caesar, 
and his request is granted. While Paul awaits departure, Festus is joined 
by King Herod Agrippa, and they bring Paul in to discuss his case for 
some unexplained reason (25.13-27.1), and Paul is eventually shipped off to 

9. Acts 
379 
Rome. It is here that we finally hear more details about the case. Festus tells 
Agrippa that Paul's accusers 'brought no charges of crimes as I suspected, 
but only certain questions against him having to do with their religion, 
and concerning a certain Jesus, who was dead, whom Paul affirmed to be 
alive' (25.18-19), which means he didn't even know who this 'Jesus' per­
son was-an impossibility if he had been executed by Pontius Pilate some 
years before, as surely Festus would have learned by now. Indeed, it looks 
like the dispute over whether Jesus was dead or alive is only understood 
here to be an obscure question of Jewish theology. 
At this point, Paul finally gets to say his piece, providing us with a 
lengthy speech spanning twenty-two verses (Acts 26.1-23). Yet at no point 
does he ever refer to a historical Jesus. We hear only of a cosmic, rev­
elatory Jesus. No mention is made of Jesus having a ministry, or having 
appointed disciples, or of having been executed (on charges false or true), 
or having proved himself divine by miracles or teachings or anything at 
all. This is very much unlike Paul's speech to the synagogue in Antioch 
(Acts 13.23-41), which goes into explicit details of the gospel account of 
who Jesus was and what happened to him. But here, in his trial speech 
(of comparable length), Jesus is known only through a 'heavenly vision' 
(26.13-19). The only mention Paul makes of the death and resurrection of 
Jesus is to say that 'Moses and the prophets said it was going to happen', 
not that anyone had actually seen it happen nor that there was any real 
evidence it did, much less that Pontius Pilate played a role in it and Roman 
records would confirm it (26.22-23). In fact the only source Paul cites for it 
is scripture. Paul preached only what 'the prophets and Moses said would 
happen, whether the Christ would suffer, whether from a resurrection from 
the dead he would be the first to proclaim light to [God's] people and to 
the Gentiles' (26.23). Revelations and scripture-his only sources, his only 
offered evidence. 
It thus makes sense why Festus would answer, 'You've gone mad, Paul! 
Your abundant learning has driven you mad!' (26.24). Since the only thing 
Paul says he was accused of preaching is what he learned from scripture 
and from voices in the sky, the only rebuttal Festus could offer is that Paul 
had gone off his rocker. Paul assures him he hasn't, and says to Agrippa 
that, as a Jew, 'he knows about these things', because none of the facts Paul 
relates 'are hidden from him, since this has not been done in a corner' (Acts 
26.26). What 'things' does Paul mean? That Paul has long been a devoted 
Pharisee (26.4-5); that he was being accused of merely hoping for the ful­
fillment of scripture (26.6), even though all Jews share that same hope 
(26.7), which is the hope that God would raise the dead (26.8); that Paul per­
secuted Christians (26.9-1 1), but then saw a blinding celestial vision from 
God (26.12-18), and he obeyed this vision and preached its message, which 
, 
was sim 1 'to repent and turn to God and do works worthy of repentance', 

380 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
which he preached all over, and eventually to the Gentiles (26.19-20); and 
that the Jews seized Paul for preaching this message (26.21), and now he's 
on trial, 'saying nothing but what both the prophets and Moses said was 
going to happen' (26.22). Not a single reference to a historical Jesus. Every 
single fact here could be true without there having been a historical Jesus. 
As the Pharisees had already said of Paul at the first court inquest starting 
this whole series of hearings, 'maybe a spirit spoke to him, or an angel' 
(Acts 23.9). Indeed. In this whole account, from Acts 23 to Acts 26, that's 
al l Paul appears to know about. 
Even as fiction, the historical deeds and fate of Jesus would be crucial 
rhetorical material for both the prosecution and defense in a11 of Paul's trials. 
They should have been arguing over the facts of Jesus' ministry, teachings, 
miracles, the facts of his death and the fate of his body, the charges against 
him and the significance of his conviction, and whether he was still alive 
and at large, and what he was instructing his spiritual soldiers to do. That 
Luke wouldn't even think of this when inventing these narratives is hard to 
explain, especially since when he provides us with speeches elsewhere, not 
just from Peter but even from Paul (as in his Antioch synagogue speech), 
he gives us something of what we expect. Whereas here, all of those details 
have mysteriously vanished, despite this being co11ectively the longest and 
most detailed series of trial hearings related in Acts. I have to conclude 
it's at least somewhat more likely that Luke is reworking some narrative 
he received, a lost Acts of Paul, in which there was no Jesus executed by 
Pilate, but a cosmically dying-and-rising Christ known only through rev­
elation and scripture. 
Still, this does not leave me with a strong certainty. Possibly Luke 
wholly fabricated Paul's trials like everything else, and it just by coinci­
dence didn't occur to him to put the same things in them that he did in 
most other speeches in Acts (even Paul's). Or maybe those things were in 
his sources for those episodes and he cut them for space, not realizing the 
coincidental effect his decision would produce. And so on. Whether any 
of those scenarios is plausible or probable I don't know. But I can imagine 
enough of them to say I would not rest an argument on this strange elision 
of the historical Jesus from the trials of Pau I. I will say the probability of it, 
if historicity is true, is at best 9 in 10 (which means I'll allow a 90o/o prob­
ability that Luke would write the Pauline trial accounts in the way he did, 
even if Jesus existed), or at worst 1 in 2 (for a 50% probability he would do 
this). If, of course, he was using sources (and thus these elisions can reflect 
omissions in those sources). If not, then the odds might be nearer 1 in 1, 
because again, that would be almost as mysterious a thing to do on either 
historicity or myth. 

9. Acts 
381 
5. Stephen's Trial Speech 
I've already noted Burton Mack's observation that the sermons used to 
persuade Jews to become Christians all throughout Acts are simply not 
believable history.34 In general we know the standard practice in antiquity, 
even for the soberest of historians, was to fabricate the speeches of histori­
cal actors, based on what the historian was sure they 'must' have said (see 
Element 44). They were rarely likely to have sources for the content of 
speeches anyway, and even when they had them, they were rarely likely to 
use them if they didn't agree with the story the author wanted to tell. And 
we can often tell this is what has happened. 
Consider, for example, the longest speech in all of Acts, that of Stephen, 
delivered to the Sanhedrin immediately before he is executed by stoning 
(Acts 6.9-8.2), in the presence of Paul and with his approval (then called 
Saul: Acts 7.58; 8.1). There are historical inaccuracies in this account as we 
have it (Mishnah Jaw required that a capital sentence be voted on the day 
after the trial, so the judges could think on it before taking a life, whereas 
Acts has the court stone him instantly, without even a vote), but that could 
be explained as a truncation of what really happened or as part of the origi­
nal fiction Luke may be using as his source.35 Similarly, Stephen's speech 
draws on the Septuagint (a popular Greek translation of the OT, perhaps an 
odd thing to do for a supposed native of Palestine in a Jerusalem courtroom, 
where summarizing the Hebrew original would be more expected), com­
plete with errors only present in the Septuagint, but that could be a reflec­
tion of either its author's method of composing the fiction or Stephen's.36 
Those elements don't concern us that much. But the overall content 
does. Stephen's speech is also unique in Acts in many other respects, for its 
34. See also my survey in Carrier. Not the Impossible Faith, pp. 332-51 .  Although 
I am there rebutting Christian apologetics by adopting a fortiori their own system of 
assumptions (such as that Acts is mostly telling the truth), from an objective point 
of view the behavior of converts and evangelists surveyed there is simply far too 
unrealistic to have any historical plausibility. 
35. On the one-day delay required of capital sentences: Mishnah. Sanhedrin 5.5. 
36. On the 'mistakes' Stephen makes in recounting the OT see Rex Koivisto, 
'Stephen's Speech: A Theology of Errors?', Grace Theological Journal 8 (1987), pp. 
101-14. Though Koivisto is (absurdly) attempting to defend the inerrancy of Acts, 
he nevertheless thoroughly surveys the problems with the text. For a more secular 
treatment of the same problem: G.E. Sterling, '""Opening the Scriptures": The 
Legitimation of the Jewish Diaspora and the Early Christian Mission', in Jesus and the 
Heritage of Israel: Luke 's Narrative Claim upon Israel's Legacy (ed. D.P. Moessner; 
Harrisburg, PA: Trinity Press International, 1 999), pp. 199-225. 

382 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
content, its construction, its length and its being assigned to an otherwise 
insignificant speaker. Stephen is only suddenly and inexplicably introduced 
in Acts 6.5, so as to immediately become the first Christian executed for 
the faith, a strange course of events given that Peter and John were twice 
tried for the exact same crimes and repeatedly acquitted, suggesting a huge 
narrative inconsistency that might again reflect Luke's employment of 
different sources (one treating the story of Paul; another, Peter and John), 
or else his remarkable ineptitude as an author. 
Stephen himself is likely a fictional creation, a stock character represent­
ing a generic martyr. His name, stephanos, meaning 'crown', evokes the 
standard epithet for a faithful Christian and martyr: Rev. 2.10 encourages 
all Christians, 'Be faithful unto death, and I will give thee the crown of life 
[stephanos tes zt5ls]', and Jas 1.12 says all who remain faithful in the face 
of temptation will 'receive the crown of life [stephanos tes zoes]'. Also, 
1 Pet. 5.4 says that when Jesus appears to the faithful, 'you shall receive the 
crown of glory [stephanos tes doxes] that never fades away', and 2 Tim. 4.8 
says martyrs 'who love the appearing of Jesus' will receive 'the crown of 
righteousness' [stephanos tes dikaiosunȩs]-and notably Jesus 'appears' to 
Stephen immediately before he dies for the faith. Hebrews 2.7-8 likewise 
says Jesus was 'crowned with glory and honor' for his martyrdom, and 
the death of Stephen is indeed modeled on the death of Jesus: like Jesus, 
Stephen forgives his killers just before his death (Acts 7.60; Lk. 23.34); and 
just before they die, both Stephen and Jesus declare aloud that they give 
their spirit to God (Acts 7.59; Lk. 23.46); both deliver their last words 'with 
a great cry',phone megale (Acts 7.60; Lk. 23.46); both have their garments 
taken and given away (Acts 7.58; Lk. 23.24); and just as Jesus says in his 
trial that his accusers will see 'the son of man sitting at the right hand of the 
power of God' (Lk. 22.69), Stephen says in his trial that he indeed sees 'the 
son of man sitting at the right hand of God' (Acts 7.55-56), yet his accusers 
don't (presumably because it is not yet the apocalypse). 
Luke has also borrowed elements from Mark. Like Jesus, Stephen is 
accused by false witnesses that his enemies drum up against him (adapting 
Mk 14.55-59 to construct Acts 6.1 1-14), and the false accusations are also 
the same: Stephen is accused of claiming that 'this Jesus the Nazarene' was 
going to destroy the temple and change the laws, the same thing Jesus was 
charged with (in Mark). Notably, even though we know Luke used Mark 
as a source in constructing his Gospel, he omitted both of these details in 
his account of the arrest and trial of Jesus; he uses them, instead, only here. 
Yet we know he knew of them. So we can be certain Luke made a con­
scious choice to use those details, originally said of Jesus, in the account of 
Stephen instead. Which is a clear sign of fabricating the story. There is also 
a curious parallel between the unnamed young man [neaniskos] who has 
his garment torn away and flees naked at Jesus' arrest (Mk 14.51-52) and 

9. Acts 
383 
the named young man [neanias], Saul (i.e. Paul), who is given the garment 
torn from Stephen at his execution (Acts 7.58). 
So when Luke inserts into Stephen's speech a brief reference to the his­
toricity of Jesus (the Jews 'betrayed and murdered' Jesus just like their 
fathers murdered the prophets who foretold his coming: Acts 7.52-53), this 
could obviously be Luke importing his own narrative assumptions-par­
ticularly as he does not have Stephen provide any further detail nor have the 
Sanhedrin argue the point with him. Or it could have been a charge of mere 
cosmic responsibility, since Stephen in fact says, 'now you have become 
his betrayers and murderers because you received the law as an ordinance 
from angels and you did not keep it', implying it was their disobedience 
that compelled Christ's death (and not their actually killing him). Either 
way, Luke just assumes there would be no argument (which is historically 
implausible) and no reason for Stephen to be any more specific-even 
though he has Stephen speak over 1 ,200 words, consuming five pages of 
Greek, needlessly summarizing, at tedious length, the whole biblical his­
tory of the Jews . . .  surely the miracles, ministry, trial and fate of Jesus 
were far more important facts to mention in his defense (Acts 7.2-53). As 
thus an evident fiction constructed by Luke, Stephen's speech is of no use 
in supporting historicity. 
6. The Possibility of 'Aramaic' Sources 
This is also why we cannot make any headway arguing that Luke had 
source material for the speeches in Acts 'because' a greater preponder­
ance of so-called Semitisms are found in them than in the narrative sec­
tions-which is to say, idioms, grammar and vocabulary more distinctive 
of the Greek spoken by Hellenized Jews (like Luke himself may have 
been) or translated from Hebrew or A ramaicY On the one hand, this 
information is of little use, since it cannot be determined which is occur­
ring (are the Semitisms just how Luke writes in his own dialect or do 
they reflect his use of a source?), nor does either make the historicity 
of the speeches any more likely (since fictional speeches can be com­
posed just as easily in Aramaic as in Greek. And even supposing these 
Sernitisms indicate the use of a source, we cannot determine whether 
that source was in Aramaic, for example, or was simply an original com­
position by another author in a Semitized Greek, which could again be 
37. See, e.g., the survey ofD.F Payne, 'Semitisms in the Books of Acts', in Apostolic 
History and the Gospel: Biblical and Historical Essays Presented to F F. Bruce (ed. W. 
W 
1 h P. Martin; Exeter: Paternoster Press 1970 
. 134-50. 

384 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
just as fictional).3s On the other hand, Semitisms can also be an effect of 
a greater reliance on the Septuagint (a text already written in a highly 
Semitized Greek) when composing speeches, where more extensive and 
more frequent allusions to and quotations of scripture are expected, even 
if the speeches are entirely composed by the same author writing the nar­
rative sections. 
For example, the very first speech in Acts, in which Peter implausibly 
persuades thousands of Jews to become Christians in a single day (Acts 
2.41), is sometimes offered as a good example of the concept of being in a 
more Semitized Greek than the surrounding narrative, and yet in it Peter 
quotes not the Hebrew Bible or an Aramaic Targum but the Greek Septua­
gint, verbatim. The most crucial part of his speech turns on his interpreta­
tion ofPss. 16.9-10 in Acts 2.26-31, but instead of quoting the Hebrew origi­
nal, he gives a verbatim quote of the Septuagint (Ps. 16.10 is word-for-word 
identical between Acts and the Septuagint, and Ps. 16.9 is also identical 
in every word, with only a few insignificant changes of order). In reality, 
Peter would hardly attempt to persuade Jews in Jerusalem by haranguing 
them in Greek, much less succeed at it; and he certainly wouldn't have per­
suaded many of them by appealing to a Greek translation of the Bible rather 
than the original Hebrew text. No, this is Luke's construction of the speech. 
Luke is using the Septuagint to build the quotes in Peter's argument. That 
destroys any hope of recovering what Peter might have originalJy said, even 
if Luke somehow had some source for it. 
Finally, as D.F. Payne says: 
Luke's indebtedness to the [Septuagint] was profound, but it was by no 
means his only influence. Other Old Testament textual traditions were 
known to him; Semitic idioms common in the contemporary church . . .  
[also] afected his diction; and there is no good reason to doubt that he 
had access to traditions or documents couched in, or translated from, a 
Semitic language . . . .  However, such Semitic elements in Luke's writ­
ing must not be pressed to support conclusions which they will not bear. 
[Hedley] Sparks emphasizes, after analysis of his specimen passages, that 
Lucanisms surround the Semitisms. [Max] Wilcox too, on the basis of his 
more full analysis, asserts that his survey shows that 'in almost every 
case the material in which they ["hard-core" Semitisn'ls] are embedded 
has a strongly Lucan stamp'.39 
In other words, even where Semitisms appear in greater abundance, those 
sections also show unmistakable evidence of distinctly Lukan style. Which 
means Luke has completely reworked any sources he may have used, delet-
38. On the logical inadequacy of 'arguments from semitisms' in general see 
Carrier, Proving History, pp. 185-86. 
39. Pa: ne 'Semitisms in the Books of Acts', p. 145-46. 

r 
9. Acts 
385 
ing, changing and adding to them as he pleased. We therefore cannot know 
what any sources he may have used actually said. For all we know Luke 
may have taken a mythicist speech collection (such as I just argued for 
Paul's trial speeches) and added historicist flourishes to it. Since we have 
abundantly demonstrated that Acts was literarily crafted and much of its 
content freely invented by Luke, and Luke was certainly interested in pro­
moting historicity, Acts' reliability for demonstrating the historicity of 
Jesus is essentially non-existent. 
7. Weighing the Evidence 
Luke's wanton fabrications, including his use of Josephus to make his story 
seem more historically informed, and his complete rewrite of history to 
reverse the facts reported directly by Paul, and his overt attempts to make 
his books look like histories (e.g. adding such embellishments as Lk. I.l-
4; 2.1-2; and 3.1-2), pretty much establish that he is not honestly reporting 
the facts as he knows them. He is trying to create facts and sell them as 
the truth. This makes it impossible for us to know if Luke was a historicist 
himself, or merely trying to sell a historicist creed. 
But either way, we cannot use Acts as evidence for historicity. For any­
thing in it will have been designed to convince us of historicity, with no 
assurance of any real basis in fact, and abundant reason to doubt there is 
any. But a text specifically fabricated to convince us of historicity, such 
as this, can give us evidence of myth, if material in it doesn't make sense 
otherwise. The evidence in that case has slipped through-against what 
Luke obviously would have wanted, but due most likely to his not being 
able to think of everything, as most authors don't. After all, as the ubiquity 
of implausible novels and film scripts today well enough attests, even the 
smartest of people don't consistently compose realistic narratives or realize 
the holes in the plots they've contrived. 
If Acts is a wholesale fabrication, however, written in total ignorance 
of what may have actually happened, then Acts might afford no evidence 
for either historicity or myth. Its historical value either way could then be 
simply nil. So its effect on the probabiJity of historicity depends on whether 
we conclude Acts was composed in total ignorance of what may have actu­
ally happened or with some awareness of what actually happened during 
the first years and decades of Christianity, and thus has been at least partly 
influenced by that information. As I argued after discussing the trial tran­
scripts (§§4 and 5) and the vanishing acts (§3), I think it's unlikely the 
author of Acts had no information. His having some better explains the 
oddities I document. I will therefore assume he did (that the probability 
of this approaches 100%, close enough not to have to consider the alterna­
tive mathematically). But you may have a different view, believing it more 

386 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
likely that Acts was written in total ignorance, in which case you have a 
harder mathematical task ahead ofyou.40 
Setting that aside, tabulating my previous estimates (so you can substi­
tute your own) we get the following ratios between the consequent prob­
ability that Acts would look like it does if minimal historicity is true, and 
the consequent probability that Acts would look like it does if minimal 
historicity is false: 
best 
worst 
Vanishing family et a/. 
4/5 
2/5 
Omissions in Paul's trials 
9/1 0  
1/2 
Remainder of Acts 
111 
Ill 
Totals 
36 1 50 
2 1 10 
8 I 25 
1 I 5 
1 I 1 .39 
1 I 5 
0.7200 
0.2000 
72% 
20% 
Conversely, nothing in Acts is unexpected on minimal mythicism, as on 
that account anything historidzing in it is a mythical invention of Luke's 
(and we've proved Luke was doing that a lot), while the omissions and van­
ishing acts would be the inevitable result of there being no historical Jesus. 
So the same consequent probabilities on -.h can be treated as all lOOo/o 
across the board.41 That leaves the probability of Acts looking this way on 
h equal to 72% at best, and 20% at worst. The content of Acts is therefore 
evidence against the historicity of Jesus. 
40. If we designate the evidence of Acts as ea, then the basic equation for the effect 
of Acts on our results is P(ea lh.b) = (P(knowledge) x P(e. !knowledge)] + [P(ignorance) 
x P(ea !ignorance)], where P(knowledge) is your estimate of the probability that Luke 
had some sources or information ultimately dating back to the time in question; and 
P(ignorance) is the converse of that (i.e. P(ignorance) = I 
- P(knowledge)). Then P(ea 
!ignorance) = I (since in that event any oddities in Acts no longer have any causal 
connection to the truth) and P(ea !knowledge) is either the probability I assign to Acts 
or whatever your estimate of that is. For some of the problems you wi II face here, see 
discussion in Chapter 12 (§2). 
41. And even if not (if instead we set this probability at less than 100%), it doesn't 
matter, since the ratio ofthe two probabilities will remain the same. See note in Chapter 
8 (§13). 

10 
THE EviDENCE oF THE GosPELs 
I .  How to Invent a Gospel 
Among the many texts recovered from the fourth-century stash of codices 
recovered from Nag Hammadi, Egypt, are two in particular: Eugnostos the 
Blessed and the Wisdom of Jesus Christ. The peculiar thing about these two 
texts is that they pull away the curtain and reveal a key pathway by which 
Jesus tradition was invented. 
Eugnostos is a fake epistle written by what is almost certainly a fake 
person ('Eugnostos' means 'well knowing', an obviously fictional name), 
possibly composed before Christianity, as it contains no material distinc­
tive of Christianity, but appears to outline an esoteric doctrine of Jewish 
theology concerning the firstborn celestial Son of God, called the Savior 
and Son of Man (see Elements 39 to 41). The Wisdom of Jesus Christ then 
takes direct quotations from this epistle and puts them on the lips of Jesus, 
and expands on them, to fabricate a post-resurrection narrative scene with 
dialogue between Jesus and his disciples. So here we see whole sayings 
of Jesus being invented by fabricating a historical conversation (a Gospel­
style narrative), borrowing things said by Eugnostos and representing them 
as things said by Jesus in conversation with his disciples.1 This could be 
how much of the canonical Gospels were composed: things said by other 
people, in other texts, being 'lifted' and adapted and placed on the lips of 
Jesus. Certainly these two texts prove this was being done. And we have no 
a priori reason to believe this isn't how it was always done. 
We've already seen examples of the sayings of Jesus being lifted directly 
from the scriptures in 1 Clement (see Chapter 8, §5). And knowing that 'the 
scriptures' included more books and variants than we have (Element 9), 
this raises the possibility that sayings of Jesus were lifted from lost scrip­
tures, too. Sayings were also invented for Jesus from previous Christian 
writings. Of course, sayings for Jesus, and situations for him to say them in, 
could also have been simply invented by each Gospel author as he required, 
J .  See the side-by-side translations in The Nag Hammadi Library in English (ed. 
James Robinson; San Francisco, CA: Harper & Row, 3rd edn, 1988). 

388 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
or by the author of whatever (now lost) Gospel they were redacting. This 
is how entire collections of sayings were invented for Daniel and Moses. 
So why not also for Jesus? Indeed the Mishnah (apart from lines attributed 
to subsequent rabbis) was supposed to be the accumulated teachings of 
Moses passed down orally (the 'Oral Torah'), but surely it is really just an 
accumulated collection of what other men said, not Moses; attributing it all 
to Moses was simply a way of bestowing authority.2 We also know sayings 
for Jesus came from revelations, which could then have been placed on the 
lips of Jesus in a fabricated historical setting as if said by a historical man, 
rather than, as originally, an imagined spirit of Jesus communicating to an 
entranced apostle (whether hallucinating or pretending to be: Elements 15 
and 16; see next chapter, §4). 
If historical settings could be invented to make Jesus say what Eugnos­
tos said, certainly historical settings could be invented to make Jesus say 
what he was believed to have said in revelations (such as to Paul or any 
other apostle), or was claimed to have said in revelations-as, for example, 
in the book of Revelation. We'll see in the next chapter that revelation and 
scripture appear to be the only source Paul knew for the sayings of Jesus. 
He shows no knowledge of them existing in any kind of historical narra­
tive-except in one instance, the inauguration of the Eucharist, and that 
he explicitly says came to him by revelation! (See Element 16; and in the 
next chapter, §7.) Inventing historical narratives in which to place or adapt 
sayings was commonplace in ancient biography, even in general, but espe­
cially in faith literature (Element 44). That was actually the norm. 
So the question is: Are the Gospels fictional constructs, like the Wisdom 
of Jesus Christ and Plutarch's Life of Romulus? In other words, are they just 
myths? Or are they some kind of historical records we can rely on to prove 
Jesus existed? 
2. Deuteronomy is likewise wholly fiction, yet begins very similarly to the Gospel 
of Mark: 'these are the words Moses spoke unto all Israel beyond the Jordan in the 
wilderness' (Deut. 1.1). Dennis MacDonald has argued that the earliest (but now lost) 
Gospel on which all others are based is essentially a rewrite of Deuteronomy, only 
casting Jesus (the new 'savior') as Moses and revising its moral program: see Dennis 
MacDonald, Two Shipwrecked Gospels: The Logoi of Jesus and Papias 's Exposition 
of Logia about the Lord (Atlanta, GA: Society of Biblical Literature, 2012). Note that 
Islam saw a similarly rapid invention of large bodies of sayings for Muhammad, in 
order to lend greater authority to what others in fact had said, and if that can happen 
to Muhammad, it could happen to Jesus: see Robert Price, 'The Abhorrent Void: The 
Rapid Attribution of Fictive Sayings and Stories to a Mythic Jesus', in Sources of the 
Jesus Tradition: Separating History from Myth (ed. R. Joseph Hoffmann; Amherst, 
NY: Prometheus Books, 2010), pp. 109-17; with Ram Swarup, Understanding the 
Hadith: The Sacred Traditions of Islam (Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 2002); and 
Muhammad Zubayr Siddiqi, Hadith Literature: Its Origin, Development and Special 
Features (ed. and rev. Abdal Hakim Murad; Cambridge: Islamic Texts Society, 2nd 
p.fi n 
1 QQ'l' 

10. The Gospels 
2. What Is Myth? 
389 
There has been frequent debate over the genre of the Gospels and whether 
they are fundamentalJy myth or history.3 But myth is not real1y a Jiterary 
'genre' in the standard sense, since it crosses aiJ genres of literary compo­
sition. Plutarch's biography of Romulus is entirely myth, for example, yet 
written in the genre of historical biography (see Chapter 4, §1, and Ele­
ment 47). Most attempts at identifying the genre of the Gospels consist 
of comparing it to other literary forms, but this has only resulted in either 
unresolved disagreement or classifying the Gospels as a unique genre of 
their own, which unhelpful1y eliminates the opportunity to interpret them 
(or assess their historical value) by comparison with documents of similar 
genre. Even classifying the Gospels as biographies is unhelpful, as demon­
strated by the example of Plutarch's Lifo of Romulus: even if the Gospels 
perfectly corresponded with the genre of ancient historical biography, that 
in itself would not indicate whether they were in fact historical or mythi­
caL For in fact, a great deal of ancient biography, even of real people, was 
constructed of myth and fiction.4 Accordingly, our aim should not be iden­
tifying the 'genre' of the Gospels but the intent of their authors: whatever 
literary form they chose or created, were they writing myth or history? 
3. This debate is partly surveyed in Paul Rhodes Eddy and Gregory Boyd, 'The 
Genre and Nature of the Canonical Gospels', in The Jesus Legend: A Case for the 
Historical Reliability of the Synoptic Jesus Tradition (Grand Rapids, Ml: Baker 
Academic, 2007), pp. 309-61. Prominent examples of diverse views on the matter (not 
all of them plausible) include Charles Talbert, What Is a Gospel? The Genre of the 
Canonical Gospels (Philadelphia, PA: Fortress Press, 1977); David Aune, The New 
Testament in its Literary Environment (Philadelphia, PA: Westminster Press, 1987), pp. 
17-76; Richard Burridge, What Are the Gospels? A Comparison with Graeco-Roman 
Biography (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1992); Lawrence Wills, The Quest 
of the Historical Gospel: Mark, John, and the Origins of the Gospel Genre (New York: 
Routledge, 1997); Michael E. Vines, The Problem of Markan Genre: The Gospel of 
Mark and the Jewish Novel (Leiden: Brill, 2002); Thomas Thompson, The Messiah 
Myth: The Near Eastern Roots of Jesus and David (New York: Basic Books, 2005); and 
Richard Bauckham, Jesus and the Eyewitnesses: The Gospels as Eyewitness Testimony 
(Grand Rapids, MI: William B. Eerdmans, 2006). See also (as particularly relevant to 
the present discussion) Meredith Kline, 'The Old Testament Origins of the Gospel 
Genre', Westminster Theological Journal 38 (197S), pp. 1-27; Mary Ann Tolbert, 
Sowing the Gospel: Mark s World in Literary-Historical Perspective (Philadelphia, 
PA: Fortress Press, 1989), pp. 48-79; and Evan Fales, 'Taming the Tehom: The Sign of 
Jonah in Matthew', in Empty Tomb (ed. Price and Lowder), pp. 307-48 (esp. pp. 307-19). 
4. See discussion and scholarship cited in Element 44. That the genres of 'history' 
and 'biography' had become fully merged with mythmaking by the time the Gospels 
were written is also demonstrated by Charles Talbert, 'Biographies of Philosophers and 
Rulers as Instruments of Religious Propaganda in Mediterranean Antiquity', Aufstieg 
und Nieder an der romischen Welt 11 16 (1978), pp. 1619-51. 

390 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
There are countless definitions of myth employed in a variety of fields. 
and debate persists as to what exactly myth is.5 But such debates need not be 
resolved here. If someone claims the Gospels are 'myth' they can define myth 
any way they please, so long as they demonstrate the Gospels con form to that 
definition, and then remain consistent with that definition when drawing con­
clusions. The major trend in the study of myth today is reflected and well sur­
veyed by Radcliffe Edmonds in his own summary of myth scholarship and 
its main conclusions.6 In that school of thought, myth consists of factually 
untrue stories that are historically improbable but symbolically meaningful. 
Myths in that sense operate according to three basic rules: 
(I) A mythic story is a seemingly straightforward account of something 
that happened, yet its content and structure are carefully arranged to con­
vey a deeper meaning than the superficial narrative might suggest. (2) This 
is accomplished using symbols familiar to the audience (keywords, ironies. 
allusions, double entendres, etc., relying on a known database of cultural. 
literary, religious, grammatical and other facts). And (3) what an author 
of a myth changes is often the point of the myth. For example, if the story 
is highly allusive to another myth, yet reverses or radically alters certain 
elements of that myth, the allusions indicate what myth to compare the 
changes to, and the changes indicate how the author's message is meant to 
differ from the message of the earlier myth. 
In the words of Radcliffe Edmonds: 
Not only can an exploration of the various ways in which authors use a 
common set of elements uncover the different agendas of these authors 
and provide a deeper understanding of the individual texts, but it can also 
shed light on the ways in which myth was used . . .  as a device for com­
munication, a mode of speaking in which they could convey meaning 
densely through the manipulation of mythic motifs and patterns that each 
had its own resonance for the audience. 7 
Very often this communicated message involved plans for reforming soci­
ety, or proposing and defending models for how society or the world should 
function (or do function). To this end, myths communicate the values and 
universal truths embraced by the author, which the author desires his audi­
ence to embrace in turn. 
5. See, e.g., Bruce Lincoln, Theorizing Myth: Narrative, Ideology, and Scholarship 
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1999). 
6. Radcliffe Edmonds, Myths of the Underworld Journey: Plato, Aristophanes. and 
the 'Orphic' Gold Tablets (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004), pp. I-13. 
For a more extensive treatise on Edmonds-style understanding of myth see William 
Doty, Mythography: The Study of Myths and Rituals (Tuscaloosa, AL: University of 
Alabama Press, 2nd edn, 2000); and Walter Burkert, Structure and History in Greek 
Mythology and Ritual (Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 1979). 
7. Edmonds, Myths, p. 4. 

10. The Gospels 
As Edmonds puts it: 
The Greek poetic and mythic tradition provides the models of and models 
for the society, models which are given authoritative status as a descrip­
tion of the way the cosmos is constituted and of the proper modes of 
behavior within it . . .  [and] their elements are symbols that enunciate a 
model with a general application. However, each myth, each telling of a 
traditional tale, presents a different variation of the model; as the teller 
shapes the narrative according to his perceptions of the cultural models 
. . .  [so] the symbolic elements within the tradition are manipulated by 
the teller . . .  [and] this symbolic system provides a language by which 
the myth-teller may communicate with his audience . . .  [and] as a result, 
every myth is shaped by its context and the motivations of its narrator.8 
391 
If the Gospels are 'myth' in this sense, then we have a ready explanation 
for the considerable contradictions and changes in the Jesus-story across 
the four canonical Gospels (and other Gospels beyond), to which modern 
apologists respond with increasingly implausible ad hoc harmonizations, 
while historians respond with attempts to develop criteria to isolate the his­
torical truth behind the conflicting accounts (a method that has consistently 
been found invalid).9 
But if the Gospels are myth, then both efforts are futile, as both assume 
the intent of the authors is to record (if perhaps embellish) a collection of 
historical facts reported to them. If instead the intent of the authors is to 
construct symbolic myths about Jesus, then we have no reason to expect any 
of their content to be historical. Some of it may be, but since distinguishing 
fact from fiction would not have been of primary interest to the Gospels' 
authors, we will have little hope of finding clues to such distinctions in the 
texts themselves. We can work with external corroboratory evidence to 
isolate the factual elements (an ideal example being the archaeological and 
literary confirmation of the existence of Pontius Pilate). So confirming the 
Gospels are myth would not in itself entail, for example, the conclusion that 
Jesus did not exist. But it would greatly alter and limit our ability to know 
the historical truth about Jesus, and would fundamentally change our focus 
in studying the content of the Gospels-from an interest in extracting his­
tory from that content, to an interest in ascertaining its mytho-symbolic 
meaning and i ntent (see Chapter 12, §3). 
This is often easier to see outside the field of biblical studies, where 
blinding bias runs less rampant. In the Iliad, for example, Homer depicts a 
boxing match between two young men named Epeius and Euryalus. Epeius 
boasts of being undefeatable, in typical Homeric fashion, and then over-
8. Edmonds, Myths, p. 6. Edmonds further shows that myth is independent of 
genre, as it can appear in any and every literary genre imaginable: Edmonds, Myths, 
p. 7. 
9. As 1 demonstrate in Carrier, Proving History, pp. 1 1-16 and 121-206. 

392 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
whelmingly defeats his opponent. Centuries later, in the Aeneid, Virgil 
mimicked this boxing match. But Virgil replaces Epeius and Euryalus with 
the Roman heroes Dares and Entellus and changes its geographical location, 
its historical date and even its outcome.10 Nevertheless, there are enough 
intentional similarities to confirm that updating Homer's tale was Virgil's 
intent, and the changes Virgil made (apart from the trivia of when, where 
and who) become more meaningful when this emulation is recognized. In 
Virgil's account, instead of the boxers being two young men, Entellus is 
an old man who laments his lost youth. Then the Homeric plot is reversed: 
young Dares, the powerful braggart, does not win as his counterpart does 
in Homer. Instead, the old man, Entellus, although taking a fall just like his 
Homeric counterpart Euryalus, returns with a fury and overwhelmingly 
defeats his foe, who is described the same way Homer had described the 
defeated Euryalus: carried by his comrades and spitting out blood. Unlike 
the Homeric story, in Virgil's account Entellus was driven to return to the 
fight by a sense of shame and valor, which were moral values emphasized 
in Roman culture. Virgil's story also reverses the Homeric glorification 
of youth and denigration of the elderly, again to reflect the more 'modern' 
values of Virgil's time.1 1  The following diagram maps the parallels: 
finvindble vouth) 
"' 
Homer 
Virgil 
(8th BC'l:) 
( ·1 "t BCE) 
both boast of prowcssl 
Epeius 
becrmws 
Dares 
I 
I 
fight\ 
.iȱt:htȲ· 
I 
I 
Eurvalus 
/)ecames 
•:ntellus 
L l><>lh take a l'aU_j 
Figure 1. From Homer to Virgil 
10. Iliad 23.624-99; and Aeneid 5.387-484. 
( i 11 vincible youf h} 
(clthT & l-vinncl') 
I I .  On this latter point see Thomas Falkner, The Poetics ofO/d Age in Greek Epic, 
Lyric, and Tragedy (Norman: OK: University of Oklahoma Press, 1995); see. e.g., Iliad 
23.624-50. 

I 0. The Gospels 
393 
Thus, Virgil has told the same story as Homer, but he has recast the charac­
ters into a different historical setting and changed the plot in order to reflect 
and communicate how Roman values differ from Homeric values. 
This was a common practice: how you changed a myth was a way of 
communicating how your message differed from the earlier myth. Thus, 
when we find parallels in a later myth with an earlier myth, the way those 
two myths difer from each other is often the author's reason for borrowing 
from the earlier myth in the first place. What the new author leaves out, 
what he adds, what he changes is all the point of the story, and is what we 
need to look at in order to understand what the author is saying. Virgil was 
certainly not saying that Homer got the historical context wrong, that the 
boxing match really took place at a different time and place between dif­
ferent people. Nor was Virgil saying that Homer incorrectly reported the 
historical outcome of the boxing match. lt's doubtful either Homer or Virgil 
believed this boxing match actually happened, even though they both place 
the match in history and record it in a straightforward narrative that looks 
no different from any poetic record of witness testimony. 
Instead, Virgil is retelling this event in order to symbolically commu­
nicate his different values. What matters to him is not whether this boxing 
match occurred. What matters to him are the underlying values and mes­
sage the story conveys. We thus don't gain any understanding if we try to 
harmonize these contradictory tales or to ascertain what actual historical 
event inspired them (even if any did). We gain understanding only by rec­
ognizing the parallels and changes intended by Virgil, and the significance 
of the resulting symbolism of the story's structure and content.'2 What the 
story means is all we can study, and all we should study, not whether it 
actually happened. Only rarely are we able to do more. 
It is therefore crucially important to determine whether the Gospels are 
myth. This cannot be achieved by identifying their genre, because myth 
exists in all genres. Jt can be achieved only by confirming whether they 
contain narratives that conform more to the definition of myth than of his­
tory. Are the central narratives of the Gospels historically improbable but 
symbolically meaningful? Is this meaning concealed by a superficially 
'historical' narrative that is highly allusive to other myths, texts or concepts 
that increase both the interpretability and likelihood of the content of that 
narrative, more than a supposition of history would? And is this evident 
in both the parallels to and the conspicuous deviations from those targets 
12. Virgil's Aeneid is full of such transvaluations of Homer, rewriting Homeric 
narratives with Roman characters and values; e.g. 'Virgil imitated the death of Hector 
[in Homer's Iliad] when composing his account of the death of Turnus', Dennis 
MacDonald, 'Imitations of Greek Epic in the Gospels', in Historical Jesus in Context 
(ed. Levine, Allison and Crossan). PP· 372-84 (380); see pp. 375-80. 

394 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
of allusion? In short, is the content of those narratives more likely on the 
theory that they are myth or on the theory that they are history? 
Characteristics of myth are (1) strong and meaningful emulation of prior 
myths (or even of real events); (2) the presence of historical improbabilities 
(which are not limited to 'miracles' but can include natural events that are 
very improbable, like amazing coincidences or unrealistic behavior); and 
(3) the absence of external corroboration of key (rather than peripheral) 
elements (because a myth can incorporate real people and places, but the 
central character or event will still be fictional). No one of these criteria is 
sufficient to identify a narrative as mythical. But the presence of all three 
is conclusive. And the presence of one or two can also be sufficient, when 
sufficiently telling. 13 
We must avoid 'parallelomania', of course, the error of finding patterns 
everywhere by relaxing what counts as a parallel or finding parallels that 
have no identifiable reason to be present. Avoiding that requires focusing 
only on features that, altogether, are very improbable on any other explana­
tion. Thus, chance correlations can be distinguished from genuine signa­
tures of mytho-symbolic composition. This does mean we might have to 
set aside correlations that might be mytho-symbolic but cannot be proven 
to be. But that does not mean concluding they are not mytho-symbolic, 
only that we cannot be certain they are. Meanwhile, in many cases we can 
be reasonably certain. And if we find enough of those in a single text, this 
supports the conclusion that the remainder are as well, according to the 
principle of contamination, which Stephen Law has formally articulated 
for 'miracle' content. 14 His argument can be fully extended to all improb­
abilities, including emulative features of a story that are improbable coin­
cidences if posited as history but not improbable as an authorial creation. 15 
In Bayesian terms, and with respect to the Gospels, what we are looking 
for in each pericope (each internally complete narrative unit within a Gos­
pel) are features that are improbable as history but probable as myth. More 
precisely, that means features that have a lower consequent probability on 
h ('history') than they have on -.h ('myth'), not in respect to Jesus being 
a myth but just in respect to the pericope itself being a myth. If we start 
with no assumptions and thus assign a prior probability of 0.5 for h in this 
sense (and thus also for -.h, i.e., assuming both are equally probable at the 
13. For the logic underlying this, see Carrier, Proving History, pp. 1 14-17 (for 
emulation as a signature: 192-204; for improbable events as a signature: 177-79; and for 
when missing corroboration can be a signature: 1 17-19). 
14. Stephen Law, 'Evidence, Miracles, and the Existence of Jesus', Faith and 
Philosophy 28 (April 201 1), pp. 129-51, available at http://stephenlaw.blogspot. 
com/2012/04/published-in-faith-and-philosophy-201 1.html. 
15. Carrier, Proving History, pp. 195-204. 

1 0. The Gospels 
395 
outset), and count the whole content of a pericope as e, and then find that 
P(elh) < P(e!-.h), the result will be that P(hle) will be less than 0.5, and that 
means the prior, the P(h), that we use to examine the next pericope will be 
less than 0.5. If we find that P(ejh) < P(el-.h) for that pericope, too, then P(h) 
falls even further. And so on. If for any pericope P(elh) = P(el--.h), it then 
has no effect. But if P(ejh) > P(el..,h) for any pericope, then that can start 
to restore credibility by raising P(hle) for that pericope and thus raising 
the P(h) for the next or remaining pericopes. However, if that never hap­
pens, or rarely happens, or happens only too weakly, then the cumulative 
effect of the other pericopes will be a substantially reduced prior probabil­
ity that any pericope is historical rather than mythical. In short, if there are 
many clear instances of mythmaking in a Gospel, and no cJear instances 
of the contrary, then the remainder of that Gospel must be assumed to be 
(more probably than not) mythical, even if we can't prove it in any of those 
remaining cases. 
The effect of this on historicity will not be to establish that Jesus didn't 
exist but to eliminate evidence for his existence. That technically does mean 
it raises the probability of the ahistoricity of Jesus, but only by the amount 
that that probability would have been lowered by the Gospels being histori­
cal accounts of him. The net effect is simply the removal of the Gospels as 
evidence (as Burton Mack has already argued we should do). 16 We already 
know, as a general rule, that completely fictional accounts can be written 
about historical persons and seemingly straightforward historical accounts 
can be written about non-historical persons. So which it is (whether the 
Gospels are fictions about a historical person, or fictions about a nonhistori­
cal person) will have to depend on what the remaining evidence indicates 
(that of the Epistles, to be examined in the next chapter, or that of the other 
evidence, examined in Chapters 8 and 9). 
There is one important exception to this point: the Rank-Raglan data, 
which was used to construct our prior probabil ity (in Chapter 6), because it 
can be correlated with enough examples to derive an actual probability that 
such data would accumulate for a real man. But we have already employed 
that evidence in our calculation (and only if we didn't would we introduce 
it here: see Chapter 6 and the end of §2 in Chapter 12). Thus, the mythic 
character of the Gospels overall will affect our estimate of historicity. But 
only as much as it already has. 
16. See Burton Mack, The Christian Myth: Origins, Logic, and Legacy (New 
York: Continuum, 2001), who also argues we need a better theory of the origin of 
Christianity, one that takes the role ofmythmaking in early Christianity seriously (and 
I agree). Mack also extensively discusses what the term 'myth' means and what its 
functions were, much in line with what I have argued here. 

396 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
3. Examining the Gospels 
Several scholars have confirmed that by the standards of myth I just spelled 
out, the Gospels are primarily and pervasively mythical. 17 In the words of 
Marcus Borg, we have to admit '(1) that much of the language of the Gos­
pels is metaphorical; (2) that what matters is the more-than-literal mean­
ing and (3) that the more-than-literal meaning does not depend upon the 
historical factuality of the language'.18 That makes the Gospels allegorical 
myth, not remembered history (see Element 14). I will here extract and 
summarize the best examples illustrating this, and show how the end result 
must be a dismissal of the Gospels as evidence for historicity. But first I 
must address several other aspects of the Gospels that reinforce this point. 
Elsewhere I have already demonstrated that they lack all substantive (as 
opposed to superficial) markers of being researched histories, even by the 
lax standards of antiquity. 19 At no point do the Gospels name their sources 
or discuss their relative merits or why they are relying on them; at no point 
do the Gospels exhibit any historiographical consciousness (such as dis­
cussing methods, or the possibility of information being incorrect, or the 
existence of non-polemical alternative accounts); they don't even express 
amazement at anything they report, no matter how incredible it is (unlike 
a more rational historian); and they never explain why they changed what 
their sources said, nor do they even acknowledge the fact that they did 
(as when, e.g., Luke or Matthew alters what they derive from Mark). And 
unlike many other ancient authors, they do not explain who they are or why 
they are qualified to relate the accounts they do. Only one Gospel, Luke, 
employs even the superficial trappings of actual history writing, such as 
explaining what his purpose in writing is and attempting to date events. But 
as we already saw (in Chapter 9) that appears to be a ruse. 
17. Besides the others I shall cite as I go, the best examples, which are required 
reading on this subject, are, in order from introductory to advanced: (J) John Dominic 
Crossan, The Power of Parable: How Fiction by Jesus Became Fiction about Jesus 
(New York: HarperOne, 2012); (2) Randel Helms, Gospel Fictions (Amherst. NY: 
Prometheus Books, 1988); (3) Dennis MacDonald, The Homeric Epics and the Gospel 
of Mark (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2000)Ϸ (4) Thomas Thompson. The 
Messiah Myth: The Near Eastern Roots of Jesus and David (New York: Basic Books. 
2005); and (5) Thomas Brodie, The Birthing of the New Testament: The lntertextual 
Development of the New Testament Writings (Sheffield: Sheffield Phoenix Press. 2004). 
18. Marcus Borg, Jesus: Uncovering the Life, Teachings, and Relevance of a 
Religious Revolutionary (San Francisco, CA: HarperSanFrancisco. 2006). p. 52. 
19. See Carrier, Not the Impossible Faith, pp. 161 -218; and Carrier, Sense and 
Goodness, pp. 246-47. 

10. The Gospels 
397 
As we shall see through the rest of this chapter, the Gospels also cannot 
be classified as eyewitness testimony or even the collection of it.20 They 
do not read as such, and they do not identify themselves as such. Even 
John, who alone cites what we shall see is a fabricated unnamed witness, 
claims to have been using something that witness wrote, in other words a 
prior Gospel, perhaps the Gospel our John is redacting; but more likely, 
as with Luke, this is again just a ruse (see §7). Instead, the Gospels look 
like the edifying but fictional biographies composed for many other heroes 
and sages (see Element 44). As David Gowler observes, they appear to be 
an assembled network of vignettes (pericopes in the language of biblical 
studies) that were already identified in ancient schools as chreiai, a stand­
ard rhetorical device that was extensively taught to all students of literary 
Greek (and as the authors of the Gospels wrote in literary Greek, we know 
they attended those schools). 
Students were actually taught to invent narratives about famous and 
legendary persons, and to build a symbolic or moral message out of gen­
eral rules or proverbs. 21 As Gowler explains, 'the composition of the stories 
in the Synoptic Gospels is very similar to such exercises as the expansion 
and elaboration of chreiai found in other ancient literature and delineated 
in ancient rhetorical handbooks', in which authors 'were free to vary the 
wording, details, and dynamics of chreiai according to their ideological and 
rhetorical interests', and in fact they 'were taught and encouraged' to make 
both minor and major changes even to traditional stories in order to make 
whatever point they desired.22 Schools also taught the method of emulating 
20. Christian apologist Richard Bauckham, in Jesus and the Eyewitnesses, attempts 
to argue otherwise, but there are far too many implausibilities in his case, combined 
with an over-reliance on the possibiliter fallacy (Carrier, Proving History, pp. 26·29). 
See the various critiques in the Journal for the Study of the Historical Jesus 6 (2008); 
and the critical review of Dean Bechard (of the Pontifical Biblical Institute in Rome) in 
Biblica 90 (2009), pp. 126-29; and the argument of Thomas Brodie, Beyond the Quest 
for the Historical Jesus: A Memoir of a Discovery (Sheffield: Sheffield Phoenix Press, 
2012), pp. l lS-36. The present chapter's evidence of extensive literary artifice is alone 
sufficient to refute his case (see also Chapter 6, §7); a conclusion only reinforced by the 
extensive evidence of precedent (see Elements 44 to 48). Likewise, Christian apologists 
Paul Eddy and Gregory Boyd, in The Jesus Legend: A Case for the Historical Reliability 
of the Synoptic Jesus Tradition (Grand Rapids, MI: Baker, 2007), also attempt to argue 
as Bauckham does, but their case is even more mired in implausibilities, contradictions 
and undemonstrated assertions, as illustrated by Ken Olson in his review of their 
book for the online Review of Biblical Literature (December 20, 2008) at http://www. 
bookreviews.org/pdf/6281_6762.pdf; and by Robert Price in his extended critique in 
'Jesus: Myth and Method', in Christian Delusion (ed. Loftus), pp. 273-90. 
21. David Gowler, •The Chreia', in The Historical Jesus in Context (ed. Levine, 
Allison, and Crossan), pp. 132-48. 
22. Gowler, •The Chreia', pp. 132, 134. 

398 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
old stories by rewriting them into new ones with new characters and out­
comes-in other words, what we saw Virgil had done to Homer was a stand­
ard method of composing stories taught in al1 schools of the day.23 Which 
means ancient schools taught their students how to construct symbolically 
meaningful historical fiction, by both innovating and emulating other fic­
tion. And as I'll show, this is what we see happening in the Gospels. 
So the Gospels are simply not historical records, even when they try to 
pass themselves off as such (like other fictional literature often did: see Ele­
ment 44). To the contrary, they are literary constructs through and through, 
intelligently designed by their authors to communicate what they wanted, 
not simply what they were told. In fact it will become quite clear that the 
Gospels operate through extended parables, not recollections of memory, 
direct or transmitted. Insofar as they incorporate any materials passed on to 
them, their sources could have been prior scriptures and texts (like the use 
of Eugnostos in writing the Wisdom of Jesus Christ or the use of the Psalms 
to derive sayings for Jesus in 1 Clement) or revelations (like those reported 
by Paul) or the inventions of prior Gospel authors (like, as we shall see, 
John's use of Luke, Luke's use of Matthew, and Matthew's use of Mark).24 
It's also known that much of the Gospels consists of rewrites of pre-Chris­
tian Jewish tales (and sometimes pagan), from scripture and beyond, such 
23. Tim Whitmarsh. Greek Literature and the Roman Empire: The Politics of 
Imitation (New York: Oxford University Press, 2001); Raffaella Cribiore, Gymnastics 
of the Mind: Greek Education in Hellenistic and Roman Egypt (Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press, 2001); MacDonald, Homeric Epics, pp. 4-6; and Dennis 
MacDonald, Christianizing Homer: The Odyssey, Plato, and the Acts of Andrew (New 
York: Oxford University Press, 1994). There is a good survey of the evidence and 
scholarship on this aspect of ancient education and composition in Brodie, Birthing of 
the New Testament, pp. 2-79. 
24. I am rejecting outright all apologetic arguments, such as that of Mark Strauss. 
who claims 'it pushes the limits of credulity to argue that the same early Christians 
who taught the greatest ethical system in the world, passionately proclaimed the truth 
of their message, and suffered and died for their faith were at the same time dishonest 
schemers and propagators of a great fraud' (Mark Strauss, Four Portraits, One Jesus: 
An Introduction to Jesus and the Gospels [Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan, 2007], p. 
388), as that ignores the reality of the whole of Christian literature which is awash with 
such fraud (even in the NT itself), and likewise all faith literature generally (see Element 
44), and all the obvious evidence of invention and fabrication in the Gospels, and also 
unjustifiably presumes the Gospels were written by martyrs (he cannot possibly know 
this; see Chapter 7, §4), and that martyrs don't have even more incentive to lie to 
promote the moral system they are dying for (when in fact the risks they undertake 
highly incentivize lying to ensure their victory: see Carrier, Not the Impossible 
Faith, pp. 219-36 and 281-85; and Carrier, 'Why the Resurrection Is Unbelievable', in 
Christian Delusion [ed. Loftus], p. 29; and lying through allegory was widely accepted 
see Element 14). Strauss is therefore simply substituting propaganda for reality. 

10. The Gospels 
399 
as the way Matthew borrows from stories about Moses and then expands 
on that to turn Jesus into a full-blown Rank-Raglan hero (see Element 48; 
and Chapter 6)ͅ or borrows from Daniel to rewrite the empty-tomb narra­
tive of Mark, or (as we shall see) how Mark created the crucifixion narrative 
out of Psalm 22, or invented the notion that the disciples were fisherman in 
order to make Jesus into the new Odysseus with his clueless sailors.25 We 
already saw how nearly the whole core Gospel narrative can be derived from 
scripture (Element 17), and that's not even including the many scriptures we 
no longer have and which could thus have contained even more inspiration 
than we know about (see Element 9, and examples in 1 Clement discussed 
in Chapter 8, §5). In fact. we'll see that creating the Gospel narratives by 
rewriting both pagan and Jewish 'scripture' was the norm, not the exception. 
Parables and sayings in the Gospels also resemble those in Jewish rabbini­
cal legends, often in style and sometimes even in content, and those legends 
also contain dubious narratives similarly constructed to communicate the 
moral of a story, not to preserve any real historical memory.26 Often influ­
ences from either Jewish or pagan moral traditions can be detected or sus­
pected (see Elements 32 and 33). 
All of this is generally admitted by most scholars, who nevertheless are 
usually certain these literary constructs are built around some sort of his­
torical core or the barest seeds of real transmitted memories. All they have 
to do, they assume, is develop the tools needed to extract those historical 
needles from the rhetorical haystacks of the Gospels. But none of the tools 
they have developed work. Every expert who has published a direct exami­
nation of them has concluded that they are invalid and incapable of doing 
what is claimed.27 
25. For Matthew's use of Daniel: Carrier. Proving History, pp. 199-204; and 
Carrier, 'Why the Resurrection Is Unbelievable', in Christian Delusion (ed. Loftus). 
pp. 294-95. For Mark's use of the Psalms: Carrier, Proving History. pp. 131-34; and 
Carrier, 'Spiritual Body', in Empty Tomb (ed. Price and Lowder), pp. 158-61. For many 
more examples, peruse the works listed in the earlier general note; e.g. on the invention 
of the idea of the disciples being fishermen, see MacDonald, Homeric Epics. 
26. Gary Porton. 'The Parable in the Hebrew Bible and Rabbinic Literature'. in The 
Historical Jesus in Context (ed. Levine, Allison and Crossan), pp. 206-21; and in the 
same volume, Herbert Basser, 'Gospel and Talmud', pp. 285-95; Peter Flint, 'Jesus and 
the Dead Sea ScroJis', pp. 1 10-31ۮ and Craig Evans, 'The Recently Published Dead Sea 
Scrolls and the Historical Jesus'. in Studying the Historical Jesus: Evaluation ofthe 
State ofCurrent Research (ed. Bruce Chilton and Craig Evans; New York: E.J. Brill, 
1994), pp. 559-61; and Craig Evans, 'Jesus and the Dead Sea Scrolls from Qumran 
Cave 4', in Eschatology. Messianism, and the Dead Sea Scrolls (ed. Craig Evans and 
Peter Flint; Grand Rapids, Ml: William B. Eerdmans, 1997), pp. 91-100. 
27. See Carrier, Proving History, pp. 1 J-16. 

400 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
This includes the ever-popular Criterion of Embarrassment, which I and 
others have demonstrated is simply incapable of extracting reliable history 
from the Gospels.28 1 have already refuted all such arguments elsewhere 
(such as for the historicity of the crucifixion of Jesus, his origin at Naza­
reth, his baptism by John, his betrayal by Judas, and so on).29 Those argu­
ments are invalid. That alone does not make these facts unhistorical; it only 
makes it impossible for us to know whether they are historical. In other 
words, historical confidence in those claims is unfounded, by any methods 
so far used. Although in some cases the evidence does tend to suggest non­
historicity. For example, the rhetorical, literary and theological utility of a 
baptism by John argues slightly in favor of its invention; while the accu­
mulated evidence suggests 'Nazareth' as the town Jesus originated from 
was a late eponymous inference from what was originally the completely 
unrelated title of 'Nazorian', having something to do with what Jesus was 
or represented, not where he was from.30 
The latter should already be obvious from the fact that Christians were 
originally called Nazorians (Acts 24.5), and the originating sect of Chris­
tianity, which remained Torah-observant, continued to be so-named for 
centuries (see Chapter 8, §1). Yet Christians neither came from nor were 
based at Nazareth. So the word clearly meant something else.31 And this is 
explicitly admitted in later Christian sources.32 In fact, that the messianic 
fable had to be set in Galilee was already established in scripture (Isa. 9.1-
7); and scripture likewise insisted the messiah had be a 'Nazorian' (Mt. 
2.23, obviously reading some scripture or variant we no longer have: see 
Element 9). 33 These facts obviously inspired the selection for Jesus' home 
28. See Carrier, Proving History, pp. 124-69. 
29. In Carrier, Proving History, pp. 121-92. 
30. Baptism: Carrier, Proving History, pp. 145-48; Nazareth: Carrier, Proving 
History, pp. 142-45. Whether Nazareth actually existed (I am convinced it did, though 
some have their doubts) is irrelevant to this conclusion. 
31. For Christians to call themselves Nazarenes because their founder was from 
Nazareth would make no more sense than Platonists calling themselves Athenians 
because their founder was from Athens. It's even worse than that, really, because 
they were not calling themselves (or even Jesus) Nazarenes, but Nazorians, which is 
analogous to Platon ists calling themselves Athonians (see note below); or even more 
analogously (and thus even more inexplicably), Athonenes. 
32. Cited in Carrier, Proving History, pp. 142-45. 
33. Contrary to the usual claim that Matthew must have made this up, there is 
no way Matthew would invent a scriptural reference. It would defeat the purpose to 
cite a scripture that didn't exist in order to prove Jesus fulfilled scripture-even in 
general, much less to a well-informed Jewish readership, as Matthew's readership was 
intended to be. Moreover, even if he wanted to invent a scripture, he would not invent 
this: because the 'scripture' he 'quotes' here does not in fact fit the name ofthe town of 
Nazareth (see following note); if Matthew were inventing, he would invent a correctly 

1 0. The Gospels 
401 
a town in Galilee with the nearest-sounding name, 'Nazareth'. That this is 
what happened is supported by the fact that those two words (Nazoraios 
and Nazareth) are not at all related9 yet Matthew reports that scripture said 
Jesus would be a Nazorian, and Acts says the Christians were calJed Nazo­
rians, and Epiphanius confirms a Torah-observant Christian sect did exist 
in Palestine called the Nazorians9 and Jesus is frequently called a Nazorian 
in the Gospels (in John and Matthew, he is only so caiJed). So the scripture 
and the name came first; the Gospel narrators then forced a fit, as best they 
could, with otherwise unrelated background facts (like a town with a near­
enough-sounding name). 34 
matching word. Note that Lk. 24.19 might be based on this very passage in Matthew, 
and if so, Luke (or a subsequent scribe) changed the spelling (see following note). 
34. In addition to everything else I adduce in Carrier, Proving History, pp. 142-
45, that supports this conclusion, Nazoraios (Mt. 2.23; Acts 24.5) simply has no 
grammatical connection to Nazara, Nazaret or Nazareth, and does not in fact form the 
word 'Nazarene'. Nazoraios would instead form in English 'Nazorian'; and if it referred 
to a town of origin at all (and there is no particular reason to believe it originally 
did), it would indicate an inhabitant of NazfJrai ('Nazors'), by analogy to 'Athenian' 
(Athenaios), meaning 'from Athens' (AthӸnai). 'Nazors' is not 'Nazareth', or indeed 
any known town. It should be clear that NazfJr- and Nazar- are completely different 
roots; and -eth and -ai are completely different terminations. The original meaning was 
probably not a town of origin but an attribute or label (a name with a secret meaning, 
as I show in Proving History some Christians in fact believed). This lack of connection 
between the terms is actually an argument for the historicity of Nazareth (at least 
when the Gospels were written), as there is no other explanation why Nazoraios would 
generate an assignment to Nazareth other than that there was an actual Nazareth and 
that sounded close enough (otherwise, if the evangelists were inventing the town, they 
would have named it NazfJrai). Conversely, this also argues that Jesus did not come 
from Nazareth, as otherwise there is no good explanation why he was called a Nazorian 
(Mt. 26.71; Lk. 18.37; Jn 18.5-7 and 19.19) and his followers Nazorians. other than 
that this was a term originally unconnected with Nazareth and therefore preceded the 
assignment ofthat town to Jesus (it's not as if Matthew, e.g., needed to find scriptural 
confirmation that he originated in Nazareth; Mark didn't, and neither did Luke or John). 
Otherwise Jesus would have been called a Nazaretos ('Nazarethan') or a Nazaranos 
('Nazaran'). Mark created the loosely similar word, Nazarlnos, for this purpose, unless 
that was a later scribal modification. And we have reason to believe it was, because 
Mk 10.47 originally agreed with the other Gospels in saying NazfJraios (e.g. in Codex 
Sinaiticus); Mk 14.67 may have (e.g. Codex Koridethi and Codex Sangallensis 48); as 
might Mk 16.6 (e.g. Codex Sangallensis 48 and Codex Regius); and there is significant 
confusion in the mss. as to the spelling in Mk 1.24, as also in those other three verses, 
leaving all cases accounted for-for Mk 1.24 alone Swanson identifies no less than five 
different variant spellings; cf. Reuben Swanson, New Testament Greek Manuscripts: 
Variant Readings Arranged in Horizontal Lines against Codex Vaticanus: Mark 
(Sheffield: Sheffield Academic Press, 1995), p. 15. Matthew knows no other spelling 
than NazlJraios (and he was using Mark as a source). John also knows no other spelling 
than Nazoraios. Luke uses Nazarenos only twice, only one of which is a lift from 

402 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
We similarly must reject attempts to argue that a given statement is his­
torical because it appears to derive from an Aramaic source. Aramaic was 
spoken by millions continually for centuries across a broad geographical 
area (far beyond just Palestine), and therefore even if an Aramaic source 
could be demonstrated, that tells us nothing about its authenticity or date or 
place of origin. Stories can be fabricated in Aramaic, and revelations can 
be delivered and reported in Aramaic (and later inserted into an invented 
narrative) by anyone in the first century as easily as in any other language. 
Actually demonstrating an Aramaic source (as opposed to Semitic Greek, 
or the use of the Septuagint or an Aramaic targum of the OT to draw mate­
rial from) is a lot harder than is pretended anyway. But the fact that even 
succeeding at it accomplishes nothing is sufficient reason to abandon hope 
that historicity can be recovered that way.35 
With all that said, we must now look at the evidence for pervasive liter­
ary artifice in the canonical Gospels, beginning with the one that all the 
others employed as their primary model. 
4. The Mythology of Mark 
A good example of how Mark is creating fiction about Jesus can be seen in 
the appearance of a previously unmentioned insurrectionist named Barab­
bas in his crucifixion narrative. As Mark tells the tale: 
At the feast, Pilate used to release to them one prisoner of their choice. 
And there was one called Barabbas, chained up with those who'd engaged 
in rebellion, who in the insurrection had committed murder. The mob 
went up and began to ask him to do what he usually did for them. And 
Pilate answered them, saying, 'Do you want me to release to you the 
King of the Jews?' For he realized the chief priests had seized [Jesus] out 
of jealousy. But the chief priests stirred up the mob. so he would release 
Barabbas to them instead. And Pilate again answered and said to them. 
Mark (Lk. 4.34, redacting Mk 1 .24), the other introduced in a story unique to Luke 
(Lk. 24.19), but elsewhere, in another lift from Mark. he uses Nazoraios (Lk. 18.37. 
redacting Mk 10.47), and this spelling can't have come from Matthew. who does not 
use the word at all in his redaction of the same story (in Mt. 20.29-34). It therefore 
must have come from Mark, which argues that Mark originally wrote Nazoraios. 
Notably, in Luke's one lift from Mark that reads Nazarlnos, the manuscripts again 
don't agree on the spelling (some seven variants are known, including spellings similar 
to Nazoraios); and in his one unique use, a great many mss. in fact read Naz{)raios. See 
Reuben Swanson, New Testament Greek Manuscripts: Variant Readings Arranged in 
Horizontal Lines against Codex Vaticanus: Luke (Sheffield: Sheffield Academic Press. 
1995), pp. 73, 317 and 411. It would appear that Nazarenos was a later scribal invention 
and might never have been in the Gospels of Mark or Luke originally. 
35. Carrier, Proving History. pp. 185-86. 

10. The Gospels 
'So what should I do about the one you call the King of the Jews?' And 
they cried out again, 'Crucify him!' And Pilate said, 'What evil has he 
done?' But they cried out more, 'Crucify him!' And Pilate, wishing to 
satisfy the mob, released to them Barabbas, and sent Jesus to be whipped 
and crucified (Mk 15.6-1 5). 
403 
This is surely myth, not fact. No Roman magistrate (least of all the infa­
mously ruthless Pilate), would let a murderous rebel go free, and no such 
Roman ceremony is attested as ever having existed; nor is it at all plau­
sible.36 But the ceremony so obviously emulates the Jewish ritual at Yom 
Kippur of the scapegoat and atonement, in a story that is actually about 
36. Raymond Brown, The Death of the Messiah from Gethsemane to the Grave: A 
Commentary on the Passion Narratives in the Four Gospels (New York: Doubleday, 
1994), I, pp. 814-20 (§ 34.C); and Robert Merritt, 'Jesus Barabbas and the Paschal 
Pardon', Journal of Biblical Literature 104 (1985), pp. 57-68. Merritt finds a similar 
religious tradition in ancient Babylonian, Assyrian and Hittite royal cult, involving a 
ceremony in which the king would be symbolically 'punished' in place of a pardoned 
prisoner, the king 'taking upon himself' the sins of the released prisoner, while the 
latter is set free, symbolically freeing the land from sin (see also Element 43); but in 
this ceremony the king would select the prisoner (and thus would obviously not select 
a murderous insurrectionist) and would only conduct the ritual as a religious ceremony 
in his role as sovereign (representing the whole land in his person), presenting no 
realistic analogy to what Pilate does (and certainly no such religious ceremony existed 
in Roman government). Merritt thinks Mark may have invented his ritual using this 
archaic ceremony as a model. Merritt also finds that a general release of prisoners 
would sometimes occur during the Greek festival of Dionysus Eleuthereus ('The 
Liberated', so-named for his own miraculous escape from prison) and some other 
similar Greek and Roman festivals, but this was only a temporary parole, and extended 
not to one but to all prisoners who were sufficiently pure and posted bond to guarantee 
their return-it therefore did not include murderers or traitors or anyone convicted of 
high crimes, and 'the release was merely a parole for the duration of the festival and 
not an amnesty, with bond required to be furnished on behalf of a released prisoner' 
(p. 63), thus bearing no analogy at all to what Mark describes. Mark's invention instead 
more clearly borrows and transvalues the 'widespread knowledge of the choice given 
to the crowd at Roman gladiatorial games, the choice to determine whether a wounded 
gladiator would be killed or allowed to live' (p. 68), and is thus a literary invention 
that doubles as a social commentary on Jewish behavior and Roman culture. Unlike 
the Synoptics, which tend to claim (following Mark) that the custom was Roman, 
Jn 18.38-40 claims the custom was Jewish, but there is no evidence of that, either. 
Attempts to claim Mishnah, Pesabim 8.6b refers to such a custom mistake what is 
there said; that law refers to anyone who is in prison during the time the Passover 
sacrifice is slaughtered but is expected to be released in time to eat of it, and therefore 
needs someone on the outside to conduct the sacrifice on their behalf (8.6a and 8.6d). 
There is no reference here to anyone being pardoned or any kind of custom peculiar to 
Passover; it simply covers anyone who was already granted acquittal or parole but not 
Yet released in time to perform the ritual. 

404 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
atonement, that its status as allegorical myth is clear.37 We already saw that 
Jesus' death was understood by the earliest Christians to have merged the 
sacrifices of Passover and Yom Kippur (Element 18). Here, Mark has clev­
erly merged the sacrifices of Passover and Yom Kippur by having Jesus be 
a Yom Kippur sacrifice performed during Passover. 
Barabbas, in reality a very unusual name, means ʂson of the Father' 
in Aramaic, and we know Jesus was deliberately styled the ʂson of the 
Father' himself.38 So we have two sons of the father; one is released into 
the wild mob containing the sins of Israel (murder and rebellion), while 
the other is sacrificed so his blood may atone for the sins of Israel-the 
one who is released bears those sins literally; the other, figuratively.39 This 
is the Yom Kippur ceremony of Leviticus 16 and Mishnah tractate Yoma: 
two 'identical' goats were chosen each year, and one was released into the 
wild containing the sins of Israel (which was eventually killed by being 
pushed over a cliff), while the other's blood was shed to atone for those 
sins.40 Hebrews already says Jesus' death was the ultimate Yom Kippur 
atonement sacrifice, and this concept was central to the earliest Christian 
teaching we have any record of (see Elements 10, 18 and 28). Mark is thus 
tell ing us, with his own parable, to reject the sins of the Jews (especially 
violence and rebellion) and embrace instead the eternal salvation of atone­
ment offered in Christ. 
37. By contrast, Brown, Death of the Messiah, pp. 811-14 (§ 34.B), completely over­
looks the Levitical connection and therefore his judgment in favor of the historicity of 
Barabbas is uninformed. 
38. William John Lyons, 'The Hermeneutics of Fictional Black and Factual Red: 
The Markan Simon of Cyrene and the Quest for the Historical Jesus·, Journal for the 
Study of the Historical Jesus 4 (June 2006). pp. 139-54 (149-50 for the translation of 
'Barabbas'). 
39. That Jesus was imagined to have borne our sins only figuratively. not literally. 
should be obvious even from its basis in Isaiah 53 (where the servant who 'bears 
our sins' and thus dies to atone for them is in fact innocent, and thus is not literally 
containing our sins: 53.9 vs. 53. 1 1; that this passage inspired Christian teaching on the 
point, see Elements 5 and 6). Likewise in earliest Christian writing: I Pet. 2.24 and 
He b. 9.28 say Jesus 'carried away' our sins (anaphero; compare the use of this same 
verb in M k  9.2/Mt. 17.1), not 'bore' them in the sense of actually embodying them (as 
in being a sinner. as Barabbas was; or having the world's sins magically cast into his 
body, which is the fate of the scapegoat). I Pet. 2.22-23 and 1 Jn 3.5 both make this 
theological point clear. Similarly, 2 Cor. 5.21, which says 'him who knew no sin' (thus, 
in distinct contrast to Barabbas) 'God made [equal to) sin' (not 'made him sin' in the 
sense of sinning, nor 'made him bear sins' in the sense of Barabbas or the goat sent 
to the Devil, but rather, made him a stand-in for sin, so that killing him was ritually 
equivalent to killing sin). See A. H. Wratislaw. 'The Scapegoat-Barabbas', Expository 
Times 3 (1891 /1892), pp. 400-403. 
40. That the goats had to be in some sense identical: Mishnah, Yoma 6.1b. 

I 0. The Gospels 
405 
Had this story appeared in any other book, we would readily identify it 
as myth and not historical fact. As fact it's hopelessly implausible. As myth 
it makes perfect sense. Because the name of Barabbas is improbably con­
venient, and the ceremony depicted is very improbable as history, but Jines 
up improbably well with the Yom Kippur ritual of atoning for Israel's sins, 
which we know Mark understands Jesus to be doing here-yet another 
improbable coincidence.41 In Bayesian terms, with all these factors con­
sidered, the consequent probability on 'Mark is recording what happened 
at the crucifixion' is extremely low, while the consequent probability on 
'Mark invented this as an allegory for the gospel' is extremely high. Given 
any plausible prior probabi lity (especially an initial prior of 50/50), this dif­
ference in consequents entails a very high probability that Mark composed 
this as an allegory for the entire gospel.42 We should conclude then that he 
did. This story is fiction. 
Adding weight to this conclusion is manuscript evidence that the story 
either acquired or originally had the name 'Jesus Barabbas'. Thus we really 
had, most improbably of all, two men named 'Jesus Son of the Father', 
41. I am not the first to notice this. It was already extensively argued by Wratislaw, 
in 'The Scapegoat-Barabbas', over a hundred years ago, and more recently by Daniel 
SttYkl ben Ezra, The Impact of Yom Kippur on Early Christianity: The Day of Atonement 
from Second Temple Judaism to the Fifth Century (TUbingen: Mohr Siebeck, 2003), 
pp. 165-73; Jennifer K. Berenson Maclean, 'Barabbas, the Scapegoat Ritual, and the 
Development of the Passion Narrative', Harvard Theological Review 100 (July 2007), 
pp. 309-34, and many others (from Will iam Arthur Heidel. in The Day of Yahweh: A 
Study of Sacred Days and Ritual Forms in the Ancient Near East (New York: Century, 
1929], p. 298, to Nicole Wilkinson Duran, in The Power of Disorder: Ritual Elements 
in Mark 's Passion Narrative [London: T. & T. Clark, 2008), pp. 85-87). 
42. The hypothesis 'Mark is recording what happened' is meant generically here: 
it must be devoid of a priori assumptions about what historically happenedޢ if instead 
we define this hypothesis as literally 'exactly this happened'. then the evidence is more 
or less 100% expected. but then it's the prior probability that is very small (since that 
hypothesis requires assuming a priori a number of unlikely coincidences, against all 
our background knowledge of how history actually works). The mathematical outcome 
is the same (because the improbabilities just transfer from one term to the other in the 
same equation). See Carrier, Proving History, pp. 79-80, 239-42. This is si milar to 
the example in Carrier, Proving History, p. 133, where P(HAPPENEo!e) does not mean 
happened exactly as described but that the author is recording whatever happened-the 
hypothesis making no assumptions about what it was that happened. This amounts to 
saying the hypothesis is that the author is generally honest and reliable: the probability 
that an honest and reliable documenter of history would report this sort of story is 
low, because the story's col lection of improbabilities and convenient coincidences is 
· ·< 
incongruous with what we know to usually come from honest and reliable recorders 
of history. 

406 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
exactly the same name.43 The odds of that being history are very small 
indeed; but the odds of it if it was an intentional fiction are effectively 
100%. In the early third century, Origen not only attests to there being 
Greek manuscripts of Matthew that read that way, he himself makes the 
connection between Barabbas and the scapegoat at Yom Kippur, saying of 
the Barabbas narrative in the Gospels: 
You see! You have here the goat who is released alive into the wilder­
ness, bearing in himself the sins of the people who were shouting and 
saying 'Crucify! Crucify!' He is therefore the goat released alive into the 
wilderness, while the other [i.e. Jesus] is the goat dedicated to God as a 
sacrifice to atone for those sins, making of himself a true atonement for 
those who believe.44 
Origen also sees Barabbas as symbolic of Israel's sin, since Barabbas 'is 
figuratively the Devil', and Israel has adulterously chosen him as her hus­
band instead of her true groom, Jesus.45 His reasoning is that in the Yom 
43. In Mt. 27.16-17: see Merritt, 'Jesus Barabbas', p. 57; Reuben Swanson, New 
Testament Greek Manuscripts: Variant Readings Arranged in Horizontal Lines against 
Codex Vaticanus: Matthew (Sheffield: Sheffield Academic Press, 1995), pp. 279-80; 
also in several Armenian, Georgie and Syriac manuscripts, demonstrating that even 
in Greek the variant existed as early as the fourth century (we have it attested in 
several later Greek manuscripts as well), and Origen reports that he saw it in Greek 
manuscripts of the early third century. In these manuscripts Barabbas is named 'Jesus 
Barabbas' twice (in two distinct verses: 27.16 and 27.17), which cannot be accidental; 
therefore either a scribe deliberately changed his name to Jesus Barabbas in both 
verses (indicating the scribe understood the mythic symbolism and intended to make 
it even more clear) or that is what Matthew originally wrote. The latter is the more 
probable hypothesis (see following note). Matthew often improves on Mark in this 
way, though the copy of Mark that Matthew derived his text from may also have said 
'Jesus Barabbas', since the evident tendency to delete them from Matthew could also 
have purged them from Mark. But even if Matthew added them, that entails Matthew 
understood the mythic symbolism (and thus intended to make it even more clear), since 
there would be no other reason to add them (either by Matthew or later scribes). 
44. Origen, Homily on Leviticus 10.2.2. That manuscripts included it is mentioned 
in Origen, Commentary on Matthew 121, where he also gives the reason why the name 
'Jesus' was then being removed from manuscripts: it was considered inappropriate to 
associate the name 'Jesus' with a sinner. And indeed, the name 'Jesus' is conspicuously 
absent from the Gospels (apart from the Jesus), despite that being one of the most 
common names of the time (even in Acts only one other person is ever even mentioned 
as having the name: Elymas the Sorcerer's father was supposedly named 'Jesus', 
according to Acts 13.6-8; and that is probably a literary invention). 
45. Origen, Commentary on Matthew 19 (on Jesus as the husband of the church, 
the heiress of the former Israel, see Element 48). Philo of Alexandria, in On Plantation 
61, had likewise said the scapegoat represents the fate of those who honor the world 
(they fall to their deaths like it does), and the atonement goat represents the fate of 
those who honor god instead (possibly alluding to martyrdom); likewise in Philo, 

1 0. The Gospels 
407 
Kippur ceremony, the scapegoat either represented or was delivered to 
the Devil (more specificalJy Azazel, either Satan himself or one of Satan's 
angels).46 Thus, to choose him was to throw in your lot with the Devil rather 
than the Lord. 
The Christian book of Barnabas discerns another aspect of Mark's alle­
gory: 
[The Torah says to] take two goats of goodly aspect, and similar to each 
other, and offer them. And let the priest take one as a burnt-offering for 
sins. And what should they do with the other? 'Accursed', says He, 'is the 
one'. Note how the type of Jesus now comes out. 'And all of you spit upon 
it, and pierce it, and encircle its head with scarlet wool, and thus let it be 
driven into the wilderness' . . . .  What does this mean? Heed what is said, 
'one upon the altar, and the other accursed'. And why is the one that is 
accursed crowned? Because they shall see Him then in that day having 
a scarlet robe about his body down to his feet; and they sha11 say, 'Is not 
this He whom we once despised, and pierced, and mocked, and crucified? 
Truly this is He who then declared Himself to be the Son of God. For 
how like is He to Him!' With a view to this, the goats had to be of goodly 
aspect, and similar, that, when they see Him then coming, they may be 
amazed by the likeness of the goat. Behold, then, the type of Jesus who 
was to suffer (Barnabas 7.6-10). 
Observe how in Mark's story Jesus is treated by the Jews exactly like the 
scapegoat: scorned and beaten and spat upon and dressed in scarlet and 
crowned and pierced, yet Barabbas is the actual scapegoat, whom the Jews 
embrace instead of abuse. So the Jews have not correctly discerned who 
the actual scapegoat is and who the actual sin offering is. Mark has thus 
created an allegory for Jewish blindness to what Jesus represents, the Jews 
choosing instead their sins over their salvation-Jesus Barabbas, instead 
of Jesus Christ. 
This was notably also a choice between two kinds of messiahs: a doomed 
one of military revolution (Barabbas is a murderous revolutionary) and one 
of spiritual victory whose death elim inated the need for mil itary revolution 
(see Elements 23 to 28). As SUSki ben Ezra explains, 'Jesus of Nazareth is 
the Messiah as God wants him to be, while Jesus Barabbas is the Messiah 
as the people want him to be', and by not letting the choice fall to a lottery 
(and thus to God), 'the people usurp the role of God on Yom Kippur in 
choosing between the two'.47 Thus, as a literary allegory, Mark's composi­
tion is near brilliant, conveying everything he wants to say about the gospe1 
Who Is the Heir of Things Divine 179, the atonement goat represents the virtuous, 
while the scapegoat represents those who abandon virtue. Mark was thus working with 
established typology. 
46. A;zazel: StOkl ben Ezra, Impact of Yom Kippur, pp. 85-101. 
47. StOkl ben Ezra, Impact 
of Yom Kippur, pp. 170-71. 

408 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
and its acceptance and rejection. But there is nothing of history here. None 
of this actually happened. 
In fact, the entire crucifixion scene is a fabrication, a patchwork assem­
bled from verses in the Psalms, in order to depict Jesus as a standard Jew­
ish mytho-type of 'the just man afflicted and put to death by evildoers, but 
vindicated and raised up by God'.48 Numerous Psalms were mined for this 
purpose, but especially Psalm 22: 
Mark 15.24: 'They part his gannents 
Psalm 22.18: 'They part my gannents 
among them, casting lots upon them •. 
among them, and cast lots upon them·. 
Mark 15.29-31: 'And those who passed 
Psalm 22.7-8: 'All those who see me 
by blasphemed him, shaking their heads 
mock me and give me lip, shaking their 
and saying, " . . .  Save yourself . . .  " and 
head, saying "He expected the lord to 
mocked him, saying ''He who saved 
protect him, so let the lord save him if 
others cannot save himselfl"' 
he likes"'. 
Mark 15.34: 'My God, my God, why 
Psalm 22.1 :  'My God, my God. why 
have you forsaken me?' 
have you forsaken me?' 
Table 1. From Psalms 22 to Mark 15 
Even the whole concept of a crucifixion of God's chosen one arranged 
and witnessed by Jews comes from Ps. 22.16, where 'the synagogue of the 
wicked has surrounded me and pierced my hands and feet'. Other texts 
Mark used to construct his crucifixion narrative include Psalm 69, Amos 
8.9, and elements of Zechariah 9-14, Isaiah 53, and Wisdom 2.49 This is 
myth, not memory. Many scholars agree. 
Notably, even the Aramaic that Mark provides when he reports Jesus' 
cry on the cross, which Mark translates into Greek similar to that of the 
Septuagint, appears to derive from a targum of the Psalms.50 The targums 
(in the Hebrew plural, targumim) were Aramaic translations of the Hebrew 
Bible as then known, and many were in circulation, so the ones we have 
48. Carrier, Proving History, pp. 131-33, with p. 315 n. 43. 
49. See G.K. Beale and D.A. Carson (eds.), Commentary on the New Testament 
Use of the Old Testament (Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Academic, 2007), pp. 235-37: and 
Darrell Bock, 'The Function of Scripture in Mark 15.1-39', in Biblical interpretation 
in Early Christian Gospels., Vol. 1. The Gospel of Mark (ed. Thomas R. Hatina: New 
York: T. & T. Clark, 2006), pp. 8-17. Notably, while Mark borrows the last words of 
Jesus from Ps. 22.1, Luke changed the last words of Jesus by borrowing from Ps. 30.5 
instead (which in the LXX is identical to what Jesus says in Lk. 23.46 but for the tense 
of the verb and its address to 'father'). 
50. Roger Aus, Barabbas and Esther and Other Studies in the Judaic Illumination 
of Earliest Christianity (Atlanta, GA: Scholars Press, 1992), p. 12. 

I 0. The Gospels 
409 
today do not necessarily reflect the exact targum used by Mark, which may 
have contained an manner of variant readings now unknown to us that 
influenced him (see again Element 9). Targums were very loose and crea­
tive translations, often more like interpretations, paraphrasing and rephras­
ing the OT, often updating the original passages with new theology or sim­
ply rewriting scripture. 51 
That Mark relied on a targum is not only evidenced in his lifting and 
adaptation of an Aramaic phrase here (obviously from the Psalms) but in 
several other places. For example, Mark appears to have relied on an extant 
targum of lsa. 6.9-10. The original Hebrew there reads, 'Go, and tell this 
people, "Indeed you hear, but do not understand; and indeed you see, but do 
not perceive"', because, the text says, their ears and eyes must be blocked, 
'lest they see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand 
with their heart, and turn again, and be healed'. An extant targum of this 
replaces 'healed' with 'forgiven', which happens to match exactly Jesus' 
saying in Mk 4.11-12, 'And he said unto them, " . . .  all things are done in 
parables, so that seeing they may see, and not perceive, and hearing they 
may hear, and not understand, lest they turn again, and be forgiven."' Apart 
from the fact that this saying of Jesus has apparently been redacted out of 
Isaiah (and thus is being read out of scripture and thus no longer requires 
Jesus to have said it: see again Elements 16 and 17), it seems here that Mark 
has drawn this saying not from the Hebrew or the Septuagint text but from 
an Aramaic targum.52 1t is for this reason that finding evidence of an under­
lying Aramaic in Mark's text cannot entail it originates from Jesus or even 
early-first-century Palestine. Because it could originate from a targum (or 
Aramaic-speaking Gentiles or apostles, or lost scriptures in Aramaic, and 
so on: see the end of §3 above; and Chapter 9, §6). 
Another example is that an extant targum of Zech. 14.21 changes the 
original Hebrew from 'in that day there shall never again be Canaanites 
in the house of Jehovah of hosts' to 'in that day there shall never again be 
traders in the house of Jehovah of hosts', which thus becomes an obvious 
inspiration for the clearing of the temple in Mk 1 1.15-17.53 The conversion 
51. See Bruce Chilton, 'Targum, Jesus, and the Gospels', in Historical Jesus in 
Context (ed. Levine, Allison and Crossan), pp. 238-55. 
52. For this and other examples see Chilton, 'Targum' (for this one: pp. 245-46). 
53. Henk Jan de Jonge, 'The Cleansing ofthe Temple in Mark 1 1 :15 and Zechariah 
14:21 ', in The Book of Zechariah and its Influence (ed. Christopher Tuckett; Burlington, 
VT: Ashgate, 2003), pp. 87-100. For other examples of Mark adapting material from 
Zechariah to construct his narrative about Jesus see Mark BlacЄ 'The Messianic Use 
of Zechariah 9-14 in Matthew, Mark and the Pre-Markan Tradition', in Scripture and 
Traditions: Essays on Early Judaism and Christianity in Honor of Carl R. Holladay 
(ed. Patrick Gray and Gail R. O'Day; Boston: Brill, 2008), pp. 97-114; and Carrier, 
Proving History, p. 155 (with p. 318 nn. 70-71). 

410 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
of 'Canaanite' to 'trader' was a known trend, happening in other verses 
even in Greek, and thus Mark might here have been relying on a lost Greek 
translation instead, or making the conversion on his own. But the fact that 
we find it in a targum makes that a more likely origin for Mark's interpreta­
tion. Thus, when in an obviously fictional story about Jesus resurrecting a 
girl (Mk 5.41) Mark repeats the magical words of Jesus in Aramaic (talitha 
koum) and then translates them into Greek ('Girl, rise!') we can rightly 
wonder if he adapted those words from a targum,just as he did with Psalm 
22. Certainly, Jesus never actually spoke those words, since the story is 
entirely a fiction. 
That tale in fact is a rewrite of another mythical story, told of Elisha in 
2 Kgs 4.17-37, which illustrates another way Mark fabricated material. 54 In 
that story, a woman of Shunem (meaning 'double resting place' in Hebrew, 
where Elisha would often take his rest-2 Kgs 4.8-11-coincidental names 
being a common marker of mythmaking) seeks out the miracle-working 
Elisha and begs him to resurrect her son. She goes looking for Elisha out­
doors and falls at his feet, begging his help, then someone checks on the boy 
and confirms he is dead; but Elisha is not deterred and goes into her house 
himself and works his magic, by word and touch, resurrecting the boy. In 
Mark's version (Mk 5.22-43), the same things happen: Jairus comes look­
ing for Jesus outdoors and falls at his feet and begs his help; someone then 
comes to confirm his daughter is dead, but Jesus is not deterred and goes 
himselfinto the petitioner's house and works his magic, by word and touch, 
resurrecting the girl. Several elements have been conspicuously reversed 
in Mark's version, producing even more telltale coincidences: instead of 
a woman begging for her son, a man comes begging for his daughter; and 
while in the OT an unnamed woman comes from a named town that means 
'rest', in Mark a named man comes from an unnamed town, and the man's 
name (Jairus) means 'awaken' (yair, 'to bring light, enlighten, awaken' in 
the Hebrew). 
In his conclusion Mark even borrows from the Greek version of this 
Elisha tale: the clause exestesan euthus ekstasei megale, 'immediately they 
were amazed with great amazement' at what Jesus had done (Mk 5.42) is 
an allusion to exestesas hemin pasan tȩn ekstasin tauten, 'you have been 
amazed with all this amazement for us' (2 Kgs 4.1 3), which is how the 
woman had earlier reacted to having Elisha as a guest, and for which he 
blessed her with a miraculous conception--of the very son he would later 
54. See Helms, Gospel Fictions, pp. 65-67. For a detailed analysis of how Mark 
employs the Elijah-Elisha narrative in the Kings literature as source material for 
constructing stories about Jesus throughout his Gospel see Adam Winn, Mark and 
the Elijah-Elisha Narrative: Considering the Practice ofGreco-Roman Imitation in 
the Search for Markan Source Material (Eugene, OR: Pickwick Publications, 2010). 

1 0. The Gospels 
41 1 
resurrect. Thus Mark accomplishes another literary reversal, reversing the 
placement of this reaction (of double amazement) from the child's mirac­
ulous conception to the chi ld's miraculous resurrection, and from what 
earns the miraculous reward to what follows it. 
Mark also frames this story around another, in which, as Jesus is walk­
ing with the man who is begging his help and is about to hear confirmation 
of his daughter's death, a woman who has been endlessly menstruating for 
twelve years touches Jesus' cloak and is healed, and he does not know who 
touched him, but blesses the woman when she confesses (Mk 5.25-34). The 
girl he then goes to resurrect is said to be twelve years old (Mk 5.42), not 
only the same number of years as the woman was endlessly menstruating 
but also the age at which menstruation traditionally began. Jesus is also 
explicitly asked to touch the girl (Mk 5.23) and does (Mk 5.41), while in 
between the woman seeks to touch Jesus (5.28) and does (5.27}, and by this 
means both are 'saved' (5.23, 28, 34) by 'faith' (5.34, 36) in spite of 'fear' 
(5.33, 36), and both the girl and the woman are called 'daughter' (5.23, 34), 
even though there is no apparent reason for Jesus to call the woman this. 
The integration of these tales obviously had some symbolic importance to 
Mark, even if we cannot discern it now. But whatever its meaning, this is 
all clearly myth, not history. Such coincidences do not commonly occur in 
real life. But in myth they are routine. Nor would such details be relevant 
to a remembered story; but they would be relevant to a myth, even if only 
esoterically (see Elements 13 and 14). And the story of a woman being 
healed of a bizarre malady and Jesus just 'mystically' knowing that had 
happened is not remotely realistic. Nor is a resurrection of a dead girl by a 
single touch and command. 
Another clue that Mark is writing historical fiction is the way he structures 
his narrative to suit literary aims rather than historical ones. The ceaseless 
incomprehension of the disciples, for example, is wholly unrealistic. No 
real human beings would ever be that dense or take so long to understand 
what Jesus was saying and doing, or learn nothing in between episodes 
(as if they never spoke to one another except in the few brief exchanges 
Mark depicts). In reality a single hour's conversation with Jesus would have 
resolved all questions. This literary fiction of the dense lackeys is adapted 
either from Homer's simi larly unrealistic depiction of the fickleness and 
incomprehension of Odysseus's crew or from Exodus's equa1ly unrealistic 
depiction of the fickleness and incomprehension of the Jews-most likely 
both (as l suggested before). In each case such 'group stupidity' only makes 
sense as a deliberate literary device; in Mark's case, to illustrate something 
he wanted to say about the gospel-and possibly about the pre-Pauline sect 
Mark was dissenting from, which was associated with the first apostles, 
most especial ly Peter, James and John (see Galatians 1-2 with Mk 9.2 and 
Element 20). 

412 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
Mark develops this theme in multiple ways, among which is ring compo­
sition, a common literary device of the time, both in myth (e.g. Homer) and 
history (e.g. Suetonius).55 When ring composition requires the invention of 
narrative material to make the structure work, especially when it is implau­
sible and unrealistic material that has an obvious pedagogical purpose, we 
are far more likely looking at myth than history. Mark's use of ring com­
position throughout his chaps. 4 through 8 has already been demonstrated 
by Norman Petersen. 56 In this central part of his narrative (which revolves 
around his travel by sea, which I'll call the Sea Narrative) Mark carefully 
constructed nested cycles of themes specifically to convey an underlying 
message about faith and the ability (or inability) to understand the gospel. 
This Sea Narrative's structure is consistently artificial: 
Cycle l :  Phase I (4.1-34) 
Phase 2 (4.35-41) 
Phase 3 (5.1-20) 
Jesus with crowds by sea 
(preachingfrom a boat] 
eventful crossing of sea 
landing with beatings I exorcisms 
Interval 1: Step 1 (5.21-43) 
first stop 
Step 2 (6.1-6) 
Step 3 (6.6-29) 
[after an uneventful boating] 
second stop 
going around 
Cycle 2: Phase I (6.30-44) 
Phase 2 (6.45-52) 
Phase 3 (6.53-55) 
Jesus with crowds by sea 
[with an uneventful boating] 
eventful crossing of sea 
landing with healings I exorcisms 
Interval 2: Step 1 (6.56-7.23) 
Step 2 (7.24-30) 
Step 3 (7.31-37) 
going around 
first stop 
second stop 
55. See Mary Douglas, Thinking in Circles: An Essay on Ring Composition (New 
Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2007); and T.D. Benedikston, 'Structure and Fate 
in Suetonius' Life ofGalba', Classical Journa/ 92 (1997), pp. 167-73. That Suetonius 
employed ring composition all throughout his imperial lives has been demonstrated 
by Matthew Ferguson, Thematic Rings and Structure in Suetonius' De Vita Caesarum 
(MA thesis, University of Arizona, 2012), available at http://www.richardcarrier.info/ 
FergusonSuetonius.pdf. 
56. Norman Petersen, 'The Composition of Mark 4:1-8:26', Harvard Theological 
Review 73 (January-April 1980), pp. 185-217. 

Cycle 3: Phase 1 (8.1-12) 
Phase 2 (8.13-21) 
Phase 3 (8.22-26) 
I 0. The Gospels 
Jesus with crowds by sea 
[with an uneventful boating] 
eventful crossing of sea 
landing with healings I exorcisms 
Table 2. Structure of the Sea Narrative in Mark 
413 
Thus, as Petersen notes, the Sea Narrative of Mark 4 through 8 is 'com­
prised of three triadically composed intervals, the central one of which 
is surrounded by triadically composed intervals, each of which contains 
one triadically composite minimal unit'.57 Indeed, as Petersen explains, the 
structure is even more brilliantly crafted than that. 
Each Phase 1 (in al1 three cycles) takes place during the day and 'depicts 
Jesus' actions with crowds on one side of the sea'.58 Each Phase 2 occurs 
on the evening of that same day (only in Cycle 3 is this not stated, though 
it is implied by what would be a long sea crossing) and 'depicts actions 
between Jesus and the twelve in the boat while in transit across the sea'. 
And each Phase 3 'represents Jesus' healing [or exorcising] of people who 
either come to him or are brought to him following his debarkation on the 
other side of the sea'. Other healings or exorcisms are then interspersed 
among the Intervals (that fol low each Phase 3). 
Each Cycle occupies one day, so the whole sequence represents three 
days and ends with a resolution on the third day-all of which concludes 
by transitioning into a debate about who Jesus really is and a declaration 
of what the gospel really is (Mk 8.27-9.1, the first time in aiJ this time that 
we hear Jesus speak on any of this). Prior to this cyclical triad Jesus had 
also journeyed to the sea and taught by the sea three times (Mk 1.16; 2.13; 
3.7) without embarking on a boat, but now he embarks on a boat (Mk 4.1; 
cf. 3.9) and makes six journeys by boat, three eventful ones (each part of 
a three-phase cycle repeated three times) and three uneventful ones that 
make a looser pattern (Mk 5.21; 6.32; 8.10). 
Between the three eventful sea journey cycles are two intervals where 
Jesus notably travels inland away from the sea of Galilee and back again, 
and these two journeys also share a triadic pattern: three land journeys 
in chiastic arrangement. First from the shore to the house of Jairus (Mk 
5.22), then from the house of Jairus to the hometown of Jesus (Mk 6.1), 
and then from the hometown of Jesus to circulating around the towns (Mk 
6.6), completing Interval 1; and then the sequence is reversed: circulating 
around the towns (Mk 6.56), then stopping at Tyre (Mk 7.24), then back 
57. Petersen, 'Composition of Mark', p. 200. 
S8. Petersen, •composition of Mark', p. 196. 

414 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
to the shore (Mk 7.31), completing Interval 2. The arrangement is ABC : 
CBA (stop on the way from the shore,. another inland stop, circulating; then 
circulating, another inland stop, stop on the way to the shore). 
In both intervals the first stop is always at a house, and in each case 
involves women and children. And each circulating phase involves both 
the disciples (in the first case sent on their own ministries; in the second 
case attacked for ignoring purity laws) and the authorities (in the first case 
Herod reacting to Jesus, and murdering John; in the second case the Phari­
sees reacting to the disciples and subverting God's law with human law). 
The second stop in each Interval is also an inversion of the other: in the 
first case, in his hometown (a metaphor for Israel) 'those hearing him' are 
'astonished' and don't believe in him (a metaphor for the Jews rejecting the 
gospel), while in the second case in a foreign country (the Greek Decapo­
lis, among the Gentiles) he miraculously makes a man 'hear' and the peo­
ple are 'astonished' in quite the opposite sense, saying he does everything 
well and publishing his fame far and wide. The two reactions are clearly 
meant to be contrasted: in both there appears the exact phrase exeplessonto 
legontes, 'they were amazed, saying' something in each case the opposite 
of the other. Indeed in the second case, when Jesus is abroad, where the 
locals accept his miracles, they are 'even more amazed', thus emphasizing 
a contrast between positive amazement and negative amazement. 
Every unit of this narrative has the same literary purpose, a message 
about faith and the gospel, playing the incomprehension of the disciples 
(and rejection of Jesus by neighbors and kin) against the ready faith of 
outsiders (Gentile foreigners and Jews who are not his neighbors or kin) 
even though they don't understand. The cyc1ic triad even begins and ends 
on the theme of 'seeing, hearing, understanding' (compare Mk 4.12 with 
8.17-21), and continually contrasts human expectations (e.g. Herod think­
ing Jesus is John resurrected; the Pharisees preferring human laws to God's 
laws; his kin expecting one thing, foreigners another) with the true real ities 
offered by the gospel (the spiritual kingdom of a spiritual messiah who has 
a greater incomprehensible plan of salvation than anyone seems able to 
comprehend). 
When you look at what Mark has to do to force the narrative to fit this 
elegant structure so perfectly, and the central role of unbelievable events 
or behaviors in nearly every one of his scenes, it is no longer possible to 
believe Mark is recording memory or even re-crafting historical lore. He is 
inventing all of this, each scene his own parable, usually with Jesus cast as 
the central character, illustrating symbolically something the reader needs 
to understand about the gospel. This is an artful literary creation. start to 
finish. 
This becomes all the clearer when we see how Mark has layered another 
pattern within this one. Within the above triadic ring structure he has inter-

10. The Gospels 
415 
woven two matching sequences of five miracles each, interspersed with 
parables and preaching and generic references to miracles (i.e. other mir­
acles mentioned but not narrated).59 In fact, all the narrated miracles in 
Mark's Sea Narrative correlate into a carefully crafted sequential structure 
as follows: 
First Sequence 
Mastery of the Waters 
Stilling ofthe Stonn (4.35-41) 
Exorcism of a Gentile Man 
The Gerasene Demoniac (5. 1-20) 
Curing an Older Woman 
The Woman with a Hemorrhage (5.25-34) 
Curing a Younger Woman 
Jairus' Daughter (5.21 -23, 35-43) 
Second Sequence 
Mastery of the Waters 
Jesus Walks on the Sea (6.45-51 )  
Exorcism of a Gentile Woman 
The Syrophoenician Woman 
(7.24-30) 
Curing a Deaf Man with Spit 
The Deaf-Mute (7.32-37) 
Curing a Blind Man with Spit 
The Blind tAan of Bethsaida 
(8.22-26) 
Table 3. The 2 x 5 Miracle Sequence in Mark 
Many miracle narratives of Jewish holy men, including Moses, exhibit a 
sequence of five miracles, and the sequence that Mark twice repeats has 
evident correlations with the wilderness narrative ofMoses (Exod. 13-17).60 
The assembly of these two pairs of five miracles (which combined make 
ten: a decalogue) is clearly Mark's intention. 
The Moses sequence begins with a 'mastery of the waters' in his parting 
of the Red Sea (Exod. 13-15), in which he simultaneously commands the 
waters, and treads upon them (crossing the sea). Then the second mira­
cle, which alludes to the power of God to heal, occurs after the Jews have 
wandered in the wilderness and are perishing from thirst, when on the 
'third day' Moses calls a magical tree to appear that makes a bitter pool 
59. For the following, I'm adopting some of the analysis (but not all of the 
conclusions) of Paul Achtemeier in 'Toward the Isolation of Pre-Markan Miracle 
Catenae', Journal of Biblical Literature 89 (September 1970), pp. 265-91 ;  and Paul 
Achtemeier, •The Origin and Function of the Pre-Marcan Miracle Catenae', Journal of 
Biblical Literature 91 (June 1972), pp. 198-221. 
60. Achtemeier, ·origin and Function', pp. 204-205. 

416 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
drinkable, at which he says if they obey God's commandments God will 
inflict no diseases on them, 'for I am Jehovah who heals you' (Exod. 15.22-
27). Moses' third miracle in this narrative is a 'miraculous feeding', when 
Moses calls manna down from heaven (Exod. 16). Then the Jews run out 
of water again, so for his fourth miracle Moses strikes water from a rock 
(Exod. 17.1-7). In this tale the Jews are worried Moses will kill them with 
thirst (17.3), and the moral of the story is that, despite their fear and doubt, 
Moses (thanks to God) will save them. And the fifth and final miracle of 
Moses in this narrative occurs when he raises his staff to ensure the victory 
of the armies of Joshua against the Amalekites (Exod. 17.8-16), a tribe in 
southern Canaan.61 But he grew tired so they put a stone under him to sit 
upon and two others held up his arms.62 This miracle symbolizes power 
over the violent forces of evil. 
These five miracles are echoed in the miracles of Jesus. Like Moses, 
Jesus begins each sequence of five miracles with a sea miracle (a rather con­
spicuous coincidence), in which he proves his dominance over the waters of 
chaos. Like Moses, Jesus treads on them and commands them-and in the 
same order: Moses parts the sea, then crosses; so in sequence one, Mark 
has Jesus calm the sea, then in sequence two, Mark has Jesus walk on it. 
From there the order of miracles does not match Exodus, but conceptual 
parallels remain. Jesus heals the sick (for which we are given two full nar­
ratives each, conspicuously the same number in each sequence, and in one 
sequence both are women, while in the other, both are men), corresponding 
to the second miracle of Moses, in which the faithful are assured power 
over diseases. Jesus also exorcises demons (for which we are given one 
full narrative each, also conspicuously the same number in each sequence, 
and in one sequence a woman, in the other a man, this time reversed), cor-
61. Num. 13.29: 14.25, 43-45 (cf. also Num. 24.20). 
62. I have to wonder if this was taken to be a prediction of Peter 'the rock' and 
the other two 'pillars', James and John. propping up the church, forming a cross. That 
Moses was lifting his staff, and not just his hand, is clear from Exod. 17.9; evidently he 
was raising it horizontally. with both hands, requiring one man to hold up each arm. 
But before those men came to his aid, Moses would have been forming the figure of a 
cross (his body erect with his hands stretched across a wooden cross beam)Ϸ similarly, 
the miracle of the bitter waters is accomplished by God revealing a 'tree', but the word 
used in the Septuagint is xu/on, more typically meaning a piece of finished lumber: 
the same word is used to describe the cross of Jesus (see Chapter 4, §3). Christians 
may have imagined foreshadowing in all this and seen in both scenes a symbolism 
predicting some salvific role for a wooden cross. Although note that in earliest 
Christian art, Jesus was also typically depicted as performing his miracles with a wand 
(as might Moses also have been imagined): see Thomas Mathews, The Clash ofGods: 
A Reinterpretation of Early Christian Art (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 
1993). 

1 0. The Gospels 
417 
responding to the fifth miracle of Moses, which exhibits power over the 
forces of evil (except demons in this case rather than soldiers). And near the 
end of each sequence we get a miraculous feeding, echoing Moses' power 
to call mana from heaven (and thus miraculously provide sustenance for his 
flock, his third miracle in Exodus). Like Moses, Jesus' miraculous feedings 
take place in the wi lderness, involve 'gathering up' the food, everyone is 
fed, and they end up with more than they start with (compare Exod. 16.4-5 
with Mk 6.43; 8.8; and 8.19-20).63 
Finally, Moses performs two water miracles that end the people's thirst: 
the tree revealed by God (making bitter water drinkable again, his second 
miracle), and the flow of water struck from a rock (his fourth miracle). 
Mark has split these up, so that each inspires two miracle narratives for 
Jesus, but in different sequences, thus keeping the total miracle narratives 
in each sequence at five-yet another conspicuous coincidence, evinc­
ing considerable artifice. In the first sequence Mark draws on the water­
from-a-rock episode, which carried the theme of faith overcoming fear and 
thus obtaining salvation. Hence, the episodes of Jairus's daughter and the 
woman with a hemorrhage have the same theme of faith overcoming fear 
to achieve salvation from suffering or death. The woman also flowed with 
blood, while the rock flowed with water. And in the Jairus narrative Jesus 
takes only his top three apostles with him into the bed chamber (the pil­
lars Peter, James and John: Mk 5.37), just as Moses is told to take only 
three elders with him to strike the rock (Exod. 17.5). The Exodus narrative 
likewise has the Jews perishing and worried about dying (17.3), thus Mark 
produces parallel narratives about a woman perishing (besides the obvious 
63. Both of Jesus' miraculous feeding narratives also emulate a similar story told 
of Elisha (in 2 Kgs 4.43·44): "There is in all three stories the initial assessment of 
how much food is available, the prophetic command to divide it among a hopelessly 
large number, the skeptical objection. puzzled obedience, and the astonishing climax 
in which not only all are fed, but they had leftovers as well', Robert Price, The Christ­
Myth Theory and its Problems (Cranford, NJ: American Atheist Press, 201 1 ), pp. 93-94. 
Mark also employed a Homeric framework for working in these biblical features (see 
earlier notes on the work of MacDonald), and both of Mark's feeding tales ultimately 
allegorize the Eucharist: see the analysis of Achtemeier, 'Toward the Isolation'; and 
Achtemeier, 'Origin and Function'. pp. 206-207. 212-21 (e.g. they are linked to the 
Eucharist with similar vocabulary: taking, blessing. breaking and giving, all in the 
same order; cf. Mk 6.41 ; 8.6: and 14.22). Another reason Mark duplicates the feeding 
narratives is so that he can have one among Jews on the western side of the lake (6.35-
43) and one among Gentiles on the eastern side ofthe lake (8. 1-9) to teach that the Jews 
and Gentiles should receive the same communion (8. 14·17). That the boat in Mark 
(and everything that happens in and with it, including its journeys) is a metaphor for 
the church: Marcus Borg, Reading the Bible Again for the First Time: Taking the Bible 
Seriously but Not Literally (San Francisco, CA: HarperSanFrancisco, 2001), pp. 206-
209. 

418 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
fact that she was slowly bleeding to death, that her condition was worsening 
is explicitly stated: Mk 5.26) and a girl who died. 
In Mark's second sequence he draws on the magical tree episode. Which 
explains the otherwise very odd detail that the blind man ofBethsaida (8.22-
26) sees trees at first instead of men (Mk 8.24), just as Moses did; and to 
cure the deaf mute, Jesus looks to heaven and cries out, just as Moses must 
cry out to God in heaven, who shows him the magical tree. (I must wonder 
if a lost tradition held that the tree was revealed from the heavens and thus 
Moses was looking up at it.) In both cases, while Moses must put the tree 
into the water to drink it, Jesus must put spit onto the afflicted to open their 
eyes, ears or tongue. The magical tree episode also concludes with the dec­
laration, 'if you will diligently hear the voice of the Lord your God, and will 
do what is pleasing in his sight, and will give ear to his commandments' 
then God will heal you (Exod. 15.26), in each case supplying inspiration for 
Jesus to heal eyes, ears and tongue (to restore the mute's 'voice'). 
Thus, Mark shows he has consciously created these double narrative 
sequences. He is not 'accidentally' duplicating them (as many scholars 
assume). He probably does not have sources for them, either. Because ofthe 
way he distributes allusions to the underlying miracles of Moses (probably 
signifying some mystical teaching not given in the text), he is clearly con­
scious of what he is doing in doubling the sequence of five, even in deciding 
what miracles they should be, and thus clearly has every motive to fabricate 
every single one of these stories, just as we have it, in order to fit his scheme 
of allusions. For example, he knew he was going to have two healing mira­
cles in the first sequence echo the water-from-the-rock miracle, and two 
healing miracles in the second sequence echo the magical tree miracle, 
and thereby still maintain five miracles in each sequence. His reversals of 
gender are likewise organized, showing knowledge of both sequences mir­
roring each other. Mark does this again for the fifth miracle (placed second 
in each sequence for Jesus), which echoes Moses' power over the forces of 
evil (the Amalekites). Here Mark divides different allusions between the 
two sequences: in the first sequence, the demons are equated with soldiers 
(they are named 'Legion'), thus reminding us of the Amalekite soldiers; 
and in the second sequence, the one cured is a Canaanite (a woman of Syria 
and Phoenicia), thus reminding us of the Amalekites themselves (who lived 
in Canaan). The extent of literary artifice here evinces considerable genius. 
This is what myth looks like. 
What about the rest of Mark? It likewise shows elegant structure along 
similar lines, but more varied, to suit Mark's purposes. The entire Gospel 
of Mark has this overall structure: 
The Discipling Narrative (chaps. 1-3) 
The Sea Narrative (chaps. 4.1-8.26) 

10. The Gospels 
The Road Narrative (chaps. 8.27-10) 
The Passover Narrative (chaps. 11-16) 
419 
And while there is elegant internal structure in the Sea Narrativeʃ there is 
a similar chiastic or 'ring' structure surrounding it, as the Road Narrative 
recapitulates the Disci piing Narrative in reverse. And each of those narra­
tives contains a consistent internal theme found nowhere else in the Gos­
pel-just as the Sea Narrative uniquely centers around sea journeys, the 
Discipling Narrative uniquely centers around Jesus' ever-increasing fame 
(again, thrice: 1.21-34в 39-45; 3.7-1 2) and discipling (again, thrice: 1 .14-20; 
2.13-22; 3.13-19), while the Road Narrative uniquely centers around a com­
mon metaphor of 'the road' as 'the way', meaning the gospel.64 The meta­
phor is repeatedly cued by this double entendre (in this narrative's very first 
and last verses, 8.27 and 10.52; and again in 9.33-34; 10.17, 32; and 10.46, 
making two pairs of three: three mentions on the road to Jerusalem, and 
three mentions before that), a device conspicuously never used in any oft he 
other narratives. Mark then folds into this 'road narrative' a triad of three 
predictions of his death (8.31-32; 9.31; 1 0.33-34), thrice not understood by 
his disciples, who instead seek to exalt themselves (8.32; 9.33-34; 10.35-
41), and thrice Jesus corrects them (8.33-9.1; 9.35-37; 10.42-45), thus thrice 
teaching the reader a key aspect of discipleship and the gospel. It is no 
accident that this sequence is sandwiched between two instances of Jesus 
making the blind see (8.22-26 and 10.46-52).65 
To grasp the artificial nature of all this, note that in all of Jesus' min­
istry throughout chaps. 1 through 3 never once does Jesus actually teach 
the gospel (he never mentions the gospel or what it is, or te1ls any parables 
about it), even though the whole narrative begins by having Jesus declare 
'repent and believe in the gospel!ʃ (Mk 1.15), an odd demand when you 
never explain what that is. In the Sea Narrative Jesus starts telling parables 
about the gospel (even beginning with an explanation of the whole concept 
of parable as a way of concealing the true meaning behind fictitious stories: 
Mk 4.9-12), but never mentions anything resembling its kerygma (that 
Jesus had to die to atone for everyone's sins and that this would procure 
eternal life for those who believe-in other words, the actual gospel). Only 
in the Road Narrative does Jesus start expounding the actual gospel, all in 
preparation for its actual enactment in the following Passover Narrative. 
This makes no sense as history. It only makes sense as artificial suspense­
driven literature, and in particular as a slow-building teaching tool that 
64. See Mk 1.3; 12. 14; 'the way', hodos, also means 'road', and thus is here a double 
entendre; that this word could be used to mean Christianity, see Acts 16.17; 18.25-26Ѕ 
19.9, 23; 24. 14, 22. 
65. See the analysis in Crossan, Power of Parable, pp. 162-68. 

420 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
would operate in a single sitting (or series of them) as you went through the 
Gospel story as Mark crafts it. 
While they wrap around the Sea Narrative, the Discipling and Road 
Narratives mirror each other, in a series of coincidences that once again 
betray the literary invention: 
A 
peripheral ministry begins (1.14-34) 
B 
people looking for Jesus to be healed (1.35-38) 
(but Jesus says he needs to teach more people) 
C 
Jesus ventures out ('throughout all Galilee', 1.39-45) 
D 
Jesus stops at Capernaum (2.1-12) 
(explains he can forgive sins) 
E 
problems and controversies (2.13-3.12) 
F 
an important gathering on a mountain (3.13-19) 
G 
Jesus is accused of being in league with Baalzebul (3.20-35) 
(and preaches those who reject Jesus are dam ned) 
The Sea Narrative (chaps. 4-8) 
G 
Jesus accuses Peter of being in league with Satan (8.27-9.1) 
(and preaches those who blaspheme Holy Spirit are damned) 
F 
an important gathering on a mountain (9.2-13) 
E 
problems and controversies (9.14-32) 
D 
Jesus stops at Capernaum (9.33-50) 
(explains dangers of sin) 
C 
Jesus ventures out (expands his ministry beyond Galilee: 10.1-6) 
B 
people looking to Jesus for boons (10.17-45) 
(but Jesus teaches them the error of their ways) 
A 
peripheral ministry ends (10.46-52) 
Jesus' ministry has two phases, the central (in Jerusalem) and the periph­
eral (outside Jerusalem), as was typical in the myths and legends of 
counter-cultural sages (see Element 46). His central ministry corresponds 
to Mark's Passover Narrative. But his peripheral ministry consumes the 
prior three narratives, and begins (1.14-28) with the first preaching about 
the importance of faith in one's salvation ('have faith in the gospel', 1 .15). 
the first insistence that people keep quiet about Jesus' identity ('be quiet'. 
1.25), and the first men called to follow him (1.16-20), and then ends with 
the last preaching about the importance of faith in one's salvation ('your 
faith has made you whole', 10.52), the last insistence that people keep quiet 
about Jesus' identity ('many rebuked him, to keep him quiet', 10.48, which 
Jesus now does not enforce-since he is about to go public in chap. 1 1), and 
the last man called to follow him (Bartimaeus, 10.49-52). 
You might notice that I omitted from the Disci piing Narrative Jesus' bap­
tism (1.1-1 1) and temptation (1.12-13). These do not line up with the Road 

10. The Gospels 
42 1 
Narrative in any fashion; instead, the mirroring of the Discipling Narrative 
in the Road Narrative begins and ends where Jesus' ministry begins and 
ends (before he enters Jerusalem). But as was common in literary artifice, 
Mark's introduction lines up with his conclusion, again in such a fashion 
as to betray the extent of his literary invention. Indeed, the beginning of 
Mark's Gospel matches the end, only in reverse, and in such a manner as to 
be a very peculiar way to end a Gospel, exposing the fact that he has forced 
the literary symbolism: 
Behold, I send my messenger into 
âGo, tell his disciples and Peter, "He goes 
your presence, who shall prepare your 
way. The voice of one calling out in 
before you into Galilee; there you'll see 
the wilderness, η Make ready the way 
him, as he told you."' And they went out, 
of the Lord. Make his paths straight.' 
and fled ft-om the tomb; for trembling and 
. . .  And there went out to him all the 
astonishment had come upon them: and 
country of Judaea, and aU the people of 
they said nothing to any one; for they 
Jerusalem (Mk 1.2-3, 5). 
were afraid (Mk 1 6.7-8). 
So: John (a man) delivers the message 
So: The women fail to deliver the message 
fearlessly and loudly to everyone, 
they are given, and so do not prepare the 
preparing the path of the Lord. 
path of the Lord, because of fell', and 
instead are sUent and tell no one. 
Jesus comes from Galilee . . .  (Mk 1 .9) 
Jesus goes to Galilee . . .  (Mk 16. 7) 
. . .  then enters the wilderness to battle 
. . .  after having left the wilderness [the 
Satan (Mk 1.12-13). 
land of the dead] having defeated Satan. 
Table 4. Reversal of Mark 1 in Mark 16 
Mark's ending is also a reversal of expectation on a wider scale: Mark has 
Jesus repeatedly tell people to be silent, but then they talk (e.g. Mk 1.43-45), 
while his ending reverses this: the women are told to talk, but then they are 
silent.66 Mark's literary fondness for triads is also reflected again in his inven­
tion of three women who appear three times, touching each of the three days 
of Jesus' death and resurrection (at his death, at his burial, and at his resurrec­
tion), and every time they appear, they 'behold' something (using the same 
exact verb: theoreo).67 These named women, notably, never appear elsewhere 
66. As noted by Bart Ehrman in Misquoting Jesus: The Story Behind Who 
Changed the Bible and Why (San Francisco, CA: HarperSanFrancisco, 2005), p. 68. 
The women are also told to go back to Galilee, which to the reader can be understood as 
an instruction to go back to the beginning of the Gospel (where Jesus begins in Galilee: 
Mk 1.9; then begins his ministry in Galilee: Mk 1.14). 
67. Mk 15.40, 15.47, 16.4 (that his burial ended with the start of the second day is 
implied by 1 5.42, which says evening had come); only in their second appearance (Mk 

422 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
in Mark's Gospel; they only suddenly appear here, without explanation. And 
so on. Several peculiarities of Mark's conclusion are thereby explained as a 
I iterary device. I have already shown elsewhere how nearly every element 
of Mark's empty-tomb narrative has scriptural or allegorical functions that 
make its content far more probable as myth than history.68 
The baptism narrative also matches the crucifixion narrative. This makes 
literary sense, because theologically baptism was understood as a symbolic 
death-and-resurrection-it was how Christians came to be crucified with 
Christ (e.g. Rom. 6.3г4). In Mark the parallels are numerous and conspicu­
ous enough to be improbable as anything but literary design: 
John cries with a [loud) voice (phone 
Jesus cries with a loud voice (eboesen . . .  
boontos, Mk 1.3). 
phone megale, Mk 15.34). 
An allusion is made to Elijah (Mk 1.6; 
An allusion is made to Elijah (Mk 15.34-
cf. 2 Kgs 1.8). 
36). 
The heavens are torn (schizo, Mk 
The temple curtain is tom (schizѠ. Mk 
1 . 1 0). 
1 5.38), symbol of the barrier between earth 
and heaven. 
I 
Holy Spirit descends upon Jesus (to 
Holy Spirit departs from Jesus 
pneuma . .
. katabainon eis auton, 'the 
pneuma . . .  descended upon him', Mk 
(exepneusen, 'he exhaled the pneuma', Mk 
1 . 1  0). 
15.37). 
God calls Jesus his son (Mk 1 . 1 1  ). 
The centurion (a Roman official) calls 
Jesus God's son (Mk 1 5.39). 
Table 5. Reversal of Mark 1 in Mark 15 
15.47) are all three not named (Salome is conspicuously not mentioned at the burial; 
her absence is not explained). But the fact that they had never been introduced before 
and only appear as a literary device to witness the death, burial and resurrection, and 
otherwise fit a multiply triadic structure, makes them more likely a literary fiction (I 
make a more extensive case for this conclusion in Carrier, Not the Impossible Faith, 
pp. 312-21). 
68. Drawing on both Jewish scripture and pagan equivalents: Carrier, 'Spiritual 
Body', in Empty Tomb (ed. Price and Lowder). pp. 156-65; and Carrier, Not the 
Impossible Faith, pp. 312-21 ;  with Element 47 and MacDonald, Homeric Epics, pp. 
1 54-68. 

1 0. The Gospels 
423 
In fact the centurion says God's claim is now дtrue' because of the witness 
of the Holy Spirit ('when the centurion saw how he exhaled the spirit, he 
said, "Truly this man was the Son of God."'), just as at his baptism Jesus 
'saw' the Holy Spirit descend and heard God's own voice declare the very 
same thing. There is a larger parallel as well, not only in that baptism sym­
bolizes death (and thus in both scenes the curtain of heaven is torn after 
Jesus passes through the threshold of death), but also in that John's baptism 
remits sins (1.4-5), and so does Jesus' death.69 
So it would seem the entireGospel of Mark is a fabrication from chap. 1 to 
chap. 10, and we've already seen several examples of the fabricatory nature 
of chaps. 15 and 16 (e.g. the crucifixion and Barabbas and empty tomb narʄ 
ratives). What about the rest of the Passover Narrative, chaps. 11 to 14? 
This is also a product of design, modeling Jewish Passover ritual and lore. 
According to the Torah the Passover lamb had to be singled out and set 
aside on the tenth day of the month (Exod. 12.3) and then is slain at twilight 
on the fourteenth day (Exod. 12.6), when 'the whole congregation of Israel 
must slay it together'. And then the lamb is eaten when Passover begins on 
the fifteenth of the month (Jewish days begin at sundown, so this means the 
lamb is slain just before sunset and eaten just after). 
This is essentially what happens to Jesus. On the tenth of the month he 
is singled out and set aside-by his triumphal entry into Jerusalem (Mark 
11).70 Which narrative Mark literarily constructs from a number of scripʄ 
tural source texts, demonstrating he had no need of historical sources.71 
69. On the various ways that Mark's baptism narrative deliberately parallels his 
death narrative, the scholarship is summarized and expanded in David Ulansey, 'The 
Heavenly Veil Torn: Mark's Cosmic "lnclusio'", Journal of Biblical Literature 110 
(Spring 1991), pp. 123-25. Ulansey also notes that Josephus says the outer veil of the 
temple was an enormous tapestry eighty feet high on which was depicted the heavens 
(Josephus, Jewish War 5.212˾14), thus anyone witnessing it tearing would indeed be 
seeing the 'heavens' torn. Ulansey also assumes the centurion at the crucifixion could 
be imagined as seeing this veil from Golgotha, but that might be doubtful (although 
perhaps Mark did not know that; and in any case, his actually seeing it is not narratively 
required). 
70. That the triumphal entry occurs on the tenth day is evident from the arrangement 
of Mark's narrative: the tenth day is his arrival in Jerusalem, after which he visits the 
temple but then leaves, returning to Bethany (Mk 1 1.1˾1 1); the eleventh day begins 
(Mk 1 1.12˾25) when Jesus reenters Jerusalem and cleanses the temple: the twelfth day 
follows with another visit to Jerusalem (Mk 1 1.27-13.37), where he preaches all day; 
then on the thirteenth day he is back at Bethany, where we are told it is just two days 
away from the Passover (14.1-3), which was to be the fifteenth; and on the fourteenth 
day Jesus instructs his disciples to prepare for the Passover ( 14.12). So counting back, 
the triumphal entry is the tenth, precisely when the Passover lamb is chosen. 
71. For the many scriptural inspirations and allusions Mark employed in 
constructing this narrative see Deborah Krause, ·The One Who Comes Unbinding 

424 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
Then on the fifteenth of the month Jesus is symbolically eaten in place of 
the Passover lamb (at the Last Supper, he declares the food and drink there 
to be his body and blood; ordinarily, they would at that time be eating 
the Passover Iamb: Mk 14.16-17, 14.22-24).72 He is killed the next after­
noon. Although the Gospel of John would later change things around so 
that Jesus is killed at exactly the same time as the Passover lamb (having 
Jesus executed on the 14th rather than the 15th), this mars the parallel of 
the Last Supper as a symbolic Passover consumption of the Lord. 73 Mark 
preferred the latter symbolism, and instead preserved the former symbol­
ism by having Jesus die at exactly the same time as the Passover lambs were 
slaughtered (albeit the day before him): at the ninth hour. 74 
the Blessing of Judah: Mark 11.1-10 as a Midrash on Genesis 49.11, Zechariah 9.9, 
and Psalm 1 18.25-26', in Early Christian Interpretation of the Scriptures of Israel: 
Investigations and Proposals (ed. Craig Evans and James Sanders; Sheffield: Sheffield 
Academic Press, 1997), pp. 141-53 (e.g. 'Mark 11.1-10 presents a complex web of 
organically related Scripture traditions', p. 147). 
72. The Greek also conceals a clue to this symbolic death: in Mk 14.14 Jesus 
instructs his disciples to ask, 'Where is my kata/uma, where I shall eat the Passover 
with my disciples?' The noun kataluma comes from the verb kataluo, which means 
dissolve, disintegrate, destroy, kill; but that noun form just happened to acquire instead 
the meaning of a place where one 'breaks up' a journey (like an inn or lodge). But the 
pun is still there. Mark uses the verb in three places: in every one (13.2; 14.58; 15.29) 
referring to the destruction of the temple, which we know for Mark was a metaphor for 
Jesus' body (with the use of the same verb and building metaphor by Paul in 2 Cor. 5. 1: 
see Carrier, Proving History, p. 190). Mark thus has Jesus say, in effect, that he will 
be destroyed (broken up) in that room at Passover, just as the Passover lamb would be. 
73. The Last Supper, as the model for the Christian Eucharist ritual, had to represent 
the consumption of the sacrificed Christ in place of the Passover lamb (Element 18), but 
also had to precede his actual death, since in the earliest esoteric tradition Christ was 
delivered to the powers (and thus killed) after he symbolically inaugurated the 'Lord's 
Supper' ( 1 Cor. 1 1.23-26; cf. 1 1.20, although this was only known by revelation: 1 Cor. 
11.23; it thus never actually happened; see Element 16 and Chapter 1 1, §7). Mark is thus 
trying to preserve the original esoteric order, while still making his exoteric myth fit 
as well as he can. 
74. At that time of year, the ninth hour (Mk 15.33-34) corresponded to our 3 P.M.; 
that this is when the Passover lambs were slaughtered is reported in Josephus, Jewish 
War 6.423. It's possible this was a coincidence resulting from Mark's fondness for 
triads, however, since Mark narrates that Jesus is hung on the cross exactly three hours 
after sunrise (Mk 15.25), and exactly three hours later darkness covers the earth (Mk 
15.33), and exactly three hours after that Jesus dies (Mk 15.34). At that time of year 
the sun would then go down exactly three hours after that; so Jesus is hung exactly 
three hours after sunrise and dies exactly three hours before sundown (and his burial 
is completed by sundown, completing the last three-hour period: Mk 15.42). Possibly 
Mark was aware of the poetry of this triadic coincidence, which the hour of slaughter 
allowed him to exploit. 

10. The Gospels 
425 
Mark has thus deliberately arranged his narrative to symbo1ically repre­
sent Jesus as the Passover lamb. And as we saw, he also used the Barabbas 
narrative to symbolically represent Jesus as also the goat of Yom Kippur 
(and we know Jesus was always imagined to have been both: Element 18). 
But he was also known as the 'firstfruits' of the general resurrection (1 Cor. 
15.20-23), and the Torah commands that the Day of Firstfruits take place 
the day after the first Sabbath fol lowing the Passover (Lev. 23.5, 10-11). 
In other words, on a Sunday. Thus Mark has Jesus rise from the dead on 
Sunday, the firstftuits of the resurrected, symbolically on the very Day 
of Firstfruits itself. So the whole choice of what day (and even year) in 
which to have Jesus crucified is decided by literary symbolism, not his­
torical plausibility.75 Indeed, since executions would not be performed on 
holy days, Mark's narrative has no historical credibility. Likewise trials for 
capital crimes had to be conducted over the course of two days and could 
not be conducted on or even interrupted by a Sabbath or holy day, nor ever 
conducted at night. So in reality had Jesus been arrested during Passover 
he would have been held over in jail until Sunday, and could only have 
been convicted on Monday at the earliest.76 So as history, Mark's narrative 
makes zero sense. But as symbolic myth, every oddity is explained, and 
indeed expected.77 
75. A specific calendar date can align only with a specific day of the week in a 
specific year, so in order to have Jesus rise on the third day after his death, counting 
inclusively as they did, while also rising on the Day of Firstfruits, it follows that even 
what year Jesus was crucified is a literary choice, and not decided by reference to any 
historical fact (beyond the presumed fact that it was some year during which Pontius 
Pilate governed Judea, although see again Chapter 8, §1). That John felt free to change 
the date (and thus the year), again for symbolic reasons, only goes to prove further how 
irrelevant historical facts were to constructing the Gospel narratives. 
76. On these facts see Carrier, 'Burial of Jesus', in Empty Tomb (ed. Price and 
Lowder), pp. 371-79, with Mishnah, Sanhedrin 4. 1k and 5.5a; trials for capital crimes 
could be held only during the day: Sanhedriun 4.1j (in explicit contrast with property 
cases, which must begin during the day but can end at night). There is no plausible 
reason why these procedures would have been violated for Jesus, as even Mark was 
aware that such gross violation of the laws of the land and of God would cause a riot in 
the city (Mk 14.1-2), whereas it would have been no trouble at all to simply jail Jesus, 
incommunicado, until the holy day had passed and the city was emptied of pilgrims. 
That would obviously be what any sensible leadership would have done. 
77. There were several other reasons Mark had to choose Sunday as the day of 
resurrection: Sunday was also traditionally the first day of creation (since God rested 
on the seventh day of creation, making that the Sabbath, hence Saturday; so creation 
began on a Sunday, the first day of the week: Gen. 1.5 and 2.2), and Jesus was also 
imagined as inaugurating a new creation (e.g. 2 Cor. 5.17), and thus logically had to 
rise on a Sunday; and the fact that scripture also said he had to rise on the third day 
(I Cor. 15.4) required the date of his execution to be Friday. Mark also saw this in the 

426 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
In fact, the overall structure of the Passover Narrative is centered on 
this Passover symbolism. Chapter 1 1, as we just saw, corresponds to the 
singling out of the Passover lamb; chap. 14 to the Passover itself(it narrates 
its preparation and commencement); chap. 15 then symbolically narrates 
the slaughter of the Passover lamb (merging it literarily with the sacrifice 
of Yom Kippur), and chap. 16 symbolizes the rescue from death that the 
Passover represents. On the original Passover, the angel of death 'passes 
over' those who are protected by the lamb's blood and kills the 'firstborn 
sons' of those who are not; in Mark, the firstborn son (Jesus) is rescued 
from death (as evidenced by his empty tomb), and his blood protects those 
who share in it. The symbolism is thus complete-except for chaps. 12 and 
1 3. How do they fit the Passover theme? 
Chapter 13 is devoted to explaining how Christian missionaries will 
suffer for a time, but the end will come, which is the new Exodus for the 
elect: a period of wandering and distress, ending in salvation, as they are 
saved from death, after their trials and tribulations, while everyone else is 
damned. They are then told to keep watch for the coming of the messiah. 
These themes are also echoed in the Passover seder, where watch is also 
kept for the messiah (or his herald, Elijah) and where the story of salvation 
(the original Exodus) is retold, including the tribulations the Jews endured. 
Such a discussion and instruction would be a common way to conclude a 
Passover seder. 
It is thus fitting that chap. 12 symbolically represents the previous con­
versational phase of the seder, as noted by Calum Carmichael.78 Carmi­
chael shows how the entire narrative arc of Mark 12 mimics the Passo­
ver haggadah, the discourse acted out during a Passover seder. This is 
yet another example of how Mark's narrative has been created to serve a 
Psalms: as we've seen, he saw the crucifixion in Psalm 22, and then the sojourn among 
the dead in Psalm 23, and then the resurrection 'on the first day of the week', that is. 
Sunday, in Psalm 24 (which in the Septuagint is sung 'on the first day of the week·. a 
line essentially quoted by Mark in 16.2, using the same distinctive idiom in the Greek). 
See Carrier, 'Spiritual Body', in Empty Tomb (ed. Price and Lowder), pp. 158-61. See 
also Barnabas 15, which explicitly links Sunday with the new-creation theology as 
well as spiritual circumcision (which took place on the eighth day, which Barnabas 
notes corresponds to the 'second' first day in a seven-day week); and Justin Martyr. 
Dialogue with Trypho 85 and 97-106 (where he explicitly says Psalm 22 predicts the 
messiah's crucifixion and Psalm 24 his resurrection; the latter is also corroborated by 
Irenaeus in Demonstration of the Apostolic Preaching 84 and Justin Martyr, Dialogue 
with Trypho 36). 
78. Calum Carmichael, 'The Passover Haggadah', in Historical Jesus in Context 
(ed. Levine, Allison and Crossan), pp. 343-56. 

r. 
' 
10. The Gospels 
427 
roytho-symbolic purpose, which almost certainly does not 'coincidentally' 
represent an actual history. 79 As Carmichael explains: 
Mark 12 recounts together four incidents involving questions. This 
series evokes the section of the Haggadah wherein three types of sons 
ask their own question and a fourth son, unable to engage his curiosity, 
has it aroused for him: a wise son asks about all the detailed rules of 
Passover; a wicked son asks in such a way as to exclude himself from the 
Jewish community; a son of plain piety inquires about essentials; and a 
son unable to ask is initiated into learning what Scripture says about the 
Exodus story. 30 
The 'wicked son' in particular asks a question that risks excluding him 
from the deliverance from bondage and death offered by God in the Exo­
dus, in parallel to the similar Christian concern now arising from their new 
Exodus, that of the Apocalypse, which was likewise a rescue from bondage 
and death for the new elect (the new Israel), the believers in Christ. 81 Thus 
the analogy to Mark becomes clear: 
In Mark, questioners first ask Jesus about a tricky legal requirement 
concerning the payment of taxes (Mk 12.13-17, like the first question in the 
seder, a query about technicalities). Next, questioners inquire in such a way 
as to mock the notion of resurrection and thereby (according to tradition 
[e.g. Mishnah, Sanhedrin 10]) cut themselves off from the community (Mk 
12.18-27, like the second question in the seder, a wicked query that threat­
ens exclusion). Then, a questioner asks about fundamental requirements of 
the moral life (Mk 12.28-34, like the third question in the seder, a query 
about essentials). Finally, Jesus himself, in response to his audience's 'not 
daring to ask him any question' (Mk 12.34), poses a problem about con­
flicting scriptural verses (Mk 12.35-37, so like the fourth 'question' in the 
seder, those unable to ask are answered anyway). 82 
Jesus then follows with teachings about priestly wealth and hypocrisy 
(Mk 12.38-44), before getting into the 'be vigilant for the messiah' narra­
tive of chap. 13. In parallel with that closing sentiment, Jesus had preceded 
this Passover haggadah with a parable about corruption in the temple cult 
and God's coming wrath (Mk 12.1-12).83 So it is no coincidence that the 
79. For this purpose it does not matter whether the seder traditions later developed 
Were post-temple. The coincidences of the features to follow demonstrates that those 
elements at least preceded the Jewish war (as otherwise those coincidences are hard 
to explain). 
80. Carmichael, 'Passover Haggadah', p. 345. 
81. Carmichael, 'Passover Haggadah', p. 347. 
82. Carmichael, 'Passover Haggadah', p. 345. 
83. That this parable is a veiled attack on the corruption of the temple priesthood: 
Chilton, 'Targum, Jesus, and the Gospels', in Historical Jesus in Context (ed. Levine, 

428 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
vanity and destruction of the temple likewise opens the apocalypse dis­
course in chap. 13, just as it had opened the Passover haggadah of chap. 12. 
So in chap. 1 2  this produces another simple ring structure: 
A Corruption of the temple priesthood 
8 Passover Haggadah 
A Corruption of the temple priesthood 
It is obviously by literary artifice that the middle section of chap. 12 exactly 
matches up with the ritual haggadah of the Passover seder, which had been 
replaced with a fundamental ritual of the Christian mystery (the Eucharist), 
about salvation from slavery and death (Exodus/Passover), and explicitly 
linked to whether we will be resurrected or not-and here, as expected, it 
is specifically resurrection that is the theme of exclusion (those who mock 
it will be excluded, while those who pursue the truth, through recognition 
and union with Christ, are saved). Mark 12.10-11 even recites Ps. 1 18.22-23, 
a psalm that was also recited as part of the Passover haggadah, in which 
God 'becomes our salvation' (118.21) and God's 'right hand is exalted' 
(118.16), and it is declared that we 'shall not die, but live' (1 18.17) and gain 
entry into the land of the righteous (1 18.18-20). 
So the entire narrative of Mark is a fictional, symbolic construct, from 
beginning to end. He adapted many other literary motifs and techniques to 
flesh it out, of course. Some we've seen here. Others we've noted before­
for example, Mark borrows a framework from the Socratic-Aesopic mytho· 
type (Element 46) and many elements from traditional pagan heroic trans­
lation fables (Element 47); and he has already co-opted more than half 
the features of the Rank-Raglan hero-type (counting fourteen hits out of 
twenty-two; or fifteen, if Jesus' metaphorical marriage to the heiress of 
his predecessor is counted, per Mk 2.18-22; the remaining features might 
already have been part of the core Jesus mythology and Mark simply omit­
ted them-unless those features were added by Matthew: see Element 48). 
Indeed, even how Mark decides to construct the sequence of the Passo· 
ver narrative appears to be based on the tale of another Jesus: Jesus ben 
Ananias, the 'Jesus of Jerusalem', an insane prophet active in the 60s cE 
who is then killed in the siege of Jerusalem (roughly in the year 70).84 His 
story is told by Josephus in the Jewish War, and unless Josephus invented 
him, his narrative must have been famous, famous enough for Josephus to 
know of it, and thus famous enough for Mark to know of it, too, and make 
use of it to model the tale of his own Jesus. Or if Josephus invented the 
Allison and Crossan), p. 247. 
84. According to Josephus his arrest and trial take place between 62 and 64 cE, as 
that was the term of office of Lucceius Albinus, the prefect overseeing his trial. 

I 0. The Gospels 
429 
tale, then Mark evidently used Josephus as a source. 85 Because the parallels 
are too numerous to be at all probable as a coincidence.86 Some Mark does 
derive from elsewhere (or matches from elsewhere to a double purpose), 
but the overall scheme of the story in Josephus matches Mark too closely 
to believe that Mark just came up with the exact same scheme indepen­
dently. And since it's not believable that Josephus invented a new story 
using Mark, we must conclude Mark invented his story using Josephus-or 
the same tale known to Josephus. 
It would appear this story inspired the general outline of Mark's entire 
Passover Narrative. There are at least twenty significant para1lels (and one 
reversal): 
1 
Both are named Jesus. 
2 
Both come to .Jerusalem during a major religious 
festival. 
3 
Both entered the temple area to rant against the temple. 
4 
During which both quote the same chapter of 
Jeremiah. 
5 
Both then preach daily in the temple. 
6 
Both declared 'woe' unto Judea or the Jews. 
7 
Both predict the temple will be destroyed. 
8 
Both are for this reason arrested by the Jews. 
9 
Both are accused of speaking against the temple. 
10 
Neither makes any defense of himself against the 
charges. 
I I  
Both are beaten by the Jews. 
} ;,: 
· .
~ . 
-:., ƥ- .  : 
2t3J4ff!Jf.: ęĚě 
. 
.' 
" 
. • 0.1 " 
'• 
Mk 14.2 
= JW6.301 
Mk 1 1 . 1 5- 1 7  
= JW 6.30l 
Jer. 7. 1 1  in Mk; 
Jer. 7.34 in JW 
Mk 14.49 
= JW 6.306 
Mk l 3. l 7 = JW 
6.304, 306, 309 
Mk 13.2 
= JW 6.300, 309 
Mk 14.43 
= JW 6.302 
Mk 14.58 
= JW6.302 
Mk 14.60 
= JW 6.302 
Mk 14.65 
= JW6.302 
85. The Jewish War of Josephus was written between 74 and 79 CE. as it was written 
after Masada was destroyed in 74. and was dedicated to Vespasian, who died in 79. 
86. Theodore Weeden, ·Two Jesuses, Jesus of Jerusalem and Jesus of Nazareth: 
Provocative Parallels and Imaginative Imitation', Forum N.S. 6.2 (Fall 2003), pp. 137-
341; Craig Evans, 'Jesus in Non-Christian Sources', in Studying the Historical Jesus 
(ed. Chilton and Evans), pp. 443-78 (475-77). 

430 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
Pilate in 
12 
Then both are taken to the Roman governor. 
Mk 15.1 
= Albinus in 
JW6.302 
13 
Both are interrogated by the Roman governor. 
Mk 15.2-4 
=JW 6.305 
14 
During which both are asked to identify themselves. 
Mk 1 5.2 
=JW 6.305 
1 5  
And yet again neither says anything in his defense. 
Mk 15.3-5 
= JW 6.305 
16 
Both are then beaten by the Romans. 
Mk 15.15 
= JW6.304 
17 
In both cases the Roman governor decides he should 
release him. 
18 
. . . but doesn't (Mark); . . .  but does (JW). 
Mk 15.6-15 vs . 
JW6.305 
19 
Both are finally killed by the Romans (in Mark, by 
Mk 15.34 
execution; in the JW, by artillery). 
= JW 6.308-309 
20 
Both utter a lament for themselves immediately before 
Mk 15.34 
they die. 
=JW6.309 
21 
Both die with a loud cry. 
Mk 1 5.37 
= JW6.309 
Table 6. Parallels of Jesus 'Christ ' with Jesus ben Ananias 
Given that Mark is essentially a Christian response to the Jewish War and 
the destruction of the Jewish temple, it is more than a little significant that 
he chose this Jesus to model his own Jesus after. This also tells us, yet 
again, how much Mark is making everything up. (It also confirms that 
Mark wrote after the Jewish War.) 
There was also, of course, a Jewish mythotype that Mark adapted to 
construct his Passion Narrative, as noted by George Nickelsburg. 87 In Jew­
ish myths and legends, 'tales about a wise [or righteous] man [or woman] 
who, as the object of a conspiracy or plot, is persecuted, consigned to death, 
rescued, vindicated, and exalted to high position in the royal court' were 
commonplace, as were wisdom tales that feature a righteous man 'who 
is put to death but exalted in the heavenly courtroom where he confronts 
his enemies as their judge'. And what is shared across both genres is 'the 
87. George Nickelsburg, 'The Genre and Function oft he Markan Passion Narrative', 
Harvard Theological Review 13 (January-April 1980), pp. 153-84. 

1 0. The Gospels 
431 
rescue and vindication of a persecuted innocent person'.88 Nickelsburg ana­
lyzes the Markan Passion Narrative and finds it is just another rewrite of 
this same mytheme.89 
The shared plot structure is: introduction (of the characters and situa­
tion), provocation (of the authorities by some act of or for the hero), con­
spiracy (in which the authorities look for the right moment or means to 
dispose of the hero), interwoven with a subplot of decision (the hero must 
choose between obeying God or the authorities), trust (the decision to obey 
God is described in terms of trusting God's will) often voiced in a prayer 
(for deliverance), and obedience (to God and the hero's fate, usually death); 
and many versions of this tale accomplish these elements with a trial at 
court. Formal accusations are brought against the hero (usually false or 
distorted); s/he faces a trial (or the equivalent), is condemned; attempts are 
made to save him or her (as in Mark's case, Pilate attempts to let Jesus go), 
but these fail, so s/he undergoes an ordeal, and is then rescued, vindicated, 
and exalted. These stories also usually narrate the different reactions of 
those witnessing the key events, and often involve the hero being invested 
with royal power. God is then praised, the hero's new status acclaimed, and 
the persecutors punished (by the hero or at his or her decision or on his or 
her behalf). 
Although 'these stories have emplotted a common theme in a highly 
consistent series and sequence of narrative components, each story has its 
own particular inner consistency and storyline that runs through its major 
elements and differentiates it from other stories in the genre'.90 They also 
often contain allusions or links to God's suffering righteous servant in the 
OT (including Isaiah 53; hence, note again Elements 5 through 7).91 Mark's 
Passion Narrative follows this generic storyline thoroughly.92 For exam­
ple, in the scene at Gethsemene, Jesus chooses to trust and obey God and 
prays for deliverance, while the whole preceding Gospel builds the theme 
of provocation (e.g. Mk 3.6; 1 1.18; 14.1).93 
Nickelsburg imagines the clearing of the temple as the final provocation 
(Mk 11.18). Of course, that scene is hardly believable: the temple grounds 
were enormous, occupying many acres (the temple as a whole occupied 
nearly forty acres, and a large portion of that, at least ten acres, was devoted 
to public space), extensively populated (there would have been hundreds 
of merchants and moneychangers there), and heavily guarded by an armed 
88. Nickelsburg, 'Genre', p. 156. 
89. Nickelsburg, 'Genre', pp. 157-62. 
90. Nickelsburg, 'Genre', p. 162. 
91. Nickelsburg, 'Genre', p. 163. 
92. Nickelsburg, 'Genre', pp. 164-66. 
93. Nickelsburg, 'Genre', p. 171. 

432 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
force deployed to prevent just this sort of thing.94 They would have killed 
Jesus on the spot. So the story is obviously fiction even on that point alone. 
But its literary artistry leads us to the same conclusion.95 When Jesus clears 
the temple he quotes Jer. 7.1 1  (in Mk 1 1.17), whose own narrative bears 
too many coincidental parallels to be accidental: Jeremiah and Jesus both 
enter the temple (Jer. 7.1-2; Mk 1 1.15), make the same accusation against 
the corruption of the temple cult (Jeremiah quoting a revelation from the 
Lord, Jesus quoting Jeremiah), and predict the destruction of the temple 
(Jer. 7.12-14; Mk 14.57-58; 15.29). 
Though that is said to be a false accusation in Mark, given Mk 13.1-
2, where Jesus does indeed predict the temple's destruction (and earlier, 
albeit more elusively, in 1 1.12-21), and given the 'Jeremiah' context that 
Jesus himself alludes to, what is false about the accusation is not the pre­
dicted destruction but that Jesus would do the destroying. Mark is thus 
exhibiting knowledge that the Romans would destroy it in 70 CE. Hence, 
again, Mark is writing after that year, and composing a fictional story to 
suit-a hindsight already confirmed by Mark's knowledge of the temple's 
destruction elsewhere (Mark 13; e.g. 13.2). Thus Mark may still have meant 
that Jesus really did say what his accusers report but did not mean it liter­
ally-and it is by taking it literally that their accusations become false, a 
theme of incomprehension among his enemies, mistaking the figurative for 
the literal, that Mark repeats throughout his Gospel. Mark's reference to 
'false witnesses' (pseudomarturoi) would then be an allusion to the 'false 
prophets' (pseudoprophɤtai) who similarly accused Jeremiah at trial (Jer. 
26.7-11 ;  in the Septuagint, 33.7-1 1).% Although their accusation was true: 
Jeremiah had predicted the temple's destruction. And it is for this 'crime' 
that Jeremiah stands trial, just as Jesus does (Mk 14.57-58 and 15.29), and 
though Jeremiah is acquitted (Jer. 26; Lxx: 33), he says God will spare the 
city and sanctuary if the Jews repent of their crimes (Jer. 26.13), but they 
don't, and of course the temple (the first temple) is destroyed by a foreign 
army. The parallel this draws with the fate of the second temple, similarly 
94. Besides Acts 4.1 and 1 Chronicles 26, see Josephus, Antiquities of the Jews 
15.403-409, and the analysis of Robert Miller, 'The (A)Historicity of Jesus' Temple 
Demonstration: A Test Case in Methodology', in Society of Biblical Literature 1991 
Seminar Papers: One Hundred Twenty-SeventhAnnual Meeting(ed . Eugene Lovering: 
Atlanta, GA: Scholars Press, 1991), pp. 235-52. 
95. Nickelsburg, 'Genre', p. 166. 
96. Nickelsburg, 'Genre', p. 179, argues that what was false is their claim to have 
heard the prediction, when Jesus in fact had only said it in private to his disciplesۯ 
although one could wonder why then Judas, a disciple, was not brought as a witness. 
it's always possible Mark didn't think of that when composing his fiction (as I've said 
before, many a novelist and screenwriter has made a similar mistake). 

10. The Gospels 
433 
destroyed by a foreign army, and in Christian imagination because the Jews 
failed to repent of their crimes, is Mark's obvious intention. 
As I noted earlier, the cleansing of the temple as a fictional scene has its 
primary inspiration from a targum of Zech. 14.21, where it is said 'in that 
day there shall never again be traders in the house of Jehovah of hosts', 
in combination with the whole intended theme of the Passover Narrative 
in Mark, which is against the corruption of the temple priesthood, most 
particularly in respect to money, as we see not only in Mk 11.15-18 but yet 
again in the beginning and ending of Mark 12 (which sandwich Mark's 
emulation of the Passover haggadah, as we just saw). And all of this con­
nects with the temple's eventual destruction as promised in Mark 13, creat­
ing a consistent through-line across chaps. 11, 12 and 13. And the crimes 
and corruption of the priesthood that would necessitate carrying out that 
promise are then narratively illustrated in chaps. 14 and 15 (where Jesus, 
unlike Jeremiah, is not acquitted but unjustly killed), ending with the vin­
dication of Jesus in chap. 16. 
In the Passover Narrative the trial sequence and the Barabbas story 
and the clearing of the temple aren't the only elements that have no his­
torical plausibility (but have obvious symbolic meaning, and thus make 
perfect sense as fiction). The Passover Narrative also contains one of the 
most peculiar (and obviously fictional) episodes in Mark's entire Gospel: 
the withering of the fig tree. As history it makes no sense at all, not only 
because it defies the laws of physics, but also because Jesus' behavior would 
be wholly illogical had such a thing actually happened-for he curses a fig 
tree because it isn't bearing figs for him to eat . . .  even though it wasn't the 
season for figs! (Mk 11.12-14). The fig tree promptly withers to death before 
nightfall (Mk 1 1.19-22). Obviously this story is completely made up. But 
why write such a bizarre story? To illustrate a point. In other words, this is 
a parable about Jesus and the Gospel, a bit of fiction Mark has composed 
to communicate something he wants to say, using Jesus as its central char­
acter. As here, so everywhere else in his Gospel: Mark is writing parables 
about Jesus as a mythical character; he is not recording anyone's memories 
of a historical man. 
The meaning of the fig tree episode is most plausibly explained by R.G. 
Hamerton-Kelly, who shows that it is really a parable that structurally sym­
bolizes the Christian rejection of the whole system of temple sacrifice (see 
again Element 28).97 'The key to understanding' the strange fig tree story, 
Hamerton-Kelly explains, is that 'the attack on the traders is placed within 
97. R.G. Hamerton-Kelly, 'Sacred Violence and the Messiah: The Markan Passion 
Narrative as a Redefinition ofMessianology', in The Messiah: Developments in Earliest 
Judaism and Christianity (ed. James Charlesworth; Minneapolis, MN: Fortress Press, 
1992), pp. 461-93 (467-71). 

434 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
the account of the attack on the fig tree'. In other words, the beginning and 
end of the fig tree story is wrapped around (and contains within its center) 
the clearing of the temple. We saw Mark do this before, when he took the 
tale of the raising of Jairus's twelve-year-old daughter and wrapped that 
around a symbolically related story of the woman who had bled for twelve 
years. The purpose of this structure (called intercalation) is to communi­
cate that the one story illuminates the meaning of the other. Mark uses 
this device repeatedly.98 In this case, 'the tree is a symbol of the sacrificial 
system whose time is now passed', hence 'it was not the season for figs' any 
more (Mk 1 1.13); therefore 'may no one eat fruit of you again' (Mk 1 1.14). 
Which finally, and perfectly, explains this strange story. 
So the fig tree and its fate are a metaphor for the temple and its fate, and 
the need to 'feed the religiously hungry'. Jesus' attack on the fig tree in 
fact deliberately parallels and thus explains Jesus' attack on the temple. As 
Hamerton-Kelly explains: 
[llhere is no question of a 'cleansing' of the Temple, as if the presence of 
holy trade somehow polluted it; such a judgment is a parochialism and an 
anachronism, arising out of the Protestant delicacy about the association 
of money with religion. and a far cry from an ancient Temple devoted 
to animal slaughter۰ in which the exchange of money was perhaps the 
least offensive thing to a modern Protestant sensibility. No, the attack on 
the traders was a prophetic symbolic act advocating and foretell ing the 
destruction of the sacrificial system.99 
The mere role of money and trade was not the problem (that was necessi­
tated by God's law); the corruption-and inevitable corruptibility-of that 
system was the problem (hence Elements 25 to 27, with Element 43). 100 
98. See David Neville, Mark 's Gospel-Prior or Posterior? A Reappraisal of 
the Phenomenon of Order (New York: Sheffield Academic Press, 2002), pp. 258۱ 
66; Francis Gerald Downing, 'Markan Intercalation in Cultural Context', in Doing 
Things with Words in the First Christian Century (Sheffield: Sheffield Academic Press, 
2000), pp. 1 18-32; T. Shepherd, 'The Narrative Function of Markan Intercalation', 
New Testament Studies 41 (1995), pp. 522-40; G. Van Oyen, 'Intercalation and Irony 
in the Gospel of Mark', in The Four Gospels 1992: Festschrift Frans Neirynck, Vol. 
II (ed. Frans van Segbroeck; Leuven: Leuven University Press, 1992), pp. 943-74: 
J.R. Edwards. 'Markan Sandwiches: The Significance of Interpolations in Markan 
Narratives', Novum Testamentum 31 (1989). pp. 193-216. 
99. Hamerton-Kelly, 'Sacred Violence and the Messiah', p. 469. 
100. See Victor Eppstein, 'The Historicity of the Gospel Account of the Cleansing 
of the Temple', Zeitschrift fur neutestamentliche Wissenschaft und die Kunde der 
alteren Kirche 55 (1964), pp. 42-58. He argues that historicity may be suggested by the 
fact that Jesus visits the temple the day before and only on his second visit clears it, but 
as we've seen, Mark did that simply to insert an additional day in his narrative, so that 
Jesus' triumphal entry would occur on the tenth ofNisan. 

I 0. The Gospels 
435 
The conclusion is that 'the sacrificial system is to be replaced by faith 
and prayer, founded on the renunciation of vengeance', thus also explain­
ing the strange unexplained transition from the fate of the fig tree to Jesus' 
discourse on the power of faith and prayer (Mk 1 1.17, 22-25). That meant 'if 
faith and prayer are to replace the sacrificial mechanism, vengeance must 
be renounced' so that 'to renounce vengeance and to break with the mecha­
nism of sacrifice is the same thing'. That's why Jesus explains that one must 
forgive others in order to receive forgiveness from God, all in order for your 
prayers to be answered (Mk 11.25). Forgiveness was normally achieved by 
the temple sacrifice system. But Jesus has done away with the temple cult 
from its very roots; hence the fig tree was withered from its very roots (Mk 
1 1.20). But to replace that system, a greater sacrifice was needed. Hence 
anyone who wanted to get rid of the corrupt temple system had to imagine 
something 1ike a messianic death, as that was the only thing that could logi· 
cally achieve it (thus Elements 23 to 28, and 43). No actual messiah needed 
to die for a theologian to come to this conclusion. Thus, a historical Jesus 
was not necessary. A cosmic Jesus could be imagined for the job just as 
easily. (And that's what Heb. 9 appears to do; see Chapter 11, §5.) In that 
case, Mark just fabricated a mythic narrative about an earthly Jesus as a 
vehicle for conveying his system of parables about Christianity and what it 
represents. And that is the sort of thing that regularly happened to cosmic 
gods, who were also 'brought down to earth' in allegorical fiction like this 
(see Elements 14 and 45). 
Hamerton-Kelly goes on to show that the whole of Mark 11-16 contains 
an escalating system of symbols and teachings about replacing the temple 
cult with a new cult comprised of the faithful, without central authority or 
location, eliminating the corrupting role of money or worldly authority. 
And while Mark is inventing narratives to fit his symbolic structure and 
to communicate abstract messages about the gospel, he often ignores his­
torical plausibility, not only inventing narratives that center around blatant 
defiances of the laws of physics (walking on water, withering trees), but 
making his characters behave in completely implausible ways, such as hav­
ing the disciples act completely surprised at the second miraculous feeding, 
as if some time-traveling Men in Black had erased their memory ofthe first 
one; or having Jesus curse a fig tree for failing to bear fruit out of season. 
Scholars have long been aware of this. For example, Mark describes 
Jesus on two separate occasions calling to fishermen-complete stran­
gers-who just leave their jobs on the spot and follow him as disciples, 
with no persuasion or explanation. This does not exactly defy any law of 
physics. But it does defy every human probability. As Robert Funk says, 
[These] scenes in Mark, repeated almost word-for-word in Matthew, 
make sense only in retrospect, in the context of a movement now already 
some years old. From that distance, it was plausible for some storyteller 

436 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
to relate how the [four men] decided on the spur of the moment to leave 
their jobs and become itinerant followers of Jesus. [These] are thus not 
actual scenes but the product of an imagination informed by the subse­
quent course of events . . . [and perhaps] stylized from constant repetiޣ 
tion.101 
Many more examples could be produced, but you get the picture. Again and 
again we see the same indicators-such as miracles and improbabilities, 
literary constructs, symbolic narratives, artificial structures, rewrites of 
biblical tales, emulations of mythic plots-in every scene of Mark's Gos­
pel. This is what myth looks like, not history. 
Dennis MacDonald has famously shown how Mark created his fiction by 
fusing Homeric parallels with biblical ones. Just as Virgil updated Homer 
by recasting the time and place and all the characters to suit Roman mythol­
ogy, and then changed key things to communicate how Roman values were 
superior to Greek, Mark updated Homer by recasting the time and place 
and all the characters to suit Jewish and (newly minted) Christian mythol­
ogy, and to fit the Roman history and political reality the Christians now 
lived in, and then changed key things (often by drawing on the Septuagint) 
to communicate how Christian values were superior to Jewish, Greek and 
Roman values. Jesus is not only the new (and better) Moses and Elijah and 
Elisha, he is also the new (and better) Odysseus and Romulus (see Chapter 
4, §1, and Element 47), and the new Socrates and Aesop (Element 46). 
The point of inventing this kind of narrative is the same as inventing or 
reworking the legend of King Arthur or Ned Ludd (see Chapter I, §4), or 
indeed Moses or Daniel, whose narratives are equally fictional, yet also 
represented as histories. 
As MacDonald explains: 
Mark and Luke wrote not to convert their readers but to provide the bur­
geoning Christian movement a literary narrative to shape its identity, 
much as classical Greek poetry-Homeric epic above all-had shaped 
Greek culture, including religion. In this respect, Mark and Luke-Acts 
are similar to the Aeneid, which was composed about a century earlier. In 
this Latin epic, Vergil transformed Homeric epic and other literature into 
a lavish and powerful mythology that profoundly shaped Roman politics, 
society, and culture. 102 
These narratives created models to follow, and stories to use to symbolize 
and communicate ideals (and criticize the competing ideals in Jewish and 
Greco-Roman society). They were a way to explain and understand the 
101. Robert Funk, 'Do the Gospels Contain Eyewitness Reports?' in Finding the 
Historical Jesus: Rules of Evidence (ed. Bernard Brandon Scott; Santa Rosa, CA: 
Polebridge, 2008), pp. 31-39 (32). 
102. MacDonald, 'Imitations of Greek Epic', pp. 374-75. 

I 0. The Gospels 
437 
gospel through parables. Thus was created a myth around which churches 
could seek a common unity. As such, each of the Gospels we have is in 
direct competition with the others, each author disagreeing with his prede­
cessors and rewriting the narrative to communicate what he thought those 
unifying values should be. 
What became the subsequently victorious Church simply chose those 
Gospels it thought could most optimally accomplish two ends simulta­
neously: be most easily reconciled with a particular common set of core 
values, while drawing into their circuit of control the widest network of 
established Christian communities, as by then every church community 
had taken sides by adopting or preferring one Gospel or other. The sec­
ond of these aims gave them a strategic advantage in their competition 
with other Christian sectarian movements: more members, more resources, 
more influence, and more geographic supremacy (thus explaining why their 
Church, and hence their canon, eventually won). But that advantage could 
only be bought at a cost: a set of Gospels rife with contradictions and con­
flicting values. Had they cast their net too widely, the canon would have 
been too inconsistent to create a unity movement at all; but if cast too nar­
rowly, they would have unified too few communities to gain any advantage. 
The canon they chose no doubt represented the best strategic compromise 
possible. The resulting contradictions and conflicts could then be resolved 
with rhetoric, handwaving and creative exegesis. And that is exactly what 
we see happened. 
But it is the construction process we are interested in here, not the selec­
tion process, which came after. In constructing his Gospel, the first we 
know to have been written, Mark merged Homeric with bib I ical mythology 
to create something new, a mythical syncretism, centered around his cult's 
savior god, the Lord Jesus Christ, and his revelatory message, the 'gospel' 
of Peter and (more specifically) Paul.103 We observed already how Mark 
created the crucifixion narrative from the Jewish Bible, for example; that 
he also honed it by drawing in features from the epics of Homer is what 
Dennis MacDonald has shown, noting that 'virtually all of Mark 15.22-46 
seems to have been generated from bib1ical texts and Iliad 22 and 24' and 
thus 'need not have known a coherent oral narrative of Jesus' death', just 
as we saw Clement of Rome seems not have known one (Chapter 8, §5), 
and yet 'one can trace all stories in the NT concerning Jesus' demise to 
Mark's literary creativity'.104 Even John's account is a close redaction of 
Mark's, and not substantially independent of it (see §7). So there clearly 
103. See my definition of godhood in Chapter 4 (§3), and discussion of syncretism 
in Element 1 1  and Elemeĺts 30 to 33. On the innovations to the gospel introduced by 
Paul, which are reflected m Mark, see Element 20. 
104. MacDonald, 'Imitations of Greek Epic', p. 380. 

438 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
was no historical memory of Jesus' death-beyond that it happened and 
involved some sort of humbling, suffering and crucifixion, the only details 
we find in Paul (see next chapter). And as for this, so for nearly every story 
in Mark, which combines OT with Homeric source materials to create a 
new mythology. 105 
Often Mark finds agreements between the Bible and Homer and thus 
uses details to double effect, simultaneously evoking both. For example, 
MacDonald sees Jesus' refusal of an offer of wine on his death-march 
(Mk 15.23) as an imitation of Homer's narrative of Hector's death, who 
also refused an offer of wine. But this was also a fulfillment of Jesus' own 
'Nazi rite' promise not to drink the fourth seder cup (the Cup of Redemp­
tion) until the end of days (Mk 14.25).106 Mark likely intended both allu­
sions, specifically to exploit the overlap of double meaning. Indeed he may 
have been inspired to invent the one by the discovery of the other. Likewise 
for the rending of the temple curtain, which also has a parallel in Homer but 
at the same time communicates the Jewish soteriological message that the 
barrier between heaven and earth is now broken, and as a result the tem­
ple is no longer the barrier between men and God.107 Similarly, Joseph of 
105. For how the Iliad and Odyssey influenced Mark's crucifixion narrative. 
see MacDonald, Homeric Epics, pp. 184-85, 154-61, 135-47 and 40-45: Mark's sea 
narratives: pp. 55-62, 148-53, 174-75 and 177; the Gerasene demoniac narrative: pp. 
63-74 and 175-76; the death of John the Baptist: pp. 77-82 and 176; the miraculous 
feedings: pp. 83-90 and 176-78; the transfiguration: pp. 91-96 and 178-79; healings of 
the blind: pp. 97-101; the triumphal entry: pp. 102-10 and 179-80; the clearing of the 
temple: pp. 33-38 and 180-81; the apocalyptic discourse: pp. 181-82; the anointing: pp. 
1 11-19 and 181; the Last Supper and Gethsemane narratives: pp. 124-34. 182-84; the 
argument over James and John: pp. 24-32; the procuring of the Passover room: pp. 
120-23; the betrayal of Judas: pp. 38-40; the messianic secret: pp. 44-54; and for how 
it influenced Mark's first chapter, the baptism and inauguration of Jesus' ministry: pp. 
173-74; and Mark's last chapter, the empty tomb narrative: pp. 74-76, 162-68 and 185-87: 
for additional examples and discussion: pp. 15-19, 188-90. Notably, Matthew and Luke 
often eliminate the Homeric features and allusions when they copy Mark: pp. 187-88. 
Among all these, not every case is as certain as MacDonald claims (in some cases mere 
coincidence can be as likely an explanation of the noted parallels), and many cases may 
simply reflect adaptive coloring (the core narrative is not Homeric but has simply been 
tweaked using Homeric allusions and motifs), but in several cases the emulation is well 
established (where 'coincidence' is far too improbable an explanation) and extends to 
the very root and purpose of the story (and thus is far more I ikely a story Mark wholly 
invented than anything he inherited from prior myths and legends of Jesus), and this 
happens in enough places in Mark to firmly establish that such a method of invention 
and composition was a pervasive trend for Marie 
106. See MacDonald, 'Imitations ofGreek Epic', p. 381; and Carmichael, 'Passover 
Haggadah', p. 343. 
107. MacDonald, 'Imitations of Greek Epic', p. 382. 

10. The Gospels 
439 
Arimathea is not just a fictive recreation of Priam, who in Homer seeks the 
body of Hector (as MacDonald shows), but also a type of Joseph the Patri­
arch, who in Gen. 50.4-6 asks Pharaoh for permission to bury Jacob (i.e. 
Israel), and lays him in the cave-tomb Jacob had hewn, just like the tomb in 
which the parallel Joseph lays Jesus. Thus, Mark derived the burier's name 
as 'Joseph'. The rest of his description comes from Mark's use of Homer 
and his own symbolic imagination. 108 
MacDonald also thinks the centurion's declaration, 'Truly, this man was 
the son of God!' is a sarcastic gloat ('Oh really, this man was God's son!?') 
rather than an expression of awed belief--because it parallels a passage in 
Homer, where Achilles similarly mocks the alleged deity of the expired 
Hector. That might make more narrative sense, since otherwise the centu­
rion's declaration is oddly unmotivated (although Matthew and Luke create 
a motivation for him: contrast Mt. 27.54 or Lk. 23.47 with Mk 15.39). But 
that would mean that even though the centurion doesn't believe what he is 
saying, he is nevertheless the only one who said it (rather than any of the 
Jews), and thereby ironically recognized Christ's deific status (being blind 
to its reality), which matches Mark's consistent theme of witnesses failing 
to comprehend what is really going on (noted earlier), and would then echo 
108. In Mark all we ever hear of this Joseph is that he was iosiph apo arimathaias 
euschimȍn bouleutis hos kai autos hin prosdechomenos tin basileian tou theou, 
'Joseph from Arimathea, a prominent council-member, who was himself also awaiting 
[or accepting or receiving] the kingdom of God', even though it is never explained why 
he gets involved in the story or what became of him (later Gospels try to make sense of 
this by adding minor details: see Mt. 27.57; Lk. 23.50-51; Jn 19.38). He exists only as a 
literary device, instantly produced on the stage when he is needed, without explanation 
or introduction, and then instantly removed when his role is done, just as inexplicably, 
never to be heard of again (not even in Acts: see Chapter 9, §3). His name likely has a 
symbolic meaning. Besides the fact that euschim6n bou/eutis ('a prominent council­
member') is a pun (it also means 'one who makes good decisions'), Arimathaia is 
probably an invented word, meaning 'Best Doctrine Town' (ari- being a standard 
Greek prefix for 'best', math- being the root of 'teaching', 'doctrine', and 'disciple' [e.g. 
mathe, mathtsis, mathima, mathltis], and ·aia being a standard suffix of place). No 
such town is known to have existed. Although close alternatives have been suggested 
(e.g. that Mark means one of the many biblical cities named Ramah ['Hightop'], the 
most famous of which also had the more elaborate name Ramathaimzophim ['Watchers' 
Peaks'), which in I Sam. 1.1 is spelled in the Septuagint Armathaimsipha, which with 
the sipha removed is only a couple of letters away from Aramathaia), the coincidence 
ofMark's exact spelling with an apposite Greek meaning is more telling (Joseph comes 
from the place of the 'best doctrine' and thus makes 'good decisions' and receives the 
Kingdom of God by honoring Jesus with the legally required burial). For a summary of 
the various perspectives on this Joseph's historicity, see William John Lyons, 'On the 
Life and Death of Joseph of Arimathea', Journal for the Study of the Historical Jesus 2 
(January 2004), pp. 29-53 (although see his updated remarks in Lyons, 'Hermeneutics'). 

440 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
the matching irony of Pilate earlier accidentally (and thus, again, ironically) 
declaring Christ the King oft he Jews {'Pilate asked him, "Are you the King 
of the Jews?" And Jesus answering him said, "You said it"', Mk 15.2). 
Another double parallel is how Mark patterns the disciples after the Jews 
in the Exodus, who are likewise implausibly fickle and stupid, never under­
standing anything even after repeatedly witnessing Moses perform incred­
ible miracles Uust like the disciples with Jesus), but also after the crew of 
Odysseus, who are likewise fickle and stupid. Which explains the strangely 
excessive role of sea travel and sailors (the leading disciples are all fisher­
men and a large chunk of the story occurs at sea), which gives Mark end­
less opportunities to build deliberate allusions to themes developed in the 
Odyssey}09 MacDonald isn't the only one to notice how implausible it is 
that Jesus' story would extensively feature sea voyages and sailors, in a 
landlocked territory.110 This would mean, of course, that the actual pillars 
(the Peter, James and John known to Paul, the same three Mark consistently 
casts as Jesus' top three disciples) were never really fishermen. And indeed 
I believe that is most likely a literary invention of Mark's, which he found 
especially convenient for grounding his literary device of literal fishermen 
becomingfigurative 'fishers of men' (Mk 1.17). Which casts doubt on the 
assumption that they were ever really uneducated or illiterate (as Acts 4.13 
dubiously claims; see Chapter 7, §3, and Chapter 11, §3). 
This in turn casts doubt on the historicity of Jesus' status as a carpen­
ter. Odysseus was also famously a carpenter, having built his own marital 
bed (a fact that plays a key role in the plot) and the doorways of his palace, 
and even bui I ding his own boat to escape Calypso's island. 1 1 1  Of course, 
even if Jesus himself were historical and actually a carpenter (Mk 6.3) or 
a carpenter's son (Mt. 13.55), that would not entail he was uneducated or 
illiterate, either. Lucian ofSamosata, one of the most educated literary wits 
of the second century, was the son of a stonemason (and trained as one him­
self). In fact, a11 rabbis of Jesus' day were expected to learn and practice a 
manual trade as well as complete a literate education, and all the Gospels 
identify Jesus as a rabbi.112 But Jesus' occupation is likely a fiction. 
109. Examples appear throughout MacDonald, Homeric Epics (but see especially 
pp. 15-23, 55·62 and 187). 
1 10. See Edmund Leach, 'Fishing for Men on the Edge of the Wi lderness', in The 
Literary Guide to the Bible (ed. Robert Alter and Frank Kermode; Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press, 1987), pp. 579-99. 
1 1 1 .  Homer, Odyssey 23.178 (with 23.189) and 5.234-56 (see also 17.266-68 and 
22.126-28, 155-56, and 257-58; and 23.190-201). Odysseus is thus called 'the builder 
[tekton]' in 17.340-41 and 21.42-43. 
1 12. Carrier, Not the Impossible Faith, pp. 55-60 and 324-28. That Jesus was a 
rabbi: Mk 10.51; 1 1 .21; 14.45; Mt. 26.25, 49; Jn 1.38, 49; 3.2; 4.31; 6.25; 9.2; 1 1.8; 20.16. 
Luke translates the Hebrew for 'rabbi' into Greek equivalents: Lk. 5.5; 7.40; 8.24, 

I 0. The Gospels 
441 
A tekton would be any craftsman, not necessarily a carpenter. One nor­
mally had to distinguish a tektcm of wood from a tekton of stone (as in 
2 Sam. 5.1 1 [Lxx]); or of brass (as in I Kgs 7.J4 [Lxx]); or of iron (as in 
1 Sam. 13.19 [Lxx]). But generically God could be figured as a tekton, being 
the craftsman of the universe. And being God's agent of creation (as Paul 
declares in 1 Cor. 8.6; see Elements 10 and 40), Jesus would also have been 
figured as such (as in Mark); and if not him, then certainly his father (as 
in Matthew). The tektones were also the ones who 'oversee the house of 
Jehovah' (2 Kgs 22.5-6; having built and continuing to maintain the tem­
ple). In both roles, God and Christ were the 'builder of better houses', as 
Paul explains in 2 Cor. 5.1 ('we know that if the earthly house of our tab­
ernacle be dissolved, we have a building from God, a house not made with 
hands, eternal, in the heavens'), which belies the hidden meaning behind 
Mk 14.58 ('we heard him say, "I will destroy this temple that is made with 
hands, and in three days I will build another made without hands"'), which 
is clearly an allegory for resurrection. 113 
Likewise, God was the 'builder [technites] and designer [demiourgos]' 
of the perfect celestial city we all await (He b. 1 1.10; 1 1.16; 1 2.22; 13.14). So 
it is probably no accident that Mark retained the Pauline 'God as builder' 
resurrection metaphor, and at the same time calls Jesus 'a builder', meaning 
he will fashion for himself a superior resurrected body (the actual mean­
ing of Mk 14.58). And that would likewise be a metaphor for the church 
(the terrestrial body of Christ: Element 18) with which indeed he would in 
three days' time replace the Jewish temple (as we've seen to be the whole 
underlying message of Mark's Gospel). Thus when Jesus is identified as a 
carpenter in Mark (the only time it ever comes up; he otherwise is never so 
called, and never works any trade), an allusion is even made to its fictive 
meaning: 'Where did he get these things? What wisdom has been given 
him? What mighty works are wrought by his hands? Is this not the crafts­
man .
. . ?' (Mk 6.2-3). 
Jesus being called a craftsman is thus a device by which Mark can illus­
trate again the incomprehension of the Jews, missing the point that Jesus is 
the true craftsman, which they ought to have realized once they see 'mighty 
works are wrought by his hands'. Just as in his crucifixion narrative Mark 
has the Jews treat him like the scapegoat, not comprehending that they 
have the wrong man, so also they derogatorily call him a craftsman without 
4S, 49О 9.33, 38. 49; 10.25; 1 1.45; 12.13; 17.13П 18.18; 19.39; 20.21, 28, 39: 21.7; 22.1 1. 
Accordingly, Luke assumes Jesus could read the Torah scroll (Lk. 4.1 6, even stating 
that he did this regularly), and the author of the Pericope adulturae assumed Jesus 
could write (Jn 8.6-8). 
1 13. See Element 18, Carrier, Proving History, p. 190; and Carrier, 'Spiritual 
Body', in Empty Tomb (ed. Price and Lowder), pp. 139-47. 

442 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
realizing he is in fact the craftsman. Thus, the only time Mark ever calls 
Jesus a carpenter is in a literary context where he has an obvious reason to 
completely invent that detail for the sake of his desired irony. Once we see 
all of this, Jesus actually being a craftsman becomes a somewhat unlikely 
coincidence. But it's not at all improbable as a literary myth-one quite 
possibly invented by Mark, who is the first to ever mention it. 
So here again, we have a double inspiration: the Homeric origin of a 
hero who is a tekt!Jn to be used as a Jewish-minded literary-theological 
device. Mark's use of Homer afforded many similar parallel patterns merg­
ing Jewish and Greek mythology to produce a new Christian mythology. 
For example, Mark's strange theme of the 'messianic secret' (which Jesus 
always insists upon, even though almost no one ever complies) makes no 
sense as history, or really even as theology or apologetic, yet makes perfect 
sense as reflecting the theme of Odysseus in disguise among the suitors in 
his palace who were maliciously courting his wife. Like Jesus, Odysseus 
endeavors, even when occasionally recognized, to maintain that disguise 
until he can get his revenge on those suitors (the sinners who would usurp 
his place to slake their greed) who have inhabited his house-analogous to 
the priests and Pharisees inhabiting the temple (God's house), who are like­
wise corrupt sinners mired in hypocrisy and greed, and likewise courting 
the same woman: the church. 
This connects with the entire 'wedding' theme in Christianity (see Ele­
ment 48), in which Jesus is the groom and the church his bride (the New 
Israel), the heiress to the preceding world order (the Old Israel). Which 
parallels a similar wedding theme in the Odyssey, where the suitors are 
hoping to become Penelope's new husband; but her true husband, Odys­
seus, returns like a thief in the night to strike them down, all the while mov­
ing among them and conversing with them, yet they do not know who he 
is. He appears as a lowly vagabond and storyteller Uust like Jesus does in 
Mark), but all the while he is the very king himself. With Jesus the analog 
of Odysseus, the Jewish elite become the analog ofthe suitors, confirming 
a consistent message of Mark's Gospel: like the suitors, the Jewish elite are 
greedy, conniving, immoral and undeserving-and will soon be destroyed 
by God and replaced by the true king, whom they do not know, even though 
he is standing before them. 
In many ways like this (many in fact even more specific and telling than 
these), we can see that 'once the evangelist linked the sufferings of Jesus 
to those of Odysseus, he found in the epic[s ofHomer] a reservoir of land­
scapes, characterizations, type-scenes, and plot devices useful for craft­
ing his narrative'.114 Mark's Gospel's main function is to illustrate what the 
1 14. MacDonald, Homeric Epics, p. 19. 

l 0. The Gospels 
443 
gospel means and to provide a system of models for Christian life (particu­
larly missionary life) and for use in teaching its social ideals and theology. 
In many scenes in Mark's Gospel, for example, Jesus is made to say and 
do things that symbolize how Christians, especially Christian missionar­
ies, are to behave or think. He gives us a model of what baptism means 
(adoption by God, and symbolic death and rebirth); a model of how to face 
martyrdom (the trial and crucifixion); a model of how to react to family 
pressure (one must follow Jesus and leave any stubborn family behind and 
adopt instead one's new kin group: Mk 3.31-35); models of healing and 
exorcism; even models of what not to do (such as doubt or fear or the mili­
tary messianism of Barabbas, or the internecine betrayal of a Judas-or 
any putting of self before the group, the message of Mk 10.35-45). 
As I concluded in Proving History, 'that Jesus had enemies who slan­
dered him, that Jesus went to parties with sinners to save them, that Jesus' 
family rejected him', are all stories that reflect the realities of Christian 
missionaries and the situations they face, so Mark is crafting these stories 
to model how they are to deal with them. Thus: 
The experiences of Christians themselves in their battles, trials, and 
evangelizations were being mapped onto Jesus as a model to follow and 
commiserate with . . . .  For example, Jesus being called crazy aligns too 
well with the fact that Christians themselves faced this charge-so how 
apposite to depict their Lord as being unjustly accused of the same, and 
then supplying him with clever speeches refuting it . . . .  Christians sim­
ilarly faced conflict from their families, which statistically must have 
involved on occasion the same charge of insanity or demonic possession 
from them; so depicting their Lord as trading his family in for a new one 
in result (Mark 3.21-35, and that in the very same scene), is again too 
convenient [to be real].115 
Mark even tells us (on the sly) that he is writing parables, so that those who 
follow the exoteric meaning will not understand and thus not be saved­
only those who follow the esoteric meaning (the symbolic meaning) wiiJ 
get the real meaning and be on the road to salvation (Mk 4.9-12; see again 
Element 14). So Mark even invented a story about Jesus that provides us 
with a model for how to read Mark's Gospel. Of course, to serve this func­
tion, his text becomes considerably more powerful and effective if it is 
also taken literally (as I've suggested before, but will soon explain further}, 
although it's clear Mark had not yet realized that. He was still using the 
literal word to conceal his real meaning, not to persuade people of it. 
I've given enough examples to demonstrate Mark has no interest in 
historical facts or sources, that he is simply inventing his stories to suit 
his aims; the other scholarship I have cited here (including my own) pro-
1 15. Carrier, Proving History, p. 156. 

444 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
vides many examples more. But before I move on to discuss the subsequent 
redactions of Mark (the remaining canonical Gospels), I should address one 
general objection with a few specific examples. Often an argument is made 
that some item or other in Mark can't have any other explanation for why 
it's there other than that it happened, and somehow the tradition of it had 
reached Mark. These arguments tend to be illogical as well as ill-informed. 
as I have already demonstrated elsewhere. 1 16 But though I treated all the 
principal examples there, others remain. 
In some cases, of course, the evidence actually ends up proving the con­
trary (e.g. it's very unlikely Nazareth is really where Jesus was from: see 
again §3). But in other cases, though we can infer Mark's literary purpose, 
we cannot prove it. Such cases afford no evidence either for or against their 
content's historicity, since that content is just as likely either way. And in 
the end, every item in Mark's Gospel falls in one of those two categories: 
either it's more likely a fiction than a historical tradition; or it's just as likely 
either way. In sum, Mark's Gospel leaves us with no evidence for the histo­
ricity of Jesus. But it also does not count as evidence against the historicity 
of Jesus, since some of its content could yet be historical-we just can't 
prove it-and eyen if none of it is, it's still possible to write a completely 
fictional story about a genuinely historical man. (Although one does strug­
gle to explain why anyone had to, if that man is supposed to have inspired 
a dozen men to launch an international religion; but I already explored 
the curious absence of the kind of documentation such a new religion is 
expected to generate in Chapter 8, §§2 and 3.) 
A prominent example of a case in this latter category (of undecidable 
historicity) is a curious detail Mark provides: naming the sons of Simon of 
Cyrene. This is most bizarre, since Mark states no reason at all for doing 
so. Why do we need to know this information? Why does Mark think it's 
important? And why is this the only instance in his whole Gospel where 
Mark names the sons of anyone Jesus encounters? (One wonders why none 
of his disciples had sons worth mentioning.) Mark does not even say these 
sons became Christians (and one would expect him to if that was the point) 
or were his sources for the account (as again, one would expect him to say 
so). So as history, this detail is just inexplicably weird. For these and other 
reasons (such as the historical implausibility of Romans pressing into ser­
vice random bystanders like this) many scholars conclude the appearance 
of Simon of Cyrene is fictional.117 
1 16. See Carrier, Proving History, pp. 123-69. 
1 17. The competing views and arguments on this question are surveyed in Lyons. 
•Hermeneutics', pp. 139-54. It is sometimes argued that a tomb recovered in Judea in 
which is buried an Alexander, son of Simon of Cyrene, is the tomb of this Simon·s 
son and thus corroborates his historicity. For example, Tom Powers, 'Treasures in the 

10. The Gospels 
445 
By contrast, we can easily explain this whole verse as an esoteric alle­
gory. We know Mark was fond of using 'reversals of expectation' in his 
construction of narrative, to embody the gospel message, which was all 
about reversing expectations (e.g. 'the least shall be first').118 Mark makes a 
point of mentioning that Jesus had told Simon Peter he had to 4;take up his 
cross and follow' Jesus. After rebuking Peter for objecting to Jesus' plan of 
effecting a sacrificial death, 
[Jesus] rebuked Peter, and said, 'Get behind me, Satan! For you have your 
mind not on the things of God, but the things of men.' And he called to 
him the multitude with his disciples, and said to them, 'If any man would 
come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross. and follow 
me' (Mk 8.33-34). 
Storeroom: Family Tomb of Simon of Cyrene', Biblical Archaeology Review 29 (July/ 
August 2003), pp. 46-51, 59; and Tom Powers, 'Simon of Cyrene Tomb Connection', 
Artifax (Autumn 2000), pp. 1, 4-6. But alas there is actually no mention of Cyrene in 
that tomb (nor any Rufus), there is only the name Alexander ben Simon (in Greek). 
Even in Judea these were common names. More than I in 10 were named Simon and 
more than I in 109 were named Alexander, which means there were more than 1 in 
1090 Alexander ben Simons buried in Judea. Even if only 100,000 Jews were ever 
interred in ossuaries in Judea, a gross undercount, then almost a hundred Alexander 
ben Simons would be found there if we could recover every ossuary there was. Even 
an origin in Cyrene would not make a significant difference. Acts already reports there 
were so many Cyrenaean Jews in Judea that they even had their own synagogues in 
Jerusalem, and many Judean pilgrims and Christians were from Cyrene (Acts 2.10; 6.9; 
l l.20; 13.1; and even if fictions, Luke is most likely basing these details on historical 
facts). If we imagine only a thousand or so Cyrenaeans were ever buried in Judea, 
we still can expect at least one Alexander ben Simon of Cyrene to be found there by 
chance alone, especially given that Alexander was a much more common name among 
Greek-speaking diaspora Jews and thus the frequency of Alexander ben Simons among 
that subgroup would have been even higher. But this Greek-speaking 'Alexander ben 
Simon' we recovered need not hail from Cyrene anyway; he could have come from 
anywhere in the Hellenistic diaspora. Note, also, that even if there was a real Simon 
of Cyrene who had the sons Alexander and Rufus in the Christian church at the time, 
that would stiiJ not entail Mark's story of him is in any way true; after all, Mark just as 
readily fictionalizes tales about the otherwise-historical Peter and Pilate. 
lt8. I give several examples of this feature in Mark in Carrier, 'Spiritual Body', in 
Empty Tomb (ed. Price and Lowder), pp. 163-65; but this aspect of Mark's composition 
has been noted and demonstrated before: Jerry Camery-Hoggatt, Irony in Mark's 
Gospel: Text and Subtext (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1992); Paul 
Danove, The End of Mark 's Story: A Methodological Study (New York: Brill, 1993); 
Adela Yarbro Collins, 'The Empty Tomb in the Gospel according to Mark', in Hermes 
and Athena: Biblical Exegesis and Philosophical Theology (ed. Eleonore Stump and 
Thomas Flint; Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre Dame Press, 1993), pp. 107-40; 
Deborah Krause, 'The One Who Comes Unbinding'; etc. 

446 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
This is thus what Peter is instructed to do. But our expectations are reversed: 
instead of Simon Peter 'taking up his cross and following Jesus', Simon 
the Cyrenaean does (Mk 1 5.21).119 This is a complete stranger, never men­
tioned before nor ever again. He appears in just this single verse. Mean­
while, Simon Peter not only abandons Jesus but denies him.120 
This makes sense of why Mark invented a second Simon to stand in for 
Simon Peter, being not only a stranger (to contrast with Peter being Jesus' 
number-one disciple) but also a foreigner (from the distant land ofCyrene, a 
province on the other side of Egypt and thus not even bordering Palestine), 
a perfect representation of 'the least shall be first'. Contrary to expectation, 
it is, of all people one could imagine, Simon of Cyrene who is the first to 
take up his cross and follow. A powerful message indeed. But Mark does 
not merely say this. He says, 'They pressed into service a certain fe11ow 
passing by, Simon the Cyrenaean, who was coming from the countryside, 
the father of Alexander and Rufus, to carry his cross'. Who are Alexander 
and Rufus? And why is Simon specifically a Cyrenaean? 
There was a large Jewish presence in Cyrene, and to come from beyond 
Egypt (the realm of slavery and death) had symbolic overtones. But I sus­
pect the more likely reason was that, according to Strabo, in those days 'the 
most famous Cyrenaeans' were the Cyrenaics, a sect of hedonistic philoso­
phers known as avowed atheists and the one sect most wholly attached to 
the physical world and its pleasures (rejecting all spiritual doctrines)Y' The 
sect had long since died out (or so we suppose), having been replaced by the 
more attractive and agnostic material ism of Epicurus, but the sect remained 
legendary, such that Strabo (who lived and wrote when Jesus would have 
been growing up) could say that even then 'the most famous Cyrenaeans' 
were still the leading philosophers of the Cyrenaics. This was a perfect 
choice to symbolize the exact opposite of the gospel: the complete rejection 
of all spiritual realities and the complete immersion in the materialistic 
pleasures and wisdom of men. Moreover, as Mark would have known, the 
Cyrenaean Jews had recently attempted a violent rebellion (shortly after the 
war in Judea) and were put down by the might of Rome.122 Cyrene was thus 
1 19. Jesus had given his first disciple the name Peter as of Mk 3. 16. but before that 
he is referred to only as Simon. 
120. On which see Carrier. Proving History, p. 1 57. 
121. Strabo, Geography 17.3.22: Diogenes Laertius. Lives of Eminent Philosophers 
2.65-104. 
122. Josephus, Life 76.424-25. The revolt was led by a certain Jonathan, who 
gathered two thousand men to fight, which happens to be the number of the demonic 
"Legion' drowned by Jesus (Mk 5.13). It has alternatively been suggested that the 
Gerasene swine represent Christ's eventual destruction ofthe Romans (suggesting he 
will drive the legions into the sea), owing to the fact that at the conclusion of the Jewish 
War, the Tenth Legion (Legio X Fretensis) was garrisoned in Jerusalem and tasked 

I 0. The Gospels 
447 
a perfect allegory for two things Mark rejected: it had most famously given 
birth to both the basest worldly philosophy and the doomed path of war. 
Paul wrote that 'they that are of Christ Jesus have crucified the flesh with 
the passions and the lusts thereof' (Gal. 5.24) by placing it 'on the cross of 
our Lord Jesus Christ, through which the world hath been crucified unto 
me, and I unto the world' (Gal. 6.14). Though Simon is not said to have been 
crucified, his carrying of the cross symbolizes everything that was on the 
cross when Jesus is killed on it: attachment to the world, and to the 'flesh 
with the passions and the lusts thereof'. He does so in two respects: as an 
allegory for everything the Cyrenaic school stood for (materialism, attach­
ment to worldly lusts, and the philosophies of men, general ly derided by 
Christians as demonic and ungodly, e.g., 1 Cor. 1 .20; 2.5, 13; Rom. 1.20-25; 
Col. 2.8; Jas 3.15) and as an allegory for everything Barabbas also stood for 
(the use of violence and rebel I ion, as the Cyrenaean Jews were then most 
recently known for), two different ways to choose attachment to worldly 
ways and things over spiritual ones. What Mark may have symbolically 
intended, then, is that by extended contact with Simon the Cyrenaean, the 
cross of Jesus symbolically absorbed these things (which this Simon repre­
sents) and were then crucified with Jesus. 
The sons of Simon corroborate this analysis: as then these are the sons 
of worldly wisdom and the way of military conquest. Thus, what they 
represent are what the idea of 'Cyrene' gave birth to. The names are thus 
significant. I suspect they are meant to refer to the most famous men of 
all time who held those names: Alexander the Great and Musonius Rufus. 
Alexander the Great was the world's most famous deified conquerer, the 
paragon of military victory and of the use of violence to effect power, the 
ideal any militaristic messiah would want to emulate. Musonius Rufus was 
the world's most famous pacifist, a philosopher of greatest renown, second 
only to Socrates-according to the Christian scholar Origen, for example, 
popular sentiment held that the very best men in history were two in num-
with ensuring the city was never rebuilt (Josephus. Jewish War 7.17). and that legion's 
emblem is known to have been a boar (see, e.g., http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Legio_X_ 
Fretensis). However, a legion's standard complement was six thousand men, and that 
was not counting auxiliaries (cavalry, archers, stingers and light infantry), who were 
also assigned at Jerusalem. I think Mark's choice of number (far too low to be an actual 
legion) has to reflect his intended symbolism and match themes he consistently echoes 
elsewhere in his Gospel; and the best fit is the fate of Jonathan, who represents the way 
of violent rebellion, which Mark criticizes repeatedly (e.g. in the Barabbas narrative; 
even the Judas narrative criticizes Jewish resort to military force: Mk 14.43-49), and 
whose own attempt to replace the 'legions' counted a mere two thousand men, the same 
number of pigs drowned. 

448 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
ber: Socrates and Rufus. 123 Rufus was also a contemporary of Mark and a 
Roman, making him a perfect contrast to the long-dead Alexander, a Greek 
(really, a Macedonian, but by then the distinction had been all but forgot­
ten), thus representing the origin of the present world order (Alexander's 
conquest being the first to subject the second temple to foreign domina­
tion) and its end (Mark's own day, the temple having just recently been 
destroyed) and at the same time representing the entire gamut of foreign 
interference in Judea (Greek and Roman, military and philosophical). 
Musonius Rufus was a Stoic philosopher who taught many things very 
similar to Jesus, representing the closest Mark could imagine 'worldly 
wisdom' came to arriving at the gospel by reason rather than revelation.124 
Rufus preached charity, pacifism and forgiving one's enemies, and declared 
that 'evil consists in injustice and cruelty and indifference to a neighbor's 
trouble, while virtue is brotherly love and goodness and justice and benefi­
cence and concern for the welfare of one's neighbor'.125 Rufus was also 
famously a close friend of Emperor Vespasian (the latest greatest military 
conquerer known to Mark) who had just recently destroyed Jerusalem and 
its temple (through the agency of his son Titus). And Rufus was recently 
renowned for risking his own death trying to stop the civil war of 69 CE by 
preaching a doctrine of peace to the armies that were about to meet on the 
battlefield.126 They were not persuaded. For Mark this would have illus­
trated the failure of the 'way of human reason' that Rufus advocated.127 For 
Mark (as for Paul), the gospel was superior, empowered by the Holy Spirit. 
123. Origen, Against Celsus 3.66. This sentiment is confirmed by Pliny the 
Younger, Letters 3.11; Philostratus, Life of Apo/lonius of Tyana 4.46; Dio of Prusa, 
Orations 31. 122; Julian, Letter to the High Priest Theodorus 16; and Julian, Letter to 
Themistius 20-22; etc. 
124. See Richard Carrier, 'On Musonius Rufus: A Brief Essay', The Secular Web 
( 1999) athttp://www.infidels.org/library/modem/richard 
_ carrier/musonius.html, which 
summarizes on this point the evidence documented in Cora Lutz, Musonius Rufus: The 
Roman Socrates (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1942), as well as Cynthia 
King, Musonius Rufus: Lectures and Sayings (Charleston, SC: Createspace, 201 1); and 
M.P. Charlesworth, Five Men: Character Studies from the Roman Empire (Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press, 1936). 
125. Musonius Rufus, Discourses 10, 14, 19 (quote: 14.29-33). 
126. Tacitus, Histories 3.81; Cassius Dio, Roman History 65.18-19. 
127. For Musonius, 'the primary concern of philosophy is the care of the soul in 
order that the qualities of prudence, temperence, justice, and courage may be perfected 
in it. This education should begin in infancy and continue throughout life, for every 
member of human society,' and his educational program included logic and debating 
skills, for the express purpose ofbuilding the ability to reason through ethical decisions 
competently (Lutz, Musonius, p. 27). This contrasted with the Christian insistence on 
faith (and trust in authority and the Holy Spirit), not reason, as the only path to moral 
competence. 

I 0. The Gospels 
449 
Rufus can also be linked to the destruction of the temple, a favorite 
theme for Mark. He failed to persuade Vespasian to choose peace over war, 
and Vespasian brought about the destruction of the temple in Jerusalem the 
following year. Coincidentally, the war Rufus failed to stop also destroyed 
the corresponding temple in Rome, the temple of Jupiter Capitolinus, 
supreme God of the Roman Empire, which was felled in a battle between 
Vitellius and Vespasian's other son, Domitian. So Vespasian's two sons 
destroyed two temples, the Jewish and the Roman, in nearly the same year 
(the Roman temple fell in Decemberof69, the Jewish temple in July of70).128 
As Mark would see it, philosophy cannot stop the wrath of God and cannot 
save us from destruction. 
An even more telling link can be made between Alexander the Great and 
the Jewish temple, in a story that exactly reverses that of Musonius Rufus. 
According to a popular Jewish legend, when Alexander reached Judea in 
his conquest, the Samaritans sent a delegation to try and convince him to 
destroy the Jerusalem temple, but he refused; which is in contrast to Rufus, 
who similarly goes out to try and convince a conquerer on his march to end 
his wars-but Vespasian refuses, and the temple is destroyed after all (and 
at long last). In one account of the Alexander tale, the high priest of the 
temple, a featured hero of the story, is even named Simon.129 But in both 
accounts, the high priest goes out to meet Alexander on his approach and 
Alexander recognizes him from visions he had been receiving from God 
and thus favors the Jews over the Samaritans and is thus dissuaded from 
destroying the temple. Revelation and trusting in God are thus contrasted 
with rational argumentation: Alexander, the warrior, exhibited the one, and 
chose peace; Rufus, the pacifist, exhibited the other, and failed to avert 
destruction. Another way the stories mirror each other as opposites is that 
Alexander is the petitioned conquerer, while Rufus was the one petitioning 
the conqueror. 
128. Philostratus, Life of Apollonius 5.30; Suetonius, Life of Domitian 1; Tacitus, 
Histories 3.71-72 and 4.53 (Tacitus declares, 'this was the most lamentable and 
appalling disaster in the whole history of the Roman commonwealth'). See Josephus, 
Jewish War 6.93-168 for the end of the Jewish temple. 
129. We have two versions of the tale, one from Josephus, in which the high priest 
at the time is Jaddus, and one in the Talmud, in which the high priest is Simon. See 
Erich Gruen, 'Fact and Fiction: Jewish Legends in a Hellenistic Context'. in Hellenistic 
Constructs: Essays in Culture, History, and Historiography (ed. Paul Cartledge, Peter 
Garnsey and Erich Gruen; Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 1997), pp. 
72-88 (78-79); James VanderKam, From Joshua to Caiaphas: High Priests after the 
Exile (Minneapolis, MN: Fortress Press, 2004), pp. 63-85 and 137-57; and Thomas 
Verenna, Of Men and Muses: Essays on History, Literature. and Religion (Raleigh, 
'" 
NC: Lulu, 2009), pp. 102-12. The two principal accounts are in the Talmud, b. Yoma 
69a, and in Josephus, Antiquities of the Jews 11.325-47. 

450 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
We can easily imagine how readily Mark would find this pairing attrac­
tive, being so rich with esoteric exegesis exactly in line with Mark's gospel 
message. The way ofCyrene (attachment to the world) gave birth to the two 
ways of the world (military m ight and man-made philosophy), which end 
in destruction-unless we submit to God. Those worldly ways were just 
what Christ had destroyed along with his own flesh, replacing them with 
the gospel of faith in God's newly revealed plan of salvation (Rom. 16.25-
26). The many motifs the pairing could evoke for him are illustrated here: 
Simon of Cyrene 
(gives birth to . . .  ) 
Alexander 
Rufus 
(the Great) 
(Musonius) 
world's most famous conquerer 
world's most famous pacifist 
prime example of seeking 
prime example of seeking 
immortality through military glory 
immortality through philosophy 
petitioned on the battlefield to destroy the 
petitions on the battlefield to stop war 
Jewish temple 
(and thus the destroying of temples) 
trusts in God and chooses peace 
trusts in reason and fails to bring peace 
temple is spared 
temple is destroyed 
both war (Alexander) and human reason (Rufus) are the way of ruin: 
only faith in God and revelation bring salvation 
Table 7. Allegorical Hypothesis for Simon of Cyrene 
Obviously it cannot be proved this is what Mark intended in naming this 
Simon and his sons, and he certainly would have expected these points to 
be revealed only in secret, through the private illumination of his parable 
(in accordance with Mk 4.10-12). But we have no more evidence for this 
than we have for the names deriving from an authentic historical tradition. 
Mark gives no indication that that is why these names are here; he gives 
no indication at all of why they are here. Symbolic intent is thus as likely a 
reason (even if not the one I suspect). 
It may seem strange to include such a complex hidden message with so 
sparse a remark, but it's obvious the Gospel authors often did this. As we 
saw before, there is surely some esoteric meaning to the 'twelve years of 
bleeding' and the 'twelve years of age' in the Jairus narrative. And there 
was certainly some now-lost meaning to the miraculous catch of precisely 

10. The Gospels 
45 1 
153 fish in Jn 21.7-12 (as I'll discuss in §7), or the number of loaves and 
baskets in Mk 8.19-21. As the reader is not told what these things mean, 
clearly they had a secret meaning never written down but only communi­
cated to initiates of sufficient rank (and probably eventually forgotten over 
time). We saw a similar rich depth of meaning in Mark's juxtaposition of 
elements in the Barabbas narrative, and in the deep structure with which he 
patterned his entire Gospel. 
Christian and Jewish theologians routinely understood casual refer­
ences to names and groups of names in scripture to indicate deep complex 
meaning. And as I noted before, if they could read texts that way, they 
surely would have written texts that way (see Element 14). For example, 
Origen finds three men mentioned together in a single line in Gen. 26.26 
and says they symbolize philosophy: Abimelech represents logic, and his 
two subordinates, Ahuzzath and Phicol, represent the other two branches 
of philosophy, which depend on and derive from logic: Ahuzzath symbol­
izes natural philosophy, and Phicol moral philosophy. And he comes to this 
conclusion from an esoteric exegesis of their names. If Origen could think 
the author of Genesis intended this under inspiration of the Holy Spirit, 
Mark could think the Holy Spirit had inspired him to do likewise with the 
names of Simon and his sons (or other name triads, like the three women 
attending the tomb, as I noted earlier, whose names also have plausible 
allegorical meaning).130 The feeling of awe he would feel at the neat paral­
lels and reversals produced by linking his Simon with the triad of Cyrene 
and Alexander the Great and Musonius Rufus could easily be mistaken as 
inspired (see Elements 15 and 16). 
So I consider this passage undecidable: it's just as likely on minimal myth­
icism and on minimal historicity, as the arguments for and against each bal­
ance each other out, leaving us with no certainty which may be in this case­
apart from what prior probability we bring to it, but this piece of evidence 
would not alter that prior and therefore this passage can be disregarded. I 
think it is more than clear that even if we started with no assumptions about 
Mar˿ and then analyzed one pericope after another, in each case updating 
our prior probability (a procedure I lay out on p. 168 of Proving History), 
we would end up with a low prior probability that anything in it is histori­
cal, and a high prior probability that all of it has some esoteric allegorical 
or symbolical purpose. Such a low prior would then only be overcome by 
strong external corroborating evidence (such as we have for the existence, at 
least, ofPeter and Pilate), in the absence of which, for any detail in Mark, we 
should assume a symbolical meaning is always more likely. The net result is 
that Mark provides us no evidence either for or against historicity. We simply 
130. Origen, Homilies on Genesis 14.3. For the three women in Mark as an 
allegorical name triad: Carrier, Not the Impossible Faith, pp. 315·16. 

452 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
cannot identify anything in it as a historical fact about Jesus-even if there 
are such facts in Mark, we simply have no means to identify them. We there­
fore must rely only on evidence for Jesus external to Mark. 
The same could be said for any other curious passage or detail in Marie 
For example, Mk 14.3-9 has the very odd story of the woman who sponta­
neously and for no historically intelligible reason anoints Jesus with pre­
cious oil from a priceless jar, which evokes an exchange between Jesus and 
his disciples that obviously has its entire origin solely within Mark's liter­
ary imagination. It is clearly another parable. Yet he concludes all this by 
having Jesus declare, 'Wheresoever the gospel shall be preached through­
out the whole cosmos, what this woman has done will also be spoken of as 
a memorial of her' (Mk 14.9). Yet Mark doesn't even name her. So how is 
she being remembered? Her deed alone is getting the memorial. 
There is obviously some symbolic meaning to this. Mark does not really 
mean this actually happened and that is why he is including it ('because 
Jesus said to!'). The event is historically implausible in every way: no ran­
dom nameless stranger would have anointed Jesus for burial (Mk 14.8) days 
before his death (a death no one, according to Mark, was even expecting). 
And they certainly would not be carrying around an $18,000 pot of oil, 
much less smash it over someone's head to make an allegorical point­
indeed, it is often overlooked that the woman does not just pour the oil but 
even breaks its delicate stone container, a whol ly pointless and wasteful 
thing to do (Mk 14.3).131 Jesus' excuse for wasting so much money (that 
he needed to be anointed for burial) is also not plausible, not only because 
he wasn't dead yet (only a corpse could be 'anointed for burial'), but also 
because such a rare oil would not be needed for that, nor would the jar it 
came in have to be broken. 
Mark simply doesn't explain why this was done with an alabaster jar, 
why it was 'pure nard oil' that had to be used, why this woman isn't given 
a name yet is supposed to be eternally remembered, why Jesus didn't get 
the point that even for the purpose of his anointing such great waste was 
unnecessary, or how this woman got the idea of doing this, or who she was 
that could afford to waste essentially $18,000 on a pointless gesture. And, 
of course, she is never mentioned again, nor was ever mentioned before. 
131. Minimum wage in antiquity was around three obols per day (which was then 
about one denarius or half a Greek drachma); minimum wage in the United States is 
over $60 per day. Therefore 300 denarii = 300 x $60 = $18,000. Oil of nard (a mountain 
flower) was indeed extraordinarily rare and expensive in antiquity; the container 
(carved from alabaster: Mk 14.3) would also not have been cheap and would have 
had considerable resale value even when emptied. It is unclear if the valuation at 300 
denarii (Mk 14.5) was only for the oil or for the oil and its container together. since 
both were destroyed. 

10. The Gospels 
453 
She is a literary device, not a person with a history. We might no longer 
know Mark's point in inventing all this, but invent it he did. Just as he (or 
someone before him) invented the betrayal by Judas, the baptism by John, 
the origin at Nazareth, and so much else. 132 
Even the names of Jesus' family members are a likely fabrication. Mythi­
cal heroes often had mythical families, and memorizing their genealogies 
and the names of their kin relations was a standard practice in ancient schools 
of the time.133 Evidently people expected mythic heroes to have families. This 
was just as true in Jewish legends. The patriarch Joseph, a mythical person, 
aJso had a father, mother and numerous brothers, all named. Obviously they 
weren't any more historical than he was. The names of the brothers of Jesus 
(Simon, Joseph, Jacob and Judas) are all among the most common of male 
names at the time. In fact, Simon was the most common Jewish name of all 
(roughly J in every 10 Jewish men were so named), and the other three names 
(pJus Jesus) are all the most common names among those also found in the 
OT: Joseph was the second most common name (at 1 in every 12 men); Judas 
the fourth (at I in every 16 men); Jesus the sixth (at I in every 26 men); and 
Jacob (i.e. James) the eleventh (at 1 in every 65 men). 134 And the latter were 
132. That someone (if not Mark himself) could have invented the story that Jesus 
was crucified by Romans: Carrier, Proving History, pp. 139-41; and likewise the story 
that Jesus was baptized by John: Carrier, Proving History. pp. 145-48; and stories of 
Jesus' professed or supposed ignorance: Carrier. Proving History, pp. 148·51; and 
Jesus' birth in Nazareth: see discussion here in conjunction with Carrier, Proving 
History, pp. 142-45; and likewise the story that Jesus was betrayed by Judas, 'one of 
the twelve': Carrier, Proving History, pp. 151·55 (with pp. 317·19 nn. 67·72: I there had 
said I'd say more on this point here, but what I say there is sufficient; others agree: see, 
e.g., Hamerton-Kelly, 'Sacred Violence and the Messiah', pp. 483-85; and John Shelby 
Spong, The Sins ofScripture: Exposing the Bible's Texts of Hate to Reveal the God of 
Love (San Francisco, CA: HarperSanFrancisco. 2005], pp. 199-204: note also there was 
apparently no betrayal by Judas in the Gospel of Peter: Gos. Pet. 14.59). 
133. See, e.g., Edmonds, Myths, p. 77 n. 138; Alan Cameron. Greek Mythography in 
the Roman World (New York: Oxford University Press. 2004), p. 172; Timothy Gantz, 
Early Greek Myth: A Guide to Literary and Artistic Sources (Baltimore, MD: Johns 
Hopkins University Press, 1996), I, pp. xxv·xliii, and ll, pp. 803-21; Timothy Wiseman, 
The Myths of Rome (Exeter: University of Exeter Press, 2004), p. 140. Genealogies and 
families were also developed for Osiris and other gods in his mythic cycle: Plutarch, 
On Isis and Osiris 38.366c. 
134. Bauckham, Jesus and the Eyewitnesses, p. 85. In Mark the names are given 
only once, in 6.3, where most mss. say 'James [:::: Jacob], and Joses [::: Joseph], and Judas 
(- Judah], and Simon', while some mss. have 'Joseph' in place of 'Joses', in agreement 
With the paraJiel passage in Mt. 13.55, but Joses is just a shortened form of Joseph 
()ike 'Rick' for 'Richard'). Some mss. of Matthew have 'John' in place of 'Joseph' (an 
evident error) while others have 'John and Joses' (which would make Jesus' family 
consist of every popular Jewish name starting with 'J'). Mark does not mention the 
name of Jesus' father. and one might wonder if in fact the name was present in Mk 6.3 

454 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
all symbolically significant names: evoking the Jacob who became Israel, 
Joseph his most famous son, the Jesus (i.e, Joshua) who conquered Israel, and 
Judas the founder of Judah (Judea). 
If someone were to rattle off five random names to just sound like a 
typical family (like we used to do with the phrase 'every Tom, Dick and 
Harry'), and one that was especially evocative of Jewish biblical heritage, 
it would look exactly like this list: the most common of all names (Simon, 
our 'John Doe') and the most common names of the time that were evoca­
tive of the OT (Jacob, Joseph, Jesus and Judah). In other words, this looks 
exactly like a made-up list. Moreover, the family of Jesus does not exist in 
Mark except as props for making literary points (and we already saw the 
family of Jesus does not exist in Acts, either: see Chapter 9, §3). They enter 
unexplained, and vanish unexplained, and never do anything relevant to the 
history of the church. Indeed, contrary to common assumption, in Mark 
the mother of Jesus does not show even at the cross-it is only the Gospel 
of John that inserts her there. Otherwise, all the Synoptics fail to identify 
any of the Mary's at the end of their story as actually the mother of Jesus. 135 
(The two Mary's at the end of Mark's Gospel appear only in a highly styl­
ized triadic function that has the hallmarks of literary invention anyway, 
as earlier noted.) 
Just like his mother, Jesus' brothers appear only twice, and each time 
they are effectively impotent characters in a parable. The first time they are 
mentioned, neither they nor his mother are even named: 
And there come his mother and his brothers; and, standing outside, they 
sent to him, calling him. And a multitude was sitting about him; and they 
said to him, 'Behold, your mother and your brothers outside are looking 
for you'. And he answered them, and said, 'Who is my mother and my 
brothers?' And looking around on them that sat around him, he said, 
'Behold, my mother and my brothers! For whosoever shall do the will of 
God, the same is my brother, and sister, and mother' (Mk 3.31-35). 
Here Mark has introduced Jesus' family for only one purpose: to give him 
occasion to make a statement about the creation of a fictive kinship among 
Christians that shall replace biological kinship (Element 1 2; a feature of all 
mystery religions: Element I I). They are therefore just props for the story. 
Note, especially, that this scene shows no knowledge that any of Jesus' 
brothers would later join the church. Mark has no idea of this James taking 
command of the church after Peter, or this Jude playing a major role either. 
To the contrary, Mark has Jesus effectively renounce his family and declare 
only those who follow him his brethren-thereby deliberately reversing the 
but dropped in transmission; in any event, the 'dying messiah' could be expected to 
have a father named Joseph, according to the Talmud, b. Sulckah 52a (see Element 5). 
135. Mk 15.40, 47 and 16.1; Mt. 27.56, 61 and 28.1 ;  Lk. 24.10; vs. Jn 19.25-27. 

I 0. The Gospels 
455 
story of Moses' family (also duly named) coming to see him, another exam­
ple of a fictional family visiting a fictional hero in a narrative treated as his­
torical, all just to make a symbolic point.136 Mark's story is no less fictionaL 
Jesus' brothers' second appearance is just as fictional as the first one: 
And he went out from there; and he came into his own country; and his 
disciples followed him. And when the sabbath had come, he began to 
teach in the synagogue: and many hearing him were astonished, saying, 
'Where did he get these things? What wisdom was given to this man? 
What mighty works have been wrought by his hands? Is this not the car­
penter, the son of Mary, and brother of James, and Joses, and Judas, and 
Simon? Are not his sisters here with us?' And they were offended by 
him. And Jesus said to them, 'A prophet is not without honor, except in 
his own country, and among his own kin, and in his own house'. And he 
could do no mighty work there, except that he laid his hands upon a few 
sick folk, and healed them. And he marveled because of their unbelief. So 
he went around the villages teaching [instead] (Mk 6. 1-6). 
Once again his brothers are serving only a literary function here. They 
aren't even actually in this story (they are not present; others are merely 
naming them). Christian missionaries would have faced the very problem 
this parable addresses: people rejecting their authority and their miracle­
working because they used to just be ordinary folk known to the com­
munity, whereas when missionaries visited new towns they did not have to 
overcome that kind of skepticism. Mark has invented a story whereby this 
same thing happens to Jesus, giving missionaries a story to tell to explain 
away not only occasions of failure ('even Jesus could not heal those with 
insufficient faith') but also their rejection by family members and friends 
('even Jesus faced that kind of rejection'). A generic list of names is thus 
just what one would expect Mark to provide here. 137 
136. On how this narrative in Mark reverses an otherwise-similar story of a family 
visit told of Moses in Exodus 18 (particularly when compared with the version in the 
LXX) see Price, Christ-Myth Theory, pp. 76-77. Unlike Price, though. I see no attack 
on dynasticism here; to the contrary, Mark seems unaware (here and throughout 
his Gospel) that the family of Jesus was ever even involved in the church. Mark is 
simply reversing the ideal of family represented in Exodus (through a tale told of 
Moses' treatment of his family) in order to promote the new Christian ideal as having 
supplanted it (through a tale told of Jesus' treatment of his family). 
137. Even 'Mary' was then the most common woman's name (and thus like 
our 'Jane Doe'); between 1 in 4 and I in 5 women had it: Bauckham, Jesus and the 
Eyewitnesses, p. 89. Although her name probably predates Mark (since Mary is Jesus' 
mother's name in the separate Babylonian tradition: see Chapter 8, §I), and there was 
symbolic utility in the name (it therefore need not have been chosen merely because it 
was generic): see Carrier, Not the Impossible Faith, pp. 312-16; and Joan Taylor, Jewish 
Women Philosophers of First-Century Alexandria: Philo's 'Therapeutae' Recon­
sidered (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2003), 322-40. As Taylor documents, in 

456 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
This parable also provides a deeper symbolic meaning: Jesus' kin are 
here analogs for the Jews and Judea as a whole (his own 'country and kin'), 
which rejected the gospel, requiring him (and thus, analogously, his m is­
sionaries) to go elsewhere and preach the gospel. This is therefore a tale 
illustrating Jewish unbelief generally, and providing an etiological myth for 
why Christians evangelized abroad. The commonness of the names (Simon 
the most common of all) and their biblical significance (Joseph, Jacob and 
Judah) only reinforce this symbolism of Jesus' own kin and country reject­
ing the gospel. This narrative also reminds us (no doubt deliberately) of 
the earlier one, in which Jesus rejects even his kin for his cultic brethren 
instead (where he also mentions 'sisters' as well as brothers, just as here). 
So we cannot establish that the family of Jesus is historical, either. In Mark 
it could just as easily be fiction. 
Obviously I can continue with example after example, exhausting every 
scene in Mark, proving it either is more likely fiction than history. or as 
likely as not.138 There is no good case to be made that any scene in Mark 
reflects a historical Jesus. Because most scenes clearly do not, and even if 
any do, we cannot discern which, or what in them is historical. 
5. The Mythology of Matthew 
That Matthew is essentially a redaction of Mark is almost universally 
agreed. He borrows extensively from Mark (nearly the whole narrative), and 
frequently duplicates his material verbatim. Matthew then added a ridicu­
lous Nativity Narrative (which no reasonable historian should regard as 
Jewish legend 'Miriam's Well' was the rock that gave birth to the flow of water after 
Moses struck it with his staff (noted earlier). Paul equated Jesus with that rock (I Cor. 
10.1-4). But if Jesus were equated with the water that flowed from it, the rock would 
then become his mother. Thus 'Mary's well' would have been Jesus' mother in Paul"s 
conceptual scheme. Note that in legend, 'Miriam's Well' not only traveled with the 
Jews, but finally settled in the Sea of Galilee, where it could 'effect magical cures for 
those who were able to get to it' (Taylor, Jewish Women, pp. 335-36). Philo equated 
that rock with the celestial being named Wisdom (Life of Moses 1.181-86, 188-90. 210-
11, 255-57; On Flight and Finding 183-87), which was then considered the feminine 
dimension of God (Taylor, Jewish Women, p. 336; e.g. 'Miriam is thus associated with 
an everlasting well which will never dry up', a legend ripe to be paralleled with the 
mothering of Jesus). Note that 'Miriam's Well' also had symbolic parallels to 'Jacob's 
Well', and Mark symbolically equated the empty tomb of Jesus with the latter (Carrier. 
'Spiritual Body', in Empty Tomb [ed. Price and Lowder], pp. 161, 163): thus his birth 
and his death were in Mark associated with life-giving wells. 
138. For example, see Dale Miller and Patricia Miller, The Gospel of Mark as 
Midrash on Earlier Jewish and New Testament Literature (Lewiston, NY: E. Mellen 
Press, 1990). 

10. The Gospels 
457 
anything but fiction) and a brief but vague resurrection-appearance narra­
tive (to fix what he may have regarded as the unsatisfying ending of Mark), 
which most historians also doubt is historical, and then revised the mate­
rial in between, often altering or expanding on the stories Mark invented, 
occasionally inventing new ones and adding large sections attributing new 
teachings to Jesus.139 
The traditional view is that this added material (at least where it also 
appears in Luke-Acts) Matthew derived from another lost Gospel or 
source, commonly designated Q. But that theory does not have as much 
to commend it as is claimed (see Chapter 7, §4 and §6 below), and should 
honestly be regarded as too speculative to generate reliable hypotheses. Of 
course, even if this theory were in some sense correct, that source could be 
fabricated every bit as much as Mark and Matthew were. So its existence 
does not support historicity any more than the existence of Mark does. And 
as we saw, Mark does not support historicity at all; although neither does 
the content of Mark argue against historicity-it just has no determinate 
value in that regard. Neither does Matthew. Neither would Q. 
The material Matthew adds (or draws from some other Gospel) could be 
wholly fabricated (by Matthew or the author of his source Gospel), or could 
be newly invented historical contexts into which were set what were origi­
nally mystically revealed sayings or teachings (such as pronounced by the 
celestial Jesus to the first apostles) or the borrowing of material once writ­
ten by or about someone else and attributed to Jesus (as in the Eugnostos 
case we saw earlier). 140 His sources in any such case would then be moot. 
And since we've already seen this is how Mark composed his Gospel, and 
139. It has been suggested that Matthew actually derived his nativity and 
appearance narratives from the lost cover leaf of Mark (which in codex form would 
have contained the first and last pages of his Gospel). However, the fact that Mark as 
we have it perfectly mirrors its beginning with its ending (as noted in the previous 
section) argues against this, as it would be a remarkable coincidence if the lost material 
corresponded so perfectly at both ends to a Markan inclusio. But possibly there were 
earlier nativity and appearance narratives that Mark has excluded and that Matthew 
embellishes. In any case, to explore the possibility of a lost beginning and ending 
of Mark see N. Clayton Croy, The Mutilation of Mark 's Gospel (Nashville, TN: 
Abingdon, 2003); C.H. Roberts, 'The Codex', Proceedings of the British Academy 40 
(1954), pp. 168-204 (190); and C.H. Roberts, 'The Ancient Book and the Ending of St. 
Mark', Journal of Theological Studies 40 (1939), pp. 253-57. See also James McGrath, 
The Burial of Jesus: History and Faith (Charleston, SC: BookSurge, 2008), pp. 1 11-12; 
supporting which is the curious agreement between Gos. Pet. 14.50-60 and John 21, 
which might indicate an original ending of Mark (redacted in Lk. 5). 
140. For example, Clare Rothschild, Baptist Traditions and Q (Tt!bingen: Mohr 
Siebeck, 2005) argues that a lot of the material attributed to Jesus in 'Q' (including 
Ϣ 
core elements of the nativity) actually originated in documents about John the Baptist 
and were simply transferred to Jesus by Matthew, just as happened to Eugnostus in the 

458 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
Matthew simply copies Mark's Gospel and tweaks it and adds to it, we 
have no good reason to trust he has any more reliable source material than 
Mark. That Matthew clearly and routinely and even egregiously fabricates 
narratives (such as his nativity, or his absurd redaction of Mark's empty­
tomb narrative) only further raises the prior probability that that is just 
what he did everywhere else in his Gospel. 141 We have no particular reason 
to believe otherwise. 
It is generally agreed that Matthew rewrote Mark not only to fix and 
improve on it but also to reverse its too-Gentile-friendly argument. Unlike 
Mark, which favors a brand of Christianity developed by Paul (in which 
Torah observance was optional), the author of Matthew comes from a 
community of Torah-observant Christians and is keen to have Jesus insist 
that we continue to make all converts remain or become practicing Jews 
(complete with circumcision and obedience to dietary and other laws, only 
minus the temple cult rituals).142 Many of Matthew's rewrites reflect this 
specific need to rewrite Mark. But that Matthew had to do this by rewriting 
Wisdom of Jesus Christ (see §I). That thesis might be neither probable nor disprovable; 
but it would have to be ruled out before it could be dismissed. 
141 . That Matthew's redaction of the empty-tomb narrative is fiction I have 
demonstrated elsewhere (see Carrier, 'Why the Resurrection Is Unbelievable', in 
Christian Delusion [ed. Loftus], pp. 293-96, and Proving History, pp. 199-204, with 
Carrier, 'Plausibility of Theft', in Empty Tomb [ed. Price and Lowder], pp. 358-68; to 
which should be added the fact that Mt. 27.SI-53 derives the additions of an earthquake 
and risen hoard of holy men in part from the Septuagint text of Zech. 14.5, 'when 
you flee from the earthquake . . .  Jehovah my God shall come, and all the holy ones 
with him'). That the nativity is fiction is evident enough from how clearly it conforms 
to the Rank-Raglan hero type (Element 48); it is clearly based extensively on the 
expanded Nativity Narrative of Moses in the first-century Biblical Antiquities (see D.J. 
Harrington, 'Pseudo-Philo', in Dictionary of New Testament Background [ed. Craig 
Evans and Stanley PorterР Downers Grove, IL: lnterVarsity Press, 2000]: 864-68, cf. 
p. 866; the section treating Moses is Bib. Ant. 9); see also Charles Talbert, 'Miraculous 
Conceptions and Births in Mediterranean Antiquity', in Historical Jesus in Context 
(ed. Levine. Allison and Crossan), pp. 79-86; Calum Carmichael, 'The Passover 
Haggadah', in Historical Jesus in Context (ed. Levine, Allison and Crossan), pp. 343-
56 (344-45); and in the same volume, George Nickelsburg, 'First and Second Enoch: A 
Cry against Oppression and the Promise of Deliverance', in Historical Jesus in Context 
(ed. Levine, Allison and Crossan), pp. 87-109 (92-93). Its incorporation of a genealogy 
does not lend any more credence to it: genealogies of mythic heroes were a mainstay of 
ancient mythography (see earlier note); and the NT even reports that many genealogies 
were being invented for Jesus and that all should be rejected as fabrications (I Tim. 1.4 
and Tit. 3.9)С e.g. the Biblical Antiquities added several genealogies for biblical heroes 
like Sampson that are similarly bogus (Harrington, 'Pseudo-PhiJo', p. 866). 
142. See David Sim, The Gospel of Matthew and Christian Judaism: The History 
and Social Setting of the Matthean Community (Edinburgh: T. & T. Clark, 1998). e.g., 
pp. 123-39. 

10. The Gospels 
459 
Mark (rather than simply producing his own Gospel) proves that Matthew 
had no actual independent sources from which to argue his position. He 
thus had to fabricate what he needed-but not by composing his own text, 
but instead simply constructing a better Mark. Maybe for that purpose he 
had some prior documents to work from, but since we don't have those, we 
cannot know if he did, or how Matthew has transformed them. As we shall 
see (in §6), Luke clearly knew and employed Matthew along with Mark 
as his primary sources, so separating what came from Matthew and what 
came from 'Q' can only be an exercise in speculation (as is even the exist­
ence ofQ). 
Matthew often 'improves' Mark by supposedly fixing Mark's omissions 
or mistakes in geography, scripture or Jewish lore and law.143 But sometimes 
Matthew's 'fixes' even make the story more ridiculous. For example, in the 
story of Jesus riding triumphantly into Jerusalem, Mark has him sit on a 
young donkey that he had his disciples fetch for him (Mk 1 1.1-10). Matthew 
changes the story so the disciples instead fetch two donkeys, not only the 
young donkey of Mark but also his mother, then Jesus rides into Jerusalem 
on both donkeys at the same time (a logistical impossibility: Mt. 21.1-9).144 
Why? Because Matthew wanted the story to better match a 'literal' reading 
of the OT prophecy that had originally inspired the detail in Mark; indeed, 
Matthew also 'improves' on Mark by actually quoting the scripture that 
Mark clearly also used as his source material but didn't actually mention: 
Zech. 9.9, 'Behold! Your king is coming to you! He is righteous and brings 
salvation. He is meek, and riding on a donkey [and] on a baby donkey'.145 
As Marcus Borg observes, these 'changes indicate a human author at 
work who felt free to modify the story he received'. And so we have to ask, 
'are the two animals in Matthew's story history remembered? Obviously 
not. Clearly, the second animal is there not because Matthew had better 
historical information on the basis of which to correct Mark', but because 
Matthew wanted to make the connection to Zechariah explicit and more 
literal, hence 'it is an instance of prophecy historicized-that is, a passage 
from the Hebrew Bible regarded as prophecy is generating details in the 
143. See, e.g .. Chapter 8 (§7). 
144. See the analysis of Marcus Borg, 'The Historical Study of .Jesus and Christian 
Origins', in Jesus at 2000 (ed. Marcus Borg; Boulder. CO: Westview Press, 1997), pp. 
121-48. Note that (as Borg observes) a child donkey would not even stand at the same 
height or run at the same pace as its mother, so the picture Matthew paints of Jesus 
straddling both is quite absurd. 
145. The Septuagint text reads epi hupozugion kai polon neon, lit. 'on an ass and 
a new foal' (meaning a very young baby donkey); the original Hebrew reads 'on an 
ass, on a young male ass, the child of a [female] ass'. which was probably originally a 
poetic idiom for just 'young male donkey', but if taken literally would seem to say 'on 
a donkey and a baby donkey', and that is how Matthew took it. 

460 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
gospel narrative' that are then 'reported as an event in the gospel', which 
'is not only a characteristic of Matthew but also a factor shaping the devel­
opment of the gospel tradition and the New Testament as a whole'.146 But 
that means the whole Gospel could be 'prophecy historicized', not 'history 
remembered'. It's already clear Matthew does not care about getting the 
historical facts right. He does not compare sources or investigate what hap­
pened. He just makes up what he wants or feels is needed. 
Matthew also completely destroys Mark's own beautiful literary struc­
ture by moving things around (e.g. the Sabbath controversies are bumped 
from Mk 2.23-3.6 into Matthew 1 2), and adding or subtracting details, and 
packing in long sections of new teaching, such as the Sermon on the Mount 
(Matthew 5-7) and the Olive Mount parables (Matthew 24-25). But Mat­
thew recycles the pieces of Mark to create large-scale structure of his own, 
as discovered and demonstrated by Dale Allison and others.147 For exam­
ple, after Matthew introduces Jesus' ministry, he adds a five-fold division 
of sections by repeating five times the complete phrase 'and it happened 
when Jesus had finished' (kai egeneto hote etelesen ho /esous: 7.28-29; 
1 1.1; 13.53; 19.1; and 26.1).148 Each phrase ends an extended insertion of 
discourse that Matthew has added to the teachings i n  Mark (though in some 
cases incorporating and transforming Markan teachings). 
As Matthew's aim was to greatly expand the teachings in Mark and make 
them more strict and more firmly Jewish, his overall structure reflects this 
intent, using those five repeated catch-phrases to alternate between narra­
tive and discourse: 
1-4 
Narrative {INTRODUCTION: of birth, baptism and ministry) 
5-7 
Discourse ('Jesus' demands upon Israel') 
ending with the key phrase at 7.28-29 
8-9 
Narrative ('Jesus' deeds' within and for Israel) 
10 
Discourse (teaching the disciples how to do the same) 
ending with the key phrase at 11.1 
146. Borg, 'Historical Study', p. 135. 
147. Dale Allison, Studies in Matthew: Interpretation Past and Present (Grand 
Rapids, MI: Baker Academic, 2005), pp. 135-56. For surveys of other structural studies 
on Matthew (which include many more examples than I shall discuss) see Marianne 
Meye Thompson, 'The Structure of Matthew: An Examination of Two Approaches', 
Studia bib/ica et theo/ogica 12 ( 1982), pp. 195-238; and David Bauer, The Structure of 
Matthew 's Gospel: A Study in Literary Design (Sheffield: Almond Press, 1988). 
148. In addition to Allison (previous note) see also the analysis in Craig Evans, 
'"The Book of the Genesis of Jesus Christ": The Purpose of Matthew in Light of 
the Incipit', in Biblical Interpretation in Early Christian Gospels, Vol. 2: Gospel of 
Matthew (ed. Thomas Hatina; London: T. & T. Clark, 2008). pp. 61-72. 

1 1-12 
13 
14-17 
18 
19-22 
23-25 
26-28 
10. The Gospels 
Narrative ('Israel's negative response') 
Discourse ('explanation of Israel's negative response') 
ending with the key phrase at 13.53 
Narrative ('founding of the church') 
Discourse ('teaching for the church') 
ending with the key phrase at 19.1 
Narrative (entering Judea and ending in Jerusalem) 
Discourse (on 'the future judgment and salvation') 
ending with the key phrase at 26.1 
Narrative (coNCLUSION: betrayal, crucifixion, resurrection) 
461 
There are shorter teachings interspersed in the narrative sections, but 
unlike Mark, Matthew inserts these five special 'long discourse' sections 
(called the five 'Great Discourses') in this overall structure.149 
But like Mark, Matthew has also crafted his Gospel into a large chiastic 
superstructure: 150 
A 
Genealogy (summary of past times: 1.1-17) 
B 
Mary [1], an angel arrives, and the birth of Jesus (1.18-25) 
C 
Gifts of wealth at birth (magi), attempt to thwart birth (Herod) 
(2.1-12) 
D 
Flight to Egypt, woe to the children, Jeremiah laments destruction 
of the first temple (2.13-21) 
E 
Judea avoided (2.22-23) 
F 
Baptism of Jesus (3.1-8.23) 
G 
Crossing the sea [twice] (8.24-1 1.1) 
H 
John's ministry (11.2-19) 
I 
Rejection of Jesus (11.20-24) 
J 
Secrets revealed through Jesus (11.25-30) 
K 
Attack of Pharisees (12.1-13) 
L 
Pharisees determine to kill God's Servant (12.14-21) 
K 
Condemnation of Pharisees (12.22-45) 
J 
Secrets revealed through Jesus (13.1-52) 
I 
Rejection of Jesus (13.53-58) 
149. Quotations are from AJJison, Studies in Matthew, pp. 141-42; Allison groups 
chap. 23 with the narrative unit of chaps. 19-22, but I think it goes with the discourse 
unit of chaps. 24-25, and thus my table reflects that assumption. Apart from that, 
the order is Allison's. For Allison's alternative placement of chap. 23 he refers to the 
analysis in Meye Thompson, •The Structure of Matthew'. 
150. This structural outline (and the subunits to follow) is adapted and expanded 
from James Jordan, 'Toward a Chiastic Understanding of the Gospel according to 
Matthew', Biblical Horizons Newsletter 94 and 9!5 (April and May, 1 997). 

462 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
H 
John's death (14.1-12) 
G 
Crossing the sea [twice] (14.13-16.12) 
F 
Transfiguration of Jesus (16.13-18.35) 
E 
Judea entered (19.1-20.34) 
D 
March to Jerusalem, woe to the children (24. 19), Jesus predicts 
destruction of the second temple (21.1-27.56; cf. 23-25) 
C 
Gift of wealth at death (Joseph of Arimathea), attempt to thwart 
resurrection (Sanhedrin and the guards) (27.57-66) 
B 
Mary [2], an angel arrives, and the resurrection of Jesus (28.1-15) 
A 
Commission (summary of future times: 28.16-20) 
Within this overall structure are several sub-structures that certify the 
larger one. For example, the F segments (the baptism of Jesus, paired with 
the transfiguration of Jesus) parallel each other in a common structure: 
Baptism Ministry 
Transfiguration Ministry 
Preliminary setting: John's witness 
Preliminary setting: Peter's witness 
(3.1-12) 
( 16. 13-28) 
Revelation of the Son (3. 13-17) 
Revelation of the Son ( 1 7. 1 -8: with 
a reference back to John: 17.9-13) 
Satan resisted ( 4. 1-11) 
Satan cast out ( 1 7. 14-23) 
Removal to Capernaum ( 4. 12-16) 
Removal to Capernaum ( 1 7  .24-27) 
Recruiting of disciples ( 4.17-22) and 
beginning of ministry ( 4.23-25) 
Sermon on the Mount (5.1-8. 1, in 
part about forgiveness) 
Sermon on discipleship,faith. recruiting. 
Faith and worship produce heaJing 
and forgiveness ( 18) 
(8.2-1 7) 
What disciples must give up 
(8.1 8-23) 
Table 8. Baptism Narrative Paralleled 
in Transfiguration Narrative 
Matthew has also recrafted the crucifixion narrative specifically to be more 
elegantly chiastic than Mark's version: 

10. The Gospels 
A Passover and crucifixion (26.1-2) 
B 
Priests plot (26.3-5) 
C 
Jesus anointed for burial (26.6-13) 
D 
Preparations: Judas enlisted (26.14-16); Passover prepared 
(26.17-19) 
E 
Judas exposed (26.20-25) 
F 
Lord's Supper [a mock death] inaugurated (26.26-28) 
G 
Nazirite vow made (26.29) 
H 
Removal to Olivet (26.30) 
I 
Abandonment (26.31-35) 
J 
Jesus asks God not to be released (26.36-46) 
K 
Judas betrays Jesus (26.47-56) 
L 
Trial before Sanhedrin (26.57-68) 
M 
Denial of Peter (26.69-75) 
463 
L 
Sanhedrin delivers Jesus to Pilate (27.1-2) 
K 
Judas hangs himself(27.3-10) 
J 
Pilate does not release Jesus (27.1 1-26) 
I 
Mockery (27.27-31) 
H 
Removal to Golgotha (27.32-33) 
G 
Nazirite vow fulfilled (27.34) 
F 
Crucifixion (27.35-44) and death (27.45-50) 
E 
Temple exposed (27.51) 
D 
Results: Jesus' lordship confirmed (27.52-54); the least are 
faithful (27.55-56) 
C 
Jesus buried (27.57-61) 
B 
Priests plot (27.62-66) 
A Passover and resurrection (28.1-1 0) 
It was necessary for Christ's sacrifice that he be completely abandoned by 
men (so his humbling would be thorough: Phil. 2.7-8), and so Peter's denial 
is essential to the story. Accordingly, Matthew makes it the centerpiece of 
his Passover chiasmus. 
Of course much of this could be 'explained away' as Matthew just 
creatively rearranging 'facts' to fit his literary design. Although even that 
entails accepting that Matthew doesn't really care all that much about the 
facts-getting history straight is not his concern; creating an elegantly 
symbolic literary structure is. But it is very unlikely that history worked 
out so well to begin with, generating all the right 'facts' that Matthew could 
arrange in this way. He certainly had to invent some things to get it all to fit. 
And a lot, of course, he got from Mark, and we already saw how the status 
ofthose details as 'facts' is already in question, since many ofthem (if not 
aU of them) were invented by Mark to suit his aims. Thus, Matthew could 

464 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
take invented details from Mark, and add invented details of his own, to 
produce a completely invented Gospel narrative, whose literary design has 
completely eclipsed any interest in historical truth. 
For example, Matthew adds the otherwise pointless and inexplicable 
detail at the beginning that ҅they shall call his name Immanuel, which 
means, "God is with us'" (Mt. 1.23), even though that never happens 
(Jesus is not named Immanuel and never so called anywhere in the ensuing 
story). This weird detail only makes sense because Matthew concludes his 
story by having Jesus declare, ҆I am with you' (28.20). Matthew has thus 
consciously invented material to parallel the end with the beginning and 
thereby communicate a fundamental concept of the Christian gospel. But 
as we've seen, this is just a small piece of a large and complex structure 
organizing Matthew's entire GospeL 
None of this can really have been orally transmitted. This kind of 
detailed and intricate structure Uust like Mark's) can only really be crafted, 
preserved and understood using a written text. Yet Matthew and Mark 
rearranged everything to create their own unique texts. This means there 
was no transmitted structure or order; these authors are inventing it. And 
since they are also freely inventing details to suit their structures, why 
should we believe they are not freely inventing all of it? Even if some of it 
comes from elsewhere, what elements are those? We cannot tell. And even 
if we could tel l, what reason have we to believe that that wasn't invented 
too-by earlier authors? None, really. Maybe some of it goes back to the 
original revelations from the Lord received by apostles such as Paul or 
Peter. But even if that's the case, those are still not from a historical Jesus, 
but a dreamed or hallucinated Jesus. The complex and deliberate structures 
of Mark and Matthew show that there was no narrative into which these 
sayings were placed, because they each freely created one of their own, and 
inserted and rearranged sayings in different ways to suit their own aims 
(as we'll see Luke did, too). As we saw in 1 Clement (in Chapter 8, §5) and 
will see in Paul (in the next chapter), it would seem that for a long time 
there were no narratives associated with Jesus (other than what the apos­
tles hallucinated, or pretended to-or what they reconstructed from ancient 
scriptures). So there is no case to be made that any of the sayings of Jesus 
that might go back to the beginning of the cult don't come from revelations 
rather than a Galilean ministry. Because the Galilean ministry was clearly 
a Gospel add-on (originated by Mark, to pair his Palestinian adventure with 
a 'sea' of sufficient size to use as his preferred metaphor). 
The same goes for the 'deeds'. The miracle stories and other events all 
have obvious symbolic and mythical roles to play in Matthew's story, just 
as in Mark's. There is no reason to believe any of those things happened, 
either. In every case, if it's not already an implausible event used to illus-

1 0. The Gospels 
465 
trate a literary and theological point (like, as we saw earlier, the clearing of 
the temple}, it could easily just be a model for missionaries to follow or cite 
in their ongoing work (like the healings and exorcisms). In fact, most of the 
sections Matthew adds or changes deal with missionary activity and how 
to run the church or how to live in it, and thus reflect interests that would 
have primarily arisen and been worked out after Jesus had died, and thus 
are most likely later creations and not original to Jesus. 
Even the narrative sections have al legorical functions in the same direc-
tion. For example, in the fourth narrative unit, Dale Allison observes: 
That the ecclesia is indeed the most important subject of [Matthew 
14-17] appears not only from the ever-increasing focus upon the disci­
ples as opposed to the crowds but also from Peter's being the rock upon 
which the church is built, because it is precisely in this section that Peter 
comes to the fore. Among the insertions into the Markan material are 
these four passages: 
14.28-33 
Peter walks on the water 
IS. IS 
Peter asks a question 
16.13·20 
Jesus blesses Peter 
17.24-27 
Peter asks a question and answers a question 
Peter's emerging preeminence [thus} correlates with the emergence of 
the church. 
Matthew 18. the next major discourse, confirms this. The chapter 
addresses issues specific to the ecclesia, to the Christian community. 
How often should one forgive a brother (18.21-22)? What is the procedure 
for excommunicating someone ( 18.15-20)? These and other ecclesiastical 
questions merit attention precisely at this point because Jesus has just 
established his church.151 
It is clear that Matthew has integrated all this into Mark's narrative; Mark 
seems unaware of any of it. It thus would appear to reflect needs and inter҇ 
ests subsequent to Mark or developed during his generation in a commu· 
nity separate from his. Which means none of these things happened, and 
Jesus never said any of it. 
Illustrating every point made so far is the Sermon on the Mount, which 
is a well-crafted literary work that cannot have come from some illiterate 
Galilean. In fact, we know it originated in Greek, not Hebrew or Aramaic, 
because it relies on the Septuagint text of the Bible for all its features and 
allusions. It relies extensively on the Greek text of Deuteronomy and Levit­
icus especially, and in key places on other texts.152 For example, the section 
151. Allison, Studies in Matthew, p. 140. 
152. Thomas Brodie, 'An Alternative Q/Logia Hypothesis: Deuteronomy-Based, 
Qumranlike, Verifiable', in The Sayings Source Q and the Historical Jesus (ed. A. 
Lindemann; Leuven: Leuven University Press. 2001). pp. 729-43. 

466 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
on turning the other cheek and other aspects of legal pacifism (Mt. 5.38-42) 
has been redacted from the Greek text of I sa. 50.6-9.153 These are not the 
words of Jesus. This famous sermon as a whole also has a complex literary 
structure that can only have come from a writer, not an everyday speaker. 
And again, it reflects needs and interests that would have arisen after the 
apostles began preaching the faith and organizing communities and strug­
gling to keep them in the fold. So it's un1ikely to come from Jesus. 
Once again, Allison has thoroughly demonstrated many of these points. 154 
In particular, he reveals its extensive and brilliant use of triadic structure: 
A. Introduction (crowds ascend the mountain: 4.23-5. 1) 
B. The Nine (3 x 3) Blessings (5.3-12) 
C. Summary Statement (salt and light: 5.13-16) 
[D. The Three Pillars Begun] 
[1] How to Obey the Torah (5.17-48) 
General Principles (5.17-20) 
[a] I. Murder (5.21-26) 
2. Adultery (5.27-30) 
3. Divorce (5.31-32) 
[b] 1. Oaths (5.33-37) 
2. Vengeance (5.38-42) 
3. Loving Your Enemies (6.43-48) 
[2] How to Pay Cult to God (6.1-18) 
General Principle (6.1) 
1. Almsgiving (6.2-4) 
2. Prayer (6.5-15) 
[1] Not as the Hypocrites or the Gentiles (6.5-8) 
[centra/focus] 
[2] The Lord's Prayer (6.9-13) 
[everything thus centers on this] 
I. Introduction and Address (6.9a-b) 
[exact center] 
2. Three (3) 'Thou' Petitions (6.9c-10) 
[God is thus at the 
3. Three (3) 'We' Petitions (6.1 1-13) 
[3] On Forgiveness (6.14-15) 
3. Fasting (6.16-18) 
[3] How to Deal with Society (6.19-7.12) 
center] 
[a] General Principles (store up treasure in heaven: 6.19-21) 
I. Eye Parable (6.22-23) 
2. Value Parable (God before mammon: 6.24) 
3. Encouragement (6.25-34) 
[b] General Principles (do not judge: 7.1-2) 
153. Allison, Studies in Matthew, pp. 219-22. 
154. Allison, Studies in Matthew, pp. 173-216, along with Dale Allison, 'The 
Structure of the Sermon on the Mount', Journal of Biblical Literature 106 (1987), pp. 
423-45; and Dale Allison, 'Q's New Exodus and the Historical Jesus', in The Sayings 
Source Q (ed. Lindemann), pp. 395-428. 

1 0. The Gospels 
1. Eye Parable (7.3-5) 
2. Value Parable (pearls before swine: 7.6) 
3. Encouragement (7.7-1 1) 
[D. The Three Pillars Concluded] 
C. Summary Statement (the Golden Rule: 7.12) 
B. The Three (3) Warnings (7.13-27) 
A. Conclusion (crowds descend the mountain: 7.28-8.1) 
467 
This is simply far too elegant, too intricately organized, and too obviously 
literary to be a casual speech. It is, from beginning to end, a written prod­
uct, carefully thought out and painstakingly arranged. It's far more likely 
that Matthew wrote this himself than that he just extracted it from some 
other text-a text for some reason no one bothered to preserve. 
Allison also shows that this Sermon on the Mount fits neatly within 
known rabbinical debates over how Jews could still fulfill the Torah after 
the destruction of the temple cult; the general consensus among the rabbis 
was that good deeds now fulfill that role (especially acts oflove and mercy). 
That is essentially also what the Sermon on the Mount says.155 Its solution is 
even more complete, by creating a new kind of worship (in simple, humble 
almsgiving, prayer, forgiveness and fasting). As Allison points out: 
Simeon the Just, a rabbi of the Maccabean period . . .  is purported to 
have declared: 'Upon three things the world standeth: upon Torah, upon 
Temple service and upon gemi/ut hasidim' ([Mishnah] Abot 1.2). The 
two words left untranslated are usually rendered, 'deeds of loving-kind­
ness' . . . .  (So] Simeon declares that three things matter most: the Jaw, 
the cult, and social or religious acts of benevolence. Now . . .  the parallel 
with the Sermon on the Mount is remarkable. Matthew 5-7 addresses 
three fundamental issues, the law, the cult, and social behavior; that is, it 
addresses the three things upon which, according to Simeon the Just, the 
world stands, and it addresses them in precisely the same order. [Thus it 
seems Matthew] arranged his discourse so as to create a Christian inter­
pretation of the three classical pi1lars.'5n 
Notably, it does this by simply assuming the temple cult doesn't exist. At 
no point does Jesus in this very long speech explain what to do about the 
temple sacrifice code in Leviticus or Deuteronomy, for example-even to 
reject it or avoid it or that it isn't needed. To the contrary, the speech simply 
assumes that's no longer an issue. In other words, it assumes the temple cult 
has already been destroyed. Which means this speech was written after 70 
CE. It does not come from Jesus. 
155. Allison, 'Structure ofthe Sermon', pp. 442-45. 
1 56. Allison, 'Structure ofthe Sermon', p. 443. 

468 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
In addition to all that, Matthew adds details that make Jesus more into 
a new Moses.157 Scholars have long known, for example, that Matthew's 
Nativity Narrative is a rewrite of the nativity of Moses (drawing not only 
on Exodus but on its first-century expansion in the anonymous Biblical 
Antiquities), and that Matthew has Jesus deliver his new commandments 
on a mountain (in the Sermon on the Mount) to emulate Moses deliver­
ing the commandments of God from Mount Sinai. And in Matthew, Jesus' 
Great Commission from a mountain is designed to echo in several respects 
Moses' Great Commission before he ascended a mountain to die (Deut. 
31-34).158 And the five Great Discourses (delivered by Jesus) are obviously 
meant to replace the five books of the Pentateuch (which were bel ieved to 
be written by Moses). 159 
There are many instances like this of Matthew's literary-historical rev i­
sionism. For example, Matthew expands Jesus' forty-day sojourn in the 
wilderness and temptation by the Devil (an event already in Mark evoking 
the forty years of temptation in the wilderness of Moses and the Jews) into 
an elaborate parable in which Jesus undergoes the exact same temptations 
as the Jews-but, unlike them, Jesus conveniently passes every test with 
flying colors, thus reversing the bad mojo their previous failure had cursed 
the Jews with. Accordingly: 
Israel was in the wilderness for forty years [Dt. 8.2]; Jesus is there for 
forty days [Mt. 4.2]. Israel was tempted by hunger and fed upon manna 
[Ex. 16.2-8]; the hungry Jesus [Mt. 4.2] is tempted to turn stones into 
bread [Mt. 4.3-4]. Israel was tempted to put God to the test [Ex. 17.1-3]: 
the same thing happens to Jesus [Mt. 4.6-7]. And just as Israel was lured 
into idolatry [Ex. 32], so the devil confronts Jesus with the same tempta­
tion to worship something other than Israel's God [Satan himself: Mt. 
4.8-10].160 
157. Extensively discussed in Dale Allison, The New Moses: A Matthean Typology 
(Minneapolis, MN: Fortress Press, 1993). See also Paul Hughes, 'Moses' Birth Story: 
A Biblical Matrix for Prophetic Messianism', in Eschatology, Messianism, and the 
Dead Sea Scrolls (ed. Craig Evans and Peter Flint; Grand Rapids, Ml: William B. 
Eerdmans, 1997), pp. 10-22. 
158. See Kenton Sparks, 'Gospel as Conquest: Mosaic Typology in Matt 28:16-20'. 
Catholic Biblical Quarterly 68 (2006), pp. 651-63. 
1 59. This does not mean each discourse corresponds to a specific book in the 
Torah. Many have tried to force such interpretations, but it is clear no one-to-one 
correspondence was intended. These five new discourses are simply the new Torah. 
reinterpreting the old. 
160. Allison, 'Q's New Exodus', pp. 395-96 (see also 404). Matthew also has Jesus 
become more like Moses here by having Jesus 'fast for forty days and forty nights' (Mt. 
4.2) just as Moses did on Mount Sinai (Exod. 34.28). 

10. The Gospels 
469 
Matthew has thus invented a narrative, and put words in Jesus' mouth, 
all to create a literarily symbolic episode, involving an obviously fictional 
event, out of what began as a brief line, also invented by Mark.161 This is not 
history. This is mythmaking. 
There is in fact no way to discern what if anything Matthew has added 
to Mark has any historical basis, or even a source (and its having a source 
would still in no way establish that it's historical; after all, Mark is one of 
Matthew's sources, and Mark's tales are not historical). The same conclu­
sion must therefore follow for Matthew that we reached for Mark: nothing 
in it is any less likely on myth than on historicity. It therefore has no evi­
dential value. The burden is therefore on anyone who would insist there is 
anything in Matthew that is any more authentic than what's in Mark. As it 
is, I deem Matthew to be just as fictional, showing a wanton readi ness to 
fabricate, and no signs of any interest in historical truth or any ability to 
discern it, or any indication he has employed any sources more reliable than 
Mark. Matthew's value for determining historicity is therefore nil. Even if 
any historical facts about Jesus are in it, we have no way to identify them. 
6. The Mythology of Luke 
Luke is the first Gospel to overtly represent itself as history. Matthew 
comes close by suggesting that the things he says happened fulfilled scrip­
ture, but that could still have lent itself to an allegorical reading. Luke, 
however, writes like a historian, adding superficial historical details as 
local color and attempting to date some events and even including an albeit­
vague preface explaining what he is doing by writing. Luke also creates a 
resurrection narrative that is engineered to answer skeptics of Matthew's 
account, a tactic that 'requires' his story to be true. Although on this count 
we know it is a fabrication. No prior Gospel, nor Paul, had ever heard of 
the peculiar and convenient details that suddenly make their first appear­
ance in Luke, such as that Peter double-checked the women's claim that 
the tomb was empty and handled the burial shroud (Lk. 24.1 1-12), or that 
Jesus showed the disciples his wounds and made sure the disciples touched 
him and fed him food to prove he wasn't a ghost (Lk. 24.36-43), or that the 
161. That Mark (or his lost source) invented the temptation (Mk 1.13) is obvious 
from how it has Jesus reverse the role of the Jews in the Exodus before beginning 
his own spiritual conquest of the Holy Land: while they wander forty years in the 
wilderness before crossing the Jordan to enter the Holy Land, Jesus departs the Holy 
Land to cross the Jordan and spend forty days in that same wilderness; and as the Jews 
there endured trials and receive miraculous aid, so does Jesus. Another indication is 
the fact that devils and angels don't exist, much less tempt and minister to people in 
deserts. That happens only in myths. 

470 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
resurrected Jesus actually hung out and partied with dozens of his follow­
ers for over a month before flying up into the clouds of heaven (Acts 1.2-9).162 
So we know Luke is making a lot of things up in order to deliberately 
sell a fake history, for purposes of winning an argument against doubt­
ers (both within and without Christianity, as his opponents included, for 
example, Christians with very different ideas about the nature of the res­
urrection). This already warns us not to trust anything he has added to 
the story found in Mark and Matthew: we should assume it is, like those, 
a convenient fabrication invented for some purpose, unless we can find 
sufficient evidence to be1ieve otherwise. In accord with this conclusion, 
despite his pretense at being a historian, preface and a11, Luke's methods 
are demonstrably nonhistorical: he is not doing research, weighing facts, 
checking them against independent sources, and writing down what he 
thinks most likely happened. He is simply producing an expanded and 
redacted literary hybrid of a couple of previous religious novels (Mat­
thew and Mark), each itself even more obviously constructed according 
to literary conventions rather than historiographical (as l've shown in the 
preceding sections of this chapter). Unlike other historians of even his 
own era, Luke never names his sources or explains why we are to trust 
them (or why he did), or how he chose what to include or exclude. In fact, 
Luke does not even declare any critical method at all, but rather insists 
he slavishly followed what was handed on to him-yet another claim we 
know to be a lie (since we have two of his sources and can confirm he 
freely altered them to suit his own agenda).163 
As I mentioned in Chapter 7 (§4) the more popular view is that Luke 
did not redact Matthew but in fact used a (hypothetical) source in common 
with Matthew, now called Q. It is time for this theory to be discarded. It has 
no merit. It is no longer reasonably deniable that Luke knew and used Mat­
thew as a source directly, and if he did that, there is no basis left for sup­
posing there was any other source involved. The evidence for Luke's exten­
sive reliance on (and purposeful redaction of) Matthew is documented in 
the works of Good acre, Goulder and MacDonald.164 It should already have 
been clear that Luke deliberately transformed Matthew's Nativity and Pas-
162. That these are all fabrications is obvious from the fact that Paul would 
have known and made use of them were they known claims of his time (see Carrier, 
'Spiritual Body', in Empty Tomb [ed. Price and Lowder], pp. 120-26, 1 35, 190-93), and 
Mark and Matthew would likewise have known of them and could hardly have failed 
to mention any of them. 
163. I thoroughly discuss the meaning of Luke's preface and compare him to other 
historians of his own time in how he constructs and argues for his version of events in 
Carrier, Not the Impossible Faith, pp. 161-218. 
164. See relevant notes in Chapter 7, §4. 

I 0. The Gospels 
471 
sion Narratives and Matthew's account of Judas's suicide, sometimes even 
repeating Matthew's Greek verbatim or borrowing heavily from it. 
For example, Mk 14.65a reads, 'and some began to spit on him, and to 
cover his face, and to buffet him, and to say to him, "Prophesy!"', which 
Mt. 26.67-68 expanded to 'then did they spit in his face and buffet him: and 
some smote him with the palms of their hands, saying, "Prophesy unto us, 
Christ! Who is he that struck thee?"' Luke 22.63·64 essentially combines 
Mark with Matthew, repeating the concluding text of Matthew verbatim: 
'and the men that held Jesus mocked him, and beat him; and they blind­
folded him, and asked him, saying, "Prophesy! Who is he that struck 
thee?"' Except for dropping 'unto us, Christ' to economize the passage, the 
Greek of Luke here is identical to that of Matthew (legontes, Propheteuson 
[hemin Chris/e)! Tis estin ho paisas se?). Luke then combines this with 
Mark's detail that they covered his eyes, which Matthew omitted (or rather 
altered, having them spit 'in his face' rather than cover 'his face'). Luke 
thus combined Mark with Matthew, recast mostly but not entirely in his 
own words, to make what he deemed to be a better passage. 165 That Luke 
knows the details Matthew added, and even borrows his exact words, is 
sufficient proof that Luke knew and used Matthew. Note that on no theory 
of Q is this element of the Passion Narrative a part of Q, so this cannot be 
explained by appealing to Q. Luke is using Matthew. And if here, so every­
where. There is simply no need of an imaginary Q. 
There are likewise many places where Matthew redacts a passage in 
Mark, and Luke follows the Greek of Matthew rather than Mark, showing 
that Luke knew Matthew and occasionally preferred Matthew's version to 
Mark's original. 166 Another example: Luke redacts Matthew's Sermon on 
the Mount, conspicuously 'reversing' it into a Sermon on a Plain. How do 
we know Luke is redacting Matthew? Because both speeches are followed 
by the otherwise-unrelated narrative of Jesus heal ing the centurion's son 
in Capernaum. The latter occurs in Mt. 8.5-13, the Sermon having ended 
at 8.1 (only a brief healing of a leper lies in between). Luke 6.17-49 redacts 
that Sermon, and then immediately in Lk. 7.1-10 the centurion's servant is 
healed in Capernaum, the story in many respects identical, even down to 
specific words and phrases (such as revising the centurion's 'son' into the 
centurion's 'boy', which some translators render as 'servant', but in context 
this is obviously just a different way of saying 'son'). Likewise, Mt. 4.23-
5.1 precedes the Sermon with a general account of Jesus healing many, and 
Lk. 6.17-19 does the same thing. These parallels are very improbable unless 
Luke was following and redacting Matthew's narrative-unless Q was an 
16S. MacDonald, Two Shipwrecked Gospels, pp. 76-87. 
166. See, e.g., R.T. Simpson. 'The Major Agreements of Matthew and Luke against 
Mark', New Testament Studies 1 2 (1965-1966), pp. 283-84. 

472 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
actual complete narrative Gospel with the same exact sequence of events, 
written in Greek. But as we've already seen, there is no need of that over­
complicated hypothesis, and plenty of evidence against it. 
That Luke redacted Matthew does not mean he always simply copied 
or paraphrased him. He creatively redacts Matthew, and often deliberately 
reverses his themes, as when Luke converts the Sermon on the Mount into 
a Sermon on a Plain. More conspicuously, when Luke rewrites Matthew's 
Nativity Narrative, he conspicuously reverses almost all of it's key ele­
ments: whereas Matthew depicts Jesus' family as essentially outlaws, flee­
ing Bethlehem and Herod's rule and cowering abroad for over a decade, 
Luke describes Jesus' family as obeying the law and going to Bethlehem 
in accordance with their emperor's command (Lk. 2.1-4); and while Mat­
thew has Herod searching to kill the baby Jesus, Luke has Jesus being 
presented in the Jerusalem temple to repeated public pronouncements of 
his messianic status (by the prophets Anna and Simeon), an event that 
would not have escaped Herod's supposedly murderous eye (or memory), 
nor that of his agents and informants; and then Luke has Jesus' family liv­
ing dutifully in their home at Nazareth the whole while (the period when 
Matthew has them hiding in Egypt), bringing Jesus back to Jerusalem for 
the Passover every single year without fail, in full compliance with Leviti­
cal law (Lk. 2.41 ). 
Luke thus deliberately changed the reason Jesus was 'born in Bethle­
hem' but 'came from Nazareth\ an aim first attempted in Matthew. It's an 
unlikely coincidence that Luke would attempt the same harmonization, 
unless he knew Matthew had started this Bethlehem tradition. There are 
many other unlikely coincidences-for example, in the way angels send 
essentially the same messages to Joseph and Mary in both accounts, and 
the fact that both accounts involve an annunciation, a virgin birth, and 
a genealogy (disp1aced in Luke but still there; disp1acement of elements 
like this being a common procedure in Luke). Even the annunciations, 
for example, are too similar to be chance coincidence: both Matthew and 
Luke have an angel report that Mary wi11 conceive and bear a son, they 
shall name him Jesus, and he shall be something great-the same three­
part announcement, in the same order, with the middle phrase identically 
the same (kai kaleseis to onoma autou iesoun, 'and you will call his name 
Jesus'), Luke having copied Matthew at that point verbatim (compare Mt. 
1.21 with Lk. 1.31-32). H is changes (such as that the angel reports to Mary 
rather than Joseph, or phrasing the same things in different words, or 
expanding what the angel says) do not disguise the fact that Luke is clearly 
redacting Matthew. He is not coming up with these things independently 
of him. 
Many of the differences are also just as improbable if they weren't inten­
tional. For Luke, the family of Jesus is always obedient to religious and 

I 0. The Gospels 
473 
secular law and is never in danger and never hiding in a foreign country.167 
Similarly, Luke erased the involvement of foreigners (the Persian 'magi') 
and replaced them with (evidently Jewish) shepherds, and replaced Mat­
thew's magical star (informing the magi) with an angelic light from heaven 
(informing the shepherds: Lk. 2.8-18). Luke clearly did not approve of Mat­
thew's version of events, and thus changed them all around to 'fix' the story 
as Luke preferred.168 There are many other respects in which it is clear Luke 
is borrowing ideas and material from Matthew, and deliberately chang­
ing others, in effect to 'correct' or 'fix' Matthew, as many scholars have 
shown.169 In much the same way Luke borrowed and deliberately changed 
Matthew's tale of the death of Judas (inserting it into Acts 1.16-20), and 
replaced Matthew's genealogy with Luke's own. Luke cannot have been 
getting these things from Q, which did not include nativities, genealogies, 
or Judas's suicide. Luke must have been redacting Matthew, even if freely 
(as redactions often were-it is fallacious to assume a redaction must be 
litera] or verbatim or line-by-line). 
Many scholars have argued that Luke aimed to unify the two major 
divided factions of Christianity, the Gentile and Torah-observant sects, and 
his account (across Luke and Acts) revises history to tell a tale of continu­
ous harmony between them, while simultaneously portraying Jesus and 
Christianity as a valid, devout, law-abiding philosophical sect respected by 
the Romans and opposed only by a faction of the hard-lined Jewish elite 
(see again Chapter 9). Luke is thus in effect a 'rebuttal' to Matthew, just 
as Matthew was an attempted ȡrebuttal' to Mark. Mark promoted Gentile 
Christianity; Matthew promoted Torah-observant Christianity; Luke pro­
motes a harmonious church, one that is a good and faithful evolution of 
Judaism into what is essentially (but carefully never said to be) the Gentile 
church.170 
167. That this role of obedience to the law explains many ofthe changes Luke made 
to Matthew's nativity story, as well as many other elements throughout Luke-Acts, is 
well argued by Robert Smith, 'Caesar's Decree (Luke 2.1-2): Puzzle or Key?', Currents 
in Theology and Mission 7 (December 1980), pp. 343-51. 
168. His changes then created a historical contradiction between the Gospels: 
Luke's story entails Jesus was born in 6 CE; Matthew's entails Jesus was born before 4 
BCE. See my summary in Richard Carrier, 'Luke vs. Matthew on the Year of Christ's 
Birth', Hitler Homer Bible Christ, pp. 213-30. 
169. P.J. Thompson, •The Infancy Gospels of St. Matthew and St. Luke Compared', 
Studia evanglica 1 (1959), pp. 217-22; Michael Goulder, Luke: A New Paradigm, Vol. I 
(Sheffield: JSOT, 1989), pp. 205-69. 
170. Seethe examples and analysis in Robert Price, The Pre-Nicene New Testament: 
Fifty-Four Formative Texts (Salt Lake City, UT: Signature Books, 2006), pp. 481-99; 

474 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
So Luke not only borrows and redacts extensively from Matthew and 
Mark, who we've seen are not exactly reliable sources of history, but he 
also makes changes and additions that conveniently suit his own pur­
poses and that were conspicuously unknown to Matthew or Mark, sug­
gesti ng that his aims were also more literary than historically reliable. 
Indeed, Luke's additions are often not plausible and look self-evidently 
like embellishments of the kind one would expect for a work like this­
pretending at being history but reinforcing the author's rhetorical aims 
by creating better stories, better models or better evidence in support of 
them. Luke's evident use of Josephus (noted in Chapter 7, §4) only rein­
forces this conclusion; likewise his use of Homer as a model for some of 
his stories. 171 But clinching it is how much of the material that Luke adds 
to Mark and Matthew is demonstrably fabricated by essentially rewriting 
the Elijah-Elisha narrative in 1 and 2 Kings, just as we saw Mark had 
done (in §4), casting Jesus in the central role and updating the details to 
fit the conditions of Roman Palestine.172 
This last point has been extensively demonstrated by Thomas Brodie (as 
I noted in Chapter 9). The parallels are sometimes direct and sometimes 
inversions (where Luke takes what is in the Kings narrative and reverses it 
or key elements of it) and are too numerous and distinct to be chance coin­
cidence. Luke (or his source for this material, if he did not invent it himself) 
is thus creating a literary myth by reworking the OT, not by recording his­
torical facts passed down to him by witnesses. Examples include: 
and Gregory Sterling, Historiography and Self-Definition: Josephos, Luke-Acts. and 
Apologetic Historiography (New York: E.J. Brill, 1992). 
171 . For example, Dennis MacDonald, Does the New Testament Imitate Homer.? 
Four Cases from the Acts of the Apostles (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. 
2003); and Dennis MacDonald, 'The Ending of Luke and the Ending of the Odyssey'. in 
For a Later Generation: The Transformation ofTradition in Israel, Early Judaism. and 
Early Christianity (ed. Randal Argall, Beverly Bow and Rodney Werline: Harrisburg. 
PA: Trinity Press International, 2000), pp. 161-68. 
172. Extensively demonstrated in Thomas Brodie, Proto-Luke: The Oldest Gospel 
Account: A Christ-Centered Synthesis of Old Testament History Modeled Especially on 
the Elijah-Elisha Narrative: Introduction, Text. and Old Testament Model (Limerick. 
Ireland: Dominican Biblical Institute, 2006), and summarized and updated in Brodie. 
Beyond the Quest, pp. 51-76; and Brodie, Birthing ofthe New Testament. pp. 146-88. 
282-446. But he is not the only one to have noticed and argued this: see Raymond 
Brown, 'Jesus and Elijah', Perspective 12 (1971), pp. 85-104; and Craig Evans, 'Luke's 
Use of the Elijah/Elisha Narratives and the Ethic of Election', Journal of Biblical 
Literature 106 (1987), pp. 75-83. 

' 
} .. 
10. The Gospels 
Lk. 1 .5-1 7  reverses 1 Kgs 1 6.29-17.1 .173 
Lk. 7.1-10 transforms 1 Kgs 17.1-6}74 
Lk. 7.1 1-17 transforms 1 Kgs 17.17-24.175 
Lk. 7. 18-25 transfonns I Kgs 22.176 
Lk. 7.36-50 plays on 2 Kgs 4.1 -37.177 
Lk. 8.1-3 plays on 1 Kgs 18.178 
Lk. 9.51-56 transfonns 2 Kgs l .  t-2.6.179 
Lk. 9.57-62 transforms 1 Kgs 1 9.1so 
Lk. 10.1-20 transforms 2 Kgs 2.16-3.27.181 
Lk. 22-24 adapts elements from 2 Kgs 2.7-15.182 
475 
To illustrate what I mean, I'll focus on two examples from this list which 
typify the rest. 
In Lk. 7.1 t-17 we learn of a new story not found in Matthew or Mark, the 
healing of the Widow's Son at Nain. This story is already intrinsically dubi­
ous. The elements of drama and the miraculous in it are typical of fictions, 
not realities, and this kind of story was a trope at the time-essentially 
the same tale is told of the medical doctor Asclepiades by Apuleius a few 
decades later, and similar tales were referenced by Pliny the Elder before 
Luke even put pen to paper. 183 It has the air of an urban legend, a standard 
tale retold a dozen times of different people in different places, but always 
coincidentally the same improbable story that we conveniently never hear 
of from an eyewitness. But what further demonstrates this particular ver­
sion of the tale is a fiction is that it is just a rewrite of the same legend told 
of Elijah in the first book of Kings. Here are the parallels, all of which Luke 
literarily modifies, merges, or improves in various ways: 
173. Brodie, Birthing of the New Testament, pp. 284-89. 
174. Brodie, Birthing of the New Testament, pp. 291-301. 
17.5. Brodie, Birthing ofthe New Testament, pp. 302-11. 
176. Brodie, Birthing of the New Testament, pp. 312-24. 
177. Brodie, Birthing of the New Testament, pp. 325-38. 
178. Brodie, Birthing of the New Testament, pp. 339-4.5. 
179. Brodie, Birthing of the New Testament, pp. 347-58. 
180. Brodie, Birthing of the New Testament, pp. 3.59-64. 
181. Brodie, Birthing ofthe New Testament, pp. 365-76. 
182. Brodie, Birthing of the New Testament, pp. 377-82. 
183. Apuleius, Florida 19; Pliny the Elder, Natural History 7.176-179 and 26.15. 
See also Philostratus, Life of Apollonius of '/jlana 4.45; Aulus Cornelius Celsus, On 
Medicine 2.6.1S; Diogenes Laertius, Lives of Eminent Philosophers 8.67-8. 

476 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
It happened after this . . .  ( 17. 17) 
At the gate of Sarepta. Elijah meets a 
widow (17.10). 
Another widow's son was dead ( 17.17). 
That widow expresses a sense of her 
unworthiness on account of sin ( 17. 18 ). 
It happened afterwards . . .  ( 7. 11 ) 
At the gate ofNain, Jesus meets a widow 
(7.1 1-12). 
This widow's son was dead (7.12). 
A centurion (whose 'boy' Jesus had just 
saved from death) had just expressed a 
sense of his unworthiness on account of 
sin (7.6). 
Elijah compassionately bears her son up 
'The Lord' feels compassion for her and 
the stairs and asks 'the Lord' why he was touches her son's bier, and the bearers 
allowed to die ( 1 7. 13-1 4). 
stand still (7. 13-14). 
Elijah prays to the Lord for the son's 
return to life ( 1 7.21 ). 
The boy comes to life and cries out 
(1 7.22). 
'And he gave him to his mother', kai 
edoken auton te mպtri autou ( 1 7.23). 
'The Lord' commands the boy to rise 
(7. 14). 
'And he who was dead sat up and began 
to speak' (7 .1 5). 
'And he gave him to his mother', kai 
edoken aut on te mltri autou ( 1 7. 1 5). 
The widow recognizes Elijah is a man of The people recognize Jesus as a great 
God and that 'the word' he speaks is the 
prophet of God and 'the word' of this 
truth (J 7.24). 
truth spreads everywhere (7. 16-1 7). 
Table 9. Brodie Thesis for Luke 7 Adapting 1 Kings 1 7  
The giveaway is Luke's use of the exact same clause, verbatim, as the Sep­
tuagint text of the Elijah story, 'and he gave him to his mother', every word 
identical and in identical order. This fact, combined with all the other obvi­
ous parallels, indicates that literary borrowing has occurred. The links are 
simply too improbable otherwise. 
Even some of the differences are too coincidental to be probable as any­
thing but a deliberate transformation of the emulated tale. There are many 
respects, in fact, in which Luke sees himself as 'improving' on the origi­
nal story. For example, Thomas Brodie observes that with several of the 
changes Luke makes 'there is a fundamental change' in the message the 
story conveys: 
Whereas in the Old Testament text the sense of sinfulness leads to a 
kind of despair, to an idea that (the man of) God is a bothersome visitor 
who comes to punish with death, in the New Testament text the sense 

I 0. The Gospels 
of unworthiness is combined with a profound faith-with an immense 
reverence for the [Lord] . . .  [and] also with a clear conviction that despite 
one's unworthiness the [Lord] comes to heal, to save from the encroach­
ment of death. In other words, the Old Testament picture of God visiting 
the sin of a mother on her child is replaced by the New Testament image 
of the life-giving [Lord] as looking not on one's unworthiness but on 
one's faith.1114 
477 
Likewise, while the OT version suggests 'that the Lord is the author of 
evil, the one who brings harm to the widow (1 Kgs 17.20)', the NT version 
suggests God is the one who comforts and heals instead (Lk. 7.7).'85 And 
so on.186 
In the case of Lk. 9.51-56 emulating 2 Kgs 1.1-2.6 there are even more 
direct verbatim and near-verbatim lifts of Greek from the Septuagint as 
well as numerous parallels and deliberate changes and reversals. And both 
accounts have the same five-part structure: a plan of death and assumption 
into heaven (2 Kgs 1.1-6; 1.15-17; and 2.1; Lk. 9.51), a sending of messengers 
(2 Kgs 1 .2; Lk. 9.52), the messengers being turned back (2 Kgs 1 .3-6; Lk. 
9.53), mention of cal ling down fire from heaven upon those who rejected 
them (2 Kgs 1 .7-14; Lk. 9.54-55), then journeying from one place to another 
(2 Kgs 2.2-6; Lk. 9.56). Luke is thus expanding on Matthew and Mark by 
adding made-up stories rewritten from the OT. As Brodie explains: 
Such similarities are striking. particularly when they occur in essential1y 
the same order. What is doubly striking, however, is that three of the five 
sections [the first, second. and fourth] contain elements that are unique 
in the entire (Greek) Bible. Nowhere else save in these passages does one 
find a picture of someone setting of/for assumption, a combining of 'and 
he sent messengers' with [the Greek word] poreuomai. and an image of 
calling downjirefrom heaven. In addition to these unique similarities are 
other significant similarities of detail, some of them intriguing. 
The differences are great. In comparison with Luke, the Old Testa­
ment text is long and repetitive. Furthermore, it involves not just one 
main character but two: King Ahaziah and Elijah. And it sets the image 
of departing for assumption not at the beginning of the death-related epi­
sode, but after its conclusion. However, though the differences are indeed 
great, they are not jumbled or incoherent, at odds with one another and 
with all known literary procedures. On the contrary, they correspond 
to steady patterns of adaptation such as modernization, abbreviation, 
fusion. and emulation-patterns which are common both in general imi-
184. Brodie, Birthing of the New Testament, pp. 302-304; table adapted from p. 302. 
185. Brodie, Birthing of the New Testament, p. 304. 
186. Brodie's analysis goes on to highlight the obvious rationale behind the 
many changes Luke makes. but the differences are partly the point (they are made 
on purpose) and partly just a common effect of creativity (a talented author does not 
slavishly duplicate but transforms and varies a literary tale). 

478 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
tation and in other instances where Luke imitates the Old Testament. 
Since these differences may be explained through the procedures of imi­
tation, they may not be invoked to prove that imitation was not used.187 
Not only did Luke lift story ideas from the Kings narratives. He also emu­
lated several other OT books.188 Luke's nativity story for John the Baptist 
is in part based on the nativity of Samson told in the Biblical Antiquities, 
an anonymous first-century elaboration on the Bible.189 Mary's song (now 
often caJJed the Magnificat) in Lk. 1.46-55 is based on Hannah's song in 
1 Sam. 2.1-10.190 Even the names he selects have rather convenient literary 
meanings: Elizabeth means ȢGod's promise', and Zechariah means 'God 
has remembered'. Thus, it is rather conspicuous that Mary's song of praise 
references both God's remembering and promising ('He has helped his 
servant Israel, in remembrance of his mercy, according to the promise he 
made to our ancestors', Lk. 1.54-55). Which is the fabrication? The song, or 
the names of John's parents? Probably both. 
Luke's literary structure is more ad hoc than Matthew's or Mark's, 
because he is attempting to interweave so many components. Many schol­
ars have found evidence of literary structures in Luke that are occasion­
ally interrupted with additional material, suggesting what may be the 
haphazard expansion of sources (or an earlier version of Luke's text) that 
were even more obviously fictional.191 For example, Brodie has identified 
a conspicuous structure in the material borrowing from the Elijah-Elisha 
narrative, making an eight-part diptych, which could be proof that Luke 
187. Brodie, Birthing of the New Testament, pp. 357-58 (summarizing his complete 
analysis on pp. 251-58). On the Bayesian confirmation that Brodie's reasoning is 
correct, see Carrier, Proving History, pp. 192-204. 
188. For many examples of possible OT sources for material in Luke-Acts see 
the footnotes throughout Price, Pre-Nicene New Testament, pp. 499-562 (some of 
the suggested links here are more speculative, but others are more definite). More 
importantly see Brodie, Birthing of the New Testament, pp. 448-537; and Thomas 
Brodie, 'Re-Opening the Quest for Proto-Luke: The Systematic Use of Judges 6-12 
in Luke 16:1-18:8', Journal of Higher Criticism 2 (Spring 1995), pp. 68-101. Other 
examples include the fact that Luke portrays Jesus as the new temple by echoing 
elements of the birth of the temple in 1 Chronicles 21-22 in elements of the birth of 
Jesus in Lk. 2.1-20 (including the role of an imperial decree). 
189. See D.J. Harrington, 'Pseudo-Philo', in Dictionary of New Testament 
Background (ed. Craig Evans and Stanley Porter; Downers Grove, IL: lnterVarsity 
Press, 2000), pp. 864-68 (866). The Samson story is told in Bib. Ant. 42. 
190. John Court (ed.), New Testament Writers and the Old Testament: An 
Introduction (London: SPCK, 2002), pp. 21-22. 
191. See Craig Blomberg, 'Midrash, Chiasmus, and the Outline of Luke's Central 
Section', in Gospel Perspectives (ed. R.T. France and David Wenham; Sheffield: 
JSOT Press, 1983), III, pp. 217-61; Barbara Shellard, New Light on Luke: Its Purpose, 
Sources, and Literary Context (New York: Sheffield Academic, 2002), pp. 85-J47. 

10. The Gospels 
479 
used a source, a previous Gospel unrelated to the others that was fabri­
cated to make Jesus into the new Elijah.192 For example, the first section of 
eight consists of Jesus' infancy narrative, which has the two-part (diptych) 
structure of 'annunciations-births'. Yet even that structure is composed 
of further diptychs: John's birth is foretold (Lk. 1.5-25), then John is born 
(Lk. 1.57-80); Jesus' birth is foretold (Lk. 1.26-38), then Jesus is born (Lk. 
2.1-14). Then another diptych of 'visits' is formed with numerous parallel 
elements: Mary is visited by an angel, then journeys to Judah, meeting 
Elizabeth, an old woman who breaks into prophecy (Lk. 1.39-56; cf. 1.7), 
and then circumcises and names her own child (John) on the eighth day 
after his birth (Lk. 1.57-59), a sequence repeated again when shepherds 
are visited by an angel and visit Mary, then Mary journeys to Jerusalem, 
meeting Anna, an old woman who breaks into prophecy (Lk. 2.15-52), and 
Mary circumcises and names her own child (Jesus) on the eighth day after 
his birth. Each of the three diptychs is increasingly more complex than 
the last, but all fit within the overarching diptych of 'annunciation, birth' 
(ending with circumcision), but doubled (one sequence for John, one for 
Jesus, with the third diptych establ ishing the theme of Jesus' supremacy to 
John). Throughout, the continuous theme is obedience to the law. Similar 
structures track all of Luke's lifts from the Kings narratives, such that if 
one extracted those from the rest of Luke-Acts one has a very elegant and 
consistent repeating diptych structure. Brodie argues that that would be 
unlikely unless these tales origina11y existed together, and Luke only broke 
them apart to intersperse them into his narrative. 193 
192. This thesis is elaborately argued, with intriguing tables and analysis, in 
Thomas Brodie, Proto-Luke: The First Edition of Luke-Acts: A Christ-Centered 
Synthesis of Septuagintal Historiography Modeled Especially on the Elijah-Elisha 
Narrative and Matthew's Logia: A Foundational Arrangement of Gospel Sayings 
Deuteronomy-Based, Qumranlike (an Alternative to Q) (Limerick, Ireland: Dominican 
Biblical Centre, 2002), pp. S-1; and Brodie, Proto-Luke: The Oldest Gospel Account, 
pp. 146-65. That either Luke or a previous redaction of Luke appears to have also 
modeled its narrative in sequential agreement with Deuteronomy in order to create, in 
effect, a 'Christian Deuteronomy', see Brodie, Birthing; MacDonald, Two Shipwrecked 
Gospels; and C.F. Evans, 'The Central Section of St. Luke's Gospel', in Studies in 
the Gospels: Essays in Memory of R.H. Lightfoot (ed. D.E. Nineham; Oxford: Basil 
Blackwell, 1955), pp. 37-53. 
193. Luke often creates dispersed diptychs (see Chapter 9, §I, for example), so that 
might have simply been the way he composed. I am thus not here affirming Brodie's 
theory is correct, only that it is worth examining; although even if incorrect, his same 
evidence confirms Luke's compositional style as one of creating paired events even 
if not adjacent to each other. Which is evidence of fiction either way. Note that this 
same observation applies to all other studies (per earlier note) that find structure in 
Luke but are then uncertain because it is interrupted: interrupting structure appears to 
be particularly Lukan, which means either the structure comes from better-organized 

480 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
But even if we accede to that hypothesis, it then only confirms the same 
point: that Luke is not writing history, but myth. He or his sources are 
simply making everything up. His tales are told for their meaning and rhe­
torical effect, not because they were researched or came from witnesses. 
I'll close with one more example of this, the Emmaus narrative of Luke 
24, a resurrection-appearance tale found in no other Gospel and thus dis­
tinctive of Luke's style of invention. Here Luke tells the story of a man 
named Cleopas (along with an unnamed friend) who journeys by road from 
Jerusalem to nearby Emmaus, after they learn the corpse of Jesus has van­
ished. On the way, the resurrected Jesus appears to them (albeit in disguise) 
and explains the secrets of the kingdom (which happens to be a spiritual 
kingdom, not a physical one), then vanishes, and Cleopas recognizes who 
he was and goes on to proclaim what he was told. Conveniently, the name 
Cleopas means 'tell all', in other words, 'proclaim'. 194 The story thus has 
several telltale markers of myth: a name invented or selected for its mean­
ing to the tale rather than any historical truth; an absurdly ahistorical narra­
tive (never heard of from any earlier source) of a disguised divine visitor; an 
unreal istic conversation with a complete stranger; a miraculous vanishing; 
and an all-too-convenient rhetorical purpose for all of it. This is the Vanish­
ing Hitchhiker legend-ancient Roman style. 195 
mythic texts that Luke has added to, or Luke constructed his own organization and 
then edited-in more materiaL Fiction, either way. That Luke appears to have been 
multiply redacted may have significance here (see note in Chapter 7, §4); like John (see 
§7), our text of Luke may have undergone numerous editorial stages. 
194. Kleopas is occasionally claimed to be a contraction of Kleopatros (which 
means 'renowned father'), but there is no need of that hypothesis when the apposite 
meaning is clear: the deliberate combination of kleo (glory, fame, report) and pas (aiL 
everything). There are few precedents for such a name, as a contraction or otherwise. It 
thus appears to be Luke's invention. In extant literature, Kleopas as a name is mentioned 
only later by the second-century grammarian Aelius Herodianus (Definitions 64): but 
he does not identify it as a contraction of Kleopatros. and he doesn't identify anyone as 
actually having that name (sometimes hypothetical examples appear in Aelius). Aelius 
says that 'every phrase deriving from the syllable kle is written with a bare epsilon. e.g .. 
kleos, as in doxa [i.e. glory/opinion/reputation], and kleiz6, in speaking, as in doxazo 
[i.e. to extol], and the following proper names derive from the same word: Kleon. 
Kleonikos, Kleopatros, and Kleopas'. Thus, we should infer that Kle6n, from Kleo + 
os, means Glorious, Reputable, Extolled; Kleonikos, from Kleo + nikos, means Famous 
Victory; Kleopatros • Kleo + patros, means Renowned Father; and so Kleopas, from 
Kleo +pas - All Glorious, Everywhere Famed, Proclaiming All. 
195. The 'vanishing hitchhiker' is a commonly replicated ghost story found in 
many forms across several centuries: for a good summary see the Wikipedia entry 
for 'Vanishing hitchhiker' (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vanishing_hitchhiker) and 
for scholarly analysis see Jan Harold Brunvand, The Vanishing Hitchhiker: American 
Urban Legends and their Meanings (New York: Norton, 1981). For an analogous oft· 

10. The Gospels 
481 
As it happens, the founding myth of Rome, then famously known 
everywhere and celebrated in annual passion plays, is almost the exact 
same story: a man named Proculus (archaic Latin for 'Proclaimer' or 'He 
Who Proclaims', thus not only again a fictional name designed for the story 
but essentially the same name as Cleopas) journeys by road from nearby 
Alba Longa to Rome, after the Roman people learn the corpse of Romulus 
has vanished; and on the way, the resurrected Romulus appears to him (not 
in disguise but this time in glorious form) and explains the secrets of the 
kingdom (literally: how to conquer and rule the world), then ascends into 
heaven (as Luke eventually has Jesus do as well), and Proculus recognizes 
who he was and goes on to proclaim what he was told. I've already demon­
strated the extent to which the Gospels have borrowed this Romulan resur­
rection tale for Jesus (see Chapter 4, §1, and Element 47). Mark had already 
fashioned his passion account in light of it, and Matthew embellished it 
even more in accord. So it is not unexpected that Luke would take the same 
model further. 
And indeed he has. Not only in the ways I have already pointed out 
in previous chapters but also here, in the tale of Cleopas on the road to 
Emmaus. If we accept the identification of Luke's intended Emmaus as the 
Ammaus mentioned by Josephus as a town nearby Jerusalem, then in both 
Luke's narrative and the Rom ulan tale the Proclaimers are journeyingfrom 
a city on a mountain to a city in a valley, roughly the same direction (east to 
west, like the sun), and roughly the same distance (seven to twelve miles). 196 
replicated ghost story (the revenant lover), which illustrates the general features of such 
legends (such as the presence of details designed to make the story sound authentic; 
you simply cannot claim the Emmaus story 'rings true' until you notice how all ghost 
legends do), see William Hansen, Phlegon of Tralles' Book of Marvels (Exeter, UK: 
University of Exeter Press, 1996), pp. 68-85 (where he shows the story was later recast 
in early modern Ireland, complete with all the same details aimed at authenticity, only 
altered to sound authentic to its new setting, thus illustrating how legends actually get 
composed). 
196. Josephus, Jewish War 7.217, which says soldiers were stationed in the 'region' 
(chorion) called Ammaous. thirty stadiums from Jerusalem (roughly three and a half 
miles); Luke says the town was sixty stadiums distant (roughly seven miles: Luke 
24.13), although some manuscripts add he/eaton, giving a result of 160 stadiums 
(roughly eighteen miles, e.g., in Codex Sinaiticus); cf. Swanson, New Testament 
Greek Manuscripts . . .  Luke, p. 409. It seems more likely, but not certain, that the 
hekaton was accidentally dropped than that it was added; in fact it could have been 
removed deliberately, since a 60-stadium distance could be crossed twice in a day 
(as Luke's story requires) while a 160-stadium distance could not-in fact that would 
take nearly three days in all-so a scribe who realized the story was impossible may 
have removed the 100 stadiums to restore its plausibility. An original reading of 160 
stadiums would be almost exactly the actual distance from Jerusalem to Nicopolis, 
later identified as Emmaus (and even later known as Imwas), although some scholars 

482 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
But the changes are the point. While Proculus receives his gospel on the 
road to Rome, Cleopas receives his gospel on the roadfrom Jerusalem: so 
while the old story suggests 'all roads lead to Rome', the new story sug­
gests all roads lead from Jerusalem. While Romulus appears in awesome 
glory, befitting the awesome glory of Rome's dominion and the very visible 
empire he promises, Jesus appears in disguise, hidden, just as the kingdom 
he promises is hidden, and which, like Jesus, becomes visible (and thus 
knowable) only in the communion of believers. Luke has thus transvalued 
the Romans' founding myth: unlike the Romans, their resurrected hero 
promises a hidden spiritual kingdom originating from Jerusalem on high. 
And just as the glorious visage of Romulus is what confirmed to Proculus 
that what he said was true, so it is the powerful word of the gospel that con­
firms to Cleopas that what Jesus said was true. Luke thus rewrites the story 
to communicate how Christian values differ from mainstream Roman val­
ues.197 This is a classic hallmark of myth making (as we saw in the example 
from Homer and Virgil in §2). 
Evidence that Luke fabricated the Emmaus narrative also lies not only 
in how thoroughly it is written in Lucan style (its vocabulary and syn-
argue this may have been why the he kat on was added. Whatever its distance, Luke may 
have intended it to be the same Ammaus mentioned as situated in Judea in l Mace. 
3.39-40 (although Luke might not have written Emmaus at all, as I'll soon discuss). 
On identifying the location of Emmaus see Hershel Shanks, 'Emmaus: Where Christ 
Appeared', Biblical Archaeology Review 38 (March/April 2008), pp. 41-51, 80; E.H. 
Scheffler, 'Emmaus-A Historical Perspective', Neotestamentica 23 (1989), pp. 251-
67; J.H. Landau, 'Two Inscribed Tombstones', Atiqot I I  (1976), pp. 89-91; Joachim 
Wanke, Die Emmauserzahlung: Eine redaktionsgeschicht/iche Untersuchung zu Lk 
24, 13-35 (Leipzig: St.-Benno-Verlag, 1973); F. Spadafora, 'Emmaus: Critica testuale e 
archeologia'. Rivista biblica italiana I (October-December 1953), pp. 255-68. See also 
Steve Reece. 'Seven Stades to Emmaus·, New Testament Studies 48 (January 2002), pp. 
262-66, for even more obscure variant readings in this passage. 
197. For more on the Romulus parallels and reversals in the Emmaus narrative 
see Arnold Ehrhardt, 'The Disciples of Emmaus', New Testament Studies 10 (January 
1964), pp. 182·201 (194-95); and Francis Gera1d Downing, 'A Rival to Romulus', in 
Doing Things with Words, pp. 133-51. An intriguing thesis has also been advanced 
that Luke has further crafted this narrative to reverse the Garden of Eden story (Adam 
and Eve, whose eating shared food inaugurates death and sin, is corrected by Cleopas 
and his companion, whose eating shared food signals an end to death and sin-Jesus 
replacing the Serpent and thus setting right what the Serpent had set wrong): see Jean 
Magne, 'The Emmaus Disciples and Adam and Eve in Paradise', in From Christianity 
to Gnosis and from Gnosis to Christianity: An Itinerary through the Texts to and 
from the Tree of Paradise (Atlanta, GA: Scholars Press, 1993), pp. 41-51. This thesis 
is bolstered by N.T. Wright, The Resurrection of the Son ofGod (Minneapolis, MN: 
Fortress Press, 2003), pp. 652; and Frederic Manns, 'Quelques variantes du Codex 
Bezae de Luc 24', Liber annuus 55 (2005), pp. 131-39. 

10. The Gospels 
483 
tax is entirely his) but also in how well it is crafted to echo Luke's open­
ing chapters (Luke 1-2), which means Luke must have created it for that 
purpose.198 N.T. Wright identifies parallels throughout, but most strongly 
in the concluding tale of Lk. 2.40؊50 (echoed throughout Lk. 24.13-33), 
where we have 'another Passover, another Jerusalem visit' and another 
'couple beginning their journey away from Jerusalem', either discovering 
or mistakenly believing 'that Jesus was not with them'. Both couples are 
distraught at having lost Jesus, and both quickly return to Jerusalem when 
the pivotal plot point is discovered (when Cleopas and his companion dis­
cover Jesus is present; or when Mary and Joseph discover Jesus is absent). 
Mary and Joseph find Jesus 'after three days' (Lk. 2.46), and so do Cleopas 
and his companion (Lk. 24.21). ln both accounts Jesus asks what they are 
doing ('why are you looking for me?' I 'what are you talking about?'), and 
explains scripture to those present, and says 'it is necessary' for him to 
have done what he did ('it's necessary [dei] for me to be among the things 
of my father' I 'it's necessary [dei] for the messiah to suffer these things'}.199 
Both stories also feature the theme of people not understanding what has 
happened, and both feature a disappearance of Jesus. And both, despite 
being far too remarkable for any previous Gospel to omit, suddenly appear 
for the first time in Luke. It's obvious he invented them both, deliberately 
in imitation of each other. 
Notably in accord with this, at Lk. 24.13, the often-intriguing Codex 
Bezae has this whole event occur not at Emmaus (spelled Ammaous in 
other treatises of the period) but at Oulammaous.200 This is a name that 
appears uniquely in the Septuagint narrative of Jacob (Israel) searching for 
a wife (Gen. 28.19), immediately after which he meets and marries Rachel 
(Gen. 29}, who would give birth to the last two tribes of Israel (Joseph 
and Benjamin). Oulammaous is there identified as the original name of 
the village of Luz, which Jacob here renames Bethel ('God's House', even 
translated as such, oikos theou, in the Septuagint), which is metaphorically 
also where Jesus is 'found' after 'three days' in the matching couple-on-a­
road-from-Jerusalem story in Luke, that being the most obvious meaning 
of his cryptic remark at Lk. 2.49, and considering where he was (2.46)­
and so most Bibles today indeed translate him as saying he had to be in 
his father's 'house'. Oulammaous is the more difficult reading here (being 
198. Lucan style: Scheffler, 'Emmaus', pp. 257-58. Emulation of Luke 1-2: N.T. 
Wright, Resurrection, pp. 649-51. 
199. Wright, Resurrection. p. 649. 
200. I owe this observation to Sylvie Chabert d'Hyeres (see http://codexbezae. 
perso.sfr.fr/comm/oulam_en.html), although it has also been noted and discussed in 
Manns, 'Quelques variantes du Codex Bezae de Luc 24', who in turn cites several other 
scholars who have analyzed this variant and its significance. 

484 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
otherwise so strange) and cannot have been accidental-since the name is 
uniquely found in the Septuagint, and in a story with meaningful paral­
lels, and thus can only have arrived in this Lucan verse deliberately. 201 It is 
therefore arguably the original. 202 
The significance of this allusion to Gen. 28.19 is that this is the account 
of Jacob's ladder (Gen. 28.10-22), which links all this to the epiphany of the 
shepherds in Luke, where also a hoard of angels descend and ascend (Lk. 
2.8-15); it is also where Jacob blesses the stone he slept on, declaring 'this 
stone, which I have set up for a pi1lar, shall be God's House' (Gen. 28.22, 
hence the name Bethel). Bethel is also where Jacob is (again) renamed 
Israel and promised he'd father an eternal kingdom (thus beginning the first 
vision of Israel as a nation).203 It is also where 'Israel' was traveling from 
when Rachel died in labor bearing Benjamin, completing the last of the 
twelve tribes of Israel-just outside Bethlehem, exactly where Jesus would 
be born (Gen. 35; Jacob had first met Rachel on his way from Bethel, and 
she later dies on her way from Bethel). And from Jerusalem, Bethel hap­
pens to be on the road to Galilee.204 Since Luke (24.13, 29, 33) assumes it is 
possible to get there in a day (and back again by midnight), this would then 
have to be the very same town where Jesus' parents stopped and returned 
to find the missing Jesus (Lk. 2.44؋45), further linking these two stories 
(beyond all the other parallels I noted earlier). So Jesus' parents stop at 
'God's House' and return to find Jesus in God's House; and both couples 
201 . The reading of Oulammaous in the Septuagint is attested in Justin Martyr, 
Dialogue with Trypho 58.13 and corroborated in Eusebius, Onomasticon 40.21; modern 
editions of the Septuagint read Oulammlouz, an evident corruption or variant. Codex 
Alexandrinus reads Ou/ammaus. 
202. It is common in textual criticism to conclude that the lectio difici/ior 
('the more difficult reading') is more likely original, since accidents are unlikely to 
produce it and there are fewer motives to make such a change deliberately. Scribes 
not understanding it must have assumed the 'Oul-' was a corruption and dropped it to 
leave Ammaous (a far-better-known town, in both Josephus and 1 Maccabees), which 
then was modified or corrupted into Emmaous. Note that in Codex Bezae (which dates 
c. 400 CE), the parallel Latin text reads Ulammaus, so the reading of Oulammaous in 
the Greek was even acknowledged by the translator. 
203. There are two contradictory stories of how, when and where Jacob was 
renamed Israel: Gen. 32.28 (where he famously wrestles an angel) and here, Gen. 35.10; 
the two verses are almost identically worded, yet attached to completely different 
stories that show no awareness of each other. 
204. If Oulammaous was the original reading, then the shared direction of travel 
with the Romulus narrative is north, not west (the road to Rome runs northwest from 
Alba Longa, so either could have been intended), since Bethel is north of Jerusalem. 
The distance from Jerusalem to Bethel was believed at the time to be 96 stadiums (12 
Roman miles according to Eusebius), which is roughly in between the variant Lucan 
readings of 60 and 160 stadiums. 

10. The Gospels 
485 
'find' Jesus in 'God's House' (Mary and Joseph in the Jerusalem temple, 
where the old Israel ends; and Cleopas and his companion in Bethel, where 
the old Israel began). This does not seem a likely coincidence. Someone 
understood the connections between Luke 24 and Luke 2 and made them 
even more elegant and complete by renaming the town. The original author 
is the most likely candidate for such an achievement. 
Whether we grant the variant reading of Codex Bezae or not, it's still 
clear Luke created his Emmaus narrative to echo (and in a sense 'com­
plete') his previous 'lost boy' narrative. That Luke was fond of this story­
model is also evident from the fact that he reuses it in Acts to create the 
meeting between Philip and the Ethiopian eunuch (Acts 8.26-40), which 
also occurs on a road journey 'from Jerusalem' to another town, also fea­
tures an overt mention of an ignorance of scripture and a question ('Do you 
understand what you are reading?' matches 'What are you discussing?') 
and a consequent explanation of the gospel from scripture, a request for the 
'interpreter' to stay longer, a featured 'sacrament' (in this case, baptism; 
in the Emmaus narrative, it's the Lord's Supper), an apostolic 'opening' 
(Cieopas's eyes are 'opened' to see the truth; Philip's mouth is 'opened' to 
reveal the truth), and the sudden disappearance of the 'interpreter' (in this 
case Philip, who inexplicably vanishes in the midst of the sacrament being 
performed, just as Jesus does in the Emmaus tale).205 This is another unbe­
lievable yarn, yet it obviously deliberately adapts the same storyline as the 
Emmaus tale. Both are fictions. 
I mentioned the additional evidence of the variant reading of Oulam­
maous here because it has another significance, which is to illustrate the 
general point (applicable to all the Gospels) that we often cannot trust mod­
ern reconstructions of the original text of the Gospels (especially Luke­
Acts, as noted in Chapter 7, §4; and John, as we'll see shortly). They are 
always to some extent hypothetical; the Gospels could easily have said dif­
ferent things in their original composition, and scholars admit as much for 
many specific verses already. We just saw it's likely Codex Bezae preserves 
the original text of Luke here, and that this story was probably said to have 
taken place not at Emmaus but in fact Oulammaus-in other words, BetheL 
This same Codex Bezae may preserve other original readings, as it 
contains several variants like this that reflect a clearer consciousness of 
literary structure in Luke's stories-which is, again, a phenomenon more 
205. See I.H. Marshall, The Gospel of Luke: A Commentary on the Greek Text 
(Exeter: Paternoster. 1978), p. 890. Note also that in the scripture quoted (lsa. 53.7) 
the Lord does not 'open his mouth' (anoigei to stoma autou) but then Philip the apostle 
4opens his mouth' (anoixas . . .  to stoma autou), Acts 8.32 vs. 8.35; similarly in the 
Emmaus narrative Cleopas's eyes are 'opened' (dianoigi5), and then he realizes Jesus 
had 'opened' the scriptures to him (dianoiglJ), Lk. 24.31 vs. 24.32. 

486 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
likely to come from the original author than a later copyist.206 For exam­
ple, its text makes Peter's escape from prison in Acts more clearly echo 
God's departing from the Jerusalem temple.207 The same is then accom­
plished by Bezae's Luke making the stone blocking Jesus' tomb require 
'twenty men' to open, just as Josephus had said of the door to the Jerusalem 
temple-which he says opened of its own accord one midnight to signal 
God's departure from Jerusalem-an allusion that turns Jesus' departing 
the tomb into a symbol of God's thereby departing the old Jewish regime.208 
The wording is even similar: Josephus says 'barely twenty men' could close 
it (molis hup' anthr6pon eikosi); Luke says it was 'hard for twenty' to roll 
it (mogis eikosi [sc. anthropois]). This also accords with the evidence that 
Luke mined Josephus for details to include in his Gospel (noted in Chapter 
7, §4), which further argues that this reading was original, as otherwise we 
must suppose a later scribe knew to continue adding details from Josephus. 
a less likely hypothesis. 
Whatever we make of these facts, I have surveyed several examples even 
from the most widely accepted text demonstrating that Luke is inventing 
his story, from beginning to end, and not using reliable sources or try­
ing to get at the truth. Even what sources he uses are just previous myths: 
Mark and Matthew and, at best, other fictional Gospels now lost, with local 
color added from historians like Josephus who didn't write about Jesus or 
Christians at all (see Chapter 8, §9). We already verified this conclusion in 
Chapter 9, demonstrating his extensive fabrication of Acts, so we should 
not be surprised to find his Gospel similarly compromised. So once again. 
there is in fact no way to discern what if anything that Luke has added 
to Mark and Matthew has any historical basis or even a source. And its 
having a source would still not establish that it's historical; after all, his 
primary sources, Mark and Matthew, are not demonstrably historical. so 
why would any of his other, unknown sources be? All his added 'histori­
cal color' comes from Josephus and (probably) other now-lost historians, 
from whom Luke derives nothing about Jesus; and many of his additions 
(like changes to the nativity or embellishments of the resurrection narra­
tive) are historically implausible and rhetorically all too convenient-some 
206. Obviously this won't always be the case. Many variant readings in Codex 
Bezae are obviously later revisions or corruptions; e.g. it occasionally harmonizes Luke 
with Matthew by inserting verses from the latter into the former (the most egregious 
example being half the genealogy). 
207. Jenny Heimerdinger, 'The Seven Steps of Codex Bezae: A Prophetic 
Interpretation of Acts 12', in Codex Bezae: Studies from the Lunel Colloquium, June 
1994 (ed. D.C. Parker and C.B. Amphoux; Leiden: Brill, 1996), pp. 303-10. 
208. See Swanson, New Testament Greek Manuscripts . . .  Luke, p. 404 (Lk. 23.53) 
and compare Josephus, Jewish War 6.292-93. 

10. The Gospels 
487 
even come from rewriting the Elijah-Elisha narrative in 1 and 2 Kings. 
As history, all this entails an improbable plethora of coincidences; but as 
historical fiction, it's exactly what we'd expect. 
The same conclusion must therefore follow for Luke that we reached for 
Mark and Matthew: nothing in it is any less likely on myth than on historic­
ity. It therefore has no evidential value. The burden is therefore on anyone 
who would insist there is anything in Luke that is any more authentic than 
what's in Mark or Matthew. As it is, I deem Luke to be just as fictional, 
showing a wanton readiness to fabricate, and there are no signs of any genϺ 
uine interest in historical truth or any real ability to discern it, or any indi­
cation he has employed any relevant sources more reliable than Matthew 
or Mark. Luke's value for determining historicity is therefore nil. Even if 
any historical facts about Jesus are in it, we have no way to identify them. 
7. The Mythology of John 
John is a free redaction of the previous Gospels. Some maintain he is inde­
pendent of them, but there is no evidence of that. To the contrary, the evi­
dence is abundant that John knew all three previous Gospels and used them 
as sources. He simply redacted them more freely, rewriting everything in 
his own words, which was the more common way ancient writers used 
sources. In the words ofL. Michael White: 
[John's many changes to the Synoptics] may well have been made inten­
tionally and with full awareness of the Synoptic tradition. Several fea­
tures of the Johannine narrative seem to reflect such an awareness and 
use of the Synoptic tradition, including direct verbal similarities with 
distinctive linguistic formulations or narrative elements in Mark and 
Luke, respectively.209 
In fact. I would say this evidence is adequately conclusive (and that Mat­
thew was also known to John, albeit less used). 
For example, John copies Mark's pairing of the feeding of ϻfive thou­
sand' and Jesus' walking on the water (John 6 thus derives from Mk 6.31-
52), in the exact same sequence. Yet as we saw earlier (in §4), this pairing 
and sequence was a product of Markan literary structure. It also involves 
absurd events that obviously never really happened. Accordingly, the only 
likely reason John would connect these same events in the same order is 
that he is borrowing the whole sequence from Mark. This is also the only 
likely explanation for why they share so many precise details in common, 
such as that 'five thousand' were fed (Jn 6.10; Mk 6.44), that exactly 'twelve 
baskets' of crumbs remained (Jn 6.13; Mk 6.43), that Jesus started with 
209. White, From Jesus to Christianity, p. 309. 

488 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
exactly 'five loaves and two fishes' (Jn 6.9; Mk 6.41), and that feeding the 
crowd would otherwise have cost 'two hundred denarii' (Jn 6.7; Mk 6.37).210 
John likewise borrows the literary structure of Mark's narrative of Peter's 
denial of Christ (compare Jn 18.15-27 with Mk 14.53-72); and the notion 
that Jesus once cured a blind man with spit (Jn 9.6 redacts Mk 8.23) but 
had to back that up with additional magic to get the spell to work (Jn 9.7 
re-imagining Mk 8.24-25). And so on. 
There are many similar matches between John and material in Luke 
and Matthew as wel\.211 Luke especially. Both John and Luke, and they 
alone, insert the same new character into the story: Martha, the sister 
of Mary (Lk. 10.38-42; Jn 1 1.1-12.2). Both alone have Jesus produce a 
miraculously vast catch of fish (Lk. 5.1-1 1 ;  Jn 21. 1-4). Both alone claim 
there was a second Judas among the twelve disciples (Lk. 6.16; Jn 14.22). 
Both alone claim Judas lscariot was possessed by Satan (Lk. 22.3; Jn 
13.16-27). Both alone report that it was the right ear of the high priest's 
slave that the disciples chopped off (Lk. 22.50; Jn 18.10). Both alone have 
Pilate thrice declare Jesus innocent (Lk. 23.4, 16, 23; Jn 18.38 and 19.4, 6). 
Both alone say Jesus was buried 'where no man had yet been laid' (Lk. 
23.53; Jn 19.41). Both alone have two angels seen at his tomb (Lk. 24.4; 
Jn 20.12). Both alone have the risen Jesus visit the disciples in Jerusalem 
(not Galilee) and in a room (not outdoors) and show his wounds and share 
a meal with them (Lk. 24.33-43; Jn 20.18-29; 21.12-13).212 And so on. John 
changes and expands many of the things he gets from Luke, but the num-
210. See John Dominic Crossan, 'Empty Tomb and Absent Lord', in The Passion 
in Mark: Studies on Mark 14-16 (ed. Werner Kelber; Philadelphia, PA: Fortress Press, 
1976). pp. 135-52 (esp. 139-44). 
21 1 .  Despite frequent protestations and a few dissenting opinions, it is now pretty 
well agreed among experts on John that he knew and redacted both Mark and Luke. 
and most likely Matthew as well. In addition to the following note, see the additional 
bibliography in MacDonald. Two Shipwrecked Gospels. p. 48 n. 1 1, and the analysis in 
Crossan, Power of Parable, pp. 218-42, and Louis Ruprecht, This Tragic Gospel: How 
John Corrupted the Heart of Christianity (San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass, 2008). For 
an example of John's use of Matthew, note that John's adaptation of the raising of the 
centurion's boy (Jn 4.46ޤ53, redacting Mt. 8.5-13, which was also redacted in Lk. 7.1-
10) copies two elements from Matthew's version: the official approaches Jesus directly. 
rather than through intermediaries, and the word •son' is used instead of 'boy· (see 
Keith Pearce, The Lucan Origins of the Raising of Lazarus', Expository Times 96 
[1985], pp. 359-61). 
212. See also Carrier. 'Spiritual Body', in Empty Tomb (ed. Price and Lowder). pp. 
191-93 (with notes on pp. 230-31); John Loftus, Why I Became an Atheist: A Former 
Preacher Rejects Christianity (Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 2008), pp. 329-32; 
Price, Pre-Nicene New Testament. pp. 665-718. And for scholarship confirming the 
same see note in Chapter 7 (§4). 

J 0. The Gospels 
489 
ber of coincidences is too great to conclude John isn't simply using Luke 
as a source, however creatively. 
Once we concede John is not independent of the other Gospels but in 
fact freely using them as sources, we can see that he (or they, as this Gospel 
appears to have had multiple authors and to have been redacted multiple 
times) aimed to rebut a theme common to them all: that 'no sign shall be 
given' that Jesus is the messiah (Mk 8.1 1-12). Mark had clearly written 
when no miracles had yet been imagined for Jesus (thus he had to explain 
this); as Paul says, no signs were given to the Jews that Jesus was the Christ 
(1 Cor. 1.22-24; see Chapter 12, §4). Hence even when Mark invents mira­
cles to put in his story as allegories, he makes sure no one other than the 
disciples ever either notices or talks about them or understands them. Even 
the witnesses of the empty tomb never tell anyone about it (Mk 16.8). 
Matthew had already expanded and corrected this by having Jesus say 
instead that 'an evil and adulterous generation seeks a sign' and therefore 
'there shall no sign be given except the sign of Jonah' (Mt. 12.39 and 16.4), 
meaning the resurrection of Jesus. Matthew thus slightly retreats from 
Mark by allowing one sign-and accordingly, unlike Mark, Matthew actu­
ally narrates a resurrected Jesus and makes sure that in his story the Jews 
'know' about it (the purpose of Mt. 28.1 1-15). This was not the case before. 
Matthew is inventing new evidence. The same point was then reinforced 
by Luke's repetition of Matthew's expanded revision of Mark (Lk. 1 1.29) 
and by his invention of the parable of Lazarus (Lk. 16.19-31) and the public 
announcement to the Jews (Acts 2). 
John 'refutes' this entire sentiment by littering his Gospel with explicitly 
identified 'signs' and by reversing Luke's parable of Lazarus with an actual 
tale of Lazarus (Jn 1 1-12), as I'll soon demonstrate. Indeed, John's Jesus 
fills his ministry with 'signs' that 'manifested his glory', and it is for this 
reason 'his disciples believed in him' (Jn 2.1 1), a notion not found in the 
previous Gospels. When Jesus is asked for a sign (Jn 2.17-18), he does not 
declare, as the other Gospels do, that no sign will be given or that only an 
evil generation would ask for one; rather, he simply says (albeit cryptically) 
that his resurrection will be a sign. This is essentially what Matthew and 
Luke had Jesus say (using a different cryptic metaphor), 'correcting' Mark 
(who did not even allow the resurrection of Jesus to be a sign; for Mark it 
only accomplishes Jesus' defeat of death); but John conspicuously does not 
say this will be the only sign. To the contrary, he immediately tells us, 'hav­
ing seen the signs he did, many believed in his name' (Jn 2.23), and 'a great 
multitude followed him because they beheld the signs he did' (Jn 6.2), and 
when people 'see the sign he did', they declare him a true prophet (Jn 6.14), 
and we're told 'no one can do these signs that you do, unless God be with 
him' (Jn 3.2), and Jesus says, 'you will in no way believe unless you see 

490 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
signs and wonders' and although this is a rebuke, he nevertheless dutifully 
performs a miracle to provide them one (Jn 4.48-54). 
These signs are explicitly said to be the evidence that Jesus is the Christ 
(Jn 7.31; 9.16; 10.41-42), and the Jewish elite lament the fact that 'he has 
done many signs' (1 1.47) and that the people are believing in him because 
he does these signs (12.18}, and we're told that those who didn't believe did 
so specifically in spite of all the signs he did (12.37). And though John nar­
rates (and sometimes numbers) seven or eight especially significant 'signs' 
(all but one, the turning of water into wine at Cana, are inspired by the 
previous Gospels: 2.1-1 1; 4.46-54; 5.1-9; 6.1-14, 15-25; 9.1-8; 1 1.1-45), he 
alludes to many others, and says there were even more than he recorded 
(20.30), and that the ones he did record, he did so for the express purpose 
of convincing people to believe in Jesus ('but these [signs] were written 
down, so that you will believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and 
that in believing you may have life in his name', 20.31). And yet, those who 
believe without seeing signs (like, e.g., John's readers) are said to be the 
more blessed and have an even greater and more admirable faith (20.29). 
This obsessive focus on 'signs' (in other words, 'proof') is unique to John 
and characterizes a lot of what he has done to change up the story, includ­
ing inventing the most absurd resurrection narrative of all: the Doubting 
Thomas episode (Jn 20.24-29). The authors of John are thus very keen to 
create 'proof' and to insist it is this 'evidence' that justifies belief, a concern 
not thus voiced in the earlier Gospels. This is why John alone invents an 
eyewitness 'source' (albeit seemingly unnamed, and never heard of before) 
and claims he has his information from him (Jn 19.35 and 21.24; more 
on this later), and obsessively talks about who and what bears witness of 
Jesus-and I mean obsessive. John talks about providing evidence ('bear­
ing witness') over thirty-one times, half of those littering three extended 
discourses on the subject.213 There is nothing like this in any of the previ­
ous Gospels. The authors of John were clearly maniacal on the subject and 
eager to beat that dead horse to a pulp, thereby 'improving' on the previous 
Gospels who didn't do this but even badmouthed the whole idea. This also 
makes John the most ruthlessly propagandistic, and thus the most thor­
oughly untrustworthy, of all the canonical Gospels. 
This is already evident from the rest of the Gospel's content. John's Gos­
pel contains long, implausible, never-before-imagined speeches of Jesus 
(and yet, no Sermon on the Mount, or indeed hardly any moral instruction 
of any sort), and entirely new characters and events also never heard of 
213. Jn 1.7, 8, 15, 19, 32, 34; 2.25; 3.11; 10.25; 12.17; 1 5.26-27; 18.37; 19.35; 2 1.24; 
and three long discourses: 3.26-33 (five times); 5.31-39 (seven times); 8.13-18 (four 
times). 

10. The Gospels 
491 
before (Nicodemus, Lazarus, Cana). John also changes everything around, 
such as moving Jesus' clearing of the temple to the beginning rather than 
the end of his ministry, expanding his ministry from one to three years 
(with multiple trips to Judea and Jerusalem rather than only one), and mov­
ing the date (and thus even the year) of Jesus' execution to make Jesus' 
death correspond exactly with the slaughter of the Passover lambs (as I 
noted earlier). John has thus run wild with authorial gluttony, freely chang­
ing everything and inventing whatever he wants. By modern standards, 
John is lying.214 
A major problem with evaluating what John has done is that we don't 
have what he originally wrote. We know someone later reorganized the 
Gospel, putting scenes out of order and adding or subtracting in the pro­
cess (though we can rarely know what). That the Gospel has been meddled 
with is already evident from the fact that it has two endings, each of which 
seemingly ignorant of the other: Jn 20.30-31 and 21.24-25, each concluding 
different appearance narratives (Jn 21.1 being a hastily added line attempt­
ing to stitch them together), a phenomenon that also plagued the Gospel of 
Mark (which had at least five different known endings).215 And of course 
everyone knows that the story of the adulteress (Jn 7.53-8.1 1, which gave 
us the famous line, 'let he who is without sin cast the first stone') was added 
by a later editor. But there is even more evidence the whole document has 
been corrupted, with material inserted (and possibly deleted) and sections 
moved around, often sloppily. 
214. Though I shall demonstrate this to be the case, recent attempts by Christian 
apologists to rehabilitate the Gospel of John as of any historical use are already 
adequately rebutted by James Crossley, 'Can John's Gospel Really Be Used to 
Reconstruct a Life of Jesus? An Assessment of Recent Trends and a Defence of a 
Traditional View', in 'Is This Not the Carpenter?' The Question ofthe Historicity of 
the Figure of Jesus (ed. Thomas Thompson and Thomas Verenna; Sheffield: Equinox, 
2012), pp. 163-84. See also Maurice Casey, Is John's Gospel True? (London: Routledge, 
1996). 
215. Besides the three endings for Mark sometimes noted in modern Bibles (a 
conclusion at 16.8, a shorter ending that adds one more verse and a longer ending 
that adds twenty), there are at least two other known endings (one incorporating 
an ascension narrative into the empty-tomb narrative and one adding a whole new 
speech from Jesus in the so-called longer ending). See Richard Carrier, 'Mark 16:9-
20 as Forgery or Fabrication', Hitler Homer Bible Christ, pp. 231-312 (236-42). As for 
John, there is Jn 20.19-31 and John 21. and there are arguments for and against either 
as interpolation and the other as original, complicated by the fact that the redactor 
who added either may have also added other material throughout the Gospel (e.g. if Jn 
20.19.31 is an interpolation, so might 1 1.16 be). Both 'endings' are redacted from Luke: 
John 21 redacts Lk. 5.4-10, which is not there a resurrection appearance, and Lk. 24.42; 
while Jn 20.19-31 redacts Lk. 24.33-48. 

492 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
For example, in John 5 Jesus goes to Judea (Jerusalem in fact: 5.1) yet in 
John 6 he is not in Judea (6.1, 24, 59); instead, (in John 5) Jesus is in Jeru­
salem and then immediately (in Jn 6.1) he 'went off to the other side of the 
sea of Galilee', but the sea of Galilee is nowhere near Jerusalem, nor even 
in Judea-clearly, in the original text preceding that verse, Jesus had been 
in Galilee somewhere on the opposite shore of its sea and not in Jerusalem. 
The order of events has thus become jumbled. Similarly we're told Jesus is 
in Jerusalem (2.13, 23) and then that he entered Judea (3.22), but if he was 
in Jerusalem he was already in Judea. Evidently some mention of his return 
to Galilee has been moved or (more likely) deleted. Likewise, at one point 
Jesus concludes a speech by saying to his disciples, 'Arise, let us go from 
here' (Jn 14.31), but instead of doing that, for no intelligible reason he gives 
another long rambling speech (spanning three whole chapters: Jn 15-17), 
and only after that do they depart (Jn 18.1). The last line of chap. 14 and the 
first line of chap. 18 clearly followed each other in the original text; which 
means someone inserted this vast speech in between. An even more glaring 
example is when we're helpfully told that a certain Mary 'was that Mary 
who anointed the Lord with ointment, and wiped his feet with her hair, 
whose brother Lazarus was sick' (Jn 1 1.2), yet that event hadn't happened 
yet (12.2-3); evidently, originally, the resurrection of Lazarus followed the 
anointing by Mary, but someone reordered the sections and added a new 
back-reference (12.1) but forgot to delete the original back-reference, or at 
least to rewrite it so that it looked forward to a future event rather than 
a past one.216 Because of all this, and other evidence besides, experts on 
John's Gospel generally agree it had multiple authors and went through 
multiple redactions before coming to its present form.217 
216. See also later note for another example of John's chapters being out of sequence. 
On these and other examples of disorder in John and what to make of it see Price. 
Pre-Nicene, pp. 666-67; Thomas Cottam, The Fourth Gospel Rearranged (London: 
Epworth Press, 1952); and Dwight Moody Smith, The Composition and Order of the 
Fourth Gospel: Bultmann's Literary Theory, with the Greek Text as Rearranged by 
R.C. Bultmann (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1965), although these latter 
reconstructions go too far by assuming John originally matched the Synoptics in 
sequencing. 
217. See note in Chapter 7 (§4). The so-called Egerton Gospel (one of the 
earliest papyrus fragments of any Christian Gospel we have) may be a piece of an 
earlier version of John (into which our John has inserted material and moved content 
around), since it definitely has lines found in John but in a different order and mixed 
with different material: see Helmut Koester, 'Apocryphal and Canonical Gospels·. 
Harvard Theological Review 73 (January-April 1980). pp. 105-30 (see pp. 1 19-23): 
and Kurt Ehrland, 'Papyrus Egerton 2: "Missing Link" zwischen synoptischer und 
johanneischer Tradition', New Testament Studies 42 (January 1996). pp. 12-34. 

10. The Gospels 
493 
Nevertheless, some evidence of John's original literary artifice has sur­
vived this hacking up and reordering and altering of his text. One of the 
best examples is the brilliantly framed sequence where Jesus travels from 
Cana to Cana, an adventure (and city) nowhere else mentioned in the other 
Gospels, although it incorporates one story from them, which John has 
completely rewritten. This role of Cana is John's invention (as I'll show 
later), a literary construct meant to illustrate different degrees of faith and 
what one must do to achieve them. The Gospel begins with a multi-day 
sequence that has become garbled: John is preaching about the coming 
Jesus (Jn 1.15-28) and then 'the next day' (1.29) Jesus just suddenly appears, 
John identifies him, and Jesus begins recruiting disciples and preaching 
about who he is, and then 'the next day' (1.35) we hear more of the same, 
and then 'the next day' (1.43) Jesus decides to go to Galilee (evidently, 
unlike the other Gospels, in John Jesus recruits his principal disciples near 
the Jordan river in Judea or Perea, not in Galilee or by its sea), so four days 
have passed and the next day should be the fifth day. Yet now we are told 
that 'on the third day there was a marriage in Cana of Galilee' that Jesus 
attended (we're not told why, or who is getting married . . .  I suspect those 
elements may have been deleted). So something might be out of order. But 
visible structure begins at this point. 
The sequence now starts with this miracle at Cana 'on the third day' and 
ends with another miracle at Cana on another third day. That Jesus' second 
visit to Cana occurs on the third day is discernible from the text: he spends 
'two days' with the Samaritans (Jn 4.40, the number of days Jesus would 
later reside in the land of the dead; he even dies at the very hour that he 
meets the first Samaritan, at the 'sixth hour', 4.6 deliberately echoing 19.14, 
thus making his descent into Samaria and return a metaphor for his death 
and resurrection) and then 'after the two days' (4.43) he went to Galilee, 
and to Cana in particular, which means it is once again 'the third day' when 
he arrives at Cana. And so we're told 'he came therefore again unto Cana 
of Galilee, where he made the water wine' (4.46) and performs there 'the 
second sign that Jesus did' (4.54), the previous miracle at Cana having been 
the first sign (2.11), thus even reminding us how and where this sequence 
of events began. 
The allusion to Jesus' resurrection 'on the third' day is obvious. It 
thus frames the whole sequence and is metaphorically represented in his 
journey through Samaria (on his way from Jerusalem to Cana). But it is 
most obvious in Jn 2.19, where Jesus' resurrection 'in three days' is made 
explicit, albeit through a metaphor, which of course is not understood by 
the Jews . . . .  John's readers are thus being warned not to make that same 
mistake (and miss John's metaphors). That the sequence begins with turn­
ing water into wine-a miracle unique to John's Gospel, which is echoed in 
the fact that water and blood run from Jesus' wound at his crucifixion (Jn 

494 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
2.6-10), another miracle unique to John's Gospel (19.34)-and then ends 
with a 'resurrection' of a son (Jn 4.47-53, the boy is 4about to die' and yet 
'lives' at the word of Jesus) only reinforces the metaphor. The centerpiece 
of what goes on in between is the speech of John the Baptist explaining it: 
Jesus is both the bridegroom (3.29), thus echoing the 'wedding' at Cana, 
and the savior (3.36), thus echoing the subsequent act of 'saving' a child 
(the official's son). John also says people should believe on Jesus' word 
alone (3.32-34). 
The overall structure of what happens in between this 'sandwich' of 
appearances at Cana is in fact superbly elegant: 
Traditional 
context 
Jn 2. 1 - 1 2 - A wedding completed at Cana. 
[features a 
wolfliln as a 
nwtherl 
I. Traditional 
context 
(ends with a lflilnl 
Featuring a mother and her son. 
A miracle is requested and fulfi lied. 
Complete faith in a traditional Jewish context. 
Story ends at Capernaum (2. 12). 
A. Jn 2. 13-22 - Clearing of the temple. 
A miracle is requested and not fulfilled 
(2. 18). 
Jesus' words are thrown back at him 
(2. 19 = 2.20). 
A question is thus voiced as disbelief (2.20). 
A metaphor [of resurrection] is 
misunderstood (2. 19-22) 
The temple Jews have no faith. 
B. Jn 3.1-2 1  - Nicodemus the Pharisee. 
Jesus is believed because of his miracles 
(3 . 1 -2). 
Jesus' words are thrown back at him 
(3.3 = 3.4). 
A question is thus voiced as doubt (3.4). 
A metaphor [of rebirth] is misunderstood 
(3.3-4). 
A •teacher of the Jews' (3. 10) has partial 
faith. 
C. Jn 3.22-36 - John the Baptist. 
Jesus is be1ieved because of his word 
(3.27-34). 
Jesus' words are explained; Jesus is the savior 
(3.35-36). 
John has complete faith. 

10. The Gospels 
A. Jn 4. 1- 15 - The Samaritan woman at Jacob's 
Well (cf. 4.5-6). 
A miracle is requested and not fulfilled 
(4. 1 5). 
Jesus' words are thrown back at him 
(4. 10. 13-14 = 4. 1 1-12, 15). 
A question is thus voiced as disbelief 
(4. 1 1-12: 4. 1 5  is sarcasm). 
A metaphor [of living water] is 
misunderstood. 
The woman has no faith. 
495 
B. Jn 4. 16-38 - The Samaritan woman reconsiders. 
Jesus is believed because of his miracle 
(4. 1 6-19). 
Jesus' words are thrown back at him 
(4. 16 = 4. 1 7). 
A question is then voiced as doubt (4.29). 
A metaphor [of a spiritual messiah] is 
misunderstood ( 4.2 1-25). 
The Samaritan woman has partial faith. 
C. Jn 4.39-42 - The Samaritans of Sychar ( cf. 4.5). 
Jesus is believed because of his word (e.g. 
4.4 1 ). 
Jesus' words are understood; Jesus is the 
savior ( 4.42). 
The Samaritans have complete faith. 
Ft:aturing a father and his son. 
A miracle is requested and fulfilled. 
Complete faith in a marginal Jewish context. 
Story began at Capemaum (4.46). 
Table 10. Structure of the Cana-to-Cana Sequence in John 
The parallels are far too numerous and neat to be accidental. They are 
clearly composed in awareness of each other-even beyond the deliber­
ate connections outlined in the table above. For example, unit ri.C presup­
poses knowledge of what was said in unit I.C, since nothing is said in II.C 
about what Jesus tells the Samaritans that convinces them-we're simply 
to understand it is essentially what the Baptist says in I .C, their structural 
parallel. 
John has invented all of this material to make a point, and has designed 
it all to fit his desired pattern of parables and metaphors: two mirac1es 

496 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
that parallel and invert each other happening at Cana, and in between two 
sequences of three conversational narratives, the first of those triads paral­
leling the second in its development of examples from having no faith, to 
having partial faith, to having complete faith. We also see the one triad in 
a traditionally Jewish context, and then the second triad repeating all the 
same themes in a more marginal context, and alternating the roles of men 
and women (as we saw Mark once did, in §4).218 
The two framing events also share structure: each involves an announced 
'problem' (running out of wine; an official's son is ill), a 'request' (Jesus is 
asked to fix the problem), a 'sharp rebuke' (Jesus says something snarky to 
the one making the request), a 'reaction' (the requester puts complete faith 
in Jesus), and its 'consequence' (the deed is done: what they believed he 
could do, he does). The first occurs in a traditionally Jewish context (a Jew­
ish wedding); the second in a marginal one: the 'official', a basilikos, was 
neither surely Jewish nor surely Gentile; being from the court of the Herods, 
he would have had a dubious status among conservative Jews (as possibly 
'not really Jewish', even if he really was). In between we see a similar con­
trast: Jesus first interacts with traditional Jews, and then Samaritans-who 
actually were Jews (being a divergent sect of Judaism), but not considered 
as such by 'traditional' Jews (a marginal status similar to Mormons among 
Catholics and Protestants today).219 Thus, John repeats the same literary 
218. For an extensive analysis of the structure of these scenes and the intervening 
sequence (from which I have adapted and expanded my table of parallels and the shared 
five-fold structure of the two incidents at Cana) see Francis Moloney, 'From Cana to 
Cana (John 2.1-4.54) and the Fourth Evangelist's Concept of Correct (and Incorrect) 
Faith', Salesianum 40 (October-December 1978), pp. 8J7-43. Moloney believes that 
the inserted remarks at 2.23-25 and 4.30-38 (where a metaphor of spiritual food is 
misunderstood by the disciples) are also part of the structure (Moloney, 'From Cana 
to Cana', p. 841), but they are too dissimilar and not logically integrated with the 
surrounding material. John 2.23-25 are about Jesus knowing the minds of men and 
judging them, a subject that is not any part of the narrative at this point, which is 
entirely about believing or not believing in Jesus; the transition from 2.22 to 2.23 is 
thus nonsensical. The transition from 4.38 to 4.39 is Jikewise illogically abrupt, and 
the question posed at 4.33 makes no sense in light of the fact that they are supposed 
to have seen Jesus having just met someone; a clumsy solution to this problem is 4.27, 
which is a strange addition and otherwise serves no narrative purpose other than to 
try and fix the problem created by inserting the following conversation. Accordingly, I 
think it's clear that both 2.23-25 and 4.30-38 are out of place and thus later insertions. 
Nevertheless, if you disagree, then Moloney shows how they still fit into the structure. 
219. Moloney (previous note) believes this is a 'non-Jewish' context and that the 
sequence treats in balance both Jewish and non-Jewish contexts, but since Samaritans 
were marginal Jews, and since John deliberately changed the 'centurion' to a 'basilicus' 
(the long-distance healing of an official's son in Capernaum is obviously a redaction of 
· 
lin of the centurion's s 
· n Mat 

I 0. The Gospels 
497 
elements in both traditional and marginal contexts: first, a traditional con­
text (a wedding) followed by another traditional context (temple Jews and 
John the Baptist), fo1 lowed by a marginal context (Samaria) that is followed 
by another marginal context (helping a Herod ian official). 
Thus, we see elegant literary invention in John just as we saw in the 
earlier Gospels. Almost certainly the whole Gospel once had a complete 
and elegant structure throughout, just as we saw Mark and Matthew did. 
It has simply been lost by later editors reorganizing the text.220 As also for 
the other Gospels, John likewise employs the device of inventing his stories 
by creatively, and meaningfully, rewriting stories (or adapting story ideas) 
from the OT. The first miracle at Cana, John's only 'new' miracle for Jesus 
(every other has precedents in the other Gospels), is a perfect example of 
this.221 It reifies the Word of God in the book of Exodus, where Aaron 'did 
the signs in the sight of the people, and the people believed' (Exod. 4.30-31), 
the basic model for John's entire Gospel. And here in particular, God had 
told Moses he will give him three signs to perform, such that if they don't 
believe after the first two signs, they will believe after the last (Exocl. 4.1-9). 
That last miracle God explains to him thus: 
If they will not believe even after these two signs, nor listen to you, then 
you shall take some of the water from the river, and pour it on the dry 
ground, and the water that you took out of the river shall become blood 
upon the ground (Exod. 4.9). 
So the last miracle Moses was to perform was to turn water into blood (in 
other words, water into wine). John has Jesus perform this as his .first mira­
cle, thus starting where Moses left off, and turning the last into the first. 
At the crucifixion, of course, Jesus spews water and blood from his 
body (Jn 19.34), thus ending his ministry with a reminder of the miracle he 
started it with, a fact Jesus even alludes to in Jn 2.4, which contains two ref­
erences to John's crucifixion scene: Jesus references the hour of his death 
(which like the bridegroom theme is also evoked again in this sequence 
at 4.6) and the fact that he would no longer be his mother's son (Jn 19.26-
27), another addition unique to John Uust as is a wound spewing water 
and blood), proving that John had this in mind and rewrote the crucifixion 
scene to match his scene at Cana. Indeed the one scene is an antitype of the 
7), he clearly avoided a Gentile context and created another marginal context instead. 
Thus, John is paralleling traditional and marginal contexts, not Jewish and Gentile 
(though the implication may be that Gentiles are likewise a marginal group who can 
likewise come to faith and salvation). 
220. For an attempt to extract its original structure see Ernst Lohmeyer, 'The 
Structure and Organization of the Fourth Gospel', Journal of Higher Criticism 5 
(Spring 1998), pp. 1 13-38. 
win anal sis summarizes 

498 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
other: at Cana his mother gives a command to Jesus, but at the cross Jesus 
gives a command to his mother; at Cana his mother says to do whatever he 
says, and at the cross Jesus says what to do; at Cana his mother asks Jesus 
to give them wine from waterϼ and at the cross he gives them blood with 
water; at Cana Jesus asks what he has to do with her, and at the cross he 
says he has nothing to do with her (transferring her kinship); at Cana he 
says his hour is not yet come, and at the cross it has come. He even repeats 
the very same Exodus theme: the miracle of the water and blood at the cross 
occurred 'so that you may believe' (Jn 19.35), exactly as God told Moses 
would happen. In just the same fashion, from the water miracle at Cana 'the 
disciples believed in him' (Jn 2.1 1), therefore so should you. 
John is thus simply duplicating the last miracle of Moses. He needed to 
develop other themes, such as a wedding, to evoke the metaphor of Christ 
as the bridegroom that he would introduce in this overall sequence (Jn 
3.29), a mother-and-son scene to reverse the father-and-son scene he was 
to conclude with, some way to introduce his desired number symbolism 
(the number and volume of the pots had some significance now lost to us: 
Jn 2.6), and to make the features of this tale line up with the one he would 
close with and to create the message about faith that the whole sequence 
was designed for, and so on. The result was this fanciful tale. But he also 
got several of the ideas for it from a similar tale of miraculous provisions 
told of Elijah in I Kgs I7.8-24. There we are also told of a woman and her 
son-though who in this case are starving to death and expect soon to die 
(I Kgs 17.12); and indeed her son approaches death from illness and Elijah 
must heal him (1 Kgs I7.24 ), just as Jesus would then save a man's son from 
deadly illness for his second miracle at Cana. 
As Randel Helms explains: 
One of the most puzzling aspects of this first miracle in the Fourth Gos­
pel is Jesus' rudeness to his mother: 'Woman, what have I to do with 
you?' [Ti emoi kai soi, gunai]. . . .  [This] statement is here not a historical 
report but an antitype of Elijah: for the woman [gunt?] in need of food 
says to the prophet, 'What have I to do with youT [Ti emoi kai soi] [1 Kgs 
17.18 in the Septuagint] In both stories the prophet instructs those in need 
of sustenance to take empty pitchers (hydria [in the Septuagint text of the 
Elijah story: l Kgs 17.12, 14, 16]; hydriai [in Jn 2.6]) and remove from 
them the needed provision, which miraculously appears.222 
222. Helms, Gospel Fictions, p. 86. Note also that when Aaron performs the 
water-to-blood miracle for the Egyptians, water in 'stone pots' is also transformed 
(Exod. 7.19); the pots in John's miracle are also made of stone (Jn 2.6). We know later 
Jewish lore also held that when Moses struck the rock in the wilderness (which rock 
the Christians equated with Jesus: I Cor. 10.4), blood came out at the first blow. and 
water at the second (Midrash Tehillim 105.12; Shemoth Rabbah 122; Targum Pseudo-
d Num. 20 but I could n 
is belief 
· 

I 
i ,  
10. The Gospels 
499 
From this, and the healing of her son (the very same two miracles John 
frames his whole Cana-to-Cana sequence with), the woman concludes Eli­
jah truly is 'a man of God' (1 Kgs 17.24). That both stories copy the exact 
same unusual phrase ('What have I to do with you?' = Ti emoi kai sol), have 
the same equipment (hudria I hudrim) and involve essentially the same feat 
(miraculously appearing sustenance) is a sufficient clue to what John has 
done.223 This is a literary construct. It is not history. And it is clear John 
is well aware of that fact, since he carefully links this miracle with his 
revised account of the crucifixion and carefully integrates it into his over­
all Cana-to-Cana structure. Thus, we can know John does not really care 
Christian times (though that does not mean it didn't). An extensive case has also been 
made that John's wedding at Cana is modeled after a wedding in £sther I: Roger Aus, 
'The Wedding Feast at Cana (John 2.1-11), and Ahasuerus' Wedding Feast in Judaic 
Traditions on Esther I ', in Water into Wine and the Beheading of John the Baptist: Early 
Jewish-Christian Interpretation of Esther 1 in John 2:1-1 I and Mark 6:17-29 (Atlanta, 
GA: Scholars Press, 1988), pp. 1-37. The parallels are intriguing but inconclusive (it 
thus remains a possibility, perhaps true but unprovable). Aus also discusses the pagan 
parallels (of Dionysian pots miraculously producing wine, a frequently performed 
miracle in ancient temples), pp. 34-37. 
223. Why Cana? We can only speculate. No previous Gospel mentions anything 
ever happening there, whereas John deliberately frames a whole literary sequence 
with two incredible events there, so the selection of Cana is clearly an invention of 
John. There was a Cana (Josephus camped there: Life 86), but its selection by John 
was probably mytho-symbolic. The tale of the Syrophoenician woman in Mk 7.25-
30 had become the tale of the Canaanite woman (Kananaia, nearly the same word 
that would be used of someone 'from Cana') in Mt. 15.22-28. This was a tale of the 
faith of a foreign woman earning God's grace (and in which a demon is cast out of 
the woman's daughter as she requested), which has certain parallels with the Cana­
to-Cana sequence in John (which is also about faith earning a reward, and adapts the 
foreign-woman theme into the encounter with the Samaritan woman; note that John 
deletes all exorcism scenes from Jesus' story). John may have chosen to frame the 
Samaritan encounter with events at Cana to create a parallel between the beginning, 
end, and middle (the latter to remind us of the woman 'from Cana' in Matthew and 
its parallel message). Another possibility are certain parallels with Joseph's feats of 
dream interpretation in Genesis 40, where Joseph interprets the dreams of a 'master 
of wine' (archioinochos) and a 'master breadmaker' (archisitopoios), just as John's 
story features a 'master of the feast' (archilriklinos), which combines both roles-both 
stories involve an actual feast where something eventful happens 'on the third day'. In 
the OT tale Joseph explains to the breadmaster that 'the three baskets' of bread in his 
dream represent 'three days' (ta tria kana treis hemerai: Gen. 40.18) after which he 
would be crucified (40.19), while the other of the two men (the winemaster who dreams 
of creating wine from three vines) will be saved. The word used here for 'baskets' in 
the Septuagint is kana (the plural of kaneon), the exact same spelling of the town of 
· 
hn: Kana). 

500 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
about history. He is weaving tales-and pasing them off as history (19.35; 
20.31; 21.24}. 
A key demonstration of this is John's invention of an eyewitness: the 
seemingly unnamed ωBeloved Disciple' (Jn 21.24; also: 19.35; cf. 19.25-27; 
and 20.2-8}. That he is an invention should already be evident from the 
fact that he is inserted into the story told by the previous Gospels, which 
never heard of him. No male disciples are at the cross in any other Gos­
pel (much less told. by Jesus as he hangs on the very cross, to take Jesus' 
mother in), nor does anyone else run to inspect the tomb (other than Simon 
Peter in Luke, and even that is a fabrication, since in Mark and Matthew no 
disciples are even in Jerusalem at the time), nor is anyone resting (a most 
remarkable thing!} on Jesus' breast at the Last Supper.224 John has clearly 
ϊinserted' this figure into these stories he inherited from the Synoptics, and 
then claimed this new character as his ϋsource' who saw all these things (Jn 
21.24). In plain terms, that's simply a lie. 
Confirmation of this fact lies in a detail often overlooked: that in fact the 
Beloved Disciple is not unnamed. As Floyd Filson had already famously 
argued over half a century ago, and as have many others since, it should be 
obvious that the author of John 'had taken sufficient pains to make clear' 
that the Beloved Disciple was Lazarus.225 Only one character in his Gospel 
224. Peter running with the Beloved to see the burial cloths in the now-empty tomb 
(Jn 20.2-8) is most likely adapted from Luke (and this inspired John's use of burial-cloth 
symbolism here and in his account ofthe raising of Lazarus). Almost all manuscripts of 
Luke have Peter running to see the empty tomb and finding the burial cloths within (the 
othonia, Lk. 24.12, as repeated in Jn 20.6-7), and I believe this was indeed in Luke's 
original, as Luke is the first Gospel to imagine the disciples are present in Jerusalem 
for the women to report to (in Mark and Matthew the disciples are in Galilee and never 
receive the women's report), and Lk. 24.12 omits mention of a second disciple (and 
many other details in John. like the presence of the soudarion, the face napkin) and 
thus is not likely a harmonization with John (the more so as reference to 24.12 is found 
in 24.24, and a double redaction is unlikely). In fact John repeats several elements 
from Luke: that there were two angels instead of one (Jn 20.1 1-12), which only women 
saw; that Mary reported the empty tomb to the disciples (and wasn't believed); that 
Jesus appeared in disguise and was only recognized in a special moment (Jn 20.14-18); 
that the first to recognize the risen Jesus went to report it to the disciples, who were 
gathered together in a room in Jerusalem; and (if we accept Lk. 24.12), Peter's running 
to the tomb and finding burial cloths within. 
225. Floyd Filson, 'Who Was the Beloved Disciple?', Journal of Biblical Literature 
68 (June 1949), pp. 83-88 (84); the same conclusion is defended by Pearce, 'The 
Lucan Origins of the Raising of Lazarus' and many others. For a survey of other 
scholars arguing the same conclusion (that Lazarus is the Beloved Disciple) see James 
Charlesworth. The Beloved Disciple: Whose Witness Validates the Gospel of John? 
(Valley Forge, PA: Trinity Press International, 1995), pp. 185-92. Charlesworth himself 
ώrouϏϐ ϑos:in"t them. hut his arguments are f:
ullible an
· 

1 0. The Gospels 
50 1 
is described repeatedly as 'the one whom Jesus loved', and that's Lazarus 
(Jn 1 1.3, 5, 36); and right after Lazarus is introduced (and described as 
Jesus' beloved), he is reclining with Jesus at supper the next day (12.1-2, 
9-1 1). So when we hear that 'the one whom Jesus loved' is reclining with 
Jesus at the Last Supper as well (13.23-25), the allusion should be obvious. 
Likewise every other appearance of 'the one whom Jesus loved' (at the 
crucifixion: 19.26-27, 35; at the empty tomb: 20.2-8; and at the resurrection: 
21.7, 20).226 
This conclusion is only confirmed by the fact that in Jn 21.21-24 we're 
told the notion had spread that the Beloved Disciple would never die­
and there is no reason why such speculation would surround that one dis­
ciple unless he was Lazarus, who alone in John's Gospel had undergone 
resurrection, provoking the question whether he could die a second time.227 
We're also told the Beloved Disciple was the first to see the burial cloths 
Jesus had cast off in his now-empty tomb-and Lazarus had been wrapped 
in burial cloths also cast off at his resurrection. And so it is he who is the 
first to believe Jesus had risen (Jn 20.8).228 In both accounts the peculiar 
detail of the deathly veil is mentioned (the soudarion, a napkin covering the 
face of the dead), and in both accounts this is distinguished from the bur­
ial wrappings, and in both accounts we find references to being bound or 
unbound by these (as a metaphor for being bound by or freed from death), 
and in both accounts we're given a vivid picture of these burial wrappings 
and their disposition.229 
you can judge for yourself: see the paragraph spanning pp. 187-88, and pp. 288Т92. 
His •seventh' argument on p. 290 is an absolute howler, and representative of the kind 
of mindset we're dealing with here: Lazarus can't be the Beloved Disciple because 
Lazarus could not possibly run faster than Peter (in Jn 20.3-5), since he had recently 
been resurrected from the dead . . .  and we all know people recently miraculously 
resurrected from the dead are too feeble to outrun anyone (oh no, not even in fiction!). 
Charlesworth's case for 'Thomas' being meant (the thesis of his whole book) is similarly 
far weaker than any case that can be made for Lazarus. 
226. Lazarus may have been explicitly declared a disciple in a passage since deleted 
from the original John, but even if not, the Beloved is clearly Lazarus, now discipled. 
227. Since John has clearly invented the Lazarus and Beloved storylines. this 
question about whether he could die again is either an invention oft he author to make a 
point about people raised by Jesus in general (such as in the earlier Gospels), or a later 
redaction answering a question that had arisen in response to an earlier edition of John 
(or an anticipation of such). 
228. Lazarus also rose from a tomb (Jn 1 1 .38), the only resurrection account in the 
Gospels in which that was the case, other than the resurrection of Jesus: and although 
whereas Lazarus was expected to stink of death (Jn 1 1.39), Jesus was extensively 
perfumed (Jn 19.39-40). 
229. For Jesus we're told 'the linen cloths [othoniar were in the tomb and •the 
· n that was u on his head 

502 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
So the Beloved Disciple is Lazarus, who alone is said to be 'the one 
whom Jesus loved', the one who thereafter reclined with Jesus at meals, 
whom people thought might have been freed from death forever, and who 
first recognized Jesus had risen from the dead when he recognized the bur­
ial cloths cast off, a fate he and Jesus shared. But this exposes the grand lie 
of John's Gospel. Because this Lazarus never existed. He therefore cannot 
have witnessed anything, much less have been John's 'source' for anything. 
And it is not as if John didn't know this and was just gullibly repeating what 
he'd read in some earlier now-lost Gospel. For John is clearly the one who 
invented him. 
This is already clear from the fact that no one had ever heard of this 
Lazarus before (he is completely unknown to Mark, Matthew and Luke), 
or his incredible resurrection (the most incredible resurrection ta]e of all 
told in the Gospels), which are definite signs of fabrication. Indeed, John's 
invention is even more exposed as a lie by the importance he assigns to this 
novel event: so famous and integral to the plot is this raising of Lazarus 
in John's account that according to John the Jews plotted to kill Jesus 
because of the raising of Lazarus, which was converting so many to Jesus 
(Jn 1 1.53).230 This was origina11y the first occasion their plotting was men­
tioned in John, since it says it was 'from that day on that they plotted to kill 
him', not before; so earlier references in John to this Jewish plotting are 
now out of their original orderY' But the point of note here is that this is not 
but rolled up in one place' (Jn 20.6-7); for Lazarus we're told he walked out of the tomb 
'bound hand and foot with grave-clothes [keiriai], and his face was bound about with 
a napkin [soudarion]', and Jesus told those present to 'loose him and let him go' (Jn 
1 1.44), verbs that evoke freeing from slavery or prison, just as 'bound' (dedemenos) 
evokes slavery or imprisonment: thus at Jesus' command Lazarus is freed from the 
bondage of death. Jesus, meanwhile, would free himself. 
230. They also plotted to kill Lazarus, presumably to silence his testimony (Jn 
12.9-1 1), even though, we're told, 'it was not lawful' for them 'to put any man to death' 
(Jn 18.31), a remark that may have been intended to illustrate the crime of the Jews 
in killing Jesus, rather than to explain why they asked Pilate to do it for them (since 
killing through an agent would not be any more lawful in God's eyes; and it is not clear 
that the Jews actually lacked the authority to execute their own). 
231. In Jn 5.18 we're told it's because Jesus healed a man on the Sabbath (which in 
fact was never a crime under Jewish law). But actually it says there that the Jews plotted 
'the more' to kill him because of this miracle, indicating that they had started plotting 
earlier (and thus for some other reason), yet this is the first time we hear of it. Evidently 
this section is out of order and originally followed one of the other references to the 
Jews plotting to kill Jesus. Then we get references to the Jews plotting to kill Jesus for 
no stated reason in Jn 7.1, 19-21, 25. Jesus here says he had performed only a 'single' 
miracle-we're not told which one-but he must mean just one before that particular 
audience, as many miracles had occurred in this Gospel by now (as is even stated in 
71_ 11t and the one m iracle here mustmean hi
· 
is lav ofk

I 0. The Gospels 
503 
a reason known to any prior Gospel. Yet surely if the raising of lazarus was 
so famous and so effective at winning over believers that it was the very 
reason the Jews arranged to kill Jesus, those prior Gospels cannot possibly 
have not known of it. It is thus more than evident that John has invented this 
story and completely rewritten history to suit his own peculiar emphasis on 
'signs' having proved Jesus was the messiah. 
The final proof of this is the fact that John has invented this Lazarus tale 
to reverse and thus 'refute' Luke's parable of Lazarus.232 The reification 
of imaginary people into real people is a major marker of myth making. 
And here we have just that. There is in fact only one other mention of any 
Lazarus in the Gospels: the fictional Lazarus in a parable told by Jesus in 
Lk. 16.19-31 (both facts are astonishing given that Lazarus was the third 
most common male Jewish name). Luke is the first to have Jesus tel1 that 
parable, and it has key similarities to Greek and Egyptian parables, folk­
tales and rhetorical exercises in Greek schools of the era (both in its content 
and message).233 It was almost certainly Luke's invention.234 
16). Then in Jn 8.37-40 Jesus says to the Jews themselves that they were plotting to kill 
him, but not why (other than in the esoteric sense that they didn't believe his gospel). 
But Jn 1 1.53 says that Lazarus is the reason, 'so from that day forth they took counsel 
that they might put him to death', clearly having no idea that the Jews had been plotting 
this for several chapters and Jesus knew it and was even throwing it back in their faces. 
The author of 1 1.53 clearly meant this was when the Jews began to plot to kill Jesus. 
This therefore originally preceded the other references to their plotting. John is out of 
order. The most likely order was chap. I I, chaps. 7 and 8, then chap. 5, not necessarily 
contiguously. 
232. See Pearce, 'The Lucan Origins of the Raising of Lazarus'. Many other 
scholars over the years have concurred with Pearce; a surprisingly good study is a 
senior thesis at the University of Massachusetts (Amherst) by Keith Yoder, From Luke 
to John: Lazarus, Mary and Martha in the Fourth Gospel (2011), available at http:// 
www.umass.edu/wsp/project/senior/FromLukeToJohn.pdf. Yoder cites and summa­
rizes past scholarship on the point and shows many deliberate parallels between John 
11-12 (containing the associated stories of the anointing by Mary and the raising of 
Lazarus) and Luke's corresponding stories also ofthe sisters Mary and Martha in Luke 
10 and the parable of Lazarus in Luke 16, showing they are all interrelated, and that in 
both cases John has borrowed from (and by his changes ·responded' to) Luke. 
233. See K. Grobe), .... . . Whose Name Was Neves"', New Testament Studies 
10 (1963-1964), pp. 373-82; Ronald Hock, •Lazarus and Micyllus: Greco-Roman 
Backgrounds to Luke 16:19-31', Journal of Biblical Literature 106 (1987), pp. 447-63; 
Thomas Brodie, •Re-Opening the Quest for Proto-Luke: The Systematic Use of Judges 
6-12 in Luke 16:1-18:8', Journal of Higher Criticism 2.1 (Spring 1995), pp. 68-101; and 
Tim Brookins, •Dispute with Stoicism in the Parable of the Rich Man and Lazarus' , 
Journal ofGreco-Roman Christianity and Judaism 8 (201 1-2012), pp. 34-50. 
234. The parable could also have been a commonplace in Jewish folklore (as its 
parallels were in pagan folklore). Lazarus happens to be the name of Abraham's steward 
babl the same man in Gen. 24.2· L 
· 

504 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
But be that as it may, the telling point is that in this parable, a rich man 
ends up burning in hell and sees up in heaven a dead beggar he once knew 
named Lazarus, resting on the 'bosom of Abraham', so he begs Abraham to 
let Lazarus rise from the dead and warn his still-living brothers to avoid his 
own hellish fate. The parable ends with Abraham refusing, because 'if they 
will not listen to Moses and the prophets, neither will they be persuaded 
if someone rises from the dead' (Lk. 16.31). Key to this parable is that this 
fictional Lazarus does not rise from the dead, and that even if he did, it 
would convince no one, and therefore it won't be done. This is thus another 
expanded exercise in making the repeated point that Jesus wi II not perform 
signs because they will not persuade anyone (as I surveyed earlier). 
Notice what happens in John: he reverses the message of Luke's parable, 
by having Jesus actually raise this Lazarus from the dead, which actually 
convinces many people to turn and be saved, the very thing Luke's Jesus 
said wouldn't work. In fact, just as the rejected request in Luke's parable 
imagined Lazarus going to people and convincing them, John's Lazarus is 
then cited as a witness to the crucifixion, empty tomb and resurrection of 
Jesus, and is so cited specifically to convince people-again what Luke's 
Jesus said wouldn't work. John has thus reified a fictional character and 
integrated him into his version of the story in order to argue against that 
particular message in Luke, even to the point of claiming this fictional 
Lazarus is the eyewitness John is using as a source.235 In addition to the 
evidence already just adduced that Lazarus is the Beloved, we can now 
see that the idea of the Beloved's reclining 'on Jesus' bosom' (Jn 13.23) 
references the fact that the Lazarus of Luke's parable was reclining 'on 
Abraham's bosom' (Lk. 16.22-23), thus John clearly meant them to be one 
and the same. 236 
Lazarus has thus been pulled out of Luke's fiction into John's history. 
and there does what Luke's parable said would be no use: he goes around 
the Jewish name Eleazar), originally the only male heir born to his household. which 
possibly originated the notion that in the afterlife this Lazarus rested in Abraham's 
bosom. His poverty in John might thus be an embellishment from the fact that God had 
disinherited him (Gen. 15.4). 
235. Fabricating sources like this was a commonplace in ancient mythography: an 
entire chapter is dedicated to the subject ('Bogus Citations') in Alan Cameron. Greek 
Mythography in the Roman World (New York: Oxford University Press, 2004), pp. 124· 
63. Cameron documents many other commonplace features of ancient mythmaking. 
including such devices as adding vivid details to a narrative (just as John also does. 
as, e.g., in his account of the empty tomb). See Carrier, Proving History, pp. 182·83. 
236. Thus reversing Luke's parable again: Abraham was asked but refused to raise 
Lazarus and send him as a sign; yet when Jesus was asked, he did what Abraham 
refused. Jesus is thus now sitting in the place of Abraham, deciding who rises from 

10. The Gospels 
505 
telling everyone (i.e. the reader) that all this is true, 'in order that you may 
be saved' (20.31; 21.24), the very thing the rich man had asked Abraham to 
raise Lazarus for. John isn't even coy about it. He has Jesus declare to God 
at the raising of Lazarus that this is all done 'because of the multitude that 
stands around', so that 'they may believe that you did send me' (Jn 11.42), a 
rather artless giveaway. Even the act itself of reifying the parable is a refu­
tation of Luke: John is thereby saying this is no parable, oh no, this really 
happened. This is reason enough to dismiss John's Gospel as a complete 
fabrication, of no historical value in discerning the historicity of Jesus.237 
Another example of reifying a parable and 'correcting' its message like 
this is seen in John's version of the miraculous catch, an idea he adapts 
from Luke (5.4-1 1), who told it as a story of converting Simon Peter to 
discipleship, whereas John revises it into a post-resurrection narrative (Jn 
21 .3-1 1).238 Luke had already created this story by reifying a parable in Mt. 
13.47-50, where Jesus says 'the kingdom of heaven is like a net cast into the 
sea, which gathered every kind, and when full, they drew it to shore and sat 
down, and gathered the good into vessels and threw away the bad'. Luke 
makes this happen for real, with obvious symbolism: they could not catch 
any fish until they followed the word of the Lord (5.5-6); the load became 
too much to bear (their nets breaking and boats sinking from the weight), 
prompting Peter to conclude he must be a sinner (5.7-9); but Jesus tells him 
not to fear, because this signifies he will become a fisher of men (5.10). 
Thus Luke creatively expanded the simple story of the calling of Simon 
in Mk 1.16-18 (repeated in Mt. 4.18-20), turning it into an absurd tale with 
symbolic meaning, and he did this by reifying the parable of the net in Mat­
thew, combining it with Mark's story of the calling of Simon Peter. Classic 
mythmaking. 
The author of John 21 then took this story from Luke and improved on it. 
For example, he made sure to mention that the net did not break after all (Jn 
21.1 1)-thus, with effort, no souls will be lost (whereas Luke's reification of 
the parable implies the nets were breaking, and thus souls were being lost: 
237. Lazarus isn't the only character John invents. He also invented Nicodemus 
(whose name means 'Victory for the People'), who, like the Beloved Lazarus, is 
inserted into stories he nowhere appeared in before (like the burial of Jesus: Jn 19.38-
42). This new character, a member of the Jewish elite (a Pharisee, a Jewish studies 
professor, and a top ranking government official: Jn 3.1, 10), who somehow no one had 
ever heard of before, defies the Jewish elite by standing up for the people (Jn 7.31-52) 
and joining them in following Jesus (Jn 7.50). See Carrier, Not the Impossible Faith, 
pp. 68-70, 194-95. 
238. Robert Grant, "'One Hundred Fifty-Three Large Fish" (John 21.11 )', Harvard 
Theological Review 42 (October 1949), pp. 273-75; and Edmund Leach, 'Fishing for 
Men on the Edge of the Wilderness', in The Literary Guide to the Bible (ed. Robert Alter 
ode· Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
· 
· 

506 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
Lk. 5.6). The number offish counted may then have been meant to reinforce 
this. Jerome believed the number '153' symbo1ized the totality of species 
offish then known (more in fact were known, but possibly this was a com­
mon folk betief of the time), so the point of the story is that all would be 
saved-or at least, an elect would be saved from all nations (a nation being 
the proper analog to a species here).239 
We already know John was fond of number symbolism-many instances 
of curious numbers appear in his narrative, from the number and size of the 
pots at Cana (2.6) to the number of years it took to build the Jerusalem tern· 
pie (2.20) to the number of stadium lengths the disciples had rowed before 
Jesus walked on the water (6.19), and much else besides. A famous example 
is that of the paralyzed man cured at Bethesda, who had been paralyzed 
for 'thirty-eight years' (5.5), and thus was beginning the thirty-ninth year 
of his infirmity when he was cured and 'took up his bed and walked' (5.9), 
at which the Jews rebuked him because 'it is not lawful for you to pick up 
your bed' on the Sabbath (5.10). As it happens, 'picking up your bed and 
moving it' on the Sabbath is the thirty-ninth prohibition of labors in the 
Mishnah, the last of the 'forty less one' prohibited acts ('he who transports 
an object from one domain to another').240 So here we have a man who was 
accused of violating the thirty-ninth Sabbath prohibition, violating it in his 
thirty-ninth year of illness. This is myth, not history. However much John 
colors his account with historical trivia about old Jerusalem, he is still just 
making all this up.241 
8. Weighing the Evidence 
The Gospels generally afford us no evidence whatever for discerning a 
historical Jesus. Because of their extensive use of fabrication and literary 
invention and their placing of other goals far ahead of what we regard as 
'historical truth', we cannot know if anything in them has any historical 
239. Leach, 'Fishing for Men'. p. 595; see also Grant, 'One Hundred Fifty-Three 
Large Fish'. Other theories of what the number meant were proposed by ancient 
Christian exegetes (surveyed by Grant) and modern mythicists (such as that it has some 
connection with Pythagorean mysticism), but Jerome's is the simplest and makes the 
most interpretive sense of the number's placement in the text. 
240. Mishnah. Shabbat 7.2 (lines L and M). 
241. On various other difficulties with this passage see David Wieand, 'John V.2 
and the Pool ofBethesda', New Testament Studies 12 (1965-1966), pp. 392-404. Among 
the other artifices in this tale are the covert fact that Jesus himself is the Sheep Gate 
(Jn 10.7 thus explains Jn 5.2) and the more overt fact that the whole story creatively 
redacts (and changes the message of) a well-known Synoptic pericope (Mk 2.1-12. 
which became Mt. 9.1-8 and Acts 9.33-34) by combining it with another Johannine 
reification of a Lucan arable Lk. 11.46 . 

J 0. The Gospels 
507 
basis-except what we can verify externally, which for Jesus is next to 
nothing. They are simply myths about Jesus and the gospel. They are not 
seriously researched biographies or historical accounts-and are certainly 
not eyewitness testimonies or even collected hearsay. Their literary art and 
structure are simply too sophisticated for that. This is equally expected on 
both minimal historicity and minimal mythicism, however, and therefore 
(apart from what we've already accounted for in determing the prior prob­
ability in Chapter 6) the Gospels have no effect on the probability that Jesus 
existed, neither to raise or lower it. 242 
A more ardent skeptic could disagree. Here I am arguing a fortiori, 
and as such granting historicity its best shot. But some w111 still ask why 
the Gospels appear out of nowhere forty to eighty years after the fact, as 
fully structured literary myths, rather than there first being more mundane 
reports, memoirs and accounts, closer to the events concerned, only later 
evolving into increasingly grandiose myths. Like the example of Haile 
Selassie in Chapter 2 (in §1): we have abundant mundane records of the 
man, and then later appear the sacred myths. Why is this not the case for 
Jesus? On background evidence we can perhaps expect the why of it is that 
the Church had no motive to preserve any of that earlier stuff; l have already 
discussed that possibility well enough in Chapter 8 (in §§3, 4 and 12). The 
matter logically belongs there; although a related matter is why there aren't 
such details even in the Epistles (as we'll see in the next chapter). Here we 
are concerned only with the content of the Gospels by themselves. And as 
such, even as completely fabricated myths, they could be such for a histori­
cal man or a cosmic one. From the material examined here, I see neither as 
inherently more likely. We have to look elsewhere for evidence. 
A more ardent apologist might disagree in the other direction, and ask 
how it is the cosmic myths became earthly myths. Isn't a historical Jesus 
in fact more mundane, and thus a shift in an unexpected direction? More 
mundane, yes; but unexpected, no. That very trend to euhemerize (and thus 
make more mundane the tales of cosmic gods) was actuaJiy typical (Element 
45). Indeed, to serve their obvious function as models for missionary life, 
values and teaching, not only must Jesus' story be transformed to resemble 
the earthly experience of missionaries (by having him interact with the world 
and society they live in), but a Gospel's text also becomes considerably more 
powerful and effective if it is also taken literally. As I've said before (Chapter 
8, § 12). Because it's harder to believe you should follow a fictional model, 
whereas if you believe Jesus really did and said these things, then you have 
a much stronger impetus to be awed by that and strive to follow his example. 
242. This represents the mathematical result of the 'excess of improbabilities' 
defining the principle of contamination in Stephen Law, •Evidence. Miracles' (as such 
· 
· · ies need not be confined to the miraculous 
di 
· 

508 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
Such historicizing also gave church hierarchies more control over doc­
trine and a rhetorical advantage over competitors, and thus it is more likely 
to be an observed feature of the eventually prevailing sect. As noted in 
Chapter 8 (§12), this gave church hierarchies more control over doctrine 
because they could then claim to have it from an unbroken line oftradents, 
in a set of documents and claims they themselves controlled, so no one 
could bypass their authority by continuing to receive updated revelations 
from Jesus or his angels. Paul was already trying to battle this problem 
in Gal. 1.8-1 0; the Montanist sect would represent the last vestige of that 
Pauline model of establishing authority, and that was stamped out by more 
successful sects, who (to win such debates) invented a canon and a trruli­
tion history, which once established could not as easily be changed-and 
so those in power got to pick their successors from then on, the ultimate 
dream of every oligarchy. 
We already saw that this was a routine trend all across ancient religion 
(see Element 44). The result is that the later Gospels (Luke and John) began 
explicitly selling themselves as historical truth (even while they continued 
composing in the same fictional-symbolic way, evidently in a nod to the 
'more enlightened' Christians, as well as in a bid to market to everyone the 
ideas those stories symbolized, this time in a package more ardently sold as 
'historically true'), while the other Gospels (Mark and Matthew) also began 
to be sold as such, even if they did not so obviously sell themselves that 
way at first. Possibly higher ranking insiders were let in on the truth, but the 
majority could not be, for fear they 'couldn't handle it' and thus would reject 
the gospel and not be saved. This elitist disdain for the lower ranks of the 
membership is reflected in later Christian literature, where we saw that this 
doctrine of double-meaning (one, the symbolic and allegorical, for the elite; 
and the other, the literal, for the hoi polloi) had certainly become standard 
in the church by the end of the second century (which necessitated keep­
ing the purely esoteric meaning as far from public knowledge as reasonably 
possible). There is no reason to believe this two-tiered system of knowledge 
did not already exist from the very beginning. In fact, Paul attests to such a 
system already existing in his churches, and it appears to have existed even 
before he arrived. (On all of this, see again Element 13.) 
As I noted earlier, this should have consequences to future research on 
the Gospels. We need to shift entirely to asking the question 'What is the 
author attempting to say or accomplish with this story, or with his revision 
of this story?' and not 'Did that actually happen?' Because the latter simply 
wasn't a concern of these authors. Even if they were concerned to convince 
people it happened, they were not themselves concerned if it actually did. 
They had a different agenda, and are crafting the myths they need to sell it. 
The Gospels were produced by faith communities for preaching, teaching 

10. The Gospels 
509 
and propaganda, and not as disinterested or even interested biographical 
inquiry. There is no indication in them of a quest to determine what Jesus 
really said or did. There is no discussion of sources or of reasons to prefer 
one claim to another or of attempts to interpret contradictory data or even 
any mention of the existence of real alternative accounts (even though we 
know they knew of them-because they all covertly used them as source 
material). Each author just makes Jesus say or do whatever they want. They 
change the story as suits them and neglect to mention they did so. They 
craft literary artifices and symbolic narratives routinely. They frequently 
rewrite classical and biblical stories and just insert Jesus into them. If will­
ing to do all that (and plainly they were), the authors of the Gospels clearly 
had no interest in any actual historical data. And if they had no interest 
in that (and plainly they didn't), they didn't need a historical Jesus. Even 
if there had been one, he was wholly irrelevant to their aims and designs. 
These are thus not historians. They are mythographers; novelists; propa­
gandists. They are deliberately inventing what they present in their texts. 
And they are doing it for a reason (even if we can't always discern what 
that is). The Gospels simply must be approached as such. We have to stop 
thinking we can use them as historical sources. 
The consequence of this to the present query is simple: from the survey 
in this chapter it's clear that if we went from pericope to pericope assess­
ing the likelihood of it being true (rather than invented to communicate a 
desired point or to fit a pre-planned narrative structure), each time updating 
our prior probability that anything in the Gospels can be considered reli­
able evidence for a historical Jesus, then that probability would consistently 
go down (or level off somewhere low), but never rise. 243 In fact I have not 
found a single pericope in these Gospels that is more likely true than false. 
These Gospels are therefore no different than the dozens of other Gospels 
that weren't selected for the canon (as discussed in Element 44). They are 
all just made-up stories. 
To change this conclusion, historicists need to find a way to prove that 
something about the historical Jesus in the Gospels is probably true (not 
possibly true, but probably true). They have often attempted this, but so 
far only with completely invalid methods (as I have already thoroughly 
documented in Chapter 5 of Proving History). I see no prospect of any valid 
method ever succeeding at that task. But only time will telL For now, my 
conclusion is that we can ascertain nothing in the Gospels that can usefully 
verity the historicity of Jesus. But neither do they prove he didn't exist. As 
evidence, they simply make no difference to that equation. 
243. On how one would apply this method of iteration using Bayes's Theorem, see 
'iteration, method or, in Carrier. Proving History, p. 337. 

1 1  
THE EVIDENCE OF THE EPISTLES 
1 .  The Passion of Pliny the Elder 
Pliny the Younger wrote a lot about his uncle and adoptive father, Pliny the 
Elder.1 And the younger Pliny's good friend Tacitus was fascinated by his 
uncle's heroic death. So he wrote Pliny a letter asking him to tell him all he 
knew about the circumstances of the elder Pliny's death and how he bore it 
and how he acted in his final days. Tacitus wanted to include something on 
it in the history he was writing, but it's obvious he really just wanted to hear 
about this remarkable and heroic story. Who wouldn't? Human curiosity is 
universal, and something like this could not just be let aside as of no inter­
est. The circumstances of his death, after all, were 'so memorable that it is 
likely to make his name live forever' .2 Much like Jesus, according to some. 
Glad to answer Tacitus, the younger Pliny wrote him a letter containing 
an extensive eyewitness account of all he saw and knew about his father's 
death, in around 1 ,500 words.3 For comparison, Paul's letter to the Gala­
tians, one of his shortest, contains around 3,000 words; Romans, nearly 
I. For example: Pliny, Letters 3.5, 5.8, 6. 16, 6.20. 
2. Pliny, Letters 6. 16.2. We've met these Plinys before (see Chapter 8, §§3 and 10). 
We have abundant direct and indirect textual, eyewitness and archaeological evidence 
of Pliny the Elder's life and influence and know far more about him than Jesus. likewise 
Pliny the Younger (both making a good example of the kind of evidence we could have 
had for Jesus had he been as famous or influential). This evidence is discussed even in 
Wikipedia ('Pliny the Elder' at http://en. wikipedia.org/wiki/Piiny _the_ Elder) and Livius 
('Pliny the Younger [I]' at http://ww.livius.org/pi-pm/pliny/pliny_y.htm). For more 
formal confinnation see 'Pliny (1) the Elder' and 'Pliny (2) the Younger' in the Oxford 
Classical Dictionary (ed. Simon Hornblower and Antony Spawforth; Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 3rd edn, 1995), pp. 1 197-98. 
3. Pliny, Letters 6. 16. This letter is, by the way, a good example of what an honest. 
straightforward historical account looks like, in contrast to the farcical literary artifices 
of the Gospels (as shown in the previous chapter). That is not to say that nothing in 
Pliny's account can be questioned, but rather that Pliny is doing precisely what the 
authors of the Gospels were not-to the extent that we know we can trust most of what 
Pliny says, but none of what the Gospels do. In Bayesian terms, Pliny's letter contains 

1 1 .  The Epistles 
511 
10,000 (although either or both may be a pastiche of what had previously 
been several shorter letters).4 Overall we have around 20,000 words from 
Paul. But in Pliny's mere 1 ,500 words we learn that his father died from res­
piratory failure after breathing the ashfall of Mount Vesuvius in his attempt 
to investigate the disaster and rescue survivors as commander of the Roman 
naval fleet stationed nearby. Pliny relates as much detail as he was witness 
to and those present informed him of.5 Pliny's response peaked Tacitus's 
curiosity and questions even more, and he wrote again, asking what the 
younger Pliny himself did in the days immediately following that tragedy. 
Pliny again obliged him with an account of that in a following letter.6 As 
Pliny says, 'the Jetter which you asked me to write on my uncle's death has 
made you eager to hear about the terrors and also the hazards 1 had to face' 
afterward. 7 
This is the kind of exchange of letters we should expect to have from the 
earliest Christians. Not necessarily in every respect, but surely something 
like it. Curiosity, the burning desire to know, to have firsthand accounts, 
to have specific questions answered and desires for knowledge satisfied, 
would dominate every congregation under Paul and beyond, most espe­
cially in respect to the Son of God and Savior of the Universe whose deeds 
and speeches and death were (for them) the most important in all of his­
tory. The same burning desires exhibited by Tacitus and eagerly satisfied 
attributes that place it within a completely different reference class from the Gospels, 
one in which the prior probability of honesty and reliability is far greater. 
4. For example, there is evidence that Romans was originally at least three separate 
letters, one of which was actually a church manual, which was split up and merged 
with an unrelated letter on a similar subject, and then a third letter was tacked onto 
the end (chap. 16, originally a stand-alone letter of introduction for Phoebe, per Rom. 
16.1, which itseJf has become corrupted: many mss. show that Rom. 16.25-27 was 
originally part of another letter, and indeed it more logically belongs after Rom. 14.23, 
while Rom. 16. 17 ·20 is even more clearly out of place and has probably likewise 
ben displaced from that other letter, although we do not have clues as to its original 
location), all more or less edited to make the resulting 'Frankenstein's monster' look 
like a single continuous letter: Junji Kinoshita, 'Romans: Two Writings Combined: A 
New Interpretation ofthe Body ofRomans', Novum Testamentum 7 (October 1965), pp. 
258-77. Many scholars suspect the letters to the Corinthians, Galatians, Philippians and 
Thessalonians are Jikewise mishmashes of what were originally multiple letters (and not 
necessarily to the same destinations), and that some letters are redactions of others: see 
Rainer Reuter, 'Introduction to Synoptic Work on the New Testament Epistles', Journal 
of Higher Criticism 9.2 (Fall 2002), pp. 246-58; Philip SeHew, ... Laodiceans" and the 
Philippians Fragments Hypothesis', Harvard Theological Review 87 (January 1994 ), pp. 
17-28; etc. For some evidence that this is the case for I Corinthians, see § 10. 
S. Pliny, Letters 6.16.22. 
6. Pliny, Letters 6.20. 
7. Pliny, Letters 6.20.1. 

5 12 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
by Pliny would have been multiplied a hundredfold in the two decades of 
Paul's mission, given the number of Christians and distant churches there 
were by then, spanning three continents. For not even one person to have 
ever exhibited this interest in writing nor for any to have so satisfied it is 
bizarre. Saying this all went on in person is simply insufficient to answer the 
point: if everything was being resolved in person, Paul would never have 
written a single letter; nor would his congregations have so often written 
him letters requesting he write to satisfy their questions-which for some 
reason always concerned only doctrine and rules of conduct, never the far 
more interesting subject of how the Son of God lived and died. On the other 
matters Paul was compelled to write tens of thousands of words. If he had 
to write so much on those issues, how is it possible no one ever asked for or 
wrote even one word on the more obvious and burning issues of the facts of 
Jesus' life and death? 
This oddity is all the greater given that there were countless moral and 
doctrinal disputes arising in these congregations (the very reason Paul wrote 
such long and detailed letters), which must necessarily have rested on many 
questions that the actual facts of Jesus' words, life and death would have 
addressed, answered or pertained to. Such facts would thus necessarily 
become points of query, debate and contention. Which in turn would have 
involved eyewitnesses weighing in, either directly (writing letters them­
selves), indirectly (by dictating letters through hired scribes, which were 
abundantly available for just that purpose; there were surely even scribes 
within Christian congregations willing to volunteer), or by proxy ( commu­
nicating with educated leaders like Paul, who would then relay what they 
learned). I've made this point already (as in Chapter 8, §4). But it bears 
repeating here because it proves by contrast how very bizarre the letters of 
Paul actually are. 
It is crucial to understand the methodological logic from here forward­
not only when we think about what's just been said but even more so when 
we go through the remaining sections of this chapter. Because, although 
the following applies to every piece of evidence examined in this book, and 
beyond, here biases are the most pernicious. If you approach the text with 
gut reactions of what you think Paul (or any other author) probably meant, 
you are not thinking in a logically sound way. Those estimates of probabil­
ity are in fact measures of the strength of your bias toward one conclusion 
over another, and not the probability of those biases being correct. Hence 
those probabilities, those estimates, those gut feelings are precisely what 
you should discard. This is why we need Bayesian reasoning, to prevent us 
from simply enshrining our biases as the truth (on this point, my book Prov­
ing History is essential reading). You would have to justifY those biases at 
the stage of determining the prior probability (Chapter 6). Otherwise, you 
cannot abide by them at all. 

1 1 .  The Epistles 
513 
The logically correct way to reason from evidence to a conclusion is to 
assume that a hypothesis is true (for the sake of argument-in other words, 
wholly regardless of whether you already think the hypothesis is probable 
or not, you must assume it is not only probable but in fact true), and then 
ask how likely the particular piece of evidence you are looking at would be 
in that case. You must do this for both competing hypotheses (thus generat­
ing two estimates of probability, not one). Thus, you must assume minimal 
historicity is true (then estimate how likely the passage you are looking at 
would be what Paul would write, for example) but you must also assume 
minimal mythicism is true (and then estimate how likely the passage you 
are looking at would be what Paul would write in that case). The differ­
ence in those probabilities is the weight of the evidence (toward whichever 
hypothesis entails the higher of those probabilities). If there is no differ­
ence, then the passage argues for neither hypothesis (it is equally likely on 
either one). 
The reason I make a point of this is that the most common, and wholly 
erroneous, way scholars look at arguments like the following is to simply 
assume, a priori, that a particular interpretation is unlikely. But that is sim­
ply a measure of the strength of your bias. It is not a measure of any logically 
valid effect of that evidence on your conclusion. The question you should 
ask here is not 'Is that likely what Paul would have meant by that?' but 
rather, 'If Paul was in fact a mythicist, is that likely what he would write?' 
(and then 'If Paul was in fact a historicist, is that likely what he would 
write?', for the comparative probability). You will find time and again the 
answer to the first question is 'yes, almost certainly'. Which means that that 
passage cannot argue for historicity even if Paul was a historicist, and even 
if historicity happened to be true. Because if a passage is already effectively 
100% what we expect on mythicism, its likelihood on historicity cannot be 
any significantly higher (since 100o/o is as high as any probability can be), 
and thus the difference in those two probabilities will favor neither hypoth­
esis, even at best (i.e. even if the passage is also 1 00% what we expect on 
historicity). And if that passage or chapter or letter is not what we expect on 
historicity but looks a little weird in that case, then that probability has to 
be less than 100o/o (even if only a little), and that means the evidence argues 
against historicity (even if only a little). So even if, for example, a passage 
is 90% expected on history (and thus very probable in that case), if that 
same passage is 1 OOo/o expected on myth, then that evidence argues for myth 
(because the probability ofhistoricity must then be multiplied by 9/l Oths on 
that evidence, a small reduction but a reduction all the same). I'll say more 
about that in the next chapter. 
This is often hard for historians to grasp, because they typically have not 
studied logic and don't usually know the logical basis for any of their modes 
of reasoning and thus have all too often simply enshrined ad hoc estimates 

514 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
of their bias-strength as arguments for a conclusion, which is not logical. 
The 'consensus' in history in fact is often based on that faulty logic, which 
is why history as a field has a deep and abiding methodological problem, 
and 'consensus' is not an intrinsically reliable guide to what's true in history 
(see Chapter 1 of Proving History for how bad this has become in the study 
of Jesus, though the problem is not unique to that topic). I am not the first 
to point this out. It was extensively documented by David Hackett Fischer 
in Historians ' Fallacies: Toward a Logic of Historical Thought (New York: 
Harper & Row, 1970). 
So when we approach interpretations of the Epistles of Paul (as with 
any evidence at all) we must look at each passage with the assumption that 
mythicism is true (something historians of Jesus have typically never done), 
and then estimate how likely it would be that the passage would look like 
that. And then look at that same passage with the assumption that historicity 
is true and do the same. The latter probability may even be high. But is it 
as high as the probability on mythicism? (Or higher?) That's the only ques­
tion that logically matters. Because what we want is the difference in those 
two probabilities. Though biases can still affect these estimates, we are at 
least not simply using our biases as our premises but actually attempting to 
reason out which theory the evidence fits better, and taking both theories 
seriously when we do. With that understood, we can proceed. 
2. The Peculiar Indiference of Paul and his Christians 
As a psychologist once put it (about Paul's letter to fellow congregants in 
Rome, whom he had not yet met and thus can't have shared his own stories 
with): 
Imagine for a moment that one of your friends writes you a twenty-page 
letter passionately wanting to share her excitement about a new teacher. 
This letter has only one topic, your friend's new teacher. [But] at the end 
of her letter, you still do not know one thing about her teacher. Yet, Paul 
presents the central figure of his theology this way .
. . .  It [seems] impos­
sible to imagine how Paul could avoid telling one story or parable of--or 
fai I to note one physical trait or personal quality of-Jesus. 3 
Indeed, Paul mentions 'Jesus' or 'Christ' in his seven authentic letters at 
least 280 times-and that doesn't count other references to him as only 'the 
Lord' or 'Son of God'. Altogether, Paul found over three hundred occa­
sions to mention Jesus (by some name or title), and on at least half of those 
occasions he tells us some particular fact or other about this Jesus. But (as 
8. Billy Wheaton and Joy Fuller, Hooks and Laders: A Journey on a Bridge to 
Nowhere with American Evangelical Christians (Bloomington, IN: iUniverse, 2009), 
p. 31. 

I I .  The Epistles 
515 
we'll see) not one of those facts connects Jesus with an earthly life (with­
out adding suppositions not in the text). His crucifixion is mentioned over 
fifteen times; and his resurrection, over thirty times. But never any details. 
So those could have occurred in outer space (as explained in Chapter 3). We 
hear very little else.9 
In fact, as we'll see in this chapter, the only Jesus Paul shows any knowl­
edge of is a celestial being, not an earthly man. Paul's Jesus is only ever 
in the heavens. Never once is his baptism mentioned, or his ministry, or 
his trial, or any of his miracles, or any historical details about what he was 
like, what he did, or suffered, or where he was from, or where he had been, 
or what people he knew. No memories from those who knew him are ever 
reported. Paul never mentions Galilee or Nazareth, or Pilate or Mary or 
Joseph, or any miracles Jesus did or any miraculous powers he is supposed 
to have displayed . . .  or anything about the life of Jesus not in the Gos­
pels. Paul never references any event in Jesus' life as an example to follow 
(beyond the abstractions of love, endurance and submissiveness), and never 
places anything Jesus said in any earthly historical context whatever. So 
far as these letters tell us, no Christian ever asked Paul about these things, 
either. Nor did any of these things ever become relevant in any dispute Paul 
had with anyone. Not one of his opponents, so far as Paul mentions, ever 
referenced a fact about Jesus' life in support of their arguments. And no 
one ever doubted anything claimed about Jesus and asked for witnesses to 
confinn it or explain it or give more details. The interest Tacitus showed in 
Pliny's father is never exhibited by any of them, nor is Pliny's eagerness to 
talk about his father ever exhibited by Paul in his eagerness to talk about 
Jesus-and yet Paul talks obsessively and repeatedly about Jesus. 
That's all simply bizarre. And bizarre means unexpected, which means 
infrequent, which means improbable. Accordingly, historicists have to 
explain why in Paul's letters there are no disputes about what Jesus said or 
did, and why no specific example from his life is ever referred to as a model, 
not even to encourage or teach anything or to resolve any disputes, and why 
the only sources Paul ever refers to for anything he claims to know about 
Jesus are private revelations and hidden messages in scripture (Element 
16), and why Paul appears not to know of there being any other sources than 
these (like, e.g., people who knew Jesus). Whatever explanation historicists 
devise for these curiosities has to be demonstrably true, and not something 
9. After completing this book I received notice of a handy Webpage listing all the 
alleged instances of Paul referencing a historical Jesus, assembled by Dave Mack, 'What 
Did Paul Know about the Life and Teachings of Jesus?' bib/eLAD (May 17, 201 3) at 
http://biblelad. wordpress.com/category/historical-jesus-2. I already addressed them all 
in this chapter, but felt i
_
t w?rthwhĘle to include this link for its utility. I will cite scholarly 
articles on the same pomt m commg notes. 

5 16 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
they just make up to explain away the evidence. Because such 'making up 
of excuses' would risk the fallacy of gerrymandering, which necessarily 
lowers your theory's prior probability since you have to assume facts that 
aren't in evidence and that aren't made probable by any evidence there is.10 
All this is evident in such passages as Gal. 1 . 1 1-16, where Paul says he 
received the gospel only by revelation, and in Rom. 15.25-26, where scrip­
ture and revelation are the only sources of information about Jesus that Paul 
mentions Christians having. In Rom. 1 5.3-4 Paul even appears to say that 
we have to learn things about Jesus by discovering them in scripture; Paul 
apparently knew nothing about any community of witnesses to consult for 
such things (he even appears to deny any such sources existed in 1 Cor. 4.6. 
beyond revelators such as himself). Combining both observations, in 1 Cor. 
1 5.1-9 Paul says the gospel that was revealed to him (as he says in Gal. 
1 ;  see §4) was known only by revelation and scripture. Stranger still, that 
gospel lacked any reference to Jesus having a ministry or ever preaching 
the gospel, or performing great deeds, or having parents who were Davidic 
heirs, or being chosen by God at his baptism. All Paul tells us is this: 
For I delivered to you first of all that which also I received: that according 
to the scriptures Christ died for our sins, and that he was buried, and that 
according to the scriptures he has been raised on the third day, and that 
he appeared to Cephas, and then to 'the twelve' and then he appeared [to 
hundreds of brethren all at once) and then he appeared to James, and then 
to all the apostles, and last of all to me as well, as if to an aborted fetus­
because I am the least of the apostles, who is not fit to be called an apostle. 
because I persecuted the Assembly ofGod.11 
Note what is missing here. We're told Christ's death and resurrection are 
known from the scriptures; but he was only seen after that. There is no ref-
10. See Carrier, Proving History, pp. 80-8 1, 104-105. 277-80. On the often-invisible 
reliance on such ad hoc assumptions to 'read into' Paul things that aren't there, see my 
commentary on one example in Richard Carrier, 'The Goodacre Debate', Richard Carrier 
Blogs (December 20, 2012) at http://freethoughtblogs.com/carrier/archives/2839. 
II. I Cor. 15.3-9. I believe this passage has become multiply corrupted, deliberately 
and accidentaiJy, and that it originally may have referenced only Cephas and Paul and 
'all the brethren at the Pentecost' (not 'five hundred brethren', the word pentakosiois 
being just a few letters away from pentȎkostȎs, 'Pentecost', meaning the very event 
fictionalized by Luke in Acts 2). I think the verbal and narrative similarities are too 
numerous to be a coincidence {see Carrier, 'Spiritual Body', in Empty Tomb [ed. Price 
and Lowder], pp. 192-93). Indeed, this would connect with Paul's claim in the same 
chapter that Christ's resurrection was the 'firstfruits' ( I  Cor. 1 5.20). which actually 
references the Pentecost For an even more extreme view, see Robert Price, 'Apocryphal 
Apparitions: I Cor. 15.3- 1 1  as a Post-Pauline Interpolation', in Empty Tomb (ed. Price 
and Lowder), pp. 69-104. However, to avoid needlessly controversial premises here. I 
will simply assume the passage as we have it is what Paul wrote. 

1 1 .  The Epistles 
517 
erence here to 'Cephas' or 'the twelve' (or any of the others) seeing Jesus 
before his death, or having traveled with him, or having sat at his feet, or 
having been personally chosen by him. In other words, according to Paul's 
gospel, Jesus had no ministry and was personally unknown to anyone until 
he appeared to an elect number after his resurrection. This is confirmed in 
Phil. 2.5- 1 1 ,  where again Jesus has no ministry: all he does is descend from 
heaven, submit to death and reascend (discussed in §4 ). 
This accords with what we found in 1 Clement (as I demonstrated in 
Chapter 8, §5), where not only is scripture and private revelation again the 
only way anyone appears to have known about Jesus, but where Clement 
actually quotes scripture as the words of Jesus, and only cites scripture as his 
evidence that certain things happened to Jesus, and says it is only through 
the apostles that Jesus transmitted the gospel (thus effectively denying Jesus 
had any public ministry). Thus, exactly as Paul (or one of his successors) 
says, the gospel was only ever learned from 'revelation' and the 'writings 
of the prophets' (Rom. 16.25-26).12 Not from any public ministry. And thus 
not from any (actual) historical Jesus. Thus, we see the same in Gal. 1 . 1 1-1 2 
(where revelation is his only source) and 1 Cor. 15.3-8 (where scripture and 
revelation are the only sources he or anyone else has). 
Even in 1 Cor. 1 1 .23-25 Paul references revelation as his only source (as 
I'll explain in §7), precisely where we should expect human testimony to 
be his only possible source; and in Rom. 15.3-4 Paul all but admits to there 
being no actual stories about Jesus, that to learn things about him we have 
to turn to the scriptures (or again, revelations). This is what these letters 
simply say, when taken by themselves (and this is corroborated by other let­
ters from the Pauline school: e.g. Eph. 3.3-12 and Col. 1 .24-29). It therefore 
requires no other added suppositions. This is therefore the simplest hypoth­
esis for why Paul never showed any interest in the historical Jesus, nor did 
any of his congregations, nor did any of his opponents. Because there was 
no historical Jesus. There was only a revealed being. Which was not any­
thing one could dispute-except by claiming to have contrary revelations 
(hence Gal. 1 .6-9). 
Apologetic attempts to dodge this bullet always involve suppositions, 
which are either not in evidence or implausible. Like, for example, the 
excuse that the earliest Christians, including even Paul and his opponents 
in the church, simply weren't interested in anything Jesus said or did in his 
life. There is no evidence ofthat. To the contrary, the letters are full of inter­
est in Jesus' death and what it accomplished and what words he revealed to 
his apostles. And a disinterest in everything else goes against all precedents 
in history and human nature. It should also be pointed out that if no Chris-
12. On who wrote this verse see Chapter 7 (§7). 

5 1 8  
On the Historicity of Jesus 
tians were interested in any details of Jesus' life, then they cannot have 
transmitted any details of his life, either. The Gospels are therefore con­
finned as fictions. For as 1 already remarked (in Chapters 6, §7, and 8, §4), 
you cannot claim the Christians were simultaneously keen to accurately 
preserve memories of Jesus and completely uninterested in any memories 
of Jesus. So the notion that 'they didn't care about any of that' is simply a 
non-starter. Only the desperately illogical would cling to such a thesis. 
Another common excuse is to say that Paul's letters were just 'occa­
sional', addressing only the specific issues that came up, and were not thor­
ough treatises on what Jesus said and did. The premise here is certainly 
correct. The conclusion is not. Why weren't any facts about the life or deeds 
or teachings or trial or execution of Jesus ever themselves an 'occasion' of 
query or example or proof or dispute? Why were such things never relevant 
to any doctrine or question or dispute in the church that Paul spent thou­
sands of words addressing? It's not that the letters we have suggest Paul 
was asked or tasked with discussing or mentioning such things and he failed 
to answer. Rather, it's that, so far as we can tell, no letters sent to him ever 
asked or tasked him with discussing or mentioning such things. No event 
in Jesus' life, no details of Jesus' life, ever had any relevance to any of the 
occasional issues he addressed, and no one ever used such events or details 
in any argument Paul ever had to confront. No one was even curious about 
such things. That is what is extremely improbable. Simply saying the letters 
were only 'occasional' does not make that fact any more likely. 
Indeed, we're not just faced with the extremely high expectation that at 
least something along those lines would come up or be relevant or asked 
about or debated. It's also improbable that even casual or incidental men­
tions of historical facts about Jesus would never arise, not once in twenty 
thousand words. Like Paul's happenstance mention of baptizing for the dead 
( 1 Cor. 1 5.29) or the fear of what angels might do if Christian women don't 
cover their hair in church ( I  Cor. 1 1 .9-10) or the fact that Christians will one 
day judge the angels (1 Cor. 6.3). Paul lets slip countless incidental details 
like these about Christian practice and belief, not because he was required 
to but simply because that sort of thing can't really be avoided. You would 
actually have to try very hard not to ever mention anything in twenty thou­
sand words beyond the bare few facts you need to communicate. That these 
kinds of incidental details about Jesus never appear, yet incidental details 
about many other things do, is again simply improbable. Unless there were 
no incidental details about Jesus.13 
1 3. Many historians fail to grasp the mathematical point here. They will explain 
away any single instance of something not being mentioned and then conclude that that 
explains why none are, not aware of the fact that the latter is less probable. For example, 
suppose for any given chapter of Paul's letters there was only a 1 in 20 (a mere 5%) 

1 1 .  The Epistles 
519 
Sure, there must have been a lot of details about the celestial Jesus and 
his ordeal in outer space (as, e.g., we know from Ignatius that the early 
Christians had a complex angelology: see Chapter 8, §6), but those were 
esoteric aspects of cult belief and doctrine, part of the Christian myster­
ies, and thus would often be secrets (Element 13; which the same example 
in Ignatius illustrates), or obviously not applicable to earthly affairs (and 
in these letters Paul generally only deals with earthly affairs). But public 
facts about the biography, ministry, feats, trial and execution of Jesus could 
not have been secrets. Nor would most of Jesus' teachings have been. Nor 
could public disputes about what he actually said or did not have arisen 
(when disputes about everything else did), nor could such disputes arise 
and not ever appeal to who was present to see and report them. Nor could 
it be that nothing in Jesus' life was relevant to the earthly affairs of Paul's 
Christian congregations. Or, again, that no one was curious to know them, 
or eager to reference or employ them in their arguments and communica­
tions. We simply never hear Paul say, 'from James I learned that Jesus, who 
was his brother in life, had said/done x', or answer, ' Peter says he was there 
when Jesus said x, so why is your teaching at odds with x?', or argue 'my 
revelations of Jesus are as good as those other apostles having known the 
man personally', or anything comparable. These are simply not arguments 
anywhere found in these Epistles, nor anything like them. And this was in a 
time when eyewitnesses were supposedly still living, abundant and running 
the church. That's weird. 
Many scholars have said much the same. In Gerd LUdemann's study of 
these letters he concluded: 
Not once does Paul refer to Jesus as a teacher, to his words as teaching, 
or to [any] Christians as disciples. In this regard it is of the greatest sig­
nificance that when Paul cites 'sayings of Jesus', they are never so desig­
nated; rather, without a single exception, he attributes such sayings to 'the 
Lord' . . . .  Paul thought that a person named Jesus had lived and that he 
now sat at the right hand of God in heaven. Yet he shows only a passing 
chance that he would mention or describe some definitely historical fact about Jesus. 
There are over sixty chapters in Paul's letters. Even if such a mention in any one of those 
chapters is that improbable ( I in 20), that there would be no mention in any of them is 
even more improbable: P(none) = 1 
- (0.05t.o = 0.046 (rounded), in other words, less 
than 5%. Which means there is a more than 95% chance we would have at least one such 
mention. So the fact that we have none is bizarre. And that's assuming every chapter 
had only a 5% chance of mentioning something of the intended sort, which is surely 
unrealistically low. Many chapters would have benefitted hugely from such a mention 
or could hardly have been written without referencing such a thing, and if Jesus existed, 
many chapters would have been specifically about his ministry or people's recollections 
of him, either to use them as examples or premises or to debate or dispute or defend them 
(or answer someone's curiosity about them). 

520 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
acquaintance with traditions related to his life and nowhere an independ­
ent acquaintance with them. In short, Paul cannot be considered a reli­
able witness to either the teachings, the life, or the historical existence of 
Jesus.14 
Indeed, despite Jesus being so central to Paul's every argument, 'it seems 
strange indeed that the Epistles so seldom make reference to [Jesus'] life 
and teachings' .15 LUdemann likewise finds modem excuses for this implau­
sible: 
The argument that [Paul] could assume his readers' familiarity with these 
[facts] because he had already passed them on in his missionary preaching 
[and therefore never had to mention them] is not convincing. He could and 
does presume some familiarity with the Greek translation of the Scrip­
ture, the Septuagint, which was mediated to his converts either by himself 
or earlier by the local Jewish community. For this reason he repeatedly 
and specifically cites it in the course of his ethical teaching. Moreover, 
when Paul himself summarizes the content of his missionary preaching 
in Corinth ( I  Cor. 2. 1 -2; 15.3-5), there is no hint that a narration of Jesus' 
earthly life or a report of his earthly teachings was an essential part of 
it. . . .  In the letter to the Romans, which cannot presuppose the apostle's 
missionary preaching and in which he attempts to summarize its main 
points, we find not a single direct citation of Jesus' teaching. One must 
record with some surprise the fact that Jesus' teachings seem to play a 
less vital role in Paul's religious and ethical instruction than does the Old 
Testament. 16 
LUdemann is not convinced Jesus didn't exist, but he finds the Epistles can 
be of no help in proving he did, and expresses his surprise at this. But if it's 
surprising, it's improbable. Because that's what 'surprising' means. In con­
trast, minimal mythicism maintains the Jesus 'Paul believed had lived as a 
man' only lived so in outer space; thus on that theory Paul's not mentioning 
any fact of his earthly life is not surprising. It is therefore more probable. 
Margaret Barker likewise expresses her perplexity at Paul's letters: 'at 
the centre of [Paul's] preaching there is not the teacher from Galilee but 
the Redeemer from heaven. Why?' Indeed, she argues, from his letters one 
would have to conclude that 'the Jesus who was only a teacher from Gali-
14. Gerd LOdemann, 'Paul as a Witness to the Historical Jesus', Sources of the Jesus 
Tradition: Separating History from Myth (Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 2010), pp. 
1 96-21 2  (2 1 1-12; emphasis added). 
1 5. LOdemann, 'Paul', p. 200. 
16. LUdemann, 'Paul', p. 21 1 (emphases added). See also Wells's additional 
argument and evidence in support of Ludemann's point, summarized in Robert Price, 
The Christ·Myth Theory and its Problems (Cranford, NJ: American Atheist Press, 201 1 ). 
pp. 356-59; see also Earl Doherty, Jesus: Neither God nor Man (The Case for a Mythical 
Jesus) (Ottawa: Age of Reason, 2009), pp. 25-82. 

•· 
:lP't' · 
I I .  The Epistles 
521 
lee disappeared from the tradition at a very early date, so early that one 
wonders whether it was ever there at all' Y Nikolaus Walter more or less 
concurs, concluding that 'we can detect no hint that Paul knew of the nar­
rative tradition about Jesus', which anyone ought to agree is 'surprising' . 1 8  
Even Helmut Koester admits, ' it is generally agreed that Paul's letters do 
not penn it any conelusions about the life of Jesus' .19 Kurt Noll goes further, 
concluding that the evidence in Paul's letters demonstrates that no fully 
fonned Jesus traditions, of either sayings or narratives, existed in Paul's 
day, and that all such traditions therefore post-date his generation.20 
Scholars are thus starting to rethink the sequence of events. Nikolaus 
Walter has concluded that many of the teachings attributed to Jesus in the 
Gospels were in fact fabricated out of the sayings of Paul, and that there 
simply wasn't any collection of teachings from Jesus beyond occasional 
revelations.21 James Dunn confesses that this 'would seem an odd conclu­
sion to be forced to' given what appears in the Gospels, but once we agree 
the Gospels are fiction, it does not look so odd after all, and even Dunn 
admits the letters are peculiar on any other assumption-so Dunn himself 
had to resort to the implausible hypothesis that Paul was everywhere simply 
implying Jesus as his authority.22 But that notion is exploded by the fact that 
Paul makes no such assumptions when citing scripture as his authority (so, 
as LUdemann argued, why would he treat Jesus differently?}, and in fact 
Paul frequently identifies Jesus ('the Lord') as his authority, and even takes 
care to distinguish between commands he received from his revealed Lord 
17. Margaret Barker, 'The Secret Tradition', Journal of Higher Criticism 2 (Spring 
1995), pp. 31-67 (58). 
18. Nikolaus Walter, 'Paul and the Early Christian Jesus-Tradition', in Paul and 
Jesus: Collected Essays (ed. A.J.M. Wedderburn; Sheffield: Sheffield Academic Press, 
1989), pp. 51-80 (60). 
19. Helmut Koester, 'The Historical Jesus and the Historical Situation of the Quest: 
An Epilogue', in Studying the Historical Jesus: Evaluation of the State of Current 
Research (ed. Bruce Chilton and Craig Evans; Leiden: Brill, 1994), pp. 535-45 (540). 
20. Kurt Noll, 'Investigating Earliest Christianity without Jesus', in 'ls This Not 
the Carpenter? ' The Question of the Historicity of the Figure of Jesus (ed. Thomas 
Thompson and Thomas Verenna; Sheffield: Equinox, 20 12), pp. 233-66. 
2 1 .  Nikolaus Walter, 'Paul'. His conclusion has been corroborated by lens Schrtster, 
'Jesus and the Canon: The Early Jesus Traditions in the Context of the Origins of the 
New Testament Canon •, in Performing the Gospel: Orality. Memory and Mark: Essays 
Dedicated to Werner Kelber (ed. R.A. Horsley, J .A. Draper and J .M. Foley; Minneapolis, 
MN: Fortress Press, 2006), pp. 104-22, 222-28. Their results are supported by the 
related conclusions of Frans Neirynck, 'Paul and the Sayings of Jesus', in Collected 
Essays, 1982-1991: Evangelica, Gospel Studies (ed. F. van Segbroeck; Leuven: Leuven 
University Press, 1991 ), pp. S 1 1 -68. 
22. James Dunn, 'Jesus Tradition in Paul', in Studying the Historical Jesus (ed. 
Chilton and Evans), PP· 1 SS-78 ( 1 73 ). 

522 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
and his own opinions (e.g. 1 Cor. 7.25 vs. 14.37 or 9.8 vs. 9.14).23 We have 
to face the fact of it. There simply is no source known to Paul, for him or 
anyone, but scripture and revelations from his celestial Jesus. And that all 
but rules out a historical Jesus. 
Mogens MOller attempts to save Jesus from this conclusion by admitting 
there is nothing in Paul's letters that confirms that Jesus recently existed but 
that 'we need, however, a broader understanding of the predicate "histori­
cal" as used in connection with the person of Jesus', such that: 
'historical' should not be employed simply in connection with attempts 
to reconstruct details in the life and teaching of Jesus, treating him solely 
as a figure of the past. The predicate 'historical' should be allowed also 
to include his impact as it has been conveyed to us through the meanings 
attached to his life . . . ,24 
But in that sense of 'historical', the mythic Christ-the Christ whom Paul 
would have said really did exist, living and dying and rising in outer space­
would also be a 'historical' Jesus. The term then becomes meaningless­
unless Muller wants to argue that Paul was right, there really is a Jesus 
Christ living in outer space. But that's a question for theology, not history. 
Either way, the effects of this 'Lord's' revelations, and how he was under­
stood from reading scripture, would then be the cause of all the 'effects' 
on Paul and his ideas that MUller then catalogues. Those effects therefore 
cannot distinguish between minimal historicity and minimal mythicism. 
Mt\ller's study is therefore impotent. Indeed, the fact that MOller had to 
resort to this tactic, that he was forced to concede Paul never talks about a 
historical Jesus in the 'other' sense, ought to be admitted as strange, and is 
itself confirmation that the mythicist thesis makes this evidence more likely. 
Accordingly, Thomas Verenna followed MOHer's study with a contrary one 
finding that Paul's letters more readily indicate that Paul had no knowledge 
of an earthly historical Jesus, but only a celestial one.25 These letters there­
fore are evidence for minimal mythicism. 
Other scholars are in denial over this. And in their efforts to deny it, 
they resort to fallacious and self-refuting notions. Robert Van Voorst pro­
vides a typical example when he says 'we should not expect to find exact 
23. For a complete list and discussion of Paul's only direct citations of 'the Lord· 
see Dale Allison, 'The Pauline Epistles and the Synoptic Gospels: The Pattern of the 
Parallels', New Testament Studies 28 (1982), pp. 1-32. See also Price, Christ-Myth 
Theory, pp. 359·60. 
24. Mogens MOller, 'Paul: The Oldest Witness to the Historical Jesus', in 'Is This 
Not the Carpenter? '  (ed. Thompson and Verenna), pp. 1 17-30 ( 120- 121). 
25. Thomas Verenna, 'Born under the Law: Intertextuality and the Question of the 
Historicity ofthe Figure of Jesus in Paul's Epistles', in '/s This Not the Carpenter? ' (ed. 
Thompson and Verenna), pp. 1 3 1-59. 

.. 
.. 
1 1. The Epistles 
523 
historical references in early Christian literature, which was not written 
for primarily historical purposes'.26 This attempt to deny the conclusion is 
twice fallacious. Because, in the first place, 'exact historical references' 
are not the only thing missing. The silence extends even to inexact histori­
cal references-in fact, all historical references of any kind, beyond details 
so vague they are just as expected on minimal mythicism and thus unable 
to demonstrate minimal historicity. And in the second place, the general 
rule Van Voorst is presuming (that if early documents about a person were 
not written for primarily historical purposes, then we should not expect to 
find in those documents any historical details about that person) is not even 
remotely defensible, and in fact is generally false. Letters about persons 
almost always contain historical references to them. In fact, our expectation 
should be exactly the opposite in exactly this case: when the person in ques­
tion is believed by the letter writer (and his intended readers) to have been 
God's Incarnate Son, the Savior of the Universe, the most important being 
ever to walk the earth, whose every utterance is the Word of God and every 
act evidence of his mission and teachings and qualifications as divine and 
the ultimate example for all doctrine and conduct, when every letter about 
him is primarily on conveying knowledge or resolving disputes about who 
he was and what his true teachings were, it is simply impossible to avoid 
ever once mentioning any details about that man's life and character. Such a 
writer could not fail to call upon or have to debate things Jesus actually said 
and did or that were said and done to him. 
In short, it is simply not conceivable that the historical Jesus never said 
or did anything, nor was anything ever said or done to him, that was rel­
evant to resolving any dispute or supporting any teaching raised in these 
letters, or to satisfYing anyone's curiosity, or even just to be mentioned in 
passing. Even if the author wanted to avoid mentioning every single thing 
Jesus did say or do and every single thing said or done to him, because it 
all-all of it, every last bit of it-contradicted what they were teaching, 
then their audience (and especially their opponents) would be asking them 
and challenging them with exactly that fact, so even then they would be 
compelled to respond, and thus compelled to mention such things anyway. 
Quite simply, the more you write about a man, the more the probability 
rises that at some point you' 11 mention in passing at least some such details 
about him (things he said, did, heard, suffered; matters regarding his friends 
and relations, his origins and travels; people's memories of him, including 
any reports being spread by his enemies; and so on). To avoid ever mention­
ing even one such detail in over twenty thousand words becomes increas­
ingly improbable, until that probability starts to become small to the point 
26. Robert Van Voorst, Jesus Outside the New Testament: An Introduction to the 
Ancient Evidence (Grand Rapids, MI: William B. Eerdrnans, 2000), p. 15. 

524 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
ofpeculiarity.27 We simply must concede: the silence of these letters is very 
improbable. To insist it is nevertheless 'possible' is irrelevant: you still have 
to face the fact of its improbability, and that improbability must always fac­
tor into your equation. 28 
Thus it becomes very significant (as LUdemann pointed out) that Paul 
never once mentions anyone being Jesus' 'disciple' (he never uses that 
word at all; not even 'the twelve' in 1 Cor. 15.5 are said to be 'the twelve 
disciples'). Paul only knows of 'apostles', who, like him, received revela­
tions of the Lord (I Cor. 9. 1; Gal. l . l ;  etc.) and confirmed their status by 
proving God had bestowed on them miraculous powers (2 Cor. 1 2.12). So 
when Paul ranks the members of the church in order of authority, he says, 
'God has set some in the church, first apostles, secondly prophets, thirdly 
teachers, then those with powers [most likely exorcists], then charismatic 
healers, then aides, administrators, and speakers in tongues' (1 Cor. 12.28). 
Disciples don't make the list. They don't exist. Instead, first in rank are 
simply all the 'apostles' like Paul. A special category of those who knew 
Jesus in life and were personally selected by him then, or were his family, 
is entirely absent. And these apostles include people we never hear about 
elsewhere, such as Apollos ( 1 Cor. 3.4-5) or possibly Andronicus and Junias 
(or Junia, Rom. 16.7). 
Paul never even says the three pillars (the Cephas, James and John of Gal. 
2.9) were Jesus' followers in life or were specially appointed by him. Only 
in the Gospels does that legend appear (Cephas then being Peter).29 And 
27. See earlier note on the mathematical point. 
28. To do otherwise is to commit the logical fallacy of possibiliter ergo probabiliter. 
and thus violate a basic axiom of sound historical reasoning: see Carrier, Proving 
History, pp. 26-29. 
29. Cephas means 'rock' in Aramaic, and Peter means 'rock' in Greek. The former 
appears unique (it is not a known name in Aramaic, therefore is a distinct appellation)Ļ 
and though the latter is not (Peter was a known name in Greek), the Gospels claim Jesus 
renamed Simon 'Rock' (hence 'Peter'), and obviously that would not have occurred in 
Greek (even by revelation), so Peter would actually have been thus renamed Cephas. 
So it is reasonably assumed the Cephas that Paul frequently refers to js the Peter of the 
Gospels and Acts (and most later legend). The fact that Paul names the top three 'pillars' 
Cephas, James and John, and the Gospels identify the top three disciples as Peter, James 
and John (see § I  0), supports that conclusion. Like Pontius Pilate or Caiaphas, these top 
three disciples in the Gospels would have been based on real people (the very ones Paul 
knew as the Pillars), but just as fictionalized there as Pilate and Caiaphas were. Whether 
Peter was really originally Simon and renamed Rock by Jesus cannot be certain (the 
mere fact is only mentioned in Mk 3.16, then becomes a story in Mt 16. 1 5-19), but even 
if based on a real event, it could have happened by revelation (perhaps in Peter's first 
vision of Jesus). Certainly Cephas cannot have been his birth name, so at the very least, 
he renamed himself (possibly all the Pillars had symbolic names befitting allegorical 
'pillars' holding up the 'truth', as I suggested in the previous chapter, in §4; the main 

·•·. 
1 1 . The Epistles 
525 
1 Cor. 1 5.3-8 also fails to mention any such relationship-which is even 
more bizarre. There, they are only appointed (so far as we can tell) by being 
blessed with visions of the risen Lord. That is Paul's point in including him­
self in that list-he simply assumes his calling as an apostle (as in Gal. 1 and 
1 Cor. 9.1 )  was the same as theirs. So we have to ask, why would Peter-or 
James or John for that matter-accept Paul into the apostolate at all if he 
hadn't been chosen by Jesus in life and struggled with him in life? How could 
his claim to be an apostle carry any weight whatever? Why did visions of the 
Lord take precedence over actually having had the man himself appoint you 
in person? This, too, is improbable-not impossible, but definitely improb­
able. Unless that's the only way anyone was appointed: by revelation. Then 
Peter would have a harder time kicking Paul to the curb. For then any chal­
lenge to Paul's claim would be just as usable to challenge Peter's. 
This fact exposes the weakness of another common apologetic argument, 
that Paul deliberately avoided talking about eyewitness testimony because 
he wouldn't call attention to the fact that he himself wasn't one. This does 
not explain why his 'not being one' did not cause his rejection by Peter and 
the pillars. It does not explain why they ended up treating him as their equal, 
an apostle just like them. Moreover, this excuse, that Paul is trying to hide 
his status as a non-witness, simply doesn't make logical sense. As someone 
once phrased this objection to me (about why Paul never discusses any­
one knowing Jesus), 'it's not surprising he doesn't relate details about their 
relationship to the historical Jesus, especially if that was already common 
knowledge to his readers. Why would he put a finger on his own weakness?' 
Because if it was his weakness, he would have to. We need to put ourselves 
in the shoes of the actual Christian congregations he was writing to. Paul 
is not writing to persuade us, some random foreigners two thousand years 
later. He's writing to persuade actual contemporaries-from whom he could 
not hide so decisive a weakness. So if it was a weakness, he would con­
stantly have to address it, head on. Because it would constantly be thrown 
pillar would then be the rock, which is supported by James, i.e. Jacob, 'the one who 
holds', otherwise known as Israel, and John, 'the grace of God', so that the church 
would be built on a rock and held up by Israel and God's grace). Paul refers only once 
to a 'Peter' (Gal. 2. 7-8), and debate exists as to whether this is a scribal insertion or if 
Paul meant Cephas or is referring to a different person (even ancient Christian scholars 
were confused on this point). I suspect Paul did write this and meant a different person, 
someone well known at the time, another apostle like Paul and Apollos (and for whom 
'Peter' was simply by coincidence his actual birth name), but it's impossible to know for 
sure. For summaries of evidence and scholarship on all of the above see Bart Ehrman, 
'Cephas and Peter', Journal of Biblical Literature I 09 (Autumn 1990), pp. 463-74; Dale 
Allison, Jr, 'Peter and Cephas: One and the Same', Journal of Biblical Literature I l l  
(Autumn 1992). pp. 489-95; and most importantly Markus Bockmuehl, 'Simon Peter's 
Names in Jewish Sources'. Journal of Jewish Studies 55 (Spring 2004), pp. 58-80. 

526 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
in his face, and constantly used against him, becoming a constant hurdle he 
would have to overcome. Yet there is no sign in his letters that it was. This 
is therefore just another made-up excuse, for which we have no evidence, 
and ample evidence to the contrary. 
For example, I Cor. 1 1 .23-26 and 15.3-8 focus prominently on the wit­
ness of Paul and his peers. There is no indication he was shy about this at 
all. In fact, Paul's whole argument of Galatians 1-2 is that human testimony 
was evidently distrusted by the Galatians, to the point that Paul had to deny 
he ever relied on it, and had to insist instead that he had all his information 
by direct revelation, and that he didn't even talk to anyone else in the church 
for years (he is even forced to swear to this). He clearly had to argue this 
way to persuade the Galatians his gospel was legitimate. So the Galatians 
only trusted direct revelation. That makes no sense on anything but minimal 
mythicism. How could Paul make this argument if there was a historical 
Jesus and therefore eyewitness companions and a family of Jesus still living 
and active in the church whose authority could never be trumped in such 
a way and whose direct testimony would surely be paramount to deciding 
all doctrinal authority within the church? The Galatians could not possibly 
have wanted Paul to prove anything but that he had his information from 
the eyewitnesses whose authority would then be paramount. Only if there 
were no such witnesses would revelation be the defining feature of apostolic 
authority, and only then would Paul have to defend his relying on noth­
ing but that, as only then would the Galatians accept only that-rejecting 
human testimony instead as illegitimate (as apparently they were). Other­
wise Paul would have to insist here that he learned the gospel from the first 
witnesses and then swear they can confirm to the Galatians that he had stuck 
to what they told him. But that's not what he argues. 
It's a curious question. How can what Jesus said and did in life not be rel­
evant to anything in Galatians 1-2? How can Paul never talk about it, when 
his opponents would be talking about it all the time? They would have been 
making arguments against Paul, or posing questions and challenges to him, 
by citing testimony from and about the historical Jesus, which Paul would 
have been compelled to answer, or at least address. There would be no plau­
sible way Paul could expect to win any argument by never even addressing 
his opponents' evidence or even acknowledging it existed. His opponents 
would then win every argument and every congregation. Paul may as well 
be writing to himself for all the good it would do. Yet that is not what we see 
happening in these letters. The 'anxiety' Paul is supposed to have had over 
his not being an eyewitness never appears. It's a modern fiction. 
This is evident, for example, in the passages where Paul uses the phrase 
'super-apostles', huper /ian aposto/oi, literally 'apostles beyond exceed­
ingly', which some who make this argument cite as evidence of his anxiety 
over not being an eyewitness like them. But in fact Paul never says this 

I I. The Epistles 
527 
phrase relates to their having known Jesus. To the contrary, he says it relates 
to their being much better speakers than him (2 Cor. 1 1 . 1 -7 and 1 2.7-13, 
which in context I suspect indicates that the famous 'thorn in his side' he 
complains of was a stutter or speech impediment). Remember that 'apostle' 
means 'messenger', so being a 'super great messenger' has a more obvi· 
ous meaning in the Greek: they were better at it than he was. Paul might 
have also been concerned about the fact that they were apostles first (as that 
could have been a problem for him even if Jesus didn't exist), but he never 
says that, and he doesn't mean that when he calls the others 'apostles super 
exceedingly'. He means they are spectacularly good at selling the gospel, 
while he is but a poor speaker and less impressive in person. So when he 
asserts that he's as good as them, he refers to his ability to receive 'revela­
tions ofthe Lord' as they did (2 Cor. 1 2.1 -7) and perform miracles (2 Cor. 
12.1 2) and demonstrate spiritual knowledge (gnosis: 2 Cor. 1 1 .6). His only 
failing compared to them, Paul says, is simply not being a good speaker 
(2 Cor. 1 1 .6; likewise implied in I Cor. 2.3-4). Conspicuously absent, again, 
is any argument that his revelations ought to be reckoned as good as their 
knowing the man personally. To the contrary, he always assumes his access 
to Jesus was identical to theirs ( 1 Cor. 9 .I and 15 .5-8) and that it was the 
most anyone could claim (Gal. 1 . 1 1 -24).30 
Supporting this conclusion is the fact that Paul speaks of people preach­
ing 'another Jesus' than the one he preached, and that this involved receiv­
ing a 'different' spirit and thus a 'different' gospel (2 Cor. 1 1 .4; see also 
Gal. 1 .6-9). Paul would not likely speak of 'other' Jesuses like this if Jesus 
were a historical man. For then there would obviously be only the one Jesus, 
and the only gospel the one he taught, so Paul would have to say his oppo­
nents were saying false things about Jesus, or misrepresenting Jesus, or get­
ting what Jesus said wrong (and, of course, Paul would have to constantly 
respond to the same claims against him from his opponents). But Paul never 
once talks like that, or as if anyone did. Yet that's how one would have to 
talk about a tradition based on the friends and witnesses of an actual man. 
But if Jesus was only a revealed deity, then it would certainly be more likely 
that we'd hear about different revealed deities named Jesus appearing to 
different people, or false spirits claiming to be Jesus, teaching different gos­
pels, such that for Paul only one of these Jesuses was the real one, even if 
angels themselves said otherwise (Gal. 1.8). Because Paul had a direct line 
to his Jesus, and no one could honestly claim anything better. 
30. In 1 Cor. 1 5.8-10 Paul refers to himself being 'the least' of the apostles, but 
in an entirely different sense: there he is referring to the fact that he didn't deserve to 
be chosen by God to be an apostle because he persecuted God's church. See parallel 
remarks in Gal. 1 .1 3- 1 6  and 1 .22-24, where Paul's having been a persecutor was not 
being counted against him as an apostolic authority, but in fact in his favor. 

528 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
Accordingly, the usual excuses simply do not hold water-they go 
against the evidence of the Epistles themselves, and against all our back­
ground knowledge regarding how people behave. If historicity is to sur­
vive as the more probable hypothesis, some new theory must be conjured, 
which not only admits and explains the bizarre silence of the Epistles but 
does so in accord with proven facts of comparable cases and human nature. 
thus either {a) having strong support in established background knowledge 
rather than careening violently against everything we know, or (b) in a way 
that can be strongly and independently confirmed from evidence in the 
Epistles themselves; or ideally, both. As I have never seen such an argu­
ment, despite surveying a century of trying by many scholars in the field, I 
have to conclude the evidence of the Epistles, on all we presently know, is 
simply improbable on h (minimal historicity), but almost exactly what we 
expect on ..,h (minimal mythicism). 
That leaves one remaining argument against this conclusion: the claim 
that the Epistles are not in fact silent about the historical Jesus, that in fact 
there are 'implicit' references in them that establish his historicity. The rest 
of this chapter will be devoted to answering that. 
3. Epistles from the Pillars? 
As I explained in Chapter 7, we cannot count as evidence any forgeries 
or demonstrable interpolations among the EpistJes. Fabricated evidence of 
historicity is not evidence of historicity. Although if forgeries or the other 
Epistles let slip evidence of nonhistoricity, that can be telling. And a few 
examples of that can be found. 
The epistles of James and 1 Peter are also oddly silent about a historical 
Jesus-an oddity later rectified by the forgery of a second letter from Peter 
(see Chapter 8, § 1 2), and perhaps by the forgery of the Epistles of John 
(since 1 Jn 1 . 1 -3 seems to serve a similar purpose as 2 Pet. 1 .  1 6-2.1, indeed 
it even appears to protest too much). Thus were produced letters from all 
three of the pillars, and indeed these letters were arranged in the NT in the 
same unusual order as Paul names them in Gal. 2.9 (placing Peter not first 
or last but between the brothers James and John), and the number of letters 
from each counts up to three (one from James, two from Peter, three from 
John), an obvious contrivance. Following them is the Epistle of Jude (lit­
erally, Judas), which also makes no reference to the historical Jesus-not 
even to claim the author was his brother, despite introducing himself (in 
Jude 1) as the brother of James. Notably Jude concurs with 1 Clement (see 
Chapter 8, §5) in suggesting that the words of Jesus only came to be com­
municated to the world through the apostles (Jude 1 7), making no mention 
of disciples or of Jesus having preached to the public. 

I. 
... 
1 1 .  The Epistles 
529 
The Epistle of James makes no mention of its author being the brother 
of Jesus, either. Instead, Jas 5.1 1  imagines that all Christians have 'seen' 
Jesus die (just like Clement did) and implies Jesus has never been on earth 
before-he will only one day come (Jas 5.7-8); James does not say Jesus is 
'returning' or coming a second time (such a specific notion is never found 
in the letters of Paul, either; on something close in Hebrews, see §5). It thus 
appears that as far as this author knew, Jesus hadn't yet been on earth at 
all. This James also says things that later appear on the lips of Jesus in the 
Gospels, yet were clearly not the words of Jesus when James wrote them.31 
So the sequence of events is again reversed: sayings came to be invented for 
Jesus by adapting sayings from common lore, lost scriptures and even the 
apostles themselves (real or fictional). James was also written by someone 
defending a Torah-observant sect of Christianity (the original sect before 
Paul's innovation: see Element 20}-exactly as Paul implies James the Pil­
lar had done (Gal. 2.9-1 2). This letter might thus be an authentic letter from 
the original, actual James (who was not the brother of Jesus, but of the other 
pillar, John: see, e.g., Mk 5.37, and the discussion in §10). That this letter 
looks more in agreement with minimal mythicism than minimal historicity 
is therefore noteworthy. 
1 Peter looks similarly curious. 32 We know this was written by a different 
author than 2 Peter (their style is too divergent). Could it have been written 
by the actual Peter himself? We cannot know for sure.33 But it's notewor-
3 1 .  For example, Jas 1.12 and 5.12. See also James Tabor, The Jesus Dynasty (New 
York: Simon & Schuster, 2006), pp. 273-77. Tabor, of course, implausibly assumes 
James lifted these things from Jesus (even though there is no evidence of that and it's 
contrary to logic to think he would pass off the words of Jesus as his own and not even 
mention the authority behind them), and also argues this James is Jesus' brother (even 
though James conspicuously does not say this in his letter's introductioŠ where surely 
he would mention it), thus exemplifying the unreasonable lengths scholars will go to 
in order to fabricate entire pet histories for a non-existent Jesus (a point I already made 
from the example of Chilton in Chapter 2, §2). 
32. This might originally have been two letters, the first ending at 4.ll and the 
second picking up at 4.12 in mid-letter (its original introduction having been deleted). 
Also, 1 Pet. 5.12 says he 'wrote in only a few words' (di 'oligon egrapsa), which he sent 
in the care of Silvanus (who is not mentioned in the introduction at 1 Pet. 1 .1). Such a 
remark would not describe the whole letter as we have it (which is much longer than 
average letters in antiquity and thus in no sense 'a few words'), but would be explicable 
if it referred to the much shorter letter of 4.12-5.20, which is indeed oddly brief enough 
to apologize for (even if a few verses are now missing). Notably, we have no reference 
to Peter in this second letter, so it's possible that it was not originally a letter of Peter's 
and only came to be attached to Peter's epistle (of 1.1-4. 1 1) because it sounded a similar 
theme. 
33. Arguments to the contrary are not well founded (see Chapter 7, §3), but neither 
is there any way to confirm its authenticity at present. 

530 
On the His tori city of Jesus 
thy again that knowledge of a historical Jesus is conspicuously absent in 
1 Peter. The author only describes himself as an 'apostle', not a disciple 
( 1 Pet. 1 .  1, which 2 Pet. 1 .1 emulates). 1 Peter 1 . 1  0-1 2  describes the actual 
process by which facts about Jesus were discovered: scripture (vv. 1 0-l l) 
and revelation to the apostles (v. 12). Jesus having ministered to the public 
and been known to anyone in person is again conspicuously absent here. 
This is practically minimal mythicism in a nutshell. Nor is Jesus ever quoted 
in this letter, not even to back anything it argues, even though it contains 
an extended summary of moral advice (instead, Peter's knowledge comes 
only from scripture: e.g. 1 Pet. 2.6-8, which he frequently cites to back what 
he says: e.g., 1 Pet. 3.8- 1 2, where Jesus' teachings on the Golden Rule and 
turning the other cheek are directly on point yet strangely not mentioned­
we get instead just a quotation from the Psalms). Nor is any event in Jesus' 
life brought up as an example or encouragement--other than the mere fact 
of his suffering death and that only in vague tenns. 
For example, this letter mentions Jesus having shed his blood as ransom 
for all (1 Pet. 1 . 1 8-19) and being resurrected by God ( 1 .2 1  ), but those are 
facts already expected on minimal mythicism. In contrast, it mentions Jesus 
as having appeared only in a 'manifestation' (phaneroO), hence by revela­
tion (1 .20), rather than as a man born and lived or chosen from among men, 
which is not a remark we expect on minimal historicity. This letter also says 
Jesus will actually visit us only in the future, as if he had not done so before 
(2. 1 2). It then says Jesus 'suffered' and his enduring that suffering is an 
example we are to follow when persecuted (2.21 ,  concluding the argument 
of 2.13-20; also 4. 1 3), and that part of what he endured was being abused 
without speaking or fighting back (2.23) and being crucified (2.24), but it 
also cites no authority for these facts but scripture. In fact, all Peter does 
here is quote and paraphrase material in Isaiah 53-directly quoting lsa. 
53.9 in 2.22 and then paraphrasing Isa. 53.7 in 2.23, and I sa. 53.4 and 53. 1 1 
in 22.4, and lsa. 53.6 in 2.25. Thus even the part about Jesus not speaking or 
fighting back is a lift from Isaiah. There is no mention here of anyone hav­
ing seen Jesus do any of this, or how Peter knows he did, or who the Lord's 
abusers were. Rather, it appears this information had simply been learned 
from scripture (hence Element 1 7). There evidently was no actual witness to 
quote other than Isaiah. Equally strange is the fact that when Peter insists all 
earthly authorities are 'sent by [God] for the punishment of evildoers' and 
thus are always to be obeyed (1 Pet. 2. 13-14), he seems to have no idea that 
it's these same earthly authorities who killed Jesus-who, in Peter,s view, 
could hardly have been an evildoer. 
We're likewise told that Jesus preached to infernal spirits ( 1 Pet. 3.19-20) 
after being resurrected (3. 18-19, 2 1  ), but curiously we're never told that he 
preached to men on earth before that. All we hear about is a celestial Jesus 
who suffers and dies in some sense 'in the flesh' (3. 1 8; 4. 1), descends to 

I I . The Epistles 
53 1 
preach to imprisoned spirits (3.1 9-20), including spirits of the dead (4.6), 
and then ascends back to heaven once he is put in charge of the universe 
(3.22).34 This is a11 in agreement with minimal mythicism, and in fact 
sounds a lot like the Ascension of Isaiah and the lgnatian mini-gospel (see 
Chapter 8, §7). So when at last Peter tells us he was a 'witness of the suffer­
ings of Christ' (I Pet. 5. 1 ), possibly in what was originally a separate letter 
(possibly not even by Peter),35 we must either convict the Gospels of lying 
(as in their accounts Peter is not present at the crucifixion) or conclude he 
means by revelation, the very way Paul saw Jesus offering the bread and 
cup (in 1 Cor. 1 1 .23-25), or the way James said all Christians saw Jesus 
suffer (Jas 5. 1 1  ). I think the latter is more likely regardless, and at worst is 
no less likely. For as we saw, Peter could only quote and paraphrase Isaiah 
for details of Christ's suffering rather than recalling what he witnessed (as 
we'd otherwise expect-even his vision must therefore have been vague on 
such detai Is). 
The content of even these Epistles therefore is less probable on h than on 
-.h. So these also count as evidence for minimal mythicism and against his­
toricity. They were simply co-opted by the historicizing sect because they 
said nothing overtly contrary to their aims, and thus could be 'interpreted' 
as being in agreement with them, even though we can see this agreement 
is strained and requires arbitrary, dogmatic assumptions to maintain. In all 
honesty, I cannot fathom the content of James, Jude and I Peter being even 
60% likely on h (while it's not at all unexpected on -.h). However, arguing a 
fortiori, I shall say it cannot reasonably be more than 80% likely. 
MeanwhileϢ I shall not count here the fact that some of the forged epistles 
in the NT show a reaction against 'mythical' Jesuses as evidence for either 
theory, since that evidence is consistent with both. But it does refute the 
claim that we should have some such evidence yet don't-because we do, 
in fact even more than we might have expected (I discussed this evidence 
in Chapter 8, § 1 2). 
4. The Earliest Gospels 
A few times in Paul's letters (and in the Pauline letters composed in his 
name afterward) we are given actual statements of the gospel 'kerygma', 
the core doctrine that defined what Christians believed (Element J 0). It is 
34. The actual process of descending and ascending is, however, not explicit here. 
We're only told Jesus 'went' to preach to imprisoned spirits after his death. So the 
location of these spirits in relation to where Jesus started and ended up may be debatable. 
But background knowledge (Elements 34-38) and evidence in Paul (Phil. 2.6- 1 1 ;  cf. 
Element 1 0) make some kind of descent and ascent most probable. 
35. See earlier note on the fragmented nature of 1 Peter. 

532 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
sometimes claimed that these demonstrate belief in a historical Jesus. How­
ever, it's obvious they do not, and indeed they make much less sense on the 
supposition that a historical Jesus is what these gospels refer to. 
The most commonly cited in this respect is 1 Cor. 15.1-8, which I already 
discussed (in §2). This only says Christians believed Jesus died (sacrifi­
cially for their sins), was buried, and rose again, and then (and, it would 
seem, only then) appeared to select church leaders. No mention of his birth, 
ancestry, ministry, miracles, teachings, promises, appointing of disciples or 
anything else we encounter in the Gospels. This looks exactly like minimal 
mythicism (especially given such background facts as Elements 37 and 38). 
Indeed, as a statement of a belief about a historical man, the things it omits 
are very strange. The fact that he is mentioned as appearing only after he 
died (as if his ministry and deeds in life were wholly unremarkable and not 
at all relevant to his status or gospel) is especially strange. This gospel thus 
provides no evidence for historicity; in fact, it supports mythicism. Because 
its content is quite unexpected on the former but not at all on the latter. And 
unexpected is just another way of saying improbable. 
Next most commonly cited is the introduction to Paul's letter to the 
Romans: 
[T]he gospel of God, which he announced in advance through his prophets 
in the holy scriptures, concerns his Son, who was born from the sperm of 
David according to the flesh, who was appointed to be the Son of God in 
power according to the spirit of holiness by resurrection from the dead, in 
other words Jesus Christ our Lord, through whom we received grace and 
apostleship, into obedience of faith among all the nations, for the sake of 
his name, and among whom you, too, are called to be Jesus Christ's (Rom. 
1.1-6). 
The specific peculiarity of Paul saying Jesus was 'born from the sperm of 
David' I will address later (in §9); the rest is no less peculiar than the gos­
pel recited in I Corinthians 1 5.36 The only source cited for knowledge of 
these facts is scripture, and the only facts constituting Christian belief here 
are that Jesus is now Lord because he was given a human body formed of 
36. Some scholars over the years have argued that this is an interpolation, but 1 do 
not find their arguments convincing. I find this passage compatible with Philippians 2, 
and its non-Pauline language (which consists of a single unique use of 'holy scriptures', 
a phrase Paul never otherwise uses) can be due to this being a hymn-like recitation not 
originally of his composition Gust like Phil. 2.4-11 ). Its unusual length for a Pauline 
introduction can be due to the fact that this is a letter about the basics of the gospel, 
which he thus could have chosen to emphasize by reciting it in his introduction. This 
introduction also echoes Rom. 16.25-26, even its unusual wording and concepts, so it's 
possible both come from a Pauline redactor; it would thus still reflect thoughts and ideas 
from Paul's school of thought (see Chapter 7, §7). 

1 1. The Epistles 
533 
Davidic seed and then appointed to supreme heavenly authority at his resur­
rection (which presupposes his death). 
This is all compatible with minimal mythicism. Not a single detail is 
more likely on minimal historicity. Indeed, Paul here says it is through Jesus 
that he and all other apostles were appointed, which again implies only by 
revelation, as no distinction is made between those Jesus appointed when he 
was alive and those who saw him only after he died. And again, no mention 
is made of Jesus' ministry, miracles or teachings. And though now we hear 
something of his birth, all we get is a generic theological statement, that he 
was 'made [genomenos] from the sperm of David'. We're not told how any­
one knew that, or who his parents were, or where he was born, or anything 
else that would make this a definite statement of earthly existence in human 
history (and not, e.g., just a doctrine of heavenly incarnation). Whether we 
can make any more out of that I' II query later (in §9), but overall we don't 
have any definite evidence supporting historicity over mythic ism here. This 
gospel still looks weird for a historical Jesus-as if anything Jesus said or 
did as a historical man was wholly irrelevant to Christian belief. All that 
mattered was how he was created and what God did for him after he died. 
That sounds more like mythicism than historicity. Though it's compatible 
with both, at this early stage it's strange to see his ministry and deeds in life 
already wholly elided as irrelevant. 
The next version of the gospel Paul gives us is the most detailed we get 
from him-and yet the most clearly in accord with the mythicist thesis: 
Have this mind [of humble love] in you, which was also in Christ Jesus, 
who, existing in the form of God, did not decide to seize equality with 
God, but emptied himself, taking the form of a slave, being made in the 
likeness of men, and being discovered as a man in outward fonn, he hum­
bled himself, becoming obedient to the point of death, a death of a cross. 
For this [act] God also highly exalted him, and granted him the name that 
is above all names, so that in the name of Jesus every knee should bend, 
of those in heaven and those on earth and those under the earth, and that 
every tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, for the glory of God 
the Father37 (Phil. 2.5-1 1 ). 
Here we have important parallels with the prefatory gospel in Romans: the 
key role of the 'name of Jesus' (Rom. 1 .5), Jesus being exalted into celes­
tial power at his resurrection (Rom. 1 .4), and Jesus being 'made' [genome­
nos] into a man (Rom. 1 .3) so he could die. Whereas his resurrection is 
declared and his death is presupposed in the Romans gospel, here his death 
is declared and his resurrection presupposed. But otherwise this appears to 
be more or less an expansion of the same gospel in Romans. 
37. Modem editions al1 concur in reading en Christȍ Ilsou in Phil. 2.5, using a 
Hebraicized dative for Msous. 

534 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
First, we're told Jesus was a preexistent being, the Fonn of God. We 
know from Philo there was already a Jewish tradition of a preexistent being 
named Jesus who was the Form of God (Element 40). It cannot be claimed 
Philo came up with this notion on his own, since that would entail a wildly 
improbable coincidence. So we surely are looking at a derivation from an 
earlier Divine Logos doctrine. Then we're told this Jesus did not try to seize 
power from God in heaven (as by some accounts Satan had once done, 
resulting in his fall to the lower realms), but instead divested himself of 
all his power and higher being, enslaving himself (either to God's plan or 
the world of flesh) by 'being made' [genomenos] in the '1ikeness' of men 
(not literally becoming a man, but assuming a human body, and thus wear­
ing human 'flesh'). Then we're told he was 'discovered' in that fonn, and 
apparently in result was thought to be a man (schema being the outward 
fonn, the appearance of a thing). 
The latter point is most curious. To say Jesus was 'found' that way entails 
someone did the finding, and mistook him for a man (heuretheis meaning 
'being found, discovered'). Who would that be? In the original Ascension 
of Isaiah, it was Satan and his demons who found him in that form-and 
then killed him, not knowing who he really was (see Chapter 3, § 1). This 
gospel says Jesus is dutifully obedient to God's plan, to the point of being 
killed on a 'cross' (a stauros, literally an 'upright stick', not necessarily a 
cross per se: see discussion in Chapter 4, §3). And for this obedience God 
rewarded him by assigning him the most powerful of all names (it seems 
as though that means the name 'Jesus' itself: Phil. 2.1 0), with the result 
that this Jesus then became God's appointed 'Lord' over a11 things in the 
universe (in, above and below the earth). The notion evidently being that 
Zechariah 6 was thought by Christians to describe the event of his naming, 
after his resurrection (Elements 6 and 40), before which he may have had 
some other name.38 
38. His previous name being Melchizedek, perhaps (Elements 5 and 42). Some 
scholars argue that the name he was assigned that is 'above all names' is 'Lord' (Phil. 
2. 1 1  ), but that seems to disagree with what is stated (2. 1 0) and the fact that many beings 
had the title of Lord (celestial: 1 Cor. 8.5; and human: Eph. 6.5). Jesus could be called 
the 'Lord of Lords' (I Tim. 6.1 5; Rev. 17.14), but that is not said here. However, many 
men were called Jesus, too (and Paul seems to imagine there were other celestial beings 
so named as well: 2 Cor. 1 1.4). Possibly what Paul means is that by assigning the name 
'Lord' to Jesus the name 'Jesus' acquired special power (Phil. 2. 10). But that is not 
obvious from the text. Either way, because 'Jesus' can be in the genitive or dative case 
in 2.1 0, an ambiguity remains as to which name was above all names (the name 'Jesus· 
itself or some other name Jesus was given), or whether that name was already above all 
names or whether God merely declared that that name would now be above all names. If 

I I .  The Epistles 
535 
Key things to notice here are that again no mention is made of Jesus 
having a ministry, teaching anything or performing any miracles. To the 
contrary, having 'emptied' himself of all he was and 'humbling' himself 
completely to the status of a 'slave' imply he would have had no super­
natural powers at all. Likewise, no mention is made of his being born to the 
virgin Mary or killed by Pontius Pilate (or even the Jews or Romans )-even 
though these had become essential components of the gospel creed by the 
time of Ignatius (see Chapter 8, §6; which raises the question of why they 
later became essential components of the creed).39 Nor do we find here any 
other details placing these generic events on earth or in human history. This 
hymn's use of the word for 'born' is also metaphysically vague: genomenos 
is used twice, once for his being 'fonned' into the likeness of men, and once 
for his 'becoming' obedient, without distinguishing one from the other. So 
is this a human birth or a celestial incarnation? We cannot tell from the 
wording (see later discussion in §9). 
These facts all accord with minimal mythicism. Whereas on minimal 
historicity, they are odd. So odd, in fact, that some scholars have had to 
insist this entire passage must be an interpolation, that Paul can't possibly 
have said this. But there is no evidence it's an interpolation. No manuscripts 
omit it; no significant variants exist for it (beyond variant spellings of a 
few words, which is common); it also does not contradict anything else 
Paul says in this or any other letter, and it does not interrupt the flow of 
thought in Philippians 2-it even matches the thought of the surrounding 
argument, emphasizing the theme of Christ's self-huml>ling and obedience 
as an example the Christian is exhorted to follow.40 I must conclude that 
this passage is authentic. I must further conclude that its content is improb­
able on h, but not at all improbable on -.h. It is therefore evidence against 
historicity, not for it. 
the text was meant to say he was given the name Jesus after his resurrection, that might 
signal an evolution of the doctrine reported by Philo (Element 42). 
39. Indeed, I find that suspicious already. Why did it matter so much what the name 
was of the officer who executed Jesus? Why was it important that 'crucified by Pontius 
Pilate' become a requirement of Christian confession (as most creeds from the second 
century onward declare)? It seems as though there were other creeds whereby that was 
not the case, wherein Jesus was crucified by someone else, and therefore to exclude 
them from inclusion converts had to specify which crucifixion myth they were aligning 
themselves with (hence see Chapter 8, § 1 ). This would make far more sense on minimal 
mythicism than minimal historicity. But, alas, we can't be certain that was the reason. So 
I have mentioned it only in a note. 
40. For a full analysis see Ralph Martin, A Hymn ofChrist: Philippians 2:5-11 in 
Recent Interpretation and in the Setting of Early Christian Worship (Downers Grove, IL: 
InterVarsity Press, 1997). 

536 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
Paul claimed these things came to him by revelation, another thing we 
expect on mythicism but not quite so much on historicity. Because Paul 
consistently employs the same phrases to reference his gospel revelations. 
For example: 
For r would have you know, brethren, the gospel which was preached by 
me is not according to a man. For I did not receive it from a man, nor was 
r taught it. but it came through a revelation of Jesus Christ (Gal. I .  1 1 -12). 
For I received from the Lord just what I delivered to you . .
. ( I  Cor. 
1 1 .23). 
And I would have you know, brethren, the gospel I preached to you . . .  
I delivered to you first of all what I received, that according to the scrip­
tures Christ died for our sins . . .  (1 Cor. 15.1, 3). 
Nevertheless, it could be argued that Paul must have really gotten this infor­
mation from human tradition. Based on their style, all the 'earliest gospels' 
we've surveyed are arguably pre-Pauline and thus in reality most likely 
learned the usual way (and not by revelation), which opened Paul to attack 
among the Galatians as a possible fraud (i.e. not a 'real' apostle). This is 
why he had to at least pretend Jesus gave him this gospel material directly 
(or that Jesus had thus reaffirmed it to him, even if the precisely worded 
creeds he picked up were from members of the church). Because to be an 
apostle, you had to have been sent by the Lord himself ( 1 Cor. 9 .I). It was 
necessary, therefore, to have learned the gospel that way. 
Paul might not have had to lie about this. He may have actually had this 
material repeated back to him in his hallucinations of Jesus, and thus was 
not pretending, even though in reality his brain had learned that material 
from human sources, such as the Christians he had previously persecuted 
(I Cor. 1 5.8-9; Gal. 1 . 13-14 and 1 .23-24). But it's also possible Paul's 'gos­
pel' summaries are Pauline originals and not in his usual style because they 
derived from conversations with his alter-ego (the hallucinated Jesus) in 
Hebrew, or were carefully formulated to look like he didn't invent them. 
It's only the list of appearances in I Cor. 1 5.5-8 that certainly must derive 
from human informants (because we can reasonably assume Paul was not 
psychic so as to magically know who saw Jesus), but that does not mean 
this is what Paul was claiming in 1 Cor. 1 5. 1 -2. To the contrary, by using 
the exact same formula there as in Gal. 1.1 1 - 1 2, Paul is claiming he got 
even this material from revelation. Thus, he was either lying or really did 
hallucinate Jesus telling him that-after having already heard it elsewhere. 
Or else the I ist of appearances was not a part of the gospe I but only the proof 
of Jesus having taught it. In which case, Paul means by 'what he received' 
only 1 Cor. 1 5.3-4. The subsequent list then only argues that it had indeed 
been received (by the apostles, of whom he was the last: 1 5.5-8). lt does not 
appear to have been received by any of the apostles in any other way. And 

r·· 
I I .  The Epistles 
537 
Christians who received it from the apostles could not themselves be called 
apostles. 
When we look at the other Epistles in Paul's name that most closely 
share his thoughts and ideas, we find another summary of the gospel: Col. 
1 . 12-20. Here we get something a bit more grandiose, but with more of the 
esoteric backstory revealed: 
[Give] thanks to the Father, who made us fit to be part of the inheritance 
of those holy in the light. he who delivered us from the authority of the 
darkness and transferred [us] to the kingdom of the Son of His love, in 
whom we have [our] redemption, the forgiveness of [our] sins, he who is 
the Image of the unseen God, the firstborn of all creation. For in him were 
all things created, in the heavens and on earth, things seen and unseen, 
whether thrones or dominions or principalities or authorities, all things 
have been created through him, and for him. And he is before all things, 
and in him all things are held together. He is also the head of the body. 
the church, and he is the beginning, the firstborn from the dead, so that he 
would have preeminence in all things. He was pleased that in him should 
all the fulness dwell and through him all things should be fully reconciled 
with himself, having made peace [with them] through the blood of his 
cross-whether things upon the earth, or things in the heavens (Col. 1.12-
20). 
And that, we're told, is 'the mystery that has been hidden for ages and gen­
erations, but now has been manifested to his holy ones', the ones 'to whom 
God wished to make known what the riches are of the glory of this mystery 
among the Gentiles', that being the realization of 'Christ in you, the hope 
of glory' (Col. 1 .26-27). 
Notice that despite the elaborate description here of who Jesus Christ is 
and what he did and why it matters, at no point is his being born and living 
on earth mentioned, or his having a ministry, or performing miracles, or 
choosing disciples, or being executed by Pontius Pilate, or anything at all 
that would place him in earth's history-we're not told who put him on the 
cross, for example, or where.41 But what we do see here is corroboration of 
the Philippians gospel: Jesus was a preexistent being, in fact the firstborn 
of all creation (thus again clearly identifying him with a known celestial 
figure in early Judaism: Elements 39 and 40); and also the firstborn from 
41. Another letter from the Pauline school quotes and interprets a passage from Ps. 
68. 18 as attesting to the ascent and descent of Jesus (Eph. 4.8- 14 ), but its account is 
too vague to pin down exactly what is meant cosmically, and it is not presented as a 
summary of the gospel. just a part of what they believed. That passage does assume that 
the descent of Jesus required scriptural evidence (Eph. 4. 9) and thus was not witnessed 
by anyone, but that does not entail minimal mythicism. Although I do believe the author 
of Ephesians had no knowledge of a historical Jesus, that can only be inferred, not 
proved, and it is a forgery anyway. 

538 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
the dead ('so that he would be first in everything'); he was also the 'image 
of God'. These are three facts that match Pauline thought-that Jesus was 
a preexistent being, in fact God's agent of creation (1 Cor. 8.6; see Element 
1 0), and that Jesus was 'the firstborn from the dead' (Rom. 8.29 and 1 Cor. 
15.20), and that he was the 'image of God' (2 Cor. 4.4). So it is very much 
in accord with the gospel known to Paul. Yet here this celestial being is the 
one who submitted to death (Col. 1 .1 8, 20) and has now been assigned all 
of God's power and authority (Col. 1.19) because his blood sacrifice has 
somehow magically effected harmony in the universe (Col. 1.20). This sure 
sounds like a celestial demigod working a celestial deed.42 There is nothing 
here that sounds like a historical man who recently lived and died on earth. 
Thus, every time Paul or his closest successors describe anything like a 
complete gospel 'kerygma' we see no clear evidence of a historical Jesus, 
but a consistently celestial being doing magical things in a supernatural 
realm, whose deeds and teachings in life (if any there were) are completely 
absent and somehow of no relevance to Christian belief. 43 What are the odds 
of that? It's simply strange. And strange means unusual, which means infre­
quent, which means improbable. This evidence therefore has a significantly 
lower consequent probability on h compared to -.h. And we must add to all 
this the evidence of Hebrews. 
5. The Gospel in Hebrews 
Things only get worse for historicity when we look at the most elaborate 
early gospel of all: that recounted in the book of Hebrews. The author of 
this text is not named, and though some claimed it was Paul, that's unlikely 
(stylistically for sure), although it may have been composed by a contempo­
rary or successor of Paul (as I suspect is the case for 1 Clement: see Chapter 
8, §5; where I also mention evidence that 1 Clement might even have used 
Hebrews as a source). In Heb. 13.13 the author claims to be a companion of 
Timothy, which could be the same Timothy Paul traveled with; the author 
also implies at least some of his readers were evangelized by the original 
42. Likewise in Col. 2.15, where we're told Jesus 'cast off the principalities and 
authorities and made a public example of them, freely triumphing over them', which 
sooner ties the immediately preceding claim of Col. 2. 14 (that Jesus 'nailed (our sin] 
to the cross') to a cosmic event, not an earthly one (see discussion of this passage in 
Element 3 7). Jesus is here being freed from the power of corruption and death, not freed 
from the Romans and Jews. Jesus is also the one driving the nails here, which we must 
suppose is metaphorical. 
43. Even the gospel declared in 1 Timothy is odd: though the author of 1 Timothy 
may have been a historicist (as suggested, e.g., by 1 Tim. 6.13; although see note below), 
the gospel he summarizes (in 1 Tim. 3.16) looks pre-historicist in origin (see discussion 
in Chapter 8, §6). 

1 1 .  The Epistles 
539 
apostles, and long enough ago that they should be teachers themselves by 
now (2.3; 5. 12); and in 1 0.32-34 the author appears to refer to their initial 
persecution in the time of Paul years before (which Paul himself references 
in Gal. 1.1 3}--if these remarks are not fabrications, they would place this 
Jetter as early as the late 40s or as tate as the early 60s.44 
Many scholars instead want to date Hebrews after the canonical Gos­
pels, but that faces two serious objections: Hebrews shows no knowledge 
of those Gospels (it never references any of their unique content and never 
quotes from them, and what it does argue often seems to be in ignorance 
of what they say); and Hebrews assumes without explanation that the Jew­
ish temple cult is still operating-that the temple hasn ϣt been destroyed by 
the Romans and the rites there outlawed. Both facts should date Hebrews 
before 70 CE and therefore before all the canonical Gospels. That would 
make it in a sense the earliest Christian 'Gospel', since it is most1y an elabo­
rate treatise on the gospel and why it should be believed (it just isn't a nar­
rative of Jesus or a collection of his sayings, so it's not analogous to other 
Gospels only in structure and genre). 
The first fact is strong enough (if written later, Hebrews should reflect 
knowledge ofthe Gospels), but the second fact is the most telling. The over­
all argument of this letter is that Jewish Christians should not backslide 
now, because Judaism can no longer guarantee their salvation (this letter 
does not advocate Torah-observant Christianity: e.g. Heb. 1 3.9).4Ϥ That the 
temple cult no longer existed (and God did nothing to save the Jews from 
destruction, not even as a nation, but neither to save his temple and the 
cult being paid to him there) would have been so extremely effective and 
important an argument in this context that for the author never once to use 
it is all but impossible-unless Hebrews was written before the year 70, 
before even the year 66 (when the Jewish War started, since that fact alone 
could hardly escape mention). For example (and this is just one example 
among many), in Heb. I 0. 1 ·4 it is clearly assumed the temple sacrifices are 
still being performed: because the author makes an argument against their 
effectiveness, yet the obvious argument-that they aren't even being per­
fanned any more and therefore can't be effective even if ever they were­
doesn't occur to him. He even asks as a rhetorical question if the effects of 
44. That a certain Timothy was Paul's close friend and companion and frequent 
CO·worker: Rom. 16.21; 1 Cor. 4.1 7; 16. 10; 2 Cor. 1 . 1 ,  19; Phil. I; 2. 19; I Thess. 1 . 1 ;  
3.2, 6; Phlm. 1 . 1 .  That he was nevertheless not an apostle is implied in 2 Cor. l . l .  
45. See also Heb. 2. 1 ;  3. 12·14; 5.12; 10.25; 12. 12, etc. Hence the 'Hebrews' to 
Which the letter is addressed-whether the author added that title or it was added by later 
editors as a descriptor-were clearly both Christian believers and also Jews or fonner 
Jews (or possibly also prospective converts to Judaism), as both facts are assumed 
throughout the letter. 

540 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
these sacrifices lasted longer than a year, 'would they not have ceased to be 
offered [by now]?' (10.2). It's undeniably clear the author has no idea here 
that they had ceased. We must conclude, then, that they had not. I find this 
so decisive a point that maintaining a later date for Hebrews is simply not 
tenable. I know of no logically valid argument for that. I therefore side with 
those scholars who accept it as early.46 
Whatever its date, this letter is almost entirely about Jesus, yet seems 
wholly unaware of his having been any kind of earthly man. I suspect this 
epistle represents, at least in its core elements (indeed if not in its entirety). 
what the gospel of Jesus was that Paul was preaching and what that gospel 
was before the Gospels mythically euhemerized Jesus into an earthly man. 
But whether that's the case or not, Hebrews certainly appears to imagine a 
solely cosmic Jesus. The simplest explanation for this fact is that this let­
ter preserves the gospel in its earlier fonn, rather than it being a later (and 
thus radical) departure from the stories and sayings tradition found in the 
Gospels. Those stories and sayings are completely absent here, and would 
seem to be unknown to this author. Surely if the author of Hebrews were 
radically departing from established or widespread tradition he would be 
compelled to argue against it and to argue for his own claims and interpreta­
tions in place of them-he would thus be compelled to explain why he is 
rejecting nearly everything those Gospels say about Jesus. That he doesn't 
suggests he is writing before they (and their stories and sayings tradition) 
even existed or were known. And either way, the historicist is still faced 
with the very difficult task of explaining why the historical Jesus has com­
pletely disappeared in Hebrews. 
The gospel repeatedly emphasized throughout the book of Hebrews is 
that 'Jesus the Son of God is the great high priest who has passed through 
the heavens' (Heb. 4. 1 4; see also 6. 1 9-20, in reference to the account in 
Heb. 5; etc.). You might notice that that sounds exactly like the celestial 
high priest named Jesus in early Jewish theology (Element 40) undertak­
ing the very task described for the celestial Jesus in the Ascension of Isaiah 
(Chapter 3, § 1 ). We saw that in the earliest discernible redaction of the 
latter, the Jesus who passes through the heavens dies in outer space, in the 
46. For a summary of the issues and scholarship see 'Hebrews, Epistle to the'. in 
Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church (ed. F.L. Cross and E.A. Livingstone; Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 3rd edn, 1997), pp. 742·43: and James Thompson, 'Hebrews. 
Epistle to the', in Eerdmans Dictionary of the Bible ( ed. David Noel Freedman: Grand 
Rapids, MI: William B. Eerdmans, 2000), pp. 568-70. See also Hugh Anderson. 'The 
Jewish Antecedents of the Christology in Hebrews', in The Messiah: Developments in 
Earliest Judaism and Christianity (ed. James Charlesworth; Minneapolis, MN: Fortress 
Press, 1992), pp. 512-35. 

.} 
1 1 .  The Epistles 
541 
sublunar heaven, not on earth. This also appears to be what the author of 
Hebrews believes: 
The sum of what we've said is this: we have such a High Priest, who is set 
on the right hand of the throne of His Majesty in the heavens, a minister of 
the sanctuary and of the true tabernacle that the Lord set up, not man. For 
every high priest is ordained to offer gifts and sacrifices, therefore it is nec­
essary that this One have something to offer, too. For if He were on earth, 
He would not be a priest, since there are already priests who offer gifts 
according to the law, and who only give service to the copy and shadow of 
heavenly things [because Moses was instructed to make on earth copies of 
the things he saw in heaven] (Heb. 8. 1-5). 
This certainly seems to say Jesus died in outer space.47 Because here we're 
told that Jesus not only performed his sacrifice in the celestial temple (as in 
Heb. 9, as we'll see in a moment), but that he had to do so. Otherwise the 
magic of it wouldn't have worked. We're also told that Jesus wasn't ever on 
earth-instead, he could only have been God's celestial high priest (so as 
to perform the ultimate sacrifice) if he wasn Ͻ on earth. Because 'if he were 
on earth, he would not be a priest', since earth already has its priests-but 
Jesus needs to be a priest, in order to mediate the new covenant (Heb. 8.6). 
We're also told here the same thing Isaiah was told in the Ascension: that 
everything on earth has a duplicate version of it in the heavens (hence Ele­
ment 38). The implication is that Jesus' blood must have been spilled on 
the heavenly duplicate of God's altar-not on earth, where there already 
are priests making blood sacrifices, which are less effective than celestial 
ones. Yet Jesus, being perfect, was the most powerful sacrifice of all (Heb. 
7.27-28). 
But we needn't rely on just implication here. Because the author of 
Hebrews goes on to say exactly that when he essentially elaborates the Phi­
lippians gospel into a full-blown explanation of what Jesus did and why: 
Christ, arriving as a High Priest of the good things to come, through 
a greater and more perfect temple, the one not made with hands (that 
is to say, not of [human] construction), and neither through the blood of 
goats and calves, but through his own blood, he entered into the holy place 
once and for all, finding eternal redemption. For if the blood of goats and 
47. This also entails that the high priests on earth are the earthly copies of Jesus, 
who is the celestial high priest, the 'realized' Platonic form of all human high priests; 
that is, the perfect and eternal high priest of which all earthly priests are but poor and 
mortal imitations (the actual Platonic form would be a thought in the mind of God; see 
Element 38). After Christ's resurrection, his copy on earth became the Christian church 
(I Cor. 12.27; Col. 1.18, 24), which was also a copy of the celestial temple (Element 
18), because the temple is the body and Christ (as its high priest) is the spirit inhabiting 
it. Believers, being the parts of Christ's body, are similarly imagined as being the new 
temple priesthood in 1 Pet. 2.5 and 2.9 (tending their body as the temple). 

542 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
bulls, and sprinkling the ashes of a heifer, made holy again those who were 
defiled, cleansing their flesh, how much more should the blood of Christ 
(who through the eternal Spirit offered himself without blemish unto God) 
cleanse your conscience from dead works to serve the living God! 
And it is for this reason that [Christ] is the mediator of a new testament, 
so that by a death having taken place for the redemption of the transgres­
sions that were under the first testament. they that have been called may 
[now] receive the promise of the eternal inheritance. For where a testament 
is, it must follow on the death of him that made it. For a testament is only 
valid upon death; it doesn't go into effect when he that made it still lives. 
For this reason even the first testament was not enacted without blood . . .  
[since Moses inaugurated the old testament with a blood sacrijice]. 
Pretty much, according to the law, all things are cleansed with blood and 
without bloodshed no forgiveness occurs. And so it was necessary that the 
copies of the things in the heavens should be cleansed with these, but the 
heavenly things themselves with better sacrifices than these. For Christ 
did not go into the holy place made with hands, the antitype of the true 
one, but into heaven itself, now to appear before the face of God on our 
behalf. Nor does he need to present himself time and again, like the high 
priest does who goes into the holy place year by year with the blood of 
another. Otherwise [Christ] must have suffered repeatedly since the foun­
dation of the world. But now. once and for all, at the end of the ages. he 
has appeared to put away sin by sacrificing himself. 
And insofar as men are appointed to die only once, and after that comes 
judgment, so Christ also, having been offered once to bear the sins of 
many, shall appear a second time, without sin, to those who eagerly wait 
for him, for salvation. For the law, containing only a shadow of the good 
things to come and not the actual image of them, can never perfect those 
who would draw near with the same sacrifices year by year, which they 
offer continually. Otherwise wouldn't they have ceased to be offered? 
Because then worshippers, having been cleansed once and for all. would 
have no more sins on their conscience. But in these [sacrifices] there is a 
remembrance of sins year by year. For it is impossible that the blood of 
bulls and goats should take away sins [for good]. 
For this reason, when coming into the world, !Christl says, 'Sacrifice 
and offering you did not desire .
. . ' [here beginning a lengthy quotation 
ofPs. 40. 6-8]. [And so] he put an end to the first, so he could establish the 
second. By this testament we have been made holy through the offering of 
the body of Jesus Christ once and for all. Indeed every priest stands day 
by day ministering and offering the same sacrifices time and again, which 
can never take away sins. But he, when he offered one sacrifice for sins for 
all time, sat down on the right hand of God. Thereafter waiting, until his 
enemies are put down to be a footstool under his feet. For by one offering 
he has perfected forever those who are made holy. 
And the Holy Spirit also bears witness to us, for after that he said . . . 
[here quoting Jer. 31.33-34]. For where the pardoning of sins be, there is 
no more offering for sin (required] (Heb. 9.1 1-10.18). 

1 1 .  The Epistles 
543 
Here we see unveiled the entire logic of the Christian gospel: the temple 
sacrifices were insufficient for salvation and had to be done away with (Ele­
ment 28), but to do that a more perfect sacrifice had to be conceived, one 
with eternal magical power (rather than one that lasts only a year) and one 
that can cleanse sins to their celestial core, and not just the earthly veneer of 
them (Element 1 8). Logic then entails that this sacrifice has to be of a divine 
body, not an earthly one-and has to be performed in the divine temple, not 
the earthly one. And the author here says that is exactly what Jesus did, that 
that was his whole purpose. That is the sum of the gospel. 
Jesus is here being declared the superior replacement for Moses. So we 
should ask whether Jesus is just as mythical as Moses. Evidence for that 
conclusion can be found all throughout this elaboration on the gospel, which 
again says nothing about Jesus being crucified by Pontius Pilate, or con­
ducting a ministry, or performing miracles, or teaching anything. Instead, 
when this author quotes Jesus ('he says . . .  ', He b. 1 0.5; and 'after that he 
said . . .  ', He b. 1 0. 15), he simply quotes the scriptures. He thus evinces no 
instances of a historical Jesus having said anything. Apparently, the only 
way the author of Hebrews knows to learn the words of Jesus on this sub­
ject is by finding them in scripture. For the author actually believes these 
are the words of Jesus, and not an interpretation of the words of Jeremiah 
or the Psalmist. Because he says these are the words of Jesus, which were 
transmitted through the Holy Spirit to the authors of those texts, and that 
therefore this is how Jesus speaks to us. Just as we saw in 1 Clement (Chap­
ter 8, §5). The fact that nowhere in Hebrews, in all its thirteen chapters, do 
any historical words of Jesus appear, yet Jesus is often 'quoted' by quoting 
scripture, is not only evidence the Gospels had not been written yet but that 
there was no historical Jesus to quote. (Revelations may have been quot­
able, and the author of Hebrews does seem aware of this, but never quotes 
them directly-their content was evidently such that he never had occasion 
to, or was not permitted to, as in 2 Cor. 12.3-5.) 
Further evidence lies in the fact that Jesus in this gospel sprinkles his 
blood on objects in outer space, not on earth. Though he does not die in 
the celestial temple, he nevertheless must carry his blood there. And only 
once he does (and thus, only after his ascension) is the new covenant estab­
lished and the sins of the elect forgiven. Which means that feat had not been 
accomplished on the cross. More importantly, this author sees no need to 
explain how a man crucified by the Romans could do any of this. It seems 
to be taken for granted that Jesus performs his sacrifice in the heavens, in 
parallel to the priests who perform theirs on earth. Sacrifices performed on 
earth are feeble; only a sacrifice in heaven has lasting power. The logic of 
this fits that of the earlier redaction of the Ascension of Isaiah. It doesn't fit 
the historicizing narratives in the Gospels. Indeed, as Paul says we are bap­
tized into Christ's death and buried with him (Rom. 6.3-4), we might infer 

544 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
he meant that is the earthly copy of the perfect death and burial of Jesus, 
which to be perfect had to be in heaven, where the author of Hebrews says 
all such superior antitypes are. 
Despite all of that, it is sometimes claimed that here at least the author 
admits Jesus appeared on earth. But that is actually, and quite conspicu­
ously, not said here. There is no mention of any of this occurring on earth. 
The author says that to perform his sacrifice Jesus 'once and for all, at the 
end of the ages, appeared (phaneroo] in order to put away sin by sacrific­
ing himself (Heb. 9.26}, the verb here being a common term for divine 
revelations and manifestations (it actually means 'make known, make clear, 
reveal'). Then he 'shall appear [optanomai] a second time' (9.28), this time 
a verb of more concrete seeing-so we will observe his next arrival with 
our eyes. This is exactly in accord with minimal mythicism, whereby Jesus 
'appeared' the first time in revelations to communicate that he had just per­
formed this sacrifice (1 Cor. 15.3-8), and then will 'appear' a second time, 
more concretely in the very air above us, at the end of the world ( I  Thess. 
4. 16-17). Likewise that Jesus had a 'body' to sacrifice, from which could 
pour 'blood', is exactly what minimal mythicism entails: he assumed a body 
of flesh in the sub lunar firmament so that it could be killed, then returned to 
the upper heavens from whence he came. Exactly as the Ascension of Isaiah 
describes Jesus did, and just like what many believed happened to Osiris 
(Elements 1 4  and 3 1  ). 
Later on the author of Hebrews mentions an additional detail about 
where Jesus died: 
For the bodies of those beasts whose blood is brought into the holy place 
by the high priest [as an offering] for sin are then burned outside the camp. 
For this reason Jesus also suffered outside the gate, in order to make the 
people holy through his own blood. Therefore, let us go out to him, outside 
the camp, bearing the same reproach he did. For we do not have a lasting 
city here, but we seek after a city to come (Heb. 13.11-14). 
From the context the argument here is metaphorical, 'leaving the camp' 
meaning departing Judaism and the temple cult. The two cities are meta­
phors for the two worlds: the present world of flesh is where they have no 
city, while their future life in the heavens is the city they look for (see Heb. 
1 1 . 1 6  and 1 2.22; Paul said much the same in Phil. 3 .20-and Gal. 4.25-26, 
on which see §9). 
But for the latter metaphor to work, the author cannot mean Jesus was 
crucified outside the gates of Jerusalem. That is in this world, where we 
have no city, and is certainly not where we must go to meet Jesus now. 
Clearly, for us to 'go out to him, outside the camp' means outside this 
world, into heaven (spiritually for now, literally only later: as explained in 
Rom. 8). But this also operates as a double metaphor: it also means going 

1 1 .  The Epistles 
545 
outside the protections of Jewish cult practice, and thus leaving Judaism, 
for which they must ҈bear reproach' as Jesus did when he was abused and 
killed. This must refer to the fact that Jesus ended that old covenant with his 
sacrifice, and that he did so 'outside the gate' of heaven. As the Ascension of 
Isaiah explains (Chapter 3, § 1 ), Jesus had to pass through the many gates of 
heaven to reach the firmament and be killed by Satan and his demons.48 He 
thus had to sacrifice himself 'outside the gate' of the heavenly temple and 
carry his blood back into it to effect the new covenant (as we saw explained 
in Heb. 9). There is therefore no clear evidence for historicity here. 
The silence throughout Hebrews, coupled with many examples of exactly 
what we'd expect on minimal mythicism, makes the evidence of Hebrews at 
least somewhat less probable on minimal historicity. It therefore also counts 
as evidence in favor of minimal myth. Indeed, it practically evinces and 
describes the first stage of it: a cosmic sacrifice of a cosmic 'high priest' (a 
preexistent being already known in Jewish theology: Element 40). Notably, 
as well, there is no evident embarrassment at any of what is being described 
here. The author is completely confident that this sacrificial system makes 
obvious and elegant sense and requires no defense, indeed the logic of it 
is its only defense (that, and finding secret messages from Jesus saying so 
in scripture). This author sees no need to justify, argue or explain how an 
executed convict could be this perfect celestial sacrifice. It's simply not an 
issue. Nor is any issue raised of how he came to be this celestial high priest. 
There is no discussion of his birth or life or sayings or deeds. There is no 
response here to the very Jewish polemic that would have been threatening 
to cause the backsliding this author is arguing to prevent-other than to 
defend its theological logic. Which means there was no historical narrative 
to defend, just a theology. 
This is all clear enough. But to bring my point home, I shall go through 
Hebrews from start to finish to illustrate how the whole of it corroborates 
the points just made, starting with Hebrews I and 2, which repeat essen­
tially the gospel of Philippians, with elaborations and scriptural citations as 
proof. Here the first Christians learned of Jesus the same way the prophets 
of old did: by revelation, God speaking to them through his Son ( 1 . 1  ). This 
48. In fact, the account of these gates in Ascension of Isaiah happens to match the 
model of the Jerusalem temple: only the three lower heavens and the firmament have 
gates, corresponding to the inner and outer sanctum of the temple (the gates down to the 
third and second heaven, respectively), the outer gate ofthe temple itself (the gate down 
to the first heaven), and the gate of the city as a whole (the gate into the finnament); 
thus the upper heavens (in which is no lawlessness or decay) corresponds as one unit 
to Jerusalem; and the sublunar realm corresponds to everything outside the walls of 
Jerusalem (such that what is 'in the city' is all that is holy, and what is without is all that 
is base and corrupt). 

546 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
Son was a preexistent being, God's agent of creation, and was later (after 
his resurrection) appointed his right-hand man, being put in charge of the 
whole universe ( 1 .2-3); this Son is the 'image' of God, a supremely radiant 
being, in the same supernatural sense claimed in 2 Cor. 4.4 and Col. 1 . 1 5  
(1 .3); who is now, since his sacrifice, sitting at God's right hand and holding 
the world together (1 .3); a supreme being (equivalent to an archangel) with 
a name greater than any other name (1 .4). There is no nativity, no ministry. 
no mention of Jesus having lived on earth. Hidden messages in scripture are 
regarded as revealing what God had said to Jesus at his incarnation ( 1 .5-
1 3) or about him (2.5-8); and yet again at no point is any historical saying 
quoted (not even from John the Baptist, who is entirely absent from this 
gospel). 
This last point is most telling. For verse after verse we are told what 
God said to Jesus at his entry into the lower world, one of which (Heb. 1 .5) 
the Gospel authors later used as what God had said to Jesus at his baptism 
(e.g. Mk 1 . 1 1) or transfiguration (e. g. Mk 9. 7; I i kewise 2 Pet. 1 . 1 7) or res­
urrection (Acts 1 3.32-35, though there admitted to be known only from 
scripture), but which here is more ambiguously said to have been declared 
at his entry into the world. The word 'birth' is not here used. Rather, we're 
told this happened when God 'led the firstborn into the inhabited placeȽ 
(He b. 1 .6), a rather oblique way to say 'born', but not such an oblique way 
to say 'supernaturally sent down into the world of flesh and clothed in a 
new body'. The author of Hebrews later seems to assume that these things 
were actually said at his death and resurrection, not his birth (e.g. in Heb. 
5). But either way, we are here given extended speeches from God about 
Jesus, which, we're told, God 'spoke' at whichever event. Obviously this is 
not history being recorded here. This is a myth. (As many scholars agree.) 
So when immediately after this we are told to 'pay even more atten­
tion to the things we heard' so we won't drift away from them (Heb. 2. 1). 
'what we heard' means these readings and interpretations of scripture. as 
just stated. Not any kind of historical report or testimony. No such thing 
is found or referred to here. Much of this information (perhaps regarding 
what scriptures to read and how to interpret them) was delivered by 'angels' 
(2.2), while the rest of it was directly revealed to the apostles by Jesus (2.3). 
who was confirmed as God's chosen by the fact that the apostles could then 
perform miracles (2.4). Notably, no mention is made of Jesus being con­
firmed by the fact that he could perform miracles. In fact there is no knowl­
edge here of Jesus ever performing miracles. God communicates the gospel 
'through the Lord' (2.3), and his words are only confirmed to later converts 
by 'those who heard' him, not by those who saw him or met him or heard 
about him. Instead, those 'first hearers' then had 'God bearing witness with 
them' with 'signs and wonders and various powers and gifts of the Holy 
Spirit according to his will' (2.4), a reference to Paul's point that Christians 

11. The Epistles 
547 
receive gifts given according to God's will (as in Heb. 6.4-6), and apostles 
prove themselves with such powers. 49 The apostles could thus prove they 
heard Jesus by doing miracles. This makes sense if the existence of Jesus 
was only known privately to those apostles, such that they· had to prove he 
appeared to them. Other interpretations are possible, but not entailed. So 
far, this all looks just like what we'd expect to hear if minimal mythicism 
were true. 
On account of all this, we're told, they now ' look at Jesus who was 
assigned to a rank a little below angels by his suffering of death crowned by 
glory and honor' (Heb. 2.9). The author probably does not mean 'look at' 
literally, of course, but that they 'look at' him in their thoughts and hopes 
(they 'consider him' in such terms, a frequent sense of the verb blepij; but 
the same metaphor is evident even in the more concrete imagery of He b. 
1 2.2). But what this author does mean literally is that God made Jesus into 
a 'lower rank' [e/attoo, 'diminish; lessen; reduce in rank or influence'] than 
an 'angel' so he could suffer death-but only 4a l ittle lower' than angels, a 
possible hint that he descended only to the sublunar finnament and not all 
the way to earth. 
We're then told that this makes theological sense because Jesus had to 
share the experience of death to partake of all things and thus have dominion 
over all things in order to save us, too, from death (2.1 0). The author then 
'quotes' Jesus declaring Christians his brothers, but again what he 'quotes' 
is just scripture (2. 11-13). We're then told that we could have shared in his 
inheritance as his brothers only if he shared our death with us: 'since chil­
dren share flesh and blood, he also shared these in the same way', so that he 
would gain power over death, 'that is, the Devil' (2.1 4-1 5), and therefore be 
able to buy us out of our own enslavement to death. He likewise, by assum­
ing a body of flesh, could experience temptation to sin, and so help those 
who experience the same (2.16-18; 4. 1 5). Thus, we have a theory of incar­
nation that neither mentions nor requires any sojourn on earth, any birth or 
childhood, or anything to do with a ministry or what we would deem the life 
of a historical man. He simply had to assume a body of flesh and blood to 
be tempted (Phil. 2.6), resemble a human (Phil. 2.7) and die (Phil. 2.8), and 
for that feat he gained supreme supernatural power (Phil. 2.9). This could 
all be accomplished in accord with minimal mythicism. There is therefore 
no evidence for historicity here, either. 
The notion that Jesus had to 'become like his brothers in all respects' 
(Heb. 2.17) is sometimes adduced as evidence a historical Jesus is meant, 
but this does not follow, nor is it all that plausible. This phrase is very 
strangely worded if a regular man is meant, who was born to human parents 
49. See, e.g., 1 Cor. 12.8-10 and 12.28-3 1; 2 Cor. 1 2. 1 2; Rom. 1 5.18-19. See also 
Justin Martyr, Dialogue with Trypho 30. 

548 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
and grew up and toured the country as a man (and as a celibate preacher and 
miracle worker besides). You do not normally describe this as a supernatural 
preexistent being 'becoming like' [homoioo] a human. And 'in all respects' 
translates the phrase kata panta, 'according to everything' , in other words, 
everything that matters to being someone's 'brother', a fact known only 
from scripture. Thus, to make the scripture true, Jesus had to be sufficiently 
'like us' in all the respects that would establish us as his brothers. Therefore 
(at least this theologian is inferring) he 'must' [opheilo] have put on a body 
of flesh so he could be tempted and suffer and die like us. Here Jesus is not 
being 'born' as one of us but simply 'becoming sufficiently like' us. And it 
appears we know this happened only because it's theologically required by 
scripture and logic. 50 A cosmic supernatural event of donning a human body 
fits this way of speaking well enough, and arguably better. 
This likewise explains why they imagined that their calling to join this 
new religion (their homologia, 'agreed-upon creed') came 'from heaven' 
and not from an earthly ministry (Heb. 3. 1 ). After that we again get quota­
tions of scripture and still not a single quotation from a historical Jesus. 
Likewise all the remaining chapters in Hebrews. Instead, we see this author 
argue that 'every high priest taken from among men is appointed on behalf 
of men' in order to offer continual sacrifices for sins (5.1), including his 
own (5.2-3), all of which would entail Jesus did not come from among men. 
As this author has already said, he came from God's celestial host. And just 
as these human high priests do not 'take the honor [of being a high priest] 
for themselves' but wait to be called by God (5.4 ), so also Jesus 'did not glo­
rify himself so as to become a high priest' .. but waited to be called by God 
(5.5-6), which (evidently) we know only because scripture says so. Jesus 
himself, once again, is not quoted on this, but we get instead the scriptur­
ally constructed myth of God's speech at Jesus' incarnation (as recounted 
in Heb. 1 ). The fact that Jesus is being regarded here not as a human high 
priest but as only analogous to one suggests further that Jesus did not live 
among men. 
We're then told that: 
50. Likewise, many Bibles translate Heb. 2.16 as saying, 'assuredly he does not give 
help to angels but he gives help to the sperm of Abraham', but epilambano normally 
only means 'help' with the dative, and •angels' and 'spenn' are in the genitive here; as 
such it means 'grab, lay hold of, obtain', hence rescue. The author is thus saying Jesus 
is not redeeming or rescuing angels, but Jews, although as this author accepts Gentile 
Christians he cannot mean that literally but only figuratively: 'sperm of Abraham' is 
thus being used here as a Jewish-friendly idiom for 'men', since we can all be the sperm 
of Abraham (as Gal. 4 patiently explains). Note that it does not say here that Jesus was 
born to a Jewish family but that he assumed a body of flesh to save Jewish families (and 
Gentiles who have spiritually joined the Jewish family. per Rom. 2.29). 

I I  
. The Epistles 
In the days of his flesh, [Jesus] offered prayers and supplications to him 
who was able to save him from death, with \oud crtes and tears, and he was 
heard because of his piety. A I though he was a Son, he learned obedience 
from what he suffered, and was perfected (Heb. 5.8-9). 
549 
This is often taken as evidence of knowledge of the story of Gethsemane 
(e.g. Mk 14.32-42), where Jesus prays and cries and begs God to release him 
from the planned sacrifice. However, here Jesus is praying for his resurrec­
tion, not to be excused. Because here we're told his prayer is answered؈ 
unlike the Gospel account at Gethsemane, where Jesus' request that he 
be excused is denied. This is most likely yet another scripturally derived 
inference about what happened to Jesus in outer space (when Satan and his 
demons abused and killed him), or a revelation of such an event, like Paul's 
vision of Jesus inaugurating the Eucharist (see §7). 
Either way, this is no more likely on historicity than on mythicism. All 
the possible details that could have secured this as an earthly event wit­
nessed in human history, rather than a cosmic event learned mystically, 
are absent. lt therefore argues for neither hypothesis, except insofar as it 
is weird to get nothing here more specifically terrestrial, which argues for 
myth. After all, though the author of Hebrews says he has a lot to say about 
Jesus ( 5 . 1 1 -12), not one of those things places Jesus in earth history. None 
are stories about his ministry, about the occasions of his deeds and sayings, 
or why any of these lofty theological conclusions were reached about an 
ordinary executed convict. In contrast, this author feels free to discuss what 
he believes are the historical details of the Melchizedek that he is comparing 
Jesus to (in Heb. 7; see Element 42), making it all the stranger that he never 
once does the same for Jesus. Instead, this author believes Melchizedek had 
'no father, no mother, no ancestry' and was never born and never died, but 
was 'made just like the Son of God' (7.3), here using the word aphomoioo, 
an emphatic form of homoioo, the same word we saw used to say Jesus had 
been 'made like' men (in Heb. 2.17). So they both had no father, no mother, 
no ancestry (in the usual sense). This again sounds like a description of a 
cosmic Jesus, not an earthly one. 
At this point we hear that Jesus became a high priest in the manner of 
this supernatural Melchizedek and not in the manner of the original human 
high priest Aaron (He b. 7. 1 1 )  because it was necessary that the priesthood 
be transferred from the one order to the other (7.12). And this is again all 
learned from scripture (7. 1 7). But here we get a piece of information that 
some cite as evidence of historicity: this transfer entailed the demotion of 
the priestly tribe of Leviϥ 'for the one about whom these things are said 
belongs to another tribe, from which no one has officiated at the altar' 
(7. 1 3), because 'it was made clear before that the Lord has arisen from 
Judah' (7. 14), which fact is 'more abundantly clear' when we acknowledge 
that 'another priest is raised up after the likeness of Melchizedek, who was 

550 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
not born according to the law of a carnal commandment but according to the 
power of an eternal life' (7 . 1  S-I6), as scripture says Jesus was (7 .I7). Jesus 
was thus not actually born; and we know he was spawned from the blood of 
Judah only because scripture and logic say he must have been. 
Here it is sometimes claimed that the author is saying Jesus had parents 
from the tribe of Judah and therefore was a historical man. But what this 
author is actually saying is that it was 'foretold' [prodelos] that the Christ 
would be of the tribe of Judah (being 'of the sperm of David', as it is put in 
Romans: see §4 above and §9 below), and a change of order theologically 
required a transfer of the priesthood from one tribe to another, and the scrip­
tures said such a transfer had occurred. The author therefore is not work­
ing from historical information, but scripture and logic. This is therefore 
just another reference to the Christ being formed 'of the sperm of David' 
as scripture required. 51 He is thus explaining how a Davidic messiah can 
be a celestial high priest. Whether this entails historicity or not therefore 
depends on whether such a belief (that a celestial Christ donned a body 
formed from the sperm of David) is any less probable on minimal mythi­
cism, which question I shall examine later (in §9). 
In contrast to obscurely ambiguous and indirect remarks like this, when 
we expect more concrete references to Jesus' life story and eyewitness tes­
tament to it, we get none (just as we get no quotations from Jesus, ever, 
except as derived from scripture). For example, Hebrews I I  is an extended 
discussion of how we need to have faith (that Jesus will give us eternal 
life: I0.39) without evidence, just as others have had faith in God's prom­
ises without evidence-and numerous examples are summarized from the 
OT.52 Curiously absent here are any examples of faith from the life of Jesus, 
from Jesus himself, or from his disciples, or the women who purportedly 
followed him even to the very end, or any of the many people the Gospels 
claim Jesus had praised for their great faith when he healed them or their 
loved ones (see Chapter 1 0). 
How could that be? Why is the only evidence to be found instead in the 
ancient scriptures? This is especially peculiar given that when the author of 
Hebrews concludes by saying, 'therefore, having so great a cloud of wit­
nesses lying around us, let us put aside every burden' and trust it will all 
51. Because David was of the tribe of Judah (1 Chron. 2. 1 5) and no other kings 
would reign but those of Judah (1 Kgs 12.20); and, as Paul said scripture tells us, the 
messiah had to be Davidic (Rom. 15 . 12, quoting I sa. 1 1 . 1 0). Many other scriptural 
passages affirmed the same (e.g. Gen. 49. 10 and 2 Sam. 7.4-17), including those no 
longer in the canon but regarded as scripture by the earliest Christians (e.g. Pss. Sol. 
17.21: see Element 9). For a survey see Joel Marcus, Mark 1-16: A New Translation 
with Introduction and Commentary (New York: Doubleday, 2000), pp. 1 19-20. 
52. See my analysis in Carrier, Not the Impossible Faith, pp. 236-40. 

11. The Epistles 
551 
work out (12.1 ), he means the examples he just surveyed. None of which 
are testimonies to the life, teachings or deeds of Jesus or anyone he encoun­
tered. Instead, by 'witnesses' this author means the long-dead people whose 
stories are told in the scriptures. This is very odd. Unless there were no 'wit­
nesses' to the life of Jesus who could reassure them that their trust in Jesus 
is well placed. They simply had to trust scripture. This looks like minimal 
mythicism. 
Here we at least do see Christians exhorted to endure the unbelief of 
those around them just as Jesus does, since he also 'has endured from sin­
ners such gainsaying against him' (Heb. 1 2.3), but this appears to refer to 
the present, not the past (as has always been the case, sinners are still abus­
ing Jesus with their doubts, and he bears it well, and so should we), unless 
it is a veiled reference to the abuse Jesus endured from his killers, which 
on minimal mythicism would be Satan and his demons, who did not know 
who he was at the time. Had this verse said anything I ike 'he endured so 
much abuse from Roman soldiers' or 'so much hatred from the Jewish mob' 
then we would have evidence for historicity, but alas we get nothing 1 ike 
that here. In a similar fashion, when we're told Jesus 'thought little of the 
shame' of 'enduring the cross' (12.2), we again aren't hearing anything not 
already expected on minimal mythicism. So that's inconclusive, but we still 
have the very strange absence of evidence and witnesses cited in Hebrews 
1 1  as previously noted. 
The same peculiarity plagues Hebrews 1 2, where an elaborate exam­
ple is derived from the Jews who were not persuaded by the many signs 
Moses did among them. So we expect now to hear about the many signs 
Jesus did among them. Instead we get the opposite: 'if they did not escape 
when they rejected the one who warned them on earth, even less shall 
we [escape] who turn away from the one [who warned] from heaven' 
(Heb. 1 2.25), meaning in both cases God the Father (whose voice 'shook 
the earth' in those days but now in scripture promises to shake the earth 
in the future: 12.26-28). The implication is that Moses lived, taught and 
gave signs among them on earth (and God's voice was actually heard on 
earth, to the point of shaking it), but the Jews didn't listen and were killed; 
whereas Jesus did not live, teach or give signs among them on earth, all 
we get is God's voice in scripture. In other words, there was evidently 
nothing Jesus did that was equivalent to shaking the earth or transmitting 
God's voice; nothing analogous to Moses. That is almost a plain declara­
tion of minimal mythicism. Indeed, the word on which the parallel turns 
here, chrȩmatizo, actually means more than 'to warn'. In fact it means 
regularly transacting business, 'having dealings' with someone, in other 
words giving speeches and performing deeds and negotiating contracts. 
It thus encompasses the whole public biography of Moses. This passage 

552 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
therefore implies Jesus didn't have one of those-none at all, by which 
to build a stronger analogy with Moses. We just have to trust scripture 
instead. They had Moses and God's voice. We only have God's voice (now 
communicated 'from heaven'). Jesus is very conspicuously missing from 
history at this point. 
All of these features of the text of Hebrews that I have surveyed so far 
are not impossible on historicity, even as a whole. But they are less prob­
able. If Hebrews was written by someone who knew only of a cosmically 
suffering and dying Christ, then its content is essential1y exactly what we'd 
expect. Yet it is certainly not 'exactly' what we'd expect on historicity. In 
fact, especially as a whole, it's very much unexpected. Some passages can 
be interpreted as veiled references to either a historical or a cosmic Jesus. 
although even those are often oddly ambiguous if a historical Jesus were 
meant (but not if a cosmic one were meant), and thus even those passages 
are somewhat unexpected, especially when we notice how consistently 
this is the case. Meanwhile several passages are downright bizarre on the 
assumption of historicity, yet readily expected on myth. 
So, yes, it's still 'possible' that these are all veiled references to a histori­
cal Jesus and historical events. But it's less probable that they are than that 
they are more overt references to a cosmic Jesus known only through scrip­
ture and revelation. And that is a fact we must enter into our equation. The 
peculiar absence of any clear reference to any facts about a historical Jesus, 
any quotations of him, any stories about him that can definitely be placed 
on earth, throughout all thirteen chapters of this extended letter or hom­
ily about Jesus is again bizarre. Yes, it's still 'possible' that the author just 
never felt the need to relate any such information, not even once, not even 
where it is expected and would even greatly improve his argument. But this 
is still improbable. And that's the essential point we cannot sweep beneath 
the rug. Hebrews is simply strange. Unless Jesus didn't exist. 
We saw the same was true of the other 'gospels' found in Paul's letters 
and in the pseudo-Pauline letter to the Colossians. Putting this all together, 
I do not believe the probability that all of these gospels would look like 
that can be anything higher than 40%, relative to nearly 100% on mythi­
cism-which would far more likely produce texts I ike this, among those 
that would survive the 'filter' of later Christian document selection. We 
might expect more explicitly mythicist texts to have been produced, but we 
have no reason to believe they would have been preserved (see Chapter 8, 
§ 12). Accounting for that, these 'gospels' are exactly what we'd expect to 
survive for us to see them now, ifmythicism were true. And already I think 
40% is being generous to historicity. But arguing a fortiori, I shall say it 
cannot reasonably be more than 60% likely. 

I I .  The Epistles 
553 
6. Things Jesus Said 
So it is for alJ the gospels declared in the Epistles worth considering. What 
about occasions when the sayings of Jesus appear in the Epistles? It's often 
claimed Paul attests to a historical Jesus because he quotes or cites some 
sayings of Jesus, though never quite anything we find in the Gospels (prov­
ing there was no accurate or controlled tradition even then, and thus there 
could not have been one later for the Gospels to draw upon: see Chapters 
6, 7 and 10). 
But this evidence is often ginned up and abused. Ginned up are occasions 
where Paul says something that sounds like the Gospel Jesus, even though 
Paul shows no awareness at all that he is quoting or paraphrasing Jesus. 
These are just the words of Paul. They were later redacted and attributed to 
Jesus. As already noted, no other account makes any human sense (see §2). 
And in any case, the converse can't be proved. 53 Thus such passages cannot 
be used as evidence of a historical Jesus. Abused are occasions where Paul 
says he has a commandment 'from the Lord' to apply to a situation, which 
he carefully distinguishes from his own opinions-thus demonstrating con­
siderable reverence for making clear when he is speaking for the Lord and 
when he is speaking for himself (further refuting the notion that he would 
ever quote or paraphrase the Lord without attribution). 54 To cite such pas­
sages as evidence of historicity is to abuse the evidence beyond what it's 
capable of proving. For we know Paul routinely received messages from 
Jesus by revelation (Element 16). He therefore did not need a historical 
Jesus to learn commandments from. 
That this adequately explains all such evidence is supported by the fact 
that never once does Paul place any such saying in a historical context, 
nor does he ever say who told it to him (e.g. he never says anything like 
'Peter told me Jesus said . . .  '). The only source he ever cites is the Lord 
himself. Which means revelation, not tradition. Indeed Paul never refers to 
any tradition coming to him from any other source but revelation (and the 
scriptures). He never uses the word 'disciple' and never says anyone handed 
anything down to him. To the contrary, again, the words he uses for received 
and transmitted doctrine are the same exact words he uses for direct revel a-
53. For some examples see David Sim, The Gospel of Matthew and Christian 
Judaism: The History and Social Setting of the Matthean Community (Edinburgh: T. 
& T. Clark, 1998), p. 264; and the various examples collected throughout LUdemann, 
'Paul '; MOller, 'Paul'; Walter, •Paul'; Neirynck, 'Paul'; Verenna, 'Born under the Law'; 
and Dunn, 'Jesus Tradition in Paul'. 
54. for example, 1 Cor. 7. 10̈1 1 (compare 7.12 and 7.25); 9.1 3-14; 14.37; 1 Thess. 
4 .l sύ 18. For scholarship se previous note. 

554 
On the Historicity qf Jesus 
tion (see below; and again Elements 1 6  and 17). So even the 'traditions' 
he mentions in 1 Cor. 1 1 .2 ('hold to the traditions just as I delivered them 
to you') may simply be the revelations he passed on to his congregations 
(which 'passing on' did not make them apostles, as it was human transmis­
sion, not revelation). For as we saw earlier, in Gal. 1.11-24 (as we shall see) 
he felt compelled to repeatedly and emphatically deny relying on any oral 
tradition. Because evidently his congregations would not trust him unless he 
was teaching what was directly revealed to him. Consequently, Paul never 
refers to Jesus having had a ministry before he died or having provided any 
body of teachings to those who sat before him or anything of that kind. And 
Paul's congregations evidently hadn't heard of any such things, either. 
Indeed, Paul essentially says Jesus never taught on earth. In Rom. I 0. J 4-
1 7  he says no Jews ever heard him teach, and that the only way anyone 
could ever have heard the words of Jesus is through an apostle like himself. 
As Paul says there of the Jews (among everyone else): 
How then shall they call on him in whom they have not believed? And how 
shall they believe in him whom they have not heart!? And how shall they 
hear without a preacher? And how shall they preach. except fa preacher] 
be sent? 
Referring to the apostles [those 'sent', apostalosin]. It is only 'their' words 
whom the Jews heard (Rom. 1 0. 1 8). Paul is assuming here (and assuming 
everyone reading this would agree) that it is only through apostles anything 
Jesus said or did can be learned. The Jews 'have not heard' him because 
no preacher was sent to tell them about him, and therefore apostles were 
needed to do so, and sent for that purpose, and they are the ones the Jews 
heard (but nevertheless resisted: Rom. I 0. 16). But that means Jesus had no 
ministry among the Jews (because they 'have not heard' him, and could not 
have but for the apostles' preaching). 
This is even clearer than the parallel passage in 1 Clement 42 (see Chap­
ter 8, §5), where it seems that only the apostles received any communica­
tions from the Lord, and thus only they could relay what they heard to the 
public. Likewise in Rom. 16.25-26, 'the preaching of Jesus Christ' is known 
only by 'revelation' and 'scripture' (and not any historical ministry). We get 
a peak at this process in 2 Corinthians 12, where Paul says God sent him a 
scourge 'to keep me from becoming conceited because of the greatness of 
the revelations' he frequently received, and he begged Jesus to remove it, 
three times even, 'but [the Lord] said to me, "My grace is sufficient for you, 
for my power is made perfect in weakness"' (vv. 7- 1 0). So Paul is having (or 
claiming) entire hallucinatory conversations with Jesus, which generated 
actual 'sayings of Jesus'. For we see one such saying generated here. And 
this is certainly not a historical Jesus. 

I I . The Epistles 
555 
More ridiculous versions of this kind of thing can be found in the book 
of Revelation, where we find the dead Jesus dictating whole letters from 
heaven (Rev. 1-3)--so Jesus was still 'teaching' and delivering sayings 
almost half a century after even Paul was dead. This was almost certainly 
a fabrication. But it passes itself off as authentic ('the spirit of prophecy 
is the testimony of Jesus', Rev. 19. 1 0), which means this was the sort of 
pathway to knowing the sayings of Jesus that Christians understood and 
respected. Yet no historical Jesus was needed to generate sayings this way. 
Rather, one could just pretend to have heard Jesus in revelations (Element 
44) or actually think one had (Element 1 5). Sayings of Jesus could likewise 
come from scripture (as we saw, Hebrews and 1 Clement quote 'Jesus' and 
yet in fact are just quoting scripture; Paul almost implies as much himself 
in Rom. 1 5.2-4), or from an author's expedient imagination (as most likely 
in Revelation, and certainly many times in the Gospels: see Chapter 1 0), 
or by simply adapting what someone else said into something Jesus said 
(as noted earl ier, in §2; and witnessed in Chapter 1 0), which could include 
things adapted from lost scriptures (Element 9) or Jewish or pagan sages 
(Elements 30 to 33). 
That this is what happened is evidenced by the fact that even some of 
the most famous teachings of Jesus appear not to have come from him. 
His famous teaching on paying taxes ('Render under Caesar what is Cae­
sar's', Mk 1 2. 1 4- 1 7) is completely unknown to Paul when he exhorts his 
fellow Christians (including Jewish Christians) in Rome to pay taxes (Rom. 
13.6-7), and this is generally believed to be Paul's last letter, dating to the 
end of the 50s, which can only mean no teaching from Jesus on this point 
existed then for him to cite (as by then he surely would have known such a 
thing if it were a tradition that could be known to Mark twenty years later}. 
Thus, we see that Pauls teachings about taxes became reformulated into a 
pithy scene in Jesus' life, a scene that is for all we know the free literary 
invention of Mark. There are many more examples like this, for instance in 
1 Corinthians 5 Paul extensively argues the Corinthians should condemn 
and expel the fornicators in their midst and abandon them to the Devil, yet 
somehow Paul knows nothing of Jesus having said that those who even look 
on women with lust would be better off cutting out their eyes than burning 
in hell, and that actual fornicators would be better off chopping off their 
hands (Mt. 5.27-30; indeed, even their testides: Mt. 19. 1 2). So it would 
seem more likely again that Paul's more prosaic idea of abandoning forni­
cators to the Devil became Jesus' more colorful teaching about abandoning 
fornicators to Hell-and not the other way around. 
The most surprising example of this pertains to the Golden Rule, consid­
ered so characteristic of Jesus. Paul teaches the concept of tumi ng the other 
cheek and loving your neighbor many times, in Rom. 12.14-21 ; Gal. 5.14-15; 

556 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
1 Thess. 5.1 5; and Rom. 1 3.9-10. Indeed in that last passage he even declares 
outright to 4love your neighbor as yourself. Yet not once does Paul show any 
knowledge that Jesus had said this, or said anything at all relevant to the topic. 
He never quotes Jesus or reminds them that Jesus commanded these things 
or appeals to any of Jesus' sayings or parables on the subject. Instead, Paul's 
only known source is Lev. 1 9. 1 8  (the actual origin ofthe Golden Rule). Eve­
rything else is just Paul's own thoughts and wishes. Thus, all of Jesus' famous 
teaching about turning the other cheek and loving your neighbor appears not 
to have existed yet. Which means we can't establish it ever came from a his­
torical Jesus. It was just as likely invented by the Gospel authors, most likely 
to capture what were in fact the teachings of Paul or other apostles by cleverly 
constructing sayings and scenes and attributing them to Jesus. 
Confirming this is the fact that nothing the Gospels claim Jesus said on 
this subject was known to the author of 1 Clement, either. When Clement 
does quote Jesus on the matter of how to treat others, he quotes a completely 
different saying that conveys a concept of reciprocity, with a sequence of 
lines (unknown to the Gospels) all communicating the same principle in dif­
ferent forms: that 'as you treat others, so shall you be treated' (1 Clem. 1 3.2-
3), a notably different sentiment than Jesus is made to voice in the Gospels 
(the closest analog is Mt. 7.2, which is still quite different from the Golden 
Rule). This more pragmatic version of the ethic that Clement learned may 
have been extracted from a lost scripture (as I discuss in Chapter 8, §5), and 
thus could have been 'discovered' after Paul wrote to the Romans. But even 
if it was known to Paul, he had no need of it, since he already cites one of 
the scriptures as his authority, one that his Jewish-leaning audience in Rome 
would be more certain to accept: Leviticus. 
By contrast, the scripture that may have contained the passage Clem­
ent cites on the Lord's sayings on reciprocity could have been sufficiently 
unorthodox that it would not be recognized as scripture by all Christians, 
perhaps especially Jewish Christians, and thus would have been less persua­
sive to a more conservative audience than a citation of Leviticus. But in any 
event, citing scripture is citing scripture. Once you've done that, you don't 
need to do it again. So even if Paul knew the Clementine saying, he must 
have known it as a passage in scripture, something not in the canon now. 
He clearly can't have known it as something declared by Jesus directly, as 
surely then he would have referenced it, as the most powerful argument a 
Christian could possibly adduce to persuade his peers: the very words of 
their Lord Jesus Christ. And again the saying attributed to Jesus in 1 Clem­
ent consists only of a series of simple commandments, each of which, I 
noted before, gets expanded into more elaborate teachings, parables and 
stories in the Gospels. That is how sayings and stories were invented for 
Jesus: a brief revelatory or scriptural passage gets 'interpreted' into the Gos­
pels by an author formulating a story depicting Jesus saying more about it. 

1 1. The Epistles 
557 
Another evidence for this conclusion is the fact that the most typical 
mode of teaching attributed to Jesus in the Gospels (at least the Synoptics) 
is the parable. Yet parables seem completely unknown to Paul. He never 
once cites one or uses one. There evidently were no parables from Jesus 
at that time. Those must have been later fabrications, most likely by the 
authors of the Gospels themselves. For surely the parables of Jesus would 
have been the main vehicle for teaching morals and doctrine in the church, 
even for Paul (who after at least fourteen years could not possibly still be 
ignorant of them). They certainly would have been the best known and most 
persuasive arguments and examples to teach with, coming from the very 
Son of God himself, and being, we're to suppose, so beautiful and mov­
ing. How could Paul so thoroughly neglect them? Most likely, because they 
hadn't been invented yet. 
However, that almost everything Jesus says in the Gospels is nonhistori­
cal is not the same as Jesus himse/fbeing nonhistorical. If we are to honestly 
test minimal historicity, we must concede it's entirely possible Jesus was 
historical but didn't teach very much at all, or much of any subsequent use. 
Thus, the 'silence' in Paul regarding the historical sayings of Jesus is inde­
terminate. It is, at best, equally Jikely on either h or -.h. 55 Although I admit 
that's over-generous. Since it is still hard to explain how Jesus could have 
been so rapidly worshiped as a demigod if he hardly ever taught anything 
worth repeating. 56 
7. The Eucharist 
Transitioning from sayings to deeds, we have the middle case of what Paul 
says about the origin of the Eucharist ritual, which could be the lone excep-
55. Note that this is only true for minimal historicity; historians who insist Jesus 
said many important things relevant to Christian life and teaching or that would inspire 
Christian dispute, inquiry or curiosity are reducing the likelihood of Jesus' existence, 
because then their theory will have a much harder time explaining the silence in Paul's 
letters-in fact, the more things of this nature a historian posits Jesus said, the lower 
the probability of Paul's silence about them (and thus the lower the probability that a 
Jesus existed who said those things). As I am only testing minimal historicity, I won't 
query more elaborate alternative theories here. They are even less likely than minimal 
historicity. 
56. Which creates a Catch-22 for historicists: claiming Jesus said many inspiring 
things makes the letters of Paul improbable (see previous note), and thus reduces 
historicity's consequent probability, while claiming Jesus said few inspiring things 
makes the origin of Christianity improbable (because then that worship of Jesus so 
quickly arose is improbable), which thus reduces historicity's consequent probability. 
Either way, the probability should go down. I am thus being extremely generous to 
historicity by overlooking this conundrum. 

558 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
tion to the last point made. This is both an event that supposedly happened 
and a 'saying' Paul learned 'from the Lord' about it. It appears not to be 
derived from witnesses or oral tradition but from Paul's hallucinated con­
versations with Jesus (or so Paul claimed}. 57 Paul says (using again the same 
language of receiving and communicating revelations he employs in Gala­
tians): 
For I received from the Lord that which I also delivered to you, that the 
Lord Jesus in the night in which he was delivered up took bread, and hav­
ing given thanks, he broke it and said, 'This is my body. which is for your 
sake. Do this in remembrance of me.' Likewise also the cup after the eat­
ing, saying, 'This cup is the new testament in my blood. Do this. as often 
as you drink, in remembrance of me.' For as often as you eat this bread. 
and drink the cup, you proclaim the Lord's death until he comes ( I  Cor. 
1 1 .23-26). 
There are strong verbal similarities with the scene in the Gospels (whose 
accounts all derive from Mk 14.22-25), indicating dependence on this pas­
sage in Paul. But note how Mark alters Paul's account. Where Paul only 
knows of Jesus taking these objects and requesting those hearing repeat the 
ritual to establish communion with him, Mark turns it into a narrative scene 
with guests present: 'as they were eating, Jesus took bread, and blessed 
and broke it, and gave it to them', and so on (Mk 14.22). Gone also is the 
instruction to 'do this in remembrance of me', and inserted are repeated 
references to people (the disciples) being present and eating and drinking 
with Jesus. 58 
If we see this for what it is-Mark having turned Paul's ritual instruction 
from Jesus into a story about Jesus-we can no longer presume that Paul 
is talking about an actual historical event. 59 The more so as he says he was 
told this directly by Jesus, not by anyone who was present at the meal. lt 
probably resembled the experience reported of Peter in Acts 1 0.9- 1 7, where 
another dinner scene is hallucinated, with words also being spoken by the 
celestial being conducting it. Hence in Paul's case, he refers to no one else 
being present but Jesus. And Paul tells us he had been preaching the gospel 
and founding churches for three whole years before he ever spoke to anyone 
who could have been there (Gal. 1 . 1 5-20), and he couldn't possibly have 
57. See discussion in Verenna, 'Born under the Law', pp. 155-57. 
58. The 'remembrance' line (essentially verbatim) is restored only much later in 
Luke's elaboration of Mark (Lk. 22. 14-20). That it is absent from Matthew confirms it 
was never in Mark's account, which Matthew essentially duplicates (Mt. 25.26-29). We 
know Luke had access to and used Paul's letters (see Chapter 9, §I). 
59. So also Paul Achtemeier, 'The Origin and Function of the Pre-Marcan Miracle 
Catenae', Journal of Biblical Literature 91 (June 1972), pp. 198-221 (see pp. 2 13- 1 8). 
Likewise LUdemann, 'Paul', pp. 202-203, and Walter, 'Paul', pp. 62-63. 

1 1 .  The Epistles 
559 
been doing that without teaching the Eucharist ritual. He therefore must 
have received this revelation then, or claimed to have (Gal. 1 . 1 1 -1 2). 
This 'revelation' of course may have been based on things he learned 
from the Christians he had been persecuting outside Judea (Paul never per­
secuted Christians in Judea, as he was completely unknown there, except 
by reputation, until fourteen years after his conversion: Gal. 1 .21-2.1), but 
it's clear he could only claim to have known it by revelation to be counted 
an apostle (as I already noted). Otherwise he would have properly cited this 
as the common tradition handed down by the first apostles, as the Corinthi­
ans would then expect him to, as that would then be the only way for him 
to affirm and verify its authenticity-and yet, instead, he validates it by 
declaring it a direct communication from Jesus. Evidently, that's how all the 
other apostles were claiming to know it, thus Paul had to as well, lest he be 
exposed as not really an apostle. Which means all the other apostles could 
have been claiming to have it by revelation as well. Though alternatives are 
possible, nothing here confirms them. 
In the narative Paul relates, Jesus appears to be speaking to the future 
Christian community: his body is 'for your sake' (meaning all Christians, 
not just those who would be present if he were just speaking to his din­
ner guests), and 'you' (plural) are to always repeat the ritual he describes 
(which obviously cannot mean just those present at the dinner, but all future 
believers). Paul also says nothing about this event being a dinner.60 Jesus 
simply takes up bread and a cup and gives instructions on how to use them 
to achieve communion.61 That an actual historical Jesus would have done 
any of this is also doubtful: that would entail he fully planned his death, and 
fully understood it to be a supernatural atoning sacrifice, and fully expected 
a lasting church tradition to be established afterward, based on a strange 
form of allegorical cannibalism, that would continue until he returned at the 
end of days. That is a right big stack of implausibilities. 
60. In 1 Cor. 1 1 .25 Paul says Jesus said the same thing of the cup as of the bread 
'after the eating' (meta to deipnesai), which most Bibles translate as 'after supper', but 
the word is not deipnon ('supper, meal') but the past (aorist) infinitive of the verb deipneo 
('to eat, dine') following the neuter definite article (to), which more ambiguously means 
'after the eating', which can mean after Jesus ate, or after the Christian eats as Jesus 
instructed. Conspicuously absent is any more overt form like 'after they ate'. Note that 
only subsequent performances of the ritual are called the 'the Lord's Supper' (kuriakon 
deipnon) in Paul ( l Cor. 1 1.20, not referring to when Jesus taught the ritual, but to 
ongoing performances of it by Christians). 
6 1 . That taking bread and a cup like this was a common form of communion ritual 
securing salvation see Randall Chesnutt, 'Joseph and Aseneth: Food as an Identity 
Marker', in Historical Jesus in Context (ed. Levine, Allison and Crossan), pp. 357-65 
( cf. Joseph and Aseneth 8. 5-9 and 15.1-4 ). And Paul is explicit about this being the 
Eucharist's function: I Cor. 10. 16-20. See also Elements 1 1  and 31. 

560 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
Note also that Paul says we do this to proclaim his death until he comes, 
not until he 'returns', thus evincing no idea that Jesus had already come (to 
convey this instruction in a room in Jerusalem, for example); and we do 
it not to proclaim that Jesus is coming, but to proclaim that he had died. 
One does not have to perform a ritual to proclaim someone has died whom 
everyone knows had died. But if his death was only mystically known, one 
would have to proclaim their belief in that death in order to partake of its 
riches (the atonement it procured and the resurrection it promised). Thus, 
Paul's Eucharist does not look like a historicist's account of a Last Supper 
but a celestial vision of an instruction from their Lord, directed to future 
generations and not to present dinner guests. 
This leaves us to ask what Paul means by saying Jesus told him he had 
said these things 'in the night in which he was delivered up'. Translations 
often render this as 'in the night in which he was betrayed', but in fact the 
word paradidomi means simply 'hand over, deliver', which is too ambigu­
ous to assume that what underlies it is the implausible Judas narrative found 
in the Gospels.62 1t most likely means when he was handed over to be killed 
(when he was 'offered up'), as Paul says elsewhere ('he was delivered up'. 
Rom. 4.24-25; 'God delivered him up', Rom. 8.32; 'he delivered himself 
up', Gal. 2.20; all the same word).63 On minima) mythicism this would be 
when he was handed over to Satan, in the same way Job had been (using 
the same word in the Septuagint text of Job 2.6), and just as Paul says of 
a Christian congregant 'delivered up' to Satan (in 1 Cor. 5.5, again the 
same word), and of all Christians who are 'delivered up to death' (in 2 Cor. 
4.1 1). Paul never mentions anything about Jesus having been betrayed (and 
if 1 Cor. 1 5.5 has not been altered, Paul had no knowledge of a disciple 
betraying Jesus}.64 Instead, he always uses this word to refer to Jesus being 
offered up by God, or offering himself up, for us. The notion most likely 
62. See Carrier, Proving History, pp. 151-55. Mark's euhemerization would 
logically transfer Jesus' demonic enemies to earthly ones, leading to the allegory of 
internecine betrayal in the Judas narrative (where the whole world conspires to kill him: 
Romans, Jews and 'Christians'). On which see also Carrier, Proving History, pp. 317-19 
nn. 69-72. 
63. Although one can wonder ifPau1 means when the Lord delivered this information 
to Paul, hence 'in the night in which [this] was communicated [to me]'. For the word 
'delivered' is identical here to that used in the same sentence for 'I delivered to you' what 
the Lord had said. Similarly in Dan. 7. 13, Daniel's revelations of a messiah figure whom 
we know some Christians associated with Jesus (the Son of Man: Element 41) are said 
to have come 'in visions during the night'. Daniel often received his revelations 'during 
the night' (Dan. 2. 19; 7.2, 7). 
64. That this passage rules out the Judas narrative in the time of Paul: Carrier, 
Proving History, pp. 1 51-52. 

I I. The Epistles 
561 
derives from lsa. 53. 1 2, which in the Septuagint uses exactly the same word 
of the very servant offered up to atone for everyone's sins (see Element 5). 
On that reading, Jesus in effect cast a ritual spell that would permit those 
who repeated it to share in what would then happen to him: passing through 
death, and thence to resurrection. He then 'revealed' this to an elect (the 
apostles, eventually Paul among them), so they and those they taught could 
enact the spell themselves and thereby commune with him and share in 
his defeat of death.65 As we saw, such communion rituals, having essen­
tially the same purpose, were already a staple feature of mystery cults of the 
time (Elements J 1 and 3 1  ). This was simply the Christian version, adapted 
with some creative Jewish ideology. That the original casting of this 'spell' 
happened during a specific past night conforms to minimal mythicism, on 
which this celestial sacrifice was believed to have taken place at a specific 
recent time, with all attending events along with it (ritual, abuse, burial). 
The specific idea that it occurred at night probably derived from scrip­
ture, like many other facts Paul and the authors of 1 Clement and Hebrews 
discovered about Jesus. There could be connections with Psalm 1 19, where 
God's 'servant' will remember God and his laws 'in the night' ( 1 19.49-56) 
as the wicked abuse him, and the 'cords of the wicked have been wrapped' 
around him at 'midnight' ( 1 1 9.61-62), as they have 'overthrown him wrong­
fully' ( 1 1 9. 78) in their pride (but for which they will be put to shame), along 
with other telling concepts befitting a Christian pesher on the night Jesus is 
delivered up (e.g. 1 19.80-84, 87-89, etc.), incJuding a reference to his being 
buried by his lawless enemies (1 19.85) and his praying to God to save him 
(e.g. l 19. 145-50, a possible inspiration for Heb. 5.8-9). Indeed much of this 
Psalm sounds like the prayer of God's servant about to be executed unjustly 
by evil men. Taking it as a hidden message about Jesus would thus 'teach' a 
Christian that this all happened at night. 
However̓ the fact that Paul understood Jesus to be merging in himself 
both the Yom Kippur goat and the Passover lamb (Element 1 8), leads us 
65. Christians are uncomfortable seeing this as blood magic. but all sacraments and 
sacrificial atonement rituals are a form of magic only semantically disguised (see Carrier, 
'Christianity's Success Was Not Incredible', in End of Christianity [ed. Loftus], pp. 
72-73). Attempts to distinguish ·magic' from 'religion' are apologetical anachronisms 
(even in antiquity). One man·s religion is always another man's magic (as anyone 
familiar with old Protestant polemics against Catholicism will well know). See Robert 
Shanafelt. 'Magic, Miracle. and Marvels in Anthropology', Ethnos 69 (September 
2004), pp. 31 7-40. in light of Rabbi G.W. Dennis, The Encyclopedia of Jewish Myth, 
Magic, and Mysticism (Woodbury, MN: Llewellyn, 2007); David Frankfurter, Religion 
in Roman Egypt: Assimilation and Resistance (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University 
Press, J998); and Miranda Aidhouse-Green and Stephen Aldhouse-Green, The Quest for 
the Shaman: Shape-Shifters. Sorcerers and Spirit-Healers of Ancient Europe (London: 
Thames & Hudson, 2005). 

562 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
to more readily see this Eucharist ritual as a new Passover, symbolically 
reenacting what the original Passover had done: the salvation of those who 
properly ritualized the use of flesh and blood at the Lord's instruction.66 
Exodus 1 2.7·14 shares many features with Paul's Eucharist account: the 
element of it all occurring 'in the night' (vv. 8, 1 2, using the same phrase in 
the Septuagint, en te nukti, that Paul employs), a ritual of 'remembrance' 
securing the performer's salvation (vv. 13-14), the role of blood and flesh 
(including the staining of a cross with blood, an ancient door lintel forming 
a double cross), the breaking of bread, and the death of the firstbom-i>nly 
Jesus reverses this last element: instead of the ritual saving its performers 
from the death of their firstborn, the death of God؉ firstborn saves its per­
formers from their own death. Jesus is thus imagined here as creating a new 
Passover ritual to replace the old one, which accomplishes for Christians 
what the Passover ritual accomplished for the Jews. 
So either Jesus really did that (which seems most unlikely) or this was a 
lie (his disciples claiming he really did that) or it was learned by revelation 
(Elements 1 5  and 1 6), inspired by creatively reading scripture (Elements 8 
and 9). We cannot decide among these options from the evidence available 
in Paul. I find it too easily explained on minimal mythicism (revelation 
makes better sense of its oddities in Paul and its divergence from Mark and 
its intrinsic historical implausibility), and too unusual and sparsely detailed 
on minimal historicity (leaving us no definite evidence it dido 't derive from 
66. This is well enough demonstrated in Calum Carmichael, 'The Passover 
Haggadah', in The Historical Jesus in Context (ed. Levine, Allison and Crossan), pp. 
343-.56. I shall draw from and expand on his analysis. But he adds other observations 
worthy of note, such as that early Jewish tradition held that the messiah would arrive 
at Passover (p. 344), which would thus create the assumption that Jesus' messianic act 
occurred then; that Paul calls this 'Eucharist' cup the 'Cup of Blessing' ( 1 Cor. 1 0. 1 6), 
which was the name of the third of four cups drunk at a Passover seder (the fourth, 
the Cup of Redemption, Christians would drink with Jesus in the future world: pp. 
343-44, 3.54; cf. Mk 14.25); and that the Passover seder invoked the salvation of the 
participant (p. 3.53), the very same thing the Christians were doing. For the Eucharist as 
a 'transformation' of the traditional Passover, see also Gillian Feeley-Hamik, The Lord's 
Table: Eucharist and Passover in Early Christianity (Philadelphia, PA: University of 
Pennsylvania Press, 1981 ). And for the Eucharist also possibly incorporating old 
Jewish temple rituals see Margaret Barker, The Great High Priest: The Temple Roots 
of Christian Liturgy (New York: T. & T. Clark, 2003), pp. 56-72; and Margaret Barker, 
'The Temple Roots of the Christian Liturgy', in Christian Origins: Worship, Belief and 
Society (ed. Kieran O'Mahony; Sheffield: Sheffield Academic Press, 2003), pp. 29-.5 1 .  
Notably Melchizedek also performed a ritual ofbread and wine for Abram in Gen. 14. 18 
(which may have occurred 'in the night', ifthe events of 14.15 and 14.17 were imagined, 
or even stated in a variant or targum, as occurring in close proximity), and Jesus was 
linked with this Melchizedek (Element 42). 

I I. The Epistles 
563 
revelations), producing at best a 50/50 fit either way. It thus argues for 
neither historicity nor mythicism. 
8. Things Jesus Did 
We just covered the question of whether Jesus actually broke bread at a 
historical Last Supper and found the question unresolvable from Paul's let­
ters alone. What about other things Jesus did or had done to him? Does 
Paul mention anything else like that? Not much. In Chapter 3 we addressed 
the bare facts of Jesus having suffered and died and been buried and resur­
rected, which are all expected beliefs on minimal mythicism-as on that 
theory, these events all occurred in outer space (in the original Christian 
belief). Jesus would have been buried in a grave or tomb somewhere above 
the clouds, just as Adam was (Element 38). He would likewise have been 
abused and crucified there, by Satan and his sky demons (Element 37), just 
as the earliest discernible redaction of the Ascension of Isaiah imagined/)7 
Of these, it's most obvious that the resurrection occurred only in secret. 
In 1 Cor. 1 5.3-8 the risen Jesus appears only to believers, evidently in pri­
vate, and only on scattered, isolated occasions.68 The sole exception Paul 
mentions is himself, having been an enemy of the church who 'saw Jesus' 
(1 Cor. 9.1 ), the only such person Paul seems to know; yet he says he saw 
Jesus in a revelation (Gal. I )  and thereupon became a believer. There is 
therefore no public appearance of Jesus known to Paul. Indeed, only once 
does Paul clearly say Jesus ever appeared to more than one person at the 
same time {I Cor. 1 5.6), but even then it was still post mortem, and only 
to believers (and in an unspecified manner). All of which indicates hallu­
cination, actual or pretended (see Element 15). Paul never mentions Jesus 
having been seen by anyone before that, much less in person. Again, his 
only cited sources for the crucifixion and burial are 'the scriptures' (1 Cor. 
1 5.3-4 ). We therefore have no indication there was any more evidence for 
those events than for the resurrection. Indeed, we should sooner conclude 
that there was decidedly less. On a plain reading, that's what Paul seems to 
be saying. 
67. The original •revealed' death and burial could have been imagined as occurring 
on earth and still be (from our perspective) mythical, if, e.g., the passion sequence was 
•revealed' to have occurred somewhere like the Garden of Eden, a place no one knew 
the actual location of and thus where no ordinary witnesses could have been available 
(of course, the earliest Christians thought even the Garden of Eden was in outer space: 
2 Cor. 12.2-4; see Element 38). 
68. I believe this passage has been multiply corrupted and originally said something 
a bit different from the present text (see earlier note), but to argue a fortiori, I shall 
operate on the assumption otherwise. 

564 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
IndeedԄ the 'cross' of Jesus (as in Gal. 6.14; 1 Cor. 1 . 1 7; and Phil. 3. 1 8) 
sounds like a cosmically potent object, and not just some everyday pole or 
crossbeam manufactured by the Romans and used repeatedly for the execut­
ing of countless others besides Jesus. In fact, the one time Paul says any­
thing about who killed Jesus (apart from one passage many scholars agree 
is an interpolation, which I shall discuss next), it looks more like he means 
the demons of the air than any earthly human authority. Paul writes: 
We speak a wisdom among the mature [i.e. the fully initiated: see Element 
13], a wisdom not of this age, nor ofthe rulers ofthis age [archonton tou 
aionos toutou], who are being abolished, but we speak God's wisdom. in 
a mystery, that has been hidden, which God foreordained before the ages 
[aioniJn] for our glory, which none of the rulers of this age [archontiJn tou 
aionos toutou] had known. For if they had known it, they would not have 
crucified the Lord of Glory. But as it is written. 'Things which eye saw 
not, and ear heard not, and which entered not into the heart of a man. those 
things God prepared for those who love him'. For God revealed them to 
us through the Spirit . . .  ( 1  Cor. 2.6-10). 
Here we are told that all these things were hidden and revealed only to the 
elect. No one saw or heard them transpire. That means God's plan, not nec­
essarily that Jesus had died. But what is key here is that the 'hidden thingsԅ 
Paul is talking about are the fact that Christ's death rescued us from the 
wages of sin and thus secured us eternal life. In other words, that Jesus had 
thereby 'atoned for our sins' (1 Cor. 1 5.3). Paul is saying that if 'the rulers 
of this age' had known that that would be the effect of his death, they would 
not have killed him. 
This cannot mean the Jewish elite, or the Romans, or any human author­
ity. None of them would have been dissuaded by knowing such a fact; 
indeed they would either have gladly gone through with it (to save all man­
kind) or not cared one whit (if they didn't really believe it would have such 
an effect). There is only one order of beings who was invested in prevent­
ing such a result: Satan and his demons, those who reveled in maintaining 
death and corruption in the human world, the only beings uniformly set 
against God's plan. It is not plausible to suggest that Paul really meant the 
Jews wanted to prevent our salvation and deliberately thwart God's plan. 
Such an anti-Semitic notion is not found anywhere in Paul's letters. More­
over, Paul does not say 'the Jews', but the 'rulers of this age', as a collec­
tive whole. This cannot mean just Pontius Pilate and the Sanhedrin. This 
is everyone in power: they killed Jesus, and did so only because they were 
kept from knowing their doing so would save the human race. This entails 
a whole world order whereby if any of 'the rulers of this age' had known 
what would happen, they would have told their peers and stopped the cruci­
fixion, to prevent its supernatural effect. This does not describe any human 

11. The Epistles 
565 
world order. This describes the Satanic world order, the realm of demons 
and fallen angelic powers. 
Thus, when Paul says 'the rulers of this age' (archonton tou aionos 
toutou) were the ones kept in the dark and who in result crucified Jesus, he 
is using archon in its thenŁcommon supernatural sense: the demonic powers 
(Element 37).69 Paul almost never uses this word of earthly authorities, and 
never so uses it in conjunction with the cosmic vocabulary of aeons. And 
here he certainly cannot be using it in a human sense, as the motives he is 
imputing to these archons then make no sense. Rather, this exactly describes 
what we saw in the earlier redaction of the Ascension of Isaiah: Satan and 
his demons kill Jesus only because his identity was kept hidden from them, 
so they wouldn't know what his death would accomplish (see Chapter 3, § 1 ;  
with Chapter 8, §6). And they would have known had Jesus not disguised 
himself, because a selfłsacrifice of the high priest of God's celestial temple 
would have had effects as obvious to them as to the author of Hebrews (see 
§5). The same could not be said of Pontius Pilate or the Jewish Sanhedrin, 
who did not possess the requisite supernatural knowledge. And even if we 
imagined they did (if God had revealed it to them, for example), why would 
they then stop the crucifixion? Obviously they would see its value and rec­
ognize it as what the supreme God of all peoples wanted; and if they didn't, 
they would have no reason not to kill Jesus anyway. 
It is usually assumed that what Paul means here is that had the authorities 
known Jesus was the messiah they would have bowed down to him rather 
than killed him, although that would not make sense to the Romans (who 
would try all the more to kill a Jewish messiah). It also ignores the fact 
that in earliest Christian understanding the messiah's death is precisely how 
God effects our salvation. This is clear not only in Hebrews 8-9 but also 
throughout the letters of Paul, as he most elaborately explains in Romans 
5-6. That is, again, the 'hidden mystery' Paul is talking about, the very 
'stumbling block' that trips up the Jews and seems 'foolish' to the Gentiles 
(1 Cor. 1 .23; on which see Chapter 12, §4). Which means if the Jews had 
known this, they would not have bowed down to Jesus rather than kill him; 
they would have done both. Only if they wanted to prevent the salvation 
of mankind would they have refrained from carrying out the sacrifice God 
commanded. And that kind of cosmic vindictiveness is not the sort of thing 
Paul ever attributes to the Jews-or the Romans. To the contrary, Paul's 
view of earthly authority is that it always does God's will (Romans 13), 
not that it is genocidally warring against it. It also makes no sense for God 
to hide his plan of salvation from his own chosen people; whereas it does 
69. See Verenna, 'Born under the Law', pp. 145-50; and Doherty, Jesus: Neither 
God nor Maf4 pp. 104- 109. 

566 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
make sense that he had to hide it from Satan and his minions by communi­
cating it to his chosen people in code (Element 8). 
It therefore makes more sense to conclude that it is the archons of the 
sky that Paul is saying God wanted to thwart by keeping all of this hidden, 
so they would kill Jesus, not knowing it would secure their destruction. For 
Paul says these archons are 'being abolished' (katargoumenon, a present 
passive participle). This does not plausibly refer to the Jewish or Roman 
elite (who were still fully in power, and could still be as saved as anyone by 
joining Christ). It most plausibly means that those sharing in the sacrifice 
of Jesus now had power over the demons, to exorcise them and escape their 
clutches-thereby escaping the power of death. Because it is by his death 
that Jesus had triumphed over those dark celestial powers (just as Col. 2. 1 5  
would later say). The early Christian scholar Origen agreed: he could only 
understand Paul here to be saying that unseen powers of darkness were 
being abolished, not any earthly authorities, and that these demonic powers 
were the ones who plotted against and crucified Jesus.70 
Someone still mired in dogma and tradition might not be ready to see 
this. They can still say (as perhaps Origen meant) that this is all just a veiled 
way of referring to Pilate and the Sanhedrin, or some such thing, that Paul is 
somehow imagining a world conspiracy of the Roman Empire and the Jews 
to thwart God's plan, and thus all the oddities just noted can be explained 
away with a battery of ad hoc excuses. So a historicist reading of this pas­
sage can be shoehorned in. But what cannot reasonably be denied is how 
well the mythicist reading of this passage fits without any shoehorning at 
all. It then matches exactly what is said in the early redaction of the Ascen­
sion of Isaiah. And nothing at an is then odd about it. Nothing needs to 
be explained away. The probability that Paul would write this passage if 
mythicism were true is therefore surely higher than the probability that he 
would write it if historicity were true. On the latter we would sooner expect 
something far less vague and far less bizarrely damning of the Romans and 
Jews as the enemies of God (and indeed of all humankind), and something 
far more plausible about how they would have acted had they 'known the 
truth'. Whereas on the former theory, this is pretty much exactly what we'd 
expect Paul to write. On the one reading, we need excuses for everything; 
on the other, we need none. 
Diehards will then appeal to another passage as their prize counter-exam­
ple, where indeed Paul appears to say the Jews specifically (no mention of 
Romans) are the ones who killed Jesus, and then got their just desserts for it: 
1 Thess. 2. 1 5-16.71 But this has long been recognized as an interpolation. It 
70. Origen, Commentary on 1 Corinthians, fragment 9. 1 4-25. 
7 1 .  The opposite is said in 1 Tim. 6. 1 3, which declares that Jesus 'testified the good 
confession before Pontius Pilate', thus claiming (supposedly) that the Romans killed 

1 1. The Epistles 
567 
was not anything Paul wrote. This is not something mythicists cooked up ad 
hoc; many well-respected historicist scholars agree, and their case has been 
made in major peer-reviewed journals. I find their case decisive. 72 Contrary 
to what this passage states, Paul never blames the Jews for the death of 
Jesus elsewhere; Paul never talks about God's wrath as having come, but 
as coming only at the future judgment (e.g. Rom. 2.5; 3.5-6; 4. 1 5); and 
Paul teaches the Jews will be saved, not destroyed (e.g. Rom. 1 1 .25-28). 
Most importantly, Paul was almost certainly dead by the time the 'wrath 
had come upon [the Jews of Judea] to the uttermost', a statement that can 
only refer to the destruction of the Jewish nation and temple in 70 CE. So 
obviously Paul can't have said any such thing. 
Attempts to defend this passage's authenticity are wholly untenable. 
They require us to believe too many improbable things. The present text 
reads (emphasis added): 
For you, brethren, became imitators of the churches of God which are in 
Judaea in Jesus Christ. for you also suffered the same things from your 
own countrymen as they did from the Jews who both killed the Lord 
Jesus and the prophets. and drove us out, and pleased not God, and are 
contrary to all men, forbidding us to speak to the Gentiles that they may 
be saved, to fill up their sins for evermore-but the wrath has come upon 
them to the uttennost ( I Thess. 2. 14- 1 5). 
Paul is writing to pagan converts (1 Thess. 1 .9) being persecuted by pagans, 
not by Jews (this is what he means in 2.14). So why would he suddenly 
break into a tirade against 'the Jews' here? This makes no sense in context 
and violates the entire thread of his argument, that the Thessalonians are to 
be commended for having withstood a pagan persecution, just as the Judean 
churches had withstood a Jewish one (or even a Judean one). Everything 
after "as they did from the Jews" is therefore illogical in context. 
Even reading ' Jews' as 'Judeans' here does not work, not only because 
the difference is not relevant here (e.g. when Paul elsewhere says the Jews 
him (and that, contrary to the Gospels, Jesus preached the gospel to Pilate). Although 
the Greek here could be read as saying only that Jesus 'testified to the good news in the 
time ofPontius Pilate'. However, I Timothy is a late forgery, and therefore useless as 
evidence-so what it may have meant here doesn't matter. 
72. See Birger Pearson, ' I  Thessalonians 2. 13-16: A Deutero-Paul ine Interpolation', 
Harvard Theological Review 64 ( 1971 ). pp. 79-94; G .E. Okeke, ' I  Thessalonians 2. 13-
16: The Fate of the Unbelieving Jews', New Testament Studies 27 (1981), pp. 127-36; 
and Earl Richard, First and Second Thessalonians (Collegeville, MN: Liturgical Press, 
1995), pp. 123-27. See also my summary and additional analysis in Richard Carrier, 
'Pauline Interpolations', Hitler Homer Bible Christ, pp. 203-1 1 ; and the analysis of 
Neil Godfrey, 'Taking Eddy & Boyd Seriously (3)', Vridar (January 5, 2010), at http:// 
vridar. wordpress.com/20 I 0/0 l/05/taking-eddy-boyd-seriously-3; and the arguments in 
Doherty, Jesus: Neither God nor Man, pp. 657-59. 

568 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
will be saved, as a generic category, and thus not damned, he necessar­
ily must mean Judeans as well), but also because many Christian churches 
were comprised of Judeans (Gal. 1 :22) for decades (1 :18; 2:1), and thus 
were not driven out (indeed, Paul was able to come and go freely), and Paul 
never elsewhere mentions the Judean churches having been destroyed or 
purged (not even in Romans, where it could hardly escape mention, since 
the fact of it would be the first question on his audience's mind that he had 
to explain). Paul also makes no mention of Judeans preventing his preach­
ing to the Gentiles, even when he was in Judea preaching to Gentiles. This 
is clear in Galatians 2, where it is Jewish Christians, and them only, who 
were wagging their fingers at this; there is no mention of the Jews generally 
attacking him, forbidding him or driving him out for it (indeed not even the 
Jewish Christians did that), or of these being problems he had to confront 
(to the contrary, his only obstacle there is the disapprobation of a certain 
faction of Christians). 
But most damning is the fact that these suspect verses say God's wrath 
has come upon the Jews 'to the uttermost' (eis telos, literally 'to the end, 
with finality'). This cannot be twisted into meaning the exact opposite of 
what it actually says. For one thing, it unmistakably refers to something 
that affected the Jews in Judea ('For you became imitators of the churches 
of God which are in Judaea 
. . . for you also suffered the same things of 
your own countrymen as they did of the Jews who' killed Jesus and the 
prophets in Judea, and 'drove us out' of Judea, etc.). So claiming this refers 
to an earlier expulsion of Jews from Rome, for example, is a complete non­
starter. That was a purely temporary and isolated event (and thus not by any 
stretch of the imagination 'final'), and hardly anything one would call the 
wrath of God (as if the worst God could do to display his 'wrath' is force 
some Jews living in pagan Rome to go back to the Holy Land), and only 
affected Jews in Rome, not the Jews in Judea--so how could God's wrath 
have been visited on the Jews of Judea by punishing Jews in Rome? The 
only thing a 'final judgment' on 'the Jews' in 'Judea' can possibly have been 
is the end of Judea itself (as a province) and the end ofthe Jewish cult (in 
the destruction of the temple), widely recognized by Christians thereafter 
as God's final abandonment of the Jews. No other event makes any sense. 
And Paul was dead by then. So even on that point alone we can be certain 
this is an interpolation. 
This is only further confirmed by how unusual this passage is. Not in 
any of Paul's 20,000 or so words, and dozens of discussions ofthe Jews, is 
there anything like it. Paul blaming the Jews for the death of Jesus is simply 
unprecedented. Paul also never talks about the Jews as if he wasn't one of 
them (see Gal. 2.I 5; I Cor. 9.20; Rom. 9.I-5; I I .  I ;  Phil. 3.4-5). Paul even 
himself says he was one of the 'Jews' persecuting the church ( I :  1 3-14, 23) 

I I. The Epistles 
569 
that he would here be saying God has damned, which makes no sense. Paul 
likewise acknowledged Jews, even Jews in Judea, as members of his own 
church, so he wouldn't damn them as a group like this, and never does (see 
Gal. 1 .22-24; 1 Cor. 1 .24; 1 2. 1 3; 2 Cor. 1 1 .12; Rom. 9.24; 10.12). Instead, 
Paul says things like, 'Did God cast off his people? God forbid! For I also 
am a Jew, of the seed of Abraham, of the tribe of Ben jam in' (Rom. 1 1 . 1 ), 
and 'Are they Hebrews? So am I. Are they Israelites? So am I. Are they the 
seed of Abraham? So am I' (2 Cor. 1 1 .22). That Paul actually taught the 
Jews would be saved, not damned, is repeatedly clear (e.g. Rom. 1 1 .25-28; 
likewise Rom. 2.5; 3.5-6; 4.1 5; even 1 Thess. 1 . 1  0). This again must nec­
essarily include the Jews of Judea (and hence 'Judeans'), even Jews who 
persecuted Christians-because Paul himself did, and he surely can't be 
damning himself here, thus redemption was possible even for that, and Paul 
makes this clear in the other verses cited as well. 1 Thessalonians 2. 1 5-16 is 
therefore simply not anything Paul would write. It can only be what a later 
anti-Semitic Christian inserted. 73 
Just as Jesus' death cannot be placed on earth using anything Paul actu­
ally wrote, neither can his 'suffering', which likewise would have occurred 
at the hands of the same demons who killed him; nor his humbleness or 
love, which were likewise displayed by his obedience to God's plan in the 
heavens, allowing himself to suffer abuse and be killed there; nor his having 
73. In Bayesian tenns, the consequent probability of interpolation is so much higher 
than authenticity that it would far overwhelm any prior probability based on the known 
frequency of interpolation. For example, any sound analysis will find the known rate 
of interpolation in the NT is higher than I in I 000 verses per century (counting both 
interpolated passages and verses with interpolated text within them), and we have at 
least one whole century of no manuscripts to check by, so at least I in 1 000 verses in 
the NT are or contain interpolations undetectable in extant manuscripts (there are nearly 
8,00 verses in the NT, so this means at least eight interpolations in the NT will not be 
detected in extant manuscripts). But the probability that Paul would write vv. 15-16 
on known background evidence is easily millions to one against. In the main text I 
identified five unlikely features, one of which is extremely unlikely (which I'd estimate 
can't be any more likely than I in 10,000), and the others very unlikely (no more likely 
than 1 in I 0 apiece, for total odds against of 1 in 1 0,000), which combined makes the 
ratio of consequent probabilities 1 in 1 00,000,000 (one in a hundred million). When this 
is weighed against a prior of 1 in 1 000 against interpolation, the odds that Paul wrote this 
come out to be less than 1 in 100,000 (odds of authenticity = 1000/1 x 1/100,000,000 
= 1/1 00,000). Even if the five counts against it have a probability of I in 100 (for the 
least likely) and 1 in 4 (for the remaining four, for I in 256 odds), making a ratio of 
consequents equal to 1 in 25,600 against a prior of 1 in 100, that leaves us with odds of 
less than 1 in 25, or about a 4% chance the passage is authentic (odds of authenticity = 
1000/1 x 1125,600 = 1/25.6). And those latter numbers are surely unrealistic. See Carrier, 
Proving History, 'Bayes's Theorem, odds fonn', p. 333. 

570 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
been a man, since as we saw in the Philippians gospel (in §4), in order to 
die Jesus had to be clothed in a human body, which the Ascension of Isaiah 
originally placed in outer space. So when Paul says we ought to im itate 
Christ's endurance of abuse (e.g. 1 Cor. 1 1 . 1  and 1 Thess. 1 .6), we have 
nothing that anchors this to an earthly event. 
Hence also Paul's references to Jesus being a man. According to Paul's 
logic, sin entered the world through one man, Adam; therefore sin had to 
be removed from the world through another man, Jesus Christ-and as sin 
entered through the one man's disobedience, it had to be removed through 
the other man's obedience (Rom. 5.12-2 1). This all conforms to minimal 
mythicism and therefore is no more likely to have been said on minimal 
historicity.74 Indeed, Paul qualifies this logic elsewhere, saying (in Phil. 
2. 7) that Christ was not actually a man, but came 'in the likeness of men' 
(homoiomati anthropon) and was found 'in a form like a man' (schemati 
euretheis hos anthropos) and (in Rom. 8.3) that he was only sent 'in the 
likeness of sinful flesh' (en homoiomati sarkos hamartias). This is a doc­
trine of a preexistent being assuming a human body, but not being fully 
transformed into a man, just looking like one, having a flesh-and-blood 
body to abuse and kilJ.15 This fits minimal mythicism exactly. 
Christ's 'obedience' (and his 'love' for us) is similarly represented in 
Paul not by a biography full of examples but by this single instance of 
allowing himself to be clothed in a body, abused and killed (Rom. 5.19̈́ 
Phil. 2.6-8; likewise Rom. 1 5.3 and Gal. 2.20). This is also what is referred 
to when Paul says, 'you know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ: though he 
was rich, yet for you he became poor, so that through his poverty you might 
become rich' (2 Cor. 8.9). Obviously Paul is not saying Jesus was a wealthy 
man and gave all his money and property away (any more than he is saying 
that Christians now would all get rich). Rather, he is referring to the fact 
74. Because on minimal mythicism Jesus was also a man (he was incarnated as one. 
wearing the flesh of a human being), it's just that he became a man in heaven, just as 
in some Jewish theology Adam did (in 2 Enoch and the Revelation of Moses, e.g.: see 
Element 38), and indeed even apart from that, Philo also spoke of the cosmic Jesus as not 
only a man, but a man in parallel to Adam, just as Paul here does (Element 39). 
75. Hence when Paul says Jesus 'knew no sin' but 'was made into sin' for our sake 
(2 Cor. 5.21 ), this refers to Jesus' preexistent status as a sinless celestial being, God then 
making him take the place of sin in order to kill it along with his body (as in Col. 2.14): 
Paul is thus not referring to biographical evidence that Jesus never sinned. Some likewise 
claim Paul says God 'displayed publicly' Jesus' death, following the NAse translation of 
Rom. 3.25, but as most other translations show, that is a mistranslation. The word is 
'planned, proposed, put forward' (protithȎmi), not 'displayed publicly'. Similarly Gal. 
3.1, where the NASB has Paul saying, 'you foolish Galatians, who has bewitched you. 
before whose eyes Jesus Christ was publicly portrayed as crucified?' The verb here is 
prographo, 'forewritten', not 'portrayed' (as I'll discuss later in this section). 

11. The Epistles 
571 
that Jesus was a supreme being; yet rather than claim that power, he lowered 
himself, temporarily divesting himself of all his potency (his supernatural 
riches), exactly as Phil. 2.6-8 says. 
On the other hand, when Paul begs the Corinthians 'by the mildness and 
kindness of Christ' not to force him to be mean to them, he is referring to 
Christ's curent gentleness as a judge, in parallel to what Paul is implying 
he will be, too, when he arrives personally (2 Cor. 10.1-2). The words he 
uses are prautes and epieikeia, which mean 'mildness, gentleness' and 'rea­
sonableness, fairness', respectively; their antonyms are hagriotes, 'savage­
ness, cruelty', and anepieikeia, 'being unreasonable, unfair'. In the context 
of2 Corinthians 10 Paul is therefore referring not to any past event in Jesus' 
life but to Jesus' present character as a kind and fair judge at the right hand 
of God (as opposed to being a savage, cruel, unreasonable and unfair one). 76 
Likewise when Paul says we 'always carry about in the body the dying of 
Jesus, so that the life of Jesus may show in our body, too' (2 Cor. 4.1 0- 1 1) 
he means Jesus' current life (as resurrected savior), not some biographical 
life he once lived. Paul is saying that by dying to the world, we display to 
the world the living spirit of Christ in us. 77 
In the same way, when Paul says, 'although we have known Christ 
according to the flesh, now we no longer know him that way' (2 Cor. 5.16), 
he is not excusing the fact that he did not know Jesus personally as the other 
apostles did, because he is referring not to himself but to all Christians, 
including the Corinthians he is writing to (as the context indicates: 2 Cor. 
5.1-15). This is therefore a reference to our living no longer 'according to 
the flesh' but according to the spirit (Romans 8). So it is not Christ's fleshly 
existence Paul is referring to here (because even on historicity the Corinthi­
ans can't possibly have known Christ that way), but our fleshly existence, 
and our choice to live 'in' the flesh or out of it-and the fact that Christians 
begin in it, and ascend out of it. Thus, we all know Christ when we are in 
the flesh, but then we evolve beyond that. As Paul says in the very next line 
(2 Cor. 5. 17). 
Sometimes it's claimed Paul referred to Jesus having had a ministry 
among the Jews when he said, 'Christ has been made a deacon of circum­
cision for the sake of God's honesty, in order to confirm [his] promises to 
the patriarchs' (Rom. 1 5.8). But all Paul is saying here is that Jesus had 
76. Notably, Plutarch says exactly the same thing of Pericles, using the same two 
words conjoined, in Pericles 39, when explaining that Pericles never used his power 
unjustly to carry out personal vendettas or desires. The same pair of terms conjoined 
appears a dozen or so times in Grek literature in a similar sense, so it was evidently a 
common idiom. 
77. Rom. 8.2- 10. See Carrier, 'Spiritual Body', in Empty Tomb (ed. Price and 
Lowder), pp. 149-50. 

572 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
to be given a Jewish body (fonned from the sperm of David: see §9) and 
appear first to Jews (Element 20) to fulfill scripture. That does not entail an 
earthly ministry. The word 'deacon' (diakonos), which is sometimes trans­
lated 'minister', as in preacher, actually means 'servant, attendant', some­
one who does another's will. As such it can mean someone's messenger or 
a temple attendant. But it does not refer to 'having a ministry' in the sense 
historicists require. It means (in this context) doing God's will. It can mean 
doing God's will by relaying God's will, and as such it can refer to 'having 
a ministry' in an indirect sense, but as such it would equally apply to reveal­
ing God's will from heaven. This passage is therefore, once again, ambigu­
ous. It cannot be confidently anchored to an earthly event. To the contrary, 
as we saw in Rom. 1 0.14- 1 7, Pau I appears to say Jesus had no historical 
ministry of the kind historicists want. 
The same goes for everything else in Paul's letters. Paul mentions there 
having been a group called 'the twelve' (1 Cor. 1 5.5), but he does not call 
them disciples or say anything about them having been chosen by Jesus 
before his death.78 Paul likewise says God put 'in Zion a stone of stumbling' 
although anyone who trusts in it will not be ashamed (Rom. 9.33); but he 
is quoting scripture here (not citing a historical fact), and the context is the 
Torah and the gospel (Rom. 9.30-32), not Jesus. 79 Thus Paul does not mean 
Jesus was crucified 'in Zion' as some sort ofgeographica1 fact. Even if Paul 
beJieved he had been (as could be the case on minimal historicity), that is 
not what Paul is talking about here. The subject is not Jesus at all, but the 
old Torah law that Jews were still trying to obey, yet could never succeed at 
(Rom. 9.30-1 0.6). They are thus stumbling over the gospel's concept that 
faith succeeds where works fail (9.32), as God intended (9.33); but it was 
still Paul's hope that the Jews would be saved (Rom. 10.1 ).80 It is thus the 
gospel that originated 'in Zion'. And even that is not geography but ethnog­
raphy: he simply means it originated within Judaism. 
More importantly, just like we saw in 1 Pet. 2. 1 3-14 (in §3), in Romans 
13 Paul appears to have no knowledge of the fact that Jesus was unjustly 
executed by earthly authorities. For here Paul insists repeatedly that all 
earthly authorities are chosen by God and only serve justice. 'Those in 
78. See Carrier, Proving History. pp. 1 5 1-55. And on whether we should even trust 
this verse see earlier note. 
79. The scripture he quotes is a conflation of lsa. 8. J 4 with I sa. 28. I 6. Most likely 
Paul's copy of Isaiah had a variant reading for the latter, which had been contaminated 
by the former (or vice versa). 
80. One might read Paul here as saying it was the Torah law they were stumbling 
on, but the whole line he quotes from scripture implies he means the gospel (in which 
Christians trust), by analogy to 1 Cor. l.23 and GaL 5. 1 1  (and I Pet. 2.7-8). See Hans 
Conzelmann, I Corinthians: A Commentary on the First Epistle to the Corinthians 
(Philadelphia, PA: Fortress Press, 1 975), pp. 612-14. 

I I . The Epistles 
573 
power (archontes) are not a terror to good work but to evil' (Rom. 13.3), 
as they only visit God's wrath on the unjust (13.4). This seems an impos­
sible thing to say for someone who believed Pilate and the Sanhedrin had 
conspired to kill Jesus without honest cause. Such a notion could not have 
existed in Paul's time. Otherwise the Christians he is writing to would have 
balked. If the authorities only wield the sword against the evil and unjust 
(13.3·5), then Christ must have been evil and unjust. As the latter is impos­
sible, yet Paul asserts the former, it cannot have been believed at the time 
that Jesus was killed by any earthly authorities. This passage in Romans 
is therefore improbable on minimal historicity, but exactly what we could 
expect on minimal mythicism. 
Similarly, in Gal. 3.1, where Paul says, 'Oh you foolish Galatians! Who 
has bewitched you, before whose eyes Jesus Christ was foretold as cruci­
fied?', he is referring to scripture (proegraphe, 'written beforehand', hence 
'foretold') and the fact that they had seen the relevant passages with their 
own eyes. He is chastising the Galatians for forgetting that Jesus was cruci­
fied and that this canceled the old Torah law (2.1 7-21 ). Paul conspicuously 
doesn't say, 'there were eyewitnesses to his death, some are still alive today, 
so why would you doubt it?' or 'everyone knows, by report told far and 
wide, that Pilate crucified Jesus and confirmed he had died on the cross' or 
'the Roman and Jewish authorities both testifY that they crucified Christ and 
took him down from the cross dead' or any of countless other things like 
that. No, the only evidence Paul has to offer the Galatians is that scripture 
said Christ was crucified. That is the only evidence anyone's eyes had seen. 
At most we might think he means the supernatural effects of this death were 
known from scripture, but that is not what he says: he says the messiah's 
crucifixion was known from scripture. So here again, at best we do not find 
any support for minimal historicity-and at worst, we find the opposite. 
And that's it. That's all Paul ever says about Jesus' deeds in life that 
could possibly have any link to a historical man. Paul says he was incar­
nated, suffered, crucified, died, and buried, and spoke about a ritual meal on 
the night that happened; and that he is humble, fair and loving. All of which 
can be true of a cosmically incarnated Jesus. As far as Paul seems to care, 
there were no miracles, no ministry, no trial, no names or dates or places or 
any details at all of anyone or anyplace involved, and quite simply nothing 
anyone witnessed before his death. That's all very odd. Which means very 
improbable. Unless, of course, minimal mythicism is true. Then it makes 
perfect sense. 
Perhaps we needn't trouble ourselves over the complete absence of 
earthly deeds in Paul's conception of Jesus, since on minimal historicity, it's 
possible Jesus actually did nothing Paul would have any occasion to note. 
We've otherwise already examined the problem ofthe weird absence of any 
debate or curiosity even over the historical details surrounding the death of 

574 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
Jesus, or his character, or (we might now add) where his body now lay or had 
lain (and whether it is or should be venerated or was of any interest to any­
one to visit), or how an earthly man (much less an executed convict) could 
be the celestial being Paul expects Christians to emulate and worship. On 
that last point alone, Jesus' deeds seem an impossible thing to leave out of 
account. How could who exactly killed him be inconsequential? How could 
Paul write thousands of words never once having to combat the polemics or 
apologetics of the Jewish elite who were supposedly blamed for killing the 
messiah and zealously campaigning against the Christian heresy? How could 
none of Jesus's earthly deeds, nor any of the particulars of them, ever be used 
as arguments or examples, or questioned? We can excuse the absence of any 
one or two such things, perhaps-but all of them? 
The probability that none would come up, in any manner clearly locat­
ing them in earth history, is certainly not ' 100%', as if we expected every 
specific historical fact about Jesus to be completely ignored by Paul and 
all his congregations and opponents-indeed, as if we expected this with 
such certainty that it would be surprising if he mentioned even one! No, 
it's quite the other way around. The probability of this must be less than 
100%. Whereas this silence is essentially 100% expected on mythicism. 
Once again, we might expect more references to have been made to the 
events of Jesus' life transpiring in outer space, but we also expect such ref­
erences to have been lost or expunged (as explained in Chapter 8, § 12), so 
their absence is not unexpected. If Paul ever wrote a letter on such things, 
that is precisely the letter we should expect not to have survived. And we 
know Paul wrote letters that curiously have not survived. 81 
So here we do have a balance in favor of mythicism. It's remotely pos­
sible Jesus never said anything that was ever deemed relevant or interesting. 
But it's not possible that he never did anything that was ever deemed rele­
vant or interesting. And even if you think that's possible, it can't be possible 
that he neither did nor said anything relevant or interesting. Though several 
vague references in Paul could go back to historical facts (both as to sayings 
and events in his life), in not one case can we prove this is any more likely 
than the alternative (and in some, it looks more the other way around). I do 
not believe this is even 50% likely, as if there were really a 50/50 chance 
Paul would never be asked or forced or have occasion to clearly identify any 
historical fact about Jesus' life, experiences and deeds, or how or why Jesus 
generated such a fanatical following that he was practically deified upon his 
death. But arguing a fortiori, I shall say it can't possibly be any more than 
75% likely.82 Whereas this is all 1 00% expected on minimal mythicism. 
81. See Chapter 7 (§§3 and 7). 
82. Note that, as with the sayings (mentioned in a previous note), these estimates are 
for minimal historicity; historians who insist Jesus did many important things relevant to 

I I .  The Epistles 
575 
9. Women and Sperm 
There are only two remaining pieces of evidence that historicists cling to as 
'evidence' Paul and his Christians knew of a historical Jesus: some vague 
references to his parentage, and mentions of there being 'brothers of the 
Lord'. I shall begin with the matter of parentage, on which there are two 
pertinent verses in Paul, one could be related to Jesus' father; the other, to 
his mother. 
Jesus' father is never named or even mentioned by Paul; nor is his home­
town or genealogy or anything else distinctive of an actual man. As noted 
before, in Rom. 1 .3 Paul says Jesus was 'made from the spenn of David, 
according to the flesh', in contradistinction to Jesus being 'declared the Son 
of God in power, according to the spirit', in the one case referencing his 
incarnation (cf. Phil. 2.5), in the other his resurrection (cf. Phil. 2.9). Like­
wise, Heb. 7.1 1 -17 says scripture 'foretold' that the Christ would 'arise' 
(anatell5) from the tribe Judah, and Rom. 1 5.12 says scripture foretold that 
the Christ would be a 'root of Jesse' (the father who sired King David). The 
same is implied in Rom. 9.5 and 1 5.8. These all hinge then on what it means 
to be 'made from the sperm of David, according to the flesh', since these 
all reference that same fact. An allegorical meaning is possible.83 But so is a 
literal one-even on minimal mythicism. 
Philippians 2.6-1 1 portrays this fact as an act of divine construction, not 
human procreation (as noted in §4): Jesus 'took' human form, was 'made' 
to look like a man and then 'found' to be resembling one (see also Heb. 
2.17). No mention of birth, childhood or parents. In Rom. 1 .3 Gust as in 
Gal. 4.4) Paul uses the word genomenos (from ginomai), meaning 'to hap­
pen, become'. Paul never uses that word of a human birth, despite using 
it hundreds of times (typically to mean 'being' or 'becoming'); rather, his 
Christian life and teaching or that would inspire Christian dispute, inquiry, fanaticism or 
curiosity are reducing the likelihood of Jesus' existence, because then their theory will 
have a much harder time explaining the silence in Paul's letters-in fact, the more things 
of this nature a historian posits Jesus did (or had done to him), the lower the probability of 
this silence (and thus the tower the probability a Jesus existed who did those things). As 
I am only testing minimal historicity, I won't query more elaborate alternative theories 
here. They are even less likely than minimal historicity. Yet explaining how Jesus could 
be virtually deified without having said or done anything worth Paul ever talking about 
is certainly not an easy task. so my estimates are still being absurdly generous. 
83. See Verenna, 'Born under the Law'. pp. 1 52-55; and Doherty. Jesus: Neither 
God nor Man, pp. 167-72. For example. in Gal. 3.26-4.29 every Christian comes from 
'the sperm of Abraham' by spiritual adoption; Jesus could have been understood to 
come from 'the sperm of David' in a similar way. Paul even uses the same phrase in his 
discussion of allegorical heritage here (kala sarka. 'according to the flesh'. Gal. 4.23, 
29) that he uses of Jesus in Rom. 1.3. 

576 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
preferred word for being born is gennao.84 Notably, in 1 Cor. 1 5.45, Paul 
says Adam 'was made', using the same word as he uses for Jesus; yet this is 
obviously not a reference to being born but to being constructed directly by 
God. If so for Adam, then so it could be for Jesus (whom Paul equated with 
Adam in that same verse). Likewise in 1 Cor. 15.37 Paul uses the same word 
of our future resurrection body, which of course is not born from a parent 
but directly manufactured by God (and already waiting for us in heaven: 
2 Cor. 5.1 ·5). Thus, Paul could be saying the same of Jesus' incarnation. 
Scripture said the prophet Nathan was instructed by God to tell King 
David (here following the Septuagint translation, although the Hebrew does 
not substantially differ): 
When your days are done, and you sleep with your fathers, I will raise 
up your sperm after you, which shall come from your belly, and I will 
establish his kingdom. He will build for me a house in my name. and I 
will establish his throne forever. I will be his father, and he will be my son 
(2 Samuel 7. 12-14a). 
If this passage were read like a pesher (Element 8), one could easily con­
clude that God was saying he extracted semen from David and held it in 
reserve until the time he would make good this promise of David's prog­
eny sitting on an eternal throne. For otherwise God's promise was broken: 
the throne of David's progeny was not eternal (Element 23). Moreover, the 
original poetic intent was certainly to speak of an unending royal line (and 
not just biologically, but politically: it is the throne that would be eternal, 
yet history proves it was not); yet God can be read to say here that he would 
raise up a single son for David who will rule eternally, rather than a royal 
line, and that 'his' will be the kingdom God establishes, and 'he' will build 
God's house (the Christian church: Element 18), and thus he will be the 
one to sit upon a throne forever-and this man wi II be the Son of God. In 
other words, Jesus Christ (the same kind of inference Paul makes in Gal. 
3.1 3-4.29, where he infers Jesus is also the 'seed of Abraham' also spoken 
of in scripture). 
It would not be unimaginable that God could maintain a cosmic sperm 
bank. After all, God's power was absolute; and all sorts of things could 
be stored up in heaven (Element 38), even our own future bodies (2 Cor. 
5. 1-5). Later Jewish legend imagined demons running their own cosmic 
spenn bank, even stealing David's sperm for it, to beget his enemies with. 
so surely God could be imagined doing the same. 85 When the prophecy of 
84. See Rom. 9. 1 1  and Gal. 4.23, 29 (yet notably not 4.4). Likewise Heb. 1 1 .23. 
85. In later Jewish legend, the demoness Igrath was believed to colJect semen from 
sleeping men, and once did so from David himself, using his sperm to beget rival kings: 
G.W. Dennis, Encyclopedia of Jewish Myth, Magic, and Mysticism (Woodbury, MN : 
Llewellyn, 2007), p. 126. 

1 1. The Epistles 
577 
Nathan is read in conjunction with subsequent history, this would be the 
most plausible way to rescue God's prophecy: God could not have been 
speaking of David's hereditary line (as no one ever established or sat on an 
eternal throne), so he must have been speaking of a special son who will be 
born of David's sperm in the future, using the sperm God took up 'from his 
belly' when David still lived. For the prophecy does not say God will set up 
an eternal throne for the one born of sperm from a subsequent heir's belly, 
but of sperm from David's own belly. 
The notion of a cosmic sperm bank is so easily read out of this scripture, 
and is all but required by the outcome of subsequent history, that it is not 
an improbable assumption. And since scripture required the messiah to be 
Davidic, anyone who started with the cosmic doctrine inherent in minimal 
mythicism would have had to imagine something of this kind. That Jesus 
would be made 'from the sperm of David' is therefore all but entailed by 
minimal mythicism. 
Paul also never names Jesus' mother, and only mentions Jesus having 
a mother in a strangely vague passage, in a chapter where Paul otherwise 
speaks of mothers being allegorical; he says nothing about Jesus' mother 
otherwise. 86 The passage in question reads: 
If you are Christ's, then you [like him] are the spenn of Abraham, heirs 
according to the promise. And I say that as long as the heir is a child, 
he's no different from a slave. Even though he is lord of all, he is under 
guardians and stewards until [the day] the father has foreordained. And so 
we, too, were enslaved under the elements of the universe when we were 
children. But when the fullness of time came, God sent his son, made from 
a woman, made under the law, in order to rescue those under the law, in 
order that we might receive adoption as sons. And because you are sons, 
God has sent the spirit of his Son into our hearts, crying 'Abba, father!' 
As a result, you are no longer a slave, but a son; and if a son, then also 
an heir by God . . . .  [So, Paul asks, why are you returning to the elements 
that had enslaved you, whom you know aren ո really gods? Remember 
how things were when we met? Why re-subject yourself to the Torah law 
all over again?] 
For it is written, that Abraham had two sons, one from a slave woman 
and one from a free woman-but the one from the slave woman was 
born according to the flesh, and the one from the free woman by the 
promise. Which things are said allegorically, for these [women] are the 
two testaments, the first being the one from Mount Sinai, which gives birth 
to slavery. That's Hagar-Hagar meaning Mount Sinai in Arabia, which 
86. See Verenna, 'Born under the Law', pp. 150-52 (although Verenna mistakenly 
concludes that Paul means Jesus' mother in Gal. 4.4 is the heavenly Jerusalem; in fact 
that would be Jesus' mother after his death-while at his incarnation Jesus is born to the 
other mother of us all, the mother of slavery, as Paul goes on to explain). For a different 
approach: Doherty, Jesus: Neither God nor Man, pp. 197-212. 

578 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
corresponds to Jerusalem now, for she is enslaved with her children. But 
the Jerusalem above is free, and she is our mother . . .  [as scripture says]. 
So now, [my] brothers, we are the children of the promise, like Isaac 
[the son of the free woman, i.e., Sarah]. But as in those days the one born 
according to the ftesh [i.e. Ishmael] persecuted the one according to the 
spirit [i.e. Isaac], so it is now. But what does the scripture say? Cast out 
the slave girl and her son, for the son of the slave girl will not be heir with 
the son of the free woman ( 
= Genesis 21. 1 0]. Accordingly, [my] brothers, 
we are not children of the slave woman, but of the free one. For freedom 
did Christ set us free [so don չ go back to being a slave to the elements.] 
(GaL 3.29-4.7 and 4.22-5. 1 ). 
It's clear that Paul is speaking from beginning to end about being born to 
allegorical women, not literal ones. The theme throughout is that Christians 
are heirs of 'the promise' (to Abraham), and as such have been born to the 
allegorical Sarah, the free woman, which is the 'Jerusalem above', mean­
ing the heavenly city of God. Jesus was momentarily born to the allegorical 
Hagar, the slave woman, which is the Torah law (the old testament), which 
holds sway in the earthly Jerusalem, so that he could kill off that law with 
his own death, making it possible for us to be born of the free woman at 
last. This is what Paul means when he says Jesus was made 'under the law' 
and 'from a woman'; he means Hagar, representing the old law; but we now 
(like Jesus now) have a new mother: God's heavenly kingdom.87 
87. Philo similarly allegorizes Sarah and Hagar in On Mating with the Preliminary 
Studies 6-1, concluding that Sarah (whom he says was a perpetual virgin) symbolically 
gave birth to 'wisdom', so if we pursue wisdom, we 'receive a share of her seed' 
(spermata), thereby also using 'spenn' allegorically. See also On the Change of Names 
23( 130}-28(152) on Isaac being virginally conceived by God (Isaac was Christ's 
sacrificial paraJiel: Element 1 8; Philo even calls him here the Son of God); and see 
On Drunkenness 8(30-3 1 )  on all things (including celestial angels) having God as their 
father and Wisdom as their mother. Wisdom (Sophia) was often imagined to be God's 
bride (e.g. Prov. 8.22-36; Wisdom 7.25; etc.). Accordingly, the 'woman' of Gal. 4.4 has 
been interpreted as meaning Wisdom by Margaret Barker in The Great High Priest, pp. 
229-61 .  But as I'm about to explain, I do not believe that fits the context (any more than 
an actual human woman does). Nor do I think the Holy Spirit is meant, even though many 
later Christians did in fact believe Jesus' mother Mary was the Holy Spirit (complete 
with magical powers): Origen, Commentary on John 2. 12 (quoting the now-lost Gospel 
according to the Hebrews) and Homily on Jeremiah I 5.4; see also Jerome, Commentary 
on Isaiah 9.9; similarly in Cyril of Jerusalem's Discourse on Mary, as translated in 
E.A. Wallis Budge, Miscellaneous Coptic Te:xts in the Dialect of Upper Egypt (New 
York: AMS Press, 1 977 [191 5]), p. 637. Mary already appears as a divine being in the 
canonical book of Revelation: see the analysis ofG.H. Dix, 'The Heavenly Wisdom and 
the Divine Logos in Jewish Apocalyptic: A Study of the Vision of the Woman and the 
Man-Child in Revelation XII 1-5, 13-1 7'. Journal of Theological Studies 26 ( I  925), pp. 
1-12; likewise Barker, 'The Temple Roots of the Christian Liturgy', p. 45 (see following 

1 t. The Epistles 
579 
That this chapter constitutes a single continuous argument is clear from 
the fact that it begins speaking about the same themes it ends with: our 
previous slavery to the Torah Jaw, our being children of the promise made 
to Abraham (and thus born from Abraham, allegorically), and our being 
now the children of Abraham's free wife (again, allegorically) and thus the 
'heirs' of that original promise (and so no longer enslaved to the OT law). 
This is how Paul starts the chapter and ends it, and everything in between 
leads logically from the one to the other. In the process Paul parallels our 
being Ԇunder' (hupo) the sway of the elemental spirits with Jesus being put 
'under' (hupo) the sway of the law, so we all could be rescued from being 
'under' (hupo) the sway of that law, and thus of the elemental spirits. That's 
why, Paul says. God 'sent' his son (thus, a preexistent being) and 'made' 
him (again, genomenos) 'from' [ek] a woman just as we are born 'from' [ek] 
a woman--either the slave woman or the free, but either way, not a literal 
woman. And as for us, so for Jesus (and vice versa).88 
It's obvious to me that by 'born of a woman, born under the law' Paul 
means no more than that Jesus was, by being incarnated, placed under the 
sway of the old covenant, so that he could die to it (and rise free, as shall 
we). So the 'woman' here is simply the old covenant, not an actual person. 
Paul does not mean a biological birth to Mary or any other Jewess. Indeed, 
that would make little sense here. Other than to reflect his upcoming alle­
gorical point, why would Paul mention Jesus having a mother here at all? 
What purpose does that fact serve in his argument? It cannot be that this 
made Jesus a Jew, as in antiquity that fact would have been established by 
patrimony or circumcision (Exod. 1 2.48), not the identity of his mother 
(except in mixed marriages, which cannot have been the circumstance of 
Jesus-much less what Paul had in mind, as if he was implying Jesus did 
not have a Jewish father).89 As we have seen, Paul already says (even in this 
very argument: Gal. 3. 16) that Jesus is of the seed of Abraham and David. 
If all he wanted to establish was that Jesus was a Jew, that would have suf­
ficed. Indeed, Paul cannot be citing Jesus' birth 'to a woman' to establish he 
was a Jew, for he does not even specify that this woman was Jewish-she 
is simply 'a woman'. That isn't even specific enough to certainly mean a 
note). Whether Paul believed any such thing of Jesus cannot be discerned from Galatians 
4, but neither can it be ruled out (since he is not there concerned with Jesus' actual 
mother). 
88. Paul alludes to a similar allegory in Rom. 9.6-8 and 4. 1 3-16, where all Christians 
are again the 'seed' of Abraham. regardless of biology; and in Gal. 3.13-18, this is 
implied to transpire through becoming the brothers of Christ (who, by being the 'seed' 
of David, was thus the 'seed' of Abraham that God had promised eternal rule). 
89. Shaye Cohen, The Beginnings of Jewishness: Boundaries, Varieties, Uncer­
tainties (Berkeley, CA: University ofCalifomia Press, 1 999), pp. 305-306. 

580 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
human woman-gods, angels, spirits and demons could also be women, 
and give birth.90 
Even if we just assume he means a human, that is already a rather odd 
thing to say of a historical man-aren't all men born to a woman? What 
woman does Paul mean? Why mention her? And why mention her only in 
such an abstract way-as simply a generic 'woman'? The only plausible 
answer is the answer Paul himself gives us in the completion of his argu­
ment: he is talking about allegorical women. Hence the generic term 'a 
woman', and hence the paralleled concepts of being born enslaved to the 
law and being born free, and hence the whole point of even mentioning this 
detail about Jesus here in the first place. The assumption that he means Jesus 
had a human mother simply doesn't make sense of the text as we have it. 
So Paul's reference to Jesus being 'made' (genomenos) of the 'seed' 
(sperma) ofDavid and being 'made' (genomenos) from a woman are essen­
tially expected on minimal mythicism and thus do not argue against it. In fact, 
that Christians were aware of the distinction between Paul saying 'made' 
rather than 'born' is proved by orthodox attempts to change what he said 
from one to the other.91 And in fact we know many Christians did conceive 
of these things celestially. lrenaeus documents this extensively in his first 
book Against All Heresies, where we learn of celestial 'seeds' impregnating 
90. In Jewish legend the fallen angel Mahalath (aka Malkat) was not only a woman 
(in later legend one of the four demon queens) but she bore a daughter, the demoness 
Igrath (on whom see previous note), also a woman, who had command of a legion of 
fallen angels: b. Pesabim 1 1 2b (see Dennis, Encyclopedia of Jewish Myth, pp. 126, 2 1 1  ); 
Shida, another demoness, bore a son (also a demon): b. Pesabim 1 1 1  b; etc. The existence 
of women among the angels is attested as early as Zech. 5.9 (even if not explicitly angels, 
they are certainly winged celestial beings); and that angels could mate and bear offspring 
not only is attested in Gen. 6.4, but it was the entire basis of Jewish demonology (see 
scholarship cited for Element 37). That 'Wisdom' (Sophia) was also conceived as a 
female celestial being, who was regarded as a mother capable of giving birth to a son 
(and even if usually meant metaphorically, it would not be a leap to conclude it could 
happen literally), is evident in Proverbs 9 and Sir. 15.2-3 (see Barker, 'The Temple Roots 
of the Christian Liturgy', p. 45). Psalm I I  0, which compares God's immortal messianic 
agent with Melchizedek (Element 42), might also be read as saying he will be bom 
from the womb of Mishchar ('Dawn'), which could be interpreted as a celestial being 
(angel of the dawn; although the intended meaning was surely otherwise, e.g., the LXX 
translates, 'born from the womb before dawn'). And so on. Thus it is notable that many 
later Christians did indeed imagine Jesus' mother to have been a celestial being (as we 
know from Irenaeus). But in Galatians 4 (as we shall see) such a notion is not required 
(although it could have been understood). 
91. In both of these passages (Rom. 1 .3 and Gal. 4.4) later attempts were made 
to change the wording so Jesus would be 'bom' rather than 'made' from sperm and 
a woman: Bart Ehnnan. The Onhodox Corruption of Scripture (New York: Oxford 
University Press, 1993), p. 239. 

I I. The Epistles 
581 
the celestial 'wombs' of celestial 'women' (e.g. 1 .1 .  I; 1 .5.6; 1 .8.4), and of 
Jesus being fully understood as having been born to a 'woman' of exactly 
that sort (e.g. 1 .30. 1-3). lrenaeus also documents how these Christians saw 
the Gospels as allegories and not histories. lrenaeus himself assumes the 
Gospels are histories, of course, but it does not look like they did. 
How many other Christian sects had thought the same? How many of 
their ideas date back to the beginning? We have no way to be sure the 
answer is none (Element 22). All the sects lrenaeus speaks of are as late and 
evolved as the 'orthodoxy' Irenaeus was defending against them, and thus 
all as divergent from original Christianity (Chapter 4, §3). But they may 
have retained kernels of the original faith that lrenaeus's sect had aban­
doned or suppressed. So the question is which kernels are the more original, 
and which the later inventions? We cannot answer this from the armchair as 
lrenaeus did, and certainly not with his specious apologetical methods and 
biases. Instead, if we start with minimal mythicism, we can easily predict 
the original kernel to most likely have been that Jesus was indeed made 
from a celestial sperm that God snatched from David, by which God could 
fulfill his promise to David against the appearance of history having broken 
it. That this fits what we read in Paul therefore leaves us with no evidence 
that Paul definitely meant anything else. As for Jesus having a mother, Paul 
never says any such thing-he only speaks of women allegorically in that 
context. 
Minimal mythicism practically entails that the celestial Christ would be 
understood to have been formed from the 'sperm of David', even literally 
(God having saved some for the purpose, then using it as the seed from 
which he formed Jesus' body of flesh, just as he had done Adam's). I do not 
deem this to be absolutely certain. Yet I could have deduced it even without 
knowing any Christian literature, simply by combining minimal mythicism 
with a reading of the scriptures and the established background facts of 
previous history. And that I could do that entails it has a very high prob­
ability on minimal mythicism. It is very much expected. So my personal 
judgment is that its probability is as near to I 00% as makes all odds. At the 
very least, the probability that Paul would only ever speak of Jesus' parents 
so obliquely and theologically on minimal historicity is no greater than the 
probability that he would imagine Jesus was incarnated from Davidic sperm 
on minimal mythicism, making this a wash. But arguing a fortiori, I shall 
set the latter probability at 50%, against a I 00% probability on minimal 
historicity. Thus, although I do not believe this counts as evidence for histo­
ricity at all̀ I am willing to allow that it might, in those proportions. In other 
words, although I doubt it, these vague passages might be twice as likely 
on historicity. 
The same follows for Paul's saying that Jesus was 'made from a womań 
made under the law'· I showed how even in context that reads as an aile-

582 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
gorical statement, not a literal one. And I am personally certain that's how 
Paul meant it. So I believe it has a 1 OOo/o probability on minimal mythic ism, 
given that such allegories are completely expected (Element 1 4), and given 
the context of the whole chapter in which he says it (and the preceding 
chapter as well, where Paul repeatedly talks about the law as a cosmic force 
and not a biological inheritance, and about assuming identities allegorically 
and not literally). But since all this is not yet commonly accepted (I am 
looking at the text without the presuppositions of historicity that all previ­
ous scholars have done), I will argue a fortiori by saying it has only a SOo/o 
chance of being what we'd expect given those facts. And for comparison I'll 
assume that this bizarre and inexplicable way of talking about Jesus' mother 
is 100% expected on minimal historicity-even though it isn't. So again. 
although I doubt it, this passage might also be twice as likely on historicity. 
I will thus tabulate these two features (the references to Jesus being 
'made from the seed of David' and 4made from a woman') separately. 
10. Brothers of the Lord 
The last evidence historicists appeal to (and in my opinion the only actual 
evidence they have) is that twice Paul mentions 'brothers of the Lord', once 
as a generic group (1 Cor. 9.5) and once naming a specific person as belong­
ing to it: James (Gal. 1 . 1 9). The first of these appears where Paul argues as 
follows: 
Am I not free? Am I not an apostle? Have I not seen Jesus our Lord? Are 
you not my work in the Lord? If I am not an apostle to others, at least I 
am to you. For you are my seal of apostleship in the Lord. My defense to 
those who are putting me on trial is this: Do we not have the right to eat 
and drink? Do we not have the right to take along with us a sister as a wife, 
as also the other apostles and the brothers of the Lord and Cephas do? Or 
is it only Barnabas and I who have no right to give up working for our 
keep? (I Cor. 9.1-6). 
Note that this passage is out of place: the argument that Paul is answer­
ing has been lost (whatever charge he says he is defending himself against 
in 9.3). It would have been explained in the preceding verses, but in fact 
in the present letter, those verses are on a different and largely unrelated 
controversy (1 Cor. 8. 1-13), and then the subject abruptly and inexplica­
bly changes. Like other epistles, I Corinthians seems to be a mishmash of 
several letters, this being an example of where two were mashed together. 
and here the preceding part of whatever letter this came from was left out 
(a curious fact in itself). 
Nevertheless, from what Paul goes on to say we can tel I he was accused 
of being a lazy moocher (or threatening to be), not earning his keep but 
just lying about and eating the Corinthians out of house and home. And 

11. The Epistles 
583 
Barnabas, too, apparently; and evidently a wife in their company (most 
likely the wife of Barnabas, as Paul elsewhere implies he did not marry: 
I Cor. 7. 7 -8). Paul seems to think every traveling minister was allowed to 
take his wife with him, to be fed by the community along with him, at least 
if she was a believer (a 'sister' of the Lord). Paul's defense is that every 
other traveling minister was allowed to do this-that is, to do no other work 
but minister to the congregation, and in return be fed at the congregation's 
expense. He goes on to cite scripture and commandments from Jesus (which 
on minimal mythicism he would have received by revelation) and other 
arguments in defense of the principle, but his first argument is to cite the 
fact that Paul and Barnabas are being singled out unfairly, that since every­
one else got to do it, so should they.92 
It's important to note this context. Because Paul is not talking about the 
right to be married or have wives. He is only talking about the right to bring 
one with him when he travels and to expect the community to feed her and 
not expect her or him to work (beyond whatever church business they are 
traveling for). He is therefore only talking about Christians who are trave­
ling on church business, which would have included not just apostles (those 
who received revelations of the Lord-the primary qualification he opens 
with-and thus who were sent by the Lord himselfto minister) but Chris­
tians of other ranks and duties (those sent by human authorities to deliver 
letters or conduct inter-church business). 
Thus, when Paul says 'the other apostles and the brothers of the Lord 
and Cephas' get to take wives with them on church business without having 
to work for their keep, he is not singling out the family of Jesus as some 
sort of specially privileged group never elsewhere mentioned by Paul­
not even when he lists the ranks of people in the church (in 1 Cor. 12.28), 
where surely he would have mentioned it if the family of Jesus was being 
given special privileges and authority. Rather, Paul is talking about all other 
Christians, who were all 'brothers of the Lord' (Element 12).93 This is evi-
92. Strangely, despite extensively defending his right to material support (in I Cor. 
9.3-1 1, 13-14), Paul also insists he never availed himself of this right (in I Cor. 9. 12, 
15, 1 8), although that leaves unclear why he didn't think that was a sufficient defense in 
itself (wouldn't the fact that he never did it be sufficient response to someone accusing 
him of doing it?), thus he must have availed himself of it on some occasion, or asserted 
he could if he wanted to, or recently insisted he receive the privilege on a future visit, 
requiring him to defend his right to do so here. Since we are missing the first part of the 
argument (containing the actual charge Paul is defending himself against) we cannot 
know exactly what it was. 
93. This is even made clear in one manuscript (designated K, from the ninth century) 
which omits the definite article before 'brothers', making the sentence read 'the other 
apostles and brothers' as one unit, and not 'the other apostles and the brothers' as two 
units. Conversely, another manuscript (designated 1 874, from the tenth century) shows 

584 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
dent from the fact that Paul is unaware of any need here to distinguish bio­
logical from adoptive brothers. Since all baptized Christians were the broth­
ers of the Lord, and all Christians knew this, Paul would need to be more 
specific when using this phrase of actual biological kin. Indeed, such a dis­
tinction would probably have become standard practice (such as by saying 
'brothers of the Lord in the flesh'). Moreover, since other Christians besides 
apostles must have been in the position Paul has in mind (of traveling on 
church business and thus in need of being fed), we should expect him to 
have included them in his examples. Yet they are conspicuously absent if 
we assume he is talking only about Jesus' kin. 
It must be noted as well that Paul does not say here (or anywhere) 'broth­
ers of Jesus', but 'brothers of the Lord', which can only be a cultic title. 
One does not become the brother of 'the Lord' until the person in question 
is hailed 'the Lord', thus the phrase 'brother of the Lord' is a creation of 
Christian ideology. Yes, one might have earned that cultic title by actually 
being the brother of Jesus. But as ample evidence shows, one would also 
have earned it by simply being a baptized Christian. Indeed, Paul seems 
quite certain that one could not have any special privilege from biological 
relation, because apart from what tasks God had assigned you to perform 
in the church ( 1 Cor. 1 2.28), all Christians are equals-as Paul says in Gal. 
3.26-29, where he even specifically argues that we are all equally related as 
sons of the same family. 
Of course, it's possible (though not in evidence) that the use of the phrase 
'brothers of the Lord' was being policed in such a fashion that it was only 
ever used of Jesus' actual kin. And thus, even though every Christian was 
in fact a brother of the Lord and all knew it, they were forbidden to refer to 
themselves with that specific sequence of words-instead they could only 
call themselves 'brother', and the fact that it was 'of the Lord' would then 
be understood but never written or spoken in that exact way.94 In such a 
someone tried changing it the other way around by actually inserting the names of Jesus· 
brothers, lifted from the Gospels, into the next verse ( I  Cor. 9.6). See Reuben Swanson. 
New Testament Greek Manuscripts: Variant Readings Arranged in Horizontal Lines 
against Codex Vaticanus: I Corinthians (Sheffield: Sheffield Academic Press, 2003), 
p. 125. 
94. Some have claimed that Paul uses the phrase 'brother in Christ' to mean 
Christian, and therefore 'brother ofthe Lord' was reserved for actual kin, but this is false. 
Paul never uses the phrase 'brother in Christ'. Paul often speaks of 'those in Christ' (and 
on single occasions 'saints in Christ', Phil. 4.21 ;  'man in Christ', 2 Cor. 12.2; 'babes 
in Christ', I Cor. 3.1; and 'churches in Christ', I Thess. 2.1 4) but that does not play on 
the fact of their adoption as sons of God but on their communion with Christ and thus 
their all sharing the same body (Rom. 12.5). Otherwise Paul routinely calls Christians 
'brothers', and the only sense in which they were brothers is that they were, like Jesus, 
the sons of God (by adoption: Rom. 1.4; with Element 12) and thus were all the brothers 

1 1 . The Epistles 
585 
case, Paul could use that phrase without further qualification and always 
be understood to mean Jesus' actual kin. But this presumes an unlikely fact 
not in evidence (this unusual policing of terminology within church com­
munications), and any theory that requires us to resort to such a thing is less 
probable than a theory that does not.95 Whereas without that implausible 
assumption, 'brother of the Lord' would mean any baptized Christian what­
ever (again: Element 1 2). 
Moreover, it is just as likely such policing of the phrase occurred in the 
other direction, and that only Christians who had obtained the highest stage 
of initiation were allowed to be referred to with the complete phrase 'brother 
of the Lord'. This would match what Clement of Alexandria reports, that 
Christians achieving the highest stage of initiation were alone fully heirs, 
and thusfu//y the sons of God (and so just as fully the brothers of the son of 
God: see Element 1 3). Since this is just as likely (or just as unlikely), even 
the possibility that the phrase 'brother of the Lord' was policed to mean 
only biological kin is then washed out by the equal possibility it was policed 
to mean only apostles of supreme rank. As either is as likely on prior con­
siderations, neither prevails. And still more likely than both is that 'brothers 
of the Lord' is simply what Christians commonly called themselves before 
they acquired the name 'Christian' (an appel1ation Paul shows no knowl­
edge of). The use of the complete phrase would then not be necessary other 
than occasionally for emphasis, hence Paul repeatedly speaks of Christians 
being simply 'the brethren', because everyone understood that was short­
hand for 'brethren of the Lord'. 
This makes 'brother of the Lord meant Christian' the simplest hypothesis 
(it requires the fewest ad hoc assumptions). Furthermore, that it would mean 
that is actually in evidence (we know all Christians in Paul's time deemed 
themselves brothers of the Lord in cultic fact), whereas that it meant some­
thing else is not. Not one time in all of Paul's letters does he ever say or 
even imply that this phrase means only biological brothersԇr apostles 
of supreme rank, for that matter, unless that's implied by the sequence in 
l Cor. 9.5, if that sequence is supposed to indicate ascending rank: apostles, 
supreme apostles, and supremest apostle (i.e. Cephas). There being apostles 
of God's first son, the Lord. Paul links both concepts in 1 Cor. 1 5.3 1 ,  but still does not use 
the phrase 'brothers in Christ' even there. Only in the Pseudo-Pauline text of Col. 1 .2 do 
we find the phrase 'to the holy and faithful brothers in Christ', but that was not written by 
Paul (indeed. that clause in and of itself is conspicuously un-Pauline). The NIV translation 
of Phil. I .  14 reads •because of my chains most of the brothers in the Lord have been 
encouraged to speak' more boldly, but this is in error; the NASB correctly translates this 
clause as 'most ofthe brethren, trusting in the Lord because of my imprisonment', speak 
more boldly. Although either is technically possible. the context supports the latter (as 
does Paul's practice everywhere else). 
95. See 'gerrymandering' in Carrier, Praving History, p. 336. 

586 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
of higher rank could also be implied by 'the twelve' (in 1 Cor. 1 5.5) or 'the 
pillars' (in Gal. 2.9). Could these higher ranked apostles be the biological 
brothers of Jesus? One would sooner think that the higher ranked apos­
tles would be the disciples (a group once again notably completely absent 
here-more evidence Paul knew of no such group), or (as just noted) the 
pillars or the twelve (which were in no account the family of Jesus). 
In fact, there is no evidence anywhere (even outside of Paul) that the 
brothers of Jesus were deemed as a collective whole to be the highest rank­
ing apostles. So that cannot be what Paul means here. Nor can he mean 
ascending ranks at all. He can only mean that all the other apostles, even 
regular Christians, and even Cephas himself, get this privilege and so should 
Paul. Because Paul's argument requires that the Corinthians would agree 
Paul has the same rights as all three examples Paul names, which entails 
Paul cannot mean these examples to be ascending in rank--otherwise he 
could easily be rebutted by pointing out to him that he doesn't get the privi­
leges of ranks he has not attained. So Paul can only be assuming none of 
these groups outrank him (and furthennore, for his argument to work, he 
can only be assuming that the Corinthians would agree). Because Paul's 
argument is that he should have the same rights as they do. And since he 
says 'the other apostles', he is including himself in that rҬ so he cannot 
mean he has the same rights as 'the brothers of the Lord and Cephas' unless 
'the brothers of the Lord and Cephas' were consistently understood to have 
no more rights than apostles. 
Therefore, Paul must mean by 'brothers of the Lord' here simply Chris­
tians-and in particular, Christians below apostolic rank. That finally makes 
the point of his argument clear: if even regular Christians were being given 
this privilege (of being supported by the communities they traveled to on 
church business), then surely Paul should be, being an actual apostle. He 
is thus arguing a fortiori. Likewise, by mentioning Cephas, Paul clearly 
assumes the Corinthians understood Cephas (i.e. Peter) and himself to 
be equals and deserving of equal rights. Paul assumes this elsewhere, too 
(1 Cor. 1 . 1 2  and 3.22). Probably Cephas was known to frequently travel 
with his wife (more so than other apostles Paul might have named). In any 
case, what is required for Paul's argument is that Cephas and Paul were of 
equal rank, and thus whatever Cephas got, the Corinthians would be forced 
to agree Paul should get. Otherwise Paul could not use Cephas to make 
this argument. And the same entails that Paul cannot mean the biological 
brothers of Jesus: for how could Paul expect the Corinthians to assume he 
was the equal of even the Lord's own family? Unless the Corinthians would 
already have agreed that their being his family gained them no special privi­
leges-but then, if that were the case, why would Paul single them out as 
an example? 

1 1 .  The Epistles 
587 
Thus, Paul's argument here would make no sense if he was talking about 
the family of Jesus. But it makes perfect sense if he was talking about 
Christians as a whole, and especia11y Christians of lower rank than himself. 
Against this conclusion historicists can refer only to evidence outside the 
Epistles, but that does not support them. The Gospels, as we saw, do con­
ceive brothers for Jesus (and even name them), but then essentia11y declare 
that Jesus renounced them (see Chapter 1 0, §4). The authors of the Gospels 
show no knowledge of these brothers even having been believers, much 
less apostles; even less, privileged ones. Except Luke, who alone imagines 
them in the first congregation (in Acts 1 ), but then shows no knowledge 
of them ever doing anything, much less being apostles; even less, apostles 
of special status. For none of them appear anywhere in Acts' record of the 
church's public history (see Chapter 9, §3). That they don't exist in the 
earliest recorded history of the church argues for the conclusion that they 
didn't exist altogether. It certainly does not argue for the opposite conclu­
sion, that they were a recognized privileged group in church leadership. No 
brothers of Jesus are found anywhere else in the NT, either; not even letters 
with their names on them claim such (see §3). And when it comes to evi­
dence outside the NT, we already saw how ridiculous and unreliable it all is 
on exactly this point (see Chapter 8). 
So Paul is surely just referring to non-apostolic Christians in 1 Cor. 9.5, 
and not to the family of Jesus. What about his one other reference to this 
category? To the Galatians Paul explains: 
When it was the good pleasure of the God who separated me from my 
mother's womb, and called me through his grace, to reveal his Son in me, 
that I might preach him among the Gentiles, I did not confer with flesh 
and blood right away, nor did I go to Jerusalem to those that were apostles 
before me, but I went to Arabia and again I returned to Damascus. Then 
after three years I went to Jerusalem, to consult with Cephas, and I stayed 
with him for fifteen days, but I did not see any other of the apostles, except 
James the brother of the Lord. And look, these things I'm writing to you, 
by God, I'm not lying! Then I went into the regions of Syria and Cilicia. 
And I was still unknown by face to the congregations of Judea that were 
in Christ (Gal. 1 . 15-22). 
Here I believe this is another fictive kinship title, not a reference to James 
litera11y being the brother ofChrist.96 We've already seen how Paul can use 
the phrase 4;brother of the Lord' to mean Christian, since all Christians were 
brothers of the Lord, and why Paul would have needed to be more specific 
if he meant 'brother of the Lord' by birth and not adoption. So here he may 
96. So also Verenna, 'Born under the Law', pp. 1 57-59; and Doherty, Jesus: Neither 
God nor Man, pp. 60-63. 

588 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
be simply saying the same thing, that James was a fellow brother in Christ. 
Indeed, Paul goes on to say that this James (unless he means a different 
one) was one of the three pillars ofhighest repute in the church, 'James and 
Cephas and John' (Gal. 2.9). The Gospels imagine these three as disciples, 
not the family of Jesus. In fact, the Gospels uniformly report that this James 
and John were the brothers of each other, not of Jesus.97 Might Paul have 
only known them as such, too? 
Certainly in Gal. 1.19 Paul meant either James the Pi1Jar or another 
James. And if he meant James the Pillar, then he did not mean he was liter­
ally the brother of Jesus-as that James appears to have been the brother of 
John, not Jesus. So to maintain that Paul means this James was the literal 
brother of Jesus, you have to conclude that Paul meant a different James in 
1 . 19 than the one he mentions soon afterward (in Gal. 2.9 and 2. 1 2). But 
that means whichever James he is speaking of in 1 . 1 9  might not have been 
an apostle at all. And that means Paul may be using 'brother of the Lord' 
yet again to distinguish apostles from other Christians, and not to identify 
the family of Jesus. 
The context ofPaul's remark is again key. Paul is arguing that he received 
all he knows about the Christian mysteries from direct revelation (Gal. 1 .6-
1 2), that he didn't 'steal' any of it by hearing other apostles teaching it 
and then passing himself off as an apostle who had heard it from the Lord 
himself (see earlier discussion in §2). Thus it was crucial to argue that Paul 
had not even met any apostles until long after he had been preaching the 
gospel and initiating converts. That's why he insists not any Christian at all 
in Judea had ever met him ( 1 .22-23) and that he only ever met one apostle 
(Cephas, i.e., Peter) or two (if he means James was an apostle), and even 
that was only after three years of conducting his own ministry in Arabia and 
Damascus (1.17-18), then spending just two weeks in Jerusalem, then meet­
ing no one else there for another fourteen years (2.1 ). 
Whether Paul is actually lying about any of this is not relevant to what 
Paul wants the Galatians to think and thus what Paul means to say here. And 
what he means to say is that no one in Judea ever met him. He swears to 
this most emphatically (Gal. 1 .20). He admits there were only two excep­
tions, Peter and James, and only for a brief time (and that years after he 
saw the Lord personally). But in saying so, why didn't Paul just say 'of 
them that were apostles before me [ 1 . 1 7] I met none except Peter and James 
97. Mk 5.37; 9.2; 14.33; Mt. 1 7. 1 ;  Lk. 5.10; 8.5 1 :  9.28; Acts 12.2. Paul himself 
mentions a James in only two places: here in Paul's defense to the Gal. ( 1. 19; 2.9; 2. 1 2) 
and in 1 Cor. 15.7 (although that verse may be an interpolation: see earlier note). The 
latter does not indicate the brother of Jesus is meant, yet neither would one expect that 
James to be the Pillar, either, as James the Pillar would have been among 'the twelve' 
in 1 Cor. 1 5.5. 

I I . The Epistles 
589 
[1.18-19]'? Why does he construct the convoluted sentence 'I consulted 
with Peter, but another of the apostles I did not see, except James'? As 
L. Paul Trudinger puts it, 'this would certainly be an odd way for Paul to 
say that he saw only two apostles, Peter and James' .98 To say that, a far sim­
pler sentence would do. So why the complex sentence instead? Paul could 
perhaps mean that he consulted with Peter (historeo) but only saw James 
(eidҭ)-that is, he didn't discuss anything with James. But if that were his 
point, he would make sure to emphasize it, since that would be essential to 
his argument. Yet he doesn't. In fact, if he is saying that he saw none of the 
other apostles, that would entail he was claiming he did not consult with 
any, either. 
So it's just as likely, if not more so, that Paul means he met only the apos­
tle Peter and only one other Judean Christian, a certain 'brother James'. By 
calling him a brother of the Lord instead of an apostle, Paul is thus distin­
guishing this James from any apostles of the same name-just as we saw he 
used 'brothers of the Lord' to distinguish regular Christians from apostles 
in I Cor. 9.5. Indeed, this would explain his rare use of the complete phrase 
in only those two places: he otherwise uses the truncated 'brother' of his 
fellow Christians; yet every time he specifically distinguishes apostles from 
non-apostolic Christians he uses the full title for a member of the Chris­
tian congregation, 'brother of the Lord'. This would be especia1ly neces· 
sary to distinguish in such contexts 'brothers of the apostles' (which would 
include kin who were not believers) from 'brothers of the Lord', which also 
explains why he doesn't truncate the phrase in precisely those two places. 
You might see how that would be important to Paul's argument in 1 Cor. 
9.5, where indeed he takes similar care in specifying that only believing 
wives have the right in question; he therefore must distinguish (so as to 
exclude) unbelieving brothers for the same reason. If the James in Gal. 
1.19 could likewise be mistaken for an unbelieving brother of Peter ( espe­
cially by readers who did not know what brothers Peter may have had), Paul 
would need to be equally specific there, and thus again use the complete 
phrase.99 And if that's the case, then Paul would in effect be saying, 'I didn't 
98. L. Paul Trudinger, '[Heteron de ton apostoMn ouk eidon, ei me iakl1bon]: A Note 
on Galatians I 19', Novum Testamentum 17 (July 1975), pp. 200-202 (200). 
99. Some claim Paul's use of the definite article ('the brother of the Lord') is 
significant, but that is not the case. For example, I Cor. 1 6.12 ('Apollos the brother'); 
Phil. 2.25 ('Epaphroditus the brother'); Rom. 14. 10 ('the brother of you'); 1 Thess. 
4.6 ('the brother of one [of us]'); I Cor. 8. 13 ('the brother of me'); 2 Cor. 2.13 ('Titus 
the brother of me'); I Thess. 3.2 ('Timothy the brother of us'), etc. Likewise, some 
claim Paul would say •James our brother' to designate his status as a Christian, but Paul 
never uses a personalizing pronoun of anyone not his personal friend (se 1 Cor. 1 . 1; 2 
Cor. 1 . 1 ;  2.13; 8.22-23; Rom. 16. 1 ;  I Thess. 3.2; Phil. 2.25; Phlm. I ,  2, 20; rhetorical 
intimacy: I Cor. 8. 13), and if this is the same James as in Gal. 2.9 and 2.12, Paul was 

590 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
meet another of the apostles, unless you count brother James [who joined us 
but was not an apostle]'. Many biblical scholars have concluded the same: 
that Paul meant this James was not an apostle (whether or not he was the 
actual brother of Jesus).100 
In fact, the Greek here is quite strange, unless Paul actually meant 'other 
than the apostles I saw only James', meaning quite specifically that this 
James was not an apostle. Ordinarily, to say you saw 'no other apostle' you 
would write heteron ton apostolon ouk (compare Rom. 7.23; 13.9; etc.) or 
oudena heteron ton apostolon (as Paul usually does: e.g. I Cor. 1 . 14; 2.8; 
9. 1 5; etc.) or things similar. But here Paul instead chose the unusual (and for 
Paul, unprecedented) construction heteron ton apostolon. Without oudeis, 
the word heteron plus the genitive in this fashion more often means 'other 
than', rather than 'another of'. 101 Paul would then be simply classifying 
a meeting with 'Cephas' as a meeting with 'the apostles' (as anticipated 
in 1 . 1 7), and then making sure he named all the Christians he met on that 
occasion (Cephas and James) in anticipation of his claim that no one in 
Judea had ever seen him ( 1 .22). The latter claim would be a lie if he had met 
any Christian, even one who was not an apostle, during his visit to Cephas 
(in 1 . 1 8). So Paul has to name all the Christians he met on that occasion. 
And, lying or not, that number needed to be low for his argument to hold. 
Accordingly, Paul says there was only one other: brother James. 
The fact that Paul needs to say he met no Christians at all (and not just 
apostles) in Gal. 1 . 1 8  in order to sustain his claim in 1 .22 that no one else 
in Judea had seen him means that we should expect Paul to have named any 
non-apostolic Christians he met in Gal. 1 . 1 8· 1 9. And lo and behold, that's 
what he appears to do: he insists he met no one else but a certain 'brother 
James'. We should conclude then that Paul is doing the same thing here 
that he did in 1 Cor. 9.5, using 'brother of the Lord' as an appellation for 
Christians, every time he wants to distinguish Christians generally from 
'apostles' specifically. Otherwise, as I pointed out before, Paul would need 
anything but James's personal friend-and even if he was. he certainly would not want 
to remind the Galatians of that fact in an argument insisting on how little he knew these 
people. 
100. See Trudinger, '[Heteron]', p. 200 n. 3; and Hans Dieter Betz, Galatians: A 
Commentary on Paul 's Letter to the Churches in Galatia (Minneapolis, MN: Fortress 
Press, 1 979), p. 78. 
101 . This is argued in Trudinger, '(Heteron]'. I find the only rebuttal to Trudinger's 
argument inconclusively weak: George Howard, 'Was James an Apostle? A Reflection 
on a New Proposal for Gal. I J 9', Novum Testamentum 19 (January 1 977), pp. 63-64. 
Howard's first argument is refuted by the fact that both the apostles and James are of 
the same class (they are all Christians, which is precisely Paul's point), and his second 
argument is refuted by relying on a premise of pure speculation that actually expects 
Paul to have written an even more convoluted sentence than he did. 

I I .  The Epistles 
591 
to make clear that he meant a biological brother of the Lord and not an 
adoptive brother of the Lord like any other Christian. That he made no such 
distinction here all but entails he intended none.102 We should conclude the 
same. 
One way to look at these two passages would be to ask what would we 
think if we only had Paul's (authentic) letters? If that was all the evidence 
we had for Christianity, would we conclude that Paul was describing with 
the title 'brother of the Lord' a biological relation or a cultic relation? The 
evidence in Paul's letters alone strongly supports the existence of the cultic 
relation, while providing no evidence for anyone having a biological rela­
tion to the Lord. Thus, you'll find the biological interpretation is always 
based on evidence outside Paul's letters. Which we have surveyed in pre­
vious chapters and found wholly unreliable. I have to conclude that there 
simply is no evidence in these two passages supporting historicity. They are 
fully explicable without it and do not make up for the gaping silence even in 
these passages, much less the vast and strange silence throughout the rest of 
Paul's letters-and all first-century Christian literature, in none of which do 
brothers of Jesus get mentioned in any historically credible way. 103 
So the question at hand is how likely it is that Paul would use the phrase 
'brothers of the Lord' on the two occasions he does (in Gal. 1 . 1 9  and 1 Cor. 
9.5), in their given context (as just analyzed), and given our background 
knowledge that all Christians would be known as brothers of the Lord (Ele­
ment 1 2), and whether that probability is any different for minimal his­
toricity (h) than it is for minimal mythicism (...,h). My own conclusion is 
that there is at best no difference in probability and at worst a difference 
favoring myth-since on historicity we should expect far more frequent 
and far less ambiguous discussion of the family of Jesus, especially if (as 
these passages would then entail) they were playing a major leadership role 
in the church at the time. I find the silence of Paul everywhere else, and his 
extreme ambiguity in these two passages, less likely on historicity. So my 
most skeptical estimate is that this is just what we'd expect on mythicism 
(for Paul to occasionally, and in contexts most demanding it, refer to other 
102. Some may note that indeed Origen, in Against Celsus J.47, denies that Paul 
meant this James in Gal. 1 . 1 9  was the actual brother of Jesus, claiming instead that 
it was a title of honor. But Origen does not say how he knows this. so I consider that 
infonnation of little use. 
103. Another possibility. of course. is that 'the brother of the Lord' in GaL L l 9 is 
a scribal interpolation, intended to create a reference to Jesus' brother where once there 
was none. But that is very unlikely. It would have a prior probability of perhaps 1 in 
1000 (see earlier note). Nevertheless. one could adopt this assumption ad hoc, thereby 
reducing the prior probability of mythicism by a factor of a thousand, and yet still come 
to a result that mythicism is more likely-if you adopt my less a fortiori estimates ofthe 
consequent probabilities elsewhere. See Chapter 12. 

592 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
Christians as 'brothers of the Lord') but somewhat not what we'd expect on 
historicity (which would sooner lead to our hearing much more about these 
people), at a ratio of 2 to 1 (equivalent to it being 100% likely on -.h and 
only 50o/o likely on h). 
However, I must argue a fortiori, and to that end I shall say it's reason­
ably possible these probabilities go the other way around. In other words, 
that Paul would speak like this on those two occasions could be only 50% 
expected on mythicism but exactly what we expect on historicity (or 50% 
expected on historicity but only 25% expected on myth, etc.). In other 
words, I actually think this evidence is twice as likely on mythicism, but, 
though I doubt it, I'll allow that it might be twice as likely on historicity. I 
certainly cannot reasonably believe these passages (including their internal 
ambiguity and surrounding silence) are any more expected than that on h 
than on -.h. 
1 1 .  Weighing the Evidence 
When Shirley Jackson Case responded in the early twentieth century to 
scholars then advocating the Jesus myth theory he summarized his own 
take on the Pauline Epistles.104 He claims they are not lacking references 
to a historical Jesus but in fact: (1) they refer to his 'human ancestry and 
family connections' (but as we saw, only in ways entirely strange, highly 
theological or oddly nonspecific, and in no case clearly referring to an 
actual ancestry or family); (2) and to his 'association with disciples' (but as 
we saw, Paul in fact never mentions disciples; such personages as Peter he 
knows only as apostles like himself, and he only mentions Jesus 'associat­
ing' with anyone after his death); (3) and to his 'riҮүhteous life' (but as we 
saw, in fact Paul only ever mentions a single righteous act, nothing more, 
and credits Jesus as being a sinless being, as any cosmic archangel would 
be); (4) and to the fact that he 'lived in worldly poverty' (but as we saw, 
Paul doesn't mention 'worldly' poverty but only a vague lowering and loss 
of status, which in the Philippians gospel is wholly cosmic); (5) and they 
refer to his 'self-sacrificing service' (which even celestial beings could pro­
vide); (6) and to his 'heavenly exaltation as a reward for obedience' (ditto); 
(7) and to the 'circumstances of his death' (but none placing that death on 
earth); (8) and include 'numerous references to his crucifixion' (which was 
not necessarily terrestrial); (9) as well as to an 'awakening of faith through 
his appearances' (yet only in revelations); ( 1  0) and also include such things 
1 04. Shirley Jackson Case, The Historicity of Jesus: A Criticism of the Contention 
That Jesus Never Lived; A Statement of the Evitknce for his Existence; An Estimate of 
his Relation to Christianity (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2nd edn, 1 928), pp. 
126 and 193-95. 

1 1 .  The Epistles 
593 
as references to his future coming (none of which mention his having been 
on earth before-e.g. not once does Paul say Jesus will 'return'), his present 
significance (which a cosmic being can also have), and his teachings (which 
as we saw even Paul seems to believe came only by revelation or scripture). 
In short, none of the 'evidence' Case could adduce requires Jesus to have 
lived on earth. Such an existence is conspicuously absent from all of Paul's 
authentic letters. That is simply strange. Case can avoid that conclusion 
only by imagining all kinds of things are in Paul's letters that in fact are not 
there. Case insists Paul thought Jesus was as 'historical' as Adam (though 
of course we know Adam is mythical), but Paul thought God and angels 
and Satan and his demons were 'historical', too, so this has no bearing on 
where Paul thought Jesus had lived or died. Case says Paul shows Chris­
tians 'remembered' Jesus' Last Supper, but as we saw, that's not what Paul 
says: he learned of this event (Paul never cal1s it a 'last' supper or in fact 
even a supper) directly by revelation, not anyone's memory (Paul never 
refers to anyone else being there or anyone 'recollecting' it, other than him­
self). Case likewise says Paul calls upon Christians to imitate Jesus' earthly 
career, but Paul never mentions an earthly career. He only calls for imitating 
Christ in his loving subservience and self-sacrifice, all represented by just a 
single event (his submission to death), which need not have been performed 
on earth. 
Overall, it's the mythicists who were right, and not Case. They argued 
that (I) some passages in Paul's letters are exactly what we would expect on 
their theory but not as expected if Jesus actually existed; that (2) the scant 
few passages in the Epistles that might refer to a historical Jesus are not only 
vague or problematic but also no less expected on the mythicist hypothesis; 
and that (3) the absence of more, clearer and more detailed references to a 
historical Jesus is strange and unexpected on any sound understanding of 
history and human nature. The excuses made up to explain away these facts 
are ( I )  not intrinsicaiJy probable and (2) not confirmed in any evidence 
(they are literally just 'made up'). 
Yes, we lack a smoking gun, such as an Epistle wherein Paul explicitly 
says Jesus was known to exist only by revelation, but we fully expect no 
such evidence to have survived for us to see it: the victorious sect did not 
preserve such things and even actively suppressed them (see Chapters 6, 
§7; 7, §7; and 8, § 12; and Elements 20-22 and 44). Paul may well have said 
such things in the letters we know he wrote but that we do not have or in 
unpreserved parts of the letters that survive inside the present canon. Many 
other letters must have existed, written by many apostles in his generation 
(see Chapter 8, §4). Yet we conspicuously don't have even a mention of 
them, much less their contents. That is profoundly suspicious. But more 
importantly, this fact rules out the argument that we 'should' have more 
evidence supporting minimal mythicism. To the contrary, that a historicist 

594 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
sect won out and was so avid at altering and fabricating documents as well 
as throwing out or destroying them entails we are lucky even to have the 
evidence we do. 105 
Romans 1 6.25·26 outright says the 'gospel' and 'preaching' of Jesus 
Christ was discovered by revelation and finding secrets hidden in scripture. 
We should conclude that's indeed exactly what happened. We should not 
try to import into this or any other passage in Paul things invented by the 
authors of the Gospels decades later. But everything is a matter of prob­
abilities. The estimates just surveyed are represented on the following table 
(measuring the odds of the evidence in the Epistles on h, minimal historic­
ity, against -·h, minimal mythicism), which you can use to input your own 
estimated odds and run your own calculations: 
best 
Other canonical Epistles 
4/5 
'Gospels' in Paul, Hebrews, Colossians 
3/5 
Things Jesus said 
1/1 
The Eucharist ( 1 Cor. 1 1 .23-26) 
1/1 
Things Jesus did 
3/4 
Made from sperm 
211 
Made from a woman 
211 
Brothers of the Lord: 
211 
Totals 
288 / 100 
6 I 100 
-
72 I 25 
3 / 50 
-
2.88 / 1  
1 / 1 6.67 
""' 
--
[0.3472 ] 
0.06 
--
1 00% 
6% 
vs. 
34.7% 
worst 
3/5 
2/5 
1/1 
1/1 
1 /2 
1 11 
1 11 
112 
In other words, when arguing a fortiori, if we assume the evidence in the 
Epistles is exactly 1 00% expected on h (minimal historicity), then the prob­
ability of that same evidence on ..,h (minimal mythicism) is just over 34%. 
Even if we granted that the Epistles are altogether strange on h (as in fact 
they are, even if many scholars still can't see it), and thus assigned them 
a lower probability of being that way (reflecting the fact that they are not 
exactly what we expect), when arguing a fortiori the ratio would still be the 
same. So on this account the evidence of the Epistles, as strange as it is, is 
105. On the mathematical logic of 'historical filters' like this, see the example of 
'Pilate's records' in Carrier, Proving History, pp. 2 1 9·24. 

l l .  The Epistles 
595 
still more likely on h than on _,h, by just over 3 to 1 (and thus about three 
times more likely if Jesus existed, than if he didn't). 
But I think that's being far too generous to historicity. Given my own 
estimates (which are closer to what I think the odds actually are), the evi­
dence of the Epistles is exactly 1 00% expected on minimal mythicism, and 
has a probability of only 6% on minimal historicity. Or again, whatever the 
percentages, I think the evidence of the Epistles is at least sixteen times less 
likely on historicity. Because they are simply so very strange on minimal 
historicity but not at ali strange on minimal mythicism. In fact, these are 
pretty much exactly the kind of letters we should expect to now have from 
Paul (and the other authors as well) if minimal mythicism is true. Not so on 
historicity. Nevertheless, the a fortiori estimates are intended to be as gener­
ous to the biases of historicity defenders as I can reasonably be, to the point 
of outright Devil 's advocacy. And yet, even on so generous estimates, the 
historicity of Jesus is still not defensible, as we shall see in our concluding 
calculation. 

1 2  
CONCLUSION 
1 .  The Final Calculation 
Bayes's Theorem entails a concluding probability (the probability that Jesus 
existed) from estimating three other probabilities: ( I )  the prior probability 
that Jesus existed; (2) the probability of the evidence if Jesus did exist; and 
(3) the probability of that same evidence if Jesus didn't exist. If our esti­
mates of those three probabilities are as far in favor of historicity as we can 
reasonably believe them to be, then our conclusion will be as far in favor of 
historicity as we can reasonably believe it to be. But of course, stretching 
the limits of what is reasonable this way only gives us an upper limit on the 
probability that Jesus existed (given what we know so far). In reality that 
probability will likely be much lower. 
Thus, I have made two estimates in every case, one a fortiori (the most 
favorable to historicity as I can reasonably be), and the other realistic (closer 
to what I honestly think those probabilities actually are). That gives us an 
upper and a lower bound. 1 However, the probability that Jesus existed could 
be even lower still, since my most critical estimates are also perhaps higher 
than they should be. So I shall call the lower bound I calculate the a fortiori 
lower bound: although I know the actual probability could be even lower, I 
believe it is at least as low as that. Whereas my upper bound is already as 
high as it could possibly be. 
The first of the three required estimates, identified as P(h), the prior prob­
ability that Jesus existed, I established in Chapter 6. The probability of the 
evidence on h (historicity) and ...,h (non-historicity), identified as P(elh) and 
P(el..,h) respectively, I established in Chapters 8 through 1 1 , generating a 
separate estimate for each category of evidence: the extrabiblical evidence 
(EXTRA), canonical Acts (ACTS), the canonical Gospels (GOSPELS), and the 
canonical Epistles (EPJSTLES). These must all be combined here by multipli­
cation into one estimate: P(ejh) :: p (EXTRAjh) X p (ACTSjh) X p (GOSPELslh) X 
1 .  On this method of arguing a fortiori see Carrier, Proving History, pp. 85-88 
(and 'a fortiori, method or on p. 333): on the concept of upper and tower bounds see 
Carrier, Proving History, pp. 87-88 (and 'margin of error' on p. 337 and 'confidence 
level' on p. 334). 

12. Conclusion 
597 
P (EPISTLEsjh). That leaves the third required number, P(el-.h). That 1 calcu­
lated in Chapters 8 through 1 1 to be simply 1 .  Because all the evidence is 
effectively 1 00%, what we could expect if Jesus didn't exist and minimal 
mythicism, as defined in Chapter 3, is true (all other possibilities of non­
historicity being ruled out there ).2 Except in Chapter 1 1, where, when argu­
ing a fortiori, I allowed the Epistles to be evidence in favor of historicity, 
and thus set P(e[h) = I instead, and estimated P(e[..,h) to be near 1 in 3. 
This can be tabulated as follows (so here you can substitute your own 
findings). The individual 'consequent probabilities' (probabilities of the 
evidence) have already been built from separate tables of subdivisions in 
each category of evidence in previous chapters: 
PRIOR PROBABILITIES 
a fortiori (upper bound) 
P(h) 
ODDS 
1 I 2 
which entails . . .  
P(-,h) 
2 I 1 
PROBABILITY 
33% (113) 
67o/o (213) 
a judicantiori (lower bound) 
ODDS 
1 I I S  
I 5  I I 
PROBABILITY 
6.25%t (1116) 
93.75% (1 51I6) 
CoNSEQUENT PROBABILITY ON MINIMAL HISTORICITY (h) 
a fortiori (upper bound) 
ajudicantiori (lower bound) 
ODDS 
PROBABILITY 
ODDS 
PROBABILITY 
P(e[h) = 
p (EXTRA[h) 
288 / 625 46.08% 
1 I 1 0  
10% 
X 
p (ACTS!h) 
1 8  I 25 
72o/o 
1 I 5 
20% 
X 
p (GOSPELS!h) 
1 1 1  
1 OOo/o 
I I 1 
1 00% 
X 
p (EPISTLES!h) 
72 I 25 
1 00% 
3 / 50 
6o/o 
P(e/h) I P(el..,h) = 373248 I 390625 
3 / 2500 
P(elh) = 
33. 1 776o/o 
00. 1 2% 
2. In reality we could assign lower estimates to P(ej-,h) in every case (to reflect how 
much the evidence might not be exactly what we'd expect if minimal mythicism were 
true), but we would then have to lower every corresponding vaJue for P(elh) according 
to the ratios determined in Chapters 8, 9 and I I  (since the evidence is never •exactly' 
what we expect on historicity, either). See note at the end of Chapter 8, § I ;  and n. I 0 in 
this chapter. 

598 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
CONSEQUENT PROBABILITY ON MINIMAL MYTHICISM (-.h) 
a fortiori (upper bound) 
a judicantiori (lower bound) 
ODDS 
PROBABILITY 
ODDS 
PROBABILITY 
P(el-.h) = 
p (EXTRA\..,h) 
625 I 288 1 00% 
1 0  I 1 
1 00% 
X 
P (ACTSI-.h) 
25 I 1 8  
100% 
5 1 1  
100% 
X 
p ( GOSPELSj-.h) 
l / 1  
100% 
1 I I 
I OOo/o 
X 
P (EPISlLEsJ..,h) 
25 1 72 
34.7222 . . .  % 
50 I 3 
1 00% 
P(e/h) I P(eJ-.h) = 390625 I 373248 
2500 I 3 
P(ej--.h) = 
34.7222 . . .  % 
100% 
We can thus calculate our concluding probability (known as the posterior 
probability) using the odds form of Bayes's Theorem or the standard long 
fonn.3 The odds form is: 
P(hje.b) 
P(-hle.b) 
P(hjb) 
P(e!h.b) 
X 
P( -hlb) 
P( ej--h.b) 
Figure 2. Bayes's Theorem, Odds Form 
Which can be expressed as: 
[Ooos ON H] = [PRioR Ooos] x [CoNSEQUENT Ooos] 
Which we can complete using the above tables as follows (using the a for­
tiori estimates): 
3. See Carrier, Proving History, pp. 284-85. The odds form is much simpler to use, 
but more confusing if you want to convert its result into a probability. The standard fonn 
is much scarier, but directly calculates the probability. However, using decimal fractions 
is also problematic because rounding off many numbers in a multiplication introduces 
deviations and thus generates small differences in the result depending on where and 
how you rounded, so it is best to multiply with standard fractions, and then reduce the 
final result to a decimal probability. 

12. Conclusion 
[BEST Ooos ON H] = [ 1 I 2 ] x [ 373248 I 390625 ] 
= 373248 I 781 250 
ƽ 1 I 2.093 1 1 23542524 [odds] 
ƽ .3232989576422 [probability] 
ƽ 32% 
599 
The final step here (of converting the odds into a probability) is the only one 
that won't be obvious to someone unfamiliar with converting odds to proba­
bilities. In this particular case, you can follow a simple rule: when the odds are 
I I x, just add I to x and complete the division. So, when we round everything 
off to the second decimal place, I I 2.09 becomes 1 / 3.09, which is 0.3236, 
or a tad over 32%, which is how the above result is derived.4 As verification, 
note that the same result will also come from using the standard equation.5 So 
even on the most outrageously generous estimates possible, there is barely a I 
in 3 chance Jesus existed. Which means, he probably didn't. 
And yet that is using the absurdly generous estimates concluding every 
chapter, and especially the last chapter on the Epistles, the only place I 
could claim to find any credible evidence for a historical Jesus. So 1 in 3 
is only the maximum possible probability Jesus existed, meaning we can 
say with confidence that the probability Jesus existed is in fact less than 1 
in 3. Indeed, I conclude it's far less than that. Using the above tables again, 
but this time plugging in the a judicantiori estimates (the 'more judicious' 
estimates): 
4. The reason 1/2.09 'odds on' historicity entai1s a roughly 32% chance of historicity 
(and not a 48% chance as one might expect from dividing 2.09 into I )  is that 112.09 is 
the 'odds on' h, and the 'odds' in this sense are in respect to total probability, because 
the probability of h and the probability of -.h must sum to I. Logically their sum can 
never be more or less than 1, since the probability that 'either h or -.h' is true is always 
exactly 1000/o, since h and -.h exhaust all possibilities (see Chapter 3, §3), and you can't 
have a probability higher than 100%. The tenn ' 1 /2.09' in this equation's conclusion is 
thus saying -·h occupies 2.09 times more of the total probability-space as h does (i.e. 
that it is 2.09 times as probable). The only way for P(hje) + P(-.hle) = 1 and for ...,h to be 
2.09 times as probable as h  is if the probability of h is (about) 32% and the probability 
of -.h is (about) 68%. Thenɴ 0.32 + 0.68 = 1 and 0.68 is (about) 2.09 times as large as 
0.32 (and exactly so, if you do the math without rounding off any of the decimals, since 
we're actuaJiy talking about 0.6767010423578 being 2.093 1 123542524 times as large 
as 0.3232989576422). This can be confusing since we often misuse the word 'odds' as 
if it were an exact synonym of 'chances' or 'probability' (I've often done so myself). 
5. For those who want to see what that looks like: the standard formula is P(hle.b) 
= [P(hjb) x P(ejh.b)] I [[P(hjb) x P(elh.b)] + [P(-.hlb) x P(ej-.h.b)]]; therefore, using the 
percentages instead of the odds from the same tables, and rounding all decimals to the 
sixth place: P(hje.b) = [0.333333 x 0.33 1776] I [[0.333333 x 0.33 1776] + [0.666667 x 
0.347222]] = 0. 1 1 0592 I [0. 1 1  0592 + 0.231481] = 0. 1 10592 I 0.342073 = 0.323299 or 
32%. 

600 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
[WoRsT ODDS oN 11] = [ I I 1 5  ] x [ 3 / 2500 ] 
= 3 I 31500 
= I  I I2500 [odds] 
::; 0.00008 [probability] 
:::: 0.008% 
In other words, in my estimation the odds Jesus existed are less than 1 in 
I2,000.6 Which to a historian is for all practical purposes a probability of 
zero. For comparison, your lifetime probability of being struck by lightning 
is around I in I 0,000. That Jesus existed is even less likely than that. Con­
sequently, I am reasonably certain there was no historical Jesus. NevertheΟ 
less, as my estimates might be too critical (even though I don't believe they 
are), I'm willing to entertain the possibility that the probability is better than 
that. But to account for that possibility, when I entertain the most generous 
estimates possible, I find I cannot by any stretch of the imagination believe 
the probability Jesus existed is better than I in 3. 
You can redo the math with your own estimates, of course. But you can 
also add new evidence in. With the odds fonn this is especially easy: you 
can just multiply additional odds ratios into the same equation if you want 
to introduce new evidence that I haven't considered. The equation would 
then look like this: 
[ODDS ON H] = [PRIOR 0oDS] X [CONSEQUENf ODDS] X (NEW CONSEQUENT ODDS] 
The 'new consequent odds' here will be the odds ratio for anything you 
want to add in (and you can do this multiple times, as long as each piece of 
evidence is independent of all others considered). For example, if you find 
another piece of evidence (one I haven't already considered and estimated 
odds on), and you believe it's three times more likely on historicity than 
on myth, then the value for this 'new consequent odds' would be 3/1 .  Just 
multiply that in and you get your result. Like so (if we start with our original 
a fortiori result): 
[BEST ODDS ON H] = [ I I 2 ] X [ 373248 I 390625 ] X [ 3 / 1  ] 
= [ 373248 I 78I250 ] x ( 3 I I ] 
= 1 1 1 9744 I 78I250 
Ƥ 1 .433272 I 1 
6. Using the standard formula (see previous note): P(hle.b) = [0.0625 x 0.001 2] I 
([0.0625 x 0.0012] + [0.9375 X 0.9988]] = 0.000075 I [0.000075 + 0.936375] = 0.000075 
I 0.93645 = 0.000080 or 0.008%. 

12. Conclusion 
601 
The odds have now flipped the other way around and favor h over -.h. The 
simplest way to convert that into a probabi1ity is to first detennine the prob­
ability of -·h by inverting the odds back to I /1 .433272 and following the 
same rule described earlier, which gets us P(--.hle) ƽ 112.433272 ƣ 0.410969 
O 4 I  %. Then P(hle) will simply be the converse of that. So: P(hle) = 1 -
P( _,hie) Ƣ I 00% - 4I% ::: 59%. Thus, finding such an item of evidence 
would make Jesus almost 60% likely to exist. Although that would still 
mean there was a very good chance he didn't (better than 40% in fact; that's 
almost 50150)--so you would still have to reserve some doubt even then. 
But we didn't find any evidence like that (beyond what we already con­
sidered and put in). Moreover, that only follows if we start with the a for­
tiori estimates, which only gets us the upper bound, the highest that prob­
ability could be. Even with this imaginary new evidence for historicity the 
lower bound would only change to: 
[WORST ODDS ON H] = [ 1 I I 5 ]  X ( 3 / 2500 ) X [ 3 / 1 ] 
= [ 3 I 37500 ) x ( 3 I 1 ] 
= 9 I 37500 
O 1 / 4166.6667 
Which means even with that hypothetical evidence added in we would still 
end up with a lower bound on the probability Jesus existed of about 1 in 
4,000. Since you could be in as much error trusting the a fortiori estimates as 
I can be in trusting my more critical estimates, you must honestly admit the 
probability Jesus existed may still be near zero, for the same reason I must 
presently admit it may be as much as 1 in 3 (on the actual evidence we have). 
So this new hypothetical evidence would only update the probability Jesus 
existed to somewhere between roughly 1/40% of 1% and 60%. You could 
not be certain where in that range it fell. And so you should still be skeptical 
of Jesus' existence. Even with such new evidence as that. 7 
And again, we don't have that evidence. Instead, with the evidence we 
have, the probability Jesus existed is somewhere between 1 in 12,500 and 
1 in 3. In other words, less than 33% and most Jikely nearer to zero. We 
should conclude that Jesus probably did not exist. 
2. On Trying to Avoid the Conclusion 
I suspect those so invested in the traditional and dogmatic views and inter­
pretations, and those so terrified of going against 'the consensus', that they 
simply cannot countenance all that I've argued (no matter how soundly I've 
1. See my discussion of this conundrum in Carier, Proving History, pp. 87-88. 

602 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
argued it) won't be willing to concede this conclusion, even if God Him­
self descended from heaven and told them it was correct. Their careers, 
reputations or religious faith may rest too firmly on their past assumptions, 
making them impervious to change. But I can't believe this will describe 
all experts, especially of the next generation, which won't have become 
invested yet in any status quo (although their seniors could threaten to 'pun­
ish' them if they entertain such ideas, thereby maintaining historicity by 
argument ad baculum). 
Nevertheless, it is legitimate to ask how any of this can be gainsaid. A 
theory is not defensible if we cannot explain what would refute it. To do 
that, you must find different probabilities, and not just claim them, but make 
a sound case for why we should adopt them. Accordingly, that is where the 
argument must now proceed. Is even my a fortiori estimate of historic­
ity's prior probability wrong? Let's see you prove it. I am not certain you 
can't. I am only certain you can't dismiss my estimate with one of your 
own without a sound argument. I want to see that sound argument. Are any 
of my a fortiori estimates of the consequent probabilities wrong? Let's see 
you prove it. Once again, I am not certain you can't. I am only certain you 
can't do it without a sound argument. So again, I want to see that argument. 
But beware: if you do not know how to detect logical fallacies, you wi11 
not know how to detect them even in your own arguments. You may be 
surprised to discover how many you rely on. 
For the prior probability, the question becomes one of what 'reference 
class' Jesus belongs to and what we do with that information. I've already 
surveyed the options on this point here (in Chapter 6) and in general else­
where.8 I do not see much room to move on this point. Right from the start 
Jesus simply looks a lot more like a mythical man than a historical one. 
And were he not the figure of a major world religion-if we were study­
ing the Attis or Zalmoxis or Romulus cult instead-we would have treated 
Jesus that way from the start, knowing full well we need more than nonnal 
evidence to take him back out of the class of mythical persons and back 
into that of historical ones. Jesus can no longer be treated as just any person 
claimed to have existed. He's not. From the Epistles alone, but even more 
from the Gospels, we can tell that Jesus was, from the earliest recorded 
point in Christian history, a rapidly mythicized cosmic savior lord. That 
remains a fact even if he was a historical man. Yet that fact takes him out of 
the category of ordinary men. Jesus is simply not like Pontius Pilate. 
That leaves the evidence, which can in principle tum the tide of any low 
prior (as I showed for Caesar in Chapter 6, §8). I divided the consequent 
probabilities of the evidence for Jesus into four general categories (Epistles, 
8. See Carrier, Proving History, pp. 229-65. 

12. Conclusion 
603 
Gospels, Acts, and Everything Else), each of which in tum can be broken 
down into any sub-units you prefer (as long as they don't relevantly overlap 
in content, otherwise you'll be counting the same evidence twice in your 
estimates of probability). I have only chosen the units that seemed reason­
able to me, in Chapters 8 (Everything Else), 9 (Acts), and 1 1  (Epistles). One 
can tease out units from among the Gospels, too; I simply didn't because I 
found nothing of use there (in Chapter 1 0). But in each of these categories 
the questions become: How do you explain the oddities I've surveyed? How 
much do you have to arbitrari1y •suppose' in order to do that? How likely 
are those suppositions to be true? You have to honestly answer these ques­
tions. Especially that last one. Because if you can't argue for a probability, 
you can't claim to argue it's probable. 
Likewise if you think there is evidence I've overlooked, evidence that 
argues for historicity: you need to present it and argue for why that evidence 
is more likely on h than on --.h (in the way those alternatives have been 
defined, in Chapters 2 and 3). And not just more likely, but so much more 
likely that it overcomes all the other factors against it-even on estimates as 
far against historicity as you can reasonably admit possible: because you, 
too, are obligated to measure the extent to which your own estimates could 
be disputed or in error. You cannot enshrine your own opinions as the truth. 
If I have to admit the probability Jesus existed could be as high as 1 in 3, 
you have to admit the probability could be as low as . . .  well, how low? You 
have to honestly answer that question. 
I already showed earlier how to introduce new evidence into the equa­
tion. And how to re-do the math after changing the estimates that I've 
already made should also be clear. For example, J considered (but dis­
missed) the possibility that Acts is such complete fiction that it has abso­
lutely no basis in any facts whatever, and thus despite its oddness perhaps 
can't argue either for or against historicity because it could not even in 
principle contain clues either way (see Chapter 9). If we instead decide to 
adopt that extreme assumption, then the ratio of consequent probabilities 
for Acts becomes simply 1/1 . This changes the total consequent probabi lity 
on h from 0.33 I 776 to 0.4608 (by altering the estimate of 72% for Acts 
back to simply 1 00%), and changes the odds ratio from 373248/390625 
to 20736/1 5625.9 The odds Jesus existed then become 1/2 x 20736/1 5625 
= 20736/3 1 250 = 1/1 .507. The probability of historicity would then be no 
greater than l/2.507 ::: 40o/o. This is essentially what we would have ended 
up with if Acts didn't have any evidence against historicity-if for example 
it contained fictions about the family of Jesus and their affairs in the early 
church (assuming they lacked anything we could verifY as true), or had a 
9. Because 288/625 x 1/1 x 1/1 x 72/25 = 20736/1 5625. 

604 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
plot that actually made historical sense (given the fact that it was claimed 
that Jesus escaped the clutches of Rome). 
But in fact Acts contains very strange oddities on the assumption that 
Luke was making the whole thing up. The notion that Luke would not put 
the family of Jesus, or a plausible historical plot, or plainly historicizing 
trial speeches into his fabrication is simply not that likely. Such strange 
omissions really make sense only if Luke was altering and embellishing 
some actual outline of the early church's first trials and internal struggles. 
Only then might he not realize that his outline lacked any mention of the 
family of Jesus having anything to do with the church, that the trial speeches 
lacked any mention of a historical Jesus, and that the plot made no sense 
unless Jesus was only known as a revealed being even to the Jewish and 
Roman elite. Certainly, we must admit that these oddities are not what we'd 
expect from such a text. They cannot therefore have a I 00% probability. My 
estimates reflect that fact. So must yours. Quite simply, the strange content 
of Acts must have some probability below 100%. 
And yet even if we adopted such an extreme tactic of claiming (against 
all common sense) that Acts is exactly as we should expect it on historicity, 
we still don't find that Jesus' existence is likely. It's not even 50/50 on that 
account. And that again would only be the upper bound, the highest possible 
probability that he existed, not the actual probability he did. So that tactic 
cannot rescue historicity. One might try instead to argue that Acts includes 
things that are improbable unless Jesus existed-such as the fact (as many 
Christian apologists argue) that the street sennons in it contain evidence of 
drawing on Aramaic sources and are 'therefore' authentic and datable to the 
time of Christ and so cannot be assuming a historical Jesus unless there had 
been one. But I already explained why that argument fails, both on its prem­
ises and its logic (Chapter 9, §6). That means you would have to find some 
way around the problems I identified. I don't see one. But maybe I missed 
something. If I did, someone has to point out what that is, and redo the math. 
Until then, my conclusion represents our current state of knowledge. You 
will find that in all of the last five chapters (7 through 10) I have similarly 
addressed (directly or indirectly) almost every conceivable argument one 
might adduce like this. What I've said in each case must be dealt with. It 
cannot be ignored. 
So, likewise, any other attempt at changing the odds by adducing evi­
dence I overlooked. For each case, you have to ask yourself, ͆How likely 
would that be if h were true?', and 'How likely would that be if -.h were 
true?' The ratio between your two answers is what you plug into the equa­
tion. For example, if you think a piece of evidence is I 00% likely on h 
but only 80% likely on -.h, then the ratio is 100/80, which is simply 5/4. 
Multiply that in. The strange content of Acts will again serve as an exam­
ple. If you had never seen or heard of Acts, if it was a newly discovered 

12. Conclusion 
605 
text written near the end of the first century and you were about to be the 
first one to ever read it, then before you cracked it open, what probability 
would you honestly say there was that it would never mention any brothers 
of Jesus having anything to do with the first three decades of the church, 
even though the book expends twenty-five chapters on no other subject than 
what happened in the first three decades of the early church? I seriously 
doubt you would say ' 1  00%', as if you would be totally confident it would 
absolutely not mention a single thing about the brothers of Jesus in any part 
of its public history, that it would fail to depict them doing a single thing in 
the early church or having any notable role in it or any interaction with it. 
Surely you don't honestly believe that. Therefore, the probability you assign 
has to be less than I 00%. 
So think about it, and be honest. Before cracking that book open, what 
probability would you assign? How likely would the strange features I out­
lined in Chapter 9 be? That s the probability of those features of Acts on 
h. Which is why I found that probability to be lower than 1 OOo/o. On the 
other hand, since -.h already entails there were no brothers to mention (and 
likewise all the other missing things), their not being mentioned is J OOo/o 
expected. Even the historicizing details are fully expected, since we know 
Luke freely makes stuff up to support what he wants his readers to believe, 
and from his Gospel we know he assumes, or wants his readers to assume, 
Jesus existed.10 You can now form your odds ratio. I came up with 2 in 5 
(40% in ratio to lOOo/o), which I doubled to 4 in 5 (80o/o in ratio to 1 00%) to 
argue a fortiori. Can you honestly produce a more favorable result? To the 
contrary, I dare say your honest estimates might even be lower than mine. 
Acts, considered honestly and objectively, is just bizarre on the assumptions 
of historicity.11 
10. Note that this would obviously assume the canceling-out of a coefficient of 
contingency (Carrier, Proving History, pp. 77-79, 21 S-19), given that multiple outcomes 
are compatible with -.h. Thus, that the absence of Jesus' family after Acts I is 100% 
expected on -.h does not entail their presence would have been 0% expected on āh, since 
fabricated histories are still compatible with -h (and given b, e.g., Element 44, they are 
not even unexpected). It's just that the coefficient of contingency ( c ,. the probabi I ity that 
Luke would fabricate a history for Jesus' family whether they existed or not) cancels out 
in any equation, and thus can be disregarded. So to be strictly literal, on --.h the absence 
of Jesus, family after Acts I is expected to a probability of 1 00010 x ( 100% - c), and is 
therefore not I 00% per se. But likewise the probability that his family would be absent 
after Acts I on historicity, i.e., h, is (on my a fortiori estimate) 72% x ( 100% - c), so the 
( 100% - c) cancels out, leaving us with just I 00% against 72% (as explained in Proving 
History, pp. 215- 19). 
I I . Note that even the extreme tactic of concluding all the evidence has no value 
(making a ratio of consequents across the board of just 1/1) except the Epistles, and then 
using the a fortiori estimate of consequents for their content still does not get a result 

606 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
The same points apply even at the stage of prior probability. If we 
began instead with straight up even odds, and stuck only with a fortiori 
estimates from there on out, the probability Jesus existed would only be 
about 49%. In other words, pretty much even money. We simply could not 
say whether he existed or not. You may as well flip a coin. And yet that 
would still be cheating. For if we did that, then we would have to move the 
Rank-Raglan data back into the evidence of the Gospels. Which means 
we would end up having to reduce the final odds by 2 to 1 all over again. 
Because evidence can't be ignored-a point I already demonstrated in 
Chapter 6. As I showed there, the evidence of the fourteen known mem­
bers of the Rank-Raglan hero class is that a historical man is at /east two 
times less likely to become a member of it than a mythical man (unless 
there have been more mythical men in history than historical men, which 
is obviously not at all likely). Since the Gospels show Jesus did become 
a member of it, the odds that that would have happened on historicity 
(rather than on mythicism) are 2 to I against. So my estimate of 1/1 for 
the Gospels would then have to become 1/2. Which means we will have 
simply swapped the original 1 /2 for this Ill in the equation, producing no 
net difference in the outcome. The original a fortiori sequence of 1/2 x 
[288/625 x 1 8/25 x 1/1 x 72/25] simply becomes 1/1 x [288/625 x 1 8/25 x 
1/2 x 72/25], which produces exactly the same conclusion: nearly a 1 in 3 
chance Jesus existed. No more. 
3. What We Should Conclude 
There is only about a 0% to 33% chance Jesus existed. Furthennore, given 
my analysis in Chapter 3, this means the probability that minimal mythicism 
is true is about 67o/o to 1 OOo/o (and most likely nearer the high end of that 
range). 
What does that mean for Jesus studies? It means all later tales of a his­
torical Jesus and his family need to be seen as legendary, mythical and prop­
agandistic inventions, and studied for their literary and rhetorical purpose 
and not for their specific historical content. But more importantly, it means 
we need to re-examine the earliest evidence from a completely different 
perspective. That means the authentic letters of Paul, but also other Epistles 
close to him in thought, such as Colossians, Ephesians, Hebrews, I Peter. 
of high confidence: you then only end up with less than a 60% chance Jesus existed. 
Such an extreme tactic is not reasonable (it is not plausible that the evidence surveyed 
in Chapters 8 and 9 does not lend any support to minimal myth, as if all of it were 
perfectly expected on minimal historicity), but even were it resorted to, a 60% chance 
Jesus existed is not that high, as it entails a 400/o chance he didn't, odds high enough to 
still make Jesus' existence reasonably uncertain. 

12. Conclusion 
607 
and 1 Clement; and perhaps other literature as well, such as the Didache. We 
need to reconsider all the evidence now from a new perspective. We need 
to see it in light of what the present study has shown to be the most likely 
account of the origin and early development of the Christian religion, which 
now fits the theory of minimal mythicism (as outlined in Chapter 3), in the 
context of the background knowledge (all forty-eight elements) surveyed in 
Chapters 4 and 5. 
In summary: Before the 20s, the Jesus that Christians would later wor­
ship was known by some Jews as a celestial being, God's agent of creation 
(Elements 40-42). Sometime between the 20s and 40s a small fringe sect of 
Jews, probably at the time led by a man named (or subsequently renamed) 
Cephas, came to believe that this Jesus figure had undergone a salvific 
incarnation, death and resurrection in outer space, thus negating the cultic 
role of the Jerusalem temple, freeing them from it politically, spiritually 
and physically, which was a very convenient thing to conceive at the time 
(Elements 1-7, 10, 18, 23-29, 43). They also came to believe that through 
this act their salvation had been secured through the defeat of the demonic 
world order, so long as they shared in that sacrifice metaphysically through 
baptism and ritual communion, a concept already adopted by many similar 
cults of the time (Elements I 1-12, 1 8, 3 1 ,  37). 
This sect, like many others of the same period (Element 2), had been 
looking for 'hidden' messages from God in the OT (Elements 8-9) in order 
to learn how and when God would solve their present woes (Elements 3-7, 
23-29). And also like many Jews, this sect was under syncretistic influences 
from diverse Jewish sects and the most popular and culturally diffused 
aspects of Greco-Roman religion and philosophy (Elements 30-39). Its 
members were also highly prone to having (or claiming to have) 'visions' 
(what we now would call dreams or hallucinations), and with a combination 
of such visions and their searching for creative reinterpretations of scrip­
ture that spoke to their present troubles they convinced themselves that this 
celestial self-sacrifice occurred and was part of God's plan and had now 
been 'revealed' from heaven to a select few (Elements 1 5- 1 7). We can­
not know now whether the idea was discovered in scripture first, inspiring 
visions to corroborate or elaborate it, or whether it was creatively arrived at 
in visions first, inspiring the apostles to then find corroboration and elabora­
tion in scripture. It could have been both, each a catalyst for the other. 
This cult began as a Torah-observant Jewish sect that abandoned their 
reliance on Levitical temple cult, and was likely preaching the imminent 
end of the world, in accordance with the scriptures, signs and revelations of 
the celestial Jesus. In the 30s or 40s an active enemy of the cul4 named Paul, 
had (or claimed to have) his own revelation from this Jesus and became an 
apostle spreading rather than attacking the faith. Over the next twenty years 
he converts many, preaches widely, and writes a body of letters. During this 

608 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
time the original sect driven by Cephas fragmented. There are many church 
schisms, and many alternative versions of the original gospel arise, includ­
ing the version inaugurated by Paul, which abandoned Torah observance 
and more avidly sought the conversion of pagans, seeking to unify Jew and 
Gentile in a common community (Elements 1 9-2 1 ). 
Between the 30s and 70s some Christian congregations gradually mythi­
cize the story of their celestial Jesus Lord, just as other mystery cults had 
done for their gods, eventually representing him rhetorically and symboli­
ca11y in overtly historical narratives, during which time much of the more 
esoteric truth of the matter is reserved in secret for upper levels of initiation 
(Elements 1 1 -14, 44-48). Right in the middle of this process the Jewish 
War of 66-70 destroyed the original church in Jerusalem, leaving us with 
no evidence that any of the original apostles lived beyond it. Before that, 
persecutions from Jewish authorities and famines throughout the empire 
(and, if it really happened, the Neronian persecution of 64, which would 
have devastated the church in Rome) further exacerbated the effect, which 
was to leave a thirty-year dark age in the history of the church (from the 60s 
to the 90s), a whole generation in which we have no idea what happened 
or who was in charge (Element 22). In fact this ecclesial dark age probably 
spans fifty years (from the 60s to 1 1 0s), if 1 Clement was written in the 60s 
and not the 90s (see Chapter 8, §5), as then we have no record of anything 
going on until either Ignatius or Papias, both of whom could have written 
well later than the 1 1  Os (Chapter 8, §§6 and 7). 
It's during this dark age that the canonical Gospels most likely came to 
be written, by persons unknown (Chapter 7, §4), and at least one Christian 
sect started to believe the myths they contain were real, and thus began to 
believe (or for convenience claim) that Jesus was a real person, and then 
preached and embellished this view. Because having a historical founder 
represented in controlled documents was a significant advantage (Chapter 
8, § 1 2; and Chapter 1, §4), this 'historicizing' sect gradually gained politi­
cal and social superiority, declared itself 'orthodox' while condemning all 
others as 'heretics' (Chapter 4, §3), and preserved only texts that agreed 
with its view, and forged and altered countless texts in support. As a result, 
almost all evidence of the original Christian sects and what they believed 
has been lost or doctored out of the record; even evidence of what happened 
during the latter half of the first century to transition from Paul's Christian­
ity to second·century 'orthodoxy' is completely lost and now almost wholly 
inaccessible to us (Elements 21·22 and 44 ). 
No element of the theory I just outlined is ad hoc. The letters of Paul 
corroborate the hypothesis that Christianity began with visions (real or 
claimed) and novel interpretations of scripture, and this is not a fringe pro­
posal but is actually a view shared by many experts. The idea of a 'celestial 

12. Conclusion 
609 
savior' is corroborated by documents such as the Ascension of Isaiah and 
has precedents in theologies like the continual death-and-resurrection of 
Osiris, and is found even in the Dead Sea Scrolls. Euhemerization of god­
men by placing them in historical contexts was commonplace in antiquity. 
That ancient texts could have symbolic and a11egorical content is weiJ estab­
lished in classics and religious studies, has ample support in the sociology 
of religion and was common practice in ancient mystery cults and Judaism. 
Christianity did possess the central features of ancient mystery cults. And 
the fact that such ͂mysteries' were kept secret and revealed only to initiates, 
who were then sworn to secrecy, is a well-known fact of ancient religion. 
Everything else is an undeniable fact: the Epistles do reveal the constant 
vexation of novel dogmas; the devastating events of the 60s did occur; the 
history of the church is completely silent from then until the mid-90s or 
later; a historicist sect did later gain supreme power and did decide which 
texts to preserve, and it did doctor and meddle with numerous manuscripts 
and even produced wholesale forgeries to that same end-and not as a 
result of any organized conspiracy, but simply from independent scribes 
and authors widely sharing similar assumptions and motives. 
The only element of the basic myth theory that is even incredible (at least 
at first look) is the idea that a transition from a secret cosmic savior to a 
public historical one happened within two generations, and without a clear 
record of it occurring. But the unusual circumstances of a major disruption 
in the church opened the door to rapid developments in its dogmas, and the 
complete silence of the record in the following period blocks any attempt to 
argue 'from silence' that there was no transition from myth to legend. That 
this development did not get recorded is because nothing got recorded. 
When we consider the prospect of newly evangelized Christians, handed 
a euhemerized Gospel, but not yet initiated into the full secret, and then 
being set loose to spread their unfinished beliefs and founding their own 
churches and developing their own speculations, the idea that a myth could 
be mistaken as and transformed into 4history' in just a few generations is 
not so implausible as it may seem, particularly given that the geographical 
distances involved were large, Iifespans then were short, and legends often 
grow with distance in both time and space. There may even have been a 
'transitional' state of the cult in which the historical narratives were seen as 
playing out what was simultaneously occurring in the heavens (so one could 
believe both narratives were true), or in which certain sect leaders chose to 
downplay or reinterpret the secret doctrines and seiJ the public ones as the 
truth instead (as Origen seems to have thought was a good idea). 
Any number of possibilities present themselves; without any data from 
that period, we cannot know which happened. Hence I already dealt with 
this objection more than adequately in Chapters 6 (§7), 7 (§7), and 8 (§§4 
and 1 2). For comparison, even if we granted historicity, then we do not 

610 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
know how some sects transitioned to a cosmically born Jesus in the Chris­
tianities Irenaeus attacks as heresies (Chapter 1 1 , §9) or a cosmically killed 
Jesus in the Ascension of Isaiah (Chapter 3, § 1 ), or to a Jesus who lived and 
died a hundred years earlier (Chapter 8, § 1 ). Thus, our ignorance in the mat­
ter of how the cult transitioned is not solved by positing historicity. Either 
way, we're equally in the dark on how these changes happened. 
4. The Last Desperate Objection 
Hence, I believe our conclusion should be in favor of minimal mythicism. 
Jesus began life as a celestial being whose suffering, death and resurrection 
was known only through revelations (real or pretended) and secret mes­
sages in scripture, and who only later became a mythically historicized per­
son as a model to follow and hang new dogmas upon. 
That leaves the last and most common objection to this conclusion: that 
'the Jews' would never conceive of a dying messiah (Element 3), much less 
a dying messiah who would become a celestial Lord, the conduit through 
whom one worshiped God. Of course, in its most naive formulation, this 
objection is self-refuting. If Jews would never conceive of it, Christianity 
would never have happened-because Christianity obviously began within 
sectarian Judaism (Elements 1 ,  20 and 33). So the very existence of Christi­
anity itself refutes the objection. It is only further refuted by the fact that it 
relies on a hidden assumption, that the Jews were monolithic in their think­
ing about theology and religion, which is false: Judaism was remarkably 
diverse and innovative in exactly this period (Element 2), and all manner of 
ideas were being tried to resolve the existential dilemma the Jews as a con­
quered people were in (Element 23). So we cannot claim the Jews 'could 
not' have done this. Because they did. 
Cornered by these facts, objectors will concede that some Jews evidently 
were able to conceive of such a thing, but then insist that some compelling 
event must have precipitated so wild a break with Jewish thinking, and only 
the crucifixion of an actual historical man could have done such a thing. But 
that's a non sequitur. If early-first-century Jews could conceive of a dying 
messiah becoming a celestial Lord (and clearly they could), they could con­
ceive of this being true of a celestial man as easily as a historical one. In 
other words, these objectors admit that some Jews could conceive of a his­
torically crucified man becoming celestial Lord. But if the Jews could do 
that, they could conceive of a celestially crucified man becoming celestial 
Lord. Which negates this objection from the start. 
We already saw that this very idea (or ideas sufficiently like it) had 
become increasingly popular in the Roman Empire; in fact it was already 
diffusing into every other foreign culture under its umbrella, from the Syr-

12. Conclusion 
61 1 
ian to the Persian to the Egyptian (Element 3 1  ). So we should actually have 
expected Jewish culture to find a way to integrate the same idea; after all, 
every other national culture was doing so. And this is where we have to 
look at the possibilities in light of what we now know. Had I been born in 
the year I and was asked as a young educated man what a Jewish mystery 
religion would look like, based on what I knew of the common features of 
mystery cult and the strongest features of Judaism, I could have described 
Christianity to you in almost every relevant particular-before it was even 
invented. It would involve the worship of a mythical-yet-historicized per­
sonal savior, a son of god, who suffered a death and resurrection, by which 
he obtained salvation for those who communed with his spirit, thereby 
becoming a fictive brotherhood, through baptism and the sharing of sacred 
meals. How likely is it that I could predict that if that wasn't in fact how it 
came to pass? Influence is the only credible explanation. To propose it was 
a coincidence is absurd. 
Objectors will then resort to the going myth that the Jews never syncre­
tized their religion with others. But we know that is false (Elements 30 and 
32). In fact, earliest Christianity is demonstrably just like all those other 
mystery religions in precisely the ways they were all like each other (Ele­
ments I I  and 1 2). That, again, cannot be a coincidence. The fact that all 
those mystery religions involved a suffering (and often dying-and-rising) 
intermediary demigod as their lord and savior (Element 3 l ),just like Chris­
tianity, points clearly to the direction of causation. It's simply not possible 
that the Jews independently just thought up exactly the same idea, somehow 
not aware that that idea was everywhere around them already. 
It's even false that the theological concepts behind this adaptation were 
foreign to Judaism to begin with. The exaltation of martyrs and the role of 
human sacrifice achieving salvation for the living was already as Jewish as 
it was pagan (Element 43), and the Jews had already been toying with the 
idea of dying messiahs (Elements 5 and 6), and one of their own scriptures 
could easily be read as predicting this would happen in the early first cen­
tury, signaling the imminent end of the world (Element 7), just as the earli­
est Christians were claiming (e.g. I Cor. 1 5.23·24 and I Thess. 4. 1 3- 1 8), 
and as many other Jews were expecting (Element 4). 
Furthermore, the Jews were already acknowledging the problems the 
temple cult was posing for them. The idea of a special divine sacrifice elimi­
nating the need of that temple cult would certainly have been attractive to 
at least some of them (Elements 23 to 28). It surely cannot be a coincidence 
that the whole idea of Jesus was conveniently constructed to serve exactly 
that role (Elements I 0 and 1 8). Anthropology even confinns how common 
exactly this kind of syncretistic revolutionary movement is in exactly the 
circumstances Judaism was then in (Element 29). This was the most likely 
'impetus' that drove the innovative ideas behind Christianity-not some 

612 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
historical man who just happened to get himself killed. Because if you think 
about it, that makes far less sense. 
That the whole Christian gospel could be read out of scripture, and 
indeed without much effort (Element 1 7), in conjunction with the fact that 
in the century leading up to Christianity many Jews were scrambling to find 
secret messages in scripture (Element 8), should already be enough to lead 
us to expect that one of those groups 'discovered' in that effort to find hid­
den meanings in scripture something to satisfY their pressing need to deal 
with the Roman occupation and the impenetrable corruption of the Jewish 
temple elite without the futile option of military revo1t (again, Elements 23 
to 28). The celestial Jesus doctrine does exactly that, so superbly well that 
once again we cannot imagine this is a coincidence. The fact that 'scripture' 
then meant a larger body of documents than we now have access to, and 
variant readings in documents we have that we no longer know about (Ele­
ment 9), only makes this even more likely. 
That Christianity began as a visionary cult prone to hallucinating fantas­
tical things (Elements 1 5  and 1 6) makes it all more likely still-because it 
eliminates the need of a historical man to die. A charismatic leader could 
simply hallucinate a dying savior in the sky. And the fact that all mystery 
religions composed exoteric (public) myths to conceal their esoteric (secret) 
cosmological doctrines (Element 14), and Christianity had secret doctrines 
from its earliest recorded time (Element 13), best explains the sequence of 
evidence in the record: no historical Jesus in the earliest documents and 
gospels (those in the Pauline and quasi-Pauline Epistles, as shown in Chap­
ter 1 1), then suddenly wildly mythological literary constructs of Jesus in the 
Gospels (Chapter 1 0), with no corroborating evidence outside these sacred 
documents (Chapter 8), and even some evidence of a progression from myth 
to history (Chapters 8 and 9). In fact, Paul does not seem to have known of 
any evidence of Jesus other than by revelation and scripture (Element 19, 
with Chapter 1 1  ). Jesus was then rapidly built up into a standard but oth­
erwise Jewish version of a Rank-Raglan hero (Element 48). Yet no known 
Rank-Raglan heroes have ever been historical (Chapter 6, §3), which only 
further pushes us to the obvious conclusion. 
And that's it. There simply is no other evidence to go by (Chapter 7). 
Indeed, we can already tell from Hebrews 8-9; Rom. 1 6.25-26; and I Cor. 
1 5.3-5 that Christianity as a religion originated with visions (and the finding 
ofhidden messages in scripture) of God's celestial high priest (the celestial 
Jesus, God's image or Logos, a supernatural being recognized by at least 
some Jews of the time: Element 40). From Philippians 2 and other passages 
(Element 10; and Chapter 1 1, §4) we can tell that in earliest documented 
Christian belief, Jesus began as what conservative Jews would have ca11ed 
an archangel (angels often being hailed as 'lords' like Jesus), descending to 
assume the body of a man, possibly no further than sublunar space (as was 

12. Conclusion 
613 
the case for Osiris: Element 37; and for the Jesus found in the earlier redac­
tion of the Ascension of Isaiah: Chapter 3, § 1 ), where he was mocked and 
killed and buried by Satan and his sky demons, and thereby gained power 
over them, and was raised from the dead to be appointed God's right-hand 
man, celestial Lord of the universe, with dominion now even over Satan and 
his demonic host, even over Death itself. 
This accords with all we know about the cosmological beliefs of many 
Jews of the time, including the multi-layered nature of the heavens (Element 
34), the existence of intercessory beings traveling among them (Element 36; 
known as ĝangels' and ×archangels' in Jewish vocabulary but by other terms 
in pagan vocabulary: see Chapter 4, §3), and the status of the vast sublunar 
realm as the realm of death and the dead (Element 35), in which resided 
countless hosts of dark supernatural beings (Element 37) and a plethora 
of distant objects such as castles and gardens (Element 38). 12 It accords, 
too, with ideas of a celestial ĝAdam' (Element 39), a celestial ×son of man' 
(Element 41 ), a celestial ǘhigh priest' (Element 42), and, again, a celestial 
'Jesus' known as the ×Logos' (Element 40), all of which Jesus had been 
associated with by mid-first century (only the early explicit designation of 
him as 'the Logos' cannot be confirmed, although it can be inferred). 
And though the evidence shows that Christianity most probably began 
this way, it also shows it evolved into a historicizing sect, and that that sect 
won out, and then destroyed or altered or let vanish almost all documents 
supporting its opponents, and then preserved only documents it agreed with, 
even inventing and editing documents as it needed for that purpose (Ele­
ment 2 1  ), which was actually the normal practice for all religions of that 
period, especially those (like Judaism and many pagan cults) that originated 
with mythical people (Elements 44 and 45). And we cannot observe this 
transition in the case of Christianity, because no documents or knowledge 
survives from the period in which it occurred (Element 22). The Gospels 
were simply constructed to euhemerize Jesus, as all mythical demigods 
had been (Element 45), modeling him after other historical and mythical 
counter-cultural heroes (Element 46), and then ultimately integrating him 
into the ubiquitous Rank-Raglan hero-type (Element 48), and matching 
an equally popular model of celestially translated heroes (Element 47), all 
appropriately Judaized. 
Even though this all makes sense, fits all the evidence (better even than 
any alternative, with a minimum of ad hoc suppositions), and accords well 
with all our background knowledge, the objectors often still won't see rea­
son. As the counter-argument was once described to me, Paul says 'we pro­
claim Christ crucified: for Jews a stumbling block, for Gentiles foolishness' 
12. In outer space; for the possibility of a terrestrial myth, see note in Chapter 1 1  
(§8). 

614 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
(1 Cor. 1 .23), so there can't be any way Jews themselves would think up 
a stumbling block on purpose; it therefore must be an accident, and that 
means a historical Jesus who got himself accidentally killed, which his fol­
lowers then tried to spin into some grand notion. But this reasoning is mul­
tiply fallacious-even apart from everything I just surveyed, and even apart 
from the fact that Paul qualifies his statement almost immediately: it was 
not a stumbling block to some Jews nor foolish to some pagans. Therefore 
this very same passage in Paul immediately proves this framing of the argu­
ment to be a fallacy of false generalization, unjustifiably leaping from 'most 
Jews' to 'all Jews'. To some, •both Jews and Greeks', Christ's death was not 
a stumbling block at all but 'the power of God', nor was it foolish, but rather 
'the wisdom of God' (I Cor. 1 .24). 
Even apart from that, to imagine Christianity happened because 'a histor­
ical Jesus got himself accidentally killed, which his followers then tried to 
spin into some grand notion' predicts an entirely different body of evidence 
than we have. Paul's Epistles, for example, would look very different than 
they do, and contain many different disputes and claims. This hypothesis 
therefore has a very low consequent probability. Indeed, if that really had 
been the sequence of events, we would not have gotten the Christianity we 
find in Paul's letters even in outline. Jesus would instead have simply been 
proclaimed a martyr exalted or resurrected by God, not a celestial Lord 
and God's intermediary. It's that additional leap that is confusing, not the 
dying part (nor the rising part: resurrections abound in the Jewish scriptures, 
hence note that it is not the 'resurrection' of Jesus that Paul says was the 
stumbling block). Jews did not stumble over the idea of exalted martyrs; 
they manufactured them by the dozens (indeed even their own scriptures 
exalted them, for 'precious in the sight of Jehovah is the death of his holy 
ones', Ps. I I 6.1 5; Wis. 5 even offers a model example of a generic martyr 
being resurrected and exalted). They had even invented and embraced a 
dying messiah in their own scriptures (Dan. 9.26--even if not the messiah, 
certainly a messiah: see Chapter 4, §3) and never had any evident trouble 
imagining their future messiah would be killed (as we see Talmudic Jews 
fully embraced the idea: Element 5). 
It's worth emphasizing here that we have absolutely no evidence that 
any ancient Jews (much less all of them) considered the idea of exalting a 
slain messiah to be blasphemous or illegal or even inconceivable-that's a 
modem myth. To the contrary, the evidence we do have (from the Talmud, 
for example) shows they had no trouble conceiving and allowing such a 
thing (Element 5). Nor would such a notion be fool ish to pagans, who had 
their own dying saviors, historical (Element 43) and mythical (Element 3 1 ). 
So the only thing Paul could mean the Jews were stumbling over was the 
notion that a celestial being could be crucified-as that would indeed seem 

12. Conclusion 
615 
strange, and would indeed be met with requests for evidence (' How do you 
know that happened?'). 
And that is in fact the context of Paul's remark: in the immediately pre­
ceding sentence Paul had said the problem he's talking about was that the 
'Jews ask for signs, and the Greeks seek after wisdom' (I Cor. 1 .22), but the 
Christian gospel met neither standard (that is the meaning of v. 23, which 
is referring to v. 22 and then qualified in v. 24). It certainly seems as if he 
means they had no evidence to present that Christ was crucified (because 
they could produce no sufficient ԯsigns' that proved what they preached was 
true), and to Greek philosophers the notion of it sounded silly, as it did not 
follow from reason or empirical evidence, but rather derived from dubious 
private revelations and a crazy toying with the ancient equivalent of Bible 
codes, neither being a 'method of knowing' accepted by the pagan elite. 
If anything, this passage all but proves minimal mythicism. Because it's 
almost inconceivable on minimal historicity. A martyred savior was never 
a stumbling block to Jews nor foolish to pagans (Element 43). Nor did it 
require signs or mystical evidence. 
But even apart from all that (which is really quite enough to debunk this 
objection), the entire logical fonn of the argument is inva1id. The general 
rule that 'only a real event would inspire people to preach a scandalous 
doctrine promoting that event' is demonstrably false. I here present a dem­
onstration of this by showing that in other cases the rule fails: 
Attis was preached castrated . 
• 
'Attis castrated' was a stumbling 
block for many (Augustine, City of 
God 6. 1 0- 1 1  ) . 
• 
Therefore, Attis was an actual 
historical man castrated. 
'Jesus crucified' was a stumbling 
block for many ( 1 Cor. 1 .22-24). 
Therefore, Jesus was an actual 
historical man crucified. 
Table 11. Competing Embarrassment: Attis Cult versus Jesus Cult 
Clearly if the rule so easily fails, it cannot be assumed to apply. There 
simply is no relevant difference between Attis cult and Jesus cult sufficient 
to sustain this kind of objection. Attis was not castrated-in fact there never 
was any such person. Yet if a non-existent Attis could be preached castrated, 
so could a non-existent Jesus be preached crucified. In actual fact the entire 

616 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
mode of 'arguing from embarasment' like this is simply not sound, as I 
have already thoroughly demonstrated.13 It just doesn't work here. 
Other objections are easily dispatched. For example., it will sometimes be 
asserted that even though the Gospels and Acts are obviously literary con­
structs, with deliberate structure and invented details serving the purpose 
of communicating abstract ideas about the gospel and missionary life, and 
not aiming at determining or even recording historical facts (all of which 
was proven in Chapters 9 and 1 0), there could still be historical facts behind 
them. The authors may have simply taken real stories and organized them 
into these elegant literary constructs, adding, deleting or changing what 
they needed to 'sculpt' them into what they wanted. But this doesn't get us 
to any valid argument. 'Possibly, therefore probably' is a fallacy.14 What's 
possible is irrelevant. What you have to prove is that any story in the Gos­
pels (even if stripped down to its core) is probably true., not that it 'possibly' 
is. And there is simply no valid argument to be made that any are. Some 
might be, sure. But that gets us nowhere. The Gospels, therefore, must be 
discarded as evidence. 
The same fallacy destroys any parallel argument made for the Epis­
tles, such as that all the oddities in them 'might' disguise historical facts 
about Jesus in any of the veiled quotations or theological references we 
surveyed (or any others even less clear), and that we 'could' explain the 
Epistles on an assumption of minimal historicity-if we adopt a num­
ber of convenient unproven and improbable assumptions about how they 
came to look very much unlike what we would usually expect if that were 
the case. Here, again, 'possibly, therefore probably' is a fallacy. No valid 
argument is to be made here. You have to prove that any of these refer­
ences probably derives from a historical Jesus, not that it possibly does. 
And here things are worse, since the historicist explanation of the Epis­
tles' content is improbable--certainly significantly less probable than the 
mythicist explanation, which requires fewer unproven assumptions (in 
fact, almost none really, beyond the hypothesis itself and what it entails 
in light of established background knowledge). Yes, 'improbable' does 
not mean impossible. But it still does mean improbable. Only by arguing 
a fortiori was I able to come to anything near a different conclusion, and 
even then it was not enough. 
After that, objections become increasingly more specious and fallacious, 
and should not even have to be addressed. There is simply no way to recover 
an argument to historicity from the extrabiblical evidence, for example-as 
I already explained in Chapter 8. 
13. Carrier, Proving History, pp. 124-69. 
1 4. Carier, Proving History, pp. 25-29. 

1 2. Conclusion 
617 
5. What Now? 
From here things can go one of three ways: 
I .  Minimal mythicism is more likely how Christianity began. Ifthat's true, 
we can prove it. If we can prove it, it will eventually become the broad­
est consensus of all but Christian apologists (who obviously will reject 
evidence and reason when in conflict with their faith). 
2. Minimal mythicism is not more likely how Christianity began. If that's 
true, we can prove it. If we can prove it, what we will then have proved 
will become the broadest consensus. We will then have some facts about 
a historical Jesus we can assert as confidently known. 
3. It's not possible on present evidence to know whether minimal mythi­
cism is more likely how Christianity began. If that's true, we can prove 
it. If we can prove it, mythicists and historicists will both have to con­
cede the point. Historicists will have to accept mythicism as a viable 
theory, and mythicists will have to accept some historical Jesus scenarios 
may be viable, too. We just won't have the data we need in order to know 
which it is. 
Accordingly, I intend this book not to end but to begin a debate about this, 
regarding both its methods and its conclusions. Hence, if readers object 
even to employing Bayes's Theorem in this case (or in any), then I ask them 
to propose alternative models for structuring the debate. If, instead, read­
ers accept my Bayesian approach, but object to my method of assigning 
prior probabilities, then I ask them to argue for an alternative method of 
assigning prior probabilities (e.g. if my choice of reference class is faulty, 
then I ask you to argue why it is, and to argue for an alternative). On the 
other hand, if readers accept my method of assigning prior probabilities, but 
object to my estimates of consequent probability, then l ask them to argue 
for alternative consequent probabilities-not just assert some, but actually 
argue for them. Because the mythicist case hinges on the claim that these 
things cannot reasonably be done. It is time that claim was properly put to 
the test. And finally, of course, if readers object to my categories and sub­
categories of evidence or believe there are others that should be included or 
distinguished, then I ask them to argue the case. 
I know many devout Christian scholars will balk and claim to find all 
manner of bogus or irrelevant or insignificant holes or flaws in my argu­
ments, but they would do that anyway. Witness what many Christian schol­
ars come up with just to reject evolution, or to defend the literal miraculous 
resurrection of Jesus (which they claim they can do even with the terrible 
and paltry evidence we have). Consequently, I don't care anymore what 

618 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
Christian apologists think. They are not rational people. I only want to know 
what rational scholars think. I want to see a helpful critique of this book by 
objective, qualified experts who could live with the conclusion that Jesus 
didn't exist, but just don't think the case can be made, or made well enough 
to credit. And what I want from my critics is not useless hole punching but 
an alternative proposal: if my method is invalid, then what method is the 
correct one for resolving questions of historicity? And if you know of none, 
how can you justify any claim to historicity for any person, if you don't 
even know how such a claim can be justified or falsified at all? Also cor­
rect any facts I get wrong, point out what I missed, and if my method then 
produces a different conclusion when those emendations are included, we 
will have progressY Even if the conclusion is the same, it will nevertheless 
have been improved. 
But it is the method I want my fellow historians to correct, replace or 
perfect above all else. We can't simply rely on intuition or gut instinct when 
deciding what really did happen or who really did exist, since that simply 
leans on unexamined assumptions and relies on impressions and instincts 
that are often not reliable guides to the truth. We need to make explicit why 
we believe what we do rather than something else, and we need this as much 
in history as in any other field. And by the method I have deployed here, I 
have confirmed our intuitions in the study of Jesus are wrong. He did not 
exist. I have made my case. To all objective and qualified scholars, I appeal 
to you all as a community: the ball is now in your court. 
1 5. On how this process of back-and-forth can eventually produce progress toward 
a more secure consensus see Carrier, Proving History, pp. 88-93, 208-1 4. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY (MODERN SCHOLARSHIP) 
Abegg, Martin, 'Messianic Hope and 4Q285: A Reassessment', Journal of Biblical 
Literature 113 (1994), pp. 81-91. 
Achtemeier, Paul, 'The Origin and Function of the Pre-Marcan MiracJe Catenae', Jour­
nal of Biblical Literature 91 (1972), pp. 198-221. 
- 'Toward the Isolation of Pre-Markan Miracle Catenae', Journal of Biblical Litera­
ture 89 (1970), pp. 265-91. 
Ahbei-Rappe, Sara, and Rachana Kamtekar (eds.), A Companion to Socrates (Oxford: 
Blackwell, 2006). 
Albertson, Fred, 'An Isiac Model for the Raising of Lazarus in Early Christian Art', 
Jahrbuchfiir Antike und Christentum 38 (1995), pp. 123-32. 
Aid house-Green, Miranda, and Stephen Aid house-Green, The Quest for the Shaman: 
Shape-Shifters, Sorcerers and Spirit-Healers of Ancient Europe (London: 
Thames & Hudson, 2005). 
Alexander, J.R., 'Graeco-Roman Papyrus Documents from Egypt', Athena Review 2 
(1999) at www.athenapub.com/egypapl.html. 
Alexander, Loveday, 'Fact, Fiction and the Genre of Acts', New Testament Studies 44 
(1998), pp. 380-99. 
Allegro, John Marco, The Dead Sea Scrolls and the Christian Myth (Buffalo, NY: 
Prometheus Books, 1984). 
- 'Jesus and Qumran: The Dead Sea SeroUs', in Jesus in Myth and History (ed. R. 
Joseph Hoffmann and Gerald Larue; Buffalo, NY: Prometheus, 1986), pp. 89-96. 
Allison, Dale, 'The Historians' Jesus and the Church', in Seeking the Identity of Jesus: 
A Pilgrimage (ed. Beverly Roberts Gaventa and Richard Hays; Grand Rapids, 
MI: William B. Eerdmans, 2008), pp. 79-95. 
- The New Moses: A Matthean Typology (Minneapolis, MN: Fortress Press, 1993). 
- 'The Pauline Epistles and the Synoptic Gospels: The Pattern of the Parallels', New 
Testament Studies 28 (1982), pp. 1-32. 
- 'Peter and Cephas: One and the Same', Journal of Biblical Literature 111 (1992), 
pp. 489-95. 
- 'Q's New Exodus and the Historical Jesus', in The Sayings Source Q and the His­
torical Jesus (ed. A. Lindemann; Leuven: University Press, 2001), pp. 395-428. 
- 'The Structure of the Sermon on the Mount', Journal of Biblical Literature 106 
(1987), pp. 423-45. 
- Studies in Matthew: Interpretation Past and Present (Grand Rapids, MI: Baker 
Academic, 2005). 
- 'Thallus on the Crucifixion', in The Historical Jesus in Context (ed. Amy-Jill 
Levine, Dale Allison, Jr, and John Dominic Crossan; Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press, 2006), pp. 405-406. 
Alvarez, Jaime, Romanising Oriental Gods: Myth, Salvation and Ethics in the Cults of 
Cybele, Isis and Mithras (Leiden: Brill, 2008). 

620 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
Anderson, Hugh, 'The Jewish Antecedents oft he Christo logy in Hebrews'. in The Mes­
siah: Developments in Earliest Judaism and Christianity (ed. James Charlesۨ 
worth; Minneapolis, MN: Fortress Press, 1992), pp. 512-35. 
Anderson, R.T., 'Samaritan Literature', in Dictionary of New Testament Background 
(ed. Craig Evans and Stanley Porter; Downers Grove. IL: lnterVarsity Press. 
2000), pp. 1052-56. 
Angus, Samuel, The Mystery-Religions and Christianity: A Study in the Religious 
Background of Early Christianity (London: J. Murray, 1925). 
Arb man, Ernst, Ecstasy, or Religious Trance, in the Experience of the Ecstatics and 
from the Psychological Point of View (3 vols.; Stockholm: Bokf6rlaget, 1963-
70). 
Arnal, William, Jesus and the Village Scribes: Galilean Conflicts and the Setting ofQ 
(Minneapolis, MN: Fortress Press, 2001). 
- The Symbolic Jesus: Historical Scholarship, Judaism and the Construction of Con­
temporary Identity (London: Equinox, 2005). 
Arnold, Clinton, Powers of Darkness: Principalities and Powers in Paul's Letters 
( Downers Grove, IL: lnterVarsity Press, 1992). 
Arnold-Biucchi, Carmen, Alexander's Coins and Alexander's Image (Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Art Museums, 2006). 
Ascough, Richard, 'Historical Approaches', in Dictionary of Biblical Criticism and 
Interpretation (ed. Stanley Porter; New York: Routledge, 2007), pp. 157-59. 
Asian, Reza, Zealot: The Life and Times of Jesus of Nazareth (New York: Random 
House, 2013). 
Athanassiadi, Polymnia, and Michael Frede (eds.), Pagan Monotheism in Late Antiq­
uity (New York: Oxford University Press, 1999). 
Aune, David, 'Christian Prophecy and the Messianic Status of Jesus', in The Messiah: 
Developments in Earliest Judaism and Christianity (ed. James Charlesworth; 
Fortress Press, 1992), pp. 404-22. 
- The New Testament in its Literary Environment (Philadelphia, PA: Westminster 
Press, 1987). 
A us, Roger, Barabbas and Esther and Other Studies in the Judaic Illumination of Ear­
liest Christianity (Atlanta, GA: Scholars Press, 1992). 
- 'The Wedding Feast at Cana (John 2.1-1 1), and Ahasuerus' Wedding Feast in Judaic 
Traditions on Esther I '. in Water into Wine and the Beheading of John the Bap­
tist: Early Jewish-Christian Interpretation of Esther I in John 2:1-11 and Mark 
6:17-29 (Atlanta, GA: Scholars Press, 1988), pp. 1-37. 
Avalos, Hector, The End of Biblical Studies (Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 2007). 
Avery-Peck, Alan, 'The Galilean Charismatic and Rabbinic Piety: The Holy Man in 
the Talmudic Literature', in The Historical Jesus in Context (ed. Levine, Allison 
and Crossan), pp. 149-65. 
Babinski, Edward, 'The Cosmology of the Bible', in The Christian Delusion: Why 
Faith Fails (ed. John Loftus; Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 2010), pp. 109-
47. 
Bagnall, Roger, Reading Papyri, Writing Ancient History (New York: Routledge, 
1995). 
Bailey, John. The Traditions Common to the Gospels of Luke and John (Leiden: E.J. 
Brill, 1963). 
Barker, Margaret, The Great Angel: A Study of Israel 's Second God (Louisville, K Y: 
Westminster/John Knox Press, 1992). 

Bibliography 
621 
- The Great High Priest: The Temple Roots of Christian Liturgy (New York: T. & T. 
Clark, 2003). 
- On Earth as It Is in Heaven: Temple Symbolism in the New Testament (New York: 
T. & T. Clark, 1995). 
- 'The Secret Tradition', Journal of Higher Criticism 2 (Spring 1995), pp. 31-67. 
- 'The Temple Roots of the Christian Liturgy', in Christian Origins: Worship, Belief 
and Society (ed. Kieran O'Mahony: Sheffield: Sheffield Academic Press, 2003), 
pp. 29-51 .  
Barnes, Timothy, 'The Date of Ignatius', Expository Times 120 (2008), pp. l 19-30. 
Barnstone, Willis, The Other Bible (San Francisco, CA: HarperCollins, 1984). 
Barrett, C.K . . The Gospel according to St. John (Philadelphia, PA: Westminster Press, 
2nd edn, 1978). 
Basser, Herbert, 'Gospel and Talmud'. in The Historical Jesus in Context (ed. Levine, 
Allison and Crossan), pp. 285-95. 
Bauckham, Richard, Jesus and the Eyewitnesses: The Gospels as Eyewitness Testi­
mony (Grand Rapids, Ml: William B. Eerdmans, 2006). 
Bauer, David. The Structure of Matthews Gospel: A Study in Literary Design (Shef­
field: Almond Press, 1988). 
Baum, Paul Franklin. 'The Mediceval Legend of Judas Jscariot', Proceedings of the 
Modern Language Association of America 31 (1916), pp. 481-632. 
Beale, G.K., and O.A. Carson (eds.), Commentary on the New Testament Use of the Old 
Testament (Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Academic, 2007). 
Bechard, Dean, 'Review of Richard Bauckham, Jesus and the Eyewitnesses', Biblica 
90 (2009), pp. 126-29. 
Beck, Roger, Beck on Mithraism (Burlington, VT: Ashgate, 2004). 
- The Religion of the Mithras Cult in the Roman Empire: Mysteries of the Uncon­
quered Sun (New York: Oxford University Press, 2006). 
Beilby, James, and Paul Rhodes Eddy (eds.), The Historical Jesus: Five Views (Down­
ers Grove, IL: IVP Academic, 2009). 
Bell, Vaughan, 'Ghost Stories: Visits from the Deceased', Scientific American Online 
(December 2, 2008) http://www.scientificamerican.com/article.cfm?id==ghost­
stories-visits-from-the-deceased. 
Belle, G. van, 'Lukan Style in the Fourth Gospel', in Luke and his Readers (ed. R. 
Bieringer, G. van Belle and J. Verheyden; Dudley, MA: Peeters, 2005), pp. 351-
72. 
Benedikston, T.D., 'Structure and Fate in Suetonius' Life ofGa/ba', Classical Journal 
92 (1997), pp. 167-73. 
Benko. Stephen, 'The Edict of Claudius of A.D. 49 and the lnstigator Chrestus', Theolo­
gische Zeitschrift 25 (1969), pp. 407-408. 
Bentall, Richard, Gordon Claridge and Peter Slade, 'The Multi-Dimensional Nature 
of Schizotypal Traits: A Factor Analytic Study with Normal Subjects', British 
Journal of Clinical Psychology 28 ( 1989), pp. 363-75. 
Bergsma, John Sietze. The Jubilee from Leviticus to Qumran: A History of Interpreta­
tion ( Leiden: Bril I, 2007). 
Beskow, Per, 'Tertullian on Mithras', in Studies in Mithraism: Papers Associated with 
the Mithraic Panel Organized on the Occasion of the XVIth Congress of the 
International Association for the History of Religions, Rome 1990 (ed. John 
Hinnells; Rome: L'Erma di Bretschneider, 1994), pp. 51-60. 

622 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
Betz, Hans Dieter, Galatians: A Commentary on Paul's Letter to the Churches in 
Galatia (Minneapo1is, MN: Fortress Press, 1979). 
- The 'Mithras Liturgy': Text, Translation, and Commentary (TUbingen: Mohr 
Siebeck, 2003). 
- 'Plutarch's Life of Numa: Some Observations on Graeco-Roman "Messianism"', 
in Redemption and Resistance: The Messianic Hopes of Jews and Christians in 
Antiquity (ed. Markus Bockmuehl and James Carleton Paget; New York: T. & T. 
Clark, 2007), pp. 44-62. 
Binfield, Kevin (ed.), Writings of the Luddites (Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins Univer­
sity Press, 2004). 
Black, Mark, 'The Messianic Use of Zechariah 9-14 in Matthew, Mark and the Pre­
Markan Tradition', in Scripture and Traditions: Essays on Early Judaism and 
Christianity in Honor of Carl R. Holladay (ed. Patrick Gray and Gail R. O'Day; 
Boston: Brill, 2008), pp. 97-114. 
- 'The Messianism of the Parables of Enoch: Their Date and Contribution to Christo­
logical Origins', in The Messiah: Developments in Earliest Judaism and Chris­
tianity (ed. James Charlesworth; Minneapolis, MN: Fortress Press, 1992), pp. 
145-68. 
Blackhirst, R., 'Barnabas and the Gospels: Was There an Early Gospel of Barnabas?', 
Journal of Higher Criticism 7 (Spring 2000), pp. 1-22. 
Blenkinsopp, Joseph, et al., The New Interpreter's Bible: Old Testament Survey (Nash­
ville, TN: Abingdon Press, 2006). 
Blomberg, Craig, 'Midrash, Chiasmus, and the Outline of Luke's Central Section', 
in Gospel Perspectives (ed. R.T. France and David Wenham; Sheffield: JSOT 
Press, 1983), Ill, pp. 217-61. 
Bock, Darrell, 'The Function of Scripture in Mark 15.1-39', in Biblical interpretation 
in Early Christian Gospels. Vol. 1, The Gospel of Mark (ed. Thomas R. Hatina; 
New York: T. & T. Clark, 2006), pp. 8-17. 
- 'Is That All There Is? A Response to Lara Guglielmo's 1 1Ql3, Malchi Sedek, Co­
Reference, and Restoration of2 18', Henoch 33 (201 1), pp. 73-76. 
Bockmuehl, Markus, 'Simon Peter's Names in Jewish Sources', Journal of Jewish 
Studies 55 (Spring 2004), pp. 58-80. 
Bockmuehl, Markus, and James Carleton Paget (eds.), Redemption and Resistance: 
The Messianic Hopes of Jews and Christians in Antiquity (New York: T. & T. 
Clark, 2007). 
Boman, Jobjorn, 'Comments on Carrier: Is Thallus Actually Quoted by Eusebius?', 
Liber Annuus 62 (2012), pp. 319-25. 
Borg, Marcus, 'The Historical Study of Jesus and Christian Origins', in Jesus at 2000 
(ed. Marcus Borg; Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1997), pp. 121-48. 
-Jesus: Uncovering the Life, Teachings. and Relevance of a Religious Revolutionary 
(San Francisco, CA: HarperSanFrancisco, 2006). 
- Reading the Bible Again for the First Time: Taking the Bible Seriously but Not Liter­
ally (San Francisco, CA: HarperSanFrancisco, 2001). 
Bosworth, A.B., From Arrian to Alexander: Studies in Historical Interpretation (New 
York: Oxford University Press, 1988). 
Boyarin, Daniel, The Jewish Gospels: The Story of the Jewish Christ (New York: The 
New Press, 2012). 
Boyer, Pascal, Religion Explained: The Evolutionary Origins of Religious Thought 
(New York: Basic Books, 2001). 

Bibliography 
623 
Bower, Bruce, 'Night of the Crusher: The Waking Nightmare of Sleep Paralysis Pro­
pels People into a Spirit World', Science News 168 (July 9, 2005), pp. 27-29. 
- 'Visions for All', Science News 181 (April 7, 2012), pp. 22-25. 
Bradley, K.R., 'Suetonius, Nero 16.2: "afflicti suppliciis Christiant'", Classical Review 
22.1 (March 1972), pp. 9-10. 
Brakke, David, The Gnostics: Myth, Ritual, and Diversity in Early Christianity (Cam­
bridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2010). 
Brandon, S.G.F., Jesus and the Zealots (New York: Scribner, 1967). 
- The Saviour God: Comparative Studies in the Concept of Salvation (Westport, CT: 
Greenwood Press, 1963). 
Brant, Jo-Ann, Charles Hedrick and Chris Shea (eds.), Ancient Fiction: The Matrix of 
Early Christian and Jewish Narrative (Atlanta, GA: Society of Biblical Litera­
ture, 200S). 
Brickhouse, Thomas, and Nicholas Smith, The Trial and Execution of Socrates: 
Sources and Controversies (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2002). 
Brisson, Luc, How Philosophers Saved Myths: Allegorical Interpretation and Classi­
cal Mythology (trans. Catherine Tihanyi; Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 
2004). 
Broadhead, Edwin, 'Reconfiguring Jesus: The Son of Man in Markan Perspective', in 
Biblical Interpretation in Early Christian Gospels. Vol. I, The Gospel of Mark 
(ed. Thomas R. Hatina; New York: T. & T. Clark, 2006), pp. 18-30. 
Brodie, Thomas, 'An Alternative Q/Logia Hypothesis: Deuteronomy-Based, Qum­
ranlike۩ Verifiable', in The Sayings Source Q and the Historical Jesus (ed. A. 
Lindemann; Leuven: University Press, 2001), pp. 729-43. 
- Beyond the Quest for the Historical Jesus: A Memoir of a Discovery (Sheffield: 
Sheffield Phoenix, 2012). 
- The Birthing ofthe New Testament: The lntertextual Development ofthe New Testa­
ment Writings (Sheffield: Sheffield Phoenix Press, 2004). 
- Proto-Luke: The First Edition of Luke-Acts: A Christ-Centered Synthesis ofSep­
tuagintal Historiography Modeled Especially on the Elijah-Elisha Narrative 
and Matthew 's Logia: A Foundational Arrangement of Gospel Sayings Deuter­
onomy-Based, Qumran/ike (an Alternative to Q) (Limerick, Ireland: Dominican 
Biblical Centre, 2002). 
-Proto-Luke: The Oldest Gospel Account: A Christ-Centered Synthesis ofOld Testa­
ment History Modeled Especially on the Elijah-Elisha Narrative: Introduction, 
Text. and Old Testament Model (Limerick, Ireland: Dominican Biblical Insti­
tute, 2006). 
- 'Re-Opening the Quest for Proto-Luke: The Systematic Use of Judges 6-12 in Luke 
16:1-18:8', Journal of Higher Criticism 2 (Spring 1995), pp. 68-101. 
Brodie, Thomas, Dennis MacDonald and Stanley Porter, The Intertextuality of the 
Epistles: Explorations of Theory and Practice (Sheffield: Sheffield Phoenix 
Press, 2006 ). 
Brookins, Tim, 'Dispute with Stoicism in the Parable of the Rich Man and Lazarus', 
Journal ofGreco-Roman Christianity and Judaism 8 (2011-201 2), pp. 34-50. 
Brown, Peter, Cult of the Saints: Its Rise and Function in Latin Christianity (Chicago: 
University ofChicago Press, 1981). 
Brown, Raymond, The Birth of the Messiah: A Commentary on the Infancy Narratives 
in the Gospels of Matthew and Luke (Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1993). 

624 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
- The Death of the Messiah from Gethsemane to the Grave: A Commentary on the 
Passion Narratives in the Four Gospels (2 vols.: New York: Doubleday, 1994). 
- The Gospel according to John (Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1966-1970). 
- 'The Gospel of Thomas and St John's Gospel', New Testament Studies 9 (1963), pp. 
155-77. 
- An Introduction to the Gospel of John (New York: Doubleday, rev. edn, 2003). 
- 'Jesus and Elijah', Perspective 12 (1971), pp. 85-104. 
Bruce, F.F., 'The Book of Daniel and the Qumran Community', in Neotestamentica 
et Semitica: Studies in Honour of Mallhew Black (ed. E. Earle Ellis and Max 
Wilcox; Edinburgh: T. & T. Clark, 1969), pp. 221-35. 
Bruce, F. F., and E. GOting, Ausserbiblische Zeugnisse uber Jesus und das fruhe Chris­
ten/urn: einschliesslich des apokryphen Judasevange/iums (Basel: Brunnen 
Verlag, 2007). 
Brunvand, Jan Harold, The Vanishing Hitchhiker: American Urban Legends and their 
Meanings (New York: Norton, 1981). 
Buchanan, George Wesley, Jewish Documents of Deliverance from the Fall of Jerusa­
lem to the Death ofNahmanides (Dillsboro, NC: Western North Carolina Press. 
1978). 
Buckman, Robert, Can We Be Good without God? Biology, Behavior, and the Need to 
Believe (Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 2002). 
Budge, E.A. Wallis, Miscellaneous Coptic texts in the Dialect of Upper Egypt (New 
York: AMS Press, 1977 [orig. 1915]). 
Budin, Stephanie Lynn, The Myth of Sacred Prostitution in Antiquity (New York: 
Cambridge University Press, 2008). 
Burkitt, F. Crawford, Jewish and Christian Apocalypses (London: H. Milford, 1914). 
Burkert, Walter, Structure and History in Greek Mythology and Ritual (Berkeley. CA: 
University of California Press, 1979). 
Burridge, Kenelm, Mambu: A Study of Melanesian Cargo Movements and their Ideo­
logical Background (New York: Harper & Row, 1960). 
Burridge, Richard, What Are the Gospels? A Comparison with Graeco-Roman Biogra­
phy (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1992). 
Byrne, Ryan, and Bernadette McNary-Zak (eds.), Resurrecting the Brother of Jesus: 
The James Ossuary Controversy and the Quest for Religious Relics (Chapel 
Hill, NC: University of North Carolina Press, 2009). 
Cadbury, Henry, '"We" and "[" Passages in Luke-Acts', New Testament Studies 3 
(1956-1957), pp. 128-32. 
Callahan, Tim, Bible Prophecy: Failure or Fulfillment? (Altadena, CA: Millennium 
Press, 1997). 
Cameron, Alan, Greek Mythography in the Roman World (New York: Oxford Univer­
sity Press, 2004). 
Cameron, Averil (ed.), History as Text: The Writing of Ancient History (Chapel Hill. 
NC: University ofNorth Carolina Press, 1990). 
Camery-Hoggatt, Jerry, Irony in Mark's Gospel: Text and Subtext (New York: Cam­
bridge University Press, 1992). 
'Capernaum', in The Archaeological Encyclopedia of the Holy Land (ed. Avraham 
Negev and Shimon Gibson; New York: Continuum, rev. and updated edn. 2001). 
pp. 1 1 1-14. 
Carmichael, Calum, 'The Passover Haggadah', in The Historical Jesus in Context (ed. 
Levine, Allison and Crossan), pp. 343-56. 

Bibliography 
625 
Carr, Wesley, Angels and Princ ipalities: The Background, Meaning, and Development 
of the Pauline Phrase hai archai kai hai exousiai (New York: Cambridge Uni­
versity Press, 1981). 
Carrier, Richard, 'B.C.A.D.C.E.B.C.E.', Richard Carrier Blogs (January 16, 2012) at 
http://freethoughtblogs.com/carrier/archives/166. 
- 'The Burial of Jesus in Light of Jewish Law', in The Empty Tomb: Jesus beyond 
the Grave (ed. Robert M. Price and Jeffery Lowder; Amherst, NY: Prometheus 
Books, 2005), pp. 369-92. 
- 'Christianity's Success Was Not Incredible', in The End of Christianity (ed. John 
Loftus; Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 2011), pp. 53-74. 372-75. 
- 'Christianity Was Not Responsible for Modern Science', in The Christian Delusion: 
Why Faith Fails (ed. John Loftus; Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 2010), pp. 
396-419. 
- 'Critical Review of Maurice Casey's Defense of the Historicity of Jesus', Richard 
Carrier Blogs (March 3, 2014) at http://freethoughtblogs.com/carrier/archives/ 
4282. 
- 'The Date of the Nativity in Luke', The Secular Web (6th edn, 2011) at http://www. 
infi dels.org/library/modern/richard _ carrier/qu irin ius.htm l. 
- 'Did Jesus Exist? Earl Doherty and the Argument to Ahistoricity', The Secular Web 
(2002) at www. infidels.org/library/modern/richard _ carrierljesuspuzzle. htm I. 
- 'Ehrman on Historicity Recap', Richard Carrier Blogs (July 24, 2012) at free­
thoughtblogs.com/carrier/archives/1794. 
- Empty Tomb FAQ (n.d.) http://www.richardcarrier.info/SpiritualFAQ.html. 
- 'Flash! Fox News Reports That Aliens May Have Built the Pyramids of Egypt!', 
Skeptical Inquirer 23 (September-October 1999), pp. 46-50. 
- 'The Goodacre Debate', Richard Carrier Blogs (December 20, 2012) at http://free­
thoughtblogs.com/carrier/arch ives/2839. 
- 'Herod the Procurator: Was Herod the Great a Roman Governor of Syria?' (201 1) 
http://www.richardcarrier.info/HerodSyrianGovernor.pdf. 
- 'Historicity News: Notable Books', Richard Carrier Blogs (October 17, 2012) at 
http://freethoughtblogs.com/carrier/archives/2669. 
- Hitler Homer Bible Christ: The Historical Papers of Richard Carrier 1995-2013 
(Richmond, CA: Philosophy Press, 2014). 
- "How Not to Argue for Historicity,'' in Bart Ehrman and the Quest of the Histori­
cal Jesus of Nazareth: An Evaluation of Ehrman's Did Jesus Exist? (ed. Frank 
Zindler and Robert M. Price; Cranford, NJ: American Atheist Press, 2013), pp. 
15-62. 
- 'lgnatian Vexation', Richard Carrier Blogs (October 1, 2008) at http://richard 
carrier. b1ogspot.com/2008/09/ignatian-vexation. htm I. 
- 'Luke vs. Matthew on the Year of Christ's Birth', in Carrier, Hitler Homer Bible 
Christ, pp. 213-30. 
- 'Mark 16:9-20 as Forgery or Fabrication', in Carrier, Hitler Homer Bible Christ, 
pp. 231-312. 
- 'More on Vardaman's Microletters', Skeptical Inquirer 26 (July-August 2002), pp. 
60-61. 
- 'The Nazareth Inscription·, in Carrier, Hitler Homer Bible Christ, pp. 315-26. 
- Not the Impossible Faith: Why Christianity Didn't Need a Miracle to Succeed 
(Raleigh, NC: Lulu.com, 2009). 

626 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
- 'On Musonius Rufus: A Brief Essay', The Secular Web (1999) at http://www. 
in fidels.org/1 ibrary /modern/richard_ carrier/musonius. htm I. 
- 'On the Dual Office of Procurator and Prefect' (2012) http://www.richardcarrier. 
in fo/TheProv i ncialProcurator.pdf. 
- 'Origen, Eusebius, and the Accidental Interpolation in Josephus, Jewish Antiquities 
20.200', Journal of Early Christian Studies 20.4 (Winter 2012), pp. 489-54. 
- 'Pauline Interpolations', in Carrier, Hitler Homer Bible Christ, pp. 203-1 1 .  
- 'The Plausibility ofTheft', in The Empty Tomb: Jesus beyond the Grave (ed. Robert 
M. Price and Jeffery Lowder: Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 2005). 
- 'The Prospect of a Christian Interpolation in Tacitus, Annals 15.44', Vigiliae chris­
tianae 68 (2014), pp. 1-20. 
- Proving History: Bayes's Theorem and the Quest for the Historical Jesus (Amherst, 
NY: Prometheus Books. 2012). 
- 'Pseudohistory in Jerry Vardaman's Magic Coins: The Nonsense of Micrographic 
Letters', Skeptical Inquirer 26 (March-April 2002), pp. 39-41, 61. 
-Sense and Goodness without God: A Defense of Metaphysical Naturalism (Bloom­
ington, IN: AuthorHouse, 2005). 
- 'The Spiritual Body of Christ and the Legend of the Empty Tomb', in The Empty 
Tomb: Jesus beyond the Grave (ed. Robert M. Price and Jeffery Lowder; 
Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 2005), pp. 105-232. 
- 'Stephen Davis Gets It Wrong' (2006) at http://www.richardcarrier.info/Carrier-­
ReplyToDav is. htm I. 
- 'Thallus and the Darkness at Christ's Death', Journal of Greco-Roman Christianity 
andJudaism 8 (201 1-2012), pp. 185-91. 
- 'Why the Resurrection Is Unbelievable', in The Christian Delusion: Why Faith 
Fails (ed. John Loftus; Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 2010), pp. 291-315. 
- Why I Am Not a Christian: Four Conclusive Reasons to Reject the Faith (Richmond, 
CA: Philosophy Press, 201 1). 
Carrier, Richard, and J.P. Holding, 'The Text of the New Testament: Do We Have What 
They Had?', a debate at the Amador Christian Center in Plymouth, California, 
on April 9, 201 1 [video: http://freethoughtblogs.com/carrier/archives/389; slides: 
http://www. richardcarrier.i nfo/NTRel i abi I itySI ideshow. pdf]. 
Carson, D.A., 'Pseudonymity and Pseudepigraphy', in Dictionary of New Testament 
Background (ed. Craig Evans and Stanley Porter; Downers Grove, IL: Inter­
Varsity Press, 2000), pp. 857-64. 
Case, Shirley Jackson, The Historicity of Jesus: A Criticism of the Contention That 
Jesus Never Lived; A Statement of the Evidence for his Existence; An Estimate 
of his Relation to Christianity (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2d edn, 
1928). 
Casey, Maurice, Is John's Gospel True? (London: Routledge, 1996). 
- Jesus: Evidence and Argument or Mythicist Myths? (Edinburgh: T. & T. Clark, 
2014). 
- 'Son of Man', in The Historical Jesus in Recent Research (ed. James Dunn and Scot 
McKnight; Winona Lake, IN: Eisenbrauns. 2005), pp. 31 5-24. 
Castillo, Richard, 'Trance. Functional Psychosis, and Culture', Psychiatry 66 (Spring 
2003), pp. 9-21. 
Chancey, Mark, The Myth of a Gentile Galilee (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 2002). 

Bibliography 
627 
Charlesworth, James, The Beloved Disciple: Whose Witness Validates the Gospel of 
John? (Valley Forge, PA: Trinity Press International, 1995). 
- (ed.), The Bible and the Dead Sea Scrolls. Vol. 3, The Scrolls and Christian Origins 
(Waco, TX: Baylor University Press, 2006). 
- (ed.), Jesus and the Dead Sea Scrolls (New York: Doubleday, 1992). 
- (ed.), Jesus ' Jewishness: Exploring the Place of Jesus within Early Judaism (New 
York: Crossroad, 1991). 
- (ed.), The Messiah: Developments in Earliest Judaism and Christianity (Minneapo­
lis, MN: Fortress Press. 1992). 
- (ed.), The New Testament Apocrypha and Pseudepigrapha: A Guide to Publica­
tions with Excursuses on Apocalypses (Chicago: American Theological Library 
Association, 1 987). 
- (ed.), The Old Testament Pseudepigrapha (2 vols.۪ Garden City, NY: Doubleday. 
1983-1985). 
Charlesworth, James. et a/. (eds.). Qumran-Messianism: Studies on the Messianic 
Expectations in the Dead Sea Scrolls (TObingen: Mohr Siebeck. 1998). 
Charlesworth, James, and Petr Pokorny (eds.), Jesus Research: An International Per­
spective (Grand Rapids. MI: William B. Eerdmans, 2009). 
Charlesworth, M.P., Five Men: Character Studiesfrom the Roman Empire (Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press, 1936). 
Chazon, Esther. Michael Stone and Avital Pinnick (eds.), Pseudepigraphic Perspec­
tives: The Apocrypha and Pseudepigrapha in Light of the Dead Sea Scrolls 
( Leiden: Brill, 1999). 
Chesnut, Glenn, 'The Ruler and the Logos in Neopythagorean, Middle Platonic, and 
Late Stoic Political Philosophy'. Aufstieg und Niedergang der rtJmischen Welt 
11.16.2 (New York: W. de Gruyter, 1978), pp. 1310-32. 
Chesnutt, Randall. 'Joseph and Aseneth: Food as an Identity Marker', in Historical 
Jesus in Context (ed. Levine, Allison and Crossan), pp. 357-65. 
Chester. Andrew. 'High Christology-Whence, When and Why?', Early Christianity 
2 (201 1), pp. 22-50. 
Chilton, Bruce, 'Commenting on the Old Testament (with Particular Reference to the 
Pesharim. Philo and the Meki Ita', in It Is Written-Scripture Citing Scripture: 
Essays in Honour of Barnabas Lindars, SSF (ed. Barnabas Lindars, D.A. Car۫ 
son and H.G.M. Williamson۬ New York: Cambridge University Press, 1988), 
pp. 1 22-40. 
- The Glory of Israel: The Theology and Provenience of the Isaiah Targum (Sheffield: 
JSOT Press, 1982). 
- 'Historical Jesus', in Dictionary of Biblical Criticism and Interpretation (ed. Stanۭ 
ley Porter; New York: Routledge, 2007), pp. 159-62. 
- Rabbi Jesus (New York: Doubleday, 2000) 
- 'Targum, Jesus, and the Gospels'. in The Historical Jesus in Context (ed. Levine, 
Allison and Crossan). pp. 238-55. 
Chitwood, Ava, Death by Philosophy: The Biographical Tradition in the Lifo and 
Death of the Archaic Philosophers Empedocles, Heraclitus, and Democritus 
(Ann Arbor, Ml: University of Michigan Press, 2004). 
Cialdini, Robert, Influence: The Psychology of Persuasion (New York: William Mor­
row. 1993). 

628 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
Claridge, Gordon, 'Schizotypy and Schizophrenia', in Schizophrenia: The Major 
Issues (ed. Paul Bebbington and Peter McGuffin; London: Heinemann Profes­
sional, 1988), pp. 187-200. 
-(ed.), Schizotypy: Implications for Illness and Health (New York: Oxford University 
Press, 1997). 
Claridge, Gordon, and Charles McCreery, 'A Study of Hallucination in Normal 
Subjects', Personality and Individual Diferences 2 (November 1996), pp. 739-
47. 
Clauss. Manfred, The Roman Cult of Mithras: The God and his Mysteries (New York: 
Routledge, 2000). 
Cohen, Shaye, The Beginnings of Jewishness: Boundaries, Varieties, Uncertainties 
(Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 1999). 
Cole, Susan Guettel, Theoi Megaloi: The Cult of the Great Gods at Samothrace 
(Leiden: Brill, 1984). 
Collins, Adela Yarbro, Crisis and Catha,.sis: The Power of the Apocalypse (Philadel­
phia, PA: Westminster Press, 1984). 
- 'The Empty Tomb in the Gospel according to Mark', in Hermes and Athena: Bib­
lical Exegesis and Philosophical Theology (ed. Eleonore Stump and Thomas 
Flint; Notre Dame, IN: University ofNotre Dame Press, 1993), pp. 107-40. 
Collins, Adela Yarbro, and John Collins (eds.), King and Messiah as Son of God: 
Divine, Human, and Angelic Messianic Figures in Biblical and Related Literaࡥ 
ture (Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans, 2008). 
Collins, John, Daniel: A Commentary (Minneapolis, MN: Fortress Press, 1993). 
- 'The Expectation of the End in the Dead Sea Scrolls', in Eschatology, Messianism, 
and the Dead Sea Scrolls (ed. Craig Evans and Peter Flint; Grand Rapids, Ml: 
William B. Eerdmans, 1997), pp. 74-90. 
Collins, John, and Craig Evans (eds.), Christian Beginnings and the Dead Sea Scrolls 
(Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Academic, 2006). 
Conzelmann, Hans, I Corinthians: A Commentary on the First Epistle to the Corinthi­
ans (Philadelphia, PA: Fortress Press, 1975). 
Cornwell, John, The Hiding Places of God· A Personal Journey into the World of 
Religious Visions, Holy Objects, and Miracles (New York: Warner Books, 1991). 
Cosmopoulos, Michael (ed.), Greek Mysteries: The Archaeology and Ritual of Ancient 
Greek Secret Cults (New York: Routledge, 2003). 
Costa, C.D.N., Greek Fictional Letters (New York: Oxford University Press, 2001). 
Cottam, Thomas, The Fourth Gospel Rearranged (London: Epworth Press, 1952). 
Cotton, Hannah, Walter Cockle and Fergus Millar, 'The Papyrology of the Roman 
Near East: A Survey', Journal of Roman Studies 95 (1995), pp. 214-35. 
Court, John (ed.), New Testament Writers and the Old Testament: An Introduction 
(London: SPCK, 2002). 
Courtney, Gary, Et Tu, Judas? Then Fall Jesus! (Lincoln, NE: iUniverse, 2nd edn, 
2004). 
Cribbs, F.L., 'St. Luke and the Johannine Tradition', Journal of Biblical Literature 90 
(1971), pp. 422-SO. 
- 'A Study of the Contacts That Exist between St. Luke and St. John', in Society of 
Biblical Literature 1973 Seminar Papers (ed. George MacRae; Cambridge, Ml: 
Society of Biblical Literature, 1973), II, pp. 1-93. 
Cribiore, Raffaella, Gymnastics of the Mind: Greek Education in Hellenistic and 
Roman Egypt (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2001). 

Bibliography 
629 
Cross, F.L., and E.A. Livingstone (eds.), Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church 
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 3rd edn, 1997). 
Crossan, John Dominic, 'Empty Tomb and Absent Lord', in The Passion in Mark: 
Studies on Mark 14-16 (ed. Werner Kelber; Philadelphia, PA: Fortress Press, 
1976), pp. 135-52. 
- The Power of Parable: How Fiction by Jesus became Fiction about Jesus (New 
York: HarperOne, 2012). 
Crossley, James, 'Against the Historical Plausibility of the Empty Tomb Story and the 
Bodily Resurrection of Jesus', Journal for the Study of the Historical Jesus 3 
(June 2005), pp. 171-86. 
- 'Can John's Gospel Really Be Used to Reconstruct a Life of Jesus? An Assess­
ment of Recent Trends and a Defence of a Traditional View', in "Is This Not the 
Carpenter?" The Question of the Historicity of the Figure of Jesus (ed. Thomas 
Thompson and Thomas Verenna; Sheffield: Equinox, 2012), pp. 163-84. 
- The Date of Marks Gospel: Insight from the Law in Earliest Christianity (New 
York: T. & T. Clark International, 2004). 
- Why Christianity Happened: A Sociohistorical Account of Christian Origins (26-
50 cE) (Louisvi11e, KY: Westminster John Knox Press, 2006). 
Croy, N. Clayton, The Mutilation of Mark's Gospel (Nashville, TN: Abingdon Press, 
2003). 
Dando-Collins, Stephen, The Great Fire of Rome: The Fall of the Emperor Nero and 
his City (Cambridge: Da Capo Press, 2010). 
Danove, Paul, The End of Marks Story: A Methodological Study (New York: Brill, 
1993). 
D'Aquili, Eugene, and Andrew Newberg, The Mystical Mind: Probing the Biology of 
Religious Experience (Minneapolis, MN: Fortress Press, 1999). 
- Why God Won't Go Away: Brain Science and the Biology of Belief(New York: Bal­
lantine, 2001). 
Davies, W.O., 'The Jewish Sources of Matthew's Messianism', in The Messiah: Devel­
opments in Earliest Judaism and Christianity (ed. James Charlesworth; Min­
neapolis, MN: Fortress Press, 1992), pp. 494-511. 
Davies, W.D., and Dale Allison, A Critical and Exegetical Commentary on the Gospel 
according to Saint Matthew. Vol. I (Edinburgh: T. & T. Clark, 1988). 
Day, S., and E. Peters, 'The Incidence of Schizotypy in New Religious Movements', 
Personality and Individual Differences 27 (July 1999), pp. 55-67. 
Dennis, Rabbi G.W., The Encyclopedia of Jewish Myth, Magic, and Mysticism (Wood­
bury, MN: Llewellyn, 2007). 
Depuydt, Leo, 'The Time of Death of Alexander the Great: 1 1  June 323 BC, ca. 4:00-
5:00 PM', Die Welt des Orients 28 (1997), pp. 1 17-35. 
Desmond, William, Cynics (Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 2008). 
- The Greek Praise of Poverty: Origins of Ancient Cynicism (Notre Dame. IN: Uni­
versity ofNotre Dame Press, 2006). 
Derrett, J. Duncan M., 'Financial Aspects of the Resurrection', in The Empty Tomb: 
Jesus beyond the Grave (ed. Robert M. Price and Jeffery Lowder; Amherst, NY: 
Prometheus Books, 2005), pp. 393-409. 
Dever, William, What Did the Biblical Writers Know, and When Did They Know It? 
What Archaeology Can Tell Us about the Reality of Ancient Israel (Grand Rap­
ids, MI: William B. Eerdmans, 2001). 

630 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
Dix, G.H., 'The Heavenly Wisdom and the Divine Logos in Jewish Apocalyptic: A 
Study of the Vision of the Woman and the Man-Child in Revelation XII 1-5. 
13-17', Journal ofTheological Studies 26 (1925). pp. 1-12. 
Dodds, E.R., The Greeks and the Irrational (Berkeley, CA: University of California 
Press, 1951). 
Dodd, C.H., Historical Tradition in the Fourth Gospel (Cambridge: Cambridge Uni­
versity Press, 1963). 
Doherty, Earl, Jesus: Neither God nor Man (The Case for a Mythical Jesus) (Ottawa: 
Age of Reason, 2009). 
- The Jesus Puzzle: Did Christianity Begin with a Mythical Christ? (Ottawa: Cana­
dian Humanist Press, 2000). 
Donalson, Malcolm Drew, The Cult of Isis in the Roman Empire: Isis lnvicta (Lewis­
ton, NY: E. Mellen Press, 2003). 
Doran, Robert, 'Narratives of Noble Death', in The Historical Jesus in Context (ed. 
Levine, Allison and Crossan), pp. 385-99. 
Doty, William, Mythography: The Study of Myths and Rituals (Tuscaloosa, AL: Uni­
versity of Alabama Press, 2nd edn, 2000). 
Douglas, Mary, Thinking in Circles: An Essay on Ring Composition (New Haven. CT: 
Yale University Press, 2007). 
Downing, Francis Gerald, Cynics and Christian Origins (Edinburgh: T. & T. Clark. 
1992). 
- Cynics, Paul and the Pauline Churches (London: Routledge, 1998). 
- 'Markan Intercalation in Cultural Context', in Doing Things with Words in the First 
Christian Century (Sheffield: Sheffield Academic Press, 2000), pp. 118-32. 
- 'A Rival to Romulus', in Doing Things with Words in the First Christian Century 
(Sheffield: Sheffield Academic Press, 2000), pp. 133-51. 
Drews, Robert, 'The Lacuna in Tacitus' Annates Book Five in the Light of Christian 
Traditions', American Journal of Ancient History 9 (1984), pp. 1 12-22. 
Droge, A.J., 'Jesus and Ned Lud[d]: What's in a Name?', CAESAR: A Journal for the 
Critical Study of Religion and Human Values 3 (2009), pp. 23-25. 
- '"The Lying Pen of the Scribes": Of Holy Books and Pious Frauds'. Method and 
Theory in the Study of Religion 15 (2003), pp. 1 17-47. 
Drury, John, Tradition and Design in Luke 's Gospel: A Study in Early Christian Histo­
riography (London: Darton, Longman & Todd, 1976). 
Dunn, James, 'Jesus Tradition in Paul', in Studying the Historical Jesus: Evaluation of 
the State of Current Research (ed. Bruce Chilton and Craig Evans; Leiden: Bri II. 
1994), pp. 155-78. 
Dunn, James, et al., Responses to Richard Bauckham's Jesus and the Eyewitnesses. 
Journal for the Study ofthe Historical Jesus 6 (2008), pp. 85-253. 
Duran, Nicole Wilkinson, The Power of Disorder: Ritual Elements in Mark 's Passion 
Narrative (London: T. & T. Clark, 2008). 
Eddy, Paul, and Gregory Boyd, The Jesus Legend: A Case for the Historical Reliability 
of the Synoptic Jesus Tradition (Grand Rapids, M I: Baker A cad em ic, 2007). 
Edmonds III, Radcliffe, Myths of the Underworld Journey: Plato, Aristophanes, and 
the 'Orphic' Gold Tablets (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 2004). 
Edwards, J.R., 'Markan Sandwiches: The Significance of Interpolations in Markan 
Narratives', Novum Testamentum 31 (1989), pp. 193-216. 
Ehrhardt, Arnold, 'The Disciples of Emmaus', New Testament Studies 10 (January 
1964), pp. 182-201. 

Bibliography 
63 1 
Ehrland, Kurt, 'Papyrus Egerton 2: "Missing Link" zwischen synoptischer undjohan­
neischer Tradition', New Testament Studies 42 (January 1996), pp. 12-34. 
Ehrman, Bart, 'Cephas and Peter', Journal of Biblical Literature J09 (1990), pp. 463-
74. 
- Did Jesus Exist? The Historical Argument for Jesus of Nazareth (San Francisco, 
CA: HarperOne, 2012). 
- Forged: Writing in the Name of God-Why the Bible's Authors Are Not Who We 
Think They Are (New York: HarperOne, 20J I). 
- Forgery and Counterforgery: The Use of Literary Deceit in Early Christian Polem­
ics (New York: Oxford University Press, 2014). 
-Jesus: Apocalyptic Prophet of the New Millennium (New York: Oxford University 
Press, 1999). 
- Jesus, Interrupted: Revealing the Hidden Contradictions in the Bible (and Why We 
Don't Know about Them) (New York: HarperOne, 2009). 
- Lost Christianities: The Battles for Scripture and the Faiths We Never Knew (New 
York: Oxford University Press, 2005). 
- Lost Scriptures: Books That Did Not Make It into the New Testament (New York: 
Oxford University Press, 2003). 
- Misquoting Jesus: The Story Behind Who Changed the Bible. and Why (San Fran­
cisco, CA: HarperSanFrancisco, 2005). 
- The Orthodox Corruption of Scripture: The Efect of Early Christo/ogical Contro­
versies on the Text of the New Testament (New York: Oxford University Press, 
1993). 
- Peter, Paul, and Mary Magdalene: The Followers of Jesus in History and Legend 
(New York: Oxford University Press, 2006). 
Ehrman, Bart, Daniel Wallace and Robert Stewart, The Reliability of the New Testa­
ment (Minneapolis, MN: Fortress Press, 201 1). 
Eliade, Mircea, Zalmoxis the Vanishing God: Comparative Studies in the Religions 
and Folklore of Dacia and Eastern Europe (Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 1972). 
Elias, Julius, Plato's Defonse of Poetry (Albany, NY: State University of New York 
Press, 1984). 
Elledge, C. D., The Bible and the Dead Sea Scrolls (Atlanta, GA: Society of Biblical 
Literature, 2005). 
Ellegard, Alvar, Jesus: One Hundred Years before Christ (Woodstock, NY: Overlook, 
1999) 
Ellens, J. Harold, 'The Dead Sea Scrolls and the Son of Man: An Assessment of 1 1Q13', 
Henoch 33 (201 1), pp. 77-87. 
Ellspermann, Gerard, The Attitude of the Early Christian Latin Writers toward Pagan 
Literature and Learning (Washington, DC: Catholic University of America 
Press, 1949). 
Engberg-Pedersen, Troels, Cosmology and Self in the Apostle Paul: The Material 
Spirit (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2010). 
- 'Paul's Body: A Response to Barclay and Levison', Journal for the Study of the New 
Testament 33 (June 2011), pp. 433-43 [with pp. 406·32]. 
Eppstein, Victor, 'The Historicity of the Gospel Account of the Cleansing ofthe Tem­
ple', Zeitschrift far neutestamentliche Wissenschaft und die Kunde der alteren 
Kirche 55 (1964), pp. 42-58. 

632 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
Evans, Craig, "'The Book ofthe Genesis of Jesus Christ": The Purpose of Matthew in 
Light of the Incipit', in Biblical Interpretation in Early Christian Gospels, Vol. 
2: Gospel of Matthew (ed. Thomas Hatina; London: T. & T. Clark, 2008), pp. 
61-72. 
- (ed.). The Interpretation of Scripture in Early Judaism and Christianity: Studies in 
Language and Tradition (Sheffield: Sheffield Academic Press, 2000). 
- 'Jesus and the Dead Sea Scrolls from Qumran Cave 4', in Eschatology. Messianism. 
and the Dead Sea Scrolls (ed. Craig Evans and Peter Flint; Grand Rapids, Ml: 
William B. Eerdmans, 1997), pp. 91-100. 
- 'Jesus in Non-Christian Sources', in Studying the Historical Jesus: Evaluation of 
the State of Current Research (ed. Bruce Chilton and Craig Evansߤ Leiden: Brill. 
1994 ), pp. 443-78. 
- 'Josephus on John the Baptist and Other Jewish Prophets of Deliverance', in The 
Historical Jesus in Context (ed. Levine, Allison and Crossan), pp. 55-63. 
- 'Luke's Use of the Elߥjah/EHsha Narratives and the Ethic of Election', Journal of 
Biblical Literature 106 (1987), pp. 75-83. 
- 'Messianism', in Dictionary of New Testament Background (ed. Craig Evans and 
Stanley Porter; Downers Grove, IL: lnterVarsity Press, 2000), pp. 698-707. 
- (ed.), From Prophecy to Testament: The Function of the Old Testament in the New 
(Peabody, MA: Hendrickson Publishers, 2004). 
- 'The Recently Published Dead Sea Scrolls and the Historical Jesus', in Studying the 
Historical Jesus: Evaluation of the State of Current Research (ed. Bruce Chilton 
and Craig Evans; Leiden: Brill. 1994), pp. 547-65. 
- 'Zechariah in the Markan Passion Narrative'. in Biblical Interpretation in Early 
Christian Gospels. Vol. I, The Gospel of Mark (ed. Thomas R. Hatina; New 
York: T. & T. Clark, 2006), pp. 64-80. 
Evans, Craig, and Peter Flint (eds.), Eschatology, Messianism, and the Dead Sea 
Scrolls (Grand Rapids, MI: William B. Eerdmans, 1997). 
Evans, Craig, and James Sanders (eds.), Early Christian Interpretation of the Scrip­
tures of Israel: Investigations and Proposals (Sheffield: Sheffield Academic 
Press, 1997). 
Evans, C.F., 'The Central Section of St. Luke's Gospel', in Studies in the Gospels: 
Essays in Memory of R. H. Lightfoot (ed. D.E. Nineham; Oxford: Basil Black­
well, 1955), pp. 37-53. 
Fairweather, Janet, 'Fiction in the Biographies of Ancient Writers', Ancient Society 5 
(1974), pp. 231-75. 
- 'Traditional Narrative, Inference, and Truth in the Lives of the Greek Poets', Papers 
of the Liverpool Latin Seminar 4 ( 1983), pp. 31 5-69. 
Fales, Evan, 'Can Science Explain Mysticism?', Religious Studies 35 (1999), pp. 213-27. 
- 'The Road to Damascus', Faith and Philosophy 22 (2005), pp. 442-59. 
- 'Scientific Explanations of Mystical Experiences, Part I: The Case of St. Teresa', 
Religious Studies 32 (1996), pp. 143-63. 
- 'Scientific Explanations of Mystical Experiences, Part II: The Challenge to Theism', 
Religious Studies 32 ( 1996 ), pp. 297-313. 
- 'Taming the Tehom: The Sign of Jonah in Matthew', in The Empty Tomb: Jesus 
Beyond the Grave (ed. Robert M. Price and Jeffery Lowder; Amherst, NY: Pro­
metheus Books, 2005), pp. 307-48. 
Falk, Harvey. Jesus the Pharisee (New York: Paulist Press, 1985). 

Bibliography 
633 
Falkner, Thomas, The Poetics of Old Age in Greek Epic, Lyric, and Tragedy (Norman, 
OK: University of Oklahoma Press, 1995). 
Fantuzzi, Marco, and Richard Hunter. Tradition and Innovation in Hellenistic Poetry 
(New York: Cambridge University Press, 2004). 
Farrer, A.M .. 'On Dispensing with Q'. in Studies in the Gospels: Essays in Memory of 
R.H. Lightfoot (ed. D. E. Nineham; Oxford: Basil BlackwelL 1955), pp. 55-88. 
Feder, Yitzhaq, Blood Expiation in Hittite and Biblical Ritual: Origins, Context. and 
Meaning (Atlantߦ GA: Society of Biblical Literature. 201 1). 
Fee, Gordon, The First Epistle to the Corinthians (Grand Rapids. M 1: William B. Eerd­
mans, 1987). 
Feeley-Harnik, Gillian, The Lord's Table: Eucharist and Passover in Early Christian­
ity (Philadelphia, PA: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1981). 
Feldman. Louis, ·on the Authenticity of the Testimonium Flavianum Attributed to 
Josephus', in New Perspectives on Jewish Christian Relations (ed. Elisheva Car­
lebach and Jacob Schechter; Leiden: Brill, 2012), pp. 14-30. 
-Judaism and Hellenism Reconsidered (Leiden: Brill, 2006). 
Ferguson, Matthew, 'Ten Reasons to Reject the Apologetic 10/42 Source Slogan\ 
AdversusApologetica (October 14, 2012) http://adversusapologetica.wordpress. 
com/2012/10/14/ten-reasons-to-reject-the-apologetic-1042-source-slogan. 
- Thematic Rings and Structure in Suetonius' De Vita Caesarum (MA thesis, Depart-
ment of Classics, University of Arizona, 201 2), available at http://www.richard 
carrier.info/FergusonSuetonius.pdf. 
Festinger. Leon, Henry Riecken and Stanley Schachter, When Prophecy Fails: A Social 
and Psychological Study of a Modern Group That Predicted the Destruction of 
the World (Minneapolis. MN: University of Minnesota Press, 1956). 
Figge, Horst 'Spirit Possession and Healing Cult among the Brasil ian Umbanda', Psy­
chotherapy and Psychosomatics 25 (1975), pp. 246-50. 
Filson. Floyd, 'Who Was the Beloved Disciple'?'. Journal of Biblical Literature 68 
(June 1949), pp. 83-88. 
Fine, Steven, Art and Judaism in the Greco-Roman World: Toward a New Jewish 
Archaeology (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2005). 
Finegan, Jack, Handbook of Biblical Chronology: Principles of Time Reckoning in 
the Ancient World and Problems of Chronology in the Bible (Peabody, MA: 
Hendrickson Publishers, rev. edn, 1998 [orig. edn, Princeton, NJ: Princeton Uni­
versity Press, 1964]). 
Finkelstein, Israel, and Neil Silberman. The Bible Unearthed: Archaeology's New 
Vision of Ancient Israel and the Origin of its Sacred Texts (New York: Free 
Press, 2001). 
Finkelstein. Israel, and Amihai Mazar, The Quest for the Historical Israel: Debating 
Archaeology and the History of Early Israel (Atlanta. GA: Society of Biblical 
Literature, 2007). 
Finlan. Stephen, The Apostle Paul and the Pauline Tradition (Collegeville, MN: Litur­
gical Press, 2008), pp. 26-28. 
Finsterbusch, Karin, 'The First-Born between Sacrifice and Redemption in the Hebrew 
Bible'. in Human Sacrifice in Jewish and Christian Tradition (ed. Karin Fin­
sterbusch, Armin Lange and K.F. Diethard Rߧmheld; Leiden: Brill, 2007), pp. 
87-108. 

634 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
Fitzmyer, Joseph, 'Crucifixion in Ancient Palestine, Qumran Literature, and the New 
Testament', Catholic Biblical Quarterly 40 (1978), pp. 493-513. 
- The Dead Sea Scrolls and Christian Origins (Grand Rapids, MI: William B. Eerd­
mans, 2000). 
- 'Further Light on Melchizedek from Qumran Cave 11', in Essays on the Semitic 
Background of the New Testament (London: Geoffrey Chapman, 1971), pp. 245-
67. 
Fletcher-Louis, Crispin, 'Jesus as the High Priestly Messiah: Part 1', Journal for the 
Study of the Historical Jesus 4 (2006), pp. 155-75. 
- 'Jesus as the High Priestly Messiah: Part 2', Journal for the Study of the Historical 
Jesus 5 (2007), pp. 157-79. 
Flint, Peter, 'The Daniel Tradition at Qumran', in Eschatology, Messianism, and the 
Dead Sea Scrolls (ed. Craig Evans and Peter Flint; Grand Rapids, MI: William 
B. Eerdmans, 1997), pp. 41-60. 
- 'Jesus and the Dead Sea Scrolls', in The Historical Jesus in Context (ed. Levine, 
Allison and Crossan), pp. 1 10-31. 
Flusser, D., 'Paganism in Palestine', in The Jewish People in the First Century. Vol. II 
(ed. Shemuel Safrai and Menahem Stern; Assen: Van Gorcum, 1974-76), pp. 
1065-1 100. 
Fornara, Charles, The Nature of History in Ancient Greece and Rome (Berkeley, CA: 
University of California Press, 1983). 
Forsythe, Gary, A Critical History of Early Rome (Berkeley, CA: University of Cali­
fornia Press, 2005). 
Foster, Benjamin, 'Descent of Ishtar to the Netherworld', in Before the Muses: An 
Anthology of Akkadian Literature (Bethesda, MD: COL Press, 3rd edn, 2005), 
pp. 498-505. 
Foster, Paul, 'Memory, Orality, and the Fourth Gospel: Three Dead-Ends in Historical 
Jesus Research', Journal for the Study of the Historical Jesus 10 (July 2012), pp. 
191-227. 
Fox, Robin Lane, Pagans and Christians (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1987). 
Frankfurter, David, Religion in Roman Egypt: Assimilation and Resistance (Princeton, 
NJ: Princeton University Press, 1998). 
France, R.T., The Evidence for Jesus (Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity Press, 1986). 
Francis, James, Subversive Virtue: Asceticism and Authority in the Second-Century 
Pagan World (University Park, PA: Pennsylvania State University Press, 1995). 
Freedman, David Noel (ed.), Eerdmans Dictionary of the Bible (Grand Rapids, Ml: 
William B. Eerdmans, 2000). 
Freyne, Sean, 'The Herodian Period', in Redemption and Resistance: The Messianic 
Hopes of Jews and Christians in Antiquity (ed. Markus Bockmuehl and James 
Carleton Paget; New York: T. & T. Clark, 2007), pp. 29-43. 
Frymer-Kensky, Tikva, 'The Tribulations of Marduk: The So-Called "Marduk Ordeal 
Text"', Journal of the American Oriental Society 103 (January-March 1983), 
pp. 131-41. 
Funk, Robert, 'Do the Gospels Contain Eyewitness Reports?', in Finding the His­
torical Jesus: Rules of Evidence (ed. Bernard Brandon Scott; Santa Rosa, CA: 
Polebridge, 2008), pp. 31-39. 
Gager, John, 'The Gospels and Jesus: Some Doubts about Method', Journal of Religion 
S4 (July 1974), pp. 264-66. 

Bibliography 
635 
Galanter, Marc, 'Cults and Charismatic Group Psychology', in Religion and the Clini­
cal Practice of Psychology (ed. Edward Shafranske; Washington, DC: Ameri­
can Psychological Association, 1996), pp. 269-96. 
- Cults: Faith, Healing, and Coercion (New York: Oxford University Press, 1989). 
Gamble, Harry, Books and Readers in the Early Church: A History of Early Christian 
Texts (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1995). 
- 'Canonical Formation of the New Testament', in Dictionary of New Testament 
Background(ed. Craig Evans and Stanley Porter; Downers Grove, IL: InterVar­
sity Press, 2000), pp. 183-95. 
Gantz, Timothy, Early Greek Myth: A Guide to Literary and Artistic Sources (Balti­
more, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1996). 
Gasparro, Giulia Sfameni, Soteriology and Mystic Aspects in the Cult of Cybele and 
Attis (Leiden: Brill, 1985). 
Gempf, Conrad, 'Public Speaking and Published Accounts', in The Book of Acts in its 
First Century Setting: 1: Ancient Literary Setting (ed. Bruce Winter and Andrew 
D. Clarke; Grand Rapids, MI: William B. Eerdmans, 1993), pp. 259-303. 
Gentili, Bruno, and Giovanni Cerri, History and Biography in Ancient Thought 
(Amsterdam: J.C. Gieben, 1988). 
Gericke, Jaco, 'Can God Exist if Yahweh Doesn't?', in The End of Christianity (ed. 
John Loftus; Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 201 1), pp. 131-54. 
Giannantoni, Gabriele, Socratis et Socraticorum reliquiae (4 vols.; Naples, Italy: Bib­
liopolis, 1990). 
Gieschen, Charles, Ange/omorphic Christology: Antecedents and Early Evidence 
(Boston: Brill, 1998). 
- 'The Different Functions of a Similar Melchizedek Tradition in 2 Enoch and the 
Epistle to the Hebrews', in Early Christian Interpretation of the Scriptures of 
Israel: Investigations and Proposals (ed. Craig Evans and James Sanders; Shef­
field: Sheffield Academic Press, 1997), pp. 364-79 (378-79). 
Giovannoli, Joseph, The Biology of Belief How our Biology Biases our Beliefs and 
Perceptions (Rosetta Press, 2000). 
Girard, Rene, Violence and the Sacred (trans. Patrick Gregory; Baltimore, MD: Johns 
Hopkins University Press, 1977). 
Godfrey, Neil, 'Taking Eddy & Boyd Seriously (3)', Vridar (January 5, 2010) at http:// 
vridar.wordpress.com/2010/01/05/taking-eddy-boyd-seriously-3. 
Godwin, Joscelyn, Mystery Religions in the Ancient World (New York: Harper & Row, 
1981). 
Goff, Matthew, 'Gilgamesh the Giant: The Qumran Book of Giants' Appropriation of 
Gilgamesh Motifs', Dead Sea Discoveries 16.2 (2009), pp. 221-53. 
Goguel, Maurice, Jesus the Nazarene: Myth or History? (New York: D. Appleton, 
1926). 
Goldberg, G.J., •The Coincidences of the Testimonium of Josephus and the Emmaus 
Narrative of Luke', Journal for the Study of the Pseudepigrapha 13 ( 1995), pp. 
59-77. 
Gooch, Paul, Reflections on Jesus and Socrates: Word and Silence (New Haven, CT: 
Yale University Press, 1996). 
Goodacre, Mark, The Case against Q: Studies in Markan Priority and the Synoptic 
Problem (Harrisburg, PA: Trinity Press International, 2002). 
- The Synoptic Problem: A Way through the Maze (London: Sheffield Academic 
Press, 2001 ). 

636 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
- Thomas and the Gospels: The Case for Thomas's Familiarity with the Synoptics 
(Grand Rapids, Ml: William B. Eerdmans, 2012). 
Goodacre, Mark, and Nicholas Perrin (eds.), Questioning Q: A Multidimensional 
Critique (Downers Grove, IL: lnterVarsity Press. 2004). 
Goodenough, Erwin, 'The Political Philosophy of Hellenistic Kingship'. Yale Classical 
Studies I (1928), pp. 55-102. 
Goodman, Felecitas, Speaking in Tongues: A Cross-Cultural Study in Glossolalia 
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1972). 
Goodman, Felicitas, Jeanette Henney and Esther Pressel, Trance, Healing. and Hal­
lucination (New York: Wiley, 1974). 
Goodman, Martin, 'Messianism and Politics in the Land of Israel. 66-135 c.E:. in 
Redemption and Resistance: The Messianic Hopes of Jews and Christians in 
Antiquity (ed. Markus Bockmuehl and James Carleton Paget; New York: T. & T. 
Clark, 2007), pp. 149-57. 
Gordon, Richard, Image and Value in the Graeco-Roman World: Studies in Mithraism 
and Religious Art (Brookfield, VT: Ashgate, 1996). 
Goulder, Michael, 'The Baseless Fabric of a Vision', in Resurrection Reconsidered (ed. 
Gavin D'Costa; Oxford: Oneworld Publications, 1996), pp. 48-61. 
- 'The Explanatory Power of Conversion Visions', in Jesus' Resurrection: Fact or 
Figment: A Debate between William Lane Craig and Gerd Ludemann (ed. Paul 
Copan and Ronald Tacelli; Downers Grove, IL: lnterVarsity Press, 2000). pp. 
86-103. 
- 'Is Q a Juggernaut?', Journal of Biblical Literature 1 15 (1996), pp. 667-81. 
- Luke: A New Paradigm (2 vols.; Sheffield: JSOT, 1989). 
Gove, Harry, Relic, Icon or Hoax? Carbon Dating the Turin Shroud (Philadelphia . PA : 
Institute of Physics, 1996). 
Gowler, David, 'The Chreia\ in The Historical Jesus in Context (ed. Levine, Allison 
and Crossan), pp. 132-48. 
Grant, Michael, Greek and Roman Historians: Information and Misinformation (New 
York: Routledge, 1995). 
Grant, Robert, "'One Hundred Fifty-Three Large Fish" (John 21.1 1)', Harvard Theo­
logical Review 42 (October 1949), pp. 273-75. 
Gray, Rebecca, Prophetic Figures in Late Second Temple Jewish Palestine: The Evi­
dence from Josephus (New York: Oxford University Press, 1993). 
Graziosi, Barbara, Inventing Homer: The Early Reception of Epic (New York: Cam­
bridge University Press, 2002). 
Green, C., and C. McCreery, Apparitions (London : Hamish Hamilton. 1 975). 
Green, Peter, Alexander to Actium: The Historical Evolution of the Hellenistic Age 
(Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 1990). 
Greenfield, Jonas, 'The Languages of Palestine, 200 B.C.E.-200 C.E:, in AI Kanjei 
Yonah: Collected Studies of Jonas C. Greenfield on Semitic Philology. Vol. I 
(ed. Shalom Paul, Michael Stone and Avital Pinnick: Leiden: Brill. 2001 ). pp. 
376-87. 
Gregory, Andrew, 'The Third Gospel? The Relationship of John and Luke Reconsid­
ered', in Challenging Perspectives on the Gospel of John (ed. John Lierman: 
TUbingen: Mohr Siebeck, 2006), pp. 109-34. 
Griffiths, J. Gwyn, The Isis-Book: Metamorphoses, Book Xl (Leiden: Brill, 1975}. 
- Plutarch 's De /side et Osiride (Cardiff: University of Wales Press, 1 970). 

Bibliography 
637 
Grobe], K., '" . . .  Whose Name Was Neves"', New Testament Studies 10 (1963-1964), 
pp. 373-82. 
Gruen, Erich, Diaspora: Jews amidst Greeks and Romans (Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press, 2002). 
- 'Fact and Fiction: Jewish Legends in a Hellenistic Context', in Hellenistic Con­
structs: Essays in Culture, History, and Historiography (ed. Paul Cartledge, 
Peter Garnsey and Erich Gruen; Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 
1997), pp. 72-88. 
- Heritage and Hellenism: The Reinvention of Jewish Tradition (Berkeley, CA: Uni­
versity of California Press, 1998). 
Guglielmo, Lara, '1 IQ13, Malchi Sedek, Co-Reference, and Restoration of 2 18', 
Henoch 33 (201 1), pp. 61-72. 
Gutmann, Joseph, Ancient Synagogues (Chico, CA: Scholars Press, 1981). 
Haar, Stephen, Simon Magus: The First Gnostic? (New York: Walter de Gruyter, 2003). 
Habermas, Gary, and Mike Licona, The Case for the Resurrection of Jesus (Grand 
Rapids, MI: Kregel Publications, 2004). 
Hagner, Donald, The Jewish Reclamation of Jesus: An Analysis and Critique of Mod­
ern Jewish Study of Jesus (Grand Rapids, MI: Academie Books, 1984). 
Hahn, Thomas, 'Judas: The Medieval Oedipus', Comparative Literature 32 (Summer 
1980), pp. 225-37. 
Hallquist, Chris, UFOs, Ghosts, and a Rising God: Debunking the Resurrection of 
Jesus (Cincinnati, OH: Reasonable Press, 2008). 
Hallstrom, Gunnar, Fides simp/iciorum according to Origen of Alexandria (Helsinki: 
Societas Scientiarum Fennica, 1984). 
Halperin, D.J., 'Crucifixion, the Nahum Pesher and the Rabbinic Penalty of Cruci­
fixion', Journal of Jewish Studies 32 (1981), pp. 32-46. 
Hamerton-Kelly, R.G., 'Sacred Violence and the Messiah: The Markan Passion Nar­
rative as a Redefinition of Messianology', in The Messiah: Developments in 
Earliest Judaism and Christianity (ed. James Charlesworth; Minneapolis, MN: 
Fortress Press, 1992), pp. 461-93. 
Hankins, James, 'Socrates in the Italian Renaissance', in A Companion to Socrates 
(ed. Sara Ahbel-Rappe and Rachana Kamtekar; Oxford: Blackwell, 2006), pp. 
337-52. 
Hansen, William, Phlegon of Tralles' Book of Marvels (Exeter, UK: University of 
Exeter Press, 1996). 
Hanson, John, 'Dreams and Visions in the Graeco-Roman World and Early Christi­
anity', Aufttieg und Niedergang der romischen Welt II 23 (New York: W. de 
Gruyter, 1980), pp. 1395-1427. 
Hard, Robin, and H.J. Rose, The Routledge Handbook of Greek Mythology (New York: 
Routledge, 2004). 
Harrington, D.J., 'Pseudo-Philo', in Dictionary of New Testament Background (ed. 
Craig Evans and Stanley Porter; Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity Press, 2000), 
pp. 864-68. 
Harris, William, Dreams and Experience in Classical Antiquity (Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press, 2009). 
Harrison, Thomas, Divinity and History: The Religion of Herodotus (New York: Clar­
endon Press, 2000). 
Hartman, Lars, 'Into the Name of the Lord Jesus': Baptism in the Early Church (Edin­
burgh: T. & T. Clark, 1997). 

638 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
Hatina. Thomas, 'From History to Myth and Back Again: The Historicizing Func­
tion of Scripture in Matthew 2', in Biblical Interpretation in Early Christian 
Gospels, Vol. 2. Gospel ofMatlhew (ed. Thomas Hatina; London: T. & T. Clark. 
2008), pp. 98-118. 
•Hebrews. Epistle to the', in Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church (ed. F.L. Cross 
and E.A. Livingstone; Oxford: Oxford University Press, 3rd edn, 1997), pp. 742-
43. 
Heckel, Waldemar. and Lawrence Tritle, Alexander the Great: A New History (Malden, 
MA: Wiley-Blackwell, 2009). 
Hedrick, Charlesݠ Ancient History: Monuments and Documents (Oxford: Blackwell, 
2006). 
- 'The 34 Gospels: Diversity and Division among the Earliest Christians', Bible 
Review 18 (June 2002), pp. 20-31, 46-47. 
Heidel, William Arthur, The Day of Yahweh: A Study of Sacred Days and Ritual Forms 
in the Ancient Near East (New York: The Century Co., 1929). 
Heilbrun, Alfred, 'Hallucinations', in Symptoms of Schizophrenia (ed. Charles Cos­
tello; New York: John Wiley & Sons. 1993), pp. 56-91. 
Heimerdinger, Jenny, 'The Seven Steps of Codex Bezae: A Prophetic Interpretation of 
Acts 12', in Codex Bezae: Studies from the Lunel Colloquium, June 1994 (ed. 
D.C. Parker and C.B. Amphoux; Leiden: Brill. 1996), pp. 303-10. 
Heisserer, A.J., Alexander the Great and the Greeks: The Epigraphic Evidence (Nor­
man, OK: University of Oklahoma Press, 1980). 
Helms, Randel. Gospel Fictions (Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 1988). 
Herner, Colin, 'Ancient Historiography', The Book of Acts in the Setting of Hellenistic 
History (TUbingen: J.C.B. Mohr, 1989). 
Hengel, Martin, 'The Effective History oflsaiah 53 in the Pre-Christian Period', in The 
Suffering Servant: Isaiah 53 in Jewish and Christian Sources (ed. Bernd Janow­
ski and Peter Stuhlmacher; Grand Rapids, Ml: William B. Eerdmans, 2004), 
pp. 75-146. 
- Judaism and Hellenism: Studies in their Encounter in Palestine during the Early 
Hellenistic Period (Philadelphia, PA: Fortress Press, 1974). 
Henze, Matthias (ed.), Hazon Gabriel: New Readings of the Gabriel Revelation 
(Atlanta, GA: Society of Biblical Literature, 201 1). 
Hering, James, The Co/ossian and Ephesian Haustafeln in Theological Context: An 
Analysis of their Origins, Relationship, and Message (New York: Peter Lang, 
2007). 
Heyob, Sharon Kelly. The Cult of Isis among Women in the Graeco-Roman World 
(Leiden: Brill, 1975). 
Hock, Ronald, 'Lazarus and Micyllus: Greco-Roman Backgrounds to Luke 16: 19-31'. 
Journal of Biblical Literature 106 (1987), pp. 447-63. 
Hoek. Annewies van den, 'Allegorical Interpretation', in Dictionary of Biblical Criti­
cism and Interpretation (ed. Stanley Porter; New York: Routledge, 2007), pp. 
9-12. 
Holden, Katharine, and Christopher French, 'Alien Abduction Experiences: Some 
Cues from Neuropsychology and Neuropsychiatry'. Cognitive Neuropsychiatry 
7 (2002), pp. 163-78. 
Holladay, Carl, Fragments from Hellenistic Jewish Authors. Volume IV. Orphica 
(Atlanta, GA: Scholars Press, 1996). 

Bibliography 
639 
Holt. Frank. Alexander the Great and Bactria: The Formation of a Greek Frontier in 
Central Asia (Leiden: Brill, 1988). 
Holzberg, Niklas, The Ancient Novel: An Introduction (New York: Routledge, 1995). 
Horbury, William. 'The Cult of Christ and the Cult of the Saints', New Testament Stud­
ies 44 (1998), pp. 444-69. 
Horgan. John. Rational Mysticism: Dispatches from the Border between Science and 
Spirituality (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 2003). 
Hornblower, Simon. and Antony Spawforth (eds.), Oxford Classical Dictionary 
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 3rd edn, 1995). 
Horsley. Richard, The Liberation ofChristmas: The Infancy Narratives in Social Con­
text (New York: Crossroad. 1989). 
- "'Messianic" Figures and Movements in First-Century Palestine'. in The Messiah 
(ed. Charlesworth), pp. 276-95. 
Hovenden, Gerald, Speaking in Tongues: The New Testament Evidence in Context 
(London: Sheffield Academic. 2002). 
Howard, George, 'Was James an Apostle? A Reflection on a New Proposal for Gal. 
I 19', Novum Testamentum 19 (January 1977), pp. 63-64. 
Howard-Johnston, James, and Paul Antony Hayward (eds.), The Cult of Saints in Late 
Antiquity and the Middle Ages: Essays on the Contribution of Peter Brown (New 
York: Oxford University Press, 1999). 
Hughes, Paul, 'Moses' Birth Story: A Biblical Matrix for Prophetic Messianism', in 
Eschatology, Messianism, and the Dead Sea Scrolls (ed. Craig Evans and Peter 
Flint; Grand Rapids. Ml: William B. Eerdmans, 1997), pp. 10-22. 
Hultgren, Stephen. 'The Origin of Paul's Doctrine of the Two Adams in I Corinthians 
15.45-49', Journal/or the Study of the New Testament 25 (2003), pp. 343-70. 
Hunt, Stephen, 'Anthropology and Interpretation', in Dictionary of Biblical Criticism 
and interpretation (ed. Stanley Porter; New York: Routledge, 2007), pp. 12-14. 
- 'Socio-Scientific Approaches'. in Dictionary of Biblical Criticism and interpreta­
tion (ed. Stanley Porterݡ New York: Routledge, 2007), pp. 337-40. 
Hurst, L.D., 'Did Qumran Expect Two Messiahs?', Bulletin for Biblical Research 9 
(1999), pp. 157-80. 
Hurtado, Larry, 'Monotheism, Principal Angels, and Christology', in The Oxford 
Handbook of the Dead Sea Scrolls (ed. Timothy Lim and John Collins; Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 2010), pp. 546-64. 
- One God, One Lord: Early Christian Devotion and Ancient Jewish Monotheism 
(Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1988). 
Hurtado, Larry, and Paul Owen (eds.), Who Is This Son of Man? The Latest Scholar­
ship on a Puzzling Expression of the Historical Jesus (New York: T. & T. Clark, 
201 1). 
lngermanson, Randall. 'Discussion of: Statistical Analysis of an Archaeological Find', 
Annals of Applied Statistics 2 (2008), pp. 84-90. 
Jackson, Mike, and K.W.M. Fulford, 'Spiritual Experience and Psychopathology', Phi­
losophy. Psychiatry, and Psychology 4 (1997), pp. 41-65; 66-90. 
James, Francis, and Miriam Hill (eds.), Joy to the World: Two Thousand Years of 
Christmas (Portland, OR: Four Courts, 2000). 
James, William, The Varieties of Religious Experience: A Study in Human Nature 
(London: Longmans, Green, 1902). 
Jarvie, I.C., The Revolution in Anthropology (London: Routledge & K. Paul, 1964). 

640 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
Jassen, Alex, Mediating the Divine: Prophecy and Revelation in the Dead Sea Scrolls 
and Second Temple Judaism (Leiden: Brill, 2007). 
Jensen, Robin Margaret, Understanding Early Christian Art (New York: Routledge, 
2000). 
Jewett, Robert, Romans: A Commentary (Minneapolis, MN: Fortress Press, 2007), pp. 
566-69. 
Johns, L.C., et al., 'Prevalence and Correlates of Self-Reported Psychotic Symptoms 
in the British Population', British Journal of Psychiatry 185 (2004), pp. 298-305. 
Johnson, Fred, The Anatomy of Hallucinations (Chicago: Nelson-Hall, 1978). 
Johnson, Sara Raup, Historical Fictions and Hellenistic Jewish Identity: Third Mac­
cabees in its Cultural Context (Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 
2004). 
Jonge, Henk Jan de, 'The Cleansing of the Temple in Mark 1 1:15 and Zechariah 14:21'. 
in The Book of Zechariah and its Influence (ed. Christopher Tuckett; Burlington, 
VT: Ashgate, 2003), pp. 87-100. 
Jordan, James, 'Toward a Chiastic Understanding of the Gospel according to Mat­
thew', Biblical Horizons Newsletter 94 and 95 (April and May, 1997). 
Judge, E.A., 'The Reaction against Classical Education in the New Testament', Journal 
ofChristian Education 11 (1983), pp. 7-14. 
Kanavou, Nikoletta, 'Personal Names in the Vita Aesopi (Vita G or Perriana)', Classi­
cal Quarterly 56 (May 2006), pp. 208-19. 
Kannaday, Wayne, Apologetic Discourse and the Scribal Tradition: Evidence of the 
Influence of Apologetic Interests on the Text of the Canonical Gospels (Atlanta, 
GA: Society of Biblical Literature, 2004). 
Kasser, Rodolphe, et al., The Gospel of Judas: From Codex Tchacos (Washington, DC: 
National Geographic, 2006). 
Kazen, Thomas, 'The Coming of the Son of Man Revisited', Journal for the Study of 
the Historical Jesus 5 (June 2007), pp. 155-74. 
Kee, Howard Clark, Jesus in History: An Approach to the Study of the Gospels (New 
York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 2nd edn, 1970). 
Keel, Othmar, and Christoph Uehlinger, Gods, Goddesses, and Images of God in 
Ancient Israel (trans. Allan Mahnke; Minneapolis, MN: Fortress Press, 1996). 
Keith, Chris, and Anthony LeDonne (eds.), Jesus, History and the Demise of Authen­
ticity (New York: T. & T. Clark, 2012). 
Kennedy, Harry Angus Alexander, St. Paul and the Mystery-Religions (London: Hod­
der & Stoughton, 1913). 
Kent, Jack, The Psychological Origins of the Resurrection Myth (London: Open Gate, 
1999). 
Kim, Jintae, 'The Concept of Atonement in Early Rabbinic Thought and the New Tes­
tament Writings', Journal ofGreco-Roman Christianity and Judaism 2 (2001-
2005), pp. 1 17-45. 
- 'The Concept of Atonement in the Fourth Servant Song in the LXX', Journal of 
Greco-Roman Christianity and Judaism 8 (2011-2012), pp. 21-33. 
- 'Targum Isaiah 53 and the New Testament Concept of Atonement', Journal of 
Greco-Roman Christianity and Judaism 5 (2008), pp. 81-98. 
King, Cynthia Ann Kent, Musonius Rufus: Lectures and Sayings (Charleston, SC: 
Createspace, 201 1). 
Kingsley, Peter, Ancient Philosophy, Mystery, and Magic: Empedoc/es and Pythago­
rean Tradition (New York: Oxford University Press, 1995), pp. 264-69. 

• 
!· 
\ 
\ 
ơ .  
' •  
•' 
Bibliography 
641 
Kinoshita, Junjiݢ 'Romans: Two Writings Combined: A New Interpretation of the Body 
of Romans', Novum Testamentum 7 (October 1965), pp. 258-77 . 
Kirsch, Jonathan, A History ofthe End of the World(San Francisco, CA: Harper, 2006). 
Klass, Philip 1., The Real Roswell Crashed Saucer Coverup (Amherst, NY: Prometheus 
Books, 1997). 
Klawans, Jonathan, 'Moral and Ritual Purity', in The Historical Jesus in Context (ed. 
Levine, A11ison and Crossan), pp. 266-84. 
Kleist, James, The Didache, The Epistle of Barnabas, The Epistles and The Martyr­
dom of St. Polycarp, The Fragments of Papias, The Epistle to Diognetus (West­
minster, MD: Newman Press, 1948). 
Kline, Meredith, 'The Old Testament Origins of the Gospel Genre', Westminster Theo­
logical Journa/ 38 (1975), pp. 1-27. 
Kloppenborg, John, 'Associations in the Ancient World', in Historical Jesus in Context 
(ed. Levine, Allison and Crossan), pp. 323-38. 
- 'On Dispensing with Q?: Goodacre on the Relation of Luke to Matthew', New Testa­
ment Studies 49 (2003), pp. 210-36. 
Knight, Jonathan, The Ascension of Isaiah (Sheffield: Sheffield Academic Press, 1995). 
- Disciples of the Beloved One: The Christology, Social Setting and Theological Con­
text of the Ascension of Isaiah (Sheffield: Sheffield Academic Press, 1996). 
Koester, Helmut, 'Apocryphal and Canonical Gospels', Harvard Theological Review 
73 (January-April 1980), pp. 105-30. 
- 'The Historical Jesus and the Historical Situation of the Quest: An Epilogue', in 
Studying the Historical Jesus: Evaluation of the State ofCurrent Research (ed. 
Bruce Chilton and Craig Evans; Leiden: Brill, 1994), pp. 535-45. 
Koivisto, Rex, 'Stephen's Speech: A Theology of Errors?', Grace Theological Journal 
8 (1987), pp. 101-14. 
Komarnitsky, Kris, Doubting Jesus' Resurrection: What Happened in the Black Box? 
(Drapper, UT: Stone Arrow Books, 2nd edn, 2014). 
Kooten, George H. van, Cosmic Christology in Paul and the Pauline School: Colos­
sians and Ephesians in the Context of Graeco-Roman Cosmology, with a New 
Synopsis of the Greek Texts (TObingen: Mohr Siebeck, 2003). 
Kovacs, David, 'And Baby Makes Three: Aegeus' Wife as Mother-to-Be of Theseus in 
Euripides' Medea', Classical Philology 103 (July 2008), pp. 298-304. 
Kraeling, Carl, 'Christian Burial Urns?', Biblical Archaeologist 9 (February 1946), 
pp. 16-20. 
Kramer, Samuel Noah, History Begins at Sumer: Thirty-Nine Firsts in Man 's Recorded 
History (Philadelphia, PA: University of Pennsylvania Press, 3rd rev. edn, 1981). 
Krause, Deborah, 'The One Who Comes Unbinding the Blessing of Judah: Mark 1 1.1-
10 as a Midrash on Genesis 49.11, Zechariah 9.9, and Psalm 1 18.25-26', in Early 
Christian Interpretation of the Scriptures of Israel: Investigations and Propos­
als (ed. Craig Evans and James Sanders; Sheffield: Sheffield Academic Press, 
1997), pp. 141·53. 
Krenkel, Max, Josephus und Lucas: Der schrifistellerische Einjluss des judischen 
Geschichtschreibers auf den Christlichen (Leipzig: H. Haessel, 1894). 
Kurke, Leslie, 'Aesop and the Contestation of Delphic Authority', in The Cultures 
within Ancient Greek Culture: Contact, Conflict, Collaboration (ed. Carol 
Dougherty and Leslie Kurke; New York: Cambridge University Press, 2003), 
pp. 77·100. 

642 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
Kydd, Ronald, Charismatic Gifts in the Early Church (Peabody, MA: Hendrickson 
Publishers, 1984). 
Lacocque, Andre, The Book of Daniel (Atlanta, GA: John Knox Press. 1979). 
Lamberton, Robert, Homer the Theologian: Neoplatonist Allegorical Reading and the 
Growth of the Epic Tradition (Berkeley, CA: University of California Press. 1986). 
Lancellotti, Maria Grazia, Attis, between Myth and History: King, Priest, and God 
(Leiden: Brill, 2002). 
Landau, J.H., 'Two Inscribed Tombstones', Atiqot I I  ( 1976), pp. 89-91. 
Lang, Manfred, Johannes und die Synoptiker: eine redaktionsgeschichtliche Ana(vse 
von Joh 18-20 vor dem markinischen und lukanischen Hintergrund (Gr.ttingen: 
Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1999). 
Lapham, F., Introduction to the New Testament Apocrypha (London: T. & T. Clark 
International, 2003). 
Lapin, Kenneth, 'Picturing Socrates', in A Companion to Socrates (ed. Sara Ahbei­
Rappe and Rachana Kamtekar; Oxford: Blackwell, 2006), pp. 1 10-55. 
Lapinkivi, Pirjo, The Neo-Assyrian Myth of !Jtar's Descent and Resurrection (Hel­
sinki: Neo-Assyrian Text Corpus Project, 2010). 
Law, Stephen, 'Evidence. Miracles, and the Existence of Jesus', Faith and Philosophy 
28 (April 201 1), pp. 129-51; http:l/stephenlaw.blogspot.com/2012/04/published­
in-faith-and-ph i losophy-201 1.htm I. 
Lawrence, Peter, Road Belong Cargo: A Study of the Cargo Movement in the South­
ern Madang District, New Guinea (Manchester: Manchester University Press. 
1964). 
Lawson, R.P., Origen: The Song of Songs, Commentary and Homilies (Ancient Chris­
tian Writings, 26; London: Longmans, Green, 1957). 
Leach, Edmund, 'Fishing for Men on the Edge of the Wilderness', in The Literary 
Guide to the Bible (ed. Robert Alter and Frank Kermode: Cambridge, MA: Har­
vard University Press, 1987), pp. 579-99. 
Lease, Gary, 'Mithraism and Christianity: Borrowings and Transformations', Aufttieg 
und Niedergang der romischen Welt 11.23.2 (New York: W. de Gruyter. 1980). 
pp. 1306-32. 
Lefkowitz, Mary, 'Biographical Mythology', in Antike Mythen: Medien, Transforma­
tionen und Konstruktionen (ed. Ueli Dill; New York: Walter de Gruyter. 2009). 
pp. 516-31. 
- The Lives of the Greek Poets (Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press. 
1981). 
Le Rider, Georges, Alexander the Great: Coinage. Finances, and Policy (Philadelphia. 
PA: American Philosophical Society, 2007). 
Levenson, Jon, The Death and Resurrection of the Beloved Son: The Transformation 
of Child Sacrifice in Judaism and Christianity (New Haven, CT: Yale University 
Press, 1993). 
Levine, Amy-Jill, Dale Allison, Jr, and John Dominic Crossan (eds.), The Historical 
Jesus in Context (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2006). 
Levine, Amy-Jill, and Marc Zvi Brettler (eds.), The Jewish Annotated New Testament 
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 201 1). 
Lewis, I.M., Ecstatic Religion: A Study of Shamanism and Spirit Possession (New 
York: Routledge, 1989). 

1 
-
· 
:· 
Bibliography 
643 
Lincoln, Andrew, 'The "Philosophy" Opposed in the Letter [to the Colossians]', in The 
New Interpreter's Bible: New Testament Survey (ed. Fred Craddock; Nashville, 
TN: Abingdon Press, 2005), pp. 242-47. 
Lincoln, Bruce, Theorizing Myth: Narrative, Ideology, and Scholarship (Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 1999). 
Littlewood, Roland, 'From Elsewhere: Prophetic Visions and Dreams among the 
People of the Earth', Dreaming 14 (June-September 2004), pp. 94-106. 
Loftus, John, 'At Best Jesus Was a Failed Apocalyptic Prophet', in The Christian Delu­
sion: Why Faith Fails (ed. John Loftus; Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 2010), 
pp. 316-43. 
- Why I Became an Atheist: A Former Preacher Rejects Christianity (Amherst, NY: 
Prometheus Books, 2008). 
Lohmeyer, Ernst, 'The Structure and Organization of the Fourth Gospel', Journal of 
Higher Criticism 5 (Spring 1998), pp. 113-38. 
Lorimer, W.L., 'Romans IX. 3-5', New Testament Studies 13 (1967), pp. 385-86. 
Ludemann, Gerd, 'Paul as a Witness to the Historical Jesus', Sources of the Jesus Tra­
dition: Separating History from Myth (Amherst NY: Prometheus Books, 2010), 
pp. 196-212. 
-Paul, the Founder ofChristianity (Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 2002). 
- Untersuchungen zur simonianischen Gnosis (GOttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 
1975). 
Luhrmann, Tanya, When God Talks Back (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 2012). 
Lutz, Cora, Musonius Rufus: The Roman Socrates (New Haven, CT: Yale University 
Press, 1947). 
Lyons, William John, 'The Hermeneutics of Fictional Black and Factual Red: The 
Markan Simon ofCyrene and the Quest for the Historical Jesus', Journal for the 
Study of the Historical Jesus 4 (June 2006), pp. 139-54. 
- 'On the Life and Death ofJoseph of Arimathea', Journalfor the Study of the Histori­
cal Jesus 2 (January 2004), pp. 29-53. 
Maccoby, Hyam, Jesus the Pharisee (London: SCM Press, 2003). 
MacDonald, Dennis, Christianizing Homer: The Odyssey, Plato, and the Acts of 
Andrew (New York: Oxford University Press, 1994). 
- 'A Conjectural Emendation of 1 Cor 15.31-32: Or the Case of the Misplaced Lion 
Fight', Harvard Theological Review 73 (January-April 1980), pp. 265-76. 
- Does the New Testament Imitate Homer? Four Cases from the Acts ofthe Apostles 
(New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2003). 
- 'The Ending of Luke and the Ending of the Odyssey', in For a Later Generation: 
The Transformation of Tradition in Israel, Early Judaism, and Early Christian­
ity (ed. Randal Argall, Beverly Bow and Rodney Werline; Harrisburg, PA: Trin­
ity Press International, 2000), pp. 161-68. 
- The Homeric Epics and the Gospel of Mark (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 
2000). 
-'Imitations of Greek Epic in the Gospels', in Historical Jesus in Context (ed. Levine, 
Allison and Crossan), pp. 372-84. 
- 'The Shipwrecks of Odysseus and Paul', New Testament Studies 45 (1999), pp. 
88-107. 
- Two Shipwrecked Gospels: The Logoi of Jesus and Papiass Exposition of Logia 
about the Lord (Atlanta, GA: Society of Biblical Literature, 2012). 

644 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
MacGregor, G.H.C., 'Principalities and Powers: The Cosmic Background of Paul's 
Thought', New Testament Studies 1 (1954), pp. 17-28. 
Mack, Burton, 'The Christ and Jewish Wisdom', in The Messiah (ed. Charlesworth), 
pp. 192-221. 
- The Christian Myth: Origins, Logic. and Legacy (New York: Continuum, 2006). 
- 'Many Movements, Many Myths: Redescribing the Attractions of Early Christiani-
ties. Toward a Conversation with Rodney Stark', Religious Studies Review 25.2 
(April 1999), pp. 132-36. 
Mack, Dave, 'What Did Paul Know about the Life and Teachings of Jesus?', bible LAD 
(May 17, 201 3) at http://biblelad.wordpress.com/category/historical-jesus-2. 
Maclean, Jennifer K. Berenson, 'Barabbas, the Scapegoat Ritual, and the Develop­
ment of the Passion Narrative', Harvard Theological Review 100 (July 2007), 
pp. 309-34. 
MacNicol, Allan (ed.), Beyond the Q Impasse: Luke's Use of Matthew: A Demonstra­
tion by the Research Team of the International Institute for the Renewal ofGos­
pel Studies (Valley Forge, PA: Trinity Press International, 1996). 
Magne, Jean, 'The Emmaus Disciples and Adam and Eve in Paradise', in From Christi­
anity to Gnosis and from Gnosis to Christianity: An Itinerary through the Texts 
to and from the Tree of Paradise (Atlanta, GA: Scholars Press, 1993), pp. 41-51. 
Malina, Bruce, The New Jerusalem in the Revelation of John: The City as Symbol of 
Life with God (Collegeville, MN: Liturgical Press, 2000). 
- The New Testament World: Insights from Cultural Anthropology (Atlanta, GA: John 
Knox Press, 3rd edn, 2001). 
- The Social Gospel of Jesus: The Kingdom of God in Mediterranean Perspective 
(New York: Routledge, 2000). 
Malina, Bruce, and John Pilch, Social Science Commentary on the Book of Revelation 
(Minneapolis, MN: Fortress Press, 2000). 
Manns, Frederic, 'Quelques variantes du Codex Bezae de Luc 24', Liber Annuus 55 
(2005), pp. 131-39. 
Marcus, Ivan, The Jewish Life Cycle: Riles of Passage from Biblical to Modern Times 
(Seattle, WA: University of Washington Press, 2004). 
Marcus, Joel, Mark 1-16: A New Translation with Introduction andCommentary (New 
York: Doubleday, 2000). 
Marincola, John, Authority and Tradition in Ancient Historiography (New York: Cam­
bridge University Press, 1997). 
Marks, Susan, Finding Betty Crocker: The Secret Life of Americas First Lady of Food 
(New York: Simon & Schuster, 2005). 
Marrou, Henri, A History of Education in Antiquity (New York: Sheed & Ward. 3rd 
edn, 1956). 
Marshall, I.H 
.• The Gospel of Luke: A Commentary on the Greek Text (Exeter: Pater­
noster. 1978). 
Martin, Dale Basil, 'When Did Angels Become Demons?', Journal of Biblical Litera­
ture 1 29 (2010). pp. 657-77. 
Martin. Ralph. A Hymn ofChrist: Philippians 2:5-11 in Recent Interpretation and in 
the Setting of Early Christian Worship (Downers Grove. IL: lnterVarsity Press. 
1997). 
Martinez, Florentino Garcia, and Eibert Tigchelaar (eds.), Qumranica Minora, VoJ. II 
(Boston: Brill, 2007). 

f 
. 
t. 
Bibliography 
645 
Mason, Steve, 'Josephus and Luke-Acts', Josephus and the New Testament (Peabody, 
MA: Hendrickson Publishers, 1992), pp. 185-229. 
Mathews, Thomas, The Clash of Gods: A Reinterpretation of Early Christian Art 
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 1993). 
Mavromatis, A .. Hypnagogia: The Unique State of Consciousness between Wakeful­
ness and Sleep (London: Routledge. 1987). 
Mayor, Adrienne, The Poison King: The Life and Legend of Mithradates. Rome's 
Deadliest Enemy (Princeton. NJ: Princeton University Press. 2010). 
McCormick, Matt, 'The Salem Witch Trials and the Evidence for the Resurrection', 
in The End a/Christianity (ed. John Loftus: Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 
201 1), pp. 195ݣ218. 
McCown. C.C., 'Gospel Geography: Fiction. Fact. and Truth'. Journal of Biblical Litࡣ 
erature 60 (March 1941), pp. 1-25. 
McCreery, Charles, and Gordon Claridge, 'Healthy Schizotypy: The Case of Outуof­
the-Body Experiences', Personality and Individual Difforences 32 (January 5, 
2002), pp. 141у54. 
McCrone, Walter, Judgment Day for the Shroud ofTurin (Amherst, NY: Prometheus 
Books. rev. edn, 1999). 
McDonald, Lee Martin, and James Sanders (eds.), The Canon Debate (Peabody, MA: 
Hendrickson Publishers, 2002). 
McDonough, Sean, Christ as Creator: Origins of a New Testament Doctrine (New 
York: Oxford University Press, 2009). 
McGinn, Bernard, et a/., The Continuum History of Apocalypticism (New York: Con­
tinuum. 2003). 
McGrath, James, The Burial of Jesus: History and Faith (Charleston, SC: BookSurge, 
2008). 
McNamara, Jo Ann, and John Halborg. Sainted Women of the Dark Ages (Durham, 
NC: Duke University Press. 1992). 
Mead, G.R.S., Did Jesus Live 100 B.C. ? An Enquiry into the Talmud Jesus Stories, the 
To/doth Jeschu, and Some Curious Statements of Epiphanius (London: Theo­
sophical Publishing Society, 1903). 
Meggitt, Justin. 'Popular Mythology in the Early Empire and the Multiplicity of Jesus 
Traditions', in Sources of the Jesus Tradition: Separating History from Myth 
(ed. R. Joseph Hoffmannݤ Amherst, NY: Prometheus, 2010). pp. 55-80. 
Meier, John, A Marginal Jew: Rethinking the Historical Jesus (4 vols.; New York: 
Doubleday, 1991-2009). 
Mendels. D 
.• 'Pseudo-Philo's Biblical Antiquities, the ••fourth Philosophy". and the 
Political Messianism of the First Century C.E.', in The Messiah (ed. Charles­
worth), pp. 261-75. 
Mercer, Samuel, The Pyramid Texts ( Longmans, Green, 1952). 
Merkelbach. Reinhold. Isis Regina. Zeus Sarapis: die griechisch-agyplische Religion 
nach den Quellen dargeste/lt (Stuttgart: B.G. Teubner, 1995). 
Merritt. Robert, 'Jesus Barabbas and the Paschal Pardon', Journal of Biblical Litera­
ture 104 (1985), pp. 57-68. 
Mettinger, Tryggve, 'The Dying and Rising God: The Peregrinations of a Mytheme', 
in Ethnicity in Ancient Mesopotamia (ed. W.H. van Soldt; Leiden: Neder1ands 
Jnstituut voor het Nabije Oosten, 2005), pp. 198-210. 
- The Riddle of Resurrection: 
"Dying and Rising Gods " in the Ancient Near East 
(Stockholm: Almqvist & Wiksell lnternational, 2001). 

646 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
Metzenthin, Christian, Jesaja-Auslegung in Qumran (Zurich: TVZ, 2010). 
Metzger, Bruce, The Canon of the New Testament: Its Origin, Development, and Sig­
nificance (New York: Oxford University Press, 1987). 
- 'Considerations of the Methodology in the Study of the Mystery Religions and Early 
Christianity', Harvard Theological Review 48 (January 1955), pp. 1-20. 
- The Gnostic Discoveries: The Impact of the Nag Hammadi Library (San Francisco, 
CA: HarperSanFrancisco, 2005). 
- 'Literary Forgeries and Canonical Pseudepigrapha', in New Testament Studies: Phil­
ological, Versional, and Patristic (Leiden: Brill, 1980), pp. l-22. 
- 'The Punctuation of Rom. 9:5', in Christ and the Spirit in the New Testament (ed. 
B. Lindars and S. Smalley; Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1973), pp. 
95-1 12. 
- The Text of the New Testament: Its Transmission, Corruption, and Restoration 
(New York: Oxford University Press, 3rd edn, 1992). 
Meyer, Marvin (ed.), The Ancient Mysteries: A Sourcebook of Sacred Texts (Philadel­
phia, PA: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1987). 
- 'The Mithras Liturgy', in The Historical Jesus in Context (ed. Levine, Allison and 
Crossan), pp. 179-92. 
Milik, Jozef T. (ed.), The Books of Enoch: Aramaic Fragments of Qumran Cave 4 
(Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1976). 
Miller, Dale, and Patricia Miller, The Gospel of Mark as Midrash on Earlier Jewish 
and New Testament Literature (Lewiston, NY: E. Mellen Press, 1990). 
Miller, Richard C., 'Mark's Empty Tomb and Other Translation Fables in Classical 
Antiquity', Journal of Biblical Literature 129 (2010), pp. 759-76. 
Miller, Robert, 'The (A)Historicity of Jesus' Temple Demonstration: A Test Case 
in Methodology', in Society of Biblical Literature 1991 Seminar Papers: One 
Hundred Twenty-Seventh Annual Meeting (ed. Eugene Lovering; Atlanta, GA: 
Scholars Press, 1991), pp. 235-52. 
Mills, Watson, Speaking in Tongues: A Guide to Research on Glossolalia (Grand Rap­
ids, MI: William B. Eerdmans, 1986). 
Mojsov, Bojana, Osiris: Death and Afterlife of a God (Oxford: Blackwell, 2005). 
Moloney, Francis, 'From Cana to Cana (Jn 2.1-4.54) and the Fourth Evangelist's Con­
cept of Correct (and Incorrect) Faith', Salesianum 40 (October-December 1978), 
pp. 817-43. 
Moo, Douglas, The Epistle to the Romans (Grand Rapids, MI: William B. Eerdmans, 
1996). 
Moreira-Almeida, Alexander, Francisco Lotufo Neto and Bruce Greyson, 'Dissocia­
tive and Psychotic Experiences in Brazilian Spiritist Mediums', Psychotherapy 
and Psychosomatics 76 (2007), pp. 57-58. 
Morgan, Kathryn, Myth and Philosophy from the Presocratics to Plato (New York: 
Cambridge University Press, 2000). 
Moss, Candida, The Myth of Persecution: How Early Christians Invented a Story of 
Martyrdom (New York: HarperOne, 2013). 
Moyise, Steve (ed.), The Old Testament in the New Testament (Sheffield: Sheffield Aca­
demic Press, 2000). 
MUller, Mogens, The Expression 'Son of Man' and the Development ofChristology: A 
History of Interpretation (Oakville, CT: Equinox, 2008). 

Bibliography 
647 
- 'Paul: The Oldest Witness to the Historical Jesus', in 'Is This Not the Carpenter?' 
The Question of the Historicity of the Figure of Jesus (ed. Thomas Thompson 
and Thomas Verenna; Sheffield: Equinox 2012), pp. 117-30. 
Munro, Winsome, 'Interpolation in the Epistles: Weighing Probability', New Testa· 
ment Studies 36 (\990), pp. 431-43. 
Murphy, Frederick, Pseudo-Philo: Rewriting the Bible (New York: Oxford University 
Press, 1993). 
Mussies, G., 'Greek in Palestine and the Diaspora', in The Jewish People in the First 
Century, Vol. II (ed. Shemuel Safrai and Menahem Stern; Assen: Van Gorcum, 
1974-76), pp. 1040-64. 
Nails, Debra, The People of Plato: A Prosopography of Plato and Other Socratics 
f 
(Indianapolis, IN: Hackett, 2002). 
tė 
Navia, Luis, Socrates: A Lifo Examined (Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 2007). 
Ȱ· 
Navia, Luis, and Ellen Katz, Socrates: An Annotated Bibliography (New York: Gar-
Q.· . 
land, 1988). 
l 
Nawotka, Krzysztof, Alexander the Great (Newcastle upon Tyne: Cambridge Scholars, 
, ,  
ϡ 
2010). 
1. 
Ė 
Neusner, Jacob, Messiah in Context: Israel 's History and Destiny in Formative Juda-
J 
ism (Philadelphia, PA: Fortress Press, 1984). 
,,. 
::· 
Neusner, Jacob, et at. (eds.), Judaisms and their Messiahs at the Turn of the Christian 
Era (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1987). 
Neville, David, Mark 's Gospel-Prior or Posterior? A Reappraisal of the Phenom­
enon of Order (New York: Sheffield Academic Press, 2002). 
Neyrey, Jerome, 'The Apologetic Use of the Transfiguration in 2 Peter 1.16 -21'. Catho­
lic Biblical Quarterly 42 (1980), pp. 504-19. 
Neirynck, Frans, 'Paul and the Sayings of Jesus', in Collected Essays, 1982-1991: 
Evange/ica, Gospel Studies (ed. F. van Segbroeck; Leuven: Leuven University 
Press, 1991), pp. 51 1-68. 
Newell, Ronald R., 'The Forms and Historical Value of Josephus' Suicide Accounts', 
in Josephus, the Bible, and History (ed. Louis Feldman and Gohei Hata; Leiden: 
Brill, 1989), pp. 278-94. 
Nickell, Joe, Inquest on the Shroud o[Turin: Latest Scientific Findings (Amherst, NY: 
Prometheus Books, 1998). 
- Relics of the Christ (Lexington, KY: University Press of Kentucky, 2007). 
Nickelsburg, George, 'The Experience of Demons (and Angels) in 1 Enoch, Jubilees, 
and the Book of Tobit', PSCO Minutes [Philadelphia Seminar on Christian Ori­
gins] (March 10, 1988) http://ccat.sas.upenn.edu/psco/year25/8803a.shtml. 
- 'First and Second Enoch: A Cry against Oppression and the Promise of Deliver-
ance', in The Historical Jesus in Context (ed. Levine, Allison and Crossan), pp. 
87-109. 
- 'The Genre and Function of the Markan Passion Narrative', Harvard Theological 
Review 73 (January-April 1980), pp. 153-84. 
Nilsson, Martin, The Dionysiac Mysteries of the Hellenistic and Roman Age (Lund: 
G1eerup, 1957). 
Nock, A.D., Conversion: The Old and the New in Religion from Alexander the Great 
to Augustine of Hippo (Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1933). 
Noll, Kurt, 'Investigating Earliest Christianity without Jesus', in 'Is This Not the Car­
penter?' The Question of the Historicity of the Figure of Jesus (ed. Thomas 
Thompson and Thomas Verenna; Sheffield: Equinox 201 2), pp. 233-66. 

648 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
Nordgaard, Stefan, 'Paul's Appropriation of Philo's Theory of"Two Men" in 1 Corin­
thians 15.45-49', New Testament Studies 51 (2011), pp. 348-65. 
Novenson, Matthew, Christ among the Messiahs: Christ Language in Paul and Mes­
siah Language in Ancient Judaism (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2012). 
Ober, W.B., 'Weighing the Heart against the Feather of Truth', Bulletin oft he New York 
Academy of Medicine 55 (July-August 1979), pp. 636-51. 
Ogden, Schubert (ed.), New Testament and Mythology and Other Basic Writings by 
Rudolf Bultmann (Philadelphia, PA: Fortress Press, 1984). 
Ohayon, Maurice M., 'Prevalence of Hallucinations and their Pathological Associa­
tions in the General Population', Psychiatry Research 97 (December 27. 2000). 
pp. 153-64. 
Okeke, G.E., 'I Thessalonians 2.13-16: The Fate ofthe Unbelieving Jews'. New Testa­
ment Studies 27 ( 1981), pp. 127-36. 
Olson, Ken, 'A Eusebian Reading of the Testimonium Flavianum', in Eusebius ofCae­
sarea: Tradition and Innovations (ed. Aaron Johnson and Jeremy Schott: Cam­
bridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2013), pp. 97-1 14. 
- 'Eusebius and the Testimonium Flavianum', Catholic Biblical Quarterly 61 (1999). 
pp. 305-22. 
- 'Review of Paul Eddy and Gregory Boyd, The Jesus Legend', in Review of Biblical 
Literature (December 20, 2008) at http://www.bookreviews.org/pdf/6281_6762. 
pdf. 
- 'The Testimonium Flavianum, Eusebius, and Consensus', Historical Jesus Research 
(August 13, 2013) at http://historicaljesusresearch.blogspot.com/2013/08/the­
testimonium-flavianum-eusebius-and.html. 
Otto, Susanne, 'The Composition of the Elijah-Elisha Stories and the Deuteronomistic 
History', Journal for the Study of the Old Testament 27 (June 2003), pp. 487-508. 
Overman, J. Andrew, and Robert MacLennan (eds.), Diaspora Jews and Judaism 
(Atlanta, GA: Scholars Press, 1992). 
Pagels, Elaine, Revelations: Visions, Prophecy, and Politics in the Book of Revelation 
(New York: Viking, 2012). 
Paget, James Carleton, 'Some Observations on Josephus and Christianity'. Journal of 
Theological Studies 52.2 (October 2001), pp. 539-624. 
Pakkanen, Petra, Interpreting Early Hellenistic Religion: A Study Based on the Mys­
tery Cult of Demeter and the Cult of/sis (Helsinki: Suomen Ateenan-lnstituutin 
Saatio, 1996). 
Parker, P., 'Luke and the Fourth Evangelist', New Testament Studies 9 ( 1963), pp. 317-
36. 
Parkin, T.G., Demography and Roman Society (Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins Uni­
versity Press, 1992). 
Partridge, Christopher (ed.), UFO Religions (New York: Routledge, 2003). 
Parvus, Roger, A New Look at the Letters of Ignatius of Antioch and Other Ape/lean 
Writings (New York: iUniverse, 2008). 
Pastor, Jack, Land and Economy in Ancient Palestine (New York: Routledge, 1 997). 
Payne, D.F., 'Semitisms in the Books of Acts', in Apostolic History and the Gospel: 
Biblical and Historical Essays Presented to FF. Bruce (ed. W. Ward Gasque 
and Ralph P. Martin; Exeter: Paternoster Press, 1970), pp. 134-50. 
Pearce, Keith, 'The Lucan Origins of the Raising of Lazarus', Expository Times 96 
(1985), pp. 359-61. 

,., 
' 
t 
Bibliography 
649 
Pearson, Birger, 'I Thessalonians 2.13-16: A Deutero-Pauline Interpolation', Harvard 
Theological Review 64 (1971), pp. 79-94. 
Peebles, Rose Jeffries, The Legend of Longinus in Ecclesiastical Tradition and in Eng­
lish Literature, and its Connection with the Grail (Baltimore, MD: J.H. Furst, 
191 1). 
Peper, Bradley, and Mark DeiCogliano, 'The Pliny and Trajan Correspondence', in The 
Historical Jesus in Context (ed. Levine, Allison and Crossan), pp. 366-71. 
Pepin, Jean (ed.), La tradition de l'al/egorie de Phi/on d'Alexandrie a Dante: Etudes 
historiques (Paris: Etudes Augustiniennes, 1987). 
- Mythe et al/egorie: les origines grecques et les contestations judio-chretiennes 
(Paris: Etudes Augustiniennes, 1976). 
Perrin, Nicholas, Thomas and Tatian: The Relationship between the Gospel ofThomas 
and the Diatessaron (Leiden: Brill, 2002). 
Perry, B. E., 'Demetrius of Phalerum and the Aesopic Fables', Transactions and Pro­
ceedings of the American Phࡤ/ological Association 93 (1962), pp. 287-346. 
- Studies in the Text History of the Life and Fables of Aesop (Haverford, PA: Ameri­
can Philological Association, 1936). 
Pervo, Richard, Acts: A Commentary (Minneapolis, MN: Fortress Press, 2009). 
- Dating Acts: Between the Evangelists and the Apologists (Santa Rosa, CA: 
Polebridge, 2006). 
- The Making of Paul: Constructions of the Apostle in Early Christianity (Minneapo­
lis, MN: Fortress Press, 2010). 
- The Mystery of Acts (Santa Rosa, CA: Polebridge, 2008). 
Petersen, Norman, 'The Composition of Mark 4:1-8:26', Harvard Theological Review 
73 (January-April 1980), pp. 185-217. 
Petty, Richard, and John Cacioppo, Attitudes and Persuasion: Classic and Contempo­
rary Approaches (Dubuque, lA: William C. Brown, 1981). 
Pfann, Stephen, and James Tabor, 'Forum: The Talpiot "Jesus" Family Tomb', Near 
Eastern Archaeology 69 (September-December 2006), pp. 1 16-37. 
Pfann, Stephen, Ross Voss and Yehudah Rapuano, 'Surveys and Excavations at the 
Nazareth Village Farm (1997-2002): Final Report', Bulletin of the Anglo-Israel 
Archaeological Society 25 (2007), pp. 19-79. 
Pflock, Karl T., Roswell: Inconvenient Facts and the Wil to Believe (Amherst, NY: 
Prometheus Books, 2001). 
Porter, Stan1ey, The Criteria for Authenticity in Historica[.Jesus Research: Previous 
Discussion and New Proposals (Sheffield: Sheffield Academic Press, 2000). 
-(ed.), Hearing the Old Testament in the New Testament (Grand Rapids, MI: William 
B. Eerdmans, 2006). 
- (ed.), The Messiah in the Old and New Testaments (Grand Rapids, MI: William B. 
Eerdmans, 2007). 
Porton, Gary, 'The Parable in the Hebrew Bib1e and Rabbinic Literature', in The His­
torical Jesus in Context (ed. Levine, Allison and Crossan), pp. 206-21. 
Posey, T.B., and M.E. Losch, 'Auditory Hallucinations of Hearing Voices in 375 Nor­
mal Subjects', Imagination, Cognition and Personality 3 (1983), pp. 99-1 13. 
Powers, Tom, 'Simon ofCyrene Tomb Connection', Artifax (Autumn 2000), pp. I, 4-6. 
- 'Treasures in the Storeroom: Family Tomb of Simon of Cyrene', Biblical Archaeol­
ogy Review 29 (July/August 2003), pp. 46-51, 59. 

650 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
Price, R.G . . The Gospel of Mark as Reaction and Allegory (n.p.: Rational Evolution. 
net, 2007). 
- Jesus: A Very Jewish Myth (n.p.: RationaiEvolution.net, 2007). 
Price, Robert M., 'The Abhorrent Void: The Rapid Attribution of Fictive Sayings and 
Stories to a Mythic Jesus', in Sources of the Jesus Tradition: Separating History 
from Myth (ed. R. Joseph Hoffmann; Amherst. NY: Prometheus Books, 2010), 
pp. 109-17. 
- 'Apocryphal Apparitions: 1 Corinthians 15.3-1 1 as a Post-Pauline Interpolation', 
in The Empty Tomb: Jesus beyond the Grave (ed. Robert M. Price and Jeffery 
Lowder; Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 2005), pp. 69-104. 
- The Case against the Case for Christ: A New Testament Scholar Refutes Lee Strobel 
(Cranford, NJ: American Atheist Press, 2010). 
- The Christ-Myth Theory and its Problems (Cranford, NJ: American Atheist Press, 
201 1). 
- Deconstructing Jesus (Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 2000). 
- The Incredible Shrinking Son of Man (Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 2003). 
- 'Is There a Place for Historical Criticism?', Religious Studies 27 (1991), pp. 371-88. 
-Jesus Is Dead (Cranford, NJ: American Atheist Press, 2007). 
- 'Jesus: Myth and Method', in The Christian Delusion: Why Faith Fails (ed. John 
Loftus; Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 2010), pp. 273-90. 
- The Pre-Nicene New Testament: Fifty-Four Formative Texts (Salt Lake City, UT: 
Signature Books, 2006). 
Prince, Susan, 'Socrates, Antisthenes, and the Cynics', in Companion to Socrates (ed. 
Ahbel-Rappe and Kamtekar), pp. 75-92. 
Quarles, Charles, Buried Hope or Risen Savior: The Search for the Jesus Tomb (Nash­
ville, TN: B & H Academic, 2008). 
Rahner, Hugo. Greek Myths and Christian Mystery (New York: Harper & Row, 1963). 
Rapske, Brian, The Book of Acts and Paul in Roman Custody (Grand Rapids, Ml: Wil­
liam B. Eerdmans, 1994). 
Reardon, Bryan (ed.), Collected Ancient Greek Novels (Berkeley, CA: University of 
California Press, 1989). 
Reece. Steve, 'Seven Stades to Emmaus', New Testament Studies 48 (January 2002), 
pp. 262-66. 
Rees, W.D., 'The Hallucinations of Widowhood', British Medical Journal 4 (1971), 
pp. 37-41. 
Reeves, John, Trajectories in Near Eastern Apocalyptic: A Postrabbinic Jewish Apoc­
alypse Reader (Atlanta, GA: Society of Biblical Literature, 2005). 
Reicke, Bo, 'The Law and This World according to Paul', Journal of Biblical Literature 
70 (1951), pp. 259-76. 
Reinmuth, Eckart, Pseudo-Philo und Lukas: Studien zum Liber Antiquitatum Bibli­
carum und seiner Bedeutung fur die Interpretation des lukanischen Doppel­
werks (TUbingen: Mohr, 1994). 
Remsberg, John E., The Christ: A Critical Review and Analysis of his Existence 
(Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 1994 [orig., 1909]). 
Reuter, Rainer, 'Introduction to Synoptic Work on the New Testament Epistles', Jour­
nal of Higher Criticism 9.2 (Fall 2002), pp. 246-58. 
Richard, Earl, First and Second Thessalonians (Collegeville, MN: Liturgical Press, 
1995), pp. 123-27. 

Bib/ iography 
65 1 
Richards, E. Randolph, Paul and First-Century Letter Writing: Secretaries, Composi­
tion, and Collection (Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity Press, 2004), pp. 99-121. 
Richey, Matthew, 'The Use of Greek at Qumran: Manuscript and Epigraphic Evidence 
for a Marginalized Language', Dead Sea Discoveries 19 (2012), pp. 177-97. 
Riley, Gregory, Resurrection Reconsidered: Thomas and John in Controversy (Min­
neapolis, MN: Fortress Press, 1995). 
Robbins, Vernon. "The "We" Passages in Acts and Ancient Sea Voyages', Papers of the 
Chicago Society of Biblical Research 20 ( 1975), pp. 5-18. 
Roberts, C. H., 'The Ancient Book and the Ending of St. Mark', Journal ofTheological 
Studies 40 (1939), pp. 253-57. 
- 'The Codex', Proceedings of the British Academy 40 (1954), pp. 168-204. 
Roberts, Diane, The Myth of Aunt Jemima: Representations of Race and Region (New 
York: Routledge, 1994). 
Robinson, James, The Nag Hammadi Library in English (San Francisco, CA: Harper 
& Row, 3rd edn, 1988). 
Roisman, Joseph (ed.), Brill 's Companion to Alexander the Great (Leiden: Brill, 2003). 
Roller, Lynn, In Search ofGod the Mother: The Cult of Anatolian Cybele (Berkeley, 
CA: University of California Press, 1999). 
Rosenbaum, Stanley, Understanding Biblical Israel: A Reexamination of the Origins 
of Monotheism (Macon, GA: Mercer University Press, 2002). 
Rosenmeyer, Patricia, Ancient Epistolary Fictions: The Letter in Greek Literature 
(New York: Cambridge University Press, 2001). 
Ross, C.A., S. Joshi and R. Currie. 'Dissociative Experiences in the General Popula­
tion', American Journal of Psychiatry 147 (1990), pp. 1547-52. 
Rothschild, Clare, Baptist Traditions and Q (TUbingen: Mohr Siebeck, 2005). 
- Luke-Acts and the Rhetoric of History: An Investigation of Early Christian Histori­
ography (TUbingen: Mohr Siebeck, 2004). 
Ruprecht, Louis, This Tragic Gospel: How John Corrupted the Heart of Christianity 
(San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass, 2008). 
Rutgers, Leonard, 'Roman Policy towards the Jews: Expulsions from the City of Rome 
during the First Century C.E.'. Classical Antiquity 13.1 (April 1994), pp. 56-74. 
- (ed.). What Athens Has to Do with Jerusalem: Essays on Classical, Jewish, and 
Early Christian Art and Archaeology in Honor of Gideon Foerster (Leuven: 
Peeters, 2002). 
Sacks, Oliver, Hallucinations (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 201 2). 
Sreb0, Magne (ed.), Hebrew Bible, Old Testament: The History of its Interpretation. 
Volume 1: From the Beginnings to the Middle Ages (unti/ 1300). Part 1: Antiquity 
(Gl>ttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1996). 
Safrai, Zeev, 'The Gentile Cities of Judea: Between the Hasmonean Occupation and 
the Roman Liberation'. in Studies in Historical Geography and Biblical Histori· 
ography (ed. Zecharia Kallai, Gershon Galil and Moshe Weinfeld; Leiden: E.J. 
Brill, 2000), pp. 63-90. 
Salm, Rene, 'A Response to '"Surveys and Excavations at the Nazareth Village Farm 
(1997-2002): Final Report"' [with replies by Stephen Pfann, Yehudah Rapuano 
and Ken Dark]. Bulletin of the Anglo-Israel Archaeological Society 26 (2008), 
pp. 95-135. 
Salvesen, Alison, 'Messianism in Ancient Bible Translations in Greek and Latin', in 
Redemption and Resistance: The Messianic Hopes of Jews and Christians in 

652 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
Antiquity (ed. Markus Bockmuehl and James Carleton Paget; New York: T. & T. 
Clark, 2007), pp. 245-61. 
Sarnuelsson, Gunnar, Crucifixion in Antiquity: An Inquiry into the Background of the 
New Testament Terminology of Crucifixion (Ttlbingen: Mohr Siebeck, 2011). 
Sanders, E.P., The Historical Figure of Jesus (London: Penguin Press, 1993). 
- Jesus and Judaism (Philadelphia, PA: Fortress Press, 1985). 
Sanders, J.A., 'Dissenting Deities and Philippians 2.1-11', Journal of Biblical Litera­
ture 88 (September 1969), pp. 279-90. 
Satterthwaite, P.E., 'Acts against the Background of Classical Rhetoric', in The Book of 
Acts in its Ancient Literary Setting (ed. Bruce Winter and Andrew Clarke; Grand 
Rapids, Ml: William B. Eerdmans, 1993), pp. 337-80. 
Sausa. Don, The Jesus Tomb: Is It Fact or Fiction? Scholars Chime In (Fort Myers, FL: 
Vision Press, 2007). 
Saylor, Dylan, 'Dirty Linen, Fabrication, and the Authorities of Livy and Augustus', 
Transactions of the American Philological Association 136 (Autumn 2006), pp. 
329-88. 
Schiifer, Peter, Jesus in the Talmud (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2007), 
cf. esp. pp. 131-44. 
Schaper, Joachim, Eschatology in the Greek Psalter (Tubingen: J.C.B. Mohr [Paul 
Siebeck], 1995). 
Scheffler, E.H., 'Emmaus-A Historical Perspective', Neotestamentica 23 (1989), pp. 
251-67. 
Schiffman, Lawrence, and James VanderKam (eds.), Encyclopedia of the Dead Sea 
Scrolls (New York: Oxford University Press, 2000). 
Schmeling, Gareth, The Novel in the Ancient World (Leiden: Brill, 1996). 
Schneemelcher, Wilhelm, and R. MeL. Wilson (eds.), New Testament Apocrypha 
(2 vols.; Louisville, KY: Westminster/John Knox Press, 1991). 
Schonfield, Hugh, According to the Hebrews: A New Translation of the Jewish Life 
of Jesus (the To/doth Jeshu), with an Inquiry into the Nature of its Sources and 
Special Relationship to the Lost Gospel according to the Hebrews (London: 
Duckworth, 1937). 
Schor, Adam, 'Conversion by the Numbers: Benefits and Pitfalls of Quantitative Mod­
eling in the Study of Early Christian Growth', Journal of Religious History 33 
(December 2009), pp. 472-98. 
Schreckenberg, Heinz, 'Flavius Josephus und die lukanischen Schriften', in Wort in 
der Zeit: Neutestamentliche Studien (ed. Karl Rengstorf and Wilfrid Haubeck; 
Leiden: Brill, 1980), pp. 179-209. 
SchrOter, Jens, 'Jesus and the Canon: The Early Jesus Traditions in the Context of the 
Origins of the New Testament Canon', in Performing the Gospel: Orality, Memory 
and Mark: Essays Dedicated to Werner Kelber (ed. R.A. Horsley, J.A. Draper and 
J.M. Foley; Minneapolis, MN: Fortress Press, 2006), pp. 104-22, 222-28. 
Schweitzer, Albert, The Quest of the Historical Jesus (trans. John Bowden; London: 
SCM Press, 2000 [orig. 1913]). 
Scott, James, 'Throne-Chariot Mysticism in Qumran and in Paul', in Eschatology, 
Messianism, and the Dead Sea Scrolls (ed. Craig Evans and Peter Flint: Grand 
Rapids, Ml: William B. Eerdmans, 1997), pp. 101-19. 
Seaford, Richard, 'Dionysiac Drama and the Dionysiac Mysteries', Classical Quar­
terly 31 (1981), pp. 252-75. 

l 
Ơ 
[ 
r 
i 
l 
·' 
i' 
i 
I 
{ 
II 
I 
r 
Bibliography 
653 
Segal, Alan, 'Conversion and Messianism: Outline for a New Approach', in The Mes­
siah (ed. Charlesworth), pp. 296-340. 
- 'Heavenly Ascent in Hellenistic Judaism, Early Christianity and their Environ­
ment', Aufstieg und Niedergang der rOmischen Welt 11.23.2 (New York: W. de 
Gruyter, 1980), pp. 1333-94. 
- In Quest of the Hero (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1990). 
- 'Jesus and First-Century Judaism', in Jesus at 2000 (ed. Marcus Borg; Boulder. CO: 
Westview Press, 1997), pp. 55-72. 
- 'Religiously-Interpreted States of Consciousness: Prophecy, Self-Consciousness, 
and Life after Death', in Life after Death: A History of the Afterlifo in the Reli­
gions of the West (New York: Doubleday, 2004), pp. 322-50. 
- 'Ruler of This World: Attitudes about Mediator Figures and the Importance of 
Sociology for Self-Definition', in Jewish and Christian Self-Definitionࡢ VoL II, 
Aspects of Judaism in the Graeco-Roman Period (ed. E.P. Sanders; Philadel­
phia, PA: Fortress Press, 1981), pp. 245-68, 403-13. 
- Two Powers in Heaven: Early Rabbinic Reports about Christianity and Gnosticism 
(Leiden: Brill, 1977). 
Sellew, Philip, '"Laodiceans" and the Philippians Fragments Hypothesis', Harvard 
Theological Review 87 (January 1994), pp. 17-28. 
Semenyna, Scott, and Rodney Schmalz, 'Glossolalia Meets Glosso-Psychology: Why 
Speaking in Tongues Persists in Charismatic Christian and Pentecostal Gather­
ings', Skeptic 17 (2012), pp. 40-43. 
Shanafelt Robert, 'Magic, Miracle, and Marvels in Anthropology', Ethnos 69 (Sep­
tember 2004), pp. 317-40. 
Shanks, Hershel, 'Emmaus: Where Christ Appeared', Biblical Archaeology Review 38 
(March/April 2008), pp. 41-51, 80. 
- 'The "Pierced Messiah" Text-An Interpretation Evaporates', Biblical Archaeology 
Review 18 (July/August 1992), pp. 80-82. 
Shellard, Barbara, New Light on Luke: Its Purpose, Sources, and Literary Context 
(New York: Sheffield Academic Press, 2002). 
Shepherd, T., 'The Narrative Function of Markan Intercalation', New Testament Stud­
ies 41 (1995), pp. 522-40. 
Sherif, Muzafer, and Carl Hovland, Social Judgment: Assimilation and Contrast 
Efficts in Communication and Attitude Change (New Haven, CT: Yale Univer­
sity Press, 1961). 
Shin, H.W., Textual Criticism and the Synoptic Problem in Historical Jesus Research: 
The Search for Valid Criteria (Dudley, MA: Peeters, 2004). 
Shorter, Edward, From Paralysis to Fatigue: A History of Psychosomatic Illness in the 
Modern Era (New York: Maxwell Macmillan International, 1992). 
Siddiqi, Muhammad Zubayr, Hadith Literature: Its Origin, Development and Special 
Features (ed. and rev. Abdal Hakim Murad; Cambridge: Islamic Texts Society, 
2nd edn, 1993). 
Sim, David, The Gospel of Mallhew and Christian Judaism: The History and Social 
Setting o/the Matthean Community (Edinburgh: T. & T. Clark, 1998). 
- •Reconstructing the Social and Religious Milieu of Matthew: Methods, Sources, 
and Possible Results', in Matthew, James, and Didache: Three Related Docu­
ments in their Jewish and Christian Settings (ed. Huub van de Sandt and JUrgen 
Zangenberg; Atlanta, GA: Society of Biblical Literature, 2008), pp. 13-32. 

654 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
Simpson, R.T., 'The Major Agreements of Matthew and Luke against Mark'. New Tes­
tament Studies 12 (1965-1966), pp. 283-84. 
Skarsaune, Oskar, 'The Question of Old Testament Canon and Text in the Early Greek 
Church', in Hebrew Bible, Old Testament: The History of its Interpretation. Vol­
ume 1: From the Beginnings to the Middle Ages (until 1300). Part 1: Antiquity 
(ed. Magne Srebe; GOttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1996), pp. 443-50. 
Slade, Peter, and Richard Bentall, Sensory Deception: A Scientific Analysis of Halluci­
nation (Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1988). 
Slingerland, Dixon, 'Chrestus: Christus?', in New Perspectives on Ancient Judaism. 
Vol. IV: The Literature of Early Rabbinic Judaism (ed. A.J. Avery-Peck; Lan­
ham, MD: University Press of America, 1989), pp. 133-44. 
Smith, Dwight Moody, The Composition and Order of the Fourth Gospel: Bultmann s 
Literary Theory, with the Greek Text as Rearranged by R.C. Bultmann (New 
Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1965). 
Smith, Mark, The Origins of Biblical Monotheism: Israel s Polytheistic Background 
and the Ugaritic Texts (New York: Oxford University Press, 2001). 
- The Ugaritic Baal Cycle, Vol. I (Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1994). 
Smith, Mark, and W. Pitard, The Ugaritic Baal Cycle, Vol. II (Leiden: E.J. Brill. 2009). 
Smith, Morton, 'Palestinian Judaism in the First Century', in Israel: Its Role in Civi-
lization (ed. Moshe Davis; New York: Seminary Israel Institute of the Jewish 
Theological Seminary of America, 1956), pp. 67-81. 
-Palestinian Parties and Politics That Shaped the Old Testament (New York: Colum­
bia University Press, 1971). 
Smith, Robert, 'Caesar's Decree (Luke 2.1-2): Puzzle or Key?', Currents in Theology 
and Mission 7 (December 1980), pp. 343-51. 
Snodgrass, Klyne R., 'The Gospel ofThomas: A Secondary Gospel', in The Historical 
Jesus: Critical Concepts in Religious Studies, Vol. IV: Lives of Jesus and Jesus 
outside the Bible (ed. Craig Evans; New York: Routledge, 2004). 
Spadafora, F., 'Emmaus: Critica Testuale e Archeologia', Rivista Biblica ltaliana 1 
(October-Dࠃcember 1953), pp. 255-68. 
Spanosa, Nicholas, Cheryl Burgessa and Melissa Faith Burgessa, 'Past-Life Identities. 
UFO Abductions, and Satanic Ritual Abuse: The Social Construction of Memo­
ries', International Journal ofClinical and Experimental Hypnosis 42 (1994). 
pp. 433-46. 
Sparks, Kenton, 'Gospel as Conquest: Mosaic Typology in Matt 28:16-20', Catholic 
Biblical Quarterly 68 (2006), pp. 651-63. 
Spong, John Shelby, The Sins of Scripture: Exposing the Bible 's Texts of Hate to Reveal 
the God of Love (San Francisco, CA: HarperSanFrancisco, 2005). 
Staikos, Konstantinos, The History ofthe Library in Western Civilization, Vols. I and 
I I  (Athens: Kotinos Publications, 2004). 
Standing, Edmund, 'Against Mythicism: A Case for the Plausibility of a Historical 
Jesus', Think 9 (Spring 2010), pp. 13-27. 
Stem, Rex, 'The Exemplary Lessons ofLivy's Romulus', Transactions of the American 
Philological Association 137.2 (Autumn 2007), pp. 435-71. 
Stephens, Susan, and John Winkler, Ancient Greek Novels: The Fragments (Princeton. 
NJ: Princeton University Press, 1995). 
Sterling, Gregory, Historiography and Self-Definition: Josephos, Luke-Acts and Apol­
ogetic Historiography (Leiden: Brill, 1992). 

I 
:, 
•'· 
" 
I 
·, 
Bibliography 
655 
- "'Opening the Scriptures": The Legitimation of the Jewish Diaspora and the Early 
Christian Mission', in Jesus and the Heritage of Israel: Luke s Narrative Claim 
upon Israel's Legacy (ed. D.P. Moessner; Harrisburg, PA: Trinity Press Interna­
tional, 1999), pp. 199-225. 
- 'Philo of Alexandria', in The Historical Jesus in Context (ed. Levine, Allison and 
Crossan), pp. 296-308. 
Stern, Jacob, 'Heraclitus the Paradoxographer: Peri Apiston, "On Unbelievable Tales"', 
Transactions of the American Philological Association 133 (Spring 2003), pp. 
51-97. 
St6kl ben Ezra, Daniel, The Impact of Yom Kippur on Early Christianity: The Day of 
Atonement from Second Temple Judaism to the Fifth Century (Ti:ibingen: Mohr 
Siebeck, 2003). 
Stone, J., et a/., 'Conversion Disorder: Current Problems and Potential Solutions for 
DSM-5', Journal of Psychosomatic Research 71 (2011), pp. 369-76. 
Stone, Michael, 'The Fall of Satan and Adam's Penance: Three Notes on the "Books 
of Adam and Eve"', Journal ofTheological Studies 44 (April 1993), pp. 143-56. 
Strange, W.A., The Problem of the Text of Acts (New York: Cambridge University 
Press, 1992). 
Strauss, Mark, Four Portraits, One Jesus: An Introduction to Jesus and the Gospels 
(Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan, 2007). 
Stroumsa, Guy, Hidden Wisdom: Esoteric Traditions and the Roots of Christian Mysti­
cism (Leiden: Brill, 1996). 
Struck, Peter, Birth of the Symbol: Ancient Readers and the Limits of their Texts 
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2004). 
Stuckenbruck, Loren, Angel Veneration and Christology (TUbingen: J.C.B. Mohr, 
1995). 
Swan, Peter Michael, The Augustan Succession: An Historical Commentary on Cas­
sius Dios Roman History Books 55-56 (9 B.C.-A.D. 14) (Oxford: Oxford Univer­
sity Press, 2004), pp. 36-38, 188. 
Swanson, Reuben, New Testament Greek Manuscripts: Variant Readings Arranged in 
Horizontal Lines against Codex Vaticanus: 1 Corinthians (Sheffield: Sheffield 
Academic Press, 2003). 
- New Testament Greek Manuscripts: Variant Readings Arranged in Horizontal Lines 
against Codex Vaticanus: Luke (Sheffield: Sheffield Academic Press, 1995). 
-New Testament Greek Manuscripts: Variant Readings Arranged in Horizontal Lines 
against Codex Vaticanus: Mark (Sheffield: Sheffield Academic Press, 1995). 
-New Testament Greek Manuscripts: Variant Readings Arranged in Horizontal Lines 
against Codex Vaticanus: Matthew (Sheffield: Sheffield Academic Press, 1995). 
Swarup, Ram, Understanding the Hadith: The Sacred Traditions of Islam (Amherst, 
NY: Prometheus Books, 2002). 
Tabor, James, '4Q285: A Pierced or Piercing Messiah?-The Verdict Is Still Out', Bib­
lical Archaeology Review 18 (November/December 1992), pp. 58-59. 
- The Jesus Dynasty: The Hidden History of Jesus, His Royal Family, and the Birth of 
Christianity (London: HarperElement, 2006). 
- Things Unutterable: Paul s Ascent to Paradise in its Greco-Roman, Judaic, and 
Early Christian Contexts (Lanham, MD: University Press of America, 1986). 
Takacs, Sarolta, Isis and Sarapis in the Roman World (Leiden: Bri11, 1995). 

656 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
Talbert, Charles, 'Biographies of Philosophers and Rulers as Instruments of Religious 
Propaganda in Mediterranean Antiquity', Aufstieg und Niedergang der rlJmi­
schen Welt 11 16 (1978), pp. 1619-51. 
- 'Miraculous Conceptions and Births in Mediterranean Antiquity', in The Historical 
Jesus in Context (ed. Levine, Allison and Crossan), pp. 79-86. 
- What Is a Gospel? The Genre of the Canonical Gospels (Philadelphiࠄ PA: Fortress 
Press, 1977). 
Tannehill, Robert, et a/., The New Interpreter 's Bible: New Testament Survey (Nash­
ville, TN: Abingdon Press, 2006). 
Taubenschlag, Rafael, The Law ofGreco-Roman Egypt in the Light of the Papyri, 332 
s.c.-640 A.D. (Warsaw: Panstwowe Wydawnictwo Naukowe, 1955). 
Taylor, Charles, Varieties of Religion Today: William James Revisited (Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press, 2002). 
Taylor, Joan, The lmmerser: John the Baptist within Second Temple Judaism (Grand 
Rapids, Ml: William B. Eerdmans, 1997). 
- Jewish Women Philosophers of First-Century Alexandria: Philo's "Therapeutae" 
Reconsidered (New York: Oxford University Press, 2003). 
Theissen, Gerd, and Annette Merz, The Historical Jesus: A Comprehensive Guide 
(Minneapolis, MN: Fortress Press, 1996). 
Theissen, Gerd, and Dagmar Winter, The Quest for the Plausible Jesus: The Question 
ofCriteria (Louisville, KY: John Knox Press, 2002). 
Thompson, James, 'Hebrews, Epistle to the', in Eerdmans Dictionary of the Bible (ed. 
David Noel Freedman; Grand Rapids, Ml: William B. Eerdmans, 2000), pp. 
568-70. 
Thompson, Marianne Meye, 'The Structure of Matthew: An Examination of Two 
Approaches', Studia biblica et theologica 12 (1982), pp. 195-238. 
Thompson, P.J., 'The Infancy Gospels of St. Matthew and St. Luke Compared', Studia 
evang/ica I (1959), pp. 217-22. 
Thompson, Thomas, Early History of the Israelite People: From the Written and 
Archaeological Sources (New York: Brill. 1992). 
- The Historicity of the Patriarchal Narratives: The Quest for the Historical Abra­
ham (New York: W. de Gruyter, 1974). 
- The Messiah Myth: The Near Eastern Roots of Jesus and David (New York: Basic 
Books, 2005). 
- The Mythic Past: Biblical Archaeology and the Myth of Israel (New York: Basic 
Books, 1999). 
Thorburn, Thomas James, The Mythical Interpretation of the Gospels: Critical Studies 
in the Historic Narratives (New York: Scribner, 1916). 
Tolbert, Mary Ann, Sowing the Gospel: Mark 's World in Literary-Historical Perspec­
tive (Philadelphia. PA: Fortress Press, 1989), pp. 48-79. 
Too, Yun Lee (ed.). Education in Greek and Roman Antiquity (Boston: Brill, 2001). 
Trafton, Joseph L., 'The Psalms of Solomon', in The Historical Jesus in Context (ed. 
Levine. Allison and Crossan), pp. 256-65. 
Trigg, Joseph, 'Divine Deception and the Truthfulness of Scripture', in Origen of 
Alexandria: His World and his Legacy (ed. Charles Kannengiesser and Wil­
liam Peterson; Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre Dame Press. 1988), pp. 
147-64. 
Trobisch, David, The First Edition of the New Testament (Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 2000). 

Bibliography 
657 
- 'Who Published the Christian Bible?'. CSER Review 2.1 (2007), pp. 29-30. 
Trompf. G.W .. Cargo Cults and Millenarian Movements: Transoceanic Comparisons 
of New Religious Movements (New York: Mouton de Gruyter, I990). 
Trudinger, L. Paul, '[Heteron de tlJn aposto/On ouk eidon, ei mџ iaklJbon]: A Note on 
Galatians I 19'. Novum Testamentum I7 (July 1975), pp. 200-202. 
Tuckett, Christopher, 'Forty Other Gospels', in The Written Gospel (ed. Markus Bock­
muehl and Donald Hagner: Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2005), pp. 
238-53. 
Turner. E.G. (ed.), Greek Papyri: An Introduction (New York: Oxford University Press, 
2nd edn, I 980). 
Turner, N., 'The Minor Verbal Agreements of Mt. and Lk. against Mk', Studia evan­
ge/ica 1 ( 1959), pp. 223-34. 
Twelftree, Graham, 'Jesus in Jewish Traditions'. in Gospel Perspectives: Studies of 
History and Tradition in the Four Gospels, Vol. V: The Jesus Tradition outside 
the Gospels (ed. David Wenham; Sheffield: JSOT Press, 1984), pp. 289-341. 
Tyson, Joseph, Marcion and Luke-Acts: A Defining Struggle (Columbia, SC: Univer­
sity of South Carolina Press. 2006). 
- 'Why Dates Matter: The Case of the Acts of the Apostles', in Finding the His­
torical Jesus: Rules of Evidence (ed. Bernard Brandon Scott; Santa Rosa, CA: 
Polebridge, 2008), pp. 59-70. 
Tzoref, Shani, "Qumran Pesharim and the Pentateuch: Explicit Citation, Overt Typolo­
gies, and Implicit Interpretive Traditions'. Dead Sea Discoveries 16 (2009), pp. 
190-220. 
Ulansey, David, 'The Heavenly Veil Torn: Mark's Cosmic "lnclusio"', Journal of Bibli­
cal Literature I to (Spring 1991), pp. 123-25. 
- The Origins of the Mithraic Mysteries (New York: Oxford University Press, 1989). 
Vaage, L.E., 'Jewish Scripture. Q and the Historical Jesus: A Cynic Way with the 
Word?', in The Sayings Source Q and the Historical Jesus (ed. A. Lindemann; 
Leuven: University Press, 2001), pp. 479-95. 
VanderKam. James, From Joshua to Caiaphas: High Priests after the Exile (Minne­
apolis, MN: Fortress Press, 2004). 
- •Righteous One, Messiah, Chosen One, and Son of Man in 1 Enoch 37-71', in 
The Messiah: Developments in Earliest Judaism and Christianity (ed. James 
Charlesworth: Minneapolis, MN: Fortress Press, 1992), pp. 169-91 . 
VanderSpek, Bert, 'The Astronomical Diaries as a Source for Achaemenid and Seleu­
cid History', Bib/iotheca orienta/is 50 (1993), pp. 91-101. 
- "Darius III, Alexander the Great and Babylonian scholarship', Achaemenid History, 
Vol. XIII (Leiden: Nederlands Instituut voor het Nabije Oosten, 2003), pp. 289-
346. 
Van Oyen, G., 'Intercalation and Irony in the Gospel of Mark', in The Four Gospels 
1992: Festschrift Frans Neirynck, Vol. II (ed. Frans van Segbroeck; Leuven: 
Leuven University Press, 1992), pp. 943-74. 
Van Voorst, Robert, Jesus outside the New Testament (Grand Rapids, MI: William B. 
Eerdmans, 2000). 
Verenna. Thomas, 'Born under the Law: Intertextuality and the Question of the His­
toricity of the Figure of Jesus in Paul's Epistles', in 'Is This Not the Carpenter? ' 
The Question of the Historicity of the Figure of Jesus (ed. Thomas Thompson 
and Thomas Verenna; Sheffield: Equinox, 2012), pp. 131-59. 

658 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
- Of Men and Muses: Essays on History, Literature, and Religion (Raleigh, NC: Lulu, 
2009). 
Vermes, Geza, The Complete Dead Sea Scrolls in English (New York: Penguin Press, 
7th edn, 201 1). 
-Jesus in his Jewish Context (Minneapolis, MN: Fortress Press, 2003). 
-Jesus the Jew (London: Collins, 1973). 
- The Religion of Jesus the Jew (Minneapolis, MN: Fortress Press, 1993). 
Vernant, Jean-Pierre, 'Mortals and Immortals: The Body of the Divine', Mortals and 
Immortals: Collected Essays (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1991), 
pp. 27-49. 
Versnel, Hendrik Simon, 'Self-Sacrifice, Compensation and the Anonymous Gods', in 
Le sacrifice dans l'antiquite (ed. Jean Pierre Vernant, et a/.: Geneva: Fondation 
Hardt, 1980), pp. 135-194. 
- Ter unus: Isis, Dionysos, Hermes: Three Studies in Henotheism (Leiden: Brill, 1990). 
- 'Two Types of Roman devotio', Mnemosyne 29 (1976), pp. 365-410. 
Vines, Michael E., The Problem of Markan Genre: The Gospel of Mark and the Jewish 
Novel (Leiden: Brill, 2002). 
Waetjen, Herman, The Gospel of the Beloved Disciple: A Work in Two Editions (New 
York: T. & T. Clark, 2005). 
Wainwright, A.W., 'The Confession "Jesus is God" in the New Testament', Scottish 
Journal ofTheo/ogy 10 (1957), pp. 278-82. 
Walck, Leslie, The Son of Man in the Parables of Enoch and in Matthew (London: T. & 
T. Clark, 2011 ). 
Walker, William, 'The Burden of Proof in Identifying Interpolations in Pauline Let­
ters', New Testament Studies 33 (1987), pp. 610-18. 
- Interpolations in the Pauline Letters (London: Sheffield Academic Press, 2001). 
- 'Text-Critical Evidence for Interpolation in the Letters of Paul', Catholic Biblical 
Quarterly 50 (1988), pp. 622-31. 
Wallbank, F.W., 'Speeches in Greek Historians', in Selected Papers: Studies in Greek 
and Roman History and Historiography (New York: Cambridge University 
Press, 1985), pp. 242-61. 
Walter, Nikolaus, 'Paul and the Early Christian Jesus-Tradition', in Paul and Jesus: 
Collected Essays (ed. A.J.M. Wedderburn; Sheffield: Sheffield Academic Press, 
1989), pp. 51-80 . . 
Wanke, Joachim, Die Emmauserztihlung: Eine redaktionsgeschichtliche Unter­
suchung zu Lk 24, 13-35 (Leipzig: St.-Benno-Verlag, 1973). 
Watson, David, 'The Life of Aesop and the Gospel of Mark: Two Ancient Approaches 
to Elite Values', Journal of Biblical Literature 129 (2010), pp. 699-716. 
Watters, Ethan, Crazy like Us: The Globalization of the American Psyche (New York: 
Free Press, 2010). 
Weeden, Theodore, 'Kenneth Bailey's Theory of Oral Tradition: A Theory Contested 
by its Evidence', Journal for the Study of the Historical Jesus 7 (January 2009), 
pp. 3-43. 
- 'Two Jesuses, Jesus of Jerusalem and Jesus of Nazareth: Provocative Parallels and 
Imaginative Imitation', Forum N.S. 6.2 (Fall 2003), pp. 137-341. 
Wells, G.A., and Morton Smith, 'The Historical Jesus' [an exchange], in Jesus in His­
tory and Myth (ed. R. Joseph Hoffmann and Gerald Larue; Buffalo, NY: Pro­
metheus Books, 1986), pp. 25-54. 

'• 
'·
. 
Ɵ 
I 
.. 
Bibliography 
659 
Wenham, David (ed.), Gospel Perspectives: Studies of History and Tradition in the 
Four Gospels, Vol. V: The Jesus Tradition outside the Gospels (Sheffield: JSOT 
Press, 1984). 
West, M.L., The Orphic Poems (New York: Oxford University Press, 1983). 
Whealey, Alice, 'Josephus, Eusebius ofCaesarea, and the Testimonium Flavianum', in 
Josephus und das Neue Testament: wechselseitige Wahrnehmungen (ed. Christ­
fried BOttrich and Jens Herzer; TObingen: Mohr Siebeck, 2007), pp. 73-1 16. 
- Josephus on Jesus: The Testimonium Flavianum Controversy from Late Antiquity 
to Modern Times (New York: P. Lang, 2003). 
- 'The Testimonium Flavianum in Syriac and Arabic', New Testament Studies 54 
(2008), pp. 573-90. 
Wheaton, Billy, and Joy Futter, Hooks and Ladders: A Journey on a Bridge to Nowhere 
with American Evangelical Christians (Bloomington, IN: iUniverse, 2009). 
White, L. Michael, From Jesus to Christianity (San Francisco, CA: HarperSan Fran­
cisco, 2004). 
Whitmarsh, Tim (ed.), The Cambridge Companion to the Greek and Roman Novel 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2008). 
- Greek Literature and the Roman Empire: The Politics of Imitation (New York: 
Oxford University Press, 2001). 
Wieand, David, 'John V.2 and the Pool of Bethesda', New Testament Studies 12 (1965-
1966), pp. 392-404. 
Wiebe, Phillip, Visions of Jesus: Direct Encounters from the New Testament to Today 
(New York: Oxford University Press, 1997). 
Wiechers, Anton, Aesop in Delphi (Meisenheim: A. Hain, 1961). 
Wiens, Devon, 'Mystery Concepts in Primitive Christianity and in its Environment', 
Aufttieg und Niedergang der rlJmischen Welt 11.23.2 (New York: W. de Guyter, 
1980), pp. 1248-84. 
Wild, Robert, Water in the Cultic Worship of Isis and Sarapis (Leiden: BriiJ, 1981). 
Will, Edouard, 'Review of Helga Botermann's Das Judenedikt des Kaisers Claudius: 
RiJmischer Staat und Christiani im I. Jahrhundert', Gnomon 71 (1999), pp. 610-
16. 
Williams, C. S.C., Alterations to the Text of the Synoptic Gospels and Acts (Oxford: 
Basil Blackwell, 1951). 
Williams, F.E., 'The Vailala Madness in Retrospect', in Essays Presented to C.G. 
Seligman (ed. E. E. Evans-Pritchard, et a/.; London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trub­
ner, 1934), pp. 369-79. 
Williams, Jarvis, Maccabean Martyr Traditions in Paul's Theology of Atonement: 
Did Martyr Theology Shape Pauls Conception of Jesus's Death? (Eugene, OR: 
Wipf & Stock, 2010). 
Williams, Margaret, The Jews among the Greeks and Romans: A Diasporan Source­
book (Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1998). 
Williamson, H.G.M., and C.A. Evans, 'Samaritans', in Dictionary of New Testament 
Background (ed. Craig Evans and Stanley Porter; Downers Grove, I L: Inter­
Varsity Press, 2000), pp. 1056-61. 
Wills, Lawrence, 'The Aesop Tradition', in The Historical Jesus in Context (ed. Lev­
ine, Allison and Crossan), pp. 222-37. 
- (ed.), Ancient Jewish Novels: An Anthology (New York: Oxford University Press, 
2002). 

660 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
- The Quest of the Historical Gospel: Mark, John, and the Origins of the Gospel 
Genl"e (New York: Routledge, 1997). 
Wilson, Emily, The Death of Socrates (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University, 2007). 
Wink, Walter, Naming the Powers: The Language of Power in the New Testament 
(Philadelphia, PA: Fortress Press, 1984). 
Winn, Adam, Mark and the Elijah-Elisha Narrative: Considering the Practice of 
Greco-Roman Imitation in the Search for Markan Source Material (Eugene. 
OR: Pickwick Publications, 2010). 
Wise, Michael, The First Messiah: Investigating the Savior before Christ (New York: 
HarperSanFrancisco, 1999). 
Wiseman, Timothy, The Myths of Rome (Exeter: University of Exeter Press, 2004). 
Witherington, Ben, The Gospel of Mark: A Socio-Rhetorical Commentary (Grand 
Rapids, MI: William B. Eerdmans, 2001). 
Wittkower, E.D., 'Spirit Possession in Haitian Vodun Ceremonies'. Acta psychothera­
peutica et psychosomatica 12 (1964), pp. 72-80. 
Wood, Michael, In Search of Myths and Heroes: Exploring Four Epic Legends ofthe 
World (Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 2005). 
Worsley, Peter, The Trumpet Shall Sound: A Study of "Cargo" Cults in Melanesia 
(London: MacGibbon & Kee, 2nd edn, 1968). 
Wratislaw, A.H., 'The Scapegoat-Barabbas', Expository Times 3 ( 1891/1892). pp. 
400-403. 
Wright, Archie, The Origin of Evil Spirits: The Reception of Genesis 6:1-4 in Ear(v 
Jewish Literature (TObingen: Mohr Siebeck, 2nd edn, 2013). 
Wright, N.T., The Resurrection of the Son of God (Minneapolis, MN: Fortress Press. 
2003). 
Yoder, Keith, From Luke to John: Lazarus, Mary and Martha in the Fourth Gospel 
(Senior Thesis, University of Massachusetts [Amherst], 201 I) at http://www. 
umass.edu/wsp/project/senior/FromLukeToJohn.pdf. 
Zetterholm, Magnus (ed.), The Messiah in Early Judaism and Christianity (Min neapo­
lis: Fortress Press, 2007). 
Zimbardo, Philip, and Robert Vallone (eds.), Persuasion. Coercion. Indoctrination and 
Mind Control (Lexington, MA: Glenn Custom, 1983). 
Zindler, Frank, The Jesus the Jews Never Knew: Sepher To/doth Yeshu and the Quest of 
the Historical Jesus in Jewish Sources (Cranford. NJ : American Atheist Press. 
2003). 
- 'Prolegomenon to a Science of Christian Origins', in Sources of the Jesus Tradi­
tion: Separating History from Myth (ed. R. Joseph Hoffmann: Amherst. NY: 
Prometheus, 2010), pp. 140-56. 
Zusne, Leonard, and Warren Jones, Anoma/istic Psychology: A Study of Extraordinary 
Phenomena q( Behavior and Experience (Hillsdale. NJ: Erlbaum Associates. 
1982). 

SCRIPTURE INDEX 
Genesis 
12.1 1 -23 
2 13n153 
21.22-23 
61-62 
1 .1-2.3 
1 97 
12.14 
144n193 
27.12 
69 
1.1-10 
178 
1 2.48 
146, 579 
3 1-34 
468 
1.3-26 
203 
13-17 
415-18 
1 .5 
425n77 
13 
213n150 
Joshua 
1.14-20 
179 
16.1-3 
213n 153 
3 
69 
1 .27 
199 
1 7  
498n222 
8.29 
61 
2.2 
425n77 
17.1-7 
70-72 
10.26-27 
61 
2.4-25 
197 
22.29-30 
213n150 
2.8-3.24 
195 
23.20 
201n120 
Judges 
3.1-19 
184 
25.40 
194 
6-12 
268n30, 
6.1-8 
184, 185n75 
3 1  
1 34nl82 
478n188, 
6.4 
1 18, 580n90 
34.28 
468nl60 
503n233 
12 
144 
14.18 
206, 562n66 
Leviticus 
1 Samuel 
15.2-4 
503-504n234 
4 
145, 207 
1.1 
439 
l7 
207 
6.22 
207 
2.1-10 
478 
17.5 
240n9 
16 
144-45, 404 
13.19 
441 
18 
455 (n. l36 
16.32 
78n38 
15.17 
207 
21.10 
578 
19.18 
556 
24.2 
503-504n234 
21.10 
78n38 
2 Samuel 
26.4 
278n47 
23.5-1 1  
425 
5.11 
442 
26.26 
451 
23.11 
211n148 
7.4-17 
550n51 
28.10-22 
484 
23.27 
144 
7.12-14 
576 
28.12 
1 82 
21.1-14 
2 1 1n148 
28.1 9  
483-84 
Numbers 
21.6-1 3  
6 1  
29 
483 
13.29 
4 16n61 
32.28 
484n203 
14.1-4 
213n153 
1 Kings 
35 
484 
14.25 
416n61 
12.20 
550 
35.10 
484n203 
14.43-45 
416n61 
16-22 
475-77, 498-
40 
499n223 
18.1-7 
234n200 
99 
40.1 8-19 
499n223 
18.16 
213n150 
49.10-11 
424n71, 
20 
498n222 
2 Kings 
550n51 
20.1-13 
70n24 
1-4 
475, 477 
50.4-6 
439 
24.20 
416n61 
25.1-13 
21ln148 
1 Chronicles 
Exodus 
25.4 
61 
2.15 
550n51 
1 .8-22 
230nl90 
21-22 
478nl88 
4.1-9 
497-98 
Deuteronomy 
21 .1 
184 
4.30-3 1 
497-98 
1.1 
388n2 
26 
432n94 
7.19 
498n222 
14.22 
213nl50 
12.3-6 
423 
15.19-22 
213nl50 
Esther 
12.7-14 
562 
16.9-10 
211nl48 
1 
499n222 

662 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
Job 
7. 1 8  
46 
9.9 
424n71 , 459 
1 .6-2.7 
1 84 
23, 25 
85-86, 155-56 
12.10 
73 
2.6 
560 
26 
432-33, 433, 
12. 1 1  
170n36 
461 
1 3.9-18 
1 53 
Psalms 
29 
7 1 n25 
14. 1 -9 
70, 71 
2.1-2 
286n 14 
3 1 .33-34 
542-43 
14.5 
458n 14 1  
1 6.9- 1 0  
384 
44. 1 5-26 
46 
14.21 
409, 433 
22-24 
426n77 
22 
91, 143, 408-
Ezekiel 
Malachi 
409 
1 . 1  
361 
4.5-6 
68 
22.7-8 
142 
1 .26-2.3 
367 
24. 1 
142 
2.9 
362 
Matthew 
30.5 
408n49 
4. 14 
362 
1 . 1 6  
338n92, 339 
32. 10 
3 1 2  
8. 1 4  
46, 1 70 
1 .20 
240n8 
34. 1 1-19 
312 
20.49 
362 
1 .2 1  
472 
40.6-8 
542 
28. 1 1 -19 
185n76 
1 .23 
464 
68. 1 8  
537n41 
37. 1 - 1 4  
326n70 
2.1 -1 9  
287 
82.8 
278n47 
2.2 
233n1 97 
95.7- 1 1  
70n24 
Daniel 
2.3 
354n 1 1 9  
1 1 0.4 
207-208 
2. 1 9-22 
1 34nl 82, 
2. 1 6  
304, 354n 1 1 9  
1 1 6. 15 
614 
560n63 
2.23 
92, 400, 
1 1 7.19-20 
330n73 
7.2-7 
560n63 
40 1n34 
1 1 8.22-23 
428 
7.13-14 
43, 560n63 
3-4 
462 
1 1 9. 1 20 
90-91 
9 
68, 7 1 n25, 76-
3. 1 - 1 2  
71 
80, 81 -82, 85, 
3. 16-17 
313 
Proverbs 
86, 142, 143, 
4. 1-1 1 
233n 195 
8 
3 1 1n42 
155-56, 206 
4.2-1 0  
468 
8.22-36 
578n87 
9.2 
85 
4. 1 8-20 
505 
9 
580 
9.23-27 
7 ln25, 77, 79, 
4.23-5.1 
47 1 
82, 83, 84, 86, 
4.24 
354 
Isaiah 
89, 91, 142, 
5-8 
460, 462, 465-
6.9-10 
1 1 9, 409 
614 
67 
8.14 
90, 572n79 
10.2-2 1 
367n21 
5.27-30 
555 
9. 1 -7 
400 
12 
71n25, 76, 78 
5.38-42 
466 
1 1 . 10 
550n5 1 
12.1 
78 
7.2 
556 
1 4. 12-1 5  
1 85n76 
12.9-12 
78-79. 83, 143 
7. 1 5-23 
147n 197 
28. 16 
90, 572n79 
7.28-29 
460 
49.7 
73n29 
Joel 
8 
496n21 9  
50.6-9 
466 
2.28-3 1 
135 
8.5-13 
47 1, 488n21 1 
52-53 
73-74, 76-77' 
8.32-34 
354n 1 1 9  
79, 81 -83, 
Amos 
9. 1-8 
506n241 
87, 91, 142-
8.9 
408 
9. 1 5  
1 27nl64, 
43, 156, 206, 
233n 1 96 
223nl 76, 
Haggai 
9.26-3 1 
354 
278n47, 3 1 0, 
1 . 1  
82 
1 1 .1 
460 
404n39, 408, 
12 
460 
43 1 ,  485n205, 
Zechariah 
12.18 
68n1 7  
530-3 1 , 561 
3 and 6 
81 -83, 1 43, 
12.24 
1 85 
184, 200-204, 
1 2.30 
68n l 7  
Jeremiah 
321 n57, 534 
12.39 
489 
3.17 
278n48 
5.19 
580n90 
12.46-50 
373n30 
7 
429, 432 
9-1 4 
408 
1 3.47-50 
505 

Scripture Index 
663 
1 3.53 
460 
454n l 35 
5.37 
372, 417, 529, 
13.55 
440, 453n l 34 
27.62-66 
369 
588n97 
1 3.56 
372 
28. 1 
454n l 35 
5.4 1 
4 1 0  
1 4-18 
462, 465 
28.4 
369 
5.42 
410 
14.13-21 
354n 1 1 9 
28. 1 1-15 
5n7, 369, 489 
6. 1 -6 
455 
1 5.22-28 
499n223 
28. 17 
56 
6. 1 
413 
1 5.32-39 
354n 1 1 9 
28. 19 
278n47 
6.2-3 
372, 440-41 '  
1&-18 
462 
28.20 
464 
453-54n 1 34 
1 6.4 
489 
6.6 
413 
16. 1 3-14 
68n21 
Mark 
6. 14-16 
68n2 1 
16. 1 5-19 
524n29 
1-10 
423 
6. 1 7-29 
499n222 
1 6. 1 9  
1 95 
1-3 
41 8-20 
6.3 1-52 
487-88 
17. 1  
404n39, 
I 
421 -22 
6.3 1-44 
354n l l 9, 
588n97 
1 . 1-2 
20 1 n l 20 
4 17n63 
17. 10-13 
68n21 
1 . 1 -8 
71 
6.32 
4 1 3  
1 8.3-7 
312 
1.1 -13 
421 -22 
6.4 1 
4 1 7n63, 488 
18. 1 8  
1 95 
1 .3 
419n64 
6.43 
4 1 7, 487 
1 9. 1  
460 
1.9 
42l n66 
6.56 
413 
1 9. 1 2  
555 
1. 10-l l 
1 82, 546 
7.3-4 
258n8, 325 
20.29-34 
402n34 
1 . 13 
233nl 95, 
7.24 
4 1 3  
2 1 . 1 -9 
459 
469n l61 
7.25-30 
499n223 
2 1 .5 
233n 197 
1.14 
42 1 n66 
7.3 1 
325, 414 
2 1 .8- 1 1  
354n l l 9  
1 . 15 
419 
8-10 
4 1 9-20 
2 1 . 1 2-13 
354n 1 1 9 
1. 16-18 
413, 440, 505 
8. 1 -9 
354n 1 1 9, 
22. 1 - 1 0  
233n1 96 
1 .24 
40 1 -402n34 
41 7n63 
24-25 
460 
1.43-45 
42 1 
8.6 
41 7n63 
24 
85n49 
2. 1-12 
506n241 
8.8 
4 1 7  
24. 1 1  
1 47nl 97 
2. 13 
413 
8. 1 0  
4 1 3  
24. 14 
278n47 
2. 1 8-20 
127n l64, 
8. 1 1-12 
489 
24. 15 
85 
233n l 96, 428 
8. 14- 1 7  
41 7n63 
24.24 
147n 197 
2.23-3.6 
460 
8. 1 7-2 1 
414, 4 1 7' 45 1 
25. 1-13 
233nl96 
3.6 
43 1 
8.22-26 
4 1 8, 488 
25.26-29 
558n58 
3.7 
413 
8.27-28 
68n21 
25.32 
278n47 
3.8 
298 
8.27-9.1 
413 
25.34 
233n l97 
3.9 
413 
8.3 1 
98n78 
2&-27 
286 
3. 16- 1 7  
372. 446n 1 19, 
8.33-34 
445-46 
26. 1 
460 
524n29 
9.2 
372, 404n39, 
26.23-25 
3 1 2, 440n l 1 2  
3.2 1-35 
443 
4 1 1 ,  588n97 
26.49 
440n l l 2  
3.22 
185 
9.7 
546 
26.67-68 
471 
3.3 1 -35 
373n30. 443, 
9.9-13 
68n2 1 
26.71 
40 1n34 
454 
9. 12 
92 
27.5 
325n67 
4-8 
4 1 2- 1 8  
9.3 1 
78 
27. 1 1-42 
233nl 97 
4.1 
413 
9.42 
3 1 2  
27. 1 6-17 
338n92, 
4.9- 12 
419, 443, 450 
10.35-45 
3 1 3, 443 
406n43 
4. 1 1 -12 
97n74, 1 19, 
10.47 
40 1-402n34 
27.22 
338n92 
409, 4 1 4  
10.51 
440n 1 12 
27.37 
370 
5. 13-14 
354n1 19, 
1 1-16 
419, 435 
27.45 
354n l 19 
446n1 22 
1 1-14 
423-24, 433 
27.51-53 
354n1 19, 
5.2 1 
413 
1 1. 1-14.12 
423n70 
458n141 
5.22-43 
4 1 0-1 1 
1 1  
423-24 
27.54 
232n1 94, 439 
5.22 
413 
1 1 . 1- 1 0  
459 
27.56-61 
369, 439n I 08, 
5.26 
418 
1 1 .8- 1 1  
354n l l 9  

664 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
Mark (continued) 
15.6-15 
402-403 
1 1.12-22 
433-34 
15.10 
314 
1 1 . 15-18 
354n 119, 409, 
15.15-20 
286 
429, 431-33 
15.21 
371, 446 
1 1.17-25 
435 
1 5.22-46 
437 
11.21 
440nl12 
15.23 
438 
12 
426-28, 433 
15.25 
424n74 
12.14-17 
555 
15.26 
370 
12.14 
419n64 
15.29 
424n72, 432 
13 
85n49, 265-
15.33-34 
250n23, 
66n24, 426, 
354n I 19, 
432-33 
424n74 
13.1-2 
424n72, 429, 
15.34-39 
422, 424n74, 
432 
439 
13.14 
85 
15.40-42 
421n67, 
13.17 
429 
424n74 
13.22 
147n197 
15.40 
454n135 
14-16 
433 
15.43-46 
232n194, 369, 
14-15 
286 
439nl08 
14.1-2 
425n76, 429 
15.47 
421-22n67, 
14.1 
43 1 
454n135 
14.3-9 
452 
16 
355n 121, 399, 
14.10-11 
314 
421 
14.14 
424n72 
16.1 
142, 454n135 
14.16-17 
424 
16.2 
425-26n77 
14.18-21 
3 12 
16.4 
421n67 
14.22-25 
417n63, 424, 
16.6 
40ln34 
558 
16.7-8 
56-57, 421-22, 
14.25 
438, 562n66 
457n139, 489, 
14.28 
57 
491n215 
14.32-42 
549 
16.9-20 
265n23, 
14.33 
372, 588n97 
276n45 
14.41 
68n17 
16.17 
1 25 
14.43-49 
447nl22 
14.43 
429 
Luke 
14.45 
440n112 
l-2 
483 
14.49 
429 
1.1-4 
341, 353, 385 
14.50-52 
57, 382-83 
1 .5-80 
479 
14.53-72 
488 
1.5-17 
475 
14.55-60 
364, 382, 
1 .5 
234n200 
424n72, 429, 
1.31-32 
472 
432 
1 .36 
234n200 
14.58 
441 
1 .46-55 
478 
14.62 
313 
1 .57-80 
479 
14.65 
429, 471 
1 .78-79 
321n57 
14.67 
40ln34 
2 
479 
15-16 
423 
2.1-20 
478n188 
15 
142, 399, 408, 
2.1-4 
472 
422, 428-30 
2.1-2 
473n167, 385 
15.1-37 
430 
2.8-18 
473, 484 
15.1 
364 
2.37 
127n164 
15.2 
440 
2.40-50 
483 
2.40-42 
2.44-46 
3.1-20 
3.1-2 
3.4 
3.21-23 
3.23 
3.24 
3.29 
4.1-13 
4.5-6 
4.14 
4.16-30 
4.16 
4.34 
5 
5.1-11 
5.4-1 1 
5.5 
5.6 
5.10 
5.33-35 
6.15 
6.16 
6.17-49 
6.17-19 
7 
7.1-10 
7.40 
8.1-3 
8.19-21 
8.24 
8.33-37 
8.45 
8.49 
8.51 
9.7-9 
9.10-17 
9.18-19 
9.28 
9.33-34 
9.35 
9.38 
9.49 
9.51-62 
10 
10.1-20 
10.18 
10.25 
10.38-42 
234nl99, 472 
483-85 
71 
287, 385 
366 
366 
287 
234n200 
234n200 
233nl95 
233n195 
354 
365 
44lnl l2 
401n34 
457n139 
488 
49ln215, 505 
440-41n l l2 
505-506 
372, 588n97 
127n164, 
233n196 
373 
488 
471 
47 1 
475-76, 496-
97n219 
47 1, 488n21 1  
440-41n112 
475 
373n30 
440-41nl12 
354n119 
440-4lnl12 
440-41nll2 
372, 588n97 
68n21 
354n119 
68n21 
372, 588n97 
440-41n 1 1 2  
68n17 
440-41n112 
440-41n1 12 
475, 477 
503n232 
475 
185n76 
440-41nll2 
371, 488 

Scripture Index 
665 
1 1 .1 5  
1 85 
335, 365-66, 
7. 1 
502n23 1  
1 1. 1 8  
233n1 95 
480, 482-85 
7.5 
373n30 
1 1.29 
489 
24. 1 3  
481 n 1 96 
7.31 -52 
505n237 
1 1 .45 
440-41nl l2 
24. 1 5  
366n20 
7.3 1 
490 
1 1 .46 
506n241 
24. 19 
401 -402nn3 3-
7.38 
92 
12. 1 3  
440-4 1 n 1 1 2  
34 
7.50 
37 1 
16-18 
478n1 88 
24.25-27 
140 
7.53-8. 1 1  
49 1 
1 6  
503n232 
24.33-48 
488, 49 1 n215 
8 
502n23 1 
1 6.19-31 
489, 503-504 
24.36-43 
469 
8.6-8 
44lnl l2 
1 7. 1 -2 
3 1 2  
24.42 
491 n2 1 5  
8. 1 3-18 
490n2 1 3  
1 7. 1 3  
440-41n1 12 
24.44-47 
92, 140 
8.37-40 
503n23 1 
1 8.12 
127n l 64 
8.57 
287 
18.18 
440-41n1 12 
John 
9. 1 -8 
490 
1 8.37 
401 -2n34 
1.1 
20 1 
9.2 
440n 1 1 2 
1 9.35-40 
354n l l 9  
1 .4-5 
321 n57 
9.6-7 
488 
1 9.39 
440-4 1 n 1 1 2  
1 .7-34 
490n21 3  
9.1 6  
490 
1 9.45-47 
354n ] ] 9  
1 .1 5-28 
7 1 , 493 
1 0.6-19 
330n73 
20.21 
440-4 1 n l l 2  
1 .20 
71 
10.7 
506n241 
20.28 
440-4 1 n 1 1 2  
1 .29-43 
493 
10.25 
490n2 13 
20.39 
440-4 1 n l l 2  
1 .38 
440n ] ] 2  
10.41-42 
490 
2 1.5-8 
364 
1 .49 
440n l l 2 
1 1-12 
372, 488-89, 
2 1 .7 
440-4 1 n 1 1 2  
1 .5 1  
68n1 7, 182 
502n23 1 
22-24 
475 
2.1-4.46 
493-99 
1 1  
502n23 1 
22.3 
488 
2. 1 - 1 1  
490, 499n222 
1 1 . 1 -45 
490 
22.1 1  
440-41 n l  1 2  
2.1 1 -23 
489 
1 1 .2 
492 
22. 14-20 
558n58 
2. 1 3-16 
354n 1 1 9  
1 1 .3-5 
501 
22.22-23 
3 1 2  
2.25 
490n21 3  
1 1 .8 
440n 1 1 2  
22.26 
364 
3. 1 - 1 0  
371 , 505n237 
1 1 . 1 6  
49 ln215 
22.48 
68n1 7  
3.2 
440n 1 12, 489 
1 1 .36 
501 
22.50 
488 
3. 1 1  
490n21 3  
1 1 .38-40 
50ln228 
22.63-64 
47 1 
3.22 
492 
1 1 .42 
505 
22.69 
382 
3.26-36 
233nl 96, 
1 1 .44 
502n229 
22.70 
354 
490n21 3, 494 
1 1 .47 
490 
23.4-23 
488 
4.6 
493 
1 1 .53 
502 
23.1 1  
286 
4.20-26 
69, 338n92 
12.1-3 
492, 501 
23.24 
382 
4.3 1 
440n1 12 
12.9- 1 1  
501 -502 
23.26 
37 1 
4.40-54 
493-94 
12. 1 2- 1 9  
354n 1 1 9, 490 
23.34 
382 
4.46-54 
488n2 1 1 , 490 
12. 1 7  
490n2 13 
23.35 
68n1 7  
5 
492, 502n23 1 
12.31 
191n88 
23.38 
370 
5.1-9 
490 
12.37 
490 
23.44-46 
354n 1 19, 382 
5.2 
506n241 
13.16-27 
488, 501 
23.46-47 
68n 17, 
5 . 1 8  
502n23 1 
13.23 
504 
408n49, 439 
5.3 1-39 
490n2 13 
14.6 
204 
23.50-5 1 
439n1 08 
6 
487, 492 
14.22 
488 
23.51-56 
369 
6.1-14 
490 
1 4.26 
1 34nl82, 204 
23.53 
486, 488 
6.2 
489 
1 4.30 
1 9 1 n88 
24 
140, 368 
6.5-1 5  
354n l 1 9  
14.31 
492 
24.4 
488 
6.7-13 
487-88 
15-17 
492 
24. 1 0  
454n1 35 
6.1 4  
489 
1 5.26-27 
204, 490n213 
24. 1 1-12 
56, 269, 469, 
6.15-25 
490 
16.7 
204 
500n224 
6.25 
440n l 12 
16.11 
19ln88 
24.1 3-35 
56, 332-33, 
7 
502-503n23 1 
18-19 
286 

666 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
John (continued) 
2 
124-25, 
12 
367. 486n207 
18. 1  
492 
134-35, 363, 
1 2. 1 -2 
373. 588n97 
1 8.5-7 
40 1 n34 
368, 370n28. 
1 2.6-10 
36 1. 364 
18. 10 
488 
37 1 -73, 489, 
12.17 
373 
18.15-27 
488 
5 16n11 
13.1 
445n 1 1 7  
1 8.31 
502n230 
2.5-1 1 
165 
1 3.2-3 
127n 164 
1 8.37 
490n21 3  
2.10 
445n l l 7  
13.6- 1 1  
364, 406n44 
1 8.38-40 
403n36, 488 
2.1 7  
1 35 
1 3 . 1 4-52 
365 
19.4-6 
488 
2.26-3 1 
384 
13.23-4 1 
379 
19. 12 
287 
2.41 
384 
1 3.32-35 
546 
19.14 
493 
3. 1 -8 
364 
14.8-19 
367 
19.19-22 
370, 401n34 
3.14 
68n l 7  
1 4.8-10 
364 
19.25-27 
33 1n74, 
4 
369 
14.1 1-18 
365 
373n30, 
4. 1 
432n94 
1 4. 19-2 1 
365 
454n 1 35, 497, 
4.13 
440 
14.23 
1 27n1 64 
500-501 
4.25-27 
286n14 
1 5.7- 1 1  
362 
19.34 
497 
5 
369 
15. 1 3  
373 
1 9.35 
490, 498, 500-
5.15 
364 
1 6  
135, 367 
501 
5.30 
286 
16. 1 3-40 
367 
19.38-42 
369, 371, 
5.34-42 
341 
1 6. 1 7  
41 9n64 
439n 108, 488, 
6-8 
381 
1 6. 1 9-40 
341 
505n237 
6-7 
368, 369 
16.25-26 
1 27, 361. 364 
20 
237 
6.5 
382 
1 7  
367 
20.2-8 
500-502 
6.9-10 
165, 364, 
17.1-5 
365 
20.2 
269 
445n1 17 
18-19 
368 
20.9 
140 
6. 1 1-14 
382 
1 8.2 
348 
20. 1 1- 1 8  
500n224 
7 
135, 383 
1 8 . 1 2-23 
296, 34 1 .  369. 
20.12 
488 
7-9 
362 
371 
20. 16 
440n 1 12 
7.52-53 
68n l 7, 383 
1 8. 1 3  
376 
20.18-3 1 
488, 491 n215 
7.55-60 
382 
1 8. 1 4-15 
376 
20.24-29 
56, 490 
7.55 
3 1 3  
1 8.25-26 
4 1 9n64 
20.29-3 1 
237, 490-91, 
7.56 
68n17 
1 9.6 
1 25. 1 35 
505 
7.58 
381 , 383 
1 9.1 1 - 1 2  
364 
21 
491n215, 
8. 1 
381 
19. 19 
419n64 
457nl39, 
8.9-1 1 
71 
19.23-41 
367, 419n64 
491n215, 505 
8.1 8-23 
364 
20.9- 12 
364 
2 1 . 1-4 
488, 491 
8.26-40 
485 
20.22-38 
364 
21.3-1 1  
505-506 
8.32-35 
485n205 
20.29-30 
147n l97 
2 1 .7-13 
45 1, 488, 501 
9 
1 35 
21-22 
368 
2 1.20-24 
501 
9. 1 -20 
365-67 
21 
367 
2 1 .24-25 
353, 490-91, 
9.1-2 
294 
2 1 .4 
364 
500, 505 
9.1 1  
165 
2 1 .9- 10 
135 
9.27 
366 
2 1 . 1 6  
272n39 
Acts 
9.33-34 
506n24 1 
2 1 . 1 7-3 1 
377 
1 
368, 370, 587 
9.36-40 
364 
2 1 . 1 8  
373 
1 .2-9 
470 
10 
1 35, 364 
2 1 .3 1 -39 
377 
1 .3-1 2  
363 
10.8-14 
361-62, 558 
21 .39-40 
377 
1 .3 
40-41 
10.46 
125 
21 .39 
165 
1.13-14 
371-73 
1 1 .20 
445nJ 1 7  
22. 1-2 1  
377 
1 . 1 5  
3 1  
1 1 .26 
28 1 
22.3 
165 
1 . 1 6-20 
473 
1 1 .27-30 
1 50n205 
22.6- 15 
377 

Scripture Index 
667 
22.14 
68n17 
5. I 2-2I 
570 
I5 
278n47 
22.17-30 
377 
6.3-10 
108 
I5.2-4 
140, 516-I7, 
22.30 
364 
6.3-4 
99, I57n6, 
555, 570 
23-26 
380 
422, 543 
I5.6 
95n69 
23-24 
341, 369 
6.11 
95n69 
15.8 
571, 575 
23.9-24 
377 
6.20-23 
1 02n84 
15.12 
550n51, 575 
23.9 
380 
6.23 
95n69 
15.18-19 
547n49 
23.20-24 
365 
7-8 
72 
15.24-28 
310, 5 16 
23.26-35 
371, 377-78 
7.1-6 
I33 
I5.30 
95n69 
24 
378 
7.23 
590 
I6 
261ni4, 
24.5 
146nl95, 281, 
7.25 
95n69 
5 11n4 
400-401 
8 
92-93, 544, 
I6.1 
1 62, 511n4, 
24.14 
419n64 
571 
589n99 
24.22 
419n64 
8.2-10 
57In77 
16.7 
524 
25-26 
293, 296, 341, 
8.2 
138 
16. I7-20 
147, 511n4 
369, 378 
8.3 
92, 94n68, 
16.2P 
191n89 
25.1 8-19 
379 
570 
1 6.21 
539n44 
26 
367, 379 
8.15-29 
I08n101 
I6.22 
262n1 5  
26.13 
321 
8.29 
108, I99, 201, 
16.25-27 
48, 80, 95n69, 
26.24 
371 
538 
97nn73-74, 
27 
135 
8.32 
560 
1 09, 1 35, 
27. 1  
378 
8.34 
94, 204 
137-38, 140, 
27.21-23 
127n164 
8.35-38 
I89 
205n131, 
27.42-44 
34I 
8.39 
95n69 
277-78, 450, 
28.1-6 
367 
9.1-5 
95n69, 568, 
51 l n4, 517, 
28.1 7-30 
348 
575 
532n36, 554, 
28.30-31 
365 
9.6-8 
579n88 
594, 6I2 
9.1 1  
576n84 
Romans 
9.24 
569 
1 Corinthians 
1 .1-6 
140, 532 
9.26 
I08n101 
1.1 
262nl 5, 
1 .3-5 
95, 277, 
9.3{}--10.6 
572 
589n99 
278n47, 533, 
9.33 
90, 572 
1 .2 
162 
550, 575, 
I 0.4-9 
106 
1.3-4 
95n69 
580n91, 
10.9 
95n69 
1 . 12 
147, 287, 586 
584n94 
10.14-18 
554, 572 
1.14 
590 
1 .7-8 
95n69 
1 1 . 1  
569 
1 .17-31 
1 10 
1.15 
533 
1 1.25-28 
97n73, 567, 
1.17 
564 
1.20-25 
447 
569 
1.18-25 
123 
1.25 
95n69 
12.2 
19I 
1.20 
447 
2.5 
567, 569 
12.4-5 
81n43, 106, 
I .22-24 
94, 31 1n42, 
2.6 
95n69 
214nl54, 
489, 565, 569, 
2.29 
548n50 
584n94 
572n80, 614-
3.5-6 
567, 569 
12.6 
135 
16 
3.23-26 
93, 144, 
12.14-21 
555 
1.28 
85n49 
570n75 
13 
565, 572-73 
1.30 
94 
4.13-16 
567, 569, 
1 3.1-7 
190, 555, 573 
2-3 
97-98, 97n74 
579n88 
1 3.9-10 
556, 590 
2 
48nll, 1 10, 
4.24-25 
560 
14.10 
589n99 
1 1 6  
5-6 
565 
14.14 
146 
2.1 -2 
97n73, 1 1 1 ,  
5.1 
95n69 
14.17-18 
57nl, 159 
520 
5.6-11 
93, 95n69, 144 
14.23 
5ll n4 
2.3-4 
527 

668 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
I Corinthians (continued) 
9. 1 - 18 
582-87 
14. 1 8  
1 25 
2.4-3.3 
1 10, 123 
9. 1 
133, 135, 139, 
14. 19-32 
136 
2.5 
447 
524-25, 527, 
14.34-35 
261 n l 4  
2.6- 10 
41, 47-48, 
536, 563 
14.37 
1 3 9, 522, 
92, 97n73, 
9.5 
287, 5 82-87' 
553n54 
1 10, 135, 142, 
589, 590, 591 
14.45-49 
J 98n 1 12 
205nn 1 3 1 -32, 
9.6 
584n93 
15 
172, 3 1 9, 
321' 564. 570, 
9.8- 14 
522, 553n54 
532 
590 
9. 15 
590 
15. 1-9 
516-17 
2. 1 3  
447 
9.20 
568 
15.1-8 
1 35, 139, 532 
2.16 
1 1 3 
10 
72, 1 1 1  
15. 1-2 
536 
3 
120 
10. 1 - 1 1  
1 1 6 
15.1 
1 39, 536 
3.1-3 
1 1 0, 584n94 
10. 1 -4 
92, 201 ,  
15.3-1 1 
5 16n l l ,  527 
3.3-24 
1 1 1, 1 47 
456n l 37, 
15.3-8 
92-93, 133, 
3.4-5 
524 
498n222 
287, 322, 5 1 7, 
3.16-17 
81 n43, 145 
10. 1 1  
92-93 
525-26, 544, 
3. 18-19 
1 1 0, 191 
10. 1 6-22 
145, 1 88, 
563 
3.22 
287, 586 
559n61 ,  
15.3-5 
1 1 1 , 520, 6 1 2  
4.1 
97n73, 98, 
562n66 
15 .3-4 
80, 140, 142, 
I l l, 205n 131 
10.17 
81n43. 1 06 
536, 563 
4.6 
140, 147, 516 
1 1-14 
1 62 
15.3 
93, 1 39, 144, 
4. 15 
1 0 1 ,  1 06n95 
1 1 . 1  
20 ln121 
536, 564 
4. 1 7  
539n44 
1 1 .2 
554 
15.4-8 
139 
4.1 9-20 
1 59 
1 1 .4-5 
1 36 
15.4 
425n77 
5 
144nl93, 555 
1 1 .7 
94, 1 99 
1 5.5-8 
1 3 1 n l76, 133. 
5.5 
1 9 1 n89. 560 
1 1 .9-10 
518 
140, 527, 536 
5.7 
1 44 
1 1 . 1 2 
554 
15.5 
151, 263. 524, 
5.9- 1 1  
1 91 ,  280n50 
1 1 .20-34 
107 
560, 572, 586, 
6 
1 62 
1 1 .20 
559n60 
588n97 
6.3 
5 1 8  
] 1 .23-28 
99, t 38, t 43-
15.6 
t06n95, 563 
6.9-10 
1 59 
144, 145, 3 1 8, 
15.7 
372. 588n97 
6.1 1  
95n69 
361 , 424n73, 
15.8- 10 
527n30 
6. 13 
85n49 
5 1 7. 526, 53 1, 
1 5.8-9 
536 
6. 16-20 
81 n43, 145 
536, 558, 
15.20-28 
78, 92-95, 
7. 1 
280n50, 292 
559n60, 594 
159, 1 90, 1 98-
7.5 
1 27n 164, 
12-14 
124-25 
99, 233nl 95, 
1 9 1 n89. 1 93 
1 2.8- 10 
547n49 
425, 6 1 1  
7.7-8 
583 
12. 10 
1 36 
15.20 
5 1 6n 1 1 ,  538 
7. 1 0- 1 2  
1 06n95, 
12.1 2-27 
8 1 n43, 106, 
1 5.29 
102, 5 1 8  
553n54 
2 14n 154, 
15.3 1 
1 06n95, 
7.25 
1 39, 522, 
541n47 
585n94 
553n54 
12. 1 3 
99, 569 
15.35-54 
1 07, 1 59, 
7.29-31 
85n49, 191 
12.28-3 1 
1 36, 1 62, 1 89, 
1 72n43, 179, 
8 
I l l  
524, 547n49, 
1 8 1 ,  1 98-99, 
8.1 - 1 3  
582 
583-84 
201 n 1 2 1 ,  370. 
8.4-6 
60. 92, 94, 
1 3.2 
97n73, 1 1 1  
576 
I 05, 183, 1 88, 
14 
124, 1 36 
15.51 
97n73 
199, 201 , 203, 
14.1 
137 
15.54-57 
95n69, 
441 ,  534n38, 
14.2 
97n73 
233n1 95 
538 
14.6 
1 36-37 
16. 1 0  
539n44 
8. 13 
589n99 
1 4. 1 2-15 
1 27, ] 37 
1 6. 1 2  
147, 589n99 

Scripture Index 
669 
16. 1 9  
162 
12. 1 - 1 3  
527 
26 1 n 1 2  
1 2.2-5 
1 1 3, 180, 195, 
2.2 
135 
2 Corinthians 
261 n  1 2, 543, 
2.6- 1 0  
93, 525n29 
1 . 1  
262n l 5. 
563n67 
2.9- 14 
287, 372, 524, 
539n44. 
1 2.7 
1 36, 1 9 1  
528-29, 586, 
589n99 
12. 1 2  
524, 527, 
588-89 
1 .2-3 
95n69 
547n49, 
2. 1 4-2 1 
362 
1 .5 
98n78, 
584n94 
2. 15 
568 
1 15n l 27 
1 3  
1 33n l 79 
2. 1 7-2 1 
573 
1 . 1 9  
539n44 
13.3 
139 
2. 1 7  
1 65 
2.2 
233nl 96 
1 3 . 1 4  
95n69 
2.20 
560, 570 
2. 1 1  
1 9 1 n89, 193 
3-4 
2 1 3  
2. 1 2  
1 89 
Galatians 
3. 1 
140, 570n75, 
2. 1 3  
589n99 
1-2 
93, 134-35, 
573 
3.8 
1 99 
138. 1 46-47, 
3.5 
189 
3. 1 8  
201n l 2 1  
263. 374, 4 1 1 ,  
3 . 1 3--4.29 
576 
3 . 1 2-4.6 
1 1 6 
526 
3. 13- 1 8  
579n88 
4.4 
60, 94, 1 04, 
353, 5 1 6, 525, 
3.1 3  
2\2, 286 
1 9 1 ,  199, 20 1 ,  
563 
3. 1 6  
2 1 3nl 53, 579 
203. 538. 546 
1 .1 -3 
95n69. 
3 . 1 9-20 
183n71 
4. 10- 1 1  
57 1 
262n 15, 524 
3.26--4.29 
575n83 
4. 1 1  
560 
1 .4 
144 
3.26-29 
99, 106, 
4. 1 8  
57n l 
1 .6- 12 
133n l 79, 147, 
108n l01, 584 
5 
97n74, 98, 
588 
3.29--4.7 
578 
I 07. 199, 
1 .6-9 
93, 133. 5 17, 
4 
2 1 4n 1 54, 
3 19n53 
527 
579n87. 
5 . 1 -5 
1 72n43, 1 8 1 ,  
1 .8- 10 
508, 527 
580n90, 
1 94. 370, 
1 . 1 1-24 
527, 554 
548n50 
424n72, 441 ,  
1 . \ 1 - 1 6  
5 1 6  
4.3-9 
1 92, 2 1 3n l 53 
57 1 .  576 
1 . 1 1 - 1 2  
92, 133, 1 35, 
4.4-7 
108n 101 
5 . 1 6  
571 
139. 5 1 7. 536, 
4.4 
575-82 
5. 1 7  
425n77. 571 
559 
4.8-9 
60, 1 93 
5 . 1 8- 1 9  
93, 144 
1 . 13-16 
527n30, 536, 
4.22-5. 1 
578 
5.2 1 
404n39. 
539, 568 
4.22-3 1 
1 16 
570n75 
1 . 1 5-22 
26 1 n 12, 362, 
4.23-29 
575n83, 
6.5 
1 27n l64 
558. 568, 587-
576n84 
6. 1 6  
8 1 n43, 145 
88 
4.25-26 
2 1 3n l53, 544 
8.22-23 
589n99 
1 . 16 
135, 1 39 
4.28 
213nl53 
1 0  
571 
1 . 1 8  
146, 1 50, 287, 
5 
1 06 
1 0. 1 -2 
57 1 
590 
5. 1 1  
572n80 
1 0.3-6 
1 33n l 79 
1 . 1 9  
372, 582, 587-
5.14-15 
555 
1 1 . 1 -7 
527, 534n38 
92 
5.19-25 
159 
1 1 .3-1 5  
147, 191n89, 
1 .20 
588 
5.24 
447 
1 93 
1 .21 -2. 1  
559 
6 
106 
1 1 . 1 2  
569 
1 .22-24 
362, 527n30. 
6. 14- 1 7  
145, 447, 564 
1 1 .22 
569 
536, 568-69, 
I 1 .25 
377 
588-90 
Ephesians 
1 1 .26-27 
1 27n 164, 1 65 
2 
106, 147, 165, 
1 .3-1 0 
205n l 3 1  
1 1.31 
95n69 
28 1 .  325, 362, 
1 .5 
108n 101 
1 1 .32 
261 n l 2 
568 
1 .9 
97n73 
1 2  
1 36. 554 
2.1 
1 46, 1 50, 
1 . 1 7  
1 36 

670 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
Ephesians (continued) 
1 .12-20 
92n64, 95, 
2.1 1  
1 33n179 
1 .20-21 
1 89 
202, 537-38 
3.17 
262nl7 
2.2 
191, 233n195 
1 .13-14 
102n84 
2. 19-22 
145 
1 .15 
1 99, 546 
J nmothy 
3 
138n186 
1.16 
1 89 
1 .3-7 
147n1 97, 351 
3.1-12 
97nn73-74, 
1 .1 8-24 
54ln47 
1 .4 
458n141 
136, 146n195, 
1 .24-29 
97nn73-74, 
1 .20 
191n89 
205n131, 517 
205n l31, 517, 
2.5 
1 83n71 
3.10 
192 
537 
3.6-7 
1 91n89 
3.16-19 
145 
2.2-3 
97n73, 
3.9 
97n73 
4.4-6 
312n43 
205nl 3 1  
3. 16 
97n73, 
4.8-14 
1 83, 537n41 
2.8-20 
193 
538n43, 322 
4. 1 1  
136 
2.8 
447 
4.1-16 
147n197 
4.27 
191n89 
2.12 
99, 108nl01, 
4.1 
133n179, 188 
5.19 
127 
1 57n6 
4.6-7 
35 1 
5.22-25 
233n196 
2.14 
570n75 
5.15 
191n89 
5.32 
97n73 
2. 15 
192, 538n42, 
6 
133n179 
6.5 
534n38 
566 
6.13 
538n43, 566-
6.1 1-12 
19ln89, 192, 
3.9 
192n92 
67n71 
233n195 
3.16 
127 
6. 15 
534n38 
6.12-17 
158n8 
4.3 
97n73 
6.19 
97n73 
4.16 
280n50 
2 1imothy 
2.26 
191n89 
Philippians 
/ Thessalonians 
3.5 
1 33n1 79, 
1 . 1  
262n1 5, 
1 . 1  
95n69, 
147n197 
539n44 
262n15, 
4.3-4 
351 
1 .2-1 1  
95n69 
539n44 
4.8 
382 
1 .14 
585n94 
1 .6 
570 
2. 1 - 1 1  
92, 94, 1 83, 
1 .9 
567 
Titus 
1 85n75, 201, 
1 .10 
569 
3.9 
147n197, 
205n 132, 212, 
2.14-16 
261nl4, 
458n141 
278n47, 463, 
286, 566-69, 
517, 53ln34, 
584n94 
Philemon 
532n36, 533-
2.1 8  
191n89 
1 -2 
262n15, 
35, 537, 541, 
3.2-6 
539n44 
539n44, 
545, 547, 570-
3.2 
589n99 
589n99 
71, 575, 592, 
3.1 1-13 
95n69 
10 
106n95 
612 
4.6 
589n99 
20 
589n99 
2.25 
589n99 
4.10-5.15 
159 
3 
106 
4.13-18 
85n49, 92-93, 
Hebrews 
3.3-14 
95n69 
95n69, 1 80, 
1-2 
545-48 
3.4-5 
568 
182, 544, 
1 
95, 202, 548 
3. 10 
98n78, 
553n54, 611 
1 . 1 -4 
92n64, 312, 
1 1 5n127 
5.8-9 
95n69, 158n8 
321n57 
3.18 
564 
5.15 
556 
1 .5-6 
546 
3.20 
544 
5.19-24 
133n 179, 136 
1 . 10-2.5 
85n49 
4. 12 
1 1 lnll3 
2 
136 
4. 19 
95n69 
2 Thessalonians 
2.1 
539n45, 546 
4.21 
584n94 
2.2-15 
147n197, 
2.7-8 
382 
262n17 
2.9 
547 
Colossians 
2.3-10 
97n73, 
2. 10-18 
108n101 
1 .2 
585n94 
191n89 
2. 10 
92n64, 98n78 

2. 14 
184, 233nl95 
2.16 
548n50 
2.17 
547, 549, 575 
3.1 
548 
3.7-4.17 
70n24 
3. 12-14 
539n45 
4.14 
183, 540 
5-6 
208n 139 
5 
540, 546 
5.1-12 
548-49 
5.6 
208 
5.8-9 
548-49, 561 
5.1 1--6.3 
1 1 1  
5. 1 1-14 
98 
5.12 
539n45 
6-13 
1 12 
6.4-6 
547 
6.19-20 
540 
7. 1-9.28 
208n139 
7 
549 
7.1-3 
208n139 
7.1 1-17 
549-50, 575 
7.1 8-22 
208 
7.25-28 
158n7, 182, 
541 
8-9 
565, 612 
8 
202 
8.1 -5 
183, 541 
8.5 
194-95 
8.6 
183n71, 541 
9-10 
541-45 
9 
144, 1 56n5, 
158n7, 172, 
435, 545 
9.l l-10.18 541-44 
9.1 1-24 
183 
9.15 
183n71 
9.22-24 
194 
9.26-28 
98n78, 
404n39, 544 
10.1-4 
539 
1 0.25 
539n45 
10.36-37 
85n49 
10.39 
550 
l l  
550-51 
1 1.10-16 
441 
1 1 .16 
544 
1 1 .23 
576n84 
12 
550-52 
12.2 
547 
12.12 
S39n45 
Scripture Index 
12.21 -22 
12.24 
1 3.8-9 
13.1 1-14 
13.13 
13.14 
James 
1.12 
2.1 9  
3.15 
4.7 
5.7- 1 1  
5.12 
I Peter 
1 .1-4. 1 1  
1 . 1  
1 .1 0-12 
1 . 1 8-21 
2.5 
2.6-8 
2.9 
2.12-25 
2.22-23 
2.24 
3.8-22 
4.1-6 
4.12-5.20 
4.1 3  
5.1 
5.4 
5.8 
5.12 
2 Peter 
1-2 
1.1 
1 . 1 5-21 
1 .1 6-2.1 
1.16 
3.5-13 
3.15-17 
I John 
1 .1-3 
2.1 
2.3-4 
1 94, 441, 544 
1 83n7 l 
147n 197, 539 
544 
538 
441 
382, 529n3 1 
189 
189, 447 
191n89 
529, 53 1 
529n31 
529n32 
529n32, 530 
1 15nl27, 530 
530 
145, 541n47 
530, 572n80 
32ln57, 
54In47 
530, 572 
404n39 
404n39 
190, 530-31 
530-3 1 
529n32 
1 1 5nl27, 530 
1 1 5n1 27, 531 
382 
191n89, 
233n195 
529n32 
351 
530 
147n197, 546 
528 
97n74 
85n49 
1 47nl97, 351 
351, 528 
68n 17, 182, 
204 
146 
671 
2.15-18 
85n49 
2.18-26 
t47nt97 
2.28-3.10 
108n 101 
3.5 
404n39 
3.10 
191n89 
4.1-5.13 
136 
4 
133nl79 
4.1-3 
351 
4. 1 
147nl97 
4.8 
108nl01 
5. 1-4 
108n 101 
5.16 
146 
5.1 8-20 
108n l 0 1 ,  
19ln89 
2 John 
7-1 1 
147n197, 35 1 
3 John 
9-10 
147n197 
Jude 
1 
528 
3-4 
147nl97 
8-16 
147n197 
9 
88, 191n89 
14 
88 
17 
528 
Revelation 
1-3 
555 
1 .1-2 
1 37 
I.IQ-3.22 
26, 138 
2.2-20 
147n197 
2.10 
382 
12 
578n87 
12.9 
233n195 
14.13 
26 
1 6.5 
68n l7 
17.5-7 
97n73 
17.10-1 1 
264n20 
17.14 
534n38 
19.7-9 
26, 233nl96 
19.10 
555 
20 
192n91 
20.2 
233nl95 
21.2 
233nl96 
21.5 
26 
22.17 
233n1 96 

AUTHOR INDEX 
Abegg, M. 
76,619 
Achtemeier, P. 
415,417,558,619 
Albertson, F. 
166, 619 
Aldhouse-Green, M. 
125, 561, 619 
Aldhouse-Green, S. 
125, 561, 619 
Alexander, J.R. 
307,619 
Alexander, L. 
359,619 
Allegro, J.M. 
285,619 
Allison, D. 
21, 69, 75, 89, 99, 106, 155, 
177, 182,209,216,223,267,305, 
342, 346 393, 397, 399, 409, 426, 
428, 458, 460-61, 465-68, 522, 
525,559,562,619-21,624,627, 
629-30, 632, 634, 636, 640-43, 
646-49, 654-56, 659 
Alvarez, J. 
96, 98, 103, 619 
Anderson, H. 
205, 540, 620 
Anderson, R.T. 
176, 620 
Angus, S. 
98, 620 
Arbman, E. 
126, 128, 620 
Arnal, W. 
174,620 
Arnold-Biucchi, C. 
23, 620 
Ascough,R. 
153,620 
Asian, R. 
176, 620 
Athanassiadi, P. 
I 04, 620 
Aune, D. 
138, 141,215,389,620 
Aus, R. 
408, 499, 620 
Avalos, H. 
21,215,620 
Avery-Peck, A. 
216, 620, 654 
Babinski, E. 
179, 194, 620 
Bagnall, R. 
307, 620 
Bailey, J. 
268, 620 
Barker, M. 
96, 105, 107, 114, 156, 181, 
520-21,562,578,580,620 
Barnes, T. 
3 16, 621 
Barnstone, W. 
36, 621 
Barrett, C.K. 
268, 621 
Basser, H. 
399, 621 
Bauckham, R. 
31, 242, 389, 397, 453, 
455, 621, 630 
Bauer, D. 
460, 621 
Baum, P.F. 
20, 129, 165.621 
Beale, G.K. 
88, 141.408.621 
Bechard, D. 
397. 621 
Beck, R. 
99,621 
Beilby, J. 
51,621 
Bell, V. 
130, 621 
Belle, G. van 
268, 621 
Benedikston, T.D. 
412,621 
Benko, S. 
348, 621 
Bentall, R. 
128-29, 621, 653 
Bergsma, J.S. 
76, 206,621 
Beskow, P. 
10 1, 621 
Betz, H.D. 
102.226.590.622 
Binfield, K. 
9, 622 
Black, M. 
68, 423, 622 
Blackhirst. R. 
221, 622 
Blenkinsopp, .1. 
215, 622 
Blomberg, C. 
478, 622 
Bock, D. 
77, 408, 622 
Bockmuehl, M. 
67, 72, 88, 221, 226. 
525.622,634,636,651 
Boman, J. 
346, 622 
Borg, M. 
158,396,417,459-60,622 
Bosworth. A.B. 
23, 218, 622 
Boyarin, D. 
73. 201, 205, 622 
Boyd, G. 
164,389,397.567,630,635. 
648 
Boyer, P. 
126, 622 
Bower, B. 
127, 129,623 
Bradley, K.R. 
349, 623 
Brakke. D. 
148. 623 
Brandon, S.G.F. 
171, 176.623 
Brant, J.-A. 
216.623 
Brettler, M.Z. 
201. 642 
Brickhouse, T. 
290, 623 
Brisson, L. 
116, 623 
Broadhead, E. 
205, 623 
Brodie, T. 
ix, 6. 49, 119, 262, 268, 270. 
359-60, 396-98, 465, 4 74-79, 503. 
623 

Author Index 
673 
Brookins, T. 
503, 623 
Brown, P. 
I 04, 623, 639 
Brown, R. 
14, 90, 268, 274, 403-404, 
474, 623 
Bruce, F.F. 
3, 83, 89, 624 
Brunvand, J .H. 
480, 624 
Buchanan, G.W. 
215, 624 
Buckman, R. 
126, 624 
Budge, E.A.W. 
578, 624 
Budin, S.L. 
170, 624 
Burgessa, C. 
130, 654 
Burkitt, F.C. 
37, 624 
Burkert, W. 
210, 390, 624 
Burridge, K. 
160, 624 
Burridge, R. 
219, 389, 624 
Byrne, R. 257, 624 
Cacioppo, J. 
132, 649 
Cad bury, H. 
361, 624 
Callahan, T. 
90, 624 
Cameron, A. 
217, 453, 504 
Cameron, A. 
217, 624 
Camery-Hoggatt, J. 
445, 624 
Carmichael, C. 
426-27, 438, 458, 562, 
624 
Carr, W. 
189, 625 
Carrier, R. 
1, 3-6, 18, 28, 30, 46, 54-55, 
57-58, 61-62, 64, 66-67, 69, 73, 
77, 79-80, 83, 94, 96, 100, 104, 
108, 127, 129, 13 1-34, 136, 138, 
142, 145-47, 150, 158-59, 161-63, 
165-73, 175-76, 186, 198, 205, 
209, 217, 227-28, 238-40, 243, 
246-52, 254-58, 260-61, 263, 265, 
267-68, 270, 273, 276-78, 283, 
285, 288-301, 305, 319, 323, 331 -
32, 337-38, 342-46, 349, 351, 354-
55, 357, 362-63, 368-71, 381, 384, 
391, 394, 396-402, 405, 408-409, 
422, 424-26, 440-41, 443-46, 448, 
451, 453, 455-56, 458, 470, 473, 
478, 488, 491, 504-505, 509, 516, 
524, 550, 560-61, 567, 569, 571-
72, 585, 594, 596, 598, 601-602, 
605, 616, 618, 625-26 
Carson, D.A. 
87-88, 141, 222, 408, 
621 ,  626 
Case, S.J. 
52, 592, 626 
Casey, M. 6, 21, 51, 205, 266, 491, 
625-26 
Castillo, R. 
128, 626 
Cerri, G. 
219, 635 
Chancey, M. 
164, 626 
Charlesworth, J. 
66, 67-69, 71, 138, 
146, 1 56, 1 59, 176-77, 205, 210, 
215, 221 , 367, 433, 500-501, 540, 
620, 622, 627, 629, 637, 639, 643, 
652, 657 
Charlesworth, M.P. 448, 627 
Chazon, E. 
215, 627 
Chesnut, G. 203, 627 
Chesnutt, R. 
559, 627 
Chester, A. 93-94, 627 
Chilton, B. 
24-27, 74, 76, 87, 96, 11 7, 
1 76-77, 254, 271, 282, 399, 409, 
427, 429, 521 , 529, 627, 630, 632, 
641 
Chitwood, A. 
219, 627 
Cialdini, R. 
132, 627 
Claridge, G. 
128, 621, 628, 645 
Clauss, M. 99, 109, 628 
Cohen, S. 
579, 628 
Cole, S.G. 
99, 628 
Collins, A.Y. 
264, 445, 628 
Collins, J. 
68, 86, 91, 1 05, 166, 639 
Conzelmann, H. 
I 02, 572, 628 
Cornwell, J. 
130, 628 
Cosmopoulos, M. 
I 00, 628 
Costa, C.D.N. 
218, 628 
Cottam, T. 
492, 628 
Cotton, H. 
307, 628 
Courtney, G. 54, 628 
Cribbs, F.L. 268, 628 
Cribiore, R. 
167, 237, 398, 628 
Cross, F.L. 46, 628, 638 
Crossan, J.D. 
69, 75, 89, 99, 1 06, 1 19, 
1 55, 1 77, 1 82, 209, 216, 223, 305, 
342, 346, 359, 365, 393, 396-97, 
399, 409, 419, 426, 428, 458, 488, 
559, 562, 619-21, 624, 627, 629-
30, 632, 634, 636, 640-43, 646-49, 
654-56, 659 
Crossley, J. 
134, 163, 2 19-20, 266, 491, 
629 
Croy, N.C. 
457, 629 
Currie, R. 
128, 651 
Dando-Collins, S. 
349, 629 
Danove, ߨ 445, 629 

674 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
D' Aquili, E. 
126, 629 
Davies, W.O. 
146. 267, 629 
Day, S. 
128, 629 
DeJCogliano, M. 
342, 648 
Dennis, Rabbi G.W. 
561 .  576, 580, 629 
Depuydt, L. 
23, 629 
Desmond, W. 
1 74, 629 
Derrett, J.D.M. 
1 6 1 , 629 
Dever, W. 
2 1  5, 629 
Dix, G.H. 
578, 629 
Dodds, E.R. 
1 25, 130, 630 
Dodd, C.H. 
268, 630 
Doherty, E. xii, xiv, 3, 6ж7, 41, 48ޠ49, 
1 4 1 , 275, 309, 3 1 9, 332, 342-43, 
346, 350, 520, 565, 567, 575, 577. 
587, 625, 630 
Donalson. M.D. 
99, 630 
Doran, R. 
209, 210, 630 
Doty, W. 
390, 630 
Douglas, M. 
4 1 2, 630 
Downing, F.G. 
174, 434, 482, 630 
Drews, R. 
50-5 1 ,  303, 630 
Droge, A.J. 
9, 49, 2 1 6, 630 
Dunn, J. 
205, 521, 553, 626, 630 
Duran, N.W. 
405. 630 
Eddy, P. 
5 1 ,  1 64, 389, 397, 567, 62 1 ,  
630, 635, 648 
Edmonds Ill, R. 
99, 1 07, 122, 390-91. 
453, 630 
Edwards, J. R. 
434, 630 
Ehrhardt, A. 
482, 630 
Ehrland, K. 
492, 630 
Ehrman, B. 
6, 20-21 ,  5 1 ,  94. 2 1 8, 221 ,  
260ж61 ,  264-65, 351, 42 L 525, 
580, 625, 63 1 
Elias, J. 
122, 63 1 
Elledge, C.D. 
1 76, 63 1 
Ellegard, A. 
285, 63 I 
Ellens, J.H. 
206, 63 1 
Ellspennann, G. 
1 67, 63 1 
Engberg-Pedersen, T. 
173, 63 1 
Eppstein, V. 
434, 63 1 
Evans. C. 
25, 67-70, 75-76, 83. 88. 91, 
94, 96, 1 07, I 4 1 ,  1 76-77, 207, 2 I 5, 
222. 254, 27 1 , 279, 282, 399, 424, 
429, 458, 460, 468, 474, 478, 52 1 ,  
620, 626, 628, 630-32, 634-35, 
637, 639, 64 1, 652, 654, 659 
Evans, C.A. 
67, 1 76, 659 
Evans, C.F. 
479, 632 
Fairweather, 1. 
2 1 9, 632 
Faith, M. 
130, 654 
Fales, E. 
xii, xiv, 1 30-3 1 ,  389, 632 
Falk, H. 
1 76, 632 
Falkner, T. 
392, 632 
Fantuzzi, M. 
230, 632 
Farrer, A.M. 
269, 633 
Fedeࠅ Y. 
213, 633 
Fee, G. 
1 25, 633 
Feeley-Harnik, G. 
562, 633 
Feldman, L. 
1 64, 2 1 8, 333, 633, 647 
Ferguson, M. 
23, 4 1 2, 633 
Festinger. L. 
1 32, 633 
Figge, H. 
1 24, 1 28, 633 
Filson, F. 
500, 633 
Fine, S. 
166, 633 
Finegan, J. 
286, 633 
Finkelstein, I. 
2 1 5, 633 
Finlan, S. 
1 73, 633 
Finsterbusch, K. 
2 1 3, 633 
Fitzmyer, J. 
62, 78, 1 76, 633 
Fletcher-Louis, C. 
207, 634 
Flint, P. 
67-68, 75, 83. 107, 1 77. 399, 
468, 632, 634, 639, 652 
Flint, T. 
445, 628 
Flusser, D. 
1 64, 634 
Fomara, C. 
2 1 7-18, 634 
Forsythe, G. 
266, 634 
Foster, B. 
1 70, 634 
Foster, P. 
25 1, 634 
Fox, R.L. I I 2, 125, 634 
Frankfurter, D. 
561 , 634 
France, R.T. 
2 1 . 342, 346, 478, 622, 
634 
Francis, J. 
1 74, 634 
Frede, M. 
104, 620 
Freedman, D.N. 
540, 634. 656 
French, C. 
1 30, 638 
Freyne, S. 
71 -72, 632 
Frymer-Kensky, T. 
1 69, 634 
Fulford, K. W.M. 
1 28, 639 
Fulfer, J. 
5 14, 658 
Funk, R. 
1 49, 435-36, 634 
Gager, J. 
205, 634 
Galanter, M. 
132, 634 

Author Index 
675 
Gamble, H. 
167, 279, 635 
Gantz. T. 
453. 635 
Gasparro, G.S. 
100, 171, 635 
Gempf. C. 
218. 635 
Gentili, B. 
219, 635 
Gericke. J. 
1 94, 635 
Giannantoni. G. 
290, 635 
Gieschen, C. 
207, 635 
Giovannoli, J. 
1 26, 635 
Girard, R. 
213, 635 
Godfrey, N. 
567. 635 
Godwin, J. 98, 635 
Goff, M. 
166, 635 
Goguel. M. 
52, 635 
Goldberg, G.J. 
333, 635 
Gooch, P. 
224. 635 
Goodacre. M. 
I, 94, 269-70. 274. 470, 
516, 625, 635, 641 
Goodenough, E. 
96, 635 
Goodman. F. 
72, 125, 128-29. 131, 137, 
636 
Goodman, M. 
72. 125. 1 28-29, 1 3 1 ,  
1 37, 636 
Gordon, R. 
99, 636 
Goulder, M. 
134, 269. 470. 473. 636 
Gove. H. 
257, 636 
Gowler, D. 
397, 636 
Grant. M. 217-18, 636 
Grant, R. 505-506, 636 
Gray, P 
409, 622 
Gray. R. 
70, 636 
Graziosi, B. 
219, 636 
Green, C. 
130, 636 
Green, P. 
1 25, 636 
Greenfield, J. 
164, 636 
Gregory, A. 
268, 636 
Greyson, B. 
129, 646 
Griffiths, J.G. 
101, 107, 1 1 6, 187. 636 
Gruen, E. 
66, 218, 449, 636-37 
Guglielmo, L. 
76-77, 206, 622. 637 
GUting, E. 
21, 624 
Gutmann, J. 
166. 63 7 
Haar. S. 
71, 637 
Habennas, G. 
23, 637 
Hagne D. 
1 77, 221, 637, 656 
Hahn, T. 
20, 637 
Hal borg, J. 
249, 645 
Hallquist, C. 249, 637 
H!illstrom. G. 
121, 637 
Halperin, D.J. 
62. 637 
Hamerton-Kelly, R.G. 
1 56, 433-35, 
453, 637 
Hankins, J. 
224, 637 
Hansen, W. 
48 1 ,  637 
Hanson, J. 
126, 1 36, 637 
Hard, R. 226, 637 
Harrington. D.J. 
458, 478, 637 
Harris, W. 
126, 1 3 1 .  637 
Harrison, T. 
108, 637 
Hartman, L. 
1 65, 1 76, 637 
Hatina, T. 
205. 352, 408, 460, 622-23, 
63 1-32, 637 
Hayward, P.A. 
104, 639 
Heckel, W. 
23, 638 
Hedrick. C. 216, 22 1, 307, 623, 638 
Heidel, W.A. 
405, 638 
Heilbrun, A. 
1 3 1 ,638 
Heimerdinger, J. 
486, 638 
Heisserer, A.J. 
23. 638 
HeIms, R. 
1 19, 361 -62, 396, 410, 497-
98, 638 
Herner, C. 
2 1 7-18, 638 
Hengel. M. 77-78, 164, 638 
Henney. J. 
128-29, 1 3 1, 137, 636 
Henze, M. 90, 638 
Hering, J. 
262, 638 
Heyob, S.K. 99, 638 
Hill, M. 
104, 639 
Hock, R. 
503, 638 
Hoek, A. van den 
1 17, 638 
Holden, K. 
130, 638 
Holding. J.P. 277, 626 
Holladay, C. 
1 65, 409, 622. 638 
Holt, F. 
23, 638 
Holzberg, N. 
299, 638 
Horbury, W. 
I 04, 638 
Horgan, J. 
126, 639 
Hornblower, S. 
230, 290, 294, 298, 
510, 639 
Horsley, J.A. 
521, 652 
Horsley, R. 71-72, 23 3, 639 
Hovenden, G. 
125, 639 
Hovland, C. 
1 32, 653 
Howard, G. 
590, 639 
Howard-Johnston, J. 
1 04, 639 
Hughes, P. 
468, 639 
Hultgren, S. 
1 98, 201 ,  639 

676 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
Hunt, S. 
153, 639 
Hunter, R. 
230, 632 
Hurst, L.D. 
75, 639 
Hurtado, L. 
I 05, 205, 639 
Ingerrnanson, R. 
257, 639 
Jackson, M. 
128, 639 
James, F. 
104, 174, 634 
James, W. 
126, 639 
Jarvie, I.C. 
159, 162-63, 639 
Jassen, A. 
76, 1 83, 206, 639 
Jensen, R.M. 
1 66, 639 
Jewett, R. 
95, 277-78, 639 
Johns, L.C. 
128, 639 
Johnson, F. 
129, 640 
Johnson, S.R. 
214-15, 640 
Jones, W. 
129, 660 
Jonge, H.J. de 
409, 640 
Jordan, J. 
461, 640 
Joshi, S. 
128, 651 
Judge, E.A. 
167, 640 
Kanavou, N. 225, 640 
Kannaday, W. 
265, 640 
Kasser, R. 
22 l ,  640 
Katz, E. 
290, 64 7 
Kazen, T. 
205, 640 
Kee, H.C. 
342, 346, 640 
Keel, 0. 
166, 640 
Keith, C. 
21, 640 
Kennedy, H.A.A. 
98, 130, 640 
Kent, J. 
1 34, 640 
Kim, J. 
74, 210, 640 
King, C.A.K. 
1 75, 448, 640 
Kingsley, P. 
1 02, 640 
Kinoshita, J. 
5 1 1, 640 
Kirsch, J. 
85, 640 
Klass, P.J. 
22 1, 640 
Klawans, J. 
155, 640 
Kleist, J. 
326, 641 
Klim; M. 
389, 641 
K1oppenborg, J. 
1 06-107, 270, 641 
Knight, J. 
36, 93, 182, 322, 641 
Koester, H. 25, 75, 221 ,  254, 492, 521, 
641 
Koivisto, R. 
381, 641 
Komamitsky, K. 
249, 641 
Kooten, G.H. van 
1 89, 641 
Kovacs, D. 
230, 273, 641 
Kraeling, C. 
257, 641 
Kramer, S.N. 
47, 641 
Krause, D. 
423, 445, 641 
Krenkel, M. 
267, 641 
Kurke, L. 
224, 641 
Kydd, R. 
125, 641 
Lacocque, A. 
86, 641 
Lamberton, R. 
1 16, 1 18, 641 
Lancellotti, M.G. 
1 00, 171, 641 
Landau, J.H. 
482, 642 
Lang, M. 
268, 642 
Lapham, F. 
221, 642 
Lapin, K. 
223, 642 
Lapinkivi, P. 
47, 169 
Law, S. 
394, 642 
Lawrence, P. 
160, 642 
Lawson, R.P 
233, 642 
Leach, E. 
440, 505-506, 642 
Lease, G. 
99, 642 
LeDonne, A. 
21, 640 
Lefkowitz, M. 
219, 642 
Le Rider, G. 
23, 642 
Levenson, J. 
213· 14, 642 
Levine, A.-J. 
69, 75, 89, 99, 106, 155, 
177, 182, 201 , 209, 216, 223, 305, 
342, 346, 393, 397, 399, 409, 426· 
27, 458·59, 562, 619-21 ,  624, 627, 
639, 632, 634, 636, 640-43, 646-
49, 654-56 
Lewis, I.M. 
1 25, 642 
Licona, M. 
23, 637 
Lincoln, A. 
1 27, 193, 642 
Lincoln, B. 
390, 642 
Littlewood, R. 
1 28, 642 
Livingstone, E.A. 
540, 628, 638 
Loftus, J. 30, 54, 67, 85, 94, I 04, 134, 
168, 1 79, 194, 2 1 1 , 217, 221, 249-
50, 354, 368, 397, 398-99, 458, 
488, 561 , 620, 625-26, 635, 643, 
645, 650 
Lohmeyer, E. 497, 643 
Lorimer, W.L. 
95, 643 
Losch, M.E. 
1 28, 649 
Lotufo Neto, F. 
129, 646 
Ltldemwm, G. 
71, 1 34, 261, 5 1 9-21 ,  
524, 553, 558, 636, 643 
Luhnnann, T. 
1 29, 643 
Lutz, C. 
1 75, 448, 643 
Lyons, W.J. 
404, 439, 444, 643 

Author Index 
677 
Maccoby, H. 
176, 643 
MacDonald, D. 
20, 262, 267, 270, 324, 
359-61, 388, 393, 396, 398-99, 
417. 422, 436-40, 442, 4 70-71' 
474, 479, 488, 623, 643 
MacGregor, G.H.C. 
189, 643 
Mack, B. 
13, 21 0, 260, 363, 381, 395, 
643 
Mack, D. 
515, 644 
Maclean, J.K.B. 
210, 405, 64 
MacLennan, R. 
66, 648 
MacNicol, A. 
269, 64 
Magne. J. 
482, 644 
Malina, B. 
1 1 8-19, 159, 644 
Manns, F. 
482-83, 64 
Marcus, I. 
234, 64 
Marcus, J. 
550, 644 
Marincola, J. 
218, 644 
Marks, S. 
23 5, 644 
Marrou, H. 
1 67, 644 
Marshall, I.H. 
485, 644 
Martin, D.B. 
185, 644 
Martin, R. 
383, 535, 644 
Martinez, F.G. 
75, 206, 644 
Mason, S. 
267, 644 
Mathews, T. 
166, 416, 64 
Mavromatis, A. 
127, 644 
Mayor, A. 
232, 644 
Mazar, A. 
215, 633 
McConnick, M. 
249, 645 
McCown, C.C. 
325, 645 
McCreery, C. 
1 28, 130, 628, 636, 645 
McCrone, W. 
257, 645 
McDonald, L.M. 
279, 645 
McDonough, S. 
201, 645 
McGinn, B. 
85, 645 
McGrath, J. 
457, 645 
McNamara, J.A. 
249, 645 
McNary-Zak, B. 
257, 624 
Mead, G.R.S. 
285, 645 
Meggitt, J. 
217, 645 
Meier, J. 
J 76, 645 
Mendels, D. 
69, 1 59, 645 
Mercer, S. 
171, 645 
Merkelbach, R. 
99, 645 
Merritt, R. 
403, 406, 645 
Merz, A. 
21, 51, 271, 332, 342, 346, 
656 
Mettinger, T. 
169, 645 
Metzenthin, C. 
76, 645 
Metzger, B. 
95, 97, 216, 261, 279, 325, 
645 
Meyer, M. 
96, 99, I 03, 148, 182, 646 
Milik, J. T. 
166, 646 
Miller, D. 
456, 646 
Miller, P. 
456, 646 
Miller, R.C. 
1 73, 226, 646 
Miller, R. 
432, 646 
Mills, W. 
125, 646 
Mojsov, B. 
171, 646 
Moloney, F. 
496, 646 
Moo, D. 
95, 646 
Moreira-Almeida, A. 
129, 646 
Morgan, K. 
122, 646 
Moss, C. 
151, 646 
Moyise, S. 
141, 646 
MUller, M. 
205, 522, 553, 646 
Munro, W. 
277, 646 
Murphy, F. 
216, 646 
Mussies, G. 
164, 64 7 
Nails, D. 
290, 64 7 
Navia, L. 
224, 290, 647 
Nawotka, K. 
23, 64 7 
Neusner, J. 
67-68, 647 
Neville, D. 
434, 647 
Neyrey, J. 
263, 646 
Neirynck, F. 
434, 52 1, 553, 647 
Newberg, A. 
126, 629 
Newell, R.R. 
218, 647 
Nickell, J. 
257, 647 
Nickelsburg, G. 
1 55, 1 85, 430-32, 458, 
647 
Nilsson, M. 
99, 101, 647 
Nock, A.D. 
1 25, 647 
Noll, K. 
49, 33 1, 352, 52 1, 647 
Nordgaard, S. 
198, 64 7 
Novenson, M. 
61, 647 
Ober, W.B. 
102, 647 
O'Day, G. 
409, 622 
Ogden, S. 
26, 648 
Ohayon, M.M. 
128, 648 
Okeke, G.E. 
567, 648 
Olson, K. 
333, 336, 340, 397, 648 
Otto, S. 
215, 648 
Overman, J .A. 
66, 648 
Owen. P. 
205, 639 

678 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
Pagels, E. 
264, 648 
Paget, J.C. 
67, 72, 88, 226, 332-33, 
335-36, 340, 342, 347, 622, 634, 
648, 65 1 
Pakkanen, P. 
103-106, 648 
Parker, P. 
268, 648 
Parkin, T.G. 
151, 648 
Partridge, C. 
1 32, 160, 648 
Parvus, R. 
3 16, 648 
Pastor, J. 
164, 648 
Payne, D.F. 383-84, 648 
Pearce, K. 
488, 500, 503, 648 
Pearson, B. 
567, 648 
Peebles, R.J. 
20, 648 
Peper, B. 
342, 648 
Pepin, J. 
1 17, 649 
Perrin, N. 
94, 269, 635, 649 
Perry, B.E. 
224, 649 
Pervo, R. 
267-68, 316, 348, 3 59-60, 
367-68, 649 
Peters, E. 
128, 629 
Petersen, N. 
412-13, 649 
Petty, R. 
132, 649 
Pfann, S. 257-58, 649, 651 
Pflock, K. T. 
250, 649 
Pilch, J. 
119, 644 
Pinnick, A. 
164, 21 5, 627, 636 
Pitard, W. 
169, 654 
Pokorny, P. 
66, 627 
Porter, S. 
21, 24, 32-34, 67, 117, 141, 
153, 176, 222, 262, 269, 279, 458, 
478, 620, 623, 626-27, 632, 635, 
637-39, 649, 659 
Porton, G. 
399, 649 
Posey, T.B. 
128, 649 
Powers, T. 
445, 649 
Pressei, E. 
128-29, 131, 137, 636 
Price, R.G. 
53-54 
Price, R.M. 
5-6, 49, 51, 57-58, 62, 66, 
83, 1 07-108, 1 1 1, 127, 129, 131-
32, 142, 145, 1 59, 161, 1 72-73, 
1 75-76, 198, 221, 227, 247, 249, 
261-63, 267, 271, 274, 283, 305, 
319, 335, 355, 362, 364, 368-71, 
388-89, 397, 399, 417, 422, 425-
26, 441, 445, 455-56, 458, 470, 
473, 478, 488, 492, 516, 520, 522, 
571, 625-26, 629, 632, 649-50 
Prince, S. 
224, 650 
Quarles, C. 
257, 650 
Rahner, H. 
98, 650 
Rapske, B. 
377, 650 
Rapuano, Y. 
258, 649, 65 1 
Reardon, B. 
299. 650 
Reece, S. 
482, 650 
Rees, W.D. 
130. 650 
Reeves, J. 
75, 650 
Reicke, B. 
189, 193, 650 
Reinmuth. E. 
216, 650 
Remsberg. J.E. 
52, 650 
Reuter, R. 
261-62, 280, 51 1. 650 
Richard, E. 
567, 650 
Richards, E.R. 
261-62, 650 
Richey, M. 
167, 650 
Riecken, H. 
132, 633 
Riley, G. 
274, 650 
Robbins, V. 
360, 650 
Roberts, C. H. 
457, 651 
Roberts, D. 235, 65 1 
Robinson . .J. 
387, 65 1 
Roisman . .1. 
23, 65 1 
Roller, L. 
1 00, 651 
Rose, H .J. 
226, 63 7 
Rosenbaum, S. 
165, 65 1 
Rosenmeyer, P. 
218, 651 
Ross, C.A. 
128, 651 
Rothschild, C. 
176, 359. 457, 65 1 
Ruprecht, L. 
488, 65 1 
Rutgers, L. 
166, 34 7. 65 1 
Sacks, 0. 
126-27, 129, 65 1 
Sreb0, M. 
92, 65 1, 653 
Safrai, Z. 
164, 634, 64 7. 65 1 
Salm, R. 
258, 65 1 
Salvesen, A. 
88, 651 
Samuelsson, G. 
61, 65 1 
Sanders, E.P. 
21. 33, 177, 189, 65 1, 653 
Sanders, J. 
88. 185, 207. 279, 424, 632. 
635. 641, 645 
Satterthwaite, P.E. 
359, 652 
Sausa, D. 
257, 652 
Say lor, D. 
226, 652 
Schachter, S. 
132, 633 
Schafer, P. 
282-84, 652 
Schaper, J. 
88, 652 
Scheffler, E.H. 
482-83, 652 
Schiffman. L. 
68, 652 

Author Index 
679 
Schmalz, R. 
125, 653 
Schmeling, G. 
299, 652 
Schneemelcher, W. 
221, 652 
Schonfield, H. 
285, 652 
Schor, A. 
170, 652 
Schreckenberg, H. 
267, 652 
Schr<Ster, J. 
521, 652 
Schweitzer, A. 
52, 652 
Scott, J. 
107, 652 
Seaford, R. 
99, 171, 652 
Segal, A. 
66, 105, 127, 146, 189, 229-
30, 367, 652 
Sellew, P. 
261, 5 1 1, 653 
Semenyna, S. 
125, 653 
Shanafelt, R. 
561, 652 
Shanks, H. 
73, 482, 653 
Shellard, B. 
267-69, 478, 653 
Shepherd, T. 
434, 653 
Sherif, M. 
132, 653 
Shin, H. W. 
251, 653 
Shorter, E. 
124, 653 
Siddiqi, M.Z. 
388, 653 
Silberman, N. 
215, 633 
Sim, D. 
146, 266, 316, 458, 553, 653 
Simpson, R.T. 
471 ,  653 
Skarsaune, 0. 92, 653 
Slade, P. 
128-29, 621 ,  653 
Slingerland, D. 
348, 654 
Smith, D.M. 
492, 654 
Smith, M. 
165, 654 
Smith, M. 
164, 654 
Smith, N. 
623, 654 
Smith, R. 
473, 654 
Snodgrass, K.R. 
94, 274, 654 
Spadafora, F. 
482, 654 
Spanosa, N. 
130, 654 
Sparks, K. 
468, 654 
Spawforth, A. 
230, 290, 294, 298, 510, 
639 
Spong, J.S. 
453, 654 
Staikos, K. 
165, 654 
Standing, E. 
19, 654 
Stem, R. 
226, 654 
Stephens, S. 
299, 654 
Sterling, G. 
267, 305, 381, 474, 654 
Stem, J. 
222, 654 
Stewart, R. 
261, 631 
StOkl ben Ezra, D. 
82, 180, 207, 210, 
405, 407, 655 
Stone, J. 
124, 655 
Stone, M. 
164, 184, 215, 627, 636, 655 
Strange, W.A. 
268, 271, 655 
Strauss, M. 
33-34, 158, 174, 269, 398, 
655 
Stroumsa, G. 
108, 655 
Struck, P. 
1 1 8, 655 
Swan, P.M. 
304, 655 
Swanson, R. 
401-402, 406, 481, 486, 
584, 655 
Swarup, R. 
388, 655 
Tabor, J. 
76, 1 13, 1 27, 178, 197, 257, 
374, 529, 649, 655 
Takacs, S. 
99, 655 
Talbert, C. 
230, 389, 458, 655 
Tannehill, R. 
193, 260, 264, 655 
Taubenschlag, R. 
307, 655 
Taylor, C. 
126, 655 
Taylor, J. 
130, 176, 455-56, 656 
Theissen, G. 
21, 51, 271, 332, 342, 346, 
656 
Thompson, J. 
540, 656 
Thompson, M.M. 
460-61, 656 
Thompson, P.J. 
473, 656 
Thompson, T. 
6, 49, 1 19, 215, 352, 389, 
396, 491, 521-22, 629, 646-47, 
656-57 
Thorburn, T.J. 
52, 656 
Tigchelaar, E. 
75, 206, 644 
Tolbert, M.A. 
389, 656 
Too, Y.L. 
167, 656 
Trafton, J.L. 
89, 656 
Trigg, J. 
120-21, 656 
Tritle, L. 
23, 638 
Trobisch, D. 
221, 264, 267, 279, 656 
Trompf, G. W. 
160, 656 
Trudinger, L.P. 
589-90, 656 
Tuckett, C. 
221, 409, 640, 656 
Turner, E.G. 
307, 656 
Turner, N. 
269, 656 
Twelftree, G. 
282, 657 
Tyson, J. 
267, 362, 657 
Tzoref, S. 
87, 657 
Uehlinger, C. 
166, 640 
Ulansey, D. 
99, 423, 657 
Vaage, L.E. 
1 74, 657 

680 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
Vallone, R. 
132, 660 
VanderKam, J. 
68, 449, 652, 657 
VanderSpek, B. 
23, 657 
Van Oyen, G. 
434, 657 
Van Voorst, R. 
4-7, 21, 51, 27 1, 275, 
282-84, 332, 340, 342, 346, 522-
23, 657 
Verenna, T. 
49, 352, 449, 49 1, 521 -22, 
553, 558, 565, 575, 577, 587, 629, 
646-47, 657 
Vermes, G. 
76, 176, 657 
Vemant, J.-P. 
107, 210, 657 
Versnel, H.S. 
104, 210, 657 
Vines, M.E. 
389, 658 
Voss, R. 
258, 649 
Wae\ien, H. 
268, 658 
Wainwright, A. W. 
95, 658 
Walck, L. 
205, 658 
Walker, W. 
261, 277, 658 
Wallace, D. 
261, 631 
Wallbank, F. W. 
218, 658 
Walter, N. 
521, 658 
Wanke, J. 
482, 658 
Watson, D. 
224, 658 
Watters, E. 
129, 658 
Weeden, T. 
251, 429, 658 
WeBs, G.A. 
49-5 1, 520, 658 
Wenham, D. 
271, 282, 478, 622, 657-58 
Whealey, A. 
332-33. 335, 337, 340, 
342, 658 
Wheaton, B. 
514, 658 
White, L.M. 
261, 264, 269, 271 , 3 16, 
487, 659 
Whitmarsh, T. 
299, 398, 659 
Wieand, D. 
506, 659 
Wiebe, P. 
130, 659 
Wiechers, A. 
224, 659 
Wiens, D. 
97, 659 
Wild, R. 
99, 659 
Will, E. 
349, 659 
Williams, C.S.C. 
265, 659 
Williams, F.E. 
160, 659 
Williams, J. 
76, 209- 1 0, 659 
Williams, M. 
66, 659 
Williamson, H.G.M. 
87, 176, 627, 659 
Wills, L. 
215, 223-24, 389, 659 
Wilson, E. 
224, 659 
Wilson, R.M. 
22 1, 652 
Wink, W. 
189, 659 
Winkler, J. 
299, 657 
Winn, A. 
410, 659 
Winter, D. 
21, 656 
Wise, M. 
285, 659 
Wiseman, T. 
226, 453, 659 
Witherington, B. 
265, 659 
Wittkower, E.D. 
1 24, 1 28, 660 
Wood, M. 
8-9, 660 
Worsley, P. 
160-62, 660 
Wratislaw, A.H. 
404-405, 660 
Wright, A. 
185, 660 
Wright, N.T. 
482-83, 660 
Yoder. K. 
503, 660 
Zimbardo, P. 
132, 660 
Zindler, F. 
xiv, 6, 260, 285, 625, 660 
Zusne. L. 
129, 660 

SUBJECT INDEX 
Abram/Abraham 
1 1 7, 196, 206-207, 
213, 2 15n1 57, 219-20, 222, 240n9, 
503-505, 548n50, 562n66, 569, 
575-79 
Acts (apocryphal) 
150, 22 1-22, 327. 
364; Acts of John, 191 -92: Acts 
of Peter and Paul, 150n202, 273, 
310, 364, 398n23; Acts of Pilate, 
304 
Acts (canonical) 
12, 1 5, 3 1 ,  71, 124-25, 
134-35, 148, 149-50, 216n 159, 
217n163, 2 1 8nl64, 22 1 . 225, 259-
60, 261 nn 12, 14, 262n 16, 265n23, 
267-68, 270-71, 274n4 1 ,  294. 306, 
308, 3 10, 324, 326-27, 340n95, 
341, 342, 348, 359-86, 40 1. 
406n44, 436, 439n l08, 445n l 17, 
454, 457, 473-74, 478nl 88, 479. 
485-86, 524n29, 587. 596-98, 603-
605, 616ੌ 'we' passages, 360-6 1 n4. 
See also scripture index, 666-67 
Acts (pagan/ Alexandrian) 
I 01, 209 
Adam and Eve 
184, 195-99, 202, 205, 
482n197, 563, 570, 576, 593, 6 1 3  
ad hoc assumptions 
\3, 28, 199, 308, 
335, 374, 391, 478, 506n239. 513-
14. 516n10, 517, 540, 566-67, 585, 
591n103, 608, 613 
Adonis (Tammuz) 
46, 100n79, 169-70, 
172. See also dying-and-rising 
gods, lnanna, mystery cults 
Aesop 
223-27, 428, 436 
a fortiori (method of) 
16, 44. 243nl5, 
279, 289, 308, 3 1 5, 3 16, 323, 330, 
370-71 , 374-75, 380,' 381 n34, 507, 
53 1, 552, 563n68, 574, 58 1 , 582, 
586, 591 n 1 03, 592, 594-606, 61 6 
ajudicantiori (method of) 
16, 597-99 
(599) 
Alexander Jannaeus 
281 -85, 288 
Alexander the Great 
21 -24, 2 1 7, 229, 
23 1-32n 193, 447-5 1 
Alexandria 22-23, 70, 130n 172, 
176n50, 209, 282, 294, 302, 305, 
455-56n 137. See also Clement (of 
Alexandria), Origen, Philo 
allegory (use of) 
xi, 9, 12, 20, 29, 
41n4, 53-54, 58, 72, 108, 114-24, 
13 7, 173, 190, 193, 197-98, 225, 
233, 236, 249-5 1, 279, 288, 3 1 8, 
326n70, 343n99, 346, 35l -53. 355, 
367, 390-94, 396-97, 398, 403-
407, 411, 414. 416, 41 7n63, 42 1-
28, 433-36. 439, 44 1, 443, 445-47, 
450-56, 463-65, 469, 
486, 489, 498-500, 505-506, 508-
509, 524n29, 559, 560n62, 575, 
577-82. 608-609. See also myth, 
secrets 
Ananias (the Apostle) 
135. 366-67 
Ananus (high priest) 
337-40 
Andronicus (the Apostle) 
524 
angels and angelology 
37-45, 48, 
52, 60, 78-79, 82, 92, 96, 104-
105, 1 1 0, 1 1 2. 1 33, 135, 1 37-38, 
144, 158, 179-95, 200-202. 206, 
233n l95, 3 12, 3 14, 322, 343n99, 
348, 360, 363. 366-67, 377. 380, 
383, 407, 426. 46 1, 462, 469n l61. 
472-73, 479. 484, 488, 500n224, 
508, 518- I 9, 527, 546-48, 565, 
578n87, 580, 592-93, 612-13. See 
also demons, demigods, Logos, 
Melchizedek, Michael, Satan 
Numbers in bold indicate the most important discussion of a concept, such as where it is defined 
and explained. 

682 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
apocalypticism 
37n2, 48n 1 1, 68, 75-78, 
85n49, 89, 93-94, 1 55-56, 159-63, 
172, 192n91, 205, 207, 215, 221, 
264n20, 265-66n24, 292, 308, 378, 
382, 427-28, 438n105, 578n87. 
See also prophecy 
apocalyptic prophet (Jesus as) 
26, 28, 
85n49, 93-94, 205, 265-66n24. See 
also apocalypticism, prophecy 
Apollos (the Apostle) 
I l l ,  147, 150, 
524-25, 589n99 
apologetics (modem Christian) 
xii, 14, 
23n9, 164n24, 233n197, 285n1 1, 
381n34, 391, 397n20, 397n20, 
398n24, 491n214, 507, 5 17, 525, 
561n65, 604, 617-18 
Apollonius ofTyana 291, 301, 448-
49nn1 23, 128, 475nl83 
Apostles 
93, 110- 1 1, 1 3 1 ,  133-36, 
139-40, 1 47-49, 151, 262-63, 272, 
292, 306, 310n41, 3 13- 14, 319, 
324-27, 360, 362, 364, 388, 409, 
411, 457, 464, 466, 485, 516-20, 
524-30, 532-33, 536-37, 538-39, 
546-47, 554, 556, 559, 561, 571, 
583-90, 592-93, 607-608. See also 
Ananias, AndronicuѮ Apollos, 
Barnabas, Brothers of the Lord, 
Disciples, James, John, Judas 
Iscariot, Junias, Paul, Peter, Philip, 
the Pillars, super-apostles, Thomas, 
Twelve 
Apuleius 
101-102, 298, 475 
Aramaic 
74n32, 78n39, 164n24, 
166n28, 195n97, 266n24, 325, 
366, 383-85, 402, 404, 408-10, 
465-66, 524n29, 604 
archaeology 
1-2, 22-23, 24, 14 7n 196, 
165-66nn27-28, 166, 215nl57, 
257-58, 391, 444-45n 117, 51 On2 
archon 
as demon, 185, 190-91, 564-
66; as human, 572-73. See also 
demons 
Arimathea 
369-72, 438-39, 462 
Arrian 
22 
Arthur (King) 
8-11, 222, 237, 350, 
352n1 17, 436 
ascension fables 
225-29. See also 
mythotype, Romulus 
Ascension of Isaiah 
36-48, 141, 1 80, 
1 82-83, 1 87, 192, 194, 214, 276, 
3 1 9n53, 321-23, 330, 351, 357, 
531 , 534, 540-45, 563, 565-66, 
570, 609-10, 613 
ascension (of Jesus) 
38-44, 56-57, 62, 
83n45, 1 05-106, 1 12, 142, 168, 
1 83, 225-29, 322, 363, 368-69, 
470, 481 , 491n215, 517, 531, 537, 
543 
astrology, astronomy, and astro­
theology 
23, 52, 178-81 ,  256, 
302. See also cosmology 
atonement (for sins) 
71n25, 74n32, 
76-78, 81-83, 92-93, 144-45, 155, 
157, 206-207, 209-11, 403-407, 
419, 560-61, 564. See also human 
sacrifice, Yom Kippur 
Attis cult 
99-100n79, 100, 102n83, 
170n36, 171n39, 602, 615 
Augustine (of Hippo) 
1 22-23, 1 25n 161, 
296, 615 
Augustus (emperor) 
220, 226n182, 229, 
252-53, 282, 296 
Bacchus. See Dionysus 
background knowledge, role of (and 
demarcation from 'evidence') 
14-
17, 24, 29, 49, 52, 55, 56-234 
{58-59, 65-66, 73, 83, 130-3 1, 134, 
141, 143nl74, 145, 153, 168n3 1, 
201n123, 234, 236-39, 240-41, 
243, 247-50, 276, 330, 405n42, 
507, 528, 531n34, 532, 569n73, 
581 , 591, 607, 61 1-16 
baptism: of Christians 
72, 97, 99, 
102n84, 106-10, 1 12, l l3nl l7, 
1 19, 157, 165n26, 1 82, 183, 191, 
192, 366, 422, 443, 485, 518, 543-
44, 584-85, 607, 61 1 ;  of Jesus, 
69-70, 1 19, 313, 3 1 8, 400, 420, 
422-23, 438n105, 443, 453, 460, 
461 , 462, 485, 515, 5 16, 546; of 
the mystery cults, 99-103, 107, 302 
Barabbas 
21 On 146, 402-408, 423, 425, 
433, 443, 447, 451 
Barnabas (the Apostle) 
582-83 
Barnabas (Epistle of) 
91, 221-22, 
265n24, 3 J 5-16n44, 407, 426n77 

• 
r. 
Subject Index 
683 
Bayes's Theorem xiii, 14-16, 45n8, 
58, 65n 13, 238-39, 254n3, 256, 
394-95, 405, 478n187, 509n243, 
510- l ln3, 512-14, 569n73, 596-
60 I, 617. See a/so mathematics, 
probabilities, reference classes, 
rule of greater knowledge 
Beloved Disciple. See Lazarus 
Bethel (God's House) 483-85 
Bethlehem 
282-85, 321, 472, 484 
Bezae (Codex) 
482-86 
bias (as affecting judgment) 
xi-xiii, 3, 
5, 14, 133, 391 , 5 1 2-14, 581, 
595 
bias (as afecting the survival of 
evidence). See evidence loss 
Biblical Antiquities 
69n22, 1 59n 1 0, 
216, 458n l41, 468, 478 
birth (of Jesus). See nativity 
Brother(s) ofthe Lord 
108, 3 10, 371-
75, 453-56, 547-48, 575, 578, 
579n88, S82-92, 594, 605, 61 1 .  
See also fictive kinship, James, 
Jude 
BT. See Bayes's Theorem 
Caligula (emperor) 266n24, 286, 295, 
304 
Can a narrative 490-99, 506 
cargo cults 
9-10, 1 59-63 
Cassius Dio 
57n3, 150n205, 273n40, 
275n42, 297, 304, 3 15n44, 
33 1 n75, 344nl 02, 347-48, 
448n l26 
Celsus 
1 19-20, 275, 283, 301 -302, 335-
36, 350, 355 
Cephas. See Peter (the Apostle) and 
Peter (name of) 
Chrestus (and the Chrestians) 
275, 295, 
343-4, 347-49 
Christ (the title of) 
3-4, 60-61, 66, 
68nl 7, 70-71 ,  73-74, 78-19, 82, 
86-87, 89-90, 92, 205-207, 239-40, 
242, 245-46, 329, 332-34, 337-40, 
342, 343-45, 349nl l0, 350, 5 14, 
550, 575 
Claudius (emperor) 
150n205, 1 53n2, 
281, 286-87, 295-96, 344, 347-49 
Claudius Lysias 377-78 
Clement (of Alexandria) 84n47, 108-
13, 122-23, 145, 180n58, 207n1 35, 
223nl 76, 585 
Clement (of Rome) 
90, 142, 148, 151 , 
22 1, 265, 271-74, 297n24, 306-15, 
320, 330n73, 338n92, 356-57, 387, 
398-99, 437, 464, 517, 528-29, 
538, 543, 554-56, 561 , 607-608 
Cleopas 56, 366, 480-83, 485 
Colossians (Epistle to the) 
95, l27n 1 64, 
146n 195, 189n86, 1 93, 262, 
280n50, 552, 594, 606. See a/so 
scripture index, 670 
Codrus (King) 
21 0 
consequent probabilities (or 'likeli­
hoods'), determining the 
14-16, 
27, 29-30, 35, 45n8, 54-55, 58-59, 
1 34, 228n 187, 238-39, 252-54, 
258n7, 278-79, 288-89, 315-17, 
320, 323n62, 326, 354-58, 386, 
393-95, 405, 509, 51 3, 538, 
557nn55-56, 569n73, 575n82, 
591nl03, 597ࠆ3, 605n l 1, 614. 
617 
conspiracy theories 
2, 56-57, 1 63n22, 
276-77, 291, 303-305, 337n88, 
378, 430-31 ,  560n62, 566, 573, 
609 
Corinthians (the Epistles to the) 48n I I .  
97-98, 1 10-1 1, 1 16, 120, 136, 
144n l 93, 191 n88, 198nl 12, 221, 
261 ,  280n50, 309, 319, 5 I 1 n4, 
516-17, 532, 554-55, 566n70, 57 1, 
572n80, 582-87. See also scripture 
index, 661-69 
cosmology (ancient) 
63, 1 73n46, 178-
81, 186, 189n86, 1 94-205, 236, 
612-13. See a/so angels, astrology. 
demigods, demons, finnament. 
gods, heavens, outer space 
criteria 
xii-xiii, 2 I, 61, 254-56, 39 1. 
394, 399-400. See a/so method, 
Rank-Raglan hero-type 
Crocker, Betty 
235-36 
crucifixion 27-28, 31-34, 38, 40-41 . 
45-48, 55, 61-62, 80, 85, 87, ࠇ 
93, I l l, 142, 168-69, 210-13, 
232nl94, 281. ࠈ7, 299, 303. 
309, 314, 3 1 7-18, 328-30, 332, 

684 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
crucifixion (continued) 
346, 371 , 373, 399-400, 402-408, 
4 16n62, 422-26, 437-38, 441, 443, 
445-47, 453nl 32, 454, 461-63, 
493-94, 497-501, 504, 515, 530-
3 1, 533-38, 543-44, 551 '  562-66, 
570n75, 572-73, 592, 610, 613-16 
Cynic influence 
173-75, 224 
Cyrenaics 
446-4 7 
Daniel (book of) 
10- 1 1, 26, 32, 36, 40, 
68, 76-83, 83-87, 87, 88n52, 90, 
137, 141, 1 55-56, 2 1 5, 2 16, 218, 
238, 287, 288, 367, 388, 399, 436. 
See also scripture index, 662 
Daniel (lost writings of) 
89n53 
Daniel (the prophet) 
10-11, 237, 
352n 1 1 7, 388, 436 
dating (the evidence) 
5, 10, 12, 13, 15, 
22, 36-37, 57n3, 63-64, 68, 73-75, 
82, 86, 88, 90-91 ,  93-94, 100n79, 
101 n80, 102, 108, 1 12, 11 4n 121, 
1 19, 121-22, 144, 146-48, 150, 
168-70, 1 75, 178n52, 180, 1 93, 
195n97, 1 98-99, 209, 2 1 1 , 216, 
222, 224-25, 257n6, 258-75, 276, 
279, 280, 281, 283, 286, 290, 293-
306, 308-10, 312n43, 315-17, 320, 
323-27, 331 n74, 332, 335, 337-38, 
342, 344-47, 350-51, 355, 360-
62nn3, 4, 14, 373, 378, 386n40, 
387, 402, 406, 409, 429n85, 436, 
440, 455nl 37, 458n l41, 467-68, 
478, 480n194, 484n202, 520-21 ,  
539-40, 555, 567, 569n73, 581 ,  
583n93, 591 
David (King) 
49, 75, 81, 89, 2 1 0-
1 1n 1 48, 232, 233n198, 282, 288, 
317-18, 328, 33 1 , 516, 532-33, 
550, 572, 575-82. See also seed 
Dead Sea scrolls 
24, 50, 62n9, 66-
67nnl 4-15, 68, 71n25, 75-76n34, 
76-78, 83-84n46, 86, 87, 89, 91, 
96n70, 105n90, l 07nl00, I l l, 142, 
155-56, 166n28, 167, 1 75, 176-77, 
180, 183n73, 185n75, 1 94, 205-
207, 215n156, 285n10, 30l n30, 
399n26, 468n157, 609 
Decius Mus 
210 
definitions 
16, 60-65. 71-72n27, 75n34. 
76. 79, 96. 1 03-107. 173n46, 
254n2. See also gods, hypothesis. 
myth. outer space 
demarcation. See background knowledge 
demigods 
34, 52, 71, 106. 107, 1 16. 
181-83, 186, 217, 236. 280, 287. 
31 4. 343, 538, 557, 611. 613. 
See also angels, demons, gods. 
mystery cults 
demons and demonology (ancient) 
41-
48, 52n I 5, 60, 67, 72, 77. 104-105. 
1 1 5-I 6, 181-93, 205. 313. 318. 
321-22, 4I5- I 8, 438n i05. 443. 
446n1 22, 447, 499n223, 534, 545. 
549. 551 , 560n62, 563-66. 569. 
576. 580, 593, 607, 613. See also 
angels, exorcism, Satan 
Dionysus (Bacchus) 
58n4, 98n78, 
99n79, 10I n80, 102nn83-84, 
104n89, I 08n 106, 11 5. I 23-24. 
1 30n 172, I 7 I n39, 172-73. 1 86. 
217. 230n189, 23 1, 237, 303, 361. 
403n36, 499n222. See also dying­
and-rising, mystery cults 
Disciples (as a group) 
22, 32-34, 41 n4. 
149. 264-65, 280, 289-92, 3 19. 
33 1 . 363, 365, 368, 379, 387, 399. 
41 L 4I4, 419, 42 1, 423-24nn70. 
72, 432n96, 435, 439n l 08, 
440. 444-46, 452, 455. 459-60. 
462, 465, 469, 488-89. 492-93. 
496n2 18, 498, 500n224, 505-506. 
519. 524, 528, 530, 532, 537. 550. 
553. 558, 560, 562, 572, 586, 588. 
592. See also apostles. Cleopas. 
James, John, Joseph of Arimathea 
Judas lscariot, Lazarus, Peter. 
Philip, the Pillars, Thomas, Twelve 
Docetism 
36-37n l, 318-20 
Domitian 
264n20, 273, 275n42, 330-
31, 340. 345n1 02, 449 
Dumuzi. See Adonis 
dying-and-rising gods (concept oO 
45-
47. IOOn79. 105-106, 168-73, 186. 
309. 61 I, 614. See also Adonis. 
demigods, Dionysus, Hercules. 
Inanna, miracles, mystery cults. 
Osiris, resurrection, Romulus. 
Zalmoxis 

Subject Index 
685 
dying messiah (concept of) 
73؍81, 
87, 454n134, 610੍16. See also 
messiahs 
Egypt 
1 -2, 53, 70, 72, 100-101, 103, 
107, 1 14, 144, 149, 167n30, 171, 
187, 219, 232n193, 261nl3, 282, 
294, 298, 304, 307n39, 387, 
398n23, 446, 461, 472, 498n222, 
503, 56ln65, 578n87, 61l . See 
also Alexandria 
Egyptian, the (as messianic figure) 
70 
elements (elementals, as demons) 
192-
93, 577-79 
elements (of background evidence) 
16-
17, 65-234, 607 
Eleusis (mysteries of) 
99n79, 100-102, 
1 1 5. See also mystery cults 
Elij ah-EI isha narrative (use of) 
215-16, 
360, 410, 417n63, 436, 474-79, 
487, 498-99. See also the scripture 
index, 661 
Emmaus narative 
332-33, 365, 480-85. 
See also Bethel, Bezae 
empty tomb (concept and narratives) 
5n7, 23, 57, 172-73, 1 97, 198-
99, 220nl 70, 225-30, 232n193, 
250n23, 354n l 1 9, 355n121, 368-
71, 374, 380, 399, 421-23, 426, 
438n l05, 439, 451, 456nl 37, 
458, 469-70, 480-81, 486, 488, 
489, 49l n215, 500, 501 -502, 504, 
563, 573. See also miracles, myth, 
resurrection 
Ephesians (Epistle of Paul to the) 
146nl95, 189n86, 191n88, 262, 
3 12n43, 537n41 ,  606. See also 
scripture index, 669-70 
Epiphanius 
146n195, 281-85, 288, 401 
Epistles (canonical) 
15, 20, 22, 26, 28, 
32-33, 54, 92-93n64, 93-94, 97, 
1 06n95, 109, 1 13-14n l 19, 138, 
145-48, 150-52, 161, 189n86, 221 ,  
259੎. 274, 277, 279-80, 287, 
292, 306-308, 331, 350, 351, 360, 
362, 374, 377, 395, 507, 510-99, 
602-603, 605؍609, 612, 614, 616. 
See also Colossians, Corinthians, 
Ephesians, Galatians, Hebrews, 
James, John, Jude, Pastoral 
Epistles, Philemon, Philippians, 
Peter, Revelation, Romans, 
Thessalonians; and the scripture 
index, 667-71 
esoteric myths. See exoteric 
Essenes 
107, 114n 1 19, 1 59n 1 0, 175-77, 
334 
estimating probabilities. See probabilities 
Eucharist 
47, 97, 102, 1 19, 138, 1 43-
45, 388, 417n63, 424, 428, 485, 
549, 557-63, 573, 594, 611; pagan 
equivalents, 99-100, 1 02, 1 07, 302. 
See also Last Supper, Passover 
Eugnostos the Blessed 387-88, 398, 
457-58 
euhemerism 
1 15-16, 222, 609 
Eusebius 
l 20nl43, 121-22, 149, 1 5 1 ,  
221, 273-74nn40-41, 286n 13, 
194n22, 301, 304, 323-24, 326-
27nn70-71, 329n72, 331-33, 
335-38, 340n94, 346n104, 347, 
484nn201, 204 
evidence loss, problem of 
19, 20, 22, 
39, 44, 48n ll , 64, 70n25, 83-84, 
88-92, 100, 1 1 9, 149, 177, 193n95, 
258, 270, 275-77, 280n50, 293-
308, 3 12-13, 326, 343, 346, 349-
56, 357nl22, 360, 380 387-88, 
409-10, 418, 450, 457, 469n161, 
486, 497, 498, 502, 529, 555-56, 
574, 578n87, 582, 608. See also 
bias, forgery 
exorcism 
31, 34, 1 19, 1 33, 1 36-37, 
3 1 3, 412-13, 415-16, 443, 465, 
499n223, 524, 566. See also 
demons, miracles 
exoteric myths vs. esoteric 
81-82, 
108n1 0੏ 1 12, 1 14, 207-208, 249, 
288, 343n99, 346, 349-52, 355, 
376, 387, 411, 424n73, 443, 445-
51, 503n231, 508, 519, 537, 608, 
612. See also allegory, myth, secrets 
extrabiblical evidence 
12, 15, 259-60, 
271-75, 279-80, 281-358, 596-98, 
616 
eyewitness check (on embellishment) 
249-52, 349-56. See also rapid 
legendary development 

686 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
eyewitness sources (availability of) 
22, 
80, 149, 227, 25 1 , 267-69, 274, 
280, 289-91 '  330-31 ,  343, 351 -52, 
355, 360, 397, 435-36, 475, 490, 
500-505, 507, 5 1 0, 51 2, 519, 525-
26, 550, 573. See also eyewitness 
check, Lazarus 
Ezekiel (lost writings of) 
89n53 
faith healing. See healing 
fallacies 
6-7, 9. 21, 24-25, 30-3 1 ,  52, 
58n5, 61, 62, 87, 97n72, J64-
65n24, 174n47, 216, 228nl 87, 
251 n24, 256, 258n8, 275n42, 3 1 7-
18, 351n l l 5, 397n20, 473, 500-
501 n25, 514, 516, 522-23, 524n28, 
602, 6 I 4, 616. See also logic, 
method, validity 
family of Jesus. See brothers, father, 
mother 
father of Jesus. See Joseph, seed 
feedings (miraculous) 
353-54, 415-18, 
435, 438nl 05, 487-88 
fictive kinship 
106-107, 1 08, 453-56, 
587, 61 1 
firmament 
37-45, 63, 1 78-80, 1 84-87, 
19 I -96, 3 22, 544-4 7. See also 
cosmology, heavens 
forgery 
9, 22, 32, 36, 78-79, 86, 90, 
191 -92, 2 1 5-18, 221, 257n6, 259, 
260-65, 275-77, 280, 290n l9, 292, 
298-99, 309, 3 10n41, 3 16, 333n81 ,  
336, 35 1 , 491n2 1 5, 528, 53 1, 
537n4 1 , 567n71 , 608-609 
Gabriel (Revelation of) 
90n55 
Galatians (the Epistle to the) 
93, 135. 
138. 146-47, 213, 261 , 28 1. 325, 
353, 362, 374, 4 1 1 ,  510, 5 1 1  n4, 
526, 536, 558, 568, 570n75, 573. 
579n87, 580n90, 587-88, 589n98, 
590n99. See also scripture index, 
669 
Galilee 
32-33, 154, 1 56, 164-68, 
1 74n47, 1 75, 2 16n160, 281, 
291 , 302, 3 14, 3 1 7, 321 , 329-30, 
339, 364, 400-40 I, 413, 420-21, 
456nl 37, 464-65, 484, 488, 492-
93, 500, 51 S, 520 
Gethsemane narrative 
438n 105, 549 
Glaucon (argument of) 
21 1-12 
Gentiles (mission to the) 
68, 146, 161, 
278n47, 379-80, 409, 414-15. 
417n63, 458, 473, 537, 548n50, 
565, 567-68, 587, 608, 613-14 
glossolalia 
124-25, 134-37, 139, 160, 
524 
gnȍsis 
1 12, 137, 527 
gods (definition of) 
60. See also angels, 
demigods, demons 
Golden RuJe 
467, 530, 555-56. See also 
Sennon on the Mount 
gospel 
5n7, 36-48, 57, 63, 72, 78-79, 
81-83, 84, 87, 89, 93, 109, 1 1 1, 
I 1 3-14, 1 19, 1 23, 1 35, 138-
40, 141-48, 1 49, 157-58, 214, 
228nl 87, 263, 266n24, 278n47, 
284, 3 14, 3 1 7-22, 33 1, 363, 366, 
368, 376, 379, 405, 407-408, 
41 1-14, 41 9-20, 435-37, 442-
43, 445-46, 448, 450, 452, 456. 
459-60, 464, 482, 485, 503n23 1. 
507-508, 516- 1 7, 526-27, 53 1-53, 
558, 567n71, 570, 572, 588, 592, 
594, 608, 612, 615-16. See also 
GospelѮ historicity, mythicism 
gospels (pagan) 
63. 101 n80. 1 1 4- 1 5, 
224, 481-82 
Gospels 
5, 1 2, 15, 20, 23-26, 30-34, 37, 
41 n4, 42, 46-47, 49-50, 52, 54, 56, 
58, 63, 68, 70-71' 85, 87, 93-94, 
1 19-20, 123, 143-44, I 49, I .55. 
174, 191n89, 201 nl23, 205, 218-
34, 238, 248, 250-5 1, 256, 259-60. 
261nl4, 262-64, 264-70, 27 1-75, 
280, 281, 283-88, 29 1, 303, 309, 
31 1-14, 3 16n44, 3 1 7, 3 19-22, 
324n64, 325-26, 331 n74, 334, 338, 
343, 345, 348-56, 360, 369-70, 
372-73, 387-509, 5 I 0-1 1  n3, 5 1 5, 
518, 52 1, 522n23, 524, 529, 531 -
32, 539-40, 543, 546, 549-50, 553. 
555-58, 560, 56 7n 71, 581, 584n93. 
587-88, 594, 596, 602-603, 605-
606, 608-609, 612-13, 616. See 
also Ascension of Isaiah, gospel, 
Hebrews, John, Judas, Luke, 
Kings, Mark, Matthew, Peter, 

Subject Index 
687 
Thomas, and the scripture index, 
662-66 
Hadrian (emperor) 
1 54, 3 1 5n44. 326-
27nn70-71 
hallucination. See visions 
healing (miraculous) 
3 1 -32. 34n 19, 59, 
1 19, 1 24nl 59, 125n l 6 1 ,  128n l68, 
132n 1 78, 1 36. 1 37, 364, 366-67. 
4 1 1 -13, 415-18. 420, 438n1 05, 
443, 455, 462, 465, 471 , 475-77. 
488, 496-99, 502n23 1, 506. 524, 
550, 561 n65. See also miracles 
heavens (layered) 
26, 36-47, 56, 60, 
63, 76, 79, 81 -83, 85-86, 92. 
105, 107n I 00, 1 12- 13, 1 15, 1 1 8, 
127n 166, 1 30-3 I n  1 74, 1 33-36, 
1 4 1 , 1 58-59, 168, 1 72-73, 178-
205, 207-208, 2 1 0, 225-27. 309, 
3 1 4, 3 1 7, 320-22, 328, 330, 36 1, 
366-67, 370-71 ,  379, 4 1 6-18, 
422-23, 430, 438, 441 , 466, 470, 
473, 477, 48 1 , 504-505, 5 1 5, 517, 
5 19-20, 531 , 533-34. 537, 540-45, 
548, 551-52, 555, 569, 570n74, 
572, 576-78, 592, 602, 607, 609, 
613. See also angels, cosmology, 
demons, firmament 
Hebrews (Epistle to the) 
40, 45, 95, 
1 1 1 -14, 144, 156n5, 158n7, 172, 
1 94-95, 202, 203, 205, 207-209, 
262-63, 265n24. 3 1 2. 382, 404, 
529, 538-52, 555, 561 ' 565, 594, 
606. See also scripture index, 67 1 
Hebrews (Gospel according to the) 
285n10, 578n87 
Hegesippus 
1 49, 22 1, 273n40, 274, 
306, 326-3 I ,  338-39, 34 I -42. 357 
henotheism 
95n69, 103-105. See also 
gods 
Hercules 
1 86, 222, 230n 189. 23 I ,  239 
Herods (royal family) 24, 33, 7 1-72n27, 
1 53n2, 281-82, 1 85-87, 193-94, 
304, 3 1 8, 321 -22, 34 1 , 364, 373. 
378, 414, 46\, 472, 496-97 
hero-type. See mythotype 
Hippolytus 
100, 1 10n l l2. 1 48n l 99, 
302 
historical method. See method 
historicity (minimal) 
7-8, 1 3-15, 1 8-
3 1 , 31-35. 5 1 , 53, 54, 55, 258, 
308, 3 1 4- 1 5, 323. 330, 356-58, 
370, 372-74. 386, 45 1 , 507, 5 1 3, 
522-23, 528-33. 535, 545, 557, 
570, 572-75, 581 -82, 591, 594-95, 
597, 606n 1 1 ,  615-16. See also 
mythicism 
historicization (causes ot) 
8-1 1, 
331, 352-53, 506-508. See also 
euhemerism, exoteric myths, myth, 
secrets 
Homer 
1 16, 21 9n l 68, 359-61, 391 -93, 
396nl 7, 398-99, 41 1 - 1 2, 4 1 7n63, 
422n68, 436-40, 442, 474, 482 
human sacrifice 
47, 7 1n25, 92-93, 1 02, 
143-45, 1 57, 185, 194, 209-14, 
3 1 0, 404, 406, 424n73, 426, 435, 
463, 538, 54 1-46, 549, 559, 561, 
565-66. 593, 607, 6 1 1  
hypothesis (of historicity or myth). See 
historicity or mythicism 
Ignatius 
36nl ,  83n45, 1 12- 13, 145, 
1 58n8. 191n88, 1 93n95, 205n l 3 1 ,  
274-75, 306, 3 15-23. 330. 35Ļ 
5 1 9, 535. 608 
Immanuel (as name of Jesus) 
464 
Inanna (lshtar) 
45-47, 58n4, 169-70, 
1 72. See also Adonis. dying-and­
rising, mystery cults 
incarnation: of Jesus, 38-45, 53, 94-96, 
199, 3 1 4, 3 I 9-22, 523, 532-35, 
542-48, 550. 554, 570-8 1, 607, 
6 1 2- 1 3; ofOsiris (and other gods), 
I I 5, I 68. I 72-73, I 86, 230; of 
Rastafari, 19; of Romulus, 56-58 
interpolations 
37n2, 39-44, 90, 
150n202, I 89n86, 26 I n  1 4, 275-78, 
280, 286, 305, 3 1 6, 322, 332-42, 
344, 349, 351 -52, 486n206, 491-
92, 496n2 18. 5 1 6n l 1 , 525n29. 
528, 532n36, 535, 564, 566-69, 
583-84n93, 588n97, 59l n 1 03 
invalid arguments. See validity 
lrenaeus 
41 n4, 83n45, 90-91, I 08n 10 I ,  
148n199, 180n58, 183-84, 190n87, 
195, 264n20, 286-88, 322-24, 
426n77, 580-8\. 6\0 

On the Historicity ofJesus 
Isaac 
213-14, :578 
Isis cult. See Osiris 
Jacob (Israel) 
182, 23 1, 310, 439, 454, 
456, 483-84, 495, 524-2Sn29 
Jairus narrative 410- 1 1 , 413, 415, 417, 
434, 450 
James (the Brother of the Lord) 
3 10, 
335, 372-75, 453-56, 516, 
519, 529, 582, 587-92, 605; in 
Hegesippus, 327-30; in Josephus, 
337-42; ossuary of, 257n6. See 
also Brother(s) of the Lord, fictive 
kinship, James (the Pillar) 
James (Epistle of) 
146, 262, 516, 
528-29, 53 1 .  See also James (the 
Pillar), and scripture index, 67 1  
James (the Pillar) 
93, 281 ,  3 13, 372-73, 
41 1 , 4 16n62, 417, 438nl05, 440, 
524-25, 528-29, 586, 588. See also 
James (Epistle of), Pillars 
Jehozadak 
81-82 
Jeremiah (lost writings of) 
89n53, 90, 
328 
Jericho 
70, 167n30 
Jerome 
1 46n 1 95, 28 1, 506, 578n87 
Jerusalem 
41, 46, 70, 85n48, 86, 124, 
150, 1 53-54, 156-57, 164-65, 170, 
213n l 53, 224, 232, 250n23, 265, 
272, 283, 294, 305, 329, 352, 353, 
354n 11 9, 362-66, 368, 372-75, 
377-78, 381, 384, 41 9-21 , 423, 
428-29, 445-49, 459, 461-62, 472, 
479-86, 488, 491 -93, 500, 506, 
544-45, 560, 587-88, 607, 608; 
celestial and allegorical, 1 79, 194. 
577n86, 578 
Jesus (as pre-Christian archangel) 
200-
205 
Jesus ben Ananias (as passion parallel) 
428-30 
Jesus ben Damneus (high priest) 
335, 
338 
Jesus ben Jehozadak (high priest). See 
Jehozadak 
Jesus (the name of) 
3-4, 3 1 ,  33, 38, 
60, 69-72, 81-83, 1 40, 1 65n26, 
1 76n50, 20205, 209, 239-40, 
242-43 257n6 282n4, 329, 342-
43, 366n20, 405-406, 453-54, 472, 
489-90, 514, 546, 532-35. See also 
Jehozadak 
Jesus ben Pandera 
282-84. See also 
Alexander Jannaeus 
Jewish hero-type 
430-32. See also 
mythotype 
Jewish wars 
72, 84, lS0-51, 154·55, 
261n12, 265-66n24, 272, 293, 296, 
332-33, 427n79, 428, 430, 446-50, 
48l nl96, 539, 608 
John (the Apostle) 
1 5 1 .  See also Pillars 
John the Baptist 
24, 32, 33-34nl9, 
68, 69n22, 70n24, 71, 72, 175, 
176n50, 177, 201n120, 270, 3 1 4, 
3 1 8, 322, 335, 366, 400, 438n105, 
453, 457-58n140, 461-62, 478-79, 
494-95, 497, 499n222, 546 
John (Epistles of) 
1 46, 204, 262-63, 
528-29. See also scripture index, 
67 1 
John (Gospel of) 
22, 93-94, 120nl46. 
202, 204, 237, 251 -52, 264-65, 
268-69, 274n41, 283, 284n9, 
285-86, 338n92, 355, 372, 389n3, 
397, 398, 401 , 424-25, 437, 454, 
457n\ 39, 480n193, 485, 487-506, 
508, 578n87. &e also scripture 
index, 665-66 
Joseph (father of Jesus) 
39, 73-75, 
233nl98, 234n200, 331n74, 371-
72, 472, 483, 485, 5 1 5  
Joseph of Arimathea See Arimathea 
Joseph (the patriarch) 
215, 219-20, 23 1 ,  
243, 439, 453-54, 456, 499n223, 
559n6l 
Josephus 
68-72, 84, 107, 1 1 4nl19, 
1 50nn204-205, 155, 207nl35, 
2 1 5-16, 218nl64, 230nl90, 242, 
245-46, 260, 267, 275, 293-94, 
296, 301, 305, 332-4l, 347-
48n107, 3S7, 360, 385, 423n69, 
424n74, 42l9, 432n94, 446-
47n122, 449nn l 28-129, 474, 48 1, 
484n202, 486, 499n223 . See aho 
Testimonium Flavianum 
Joshua (of the Old Testament) 
61 , 
69-72, 242, 4 1 6, 454. See also 
Jesus 

Subject Index 
689 
Judaism (diversity of and influences 
on) 
66, 74-76, 102, 1 04-107, 
1 14, 1 64-68, 173-77, 1 82, 209-14, 
496, 610- 1 1  
Judas lscariot 
20n4, 3 1 2, 3 1 4, 324-
25, 400, 432n96, 438n l05, 443, 
447nl 22, 453-54, 463, 471 , 473, 
488, 560 
Judas (the Galilean) 
154, 1 56, 291, 339 
Judas (Gospel of) 24, 221 n l 72 
Jude (as Judas, the brother of Jesus) 
330-3 1, 375, 453-455 
Jude (Epistle of) 
88-89, 262, 528, 53 1 
Judea and Palestine 
31, 33, 46, 62n9, 
65-68, 70-7 1 nn24, 27, 85, 91, 1 50, 
153-54, 159n 10, 163-68, 28 1, 
282, 283n5, 286, 290-91 , 293-
94, 296, 297, 304-305, 325, 33 1, 
343, 345n l 02, 347, 354, 360n2, 
362-63, 376-77, 381, 401 -402, 
409, 425n75, 429, 444-46, 448, 
449, 454, 456, 461 , 462, 464, 474, 
482nl 96, 491-93, 559, 567-69, 
587-90 
Julius Africanus 
84, 90n58, 346-47 
Junias (the Apostle) 
524 
Justin Martyr 
83n45, 90, 120n 144, 
168-69, 171n39, 223n1 76, 322, 
338n92, 350-51 ,  426n77, 484n20 I, 
547n49 
Kings Gospel (Brodie thesis). See Elijah­
Elisha narrative 
Last Supper 
33, 312, 424, 438n I 05, 
463, 500-501 , 559-63, 593-94. See 
also Eucharist, Passover 
Lazarus 
166n27, 371 -72, 488-89, 491 -
92, 500-505 
legendary development (rapid). See rapid 
legendary development 
likelihoods. See consequent probabilities 
Lincoln-Kennedy parallels 
228n 1 87, 
23 1nl91 
logic 
xiii, 6-7, 1 1 -1 2, 14, 15, 1 6, 20n3, 
21, 26, 27-28, 29, 32, 37nl, 50, 
59, 79n40, 80, 1 66, 238-39, 255-
56, 278n48, 283, 284n9, 335-36, 
3S2, 354, 3S9nl, 375, 384n38, 
394n 13, 444, 5 1 2-14, 5 1 8, 524n28, 
525, 529n3 1, 540, 567, 594n105. 
599n4, 602, 604, 615-16; in 
ancient thought, 79, 81, 97, I OS, 
145nl 94, 158, 1 72, 21 1-14, 287, 
363, 425, 433, 435, 448n1 27, 45 1, 
496n2 18, 507, 51 1n4, 543-45, 548, 
550, 560n62, 570, 579. See also 
fallacies, mathematics, method, 
validity 
Logos (as an entity) 
78n39, 168, 
182-83, 196, 200-205, 207n135, 
208, 301, 321, 534, 578n87, 612-
1 3. See also Jesus (archangel), 
Wisdom 
lost evidence. See evidence loss 
Lucian (of Samosata) 
170, 254-56, 275, 
298-99, 301' 440 
Luddites. See Ned Ludd 
Luke (Gospel ot) 
56-57nn l -2, 140, 
234nn 199-200, 262n16, 264, 
265n23, 267-71, 274n41 , 285-86, 
308, 3 1 9, 325-26n69, 332-333, 
335, 341, 359-60, 362n13, 363, 
364-66, 368, 371, 372-73, 383-85, 
396, 397, 398, 401-402nn33-34, 
408n49, 436, 438n l 05, 439, 440-
41nl 12, 445n1 1 7, 457, 459, 464, 
469-87, 487-489, 491n215, 496-
97n2 19, 500, 502-506, 558n58. 
See also Acts; and scripture index, 
664-65 
LXX. See Septuagint 
Maccabean literature 
76n35, 84-86, 88, 
209- 1 1 , 214-15, 364, 467, 484n202 
Mara bar Serapion 
275 
Mark (Gospel of) 
52-53, 57, 85, 1 1 9, 
142, 201 -202nn l 20, 123, 207, 
224n 1 80, 244, 250n23, 258n8, 
2ε, 267, 268, 269-70, 274n4 1 .  
276, 286, 308, 319, 32 1 , 325-26, 
346, 355n l 2 1 , 360, 373. 382. 
388n2, 389n3, 396, 398, 399, 
40 I n34, 402-56, 456-6 1, 463-65, 
468-71 , 473-75, 477, 48 1, 486-87, 
488nn210-1 1 ,  489, 491 , 496-97, 
S00, 502, 508, 555, 558, 562. See 
also scripture index, 663-64 

690 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
Martha (the sister of Mary) 
371, 488, 
503n232 
Mary (the Magdalene) 
20n4, 371, 45 1 , 
454, 462, 500n224 
Mary (mother of Jesus) 
39, 50, 
233n 1 98, 233-34, 283-84, 3 1 7, 
320-21 , 371 -72, 375, 454-56n1 37, 
461 , 472, 478-79, 483, 485, 5 1 5, 
535, 578n87, 579. See also woman 
Mary (the sister of Martha) 
488, 492, 
503n232 
mathematics 
1 6, 27-29, 3 1 ,  45n8, 55, 
231 , 240-48, 252-53, 27 1 , 289, 
300, 3 1 5, 323, 330, 356-58, 374-
75, 380, 385-86, 394-95, 405-
406, 452n 1 3 1, 5 1 3, 5 1 8- 1 9n 1 3, 
53 1 , 552, 569n73, 574, 58 1 -82, 
592, 594-95, 596-60 I, 603-
606. See also Bayes's Theorem, 
probabilities 
Matthew (Gospel of) 
90n59, 1 46, 
1 46n1 95, 205n130, 232, 233n1 97, 
239-40, 244, 250n23, 264-67, 268-
70, 274n4 1 , 282, 285, 308, 3 1 9-
2 1 ,  325-26, 352n J J 7, 354n 1 1 9, 
355n 1 2 1 , 360, 369, 396, 398-402, 
406, 428, 435, 438n1 05, 439, 441 ,  
453n1 34, 456-69, 469-75, 477, 
478, 481 , 486-89, 497, 499n223, 
500, 502, 505, 508, 553n53, 
558n58. See also scripture index, 
662-63 
Melchizedek 
78n39, 79, 206-209, 
534n38, 549-50, 562n66, 580n90 
Melchizedek Scroll (I IQ13) 
76-77, 79, 
80-82, 206-208 
messiahs and messianism 
1 9, 60-61, 62, 
66-92, 1 42-43, 153-58, 1 60, 1 99-
200, 206n134, 207, 240, 266n24, 
288, 293, 33 1 ,  348n1 07, 363, 391 ,  
394, 400, 407, 4 1 4, 426-27, 435, 
438n 1 05, 442-43, 447, 454n1 34, 
472, 483, 489, 495, 503, 550, 
560n63, 562n66, 565, 573-74, 577, 
580n90, 6 1  0- 1 1 ,  614. See also 
dying messiah 
method and methodology 
xi, xii­
xiii, 1 -4, 6-8, 1 1-16, 20-29, 35, 
5 1-52, 55, 59-61, 79-80, 82-83, 
86, 97n72, 189n86, 205nl 30, 
216n 1 6 1 ,  2 J 8-2 1 ,  240-52, 254-59. 
266n25, 269-70, 278-79, 287, 3 1 6. 
362n13, 38 1 ,  39 1 -95, 396, 397-
400. 432n94, 438n 1 05. 445n l 1 8. 
470, 509, 5 1 2-14, 58 1 , 596-60 1 .  
615. 617- 1 8. See also ad hoc, a 
fortiori, ajudicantiori, Bayes's 
Theorem, background knowledge. 
bias, criteria, dating, definitions, 
fallacies, logic, mathematics, 
probabilities, reference classes. 
rule of greater knowledge. silence. 
validity 
Michael (archangel) 
78-79, 83. 1 79-80 
minimal historicity. See historicity. 
minimal mythicism. See mythicism 
ministry (of Jesus) 
I 0, 24-25, 32-34. 
41, 70, 89, 137-42, 146, 168, 174. 
1 83, 219, 223-24, 28 1. 289-93. 
303, 309-3 14, 3 1 7, 32 1, 325, 329. 
332-35, 351 ' 355, 363-65, 369-70. 
379-80, 383, 388, 412-2 1 , 423-24. 
427-30, 438n 1 05, 452, 455-57. 
460-62, 464, 489, 49 1-97. 507. 
5 1 5-23, 528, 530-38, 543. 546-5 1. 
554-57, 559n60, 567n7 1, 571 -73. 
594. See also Eucharist, Sermon 
on the Mount 
miracles and signs 
I 0, 1 9, 26. 5, 69-72. 
1 01 n80, 1 1 9, 124, 129, 130n l 73. 
190, 1 92, 207, 220, 226, 230, 236. 
263, 273n40, 285, 197n24, 302. 
304, 3 1 3-14, 32 1 , 334, 353-54. 
361 . 364, 367, 379-80, 383, 394, 
403n36, 4 1 0- 1 8, 435-36, 438n 105. 
440, 450-5 1 , 455, 458n141, 464, 
469n161, 475, 480, 488-507, 5 1 5. 
524. 527, 532-33, 535, 537, 543, 
546-48, 551-52, 561 n65, 573, 
607, 615, 617. See also ascension. 
empty tomb, exorcism, feedings, 
glossolalia. healing. incarnation, 
Lazarus, ministry, myth, nativity. 
prophecy, resurrection. visions 
Mishnah 
283, 381, 388, 403n36, 404, 
425. 427, 467, 506 
Mithradates (King of Pontus) 
23 1-
32n l 93 

Subject Index 
691 
Mithras (and Mithraism) 96n71, 99-
103, 109nl06, 171n39, 182-83. 
See also mystery cults 
Moses 
10-11, 61, 70-71, 89, 1 1 8, 121, 
140, 1 83n71, 1 87, 194-95, 196-97, 
204nl28, 21 ln148, 214-l5, 218-
20, 222, 230-31, 237, 239, 243, 
270, 350, 352nl17, 36ln4, 379-80, 
388, 399, 414-18, 436, 440, 455-
56, 458nl41, 468, 497, 498, 504, 
541-43, 551-52, 570n74 
Moses (Revelation of) 
89, 195-97, 214, 
570n74 
mother (of Jesus). See Mary, and woman 
Muhammad 263, 388n2 
Musonius Ruft.as 
175, 291, 447-451 
mystery cults 
96-118, 122-24, 130nl72, 
163, 165, 170n35, 17ln39, 203, 
212, 247n19, 291, 302-303, 349, 
454, 561, 608-609, 611-12. See 
also Adonis, Dionysus, Eleusis, 
Osiris, Zalmoxis 
myth (definition of) 
8-10, 217, 258n7, 
389-95, 437, 456, 480-83, 609. 
See also allegory, euhemerism, 
exoteric myths, mythicism, 
mythotype, rapid legendary 
development 
mythicism (cases against). See authors 
Case, Casey, Ehrman, Van Voorst 
mythicism (minimal) 
xi, 4, 7-8, 1 1, 13-
14, 1 5, 26, 30, 36-52, 52-55, 246-
52, 308, 310, 3 14-15, 317, 323, 
329, 330, 346, 349, 351, 356-58, 
372, 374, 386, 45 1, 507, 513, 520, 
522-23, 526, 528-33, 535, 537n41, 
544-45, 547, 550-51, 560-63, 570, 
573-75, 577, 580-83, 591, 593-95, 
597-98, 606-18 
mythicists (ancient evidence of) 5, 36-
48, 3 1 7-23, 349-56, 540-45, 580-
81, 612. See also Acts, Clement 
(of Rome), and Epistles 
mythotype. See Jewish hero-type, 
Rank-Raglan, Socratic-Aesopic, 
ascension fables 
names (origin of). See Abram, Aesop, 
Ananias, Arimathea, Barabbas, 
Bethel, Cephas, Cleopas, Egyptian, 
Eugnostos, Immanuel, Jairus, 
Jehozadak, Jesus, Joseph, Lazarus, 
Mary, Melchizedek, Nazareth, 
Nicodemus, Peter, Proculus, 
Ramah, Romulus, Simon of 
Cyrene, Stephen 
nativity (of Jesus) 
33, 39, 86, 90, 229-
34, 250, 281-85, 293, 304, 314, 
3 17-22, 453n 132, 456-58, 460-61, 
468, 470, 472-74, 478-79, 484, 
486, 532-35, 537, 545-50, 575-82, 
587-88, 610 
Nazareth/Nazarene/Nazorian 
24, 26, 33, 
34, 146n l95, 254, 258n8, 281á, 
382, 4oo-402, 407, 429n86, 444, 
453, 472, 515 
Ned Ludd 
9-11, 222, 237, 350, 
352n 1 1 7, 436 
Nero (emperor) 
37n2, 154, 293, 295-96, 
299, 300, 343-46, 347-48ni07. See 
also Neronian persection 
Neronian persecution 
148, 150, 261nl2, 
273, 275, 295-96, 299, 3 10, 343-
46, 349, 608. See also Nero 
New Testament (as a whole) 
8, 12, 37, 
39-40, 42, 62-63, 68nl7, 70n24, 
72, 74n32, 78n39, 88, 95n69, 
97, 107n 100, ll9n 142, 120, 134, 
141, 146-47, 1 59n9, 167n30, 188, 
197n105, 201n1 19, 210n147, 
215nl56, 221, 259-71, 273-77, 
279-80, 306, 3 10n41, 3 15, 344, 
349, 364, 396n17, 398, 437, 
458nl41, 460, 476-77, 521n21, 
528, 531, 569n73. See also 
Epistles, Gospels, the entries for 
individual books of the NT, and the 
scripture index, 662-71 
Nicodemus 371-72, 491, 494, 505n237 
Ockham 's Razor. See ad hoc assumptions 
Old Testament 
(as a whole), 29, 32, 
36, 63, 68, 83, 88, 92, 1 16, 141, 
143, 155, 1 57, 159nl0, 1 75, 195, 
200, 210, 2llnl48, 215-16, 270, 
3 1 0-14, 331n74, 360-61, 381, 398, 
399n25, 402, 409-ll, 426-28, 431, 
438, 440, 453-54, 459, 465-68, 

692 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
Old Testament (continued) 
469n161, 474, 477-78, 497, 499, 
530, 550, 556, 579, 607; as fiction, 
10, 21 5-16, 218-19, 388n2. 5ee 
also scripture index. 661-62 
Onias Ill (high priest) 78-79, 86 
oral transmission 
70n25, 1 38, 1 52, 166, 
1 74, 225, 250-52, 269, 274n4 1, 
292-93, 324-27, 350, 353, 359, 
388, 437, 464, 507, 52 1 . 554, 558 
Origen 
46n9, 90, 100n79, 1 10, 1 13, 
1 19-24, 169-70, 1 80n58, 1 82, 
185n76, 191, 193n95, 198-99, 
223n1 76, 233n 1 96, 283, 291, 
298n25, 301, 332n79, 335-39, 341 -
42, 350, 353, 355, 406, 447-48, 
451 , 566, 578n87, 591nl02, 609 
Osiris (and Isis-Osiris cult) 
53, 58n4, 
96, 98n78, 99-109, 1 1 4-16, 1 1 8, 
J 66n27, 1 71-72, 186. 203, 230-3 1, 
249, 305, 336. 453n1 33, 544, 609, 
613. See also dying-and-rising, 
mystery cults 
OT. See OJd Testament 
Oulammaous. See Bethel 
outer space (definition of) 
63. See also 
cosmology, firmament, heavens 
Pandera. See Jesus ben Pandera 
Papias 
149, 221 ,  274, 306, 323-26, 330, 
357, 359, 608 
Passover 
33, 143-45, 2 1 1  n 148, 213. 
283-86, 328, 403n36, 404. 419-29, 
433, 438n1 05, 463, 472, 483, 491 ,  
561-62. See also Eucharist. Last 
Supper 
Pastoral Epistles (to Timothy and 
Titus) 
262, 538, 567n71 
Patriarchs 
I 0, 95n69, 180, 215, 571 .  
See also Abram, Adam, Isaac, 
Jacob, Joseph 
Paul (the Apostle) 
20, 22, 40-41, 47-48, 
61 n7, 64, 76n35, 80, 90, 92, 93, 
95n69, 97-99, 105-107, 1 1 0-17, 
1 20-25, t 27-28, 134-40, 142, 144, 
146-48, 1 50-52, 161, 165-66, 1 72-
74, 178n53, 1 79-8 1, 183, 1 88-93, 
195, 1 98-205, 212-14, 221 -22, 
251, 261 -63, 265n24, 267-68, 271 -
73, 277-81, 287, 291 -95, 306-10, 
314, 3 16n45, 318-19, 321, 325, 
33 1, 348, 351 -53, 360-67, 370-83, 
385-86, 388, 398, 4 1 1 ,  424n72, 
437-38, 440-41, 447-49, 456n 137, 
458, 464, 469, 470nl 62, 489, 508, 
5 10-29, 531-40, 543-44, 546-4 7, 
549, 550n51, 552-95, 606-608, 
612-1 5. See also Epistles 
peshers (pesharim) 62n9, 76-77, 82-83, 
87, 141' 143, 206-207, 561. 576. 
See also scripture 
Peter (Apocalypse of) 
192n91 
Peter (the Apostle) 20n4, 64, 80, 93, 
135, 147, 1 50-52, 22 1 , 263-64, 
273, 281, 287, 306, 3 10, 3 1 4, 3 18, 
325, 327, 35 1, 361 -65, 372-74, 
380, 382, 384. 4 1 1 ,  416n62, 417, 
420-2 1 ' 43 7' 440, 445-46, 451 ' 
454, 463-65, 469, 500-501, 50S, 
516- 1 7. 519, 524-3 1, 553, 558, 
582-83, 585-90, 592, 607-608. See 
also Peter (name of), Pillars 
Peter (Epistles ot) 
145, 221, 262n l6, 
263-64, 351 ' 353, 528-31 ' 606 
Peter (Gospel ot) 
33, 286-87, 453n 1 32, 
457n l39 
Peter (name ot) 
524-25n29 
Pharisees 
80, 1 75-77, 3 14, 328, 334, 
377-80, 414, 442, 461, 494, 
505n237 
Philemon (the Epistle to) 261 .  See also 
scripture index, 610 
Philip (the Apostle) 222n 172, 485 
Philippians (the Epistle of Paul to 
the) 
212, 261, 278n47, 5 1 1 n4, 
532n36, 533-35, 537, 541 ,  545, 
570, 575, 592, 612. See also 
scripture index, 610 
Philippians Hymn (Phil. 2.5-1 1 ), see 
scripture index, 6 70 
Philo (of Alexandria) 
68, 8 1-82, 87n51 , 
1 08n I 06, 1 1 7-18, 134n 1 82, 1 65-
66, 1 73 n45, 181-82, I 87-88, 195-
208, 216, 294, 304-305, 32Jn58, 
406n45, 456nl37, 458n141, 478, 
534ࠉ35, 570n74, 578n87 
Phlegon 
298, 347nl05, 481nl95 
Pillars (as Apostles) 
93, 165, 28 1, 352, 

Subject Index 
693 
372-73, 416n62, 4 1 7, 440, 524-25, 
528-3 1 ,  586, 588. See also James, 
John, Peter 
Plato (and Platonism) 
99-1 00n79, 
I 02n83, 1 09-1 0, 1 1 6, 120-22, 
1 56n5, 173, 181, 1 87n84, 194. 
1 96, 199, 203nl 27, 2 1 1 - 12, 224, 
289-90, 293, 398n23. 400n3 1. 
54 1n47 
Pliny (the Elder) 
1 78n52. 295. 343-45. 
475, 510- 1 1  
Pliny (the Younger) 
261n13, 275, 296-
97, 340n95, 342-43, 345-46. 357, 
377n33, 448n 123, 5 1 0-12 
Plutarch 
2 1 ,  41, 56-58, 98n78, 10 I n80, 
1 08-109n 1 06, 1 1 4-1 8, 1 7 1 -
73, 181-83, 186-87, 190, 193, 
203n l 27, 2 1 7, 222, 226nl 84, 
230n l 9 1 . 237, 298, 303. 305. 388-
89, 453n l 33, 57I n76 
Ponti us Pilate 
2 7-28, 3 1 ,  3 3, 222n 1 72, 
232n l 94, 258n7, 28 1 . 284, 286-87, 
294, 303-304, 314, 3 1 7- 1 8, 322, 
332-34, 343-46, 351. 369-76, 379-
80, 391, 402-403, 425n75, 429-3 1, 
440, 445nl l 7, 451, 463, 488, 502, 
5 1 5, 524n29, 535, 537. 543. 564, 
565, 566-67, 573, 602 
priesthood (Jewish) 
32-33, 60, 75n34, 
78, 81 -83, 86. 95, 145, 1 56n5, 
1 58n7, 186, 1 94-95, 200-209, 224, 
234n200, 282, 3 1 2, 328-30, 337, 
364, 366, 402, 407. 427-28, 433, 
442, 448n1 23, 449, 463, 488, 540-
45, 548-50, 562n66, 565, 612-13. 
See also Ananus, Jesus (b. D.), 
Jesus (b. J.), Melchizedek, Onias, 
temple 
prior probabilities, detennining the 
14-16, 27-31, 35, 44-45. 54-55. 
65nl3, 8 1 ,  134, 143, 2 1 4, 220, 
222n1 72, 234, l3S-53, 263, 278-
80, 323n6 1 , 364, 394-95, 405, 45 1, 
458, 509-1 4, 516, 569n73, 585, 
591 n 1 03, 5602, 606, 6 1 7. 5ee 
also reference classes 
probabilities, detennining the 
7-8, 1 4-
16, 24, 55, 23 1 '  238-48, 252-53, 
278-80, 356-58, 385-86, 5 509, 
591-95, 596-6 1 0. See also Bayes's 
Theorem, consequent probabilities, 
mathematics, prior probabilities 
Proculus 
56. 48 1-82 
prophecy 
I 0, 1 9, 26, 28, 32, 36-45, 
48, 53, 60, 68-69, 70-7 1 nn24-25, 
73-91, 94-95, 109- 10, 1 1 9, 1 25, 
127-32, 135-43, 1 54, 155, 160, 
162-63. 182-83, 200-20 I ,  210, 
223. 230, 237. 265-66, 286, 3 1 9. 
327-28, 332, 334-35. 364, 379-
80, 383, 4 1 6- 1 7nn62-63, 419, 
426n77, 428-29, 432, 434, 455, 
459-60, 462, 468n 157, 4 71 -72, 
476, 479, 486n207, 489, 498, 504, 
517, 524, 532, 545, 550, 555, 
564, 567-68, 573-77, 61 1 .  See 
also apocalypticism, messiahs, 
miracles, peshers, Revelation, 
visions 
Protevangelion of James 
233n 1 98 
Psalms 
91, 143, 3 1 2-13, 398-99, 408-
409, 425-26n77. 530. See also 
scripture index, 662 
Psalms ofSolomon 
89, 1 08nl 01. 
550n51 
Q (hypothetical source document) 
1 n I, 
174. 1 76n50, l69-70, 325-26n69, 
457, 459, 465-66nn1 52, 154, 470-
73, 479nl 92 
Qumran. See Dead Sea scrolls 
Ramah (Ramathaimzophim) 
439n 1 08 
Rank-Raglan hero-type 
229-34, 
238-46, 249-53, 395, 399, 428, 
458n141, 606, 612-13 
rapid legendary development 
9, 18, 
160, 220, 245, 248-52, 324n64, 
388n2. 609. See also eyewitness 
check 
Rastafarianism 
1 8-20, 236n2, 249-50, 
507 
reference classes 
1 5, 238-46, 288, 51 O­
l l n3, 602, 617 
resurrection 
33n 19, 4 1 ,  46-48, 50, 53, 
S4n 1 7, 56-58, 62-63, 68, 72-79, 
83, 89-90, 92, 94, 99- 1 0 1 , 106-
107, 1 1 2, 1 1 5, 123, 1 34, 1 39-40, 

694 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
resurrection (continued) 
143, 1ݥ1. 165, 16ݦ73, 1 80, 
183, 186, 196, 198-200, 209, 2 1 1, 
213n151, 220nl70, 226-28, 237, 
239, 249n21, 250n23, 274n41, 
290, 298n25, 300, 302, 3 10-11, 
314, 31 7-22, 326n70, 328, 334-35, 
353-54, 361, 363, 365, 368-71, 
374-75, 378-79, 387, 398n24, 408, 
410-1 1, 414, 421-22, 425-28, 441, 
457-58, 461-63, 469-70, 480-83, 
486, 488-94, 500-505, 515-17, 
525, 530, 532-35, 541, 546, 549, 
5ݧ1, 563, 571, 575-76, 607, 
609-1 1, 613-14, 617. See also 
dying-and-rising, empty tomb, 
miracles 
Revelation (the book of) 26, 32, 37n2, 
J 19nl42, 136-38, 141, 146, 
191n89, 197nt05, 221, 260, 264, 
267n25, 318, 388, 555, 578n87. 
See also scripture index, 611 
revelations. See visions 
ring composition (examples of) 412-23, 
428, 434n98, 457nl39, 461-63, 
466-67, 478-80, 494-97 
Romans (Epistle to the) 9, 135, 146, 
182, 190, 260-61, 277-78, 51ln4, 
520, 532-33, 550, 556, 565, 568, 
572-73. See also scripture index, 
667 
Romulus 56-58, 75, 171-72, 217, 219, 
222, 225-32, 237-39, 249, 287, 
302-303, 388-89, 436, 481-82, 
484n204, 602 
Roswell myth 249-50 
rule of greater knowledge 238, 245 
sacrifice. See human 
Sadducees 334, 339, 377 
Samaritan, the (as messianic figure) 
69 
Samaritans 69, 156-57, 159n10, 1 76, 
449, 493-99 
Satan 
37, 40-45, 47, 77, 81-83, 104, 
1 1 2, 184-85, 187, 189, 191-93, 
206, 233, 407, 420-21, 445, 462, 
468, 488, 534, 545, 549, 551, 560, 
563-66, 593, 613 
scapegoat rituals. See human sacrifice, 
Yom Kippur 
schizotypal cults and personalities 
124-
34, 160, 163, 247nl9 
scripture (as a source of the gospel) 48, 
7J.92, 108n102, 109, 137-43, 155-
56, 158, 177-78, 201n120, 205, 
207, 287-88, 31ݨ15, 371, 379-80, 
387-88, 398-401, 408-10, 422n68, 
422-25, 428, 431-33, 459-60, 464, 
515-17, 522, 529-30, 532, 536-
37, 541-56, 561-64, 573-77, 583, 
593-94, 607-608, 610-12, 614. 
See also Bethlehem, Elijah-Elisha 
narrative, peshers, secrets 
Sea Narrative (in Mark) 412-20 
secrets 36-37, 47, 76-77, 80, 85, 87, 89, 
97, 100, 107, 108-14, 1 16-17, 119-
24, 135, 138, 141-43, 1 52, 158, 
160, 183n71, 193, 205, 208-209, 
251, 274n41, 291-92, 302, 314, 
322, 330, 349, 355, 363, 368, 377-
78, 401n34, 438n105, 442, 450-Sl ,  
461, 480-81, 519, 521n17, 545, 
563, 594, 608-10, 612. See also 
allegory, exoteric myths, mystery 
cults 
seed of David (Jesus as) 288, 532-33, 
550, 572, 575-77, 579-82. See also 
incarnation 
Selassie, Haile. See Rastafarianism 
Semitisms. See Aramaic 
Septuagint 61-63, 74, 78, 81, 87-88, 
90-92, 101n80, 142-43, 164n24, 
167, 179, 195, 203, 210nl47, 240, 
32l n57, 361-62, 381, 383-84, 402, 
408-10, 416n62, 426n77, 432, 436, 
439n l08, 441, 455n136, 458nl41, 
459nl45, 465ݩ, 476-77, 479nl92, 
483-84, 498-99, 520, 560-62, 576, 
580n90. See also Old Testament 
Sermon on the Mount 460, 462, 465-68, 
471-72, 490 
silence (arguments from) 2-6, 20, 79-
8ݪ 166, 255n4, 278n48, 349nl l3, 
356, 609 
Simon Magus 71, 364 
Simon ofCyrene (and sons) 371, 
404n37, 444-52 

Subject Index 
695 
Socrates 
1 1 7, 209, 223-24, 289-93, 308, 
436, 447-48 
Socratic-Aesopic hero-type, 222-25, 
436. See also Aesop, mythotype, 
Socrates 
Son of Man 
43, 67-68, 1 82, 205-206, 
3 1 2, 328, 382, 387, 560n63, 613 
Sophia. See Eugnostos, Wisdom 
speaking in tongues. See glossolalia 
speeches (invention of) 
1 0, 22, 2 1 7- 1 8, 
298-99, 363-64, 370-71 ,  375-85, 
443, 47 1, 490, 5 1 1 , 546, 551, 604. 
See also Sermon on the Mount 
Stephen (the martyr) 
135, 3 1 4, 381-83 
Stoicism 
1 58, 1 73, 1 75, 203n 127, 2 1 2, 
448, 503n233 
sublunar sphere. See firmament 
Suetonius 
84n48, 148, 1 50nn202, 205, 
273n40, 275, 33 1 n75, 344-45, ζ 
49, 357, 412, 449nl 28 
super-apostles (hyper /ian aposto/01) 
526-27 
syncretism 
47, 66, 97n72, 100, 103-
105, 163-69, 172-75, 187n84, 225, 
437, 607, 6 1 1 .  See also Cargo 
Cults, Judaism, myth 
Synoptic Gospels 
1 n 1, 3 1 , 93-94, 
164n24, 25 1 n25, 265n23, 269-70, 
274n41, 285-86, 303, 354, 389n3, 
397, 403n36, 454, 487, 492n216, 
500, 506n241, 522n23, 557. See 
also Luke, Mark, Matthew, Q, 
Thomas 
Tacitus 84n48, 148, 150, 275, 295, 301, 
303-304, 338, 340n95, 342-46, 
349, 357, 448-49nnl26, 128, 510-
1 1 ,  5 1 5. See also Testimonium 
Taciteum 
Talmud (Jesus in the) 
274, 282-85. See 
also dying messiah 
Tammuz. See Dumuzi 
targums (targumim) 
74n32, 384, 402, 
408-10, 427-28n83, 433, 498n222, 
562n66 
temple and temple cult (Jewish) 
24, 
32-33, 69, 81-82, 96n70, 1 07n 100, 
t l 4n l 20, 143-46, 153-59, 194, 
213-14, 265-66, 272, 3 1 Sn44, 
327-30, 353-55, 363-64, 378, 382, 
409, 422-24, 427-35, 438, 441 -42. 
448-50, 458, 461 -63, 465, 467, 
472, 478nl 88, 485-86, 49 1, 494, 
497, 506, 539-45, 562n66, 567-68, 
607, 61 1-12. See also atonement, 
Jewish wars, Passover, priesthood, 
Yom Kippur 
Testimonium Flavianum 
305, 332-42 
Testimonium Taciteum 
295, 342-46 
Thallus 
275, 298n25, 346-47, 357 
Theudas 
69-70 
Therapeutae 
I JOn 1 72, 1 75-76 
Thessalonians (Epistles to the) 
26 I -62, 
5 1 1n4, 566-69. See also scripture 
index, 670 
Thomas (the Doubting Apostle) 
490, 
501n225 
Thomas (Gospel of) 
93-94, 269n33. 
273, 274n41 
Tiberius (emperor) 
23n9, 221 , 281 , 286, 
296, 304, 343-44, 347n l07 
Timothy (Paul's companion) 
538-39 
Timothy (Epistles to). See Pastoral 
Epistles 
Titus (companion of Paul) 
589n99 
Titus (emperor) 
296, 344-45, 448 
Titus (Epistle to). See Pastoral Epistles 
tombs of Jesus 
257n6. See also empty 
tomb 
Trajan (emperor) 
151, 154, 315, 
324n64, 331, 342n97, 343-44 
trial of Jesus 
47, 98, 286, 314, 382-83, 
43 1-33, 443, 463, 515, 518-19, 
573. See also Jesus ben Ananias 
Twelve (apostles) 
32, 149-51, 413, 
453n l32, 488, 516-17, 524, 572, 
586, 588n97. See also James, John, 
Judas, Peter, the Pillars, Thomas 
validity (of argument) 
xiii, 3, 4, 6-7, 10, 
1 1 ,  20n3, 21, 26, 30-32, 36-3 7n I ,  
48, 54, 61, 1 59n9, 166, 228nl 87, 
238, 248-50, 25 1 n25, 255, 283-84, 
349n113, 357n1 22, 359n l, 391, 
399-400, 509, 413, 540, 615-16, 
618. See also fallacies, logic, 
method 

696 
On the Historicity of Jesus 
Vespasian (emperor) 
296, 329, 331n74, 
429n85, 448-49 
Virgil 
361, 392-93, 398, 436, 482 
visions (role and theory of) 
26, 32-33, 
37, 40, 41n4, 44, 47-48, 53-55, 59, 
81, 108, 124-43, 146, 160, 162, 
181-82, 185n76, 1 86, 193, 199, 
205, 248, 263, 264, 279, 287, 309, 
31 1-15, 318- 19, 321, 334, 352-53, 
361-66, 368, 371, 377, 379-80, 
388, 398, 402, 424n73, 432, 448-
50, 464, 499n223, 508, 515-27, 
530-33, 536, 544-46, 549, 554, 
552-55, 558-63, 578n87, 583, 588, 
592-94, 607-608, 610, 612, 615 
'we' passages (in Acts) 
268, 360-61 n4 
Wisdom (as an entity) 
3 1 1  n42, 
456n137, 578n87, 580n90. See 
also Logos 
Wisdom of Jesus Christ. See Eugnostos 
Wisdom of Solomon 
16, 88, 134n 182, 
142-43, 158n8, 184, 408, 614 
woman (Jesus born of) 
577-82 
Yom Kippur 
82n44, 143-45, 403-408. 
425-26, 561 . See also atonement 
Zalmoxis 
58n4, 100n79, 171 -72, 602. 
See also dying-and-rising, mystery 
cults 
Zealots 
156-59, 176n50, 334 
Zechariah (father of John) 
478 
Zerubbabel (Apocalypse of) 
75-76. 80 
Zoroastrianism 
165, 168, 184, 187 


