 
 
  
 
 
  

 
 
  
 
 
Table Of Contents 
The  Rich  Villain  Speaks ............................................................................3 
The Rich Villain Speaks
Getting Down to Business ........................................................................4 
Easy Methods ............................................................................................6 
Easy Method #1: Ebay Arbitrage.......................................................................6 
Easy Method #2: Forum Marketing ...................................................................8 
Easy Method #3: TypoSquatting .....................................................................11 
Easy Method #4: Domain Bait & Switch..........................................................12 
Easy Method #5: Tube Marketing....................................................................14 
Easy Method #6: Torrent & P2P Marketing.....................................................17 
Easy Method #7: Expired Domains .................................................................18 
Advanced Methods..................................................................................20 
Advanced Method #1: Adsense Arbitrage.......................................................20 
Advanced Method #2: Community Site Marketing ..........................................24 
Advanced Method #3: Email Marketing...........................................................29 
Advanced Method #4: Adwords Tricks............................................................32 
Adwords Trick #1 : Classic Bait & Switch ....................................... 32 
Adwords Trick #2 : Terrorize .......................................................... 33 
Adwords Trick #3 : Exploit the Buzz Factor.................................... 35 
Just Do It! ................................................................................................37 
 

 
 
  
 
Copyright © 2008-2009, RICHVILLAIN.COM 
3
The Rich Villain Speaks 
 
lease allow me to introduce myself, I’m Eddie Temple.  I see the 
world as my own personal ATM machine, and so should you. 
I’ll warn you right now, this book is about making money not making 
friends.  Getting into internet marketing is like stepping into a boxing ring – 
with knuckles wrapped in glass shards.  It’s kill or be killed out there, folks. 
My job is to teach you how to survive. 
Take off your shoes, leave your morals at the door and step into my  
office … 

Getting Down to Business 
 
o many of those ripoff internet marketing eBooks on Clickbank give   
 
you nothing but vague, general information.  It’s hard for you to make 
big money because nobody will tell you straight up how to do it.  They talk 
about sales letters, psychology, seo, web design … but they never really 
teach you how to make money.   
I’m taking the opposite approach.  I’m here to show you how to get rich, 
not how to write ad copy. You want to learn psychology and write sales 
copy?  Great, read a book on copywriting.  This is a book about making 
money right now.  I’m going to teach you what you can’t find in a 
bookstore, what other affiliate marketing books simply won’t tell you.  And 
more than that … I want to give you easy-to-use techniques that you can 
put into practice TODAY to start generating income.   
 A word about choosing domain names … 
Many of the methods described in this eBook require using 
domains.  When registering domains, I strongly recommend 
Moniker.  Avoid Godaddy and other registrars at all costs.  You 
should only register two or three word non-hyphenated dot com 
domains.  If you ever need to resell them, you’ll thank me for 
this advice.  And your SEO results will be better. 
 It’s better to be feared than loved … 
Never appeal to love or honesty when selling on the internet.  
Human nature is what it is.  Always appeal to base desires such 
as greed, fear, sex, jealousy.  These are what I call prime 
movers.  They are the psychological elements you’ll need to 
trigger.  That’s all I’m going to say about psychology, because 
that’s all you need to know. 
 
 
  
 
Copyright © 2008-2009, RICHVILLAIN.COM 
4

 Study, Study, Study … 
Knowledge is the key to all things – even more so on the 
Internet.  You must keep up with all the latest changes, trends, 
techniques, and ideas that other internet marketers are using to 
make money.  Frequently, you can simply take someone else’s 
idea, improve it, and do even better than the competition.  I 
spend 2-3hrs every day just reading new content on the big 
internet marketing forums.  I recommend joining all of the 
forums below and spending at least 30 minutes each day 
browsing through the top posts: 
WarriorForum, Digitalpoint, Gfy Board, Webmasterworld, 
Wickedfire, Blackhatworld, TalkMania, V7n, 
EasyAdForum, IM4Newbies, NetBusinessTalk, 
MoneyMaker Group,  ewealth, young entrepreneur, 
Copywriters Board , Webmaster World 
 Think Scale …  
All profitable online advertising methods are highly scalable.  
That is, once you fine-tune the technique it can be easily applied 
to a broader market or larger audience without extra capital 
investment.  This is markedly different from a restaurant 
franchise, for example.  If a McDonalds franchise owner is 
making $200k / year off his east-side Mickey D’s, he’s going to 
have a very hard time increasing revenues beyond, say 20%.  
That’s due to a fundamental limitation of his market share; his 
restaurant is located on the east side of town, and only so many 
people live there. He can’t target people on the west side of 
town without opening an additional franchise, which entails a 
great deal of startup cost and time investment.  The trick to 
successful internet marketing is mastering techniques that are 
highly SCALABLE, allowing you to increase your market share 
and reach a vast audience with little additional investment in 
time or money.  All the best marketers understand that 
scalability is the key to success.  
 
 
  
 
Copyright © 2008-2009, RICHVILLAIN.COM 
 
5

Easy Methods 
  
Easy Method #1: Ebay Arbitrage 
 
simple yet powerful concept is based on the fact that eBay offers a 
 
huge market for retailers.  This is buy low and sell high, folks.  Find a 
market where the average sale price is lower than on eBay, then buy 
products and resell them at auction.  Forget most of those wholesale 
directories, though.  They’re scams.  The only legit wholesale directory 
that I know of is WorldWideBrands.  Another great source of products is 
Craigslist. This is necessarily a smaller market than eBay, so prices tend 
to be lower.  You also have more flexibility in negotiating with the seller.  
Here’s the strategy: 
Step 1. Find products that are hot on eBay and commanding high 
prices – usually electronics or trend items. Determine an 
average sale price for those items. 
Step 2. Search for similar products on Craigslist and make lowball 
offers to every seller.  You’ll get some takers.   
Step 3. Resell the items you bought on craigslist for a profit on 
eBay. 
Okay, so you’ve built up your bank account doing this little arbitrage trick 
and you’re ready to scale up to the next level.  Obviously the amount of 
money you can make doing this is limited by the amount of stuff you can 
buy from your local craigslist.  So now we need to find an even better 
source of products, and the answer is Alibaba  
 
 
  
 
Copyright © 2008-2009, RICHVILLAIN.COM 
6

Alibaba is a worldwide marketplace where manufacturers and distributors 
sell their stuff, usually at deep volume discounts.  Take advantage of this 
by following these steps: 
Step 1. Do some market research on eBay to find the hottest and 
best products to sell, just like step 1 above. 
Step 2. Look for those same items on Alibaba and buy in volume, 
reaping huge discounts. 
Step 3. Resell the items on eBay for a large profit.   
Because Alibaba offers a virtually unlimited supply of wholesale items, you 
won’t hit the same wall that you do with craigslist.  There is virtually no 
limit to the amount you can make.  I know a guy who started small with 
this retail arbitrage method and now owns a forty thousand square foot 
warehouse and earns over a million dollars a year. 
 Key Points : 
 Only deal with trusted vendors on Alibaba.  Don’t get 
ripped off. 
 
 The key to the whole system is doing good market 
research on eBay so you know what the average sale 
price is for the items you want to sell.  Research first, 
then acquire the product (from craigslist or Alibaba) 
 
 Your eBay reputation becomes very important, so deliver 
the products promptly and maintain good communication 
with buyers. 
 
 
  
 
Copyright © 2008-2009, RICHVILLAIN.COM 
7

Easy Method #2: Forum Marketing 
 
imple but effective, you won’t make huge money with this technique 
 
but it’s extremely easy to do and provides a nice source of residual 
income.  Lots of people are making $100-$200 a day doing this with very 
little time commitment. 
The goal is to make high-profile forum posts in the big internet marketing 
forums and drive traffic to an affiliate program you’re promoting by using 
an eye-catching forum signature.  The type of post that generates lots of 
page views is one which breeds curiosity, fear or hope.   
For example : 
“13yr old internet marketer youngest millionaire ever” (curiosity) 
“how I made $x,xxx in X days doing …” (hope) 
“Google about to ban affiliate marketing permanently?” (fear) 
Make sure to put real information in the post (from news articles, or 
personal experience, or just the rumor-mill) otherwise you’ll get banned 
and your post gets deleted.   
We’re targeting two kinds of traffic here; the forum viewers and the natural 
serp results, since forums tend to have a very high Google page rank.  
This means that you need to use keywords relevant to your forum sig all 
throughout your post.  For example, if you’re promoting a dating program 
like HornyMatches, you would interweave words like “best dating affiliate 
program”, “high dating conversions” etc. into your post.  Then people 
doing a Google search for “dating conversions” will usually see your forum 
post on the first page of search results.  When they view it, they notice 
your sig and you know the rest of the story. 
 
 
  
 
Copyright © 2008-2009, RICHVILLAIN.COM 
8

Here’s an example of a post that spikes curiosity and generates a ton of 
page views and replies.  This is the type of thread you want to post, and 
the type of thread you should reply to: 
 
Figure 1 
 
 
Step 1. Choose an affiliate program to promote. I recommend a 
PayDotCom eBook, a Copeac CPA (cost per action) offer 
related to internet marketing, or a dating program such as 
LustDollars.com.  Best of all is the Rich Villain Affiliate 
Program   We’re the only program offering daily PayPal 
payouts! 
Step 2. Choose forums in which to promote your offer.  I 
recommend: WarriorForum, Digitalpoint, Gfy Board, 
Webmasterworld, Wickedfire, Blackhatworld, TalkMania, 
V7n, EasyAdForum, IM4Newbies, NetBusinessTalk, 
MoneyMaker Group,  ewealth, young entrepreneur, 
Copywriters Board   
Step 3. Determine which kind of posts get the most views/replies in 
the forums you’ve chosen 
 
 
  
 
Copyright © 2008-2009, RICHVILLAIN.COM 
9

Step 4. Make posts similar to those discovered in step 3 above.  Be 
sure to use keywords in your posts relevant to the affiliate 
program you’re promoting in your forum sig. 
In addition to making posts, you should be responding to high traffic 
threads to get your sig out there even more.  This method offers a nice 
little residual income because your posts stay on the forum pretty much 
forever, sending consistent traffic to the affiliate program you’re promoting. 
 Key Points : 
 Change it up. Don’t always promote the same program.   
 
 Be creative with your forum sig to make it really stand out 
 
 Choose a high converting program to promote, usually 
money-making offers or dating. (shameless plug: 
RichVillain is one of the best!) 
 
 Make a LOT of posts 
 
 Target the organic serp results with keywords in your 
threads relating to the program you’re promoting in the 
sig 
 
 Determine the kind of threads that generate high 
views/replies and make similar ones 
 
 Of all the forums, Digitalpoint and WarriorForum offer the 
highest Google PR and thus should be given priority 
when targeting the serp results with keywords 
 
 
  
 
Copyright © 2008-2009, RICHVILLAIN.COM 10

Easy Method #3: TypoSquatting 
 
Overview 
 
xtremely easy to do, but you may have a lot of competition.  The idea 
 
is to register domains that are typos of popular sites.  For example: 
“googl.com, adultfriendfinde.com, youporrn.com”.  Surfers accidentally 
type in your misspelled domain and get redirected to a porn site affiliate 
program (usually converts best).  It’s not nice, it’s not friendly, it’s not 
moral … but it makes money! 
Step 1: Sign up for a porn or dating affiliate program (Brazzers, 
BangBros, LustDollars, etc.) 
Step 2: Identify a list of adult sites you want to target.  Pick from the 
top 500 Alexa traffic rankings.   
Step 3: Now for the tricky part. You need to find misspellings of the 
sites you’ve targeted.  I don’t recommend doing it by hand 
because it will take too long. You can hire someone to 
write a simple php script that does this for you.  Just put a 
project up on GetAFreeLancer   
Step 4: Plug your misspelled domains into Moniker bulk registration 
to find the available ones, then register as many as you 
can. 
Step 5: Set your URL redirecting for each domain to take the surfer 
to the affiliate program you want to promote. 
 
 
  
 
Copyright © 2008-2009, RICHVILLAIN.COM 
11

 Key Points : 
 ICANN doesn’t like people doing this and may eventually 
shut down your domains, but you’ll make plenty of money 
in the meantime 
 
 Look for “top movers” on Alexa and target those sites that 
appear to be moving rapidly up in the rankings.  This is 
because you’ll have a hard time finding good 
misspellings of the top 100 sites, many  of them are 
taken.  But fewer people target the big movers. 
 
 Common misspellings are reversed “ie”, typos where the 
last letter of the site is omitted, keys to the right and left 
of the intended key, forgotten letters like “googl.com”, 
reversed “ao” like “downlaod.com” , merged “www” with 
domain for example “wwwgoogle.com”   
 
 
 
Easy Method #4: Domain Bait & Switch 
 
Overview 
 
ery simple yet effective trick.  The idea is to get lots of traffic to your 
 
domain for free, then use a URL redirect to take them to an affiliate 
program you’re promoting – usually porn or internet marketing.  All you’re 
going to do is register some domains, set a URL redirect, and then 
advertise those domains for sale on eBay, the forums, and aftermarket 
domain auctions.  People see your domain for sale, visit the domain to 
“check it out”, and get redirected to whatever affiliate program you’re 
promoting.   
 
 
  
 
Copyright © 2008-2009, RICHVILLAIN.COM 12

Step 1: Register some good non-hyphenated .com domains with 
curiosity value (so people will type them in). Example: 
“yougetrichquick.com” , “makecashinstantly.com”, etc.   
Step 2: Choose an affiliate program to promote (I recommend the 
internet marketing niche)  
Step 3: Set URL redirect for your domains to the affiliate 
program(s) you’re promoting 
Step 4: List the domains for sale on high traffic sites such as : 
Ebay, DigitalPoint “domains for sale”, DnForum, 
NamePros, Warriorforum “sites for sale”, Sedo, 
SnapNames, Namejet and Moniker  
 
 Key Points : 
 Most of the good two-word domains will be taken, but you 
can find lots of three-word dot coms. 
  
 When listing the domains for sale, use keywords 
designed to target natural serp results because many of 
the sites will have a high PR and therefore your “domain 
for sale” posting will show up in Google search results.  
Use keywords like “internet marketing”, “make money 
fast”, “get rich quick”, “home business opportunity” if 
you’re promoting an IM-related affiliate program. 
 
 Don’t be afraid to pay a little more on eBay to make your 
domain listing more visible. You can calculate ROI after 
doing this a few times, but it’s likely to be worth the extra 
$ for visibility. 
 
 If you haven’t joined DNforum yet, do so now!  It’s worth 
every penny.   
 
 
  
 
Copyright © 2008-2009, RICHVILLAIN.COM 13

Easy Method #5: Tube Marketing 
 
Overview 
 
ere is an easy yet powerful way to siphon traffic from adult tube sites 
 
to adult affiliate programs.  You’ll need to download some adult 
videos from the tube sites (or other porn sites, torrents, etc.).  Then re-
encode the videos with a domain that redirects them to an adult affiliate 
program.  For example, let’s say you register the domain 
“HotHomeVideos.com” and then join the affiliate program at BangBros.  
Now you just set redirection for “HotHomevideos.com” to your affiliate link 
at BangBros.  Download some movies and embed the URL 
“HotHomeVideos.com” into the vids, then upload them to all the tube sites.  
When surfers watch your videos, they notice the URL and (hopefully) visit 
your domain, get redirected to BangBros and, well, you know the rest  
Step 1: Register an adult-oriented domain with some OOOMPH to 
it.  Choose a two or three word domain like 
“HottestHomeVids.com”.  Put some effort into this step 
because you want something interesting/memorable that 
people will be willing to type into their browser. 
Step 2: Download some videos from YouPorn, Redtube, Pornhub, 
and Tube8.com.  Or from the torrents, or from paysites. It 
doesn’t matter where you get the vids.  You can use Orbit 
as a free utility to capture .flv files from the tube sites. 
 
 
  
 
Copyright © 2008-2009, RICHVILLAIN.COM 14

 
Step 3: After downloading the videos, embed them with the domain 
you reg’d in step 1.  You can use Windows Media Encoder 
to do this, but I prefer Adobe Premier Elements instead.  
Here’s a screenshot of a video I embedded with my URL: 
 
 
Figure 2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Step 4: Now just upload the videos to tube sites.  I recommend 
these:  
Xvideos, Redtube, Tube8, Pornhub, Bonktube, 
Pornema, HardcorePornTube, Hardcoretube, 
xxxtube, ZEfreeporn, realxtube, xshare, 
slutload, voolly, pacoporn, pornexchanger, 
haporn, sharepornmovies, shockingtube, 
xhamster, hardsextube, camptube, xxxupload 
 
 
  
 
Copyright © 2008-2009, RICHVILLAIN.COM 15

 Key Points : 
 Make sure to choose a catchy domain that viewers will 
want to type in 
 
 Try to use higher quality vids 
 
 Volume is very important – you need to upload quite a 
few vids to get good traffic. Aim for at least 25 per day.   
 
 Recommend Adobe Premiere Elements for this, but free 
encoders like Windows Media Encoder will work too 
 
 Make the domain really stand out in the video – bright 
yellow or red works best – but don’t overwhelm the video 
with the URL by having gigantic letters, etc 
 
 Niche targeting works best.  Sign up for a bunch of 
different affiliate programs targeting various niches 
(dating, gangbang, milf, etc.)  Then get a different domain 
for each niche.  Use videos where the content matches 
the niche you’re promoting.  This takes a bit more work 
but you’ll notice much better returns. 
 
 
  
 
Copyright © 2008-2009, RICHVILLAIN.COM 16

Easy Method #6: Torrent & P2P Marketing 
 
Overview 
 
he tube site marketing technique described above can be modified 
 
easily to work with torrents and P2P networks.  You can even use the 
same videos, but instead of uploading them to tube sites you seed them 
as torrents and P2P file sharing.  People download the videos by torrent or 
P2P (limewire, emule, etc.), they watch the videos and type in the 
embedded URL, hit your affiliate program and hopefully buy some porn.     
The steps are the same as Method #5 above.  Instead of targeting tube 
sites, you’ll need to seed on the torrent networks like Piratebay, mininova, 
and isohunt.  I like to use the client UTorrent but others work fine.  For 
P2P networks, I recommend using Limewire, Emule, Bearshare.  A quick 
Google search will pull up plenty more p2p networks and torrent sites.  
The more videos you share the better, again it’s all about volume. 
This is a super easy way to make a nice residual income, because when 
those videos get downloaded they tend to float around the ‘net, with your 
domain along for the ride. 
 
Rich Villain says:  
Use hundreds of niched videos, seed like crazy 24/7, and the 
money will flow! 
 
 
  
 
Copyright © 2008-2009, RICHVILLAIN.COM 17

Easy Method #7: Expired Domains 
 
Overview 
 
ere is an easy way to make some cash right away, literally within 
 
hours.  There are lots of reasons a domain may expire (site has gone 
out of business, owner of domain died, domain owner lost interest or 
forgot about it, etc.).  Some of these expired domains had previous traffic 
from an established site, and you can harness the residual traffic simply 
by purchasing the domain.   
Step 1: Go to http://JustDropped.com or Google “buy expired 
domains” and start browsing the listings of expired 
domains. 
Step 2: Evaluate expired domains to determine how much traffic 
they have.  Do an Alexa search on the domain, check 
Google PR, check number of backlinks. 
Step 3: Buy the expired domains that have the best potential for 
traffic. 
Step 4: Set URL forwarding to redirect traffic from that domain to 
an affiliate site related to the domain niche   
 
 
  
 
Copyright © 2008-2009, RICHVILLAIN.COM 18

 Key Points : 
 The key here is estimating the amount of residual traffic 
the domain is generating 
 
 Highly scalable – the more domains you buy, the better 
 
 Choose a high converting affiliate program to maximize 
traffic. If possible, target the affiliate program you’re 
promoting to the domain type you purchased (if the 
domain is internet marketing related, then direct them to 
an IM-type affiliate site) 
 
 
  
 
Copyright © 2008-2009, RICHVILLAIN.COM 19

Advanced Methods 
  
Advanced Method #1: Adsense Arbitrage 
 
  
Overview 
 
he art of good business is being a good middleman.  I love arbitrage 
 
because you’re not selling anything or even providing a real service, 
you’re just skimming money from traffic.  It’s a beautiful model for residual 
income and infinitely scalable once you get the hang of it.  I personally 
know guys who are making $5,000 per day with arbitrage techniques, 
working for a few hours from home.  It takes some time to learn all the 
tricks but once you get good, the sky is the limit.  Here’s a broad picture of 
how this works … 
You set up a landing page optimized for a specific high-paying keyword 
like “internet marketing”.  Weaved throughout the text of the landing page 
are Adsense ads.    You drive traffic to your landing page by bidding on 
much cheaper keywords and using other PPC engines with cheaper bid 
prices.  If your click-through rates are high enough, you will turn a profit 
because of the price differential between cost-per-click traffic versus your 
adsense pay-per-click commissions.   
This is pure mathematics, folks, so if you don’t like numbers then move on 
to Advanced Method #2.  Because this is all about numbers! 
Let’s consider a specific example.  Say you set up a nice landing page for 
the keyword “internet marketing” and Adsense will pay you $2 for anyone 
who clicks on your Adsense ads on the landing page.  Now let’s say 
you’re able to drive traffic to the page for $0.05 per click from a cheaper 
PPC engine like Miva.  If you can achieve a click-thru percentage (the % 
of people who click on your adsense ads) of 4%, can you make money?   
 
 
  
 
Copyright © 2008-2009, RICHVILLAIN.COM 20

The math is straightforward.  Let’s say you drive 1000 people to the 
landing page at a cost of $50.  If 4% of visitors click your adsense ads, 
your gross is $80 (.04x1000x$2).  Your net profit is therefore $30 on this 
campaign.  Here’s a simple formula that you will ABSOLUTELY NEED to 
learn and understand in order to play the Adsense arbitrage game: 
 
(Adsense Commissions  x  CTR  x  clicks) – (cost per click  x  clicks)  =  profit 
 
Adsense commissions is the amount of money Adsense pays you for each 
person who clicks on your adsense ads.  The CTR is the percentage of 
surfers who visit the landing page and click on an Adsense ad. The clicks 
is the raw number of surfers who hit your landing page.  The cost-per-click 
refers to the cost you pay to drive each visitor to your page (your bid price 
on other PPC engines).   
Using this formula, you can easily calculate your break-even CTR if you 
know the other variables.  Taking the example above, the equation looks 
like this: 
($2  x  CTR  x 1000) – (.05  x  1000) = $0  which simplifies to … 
($2000 x CTR) – $50 = $0  or … 
$2000 x CTR = $50 and we can see that our clickthru% is … 
CTR = $50 / $2000 which equals … 
2.5% 
If you run the campaign above and can’t achieve a 2.5% clickthru to your 
adsense ads, you will lose money.  Using the formula I provided, you can 
solve for any of the variables if you know the other ones.  This is a very 
powerful formula and the only one you’re going to need for getting started 
with Adsense. 
I warned you there’s some math involved  
 
 
  
 
Copyright © 2008-2009, RICHVILLAIN.COM 21

Let’s take a look at the general outline of the steps you’ll need to complete 
to get your first Adsense campaign online … 
Step 1. Choose a keyword to target.  This should be a high-
paying keyword like “internet marketing”, “blogging”, 
etc. There are thousands. 
Step 2. Create a landing page with unique content (write an 
article, or paraphrase someone else’s article, or hire 
a content writer).  You should also make the site 
look more legitimate by adding a contact page, 
privacy page, etc. This can all be B.S.  But Google 
is less likely to ban you if your landing page looks 
like a real website as opposed to, well, just a landing 
page. 
Step 3. Sign up for Adsense if you haven’t already and 
interweave Adsense code throughout your landing 
page, it should be well integrated with the content. 
Step 4. Drive traffic to your landing page from a cheaper 
PPC engine.  You can see some reviews of PPC 
engines here.  You can try: Miva, 7Search, 
Kanoodle, Enhance, Search123, Cliksor, Looksmart.  
Make lowball bids on your keywords at these other 
engines.  
Step 5. Go back and refine your adsense ads, your landing 
page, etc. to maximize your CTR.  Explore more 
Adwords alternative PPC engines to drive more 
traffic to your landing page.  
Step 6. Once you’ve achieved profitability, repeat steps 1-5 
for other keywords to scale your arbitrage operation.   
 
 
  
 
Copyright © 2008-2009, RICHVILLAIN.COM 22

 Key Points : 
 Scale! Scale! Scale! The more landingpages / arbitrage 
campaigns you have going, the more $ you will make 
 
 Never use just one Adsense account.  Use multiple 
accounts in case they shut you down, since Google 
doesn’t really like arbitrage. 
 
 Watch out for PPC click fraud on the smaller PPC 
engines  
 
 Use interesting and unique content for each landing 
page, and make it seem like an established website 
 
 You should closely monitor your campaigns to tweak 
your landing page for maximal conversions 
 
 Experiment with all the PPC engines you can find – there 
are dozens and dozens of them.  Play around with other 
techniques to drive cheap traffic to your landing page. It 
really doesn’t matter how the traffic gets there, as long as 
it doesn’t cost too much. 
 
 Use one landing page to start, learn the ropes, then 
expand.  There is a learning curve associated with 
arbitrage but it’s not rocket science, anyone can do it and 
make serious cash. 
 
 
  
 
Copyright © 2008-2009, RICHVILLAIN.COM 23

 
Advanced Method #2: Community Site Marketing 
 
Overview 
 
 
ee those PimpMansion stats on RichVillain.com? All from community 
 
site marketing   The system I use is very simple, a classic “bait & 
switch” which can be applied to any community personals site.  My 
favorite sites are Craigslist, AdultFriendFinder, and PlentyofFish.  The 
system is very simple; you post legitimate-looking ads pretending to be a 
hot girl looking for “no strings attached” sex.  Grab some photos of sexy 
chicks from Hotornot.com or Ratemypics.com and use them in your ads.  
Here is a sample of the type of ads I like to use:  
unlucky in love needs to get lucky!  im 20yo bayarea 
gal, just chillin' tonite and lookin' for some sexy fun, 
bored with all the guys i usually hang with, need some 
new blood hehe :)  so .. about me, umm .. im 5'6, 
115lbs, athletic and toned, brown hair .. send me your 
pic and i'll send you mine :)   
Sounds real, sort of, doesn’t it?  This ad will easily dupe 80% of the guys 
out there.  Now for the fun part, when the guy responds to your ad, you set 
up an autoresponder system to reply back to him with a message like: 
heya ... you sound pretty cool, so what comes next?  im 
really new to this as you can prolly tell lol ... anyways 
yeah, we should definitely meet up!  ... i live on campus 
but i have a car and could meet you pretty much 
wherever. your place or mine :-) check out my profile 
at http://JennyFoster.com, and lemme know what you 
wanna do ... 
 
 
  
 
Copyright © 2008-2009, RICHVILLAIN.COM 24

Easy as that.  Just put up a fake profile on the landing page (ie 
JennyFoster.com) with a link to a dating site and some text like: Sorry, I 
only meet people from HornyMatches.com because it’s safer that way … 
You might not think the average guy is dumb enough to fall for this trick, 
but I have $150k in the bank this month that says he is. 
The overall system is simple but the devil is in the details. To make big 
money here there are some fine points you’ll have to work out.  The 
system can be applied to any dating site or online personals, social 
networking, etc.  I target the high-profit but difficult sites like craigslist, 
AFF, PlentyofFish but you may want to start smaller and go after the low-
hanging fruit.  Big sites have big security to stop people from doing this 
kind of thing.  Smaller sites have less of a budget for security so they’re 
easier to exploit.  Let’s go through the basic steps now … 
Step 1: Choose an adult dating program to promote. I 
recommend CraigsPimp or LustDollars 
Step 2: Choose a site to target depending on your skill level.  
I *strongly* recommend newbies start out with 
posting ads on Craigslist through the affiliate 
program CraigsPimp.  The nice thing about this 
program is that you don’t have to worry about 
autoresponding or conversions because you get 
paid for each response to your ads.  As your skill 
level advances, you can go after the low-hanging 
fruit at sites like Backpage,  Gumtree, 
LocalSex.com.  Advanced marketers can work on 
the big sites. They are: AdultFriendFinder.com, 
Fling.com, PlentyofFish.com, Blackplanet.com, 
Singlesnet.com, OkCupid.com.  No doubt there are 
many more.  Any community personals site, or 
dating site (free or paid), will do the trick. 
 
 
  
 
Copyright © 2008-2009, RICHVILLAIN.COM 25

Step 3. If you’re promoting CraigsPimp, skip to step 4.  
Otherwise, you’ll have to develop an autoresponder 
for the site you’ve chosen to exploit.  This is the 
most difficult but also most important step.  Some 
sites like Backpage, Craigslist, Kijiji, and Gumtree 
will send replies directly to your email, which makes 
it really easy to autorespond.  You won’t find reliable 
commercial autoresponders, so you’ll have to post 
an ad on a freelancer site like Getafreelancer for a 
php developer to code you what you need. This 
won’t cost much – a few hundred bucks at most.  If 
you’ve chosen a site with strong security, like 
PlentyofFish or AdultFriendFinder, you’re looking at 
considerably more expense for the autoresponder 
because those sites use internal messaging.  It can 
still be done, but expect to pay over $1k with 
maintenance expenses as the sites change up their 
templates, security, etc. Trust me though, it’s worth 
the investment many thousands of times over. 
Step 4. Develop a system for posting ads / profiles on the 
site.  If you’re using Craigslist, you can find valuable 
resources at http://EasyAdForum.com.  The Easy 
Ad Poster Deluxe software used to be the best in 
the business, but it was discontinued.  I recommend 
AdsOnCraigs now. If you’re posting on any other 
site, you can make a few bucks posting manually 
but the real money is in automation, so you’ll need 
to develop an autoposter for the site.  Go back to 
the freelancer sites and get a programmer to make 
you a profile poster.  It’s not rocket science – any 
php developer worth his salt can do it. 
 
 
  
 
Copyright © 2008-2009, RICHVILLAIN.COM 26

 Key Points : 
 Automate, Automate, Automate.  The more ads & profiles 
go up, the more money you make. Efficiency is key to big 
numbers here. 
 
 How will you deliver the autoresponse, have you thought 
about that?  You’ll need an smtp server to push your 
mail.  There are some commercial services like 
Authsmtp, smtp.com, smtpeu.com, and smtp-server.com.  
Most of these will terminate you for high volume, so if you 
start getting good at this technique, you’ll need to find a 
hosting company to provide you with a durable smtp 
server for autoresponder mailings.  Look around on the 
forums and you’ll also find some guys who provide this 
service. 
 
 Proxies.  Any big site will block you for posting multiple 
ads from the same IP address, so you’ll need to line up a 
good supplier of proxies to switch your IP.  You can use a 
free service like the TOR network, but I recommend 
these guys instead: http://ExclusiveProxy.com 
 
 Use pictures of hot girls. Sounds obvious, but easy to get 
lazy with this.  Make sure the girls are HOT to maximize 
your revenue. 
 
 Make the ads & profiles sound REAL.  Put some effort 
into it. 
 
 Be creative and persistent.  This is a big money method 
but there are lots of hurdles to be overcome, so stay 
focused and dog your dating site until it starts pumping 
out cash for you! 
 
 
 
  
 
Copyright © 2008-2009, RICHVILLAIN.COM 27

 Concentrate on one site only, dominate it, then move on 
to another one. Don’t try to exploit multiple sites at once 
because it’s too frustrating.  Learn one site, learn how to 
play it, then when you’ve mastered the technique on that 
site you can move on to a new one. 
 
Rich Villain says:  
I strongly recommend http://CraigsPimp.com 
for community site marketers.  You post ads and 
get paid for each person who replies. No need 
for your own autoresponder, smtp server, or 
worrying about conversions for a dating site.   
 
 
  
 
Copyright © 2008-2009, RICHVILLAIN.COM 28

Advanced Method #3: Email Marketing 
 
Overview 
 
wo months of email marketing paid for a new Lamborghini Gallardo in 
 
my garage.  Let’s review those Copeac stats again, they’re all from 
email marketing: 
 
Figure 3 
 
Maybe you’ve heard the phrase “the money is in the list”?  Believe it.  The 
basic idea is brutally simple; you send out hundreds of thousands (millions 
.. billions?) of emails promoting a wide range of CPA (cost per action) 
offers, sit back and collect your commissions.  The days of promoting 
porn, pills, and gambling by email are long over.  The US Can-Spam Act 
makes that illegal.  Lucky for us email marketers, free CPA offers like 
ringtones do even better than porn   After all, everyone wants to get 
something for free.  In case I’ve lost you, when I refer to a CPA offer I 
mean you get paid when you direct a surfer to a site where they fill in 
some required piece of information (perform the “action”) rather than fill 
 
 
  
 
Copyright © 2008-2009, RICHVILLAIN.COM 29

out an order form to buy something.  An example of a CPA offer might be 
a squeeze page for an internet marketing ebook which doesn’t actually 
sell the ebook, just captures the customer’s email for future marketing, 
and pays you a commission (usually a few bucks per lead).  There are lots 
of CPA networks out there to join, but I strongly recommend Copeac . 
They’ve got awesome affiliate support, a wide range of offers, a weekly 
payout option, and a Payoneer payout option. Can’t beat that! Let’s take a 
look at the steps involved in playing the email marketing game … 
Step 1.  Buy a list of option coregistration data.  “CoReg 
Data” refers to emails that are collected when 
someone signs up for a free service, like when you 
sign up for a yahoo account and have to tick off your 
interests in sports, hobbies, etc.  That information 
(along with your email address, name, and more) 
gets sold to a CoReg data broker, who resells it to 
guys like me.  Makes you want to sign up for free 
stuff, doesn’t it?  The best CoReg broker out there is 
Route 72  
Step 2. Sign up for a CPA network and choose an offer to 
promote.  I recommend Copeac.  They have 
thousands of offers you can push. Make sure to 
match your offer to your coreg data so you’re giving 
people what they want.  Otherwise, conversions will 
be low. 
Step 3. Choose an email marketing software.  There are 
hundreds available and most will do what you need.  
Don’t be thrifty here, buy something robust.   
I recommend EliteMail which is a server-side mailer 
and one of the best in the industry. 
Step 4.  Choose an smtp server. You still need a way to 
relay your messages from your email software to the 
customer’s inbox.  This requires a high-volume smtp 
server, preferably one that’s “whitelisted” or at least 
not “blacklisted”.  You can try www.smtp-
server.com, smtpauth.com, or google “whitelist smtp 
server”.   
 
 
  
 
Copyright © 2008-2009, RICHVILLAIN.COM 30

Step 5. Compose your email.  Most CPA networks (including 
copeac) will provide html emails for use in email 
marketing, so this step may be very easy. Just copy-
and-paste the offer from your Copeac panel into 
your email marketing software. 
Step 6. Import your list, filter for duplicates, filter against 
suppression list (people who don’t want to receive 
your mail. If you’ve just started, then use the default 
suppression list provided by your CPA network) 
Step 7. Press the “send” button   
 
 Key Points : 
 When buying CoReg data, make sure to get at least 
these three fields; name, email, city 
 
 Always match up your offers to your coreg data; for 
example, if you buy a list of business owners, then send 
them emails with business-to-business type offers.  If you 
buy a list of college students, send them student loan 
offers, ringtones, etc. 
 
 Never promote porn, pharmacy, or gambling offers  by 
email. It’s illegal under the US Can-Spam Law.  
 
 Look for these features in email marketing software: link 
tracking, unencrypted php source code (so you can 
modify it), html email templates, server-side,  automated 
bounce handling, scheduling, personalization options, 
campaign-based, link tracking / open tracking / 
embedded pictures, full graphical statistics 
 
 Before scheduling a mailing, ping your smtp server to 
obtain its IP address and check it for blacklisting here  
 
 
 
  
 
Copyright © 2008-2009, RICHVILLAIN.COM 31

 Use an up-to-date suppression list so that complaints are 
kept to a minimum 
 
 For increased conversions, use personalization in your 
emails:  
Dear Michael, I live in Vancouver too and 
know how hard it is to get a home loan 
here, so I wanted to talk to you about this 
offer … 
 
 
  
 
Copyright © 2008-2009, RICHVILLAIN.COM 3
 
 
Advanced Method #4: Adwords Tricks 
 
Overview 
 
 could write a whole book about Adwords but I’m just going to pass 
 
on a few of the dirtiest tricks I use to cash in on the Google 
phenomenon.  Beating Adwords is tricky and requires a budget for lots of 
trial and error.  You’ll also need a good supply of prepaid credit cards 
because using these techniques will likely get your account banned! 
Adwords Trick #1 : Classic Bait & Switch 
Adwords doesn’t allow porn anymore (well, it takes days of jumping 
through hoops to get an ad approved, rendering it useless).  Still, it’s easy 
to drive traffic to a porn affiliate site using Adwords.  I just create innocent-
looking ads for car websites, hunting websites, sports websites, etc.  Note 
that these are MALE TARGETED.  We don’t want chicks clicking on our 
ads and going to a porn site.  Here’s an example of an ad I used just last 
week: 
best hunting crossbows for sale 
Just in time for hunting season 
www.bestcrossbowsales.com 
 
2

 
 
  
 
Copyright © 2008-2009, RICHVILLAIN.COM 33
I downloaded some text about crossbows from the web and threw up a 
cheesy little website for a landing page, took 5 minutes. Then I went into 
my adwords account and bid on related keywords like “crossbows, 
hunting, hunting supplies”, etc.  And I got a very good deal on those 
keywords since they aren’t super popular.  The ad was approved 
immediately. Now for the tricky part.  I went to Moniker and set URL 
forwarding to redirect the domain www.bestcrossbowsales.com to a porn 
affiliate site (LiveJasmin.com).  Bing, bang, boom! Surfers see my 
adwords ad, click on it, get redirected to a porn site where I get a 
commission from whatever they buy.  Google can’t do anything about it 
because the changes were made SERVER-SIDE at moniker, rather than 
through my adwords account (which might require approval, delays, or 
review).   
This particular ad didn’t generate a ton of traffic, only a few hundred clicks 
a day, but the ROI was very good and it made me about $20/day profit for 
the week that I ran it.  Now you won’t be buying any Lamborghinis with 
twenty bucks a day, but imagine if you ran 10 of these ads every day.  
That’s $200/day.  What if you ran 100 of these ads?  It’s a highly scalable 
system. 
Adwords Trick #2 : Terrorize 
Internet surfers get ripped off all the time – that’s a fact of life.  You can 
exploit this fear.  Create an adwords campaign targeting a product or 
brand, label it a scam (create fear), then redirect the surfer to a 
“legitimate” brand (create trust).  I love to do this with dating sites but it 
works with any well-known brand.  Here’s an example of a recent 
campaign targeting Adult Friend Finder: 
Adult Friend Finder Scam? 
Read Our Expert Review and User 
Reviews on Adult Friend Finder Here 
www.BabylonLove.com 
 
I created a quick & easy little landing page for my domain 
BabylonLove.com.  It was just a free template with some bullshit like … 
“AFF scammed me … then I tried AmateurMatch and I hooked up with a 
girl right away” 

I really like to do this with adult dating sites because all the pay dating 
sites are scams (the myth that millions of hot girls log on every day looking 
to hook up with a random stranger is mind-numbingly absurd).  Therefore, 
lots of guys have been burned by dating sites and before joining a new 
one they’re likely to Google:  
Adult friend finder scam  /  adult friend finder ripoff 
Targeting those keywords and confirming their suspicions, then sending 
them to a “real” dating site based on your “personal experience” is a 
devilishly profitable exploit.  You can target any big adult dating site such 
as AmateurMatch, Fling, Singlesnet, etc. 
This campaign is making me a few hundred dollars a day.  Took me all of 
20 minutes to set it up.  Here’s a screenshot of my technique in action just 
last week.   
 
Figure 4 
 
 
Check out my landing page BabylonLove.  This is a great example of a 
landing page for this technique and you’re welcome to copy it exactly! 
This system works with any brand or niche where people are likely to get 
ripped off, especially dating and internet marketing. 
 
 
 
  
 
Copyright © 2008-2009, RICHVILLAIN.COM 34

Adwords Trick #3 : Exploit the Buzz Factor 
Many search terms will be wildly popular but without considerable 
competition from bidders.  This is usually related to “buzz” from news 
stories or rumors circulating the internet.  A hot celebrity name that pops 
up in the news will command high bid prices, but a story about a rat brain 
robot will not (true news story that was all over the AP last month).  The 
reason?  Nobody else sees any value in bidding on a term like rat brain 
robot.  Yet, millions of people were searching for it.  Visit these sites to find 
out what’s hot right now: Google Zeitgeist, Yahoo Buzz Index, Google 
Search Keyword Trends, Lycos Top 50  Look for keywords that are 
producing a lot of traffic but wouldn’t seem to hold much bid value for 
adwords.  For example, simply create a landing page related to that 
search term and promote something on the page, interweaved with the 
“information” you’re providing about the rat brain robot.  
I used this technique a few months ago to exploit the news story about the 
New York Attorney General Elliot Spitzer who was shacking up with high-
end prostitutes.  Soon as the story hit, I bid like crazy on every keyword 
related to Elliot Spitzer and the prostitute’s name, the name of the escort 
agency he used, etc.  My ad looked like this: 
Elliot Spitzer arrested? 
Spitzer resigns, goes to jail 
www.spitzerinprison.com 
 
Of course, the Attorney General didn’t go to prison – it was just a ruse to 
get people to the site.  On the landing page I copied some news articles 
about Spitzer, through some pics of his escort on there, and shamelessly 
promoted an adult escort agency affiliate program! I made a quick $4,800 
in those two days before the keyword terms became too popular to 
continue.   
 
 
  
 
Copyright © 2008-2009, RICHVILLAIN.COM 35

 
 
  
 
Copyright © 2008-2009, RICHVILLAIN.COM 36
I check the yahoo buzz factor and Google trends every day for potential 
moneymaker stories and keywords and so should you! 
Rich Villain Says:  
I like to find keyword ideas at Dogpile’s Realtime Search 
Results. You should also become familiar with Google’s 
keyword tool and consider signing up for some fee-based 
keyword analysis services. My favorites are nichebot, 
wordtracker, and keyword country.  

Just Do It! 
I’ve taught you some of my favorite techniques for making quick, easy 
money on the Internet.  Enough reading, it’s time for you to put these 
methods into practice.  Don’t wait until tomorrow, don’t put this off.  Start 
right now.  Pick a technique from this book that fits your skill level and put 
it into practice today.  Some of the tricks I’ve taught you will earn you 
commissions within hours if applied correctly.   
Most internet marketers make the big mistake of trying to learn so much 
that they become overwhelmed by all the opportunities available.  Instead 
of focusing on one money-making method, they dabble with dozens of 
them.  This is no good.  You need to laser focus on one particular 
technique, use trial and error and refine your strategy until you make it 
work, then move on to the next.   
One final word of advice … Internet marketing is a ruthless art. Play nice 
and they’ll eat you alive.  In this business, you’re either the fucker or the 
fuckee.  Welcome to the jungle and good luck out there … 
 
Your Rich Villain, 
Eddie Temple   
 
 
 
  
3
 
Copyright © 2008-2009, RICHVILLAIN.COM 
7

