
RICH AND POOR 
IN AMERICA


Books in the Contemporary World Issues series address vital
issues in today’s society such as genetic engineering, pollution,
and biodiversity. Written by professional writers, scholars, and
nonacademic experts, these books are authoritative, clearly
written, up-to-date, and objective. They provide a good starting
point for research by high school and college students, scholars,
and general readers as well as by legislators, businesspeople,
activists, and others.
Each book, carefully organized and easy to use, contains an
overview of the subject, a detailed chronology, biographical
sketches, facts and data and/or documents and other primary-
source material, a directory of organizations and agencies,
annotated lists of print and nonprint resources, and an index.
Readers of books in the Contemporary World Issues series will
find the information they need in order to have a better
understanding of the social, political, environmental, and
economic issues facing the world today.


RICH AND POOR 
IN AMERICA
A Reference Handbook
CONTEMPORARY 
WORLD ISSUES
Santa Barbara, California 
Denver, Colorado 
Oxford, England

Copyright 2008 by ABC-CLIO, Inc.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any
means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise,
except for the inclusion of brief quotations in a review, without prior
permission in writing from the publishers.
Cataloging-in-Publication data is on file with the Library of Congress
11
10
09
08
07
06
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
ABC-CLIO, Inc.
130 Cremona Drive, P.O. Box 1911
Santa Barbara, California 93116-1911
This book is also available on the World Wide Web as an ebook. Visit
http://www.abc-clio.com for details.
This book is printed on acid-free paper. 
Manufactured in the United States of America
∞

To Mundy, for richer, for poorer


Contents
Preface, xiii
1
Background and History, 1
A Widening Gap, 3
Measuring Income Inequality, 5
Wealth Inequality, 7
Long-Term Trends, 9
Rowboats, Yachts, and Rising Tides, 11
Race, Ethnicity, and Economic Inequality, 13
Income Inequality and Health, 16
Income Inequality and Education, 18
A Shrinking Middle Class? 21
From Rich to Poor and Poor to Rich: Mobility, 23
Rich and Poor: The Political Dimension, 25
2
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions, 31
The Wage Structure and Human Capital, 32
Labor Skills, Labor Demand, and Technological 
Change, 33
International Competition, 35
Immigration, 37
Unions and the Wage Distribution, 39
The Minimum Wage and Inequality, 41
Winner Take All? 42
Family Structure and Income Distribution, 44
Political Perspectives on Income Inequality, 46
Education as an Income Equalizer, 47
The Effectiveness of Early Interventions, 48
U.S. Schools and Inequality, 51
ix

Ways to Improve Low-SES Student Performance, 53
College: Ticket to the Middle Class, 55
Working on the Labor Market, 57
The Living Wage as a Boost to Low Wages, 58
Stronger Unions as a Means to Lift Low Wages, 59
Earned Income Tax Credit , 60
Limits on CEO Pay, 62
Immigrant Labor Supplies, 63
Taxes and Transfer Payments, 65
Wealth and Estate Taxes, 68
Asset-Building Policies, 70
Summary, 72
3
Worldwide Perspective, 79
A World of Contrasts, 79
National Rates of Income Inequality, 81
Income Inequality in Latin America and Africa, 83
Poverty in the Rich Countries, 85
National Trends in Income Inequality, 87
Income by Country: Divergence or Convergence? 90
A New Concept of Global Inequality, 92
Less Inequality, Less Poverty? 94
Economic Mobility: The United States in Global 
Perspective, 96
Top U.S. Incomes in Worldwide Perspective, 98
CEO Pay and Income Inequality, 99
Wealth Taxes: A (So Far) Non-American Response 
to Wealth Inequality, 101
A Caution on Wealth Taxes, 103
4
Chronology, 107
5
Biographical Sketches, 127
Horatio Alger Jr., 127
Anne L. Alstott, 128
Warren E. Buffett, 129
John Bates Clark, 130
Chuck Collins, 131
Marian Wright Edelman, 132
John Edwards, 133
Barbara Ehrenreich, 134
Victor R. Fuchs, 135
x
Contents

William H. Gates III, 136
Corrado Gini, 137
Hetty Green, 138
Dolores Huerta, 139
Jonathan Kozol, 140
Simon Kuznets, 141
Bhashkar Mazumder, 142
Sara S. McLanahan, 143
Mollie Orshansky, 144
John D. Rockefeller, 145
Paul G. Schervish, 146
Thomas M. Shapiro, 147
Michael Sherraden, 148
Ronald J. Sider, 149
Timothy M. Smeeding, 150
Samuel Walton, 151
Richard Wilkinson, 151
Edward N. Wolff, 152
6
Data and Documents, 155
Inequality and the American Public: The Maxwell 
School Survey, 171
Perceptions of Inequality Trends, 171
Concerns about Inequality, 173
California Kids Investment and Development Savings
(KIDS) Accounts, 175
Ben Bernanke on U.S. Income Inequality, 179
Pay without Performance: The Great CEO Guarantee, 182
Are CEOs Overpaid? 184
The Estate Tax ‘Recycles’ Opportunity, 187
Being Profitable Is Giving Back, 190
Andrew Carnegie on What to Do with a 
Fortune [1889], 192
Giving Back, Big Time: The Carnegie-Buffett 
Connection, 194
Being Poor, 197
7
Directory of Organizations, 201
8
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources, 227
Print Resources, 227
Articles, 227
Contents
xi

Books, 230
Nonprint Resources, 247
Web Sites, 247
Videos, 251
Contact Information for Video Distributors 
and Vendors, 256
Glossary, 259
Index, 263
About the Author, 275
xii
Contents

Preface
T
he growing income gap between the richest Americans and
the poorest, once barely noticed, is now widely known and
debated. Front-page articles in The Wall Street Journal, The New
York Times, and many other mainstream news outlets have driven
home the unsettling truth that the United States is growing more
unequal, at least in economic terms. Some suggest that we are in
a new Gilded Age, pointing to concentrations of wealth and
income at the very top not seen since the 1920s or earlier. The
public tends to focus less on the statistics and more on the glitz:
private jets, mega-yachts, and palatial residences. Magazines and
television programs are devoted to voyeuristic explorations of
the lifestyles enjoyed by billionaires. And while the lifestyles of
those at the opposite end of the income distribution sell very few
magazines, there are indications that poverty—and the lengthen-
ing distance between society’s haves and have-nots—may be
reentering the realm of political and policy debate, just in time for
a presidential election.
This handbook is a primer on the dimensions, the trend
lines, the causes, and the consequences of the widening gap
between America’s rich and poor. It also considers some of the
policy options for slowing or halting the current trend. There are
strong differences of opinion about how seriously to take the
“stretching out” of the income distribution, with liberals more
likely and conservatives less likely to see it as problematic. Valid
arguments can be made on both sides, and this book does not
prejudge the question of whether the present degree of inequal-
ity exceeds what is acceptable or desirable. The real purpose of
the book is merely to offer a handy, single-volume guide to an
issue that is becoming more prominent with each passing year.
xiii

For those who are not familiar with the general topic of
income and wealth disparity, the best starting point will be chap-
ter 1. It provides background information on inequality trends,
defines key terms, and identifies some social issues to which eco-
nomic inequality has been linked, for example, the health status
of rich and poor, the educational opportunities afforded the well-
off and those less privileged, and racial-ethnic disparities of
wealth and income. It also explores the question of whether it has
become more difficult to lift oneself from a lower to a higher
income level (or to fall from higher to lower) in the course of a
generation. There are indications that growing income inequality
coincides with falling income mobility in the United States.
To engage immediately with some of the critical issues and
controversies related to the rise of economic inequality, one
should go straight to chapter 2. That chapter lays out all of the
major explanations for the widening wage gap we have seen in
U.S. labor markets: skill-biased technological change, increased
trade with the rest of the world, immigration, the long decline of
labor unions, and the shrinking value of the minimum wage. It
looks at a range of policy changes that might address these devel-
opments in the labor market, from pre-school interventions to
helping low-income kids build their human capital, to passage of
so-called living wage ordinances. The chapter also explores vari-
ous tax and asset-building policies that have been put forward as
ways to modify current inequality trends.
Chapter 3 offers a global perspective on what has been hap-
pening in the United States. It answers questions one may have
about whether the widening rich-poor gap is unique to the
United States or is seen in other rich, developed nations; whether
corporate chieftains in other developed countries are rewarded
on the same scale as American CEOs; how the United States
ranks among industrialized nations on the issue of income
mobility; and whether the gap between the world’s rich and poor,
as in the United States, is getting wider. The chapter also asks
whether a wealth tax, such as several European nations impose,
might make sense in the United States.
A time line of significant laws, publications, speeches, and
events involving the gap between America’s rich and poor is pre-
sented in chapter 4. A selective listing, as any such chronology
must be, it nevertheless can help build a historical context for
understanding how we view economic inequality today. Chapter
5 offers biographical sketches of a number of significant individ-
xiv
Preface

uals, be they scholars, advocates, or persons whose own financial
achievements have put a human face on American wealth. Again,
the list can only be selective. Chapter 6 presents data and docu-
ments related to the rich-poor divide. The data, culled mainly
from government statistics, cover such parameters as the Gini
coefficient for the United States and all other countries; U.S.
wealth distribution; the minimum wage; probability of achieving
a bachelor’s degree contingent on family economic status; and
poverty rates dating back to 1973. The documents chosen for
inclusion express a range of opinion about poverty, wealth, and
how the gulf between them might be kept from further widening.
Chapter 7 gives a selective listing of organizations that take
a direct interest in some aspect of the rich-poor divide. Think
tanks of the left and the right are included, as are some more
advocacy-oriented organizations. Several academic institutions
also make the list. Full contact information is provided for each
organization. The final chapter gives annotated lists of print and
nonprint resources that can extend one’s knowledge of (and
interest in) any topic covered in the book. All the books listed are
in print, and all the videos are fairly recent and available. Nine-
teen Web sites of special relevance to the rich-poor gap are iden-
tified; all are presently supported and likely to be in the future.
I am pleased to acknowledge the support of Hobart and
William Smith Colleges, the splendid small institution where I
have taught for many years, in advancing this project. A term’s
sabbatical leave and some funding through the Lloyd Wright Pro-
fessorship were most helpful. The editorial and production teams
at ABC-CLIO have impressed me greatly with their friendly, effi-
cient support not only on this project but two previous ones.
Dayle Dermatis and Holly Heinzer have kept me on track with
the current volume. Special thanks go to Mim Vasan for propos-
ing the idea (and title) of this handbook years ago and for her
warm words of encouragement as it gradually took shape.
Preface
xv


1
Background and History
L
ife is good for America’s rich. Their consumption possibilities
exceed what the majority of their fellow citizens can even
imagine. At a bar in Chicago, they can order a special cocktail
featuring premium vodka, Dom Pérignon champagne, a few
other ingredients, and a stirrer topped with a one-carat ruby—at
a cost of $950. At home they can keep their food and drink nicely
cooled in a Sub-Zero PRO 48 refrigerator costing $12,000. If they
carry the ultimate American Express Black credit card, issued by
invitation only to people who customarily charge at least
$250,000 a year, they can receive a luxury magazine so exclusive
that its cover bears no name. If they wish to spend a million dol-
lars on an automobile, they have that option as of late 2005 in the
Bugatti Veyron, built by Volkswagen. (Industry analysts expect
most buyers to treat the car as a “piece of art” rather than a
means of transportation.) For vacation travel to the Caribbean,
the Mediterranean, and other luxury destinations, billionaires
can now acquire mega-yachts as long as football fields and cost-
ing $200 million or more. When it comes to real estate, the sky is
the limit: four penthouse apartments atop the Trump World
Tower in New York City were on the market as a single unit in
early 2006 for $58 million. Occupying three floors, the unit fea-
tured 16 bedrooms, 24 bathrooms, 17-foot-high windows, and
bird’s-eye views of an important neighbor, the United Nations.
For America’s poor, consumption possibilities are much
more limited. A minimum-wage worker does not earn in a month
what the special ruby cocktail costs. She or he does not earn in a
year what the Sub-Zero refrigerator costs. A surprising number
of America’s poor do not have a bank account, much less an
1

American Express credit card. Vacation travel is not something
the poor have to be overly concerned about, whether by yacht,
plane, or train. For many, a vacation is an almost unthinkable lux-
ury. As for housing, the conditions under which America’s poor
are sheltered range downward from “adequate” to crowded, and
then to unsafe, unhealthy, and shoddy—hardly what would be
expected in the world’s richest democracy.
In talking about America’s rich and poor, we find ourselves
confronting a language problem. The term “rich” is problematic
on two counts. First, it has no operational definition. The U.S.
government has never issued guidelines on the income level
needed to qualify as rich. One could take a cue from the federal
income tax tables (2006), which push individuals and married
couples into the top marginal tax bracket when their annual in-
comes reach $336,550. Or one might draw a wealth line at some
multiple of the poverty line, for example, seven or eight times the
poverty line, and declare anyone with an income above that level
to be rich. Or one might define as rich anyone with an income in
the top 2 percent of Americans, or anyone with a net worth of,
say, $5 million. The problem with any and all of these definitions
is that they are fundamentally arbitrary. They will omit some
people we might feel really are rich and include others about
whom we have serious doubts. A second problem with the term
“rich” is the reluctance of those to whom it should apply to ac-
cept the designation. Oddly enough, many affluent Americans
are uncomfortable with being called what they so clearly are—
rich. Perhaps they resist the label believing that it makes them
sound pompous, over-privileged, or snooty. And yet the United
States has always been a place where wealth receives respect and
confers power. Wealth is a part, small or large, of what most
Americans mean when they refer to someone’s having achieved
“success,” and it surely figures in the fantasies and daydreams of
millions of Americans, given the evidence of billions of dollars in
lottery ticket sales every year.
The term “poor” poses neither of the problems just noted.
For more than 40 years, the U.S. government has defined poverty
thresholds that make it perfectly clear—at least in an official
sense—who is poor and who is not. Critics have found fault with
the poverty lines for a long time, but that is a separate issue. Any
family in the United States can see for itself whether the govern-
ment categorizes it as poor. There is also none of the ambivalence
about the word “poor” that attaches to the word “rich.” People
2
Background and History

neither want to be nor be labeled as poor. In an unintentional way,
that is exactly what the government does when it declares that
36.5 million Americans, or one in eight, fall below its poverty line
(in 2006). Of course, people who have no health insurance, who
make lengthy commutes on public transportation every day to
get to jobs that pay seven or eight dollars an hour, who send their
children to dilapidated public schools (from which they drop out
at alarming rates), and who face the recurring challenge of
stretching their cash and food stamps to the end of the month, do
not need government guidelines to inform them that they are
poor. They know poverty firsthand. What some may not know is
that economists, sociologists, journalists, and policymakers see a
growing divide between them and the rich.
A Widening Gap
“The rich get richer and the poor get poorer,” according to an old
saying. As a description of what has been happening in the United
States in recent decades, this is at least half-true. The rich have in-
deed gotten richer—much richer. America’s poor on the whole
have not gotten poorer, but their income gains have been minimal
at best, causing the gap between rich and poor to grow much
wider. A similar widening has occurred between those at the top
of the income scale and those in the middle. Average Americans
have to lift their gaze much higher than a few decades ago to
glimpse the heights now occupied by those making top incomes.
The highest 1 percent of income recipients in 2006, for example,
had incomes that ranged upward from $400,000 into the many mil-
lions of dollars (Krugman 2006). With incomes getting stretched
farther apart, it comes as no surprise that accumulated wealth is
also becoming more concentrated. Wealth disparities in the United
States have reached levels not seen since the 1920s, when men like
Henry Ford, Andrew Mellon, and John D. Rockefeller were living
reminders of the not-so-distant Gilded Age.
The widening gap between haves and have-nots can be
brought into sharper focus by looking at what chief executive of-
ficers (CEOs) at big U.S. corporations earn in comparison to the
ordinary employees below them. In 1965, the average CEO salary
in the United States was 24 times that of the average worker; by
1989, the ratio had climbed to 71; by 1995, it was 100; and in 2005,
the ratio had reached 262 (Mishel 2006, 203). In other words, the
A Widening Gap
3

imbalance between the highest-paid and average-paid Ameri-
cans is now ten times greater than it was 40 years ago. Executive
compensation has vaulted to such lofty levels that it is prompt-
ing concern even in the pages of reliably business-friendly publi-
cations like Fortune and The Wall Street Journal. Elsewhere in the
developed world, the gap between chief executive pay and that
of ordinary workers does not approach what is found in the
United States. This is mainly because corporate chief executives
are paid much less in Europe and Japan than in the United
States—less than half as much in most places.
While the long-term trend toward inequality is beyond dis-
pute, there is a lively range of opinion about the meaning of the
trend, the underlying reasons for it, whether anything can or
should be done about it, and what role, if any, the government
might play in slowing or reversing it. Much of the balance of this
chapter and the next will explore these issues. First, however, it is
important to be clear on one point: economic inequality is not, in
and of itself, an unacceptably bad thing. It may be disagreeable or
morally repugnant to some. It may fuel envy, guilt, stress, and
even health problems. It may weaken social cohesion. In the work-
place, it may promote shirking and corruption. But on the other
side of the equation are several pluses for inequality, and they are
substantial. Economic inequality plays a role in motivating per-
sonal effort, innovation, investment, and entrepreneurship. With-
out these manifestations of ordinary individuals trying to “get
ahead”—taking risks to achieve more-than-average gains for
themselves and their families—it is hard to see how an economy
could be kept dynamic and growing. Analyses of inequality that
overlook its positive aspects, therefore, give an incomplete picture
and cannot be the basis for balanced policy proposals.
Whatever their views on all of this, most Americans have
been willing to accept a considerable amount of economic in-
equality, in part because they believe theirs is a country in which
everyone has a fair chance to climb the ladder of economic suc-
cess. What worries many observers now is the possibility that the
trend toward greater inequality may be rendering American so-
ciety more rigid. Put another way, the growing gap between rich
and poor may be contributing to a decline in economic and social
mobility in the United States. If true, this would be a serious blow
to the nation’s “land of opportunity” image. A society in which
some are able to reserve the upper rungs of the ladder for their
children and grandchildren, while others are consigned to the
4
Background and History

lower rungs with little chance of climbing upward, meets the de-
finition of a caste system rather than a healthy, democratic soci-
ety. We return to this issue later in the chapter.
Measuring Income Inequality
Statisticians use a number of different tools to quantify how
equally or unequally a nation’s income is distributed. One of the
most widely used is the Gini coefficient, named for its developer,
Corrado Gini, a 20th-century Italian statistician. The details of its
computation are too complex to go into here. Suffice it to say the
Gini coefficient always has a value between zero and 100. A Gini
coefficient of zero would indicate a perfectly equal distribution of
incomes—the egalitarian’s dream. A coefficient of 100 would in-
dicate perfect inequality, with all income going to a single indi-
vidual or family. Obviously, no society in the world is at either of
these two extremes. Those with the highest Gini values—in other
words, the most inequality—tend to be located either in Latin
America or southern Africa. According to the United Nations,
Namibia, in sub-Saharan Africa, has the world’s highest Gini co-
efficient, at 71. Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Guatemala, and Paraguay
all have Ginis in the high 50s. The countries with low Gini ratios,
evidencing the least income inequality, are widely dispersed out-
side Latin America. Most European nations have Gini coefficients
in the range of 30 to 40. Scandinavia and Japan have greater in-
come equality than that, with coefficients under 30 (UNDP 2005,
270–273). The Gini coefficient for the United States in 2006 was 47
(U.S. Census Bureau 2007, 7). It has been on the rise for more than
three decades.
Gini coefficients are challenging to compute and difficult to
interpret. (What, after all, does a coefficient of 47 really mean?)
Experts find them useful for tracking changes in income distrib-
ution over time and for comparing the distributions of different
countries, but other statistical measures give a more intuitive
sense of the extent of economic inequality. There are many such
measures. Some look at income shares for particular subsets of
the population, for example, quintiles. A quintile is a 20 percent,
or one-fifth, share of the population. In the United States, each
quintile represents about 60 million people. In 2006, the top quin-
tile of American households took home 50.5 percent of total na-
tional income. The bottom quintile received only 3.4 percent. It is
Measuring Income Inequality
5

important to note that the “income” measured by these figures is
pre-tax and exclusive of such noncash benefits as food stamps,
housing subsidies, and government-paid medical benefits. Many
people in the lowest quintile qualify for, and receive, such bene-
fits. This suggests that the 3.4 percent share for the lowest quin-
tile should be considered an underestimate of the true economic
status of that group. Even so, the long-term trend toward in-
equality is apparent from the fact that in 1970 the top quintile of
households received about 43 percent of total income, consider-
ably less than its current 51 percent share (U.S. Census Bureau
2007, 38–39).
Other U.S. income shares have been calculated for the top 10
percent, 5 percent, 1 percent, 0.1 percent (the top one-thou-
sandth), even 0.01 percent (the top ten-thousandth), and, at the
other end of the distribution, the bottom 10 percent, 20 percent,
and 40 percent. At the top end, the most systematic and widely
cited research has been done by Thomas Piketty and Emmanuel
Saez, economists at the Ecole Normale Superieure (Paris) and the
University of California at Berkeley, respectively. Their data se-
ries on top incomes, based on income tax returns filed with the
Internal Revenue Service, reach as far back as the early 20th cen-
tury. Piketty and Saez found that the share of income going to the
top 10 percent, or decile, of Americans climbed from roughly 32
percent in 1973 to about 43 percent in 2004. The share of income
going to the top 1 percent has also jumped in recent decades,
from about 8 percent in 1979 to 16 percent in 2004. This trend has
been similar for the smaller, more elite “fractiles” within the top
percentile (Piketty and Saez 2006).
A final way of measuring income inequality is by forming
ratios of income percentiles. Picture every American household
being lined up by income level, from the super-richest to the very
poorest. If you picked out the household that was exactly one-
tenth of the way down from the top income, it would define the
90th percentile. In 2006, the income at the 90th percentile, or P90,
was $133,000. One-tenth of the population received more income
than that, and nine-tenths received less. At the opposite end of
the spectrum, the household at the 10th percentile, or P10, had an
income of $12,000 in 2006. Nine-tenths of the population received
more income than that, and one-tenth received less. If we form
the ratio of P90 divided by P10, we get a useful gauge of income
inequality. In 2006, this ratio stood at 11.1 ($133,000 divided by
$12,000). As might be expected in an era of growing inequality,
6
Background and History

the ratio has moved higher in recent decades; in 1967, the
P90/P10 ratio was only 9.2. Similar increases are found when
looking at other percentile ratios, like P95/P20 and P95/P50 (U.S.
Census Bureau 2006, 38–39).
Wealth Inequality
Not only is there a growing income gap in the United States, but
there is also a growing wealth gap. The terms income and wealth
are sometimes casually, and mistakenly, substituted for each
other. Properly speaking, income consists of annual dollar flows
such as wages and salaries, interest, dividends, capital gains,
rental income, and transfer payments like Social Security. Per-
sonal wealth consists of what people own minus what they owe.
On the plus side, they may own bank accounts and certificates of
deposit (CDs), stock portfolios (including 401(k) and 403(b) ac-
counts), bonds, mutual fund shares, the surrender value of life
insurance policies, homes and rental properties, durables like
cars and appliances, and unincorporated business firms. On the
minus side, households typically carry some debt, whether mort-
gage balances, credit card balances, college loans, consumer
loans, or simply unpaid bills. When a family’s total debts are sub-
tracted from its total assets, the difference is net worth or wealth.
Net worth can be negative, of course, as anyone filing for bank-
ruptcy can attest. Whether formally bankrupt or not, millions of
the poorest Americans have zero or negative net worth. At the
other extreme, wealth can run into the billions of dollars. Con-
sider this: to be listed by Forbes magazine in 2006 as one of the 400
richest people in the country, one needed to be worth, at a mini-
mum, $1 billion. Effortlessly qualifying was the man who has
headed the Forbes list since the 1990s, Bill Gates, with wealth es-
timated at $53 billion.
One might ask what is gained by broadening the analysis
from income distribution to wealth distribution. Do we actually
get a fuller understanding of economic inequality at the national
level, or make more realistic assessments of people’s economic cir-
cumstances at the individual level, by looking at both income and
wealth? The short answer is a resounding yes. At the national
level, wealth is often found to be distributed much differently than
income. (This is true of the United States, for example.) On an in-
dividual level, too, the picture one gets from looking at income
Wealth Inequality
7

alone can vary considerably from the picture one gets when both
income and wealth are considered. For individuals and families,
one of the key differences between income and wealth lies in year-
to-year variations. Income by its nature is volatile. This year it may
be high if one is receiving a bonus, collecting on an insurance
claim, taking a second job, or receiving an inheritance. Next year it
may be low if one’s working hours are reduced, wages are cut,
one’s personal relationship with an income-earner ends, or one
loses eligibility for an income transfer program. Wealth, for those
who have it, can provide a stabilizing influence on family finances.
As one leading expert on U.S. wealth inequality puts it, “In times
of economic stress, occasioned by such crises as unemployment,
sickness, or family breakup, wealth is an important cushion”
(Wolff 2002, 6).
We may now consider two central propositions about wealth
in the United States: first, for the country as a whole, and for most
individuals above the bottom two income quintiles, wealth is a
larger magnitude than annual income; and second, wealth is
more unequally distributed than income. The extent of U.S.
wealth inequality can come as a great surprise to those un-
acquainted with the numbers. One way it can be seen is in the
Gini coefficient for wealth. With wealth, as with income, there is
a range of possible Gini values. If the wealth Gini were computed
to be zero, it would mean that every American family had equal
wealth; if it computed to 100, all wealth would be held by a sin-
gle family. In 2004, the U.S. Gini coefficient for wealth was 80, far
above the income Gini of 47 and, some would say, uncomfortably
close to the value that would signal maximum possible wealth
inequality.
Another way to express wealth inequality is through the size
shares of wealth held by various subgroups of Americans, such
as the top 20 percent, 10 percent, 5 percent, 1 percent, and bottom
50 percent, 25 percent, or 10 percent. Often cited is the fact that in
2004, the top 5 percent of Americans held more wealth (over 57
percent) than the bottom 95 percent. Generally, however,  the
most attention is paid to the share of wealth held by the top 1 per-
cent of Americans. In 2004, their share was 33.4 percent. That fig-
ure is higher than was seen in 1989, just as the 2004 wealth Gini
of 80 was somewhat higher than was found in 1989. At the same
time, the share of wealth held by the bottom half of the popula-
tion dropped from a meager 3.0 percent in 1989 to an even more
meager 2.5 percent in 2004. The statistical evidence strongly sup-
8
Background and History

ports the conclusion that between 1989 and 2004, wealth became
more concentrated in the United States (Kennickel 2006, 10–11).
Why the wealth gap should be so much wider than the in-
come gap is an intriguing question. One answer is simple, intu-
itive, and undoubtedly correct to some degree: people with low
incomes live from paycheck to paycheck, with no money left over
at the end of the pay period. Barely able to make ends meet, such
families are not in a position to save, invest, or build up their as-
sets to any significant extent. By contrast, those with high in-
comes can easily afford a comfortable lifestyle with funds to
spare most of the time. Because their incomes exceed their spend-
ing, they are able to save. They invest their surplus funds in
stocks, bonds, CDs, and other kinds of investments, and their
wealth grows almost automatically, like water rising behind a
dam. Even without regular infusions of savings, the “water be-
hind the dam” would continue to rise over the long run because
bonds and money market funds earn interest, stocks earn divi-
dends and also appreciate in price, rental properties generate
rents, and so on. Diversified portfolios tend to grow regardless of
the occasional “down” years for certain investments. The rich in
this way get richer, and the poor tread water. In chapter 2, we
consider some asset-building proposals designed to help low-
income Americans break out of this vicious circle.
Long-Term Trends
What has been the long-term trend for income and wealth distri-
bution in the United States? Is there an economic theory that
makes some sense of the trend? As a matter of fact, the best-
known theory put forward by any economist on this issue pre-
dicted a pattern of income changes exactly the opposite of what
has occurred in recent decades. Simon Kuznets (1901–1985), a
Russian immigrant to the United States in 1922 who won the
Nobel Prize in Economic Science a half-century later, argued in
the mid-1950s that income inequality was likely, over time, to fol-
low an inverted U-curve pattern. As per capita incomes rose in
the early stages of economic growth, Kuznets suggested, income
inequality could be expected to increase. Why? Because eco-
nomic development would entail a massive shift of workers out
of agriculture, where incomes tended to be low and relatively
equal, into industrial occupations, where they tended to be
Long-Term Trends
9

higher but more unequal. At some point, inequality would reach
a peak and then begin to decline, in part, because the special
skills that had enabled some workers in the industrial sector to
command extra-high incomes would be disseminated more
widely across the workforce, thus evening out the highs and lows
of earned income (Kuznets 1955). For half a century, social scien-
tists have debated the validity of Kuznets’s inverted U-curve. All
that can be said today with any confidence is that, however valid
the theory may have been with respect to the U.S. income distri-
bution up to the 1950s, it does not describe inequality trends from
that time onward.
Considering the 20th century as a whole, experts see a broad
U-shaped pattern—not the inverted U-curve described by
Kuznets—characterizing top American income and wealth
shares. At the end of the 1920s, the top 1 percent and 5 percent of
American income recipients engrossed a larger share of national
income than they have ever done since, and the same was true of
the top 1 percent of wealth holders. The year 1928 was truly the
high-water mark for inequality during the 20th century. Things
changed abruptly the next year. Stock prices plunged in late 1929,
and the economy followed. The Great Depression eroded income
and wealth concentrations during the 1930s. Hard times for the
wealthy were to be expected with the crash of the stock market
and the ongoing liquidation of business equity during the worst
economic contraction most Americans had ever seen. The erosion
continued and even accelerated during World War II. The star-
tling damage done to top wealth positions during the early 1940s
was mainly due to steeply progressive wartime taxes and wage-
price controls. The income share of the top 1 percent of Ameri-
cans fell by a remarkable one-third in only five years, dropping
from 15.7 percent in 1940 to 10.5 percent in 1944; other top shares
took similar hits (Piketty and Saez 2006).
For a few decades in the middle of the 20th century, from
roughly the mid-1940s to the mid-1970s, U.S. income inequality
was relatively stable and low. The top decile’s share, for example,
dropped to 31.6 percent of total income in 1944, and in 1972, it
was still at that level, following some minor fluctuations in the
intervening years. In the 1970s, the United States entered upon
an economic landscape—some have called it the postindustrial
economy—that Kuznets did not and could not envision in 1955.
Contrary to his expectation, inequality not only failed to keep
falling, but it reversed course and began an upward climb that
10
Background and History

has not yet ended. The Gini coefficient has been trending higher
since 1974. The share of total income accounted for by the top
decile of earners has been moving upward since about 1972, and
the share of the top 1 percent increased sharply during the 1980s
and 1990s; meanwhile, some 30 years ago the bottom quintile
began its slow, steady shrinkage to today’s 3.4 percent share of
total income (Piketty and Saez 2006; U.S. Census Bureau 2007,
38). Essentially, the final quarter of the 20th century and the first
years of the 21st century have been a period of growing disper-
sion of wealth and income in the United States.
Rowboats, Yachts, and Rising Tides
Historically, and fortunately for all concerned, the normal condi-
tion of the American economy is one of expansion. As the pro-
duction of goods and services increases, and as the selling of
those goods and services generates the incomes paid to workers,
farmers, managers, and other contributors to the national output,
national income rises. Living standards improve over time when
people’s real (inflation-adjusted) per capita incomes grow, and
that happens when the output per worker, or productivity, rises.
These simple facts have a strong bearing on the issue of income
inequality. Since the end of World War II, the productivity of
American labor has indeed risen, along with national output and
income, so there has been more gross national product (GNP) to
go around. But while the GNP pie has gotten bigger, it has not
been sliced in equal-sized shares, especially since the mid-1970s.
To switch metaphors from culinary to nautical, it has been said
that “a rising tide lifts all boats.” In relation to income distribution,
what this means is that when the economy grows, it raises every-
one’s income, from the corporate chieftain to the short-order cook.
As an economic proposition this is more hypothetical—or perhaps
aspirational—than factual. It is a statement of what can happen, not
what must happen. Looking at Graph 1.1, we see the second half of
the 20th century broken down into two periods, 1947–1973 and
1973–2000. For each period, the growth experience of each of the
five income quintiles is shown. Two facts jump off the page: First,
income growth was much stronger during the immediate postwar
decades than during the final quarter of the century, with all
groups experiencing at least an 85 percent increase in average real
family income. Second, growing national income—the extra pie, so
Rowboats, Yachts, and Rising Tides
11

12
Background and History
116.1%
97.1%
98.2%
103.0%
84.8%
0.0%
20.0%
40.0%
60.0%
80.0%
100.0%
120.0%
140.0%
Lowest fifth
Second fifth
Middle fifth
Fourth fifth
Top fifth
GRAPH 1.1
Real family income growth by quintile, 1947–2000
1947–1973
12.1%
18.3%
26.6%
36.5%
66.9%
0.0%
10.0%
20.0%
30.0%
40.0%
50.0%
60.0%
70.0%
80.0%
Lowest fifth
Second fifth
Middle fifth
Fourth fifth
Top fifth
1973–2000
Source: Mishel, Bernstein, and Alegretto 2005, 71.

to speak—was shared much more evenly across the income spec-
trum in the earlier period than in the later. 
The prosperity of the 1950s and 1960s was truly widespread;
the rising tide did lift all boats. In the later period, by contrast, the
poorest quintile saw their incomes rise by only 12 percent over a
27-year period—an almost negligible change—while higher
quintiles fared better. For the top quintile, there was a 67 percent
rise in real income. The rising tide lifted the yachts far higher
than the rowboats.
To push the metaphor one step further, what about the ordi-
nary tugboat berthed next to a yacht or a cruise ship? Let the tug-
boat represent the median American household income, that is,
the income that is exactly in the middle of the distribution, with
half the population above it and half below it. This would be, in
some sense, the most ordinary or typical income. In the recent pe-
riod 1973–2005, the median income, in 2006 dollars, rose from
$41,700 to $47,800—a 15 percent gain. Over the same period, the
average income of the top 10 percent of households rose from
$136,381 to $207,681; the top 1 percent rose from $331,473 to
$815,378; and the top 0.1 percent rose from $807,641 to $3,607,046.
The percentage gains of these yachts and mega-yachts were, re-
spectively, 52 percent, 146 percent, and 347 percent, far above the
tugboat’s 15 percent rise. None of these gains are illusory, caused
by inflation. All are computed in constant dollars. One cannot es-
cape the conclusion that the tide has been showing tremendous
favoritism toward the high-end boats (U.S. Census Bureau 2007,
Table A-1; Piketty and Saez 2006).
Race, Ethnicity, and Economic Inequality
An important added perspective on the picture of rich and poor
in the United States comes from taking into account racial and
ethnic differences. America’s diversity by race and ethnicity, with
all the circumstances surrounding it, raises a whole range of is-
sues related to economic inequality, some of which lie beyond the
scope of this handbook. Our purpose here will be fairly modest—
to highlight the basic facts regarding income and wealth inequal-
ity as experienced by the two largest minority groups in the
country, Hispanics and African Americans, so that a context can
be established for later comments, observations, and analyses. It
Race, Ethnicity, and Economic Inequality
13

should be noted at the outset that “Hispanic” is an ethnic rather
than a racial category; Hispanics can be of any race.
No one disputes that wealth in the United States has always
had a lighter-skinned complexion than poverty. This may change
in the future, but for now the reality of the color divide is obvi-
ous. Starting at the pinnacle of American wealth, we note an al-
most complete absence of blacks and Hispanics from the Forbes
list of the 400 richest Americans in 2006. The well-known enter-
tainment figure Oprah Winfrey makes the cut at No. 242, with a
net worth of $1.5 billion. Two Hispanic businesspeople are also
listed: Jorge Perez, ranked No. 197, with $1.8 billion from real es-
tate, and Arturo Moreno, at No. 354, with $1.1 billion from bill-
boards. Beyond this handful of names, it is unclear what other
minority individuals have achieved billionaire status in the
United States. Many Hispanic Americans are millionaires, of
course, with Cuban Americans particularly well represented in
that group, and the ranks of black millionaires extend far beyond
the highly publicized sports and entertainment personalities like
Tiger Woods, Kobe Bryant, Bill Cosby, and Spike Lee.
At the opposite end of the distribution, African Americans
and Hispanics are distressingly well represented among those
who fall below the poverty line. As documented by the Census
Bureau, the poverty rates for America’s largest minorities are rou-
tinely higher—much higher—than the rates for non-Hispanic
whites. In 2006, the poverty rates for African Americans and His-
panics were 24.3 percent and 20.6 percent, respectively, as com-
pared with 8.2 percent for non-Hispanic whites. One consequence
of minorities’ lesser command of economic resources in the
United States is that they have less access to insured medical care:
while 10.8 percent of whites lack health insurance coverage, the
comparable figures for blacks and Hispanics are 20.5 percent and
34.1 percent (U.S. Census Bureau 2007, 11, 19).
How substantial are the income and wealth gaps within the
minority populations, and how divergent from the population as
a whole? Government statistics shed some light on these ques-
tions. Recent Census Bureau data suggest that there are no large
differences among blacks, whites, and Hispanics when it comes
to how evenly incomes are distributed within each racial or eth-
nic group. The income Gini for blacks in 2004 was 48, for non-
Hispanic whites, 46, and for Hispanics, 45. (As previously noted,
the overall income Gini for the nation is 47.) Wealth distributions
are also fairly similar within each racial or ethnic group. Data
14
Background and History

from the latest Federal Reserve survey put the wealth Gini for
black households at 80, for Hispanics at 83, and for all families at
80. Summing up, then, it seems fair to say that income- and
wealth-holding patterns among minorities in the United States
are so similar to the national, multiracial pattern that they do not
significantly skew the national pattern in any one direction (U.S.
Census Bureau 2006a; Kennickel 2006, 34).
But what about the actual income and wealth levels of mi-
norities in the United States as compared with whites? The facts
are very simple: whites receive more income, typically, than either
blacks or Hispanics, and they also have more wealth. In 2006, the
median white household income was $52,400, well above the me-
dian income for both blacks ($32,000) and Hispanics ($37,800). The
measured white income advantage over black incomes has de-
clined somewhat, from 71 percent in 1973 to 64 percent in 2006. Yet
it remains the case that the typical African American household re-
ceives only three-fifths the income of the typical white household.
(Part of the explanation is demographic: more African American
households than white households are headed by single adults,
making dual-earner support of the household less common in the
African American community.) The white income advantage over
Hispanic incomes is smaller than over black incomes, but unlike
the black-white gap, this one has grown somewhat wider over the
decades, with the white-over-Hispanic household income advan-
tage rising from 36 percent in 1973 to 39 percent in 2006 (U.S. Cen-
sus Bureau 2007, Table A-1).
Wealth comparisons only reinforce the impression of a racial
economic gap. On the lower rungs of the wealth ladder, the Fed-
eral Reserve consumer survey in 2004 found the net worth for
African American households at the 25th percentile to be $1,700.
One quarter of all black households had total wealth of less than
$1,700. (Many, of course, had no wealth at all.) The comparable
figure for Hispanics was $2,800. Across the American population
as a whole, wealth at the 25th percentile was $13,300, a figure high
enough to suggest that white wealth at the 25th percentile was a
large multiple of minority wealth. The same Federal Reserve sur-
vey put median African American net worth in 2004 at $20,600,
median Hispanic net worth at $18,600, and median net worth for
all American households at $93,100, indicating a racial wealth gap
of major proportions. One scholar who has studied the racial
wealth issue carefully, Thomas M. Shapiro, argues in The Hidden
Cost of Being African American that family wealth levels are critical
Race, Ethnicity, and Economic Inequality
15

to homeownership, which in turn bears on the question of where
a family’s children will be schooled. Families that are asset-poor,
as minority families tend to be, will find themselves shut out of
the neighborhoods where the best schools are located, schools
with the most qualified teachers, the best equipment, and the
strongest academic programs. They will have limited chances to
attend the educational institutions that confer real competitive ad-
vantages on their students (Kennickel 2006, 9, 34; Shapiro 2004).
Income Inequality and Health
Income inequality can be harmful to people’s health in two ways.
It is clearly bad for the health of individuals and families at the
lower end of the income scale, who almost everywhere have
lower life expectancies, worse health habits, higher disease rates,
and, in the United States, less access to regular, professional
health care than those at the upper end of the scale. Inequality
may also be bad for people’s health in a much less obvious way.
In a society characterized by wide income disparities, there ap-
pears to be “more violence, less trust, more hostility, and less in-
volvement in community life” than in more egalitarian settings,
and this could well take a toll on the health of people at all so-
cioeconomic levels (Wilkinson 2000, 20).
Evidence on the first point is abundant: more income, in
general, translates into better health. The list of health advan-
tages enjoyed by those with incomes above the poverty level is
extensive: better nutrition, higher rates of vaccination, higher
rates of preventive health care, lower exposure to various pollu-
tants and other toxic substances, fewer occupational hazards,
lower rates of obesity, lower use of tobacco, and so on. A sam-
pling of relevant numbers makes the picture clear. Twenty-nine
percent of American adults below the poverty line smoked in
2004; less than 21 percent of those above the poverty line smoked
(CDC 2005). In 2003, 21 percent of poor respondents to a govern-
ment survey rated their own health as fair or poor. Among the
near-poor—those with incomes between the poverty threshold
and double the threshold—the figure was 15.5 percent, and
among the nonpoor just 6.2 percent rated their health unfavor-
ably. Even mental health appears to be statistically correlated to
income levels: in 2002–2003, serious psychological distress was
reported by 8.7 percent of the poor, 5.4 percent of the near-poor,
16
Background and History

and only 1.8 percent of the nonpoor (NCHS 2005, 242, 248, 250).
In a 2002 survey of Americans nearing retirement age, respon-
dents were divided into three income categories, which might be
labeled high, middle, and low. The self-reported incidence of di-
abetes among high-income people was less than half the inci-
dence among the low-income. The same was true for heart
attacks. Even more dramatically, the rates of lung disease and
stroke for high-income individuals were less than one-third the
rates for low-income individuals (Banks, Marmot, Oldfield, and
Smith 2006, 2039).
Beyond the linkage between income and disease rates, there
is the truly bottom-line issue of income and mortality. Lots of
data support the proposition that the poor face a higher risk of
death at all ages than those with higher incomes. A study pub-
lished in the American Journal of Public Health in 1996 documented
an income-mortality gradient for white men, showing an almost
continuous decline in the age-adjusted mortality rate with higher
income levels. For example, the death rate per 10,000 person-
years was 91.8 for men with annual incomes below $10,000 and
ranged downward to a low of 51.4 for those with incomes over
$34,000. (Income levels appear low because they were drawn
from census data now a quarter-century old.) When a variety of
other risk factors—blood pressure, cholesterol, cigarette smoking
rates, etc.—were taken into account, the gradient still existed, al-
though less steep, with the death rate remaining more than 50
percent higher for those receiving the lowest incomes by com-
parison with those receiving the highest incomes (Smith, Neaton,
and Wentworth 1996). A similar and even stronger pattern was
seen in African Americans, as reported in the second installment
of the article. Black men with the lowest incomes faced an age-
adjusted death rate 109 percent higher than those with the high-
est incomes. When both age and other risk factors were taken
into account, the poorest men still faced a 92 percent higher mor-
tality risk than those with top incomes (Smith et al. 1996). Even
pain itself appears to be measured out according to income level:
the pain experienced by people nearing death depends on eco-
nomic standing, with the least pain reported by those with the
most wealth (Silveira 2005).
There can be little doubt that a reduction in the U.S. income
gap, if it were achieved by raising the incomes of the poorest
Americans, would improve health and mortality rates for the na-
tion as a whole. That is what all the statistics just cited imply. But
Income Inequality and Health
17

there could be another way in which reducing the income gap
would improve the nation’s health, namely, through the indirect,
psychological benefits of having a society with fewer class and
income divisions. The British epidemiologist Richard Wilkinson
has been the foremost proponent of this viewpoint. He argues
that societies with wide disparities of income tend to be places of
chronic stress, social anxiety, and violence, compared to societies
that are more egalitarian. Communities of greater income equal-
ity are conducive to better social relationships, which translate to
physical benefits, such as lower blood pressure, and behavioral
benefits, such as mutual social support and low levels of violence
(Wilkinson 2000). Much empirical research has been done on
what might be called the “Wilkinson hypothesis,” some support-
ing it and some not. Among the stronger studies in support is one
published in 1998 that looked at 282 U.S. metropolitan areas and
measured the statistical association between mortality rates and
levels of inequality seen in those areas. Mortality was indeed
highest in places with low average incomes and a high degree of
inequality; it was lowest in places with high incomes and a low
degree of inequality. The mortality difference between the two
extremes was enormous, “comparable to the combined loss of
life from lung cancer, diabetes, motor vehicle crashes, HIV infec-
tion, suicide, and homicide in 1995” (Lynch et al. 1998, 1074).
Income Inequality and Education
If the amount and quality of education that individuals receive in
the United States were quantifiable in the same way that income
is quantifiable, one would find the distribution of education to be
far from uniform. Some people receive a great deal of education,
others very little. This is important because education and in-
come are strongly interconnected. More education brings higher
lifetime income; higher incomes enable parents to live in neigh-
borhoods with excellent public schools or to send their children
to private schools; and well-educated children are favorably po-
sitioned to repeat the cycle. An inferior education brings a re-
duced stream of lifetime income, limits housing options, puts the
best public schools out of reach, and so on. There are exceptions
at both ends, of course—some rich kids drop out of school, and
some poor kids make it to the Ivy League—but they are excep-
tions. The United States does not offer anything like a “level
18
Background and History

playing field” to its children when it comes to education, and this
is surely one of the factors behind the gap between rich and poor.
Variations in school quality have much to do with variations
in family income. By and large, the best schools are found in lo-
calities where housing prices are high enough to exclude families
with low incomes. These are the schools with the most up-to-date
laboratory equipment, the best-stocked libraries, the most de-
manding curricular offerings, and, crucially, the best-qualified
and highest-paid teachers. (They also tend to have guidance
counselors who are on a first-name basis with admissions staff at
the better colleges and universities.) Such schools function as vir-
tual conveyor belts to college for the great majority of their stu-
dents. The schools attended by America’s poor can be dismal and
dispiriting, as documented by Jonathan Kozol in Savage Inequali-
ties. Roofs leak, classes are overcrowded, books are too scarce to
go around, teachers are underpaid, students are underserved by
counselors, and dropout rates are high.
It would not be inaccurate to describe American schools
today as segregated—not by law or design but by economic reali-
ties. The segregation is both racial and socioeconomic. This may
come as a surprise to those who recall that in 1954 the Supreme
Court banned school segregation in the famous case of Brown v.
Board of Education. That decision forbade state-imposed racial seg-
regation but not the spontaneous segregation that results from the
way the housing market works. Since race and poverty are closely
linked, since neighborhoods have become ever more stratified by
housing price, and, finally, since the courts no longer impose bus-
ing for the purpose of achieving desegregation, schools tend to be
populated by children of the same race and socioeconomic class.
The typical black student attends a school that is only 31 percent
white, while the typical white student attends a school that is 80
percent white. (The typical Hispanic student attends a school that
is 29 percent white.) Segregation by class or income is equally
widespread. Statistically speaking, a student who qualifies for free
or reduced-price school meals is counted as poor. Poor students
typically attend schools that are 58 percent poor, while nonpoor
students go to schools that are only 25 percent poor (Kahlenberg
2005; Phillips and Chin 2004, 473–474).
The problem with having low-income children attend school
mainly with other low-income children, from an educational
standpoint, is that most of the research singles out peer influ-
ences as the main determinant of student academic achievement.
Income Inequality and Education
19

If one’s classmates are poor, one will spend a major part of every
day with children who entered kindergarten with weaker letter
and number recognition, smaller vocabularies, less likelihood of
having been read to by an adult, and a greater tendency to be dis-
ruptive in class than higher-income children. Time alone does not
eliminate the cognitive gaps. Being placed in a school with more
balanced enrollments by socioeconomic status can make a differ-
ence. Creating schools that have such a balance, however, pre-
sents a tough political challenge, despite the clear social and
educational benefits they promise. In chapter 2 we explore some
of the evidence on this point.
The rich-poor divide in the United States comes into partic-
ularly sharp focus when considering the issue of college atten-
dance. The necessity of being a college graduate if one aspires to
a life in the middle class has never been clearer, yet college costs
have been rising faster than most Americans’ incomes. Grade
school and high school are publicly financed, that is, essentially
free. College costs are subsidized out of the public coffers but not
covered completely, and private scholarship aid is limited, leav-
ing a hefty part of the cost to be borne by students and their fam-
ilies. Although most studies of the value of a college education
conclude that it is an excellent investment, many high school
graduates from poor families either do not appreciate that fact or
do not believe that they have access to the financial resources to
pay for it. A telling demonstration of the importance of family in-
come in determining college attendance emerged from a study
by Mathtech, Inc., in 1998. The researchers grouped a random
sample of students from around the country by (1) test scores as
they finished high school, and (2) family income. In both cate-
gories, there were three ratings: bottom, middle, and top. No
matter what their academic promise, as indicated by their test
scores, students from the bottom-income group went on to col-
lege in much lower numbers than students from top-income fam-
ilies. For high-scoring students, the attendance gap was about 20
percent, for middle-scoring students, about 30 percent, and for
low-scoring students, 35 percent. Almost two-thirds of the afflu-
ent kids who scored low on the test went on to college anyway;
only 29 percent of low-income kids with low scores did so
(Schiller 2004, 184).
Attending a highly selective college has been shown to be es-
pecially beneficial, in terms of economic payoff, to students from
lower socioeconomic backgrounds. Unfortunately, this fact has
20
Background and History

not produced a significant presence of such students on those
well-manicured campuses. A2003 study found that only 3 percent
of the students attending the most selective 146 colleges in the
United States came from the bottom quartile (one-fourth) of the
population as ranked by their socioeconomic status, and only 10
percent came from the lower half. The same study found that low-
income students are even more underrepresented at top colleges
than racial minorities, who themselves are underrepresented.
Those who could benefit the most from the education available at
elite schools are, at present, the least likely to attend them (Draut
2005, 96).
Part of the explanation for why low-income students are
scarce at the leading colleges may lie in the trend away from
need-based financial aid and toward merit-based aid. To improve
their position in various national rankings, colleges nowadays
seek to attract more students with high SAT scores by offering
them rich financial-aid packages. By putting more of their aid
dollars into grants to high-testing students, colleges are essen-
tially “buying academic talent” in the same way many have tra-
ditionally bought sports talent with athletic scholarships. The
extra “merit” dollars, however, come at the expense of those stu-
dents whose main claim to aid is that their families lack the fi-
nancial resources to see them through four years of higher
education. Under this new approach, grants and loans are often
a kind of bonus to students who do not really require the help.
The problem of keeping college affordable for low-income stu-
dents is exacerbated by the dwindling of federal aid dollars in re-
cent years. We explore the issue of college finances in greater
depth in chapter 2.
A Shrinking Middle Class?
Does the growing gap between America’s rich and poor mean
the ranks of the middle class are thinning out? Worries about a
disappearing middle class in the United States have been voiced
for decades, and not without cause. Modern democratic societies
function most successfully, it is believed, when they rest on
broadly middle-class foundations. If those foundations are weak-
ened, the economy may lose its stability and the political system
its resiliency. But answering questions about the size of the mid-
dle class is a challenge, since the term “middle class” is no more
A Shrinking Middle Class?
21

easily defined than “rich.” It refers to a subset of the total popu-
lation, but should the subset be identified in terms of education,
occupation, social values, income, or some combination of indi-
cators? Even a simple income-based definition can be tricky. Are
we looking at the middle 60 percent of families, sandwiched be-
tween an upper-class 20 percent and a lower-class 20 percent?
That sounds reasonable until we notice that it defines away the
question before we have even begun to tackle it, since a middle
class of pre-set size—60 percent or any other number—can never
shrink (or expand).
An alternative approach would set a dollar range within
which a family is considered to be middle class. This would
allow changes in the distribution of income over time actually to
affect the size of the middle class, either upward or downward.
Suppose we arbitrarily set the range for middle-class member-
ship at, say, $25,000–$100,000 of family income, in 2002 dollars.
The data required to count the number of families in this income
range can be found in the 2005 edition of The State of Working
America, compiled by the Economic Policy Institute. With the
issue posed in this specific way, we find a clear pattern over time:
the middle class is indeed shrinking, although very gradually. It
accounted for 70 percent of families in 1969, 68 percent in 1979,
64 percent in 1989, and 61 percent in 2002. The downward trend
is unmistakable. Of course, the way in which the shrinkage oc-
curs makes a big difference in the way we feel about it. If most of
the families losing middle-class status were dropping into
poverty, we would probably view it quite differently than if most
were gaining upper-class status. As it happens, the squeeze on
the middle class has produced a “bulge” to the upside, not the
downside. The share of families with incomes above $100,000 in-
creased from 4.3 percent in 1969 to 17.8 percent in 2002; the share
with incomes below $25,000 declined from 25.5 percent to 21.0
percent. Middle-class shrinkage is completely accounted for, in
the raw statistical sense, by an enlargement of the well-off class
at the top (Mishel, Bernstein, and Allegretto 2005, 88).
The image of middle-class American families being
squeezed upward into the comfortable “over $100,000” category
is a reassuring one, but like all statistical artifacts it reveals only
a part of the full picture. Another way to rate the progress of mid-
dle-class Americans is to examine what has been happening to
median family income, generally considered the single most
telling measure of how the typical family is doing over time. It is
22
Background and History

the income that lies at the precise midpoint of the overall distrib-
ution of family incomes. Adjusted for inflation, median income
moved upward from $44,400 in 1973 to $54,100 in 2004, a rise of
about 22 percent stretched out over three decades. To put it an-
other way, median income grew at a rate of less than two-thirds
of 1 percent annually (U.S. Census Bureau 2006b).
Accompanying the snail’s-pace improvement in middle-class
incomes, there has been a significant erosion of middle-class
neighborhoods in American cities and, to some extent, its sub-
urbs. A recent Brookings Institution study, which defined middle
income as between 80 percent and 120 percent of median income,
found that people in the nation’s 100 largest metropolitan areas
are increasingly “sorting themselves” in their housing locations
by income level. (For the impact of economic segregation on
schooling, see the previous section.) Formerly middle-class neigh-
borhoods have tipped either toward wealth or poverty. As a share
of all neighborhoods, middle-income ones dwindled from 58 per-
cent to 41 percent between 1970 and 2000 (Booza, Cutsinger, and
Galster 2006). The most severe residential segregation by income
was found in Los Angeles, where more than two-thirds of resi-
dents now live in “neighborhoods that are solidly rich or poor”
(Harden 2006). Not a single American city became more integrated
by income during the past three decades, according to one of the
scholars at the Brookings Institution who worked on the study.
For people who want to move up the social ladder by buying a
house in a decent neighborhood with good schools and low crime
rates, this is not encouraging news. A rung of the ladder has been
removed (Harden 2006).
From Rich to Poor and 
Poor to Rich: Mobility
Suppose youngsters with parents in the top one-fifth of the U.S.
income distribution had a one-in-five chance of remaining in that
quintile as adults and an equally good chance of ending up in
one of the lower quintiles, including the lowest. Suppose the
same were true for kids born into every other quintile—a one-in-
five shot at any of the five quintiles when they grew up. Family
background would count for nothing: one’s life chances would
be essentially unconnected to one’s origins. In a world of such
From Rich to Poor and Poor to Rich: Mobility
23

maximum generational mobility, it would be hard to find fault
with big income differences between the rich and the poor. Peo-
ple would feel as if their adult position on the income ladder was
perfectly fair, or at least as fair as any outcome determined by
pure luck. The poor could reconcile themselves to their position
knowing that their children would have the chance to do better,
possibly much better, than they had done, and the rich would un-
derstand that their good fortune had a low probability of being
repeated in the next generation.
Needless to say, economic mobility in the United States today
falls far short of what would be seen in a random-outcome soci-
ety. Adult economic status depends rather significantly on the sta-
tus of one’s parents, on their income, their race, and various other
characteristics they impart to their offspring. This works to the ad-
vantage of those at the top, while stacking the deck against those
at the bottom. As a familiar quip goes, people benefit greatly from
choosing the right parents. One way to quantify the benefit is to
compare the statistical odds of becoming rich in the United States
if you were already well-off in childhood with the odds if you
started out poor. Tom Hertz, an economist at American Univer-
sity, has done interesting research that answers this question.
Defining “rich” as being in the top 5 percent of incomes, he finds
that those who start in the highest quintile have a 14.2 percent
chance of becoming rich. That is well above the 5 percent chance
they would have in a random-outcome society, and way above the
1.1 percent probability of ending up rich for those who start in the
lowest quintile (Hertz 2006, 9).
The model of maximum economic mobility, as we saw, gave
every person one-in-five odds of remaining, as an adult, in the
same quintile in which he or she began. What Hertz finds for the
United States is that those who start in the bottom quintile have
about a 42 percent prospect of remaining there. The odds of
someone who starts in the top quintile remaining there are also,
coincidentally, 42 percent (Hertz 2006, 9). This is not the sort of
social fluidity most people would associate with the American
Dream, an ideal which assures us that anyone can make it to the
top. One’s real chances of rising to the top turn out to be better
the closer one is born to the top. Education is one factor helping
account for the stickiness of movement up and down the ladder:
higher-income people can afford to invest more in their children,
improving their future earning prospects. Race is also a factor.
African Americans have much lower mobility than whites. White
24
Background and History

children born in the bottom one-quarter of the population be-
tween 1942 and 1972 had a 32 percent probability of remaining in
that quartile as adults; for black children, the probability was al-
most twice as high at 63 percent. Even health can play a role in
limiting mobility: children in low-income families experience
more health problems than those in better-off families, and their
health tends to remain worse as adults (Hertz 2006, 4).
Intergenerational mobility in the United States is more limited
than we used to think it was; it is lower than in a number of other
rich democracies, including Canada, France, Germany, and all of
the Scandinavian countries; and it appears to be in decline
(Mazumder 2005, Hertz 2006, Bernstein 2003). In light of the
widening gap between rich and poor in the United States, evi-
dence of fading economic mobility raises awkward questions
about the “land of opportunity” and “rags to riches” faith that has
been central for so long to Americans’ sense of national identity. If
the ladder is getting more stretched out, and the middle rungs are
getting more slippery—or even disappearing entirely—how valid
is the picture of the United States as a dynamic, socially fluid, mer-
itocratic society? And if mobility continues to decline, how will it
affect public attitudes toward wealth and income gaps that are
now approaching historic levels? For now, the public’s sense of the
possibilities of upward mobility remains quite strong. A New York
Times poll in early 2005 asked people, “Is it possible to start out
poor, work hard and become rich” in the United States? In 1983,
just under 60 percent said yes, while in 2005, fully 80 percent said
yes (Scott and Leonhardt 2005).
Rich and Poor: The Political Dimension
Given the polarization that American politics has undergone in
recent decades, it stands to reason that the issue of a growing gap
between rich and poor would be viewed quite differently by those
on the left and those on the right. Liberals, who tend to vote Dem-
ocratic, decry the gap. It disturbs and worries them because it vi-
olates their egalitarian ideals. They usually attribute income
inequalities to racial and gender discrimination, exploitation of
labor, and the ability of the rich to influence public policy to their
own advantage. Liberals support redistributive policies to narrow
the income gap while opposing policy changes that would widen
it. Conservatives, who tend to vote Republican, say little about the
Rich and Poor: The Political Dimension
25

gap—a good indication that it does not particularly concern or of-
fend them. They value free markets, economic growth, and per-
sonal responsibility above social solidarity and economic equality.
For them, equality of opportunity is far more important than
equality of outcome. A distribution of income that is heavily
skewed toward the wealthy strikes them as reasonable, even nat-
ural, in a free-market society. Income disparities, they believe, cre-
ate incentives for saving, investment, and risk-taking, and thus
promote economic growth. Most conservatives support policies
aimed at quickening economic growth even if a side effect would
be greater disparities of wealth and income.
Several tax cuts advanced by the George W. Bush adminis-
tration have provided fuel for heated debate between liberals
and conservatives since 2001. Liberals have cited (and written) a
number of studies that indicate that the benefits of the Bush tax
cuts go overwhelmingly to the wealthiest Americans. The Center
on Budget and Policy Priorities, a left-of-center think tank in
Washington, D.C., has calculated the probable future impact of
the Bush tax cuts if Congress makes them permanent. It finds
that in the period 2007–2016, the top 1 percent of taxpayers will
reap 29 percent of the benefits of the tax cuts, and the top 20 per-
cent will garner 72 percent of the benefits, while the bottom 40
percent will receive just 5 percent of the benefits (Aron-Dine and
Friedman 2006). Most liberals disapproved of the 2003 tax cut on
investment income. According to a New York Times analysis, that
legislation had a noticeably uneven impact on rich and poor, pro-
viding an average annual tax benefit of $500,000 for those with
incomes of $10 million or more, and a mere $10 average benefit
for those earning less than $50,000 (Johnston 2006, C4). Conserv-
atives retort that the highest-income Americans pay the biggest
share of the federal tax bill, so it is only right that they should
reap disproportionate benefits from tax rate reductions. Conser-
vatives also argue that estimates of tax-cut impacts that fail to
note the jobs created by added spending and investing by high-
income individuals do not tell the whole story. The term “trickle-
down” has gone out of fashion, but conservatives continue to
believe that extra infusions of income at the top eventually work
their way into the wallets of those at the bottom.
Liberals are especially critical of the Bush-led repeal of the
federal estate tax. This tax, on the books since 1916, clearly targets
those at the high end of the income distribution. It affects only
the wealthiest 1 or 2 percent of Americans. Liberals see it as the
26
Background and History

ideal progressive tax, one that draws far more revenue from the
rich than from anyone else. In their eyes, it is a useful and per-
haps essential means of preventing the nation from evolving into
a plutocracy, that is, a system of rule by the rich. Conservatives,
on the other hand, present the estate tax as a “death tax,” high-
lighting the way in which it deprives sons and daughters of their
parents’ hard-earned lifetime financial accumulations. They
claim the tax has a devastating impact on small business owners
and family farms. (Supporting evidence on this point is exceed-
ingly scarce.) Both sides claim the moral high ground, with liber-
als arguing the fairness of a tax that burdens only the rich, and
conservatives arguing the unfairness of a tax that denies people
the right to leave whatever they have, in its entirety, to the next
generation. In 2001, the Republican-controlled Congress voted to
phase out the estate tax by 2010. Most Democrats voted against
repeal. Because the 2001 legislation provides for full reinstate-
ment of the tax in 2011—politics required this bizarre provision
as a way to keep projected revenue losses acceptably low—the
issue has not yet reached a permanent resolution (Graetz and
Shapiro 2005).
As we will see in the next chapter, experts have identified a
number of factors that might explain the widening dispersion of
incomes in the United States. One factor in particular excites in-
dignation among liberals: public policy. Liberals view govern-
ment action as a means to lessen economic inequalities—they cite
the New Deal programs of Franklin D. Roosevelt and the Great
Society programs of Lyndon B. Johnson—and not as a means to
exacerbate inequalities. Hence they have strongly opposed the tax
policies of the Bush administration and denounced it for failing
to propose any increase in the federal minimum wage from the
level it reached in 1997. (The increased minimum wage enacted
by Congress in 2007 resulted from Democratic successes in the
election of 2006, not a change of position by the Bush adminis-
tration.) Liberals believe that public policies in these and many
other areas now reflect the economic interests of the wealthiest
Americans much more than they do the national interests of all
Americans. Howard Rosenthal, a political scientist at New York
University, has noted a pattern of increasing partisan polariza-
tion and widening income disparity since the 1970s. This has
great significance for public policy. It means that policies in-
tended to blunt or reverse the trend toward inequality—the sorts
of policies Congress enacted during the Great Society era of the
Rich and Poor: The Political Dimension
27

1960s, for example—stand little chance of being enacted today
(Rosenthal 2004). Rosenthal would probably concede, however,
that political trend lines, like economic trend lines, eventually
change direction.
References
Aron-Dine, Aviva, and Joel Friedman. “The Skewed Benefits of the Tax
Cuts, 2007–2016.” Washington, DC: Center on Budget and Policy Priori-
ties, 2006. Accessed at http://www.cbpp.org.
Banks, James, Michael Marmot, Zoe Oldfield, and James P. Smith. “Dis-
ease and Disadvantage in the United States and in England.” Journal of
the American Medical Association 295 (2006): 2037–2045.
Bernstein, Aaron. “Waking Up from the American Dream.” BusinessWeek
3860 (December 1, 2003): 54–58.
Booza, Jason C., Jackie Cutsinger, and George Galster. “Where Did They
Go? The Decline of Middle-Income Neighborhoods in Metropolitan
America.” Brookings Institution, Metropolitan Policy Program, Living
Cities Census Series, June 2006.
Bowles, Samuel, Herbert Gintis, and Melissa Osborne Groves, eds. Un-
equal Chances: Family Background and Economic Success. New York: Russell
Sage Foundation, 2005.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). “Cigarette Smoking
among Adults—United States, 2004.” MMWR Highlights 54 (November
11, 2005): 44.
Draut, Tamara. “The Growing College Gap,” in Lardner and Smith 2005:
89–101.
“The 400 Richest Americans.” Forbes (November 21, 2006). Accessed at
http://www.forbes.com.
Graetz, Michael J., and Ian Shapiro. Death by a Thousand Cuts: The Fight
over Taxing Inherited Wealth. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press,
2005.
Harden, Blaine. “U.S. Losing Its Middle-Class Neighborhoods.” The
Washington Post (June 22, 2006): A3.
Hertz, Tom. “Understanding Mobility in America.” Report prepared for
Center for American Progress, Washington, DC, 2006. Accessed at
http://www.americanprogress.org.
Johnston, David Cay. “Big Gain for Rich Seen in Tax Cuts for Invest-
ments.” The New York Times (April 5, 2006): A1, C4.
28
Background and History

Kahlenberg, Richard D. “The Return of ‘Separate but Equal,’” in Lardner
and Smith 2005: 54–64.
Kennickel, Arthur B. “Currents and Undercurrents: Changes in the Dis-
tribution of Wealth, 1989–2004.” FEDS Working Paper No. 2006–13.
(2006). Accessed at http://www.federalreserve.gov.
Kozol, Jonathan. Savage Inequalities: Children in America’s Schools. New
York: Crown Publishers, 1991.
Krugman, Paul. “Graduates Versus Oligarchs.” The New York Times (Feb-
ruary 27, 2006): A19.
Kuznets, Simon. “Economic Growth and Income Inequality.” American
Economic Review 45, no. 2 (1955): 1–28.
Lardner, James, and David A. Smith, eds. Inequality Matters: The Growing
Economic Divide in America and Its Poisonous Consequences. New York: The
New Press, 2005.
Lynch, John W., et al. “Income Inequality and Mortality in Metropolitan
Areas of the United States.” American Journal of Public Health 88, no. 7
(1998): 1074–1081.
MathTech, Inc. Factors Related to College Enrollment. Washington, DC: U.S.
Department of Education, 1998.
Mazumder, Bhashkar. “The Apple Falls Even Closer to the Tree than We
Thought,” in Bowles, Gintis, and Groves, 2005: 80–99.
Mishel, Lawrence. “CEO-to-Worker Pay Imbalance Grows.” Economic
Policy Institute, Economic Snapshots (June 21, 2006). Accessed at http://
www.epinet.org.
Mishel, Lawrence, Jared Bernstein, and Sylvia Allegretto. The State of
Working America 2004/2005. Ithaca, NY: ILR Press for Economic Policy In-
stitute, 2005.
National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS). Health, United States, 2005.
Hyattsville, MD: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 2005.
Neckerman, Kathryn M., ed. Social Inequality. New York: Russell Sage
Foundation, 2004.
Phillips, Meredith, and Tiffani Chin. “School Inequality: What Do We
Know?” in Neckerman 2004: 467–519.
Piketty, Thomas, and Emmanuel Saez. “Income Inequality in the United
States, 1913 to 2002,” in A. B. Atkinson and T. Piketty, eds., Top Incomes
over the Twentieth Century: A Contrast between European and English Speak-
ing Countries. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2006.
Rosenthal, Howard. 2004. “Politics, Public Policy, and Inequality: A
Look Back at the Twentieth Century,” in Neckerman 2004: 861–892.
References
29

Schiller, Bradley R. The Economics of Poverty and Discrimination. 9th ed.
Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Prentice Hall, 2004.
Scott, Janny, and David Leonhardt. “Class in America: Shadowy Lines
That Still Divide.” The New York Times (May 15, 2005): A1, 26–29.
Shapiro, Thomas M. The Hidden Cost of Being African American. New
York: Oxford University Press, 2004.
Silveira, Maria J., et al. “Net Worth Predicts Symptom Burden at the End
of Life.” Journal of Palliative Medicine 8, no. 4 (August 2005): 827–837.
Smith, George Davey, James D. Neaton, and Deborah Wentworth. “So-
cioeconomic Differentials in Mortality Risk among Men Screened for the
Multiple Risk Factor Intervention Trial: I. White Men.” American Journal
of Public Health 86, no. 4 (April 1996): 486–496.
Smith, George Davey, et al. “Socioeconomic Differentials in Mortality
Risk among Men Screened for the Multiple Risk Factor Intervention
Trial: II. Black Men.” American Journal of Public Health 86, no. 4 (April
1996): 497–504.
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP). Human Development
Report 2005: International Cooperation at a Crossroads. New York: Oxford
University Press, 2005.
U.S. Census Bureau. “Household Income Tables – Households, Table H-
4, Gini Ratios for Households, by Race and Hispanic Origin of House-
holder: 1967 to 2004.” 2006a. Accessed at http://www.census.gov.
U.S. Census Bureau. “Historical Income Tables – Families, Table F-7,
Type of Family, All Races by Median and Mean Income: 1953 to 2004.”
2006b. Accessed at http://www.census.gov.
U.S. Census Bureau. Current Population Reports, P60–233, “Income,
Poverty, and Health Insurance Coverage in the United States: 2006.”
2007. Accessed at http://www.census.gov.
Wilkinson, Richard. Mind the Gap: Hierarchies, Health and Human Evolu-
tion. London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson, 2000.
Wolff, Edward N. Top Heavy: The Increasing Inequality of Wealth in Amer-
ica and What Can Be Done about It. New York: The New Press, 2002.
30
Background and History

2
Problems, Controversies, 
and Solutions
T
he income gap between America’s rich and poor stretches
wider today than at any time in more than half a century, and
the gap continues to widen. A growing distance also sepa-
rates the wealth holdings of those at the top of the ladder from
those at the bottom. A deep-seated, ongoing trend toward eco-
nomic inequality is acknowledged by observers across the polit-
ical spectrum. People’s responses to these developments vary.
Some see inequality trends in the same light that skeptics see
data on global climate change, arguing that the present numbers,
though stark and unsettling, are part of a normal, long-term pat-
tern of variability. If we simply allow current trends to run their
course, they claim, the numbers will eventually turn around and
bring us back to lower levels of inequality. Others, by contrast,
view the current situation as highly problematic. They would
deem any further widening of the income gap both dangerous
and unacceptable.
This chapter goes behind the numbers on U.S. income in-
equality to seek the underlying causes of the trend toward eco-
nomic polarization. Several theories have been put forward—each
is interesting; some are controversial. After considering possible
reasons for the current trends, we will examine a whole range of
policies that have been proposed by those who think the gap be-
tween rich and poor Americans has grown too wide and that
something needs to be done about it.
31

The Wage Structure and Human Capital
Americans receive income in a variety of forms: wages, interest,
dividends, alimony, rental income, pensions (including Social Se-
curity), and cash welfare, among others. Leading the list for most
people is wages. If U.S. incomes are becoming more unequally
distributed, therefore, it must be largely because of a similar
trend in the wage distribution. And that is exactly what the data
show. High earners in every major category—male, female, sin-
gle, and married—are pulling farther and farther ahead of low
earners. For example, over the period 1975 to 2002, the real (in-
flation-adjusted) hourly wage earned by the bottom one-third of
male workers actually fell, while those in the top 5 percent saw
their real hourly earnings increase by nearly 50 percent—a dra-
matic stretching of the wage distribution (Danziger and
Gottschalk 2004, 15–16). This typifies the broad historical pattern
of the second half of the 20th century, a pattern in which the well
paid found ways to earn even better pay, while the poorly paid
fell behind. It also represents a reversal from the first half of the
20th century, when trends toward a more equal, more “com-
pressed” wage structure were in place (Goldin and Katz 2001).
How is it that some workers earn so much more than others?
It is an age-old question to which standard economic theory has
a simple answer: they produce things that have greater monetary
value in the marketplace. Those things can range all the way
from hand-harvested bunches of Riesling grapes to the manage-
ment of critical aspects of an initial public offering (IPO) of secu-
rities on Wall Street. IPO specialists are paid more than vineyard
laborers because what they, as individuals, produce on a weekly
or yearly basis is worth more to their employers, and ultimately
to consumers, than the harvest of the vineyard. High-wage work-
ers in our economy tend to be well educated, well trained, skill-
ful, and experienced. Low-wage workers generally lack these
characteristics.
Economists use the term human capital to denote the earning
capacity built up in a person through education, training, and ex-
perience. Like all capital, human capital is expanded through in-
vestment. Societies with sufficient resources invest in the education
of their children and young adults to ensure that they will have the
skills required to function successfully in the modern economy.
Rates of return on educational investments have been measured
time and again and are always found to be positive. Women with
32
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

more education out-earn those with less education. Men with more
education out-earn those with less. The same holds true for blacks,
Hispanics, and other demographic categories.
Investment in human capital is not just social (tax-funded),
however. In the United States, much of it is privately funded.
Many companies invest heavily in the human capital of their em-
ployees through a variety of in-house programs, training subsi-
dies, and even tuition grants. Individuals invest in their own
human capital by paying, sometimes with help from their fami-
lies, for education and training beyond what the government
makes available to everyone. The question of who pays for
human capital becomes critical at the level of college and gradu-
ate school, because higher education, unlike elementary and sec-
ondary education, must normally be paid for by the student.
Broadly speaking, then, we have reason to think that the
wage gap in the United States is related to unequal rates of in-
vestment in human capital. We already saw, in chapter 1, that the
educational playing field is far from level in the United States.
Low-income children attend public schools that are inferior in al-
most every way to the ones attended by more affluent children,
and when (or if) they graduate from high school, they are much
less likely to attend college than the sons and daughters of the
middle class. Several policies have been proposed to remedy the
problem of unequal educational opportunity, and we will exam-
ine them later in this chapter. First, it will be useful to develop a
fuller, more dynamic analysis of wage determination in the U.S.
labor market.
Labor Skills, Labor Demand, 
and Technological Change
In theory, the wage in every labor market is determined by the in-
terplay of supply and demand. The supply of labor expresses the
willingness of workers to offer various amounts of their labor at
varying wage rates. Other things equal, an increase in the supply
of labor will lower the wage rate, and a decrease in labor supply
will elevate the wage rate. The demand for labor comes from
business firms, at least in the simplest models; government and
nonprofit employers are added to the picture in more complete
models. Firms base their hiring decisions on the productivity of
Labor Skills, Labor Demand, and Technological Change
33

labor, which, of course, is tied to human capital. If productivity
rises, firms are likely to hire more workers and, in some cases,
pay them better.
It should be pointed out that workers are not, generally
speaking, interchangeable with one another. High school drop-
outs, for example, rarely find employment in engineering firms,
and an assembly line worker cannot trade jobs with a radiologist.
The limits on labor substitutability mean that workers in low-pay-
ing jobs cannot simply quit and take higher-paying jobs instead.
A well-known British economist of the 19th century, John Stuart
Mill, recognized that deficiencies in education, skills, training, or
other attributes meant that workers in certain trades did not have
the freedom to compete for better jobs in other trades. In his view,
this accounted for the otherwise puzzling long-term persistence
of wage differences across occupations (Mill 1999, bk. II, ch. XIV).
Mill’s idea of non-competing groups sheds light on the ques-
tion of why wages at the top of the job market have been rising
faster than wages at the bottom. Suppose the demand for highly
skilled labor grows faster than the demand for less-skilled labor.
Wages for high-skill labor will rise, and (non-competing) low-skill
labor will lack the ability to move into those high-skill jobs that
now pay much better. The result will be a growing wage gap be-
tween the top and bottom of the labor market. That is the scenario
presented in a recent analysis of the changing U.S. wage structure
by David Autor, Lawrence Katz, and Melissa Kearney (2006). The
authors contend that technological change in recent decades—
specifically, the advent of computer technology—has impacted
three categories of workers in divergent ways. Managers and ab-
stract problem solvers, who tend to be college graduates, do the
kinds of work that computers can leverage; accordingly, demand
for these workers has risen significantly, and so have their wages.
At the next lower rung of the ladder, where middle-wage workers
perform more routine, repetitive tasks, computers can actually re-
place labor. Thus, demand for this kind of labor has fallen, and
wages have been under pressure. The displaced mid-level work-
ers find it difficult to shift upward to the top job category, as Mill
might have predicted. They are more likely to drop into the lower
ranks.
At the lower end of the job scale, manual tasks are per-
formed by janitors, house cleaners, truck drivers, security
guards, and others. These are not jobs for college graduates. They
require more physical than managerial or high-level cognitive
34
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

skills, and they might seem vulnerable to downward wage pres-
sures. But compared to mid-level jobs, they are actually less vul-
nerable to technological unemployment because they involve
non-routine tasks. The physical labor done by these workers can-
not easily be substituted by a computer, no matter how cheap
computing power becomes. At the lower end of the wage scale,
therefore, the stress from technological change is less than in the
middle range.
Autor, Katz, and Kearney give a fairly specific account of how
technology is driving wage polarization. Other experts share these
scholars’ emphasis on technological change as a key force in de-
termining relative income levels. The highly skilled top earners
identified by Autor, Katz, and Kearney are essentially the same
group singled out as critical new players in the economy by Robert
Reich in his book The Work of Nations. Reich calls them “symbolic
analysts” who “solve, identify, and broker problems by manipu-
lating symbols.” Most symbolic analysts, needless to say, are col-
lege educated (Reich 1991, 178–179). Frank Levy and Richard
Murnane (2004) explore in depth the powerful role that computers
have played in reshaping the skill sets desired by U.S. employers.
They see the wage growth among college graduates since 1973 as
clear evidence of growing demand for workers capable of “expert
thinking” and “complex communication,” while wage stagnation
for high school graduates and dropouts suggests much less de-
mand for lower-level job skills (Levy and Murnane 2004, ch. 3).
A top policy maker in the U.S. government supports the
“skill gap” explanation of the growing wage (and income) gap.
In congressional testimony, Federal Reserve chairman Ben
Bernanke cited the rising skill premium—the extra wage paid to
those with higher skills—as the “most important factor” behind
rising income inequality during the past quarter-century. Equally
significant was his further comment: given the problematic trend
toward inequality, efforts to increase education and job training
would be “a very positive thing” (Bernanke 2006).
International Competition
Historically, free trade has not been a consistent policy priority of
the United States, but since the 1960s, the U.S. government has gen-
erally moved in the direction of trade liberalization. Indeed, the
United States has become a leading proponent of globalization,
International Competition
35

which can be loosely defined as an international system allowing
for the unrestricted movement of goods, capital, and ideas across
national borders. Many observers are convinced that the increas-
ing flow of certain types of imports into the United States, com-
bined with increased rates of immigration in recent years (see next
section), has contributed to the growing gap between rich and
poor in the United States. Is there something to this?
Liberalized trade means fewer barriers to the free movement
of goods into and out of a country. As tariffs and quotas are re-
duced, goods that can be produced more cheaply abroad start
flowing into a country at higher rates than before. Industries that
have been sheltered from foreign competition now must adapt to
a more rigorous competitive environment. Companies in import-
competing industries lose sales, which reduces their demand for
resources, including labor. Workers feel the impact in plant clos-
ings, job losses, and lower wages and benefits. In the United
States, much concern has been expressed for low-skilled workers
in manufacturing industries, especially where products have to
compete with imports from newly industrializing, low-wage
countries like China, Indonesia, and Mexico. No one doubts that
low-wage competition from abroad has done serious economic
harm to such U.S. industries as apparel, textiles, athletic shoes,
toys, and low-end electronics.
A shift to more open trade always creates both winners and
losers. In a wealthy industrialized nation like the United States,
free trade’s losers tend to be low-skilled, less educated workers
who, in some sense, must compete against workers in the Third
World. It is an oversimplification to say that the unskilled wage
rate in the United States today is set in China. Nevertheless, if
low-skilled workers are producing the same items in the United
States and in China, the fact that Chinese workers are paid only
about 3 percent of what American workers are paid is certain to
put downward pressure on the U.S. wage (Krugman 2007). Free
trade’s winners in the United States are likely to be found in
high-tech, capital-intensive export industries—jet aircraft, com-
puter software, machinery, and the like—where the workforce is
characterized by high levels of human capital.
As far as overall efficiency is concerned, moving in the free
trade direction is a plus, according to classic economic theory.
The long-term benefits outweigh the costs. If tariffs are reduced
on all sides, resource allocation improves. Job losses in import-
competing industries may be matched or exceeded by the job
36
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

gains in export industries. And of course, consumers everywhere
enjoy the benefits of lower prices. But the implications for the
rich-poor divide may not be so favorable: if the winners are al-
ready at the upper end of the skill and wage distribution,
equipped with the human capital to take advantage of expand-
ing opportunities in the export sector, while the losers are con-
centrated at the lower end of the skill and wage distribution, then
the gap between rich and poor will grow wider. It is a troubling
prospect that is only partially mitigated, in some people’s minds,
by a sense that the world distribution of income is becoming more
equal as a result of markets in the wealthy nations opening up to
imports of manufactured goods from Asia, Latin America, and
Africa (see ch. 3 and Gilbert 2004, ch. 1–2).
Immigration
It is not hard to see how immigration on a large scale might af-
fect the income structure of a country. If immigrants were mainly
high-skilled and high-earning—think Sergey Brin, the Russian-
born American cofounder of Google whose personal wealth ex-
ceeds $10 billion—then adding large numbers of them to the
labor force would stretch the nation’s income distribution at the
upper end. If, on the other hand, most immigrants were low-
skilled and low-earning, their influx would put a heavier weight
on the lower end of the scale. And if the foreign-born came to the
labor market with exactly the same proportions of human capital
as the native-born population, measures of income inequality
would barely be affected. This last scenario is one that we know
for certain does not apply to the United States.
In recent years, the average skill level of immigrants to the
United States has declined relative to native-born levels. The edu-
cation data tell the story: in 2005, only 12 percent of U.S.-born res-
idents age 25 or older had less than a high school education, while
32 percent of recently arrived foreign-born residents lacked a high
school diploma (Martin and Midgley 2006, 18). This has meant
that immigrants increasingly dominate the low-pay job ranks. In
1970, for example, foreign-born male workers were evenly dis-
tributed across all the deciles of the wage distribution, holding 5
or 6 percent of the jobs in each decile, from the highest paying to
the lowest. By 2000, everything had changed. In the first place,
there were many more immigrants in the labor force, with at least
Immigration
37

10 percent of the jobs in every decile held by the foreign born. But
more importantly, their distribution across the job ranks had be-
come highly skewed. Foreign-born men in 2000 were slightly
overrepresented in the top two deciles—again, think Russian-
born, Korean-born, and Indian-born doctors, financial analysts,
and Silicon Valley entrepreneurs—but heavily overrepresented in
the bottom two deciles. Immigrants now do roughly 25 percent of
the lowest-paying work performed by men in the United States
(Borjas 2003a, 248–249).
Immigration’s full potential for widening the gap between
rich and poor in the United States cannot be gauged without con-
sidering the effects of immigration on native earnings and em-
ployment. This is a highly controversial topic politically, and one
on which expert opinion is also divided. A standard argument
runs like this: if you introduce large numbers of immigrant la-
borers into a job market, the native workers with whom they
compete will experience depressed wages, and some of them will
likely lose their jobs. It is a textbook example of supply and de-
mand: an increase in supply results in a lower price. The real
world, however, rarely matches up neatly with simple economic
models. If immigrants bring a large amount of capital with them,
for example, its infusion into the economy may indirectly lead to
an increase in the demand for labor, which will tend to offset the
wage-depressing effects of the increased supply of labor. This is
just one of a large number of alternative assumptions that can be
made, and alternative scenarios that can be explored, when one
asks how immigration affects the well-being of unskilled natives.
The Harvard economist George Borjas, an immigrant him-
self, has consistently voiced a range of concerns about the eco-
nomic harm done to native workers by the heavy immigrant
inflow of the 1980s, 1990s, and early years of the 21st century. He
argues that the influx of unskilled, heavily Hispanic labor in re-
cent decades has probably worked to the advantage of more
highly skilled labor, consumers, and employers, but not the least-
skilled workers. He estimates, for example, that native-born high
school dropouts saw their wage reduced by about 9 percent be-
tween 1980 and 2000 because of immigration (Borjas 2003b,
1368). In a 1999 book, he blamed immigration for roughly half the
deterioration of dropouts’ wages relative to other workers in the
period 1980–1995, and went on to state a larger conclusion: “Im-
migration seems to have been an important contributor to the
rise in income inequality in the United States, depressing the eco-
38
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

nomic opportunities faced by the least skilled workers” (Borjas
1999, 11).
Borjas’s negative findings on the size and extent of the im-
pact experienced by low-wage native labor as a result of immi-
gration have garnered considerable attention, but they have not
gone unchallenged. The literature on this subject, much of it
highly technical and complex, continues to expand rapidly. The
New School’s David Howell offers a concise, evenhanded review
of that work, at the end of which he sums up this way: “On bal-
ance . . . the post-1980 surge in less skilled and heavily undocu-
mented immigrants in largely unregulated labor markets
contributes to downward wage and employment rates at the bot-
tom of the labor market” (Howell 2007). If Howell is correct, it
suggests that current U.S. immigration policy can be paired with
the nation’s trade policy in the vexing category of policies that si-
multaneously reduce global income inequality and raise U.S. in-
come inequality.
Unions and the Wage Distribution
So far we have considered explanations for the growing wage
gap that center on technology, trade, and immigration, each un-
derstood to be influencing labor markets through the ordinary
forces of supply and demand. Some analysts believe that, aside
from these fundamental forces, there are certain institutional fac-
tors affecting U.S. workers in ways that tend to widen the dis-
tance between top earners and those barely getting by on their
weekly paychecks. Two that are commonly cited are the declin-
ing membership of U.S. workers in labor unions and the eroding
real value of the minimum wage.
Historically, unions have given workers the opportunity to
join together and bargain collectively with their employers to
achieve better results, including higher wages, than they could
have gotten as individuals. Few question the positive impact
unions had, from the late 19th to the mid-20th century, on the
earnings of at least part of the labor force. This is particularly true
of workers at the lower end, the kind who joined the Congress of
Industrial Organizations (CIO), for example. But union member-
ship as a percentage of the labor force peaked in the early 1950s
and has been in decline ever since. Unions are much weaker in
the United States today than they are in Europe, and weaker than
Unions and the Wage Distribution
39

they have been in this country since the 1930s. The union mem-
bership rate was down to a mere 12 percent by 2006 (U.S. De-
partment of Labor 2007).
Reasons offered for the strong deunionization trend have in-
cluded a shift in the economy’s structure from manufacturing to-
ward services, a less supportive political environment beginning
with the presidency of Ronald Reagan, and global competition
that indirectly pits U.S. workers against low-paid workers over-
seas. Whatever its true cause, the shrunken share of workers cov-
ered by collective bargaining agreements is not good news for the
low-paid end of the wage scale. Unions have traditionally been in
the forefront of efforts to improve working conditions, wages, and
benefits for the workers they represent, and this has been particu-
larly beneficial for minorities and low-wage workers.
The wage advantage enjoyed by unionized over non-
unionized workers is called the union premium. It is the higher
pay, expressed as a percentage, that unionized workers receive
compared to non-unionized workers in the same types of jobs, in
the same regions and industries, with the same education and ex-
perience. The premium varies up and down the pay scale in
ways that tend to compress rather than widen the dispersion of
wages: it is only about 5 percent for college graduates but a
whopping 35 percent for those with a high school diploma or
less. Among low-wage workers, the union premium has been es-
timated at 28 percent, while among the highest-paid quintile it is
about 11 percent (Mishel, Bernstein, and Allegretto 2007, 187–
188). A point that should be stressed is that union benefits, along
with their income-equalizing effects, extend beyond union mem-
bers and even non-union members who are covered incidentally
by collective bargaining agreements. Many not-yet-organized
employers are so averse to unions that they will match the wages
and benefits achieved by unions in their area in order to discour-
age union organizers.
The long-term decline of unions in the United States has 
a tendency to raise income inequality partly because member-
ship losses are concentrated where union membership itself is
concentrated—at the lower end of the wage distribution. The dis-
tributional impact is magnified by the fact that, as noted, the
union premium is largest for the lowest-wage members. And
there is something else to be considered: unions in the past have
wielded substantial political clout in state capitols and in the
halls of Congress. They have lobbied hard for passage of legisla-
40
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

tion favorable to working men and women. As the union move-
ment weakens, so does its political influence on issues across the
board, including those that may affect the distribution of income.
One such issue is the minimum wage.
The Minimum Wage and Inequality
The minimum wage is the lowest hourly wage that employers,
by law, are allowed to pay their employees. The United States has
had a federal minimum wage since 1938, with Congress raising it
from time to time since then, most recently in May 2007. By the
summer of 2009, the federal minimum is scheduled to reach $7.25
an hour. Many states, including New York, California, Illinois,
and Florida, have established their own minimum wages at lev-
els above the federal rate. In such cases, the state minimum pre-
vails; if the state minimum is below the federal, then the federal
minimum prevails. Whether state or federal, these laws are com-
monly justified by the argument that low-wage labor needs to be
protected from exploitation. While some workers who are paid
the minimum wage would presumably earn the same wage in
the absence of a legal minimum, others would certainly be paid
less. To that extent, minimum wages are seen as nudging the in-
come distribution in the direction of greater equality.
Critics of minimum wage laws contend that this type of gov-
ernment intervention into the labor market does more harm than
good. If the government introduces a minimum wage that is
higher than the equilibrium wage, it will result in some unem-
ployment. Why? Because workers will want to work more hours
at the higher wage, and employers will choose to hire fewer
workers at that wage. (Employers will look for ways to econo-
mize on labor, possibly by replacing it with capital.) Thus, the
benefits of having some low-paid workers earning better wages
than they otherwise would are offset, to some degree, by the loss
of income among those who are displaced from their jobs. Critics
also point to the fact that only a few million U.S. workers are ac-
tually paid at the legal minimum. Millions more, however, earn
wages that are linked informally to the legal wage floor; if the
floor is lifted, they, too, will take home more pay. For example,
workers whose jobs customarily pay $2 above the minimum
wage can expect the 2007 legislation to increase their pay from
$7.15 an hour to $9.25 by the summer of 2009.
The Minimum Wage and Inequality
41

Those who see a connection between rising U.S. wage in-
equality and the minimum wage usually focus on the real 
(inflation-adjusted) value of the federal minimum, arguing that
workers at the low end of the wage distribution get hammered
when inflation eats into the value of a given wage floor. This has
happened repeatedly in the past. For long periods of time—
typically when the Republican Party controls either the White
House or Congress—the real minimum wage falls because the
nominal rate is not automatically adjusted for inflation. The
change in the federal minimum wage enacted by Congress in
2007 was the first increase in 10 years. During the preceding
decade, the minimum wage of $5.15 an hour was so ravaged by
inflation that its purchasing power fell to a 50-year low. It also
shrank to a record low of 31 percent of the average U.S. hourly
wage (Bernstein and Shapiro 2006, 2).
How much of the recent rise in inequality is attributable to the
falling real value of the minimum wage remains an open question.
The last (and only other) time the U.S. minimum wage was left un-
changed for a decade was between 1981 and 1990. One study de-
termined that the falling real value of the minimum wage in that
period was a significant factor in the hefty increase of wage in-
equality that occurred in the 1980s, especially for women (Lee
1999). So far, no one has done the same math for the period 1997 to
2007. With the federal minimum wage now set to rise until 2009,
both nominally and in real terms (unless there is a surge of infla-
tion), we can expect a reduction of the wage gap at the lower end
of the pay scale. The authors of The State of Working America 2006/
2007 calculated the impact of a $2.10 wage hike, and their results
suggest that disproportionate benefits will flow to the lowest earn-
ers, as one would expect. They foresee 38 percent of the total gains
generated by the wage increase going to the poorest quintile of
households, and 57 percent going to the bottom two quintiles. This
contrasts strongly with a mere 12 percent of the gains going to the
top quintile (Mishel, Bernstein, and Allegretto 2007, 195–196).
Winner Take All?
At the very summit of the income distribution, where some indi-
viduals earn in a day what it would take years for the minimum-
wage worker to earn, it seems that something more than
education, training, and experience must be at work to account
42
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

for relative incomes. Top entertainers, athletes, lawyers, and
CEOs are much better paid today than was the case a generation
ago, not only in inflation-adjusted terms but also relative to the
average entertainer, athlete, lawyer, and CEO. There has never
been a better time to be Number One in your field. The world’s
top-ranked tennis players now take home in excess of $20 million
a year, if we include their commercial endorsements (Hodgkin-
son 2006). A few movie actors, like Will Ferrell and Johnny Depp,
collect $20 million paychecks for each movie they make. A top TV
and film producer, Jerry Bruckheimer, earns over $80 million per
year. Something appears to have blown the top off the wage dis-
tribution in at least some U.S. industries and occupations.
Do “superstars” like the ones just named possess more
human capital than their predecessors? More talent? Their fans
may think so, but a better explanation for their jumbo-sized pay-
checks may lie in what the English economist Alfred Marshall, in
his 1890 Principles of Economics, identified as a likely source of
rapidly growing fortunes, namely, “the development of new facil-
ities for communication, by which men who have once attained a
commanding position are enabled to apply their constructive or
speculative genius to undertakings vaster, and extending over a
wider area, than ever before” (Marshall 1961, book VI, ch. XII).
Athletic and acting performances today can be viewed not just by
hundreds, as in the past, but by millions, thanks to advances in
telecommunications. And the market system has found effective
ways to charge national and global audiences for access to those
performances. Since the public is far more interested in seeing the
world’s top-ranked tennis players, boxers, actors, etc., than others
further down the list, even if the lower-ranked performers are, ob-
jectively speaking, almost as good, the top names in winner-take-
all markets can command top dollar.
A direct application of Marshall’s insight about the impor-
tance of scale (“vaster undertakings”) as a basis for greater fi-
nancial rewards can be seen in the world of investment banking
during the 1980s. In that decade, the bonuses paid to Wall Street’s
top bond sellers—“masters of the universe,” as they were
called—shot up to unprecedented levels, and the reason was sim-
ple. The traders were not more skillful than before, but trading
volumes in that decade exploded. According to one participant,
the volume of business done by a typical trader went from about
$5 million per week to $300 million per day. Hence, a salesperson
of given talent and persuasiveness gained much more leverage
Winner Take All?
43

and became worth much more to his or her employer than in pre-
vious decades (Frank and Cook 1995, 94–95). A similar logic may
be applied to the whole issue of CEO compensation in the United
States: the volume of sales and the level of profits for firms oper-
ating on a global scale mean that having the right executive at the
top is of paramount importance. We return to the issue of CEO
compensation later in the chapter.
Family Structure and Income Distribution
So far, we have focused on ways in which the growing divide be-
tween America’s rich and poor might be accounted for by a
growing polarization of earnings. The wage distribution has in-
deed been stretching wider across groups; thus, college gradu-
ates are widening the pay gap between themselves and high
school graduates, and white-collar occupations are outdistancing
blue-collar occupations. Within-group inequality also is growing:
among male workers, for example, the gap between top and bot-
tom earners has widened, and the same holds for female workers
(to a lesser extent), as well as workers within industries, occupa-
tions, and ethnicities. The economic and technological factors
that have been studied as possible causes of these developments
are indeed a big part of the inequality story, but not the whole
story. An important element in what has been happening with in-
come inequality has to do with household arrangements in the
United States. Demographic patterns have changed in ways that
have a measurable impact on the distribution of income.
We can get a clear picture of how economic fortunes vary
across different types of families by putting a spotlight on the
lower end of the income distribution, that is, on those who fall
below the poverty line. In 2005, only about one married-couple
family in twenty had an income below the poverty line. The basic
reason for such a low poverty rate is obvious: the traditional “nu-
clear” family structure is one that allows for two earners in the
same household. If one spouse works full-time, even if the other
works only part-time, it is difficult for the family’s combined in-
come to fall below the government’s poverty threshold. The out-
look is quite different for single-parent families. In those headed
by a male with no wife present, the poverty rate was 13.0 percent
in 2005. In families headed by a female with no husband present,
the poverty rate was a staggering 28.7 percent (U.S. Census Bu-
44
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

reau 2006, 58). The high vulnerability of mother-only families in
the United States has long been a staple of poverty analysis and
policy discussion.
Long-term changes in family structure become a force be-
hind rising inequality if they result in more families experiencing
extra-low or extra-high incomes. This has, in fact, been happen-
ing at the lower end of the distribution. In 1973, about 15 percent
of American families were headed by a single parent; by 2005,
that figure had risen to 25 percent. Thus, part of the overall in-
crease in the U.S. poverty rate for families, from 8.8 percent in
1973 to 9.9 percent in 2005, can be attributed to a simple shift in
the makeup of families, with more now in the vulnerable lone-
parent category (U.S. Census Bureau 2006, 58). A specific calcula-
tion of the impact of evolving family structure on U.S. income
inequality has been done by economist Gary Burtless. He finds
that about one-fifth of the rise in the Gini coefficient (index of in-
equality) from 1979 to 1996 can be blamed on the declining per-
centage of Americans in husband-and-wife families (Burtless
2003, S189).
At the upper end of the income distribution, a different sort
of demographic change has been intensifying inequality. It goes
by the name “assortative mating” and involves the increasing
likelihood that marriage partners will share common back-
ground characteristics, whether of income, education, or occupa-
tion. Couples already do themselves a financial favor just by
tying the knot. When equally well-educated men and women do
so, it elevates their prospects of moving quickly to the top income
ranks. As Annie Paul has observed, “Once, it was commonplace
for doctors to marry nurses and executives to marry secretaries.
Now the wedding pages are stocked with matched sets, men and
women who share a tax bracket and even an alma mater.” She re-
ports on a study that found a 43 percent drop, from the 1940s to
the late 1970s, in the odds of a college graduate marrying a high
school graduate, and another study that finds a strengthening as-
sociation between women’s pre-marriage earnings and the post-
marriage earnings and occupational status of their husbands
(Paul 2006).
How much has the growing concentration of earning power
among couples contributed to rising income inequality in the
United States? Gary Burtless credits the increasing similarity of
husbands’ and wives’ earnings over the period 1979–1996 with
about one-eighth of the rise in the Gini coefficient, making it a far
Family Structure and Income Distribution
45

from negligible factor (Burtless 2003, S189). This particular trend
may now be played out, however. Historically, middle-class
women began entering the labor force and bolstering their fami-
lies’ incomes during the 1960s. As time went on, women of
higher educational attainment and earning potential joined the
march into the workplace. As they added their earnings to those
of their well-compensated husbands, the gap between rich and
poor families tended to grow wider (Burtless 2003, S190). In re-
cent years, the participation rate of women in the U.S. workforce
seems to have peaked, which suggests that any further rises in in-
equality will have to come from other sources.
Political Perspectives on Income Inequality
Nearly everyone who has looked at the facts concerning income
distribution in the United States has come to the same conclusion:
the gap between rich and poor stretches wider today than at any
time in decades. There is no similar unanimity on the exact causes
of the polarization, although the explanations we have considered
so far in this chapter are the ones most frequently cited. There is
perhaps even less agreement about what, if anything, should be
done about the current extent and trend of inequality. Those who
mistrust government “meddling” in the economy argue that no
action should be taken, at least by the government. In their con-
servative perspective, even the current degree of economic in-
equality falls within the normal bounds of historical variation.
They point out that nearly all of the increase in statistical inequal-
ity can be accounted for by improvements at the top of the income
distribution, rather than deterioration at the bottom. To begrudge
the financially successful their gains—even outsized gains—is to
indulge in the politics of envy.
A radical counterpoint to the conservative view on inequal-
ity would start from the premise that capitalism is what has cre-
ated the vast gulf now separating the haves from the have-nots.
The logical solution to the problem of inequality, therefore, is to
sweep capitalism aside. And replace it with what? Radical critics
of capitalism have generally proposed some form of socialism as
a replacement. Although the varieties of socialism, both in theory
and practice, are numerous, all have aimed to achieve a more eq-
uitable allocation of incomes than occurs under capitalism. In-
deed, the promise to end poverty and inequality has always been
46
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

counted among the most appealing aspects of socialism, at least
on paper.
Between the two extremes sketched above lies a vast middle
ground of positions on inequality occupied by moderates, cen-
trists, liberals, and progressives. Most of them accept the premise
that unequal incomes are a natural outcome of the capitalist
economy, but they take this as a call to modify, not jettison, capi-
talism. Unlike conservatives, they are generally comfortable with
using government to deal with social and economic problems, in-
cluding inequality. This means they are prepared, at a minimum,
to enlist the tax-and-transfer system to secure more equitable re-
sults for those left behind by the workings of the market econ-
omy. Rarely, if ever, do they call for a specific numerical change
in an indicator such as the Gini coefficient or the 90–10 income
ratio. What these scholars, activists, and politicians offer is a wide
range of policies aimed at alleviating the worst, most deep-seated
inequities generated by the U.S. economy. They do not necessar-
ily worry about how realistic the chances are for acceptance of
their proposals; even politicians have been known to float “trial
balloons” that stand a good chance of being shot down. In the re-
mainder of this chapter, we take up some of the most interesting
and controversial policy proposals for countering the trend to-
ward inequality.
Education as an Income Equalizer
If every five-year-old walking into kindergarten on the first day of
school were put on a path of guaranteed educational success—as-
sured that he or she would progress smoothly through elemen-
tary and middle school, graduate from high school, get accepted
to college, and have the money to stay there for four years—much
of the current gap between the rich and the poor would be closed.
It would not disappear entirely, of course. The accidents of birth
would continue to favor some and not others, with advantages
like above-average IQs, social connections, and wealth. Some oc-
cupations would continue to pay more than others, as they al-
ways have. But over time, the distribution of incomes would
almost certainly become more equal. This is not, however, the ed-
ucational world we know. Children do not enter kindergarten on
the same footing. They do not go home after school to the same
family circumstances. Their schools are not identical because their
Education as an Income Equalizer
47

neighborhoods are not. And college attendance is far from auto-
matic for a majority of high school graduates.
If nothing is done to interrupt the typical growing-up expe-
rience of children from backgrounds of low socioeconomic status
(SES), most will reach adulthood with far less human capital than
their more advantaged peers, and their wages will lag accord-
ingly. A number of policy interventions have been suggested to
compensate for the social and cognitive deficits that low-SES
children bring to school at every age. Some have been tested ex-
perimentally, and some implemented on a larger scale. In the
next section we look at two famous examples; many more are de-
scribed in Jonathan Crane’s Social Programs That Work (1998). If
educational investments are well timed and well carried out, ex-
cellent results are achievable. The rates of return on such invest-
ments can be remarkably high.
When a new public policy is contemplated, it often raises con-
cerns about a trade-off between equity and efficiency—what helps
the one may hurt the other. Nobel Prize-winning economist James
Heckman notes that when it comes to educational interventions,
particularly at young ages, there is no equity-efficiency trade-off
to contend with. When these policies target low-income children
and improve their life chances, they advance equity. They also
build up much-needed human capital in the labor force, make our
schools more productive, and “reduce crime, teenage pregnancy,
and welfare dependency” (Heckman 2006, A14). Compensatory
education has to be one of the prime tools employed by govern-
ment if it is serious about addressing the nation’s income gap.
The Effectiveness of Early Interventions
Two early childhood intervention programs have received a vast
amount of attention from educators and social policy analysts: the
1962–1967 Perry Preschool (PP) program in Ypsilanti, Michigan,
and the 1972–1977 Carolina Abecedarian (CA) program in North
Carolina. Both studies were structured as randomized trials, and
both tracked the participants for many years afterward to check on
the long-term effects of the programs. The PP program started
with a group of 123 low-SES African American children, ages three
and four, who were randomly assigned to either a treatment group
or a no-treatment group. The treatment group received high-
quality preschool instruction for 2.5 hours each day, five days a
48
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

week, eight months a year, for a two-year period. The teaching
staff were trained in early childhood development and closely su-
pervised. In addition to classroom sessions, they made weekly 90-
minute visits to their pupils’ homes (Schweinhart 2005).
The impact of the preschool program was substantial and
long-lasting, as evidenced in data collected on PP participants
every year until they were 11, and then again at ages 15, 19, 27, and
40. At age 40, for example, those who had been in the treatment
group stood better than those who had been in the control group
on a number of economic measures: they were more likely to be
employed (76 percent vs. 62 percent); they had higher median
earnings ($20,800 vs. $15,300); they had more savings accounts (76
percent vs. 50 percent); and they had higher homeownership rates.
In many other ways, the PP program served the treatment group—
and society—well. Those in the treatment group spent fewer years
in special education, were much less likely to be classified as men-
tally retarded, graduated from high school at higher rates, received
post-secondary education at higher rates, and had less involve-
ment with crime. Cost-benefit calculations for the PP program
have been highly favorable, mainly due to the estimated savings to
society from lower crime rates among program participants
(Schweinhart 2005).
A decade later, the CA program took an even more intensive
approach to early childhood intervention than the PP program.
Subjects were recruited into the program as infants; their average
age at entry was 4.4 months. As with PP, the children were over-
whelmingly African American, from low-SES backgrounds. The
sample size, again, was small. By a randomized process, 57 in-
fants were assigned to the treatment group and 54 to the control,
or no-treatment, group. The former received high-quality child
care eight hours a day, five days a week, 50 weeks a year, until
they were three or four years old, at which time they were
switched to a preschool program. During the five years children
spent in the pre-kindergarten phase of the CA program, the cur-
riculum emphasized age-appropriate play activities and lan-
guage development. Upon entry to kindergarten, an extension of
the Abecedarian program was made available to some treatment-
group and some control-group children through second grade
(Child Trends 2007).
The impact of the CA program on participants has been quite
positive. Those in the treatment group, by comparison with no
treatment, got better scores on reading and math tests, repeated
The Effectiveness of Early Interventions
49

fewer grades, were placed less often in special education, and at
age 21 had either graduated from or were enrolled in four-year
colleges at higher rates (35 percent vs. 14 percent). Among CA
participants who had borne a child, the average mother’s age at
first birth was more than a year older for the treatment group than
for the controls. Even IQ gains, which tend to fade out in child-
hood interventions, appeared to persist to age 21 among CA par-
ticipants (Child Trends 2007).
The results achieved with Perry Preschool, Abecedarian, and
a handful of other small-scale, model programs of early child-
hood intervention have convinced psychologists, educators, and
even hard-headed economists that investing in young children
from disadvantaged backgrounds makes sense (Heckman and
Krueger 2003, 163–174). It can give participating children, and in
some cases their mothers, a realistic chance of earning higher in-
comes over a lifetime, thus putting at least a dent in current lev-
els of inequality. One might expect there to be an attempt at
scaling up these promising efforts to a state or national level, but
so far that has not happened.
What we have instead is Head Start, a vast Great Society-era
program that annually serves more than 900,000 children, ages
three and four, on a budget of roughly $7 billion. The goal of
Head Start is to ensure that children from low-income families
are ready for school. Head Start funding does not approach the
per-child levels of the model programs, nor are its teachers as
well qualified or well paid. In 2003, for example, only 31 percent
of Head Start teachers had a BA degree or higher (Hart and Schu-
macher 2005, 3). Head Start children achieve modest IQ and
other cognitive gains that tend to fade out in time, something that
also happens in the model programs. James Heckman, among
others, has stressed that cognitive measures (test scores) are not
the sole gauge of program effectiveness. Noncognitive skills can
be just as important as, or more important than, cognitive skills
for those who come from a background of disadvantage. Self-dis-
cipline, perseverance, and cooperative skills can be critical to suc-
cess at higher levels of education and in the job market, and
preschool programs appear to develop these skills. Heckman re-
ports on a recent long-term study of Head Start that finds solid
benefits for its participants, whether in high school graduation
rates, earnings, or lower crime rates, with the largest benefits
going to those whose mothers had been high school dropouts
(Heckman and Krueger 2003, 169–171).
50
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

U.S. Schools and Inequality
Most experts on poverty and inequality see a role for preschool
intervention to help children from disadvantaged backgrounds
have a better chance at success when they start school. But even
with intervention and enrichment, children from low-SES fami-
lies face daunting obstacles to success in the classroom. Many are
being raised by a single parent whose own educational experi-
ence was limited and negative. Some have health issues related
to poverty that can interfere with steady school attendance. Fam-
ily instability causes many children to get moved from school to
school, disrupting their educational progress in serious ways. For
some children, the home environment is so chaotic that they can-
not find the space or quiet to sit down and complete a homework
assignment. If these are the personal challenges faced by a great
many children from the lower end of the income scale, one may
well ask: what can a school do to compensate? An even tougher
question would be: what can society do to enable schools to be
equalizing institutions, when children come to them with such
diverse capacities and preparation?
As noted in chapter 1, most public schools in the United
States are neighborhood-based and draw their funding, to a con-
siderable extent, from local property taxes. U.S. residential pat-
terns have become so segregated along class lines that many
schools are essentially lower class, middle class, or upper middle
class in terms of student enrollments. At the upper end, in leafy
suburbs, one finds well-prepared, motivated children, supported
by parents who know the value of education. Students are taught
in well-maintained classrooms and state-of-the-art laboratories.
They have a rich menu of extracurricular options. And long be-
fore high school, most understand that they are on the path to
college. At the lower end, the situation can be much bleaker, from
school locations in drug-infested neighborhoods and youth cul-
tures that devalue academic achievement, to facilities and curric-
ula that can only be called substandard. In settings like these,
student expectations will not typically include automatic passage
to college and a career.
In many public schools, of course, students are drawn from a
mix of backgrounds. However, that diversity does not necessarily
mean that the students mingle in the classroom or get the same ed-
ucation. Those with more advantage in their upbringing—that is,
higher SES—usually take a different set of classes (college-prep)
U.S. Schools and Inequality
51

from the ones taken by students of less economic and social ad-
vantage. When we see such “tracking,” which often begins well be-
fore high school, it can shake our confidence in America’s schools
as engines of opportunity and upward mobility. To some ob-
servers, it appears that the public schools serve an opposite func-
tion, as institutions for the entrenchment of current inequalities.
One view of how to change the system for the better would
stress the importance of money. In Savage Inequalities, Jonathan
Kozol paints a vivid picture of the underfunded school. The log-
ical remedy for such schools would involve the injection of ad-
ditional financial resources. Title I of the Elementary and
Secondary School Act of 1965 has put federal money into high-
poverty schools for the past 40 years. The great majority of the
funds go to support children at the K–6 level, helping poorer dis-
tricts hire more teachers and teachers’ aides, purchase comput-
ers, and offer summer school. Title I was reauthorized in 2001 as
part of the No Child Left Behind (NCLB) initiative of President
George W. Bush.
Most school funding actually comes from states and locali-
ties; the federal share of total funding, including Title I, is only in
the 6–8 percent range. Total expenditures per pupil in the United
States have grown considerably over the decades, nearly dou-
bling between 1970 and 1998 (Corcoran et al. 2004, 434). Local fi-
nancing has diminished in importance, state funding has grown,
and federal funding has edged up. The most notable change has
been in state funding. Under political pressure and sometimes
court order, the states stepped up aid to poorer districts enough
to cause every measure of school spending inequality to fall sig-
nificantly (20–30 percent) between 1972 and 1997 (Corcoran et al.
2004, 436–441). Per-pupil expenditures within states have been
adjusted to the point where one can no longer claim that they
show substantial inequality.
On other measures, however, inequality remains. A U.S. De-
partment of Education survey in 1999 found that the schools with
the highest numbers of poor students (that is, students eligible
for free or reduced-cost lunches) were older, more crowded, and
in worse shape in terms of roofing, plumbing, and heating than
other schools. A 1994 survey found that teachers at high-poverty
schools were less likely to be certified in their primary teaching
field and much less likely to hold an advanced degree. Advanced
placement courses, while more available in all schools in 1992
than in 1972, were offered less than half as often in high-poverty
52
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

schools as in low-poverty schools. Computer access was more lim-
ited in high-poverty schools. In all of these dimensions of school
quality, there remain differences—though they are narrowing—in
the quality of educational resources available to the children of the
middle class and the children of the poor (Cochran et al. 2004,
452–458).
Ways to Improve Low-SES 
Student Performance
Ironically, as the United States has been moving toward greater
equalization of school expenditures, experts have reached no
consensus on the efficacy of additional expenditures in produc-
ing better outcomes for less privileged students. Some say the
extra dollars have little or no impact, a view originally expressed
(or implied) in the famous Coleman Report of 1966. Others find
that more spending produces positive results, and the balance of
current research may be shifting in their direction (Rouse and
Barrow 2006, 112–113). But even if we believe that more spending
can improve student outcomes, we do not necessarily know how
and where to spend those extra dollars. One possibility would be
to create smaller classes for disadvantaged children. Would this
help? A widely cited, rigorous, random-trial experiment con-
ducted in Tennessee in 1985–1986 found that students performed
better in class sizes of 13–17 pupils than in class sizes of 22–25,
and the small-class advantage was greatest for students from less
privileged backgrounds. Several other studies support the notion
that lower pupil-teacher ratios make for better long-term out-
comes, both in test scores and in adult earnings (Rouse and Bar-
row 2006, 113–114).
Another approach to improving the school performance of
lower-SES children is to integrate them into classrooms with chil-
dren from middle-class families. The idea is simple: lower-SES
children benefit from the stimulating presence of classmates with
larger vocabularies, higher aspirations, and other cognitive and
attitudinal advantages. In a racial context, this was the core mes-
sage of the Brown v. Board of Education decision by the Supreme
Court in 1954, which ruled that “separate but equal” really was
not equal at all. The court-ordered school busing that followed
Brown, though politically untenable from the start, was based on
Ways to Improve Low-SES Student Performance
53

the assumption that black children would achieve better educa-
tional results if they shared classrooms with white children. That
belief got social science backing in the Coleman Report alluded to
above. Johns Hopkins sociologist James Coleman, in trying to ac-
count for differences between black and white student outcomes
in U.S. schools, concluded that student achievement had less to
do with school quality per se—buildings, teachers, curricula—
than with the SES of the students and their peers in the classroom.
To achieve the kind of SES mixing that promises to lift
achievement levels for disadvantaged (and minority) kids, a
number of school districts across the country have resorted to a
strategy called income-based or economic integration. Four dis-
tricts in particular have garnered considerable media attention
for moving in this direction: La Crosse, Wisconsin; Cambridge,
Massachusetts; San Francisco; and, most notably, Wake County,
North Carolina. In 2000, Wake County school officials replaced a
policy mandating racial balance among its schools with a new
plan capping the share of low-income students permitted to at-
tend any one school at 40 percent. Meeting this rule required a
certain amount of busing, but since the school district sprawls
out from Raleigh into rural areas, busing has been a normal ex-
perience for many students anyway. Busing within the city of
Raleigh was made more palatable for middle-class families by
the designation of certain schools as “magnet schools.” The im-
pact of the new policy to date has been remarkable. Student
achievement across all groups has improved since 2000, and
achievement gaps between groups, including high- and low-in-
come students, have been narrowed (Kahlenberg 2006, 2–4).
Many school officials around the country now are studying the
Wake County program as a model of how to get low-SES stu-
dents into middle-class schools, where they are known to per-
form better.
Raising the lagging achievement levels of minority and low-
income students is a key motivation behind President Bush’s No
Child Left Behind Act of 2001. The law speaks of “meeting the
educational needs of low-achieving children in our Nation’s
highest-poverty schools” and of “closing the achievement gaps
between minority and nonminority students, and between dis-
advantaged children and their more advantaged peers” (U.S.
Congress 2002, 115 STAT 1439–1440). NCLB calls for better
teacher preparation and training, regular testing of students in
math and reading, much more school accountability for educa-
54
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

tional results, and rising penalties for schools that fail to make
timely progress. By 2014, all students are expected to meet their
state’s proficiency standards—an extremely ambitious goal. Sup-
porters believe that holding schools and states accountable for re-
sults will force them to do a better job of educating all students,
especially those from less privileged backgrounds. Critics, how-
ever, assail the regimen of frequent testing, the uneven profi-
ciency standards from state to state, the punitive aspects of
accountability, and the inadequate federal funding of some parts
of the program. On one thing, all can agree: it will be years before
we know whether NCLB is contributing to a reduction in U.S. in-
equality.
College: Ticket to the Middle Class
For at least a century, Americans have viewed their public school
system as an essential part of what makes the “land of opportu-
nity” work. While the role of the public school continues to be
fundamental, vast changes in technology and industrial organi-
zation over the past half-century have made college degrees the
new minimum requirement for entry into, or continued occu-
pancy of, the middle class. This marks a sea change from earlier
eras when a blue-collar job often provided a high school gradu-
ate with enough income for a comfortable middle-class lifestyle.
Today, college graduates have skills that are much in demand in
the so-called “knowledge economy,” which means they receive
an excellent return on their investment in higher education. But
not all high school graduates feel they can afford that investment.
In the United States, post-secondary education is generally
obtained at the expense of the individual student. There is a com-
mon belief that scholarships, loans, and grants make college af-
fordable for everyone who really wants to go, but that notion
stretches the truth. Students from higher-income backgrounds
find the expense, including debt financing, easier to bear than
those from poorer backgrounds. It has been estimated that in the
early 1970s, it cost a low-income family 42 percent of its annual in-
come to send a child to a public university; 30 years later, the cost
had risen to nearly 60 percent (Haveman and Smeeding 2006,
137). Financial aid to needy college applicants has not kept pace
with rising costs. Pell grants, the main type of federal assistance
to low-income students, have shrunk in relation to total college
College: Ticket to the Middle Class
55

costs. In 1976–1977, they covered 72 percent of average costs at a
four-year college; by 2005, they covered only 34 percent (Draut
2005, 93). Colleges and universities themselves, as well as state
governments, are making it harder for needy families to cover
higher education costs by shifting need-based aid dollars into the
status-enhancing category of merit-based financial assistance.
High-SES applicants, who have had the benefit of high-quality
public (or private) schools, summer science camps, stimulating
travel, and expensive SAT prep courses, tend to receive most of
the merit awards (Draut 2005, 93–94).
These cost factors are contributing to a widening “college
gap” in the United States. In 1980–1982, 29 percent of the bottom
income quartile of high school graduates went on to a four-year
college, while 55 percent of the top quartile did so. By 1992, the
bottom quartile figure had slipped to 28 percent, while the top
quartile figure had climbed to 66 percent. Thus, the attendance
gap had widened from 26 to 38 percent in just 10 years (Haveman
and Smeeding 2006, 129–130). Viewed from the perspective of the
nation’s most selective colleges and universities, an even wider
attendance gap has been reported: only 3 percent of students at
those institutions come from the lowest income quartile, while
nearly three-quarters are from the top quartile (Carnevale and
Rose 2004, 106).
Policy analysts have come up with several solutions for the
problem of unequal college access. First, put more resources into
compensatory education at all levels from pre-K through high
school; eventually, this should give lower-SES 12th-graders a
fairer crack at college admission. Second, channel more federal
aid to economically disadvantaged college students. The Pell
grants, already mentioned, need more funding. The Hope and
Lifetime Learning credits introduced in the 1990s could be made
refundable so that their full benefits are available not just to fam-
ilies in higher tax brackets but also to those in the lowest brack-
ets. Currently nonrefundable, these credits of as much as $2,000
a year are of little or no value to families with such low incomes
that they owe no federal income taxes. Third, get colleges them-
selves to implement “economic affirmative action” in dealing
with lower-SES applicants. Several universities have already
moved in this direction, including the Universities of Florida,
Washington, and California (Kahlenberg 2003, 2).
Less-advantaged students wanting to get into any of the na-
tion’s top colleges today face fierce competition for limited slots.
56
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Tamara Draut, director of the Economic Opportunity Program at
the think tank Demos, explains why: “As the spoils of our econ-
omy are increasingly spread among only a small group of top per-
formers, getting into the winner’s circle from the outset is
imperative” (Draut 2005, 97–98). Unless we want the winner’s cir-
cle in higher education closed to all but high-SES “insiders” who
have enjoyed every advantage from infancy onward, our top
schools—the ones serving as “gatekeepers” to the top jobs—will
have to find ways to reach out to disadvantaged but high-potential
applicants. Need-blind admissions policies have long been
adopted at Ivy League schools and other premier colleges, yet low-
income students are still grossly underrepresented. Devising cre-
ative ways to recruit and retain the brightest of these students is a
continuing challenge.
Working on the Labor Market
The income inequality seen in the United States, insofar as it re-
flects an underlying wage inequality, arises chiefly from the fact
that too many people are employed at low wages, and wage
earners at the top are outdistancing those at every lower rung of
the ladder. This awkward pattern does not prove that U.S. labor
markets don’t work; rather, it shows that they are responding to
underlying forces that happen to be pushing them strongly in the
direction of inequality. Those forces of technology, demography,
custom, and political power act through supply and demand to
yield a wage pattern that some find acceptable and others unac-
ceptable, or at least worrisome. If the pattern is considered un-
satisfactory, steps can be taken to modify it. In the next few
sections, we consider a variety of policies that have the potential
to alter the U.S. wage distribution over time.
One policy that can be taken off the table for now is the fed-
eral minimum wage. As noted earlier, the U.S. minimum wage
has been cited as a contributor to growing wage inequality in the
United States since its purchasing power has been allowed to
drop for lengthy periods of time, including the decade following
the increase of 1996. Given the minimum wage’s role as an an-
chor wage, to which various other wage rates are attached or ad-
justed, the sinking of the real (inflation-adjusted) minimum wage
over time may have exerted downward pressure across the entire
lower end of the wage scale. The raising of the minimum wage in
Working on the Labor Market
57

the spring of 2007, now set to reach $7.25 by 2009, probably re-
moves this policy from further consideration until the mid-term
election year of 2010, at the earliest. Proponents may work at the
state level to keep lifting state minimum wages, but, barring an
unexpected surge of inflation, the federal wage floor will not be
looked at again for a number of years.
The Living Wage as a 
Boost to Low Wages
Frustration with the provisions of the federal and state minimum
wage laws has sparked a movement across the United States to
ensure that workers at city and county levels get paid a so-called
living wage. The city of Baltimore passed the first living wage or-
dinance in 1994. It required that any private contractor doing
business with the city pay its workers a minimum of $6.60 by 1996
(this at a time when the federal minimum wage was $4.25) and lift
the minimum in stages to $7.70 by 1999. After 1999, the Baltimore
living wage was to be adjusted annually in line with inflation.
Other cities that have enacted similar legislation include Boston,
St. Louis, Milwaukee, Detroit, San Francisco, Los Angeles, and at
least 130 others. Dozens of campaigns are underway to extend the
list (Gertner 2006, 39–42; Pollin and Luce 2000).
Living wage ordinances typically affect only a fraction of the
workers in a city, namely, those employed by private firms doing
business with the city or receiving financial assistance from it. The
actual wage level varies from place to place, depending on the
local cost of living and whether the contractor covers health ben-
efits. A typical case is Manchester, Connecticut, which adopted a
living wage ordinance in the spring of 2006. It applies to compa-
nies employing 25 or more workers and having service contracts
of at least $25,000 with the city or receiving tax benefits of that
amount. The wage is set at $11.06 an hour if health benefits are
provided and $14 an hour if they are not (Living Wage Resource
Center 2006). More ambitious living wage campaigns have at-
tempted to extend wage floors to all workers in a given city. Santa
Fe, New Mexico, is perhaps the best-known example. In 2002, the
city passed a standard-issue living wage ordinance, but the next
year, after huge controversy, it extended the city-wide wage floor
to all firms employing 25 or more workers. By 2008, all Santa Fe
58
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

employees will earn $10.50 an hour or more. A ballot measure to
establish a similar wage floor in nearby Albuquerque, however,
was defeated in 2005 (Gertner 2006, 62, 68, 72).
Opponents of living wage ordinances muster some of the
same arguments against it as those used against the federal min-
imum wage: jobs will be lost, low-skill workers will be hurt the
most, and there are more effective ways to reduce poverty and in-
come inequality. They can make one additional argument that
does not apply at the federal level: living wages, being local, can
put businesses at a competitive disadvantage vis-à-vis other lo-
calities that have not passed such laws. So far, there is little evi-
dence to support such a prospect. In general, the living wage
appears to be delivering what its supporters promise. Two lead-
ing students of the economics of living wages, Scott Adams and
David Neumark, of the Universities of Wisconsin and California,
respectively, have looked at impact data for 1996–2002. They con-
clude that living wage laws raise the wages of low-wage workers
but cost some jobs at the low-skill end; overall, these laws tend to
cut urban poverty (Adams and Neumark 2005).
Stronger Unions as a 
Means to Lift Low Wages
Unionized workers in low-wage labor markets earn, on average,
28 percent higher wages than non-union workers (see above). If
unions have a demonstrated capacity for boosting wages
through collective bargaining, a prolonged decline in union den-
sity (less than 10 percent of the private sector is now unionized)
is likely to place downward pressure on wage rates. Indeed, one
of the reasons for the emergence of the living wage movement
just discussed was the weakening and disappearance of the
unions to which municipal workers once belonged. With the out-
sourcing of many city services to non-union private firms, work-
ers found themselves earning wages inadequate to support their
families.
There is no simple remedy for deunionization. It is a 50-year
trend in the United States, driven by technological, political, and
institutional forces. But one authority on labor economics, Har-
vard’s Richard Freeman, believes that a turnaround in union
membership, to 20 or 30 percent of private sector employment,
Stronger Unions as a Means to Lift Low Wages
59

would result in “a huge increase in pay and benefits at the bot-
tom of the [income] distribution” (Freeman 1997). Even if Free-
man is wrong, or overly optimistic, about the direct impact of
higher union density on worker compensation, there could be
significant indirect gains from union growth. Politically, a
stronger labor movement might become a powerful ally of law-
makers trying to increase the frequency and size of minimum
wage adjustments. It might also wield greater influence over fu-
ture tax policy changes; in recent years, those changes have been
skewed toward the high end of the income distribution.
For the labor movement to reverse its downward slide, there
may need to be legal changes making it easier for workers to
form a union. It is no secret that most employers actively oppose
the introduction of unions. Wal-Mart is a famous example of a
huge corporation that has consistently fended off all attempts to
get its employees organized. In many workplaces, employees
face delaying tactics, harassment, intimidation, and loss of their
jobs when they try to gain union recognition. Companies have
significant advantages in these confrontations, not least of which
is the fact that labor law has been interpreted and enforced in em-
ployer-friendly ways since the 1980s. About one-third of the non-
union workers in the United States would like to join a union,
according to a 1994 poll. Why don’t they? Because, according to
the same poll, upwards of 40 percent fear that if they try to orga-
nize, they will lose their jobs (Pollin and Luce 2000, 189–190).
Earned Income Tax Credit
A program designed to bolster the wages of low-paid working
Americans is the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC), also known
by the simpler term Earned Income Credit. It is a poverty-reduc-
ing measure that has had support from liberals and conserva-
tives, Democrats and Republicans, since its passage in 1975. Only
low-income workers are eligible for this refundable credit, and
the size of one’s refund depends on hours worked, total earned
income, and family structure. The EITC is essentially a federal
wage subsidy. Conservatives like it because it rewards work ef-
fort and cannot be confused with welfare. Liberals like it because
it targets low-income people, especially low-income families.
Both sides understand that it is an expensive program, with an
annual price tag of roughly $40 billion, but presidents of both
60
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

parties have helped lift the benefit rates from their initially low
levels in 1975. At the same time that it reduces poverty, the EITC
has an added benefit: it helps narrow the gap between rich and
poor in the United States.
The mechanics of the EITC are fairly straightforward. Con-
sider a family with two dependent children in 2006. (The same
numbers would apply with any higher number of children.) On
annual earnings up to $11,340, the EITC gives the worker a 40
percent refund, so if he or she earns, say, $8,000, a refund of
$3,200 will be available. As earned income increases from $11,340
to $14,810, the EITC remains constant at its maximum amount,
$4,536 (40 percent of $11,340). If the worker pushes earnings
above the level of $14,810, the tax credit begins to decline from its
maximum. For each additional dollar that is earned, 21 cents is
deducted from the maximum benefit. If earned income reaches
$36,348, the worker will be fully phased out, that is, the EITC will
drop to zero. Why does there have to be a phase-out range of in-
comes in which extra dollars earned bring a reduction in the tax
credit? Simply because without such phasing out everyone, from
the poorest worker to the highest-paid, would be collecting
EITC—a budget-busting, nonsensical situation.
Federal EITC income can be supplemented in about 20 states
by state-level EITCs that offer qualified workers a refundable
credit on their state income taxes, ranging from 5 percent to as
much as 30 percent of the federal EITC. For example, in New
York State, an individual who qualifies for a $1,000 federal re-
fund can apply for an additional $300 from the state. A low-paid
New York worker, in other words, can have wage income
boosted by 52 percent—40 percent federal plus 12 percent New
York—in the phase-in range.
In the majority of states, workers have only the federal EITC,
but when $40 billion (plus billions more in state-level tax credits)
are transferred from taxpayers in general to low-income workers,
there has to be some equalizing impact on the U.S. income distri-
bution. Presumably, if the EITC keeps getting made more gener-
ous, the impact will become even larger. There are a few policy
downsides with the EITC, however. It is less generous to low-in-
come workers with only one child and markedly less so to those
with no children. Also, there is a distinct possibility that employ-
ers, mindful of the EITC, may be paying their employees less
than they otherwise would, knowing that the tax credit will boost
a low wage. And perhaps most seriously, there is the unavoidable
Earned Income Tax Credit
61

fact that once a worker reaches a high enough wage income to
start phasing out of the EITC, the program switches from being
an incentive to a disincentive to work, that is, it puts a marginal
penalty on work effort of at least 21 percent (Schiller 2003,
266–269).
Limits on CEO Pay
The facts on chief executive officer (CEO) compensation in the
United States have already been sketched in chapter 1, where it
was noted that CEO pay at the biggest U.S. corporations is now
about 250 times the pay of an average worker. This top-to-middle
ratio was only one-tenth as large in 1965, and it greatly exceeds
what is common in the rest of the industrialized world. But there
are even more impressive numbers to illustrate high compensation
at U.S. companies. Pay levels in the hedge fund industry in 2006,
when announced in April 2007, made headlines around the world.
In a listing of the top 25 hedge fund earners, the lowest-paid indi-
vidual took home $240 million. The top three each earned at least
$1 billion in a single year (Anderson and Creswell 2007, A1).
Clearly the phenomenon of the highly compensated manager-ex-
ecutive contributes to overall income inequality in the United
States, although top salaries in other parts of our “winner-take-all”
society—sports, entertainment, law—have also rocketed to new
heights in recent decades. The policy question is whether some-
thing should be done about it.
Logically, the gap between the rich and poor could be nar-
rowed by raising the bottom (poor), lowering the top (rich), or
some combination of the two. Liberals and progressives, with
their strong dislike of inequality, would like to pull both extremes
toward the middle. Conservatives, with their fundamental faith
in the outcomes delivered by the free market, would leave things
as they are. Capping CEO pay at some agreed-upon level is a top-
reducing strategy that would partially satisfy liberals, though
probably less than boosting low-end wages or incomes. It would
be furiously opposed by the business community and conserva-
tives. That no one has yet put this forward as a serious proposal
is surely due to the fact that no one knows what the “right” level
of compensation for a top executive should be. In theory, CEOs,
like all employees, are paid an amount that reflects what they are
worth to the company that employs them. In practice, CEO com-
62
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

pensation is set by subcommittees of boards of directors, often
composed of individuals who themselves were appointed by the
CEO. Such personal ties can fortify CEO paydays (Larcker et al.
2005).
CEO compensation packages generally consist of base
salary, bonus, perks, and stock options. The huge compensation
amounts reported for some CEOs are nearly always dominated
by the value of stock options, and that is exactly the point: cor-
porate boards like to align their top managers’ personal financial
interests with those of the company and its stockholders. When
the company prospers, so do the stockholders—and so does the
CEO. Few would quarrel with this arrangement. But the record
shows that many CEOs receive vast stock grants, options, and
golden parachutes even when their companies perform poorly.
Rank-and-file workers are rarely treated so kindly when com-
pany fortunes falter.
Although direct regulation of CEO pay is not on the legisla-
tive agenda, increasing attention is being given to pay at the top.
Investor activists now regularly propose limits on CEO pay at
stockholder meetings. Institutional investors, such as pension
funds and mutual funds, are weighing in on the side of moder-
ated executive compensation. Legislation to give shareholders
some input or a “say on pay,” rather than leaving compensation
decisions entirely to boards of directors, was overwhelmingly ap-
proved by the U.S. House of Representatives in April 2007,
though it faced uncertain prospects in the Senate and a veto at
the White House if it ever got that far. One U.S. corporation, the
insurer AFLAC, has adopted the shareholder “say on pay” idea
voluntarily (Drawbaugh 2007); others may follow. In early 2007,
the Securities and Exchange Commission announced that corpo-
rations would soon be required to disclose more clearly and fully
the compensation of their top executives, including perks and
stock options. Whether any of these actions will affect trends for
CEO pay in the long run, or change institutional norms regard-
ing such pay, is not yet apparent.
Immigrant Labor Supplies
A final labor market solution to the problem of a widening wage
gap in the United States takes us back to the lower end of the dis-
tribution where, as noted before, the presence of large numbers of
Immigrant Labor Supplies
63

less-skilled immigrants puts downward pressure on wages. Two
kinds of policies might relieve this pressure. First, the United
States could legalize the undocumented workers currently in the
country. (In what manner and on what schedule this would be
done is a separate issue.) How might this boost low-end wages
and thus reduce wage inequality? If we recognize that undocu-
mented workers labor “in the shadows,” where they are vulnera-
ble to exploitation by employers, we can see that, in theory, the
regularization of their status would free these workers to demand
higher pay. Some labor unions already see undocumented work-
ers as a pool of potential recruits. Probably for that reason, among
others, the International Brotherhood of Teamsters, the Service
Employees International Union (SEIU), and the Hotel Employees
& Restaurant Employees International Union (HERE) have sup-
ported the legalization of undocumented immigrants.
The other immigration policy that might lift the lower end of
the U.S. wage scale would be a restriction on further immigration
by the low skilled. This would begin to reverse the pattern of re-
cent decades when large numbers of immigrants, mainly from
Mexico and other Latin American countries, have been unskilled.
Even within the U.S. population of high school dropouts in 2000,
immigrants came up short in terms of education—averaging only
6.9 years of school, compared to 9.7 years for U.S. native-born
dropouts (Borjas 2003a, 247). Since their relative lack of human
capital pushes so many immigrants to the low end of the U.S. job
market, worsening income inequality, George Borjas has sug-
gested one remedy: deny further immigration to persons lacking
at least 10 years of education. This would deplete the numbers of
immigrants in the lowest deciles of the wage distribution and, in
his view, “drastically cut the number of low-income persons in the
population” (Borjas 2003a, 250–251).
In the second term of George W. Bush’s presidency, immigra-
tion reform became a contentious issue for Congress and the pres-
ident. Not surprisingly, it got pinned down in a deadly crossfire
of conflicting political interests. Both political parties recognized
the need for reforming the system, but neither was internally uni-
fied on how to proceed. Questions of border security and amnesty
for the estimated 12 million illegal aliens living in the country fig-
ured more prominently in the debate than any considerations of
income inequality, although the latter issue was occasionally men-
tioned. The Senate bill that was the focus of debate featured a re-
vision in the prioritizing of future visa applicants, making job
64
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

skills a more important criterion and family ties less important. It
was a slight shift in the Borjas policy direction.
Taxes and Transfer Payments
We have seen that inequality can be countered through measures
aimed at boosting educational opportunities for disadvantaged
youth, and also through labor market policies designed to make
work more financially rewarding at the lower end (or less re-
warding at the high end). With this assortment of tools at their
disposal, policy makers, in theory, should be able to narrow the
gap between rich and poor quite substantially. An additional set
of policy tools—powerful, flexible, and simple to administer—
can also be utilized to make the income distribution more equal.
These are taxes and transfer payments. In a sense, taxes and
transfers are the final means of modifying the pattern of incomes
generated by market forces in our society.
When the government makes a monetary payment to an in-
dividual and asks for no goods or services in return, it is called a
transfer payment. Examples include unemployment compensa-
tion, cash welfare, veterans’ disability payments, and Social Se-
curity pensions. These kinds of payments tend to benefit people
further down the income distribution more than those higher up.
Therefore, if we wanted to make the income distribution more
equal, one approach would be to increase transfer payments
across the board. It would be essential, however, to fund the in-
creased payments out of revenues raised from the affluent rather
than from the kinds of people who typically receive transfer pay-
ments. Since this would not be the normal way of funding trans-
fers, it would take an extraordinary change in the U.S. political
climate to adopt such a policy.
Taxation offers a broader, more potent set of policy instru-
ments than transfer payments for dealing with an issue like in-
come inequality. The federal income tax is at the heart of the U.S.
tax system. It imposes lower rates on those at the bottom of the in-
come scale than on those at the top. In 2006, for example, single
tax-filers with taxable incomes below $7,550 faced only a 10 per-
cent marginal tax rate. At higher income levels, the marginal tax
rates climbed to 15, 25, 28, 33, and 35 percent, with the 35 percent
rate applying to all incomes above $336,550. On paper, then, the
federal income tax is progressive, putting a heavier relative burden
Taxes and Transfer Payments
65

on those earning high incomes than on those earning low incomes.
In the past, it probably did a better job of equalizing after-tax in-
comes, given that the marginal tax rates used to be much higher
than they are today. The top marginal rate peaked during World
War II at 94 percent, and as recently as 1971–1980, it was still 70
percent, twice the current rate (Tax Policy Center 2007).
The impact of the entire tax system on the distribution of in-
comes in the United States is a more complicated issue. There are
other federal taxes to consider, especially the so-called payroll
tax, and there are many state and local taxes on individuals as
well. The payroll (FICA) tax, which pays for Social Security pen-
sions, survivors’ and disability benefits, and Medicare, has a re-
gressive structure: its burden falls more heavily on low-income
earners than on the well paid. In 2000, for example, it imposed an
average 9.6 percent burden on households in the middle quintile;
the burden on households in the top 1 percent was only 1.9 per-
cent (Mishel, Bernstein, and Allegretto 2007, 70). For a majority of
Americans, the FICA tax of 7.65 percent, when doubled to in-
clude the employer’s share, is larger than their federal income tax
liability. The overall impact of all taxes—federal, state, and
local—on the populace of the United States is considered to be
modestly progressive.
If we wanted to use the federal income tax to lessen income
inequality, one way to do it would be to raise marginal tax rates
at the upper end. Depending on the amount of the increase, this
might roll back first the tax cuts of President George W. Bush and
then those of President Ronald Reagan. Under Reagan, the top
marginal rate was cut from 70 to 28 percent, while, after two
other presidents, the top rate under Bush was cut from 39.6 to 35
percent (Tax Policy Center 2007). When the entire post-2001 Bush
program of cuts in income, investment, and inheritance taxes is
costed out, the largest tax savings by far have gone to those with
the highest incomes. As of mid-2006, the average annual tax sav-
ings had been estimated at $63 per household in the bottom quin-
tile, $363 in the second quintile, $665 in the middle quintile, and
$1,113 in the fourth quintile. At the very top, tax savings to
households in the top 1 percent are estimated to be $44,477 per
year (Mishel, Bernstein, and Allegretto 2007, 75).
The other income-equalizing change that could be made to
the federal income tax would be to cut tax rates and widen tax
brackets at the lower end. If combined with hikes at the upper
end, this would render the tax structure more progressive than it
66
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

is today. Budget “hawks” might object that these changes would
enlarge the federal budget deficit, but that need not happen. The
changes could be calibrated so as to be revenue-neutral.
The payroll tax could also be adjusted to achieve greater after-
tax income equality. The FICA tax rate itself could be lowered, al-
though the resulting revenue losses would have to be recouped
elsewhere to avoid damaging the already shaky long-term fiscal
picture for Medicare and Social Security. Or there could be a
change in the way the payroll tax is assessed. At present, the FICA
tax is imposed on the very first dollars earned. That could be
changed to exempt some initial amount of earnings from the tax,
say, the first $5,000 or $10,000. Another modification of the payroll
tax would be to lift the ceiling on taxable earnings. In 2006, the So-
cial Security component of FICA (6.2 percent of the overall 7.65
percent tax) was assessed on only the first $94,000 of earnings. If
the $94,000 ceiling were doubled, tripled, or simply removed, the
payroll tax would become much less regressive. (The tax would
also raise far more revenue and thus put off the day when Social
Security runs out of money.)
We have looked at several ways to narrow the gap between
rich and poor through modifications in the income and payroll
tax structure. There is another, more radical way to use the in-
come tax to reduce income inequality: adopt the negative income
tax (NIT), as proposed by Milton Friedman more than 40 years
ago. This NIT would use the existing income tax mechanism to
channel funds—“negative taxes”—to those with incomes below
a certain level. For example, if the line were drawn at $10,000 a
year for a single person, and if Michael, a hypothetical taxpayer,
had taxable income, from whatever sources, of only $4,000, the
government would send him a check for some percentage of the
$6,000 gap between his actual income and the official support
level. With an NIT rate of 50 percent, his check from the govern-
ment would be $3,000. Note: The NIT is not intended to fully
close the gap between an individual’s income and the support
level. If it did that for Michael, he would have no incentive to
earn more than $4,000, or indeed to earn anything at all up to
$10,000 (Friedman 1962, 191–194). Like the EITC, the negative in-
come tax offers a way to reduce poverty and income inequality.
It could, however, be quite expensive unless, as in Friedman’s
original formulation, it replaced most other support programs.
No politician since President Richard Nixon has seriously pro-
posed the adoption of the NIT (Moffitt 2003).
Taxes and Transfer Payments
67

Wealth and Estate Taxes
Because wealth is distributed so much more unevenly than in-
come (see chapter 1), it would seem natural to consider the adop-
tion of a wealth tax as a means to alleviate the rich-poor gap in
the United States. Yet the nation has not so far adopted a broad
tax on wealth comparable, in scope or revenues raised, to the fed-
eral income tax. The property taxes levied by counties and mu-
nicipalities across the country are wealth taxes, of course, but
they are a hodge-podge of uncoordinated local taxes of varying
steepness, rarely designed to redistribute wealth. Their general
impact is probably regressive rather than progressive, since
much of the revenue is raised from seniors and farmers whose
properties often have a value out of all proportion to their current
income levels.
With a wealth tax, taxpayers must place a value on their real
and financial properties and then pay a tax on the total value.
Many European countries impose wealth taxes that could serve as
models for the United States. Edward Wolff has studied some of
them and simulated their effects if adopted in this country. His
preference is for a Swiss-type wealth tax that would raise $55 bil-
lion of additional federal revenues each year. It would feature a
$100,000 exclusion, with rising marginal tax rates on higher wealth
amounts. For example, on household wealth between $100,000
and $200,000, the marginal tax rate would be 1/20 of 1 percent. For
all amounts above $1 million, it would be 3/10 of 1 percent. Inter-
mediate tax rates would apply to wealth amounts between
$200,000 and $1 million. The same tax forms could be used by tax-
payers for both their income and wealth taxes. Wolff concedes that
there would be some risk of a disincentive to saving under such a
wealth tax, but he believes it would be “very modest.” And while
he understands that a brand-new tax would not be popular, he
notes that only 3 percent of U.S. families would see their combined
income and wealth tax rise by more than 10 percent (Wolff 2002,
72–74).
One wealth tax that the federal government has imposed for
most of the last century is the estate or inheritance tax. Histori-
cally this tax has been supported not so much because of the rev-
enues it raises but because of the principle on which it rests: vast
fortunes, if allowed to pass intact from one generation to the
next, would endanger our democratic society. In the United
States, the estate tax clearly operates in a progressive manner,
68
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

since fewer than 1 percent of estates (those valued above $2 mil-
lion) are subject to it. Under current law, the exemption rises to
$3.5 million in 2009, the tax disappears completely in 2010, and
in 2011 it comes back. The odd notion of a major tax making a re-
turn appearance the very year after its abolition tells us more
about the political legerdemain needed to pass President Bush’s
2001 tax bill than about the actual legislative preferences of Con-
gress regarding the estate tax.
Some specific numbers gathered from the IRS by Citizens for
Tax Justice (CTJ) help to clarify who pays the estate tax. In 2004,
about 2.4 million Americans died, and of those, about 18,000 left
a federal estate tax liability—fewer than 1 percent. The total
amount collected by the government was almost $22 billion.
Nearly two of every five dollars collected came from the 498 es-
tates valued at over $20 million, and over half of the total revenue
came from estates valued in excess of $10 million. Less than one-
third of the tax revenue came from estates valued below $5 mil-
lion. On paper, the top marginal tax rate was 48 percent in 2004,
but in reality the actual estate tax burden on even the biggest es-
tates (those over $20 million) averaged only 15.8 percent (CTJ
2007).
Support for the estate tax has come from those who worry
about a growing concentration of wealth in the United States and
who want to hold onto taxes that are clearly progressive. Oppo-
sition to the estate tax is found chiefly among Republicans, con-
servatives, businesspeople, and, of course, the wealthy (Gates
and Collins 2003). Policy briefs in favor of its repeal have poured
forth from think tanks on the right, that is, the Cato Institute, the
Heritage Foundation, and the American Enterprise Institute. Op-
ponents of the estate tax made a smart semantic move early on:
they substituted the term “death tax” for estate tax. Who could
be in favor of having tax collectors ringing the doorbells of the
bereaved and demanding payment of a hefty proportion of the
hard-earned savings of the deceased? Beyond semantics, the op-
ponents of the estate tax have produced some serious arguments.
They stress how crippling the estate tax is, or could be, to small
business owners and family farmers. They point out that many
countries around the world have no estate tax, including Canada,
Australia, Sweden, and Switzerland. Of the countries that do im-
pose this tax, most impose it at a lower rate than the United
States. Perhaps the most compelling argument against the estate
tax concerns economic efficiency: the extensive estate-planning
Wealth and Estate Taxes
69

and tax-avoidance activities engendered by the estate tax make
this tax, ultimately, a very costly one. It is conceivable, in fact,
that the efficiency losses from this tax exceed the revenues col-
lected by the government, or so its opponents claim (Edwards
2006).
The saga of the federal estate tax is not over yet. It remains a
ticking political time bomb. As the law now reads, the tax disap-
pears in just a few years. But the following year it is reinstated,
with the same high-end marginal rate (55 percent) and the same
low exemptions as in 2001. An entire book has been written about
the repeal campaign of 2001 (Graetz and Shapiro 2005). In a few
years, when the upcoming battle over repeal versus reinstate-
ment of the estate tax is over, there will no doubt be an audience
for another book or two on the subject.
Asset-Building Policies
A new policy direction for dealing with economic inequality has
slowly been gaining traction in the past decade and a half. It is
grounded in a fundamental fact: financial assets are so unequally
distributed in the United States, and passed on to succeeding
generations so unequally, that young adults do not in any sense
start out at the same point with the same advantages. This side 
of utopia, that of complete equality of opportunity, is unlikely to
be realized, but there are ways we could do a better job of living
up to that high standard. The history of the United States pro-
vides examples of bold national initiatives to broaden economic
opportunity. The Homestead Act of 1862 offered up to 160 acres
of land at no cost to anyone willing to settle on it, and the GI Bill
of 1944 gave millions of returning veterans a chance to further
their educations at government expense. In both cases, policies
aimed at building up assets—whether productive land or human
capital—left a legacy of expanded opportunity for millions of
Americans. At a time when both political parties are searching
for new ideas to address intractable problems of inequality and
poverty, asset-based policies may soon be in the limelight.
Probably the boldest asset-based proposal to date is the one
from Yale law professors Bruce Ackerman and Anne Alstott to
provide every American, on reaching the age of 21, with a one-
time “stakeholder grant” of $80,000. The money could be used to
buy a house, pay off college loans, enter a trade, start up a small
70
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

business, or do whatever the individual wanted, even if it were
foolish. Ackerman and Alstott doubt that many would waste
their stake, partly because high school graduation would be a
prerequisite to receiving the money. (They envision new high
school classes that would build up teenagers’ financial literacy.)
The price tag on this program would be about $255 billion, to be
financed by an annual 2 percent wealth tax. At the end of life,
those who could (or whose estates could) bear the cost would be
expected to repay the original $80,000 plus interest. It would
seem a near-certainty that this proposal, if enacted, would reduce
the U.S. wealth gap considerably. Its rationale, however, is not so
much to change a Gini coefficient as to provide each young
American with “the wherewithal needed to pursue happiness on
his or her own terms” (Ackerman and Alstott 1999, 13, 28, 34–41).
A less radical asset-building program that has already been
implemented in localities across the United States is the individ-
ual development account (IDA). The program has its origins in
the groundbreaking ideas of Michael Sherraden, a social policy
analyst at Washington University (Sherraden 1991). An IDA is a
savings account that permits a low-income individual to save up
for educational costs, a down payment on a first house, the start-
up of a business, or even retirement, with each dollar of savings
getting matched by public or private funds, sometimes in ratios
as favorable as 2:1. The idea is to motivate asset-accumulation
among those who have traditionally been thought unable or un-
willing to save but who, experience now shows convincingly, can
do so on a regular basis. IDA programs have been set up in more
than 40 states, and federal legislation to bolster funding for the
program has had the support of both President Clinton and Pres-
ident Bush. The Savings for Working Families Act, aimed at
adding almost a million people to the roughly 50,000 who now
participate in IDAs, has been introduced for several years in Con-
gress and still awaits passage.
An asset-building proposal that combines elements of the
stakeholder grant and the IDA is the children’s savings account,
seeded with an initial deposit of, say, $500 provided by the gov-
ernment. For low-income children, an extra $500 might be de-
posited at birth. Until the child turned 18, additional deposits
could be made to the account by parents, relatives, or the child,
and those deposits might be matched by the government in some
predetermined ratio. At age 18, the young adult would gain ac-
cess to the accumulated funds but only for approved uses, such as
Asset-Building Policies
71

education, a down payment on a house, or investment in a retire-
ment fund. This policy proposal has been developed by the New
America Foundation, a Washington, D.C.-based think tank, and a
version of the proposal has been adopted in Great Britain, where
it is known as the Child Trust Fund. A “Kids Account” plan was
introduced into the California legislature in early 2007, where it
ran into strong political headwinds and did not pass. Versions of
the proposal have also been introduced into both the U.S. Senate
and House, where the bill is known as the America Saving for Per-
sonal Investment, Retirement, and Education (ASPIRE) Act
(Boshara, Cramer, and Parrish 2005, 3). The ASPIRE Act has not
yet been put up for debate on the floor of either house.
What these three initiatives and many others like them have
in common is the principle that families with financial assets
make better, more confident choices about education, employ-
ment, saving, and retirement. People with assets have a stake in
the future of their community and their nation. They have an in-
terest in better understanding how credit works, how compound
interest can multiply savings, and how rainy-day funds can
sometimes make the difference between temporary hardship and
financial collapse. Asset-building programs appeal to liberals
with the promise of lifting up the disadvantaged and perhaps,
over time, narrowing the gap between rich and poor. They ap-
peal to conservatives as well, since they emphasize thrift, owner-
ship, and personal responsibility. In most configurations, they do
not involve massive redistributions of wealth, yet the funding
flows that they entail are generally in a progressive direction, to-
ward those at the lower end of the scale. Although some asset-
building ideas, like the IDAs, have been implemented, many
remain to be acted upon at all levels of government.
Summary
A considerable part of the widening U.S. income gap can be at-
tributed to a widening wage gap. Some workers have much more
human capital than others, and they have been in high demand
given the nature of technological change in our society. Low-end
workers, with low levels of human capital, are getting less wage
protection from labor unions than in former times, and to make
matters worse, they are facing stiffer competition from low-
72
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

skilled immigrants. Meanwhile, they are also getting little help
from minimum wage legislation. To boost wages at the lower
end, some have recommended: programs to improve the educa-
tional opportunities of the disadvantaged; steps to strengthen
labor unions; more restrictive immigration policies; and a more
generous funding of the EITC program. At the upper end, it has
been proposed that caps or other kinds of limitations be placed
on CEO compensation. Beyond these labor-market changes,
there have been proposals to help low-income families build up
their assets. Certain tax changes could also moderate the in-
equality trend, whether through easing of taxes on poorer indi-
viduals or raising tax rates on high-end wealth and incomes.
References
Ackerman, Bruce, and Anne Alstott. The Stakeholder Society. New Haven:
Yale University Press, 1999.
Adams, Scott, and David Neumark. “Living Wage Effects: New and Im-
proved Evidence.” Economic Development Quarterly 19, no. 1 (February
2005): 80–102.
Anderson, Jenny, and Julie Creswell. “Make Less Than $240 Million?
You’re Off Top Hedge Fund List.” The New York Times (April 24, 2007):
A1.
Autor, David H., Lawrence F. Katz, and Melissa S. Kearney. “The Polar-
ization of the U.S. Labor Market.” NBER Working Paper No. 11986. Cam-
bridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research, 2006.
Bernanke, Ben. “Questions and Answers with Chairman Bernanke.”
Washington, D.C.: U.S. House Committee on Financial Services, Febru-
ary 15, 2006. Accessed at http://financialservices.house.gov.
Bernstein, Jared, and Isaac Shapiro. “Buying Power of Minimum Wage
at 50-Year Low.” Washington, DC: Center on Budget and Policy Priori-
ties, and Economic Policy Institute, June 20, 2006. Accessed at http://
www.cbpp.org.
Borjas, George J. “Comment,” in Heckman and Krueger, 2003a: 241–251.
Borjas, George J. Heaven’s Door: Immigration Policy and the American Econ-
omy. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1999.
Borjas, George J. “The Labor Demand Curve Is Downward-Sloping: Re-
examining the Impact of Immigration on the Labor Market.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 118, no. 4 (November 2003b): 1335–1374.
References
73

Boshara, Ray, Reid Cramer, and Leslie Parrish. “Policy Options for
Achieving an Ownership Society for All Americans.” New America
Foundation, Asset Building Program, Issue Brief #8 (February 2005).
Burtless, Gary. “Has Widening Inequality Promoted or Retarded U.S.
Growth?” Canadian Public Policy 29 (January 2003 supplement): 185–202.
Carnevale, Anthony, and Stephen J. Rose. “Socioeconomic Status, Race/
Ethnicity, and Selective College Admissions,” in Richard D. Kahlenberg,
ed., America’s Untapped Resource: Low-Income Students in Higher Education.
New York: The Century Foundation Press, 2004.
Child Trends. “Carolina Abecedarian Program.” Online information
sheet (2007). Accessed at http://www.childtrends.org.
Citizens for Tax Justice. “Who Paid the Federal Estate Tax in 2005?” Jan-
uary 10, 2007. Accessed at http://www.ctj.org.
Corcoran, Sean, et al. “The Changing Distribution of Education Finance,
1972 to 1997,” in Neckerman 2004: 433–465.
Crane, Jonathan, ed. Social Programs That Work. New York: Russell Sage
Foundation, 1998.
Currie, Janet. “Early Childhood Education Programs.” Journal of Eco-
nomic Perspectives 15, no. 2 (Spring 2001): 213–238.
Danziger, Sheldon, and Peter Gottschalk. Diverging Fortunes: Trends in
Poverty and Inequality. New York: Russell Sage Foundation, and Wash-
ington, DC: Population Reference Bureau, 2004.
Draut, Tamara. “The Growing College Gap,” in James Lardner and
David A. Smith, eds., Inequality Matters: The Growing Economic Divide in
America and Its Poisonous Consequences. New York: The New Press, 2005:
89–101.
Drawbaugh, Kevin. “House Approves ‘Say on Pay’ for Shareholders.”
April 20, 2007. Accessed at http://www.earthtimes.org.
Edwards, Chris. “Repealing the Federal Estate Tax.” Tax & Budget Bul-
letin 36 (June 2006). Washington, DC: Cato Institute.
Frank, Robert H., and Philip J. Cook. The Winner-Take-All Society: Why the
Few at the Top Get So Much More Than the Rest of Us. New York: The Free
Press, 1995.
Freeman, Richard. “Solving the New Inequality.” Boston Review 21, no. 6
(December 1996–January 1997): 3–10.
Friedman, Milton. Capitalism and Freedom. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1962.
Gates, William H., Sr., and Chuck Collins. Wealth and Our Commonwealth:
Why America Should Tax Accumulated Fortunes. Boston: Beacon Press,
2003.
74
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Gertner, Jon. “What Is a Living Wage?” The New York Times Magazine
(January 15, 2006): 38–45, 68, 72.
Gilbert, Geoffrey. World Poverty: A Reference Handbook. Santa Barbara,
CA: ABC-CLIO, 2004.
Goldin, Claudia, and Lawrence F. Katz. “Decreasing (and Then Increas-
ing) Inequality in America: A Tale of Two Half-Centuries,” in Finis
Welch, ed., The Causes and Consequences of Increasing Inequality. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 2001: 37–82.
Graetz, Michael J., and Ian Shapiro. Death by a Thousand Cuts: The Fight
over Taxing Inherited Wealth. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press,
2005.
Hart, Katherine, and Rachel Schumacher. “Making the Case: Improving
Head Start Teacher Qualifications Requires Increased Investment.” Center
for Law and Social Policy, Policy Paper 1 (July 2005), Head Start Series.
Haveman, Robert, and Timothy Smeeding. “The Role of Higher Educa-
tion in Social Mobility.” The Future of Children 16, no. 2 (Fall 2006):
125–150.
Heckman, James J. “Catch ‘em Young.” The Wall Street Journal (January
10, 2006): A14.
Heckman, James J., and Alan B. Krueger. Inequality in America: What Role
for Human Capital Policies? Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2003.
Hodgkinson, Mark. “Sharapova Looks Unbeatable in the Money
Stakes.” Telegraph.co.uk (August 17, 2006).
Howell, David R. “Do Surges in Less-Skilled Immigration Have Impor-
tant Wage Effects?” in Border Battles: The U.S. Immigration Debates. Social
Science Research Council Report. March 8, 2007. Accessed at http://
borderbattles.ssrc.org.
Kahlenberg, Richard D. “Economic Affirmative Action in College Ad-
missions.” Century Foundation Issue Brief (April 2, 2003). Accessed at
http://www.tcf.org.
Kahlenberg, Richard D. “A New Way on School Integration: An Update.”
Century Foundation Issue Brief (November 27, 2006). Accessed at http://
www.tcf.org.
Kozol, Jonathan. Savage Inequalities: Children in America’s Schools. New
York: Crown Publishers, 1991.
Krugman, Paul. “Divided over Trade.” The New York Times (May 14,
2007): A19.
Larcker, David, et al. “Back Door Links between Directors and Executive
Compensation.” Knowledge@Wharton (February 26, 2005). Accessed at
http://knowledge.wharton.upenn.edu.
References
75

Lee, David S. “Wage Inequality in the United States during the 1980s:
Rising Dispersion or Falling Minimum Wage?” Quarterly Journal of Eco-
nomics 114, no. 3 (August 1999): 977–1023.
Levy, Frank, and Richard J. Murnane. The New Division of Labor: How
Computers Are Creating the Next Job Market. New York: Russell Sage Foun-
dation, and Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 2004.
Living Wage Resource Center. “City and County Campaigns.” (May
2006). Accessed at http://www.livingwagecampaign.org.
Marshall, Alfred. Principles of Economics. 9th ed. New York: Macmillan,
1961 [1890].
Martin, Philip, and Elizabeth Midgley. “Immigration: Shaping and Re-
shaping America,” rev. 2nd ed. Population Bulletin 61, no. 4 (December
2006).
Mill, John Stuart. Principles of Political Economy. New York: A. M. Kelley,
in Reprints of Economic Classics series, 1999 [1848].
Mishel, Lawrence, Jared Bernstein, and Sylvia Allegretto. The State of
Working America 2006/2007. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2007.
Moffitt, Robert A. “The Negative Income Tax and the Evolution of U.S.
Welfare Policy.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 17, no. 3 (Summer 2003):
119–140.
Neckerman, Kathryn M., ed. Social Inequality. New York: Russell Sage
Foundation, 2004.
Paul, Annie Murphy. “The Real Marriage Penalty.” The New York Times
(November 19, 2006): L22.
Pollin, Robert, and Stephanie Luce. The Living Wage: Building a Fair Econ-
omy. Rev. ed. New York: The New Press, 2000.
Reich, Robert. The Work of Nations: Preparing Ourselves for 21st-Century
Capitalism. New York: A. A. Knopf, 1991.
Rouse, Cecilia Elena, and Lisa Barrow. “U.S. Elementary and Secondary
Schools: Equalizing Opportunity or Replicating the Status Quo?” The
Future of Children 16, no. 2 (Fall 2006): 99–123.
Schiller, Bradley. The Economics of Poverty and Discrimination, 9th ed.
Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Prentice Hall, 2003.
Schweinhart, Lawrence J., et al. Lifetime Effects: The High/Scope Perry
Preschool Project through Age 40. Ypsilanti, MI: High/Scope Press, 2005.
Sherraden, Michael. Assets and the Poor: A New American Welfare Policy.
Armonk, NY: M.E. Sharpe, Inc., 1991.
Tax Policy Center. “Historical Top Tax Rate.” (2007). Accessed at http://
www.taxpolicycenter.org.
76
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

U.S. Census Bureau. “Income, Poverty, and Health Insurance Coverage
in the United States: 2005.” Current Population Reports: Consumer Income
(P60–231), August 2006. Accessed at http://www.census.gov.
U.S. Congress. Public Law 107–110: “No Child Left Behind Act of 2001.”
January 8, 2002.
U.S. Department of Labor. “Union Members in 2006.” Washington, DC:
Bureau of Labor Statistics news release (January 25, 2007). Accessed at
http://www.bls.gov.
Wolff, Edward N. Top Heavy: The Increasing Inequality of Wealth in Amer-
ica and What Can Be Done about It. New York: The New Press, 2002.
References
77


3
Worldwide Perspective
T
he widening gap between rich and poor seen in the United
States in recent decades prompts a number of larger ques-
tions: Is economic divergence a trend peculiar to the United
States, or is it part of a global pattern? Is the economic growth of
the world’s richer countries moving them ahead at a pace that
leaves the poorer countries farther and farther behind? And on
the related issue of mobility, does the United States lead the
world—as Americans like to think it does—in the opportunity it
offers its poor to rise to a higher rung on the economic ladder?
These are a few of the important questions addressed in this
chapter. The premise on which we proceed is that American
trends are better understood when placed in a worldwide con-
text. The forces driving U.S. inequality, after all, can hardly be
unique to this country; in greater or smaller measure, they are
undoubtedly being felt in many other parts of the world.
A World of Contrasts
Not unlike the gulf that separates low-income from high-income
Americans, an economic, demographic, and educational gulf
separates the world’s poorest nations from its richest. Reams of
statistics pour forth from the United Nations every year that en-
able us to document the dimensions along which global inequal-
ity is defined. In 2005, for example, the per capita incomes of 19
East African countries averaged $1,090, while the comparable fig-
ure for northern and western European countries was 28 times
higher, and for the United States, 38 times higher (PRB, 2006).
79

One of the standard measures of absolute poverty employed by
international agencies is the percentage of a country’s population
living on less than $2 per day. For the world’s richest nations, that
statistic is too small even to be reported, but elsewhere the pic-
ture is far different. In Asia, four of every five residents of India
and Bangladesh, and three of every four Pakistanis—a total of 1.1
billion people on the subcontinent—subsist on less than $2 a day.
In South America, two of every five Bolivians and Ecuadorians
live on less than $2 a day. On the continent of Africa, home to
more than 900 million people, fully two-thirds of the population
fail to meet the $2 a day standard (PRB 2006).
Money is not the only gauge of cross-national differences in
well-being, nor is it necessarily the most meaningful one. For
confirmation of the enormous gap dividing the world’s richest
nations from its poorest, we can look to several alternative in-
dices of material well-being: infant mortality rates, births at-
tended by skilled health personnel, tuberculosis (TB) cases per
100,000 people, and the percentage of the population with access
to clean water and sanitation. Worldwide infant mortality rates
vary from around 4 per thousand in Western Europe to 102 per
thousand in Western Africa. The West African nation of Sierra
Leone has the world’s highest rate, 163, which gives a newborn
there a one-in-six chance of dying before her first birthday (PRB
2006). Virtually all births in Western Europe, North America, and
Japan are attended by skilled health personnel. Such attendance
falls to levels as low as 24 percent in Haiti, 16 percent in Niger,
and 6 percent in Ethiopia (UNDP 2005, 236–239). The national in-
cidence of tuberculosis correlates imperfectly but fairly strongly
with economic status: rich nations like Norway, Australia,
Canada, and the United States have rates in the single digits per
100,000 people, while poor nations in Asia and Africa can have
rates 100 times higher. Cambodia and Congo, for example, have
TB rates of 742 and 489 per 100,000, respectively (UNDP 2005,
246–249). Access to clean water and improved sanitation can
spare adults and especially infants from deadly encounters with
diarrhea, cholera, and other water-borne diseases. In the wealthy
countries, access to improved sanitation and safe water supplies
is universal. Among the poorer countries, such access is much
more limited. Angola is not atypical, with only 50 percent of its
population having access to an “improved water source” and 30
percent having access to “improved sanitation” (UNDP 2005,
240–243).
80
Worldwide Perspective

It does not minimize in any way the hardships of poor
Americans to suggest that their material deprivations are of a dif-
ferent order of magnitude from what the poorest people on the
planet experience. At the lower end of the U.S. wealth and in-
come distribution, one finds economic insecurity, substandard
housing, limited access to health care, and other manifestations
of poverty that trouble the national conscience. At the lower end
of the world distribution of wealth, one encounters life-threaten-
ing malnutrition, AIDS, malaria, tuberculosis, and life expectan-
cies that are decades shorter than what is seen in Europe and
North America. It is worth noting that the Millennium Develop-
ment Goals adopted by the United Nations in 2000 do not call ex-
plicitly for reductions in wealth inequality either within or across
nations. They do, however, call for the eradication of “extreme
poverty and hunger,” including a 50 percent reduction, by the
year 2015, in the proportion of the world’s population living on
less than $1 a day (Gilbert 2004, 153). The United States, home to
millions who are defined as poor by our government’s standard,
is expected to be a funding source for international poverty-re-
duction efforts, not a target of such efforts.
National Rates of Income Inequality
Economists have developed many statistical measures of income
inequality. The most widely employed is the Gini coefficient or
index. As noted in chapter 1, this coefficient can take on values
anywhere from zero, indicating complete equality, to 100, indi-
cating complete inequality. In the real world, the lowest Gini
value seen in recent years has been 25. Five nations can claim that
lofty degree of income equality: Belgium, the Czech Republic,
Denmark, Japan, and Sweden. It is worth noting that all five are
wealthy, industrialized countries. At the other extreme, one finds
the world’s highest Gini coefficients, and thus the widest gaps
between rich and poor, in sub-Saharan Africa, with Namibia at 71
and Botswana, Lesotho, and Sierra Leone all at 63.
In its annual Human Development Report, the United Nations
supplements the Gini index for each country with two ratio mea-
sures of inequality. One is the ratio of the income received by the
richest 10 percent of a country’s population to the income re-
ceived by the poorest 10 percent; the other is the ratio of the top to
the bottom 20 percent. Let us consider just the first ratio. The five
National Rates of Income Inequality
81

countries rated most equal in the world according to the Gini
index have top-to-bottom 10 percent ratios between 4.5 (Japan)
and 8.1 (Denmark). Indeed, the majority of the 57 nations judged
to have “high human development” by the United Nations have
ratios under 10. At the other end of the spectrum, the four nations
with the highest Gini indices and thus the worst inequality in the
world—Namibia, Botswana, Lesotho, and Sierra Leone—also
have among the highest ratios of top-to-bottom 10 percent income
shares. These ratios range from 77.6 (Botswana) to 129 (Namibia).
It is difficult to fathom how, in one of the world’s poorest coun-
tries, the richest tenth of the population can command more than
100 times the income of the poorest tenth (UNDP 2005, 270–273).
There is no comprehensive theory to explain the wide varia-
tions of income inequality found across the globe. Politics, his-
tory, economic development, culture—all of these surely play a
role, as do other factors. Even geography can be telling: the
world’s most unequal nations, as it happens, are found mainly in
Latin America and sub-Saharan Africa (UNDP 2005, 270–273).
That is among the few generalizations that can be made on this
issue. One other is the following: countries judged to exhibit high
“human development” by the United Nations tend to have more
equal distributions of income than countries judged to exhibit
only medium or low human development. The human develop-
ment index (HDI) is a composite index of national well-being
that incorporates measures of education effort, adult literacy, life
expectancy, and per capita income. Income distribution is not ex-
plicitly factored into the HDI, yet the HDI seems to correlate
fairly well with income distribution. Each of the top 20 high
human development countries but one (the United States) has a
Gini below 40, and three-quarters of the lowest-ranked countries
in the “low human development” category have Gini coefficients
above 40. Social and economic development appears to push na-
tions, although not uniformly, toward income equality (UNDP
2005, 214–217, 270–273).
The placement of the United States in the global inequality
rankings is anomalous. Its Gini coefficient of 41 puts it solidly in
the middle third of worldwide Gini values reported by the United
Nations. The nations with Gini values identical, or very close, to
that of the United States are Turkmenistan, Ghana, Cambodia,
Guinea, and Trinidad/Tobago. The Western industrialized na-
tions to which the United States more routinely compares itself all
have lower Gini coefficients, that is, greater income equality than
82
Worldwide Perspective

the nation whose Declaration of Independence stated that “all
men are created equal.” The ratio of the top 10 percent to the bot-
tom 10 percent of income received in the United States is 15.9, in-
dicating a degree of income inequality significantly higher than is
found among most other wealthy nations. It has sometimes been
remarked that the world’s English-speaking countries, for various
historical and cultural reasons, tolerate more inequality than other
advanced, industrialized countries. Even in the company of other
Anglophone countries, however, the United States stands out
with a higher Gini index, a higher 10 percent ratio, and a higher
20 percent ratio than what is found in the United Kingdom,
Canada, Australia, or New Zealand (UNDP 2005, 270–273).
Income Inequality in 
Latin America and Africa
As skewed as wealth and incomes are in the United States, they
are much more skewed in some other parts of the world. It has
been noted above that the countries of Latin America and sub-
Saharan Africa have some of the widest income disparities in the
world. Why this should be so is not a question that lends itself to
easy answers, but experts offer several conjectures worth exam-
ining. We begin with Latin America.
The six most populous countries in Latin America—Brazil,
Mexico, Colombia, Argentina, Peru, and Venezuela—all have
Gini coefficients that put them in the top (most unequal) one-
quarter of the 124 countries for which the United Nations pre-
sents such data. Brazil ranks eighth in the world for income
inequality, and Colombia and Chile are close behind. Even Latin
America’s least unequal country, Uruguay, has a Gini value (45)
that is worse than that of the United States (41). Latin American
inequality is stark, pervasive, and deeply rooted in its colonial
past. When Spanish colonizers first came to the continent in the
15th and 16th centuries, their efforts at wealth-extraction cen-
tered on mining in Peru, Mexico, and Colombia. Indigenous In-
dios who survived contact with the diseases brought in by the
Europeans were forced into the mines. Later, in other parts of
South America, both Spain and Portugal found that higher re-
turns could be achieved in their colonies through plantation agri-
culture, especially the growth and export of sugar. Slaves
Income Inequality in Latin America and Africa
83

imported from Africa supplemented native populations in the
workforce. Thus a legacy of extreme inequality developed be-
tween European-descended elites on the one hand and Afro-de-
scended and indigenous people on the other, a legacy that
survived the revolutions that liberated one nation after another
from colonial rule in the early 19th century (UNDP 2005, 270–271;
Perry et al. 2003, ch. 4).
The highly unequal distribution of income in Latin America
mirrors a severely unequal distribution of resources (landowning
inequalities are notorious) that favors the European-descended
elites. Those elites also benefit from better access to water, health
care, electricity, and education, public services that contribute di-
rectly to one’s capacity to advance in society. Public funding for
elementary education has traditionally been stinted in Latin
America, while state funding for the universities to which only
the elites send their children has been generous. Structures of
privilege like these have embedded inequality so deeply that one
does not expect to see significant changes in the near future. On
a continent where the top 10 percent of the population receives 30
times the income of the bottom 10 percent, however, the future
may instead hold considerable political turmoil. That appears all
the more possible when one finds that over 80 percent of respon-
dents in every Latin American country surveyed except one
(Venezuela) judged the income distribution in their country to be
either unfair or very unfair (Perry et al. 2003, Table A.9).
The poor quality of economic data for Africa limits what we
can say with any certainty about the reasons for high inequality
there, but several factors are often cited. First, Africa is a continent
without a middle class: its national populations are comprised of
small elites and large majorities of very poor people. The poorest
Africans survive on less than $1 a day, mainly in rural areas where
their small plots of land yield minimal subsistence crops. The rich-
est Africans live in urban centers and have incomes based on trade,
banking, government employment, and the like. Second, there are
powerful structures of privilege in Africa, as in Latin America, that
reinforce the high incomes of the elites. As in Latin America, the
provision of public services is tilted toward the elites. Those at 
the top are also the beneficiaries of levels of corruption that can
only be described as massive. Protectionist trade policies also
work to the benefit of indigenous capitalist elites and to the detri-
ment of impoverished consumers. Finally, nearly everyone agrees
that ethnic fragmentation in Africa is a factor in the dominant 
84
Worldwide Perspective

positions of some groups and the marginalization of others. While
the roots of African inequality are complex, the path to greater eco-
nomic equality is as simple to specify as it is difficult to achieve. It
requires above all a shift to higher rates of economic growth, and
that can probably only come from a stronger engagement with the
global economy.
Poverty in the Rich Countries
When we consider how people at the lower end of the income
scale live their lives on opposite sides of the world, we have to
admit that differences of culture and economic development may
be so substantial as to make meaningful comparisons nearly im-
possible. How similar can the lives of the poor in Canada be to the
lives of the poor in Cambodia or Cameroon? Feelings of power-
lessness, insecurity, demoralization, and alienation may well be
common to the poor of every continent, but material standards of
living differ markedly, as do national methods of measuring
poverty. To gain a meaningful perspective on U.S. poverty, there-
fore, it makes sense to restrict our comparisons to countries of sim-
ilar economic standing. That is the approach Timothy Smeeding
takes in a study published in the Journal of Economic Perspectives
(Smeeding 2006). A well-known authority on the measurement of
poverty internationally, Smeeding is a founder and former director
of the Luxembourg Income Study (LIS), a nonpartisan research
project that tries to harmonize the data gathered periodically from
households in about 30 countries, mainly in Europe.
Smeeding takes a comparative look at several dimensions of
poverty in the United States and 10 other wealthy nations. Three
of those nations are English-speaking (United Kingdom, Ireland,
Canada), two are Nordic (Sweden, Finland), four are in the heart
of Europe (Germany, Belgium, Austria, Netherlands), one is
southern European (Italy), and all are in the top tiers of interna-
tional league standings for social and economic development.
Smeeding finds poverty to be significantly more prevalent in the
United States than in most other rich countries. If the poverty line
is drawn at one-half the median income level of a country, and
the count of people below that line is divided by total population
to determine the poverty rate, then the United States ranks first
in poverty among all 11 countries, with a poverty rate of 17.0 per-
cent. (Finland has the least poverty, 5.4 percent.) The only other
Poverty in the Rich Countries
85

country with a poverty rate above 15 percent is Ireland, with 16.5
percent. When poverty rates for children are computed, the
United States again tops the list, with a rate of 18.8 percent, well
above the runner-up nation, Italy, with 15.4 percent (Smeeding
2006, 74).
Data from the LIS project make it possible, as Smeeding
shows, to compare the effectiveness of government spending in
each of the 11 countries in reducing poverty. This can be a useful
exercise for policymakers—and for voters and advocates who
want to educate themselves on the issue—as they think about the
adequacy of the antipoverty efforts their governments are mak-
ing. One begins by computing the poverty rate based on “market
income” alone, meaning income from all private sources, like
earnings, company pensions, investments, and child support, but
excluding any cash or cash-like benefits from the government.
On the basis of market incomes, about 23 percent of the U.S. pop-
ulation would fall below one-half the median income level and
thus be considered relatively “poor.” Surprisingly, based solely
on market incomes, most of the other rich countries would have
higher poverty rates than the United States. But other govern-
ments do much more than the U.S. government to modify mar-
ket incomes for low-income individuals and families. Income
enhancements can come in the form of social insurance or social
assistance. Social insurance refers to benefits that are not means-
tested, for example, Medicare, unemployment compensation,
and Social Security. Social assistance refers to benefits going only
to low-income individuals, such as welfare, Medicaid, and food
stamps (Smeeding 2006, 78–80).
When social insurance and social assistance are taken into
account, the U.S. poverty rate is reduced from 23.1 percent to 17.0
percent. This drop of 6.1 points represents little more than a one-
quarter reduction from the poverty rate based on market incomes
alone. No other rich country achieves so little poverty reduction
by its government’s efforts. In Canada and Ireland, government
benefits cut the poverty rate by about 45 percent; in the United
Kingdom and Italy, by about 60 percent; and in Austria, Belgium,
Germany, and Sweden, by over 70 percent. When we focus on
poverty reduction among families with children, the results are
similar. For families with two parents, the U.S. government’s ef-
forts shave the poverty rate by 3.6 percent—a negligible amount
compared to the 44.3 percent reduction achieved, on average, by
all 11 rich countries. And for families with one parent, the U.S.
86
Worldwide Perspective

poverty reduction through government efforts is 10 percent,
while the average for all the rich countries is 46.3 percent
(Smeeding 2006, 79–81). Americans, it would seem, tolerate more
poverty than people in rich societies elsewhere, and are content
to have their government do less about it.
National Trends in Income Inequality
The current levels of poverty and inequality for any country can
be thought of as the culminating end-points of past trends. Some-
times we can trace the historical roots of current patterns into the
distant past, as with Latin America. If we want to track specific
indicators of inequality over time, however, we face severe limi-
tations in trying to assemble the necessary data. Statistical trend
lines for inequality rarely can be extended more than a century
into the past, and only for certain European nations and their
colonial offshoots. For most countries, we have, at best, a mere 30
or 35 years of reliable data to work with. Still, a third of a century
is more than enough time to discern broad patterns, such as the
widening gap between rich and poor in the United States. That
particular trend is now beyond dispute, and it raises a larger
question: Is the trend toward higher levels of economic inequal-
ity unique to this country, or are similar trends to be seen in other
regions of the world?
Bernard Wasow, a senior fellow at the Century Foundation,
has studied the evidence on changing income patterns for 15 rich,
mainly European countries—though the United States and Japan
are included—over the quarter-century ending in 2005. His find-
ings are presented in Figure 3–1. For each country, Wasow plots
a point in the graph to indicate its Gini coefficient in 1980 and in
2005. 
The heavy diagonal line separates countries that have expe-
rienced a rise in inequality (higher Gini in 2005 than in 1980) from
those that have experienced a fall (lower Gini in 2005 than in
1980). With nine countries above the line, three below, and three
essentially on the line, the broad picture seems to be that within-
nation income inequality is trending upward. One should not,
however, overstate the case. Only the labeled countries had Gini
changes that were statistically significant, and those six countries
were split evenly between upward and downward changes. Fin-
land, the United Kingdom, and the United States became more
National Trends in Income Inequality
87

88
Worldwide Perspective
Inequality
increased
Inequality
decreased
USA
UK
50
45
40
35
30
25
20
Finland
Switzerland
Gini in 1980
Gini in 2005
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
France
Germany
FIGURE 3.1
Inequality in 1980 and 2005 in Various Rich Countries
Source: Bermard Wasow, The Century Foundation, http://www.tcf.org/list.asp?type=NC&pubid=1403.

unequal; Germany, France, and Switzerland became more equal.
Note that in both 1980 and 2005, the United States topped all the
other rich nations in income inequality (Wasow 2006).
Glenn Firebaugh, a professor of geography at Penn State, of-
fers a more detailed and geographically comprehensive account of
global trends in income inequality in The New Geography of Global
Income Inequality (2003). Firebaugh presents an ambitious theoreti-
cal and empirical analysis of worldwide income-distribution
trends that leads him to a pair of strong conclusions: first, income
inequality within six of seven regions of the world has been rising
in recent decades, and second, income inequality, when measured
across the entire global population, has been falling. The apparent
contradiction between these two conclusions is an intriguing issue
in itself and one to which we return later, but first it will be useful
to focus on the regional trends. Firebaugh works with data from
1980 to 1995, computing two indices of inequality, the Theil index
and the mean logarithmic deviation (MLD). These indices differ in
certain technical respects from the Gini coefficient but are easier to
compute from the income data that is most commonly available.
Firebaugh defines his seven regions as Western Europe, Western
offshoots, Southern Europe, Eastern Europe, Latin America, Asia,
and Africa. The Western offshoots include Canada, the United
States, Australia, and New Zealand. Even though the seven re-
gions have experienced great diversity in their economic growth
rates, every region except Africa saw income inequality rise be-
tween 1980 and 1995, with most of the increase occurring during
the 1980s (Firebaugh 2003, ch. 9).
It is startling to see income gaps widening with such consis-
tency across regions, but Firebaugh offers persuasive reasons for
accepting the picture he paints. At the general level, he argues
that structural changes related to economic development are the
key driver of inequality. Poorer countries and regions are starting
to industrialize, and this is something that historically has in-
volved a major redeployment of workers from low-productivity
(low-income) employments to higher-productivity (higher-
income) employments. As we saw in chapter 1, Simon Kuznets
theorized many years ago that this type of employment shift
tends to raise income inequality, although not permanently.
Meanwhile, in richer countries, Firebaugh believes that a trend
toward increased employment in the service sector also is widen-
ing the dispersion of incomes because service jobs vary so greatly
in their pay, from the low wages of fast-food preparers, daycare
National Trends in Income Inequality
89

workers, and hotel maids up the scale to the lofty salaries of doc-
tors, computer engineers, and financial analysts (Firebaugh 2003).
There are more specific reasons why inequality has increased
in some regions. Eastern Europe, which recorded a huge jump in
inequality between 1980 and 1995, made an epochal transition
from communism to a system of market economics during that pe-
riod. The resulting economic liberalization created big winners
and losers, stretching the income distribution at both ends. The
Asian region has grown more unequal simply because its two pop-
ulation giants, China and India, have been undergoing rapid in-
dustrialization, shifting millions of laborers toward higher-paying
jobs. The so-called Western offshoots region has experienced a rise
in income inequality because the richest and most populous mem-
ber of that region, the United States, has recorded a significant in-
crease in its inequality; Canada and Australia have also grown
more unequal. Whatever the particular reasons, economic in-
equality has been on the rise within nations and regions for some
time now, and this represents a reversal of the trend that much of
the world, including the United States, followed during the greater
part of the 20th century (Firebaugh 2003, ch. 9; Cornia and 
Kiiski 2001).
Income by Country: 
Divergence or Convergence?
Inequality trends within countries and inequality trends across
countries are two separate issues. Both merit attention. We saw in
the preceding section that within-country inequality is on the rise
all over the world, except, possibly, in Africa. This does not
imply, however, that average incomes among countries are
spreading farther and farther apart. Some observers claim that
such a trend is ongoing, with the rich nations getting richer and
the poor nations getting poorer. Globalization, they say, is the
main culprit. They contend that the breakdown of barriers to the
free flow of goods, information, technology, and investment
funds—globalization, in short—has enabled the more advanced,
industrialized countries to not only maintain but lengthen their
lead over the less developed ones, creating a degree of global in-
equality that, in their view, calls for urgent international action.
90
Worldwide Perspective

The debate over whether the economic fortunes of nations tend
to converge or diverge over time has engaged deep thinkers as
early as the 18th century (Firebaugh 2003, 173). Today, unlike
then, we have the kinds of data that allow us to advance the de-
bate beyond vague hunches and speculations.
Before industrialization, there was not much variation from
one country to another in the average standard of living. In a sense,
all countries were poor, at least on average. In the early 19th cen-
tury, therefore, we would expect the Gini coefficient for inequality
among nations to have had a relatively low value, meaning not
much difference between the per capita GDPs of the “better-off”
nations and the “worse-off” nations. Branko Milanovic, in his im-
portant study, Worlds Apart: Measuring International and Global In-
equality (2005), puts the worldwide Gini coefficient in 1820 at 19.6.
This figure is based on data for 26 countries encompassing 79 per-
cent of the world’s population, and gives each country equal
weight in the computation. If instead we follow a procedure fa-
vored by most experts and give each country a weight propor-
tioned to its population size, the Gini drops to a remarkably low
value of 12 (Milanovic 2005, 140–142).
From 1820 onward, however, national per capita incomes
took strongly divergent paths as industrialization and economic
growth boosted the incomes of Western nations while leaving the
others increasingly far behind. The period from 1820 to 1913,
dubbed the “first century of globalization” by Milanovic, saw
steady increases in both the Gini and Theil indices of inequality,
with the unweighted Gini coefficient rising from 19.6 in 1820 to
30.8 in 1890 and 36.4 in 1913. The population-weighted Gini in-
creased even more dramatically and for a longer time, from 12.0 in
1820 to 40.3 in 1929. It could truly be said that by the end of the
1920s, one’s standard of living depended quite significantly on
where in the world one was born, whereas a century earlier it
would not have made much difference. After their century-long
climb, between-country measures of inequality took a short pause
and then resumed their climb. But from here the story has two
endings. The unweighted Gini index reached its highest level ever,
54.3, in 2000. If one thinks it is appropriate to put exactly the same
weight on every nation in a global inequality measure—giving Ar-
menia’s 3 million people the same mathematical representation as
India’s 1.1 billion, for example—then the steady rise of the un-
weighted Gini presents a rather bleak picture of ever-increasing
Income by Country: Divergence or Convergence?
91

global inequality. By contrast, the population-weighted Gini
reached a peak value of 56.9 as far back as 1952, and thereafter sub-
sided gradually to 50.2 in 2000 (Milanovic 2005, 140–143).
Where does this leave us on the issue of convergence versus
divergence? Are the poorer countries of the world converging to-
ward the incomes of the richer countries, or are they continuing
a very long pattern of divergence? A partial answer comes from
looking at standard statistical measures of inequality. When the
Gini coefficient for between-country inequality rises, it implies
that the income gap between rich and poor countries is widen-
ing; when it falls, it implies the opposite. The data assembled by
Milanovic is quite comprehensive for 2000, based on 136 coun-
tries with 99 percent of the world’s population (Milanovic 2005,
142). If we cannot offer a definitive answer to the convergence
question, it is not for lack of data but for lack of universal agree-
ment on the proper measure of inequality (weighted or un-
weighted Gini coefficient). For a century and half before 1950,
national income levels grew farther apart. Since then, they have
either diverged further (unweighted index) or begun a gradual
convergence (weighted index). A split decision does not settle the
issue, but an entirely new approach just might, and to that we
now turn.
A New Concept of Global Inequality
We have considered two ways of measuring the divide between
the world’s rich and poor: within-country inequality and 
between-country inequality. Income gaps within many countries,
including the United States, have been growing for decades. In-
come dispersion across countries, although far greater today than
at the dawn of the industrial era, has begun to diminish during
the past half-century, according to one index (the population-
weighted Gini). So these two approaches give us mixed signals
on the inequality trend. There is a third approach to the issue of
global income inequality that has begun receiving attention in re-
cent years. It involves treating everyone in the world as a “world
citizen” rather than as a resident of any particular country. The
world is reconceived as a borderless community of 6.7 billion in-
dividuals. The idea is neatly conveyed in the title of Surjit
Bhalla’s 2002 book, which helped inaugurate this new approach:
Imagine There’s No Country: Poverty, Inequality, and Growth in the
92
Worldwide Perspective

Era of Globalization. What Bhalla and others aim to do is gauge the
extent of inequality across all of the world’s people, wherever
they may live, and to determine whether the global trend is to-
ward more equality or more inequality.
Before we consider the specific findings of this third ap-
proach, it is worth noting the policy relevance of the three ways of
thinking about inequality. Country-level inequality is an impor-
tant concern for those who design, analyze, and advocate for pol-
icy changes within nations, whether in the area of taxation,
income transfers, educational subsidies, or investment policies.
National inequality levels also matter to voters, who may give
support to, or withhold support from, candidates on the basis of
their positions regarding the current degree of inequality. Inter-
country levels of inequality are important to those whose con-
cerns extend beyond their own national borders to issues of
global equity. Often motivated by the plight of the world’s most
impoverished, these individuals have an interest in aid and trade
policies that will benefit the least-developed countries. It is less
clear who should take an interest, or feel they have a stake, in the
abstract, borderless distribution of income. Academics, of course,
have a professional interest in developing any new line of re-
search that can shed fresh light on old questions. Another group
taking an interest in the third approach to global income inequal-
ity consists of supporters of globalization; they have warmed to
this approach because it tends to produce statistical results to
their liking. We turn now to those results.
While several scholars (Bhalla 2002; Firebaugh 2003; Mi-
lanovic 2005) have depicted essentially the same trend for global
inequality, Xavier Sala-i-Martin’s 2006 article offers the most suc-
cinct and up-to-date presentation of the world distribution of in-
come (WDI). It has the added advantage of addressing both the
WDI issue and the related question of whether global poverty lev-
els have shrunk in recent decades. The author integrates data from
138 countries for the time period 1970–2000. Statistically, what he
does is tantamount to placing every household in the world on an
income line that stretches from extraordinarily low (subsistence-
level farmers in sub-Saharan Africa, perhaps) to nosebleed high
(billionaire owners of computer software companies, for exam-
ple), and then calculating how “spread out” those incomes are.
Every person in the world is weighted equally under this ap-
proach, which means developments in China and India have a
much larger impact on inequality measures than developments in
A New Concept of Global Inequality
93

Peru or Latvia. Sala-i-Martin computes eight different inequality
indices and finds a drop in global inequality by every index. The
largest drop between 1970 and 2000 is for the ratio of the top 20
percent of income-recipients in the world to the bottom 20 percent:
in 1970, that ratio was 10.3, and in 2000, it was only 8.2. The small-
est change of a computed index is the 2.4 percent drop in the Gini
coefficient (Sala-i-Martin 2006, 384).
A closer examination of Sala-i-Martin’s results reveals some
interesting details. It shows, in the first place, that none of the
eight inequality measures moved steadily downward over the
whole 30-year period, but most of the time the indices moved to-
gether, whether upward or downward. Second, it shows that the
1970s saw a slight increase in inequality, with real reductions of
global inequality not beginning until the 1980s. And finally, a
closer examination of the data shows the important role played
by individual countries and regions in determining the global re-
sults. The United States and Africa both caused a worsening of
global inequality from 1970 to 2000 in the following sense: U.S.
citizens, already at the top of the global income distribution in
1970, pulled even farther ahead of the rest of the world’s citizens
by 2000, stretching the upper end of the distribution. Africans, al-
ready low on the income scale in 1970, dropped even farther by
2000, stretching the distribution in a downward direction. Out-
weighing the divergent impact of both the United States and
Africa was the convergent impact of an economically dynamic
China. Rapid economic growth in the world’s most populous na-
tion raised many millions of impoverished peasants into the mid-
dle ranks of the global income distribution. Had this not
happened, the global Gini coefficient would have gone up rather
than down, marking an increase in world income inequality
(Sala-i-Martin 2006, 385–388).
Less Inequality, Less Poverty?
Which is the more urgent issue today, global inequality or global
poverty? For most people, the question is easily answered. The
term “poverty” suggests human misery in a way that “inequal-
ity” does not and thus appeals directly to our consciences. It
would seem churlish to put a higher priority on unequal incomes
than on inadequate incomes as a policy matter. Let the question be
rephrased: Would you rather see a reduction in absolute poverty
94
Worldwide Perspective

or a narrowing of the gap between the world’s rich and poor? Put
in this way, the question appears to require a choice, yet in real-
ity it does not. Both outcomes can be achieved simultaneously.
Not only is this theoretically possible, it is what the research of
Bhalla and Sala-i-Martin has shown to be the case in recent
decades. At the same time that the incomes of global citizens
have become more equally distributed, the fraction, and proba-
bly the actual number, of the world’s people living in absolute
poverty has declined, say these economists.
Sala-i-Martin’s estimates of poverty by world region, using a
$1.50 per day standard of poverty, display a wide range of results
for the period from 1970 to 2000. East Asia saw the number of peo-
ple in poverty fall by 88 percent; the Middle East and North
Africa, by 88 percent also; South Asia, by 84 percent; and Latin
America, by 25 percent. Eastern Europe recorded a mere 4 percent
reduction in the number of poor, and sub-Saharan Africa experi-
enced an increase of 217 percent. Regional variations aside, the
world as a whole saw the number of people in absolute poverty
drop from around 700 million to around 400 million during those
three decades, a remarkable 43 percent reduction. The same
scholar gives alternative estimates of poverty reduction based on
poverty lines of $2 per day and $3 per day, and they, too, show
sizeable drops in the numbers of global poor. The prime mover in
all of these glowing poverty-reduction results is China, where
economic growth in recent decades has been little short of phe-
nomenal (Sala-i-Martin 2006, 378).
In the fall of 2000, government delegates from around the
world gathered at the United Nations to commit their countries
to a set of so-called Millennium Development Goals (MDGs).
Eight major goals were defined, all to be achieved by 2015.
Greater income equality did not make the list of goals, although
gender equality did. Probably the most cited goal was the first on
the list: “eradicate extreme poverty and hunger.” A specific target
associated with this goal was to halve the proportion of the
world’s people living on less than $1 a day, with 1990 designated
as the reference year (Gilbert 2004, 153). Sala-i-Martin notes that
on the $1.50 per day standard, which he considers roughly equiv-
alent to the World Bank’s $1 per day standard, the world poverty
rate in 1990 was 10 percent. By 2000, when the delegates in New
York signed off on the MDGs, the poverty rate had already fallen
to 7 percent. This meant, in effect, that the world was already
three-fifths of the way to achieving its 2015 goal of a 5 percent
Less Inequality, Less Poverty?
95

global poverty rate. As Sala-i-Martin comments, “The world
might just be in better shape than many of our leaders believe!”
(Sala-i-Martin 2006, 374, 393)
Bhalla’s projections of world poverty rates for 2015 support
the optimism of his fellow economist. On a $2 per day poverty
standard—an even higher standard than Sala-i-Martin’s $1.50
per day—he projects a regional poverty rate for East Asia of zero
by 2015. For South Asia, which includes India, Pakistan, and
Bangladesh, he projects a drop in the poverty rate from 21.1 per-
cent in 2000 to 3.5 percent in 2015. Other regions show smaller
declines, but all should experience reductions in poverty, includ-
ing sub-Saharan Africa. Bhalla believes that his forecasts are, if
anything, on the conservative side, as they are based on eco-
nomic growth rates that will probably be exceeded in most
places. Both economists, therefore, see the globalization currently
under way in a benign light: the world is moving toward a con-
vergence of incomes while also enjoying a welcome reduction of
absolute poverty (Bhalla 2002, 170).
Economic Mobility: 
The United States in Global Perspective
We saw in an earlier section that the income inequality now seen
in the United States, as measured by the Gini coefficient, places it
in the company of Ghana, Cambodia, and other countries that are
not usually thought to bear much similarity to it. The wealthy in-
dustrialized nations that are similar to the United States have, in
general, far more equal distributions of income. Many Ameri-
cans, informed of this anomaly, would probably say that a high
degree of inequality—a wide gap between rich and poor—is sim-
ply the price their country must pay for being a true “land of op-
portunity,” where hard work, talent, and sheer grit are permitted
to reap their full reward. The exceptional faith that Americans
place in the value of hard work was confirmed by a 1999 survey,
which found 61 percent of Americans agreeing with the state-
ment that “people get rewarded for their effort” (Hertz 2006, 1).
Among 27 countries where the same survey was conducted,
there was no stronger endorsement of the work-gets-its-reward
statement, except in the Philippines. We also have survey evi-
dence, as noted in chapter 1, that Americans strongly (and in-
96
Worldwide Perspective

creasingly) endorse the notion that anyone can “start out poor,
work hard, and become rich.” It is clear, therefore, that Ameri-
cans prize the image of their country as a land of opportunity. But
is the real extent of opportunity and mobility so high, by inter-
national standards, as to justify the very considerable income in-
equality that now exists in the United States?
A common way for social scientists to gauge long-term
equality of opportunity is by seeing how one generation com-
pares economically with its predecessor. Specifically, one may
compare the wages earned by sons at a certain age with the wages
their fathers earned at the same age. Daughters can likewise be
matched up with their mothers. In a society of completely equal
opportunity, one would find no correlation at all between the eco-
nomic status of parents and that of their children. The offspring of
poor fathers or mothers would be spread across the income dis-
tribution in a totally random fashion, with only 20 percent land-
ing in the lowest quintile. The data needed to test for such an
outcome are not easily obtained, however; only a couple dozen
countries, mainly in Europe but including the United States, have
good long-term mobility data. One study of intergenerational mo-
bility in five European countries and the United States looked at
the probability of sons and daughters ending up in the lowest in-
come quintile, given that their fathers had been in the lowest
quintile. Denmark proved to have the highest mobility, with 23.5
percent of daughters and 24.7 percent of sons of poor fathers end-
ing up in the lowest quintile. The other European nations had
somewhat lower mobility than Denmark, particularly the United
Kingdom, with 30.3 percent of sons ending up in the lowest quin-
tile. But the United States stood apart, with over 42 percent of sons
in the lowest one-fifth of incomes. American daughters also had
higher odds than their European counterparts of being in the
poorest quintile, given a mother who had been in that quintile
(Mishel, Bernstein, and Allegretto 2006, 100).
Another way that experts have quantified the ability of the
younger generation to raise itself to a higher economic status is by
estimating the intergenerational elasticity of earnings (IEE). This
awkward-sounding term refers to the predictability of sons’ (or
daughters’) wages based on their fathers’ wages. The IEE can have
a value between zero, meaning no correlation at all, and 1, mean-
ing a 100 percent correlation between what the child earns and
what his or her father earned. Put very simply, if a country has a
low IEE, it means that sons have good prospects of out-earning
Economic Mobility: The United States in Global Perspective
97

their fathers; a higher IEE would mean that sons have worse
prospects of out-earning their fathers. In a 2004 review of father-
son earnings profiles in nine countries, the highest IEE values were
found for the United Kingdom (0.50) and the United States (0.47),
suggesting that poor sons faced the worst odds of bettering their
condition in those two countries. Much lower IEE values were
found in the other countries studied, including Denmark (0.15),
Norway (0.17), Finland (0.18), and Canada (0.19), where fathers’
wages were not especially predictive of their sons’ wages (Hertz
2006, 2).
From the most recent evidence, therefore, it appears that long-
term upward mobility is a more realistic prospect in the Nordic
countries—Canada, Germany, and France—than in the United
States—hardly what most Americans would want to believe about
their land of opportunity. This evidence throws into doubt the fa-
miliar argument that a wide U.S. gap between rich and poor—
wider than is seen elsewhere in the industrialized world—is just
the price we pay for being such a fluid society. It now looks as if
the United States is more unequal and, very possibly, more rigid in its
income structure than most other high-income nations.
Top U.S. Incomes in 
Worldwide Perspective
As noted in chapters 1 and 2, the share of national income going
to America’s wealthiest families has been on the rise for at least
three decades. This is a highly visible aspect of the growing in-
come inequality in the United States. It is also a trend that has yet
to show any sign of weakening. But does it set the United States
apart from other countries? Is something really exceptional hap-
pening in the nation, or would we find, if we took a wider per-
spective that included countries similar to the United States, the
same extraordinary redirection of income toward the very top?
Economists Thomas Piketty and Emmanuel Saez provide some
preliminary answers in a 2006 article on top incomes in the United
States and a handful of other countries. What they find, in a nut-
shell, is that some countries are experiencing the same strong flow
of income toward the top as the United States, while others show
no such tendency (Piketty and Saez 2006, 204–206). The details are
well worth examining.
98
Worldwide Perspective

An intriguing part of the story that Piketty and Saez tell is the
stark divergence between the English-speaking countries and
some non-English-speaking countries with regard to super-high
incomes. If we focus on the former group, we see a sharply rising
share of total income going to the top one-thousandth of income re-
cipients (top 0.1 percent) from the late 1970s to the late 1990s. The
rise is most pronounced in the United States but unmistakable in
the United Kingdom and Canada as well. France and Japan, how-
ever, follow a completely different path: in those two countries, the
share of income going to the top one-thousandth of the population
has been essentially flat since the end of World War II. There is just
as sharp a contrast between the English- and non-English-speaking
countries with regard to the actual share of national income going
to the top one-thousandth. In both Japan and France, the share has
held steady at roughly 2 percent for over half a century—notable
constancy in a basic social parameter when so much else was
changing in both the Japanese and French economies. In Canada,
on the other hand, the fraction of national income received by the
top 0.1 percent has grown in recent decades to over 3 percent. In
the United Kingdom, it has risen to over 5 percent; in the United
States, to over 7 percent (Piketty and Saez 2006, 203).
It may strike some that a 2 percent, 3 percent, or even 7 per-
cent share of national income is too small to merit concern or dis-
cussion. Bear in mind, however, that these are fractions of total
national income going to a mere sliver (one-thousandth) of the
population. To put this in perspective, if income flowed to the top
5 percent of the French population at the same proportional rate
that it flows to the top 0.1 percent, there would be no income left
for the bottom 95 percent. In the United States, income concen-
tration is even more drastic: if income accrued to other top in-
come recipients at the same rate that it now accrues to the top 0.1
percent, there would be no income left to support the lowest 98.5
percent of the population. This degree of income concentration at
the top has not been seen in the United States since the end of the
1920s, nor in Canada and the United Kingdom for over half a
century (Piketty and Saez 2006, 203).
CEO Pay and Income Inequality
The substantial difference among countries in both the shares
and trends of income going to the very richest percentiles begs
CEO Pay and Income Inequality
99

for an explanation. As yet, no one has come forward to do the ex-
plaining, but when that happens, the issue of compensation prac-
tices in various countries will surely be a decisive factor. Why?
Because top-end incomes in most industrialized societies today
are based more on earnings than on interest, dividends, or rents
on property holdings. This is a huge change from a century ago.
Top incomes at that time were obtained mainly from capital ac-
cumulations, typically in the form of stocks and bonds. But those
“piles” of capital were heavily eroded by stock market melt-
downs, the Great Depression, and steeply progressive wartime
and postwar tax rates. Today’s highest incomes, therefore, rarely
come from “coupon-clipping”; more often they have to do with
executive compensation packages. Executives at the world’s
biggest corporations have come to be paid handsomely for their
services, and significantly better in some countries than others
(Piketty and Saez 2006, 204).
The United States rewards its CEOs more generously than
any other country, and by a wide margin. In 2005, the average
compensation to U.S. chief executives was around $2.2 million.
(There are, in any given year, some well-publicized individuals
who receive $100 million or more, but those numbers are far
above the average.) For the world’s second-highest-paid CEOs,
in Switzerland, average pay was about $1.4 million. Chief exec-
utives in France earned $1.2 million; in the United Kingdom and
Germany, somewhat less than $1.2 million; and in Italy and
Canada, about $1.1 million. Japanese CEOs, in contrast to their
Western European and North American counterparts, make
only about half a million dollars annually. From an income-
distributional point of view, it is useful to see how CEO pay com-
pares to the average pay of manufacturing workers. (The figures
that follow are based on different income definitions and data
sources than those cited in chapter 1, which accounts for their
much lower levels.) In the United States, the CEO-to-average-
worker pay ratio in 2005 was 39, and in the United Kingdom it
was 32. Among the 14 countries considered, the median pay ratio
was just under 20, or about half what is seen in the United States,
and in Japan it fell below 11 (Mishel, Bernstein, and Allegretto
2007, 203–204).
If national differences in top incomes at present are the result
of—or even heavily influenced by—CEO pay differences, the
next question has to be how to account for those CEO pay differ-
entials. Standard economic theory relates pay levels to individual
100
Worldwide Perspective

productivity, implying that if American CEOs are paid much
more than their counterparts in other countries, that is simply be-
cause they create more value for their employers and stockhold-
ers. It is a flattering explanation, to be sure, and one that would
seem to reflect great credit on Wharton, Tuck, and other presti-
gious American business schools, but is it the right one? Much
has been written about the non-transparency of CEO pay rates in
the U.S. and the fact that they are set by compensation commit-
tees packed, as often as not, by friends and close associates of the
top executive. High pay under these circumstances may reflect
something other than a sterling job performance. Another line of
analysis focuses on the grand scale of American enterprises (at
least among the top 500 or 1,000) compared to those in other
countries. Thus, a talented executive at a Dutch company may re-
ceive a modest compensation while an American executive of ex-
actly the same talent may receive a proverbial king’s ransom
simply because the latter makes decisions on a bigger stage, with
larger monetary consequences (Cowen 2006). Beyond issues of
corporate scale and individual productivity, it may also be the
case that in some societies—Japan, for example—there are well-
established social norms that prevent companies from paying
their CEOs at levels that greatly exceed what is considered
seemly or customary. Keeping executive pay at a familiar multi-
ple of average worker pay could be considered a requirement of
the social contract in a number of European societies.
Wealth Taxes: A (So Far) Non-American
Response to Wealth Inequality
The overwhelming weight of evidence now points to a disper-
sion of incomes, in the United States and many other countries,
beyond what has been seen for at least a half-century. Trend lines
suggest no slackening of the tendency of high incomes to pull
away from middle- and lower-level incomes. It would seem rea-
sonable, then, to give some consideration to policies that might
be adopted in order to avoid what could become a destabilizing
and politically unacceptable state of affairs. The range of policy
options in any given society, including the United States, will al-
ways be a function of the historical, social, political, and cultural
characteristics of that society, and an interesting case in point is
Wealth Taxes
101

the wealth tax. Americans historically have shown little appetite
for a direct tax levied on an individual’s or family’s total wealth
accumulation. (The only exceptions have been state and federal
estate taxes.) Opponents call them “death taxes,” and under the
presidency of George W. Bush, the latter have been attacked and
scheduled for eventual elimination.
In Europe, on the other hand, wealth taxes are relatively
common. Switzerland, Germany, Sweden, Denmark, France, and
the Netherlands are among the European nations where people
are taxed annually on their wealth (although this is not the only
tax they pay). The arguments in favor of a wealth tax are based
on both equity and efficiency considerations. The fairness argu-
ment starts from the premise that people’s tax liabilities should
be based, to a great extent, on their ability to pay. Since ability to
pay depends on both income and wealth, an income tax alone,
even if it is progressive, fails the fairness test. It taxes individuals
with equal incomes equally even if one has 50 times the wealth
of the other. A fairer tax system would tax both income and
wealth. On the efficiency side, a persuasive argument can be
made that taxes levied on wealth will induce people to put their
assets into more productive uses. For example, a wealth tax may
encourage owners of low-yielding bonds to switch to higher-
yielding bonds, and owners of idle land to convert their property
to more productive, income-generating uses (Wolff 1996).
Edward N. Wolff, the preeminent American expert on wealth
distribution, has studied the operations of European wealth taxes,
particularly in Germany, Switzerland, and Sweden, and has con-
sidered how the adoption of similar taxes would impact the
United States. In results reported in 2000, he found that a “very
modest tax” on wealth, which included a $100,000 exemption and
marginal tax rates ranging from 0.05 percent upward to 0.3 per-
cent, would raise $50 billion of revenue for the federal govern-
ment. On the plus side, these funds could be used to support a
family allowance plan—the type of program many European gov-
ernments use to help families with children—and other kinds of
social transfers to benefit the poor and lower middle class. On the
minus side, there would be a slight disincentive effect on savings,
at least in theory. Wolff, however, has found “no deleterious ef-
fects” on either savings or economic growth from the modest
wealth taxes that European countries have imposed, and he
doubts that any such effects would be felt in the United States
(Wolff 2000, 62–63).
102
Worldwide Perspective

A Caution on Wealth Taxes
Public policymaking becomes exceedingly difficult when new
constraints and new policy goals are added to existing ones. Such
is the prospect facing the industrialized world in the coming
decades. Its population will be aging rapidly, and the resulting
burden on fiscal systems will be tremendous. In Europe and
Japan, especially, the costs of supporting a retired, elderly popu-
lation will weigh upon labor forces that are either stagnating or
shrinking in size. The financial resources of the state will be
strained to the breaking point. To a lesser degree, the same pres-
sures will be felt in the United States, with 78 million baby
boomers set to begin retiring in 2011, and for that reason as much
as out of any desire to narrow the growing gap between rich and
poor, the U.S. political leadership may be forced to consider a
wealth tax. Many dismiss that prospect as a fantasy: surely
Americans would bridle at the idea of a direct tax on wealth. Yet
most Americans already face local taxes on the value of their real
estate, and that is a wealth tax. Also, estate (inheritance) taxes
have been broadly accepted by the U.S. public until quite re-
cently, and polls indicate continued acceptance by a majority of
the population. Income taxes were once considered as unthink-
able as a national wealth tax—until Congress passed the Six-
teenth Amendment to the Constitution in 1909 and the states
ratified it four years later (Alperovitz 2004, 23).
When tax revenues are no longer adequate to fund current
outlays in the Social Security program (2017) or Medicare (2018),
therefore, the U.S. government will have no way to avoid cutting
entitlement benefits except by raising taxes, finding new taxes, or
increasing its borrowing. Gar Alperovitz, a political economist at
the University of Maryland, expects the coming fiscal crisis to be
so severe that instituting a federal wealth tax will prove all but in-
evitable (Alperovitz 2004, 22–23). If he is right and a progressive
wealth tax is adopted, it is highly unlikely that it will be justified
to the electorate on any other grounds than fiscal necessity. A more
balanced distribution of wealth may come to be seen as a positive
side effect of the tax, but it is unlikely to be presented as the pri-
mary justification. Who, after all, can imagine an American presi-
dent in the early 21st century railing against “malefactors of great
wealth” as Theodore Roosevelt did in the early 20th century?
Any government contemplating a wealth tax will have to
weigh not only a potential discouraging effect on the savings rate
A Caution on Wealth Taxes
103

but also the possibility of capital flight. Individuals who find
themselves subjected to steep new taxes have an understandable
wish to deflect the blow. History offers many examples of people
sending their money—and themselves—out of jurisdictions that
have implemented heavy taxes on wealth or high incomes. Pre-
sent-day France offers a case in point. Its wealth tax has been
blamed for the self-exile of many rich families, most notably the
Taittingers of champagne fame. According to tax experts, some
well-off French citizens can find themselves paying more in
wealth tax than their annual income. With the dubious distinc-
tion of ranking first on Forbes magazine’s annual Tax Misery
Index, France experiences capital flight in the form of a departing
millionaire every day (Moore 2006, A12).
A national wealth tax might promote similar flight tenden-
cies in the United States. It is a contingency to be studied and
weighed carefully, since we know well that American families
and businesses factor tax rates into their locational decision mak-
ing. Experts believe that French entrepreneurs have found it rel-
atively easy to flee to neighboring countries, particularly
Belgium, thanks to the European Union’s uniform business rules
(Moore 2006, A12). Allowing for some essential differences be-
tween the way the European Union and the North American Free
Trade Agreement (NAFTA) operate, policy makers contemplat-
ing a U.S. wealth tax may want to explore the risks and the con-
sequences of wealthy American families relocating to Canada or
Mexico. At present that does not seem likely to happen, but it
cannot be ruled out either.
References
Alperovitz, Gar. “The Coming Era of Wealth Taxation.” Dollars and Sense
254 (July/August 2004): 22–24.
Bhalla, Surjit S. Imagine There’s No Country: Poverty, Inequality, and Growth
in the Era of Globalization. Washington, DC: Institute for International
Economics, 2002.
Cornia, Giovanni Andrea, and Sampsa Kiiski. “Trends in Income Distribu-
tion in the Post–World War II Period: Evidence and Interpretation.” Dis-
cussion Paper No. 2001/89 (September), World Institute for Development
Economics Research (WIDER). New York: United Nations University, 2001.
Cowen, Tyler. “A Contrarian Look at Whether U.S. Chief Executives Are
Overpaid.” The New York Times (May 18, 2006).
104
Worldwide Perspective

Firebaugh, Glenn. The New Geography of Global Income Inequality. Cam-
bridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2003.
Gilbert, Geoffrey. World Poverty: A Reference Handbook. Santa Barbara,
CA: ABC-CLIO, 2004.
Hertz, Tom. “Understanding Mobility in America.” Report prepared for
Center for American Progress, Washington, D.C., 2006. Accessed at http://
www.americanprogress.org.
Human Development Report 2005: International Cooperation at a Crossroads:
Aid, Trade, and Security in an Unequal World. New York: United Nations
Development Program (UNDP), 2005.
Milanovic, Branko. Worlds Apart: Measuring International and Global In-
equality. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2005.
Mishel, Lawrence, Jared Bernstein, and Sylvia Allegretto. The State of
Working America 2006/2007. Ithaca, NY: ILR Press, 2007.
Moore, Molly. “Old Money, New Money Flee France and Its Wealth
Tax.” The Washington Post (July 26, 2006): A12.
Perry, Guillermo E., Francisco H. G. Ferreira, Michael Walton, and David
M. de Ferranti. Inequality in Latin America: Breaking with History? Wash-
ington, DC: World Bank Publications, 2003.
Piketty, Thomas, and Emmanuel Saez. “The Evolution of Top Incomes:
A Historical and International Perspective.” American Economic Associ-
ation, Papers and Proceedings 96, no. 2 (May 2006): 200–205.
Sala-i-Martin, Xavier. “The World Distribution of Income: Falling Poverty
and . . . Convergence, Period.” Quarterly Journal of Economics CXXI, no. 2
(May 2006): 351–397.
Smeeding, Timothy. “Poor People in Rich Nations: The United States in
Comparative Perspective.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 20, no. 1 (Win-
ter 2006): 69–90.
Wasow, Bernard. “Standing Alone in Inequality.” The Century Founda-
tion, News & Commentary (September 22, 2006). Accessed online at http://
www.tcf.org.
Wolff, Edward N. “Recent Trends in the Distribution of Household
Wealth,” in Ray Marshall, ed., Back to Shared Prosperity: The Growing In-
equality of Wealth and Income in America. Armonk, NY: M. E. Sharpe, 2000:
57–63.
Wolff, Edward N. “Time for a Wealth Tax?” Boston Review (February/
March 1996).
World Population Data Sheet. Washington, DC: Population Reference Bu-
reau, 2006.
References
105


4
Chronology
T
his chapter highlights some of the key points of interest in our
emerging sense of U.S. economic inequality. The entries are
arranged chronologically from 1630 to the present. On the
technical side, experts have developed various tools to measure
and explain inequality, and our timeline records some of their key
accomplishments. The degree of U.S. wealth inequality seems to
have varied substantially through the centuries, and the public’s
response to the issue has likewise fluctuated. Our timeline reflects
this: important political speeches, exposés, and other forms of
commentary are noted. Because attitudes toward wealth inequal-
ity have often been shaped by public perceptions of individuals
and families at the top of the income distribution, our chronology
marks some of the key moments in the lives of those who, in an
earlier era, were known as plutocrats. And, of course, the re-
sponses of government to poverty and inequality need to be taken
into account. Redistributive federal programs have been pro-
posed and then enacted or defeated, and the taxation of income
and wealth has often been on the political agenda since early in
the 20th century.
1630
In a sermon written on board the Arbella as it sails west-
ward toward America, John Winthrop (1588–1649), the
already-elected first governor of the Massachusetts Bay
Colony, states: “God Almighty, in his most holy and wise
providence, hath so disposed of the condition of
mankind, as in all times some must be rich, some poor,
some high and eminent in power and dignity; others
mean and in submission.” The sermon, “A Model of
107

Christian Charity,” is famous in later years for its com-
parison of the Puritan colony to a “city upon a hill” (Bre-
mer 2003, 176).
1662
Boston erects its first almshouse.
1758
Benjamin Franklin publishes The Way to Wealth, a com-
pendium of proverbs extolling the twin virtues of indus-
try and frugality. It is basically a repackaging of proverbs
previously set forth in his Poor Richard’s Almanac (see
Franklin 1732–1758). A few examples: “What maintains
one vice would bring up two children”; “If you would
know the value of money, go and try to borrow some; for,
he that goes a borrowing goes a sorrowing”; and “Dili-
gence is the mother of good luck.” As his posthumously
published Autobiography makes clear, Franklin was the
archetypal American striver, who, incidentally, died
enormously wealthy in 1790.
1797
Thomas Paine (1737–1809), in his Agrarian Justice, remarks
that society at present is “checkered with the extremes of
affluence and want.” He therefore proposes a “national
fund” from which every person reaching the age of 21
shall be paid a stakeholder sum. He also proposes a guar-
anteed annual payment to the elderly out of the same
fund, with revenues to be drawn from a 10 percent tax on
inherited wealth. This is an early and often-cited example
of a wealth-redistributive proposal (Paine 1797).
1802
Eleuthère Irénée du Pont, a recent immigrant from
France, builds a gunpowder mill on the Brandywine
River in Delaware. In later years, the family-managed du
Pont company produces a variety of explosives and be-
comes the world’s largest munitions supplier. The fam-
ily, prospering and growing larger with each generation,
comes to be regarded as one of America’s richest. (In the
first Forbes listing of the 400 richest Americans, in 1982,
there are 28 du Ponts.)
1806
Shoemakers in Philadelphia go on strike for higher
wages. They not only lose the strike but are convicted of
criminal conspiracy for joining together in a labor union.
108
Chronology
1630
(cont.)

1828
The wealthiest 4 percent of people in New York City own
49 percent of the city’s non-corporate wealth, confirming
what the New York merchant Philip Hone writes in his
diary about the city which he serves as mayor during
1827–28: “The two extremes of costly luxury in living, ex-
pensive establishments and improvident waste are pre-
sented in daily and hourly contrast with squalid misery
and hopeless destitution.” Wealth becomes concentrated
so quickly in the city that by 1845, the top 4 percent share
of total non-corporate wealth has jumped from 49 to 66
percent. Similar trends are seen in Boston and Philadel-
phia (Pessen 1973, ch. 3).
Thomas Mellon, a 14-year-old Irish immigrant in Penn-
sylvania, finds inspiration in Ben Franklin’s Autobiogra-
phy: “Here was Franklin, poorer than myself, who by
industry, thrift, and frugality [was] elevated to wealth
and fame.” At age 17, Mellon balks at following in his fa-
ther’s footsteps as a farmer, choosing instead to become a
lawyer, judge, capitalist, and banker. In 1870, he founds
what will eventually become the Mellon Bank in Pitts-
burgh. His son Andrew will later magnify the family for-
tune and also serve as Secretary of the Treasury under
presidents Harding, Coolidge, and Hoover (Mellon 1996).
Workers at textile mills in Paterson, New Jersey, stage the
first factory strike in U.S. history, demanding a reduction
of the workday from 13.5 to 12 hours. They lose.
1829
The Boston Prison Discipline Society claims that 75,000
people each year are imprisoned for debt in the United
States (Pessen 1973, 31).
1834
In New Hampshire, the Reverend Charles Burroughs
sermonizes on the difference between honest poverty
and degrading pauperism. “The former is an unavoid-
able evil, to which many are brought from necessity. . . .
It is the result, not of our faults, but of our misfortunes.”
Pauperism, on the other hand, is the result of “willful
error, of shameful indolence, of vicious habits.” The
poverty-pauperism distinction mirrors another, that be-
tween the “deserving” and the “undeserving” poor,
Chronology
109

which pervades much of American discourse on the
poor and how they should be dealt with (Katz 1989, 13).
1847
New Hampshire is the first state to set a legal limit of 10
hours of labor per day.
1853
Construction begins on Llewellyn Park, the first gated
community in the United States. The exclusive park is in
West Orange, New Jersey, about 15 miles west of New
York City. Luxurious homes in the development are de-
signed by celebrated architects like Charles McKim and
Stanford White, and there is a guardhouse to ensure the
privacy and security of residents. Thomas Edison buys a
23-room mansion here in 1886; other residents include
members of the Merck and Colgate families.
1862
The first federal inheritance tax is approved by Congress
as a way to help pay for Civil War expenses. In 1874, the
Supreme Court upholds the constitutionality of the tax,
even though Congress had repealed it by then.
1863
President Abraham Lincoln issues the Emancipation
Proclamation, freeing slaves held in the southern states.
The long-term legacy of slavery, Jim Crow, and racial dis-
crimination in hiring and housing is this: poverty rates
for African Americans are consistently higher than for
any other racial or ethnic group in the United States up
to the present day, and the black-white wealth gap is
enormous.
Congress authorizes the northern states to draft soldiers
into the Union army. Class differences are brought into
stark relief as wealthier men are permitted to buy “sub-
stitutes” to serve in their place, while working-class men
must put on the Union blues and go off to fight. (Mortal-
ity rates during the Civil War are horrendous, due to the
primitive state of battlefield medicine.)
1866
Horatio Alger (1832–1899) publishes Ragged Dick, the
first of his hugely popular rags-to-riches stories written
mainly for boys. In more than 100 such books, Alger pro-
motes a single message: with hard work and good
110
Chronology
1834
(cont.)

morals, anybody can make a success of himself in the
United States.
1868
Congress sets an eight-hour workday for federal em-
ployees. It will be 30 more years before the United Mine
Workers of America win a similar workday for miners,
and 70 years before the eight-hour day becomes the na-
tional rule in the Fair Labor Standards Act (1938).
1879
Journalist and economist Henry George (1839–1897)
writes Progress and Poverty, one of the best-selling books
of the 19th century. George offers a compelling explana-
tion for the depressed condition of labor and the ten-
dency of the economy to fall into periodic, painful
downturns. He points to the fact that whenever the eco-
nomic system becomes more productive, the resulting
gains are captured by landowners, who hold a monopoly
on the only fixed resource, land. Their rising rents are en-
tirely unearned, and this suggests to George a suitable
corrective policy. The government should put a heavy
tax—he calls it a “single tax”—on land, and it should re-
place all other taxes.
1883
In What Social Classes Owe to Each Other, Yale sociologist
William Graham Sumner (1840–1910) expresses the social
Darwinist philosophy in its starkest terms: funds should
not be redistributed from the rich to the poor, as this
would amount to “coddling” the latter and would go
against the laws of nature. The rule of survival of the fittest
applies in the social realm just as it does in the natural.
1886
The Statue of Liberty is installed in New York Harbor. On
its pedestal are inscribed the last five lines of “The New
Colossus,” an 1883 poem by Emma Lazarus. Lazarus is a
member of New York’s Jewish social elite. She writes
movingly of the welcome to be extended to future gen-
erations of immigrants: “Give me your tired, your poor,
/ Your huddled masses yearning to breathe free, / The
wretched refuse of your teeming shore.”
1887
The novel Looking Backward, by Edward Bellamy (1850–
1898), depicts an egalitarian United States of the future in
Chronology
111

which people live in harmony and comfort, their mater-
ial needs met by an efficient, centrally planned economy.
Sharp contrasts are drawn between this utopia and the
harsh economic realities of late 19th-century America.
The novel is a huge bestseller.
1889
Andrew Carnegie (1835–1919) publishes The Gospel of
Wealth, in which he tackles the problem of how to main-
tain a harmonious relationship between the rich and the
poor in a modern capitalist society. Great wealth accu-
mulations, he argues, can be passed along privately to
heirs; they can be taxed away upon death; or they can be
“administered” for public purposes by rich individuals
during their own lifetimes. Carnegie favors the third ap-
proach. He calls the wealthy man a “trustee for his
poorer brethren.” (See chapter 6.) Demonstrating the
strength of his convictions, Carnegie, a great steelmaker,
gives away some $350 million of his personal fortune be-
fore his death, mainly to public libraries and colleges.
Construction begins on Biltmore Estate, near Asheville,
North Carolina, a grand residence for George W. Van-
derbilt, grandson of “Commodore” Cornelius Vander-
bilt. It is the largest house in the United States, with 250
rooms, including 34 master bedrooms and 43 bath-
rooms. Designed by Richard Morris Hunt and set in a
park laid out by Frederick Law Olmsted, it takes six
years to complete.
1890
Jacob Riis (1849–1914), a Danish immigrant to New York
City, publishes How the Other Half Lives, an eye-opening
account of life among the poorest slum-dwellers of his
adopted city. Uniquely informed by Riis’s own episodes
of destitution and illustrated by his black-and-white
photographs, the book is quickly recognized as a land-
mark in U.S. social history (Riis 1971).
1892
Cornelius Vanderbilt II, grandson of “Commodore” Van-
derbilt, orders construction of The Breakers, a summer
“cottage” in Newport, Rhode Island, with more than 70
rooms and 130,000 square feet of living space. Designed
by Richard Morris Hunt and costing a staggering $7 mil-
112
Chronology
1887
(cont.)

lion, the mansion is completed in 1895. It features floors
of Italian and African marble and whole rooms imported
from chateaux in France. The Vanderbilts occupy The
Breakers for two months each year.
1896
William Jennings Bryan gives one of the most famous
speeches in American history at the Democratic National
Convention in Chicago. Speaking in favor of a bimetallic
monetary standard, which would tend to favor debtors
(chiefly the poor), over the gold standard, which would
favor creditors (chiefly the rich), Bryan declares, “You
shall not press down upon the brow of labor this crown
of thorns; you shall not crucify mankind upon a cross 
of gold.” Bryan, an aspirant to his party’s presidential 
nomination—which he receives on the strength of this
speech—also declares, “What we need is an Andrew
Jackson to stand, as Jackson stood, against the encroach-
ments of organized wealth” (Bryan 1896).
1899
John Bates Clark, one of America’s most respected econ-
omists, argues, in his Distribution of Wealth: A Theory of
Wages, Interest, and Profits, that in a competitive economy,
every factor of production is paid what it is worth to the
employer. One implication of this theory is that however
low the wage rate may fall, it cannot be called exploita-
tive, since it reflects what the worker’s productive efforts
are worth to the employer, no more, no less. Such a the-
oretical framework puts neoclassical economics in the
position of vouching for the essential fairness of the ex-
isting income distribution.
1904
Ida Tarbell (1857–1944) publishes The History of the Stan-
dard Oil Company, a carefully researched account of the
business tactics, described by some as ruthless, em-
ployed by John D. Rockefeller in creating one of history’s
most lucrative monopolies. Rockefeller dismisses the
book and its author, whom he derides as “Miss Tarbar-
rel.” Seven years later, in 1911, the Supreme Court orders
the Standard Oil trust dissolved.
1905
Max O. Lorenz, an American economist, introduces a
simple graphical representation of wealth inequality that
Chronology
113

later becomes, along with the Gini coefficient, a vital part
of the technical toolkit experts use to study wealth and
income disparities in the United States and elsewhere.
The Lorenz curve can be seen in any introductory eco-
nomics textbook (Lorenz 1905).
1906
President Theodore Roosevelt proposes the introduction
of a federal inheritance tax in his State of the Union ad-
dress to Congress. “The man of great wealth,” he asserts,
“owes a peculiar obligation to the State because he de-
rives special advantages from the mere existence of gov-
ernment.” Roosevelt notes that the main purpose of the
proposed tax should be to “put a constantly increasing
burden on the inheritance of those swollen fortunes
which it is certainly of no benefit to this country to per-
petuate” (Roosevelt 1906).
1907
President Roosevelt attacks the “malefactors of great
wealth” who, in his opinion, put their selfish financial in-
terests above all other considerations, including the wel-
fare of their workers and the stability of the marketplace.
Roosevelt says that such individuals deserve to be pun-
ished. The “malefactors” phrase is often repeated in later
years by critics of those who accumulate and then mis-
use great wealth (Hart and Ferleger 1941, 327–328).
1910
Gustavus Myers (1872–1942) publishes a three-volume
work, History of the Great American Fortunes, which offers
a hard-hitting exposé of the leading robber barons of the
late 19th century. In Myers’s view, all the great fortunes
were founded on deceit, corruption, fraud, bribery, and
exploitation, and he provides extensive details to bolster
his case.
1912
Italian statistician Corrado Gini (1884–1965), in a journal
article entitled “Variabilita e Mutabilita,” presents a new
quantitative measure of inequality. The so-called Gini co-
efficient is used extensively in later studies of income
and wealth inequality around the world.
John D. Rockefeller’s personal fortune reaches a peak of
$900 million. In relation to the country’s gross domestic
114
Chronology
1905
(cont.)

product (GDP), this sum vastly exceeds the fortunes of
either Bill Gates or the Walton family a century later.
1913
Ratification of the Sixteenth Amendment to the Consti-
tution authorizes the U.S. government to levy an income
tax. Congress proceeds swiftly to impose such a tax, set-
ting the rate at 1 percent on incomes from $3,000 to
$20,000. The marginal tax rate rises on incomes above
$20,000, to a high of 7 percent on incomes over $500,000.
Most Americans have incomes well below $3,000 and
thus avoid taxation. Only about 2 percent pay any tax.
J. P. Morgan dies in Rome. The American financier famous
for calming financial markets under pressure, for his deal-
making prowess (he created the U.S. Steel Corporation out
of the steel companies of Andrew Carnegie and others in
1901), and for his art-collecting exploits, is said to have left
an estate of around $80 million. John D. Rockefeller, on
learning of Morgan’s worth, is quoted as saying, “And to
think he wasn’t even a rich man” (Strouse 2000, 15).
1916
In the year of her death, Hetty Green is America’s
wealthiest woman, with a fortune some estimate at $130
million. (At today’s price levels, she would be a billion-
aire.) Never before—or since—has a woman in the
United States had such a career at the very pinnacle of
high finance. Often derided as the “Witch of Wall Street”
for her preferred black attire and curmudgeonly manner,
Green is also known for miserliness of epic proportions.
Congress reinstitutes a federal estate tax to offset costs
associated with World War I. The top rate is 10 percent
on estates over $5 million. By 1924, the top rate will be
hiked to 40 percent on estates in excess of $10 million.
1918
The top marginal income tax rate hits 77 percent on in-
comes above $1 million, as the costs of World War I force
the federal government to raise as much revenue as pos-
sible. Rates fall quickly after the war’s conclusion.
1924
Congress enacts a federal gift tax. Its purpose is to pre-
vent wealthy individuals from giving away their assets
Chronology
115

just before death to avoid the estate tax passed by Con-
gress eight years earlier. The new tax is repealed in 1926
but permanently reinstated in 1932.
1926
An exchange between two American literary giants sup-
posedly has F. Scott Fitzgerald telling Ernest Heming-
way, “The rich are different from you and me,” and
Hemingway replying, “Yes, they have more money.” The
exchange is apocryphal, although it strongly echoes
some lines in a short story by Fitzgerald (“The Rich
Boy”). The 1920s are a decade of high and increasing
wealth inequality in the United States, and the lavish
lifestyles of the rich are captured memorably in Fitz-
gerald’s novels and stories.
1934
President Franklin D. Roosevelt and Congress raise the
estate tax to 60 percent on estates above $10 million. Un-
like previous inheritance taxes, this one is justified on
general redistributive grounds, as opposed to wartime
revenue needs.
1936
Nominated on June 27 to run for a second term as presi-
dent, Roosevelt uses his acceptance speech at the Demo-
cratic Convention to attack “economic inequality” in the
United States. A small group of “economic royalists” has
“concentrated into their own hands an almost complete
control over other people’s property, other people’s
money, other people’s labor—other people’s lives.”
1938
Congress passes a federal minimum wage law: the Fair
Labor Standards Act (FLSA). The minimum wage is set
initially at 25 cents per hour but later raised in varying
amounts at irregular intervals. By the end of the 20th
century, some observers are convinced that the failure of
the government since the late 1960s to maintain the real
(inflation-adjusted) value of the minimum wage holds
down wage levels at the lower end of the labor market,
contributing to the growing inequality of income in the
United States.
1939
John Steinbeck (1902–1968) publishes one of the most
powerful accounts of Depression-era poverty in The
116
Chronology
1924
(cont.)

Grapes of Wrath. It tells the story of a family of Oklahoma
farmers driven west by the Dust Bowl and barely hang-
ing on to life and dignity. Steinbeck later wins the Nobel
Prize for Literature (1962).
1944
The top marginal income tax rate hits 94 percent on in-
comes over $200,000. This is an all-time record high that
Congress justifies on the basis of wartime revenue needs,
and it lasts through 1945. After the end of World War II,
the top marginal rate varies between 82 and 91 percent
until the Tax Cut of 1964 reduces it to 77 percent on in-
comes over $400,000. The top rate remains in the 70 per-
cent range through the 1960s and 1970s (Wilson and
Jordan, 2002).
Congress passes the Servicemen’s Readjustment Act of
1944, otherwise known as the GI Bill of Rights. It entitles
servicemen returning from World War II to education
and training benefits; offers loan guarantees to veterans
for the purchase of a home, farm, or business; and pro-
vides weekly cash benefits to unemployed veterans for
up to one year. Over half of all veterans receive training
of some kind under the bill, and in 1947 veterans account
for roughly half of all college admissions. The GI Bill is
later seen as one of the most successful pieces of social
legislation in U.S. history, making it possible for vast
numbers of ordinary Americans, including many poor
(as long as they have served in the military), to raise
themselves to a higher economic and social status than
would otherwise have been the case. New versions of the
GI Bill are passed in the wake of the Korean War and the
Vietnam War with overwhelming public support.
1953
Union membership as a share of the total U.S. labor force
peaks at about 35 percent. Thereafter, the union share
falls steadily, and in 2006 it is a mere 12 percent. This is
significant because some explanations of the growing
rich-poor gap in the United States point to the role of
unions in helping workers achieve higher wages. Weaker
unions, in this view, can cause a lowering of labor in-
comes relative to the incomes of business owners, man-
agers, and professionals.
Chronology
117

1958
John Kenneth Galbraith (1908–2006), a Harvard econo-
mist, publishes The Affluent Society, in which he observes
that “in the United States, the survival of poverty is re-
markable. We ignore it because we share with all soci-
eties at all times the capacity for not seeing what we do
not wish to see” (Galbraith 1998, 242). American poverty,
he asserts, is a disgrace that cannot be excused or toler-
ated. Galbraith makes the case that public investments—
in schools, parks, mass transportation, and so on—will
not only help correct a systemic imbalance between pub-
lic and private consumption in the United States but will
do much to alleviate poverty. His book is later seen as an
antidote to Eisenhower-era complacency and a harbin-
ger of the Kennedy-Johnson commitment to tackle U.S.
poverty.
1962
The economist Milton Friedman (1912–2006), in his
highly influential book Capitalism and Freedom, advocates
a guaranteed annual income to every household as a
way to replace the existing hodge-podge of government
programs for the poor. Friedman proposes that those
earning very low (or no) incomes be provided with a
check from the U.S. government through the income tax
system; he calls it a “negative income tax.” Some are
shocked by such a radical idea, especially coming from a
conservative, but Friedman points to the superior effi-
ciency and expanded freedom of choice promised by his
proposal.
Michael Harrington (1928–1989) publishes The Other
America: Poverty in the United States, a now-classic ac-
count of the extensive destitution coexisting with afflu-
ence in mid-century America. Harrington, a prominent
socialist, describes rural poverty, racial and ethnic
poverty, urban poverty, and the poverty of many older
people, venturing a guess that the number of poor in the
United States may total 50 million. The book is often de-
scribed by middle-class readers as revelatory, and histo-
rians credit it as one of the key intellectual forces behind
the War on Poverty initiated by President Lyndon John-
son in 1964.
118
Chronology

1963–
Mollie Orshansky (1915–2006), a Social Security Admin-
istration statistician, constructs the official poverty
thresholds still used by the U.S. government more than
40 years later. Her poverty yardstick is based on Agricul-
ture Department estimates of what it costs to feed a fam-
ily on a “thrifty” food plan. Since American families in
this time period spend, on average, about one-third of
their income on food, Orshansky multiplies the food cost
by three to arrive at the poverty threshold, that is, what
it would cost to meet all of a family’s basic needs. She
calculates an array of threshold figures appropriate to
various family sizes, ages, and rural/urban locations. In
later years, the figures are adjusted upward annually to
take inflation into account.
1964
President Lyndon B. Johnson (LBJ) uses the occasion of
his first State of the Union address on January 8 to de-
clare “unconditional war on poverty in America.” In
March, he submits his Equal Opportunity Act of 1964 to
Congress, and in August, he signs the bill into law. An
Office of Economic Opportunity (OEO) is established to
run the war on poverty, with Robert Sargent Shriver Jr.,
brother-in-law of the late President John F. Kennedy, as
its first director. OEO oversees several programs, includ-
ing Job Corps, Volunteers in Service to America (VISTA),
and Neighborhood Youth Corps.
LBJ, in a speech in May, outlines his “Great Society” ini-
tiative, which will come to include the Medicare, Medi-
caid, and Head Start programs (passed by Congress in
1965). Near the end of his speech, LBJ asks the audience:
“Will you join in the battle to give every citizen an escape
from the crushing weight of poverty?”
Warren Buffett (b. 1930) takes control of Berkshire Hath-
away, an old-line New England textile company that he
soon transforms into an all-purpose investment com-
pany through which he is able to build up an immense
personal fortune. By 2006, he is worth $44 billion (on
paper) and is the second-richest person in the United
States.
Chronology
119
1964

1968
Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. (1929–1968) writes, “The time
has come for us to civilize ourselves by the total, direct
and immediate abolition of poverty.” Previous govern-
ment efforts to alleviate poverty, he says, have been
“fragmentary” and “spasmodic.” What is needed now is
a comprehensive attack on poverty. He comes out in
favor of the Milton Friedman plan for a guaranteed an-
nual income, without mentioning Friedman by name.
The two economists he does refer to are Henry George
and John Kenneth Galbraith (King 1967, 161–166).
1969
Just six months into his presidency, Richard Nixon pro-
poses his Family Assistance Plan (FAP), a modified ver-
sion of Milton Friedman’s negative income tax. Nixon
stresses that the FAP will replace the existing welfare
program, Aid to Families with Dependent Children
(AFDC), but will be structured in a way that leaves no
family worse off than before. After the House of Repre-
sentatives passes the FAP bill in 1970, Milton Friedman
speaks out publicly against it for being a mere add-on to,
rather than replacement for, existing programs. The plan
dies in a Senate committee.
1970
Arkansas Community Organizations for Reform Now
(ACORN) begins to organize welfare recipients and low-
wage workers in Little Rock. Its leadership comes from a
well-established national group, the National Welfare
Rights Organization (NWRO), and its agenda ranges from
obtaining clothes and furniture for welfare families to se-
curing better social services for Vietnam vets, the un-
employed, and blue-collar families. ACORN expands
beyond Little Rock and eventually beyond Arkansas, to
Texas and South Dakota in 1975 and to 20 states by 1980.
Renamed as the Association of Community Organizations
for Reform Now, ACORN becomes a grassroots political
force and a major backer of the living wage movement in
the United States. By 2006 it is the “largest neighborhood-
based antipoverty group in the country” (Eckholm 2006).
1973
The poverty rate in the United States hits its lowest
recorded level ever: 11.1 percent.
120
Chronology

1975
Microsoft Corporation is founded by Harvard dropout
William Henry (Bill) Gates III and his friend Paul Allen.
The company will eventually make Gates the richest per-
son in the United States, if not the world. Paul Allen
ranks eleventh in the 2007 Forbes listing of the richest
people in the United States.
Congress passes and President Gerald Ford signs the
Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) bill, under which low-
income workers can receive a wage subsidy from the
federal government. The EITC program becomes one of
the most expensive, but also one of the most effective, of
all the federal efforts to fight poverty. It consistently
draws bipartisan support in Congress and the White
House.
1981
President Ronald Reagan signs into law the Economic
Recovery Tax Act of 1981, which cuts federal income tax
rates by 23 percent in three yearly stages. The top mar-
ginal tax rate falls from 70 percent to 50 percent. By the
end of the decade, the top rate has dropped to 28 percent.
1982
Forbes magazine launches its annual listing of the richest
400 Americans.
1983
The Federal Reserve Board begins conducting a triennial
Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF) that offers for the
first time a semi-official government overview of the U.S.
wealth distribution.
1985
Forbes ranks Samuel Walton, founder of the Wal-Mart
Corporation, as the country’s richest man, a title he car-
ries for several years until the magazine decides to split
credit for the Wal-Mart fortune among Sam, his wife, and
his children. Unlike fellow billionaires Bill Gates and
Warren Buffett, Walton puts a lifetime into building a
business and making money, showing little interest in se-
rious philanthropic endeavors. At his death in 1992, the
great bulk of Walton’s personal fortune passes to his wife
and children, not to charitable causes. More than 20
years later, the Walton family remains America’s richest.
Chronology
121

1988
In his January 25 State of the Union address to Congress,
President Reagan says, “My friends, some years ago, the
Federal Government declared war on poverty, and
poverty won.” He then describes the “fifty-nine major
welfare programs” on which the federal government
spends $100 billion a year, bemoans the “dependency”
they have created among America’s poor, and praises the
states for their many innovative programs aimed at get-
ting welfare recipients back to work. He urges that the
states be given more flexibility to pursue tougher child-
support and welfare-to-work policies.
1990
The Immigration Act of 1990 lifts the ceiling on annual
(legal) immigration from 500,000 to 700,000 persons an-
nually. “Family reunification” now accounts for the
largest number of legal immigrants into the country. Ille-
gal immigration grows steadily during the 1990s and in
the first years of the new century. Some observers link an
influx of lower-skilled workers into U.S. labor markets to
downward pressures on wage rates, thus causing—or
worsening—poverty (Samuelson 2006).
1993
The Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1993, signed
into law by President William J. Clinton, raises the top
marginal tax rate to just under 40 percent, where it re-
mains throughout his two terms in office.
1996
Congress approves a two-stage increase in the federal min-
imum wage, from a level of $4.25 (set in 1991) to $4.75 in
1996 and then to $5.15 in 1997. Liberals urge a higher rate
in order to benefit low-paid workers and their families;
conservatives argue that minimum wages burden small
businesses with added costs and create unemployment.
2001
A Boston-based group, Responsible Wealth, speaks out
vigorously against President George W. Bush’s proposal
to repeal the federal estate tax (see next item). The
group—which includes Warren Buffett, George Soros,
several Rockefellers, and William Gates Jr., father of
Microsoft billionaire Bill Gates—places an ad in The New
York Times on February 18, warning that revenues lost
from the repeal of the estate tax will either force increases
122
Chronology

in other taxes or result in reduced funding for govern-
ment programs like Social Security and Medicare.
President Bush signs into law the Economic Growth and
Tax Relief Reconciliation Act of 2001. The law lowers the
income tax rate applicable to the wealthiest Americans
from about 40 percent to 35 percent. It also lowers the top
marginal tax rate on estates from 55 percent in 2001 to 45
percent by 2009, and increases the individual tax-exempt
amount from $675,000 in 2001 to $3.5 million ($7 million
for married couples) in 2009. Under the law, federal es-
tate taxes will disappear completely in 2010—and then
be reinstated in 2011 at the tax rates prevailing in 2001.
2004
Forbes inaugurates an annual listing of the nation’s most
expensive gated communities. The magazine observes,
“As long as there have been rich people, there have been
gates to keep everyone else out.” In the initial listing,
more gated communities are found in Boca Raton,
Florida, than anywhere else in the country, although
high-end developments are also found in California,
Connecticut, Nevada, and Hawaii (Clemence 2004).
2005
Hurricane Katrina devastates New Orleans and much of
the Gulf Coast. The nation’s media, politicians, and pun-
dits belatedly “discover” poverty in America. Newsweek
magazine, for example, runs a cover story entitled “The
Other America,” consciously echoing the title of Michael
Harrington’s groundbreaking book of 1962. Calling the
kind of poverty the storm revealed in New Orleans’s
Ninth Ward and the rural counties of Louisiana and Mis-
sissippi “an enduring shame,” the article notes that
“Hurricane Katrina exposed the harsh disparities be-
tween rich and poor in this country. Despite recent eco-
nomic growth, poverty rates have risen for four straight
years” (Alter 2006, 46).
2006
Bill Gates, the richest man in the United States for over a
decade, announces that he will be stepping down from
major business responsibilities related to Microsoft in the
summer of 2008. From then on, he will devote his time
and energy to the philanthropic projects of the Bill &
Chronology
123

Melinda Gates Foundation that have already earned him
high praise, particularly in the field of international pub-
lic health. Gates is a few years younger than John D. Rock-
efeller was when he withdrew from active engagement in
running the Standard Oil Company in 1896, devoting the
remainder of his long life to philanthropic pursuits.
Warren Buffett announces that he will give the bulk of
his fortune—about $31 billion at current Berkshire Hath-
away stock prices—to the Bill & Melinda Gates Founda-
tion. This reverses earlier declarations by Buffett that his
charitable donations would not occur until his death.
Observers credit the relationship of trust that has devel-
oped between Buffett and Gates since the two met in
1991 for this change in Buffett’s plans. For an individual
of Buffett’s wealth to donate most of it to another foun-
dation rather than establishing his own is unprecedented
(O’Brien and Saul 2006).
The results of the Federal Reserve’s 2004 SCF survey are
released, and in the carefully worded conclusion of the
survey report, they reveal that from 1989 to 2004, “the
distribution of family wealth shifted higher.” The Gini
coefficient in 2004 was significantly higher than it had
been in 1989, 1992, or 1995, although little changed from
1998 or 2001. Also, the share of net household wealth
held by the poorer half of the population fell between
1995 and 2004, from a paltry 3.6 percent to an even pal-
trier 2.5 percent (Kennickell 2006, 46).
2007
The official U.S. poverty rate is 12.3 percent.
Congress passes, and President Bush signs into law, an
increase in the federal minimum wage that will lift it, in
stages, to $7.25 by mid-2009.
References
Alter, Jonathan. “The Other America.” Newsweek (September 19, 2005):
42–48.
124
Chronology
2006
(cont.)

Bremer, Francis J. John Winthrop: America’s Forgotten Founding Father.
New York: Oxford University Press, 2003.
Bryan, William Jennings. “Cross of Gold” speech (1896).
Clemence, Sara. “Most Expensive Gated Communities in America.”
Forbes (2004). Accessed at http://www.forbes.com.
Eckholm, Erik. “City by City, an Antipoverty Group Plants Seeds of
Change.” The New York Times (June 26, 2006): A12.
Fitzgerald, F. Scott. “The Rich Boy,” in All the Sad Young Men. New York:
Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1926.
Franklin, Benjamin. Poor Richard’s Almanac. Published annually; origi-
nally published 1732–1758.
Galbraith, John Kenneth. The Affluent Society, Fortieth Anniversary Edi-
tion. Boston: Mariner Books, 1998 [1958].
Hart, Albert Bushnell, and Herbert Ronald Ferleger, eds. Theodore Roo-
sevelt Cyclopedia. New York: Roosevelt Memorial Association, 1941.
Katz, Michael B. The Undeserving Poor: From the War on Poverty to the War
on Welfare. New York: Pantheon Books, 1989.
Kennickell, Arthur B. “Currents and Undercurrents: Changes in the Dis-
tribution of Wealth, 1989–2004.” Federal Reserve Board, SCF Working Pa-
pers (2006). Accessed at http://www.federalreserve.gov.
King, Martin Luther, Jr. Where Do We Go from Here: Chaos or Community?
New York: Harper and Row, 1967.
Lorenz, M. O. “Methods of Measuring the Concentration of Wealth.”
Publications of the American Statistical Association 9, no. 70 (1905): 209–219.
Mellon, Thomas. Thomas Mellon and His Times. Pittsburgh: University of
Pittsburgh Press, 1996 [1885].
O’Brien, Timothy L., and Stephanie Saul. “Buffett to Give Bulk of His
Fortune to Gates Charity.” The New York Times (June 26, 2006): A1, A15.
Paine, Thomas. Agrarian Justice (1797). Accessed at http://www.ssa.
gov/history/paine4.html
Pessen, Edward. Riches, Class, and Power before the Civil War. Lexington,
MA: D. C. Heath, 1973.
Riis, Jacob. How the Other Half Lives. New York: Dover Publications, 1971
[1890].
Robbins, Gary. “Estate Taxes: An Historical Perspective.” The Heritage
Foundation, Backgrounder 1719 (January 16, 2004).
Samuelson, Robert. “We Don’t Need ‘Guest Workers.’” The Washington
Post (March 22, 2006): A21.
Chronology
125

Strouse, Jean. Morgan: American Financier. New York: Random House,
2000.
U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs. “History of the G.I. Bill.” Accessed
at http://www.gibill.va.gov.
Wilson, Robert A., and David E. Jordan. “Personal Exemptions and In-
dividual Income Tax Rates, 1913–2002 (Rev. 6–02),” Internal Revenue
Service, Statistics of Income Bulletin (Publication 1136), Spring 2002:
216–225.
126
Chronology

5
Biographical Sketches
T
his chapter offers thumbnail sketches of 27 individuals whose
lives or ideas shed light on economic inequality in the United
States. Some, like Warren Buffett, Bill Gates, and Sam Walton,
give us a sense of what it means—and what it takes—to be at the
very top of the income distribution, to have wealth that can be
equated to the GDPs of small nations. Some, like Chuck Collins,
Marian Wright Edelman, and Dolores Huerta, have been notable
advocates on behalf of those at the lower end of the income dis-
tribution. Several economists are included for the work they have
done to fashion tools for measuring the gap between rich and
poor, or for their contributions to the actual measurement of the
gap. Another group of individuals featured in the chapter are ex-
perts on wealth or poverty in the United States, people like Paul
Schervish, Sara McLanahan, and Timothy Smeeding. And finally,
there are individuals who have legendary and mythologic
stature in the annals of American wealth: John D. Rockefeller,
Hetty Green, and Horatio Alger. Taken together, they constitute a
fascinating gallery of men and women who, in one way or an-
other, help us grasp the meaning of highly disparate economic
fortunes in the United States.
Horatio Alger Jr. (1832–1899)
The belief that anyone can rise from poverty to wealth through
hard work, honesty, and sheer persistence is often seen as char-
acteristically American. Although the creed of “strive and suc-
ceed” did not originate with Horatio Alger—think, for example,
127

of Benjamin Franklin’s Autobiography—Alger undoubtedly drove
it much deeper into the popular consciousness with the best-sell-
ing dime novels that he produced by the scores, beginning in
1867. The son of a Unitarian minister, Alger attended Harvard
and then Harvard Divinity School, and served briefly as a parson
on Cape Cod before moving to New York City and becoming a
full-time writer. He was struck at once by the vast numbers of or-
phaned and abandoned children living on the streets. His first
rags-to-riches story, Ragged Dick, was so successful that it became
the template for more than a hundred similar tales with titles like
Bound to Rise, Sink or Swim, and Making His Way, or, Frank Court-
ney’s Struggle Upward. Nearly all featured a penniless youth who,
by dint of luck and pluck—and often with the timely assistance
of a mentoring adult—pulled himself up to respectability and fi-
nancial success. In the era of the robber barons, when the gap be-
tween rich and poor yawned wider than at any other time in U.S.
history, the Horatio Alger stories found a huge readership, sell-
ing as well as the works of Mark Twain. What they offered young
readers was the promise that anyone, however humble his ori-
gins, could climb the ladder of success if he was diligent and in-
dustrious enough.
Further Reading
Horatio Alger, Ragged Dick and Mark, the Match Boy: Two Novels by Hora-
tio Alger, New York: Touchstone, 1998; Stefan Kanfer, “Horatio Alger:
The Moral of the Story,” City Journal (Autumn 2000), accessed at
http://www.city-journal.org.
Anne L. Alstott (b. 1963)
Faced with the facts about U.S. income and wealth disparities,
some observers shrug and find nothing amiss. Others, like Anne
Alstott, argue for redistributive efforts by the government to
move society in a more egalitarian direction. Alstott and Bruce
Ackerman, coauthors of The Stakeholder Society, have said that
they would not object to an unequal distribution of wealth if all
Americans enjoyed genuine equality of opportunity from birth to
adulthood. But since that is far from the case, Alstott and Acker-
man have advanced a radical proposal: every American reaching
adulthood should be given an $80,000 “stake” to be used for any
good purpose, such as going to college, starting a business, buy-
128
Biographical Sketches

ing or making a down payment on a house, or enrolling in a train-
ing program. This stakeholding program would cost around $250
billion a year. It could be financed by a 2 percent wealth tax to be
imposed on the top 40 percent of wealth-holders and, when pos-
sible, by a payback of each person’s original stake upon death.
In her 2005 book No Exit: What Parents Owe Their Children and
What Society Owes Parents, Alstott offers another bold proposal
that would tend to lessen economic inequality in the United
States. Arguing that society has a clear interest in ensuring that
parents have the resources they need to rear their children, and
that the costs of childrearing are now higher than ever, she favors
a government award of $5,000 to every parent of a child under
13. The “caregiver grant” could be used to pay for child care, ed-
ucation, or even retirement savings. Alstott holds an AB degree
from Georgetown University (1984) and a law degree from Yale
(1987), where she is now a deputy dean and the Jacquin D. Bier-
man Professor of Taxation.
Further Reading
Bruce Ackerman and Anne Alstott, “$80,000 and a Dream,” The Ameri-
can Prospect 11, no.16 (July 17, 2000): 23–25; Bruce Ackerman and Anne
Alstott, The Stakeholder Society, New Haven, CT: Yale University Press,
1999; Anne Alstott, No Exit: What Parents Owe Their Children and What So-
ciety Owes Parents, New York: Oxford University Press, 2005.
Warren E. Buffett (b. 1930)
Often referred to as the greatest investor in the world—possibly
the greatest of all time—Warren Buffett has been the second-
richest American for a number of years. Forbes magazine estimated
his wealth in 2007 at $52 billion, somewhat behind Bill Gates’s $59
billion but far ahead of third-ranked Sheldon Adelson’s $28 billion.
Buffett is a generation older than Gates, and he built his fortune by
acquiring much more traditional companies than Microsoft. He is
a “value investor” who sizes up the intrinsic value of a company,
checks the price at which its shares are selling in the stock mar-
ket, and acts accordingly. If the value is greater than the share
price, the company is worth buying; otherwise, it is not. In his
youth, Buffett studied this investment strategy in a class taught
by the legendary Benjamin Graham at Columbia University. By
the mid-1950s, he was back in his hometown of Omaha, 
Biographical Sketches
129

Nebraska, managing investment partnerships. His own savings
and those of many partners enabled him to achieve control of
Berkshire Hathaway by the middle of the 1960s. He proceeded to
turn this old-line textile company into a holding company
through which he could buy and control a whole range of busi-
nesses that he deemed to be undervalued, with good market
share and solid growth potential. Some of Buffett’s most impor-
tant (and profitable) investments over the years have been in in-
dustries that are anything but high-tech: insurance, soft drinks,
candy, underwear, and manufactured houses. The popular press
depicts Buffett as someone who lives simply in the same house
he bought 45 years ago, drives a pickup truck, eats burgers and
steaks, drinks Coca-Cola, and, as the “Oracle of Omaha,” dis-
penses simple yet astute investment advice to Berkshire Hath-
away stockholders at their annual meetings. Colorful he may be,
but Buffett has a track record unrivaled anywhere—a 22 percent
compound annual return on Berkshire Hathaway stock since he
gained control of the company more than 40 years ago.
Further Reading
Warren E. Buffett, The Essays of Warren Buffett: Lessons for Corporate Amer-
ica, New York: L. Cunningham, 2001; Roger Lowenstein, Buffett: The
Making of an American Capitalist, New York: Random House, 1995.
John Bates Clark (1847–1938)
Everyone knows the expression, “You’re paid what you’re worth.”
The plausibility of that statement probably helps many people ac-
cept, without too much grumbling, a distribution of personal in-
come that is far from equal in the United States. If some
individuals are paid poorly, it is because they are less productive
and therefore worth less to the employer, and if some are paid
much better, it is because they are more productive. The notion
that we are all paid according to how productive we are goes back
to a theory developed by one of America’s great economists, John
Bates Clark. In The Distribution of Wealth: A Theory of Wages, Inter-
est, and Profits (1899), Clark set out his marginal productivity 
theory of income distribution. In essence, he argued that in a free-
market economy, labor will be paid according to its productivity,
and capital (tools, machines, and so on) will likewise be rewarded
according to its contribution to total output. No individual or so-
130
Biographical Sketches

cial class will have any good reason to complain. In particular, the
radical claims of Karl Marx (1818–1883) and Henry George
(1839–1897) that capitalists and landlords were hogging too much
of society’s income were, in Clark’s view, refuted by his theory. In
later years, however, Clark came to recognize that the proliferation
of monopolies and trusts—Rockefeller’s Standard Oil Company,
for example—posed a serious problem for his theory. Only if the
economy were competitive, and not marred by monopoly, could
the distribution of incomes be considered “natural” and fair.
Clark graduated from Amherst College in 1875 and got his
graduate training at universities in Switzerland and Germany.
Upon his return to the United States, he received teaching ap-
pointments at Carleton College, then Smith, Amherst, Johns
Hopkins, and finally, Columbia University. In 1883, he served as
president of the American Economic Association (AEA), of which
he had been a co-founder three years earlier. Since 1947, the AEA
has awarded the John Bates Clark Medal every two years to out-
standing young economists, many of whom go on to win the
Nobel Prize in economics.
Further Reading
Stanley L. Brue, The Evolution of Economic Thought, New York: Dryden
Press, 2000: 281–291; John Henry, John Bates Clark: The Making of a Neo-
classical Economist, New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1995; Steven Pressman,
Fifty Major Economists, New York: Routledge, 1999: 73–77.
Chuck Collins (b. 1960)
When Chuck Collins, great-grandson of meatpacking magnate
Oscar Mayer, inherited his share of the family fortune in 1986 at
the age of 26, it amounted to a little under half a million dollars. He
promptly donated all the money to charity. The idea of coasting
through life on inherited wealth does not appeal to Collins, nor
does the prospect of an entire society becoming more and more di-
vided between the rich and the poor. In 1995, he co-founded
United for a Fair Economy (UFE), a Boston-based organization
committed to shining a bright light on the growing inequality of
wealth and income in the United States, and doing something
about it. UFE works on many fronts to try to narrow the income
gap. It encourages corporate philanthropy, holds seminars for reli-
gious and business groups, drafts shareholder resolutions aimed
Biographical Sketches
131

at narrowing the pay gap, lobbies against tax cuts for the wealthy,
and organizes rallies. In 1997, Collins co-founded Responsible
Wealth, a spin-off of UFE that enlists wealthy individuals and cor-
porate leaders to work together in opposition to national policies,
especially tax policies, that widen the gap between the haves and
have-nots. One would not expect America’s most affluent citizens
to show much enthusiasm for activism that runs counter to their
own interests, but Collins has made some powerful friends.
William H. Gates Sr., father of the world’s richest man, worked
with Collins on a petition drive in early 2001 aimed at defeating a
Republican proposal to abolish the federal estate tax. More than
100 of the country’s richest individuals signed the ad, which ap-
peared in The New York Times. Collins is a 1984 graduate of Hamp-
shire College, with an MBA in community economic development
from New Hampshire College (1987).
Further Reading
Chuck Collins and Felice Yeskel, Economic Apartheid in America: A Primer
on Economic Inequality and Insecurity, revised and updated edition, New
York: The New Press, 2005; Bill Gates Sr. and Chuck Collins, Wealth and
Our Commonwealth: Why America Should Tax Accumulated Fortunes, Beacon
Press, 2003; David Cay Johnston, “Dozens of Rich Americans Join in Fight
to Retain the Estate Tax,” The New York Times (February 14, 2001): A1.
Marian Wright Edelman (b. 1939)
Children have the highest poverty rate of any age group in the
United States, far higher than adults or the elderly, and far above
the child-poverty rates seen in other wealthy, developed coun-
tries. One might almost say that being young is a risk factor for
poverty in the United States. One of the loudest voices calling at-
tention to the plight of children in this country belongs to Marian
Wright Edelman, founder and long-time president of the Chil-
dren’s Defense Fund (CDF). Born in Bennetsville, South Carolina,
Edelman experienced racial prejudice as an African American
child, but she also learned lessons of social service and commit-
ment to equality from her parents. (Her father was a Baptist min-
ister and a great admirer of civil rights pioneer A. Philip
Randolph.) After graduating from Spelman College in Atlanta,
Edelman earned a law degree from Yale in 1963. Her career began
in Mississippi, where she worked on civil rights issues for the
132
Biographical Sketches

NAACP Legal Defense Fund. In 1968, she moved to Washington,
D.C., to provide counsel to the Poor People’s Campaign, a project
begun by Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.
In 1973, Edelman founded the CDF, and she has been its vig-
orous, outspoken leader ever since. The CDF advocates for chil-
dren in many ways but primarily through lobbying efforts. It
supports, and often urges expansion of, such programs as Head
Start, child nutrition, children’s health insurance, childhood im-
munization, foster care, and welfare. Because of the toll that guns
have taken on children’s lives, Edelman supports gun control.
And because so many black youths end up in prison, she works
for reform of the criminal justice system. Edelman never tires of
reminding audiences that the United States is the world’s richest
nation. Why then, she asks, can it not provide a safe, healthy, and
nurturing environment for its children? Edelman has written
many books, received more than 100 honorary degrees, and been
awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom.
Further Reading
Marian Wright Edelman, The Measure of Our Success: Letter to My Children
and Yours, New York: Harper Paperbacks, 1993; Marian Wright Edelman,
commencement remarks, Colgate University, May 15, 2005, accessed at
http://www.colgate.edu; “Marian Wright Edelman” page at Children’s
Defense Fund Web site, accessed at http://www.childrensdefense.org.
John Edwards (b. 1953)
In recent years, no politician running for national office in the
United States has spoken as passionately about poverty as John
Edwards. His “Two Americas” stump speech was easily the most
memorable of the 2004 presidential primary season. In that
speech, Edwards spoke of “one America that does the work, an-
other America that reaps the reward,” and of “one America that
is struggling to get by, another America that can buy anything it
wants, even a Congress and a President.” Although the Kerry-
Edwards ticket lost to Bush-Cheney in 2004, Edwards did not let
go of the poverty issue. In early 2005, he helped create the Cen-
ter on Poverty, Work and Opportunity at the University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill and became its first director. In the fall of
that year, his campus speaking tour, Opportunity Rocks, drew
enormous audiences across the country. “You can make ending
Biographical Sketches
133

poverty in America the cause of your generation,” he told them.
“It’s the right thing to do. This is not about charity—it’s about
justice!”
John Edwards strikes many as uniquely qualified to speak
about wealth disparities. His father was a textile mill worker in
North Carolina; his mother was a postal worker. Edwards’s own
career took him from working-class origins to the heights of fi-
nancial success as a trial lawyer. He received his undergraduate
degree, the first in his family to do so, from North Carolina State
University (1974). His law degree is from the University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill (1977). Edwards won his first political
contest by beating North Carolina’s incumbent Republican sena-
tor, Lauch Faircloth, in 1998. Two years later, he had made the
short list to be Al Gore’s running mate in the presidential election
of 2000, just behind Joe Lieberman.
Further Reading
David Kusnet, “Stumped: Edged Out,” The New Republic Online (July 29,
2004); Bob Moser, “Cornbread and Roses,” The Nation (November 28,
2005); Peter Slevin, “Edwards Builds New Platform,” The Washington
Post (June 15, 2005): A03.
Barbara Ehrenreich (b. 1941)
A rite of passage for college freshmen across the country is to
read, during the weeks before their arrival on campus, a book se-
lected by their college faculty for reflection and discussion. Bar-
bara Ehrenreich’s Nickel and Dimed has become a familiar entry
on such reading lists. The book gives middle-class young adults
a glimpse—for some, their first—into what life is like for Amer-
ica’s low-wage workers. Ehrenreich’s first-person account of her
experiences cleaning houses, waiting on restaurant tables, and
straightening ladies’ garments at a Wal-Mart store is sharp,
angry, funny, and eye-opening. To the surprise of many, includ-
ing Ehrenreich, the book has sold over a million copies since its
publication in 2001.
Born in Butte, Montana, Ehrenreich had well-established
credentials as a writer, social critic, and radical long before she
went “undercover” to investigate the world of low-paid wage
labor. An undergraduate degree from Reed College (1963) and a
PhD in cell biology from Rockefeller University (1968) equipped
134
Biographical Sketches

her with the research skills to undertake a wide range of projects.
Her books and articles have dealt with student activism,
women’s health issues, welfare policy, the psychological roots of
war, and class divisions in the United States. Beyond her dozen
books, she has written prolifically for, among others, The New
York Times, The Atlantic Monthly, Time, and The Progressive.
Further Reading
Robert Birnbaum, “Interview with Barbara Ehrenreich,” identity theory
(2001), accessed at http://www.identitytheory.com;  Barbara Ehren-
reich, Nickel and Dimed: On (Not) Getting by in America, New York:
Henry Holt and Company, 2001; Scott Sherman, “Class Warrior: Barbara
Ehrenreich’s Singular Crusade,” Columbia Journalism Review 42, no. 4
(November/December 2003): 34–41.
Victor R. Fuchs (b. 1924)
The poverty line adopted by the U.S. government in 1964 and
still used today is sometimes called the Orshansky index, in
honor of Mollie Orshansky, who devised it. Based on what it
costs for a household to barely subsist, it is an absolute poverty
standard. If general living conditions improve, the poverty line
does not rise accordingly; it rises only with inflation. The econo-
mist Victor Fuchs proposed a different poverty standard in 1967.
He argued for drawing the poverty line at one-half the national
median income level. In 1967, the median household income in
the United States was around $6,000, meaning there were as
many households receiving more than that income as there were
receiving less. Fuchs’s proposal would have counted any house-
hold below $3,000 as poor. Coincidentally, in the mid-1960s, the
Orshansky and Fuchs poverty lines both stood at roughly $3,000,
but as time passed, the two lines spread apart, with the Fuchs
standard rising faster. Thus, today we would count more Ameri-
cans as poor if we applied the Fuchs standard than we do using
the official (Orshansky) standard. Most other countries measure
poverty in the relative manner that Fuchs proposed.
Fuchs did his undergraduate work at New York University,
then earned his PhD at Columbia University (1955). He went on
to become one of the country’s leading experts on the economics
of the health care industry. His 1974 classic Who Shall Live? Health,
Economics, and Social Choice is widely read in medical schools
Biographical Sketches
135

around the nation; it was revised and reissued in 1998 (Singa-
pore: World Scientific Publishing). Fuchs has taught at Columbia
University, New York University, City University of New York,
and Stanford University. He served as president of the American
Economic Association in 1995.
Further Reading
Victor R. Fuchs, “Redefining Poverty and Redistributing Income,” The
Public Interest 8 (Summer 1967): 88–95; Joseph P. Newhouse, “Distin-
guished Fellow: In Honor of Victor Fuchs,” Journal of Economic Perspec-
tives 6, no. 3 (Summer 1992): 179–189.
William H. Gates III (b. 1955)
Bill Gates has been the richest man in America, and probably the
world, for over a decade. Although his name is not quite the by-
word for super-wealth that “Rockefeller” and “Vanderbilt” once
were, Gates’s fortune of $50–$60 billion is regularly compared to
the gross national products of entire countries. By one calcula-
tion, his net worth exceeds that of the bottom 40 percent of all
Americans combined.
Gates was born, grew up, and still lives in Seattle, where his
company, Microsoft is headquartered. The son of a lawyer and a
schoolteacher, he got hooked on computers at the age of 13. He
was able to master the skills of computer programming so
quickly that he ended up teaching programming to other stu-
dents. He and a young friend, Paul Allen, even formed a small
programming business as teenagers; it folded when Gates de-
parted for college at age 18. At Harvard, he began developing
software for personal computers (PCs), and in his junior year, he
dropped out of college to devote himself full-time to the business
of designing and marketing software. He and Paul Allen
founded Microsoft in 1975, with partnership shares of 60 and 40
percent, respectively.
The patents and royalties on various Microsoft products, like
Windows, Word, PowerPoint, and Excel, as well as the promise
of future innovations in PC technology, are what give the Mi-
crosoft Corporation its enormous market value and, thereby,
make Bill Gates the world’s wealthiest man. Gates’s entrepre-
neurial qualities—his extreme competitiveness, intensity, strate-
gic vision, and ability to attract talented people to work for
136
Biographical Sketches

him—no doubt factor into Microsoft’s success. (Business rivals
have pointed to a “ruthless” streak in Gates, and the govern-
ment’s antitrust division has had serious problems with some
Microsoft practices.) In recent years, however, Gates has taken a
growing interest in philanthropic endeavors. In 2000, he and his
wife established the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation “to help re-
duce inequities in the United States and around the world.” With
assets of $29 billion in 2005, it is by far the most richly endowed
U.S. charitable foundation, and its global health programs are
winning considerable praise, especially its initiatives to combat
AIDS and tropical diseases.
Further Reading
Bill Gates biography page at http://www.microsoft.com; The Bill and
Melinda Gates Foundation Web site at http://www.gatesfoundation.
org; “Profile: Bill Gates,” BBC News (January 26, 2004), at http://news.
bbc.co.uk.
Corrado Gini (1884–1965)
In discussions about income distribution, the measure of income
inequality that is cited most frequently is the Gini coefficient. The
calculation of this measure—also called the Gini index or Gini
ratio—can be technically challenging, but the interpretation of
the number itself is relatively straightforward. If incomes are per-
fectly equal throughout society, the Gini coefficient is zero. If the
income distribution is perfectly unequal, with all income going to
just one individual or family, the Gini coefficient is 100. Since the
real world is more complicated than these two theoretical ex-
tremes, actual values of the coefficient always lie somewhere be-
tween zero and 100. The Gini coefficient for the United States
stands at around 47. What concerns some observers, however, is
the fact that the Gini coefficient has moved upward during the
past few decades. This strongly suggests that the gap between
the rich and the poor has been growing.
The Gini coefficient was developed by an influential Italian
statistician and fascist political theorist, Corrado Gini. Born in a
small town near Venice, Italy, Gini studied law, statistics, econom-
ics, and biology at the University of Bologna. In a long academic
career, he taught, successively, at the Universities of Cagliari,
Padua, and Rome. Beyond the academy, he also reorganized the
Biographical Sketches
137

national statistical office in Rome and devised a plan for reform-
ing the Italian Senate along lines agreeable to the Fascist Party.
Gini was elected to national and international scientific bodies,
served as a consultant to the League of Nations, and received hon-
orary degrees from four universities, including Harvard (1936)
and the University of Geneva (1934). The scientific study of pop-
ulation was one of his strong interests, and the demographic jour-
nal Genus, which he founded in 1934, continues to be published
today. Gini’s famous inequality coefficient was presented in a
1912 paper, “Variabilita e Mutabilita.”
Further Reading
“Biography of Corrado Gini,” Metron (n.d.), accessed at http://www.
metronjournal.it; Corrado Gini, “The Scientific Basis of Fascism,” Politi-
cal Science Quarterly 42, no. 1 (1927): 99–115.
Hetty Green (1834–1916)
Hetty Green was described in her day as the richest woman in
America, if not the world—and also the most miserly. At her
death in 1916, Green was probably worth at least $130 million, a
sum that would exceed $2 billion in today’s prices. Daughter and
granddaughter of New Bedford, Massachusetts, whaling mer-
chants, Green learned the elements of finance from her father. A
lonely Quaker childhood with minimal schooling seems to have
formed her character along unsociable and frugal lines. On her
father’s death in 1865, Green received a substantial inheritance,
which she promptly invested in government notes that were
deeply discounted in the aftermath of the Civil War. Her faith in
the government’s ability to pay its debts rewarded her hand-
somely, and she continued making savvy investments for
decades to come. Real estate and railroads, she once said, were
more attractive to her than mines, factories, or trade. She also
made many loans to municipalities—her loan to Tucson, Ari-
zona, in 1900 financed the construction of that city’s water sys-
tem, and more than once she rescued New York City from
financial straits.
Hetty Green’s reputation in the world of finance reached its
zenith during the Panic of 1907. When two trust companies in
New York City were threatened with ruin by massive deposit
withdrawals, the banker J. P. Morgan summoned the city’s top
138
Biographical Sketches

moneymen to an all-night session at his private library. A solitary
woman wearing a black veil (a standard feature of Green’s
wardrobe) was reported to have joined the men for several hours,
and reporters concluded that it had to be Green. By this time, her
personal quirks were considered as newsworthy as her financial
exploits. Tales of her stinginess multiplied. She migrated among
apartments in Brooklyn, New York, and Hoboken, New Jersey, to
avoid the taxes she would have faced by living in more perma-
nent, spacious dwellings. She dressed in rags when visiting a
doctor so as not to be recognized and charged the full medical
fees. She once spent two days hunting for a two-cent stamp she
had misplaced. Eccentric in these and many other ways, Green
was nonetheless as skilled and determined as any man of her era
when it came to high-stakes finance.
Further Reading
Charles Slack, Hetty: The Genius and Madness of America’s First Female Ty-
coon, New York: Ecco, 2004.
Dolores Huerta (b. 1930)
Some of the worst-paid American workers are those who labor in
the fields, orchards, and vineyards. Their low wages and minimal
family incomes result, in part, from the fact that so many are un-
documented immigrants, hesitant to organize themselves for bet-
ter wages and working conditions. For decades, Dolores Huerta
has been striving to change this. Born to a father who was a farm
worker, miner, and union activist, and a mother who was first a
cook and later a businessperson and community activist, Huerta
grew up in the San Joaquin Valley of California. After becoming
the first in her family to graduate from college, she took an ele-
mentary school teaching job, but soon gave it up because, in her
words, “I couldn’t stand seeing farm worker children come to class
hungry and in need of shoes. I thought I could do more by orga-
nizing the parents than by trying to teach their hungry children.”
Mainstream U.S. labor leaders were not interested in organiz-
ing a group of workers who were mainly Latino, so in 1962 Huerta
and César Chávez decided to establish the National Farm Work-
ers Association (NFWA). The fledgling NFWA soon joined forces
with the Agricultural Workers Organizing Committee (AWOC), a
labor group primarily for Filipinos, in the epic five-year Delano
Biographical Sketches
139

(California) Grape Strike. The NFWA and AWOC merged to form
a group that evolved into the United Farm Workers (UFW). Do-
lores Huerta became deeply engaged in recruiting workers to join
the union, negotiating contracts, assisting with grievance and ar-
bitration processes, and lobbying state lawmakers, even as she
raised 11 children. Her lifelong advocacy on behalf of low-paid,
mainly Latino, workers has earned her widespread recognition.
She has received half a dozen honorary degrees; schools have
been named after her in three western states; and President Clin-
ton presented her with the Eleanor Roosevelt Human Rights
Award in 1998.
Further Reading
“Biography” at the Dolores Huerta Foundation Web site, accessed at
http://www.doloreshuerta.org/dolores_huerta_foundation.htm; John
Gregory Dunne, Delano: The Story of the California Grape Strike, New York:
Farrar, Straus, & Giroux, 1967.
Jonathan Kozol (b. 1936)
Common sense suggests that in any society with substantial vari-
ations in wealth and income, those with the most financial re-
sources will have the most appealing choices when it comes to
private goods like clothing, cars, travel, and housing. Should
these same high-income individuals also be placed ahead of
everyone else when it comes to social goods, such as health care
and education? Many democratic theorists would say no, but re-
ality often differs from our democratic ideals, as social critic
Jonathan Kozol has been documenting with regard to America’s
public schools over the past four decades. After graduating from
Harvard in 1958, going on to Oxford as a Rhodes Scholar, and
spending several years in Paris writing a novel, Kozol took a
teaching job in one of Boston’s poorest neighborhoods. His book
describing that experience, Death at an Early Age: The Destruction
of the Hearts and Minds of Negro Children in the Boston Public Schools
(1967), won a National Book Award. In 1991, Kozol confronted
the issue of disparate educational opportunities for rich and poor
children head-on in Savage Inequalities: Children in America’s
Schools. Through extensive travel and research, he uncovered
many stark contrasts between conditions in inner-city and sub-
urban schools. The former were often characterized by over-
140
Biographical Sketches

crowding, dilapidated buildings, and grossly inadequate fund-
ing, while the latter featured well-equipped, spacious campuses,
staffed with well-paid teachers and administrators. More re-
cently, in The Shame of the Nation: The Restoration of Apartheid
Schooling in America (2005), Kozol has called attention to the re-
segregation of America’s public schools long after the landmark
1954 Brown v. Board of Education decision outlawing the doctrine
of “separate but equal” schooling for minority children.
Besides the inequalities of the U.S. educational system, two
related issues on which Kozol has written are homelessness
(Rachel and Her Children) and illiteracy (Illiterate America). Kozol
has received a number of honors in his career, including fellow-
ships from the Guggenheim, Rockefeller, Ford, and Field foun-
dations. Several colleges and universities have bestowed
honorary degrees on him, and he is much in demand as a speaker
before college and community groups.
Further Reading
Jonathan Kozol, Savage Inequalities: Children in America’s Schools, New
York: Harper Perennial, 1992; Jonathan Kozol, The Shame of the Nation:
The Restoration of Apartheid Schooling in America, New York: Crown Pub-
lishers, 2005; Jonathan Kozol, “Still Separate, Still Unequal: America’s
Educational Apartheid,” Harper’s Magazine 311, no. 1864 (September
2005): 41–54.
Simon Kuznets (1901–1985)
During some periods of American history, the gap between the
rich and poor has grown wider, while in other periods it has nar-
rowed. Are these long-term fluctuations in income distribution
merely random, or is there some logic behind them? Do econo-
mists have any theories about this? One notable economist who
contributed to both the theory and the measurement of income in-
equality was Simon Kuznets. Born in Russia, he and his brother
immigrated to New York City in 1920. By 1923, Kuznets had
learned English and received a BS degree from Columbia Univer-
sity, where he went on to earn a PhD in economics three years later.
During his long and productive career, Kuznets taught at the Uni-
versity of Pennsylvania, Johns Hopkins University, and Harvard.
But much of his most notable research was done at the National
Bureau of Economic Research (NBER), including his pioneering
Biographical Sketches
141

work on the construction of the U.S. national income accounts dur-
ing the 1930s. Kuznets won the Nobel Prize for economics in 1971.
In a classic 1955 article, Kuznets hypothesized that the dis-
tribution of incomes depended on the stage of a nation’s eco-
nomic development. As a country advanced economically, he
said, its incomes would become more unequal, in part because of
the migration of workers from rural areas, where incomes tended
to be more equal, into urban areas, where they were less equal.
But as time went on, the trend would reverse itself: the skills re-
quired to earn higher urban incomes would gradually be spread
through the population, reducing inequality. These ideas came to
be represented by the Kuznets U-curve, which depicts a decline
in income equality followed by a rise in equality as nations grow
richer and more industrialized. For most of his professional life,
Kuznets’s theory had the support of empirical data. (He was, in
fact, a pioneer in the gathering of statistics on U.S. income distri-
bution, especially for the top 1 percent and 5 percent of income
earners.) During the 1970s, however, U.S. incomes started be-
coming more unequal again—reversing a long-term trend to-
ward equality that dated back to around 1929. This was not
supposed to happen under Kuznets’s theory. But as he would
have been the first to say, if the facts change, we have to revise
our theories.
Further Reading
Simon Kuznets, “Economic Growth and Income Inequality,” American
Economic Review 45, no. 2 (March 1955): 1–28; Steven Pressman, Fifty
Major Economists, New York: Routledge, 1999: 120–124.
Bhashkar Mazumder (b. 1966)
Our intuition tells us that a society with a wide gap between rich
and poor will tend to be one in which a person’s economic status
is substantially determined at birth. In other words, the children
of the rich have a far better chance of ending up (or staying) rich
than the children of the poor. Most Americans would resist ap-
plying these ideas to their own society. They generally think of
their country as one in which, regardless of the existing distribu-
tion of wealth, anyone can climb the ladder of success. Bhashkar
Mazumder, a senior economist at the Federal Reserve Bank of
Chicago, has been doing sophisticated research that bears directly
142
Biographical Sketches

on this question. He focuses on measures of intergenerational mo-
bility, and what he finds runs counter to some of our “Horatio
Alger” beliefs. His econometric work indicates that sons and
daughters tend to earn incomes quite similar to their fathers’ in-
comes in the previous generation. Hence, economic mobility is
considerably lower than previous studies have suggested. This is
particularly true of the period since 1980. Mazumder’s findings,
when plugged into a simple model of economic advancement
over time, imply that a family on the poverty line today might
need five to six generations, or 125 to 150 years, to work its way
up to the average U.S. income level. Mazumder holds bachelor’s
and master’s degrees from New York University and a PhD in
economics (2001) from the University of California, Berkeley.
Further Reading
Bhashkar Mazumder, “The Apple Falls Even Closer to the Tree Than We
Thought,” in Samuel Bowles, Herbert Gintis, and Melissa Osborne
Groves, eds., Unequal Chances: Family Background and Economic Success,
New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 2005: 80–99; Bhashkar Mazumder,
“Fortunate Sons: New Estimates of Intergenerational Mobility in the
United States Using Social Security Earnings Data,” Review of Economics
and Statistics 87, no. 2 (May 2005): 235–255.
Sara S. McLanahan (b. 1940)
It is an oversimplification to say that poor children grow up to be
poor adults, but it is not flat-out wrong. Social scientists have spent
the past few decades trying to understand (and even quantify) the
various ways in which a disadvantaged childhood impairs one’s
life chances. Princeton sociologist Sara McLanahan has become a
leader in this field of research. The main focus of her work has
been the impact of nontraditional family structures on children’s
well-being. In collaboration with Gary Sandefur, she has found
that children growing up in single-parent households perform less
well on academic tests, are more likely to become pregnant as
teens, and have lower school completion rates than children raised
by married biological parents. Even when the lower average in-
come levels of single-parent households are taken into account—
“controlled for,” in the jargon of the statistician—these effects still
weigh upon children raised by single parents. More recently,
McLanahan (2004) has expressed concern about U.S. demographic
Biographical Sketches
143

trends since the 1960s that have worsened inequality among moth-
ers and therefore among children. The offspring of young, single
mothers are coming up short in terms of the parental resources
available to them compared to the children of older, married, more
educated, and higher-earning mothers. As the gap in parental re-
sources widens, McLanahan sees a role for public policy in pro-
viding support to low-income mothers and fathers. She also sees
merit in the “marriage initiatives” proposed by the Bush adminis-
tration—if they are designed correctly.
McLanahan earned her BA in sociology from the University
of Houston (1974) and her doctorate (1979) from the University
of Texas, Austin. At Princeton University, she is the founder and
director of the Center for Research on Child Wellbeing at the
Woodrow Wilson School of Public and International Affairs. She
is editor-in-chief of the journal The Future of Children, and she
oversees a major national study of “fragile families” that began
in the late 1990s and will last for many years.
Further Reading
Sara McLanahan, “Diverging Destinies: How Children Are Faring
Under the Second Demographic Transition,” Demography 41, no. 4 (No-
vember 2004): 607–627; Sara McLanahan and Gary Sandefur, Growing Up
with a Single Parent, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1994.
Mollie Orshansky (1915–2006)
The U.S. government has never defined an income level that qual-
ifies someone as rich, but it has defined an income level below
which someone is considered poor. Major credit for establishing
the official poverty line belongs to Mollie Orshansky. In 1963,
while employed as a researcher in the Social Security Administra-
tion, she pursued the following logic: if a family could subsist on
about $1,000 worth of food in the United States, and if, as surveys
indicated, families tended to spend about one-third of their in-
comes on food, then in theory a family needed $3,000 of income
to avoid being in poverty. Hence, $3,000 was the poverty thresh-
old. (Bear in mind the lower price levels of the 1960s.) This figure
was quickly adopted by the Lyndon B. Johnson administration as
a handy round number that could be used for marking progress
in its War on Poverty. Orshansky developed a whole matrix of
poverty thresholds, based on family size, elderly or non-elderly
144
Biographical Sketches

status, and urban or non-urban location. Although it has often
been criticized over the decades, the Orshansky index, as it is
sometimes known, remains the official yardstick for poverty in
the United States. It rises with inflation but not for any other rea-
son. Data released in 2007 placed the 2006 poverty line for a fam-
ily of two adults and two children at $20,444, and the poverty rate
for the nation at 12.3 percent. Orshansky, a 1935 Hunter College
graduate and lifelong public servant, retired from the Social Secu-
rity Administration in 1982. Among friends and former co-work-
ers, she was known affectionately as “Miss Poverty.”
Further Reading
David Brady, “Lies, Damned Lies, Poverty Statistics,” Duke Magazine 92,
no. 1 (January-February 2006), accessed at http://www.dukemagazine.
duke.edu/dukemag; Gordon M. Fisher, “The Development and History
of Poverty Thresholds,” Social Security Bulletin 55, no. 4 (Winter 1992):
3–14; Robert D. Hershey Jr., “The Hand That Shaped America’s Poverty
Line as the Realistic Index,” The New York Times (August 4, 1989): A11;
U.S. Census Bureau, “Income, Poverty, and Health Insurance Coverage
in the United States: 2006,” accessed at http://www.census.gov.
John D. Rockefeller (1839–1937)
The Rockefeller name evokes an era of ruthless capitalism, rob-
ber barons, muckraking journalism, trust-busting, and dynastic
privilege, as well as philanthropy on a massive scale. John D.
Rockefeller came of age at a time when whale oil was no longer
sufficient to light America’s lamps and a refined petroleum prod-
uct, kerosene, was just beginning to offer a good alternative.
(Later, the automobile industry would spur a rapidly growing
demand for another petroleum derivative, gasoline.) Oil drilling
was a chancy business at best, but Rockefeller was smart enough
to leave that aside and focus instead on the refining end of the in-
dustry. He and his associates formed the Standard Oil Company
in 1870; they soon controlled nearly all refining activities in the
Cleveland area. Over time, Rockefeller built up Standard Oil to
the point where it completely dominated the domestic oil-refin-
ing industry. By 1896, when he was 57 years old, Rockefeller was
ready to retire from active management of Standard Oil. For the
remaining 40 years of his life, he occupied himself with giving
away money.
Biographical Sketches
145

There was much to give away, since Rockefeller was by far
the richest man of his time. The fortune he had accumulated by
1913 ($900 million) represented a share of the U.S. gross domes-
tic product that today would translate to about $200 billion,
vastly more than even Bill Gates can claim. Estimates vary, but it
appears that by the end of his life Rockefeller had given away
roughly half of his fortune. Objects of his philanthropy included
the University of Chicago, the Rockefeller University, and vari-
ous other colleges and universities, notably several historically
black colleges. One of these, Spelman College in Atlanta, is
named for Rockefeller’s wife, Laura Celestia Spelman.
Further Reading
Ron Chernow, Titan: The Life of John D. Rockefeller, Sr., New York: Random
House, 1998; Michael Klepper and Robert Gunther, The Wealthy 100:
From Benjamin Franklin to Bill Gates – A Ranking of the Richest Americans,
Past and Present, Secaucus, NJ: Citadel Press, 1996.
Paul G. Schervish (b. 1946)
Paul Schervish is one of the nation’s best-known philanthropy
experts, which of course implies that he is also an authority on
those who engage in philanthropy, namely, the wealthy. Trained
in both theology and sociology, Schervish has conducted many
interviews with wealthy individuals to try to understand what
motivates their giving. The 1994 book Gospels of Wealth is an im-
portant product of that research. Schervish was in the news in
1999 for an estimate he and John Havens made of the amount of
wealth that Americans were likely to transfer to heirs and charity
in the first half of the 21st century—$41 trillion at a minimum.
This was shaping up to be, as they put it, the largest intergenera-
tional wealth transfer in history. The unprecedented magnitude
of the wealth to be transferred and its concentration in the hands
of a relatively small segment of the population led Schervish and
Havens to speculate that the United States would soon be enter-
ing a “golden age of philanthropy.” By their estimate, at least $6
trillion was likely to be donated to charitable causes.
Schervish holds degrees in literature, theology, and sociol-
ogy, including a doctorate in sociology from the University of
Wisconsin (1980). He is currently the director of the Center on
Wealth and Philanthropy at Boston College. A senior advisor to
146
Biographical Sketches

the John Templeton Foundation and to the Wealth & Giving
Forum, Schervish consults widely on issues of philanthropy.
Further Reading
John J. Havens and Paul G. Schervish, “Millionaires and the Millennium:
New Estimates of the Forthcoming Wealth Transfer and the Prospects
for a Golden Age of Philanthropy,” accessible at http://www.bc.edu;
Paul G. Schervish, Platon E. Coutsoukis, and Ethan Lewis, Gospels of
Wealth: How the Rich Portray Their Lives, New York: Praeger, 1994.
Thomas M. Shapiro (b. 1947)
In 1999, African Americans in the United States earned about 60
cents for every dollar earned by whites. This income gap is sig-
nificant, but its size cannot compare to the wealth gap the same
year, when African Americans had only about 10 cents of accu-
mulated wealth for each dollar of wealth held by whites. As
Thomas Shapiro explains in his book The Hidden Cost of Being
African American, wealth confers many tangible and intangible
advantages. It improves one’s chances of being able to buy a
home, allows one to live in a better (safer) neighborhood, pro-
vides access to higher-quality public schools, and furnishes an
all-important safety net. Because whites are so disproportion-
ately wealthy compared to blacks, they enjoy a racial economic
advantage that carries forward from generation to generation.
Shapiro argues that social justice requires us to pursue policies
that might narrow the gap, such as children’s savings accounts,
individual development accounts (as pioneered by Michael Sher-
raden), and estate taxation. These asset-based policies would be
race-neutral in design, but over time they should work to shrink
both the rich-poor and the black-white economic divides.
Shapiro had a fruitful collaboration with fellow sociologist
Melvin Oliver on the 1995 book Black Wealth/White Wealth, which
won several prestigious awards. He is a 1969 graduate of the Uni-
versity of Wisconsin and holds a PhD in sociology from Wash-
ington University in St. Louis (1978). Currently, he is the Pokross
Professor of Law and Social Policy at Brandeis University.
Further Reading
Melvin Oliver and Thomas Shapiro, Black Wealth/White Wealth: A New
Perspective on Racial Inequality, New York: Routledge, 1995; Thomas
Biographical Sketches
147

Shapiro, The Hidden Cost of Being African American: How Wealth Perpetu-
ates Inequality, New York: Oxford University Press, 2004.
Michael Sherraden (b. 1948)
Michael Sherraden’s 1991 book Assets and the Poor: A New Ameri-
can Welfare Policy lived up to its title by introducing a genuinely
new idea for helping low-income Americans start the climb to a
better life. Sherraden proposed that the government help the poor
save for such life goals as the purchase of a house, post-secondary
education, a business start-up, or a more secure retirement. Low
income earners could put their savings into individual develop-
ment accounts (IDAs), and the government would match their
savings at a one-to-one or two-to-one ratio. As Sherraden has
often pointed out, a program of this kind would not be so differ-
ent from a number of existing programs, like individual retire-
ment accounts (IRAs) and 529 college savings plans, through
which the government already subsidizes socially beneficial ac-
tivities. The big difference would be that IDAs would mainly ben-
efit the poor, rather than the middle and upper classes. IDA
programs are now being tried out—or “piloted”—in many states.
The results so far indicate that the poor can be successful at sav-
ing when offered a structured program with incentives. Sher-
raden believes that IDA programs yield other behavioral benefits,
too: they encourage hard work, deferral of consumption, and
more positive attitudes toward planning for the future.
Sherraden is a professor of social development at Washing-
ton University in St. Louis and the founder, as well as long-time
director, of the Center for Social Development there. He has ad-
vised the White House, the Treasury Department, and the gov-
ernments of several other countries, including the United
Kingdom, Taiwan, and Canada. He was an undergraduate at
Harvard and holds a PhD from the University of Michigan.
Further Reading
Mark Schreiner and Michael Sherraden, Can the Poor Save? Saving and
Asset Building in Individual Development Accounts, Somerset, NJ: Transac-
tion Publishers, 2006; Michael Sherraden, Assets and the Poor: A New
American Welfare Policy, Armonk, NY: M. E. Sharpe, 1991; Judy H. Watts,
“Helping the Poor Build Assets,” Washington University in St. Louis Mag-
azine (Fall 2000), accessed at http://magazine.wustl.edu.
148
Biographical Sketches

Ronald J. Sider (b. 1939)
Politically speaking, Ron Sider is nobody’s idea of a typical evan-
gelical Christian. Evangelicals are commonly viewed as core con-
stituents of the Republican Party base, dependably supporting
the most conservative positions on social and economic issues.
Sider breaks the mold, at least in part. Founder and president of
Evangelicals for Social Action (ESA), he calls upon his fellow
Christians not to ignore the huge gap between the rich and the
poor, but to follow Jesus’s words and example in providing for
the “least among us.” His influential Rich Christians in an Age of
Hunger, first published in 1977, challenged people of faith in the
wealthy industrialized nations to do more—much more—for the
world’s poor. In his 1999 book Just Generosity, Sider laid out an
ambitious program for reducing U.S. poverty through such mea-
sures as a federally mandated living wage, equal per-student
funding of all schools, and universal health insurance.
While the liberal tilt of his antipoverty agenda is undeniable,
Sider defies easy labels. He is, for example, a supporter of school
voucher experiments, faith-based initiatives, and a constitutional
ban on same-sex marriage. An ally of President George W. Bush
on social issues, he is a strong dissenter from the president’s tax
cuts and his plan to abolish estate taxes. Taxes, Sider believes,
should be levied according to people’s ability to pay. The Bush
tax cuts have disproportionately benefited the wealthy, when
they could and should have been directed to the middle class and
the working poor. Sider also parts ways with the president on en-
vironmental issues. God expects us to be good stewards of the
Earth, and the Bush record of environmental stewardship has
been, as Sider sees it, “abominable.”
Raised in rural Canada the son of a pastor, Sider earned his
BA in European history from the University of Waterloo (On-
tario). He went on to Yale University, where he received a Master
of Divinity degree and a PhD in history. In addition to directing
the ESA, Sider is a professor of theology, holistic ministry, and
public policy at the Palmer Theological Seminary of Eastern Uni-
versity, outside Philadelphia.
Further Reading
Ronald J. Sider, Just Generosity: A New Vision for Overcoming Poverty in
America, Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Books, 1999; Ronald J. Sider, Rich
Christians in an Age of Hunger: Moving from Affluence to Generosity, 5th ed.,
Biographical Sketches
149

Nashville: W Publishing Group, 2005; Tim Stafford, “Ron Sider’s Unset-
tling Crusade,” Christianity Today (March 13, 2000).
Timothy M. Smeeding (b. 1948)
When people want to compare the income distribution within
the United States with what is seen in other countries, they often
turn to the work of Timothy Smeeding, an economist and profes-
sor of public policy at Syracuse University. For many years,
Smeeding has studied income patterns in both the United States
and Europe. He was instrumental in the establishment of the
Luxembourg Income Study (LIS) in 1983 and served as its over-
all director until retiring in 2006. Smeeding and others have used
the data yielded by the LIS to draw a much clearer picture of
where the United States stands relative to other industrialized
nations, such as Sweden, Germany, France, and Canada, on var-
ious measures of income inequality. When looking at incomes
generated by the market—before the government either taxes or
provides benefits to families—the United States is just behind the
United Kingdom as the most unequal in its income distribution.
After taking into account taxes and transfers by the government,
the United States overtakes Britain as the most unequal of all. In
related research, Smeeding and Lee Rainwater have found that
the United States lifts many fewer children out of poverty
through government action than other wealthy nations do.
Smeeding has also studied international public opinion regard-
ing income distribution. In unpublished research with Lars Os-
berg, he finds Americans to be increasingly polarized in their
attitudes toward inequality, with a more accepting attitude to-
ward inequality at the poor end, but a less accepting attitude to-
ward inequality at the wealthy end of the spectrum. Smeeding is
a 1970 graduate of Canisius College with an economics doctorate
from the University of Wisconsin (1975).
Further Reading
Lars Osberg and Timothy Smeeding, “‘Fair’ Inequality? An Interna-
tional Comparison of Attitudes to Pay Differentials,” unpublished (June
2005); Lee Rainwater and Timothy M. Smeeding, Poor Kids in a Rich
Country: America’s Children in Comparative Perspective, New York: Russell
Sage Foundation, 2003.
150
Biographical Sketches

Samuel Walton (1918–1992)
In his 1992 autobiography, Sam Walton recounts how shocked he
was one day in 1985 to learn that he had been named the richest
American by Forbes magazine. Older by three decades than Bill
Gates was when he reached the top of the Forbes list some years
later, Walton was an acknowledged business innovator of the first
rank. His Wal-Mart chain of retail stores (the first was opened in
1962) thrived on a combination of “everyday low prices” and
rapid inventory turnover. Wal-Mart struck ferociously tough bar-
gains with suppliers, established a tight distribution network, in-
stalled the most advanced computerized merchandise-tracking
system ever seen, and fended off labor unions. Walton presided
over his corporate domain with a folksy manner that never quite
masked the ruthless competitor within. Even detractors conceded
that he knew how to motivate his workers—he introduced the
term “associates”—to high levels of performance. Some of them
managed to retire very comfortably with their Wal-Mart stock
holdings, even though they had never earned much more than
the minimum wage. After the company went public in 1970, Wal-
ton chose to retain about 40 percent of the stock for his family. His
five main heirs were collectively worth over $60 billion in the fall
of 2005, making them the nation’s wealthiest family. Contrary to
popular belief, Sam Walton was born in Oklahoma, not Arkansas,
but Wal-Mart’s corporate headquarters have always been in Ben-
tonville, Arkansas. The company he built is now the largest in the
world.
Further Reading
Bob Ortega, In Sam We Trust: The Untold Story of Wal-Mart, the World’s Most
Powerful Retailer, New York: Times Business, 2000; Sam Walton, with John
Huey, Sam Walton: Made in America, New York: Doubleday, 1992.
Richard Wilkinson (b. 1943)
No one is surprised to learn that richer nations have better health
statistics—lower infant mortality, longer life expectancy, and so
on—than poorer nations. For example, health measures for Ger-
many today are generally higher than those for Guatemala, as
Biographical Sketches
151

one would expect from the large disparity between the two coun-
tries’ average income levels. What may come as a surprise is the
fact that health tends to be worst in countries where the gap be-
tween rich and poor is widest, regardless of the average wealth
or poverty of the country. Richard Wilkinson, a professor of so-
cial epidemiology at the University of Nottingham (England),
has been a pioneer in sorting out the effects of inequality on so-
cial health. He and his co-researchers have found that rates of
homicide and other types of violent crime, heart disease, infant
mortality, and many other dimensions of social well-being are
statistically correlated with income inequality. This holds true
across nations, states, and counties. In other words, inequality is
harmful to people’s health, in and of itself. Why? Wilkinson be-
lieves that when people see themselves on the lower rungs of a
stretched-out social ladder, they are likely to experience a sense
of deprivation, unworthiness, depression, and lack of control. In
short, they feel stressed, and the stress takes a toll on their minds
and bodies. Therefore, if we want to achieve broad advance-
ments in social well-being, it would be a mistake, according to
Wilkinson, merely to treat the psychosocial symptoms of in-
equality with more prisons or doctors or counseling programs. A
better solution, he thinks, would be to deal with the structural
causes of the problem, which means taking steps to reduce in-
equality and increase social cohesion. Richard Wilkinson was a
senior research fellow at the University of Sussex before assum-
ing his present position at the University of Nottingham.
Further Reading
Richard Wilkinson, The Impact of Inequality: How to Make Sick Societies
Healthier, New York: The New Press, 2005; Richard Wilkinson, Unhealthy
Societies: The Afflictions of Inequality, London: Routledge, 1996; R. G.
Wilkinson and K. E. Pickett, “Income Inequality and Population Health:
A Review and Explanation of the Evidence,” Social Science and Medicine
62, no. 7 (2006): 1768–1784.
Edward N. Wolff (b. 1946)
A New York University professor of economics, Edward Wolff is
generally considered the nation’s top expert on U.S. wealth in-
equality. Wolff has been studying American wealth patterns for
over a quarter-century; his primer on the subject, Top Heavy, went
152
Biographical Sketches

into its third edition in 2002. Broadly speaking, Wolff has found,
and so far no one has seriously disputed, that wealth in the
United States has become more concentrated since the 1970s. In-
deed, the wealth gap has grown wider than at any time since the
late 1920s. In no other advanced economy for which we have
data, whether Japan, Germany, France, or the United Kingdom,
is wealth as unequally held as in the United States. Wolff has pro-
posed a number of suggestions for alleviating the disparity be-
tween rich and poor: raise the minimum wage, make the earned
income tax credit (EITC) more generous, help low-income fami-
lies build up assets, and implement a wealth tax. It is the final
suggestion that stirs the most controversy. Wolff points to
Switzerland as a prime example of an affluent country that as-
sesses a modest tax on wealth accumulations; he suggests that a
similar tax in the United States could easily raise over $50 billion
of tax revenue each year.
A Harvard graduate (1968) with a PhD from Yale (1974),
Wolff is the author of many scholarly articles and a number of
books. He has written on income and wealth distribution, alter-
native measures of living standards, regional variations in eco-
nomic well-being, and labor productivity trends. Besides his
primary affiliation with New York University, he is a research as-
sociate at the National Bureau of Economic Research and a senior
scholar at the Levy Economics Institute.
Further Reading
Edward N. Wolff, “The Rich Get Richer: And Why the Poor Don’t,” The
American Prospect 12, no. 3 (February 12, 2001): 15–17; Edward N. Wolff,
Top Heavy: The Increasing Inequality of Wealth in America and What Can Be
Done About It, 3rd ed., New York: The New Press, 2002.
Biographical Sketches
153


6
Data and Documents
T
he metrics of economic inequality in the United States are var-
ied, but they tell a fairly consistent story of a wide—and
widening—gap between the rich, especially the super-rich,
and the poor over the past few decades. This chapter presents a
range of statistics on both income and wealth inequality, drawn
mainly from government sources. The aim is to offer a ready ref-
erence place for some of the data most frequently cited in discus-
sions about U.S. poverty and wealth levels. The chapter also
features several document excerpts and short essays dealing with
particular aspects of inequality, such as CEO compensation lev-
els and inheritance taxes. Issues such as the two just mentioned
tend to be controversial, with advocates staking out strong pro
and con positions. The excerpts offered below can be, at the very
least, a starting point for anyone who wants to become better in-
formed about inequality-related topics. Many additional sources
of information are provided in chapters 7 and 8.
U.S. household income has been slowly shifting toward the
top quintile for several decades, as seen in Table 6.1. In 1967, the
poorest quintile had 4.0 percent of total income; it maintained or
increased its share through 1984 but then underwent a gradual
reduction to 3.4 percent in 2005. The second and third quintiles
also shrank between 1967 and 2005, and did so more steadily. The
second-from-highest quintile has been shrinking gradually since
the mid-1980s. Only the top quintile’s share of income has actu-
ally increased over the full 38-year period from 1967 to 2005, ris-
ing from 43.6 to 50.4 percent.
The Gini coefficient or index is the most commonly cited sin-
gle number reflecting overall income (or wealth) inequality for a
155

156
Data and Documents
TABLE 6.1
U.S Household Income Shares by Quintile, 1967–2005
(All figures in percent)
Lowest
Second
Middle
Fourth
Highest
Year
Quintile
Quintile
Quintile
Quintile
Quintile
2005
3.4
8.6
14.6
23.0
50.4
2004
3.4
8.7
14.7
23.2
50.1
2003
3.4
8.7
14.8
23.4
49.8
2002
3.5
8.8
14.8
23.3
49.7
2001
3.5
8.7
14.6
23.0
50.1
2000
3.6
8.9
14.8
23.0
49.8
1999
3.6
8.9
14.9
23.2
49.4
1998
3.6
9.0
15.0
23.2
49.2
1997
3.6
8.9
15.0
23.2
49.4
1996
3.6
9.0
15.1
23.3
49.0
1995
3.7
9.1
15.2
23.3
48.7
1994
3.6
8.9
15.0
23.4
49.1
1993
3.6
9.0
15.1
23.5
48.9
1992
3.8
9.4
15.8
24.2
46.9
1991
3.8
9.6
15.9
24.2
46.5
1990
3.8
9.6
15.9
24.0
46.6
1989
3.8
9.5
15.8
24.0
46.8
1988
3.8
9.6
16.0
24.2
46.3
1987
3.8
9.6
16.1
24.3
46.2
1986
3.8
9.7
16.2
24.3
46.1
1985
3.9
9.8
16.2
24.4
45.6
1984
4.0
9.9
16.3
24.6
45.2
1983
4.0
9.9
16.4
24.6
45.1
1982
4.0
10.0
16.5
24.5
45.0
1981
4.1
10.1
16.7
24.8
44.3
1980
4.2
10.2
16.8
24.7
44.1
1979
4.1
10.2
16.8
24.6
44.2
1978
4.2
10.2
16.8
24.7
44.1
1977
4.2
10.2
16.9
24.7
44.0
1976
4.3
10.3
17.0
24.7
43.7
continues

nation. It can range from a low value of zero, indicating complete
equality, to a high value of 100, indicating complete inequality. As
we see in Table 6.2, the Gini coefficient for the United States has
risen (moved in the inequality direction) fairly steadily since
about 1974. Two other measures in the same table confirm what
the Gini and the income quintile data suggest: growing inequality
Data and Documents
157
TABLE 6.1
Continued
Lowest
Second
Middle
Fourth
Highest
Year
Quintile
Quintile
Quintile
Quintile
Quintile
1975
4.3
10.4
17.0
24.7
43.6
1974
4.3
10.6
17.0
24.6
43.5
1973
4.2
10.4
17.0
24.5
43.9
1972
4.1
10.4
17.0
24.5
43.9
1971
4.1
10.6
17.3
24.5
43.5
1970
4.1
10.8
17.4
24.5
43.3
1969
4.1
10.9
17.5
24.5
43.0
1968
4.2
11.1
17.6
24.5
42.6
1967
4.0
10.8
17.3
24.2
43.6
Source: U.S. Census Bureau. 2006. Current Population Reports, P60-231, “Income, Poverty, and Health Insurance
Coverage in the United States: 2005,” 40–41.
TABLE 6.2
Selected Measures of Income Inequality in the United States, 1967–2005
Year
Gini Index
90th/10th percentile
95th/50th percentile
2005
46.9
11.17
3.61
2004
46.6
11.08
3.57
2003
46.4
11.22
3.57
2002
46.2
10.75
3.54
2001
46.6
10.63
3.57
2000
46.2
10.58
3.46
1999
45.8
10.42
3.52
1998
45.6
10.44
3.41
1997
45.9
10.60
3.43
continues

158
Data and Documents
TABLE 6.2
Continued
Year
Gini Index
90th/10th percentile
95th/50th percentile
1996
45.5
10.33
3.40
1995
45.0
10.11
3.32
1994
45.6
10.57
3.41
1993
45.4
10.64
3.37
1992
43.3
10.34
3.27
1991
42.8
10.22
3.21
1990
42.8
10.12
3.17
1989
43.1
9.99
3.17
1988
42.6
10.21
3.16
1987
42.6
10.23
3.11
1986
42.5
10.09
3.10
1985
41.9
9.69
3.05
1984
41.5
9.55
3.06
1983
41.4
9.61
3.04
1982
41.2
9.48
3.00
1981
40.6
9.22
2.91
1980
40.3
9.09
2.86
1979
40.4
9.14
2.87
1978
40.2
8.90
2.80
1977
40.2
8.74
2.80
1976
39.8
8.70
2.76
1975
39.7
8.53
2.74
1974
39.5
8.58
2.76
1973
40.0
8.86
2.78
1972
40.1
8.99
2.75
1971
39.6
9.08
2.68
1970
39.4
9.22
2.67
1969
39.1
8.93
2.62
1968
38.6
8.68
2.58
1967
39.7
9.23
2.70
Source: U.S. Census Bureau. 2006. Current Population Reports, P60–231, “Income, Poverty , and Health Insurance
Coverage in the United States: 2005,” 40–41.

of income. The 90th-10th percentile ratio is a measure of top-to-
bottom income disparity. Thus, the figure of 11.17 for 2005 means
that the average household that was one-tenth below the top of
the income distribution had more than 11 times as much income
as the average household that was one-tenth above the bottom. In
1967, the ratio had been much less unequal at 9.23. In the last col-
umn, we have an index of top-to-middle income disparity. Natu-
rally, this ratio is lower than the 90th-10th ratio, but what is telling
is the fact that it climbed from 2.70 in 1967 to 3.61 in 2005—a rel-
atively bigger stretch than occurred in the top-to-bottom income
gap. This statistic hints at the way the very top of the U.S. income
scale has been pulling away from everyone below it.
To gain some international perspective on the degree of in-
come inequality in the United States, one needs to have compara-
ble measures of inequality for other nations. That is provided in
Table 6.3, a listing of Gini coefficients for nations across the globe.
The six highest Ginis, indicating the most extreme income in-
equality, have values of 60 or above, and all except one are nations
in Africa: Botswana, Central African Republic, Lesotho, Namibia,
and Sierra Leone; the only non-African nation is Bolivia. These are
countries that stand out not only for the inequality in their income
distributions but also for their low per-capita income levels. Eu-
ropean countries tend to have much narrower income spreads;
the Scandinavians in particular boast low Gini coefficients, in the
20s. The United States, with a Gini of 45, borders a more equal na-
tion on the north (Canada: 33.1) and a less equal nation on the
south (Mexico: 54.6). The country often cited as the greatest eco-
nomic rival of the United States, both in the present and the fu-
ture, is China, which now has a Gini coefficient that is essentially
the same (44) as the U.S. coefficient. This represents a significant
departure from Maoist egalitarian ideals, to say the least, but it is
consistent with the emergence of a dynamic capitalist economy in
China since around 1990. The shift to a market economy has been
taking a similar toll on the vaunted Soviet-era equality of Russia;
that nation now has a Gini (40.5) that could match the United
States in a few more years.
As noted in chapter 2, growing income inequality has its
roots in growing wage inequality, since wages are by far the most
important source of income for Americans. Tables 6.4 and 6.5
provide useful statistics on U.S. wage patterns over time. Table
6.4 looks at wage trends since 1973, tracing the changes for each
decile. What is especially notable over the period from 1979 to
Data and Documents
159

160
Data and Documents
TABLE 6.3
Global Gini Coefficient
Albania
26.7 (2005)
Egypt 
34.4 (2001)
Algeria
35.3 (1995)
El Salvador 
52.5 (2001)
Argentina
48.3 (June 2006)
Estonia  
33 (2003)
Armenia
41 (2004)
Ethiopia 
30 (2000)
Australia 
35.2 (1994)
European Union 
31.3 (2003 est.)
Austria 
31 (2002)
Finland 
26.9 (2000)
Azerbaijan  
36.5 (2001)
France 
26.7 (2002)
Bangladesh  
31.8 (2000)
Georgia 
38 (2003)
Belarus 
30.4 (2000)
Germany  
28.3 (2000)
Belgium  
25 (1996)
Ghana 
30 (1999)
Bolivia  
60.6 (2002)
Greece  
35.1 (2003)
Bosnia/Herzegovina  
26.2 (2001)
Guatemala  
59.9 (2005)
Botswana  
63 (1993)
Guinea 
38.1 (2006)
Brazil  
56.7 (2005)
Honduras 
55 (1999)
Bulgaria 
31.6 (2005)
Hong Kong 
52.3 (2001)
Burkina Faso  
48.2 (1998)
Hungary 
26.9 (2002)
Burundi 
33.3 (1998)
India  
32.5 (2000)
Cambodia  
40 (2004 est.)
Indonesia  
34.8 (2004)
Cameroon  
44.6 (2001)
Iran  
43 (1998)
Canada  
33.1 (1998)
Ireland  
35.9 (1996)
Central African Rep. 
61.3 (1993)
Israel 
38.6 (2005)
Chile 
53.8 (2003)
Italy  
36 (2000)
China 
44 (2002)
Jamaica  
38.1 (2003)
Colombia 
53.8 (2005)
Japan  
38.1 (2002)
Costa Rica  
46.5 (2000)
Jordan  
36.4 (1997)
Côte d’Ivoire  
45.2 (1998)
Kazakhstan  
31.5 (2003)
Croatia 
29 (2001)
Kenya 
44.5 (1997)
Czech Republic  
27.3 (2003)
Korea, South 
35.8 (2000)
Denmark 
23.2 (2002)
Kyrgyzstan  
29 (2001)
Dominican Republic  
47.4 (1998)
Laos  
37 (1997)
East Timor 
38 (2002 est.)
Latvia  
35 (2003)
Ecuador  
42 (2003)*
Lesotho  
63.2 (1995)
continues

Data and Documents
161
TABLE 6.3
Continued
Lithuania  
32.5 (2003)
Russia  
40.5 (2005)
Macedonia  
28.2 (1998)
Rwanda
28.9 (1985)
Madagascar  
47.5 (2001)
Senegal
41.3 (1995)
Malawi 
50.3 (1997)
Sierra Leone
62.9 (1989)
Malaysia  
46.1 (2002)
Singapore
42.5 (1998)
Mali
50.5 (1994)
Slovakia
25.8 (1996)
Mauritania
39 (2000)
Slovenia
28.4 (1998)
Mauritius
37 (1987 est.)
South Africa
59.3 (1995)
Mexico
54.6 (2000)
Spain
32.5 (1990)
Moldova
33.2 (2003)
Sri Lanka  
50 (2004)
Mongolia
44 (1998)
Sweden  
25 (2000)
Morocco
40 (2005 est.)
Switzerland
33.1 (1992)
Mozambique
39.6 (1996–97)
Tajikistan
34.7 (1998)
Namibia
70.7 (2003)
Tanzania
38.2 (1993)
Nepal
37.7 (2005)
Thailand
51.1 (2002)
Netherlands
30.9 (2005)
Tunisia
40 (2005 est.)
New Zealand
36.2 (1997)
Turkey
42 (2003)
Nicaragua
55.1 (2001)
Turkmenistan
40.8 (1998)
Niger
50.5 (1995)
Uganda
43 (1999)
Nigeria
50.6 (1996–97)
Ukraine 
31 (2006)
Norway
25.8 (2000)
United Kingdom  
36.8 (1999)
Pakistan
41 (FY98/99)
United States
45 (2004)
Panama
56.4 (2000)
Uruguay  
45.2 (2006)
Papua New Guinea
50.9 (1996)
Uzbekistan
26.8 (2000)
Paraguay
56.8 (1999)
Venezuela  
49.1 (1998)
Peru
49.8 (2000)
Vietnam  
36.1 (1998)
Philippines
46.1 (2003)
Yemen
33.4 (1998)
Poland
34.1 (2002)
Zambia
52.6 (1998)
Portugal
38.5 (1997)
Zimbabwe 
56.8 (2003)
Romania
28.8 (2003)
* Ecuador’s data are for urban households.
Source: U.S. Central Intelligence Agency, The World Factbook, “Distribution of Family Income—Gini Index,” updated
on June 19, 2007. Accessed at https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/fields/2172.html.

162
Data and Documents
TABLE 6.4
Unequal Wage Growth, 1973–2005 (2005 dollars)
Wage by percentile*
Year
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
95
Real hourly wage
1973
$6.79
$8.20
$9.74
$11.33
$12.99
$14.91
$17.31
$19.80
$24.88
$31.21
1979
7.37
8.40
9.86
11.60
13.13
15.22
17.99
20.96
25.64
31.31
1989
6.33
7.88
9.45
11.29
13.13
15.33
18.24
21.81
27.54
33.85
1995
6.44
7.87
9.41
11.07
12.89
15.25
18.18
22.01
28.44
35.67
2000
7.15
8.81
10.29
11.90
13.88
16.42
19.47
23.66
30.92
39.44
2005
7.20
8.84
10.21
12.12
14.29
16.82
19.86
24.44
32.49
41.70
Percent change
1973–79
8.4%
2.4%
1.2%
2.4%
1.0%
2.1%
3.9%
5.9%
3.1%
0.3%
1979–89
–14.1
–6.2
–4.2
–2.7
0.0
0.7
1.4
4.0
7.4
8.1
1989–2000
13.0
11.8
8.9
5.4
5.7
7.1
6.7
8.5
12.3
16.5
1989–95
1.8
–0.1
–0.5
–2.0
–1.8
–0.5
–0.3
0.9
3.3
5.4
1995–2000
11.1
11.9
9.4
7.5
7.7
7.7
7.1
7.5
8.7
10.6
2000–05
0.6
0.3
–0.8
1.8
3.0
2.4
2.0
3.3
5.1
5.7
1979–2005
–2.3
5.2
3.5
4.4
8.9
10.5
10.4
16.6
26.7
33.2
*The Xth percentile wage is the wage at which X% of the wage earners earn less and (100-X)% earn more.
Source: Mishel, Bernstein, and Allegretto, The State of Working America 2006/2007, p. 121.

2005 is that the hourly wages of those near the top increased
much faster than wages for any other group. At the 90th per-
centile, the gain was 27 percent in real terms, and for those at the
95th percentile, it was a robust 33 percent. Although these are not
spectacular increases by historical standards, they are far bigger
gains than workers farther down the ladder experienced. One
way to illustrate the divergent experiences of low-paid and
highly paid workers is this: in 1979, a worker at the 10th per-
centile had to work about 4.5 hours to earn what a worker at the
95th percentile earned in an hour. In 2005, it took the low-paid
worker 5.8 hours to equal the hourly wage of the 95th percentile
worker. The big picture is clear: in the bottom half of the wage
distribution, American workers had only single-digit gains be-
tween 1979 and 2005, with the lowest-paid decile actually expe-
riencing an absolute drop of 2.3 percent in real wages, while in the
top half of the distribution, workers enjoyed double-digit gains.
The worst wage setback shown in Table 6.4 is the 14.1 per-
cent drop for the first decile during the 1980s. It is probably no
coincidence that this was a decade, starting in 1981, when the
federal minimum wage did not change at all, since many low-
level wage rates are keyed to the minimum wage. Table 6.5 pro-
vides data on the minimum wage back to 1947, with columns for
the minimum and inflation-adjusted minimum wage and for the
fraction (the nominal wage) represented of the average private-
sector nonsupervisory wage. This table is relevant background to
the congressional action taken in the spring of 2007, when, after
a decade at $5.15, the federal minimum wage was finally raised,
in stages, to $7.25, effective the summer of 2009. In real or infla-
tion-adjusted terms and as a fraction of the average U.S. wage,
the minimum wage had fallen to levels not seen in half a century.
Supporters of the raise argued that it was long overdue.
The inequality of wealth holdings in the United States is the
subject of Tables 6.6 and 6.7. In the first, we see that in 1962, the
top one-fifth of wealth-holders claimed over four-fifths of the 
nation’s wealth or net worth. In fact, the inequality was even
greater than those numbers suggest, since the top 1 percent held
fully one-third of all wealth. By 2004, things had not changed
much except to become slightly more unequal: the top quintile
now held 84.7 percent of the nation’s wealth, a bump up from its
previous 81.0 percent. The noticeable drop in the share of the top
1 percent from 1998 to 2001 was largely accounted for by the
bursting of Wall Street’s “dotcom” bubble and subsequent bear
Data and Documents
163

164
Data and Documents
TABLE 6.5
U.S. Minimum Wage, 1947–2006
Year
Nominal
Inflation-adjusted
Fraction of average wage
1947
$0.40
$3.04
35%
1948
0.40
2.82
33%
1949
0.40
2.85
31%
1950
0.75
5.28
56%
1951
0.75
4.89
52%
1952
0.75
4.80
49%
1953
0.75
4.76
47%
1954
0.75
4.73
45%
1955
0.75
4.74
44%
1956*
0.96
5.99
53%
1957
1.00
6.03
53%
1958
1.00
5.86
51%
1959
1.00
5.83
50%
1960
1.00
5.72
48%
1961*
1.05
5.95
49%
1962
1.15
6.46
52%
1963*
1.18
6.54
52%
1964
1.25
6.83
49%
1965
1.25
6.73
48%
1966
1.25
6.54
46%
1967*
1.39
7.06
49%
1968*
1.58
7.71
52%
1969
1.60
7.48
50%
1970
1.60
7.14
47%
1971
1.60
6.84
44%
1972
1.60
6.63
41%
1973
1.60
6.24
39%
1974*
1.87
6.64
42%
1975
2.10
6.88
44%
1976
2.30
7.13
45%
1977
2.30
6.70
42%
continues

Data and Documents
165
TABLE 6.5
Continued
Year
Nominal
Inflation-adjusted
Fraction of average wage
1978
2.65
7.40
45%
1979
2.90
7.41
46%
1980
3.10
7.13
45%
1981
3.35
7.04
45%
1982
3.35
6.65
43%
1983
3.35
6.38
41%
1984
3.35
6.14
40%
1985
3.35
5.94
38%
1986
3.35
5.83
38%
1987
3.35
5.64
37%
1988
3.35
5.44
36%
1989
3.35
5.22
34%
1990*
3.69
5.48
36%
1991*
4.14
5.93
39%
1992
4.25
5.94
39%
1993
4.25
5.80
39%
1994
4.25
5.68
38%
1995
4.25
5.54
37%
1996*
4.38
5.56
36%
1997*
4.88
6.07
39%
1998
5.15
6.31
40%
1999
5.15
6.18
38%
2000
5.15
5.98
37%
2001
5.15
5.82
35%
2002
5.15
5.73
34%
2003
5.15
5.60
34%
2004
5.15
5.46
33%
2005
5.15
5.28
32%
2006
5.15
5.15
31%
*Minimum wage changed during the course of the year; values of nominal and inflation-adjusted minimum wages
reflect weighted averages for the year.
Source: Economic Policy Institute analysis based on data from the U.S. Department of Labor; accessed at
http://www.epi.org/issueguides/minwage/table4.pdf.

market that began in 2000. In any case, most of the wealth lost
from the top 1 percent was balanced by a gain of wealth for
households in the next 4 percent—their share rose from 21.3 to
25.8 percent. Table 6.7 breaks down the assets held by U.S. house-
holds into major categories and shows how equally or unequally
they were distributed across the population in 2004. In every
asset category except housing equity, the top 5 percent of house-
holds owned more than half the wealth. Their dominance is es-
pecially impressive when it comes to non-equity financial
assets—items such as savings accounts, certificates of deposit
(CDs), bonds, and the value of unincorporated businesses. Of
these valuable assets, the top 1 percent of U.S. households own
just about as much as the bottom 99 percent. When it comes to
common stock, whether owned outright or indirectly in pension
accounts, the top 5 percent of households own more than the bot-
tom 95 percent.
To secure a place in middle-class America today, one needs a
college education, yet access to higher education is far from
equal, even when student abilities are comparable. Because of the
cost factor, those from more privileged backgrounds stand a
166
Data and Documents
TABLE 6.6
U.S. Wealth Distribution, 1962–2004
Wealth class*
1962
1983
1989
1998
2001
2004
Top fifth
81.0%
81.3%
83.5%
83.4%
84.4%
84.7%
Top 1%
33.4
33.8
37.4
38.1
33.4
34.3
Next 4%
21.2
22.3
21.6
21.3
25.8
24.6
Next 5%
12.4
12.1
11.6
11.5
12.3
12.3
Next 10%
14.0
13.1
13.0
12.5
12.9
13.4
Bottom four-fifths
19.1%
18.7%
16.5%
16.6%
15.6%
15.3%
Fourth
13.4
12.6
12.3
11.9
11.3
11.3
Middle
5.4
5.2
4.8
4.5
3.9
3.8
Second
1.0
1.2
0.8
0.8
0.7
0.7
Lowest
-0.7
-0.3
-1.5
-0.6
-0.4
-0.5
Total
100.0%
100.0%
100.0%
100.0%
100.0%
100.0%
*Wealth defined as net worth (household assets minus debts).
Source: Mishel, Bernstein, and Allegretto (2007), p. 254.

much better chance of attending and graduating from a four-year
college than do those with less privilege. This can be seen clearly
in Table 6.8, which is based on a national sample of eighth-
graders who were tested on their mathematical abilities in 1988
and categorized by socioeconomic status (SES). In a follow-up
Data and Documents
167
TABLE 6.7
Household Ownership of Asset Types, 2004
Common stock
All
Non-equity
excluding
common
financial
Housing
Wealth class
pensions*
stock**
assets***
equity
Net worth
Top 1%
39.2%
36.9%
49.1%
12.5%
34.4%
Next 4%
28.6               
28.4
23.1 
19.9
24.6
Next 5%
13.3
13.5
9.3
13.5
12.3
Next 10%
11.0
11.9
9.3
19.5
13.4
Bottom 80%
7.9
9.4
9.1
34.6
15.3
Total
100.0%
100.0%
100.0%
100.0%
100.0%
*   Includes direct ownership of stock shares and indirect ownership through mutual funds and trusts.
** Includes direct ownership of stock shares and indirect ownership through mutual funds and trusts, IRAs, Keough
plans, 401(k) plans, and other retirement accounts.
***Includes direct ownership of financial securities and indirect ownership through mutual funds, trusts, and retire-
ment accounts, and net equity in unincorporated businesses.
Source: Mishel, Bernstein, and Allegretto (2007), p. 260.
TABLE 6.8
Probability of Achieving Bachelor’s Degree by 
Socioeconomic Status and Math Ability in 8th Grade
Math ability
Low SES
Middle SES
High SES
Low
3%
7%
30%
Middle
8%
21%
51%
High
29%
47%
74%
Socioeconomic status is determined by a combination of family income, parental education, and parental occupation.
Low math ability means bottom quartile of test-takers; middle ability means the middle two quartiles; and high abil-
ity means the top quartile of test takers.
Source: U.S. Department of Education, National Education Longitudinal Study of 1988 (NELS: 88/2000), accessed at
http://nces.ed.gov/programs/youthindicators.

study in 2000, the students’ eventual levels of educational attain-
ment were noted, from “less than high school completion” to “re-
ceived bachelor’s degree or higher.” The difference in outcomes
by SES is startling. Among students testing in the lowest quartile
of math ability, those from a low SES background stood only one-
tenth as good a chance of graduating from college as those from
a high SES background (3 percent versus 30 percent). Among stu-
dents from a low SES background, those in the top quartile of
ability were slightly less likely to graduate from college than high
SES students who were in the bottom quartile of ability.
Tables 6.9, 6.10, and 6.11 present the broad picture on eco-
nomic inequality by race and ethnicity. In Table 6.9, we find that
among whites, there are three times as many households with in-
comes of $100,000 or more as there are with incomes under
$10,000, based on  2005 data. Among Hispanics, the picture is
quite different: more households receive under $10,000 than re-
ceive $100,000 or more. And among blacks, more than twice as
many households are below $10,000 as are above $100,000. Simi-
lar inequalities can be seen as early as 1980 in the table. Racial
wealth differences are highlighted in Table 6.10 and, as one
would expect, they offer a much more graphic profile of inequal-
ity than income data do. Median household wealth among blacks
in 2004 was $11,800; among whites, it was $118,000, or ten times
as much. 
168
Data and Documents
TABLE 6.9
U.S. Income Extremes by Race and Hispanic Origin, 1980–2005
Non-Hispanic whites
Hispanics (any race)
Blacks
Under
$100,000
Under
$100,000
Under
$100,000
Year
$10,000
and over
$10,000
and over
$10,000
and over
2005
6.4%
19.7%
10.0%
8.8%
17.1%
7.8%
2000
6.1
19.3
9.1
8.3
14.9
8.2
1995
6.5
15.1
14.6
5.4
18.5
5.3
1990
7.1
13.3
12.6
5.6
21.3
5.1
1985
7.9
11.0
13.8
4.4
21.3
3.1
1980
8.1
8.6
13.1
3.3
21.5
2.3
Source: U.S. Census Bureau (2006), Table A-1, pp. 33-34.

Data and Documents
169
TABLE 6.10
U.S. Wealth in Black and White, 1983–2004
(thousands of 2004 dollars)
1983
1989
1992
1995
1998
2001
2004
Median wealth*
Black
$5.5
$2.5
$13.9
$9.1
$11.6
$11.4
$11.8
White
$82.9
$98.4
$82.6
$75.6
$94.6
$113.5
$118.3
Black-white ratio
0.02
0.03
0.17
0.12
0.12
0.10
0.10
Households with zero or negative net wealth
Black
34.1%
40.7%
31.5%
31.3%
27.4%
30.9%
29.4%
White
11.3%
12.1%
13.8%
15.0%
14.8%
13.1%
13.0%
Black-white ratio
3.0
3.4
2.3
2.1
1.9
2.4
2.3
Median financial wealth**
Black
$0.0
$0.0
$0.2
$0.2
$1.4
$1.2
$0.3
White
$23.1
$31.2
$25.4
$22.4
$43.6
$44.9
$36.1
Black-white ratio
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.01
0.03
0.03
0.01
*Wealth is net worth (household assets minus liabilities).
**Financial wealth is defined as liquid and semi-liquid assets, such as mutual funds, trusts, retirement accounts, and pensions.
Source: Mishel, Bernstein, and Allegretto (2007), Table 5.6, p. 258.

Almost 30 percent of black households had zero or negative
net worth, as compared with 13 percent of white households.
When it comes to financial wealth, or wealth in the form of stocks,
bonds, mutual funds, retirement accounts, and so on, the gap be-
tween blacks and whites is almost unbelievably wide. The me-
dian black household has about a penny for every dollar held by
the median white household. A final basis for comparison is the
share of population with income below the official government
poverty line. In Table 6.11, we see that the poverty rate for blacks
has been between three and four times the rate for non-Hispanic
whites for decades. The poverty rate for Hispanics has generally
been lower than for blacks but still much higher than for non-His-
panic whites. In the past ten years, the poverty gaps between
whites and the two major U.S. minorities have narrowed some-
what, but given the fluctuations often seen in those gaps, it is not
clear whether there is a true equalizing trend under way.
170
Data and Documents
TABLE 6.11
U.S. Poverty Rates by Race and Hispanic Origin, 1980–2005
Year
Whites
Hispanics
Blacks
2005
8.3%
21.8%
24.9%
2004
8.7
21.9
24.7
2003
8.2
22.5
24.4
2002
8.0
21.8
24.1
2001
7.8
21.4
22.7
2000
7.4
21.5
22.5
1999
7.7
22.7
23.6
1998
8.2
25.6
26.1
1997
8.6
27.1
26.5
1996
8.6
29.4
28.4
1995
8.5
30.3
29.3
1994
9.4
30.7
30.6
1993
9.9
30.6
33.1
1992
9.6
29.6
33.4
1991
9.4
28.7
32.7
continues

Inequality and the American Public: 
The Maxwell School Survey
How does the American public view the current degree of income in-
equality? Professor Jeffrey Stonecash of Syracuse University began con-
ducting an annual national poll on American attitudes about inequality
in 2004. The 2006 polling report, from which the following is excerpted,
indicates a rising level of concern about U.S. income inequality. Be-
tween 2005 and 2006, for example, there was a 15 percent jump in the
share of the public perceiving that income inequality had increased. Al-
most 55 percent of respondents thought the trend would continue.
Based on this survey, it appears that seven in ten Americans believe we
are becoming a society of haves and have-nots, and over half now see in-
come inequality as a serious problem.
Perceptions of Inequality Trends
While the evidence indicates inequality is increasing, do Americans
recognize this trend? Over the last several years the percentage 
Data and Documents
171
TABLE 6.11
Continued
Year
Whites
Hispanics
Blacks
1990
8.8
28.1
31.9
1989
8.3
26.2
30.7
1988
8.4
26.7
31.3
1987
8.7
28.0
32.4
1986
9.4
27.3
31.1
1985
9.7
29.0
31.3
1984
10.0
28.4
33.8
1983
10.8
28.0
35.7
1982
10.6
29.9
35.6
1981
9.9
26.5
34.2
1980
9.1
25.7
32.5
“Whites” are non-Hispanic whites. Hispanics can be of any race.
Source: U.S. Census Bureau (2006), Table B-1, pp. 48-51.

seeing inequality as increasing has grown from 44.2 percent to 56.7
percent. The percentage that sees it as decreasing is now 16.4 per-
cent. The sense that it will continue to increase has also risen, from
37.4 percent in 2004 to 54.7 percent in 2006. Most respondents, 70.6
percent, agree that we are becoming a society of the haves and
have-nots, and only 23.4 percent disagree. The sense that inequal-
ity is increasing and will continue to increase is widespread.
Over the last 5-10 years, do you think income inequality
has increased, stayed the same, or decreased?
2004
2005
2006
Increased
44.2
41.8
56.7
Stayed the same
25.9
28.6
23.0
Decreased
23.9
24.5
16.4
No opinion
6.0
5.2
4.0
Over the next 5 years, do you think income differences will
decline, stay about the same, or grow larger?
2004
2005
2006
Increase
37.4
49.2
54.7
Stay the same
34.7
30.9
26.3
Decrease
14.1
16.9
11.4
No opinion
13.8
3.0
7.7
Do you think we are becoming a society of the haves and
the have-nots?
2004
2005
2006
Yes
67.6
75.2
70.6
No
27.8
20.5
23.4
No opinion
4.6
4.3
5.9
Those who see inequality as having increased are more
likely to think it is going to increase in the future (59.4 percent
will increase; 21.8 percent will stay the same; 10.8 percent will de-
crease), while those that think no change has occurred are more
optimistic (35.9 percent will increase; 46.0 percent will stay the
same; 15.9 percent will decrease). Likewise, those who see a
haves and have-nots society are more likely to expect inequality
to increase in the future (54.1 percent will increase; 24.8 percent
stay the same) than those who do not (30.0 percent will increase;
47.3 percent stay the same).
172
Data and Documents

Concerns about Inequality
When asked about the extent of opportunity and upward and
downward mobility in American society, opinions are divided
and can be seen in different ways. The Maxwell Poll shows that
in 2006, 25.7 percent think everyone in American society has an
opportunity to succeed, but 32.2 percent think only some have
this opportunity. There is more optimism than pessimism about
mobility, with 30.5 percent in 2006 thinking there is a lot of up-
ward mobility and only 9.7 percent thinking there is not much
mobility. In addition, only 17.3 percent see a lot of downward
mobility and 27.4 percent do not see much downward mobility.
Most respondents see the opportunity for upward mobility,
therefore, and few see a lot of downward mobility.
Views of inequality trends are related to perceptions of 
opportunity. Among those that agree that we are becoming a di-
vided society, 21.6 percent see everyone as having an opportu-
nity and 36.2 percent think only some have opportunity. Among
those who disagree, 47.2 percent see opportunity available to
everyone and 9.4 percent think only some have opportunity.
Among those who think inequality will increase, 22.1 percent
see opportunity for everyone and 33.2 percent think only some
have an opportunity. In contrast, among those who think in-
equality will not change, 36.3 percent think everyone has oppor-
tunity and 19.2 percent think only some have opportunity. While
there are differences of opinion about opportunity in American
society, those optimistic and pessimistic are not strongly polar-
ized. If all those who see us as becoming a society of the haves
and have-nots also saw little equality of opportunity and all
those who do not see a growing divide saw widespread oppor-
tunity, conflicts over opportunity would likely become more 
intense.
Do you think everyone in American society has an op-
portunity to succeed, most do, or do only some have this 
opportunity?
2004
2005
2006
Everyone
28.9
30.3
25.7
Most 
45.5
39.7
40.2
Only some
24.9
29.6
32.2
No opinion
0.8 
.4
1.9
Data and Documents
173

How much upward mobility—children doing better than
the family they come from—do you think there is in America:
a lot, some, or not much?
2004
2005
2006
A lot 
33.4
34.1
30.5
Some mobility
56.4
48.9
56.1
Not much
9.1
14.8
9.7
No opinion 
1.0
2.2
3.7
How about downward mobility in America—children
doing worse than the family they come from—is there a lot,
some, or not much?
2004
2005
2006
A lot 
19.0
16.9
17.3
Some mobility
55.0
50.2
48.2
Not much
22.9
28.3
27.4
No opinion 
3.1
4.6
7.0
When asked about the seriousness of inequality, 51.6 percent
of Americans now see the extent of inequality as a serious prob-
lem, an increase from 38.3 percent in 2004.  Only 15.3 percent
now see it as not much of a problem. The view that inequality is
a serious problem is considerably greater (56.7 percent) among
those who see our society as becoming one of haves and
havenots.  Among those who do not see us as becoming a di-
vided society, 16.1 percent see it as a serious problem, 43.6 per-
cent see it as somewhat of a problem, and 38.2 percent see it as
not much of a problem. Among those who think all have an op-
portunity to succeed, 22.4 percent see inequality as a serious
problem and 25.4 percent see it as not much of a problem. In con-
trast, among those who think only some have an opportunity to
succeed, 70.6 percent see inequality as a serious problem and 5.0
percent as not much of a problem.
Do you see the current extent of income inequality in our
society as a serious problem, somewhat of a problem, or not
much of a problem?
2004
2005
2006
Serious problem
38.3
46.8
51.6
Somewhat of a problem 43.1
38.5
30.6
Not much of a problem
17.1
12.6
15.3
No opinion
1.6
2.0
2.6
174
Data and Documents

California Kids Investment and 
Development Savings (KIDS) Accounts
A good example of an asset-building proposal is the California KIDS ac-
count that was introduced into California’s legislature in early 2007 by
representatives Darrell Steinberg and Robert Dutton, Democrat and
Republican, respectively. The state would deposit $500 into an account
for each child born in California, and with modest additional deposits of
$50 per month, the youngster would have a sizable nest egg by age 18.
Beyond the actual accumulation of capital, the program also promises to
raise the financial sophistication of families and help them form lifelong
habits of saving and investing. The Q & A below was written by Olivia
Calderon of the Washington, D.C. think tank New America Founda-
tion, which strongly supports KIDS accounts and similar programs.
Questions and Answers
What does this bill do?
SB 752 creates a California Kids Investment and Development
Savings (KIDS) Account for every child born in California from
2008 onward. Each account will be seeded with an initial $500
contribution by the state, and housed in the treasurer’s office.
Once account holders turn 18, they may withdraw the funds for
college or career technical education, a first-time home purchase,
or to roll over into a retirement account.
Why are these accounts important?
Success in today’s economy depends not only on a job and a
growing income, but increasingly on the ability to accumulate a
wide range of financial assets. It is therefore troubling that the
personal savings rate nationwide is negative—meaning more
Americans owe more than they save—and is at its lowest since
the Great Depression. Furthermore, nearly half of children in the
U.S. grow up in households with zero or negative savings. Lack-
ing savings leaves many families just a layoff or accident away
from poverty. In California, 7.8 million households, or 29 percent,
would last only three months at the poverty level if they lost their
income and had to rely on their savings and financial assets. By
creating a permanent platform for lifelong savings, KIDS Ac-
counts have the potential to expand opportunity, broaden wealth
accumulation, and fortify the American economy for the long
Data and Documents
175

haul by helping children and their families save. California’s chil-
dren may grow up knowing they own a modest pool of resources
that can help them get started in life as a young adult. For some,
these funds will be used to seed profitable and productive in-
vestments; for others, it may provide a sense of security that
many currently lack. For all, it will provide a basis for financial
literacy, and will engage them in investing in their own futures.
Who is eligible?
Every child born in California on or after January 1, 2008, will re-
ceive an account.
Why do the children of wealthy families get these accounts?
Policies that include everyone but are targeted to people with
greater needs have proven to be more enduring. Including every-
one in the same system will provide the strongest foundation for
increased savings for all. While a KIDS Account will be univer-
sally accessible to each and every child, the majority of benefits
will flow to families with low or modest incomes. Also, since a
family’s income level can fluctuate over the course of a career,
this universal structure will ensure that children are not unfairly
included in or excluded from the program because their parent’s
or parents’ income level reached a high or low point when they
were born.
Why do the children of low-income families get accounts?
The ability to move up and out of poverty often depends on one’s
ability to accumulate wealth. But millions of Americans live in
households with few or no assets. For children in these families,
which are oftentimes low-income households, KIDS Accounts
would provide an easy mechanism to save. By creating the basic
infrastructure for all children to build savings over time, those
children of low-income families that might not otherwise have an
investment account, will have the opportunity to invest in their
own futures.
Is it unrealistic to expect those with low incomes 
to save when they already struggle to get by?
Locally administered Individual Development Accounts (IDAs),
which help low-income individuals save by creating accounts
and matching their savings, have proven successful throughout
176
Data and Documents

California and the United States. Although the KIDS Accounts, as
proposed, do not include matching funds, they do make it easier
for low-income parents to begin to save by providing accounts
into which they can put aside some money for their children. By
simply putting the basic mechanisms in place, these accounts
could make it a great deal easier for people to save.
Will funds in the accounts penalize 
people applying for public assistance?
No. Amounts in accounts will not be considered when determin-
ing eligibility for any state or federally funded benefit.
Who can contribute to the accounts?
Private, voluntary contributions can be made to each account.
These contributions will be after-tax and can come from any
source, including parents, grandparents, friends, employers,
nonprofit organizations, and children themselves.
Who will control and administer the accounts?
Parents and legal guardians will serve as account custodians and
make investment decisions until the account-holder reaches the
age of 18. The treasurer’s office will administer the account like a
public pension fund, by investing it in funds and financial markets.
How much will this cost?
The Department of Finance projects that approximately 566,000
babies will be born in 2008. If the State invested $500 per child,
the deposits would cost an estimated $283 million for the first
year, plus administrative costs. The initial costs would undoubt-
edly be offset in the future, as accounts would grow from the ini-
tial deposit, and would create more investors and homebuyers in
the Golden State.
How can money in a KIDS Account be used?
There are a set of withdrawal restrictions to ensure that the ac-
counts are used for purposes that promote the building of finan-
cial assets. No withdrawals can be made from the KIDS Accounts
until an account-holder turns 18. Once the child reaches the age
of adulthood, he or she may withdraw the funds tax-free for col-
lege or career technical education, a first-time home purchase, or
to roll over into a retirement account.
Data and Documents
177

Has this been done before? How do other policies compare?
The California KIDS Account Act is innovative in many respects,
but it has historic precedents both abroad and in the United
States. The United Kingdom has created a national system of
Child Trust Fund accounts. Every child born in the UK after Sep-
tember 2002 is eligible to receive a voucher of £250; children from
low-income families receive an additional £250. Funds are in-
vested until children reach the age of 18. Unlike the KIDS Ac-
counts bill, the Child Trust Fund accounts are administered as
vouchers, which parents can take to participating banks. Addi-
tionally, there are no use restrictions on withdrawals. Canada has
recently proposed helping low-income families save for their
children’s education with Learning Bonds. This program will
give low-income children a $500 endowment toward a Regis-
tered Education Savings Plan at birth, and $100 top-up deposits
every year. In addition, families with low incomes will be eligible
to receive a matching grant on the first $500 saved into the ac-
count. In the United States, both the Senate and House of Repre-
sentatives introduced bipartisan federal KIDS Accounts
proposals, known as the ASPIRE Act, in 2005. Both bills made 
it through their respective policy committees and on to fiscal
committees.
How much would a child save in a KIDS Account?
If families saved just $50 per month, with a conservative growth
rate of 5 percent, this small investment would be worth nearly
$17,500 when the child turned 18. That would more than cover
the cost of two years of student fees at a University of California
or California State University campus. If the account-holder were
to allow the funds to develop, they would grow to approximately
$31,000 by age 30 and $173,000 by age 65. If the contributions or
growth rate were greater, so too would be the payout.
How will this bill help promote financial literacy?
KIDS Accounts may be used as valuable teaching tools in ensur-
ing that all children become financially literate. While parents
and legal guardians will serve as account custodians and initially
make investment decisions, children will have a stake in learning
about an account that has their name on it. Additionally, provid-
ing every child with an account would facilitate introducing fi-
nancial education into K–12 curriculum.
178
Data and Documents

Ben Bernanke on U.S. Income Inequality
As chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, Ben Bernanke exercises con-
siderable influence over U.S. financial markets. His views on any eco-
nomic topic are bound to be taken seriously by investors and
commentators. In the February 2007 speech excerpted below, Bernanke
follows his predecessor at the Federal Reserve Board, Alan Greenspan,
in publicly acknowledging the growth of income inequality in recent
decades. He cites the possible reasons for this (in sections omitted be-
cause of space limitations) and then offers “policy implications,” giving
strong support to policies that help individuals build up their human
capital.
[T]hree principles seem to be broadly accepted in our society:
that economic opportunity should be as widely distributed and as
equal as possible; that economic outcomes need not be equal but
should be linked to the contributions each person makes to the
economy; and that people should receive some insurance against
the most adverse economic outcomes, especially those arising
from events largely outside the person’s control. Even when we
accept these principles, however, important questions remain. For
example, what is meant in practice by equality of economic op-
portunity? Some might limit the concept to the absence of overt
discrimination against particular individuals or groups, while
others might extend the term to encompass universal access to ad-
equate housing, education, and health care. Another difficult
question is how to balance the need for maintaining strong mar-
ket-based incentives, which support economic growth and effi-
ciency but may be associated with greater inequality of results,
against the goal of insuring individuals against the most adverse
outcomes, which may reduce inequality but also tends to dimin-
ish the strength of incentives. No objective means of answering
these questions exists. One can only try to understand the various
issues and trade-offs involved and then come to a normative
judgment based on that understanding. . . .
Although average [U.S.] economic well-being has increased
considerably over time, the degree of inequality in economic out-
comes has increased as well. Importantly, rising inequality is not
a recent development but has been evident for at least three
decades, if not longer. The data on the real weekly earnings of
full-time wage and salary workers illustrate this pattern. In real
terms, the earnings at the 50th percentile of the distribution
Data and Documents
179

(which I will refer to as the median wage) rose about 11.5 percent
between 1979 and 2006. Over the same period, the wage at the
10th percentile, near the bottom of the wage distribution, rose
just 4 percent, while the wage at the 90th percentile, close to the
top of the distribution, rose 34 percent. . . .
The long-term trend toward greater inequality seen in real
wages is also evident in broader measures of financial well-
being, such as real household income. For example, the share of
income received by households in the top fifth of the income dis-
tribution, after taxes have been paid and government transfers
have been received, rose from 42 percent in 1979 to 50 percent in
2004, while the share of income received by those in the bottom
fifth of the distribution declined from 7 percent to 5 percent. The
share of after-tax income garnered by the households in the top 1
percent of the income distribution increased from 8 percent in
1979 to 14 percent in 2004. Even within the top 1 percent, the dis-
tribution of income has widened during recent decades. . . .
What, if anything, should policymakers do about the trend of
increasing economic inequality? As I noted at the beginning of my
remarks, answering this question inevitably involves some diffi-
cult value judgments that are beyond the realm of objective eco-
nomic analysis—judgments, for example, about the right trade-off
between allowing strong market-based incentives and providing
social insurance against economic risks. Such trade-offs are, of
course, at the heart of decisions about tax and transfer policies that
affect the distribution of income as well as countless other policy
debates.
Policy approaches that would not be helpful, in my view, are
those that would inhibit the dynamism and flexibility of our
labor and capital markets or erect barriers to international trade
and investment. To be sure, the advent of new technologies and
increased international trade can lead to painful dislocations as
some workers lose their jobs or see the demand for their particu-
lar skills decline. But hindering the adoption of new technologies
or inhibiting trade flows would do far more harm than good, as
technology and trade are critical sources of overall economic
growth and of increases in the standard of living.
A better approach for policy is to allow growth-enhancing
forces to work but to try to cushion the effects of any resulting
dislocations. For example, policies to facilitate retraining and job
search by displaced workers, if well designed, could assist the
adjustment process. Policies that reduce the costs to workers of
180
Data and Documents

changing jobs—for example, by improving the portability of
health and pension benefits between employers—would also
help to maintain economic flexibility and reduce the costs that in-
dividuals and families bear as a result of economic change. Of
course, devising policies that accomplish these goals in the most
effective way is not straightforward, nor can such policies deal
with all of the negative effects of trade and technology on af-
fected individuals. Displaced older workers present a particu-
larly difficult problem, as these workers have greater difficulty
than others in finding new jobs and experience a greater decline
in earnings than other workers if they are re-employed. Consid-
erable debate and analysis of policy alternatives lie ahead, but
these discussions will be well worth the effort.
As the larger return to education and skill is likely the single
greatest source of the long-term increase in inequality, policies
that boost our national investment in education and training can
help reduce inequality while expanding economic opportunity. A
substantial body of research demonstrates that investments in
education and training pay high rates of return both to individu-
als and to the society at large. That research also suggests that
workers with more education are better positioned to adapt to
changing demands in the workplace.
In assessing the potential of education and training to mod-
erate inequality, one should keep in mind that the economically
relevant concept of education is much broader than the tradi-
tional course of schooling from kindergarten through high school
and into college.
Indeed, substantial economic benefits may result from any
form of training that helps individuals acquire economically and
socially useful skills, including not only K–12 education, college,
and graduate work but also on-the-job training, coursework at
community colleges and vocational schools, extension courses,
online education, and training in financial literacy. The market
incentives for individuals to invest in their own skills are strong,
and the expanding array of educational offerings available today
allows such investment to be as occupationally focused as de-
sired and to take place at any point in an individual’s life.
Although education and the acquisition of skills is a lifelong
process, starting early in life is crucial. Recent research—some
sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis in collab-
oration with the University of Minnesota—has documented the
high returns that early childhood programs can pay in terms of
Data and Documents
181

subsequent educational attainment and in lower rates of social
problems, such as teenage pregnancy and welfare dependency.
The most successful early childhood programs appear to be those
that cultivate both cognitive and noncognitive skills and that en-
gage families in stimulating learning at home.
To return to the themes I raised at the beginning, the chal-
lenge for policy is not to eliminate inequality per se but rather to
spread economic opportunity as widely as possible. Policies that
focus on education, job training, and skills and that facilitate job
search and job mobility seem to me to be a promising means for
moving toward that goal. By increasing opportunity and capa-
bility, we help individuals and families while strengthening the
nation’s economy as well.
Pay without Performance: 
The Great CEO Guarantee
The U.S. income distribution has been noticeably “stretched” at the
upper end, where stratospheric salaries of chief executive officers (CEOs)
are clearly a big part of the explanation. Critics, like Christian Weller
and Kate Sabatini, authors of the excerpt below, assert that CEO pay is
often unjustified on the basis of job performance. This compensation pol-
icy diverts valuable funds from more important corporate purposes, and
ultimately may harm the economic health of the United States.
Calculated self-enrichment by America’s cosseted chief ex-
ecutive officers has institutional shareholders up in arms and the
Securities and Exchange Commission pondering new corporate
disclosure rules for CEO pay. The response of corporate chief-
tains varies.
Some note that their boards of directors and compensation
experts agree they are worth an average annual salary of be-
tween $2.5 million and $5.4 million (in 2005 dollars) including
performance-based stock incentives and other perks of the famed
“C Suite.” Other executives simply point to their companies’
share price as proof they earn every penny of their pay.
On occasion, both of these arguments may boast some basis
in fact, but often the great pay guarantees that chief executives in
America engineer for themselves are simply blessed by compli-
ant boards and conflicted compensation experts without much
real regard for executive performance. This is costly for share-
182
Data and Documents

holders, but from a public policy perspective escalating CEO pay
packages are a debilitating drag on the American economy.
How costly? Every dollar of CEO compensation, which on av-
erage accounts for about 10 percent of aggregate corporate earn-
ings, displaces a dollar that corporations could have invested in
other things, such as labor, new plant and equipment, and research
and development. Skyrocketing CEO pay can be detrimental to a
company’s longer-term performance and . . . our economy’s over-
all competitiveness. And CEO pay that is not linked to real perfor-
mance can ultimately undermine shareholders’ trust in financial
markets, where millions of Americans have placed their retirement
savings.
Recent investigative reporting by the financial press has ex-
posed the most egregious examples of over-compensated CEOs
and the means by which they enriched themselves. Institutional
investors and financial analysts also regularly crunch the num-
bers of individual corporations to see whether CEOs’ claims of
superior performance are in fact reflected in their companies’
stock price. It is, however, striking to see the extent to which
CEOs as a group have managed to maintain healthy pay levels
even though, in some cases, their companies’ stocks have per-
formed poorly.
Our analysis of CEO pay during five years, from 2001 to
2005, shows that many companies increased the pay of their
CEOs even when the company’s stock price fell short of basic
benchmarks, such as the S&P 500 stock price index, or even when
the company’s stock failed to out-perform staid U.S. Treasury
bonds. Performance-based pay is meant to set the company’s
stock performance apart from the broader market, but if a com-
pany’s stock fails to beat the S&P 500 then the basic goal of per-
formance-based pay is not met.
Similarly, performance-based pay at the very least should
encourage CEOs to lift their companies’ shares above the cost of
capital. This is most easily defined as the rate of interest on U.S.
Treasury bonds, which serve as an anchor for other interest rates
on corporate borrowing, such as commercial paper and corporate
bond rates. Yet, from 2001 to 2005 many CEOs failed to meet this
basic performance goal.
Our analysis of this five-year stock and bond data shows that
total compensation for CEOs of well-performing companies tended
to be higher than compensation for CEOs of poorly performing
companies, yet the differences are small. Consider the following:
Data and Documents
183

• Salaries, which account for 25 percent to 35 percent of a
CEO’s total compensation, are similar for CEOs of
poorly performing companies and well-performing
companies. The mean salary of a CEO whose company’s
stocks underperformed U.S. Treasury bonds during any
five-year period ending between 2001 and 2005 was
$982,757, compared to $943,445 for CEOs whose stocks
performed better than Treasury bonds.
• The bulk of CEOs’ compensation comes in forms other
than salaries in order to inspire good performance, yet
CEOs of companies whose stocks performed poorly still
received very high compensation beyond their salaries.
CEOs whose companies’ stocks failed to do better than
Treasury bonds during any five-year period ending be-
tween 2001 and 2005 received compensation in addition
to their salary to the tune of $2.1 million.
• A substantial share of companies with underperforming
stocks still chose to bump up their CEOs’ compensation.
For example, 16.5 percent of CEOs whose company’s
stocks did not rise faster than Treasury bond yields dur-
ing any five-year period ending between 2001 and 2005,
still received raises in their total compensation.
Such unjustified growth in CEO pay deserves serious atten-
tion. This rising share of corporate resources is diverted away
from other uses, such as long-term corporate investment that is
critical to the future competitiveness of our economy and job
growth throughout the country. Ever-escalating CEO pay also
contributes to rising income inequality in America. In the interest
of a healthy and more equitable economy, it is time to rethink cor-
porate policies and practices that can result in pay without per-
formance for a substantial share of corporate executives.
Are CEOs Overpaid?
Nobel-Prize-winning economist Gary Becker takes a more benign view
of high CEO pay levels than Weller and Sabatini (previous document).
Becker argues that in the market for managerial talent, bigger compa-
nies will offer higher compensation to get the very best managers. Since
the biggest American companies are now much larger than a few
decades ago, it is to be expected that the pay for top management would
184
Data and Documents

keep pace. Likewise, since the biggest American firms tend to dwarf the
biggest foreign firms, American CEO pay levels are relatively higher
than in other countries.
The answer to the question of whether American CEOs are
overpaid is clearly “yes” for those who earn large bonuses and
generous stock options when their companies are doing badly, ei-
ther absolutely or relative to competitors. BusinessWeek has had
an annual list of the most overpaid CEOs relative to the perfor-
mance of the companies they head. A number of well-known
companies usually top that list.
But the concern in the media and in Congress over CEO pay
is not motivated by some bad apples like these, but by the huge
increase in the typical CEO pay in the U.S. during the past 25
years. The total real compensation (that is, compensation ad-
justed for increases in the price level) of CEOs in larger publicly
traded companies during this period grew a remarkable six-fold,
where compensation adds together regular pay, bonuses, stocks
awarded, the value of stock options, and payouts from longer
term pay programs. A big but not the only component of the in-
crease is due to much greater use of stock options. Since median
full-time real earnings during the same period only just about
doubled, the gap between pay at the top and the average pay of
employees widened enormously. It is hard to resist the wide-
spread perception from these trends that CEOs and other top ex-
ecutives are being increasingly overpaid.
The case against the pay of American CEOs looks even more
powerful by recognizing that the typical American company
head receives greater total compensation than company heads in
Great Britain, Canada, Japan, Spain, and in pretty much all de-
veloped countries. Clearly, American CEOs are much better paid
than CEOs elsewhere, even when per capita incomes of the coun-
tries do not differ by very much.
Yet competition for top management can explain the rapid
rise over time in the pay of the average American CEO. To un-
derstand how competition works in the management market,
consider the strong and stable relation at any moment between
the total compensation of CEOs at publicly traded companies,
and the size of the companies they head. For every 10 percent in-
crease in firm size, measured by the market value of assets, by
sales, or by related variables, compensation increases by about 3
percent. This “30 percent” law held during the 1930s, and has held
for every succeeding decade, including right up to the present.
Data and Documents
185

Note that stock options and other forms of compensation than
salaries and bonuses were unimportant until the 1970s, so this re-
lation is not due to the rapid growth of options and compensation
through shares of stock.
The usual explanation given by economists for the positive
relation between compensation and firm size is that the largest
companies attract the best management. Therefore, bigger com-
panies have to pay their CEOs better in order to discourage them
from going to head smaller companies. It is also socially efficient
to have the best mangers run the largest companies because their
greater skills then have a bigger influence, since they would
manage a larger amount of labor and capital. The efficient com-
bining of better managers with larger companies in a competitive
market for top managers would imply a positive relation be-
tween firm size and the total compensation package. This analy-
sis does not explain why the 30 percent rule holds, but it suggests
that the relation between pay and size is likely to be sizable, even
when top management in different sized companies do not differ
greatly in skills and abilities.
We need two additional facts to explain the sharp rise in pay
over time, and the much higher pay in the United States than
other countries. The first is that the average size of large Ameri-
can companies has grown in real terms about six-fold during the
past 25 years, regardless of how “large” is measured, as long as
the same measure is used consistently over time. The other im-
portant fact is that the largest 50, 100, or 500 American publicly
traded companies are much bigger than the largest companies in
other countries.
Clearly, if large companies pay more, and if the average size
of companies has grown sharply over time, average compensa-
tion would also grow, even if the value of the increasingly gener-
ous granting of stock options and equity shares were fully
understood by stock markets and boards of directors. It is also
possible to understand why average compensation grew about
as rapidly as average company size, although the argument here
is more complicated (for the details of this argument, see Xavier
Gabaix [MIT] and Augustin Landier [NYU], “Why Has CEO Pay
Increased So Much?” unpublished, April 17, 2006). The allocation
of better managers to larger firms, and competition for these
managers among companies of different sizes, means that com-
panies in, say, 2006 would have to pay more for their CEOs than
even the same-sized companies did in 1980, although much less
186
Data and Documents

than six times as much. The reasoning is that the 2006 companies
of a given size are competing against relatively larger companies
than comparable size companies did in 1980. Using this analysis,
Gabaix and Landier are able to explain why total compensation
of the average CEO of larger companies grew about six-fold
along with the six-fold growth in average company size during
the past several decades.
The same argument explains why compensation of Ameri-
can CEOs is much higher than that of CEOs in other countries.
Since average firm size is much lower elsewhere, their pay would
be more like that of pay in the U.S. in 1980 or 1990 than the pay
of CEOs in today’s much larger American firms. As the market
for top executives becomes increasingly global, the pay of CEOs
in other countries would rise, and that of CEOs in America might
fall. For example, to attract Carlos Ghosn, a Brazilian working in
France, to turn around Nissan, a seriously ailing company, Nis-
san had to pay him not at the low Japanese CEO levels, but at the
much higher levels found in other countries.
I believe that the explanation based on the allocation of CEO
talent largely is behind the explosion in compensation of Ameri-
can CEOs during the past several decades. Yet at the same time,
some American CEOs are obviously grossly overpaid, since they
have mismanaged their companies and still receive exorbitant
compensations. But mismanagement is not new and probably
has not become so much more important over time. So I am sug-
gesting that the rapid growth of compensation of American
CEOs, and its premium over compensation of CEOs in other
countries, is not mainly due to a growth in the degree of excess
payment of executives in the United States. Rather, on this inter-
pretation, the main cause of the increase in pay is the greater
challenges and opportunities facing executives who manage
much larger combinations of resources.
The Estate Tax ‘Recycles’ Opportunity
Under legislation proposed by President George W. Bush and passed by
Congress in 2001, the federal estate tax is slated to disappear—at least
briefly—in 2010. Some have argued that abolishing the inheritance tax
would worsen the current U.S. “wealth gap” and undermine the idea of
American meritocracy. Chuck Collins and William Gates Sr. are among
the best-known advocates for keeping the inheritance tax. In the following
Data and Documents
187

editorial piece, which appeared in many newspapers in late 2006,
Collins and Gates warn of a major loss of revenue if the tax is elimi-
nated. They also propose that in the future the tax be used to pay for a
new program of stakeholder grants and college scholarships in order to
broaden opportunity for those who were “not born wealthy.” Gates is
the father of Microsoft billionaire Bill Gates, and Collins is a longtime
progressive activist.
In December 1906, President Theodore Roosevelt expressed
alarm about the dangerous concentration of wealth and power in
the United States and called on the incoming 60th Congress to
pass a federal estate tax. Its primary objective, intoned T.R.,
“should be to put a constantly increasing burden on the inheri-
tance of those swollen fortunes which it is certainly of no benefit
to this country to perpetuate.”
A century later, after a 10-year assault, the federal estate tax
is here to stay. While the votes no longer exist for permanent re-
peal, action is still needed. Otherwise, the tax will vanish in 2010
and return in 2011, creating a one-year window for tax-free
dying. Congress must act to discourage a year of mysterious ac-
cidents in affluent households, bring back predictability, and pre-
vent further deterioration of the nation’s fiscal situation.
It is likely that 2007 will be the year of estate tax reform be-
cause of these pressures and the rising cost of inaction. But before
Congress simply raises exemptions or cuts rates, let’s consider all
our options.
Congress has been unable to have a reasoned deliberation on
the topic, even after solid research and investigative journalists
have dispelled most of the fallacies about the tax. The facts are
clear: the estate tax raises substantial revenue from those with the
greatest capacity to pay. Abolishing the estate tax would cost
$1.03 trillion over the first decade. There are only three ways to
fill that shortfall: cut spending, raise taxes on the non-wealthy, or,
the current favorite, pile it onto the national debt.
Starting in January [2007], the amount of wealth exempted
by the tax will be $2 million for an individual and $4 million for
a couple and the tax rate will fall to 45 percent. At that point, less
than one-third of the richest 1 percent of households will pay the
tax. Ample wealth will still flow to heirs and heiresses, as the ef-
fective tax rate on a $10 million estate is only 19 percent.
Repeal advocates are still gunning for the estate tax. They
have offered several reckless proposals to gut the tax under the
188
Data and Documents

guise of “reform.” They need to explain how to pay for the bil-
lions in lost revenue.
Instead of leaving more debt for the next generation, the U.S.
should retain a robust estate tax and dedicate its revenue to in-
creasing economic opportunity for the next generation. A re-
sponsible reform would increase the amount of wealth exempted
by the tax to $2.5 million for an individual and $5 million for a
couple—and include provisions to assist in the transfer of closely
held family businesses.
Instead of the present “flat rate” system—where a $5 million
estate pays the same rate as a $5 billion estate—we should adopt
a progressive rate structure. Lifting the tax off smaller estates
could be paid for by higher rates on estates over $50 million.
In a November [2006] ballot initiative, Washington State vot-
ers chose by substantial margins to retain their estate tax. Rev-
enue from the state’s tax is dedicated to an Education Legacy
Trust Fund that last year spent $100 million to reduce K–12 class
size and provide college scholarships for working-class students.
We should consider a similar design for the federal estate tax.
Such a prudent policy won’t happen unless we change our
attitude about taxing inheritances. No one makes a fortune alone,
without the help of our society’s investments. The moral justifi-
cation for an estate tax is that some of us have disproportionately
benefited from the fertile economic soil we have cultivated 
together.
How many billionaires land on the Forbes 400 list courtesy of
our technological and scientific commons, including the Internet,
airwaves, biotechnology and mechanical advances? Seeing the
invisible role of the commons in individual wealth creation
should foster both an attitude of gratitude and recognition of our
obligation to pass on similar opportunities. Previous generations
did it for us—and it is our turn to pass on the gift.
We are not fans of earmarking funds, but the estate tax
should be appreciated as an “economic opportunity recycling”
program. Estate tax revenue should go into an “American oppor-
tunity fund,” a sort of universal GI Bill for the next generation. It
could provide grants for higher education and stakeholder funds
to start businesses and purchase homes.
A progressive estate tax could serve as an intergenerational
pact between the wealthy at the end of their lives—and the next
generation who are not born wealthy. Like the GI Bill, it could 
Data and Documents
189

be one of the best investments our nation makes in its people’s
aspirations.
Being Profitable Is Giving Back
John Tamny, a frequent contributor to the National Review Online,
makes a strong libertarian case for abolishing the estate tax in the fol-
lowing piece. Those who earn great fortunes in the free market, he ar-
gues, have already “given back” to society by finding new ways to meet
consumer needs and should not be penalized, upon death, by having
their wealth taxed away. The von Mises referred to by Tamny is Ludwig
von Mises, an Austrian economist (1881–1973) famed for his staunch
defense of the market economy.
The U.S. House of Representatives voted 272 to 162 in April
[2005] to abolish the estate tax. An editorial in last Friday’s Wall
Street Journal said that President Bush needs eight Senate De-
mocrats to cross the aisle so that total repeal becomes filibuster-
proof in the upper chamber.
Regardless of the Senate outcome, a big cut in the estate tax
looms. Unhappy with this inevitability, estate-tax supporters
have used the media to spread the false notion that repeal will
save the rich from having to “give back.”
An April article in USA Today described the belief among 
estate-tax supporters that “wealthy Americans owe a special debt
because their wealth would not be possible without tax-sup-
ported schools and regulatory agencies.” In the same article,
William Gates Sr. voiced his support for the tax as “a fair payback
to society for the opportunity to do business in our marvelous
economy and society.” Leaving aside the questionable value of
tax-supported schools and regulatory agencies, not to mention
the millions of jobs created, charities funded, and taxes already
paid by the wealthiest Americans, Gates and the pro–estate-tax
lobby get the whole concept of giving back exactly backwards.
Von Mises once wrote that the entrepreneur who fails to use
his capital to the “best possible satisfaction of consumers” is “rel-
egated to a place in which his ineptitude no longer hurts people’s
well-being.” Successful entrepreneurs help consumers, while
failures by definition help no one, and often hurt consumers.
Successful people, by virtue of being successful, have met
previously unmet market needs, saved lives, saved consumers
money, and in general have removed what von Mises referred to
190
Data and Documents

as “uneasiness” from the marketplace. A look at the 2004 Forbes
400 confirms his thinking.
• Charles Schwab, the 68th richest American, made in-
vesting in the stock market easy and affordable for the
middle class. In doing so he helped launch an invest-
ment boom that an increasing number of Americans are
able to participate in.
• Dr. Patrick Soon-Shiong, the 234th richest American, has
developed a drug (Abraxane) that is injected into can-
cerous tumors. The tumors feed on Abraxane, only to be
wiped out by a cancer-killing “Trojan Horse” within.
• It is estimated that Wal-Mart stores save consumers $100
billion a year. In other words, Wal-Mart’s customers get
a raise every time they shop there. Unsurprisingly, Wal-
Mart’s heirs and executives take up spots four through
eight on the Forbes 400.
• Can anyone imagine living without Google, Amazon,
and travel Web sites such as Expedia? Internet trailblaz-
ers Sergey Brin and Larry Page (43), Jeff Bezos (38), and
Barry Diller (215) are all Forbes 400 members.
That the individuals behind the products and companies
that improve our lives often reside in the Forbes 400 should not
surprise us. Indeed, the greater a person’s wealth, the more likely
than not that he or she did something extraordinary that bene-
fited others. “Giving back?” High profits are the surest sign that
someone has given back. Can the same be said for entrepreneur-
ial failures?
Furthermore, it’s not just morally wrong for the government
to use the estate tax to redistribute wealth; it’s also bad economic
policy. Wealth by definition is savings. When savings are confis-
cated for government use, entrepreneurial opportunities in need
of capital go wanting in favor of immediate consumption.
Edward Wolff, an economics professor at New York Univer-
sity, told The Wall Street Journal in May that a poll showing a ma-
jority of the “rich” back estate-tax reform is a sign that “any
notion of noblesse oblige is disappearing.” Wolff gets it wrong,
too. As the late Warren Brookes once said, “We are blessed by the
genius of the few.”
When the brilliant few innovate and improve our existence,
we are receiving their very best and being given to in spades. The
Data and Documents
191

estate tax penalizes society’s greatest benefactors, and for doing
so should be repealed.
Andrew Carnegie on What to Do 
with a Fortune [1889]
The 19th-century steel magnate Andrew Carnegie is considered the
foremost American philanthropist of his time. His essay “Wealth,” later
re-titled “The Gospel of Wealth,” placed a heavy responsibility on those
who accumulated great fortunes to do right by their fellow citizens, not
through bequests at death but through active administration of charita-
ble giving during their lifetimes. Carnegie, whom history remembers in
part for the violence with which his hired security men put down the
Homestead Strike in 1892, believed he had found a key to achieving
“harmony” between rich and poor. In the excerpts below, he also states
his approval for highly progressive wealth taxation. Carnegie’s mention
of Shylock refers to a money lender in William Shakespeare’s The Mer-
chant of Venice.
We start, then, with a condition of affairs [laissez-faire capi-
talism] under which the best interests of the race are promoted,
but which inevitably gives wealth to the few. Thus far, accepting
conditions as they exist, the situation can be surveyed and pro-
nounced good. The question then arises—and, if the foregoing be
correct, it is the only question with which we have to deal—What
is the proper mode of administering wealth after the laws upon
which civilization is founded have thrown it into the hands of the
few? And it is of this great question that I believe I offer the true
solution. . . .
The growing disposition to tax more and more heavily large
estates left at death is a cheering indication of the growth of a
salutary change in public opinion. The State of Pennsylvania
now takes—subject to some exceptions—one-tenth of the prop-
erty left by its citizens. The budget presented in the British Par-
liament the other day proposes to increase the death-duties; and,
most significant of all, the new tax is to be a graduated one. Of all
forms of taxation, this seems the wisest. Men who continue
hoarding great sums all their lives, the proper use of which for
public ends would work good to the community, should be made
192
Data and Documents

to feel that the community, in the form of the state, cannot thus
be deprived of its proper share. By taxing estates heavily at death
the state marks its condemnation of the selfish millionaire’s un-
worthy life.
It is desirable that nations should go much further in this di-
rection. Indeed, it is difficult to set bounds to the share of a rich
man’s estate which should go at his death to the public through
the agency of the state, and by all means such taxes should be
graduated, beginning at nothing upon moderate sums to depen-
dents, and increasing rapidly as the amounts swell, until of the
millionaire’s hoard, as of Shylock’s, at least
“ . . . The other half
Comes to the privy coffer of the state.”
This policy would work powerfully to induce the rich man to
attend to the administration of wealth during his life, which is the
end that society should always have in view, as being that by far
most fruitful for the people. Nor need it be feared that this policy
would sap the root of enterprise and render men less anxious to
accumulate, for to the class whose ambition it is to leave great for-
tunes and be talked about after their death, it will attract even
more attention, and, indeed, be a somewhat nobler ambition to
have enormous sums paid over to the state from their fortunes.
There remains, then, only one mode of using great fortunes;
but in this we have the true antidote for the temporary unequal
distribution of wealth, the reconciliation of the rich and the
poor—a reign of harmony—another ideal, differing, indeed, from
that of the Communist in requiring only the further evolution of
existing conditions, not the total overthrow of our civilization. It
is founded upon the present most intense individualism, and the
race is prepared to put it in practice by degrees whenever it
pleases. Under its sway we shall have an ideal state, in which the
surplus wealth of the few will become, in the best sense, the prop-
erty of the many, because administered for the common good, and
this wealth, passing through the hands of the few, can be made a
much more potent force for the elevation of our race than if it had
been distributed in small sums to the people themselves. Even the
poorest can be made to see this, and to agree that great sums gath-
ered by some of their fellow-citizens and spent for public pur-
poses, from which the masses reap the principal benefit, are more
valuable to them than if scattered among them through the course
of many years in trifling amounts. . . .
Data and Documents
193

This, then, is held to be the duty of the man of Wealth: First,
to set an example of modest, unostentatious living, shunning dis-
play or extravagance; to provide moderately for the legitimate
wants of those dependent upon him; and after doing so to con-
sider all surplus revenues which come to him simply as trust
funds, which he is called upon to administer, and strictly bound
as a matter of duty to administer in the manner which, in his judg-
ment, is best calculated to produce the most beneficial results for
the community—the man of wealth thus becoming the mere
agent and trustee for his poorer brethren, bringing to their service
his superior wisdom, experience, and ability to administer, doing
for them better than they would or could do for themselves. . . .
Thus is the problem of Rich and Poor to be solved. The laws
of accumulation will be left free; the laws of distribution free. In-
dividualism will continue, but the millionaire will be but a
trustee for the poor; intrusted for a season with a great part of the
increased wealth of the community, but administering it for the
community far better than it could or would have done for itself.
The best minds will thus have reached a stage in the develop-
ment of the race in which it is clearly seen that there is no mode
of disposing of surplus wealth creditable to thoughtful and
earnest men into whose hands it flows save by using it year by
year for the general good. This day already dawns. . . . Men may
die sharers in great business enterprises from which their capital
cannot be or has not been withdrawn, and is left chiefly at death
for public uses, yet the man who dies leaving behind him mil-
lions of available wealth, which was his to administer during life,
will pass away “unwept, unhonored, and unsung,” no matter to
what uses he leaves the dross which he cannot take with him. Of
such as these the public verdict will then be: “The man who dies
thus rich dies disgraced.”
Giving Back, Big Time: 
The Carnegie-Buffett Connection
In June 2006, Warren Buffett, the world’s second-richest man, an-
nounced that he would be giving the bulk of his fortune to the founda-
tion already established by the world’s richest man, Bill Gates, to be
used for charitable endeavors. David Nasaw, a historian at City Uni-
194
Data and Documents

versity of New York and biographer of Andrew Carnegie, offers some re-
flections on similarities between Buffett and Carnegie in the following
op-ed that appeared in The Los Angeles Times.
It has taken almost 120 years, but millionaires are finally be-
ginning to follow Andrew Carnegie’s advice. Hundreds of arti-
cles have appeared in the last six months comparing Bill Gates
and a variety of 21st century philanthropists to Carnegie. In June,
Warren Buffett explicitly referred to Carnegie and his writings in
explaining why he had decided to leave $31 billion in Berkshire
Hathaway stock to the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation.
In his 1889 “Gospel of Wealth” essays, Carnegie demanded
that the wealthy give away their fortunes in their lifetimes. Those
who did not would “pass away ‘unwept, unhonored, and un-
sung’ . . . . Of such as these the public verdict will then be: ‘The
man who dies thus rich dies disgraced.’”
By his own measure, Andrew Carnegie did not die dis-
graced.
He sold his steel company to J. P. Morgan in 1901 (Carnegie
got $226 million), and Morgan proclaimed him “the richest man in
the world.” Carnegie was an unapologetic capitalist. He defended
the right of businessmen to make the largest profit possible, and he
wasn’t ashamed of cutting his workers’ wages, increasing their
hours, crushing their unions or violently breaking strikes, as at his
Homestead mill in 1892.
But Carnegie also heeded his own “gospel,” developing a
moral philosophy of capitalism that resonates today. He handed
out more than $350 million (tens of billions in 2006 dollars) to
small colleges, technical schools, and libraries. He established a
scientific research institution in Washington; provided trusts to
pay students’ tuition and professors’ pensions; built a library/
museum/concert hall complex in Pittsburgh; and gave millions
of dollars to campaigns for world peace and to establish the
Carnegie Corp., dedicated to the “advancement and diffusion of
knowledge.”
Even smart and hardworking millionaires did not, Carnegie
argued, earn their fortunes by themselves. “Wealth,” he declared,
“is not chiefly the product of the individual, but largely the joint
product of the community.”
Buffet, in a Fortune interview in June, recalled Carnegie’s
words. He had, he explained, told his first wife in 1952 that he ex-
pected to get rich mostly “because I was born with the right skills
Data and Documents
195

in the right place at the right time. . . . We agreed with Andrew
Carnegie, who said that huge fortunes that flow in large part
from society should in large part be returned to society.”
Buffett’s understanding of the ways in which wealth falls
into the hands of the lucky few accords entirely with Carnegie’s.
Buffett credited his wealth to being “wired at birth” with invest-
ment acumen, the help of parents and others, and the fact that he
lived in “a rich, populous country in which enormous quantities
of marketable securities were traded and were sometimes ridicu-
lously mispriced.” Carnegie similarly made his fortune because
his Scottish immigrant parents settled in Pittsburgh, a city
blessed with abundant coke and iron ore and located at the cen-
ter of a westward-reaching rail network.
The two men also see eye to eye on at least one way that so-
ciety ought to collect its due from the rich: the much attacked and
debated estate tax.
“I would hate to see the estate tax gutted,” Buffett said as he
announced his gift to the Gates Foundation. “It’s a very equitable
tax. It’s in keeping with the idea of equality of opportunity in this
country, not giving incredible head starts to certain people.”
Carnegie, who was opposed to income taxes and property
taxes, nevertheless supported near 100 percent inheritance taxes
on large estates. Those who held on to their money, he said, in-
stead of distributing it for the good of society, had no moral right
to decide what happened to it after their deaths: “By taxing es-
tates heavily at death, the state marks its condemnation of the
selfish millionaire’s unworthy life.”
Carnegie did not support estate taxes because he believed the
state needed more money. (As a good Republican, he was in favor
of smaller, not larger, government.) An inheritance tax was neces-
sary because it preserved the ability of men like him to rise to the
top through their wits. The hereditary transmission of wealth
from generation to generation would create dynastic power over
business and politics. This was bad for capitalism, bad for de-
mocracy, bad for the children of the rich who were handed lead-
ership positions they had not earned and worse for the poor and
middle classes that had to struggle against unreasonable odds to
achieve leadership positions.
Carnegie’s demand that the wealthy give away their
riches—or lose them to inheritance taxes—remains an extreme
idea. The fact that the Republican-led Congress has severely cut
196
Data and Documents

what it calls the “death tax” is evidence of that. So is the commo-
tion that greeted Buffett’s largesse—the gift of about 85 percent
of his fortune.
But Buffett’s acknowledgment of Carnegie’s vision also is
evidence that a good idea—however extreme—will survive.
Carnegie’s gospel is alive, and spreading.
Being Poor
When Hurricane Katrina struck New Orleans on August 29, 2005, the
impact was catastrophic. The storm left well over a thousand dead—
even now there is no exact count. Media coverage of the disaster centered
on the city’s Ninth Ward, where a level of poverty was revealed beyond
what most Americans could comprehend. John Scalzi wrote “Being
Poor” in reaction to the many who asked why the residents had not
heeded warnings to evacuate the city. (Short answer: they couldn’t af-
ford to.) “Being Poor” struck a chord. It was widely circulated and dis-
cussed. Many alternative “being poor” lists were subsequently posted to
the Internet.
Being poor is knowing exactly how much everything costs.
Being poor is getting angry at your kids for asking for all the
crap they see on TV.
Being poor is having to keep buying $800 cars because
they’re what you can afford, and then having the cars break
down on you, because there’s not an $800 car in America that’s
worth a damn.
Being poor is hoping the toothache goes away.
Being poor is knowing your kid goes to friends’ houses but
never has friends over to yours.
Being poor is going to the restroom before you get in the
school lunch line so your friends will be ahead of you and won’t
hear you say “I get free lunch” when you get to the cashier.
Being poor is living next to the freeway.
Being poor is coming back to the car with your children in
the back seat, clutching that box of Raisin Bran you just bought
and trying to think of a way to make the kids understand that the
box has to last.
Being poor is wondering if your well-off sibling is lying
when he says he doesn’t mind when you ask for help.
Being poor is off-brand toys.
Data and Documents
197

Being poor is a heater in only one room of the house.
Being poor is knowing you can’t leave $5 on the coffee table
when your friends are around.
Being poor is hoping your kids don’t have a growth spurt.
Being poor is stealing meat from the store, frying it up before
your mom gets home and then telling her she doesn’t have to
make dinner tonight because you’re not hungry anyway.
Being poor is Goodwill underwear.
Being poor is not enough space for everyone who lives with
you.
Being poor is feeling the glued soles tear off your supermar-
ket shoes when you run around the playground.
Being poor is your kid’s school being the one with the 15-
year-old textbooks and no air conditioning.
Being poor is thinking $8 an hour is a really good deal.
Being poor is relying on people who don’t give a damn
about you.
Being poor is an overnight shift under fluorescent lights.
Being poor is finding the letter your mom wrote to your dad,
begging him for the child support.
Being poor is a bathtub you have to empty into the toilet.
Being poor is stopping the car to take a lamp from a
stranger’s trash.
Being poor is making lunch for your kid when a cockroach
skitters over the bread, and you looking over to see if your kid
saw.
Being poor is believing a GED actually makes a goddamned
difference.
Being poor is people angry at you just for walking around in
the mall.
Being poor is not taking the job because you can’t find some-
one you trust to watch your kids.
Being poor is the police busting into the apartment right next
to yours.
Being poor is not talking to that girl because she’ll probably
just laugh at your clothes.
Being poor is hoping you’ll be invited for dinner.
Being poor is a sidewalk with lots of brown glass on it.
Being poor is people thinking they know something about
you by the way you talk.
Being poor is needing that 35-cent raise.
198
Data and Documents

Being poor is your kid’s teacher assuming you don’t have
any books in your home.
Being poor is six dollars short on the utility bill and no way
to close the gap.
Being poor is crying when you drop the mac and cheese on
the floor.
Being poor is knowing you work as hard as anyone, any-
where.
Being poor is people surprised to discover you’re not actu-
ally stupid.
Being poor is people surprised to discover you’re not actu-
ally lazy.
Being poor is a six-hour wait in an emergency room with a
sick child asleep on your lap.
Being poor is never buying anything someone else hasn’t
bought first.
Being poor is picking the 10-cent ramen instead of the 12-
cent ramen because that’s two extra packages for every dollar.
Being poor is having to live with choices you didn’t know
you made when you were 14 years old.
Being poor is getting tired of people wanting you to be 
grateful.
Being poor is knowing you’re being judged.
Being poor is a box of crayons and a $1 coloring book from
a community center Santa.
Being poor is checking the coin return slot of every soda ma-
chine you go by.
Being poor is deciding that it’s all right to base a relationship
on shelter.
Being poor is knowing you really shouldn’t spend that buck
on a Lotto ticket.
Being poor is hoping the register lady will spot you the
dime.
Being poor is feeling helpless when your child makes the
same mistakes you did, and won’t listen to you beg them against
doing so.
Being poor is a cough that doesn’t go away.
Being poor is making sure you don’t spill on the couch, just
in case you have to give it back before the lease is up.
Being poor is a $200 paycheck advance from a company that
takes $250 when the paycheck comes in.
Data and Documents
199

Being poor is four years of night classes for an Associate of
Arts degree.
Being poor is a lumpy futon bed.
Being poor is knowing where the shelter is.
Being poor is people who have never been poor wondering
why you choose to be so.
Being poor is knowing how hard it is to stop being poor.
Being poor is seeing how few options you have.
Being poor is running in place.
References
Becker, Gary. “Are CEOs Overpaid?” The Becker-Posner Blog, May 14,
2006.
Bernanke, Ben S. “The Level and Distribution of Economic Well-Being.”
Remarks before the Greater Omaha Chamber of Commerce, Omaha, Ne-
braska (2007). Accessed at http://www.federalreserve.gov.
Calderon, Olivia. “Q & A on California Kids Investment and Develop-
ment Savings (KIDS) Accounts,” Senate Bill 752 (2007). Accessed at
http://www.newamerica.net.
Carnegie, Andrew. “Wealth.” North American Review 148, no. 391 (June
1889): 653–664.
Collins, Chuck, and William Gates, Sr. “The Estate Tax ‘Recycles’ Op-
portunity.” Roanoke Times (December 24, 2006).
Nasaw, David. “Giving Back, Big Time.” The Los Angeles Times (Novem-
ber 2, 2006): A19.
Scalzi, John. “Being Poor.” The Chicago Tribune (September 15, 2005): A27.
Stonecash, Jeffrey M. Inequality and the American Public—Results of the
Third Annual Maxwell School Survey Conducted September – October 2006.
Syracuse, NY: Maxwell School of Citizenship & Public Affairs, Syracuse
University, 2007.
Tamny, John. “Being Profitable Is Giving Back.” National Review Online
(July 14, 2005). Accessed at http://www.nationalreview.com.
Weller, Christian, and Kate Sabatini. “The Great CEO Guarantee: Get 
Really Well-Paid Regardless of Your Performance.” Washington, DC:
Center for American Progress, 2006. Accessed at http://www.american
progress.org.
200
Data and Documents

7
Directory of Organizations
A
wide range of U.S. organizations have shown an interest in
the growing gap between rich and poor, whether focused on
investigating the causes and consequences of the gap or on
policies to reverse it. For some, the interest is not in inequality per
se but rather in the condition of those on the bottom rungs of the
ladder—those in poverty. A couple of examples are the National
Coalition for the Homeless and America’s Second Harvest. For
such groups, a reduction of poverty and insecurity is the main
goal to be sought, and a lessening of inequality would be merely
a secondary benefit. For other organizations, the perceived injus-
tice of the current level of economic inequality is the primary
issue. This would be a reasonable way to characterize United for
a Fair Economy or the Legal Aid Society of New York, to name
two examples. With both the poverty-oriented and injustice-ori-
ented organizations, there is, not surprisingly, a straightforward
willingness to advocate for steps that would benefit those in the
lower ranks of the income distribution.
Policy institutes—known to most of us as “think tanks”—are
well represented in the list below. Those with a liberal perspective
outnumber those of a conservative bent for the simple reason that
liberals tend to be more engaged with, indeed disturbed by, the
widening gap between America’s haves and have-nots. Conserva-
tives, as noted in chapter 2, are more likely to view rising inequal-
ity as a cyclical phenomenon that should not concern us unduly
nor be used as an excuse for government interventions into the
economy. They do not ignore the issue entirely, and thus three of
the highest-profile think tanks on the right are included in the di-
rectory. Several institutes with a special, scholarly commitment to
201

matters of inequality and poverty also make the list, such as the In-
stitute for Research on Poverty and Stanford’s Center for the Study
of Poverty and Inequality. Overall, the list is selective and could
easily be extended. Those who have a reason to do so can make
use of the “links” feature found on almost every Web site.
American Enterprise Institute for Public Policy Research
(AEI)
1150 17th St. NW, Washington, DC 20036
(202) 862-5800 Fax: (202) 862-7177
E-mail: vrodman@aei.org
http://www.aei.org
Oldest of the big three conservative think tanks (the others being
Cato and Heritage), AEI was founded in 1943 as a nonprofit, non-
partisan institution aiming to advance the values of “limited gov-
ernment, private enterprise, and individual liberty.” Its resident
and adjunct scholars pursue studies across the full range of pub-
lic policy issues, both foreign and domestic, and disseminate
their findings in monographs, research papers, videos, and con-
ference presentations. In recent years, AEI has taken a relatively
slight interest in U.S. poverty, the major exception being the
“Welfare Reform Academy” project administered by AEI scholar
Douglas J. Besharov through the University of Maryland. The
Academy helps officials and others understand how best to im-
plement and evaluate new programs under the 1996 welfare re-
form law. AEI also has two scholars on staff with expertise in
income inequality, Marvin Kosters and Richard Vedder, although
they do not write on this issue regularly.
Publications: AEI posts large numbers of newsletters, op-eds,
papers, and speeches on its Web site; in addition, some longer pa-
pers (monographs) may be purchased from AEI Press. A shorter
paper of interest is “Fair Taxes? Depends on What You Mean by
‘Fair’” (7/16/07), by Gregory Mankiw, a Yale economist who
served as chairman of President George W. Bush’s Council of Eco-
nomic Advisors. This essay addresses the question of whether the
rich are taxed enough. More in-depth on the same topic is “The
Trouble with Taxing Those at the Top,” a June 2007 article in the
AEI Tax Policy Outlook.
America’s Second Harvest (ASH)
35 E. Wacker Dr., Ste. 2000, Chicago, IL 60601
202
Directory of Organizations

(312) 263-2303 or (800) 771-2303
http://www.secondharvest.org
The mission of America’s Second Harvest is two-fold: to feed the
nation’s hungry through a network of member food banks and to
advocate for policies that would end hunger. From its beginnings
in Phoenix in the 1960s, ASH has become the largest private
hunger-relief agency in the country. It established its headquar-
ters in Chicago in 1984, although it also maintains an office in the
nation’s capital. Through its network of food banks serving all 50
states, the District of Columbia, and Puerto Rico, ASH supports
about 94,000 local food assistance programs, from soup kitchens
to after-school feeding programs—some 25 million (mainly low-
income) people. Among other initiatives, ASH operates a Back-
Pack Program and a Kids Café. The former provides backpacks
of nonperishable, nutritious food to low-income children over
weekends, school vacations, and, in some cases, the summer.
(Exact program details vary among local food providers.) The
latter is a program set up in 1993 under which ASH provides hot
meals and snacks to low-income kids in places where they get to-
gether, such as Boys and Girls Clubs, church halls, and public
schools. ASH has received the top, four-star rating from Charity
Navigator for the efficiency with which it uses donated resources
to provide services to those in need.
Publications: In addition to a variety of fact sheets on hunger,
ASH also issues two key documents: Hunger in America and The
Almanac of Hunger and Poverty in America. The first builds on ex-
tensive client and agency surveys to render a detailed profile of
those receiving emergency food assistance; the Hunger Almanac is
a compilation of hunger statistics and information about hunger
programs in all 50 states.
Association of Community Organizations for Reform Now
(ACORN)
739 8th St. SE, Washington, DC 20003
(877) 55-ACORN Fax: (202) 546-2483
E-mail: natacorndc@acorn.org
http://acorn.org
The Association of Community Organizations for Reform Now,
ACORN, was formed in 1970 as the Arkansas Community Orga-
nizations for Reform Now—an offshoot of the National Welfare
Rights Organization. From its roots in Little Rock, ACORN grew
Directory of Organizations
203

to become a national quasi-political force advocating for the
rights of low- and moderate-income people across the country.
Some of the things ACORN has successfully pushed for are: com-
munity reinvestment by banks; urban homesteading programs
for low-income residents; physical, curricular, and staffing im-
provements in urban public schools; no-shut-off agreements with
utility companies; and the passage of living wage ordinances.
ACORN is perhaps best known for the last-named activity. It has
been a leader in getting living wages passed in Boston, Chicago,
Detroit, and Oakland, California, and has established a Living
Wage Resource Center (online) to assist those trying to pass sim-
ilar ordinances in additional jurisdictions. A major current cam-
paign by ACORN is to ensure paid sick leave for workers in both
the public and private sectors.
Publications: ACORN has prepared reports on such issues as
the living wage, the minimum wage, home foreclosures, un-
claimed EITC benefits, lending costs to minority urban home-
owners, and the impact of Hurricane Katrina on black
homeowners in New Orleans, all of which can be downloaded.
Boston College Center on Wealth and Philanthropy (CWP)
McGuinn Hall 515, 140 Commonwealth Ave., Chestnut Hill,
MA 02467
(617) 552-4070 Fax: (617) 552-3903
E-mail: cwp508@bc.edu
http://www.bc.edu/cwp
Established at Boston College in 1970, the Center on Wealth and
Philanthropy meets a need that could only emerge in a society
with considerable wealth: to help affluent individuals find mean-
ingful ways to help others, and in the process develop their own
spirituality through charitable giving. The CWP aims to assist
people in self-reflection about what they want to accomplish
with their philanthropy. Its director, Paul Schervish, is an author-
ity on what is called donor behavior. Research at the CWP
explores both the everyday acts of charity that are barely recog-
nized as such and the more dramatic acts by which wealth is be-
queathed from the older generations to the younger. Schervish
and his Center have been in the media with forecasts of the vol-
ume of wealth that is set to be transferred as the baby boomers
pass from the scene—estimated at a minimum of $41 trillion.
Schervish has professional credentials in both divinity and soci-
204
Directory of Organizations

ology, and he takes a particular interest in the spiritual dimen-
sions of philanthropy.
Publications: A variety of papers authored or co-authored by
Mr. Schervish are available for download or purchase at the CWP
Web site; they deal with economic, social, geographic, psycho-
logical, and spiritual aspects of philanthropy.
The Brookings Institution
1775 Massachusetts Ave. NW, Washington, DC 20036
(202) 797-6000 Fax: (202) 797-6004
E-mail: communications@brookings.edu
http://www.brookings.edu
The Brookings Institution can fairly claim to be the oldest think
tank in the country: its forerunner, the Institute for Government
Research, was founded in 1916. Centrist in its political outlook,
Brookings is an “institution” in more than the technical sense. It is
at the heart of the policymaking establishment in Washington,
D.C., where its experts conduct research on just about everything
policy-related, from science and technology to politics and the
economy. It is not a gross exaggeration to say that from the 200-
plus scholars and visiting scholars currently at Brookings, a newly
elected president could recruit an entire cabinet and many of the
needed deputies and support staff. Its work on the rich-poor di-
vide extends from the global context to various aspects of U.S. so-
ciety. Brookings is home to some of the nation’s top poverty and
welfare scholars—Isabel Sawhill, Gary Burtless, and Ron Hask-
ins—and their names are on most of its research concerning in-
come inequality and poverty. Brookings hosts briefings, speeches,
and panel discussions on a weekly, sometimes daily, basis.
Publications: Brookings offers the full panoply of policy pub-
lications: articles, op-eds, testimony, policy briefs, all accessible at
their Web site. They also publish about 50 books each year along
with several journals, of which two are particularly relevant: The
Future of Children (jointly with Princeton’s Woodrow Wilson
School of Public and International Affairs) and Brookings Papers
on Education Policy.
Cato Institute
1000 Massachusetts Ave. NW, Washington, DC 20001-5403
(202) 842-0200 Fax: (202) 842-3490
http://www.cato.org
Directory of Organizations
205

Founded in 1977, Cato is a nonprofit, right-oriented think tank in
Washington, D.C. It prefers the labels “libertarian” and “market
liberal” to “conservative” as descriptions of its ideological stance
in favor of small government and free markets. Its roughly 40
policy scholars and 70 policy adjuncts include some very high-
powered economists and other academics. Cato takes an interest
in a wide range of issues—political, legal, philosophical, eco-
nomic, and scientific. Income inequality is not a major focus, but
from time-to-time, Cato issues interesting research or opinion
pieces on income inequality and taxation. Scholars associated
with the institute frown on the types of policies discussed in
chapter 2 that would lessen—or aim to lessen—the current de-
gree of income inequality in the United States. They tend to favor
flat taxes, not progressive taxes, and consistently seek reductions
in taxation and government spending.
Publications: The Cato Institute publishes vast quantities of
libertarian analysis and opinion in the form of books, policy
studies, journals, briefs, and white papers. Cato also puts out a
lot of free online material, including the Daily Dispatch, the
monthly Cato Unbound magazine, and the quarterly Cato’s Letter.
Of special interest was the February 2007 edition of the online
forum “Cato Unbound,” which was devoted to the topic “Inter-
rogating Inequality” and included follow-up entries in blog style.
Participants were persuasive and well-informed.
Center for American Progress (CAP)
1333 H St. NW, 10th Fl., Washington, DC 20005
(202) 682-1611
E-mail: progress@americanprogress.org
http://www.americanprogress.org
Established in 2003, the Center for American Progress is a liberal
response to the conservatively oriented think tanks like Cato and
Heritage (see p. 214), although CAP consistently substitutes the
term “progressive” for “liberal.” It promotes the value of open,
effective government in helping to solve social and economic
problems. Its guiding philosophy might best be described as
Clintonian pragmatism. President Clinton, whose one-time chief
of staff, John Podesta, presides over CAP, was known for favor-
ing centrist, non-ideological social policies during his 1993–2001
term of office. On the professional staff at CAP are about 70 ex-
perts on all the major public policy issues. CAP develops new
206
Directory of Organizations

ideas and policy initiatives in a number of areas. Two thematic
fields that relate to income inequality are “Economic Mobility”
and “Task Force on Poverty.” Speeches and panel discussions
with invited guests occur on a regular basis at the center, and
videos of the proceedings are posted to the CAP Web site. In
2006, for example, CAP hosted a session on “Ending Child
Poverty: The United Kingdom’s Commitment, the United States’
Challenge,” featuring presentations by the UK Secretary of State
for Work and Pensions and a former top official in the Clinton ad-
ministration. Their remarks are available on the Web site.
Publications: CAP issues reports and recommendations on
various policy initiatives, such as the 72-page “From Poverty to
Prosperity” (April 2007), which outlined a CAP program de-
signed to halve the U.S. poverty rate in 10 years. The center also
puts out newsletters that alert subscribers to upcoming CAP
events and to columns, backgrounders, and talking points its
staff have written. Anyone can register to receive the newsletters.
Center on Budget and Policy Priorities (CBPP)
820 1st St. NE, Ste. 510, Washington, DC 20002
(202) 408-1080 Fax: (202) 408-1056
E-mail: communications@cbpp.org
http://www.cbpp.org
Since its establishment in 1981, the Center on Budget and Policy
Priorities has built a reputation for timely, accurate analysis of
fiscal issues at both the federal and state level. Its particular em-
phasis is on the way government policies affect low- and moder-
ate-income individuals and families. While this suggests a liberal
slant, the CBPP is actually known to be fiscally conservative: it
keeps a close eye on spending and tax levels out of a concern that
scarce resources remain available to meet pressing social needs.
Its analyses of the tax cuts of President George W. Bush have fo-
cused as much on lost tax revenues as on their supposed tilt to-
ward the wealthy. The devolution of many federal programs to
the states in recent years has brought a corresponding shift in
CBPP research and consulting activity, so that about half of its
work is now state-oriented, in part through its State Fiscal Analy-
sis Initiative. Because it is so nimble and accurate in its analyses,
the CBPP is often cited on Capitol Hill and in the media.
Publications: The CBPP offers a unique online resource: slide-
shows on several issues of public interest. Two that relate to the
Directory of Organizations
207

rich-poor gap are “Putting Tax Cuts into Context” and “Issues
Surrounding the Federal Estate Tax.” Policy reports and fact
sheets on poverty, low-income immigrants, taxes, the EITC, and
low-income housing may be accessed at the Web site.
Center for Law and Social Policy (CLASP)
1015 15th St. NW, Ste. 400, Washington, DC 20005
(202) 906-8000 Fax: (202) 842-2885
http://www.clasp.org
The Center for Law and Social Policy was founded in 1968 as a
public interest law firm, with high-powered backing from former
Supreme Court Justice Arthur Goldberg. In 1981, the firm recon-
ceived itself as a nonprofit research and advocacy center dedi-
cated to low-income family issues. CLASP lawyers and policy
analysts work in several areas to improve the stability and finan-
cial security of poor families. They have been heavily involved,
for example, in efforts at the federal and state levels to strengthen
child support programs and find ways for children to be sup-
ported even when the absent parent is not making payments.
(Child support is a far more serious problem for low-income
families than for those on higher rungs of the income ladder.)
CLASP takes a strong interest in work supports for single parents
leaving welfare, such as child care, transitional jobs, and training
programs. Reflecting its own institutional roots, CLASP advo-
cates for legal services to be available to those of limited means.
It is a vigorous defender of the Legal Services Corporation (see p.
217), which tends to experience fluctuating support from Con-
gress depending on election results.
Publications: In each of the fields in which it works, CLASP
offers fact sheets, reports, policy briefs, legislative analyses, and
transcripts of testimony, all of which can be downloaded. Their
materials on child support are particularly informative.
Center for Social Development (CSD)
One Brookings Dr., St. Louis, MO 63130-4899
(314) 935-7433 Fax: (314) 935-8661
E-mail: csd@gwbmail.wustl.edu
http://gwbweb.wustl.edu/csd
Founded in 1994 and located within the George Warren Brown
School of Social Work at Washington University, the Center for So-
cial Development is a research and policy center with two main in-
208
Directory of Organizations

terests: civic engagement and asset building. Under the direction
of Michael Sherraden, CSD has been an intellectual and institu-
tional driver of the asset-building movement that many see as an
essential part of any overall strategy for narrowing the rich-poor
divide in the United States. It has been a pioneer in researching in-
dividual development accounts (IDAs) and has conducted pilot
programs to see how effective such accounts can be. (An IDA is a
savings plan under which dollars saved by individuals are
matched by either government or private sources, with the accu-
mulated savings available for the purchase of a home, retirement,
or other good purposes.) Participating in an IDAcan raise financial
literacy, promote entry into the economic mainstream, stabilize
families, and bolster communities. CSD has major foundation sup-
port for a State Assets Policy Project, under which the center ad-
vises and works with states to develop state-level assets policies.
Almost half the states now have IDA programs in place.
Publications: A variety of reports, working papers, and
speech transcripts dating back to 1995 are available for down-
loading from the CSD Web site. The website has a useful feature
for researchers—an extensive list of keywords that can assist
them in performing a successful search of CSD publications.
The Century Foundation (TCF)
41 E. 70th St., New York, NY 10021
(212) 535-4441 Fax: (212) 535-7534
E-mail: info@tcf.org
http://www.tcf.org
Established in 1919 by Edward Filene, of Boston department
store fame, the Century Foundation is one of the oldest public
policy research institutes in the country. Centrist in outlook, its
bywords are “effective government,” “open democracy,” and
“free markets.” One of its continuing policy interests is inequal-
ity, both economic and educational. Its education expert, Richard
D. Kahlenberg, has written extensively on the benefits of eco-
nomically integrated classrooms. Kahlenberg and about a dozen
other fellows at TCF write and speak on a broad range of issues.
They also convene forums with policy makers, academics, and
the public, which explains why TCF maintains offices in both
New York City and Washington, D.C.
Publications: Aside from the shorter commentary and opin-
ion items that occasionally deal with rich-poor issues, the TCF
Directory of Organizations
209

Web site also features reports and issue briefs that can be down-
loaded, and lists books by TCF authors that can be purchased
from online booksellers.
Children’s Defense Fund (CDF)
25 E St. NW, Washington, DC 20001
(202) 628-8787 or (800) 233-1200
E-mail: cdfinfo@childrensdefense.org
http://www.childrensdefense.org
Because children have the highest poverty rate of any age group in
the United States, an organization dedicated to helping children is
implicitly concerned with the issue of inequality. To put it another
way, if all the goals of the Children’s Defense Fund were achieved
tomorrow, the nation’s measured levels of inequality—and
poverty—would be lowered instantly. A private, nonprofit organi-
zation, the CDF was founded in 1973 as an outgrowth of the civil
rights movement. Its founder, Marian Wright Edelman, widely
considered the nation’s most effective advocate for children, re-
mains its president. CDF works for children’s health, readiness for
school, safe care when parents are at work, and moral upbringing.
It has established a number of signature programs with catchy
names and solid policy rationales. An example is SHOUT (Student
Health Outreach Project), which connects high school and college
students with local agencies to get uninsured children enrolled in
the health coverage they are entitled to, either through Medicaid
or the Children’s Health Insurance Program (CHIP). CDF keeps
track of congressional votes on issues critical to children and issues
an annual “scorecard” on individual members of Congress. Be-
yond advocacy and activism, CDF also engages in policy analysis
of issues related to children’s well-being.
Publications: The CDF puts out a variety of child-related guides
and reports, some of which are highly practical, for example, “Fact
Sheets for Grandparents and Other Relatives Raising Children”
(one for every state). Ms. Edelman’s weekly “Child Watch” column
and the monthly CDF newsletter can be read online.
Citizens for Tax Justice (CTJ)
1616 P St. NW, Ste. 200, Washington, DC 20036
(202) 299-1066 Fax: (202) 299-1065
E-mail: mattg@ctj.org
http://www.ctj.org
210
Directory of Organizations

Citizens for Tax Justice is a nonprofit research and advocacy or-
ganization that has pushed, since 1979, for federal, state, and
local tax policies that place a fair burden on the rich and the poor.
It tends to see the rich as undertaxed, the poor as overtaxed. CTJ
has a stated interest in curbing corporate tax avoidance; holding
down federal deficits and debt; ensuring an adequate level of tax
revenues to fund essential services; and promoting a tax struc-
ture that does not distort the economy. It was given major credit
for putting tax reform on the political agenda in the mid-1980s,
and it has played a key role in illustrating the consequences of
the tax cuts of President George W. Bush since 2001. Its analysts
have shown that those tax cuts tend to bloat the federal deficit
while conferring quite large benefits on the wealthy. For exam-
ple, CTJ calculated that the cuts reduced President Bush’s own
2005 tax bill by some $26,000 and Vice-President Cheney’s bill by
over $1 million. CTJ staff members research tax issues, place op-
ed pieces in major newspapers, and testify before congressional
and state legislative committees. The director, Bob McIntyre, is
the omnipresent public face of CTJ.
Publications: CTJ puts out short, data-filled, accessible analy-
ses of various tax issues, usually those involved in ongoing con-
troversy. Many are variations on a central theme—that the tax
code favors the rich. These briefs can be downloaded at no cost
from the CTJ Web site.
Corporation for Enterprise Development (CFED)
777 N. Capitol St. NE, Ste. 800, Washington DC 20002
(202) 408-9788 Fax: (202) 408-9793
E-mail: info-dc@cfed.org
http://www.cfed.org
The Corporation for Enterprise Development was established in
1979 as a nonpartisan, nonprofit organization dedicated to bring-
ing low-income, low-wealth people into the nation’s financial
mainstream. Broadly stated, the mission of CFED is to identify and
test, and then help implement, ideas for expanding economic op-
portunity. It has been a big supporter of individual development
accounts (IDAs) or matched savings accounts, but has moved in
some new directions, too, such as microenterprise, Native Ameri-
can entrepreneurship, and a program to assist self-employed busi-
ness owners with tax preparation. CFED partners with policy
makers, community groups, and financial institutions to promote
Directory of Organizations
211

the goal of a wider sharing of economic opportunity. It works at
the federal, state, and local levels with both public and private
agencies.
Publications: CFED issues an annual Development Report Card
for the States that ranks each state’s economic health and prospects
based on a wide range of criteria. It also puts out fact sheets and
brochures on IDAs and other asset-building ideas.
Demos
220 5th Ave., 5th Fl., New York, NY 10001
(212) 633-1405 Fax: (212) 633-2015
E-mail: info@demos.org
http://www.demos.org
Demos calls itself a “network for ideas and action.” It is also a
nonpartisan research and advocacy organization that believes
democracy is undermined by the growth of inequality and inse-
curity among Americans. One of its three major themes of re-
search and advocacy is “Economic Opportunity”; under that
rubric it looks at issues related to debt buildup, the vulnerability
of the middle class, inequality and its consequences, the financial
challenges facing young adults, and asset building programs.
Demos sponsors speakers and conferences occasionally. It
arranged a notable conference on inequality in 2004, which led to
publication of the book Inequality Matters: The Growing Economic
Divide in America and Its Poisonous Consequences. Like some other
think tanks, Demos has both a team of staff experts and adminis-
trators and a stable of fellows who are scholars and writers work-
ing out and debating new ideas.
Publications: A variety of Demos papers, available online or
in hard copy, document the economic challenges facing the mid-
dle class and those who aspire to it. How well (or badly) people
are handling credit and debt is a topic featured prominently in
these reports. “Around the Kitchen Table,” a monthly e-journal,
explores economic problems facing America’s poor.
Economic Mobility Project (EMP)
1025 F St. NW, Ste. 900, Washington, DC 20004
(202) 552-2000 Fax: (202) 552-2299
http://www.economicmobility.org
Still in its early stages as an initiative sponsored by the Pew Char-
itable Trusts, the Economic Mobility Project tackles the question
212
Directory of Organizations

of whether the American dream of economic mobility remains
alive. The EMP represents a unique partnership among four
Washington think tanks—two on the conservative side (Heritage,
AEI) and two on the liberal side (Brookings, Urban Institute).
Some of the leading American scholars on poverty and inequal-
ity sit on its advisory board. The project hopes to establish “non-
partisan agreement on the facts, figures and trends related to
mobility” and to spark a national debate on ways to keep oppor-
tunity alive for generations to come.
Publications: The EMP will produce reports and white papers
and hold events to publicize issues related to mobility. It has al-
ready produced a short introductory report, “Economic Mobility:
Is the American Dream Alive and Well?” (2007), by Isabel Sawhill
and John Morton, which can be downloaded from the Web site.
Economic Policy Institute (EPI)
1333 H St. NW, Ste. 300, East Tower, Washington, DC 
20005-4707
(202) 775-8810 Fax: (202) 775-0819
E-mail: epi@epi.org
http://www.epinet.org
The Economic Policy Institute calls itself “the first organization to
focus on the economic condition of low- and middle-income
Americans and their families.” It has been an important liberal
think tank in Washington, D.C. since it was founded in 1986 by a
half-dozen innovative thinkers on the left: Jeff Faux, Barry Blue-
stone, Robert Reich, Robert Kuttner, Ray Marshall, and Lester
Thurow. EPI works in a number of fields that relate to the rich-
poor gap in the United States, from the living wage and welfare
reform to tax policy and union organizing. The basic thrust of EPI
policy advocacy is toward the notion of “broadly shared pros-
perity and opportunity.” EPI supports a fair reward for labor, in-
cluding higher minimum wages. It defends the usefulness of
social safety-net programs, and favors a more robust program of
educational investment in American youth. It is mistrustful of
current trade levels with China and concerned about the “off-
shoring” of U.S. jobs.
Publications: Half of the EPI “Issue Guides” are on topics ger-
mane to the rich-poor divide in the United States: minimum
wage, living wage, poverty and family budgets, and welfare. All
of the guides, as well as a host of other reports, op-ed pieces, and
Directory of Organizations
213

speeches by EPI staff and associates, can be downloaded from the
Web site. The institute’s signature publication, The State of Work-
ing America, is issued biennially and can be purchased online or
at bookstores. It contains a wealth of information on the U.S.
economy and the developing record of inequality.
Food Research and Action Center (FRAC)
1875 Connecticut Ave. NW, Ste. 540, Washington, DC 20009
(202) 986-2200 Fax: (202) 986-2525
http://www.frac.org
The Food Research and Action Center was started in New York
City in 1970. FRAC made a name for itself as a strong anti-hunger
organization during the 1970s, with lobbying and lawsuits to cre-
ate or strengthen nutrition programs for school children, seniors,
and pregnant and nursing mothers. The goal of FRAC remains
the eradication of hunger and undernutrition in the United
States. To achieve that goal, FRAC conducts research on hunger
issues and their solution; advocates for policies to end hunger;
acts as a watchdog over current regulations and policies; offers
training to and coordinates actions among program administra-
tors, policymakers, and advocates; and works to keep the public
informed about the hunger issue. Two of its current programs are
notable: the Campaign to End Childhood Hunger, which is coor-
dinated by FRAC but involves citizen groups in every state, and
D.C. Hunger Solutions, which is aimed at improving nutrition
and ending hunger in the nation’s capital.
Publications: A number of carefully prepared reports are
available at the Web site, such as “Food Stamp Access in Urban
America: A City-by-City Snapshot” (2006) and “Hunger Doesn’t
Take a Vacation: Summer Nutrition Status Report” (2007). Al-
though all are downloadable, some of the reports may be pur-
chased in hard copy as well. Many outreach brochures are also
available, in English and Spanish.
Heritage Foundation
214 Massachusetts Ave. NE, Washington, DC 20002-4999
(202) 546-4400 Fax (202) 546-8328
E-mail: info@heritage.org
http://www.heritage.org
Founded in 1973 and based in Washington, D.C., the Heritage
Foundation is regarded as the nation’s premier conservative think
214
Directory of Organizations

tank, devoted, as it notes on its Web site, to “building an America
where freedom, opportunity, prosperity and civil society flour-
ish.” With an operating budget in excess of $40 million in 2006,
Heritage outranks its peer institutions, AEI and Cato, in financial
resources. Its dozens of experts write and speak on a wide range
of policy issues, with an influence in Washington much enhanced
by the fact that Republicans have had control of the executive
branch for all but eight years since the election of 1980. The basic
Heritage position on income inequality is that it does not pose a
serious problem. Measured inequality has increased, but much of
that is due to an increase in performance-based compensation (es-
pecially for CEOs) that raises productivity and efficiency. Her-
itage opposes minimum wage laws and efforts to make union
organizing easier. Its position on poverty is that it is a less serious
problem in the United States than many believe.
Publications: The Heritage Foundation issues copious special
reports, Web memos, backgrounders, and weekly, monthly, and
bimonthly newsletters on all sorts of topics. Many touch upon in-
come inequality and what should—or should not—be done
about it.
High/Scope Educational Research Foundation
600 N. River St., Ypsilanti, MI 48198-2898
(734) 485-2000 Fax: (734) 485-0704
E-mail: info@highscope.org
http://www.highscope.org
Proponents of early childhood education hail it as a potential
means of boosting the life chances of those born and raised at a so-
cioeconomic disadvantage. Among the studies that have fur-
nished statistical support for preschool interventions, none has
been more influential than the Perry Preschool Project carried out
in the 1960s and monitored later by the High/Scope Educational
Research Foundation, a private, independent foundation estab-
lished in 1970. Three-to-four-year-old children from disadvan-
taged minority backgrounds in Ypsilanti, Michigan, were given a
quality preschool experience and then tracked for decades to see
how they compared, on a host of economic and social indicators,
with similar children who had not gotten the preschool experi-
ence. Results were decidedly positive, and the High/Scope meth-
ods and curriculum became the gold standard for preschool
educators. High/Scope has continued to be a leader in the field of
Directory of Organizations
215

pre-K and elementary school research and curriculum develop-
ment. Its educational materials are used in roughly one-fifth of all
Head Start classrooms, and its demonstration preschool, still in
Ypsilanti, is visited by educators regularly. Centers for the distrib-
ution of High/Scope active-learning materials have been estab-
lished in, among other places, the United Kingdom, Mexico, and
Indonesia.
Publications: A wide range of educational products—
classroom resources, group activities, lesson-planning and as-
sessment tools—can be ordered from the online store. High/
Scope publishes a magazine, ReSource, with articles about early
childhood education; print subscriptions are free, and articles can
also be downloaded.
Institute for Research on Poverty (IRP)
University of Wisconsin-Madison, 1180 Observatory Dr., 
3412 Social Science Bldg., Madison, WI 53706-1393
(608) 262-6358 Fax: (608) 265-3119
E-mail: djohnson@ssc.wisc.edu
http://www.irp.wisc.edu
The Institute for Research on Poverty was established in 1966 as a
nonprofit, nonpartisan center for research into the causes and con-
sequences of poverty and inequality. IRP scholars, whether affili-
ated with the University of Wisconsin or with other academic
institutions, develop and assess social policy alternatives and train
future poverty scholars. Their work on poverty deals with funda-
mental questions about low-wage labor markets, the intergenera-
tional transmission of poverty, race and poverty, and how best to
measure the extent of poverty. The IRP also coordinates meetings
of the Midwest Welfare Peer Assistance Network (WELPLAN), a
group of upper-Midwest welfare officials trying to make welfare
reform work in their states. Inequality has been a concern of IRP
through its association with two major foundations on a wide-
ranging social inequality project, which resulted in a 2004 confer-
ence and a book, Social Inequality (see chapter 8).
Publications: IRP publishes its house journal, Focus, three
times a year; it is quite accessible to the nonspecialist, often fea-
tures articles on inequality, and is downloadable. More in-depth
discussion papers and special reports are also posted on its Web
site.
216
Directory of Organizations

Legal Aid Society of New York (LASNY)
199 Water St., New York, NY 10038
(212) 577-3300 Fax: (212) 509-8761
http://www.legal-aid.org
Not only is there a health gap, an education gap, and a shelter
gap between America’s rich and poor; there is also a “justice
gap.” Americans with ample income and wealth are able to af-
ford the best legal assistance when they need it. Those of modest
means must settle for much less, or nothing. The Legal Aid Soci-
ety of New York is probably the oldest of more than 100 similar
groups around the country that help to level the legal playing
field for the poor. Founded in 1876, LASNY began as an organi-
zation helping German immigrants cope with legal difficulties.
By 1899, it was setting up offices in the boroughs outside Man-
hattan, and a few years later it expanded its original mandate to
include not only civil but also criminal cases. Another significant
expansion, into juvenile practice, took place in 1962. Large num-
bers of New York law firms, including the most prestigious
“white shoe” firms, support LASNY with pro bono work and
monetary contributions. (A standard donation level for partici-
pating firms is $600 per lawyer in the firm.) Beyond the usual
caseload of domestic violence and housing eviction threats,
LASNY also gets involved with prisoner rights, homeless rights,
predatory lending cases, immigrant issues, and HIV/AIDS cases.
Publications: LASNY offers little in the way of standard pub-
lications, but its Web site has an interesting history of the organi-
zation, FAQs, and self-help information and hotlines for those
facing legal emergencies.
Legal Services Corporation (LSC)
3333 K St. NW, Washington, DC 20007
(202) 295-1500 Fax: (202) 337-6797
E-mail: info@lsc.gov
http://www.lsc.gov
Established by Congress in 1974, the Legal Services Corporation
applies federal funds to the support of local agencies that help
the poor with legal problems. Examples of such local agencies
are: Legal Aid of Western Missouri, Texas RioGrande Legal Aid,
and the Legal Aid Foundation of Los Angeles. LSC grants are
made through a competitive application process. In 2007, some
Directory of Organizations
217

138 programs or agencies received LSC funding at more than 900
offices across the country. The majority of the legal problems on
which clients are helped fall into one of two categories: family is-
sues, such as child custody or domestic violence, and housing is-
sues, such as tenant-landlord disputes. Other problems arise in
connection with employment, government benefits, health, or
consumer complaints. The population eligible to receive LSC-
funded legal assistance is normally those with incomes at or
below 125 percent of the poverty line—roughly 50 million peo-
ple. Surveys indicate that half or more (perhaps many more) of
the individuals who apply for such assistance are turned away
for one reason or another. Case resolutions exceed 1 million each
year, however. Most are not high-profile court cases but rather
settlements achieved with a letter, a phone call, or a referral.
Three out of four clients are women, a majority of whom have
children.
Publications: The reports and studies at the LSC Web site tend
to be bureaucratic in nature, and the online “LSC Resource Li-
brary” is probably of more use to lawyers than the general public.
Highly informative, however, is the 2005 report, “Documenting
the Justice Gap in America,” which can be downloaded.
Levy Economics Institute of Bard College
Blithewood, Bard College, Annandale-on-Hudson, NY
12504-5000
(845) 758-7700 Fax: (845) 758-1149
E-mail: info@levy.org
http://www.levy.org
The generosity of Leon Levy, a Wall Street financier-turned-phil-
anthropist, made possible the establishment in 1986 of a non-
profit, nonpartisan economic research institute at Bard College.
The Levy Institute maintains an active schedule of conferences,
workshops, and seminars at Blithewood, on the Bard campus. Of
its seven sponsored research programs, one in particular, “The
Distribution of Income and Wealth,” concerns the topic of rich
and poor directly, and several others are linked to it indirectly
(gender, immigration, 21st century economic policy). The schol-
ars associated with the Levy program on income distribution are
some of the top researchers in the field, including Edward Wolff,
Susan Mayer, James K. Galbraith, and Branko Milanovic. Schol-
218
Directory of Organizations

ars at Levy have developed a comprehensive measure of eco-
nomic welfare, the LIMEW (Levy Institute Measure of Economic
Well-Being), which gives a more reliable picture of average well-
being than the government’s official measures, such as per capita
income. This, in turn, makes possible a more accurate calculation
of the overall extent of economic inequality in the United States
and a better sense of disparities among racial and age groups.
Publications: The Levy Institute puts out policy briefs, policy
notes, working papers, books, and LIMEW Reports. Most of its
publications relate to macroeconomic problems, but a significant
number deal with issues of poverty and income distribution.
National Center for Children in Poverty (NCCP)
215 W. 125th St., 3rd Fl., New York, NY 10027
(646) 284-9600 Fax: (646) 284-9623
E-mail: info@nccp.org
http://www.nccp.org
Any long-term remedy for the widening disparities between rich
and poor will almost certainly involve the issue of child poverty,
which is more extensive in the United States than in all other in-
dustrialized nations. The National Center for Children in
Poverty, part of the Mailman School of Public Health at Colum-
bia University, has been focused on this issue since 1989. The
NCCP envisions a society in which all children are nurtured by
healthy, economically stable families; it helps translate that vision
into reality through research, data-gathering, networking with
practitioners, policy development, and advocacy. Much of its
work is done in collaboration with state partners—not surpris-
ingly, given how many policies affecting child well-being are set
at the state level. NCCP renders a valuable service to the entire
field of child care and early education with its Web resource, “Re-
search Connections.” This online resource provides access to
some 11,000 items and 132 datasets that relate to the support of
children and working families. Another useful feature of the
NCCP Web site is a “policy wizard” that makes it possible to cre-
ate a customized table for any state detailing which programs
and benefits it offers, levels of benefits, etc.
Publications: The NCCP posts many up-to-date fact sheets,
briefs, and reports on its Web site, and they can be searched effi-
ciently by title, date, or topic.
Directory of Organizations
219

National Coalition for the Homeless (NCH)
2201 P St. NW, Washington, DC 20037
(202) 462-4822 Fax: (202) 462-4823
E-mail: info@nationalhomeless.org
http://www.nationalhomeless.org
The mission of the National Coalition for the Homeless, founded
in 1982, is basic: to end homelessness in the United States. The
NCH engages in public education and advocacy on this issue, or-
ganizing its efforts into four main areas. The first is housing jus-
tice: the NCH believes “safe, decent, accessible, affordable, and
permanent” housing is the right of every person, regardless of
his or her life circumstances. People experiencing homelessness
should be provided with shelter that meets these standards. In
the area of economic justice, the NCH campaigns for what is
called a “universal living wage.” Health care is a major concern
for the homeless; disease and disability can be both a cause and
an effect of homelessness. The NCH has supported periodic re-
newal and added funding for the Health Care for the Homeless
program that Congress created 20 years ago. And finally, the
NCH seeks to have the civil rights of the homeless recognized
and enforced.
Publications: A number of reports and fact sheets are avail-
able at the NCH Web site, including an annually updated (and
disturbing) report on violence against the homeless. A number of
items are for sale as well, such as a voting rights manual, an or-
ganizing manual for National Hunger and Homelessness Aware-
ness Week, and a directory of housing and homeless advocacy
groups across the country.
National Low Income Housing Coalition (NLIHC)
727 15th St. NW, 6th Fl., Washington, DC 20005
(202) 662-1530 Fax: (202) 393-1973
E-mail: info@nlihc.org
http://www.nlihc.org
The National Low Income Housing Coalition works to end what
it calls “America’s affordable housing crisis.” The NLIHC coa-
lesced in the late 1970s from a loose grouping of labor unions,
civil rights activists, public interest advocates, church groups,
and the National Organization for Women. Long led by Cushing
Dolbeare, and since 1998 by Sheila Crowley, the NLIHC tries to
ensure that the public, policy makers, and advocates for the poor
220
Directory of Organizations

are well informed about the housing needs of the lowest-income
households; it also lobbies to retain and expand federal housing
and housing-assistance resources for those with low incomes.
One of the NLIHC’s top legislative priorities is passage of the Na-
tional Affordable Housing Trust Fund Act, which would provide
funds to build, preserve, and rehabilitate 1.5 million affordable
homes during a 10-year period. Aside from how much housing is
available to low-income Americans, the conditions under which
they buy, rent, and live in that housing concerns NLIHC. It takes
an interest, for example, in discrimination, eviction practices, flat
rent versus tiered rent, lead safety, and similar housing issues.
Publications: At the NLIHC Web site there is an Advocate’s
Guide that defines and explains dozens of terms used in discus-
sions of housing and community development policy; an archive
of the weekly Memo to Members, summarizing current housing is-
sues on Capitol Hill and elsewhere; and reports produced by the
organization’s small research staff.
National Student Campaign against Hunger and
Homelessness (NSCHH)
407 S. Dearborn, Ste. 701, Chicago, IL 60605
(312) 291-0349 x301 Fax: (312) 275-7150
E-mail: info@studentsagainsthunger.org
http://www.studentsagainsthunger.org
The National Student Campaign against Hunger and Homeless-
ness has its roots in the national (and global) outpouring of con-
cern about African hunger in the 1980s, joined to a growing
awareness of U.S. hunger and homelessness at about the same
time. Organizationally, the new entity got its start in 1985 with
major support from an existing national network of student ac-
tivists, the state-level Public Interest Research Groups (PIRGs).
Over time, the Campaign has evolved to become a clearinghouse
of information, an opportunity for students to develop activist
and leadership skills—almost 500 high schools and colleges are
part of NSCHH—and, most importantly, a means for young
adults to put their beliefs into action through community service.
The Campaign engages in fundraising, “sleep-outs,” community
action, planning/holding national conferences, and advocacy for
systemic solutions.
Publications: A variety of reports on hunger, homelessness,
and affordable housing are available on the Web site; authorship
Directory of Organizations
221

usually is by an organization other than NSCHH. Manuals and
fact sheets are also downloadable.
New America Foundation (NAF)
1630 Connecticut Ave. NW, 7th Fl., Washington, DC 20009
(202) 986-2700 Fax: (202) 986-3696
http://www.newamerica.net
The New America Foundation, founded in 1999, is a nonprofit,
“post-partisan” research institution in Washington, D.C., best char-
acterized as centrist rather than liberal or conservative. It strives to
offer fresh thinking on “both sides of the political divide”—new
ideas from new voices. Already it has achieved a reputation for
producing smart domestic policy proposals. The administration of
California Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger, for example, turned
to NAF in 2005 and 2006 for ideas on how to reform the health care
system in California; the final result was widely considered an im-
portant step forward. (NAF is probably the only East Coast think
tank that maintains a second office in Sacramento, the capital of
California.) In addition to advocating universal health care, a pol-
icy change that would clearly benefit America’s poor, NAF ad-
dresses the rich-and-poor issue through work on “Ownership and
Assets,” one of its key research areas. Its staff has put forward var-
ious initiatives designed to increase the U.S. savings rate, broaden
U.S. home ownership, eliminate asset limits in public assistance
programs, and link tax refunds to savings options. All of these pro-
posals are aimed at helping low- and middle-income families
achieve greater economic security.
Publications: The fellows and staff at NAF promote new
ideas through issue briefs, articles published in mainstream out-
lets like The New York Times and The American Prospect Online, and
trade books. The first two can be downloaded from the NAF Web
site; the books must be purchased from book dealers.
Physicians for Human Rights (PHR)
2 Arrow St., Ste. 301, Cambridge, MA 02138
(617) 301-4200 Fax: (617) 301-4250
E-mail: web@phrusa.org
http://physiciansforhumanrights.org
Physicians for Human Rights was founded in 1986 by a half-
dozen doctors in the Boston area, several of whom had gained
first-hand knowledge of human rights abuses by governments in
222
Directory of Organizations

Latin America and wanted to do something in response. Over the
years, PHR’s membership has expanded to some 5,000 medical
professionals, including doctors, nurses, scientists, and public
health specialists. Its mission remains the same—to use the skills
and dedication of health professionals to advance global health
and protect human rights. While most of PHR’s work is done
overseas, its Health and Justice for Youth campaign addresses
problems connected with the U.S. juvenile justice system. That
system impacts and criminalizes low-income (and minority)
youths disproportionately, often treating them as adults. PHR be-
lieves this is wrong and brings expertise in adolescent brain de-
velopment to bear as it campaigns for more rehabilitative and
community-based alternatives to incarceration. As part of its
Health and Justice for Youth initiative, PHR also advocates the
abolition of capital punishment for minors. (It has the support of
three former surgeons general on this.) On an issue involving
both juvenile and adult interactions with the justice system, PHR
opposes mandatory minimum prison sentences for low-level
drug crimes.
Publications: PHR issues fact sheets on different dimensions
of the juvenile justice issue. It released a lengthier report, The
Consequences Aren’t Minor: The Impact of Trying Youth as Adults and
Strategies for Reform, in the spring of 2007. That report can be read
online. PHR has a strong interest in recruiting medical students
and puts out an advocacy toolkit and other start-up materials for
them.
Russell Sage Foundation (RSF)
112 E. 64th St., New York, NY 10065
(212) 750-6000 Fax: (212) 371-4761
E-mail: info@rsage.org
http://www.russellsage.org
For the past century, the Russell Sage Foundation has sponsored
social science research aimed at “the improvement of social and
living conditions” in the United States. In the first years after its
founding in 1907, the RSF was chiefly known for a venture in di-
rect assistance to working families: Forest Hills Gardens. This
was an early example of a planned residential community in
Queens, New York. Ironically, the homes ended up being too ex-
pensive for lower-class families and are today among the priciest
in the borough. RSF had more success with an effort in the 1920s
Directory of Organizations
223

and 1930s to give a solid academic grounding to the emerging
profession of social work. It even permitted the New York School
of Social Work to share its (first) building near Gramercy Park. In
the late 1940s, RSF consciously reoriented its funding away from
direct support of charitable activities and toward a new role as fa-
cilitator and disseminator of social science research, a role it con-
tinues to play. In 1999, RSF partnered with the Carnegie
Corporation to sponsor a project on social inequality that has as
its main purpose to determine whether families that lag econom-
ically are also put at other kinds of long-term disadvantage.
Publications: Over many decades, RSF has published or co-
published, in book form, much of the best research that it spon-
sored. The RSF list is stellar; since 1990 it includes Uneven Tides:
Rising Inequality in America (1993), Social Programs That Work
(1998), Understanding Poverty (2001), Poor Kids in a Rich Country:
America’s Children in Comparative Perspective (2003), and Social In-
equality (2004). RSF also posts working papers to its Web site,
many on aspects of social inequality.
Stanford Center for the Study of Poverty and Inequality
(SCSPI)
McClatchy Hall Bldg. 120, 2nd Fl., 450 Serra Mall, Stanford, CA
94301-2047
(650) 724-6912 Fax: (650) 736-9883
E-mail: inequality@stanford.edu
http://www.stanford.edu/group/scspi
The recently established (2006) Stanford Center for the Study of
Poverty and Inequality commits one of the nation’s great univer-
sities to a leadership role in addressing what has become, in its
view, “one of the most pressing problems of our time.” The
SCSPI monitors trends, develops policy, and trains new profes-
sionals to enter careers related to inequality matters. Stanford’s
programmatic commitment to the study of poverty and inequal-
ity is broad-gauged: it is putting resources into undergraduate
work, master’s degree work, faculty seminars, visiting scholars,
internships for its undergraduates, and more. So far, only two
other major American universities seem as invested as Stanford
in the idea that students should have a formal option of in-depth
study of inequality—Cornell has an inequality concentration for
undergraduates, and Harvard offers a multidisciplinary program
for PhD students at the Kennedy School of Government. If the in-
224
Directory of Organizations

equality trend continues in the economy, and if journalists and
scholars continue to document its repercussions, one would be
surprised not to see other academic institutions following in
Stanford’s footsteps.
Publications: The SCSPI publishes Poverty, Inequality, and Pol-
icy Magazine as well as two book series: Studies in Inequality and
Controversies in Inequality. Working papers and trend data are also
available through its Web site.
United for a Fair Economy (UFE)
29 Winter St., Boston, MA 02108
(617) 423-2148 Fax: (617) 423-0191
E-mail: info@faireconomy.org
http://www.faireconomy.org
Since its founding in 1995, the nonpartisan, nonprofit, left-oriented
United for a Fair Economy has worked to “raise awareness that
concentrated wealth and power undermine the economy, corrupt
democracy, deepen the racial divide, and tear communities apart.”
UFE puts an almost unique organizational emphasis on the issue
of economic inequality in the United States. It works to educate the
public on the advantages of, and ways to better achieve, a society
without “dramatic disparities of income, wages, wealth, health,
safety, respect, and opportunities for recreation and personal
growth.” As part of its educational outreach, UFE has given its sig-
nature workshop, “The Growing Divide: Economic Inequality and
the Roots of Insecurity,” to some 70,000 people, and has trained
more than 400 to lead those workshops and other sponsored
events. It multiplies its influence through media outreach and
measures the success of those efforts in terms of “media hits”
(more than 2,000 in the past two years). UFE takes a particular in-
terest in tax fairness and racial economic justice. Its Responsible
Wealth Project brings together affluent Americans who share a
concern about growing wealth inequality, and its Tax Fairness Or-
ganizing Collaborative has built an 18-state grassroots network
since 2004 to push for fair and adequate taxation, while combating
widespread anti-tax, anti-government attitudes. UFE’s Racial
Wealth Divide Project was begun in 2001 to organize minority
communities to adopt wealth-building strategies, with a long-
range goal of ending racial wealth disparities.
Publications: UFE puts out fact sheets and backgrounders on
inequality issues, as well as a monthly e-newsletter. Workshop
Directory of Organizations
225

materials can be downloaded from the Web site. UFE’s annual
State of the Dream report features themes relevant to the economic
challenges faced by black and/or Hispanic communities. The bi-
annual Tax Fairness Action News had its inaugural issue in the
spring of 2007. Some of the most cogent UFE documents relate to
the estate tax, the future of which remains unsettled.
226
Directory of Organizations

8
Selected Print and 
Nonprint Resources
A
s the gap between America’s rich and poor grows wider and
deeper over time, so too does the literature on this critical
issue. The resources one may consult for a fuller under-
standing of how, and why, the U.S. income distribution has been
changing in recent decades come in several formats. On the print
side, there are important articles in academic journals and news-
papers of national stature, and there are books that delve into
specific aspects of the rich-poor divide in all the depth one could
want. On the nonprint side, there are Internet resources offering
detailed statistics and other relevant information with the ad-
vantage, often, of being more up-to-date than comparable print
materials. With the Internet, however, one does have to exercise
some caution in one’s reliance on the “facts” presented, always
weighing the credibility of the source. And finally, there are a
number of videos that would be of interest to anyone who wants
to grasp the implications of the trend toward an economically
more polarized U.S. population.
Print Resources
Articles
Borjas, George J. “The Labor Demand Curve Is Downward-
Sloping: Reexamining the Impact of Immigration on the Labor
227

Market.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 118, no. 4 (November
2003): 1335–1374.
Borjas argues that recent immigrants to the United States have
been lower-skilled than their predecessors and therefore have
put downward pressure on wages at the low end of the labor
market. If true, this worsens the income gap.
Cowen, Tyler. “A Contrarian Look at Whether U.S. Chief Exec-
utives Are Overpaid.” The New York Times (May 18, 2006): C4.
An economics professor at George Mason University gives a con-
cise version of the argument that rising CEO pay, which con-
tributes to the widening rich-poor gap, is accounted for by the
growing stock-market value of U.S. corporations. If the CEO per-
forms well, he or she is worth every penny paid.
Gertner, Jon. “What Is a Living Wage?” The New York Times
Magazine (January 15, 2006): 38–45, 68, 72.
Its title is slightly misleading, because this article deals not only
with the living wage but also the minimum wage—in depth and
with great clarity. It puts a human face on the issues, focusing on
the hard-fought and ultimately successful battle for a citywide
living wage in Santa Fe, New Mexico.
Heckman, James J. “Catch ‘em Young.” The Wall Street Journal
(January 10, 2006): A14.
Nobel laureate Heckman makes the case, with op-ed brevity, for
publicly funded early childhood interventions to help low-in-
come children.
Hertz, Tom. “Understanding Mobility in America.” Center for
American Progress (April 26, 2006). Accessed at http://www.
americanprogress.org.
Hertz shows that the odds of a low-income child, or even a 
middle-class child, eventually becoming rich in the United States
are actually quite low—lower than many people probably want
to believe.
Johnston, David Cay. “Corporate Wealth Share Rises for Top-In-
come Americans.” The New York Times (January 29, 2006): A22.
228
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Johnston won a Pulitzer Prize in 2001 for his reporting on the U.S.
tax system. He is the author of Perfectly Legal: The Covert Cam-
paign to Rig Our Tax System to Benefit the Super-Rich—and Cheat
Everybody Else (2005). In this article, he reports that the top 1 per-
cent of U.S. households increased their ownership share of cor-
porate wealth to 57.5 percent in 2003 (in 1991, that share was only
37.8 percent).
Kennickell, Arthur B. “Currents and Undercurrents in the Dis-
tribution of Wealth, 1989–2004.” Federal Reserve Board (Janu-
ary 30, 2006). Accessed at http://www.federalreserve.gov.
Kennickell, a senior economist at the Federal Reserve, summa-
rizes the findings of the board’s most recent triennial survey of
household wealth in the United States. This survey has been the
chief basis for estimates of U.S. personal wealth since the 1980s.
Kuznets, Simon. “Economic Growth and Income Inequality.”
American Economic Review 45, no. 1 (March 1955): 1–28.
This is the classic article in which Nobel laureate Kuznets sets
forth his theory relating income inequality to the stage of eco-
nomic development. The trend of rising U.S. inequality, however,
does not fit his theory.
Piketty, Thomas, and Emmanuel Saez. “Income Inequality in
the United States, 1913–1998.” Quarterly Journal of Economics
118, no. 1 (February 2003): 1–39.
Piketty and Saez are considered the top experts on U.S. income
inequality, and this article is referred to frequently. Saez updates
the key statistics at his personal Web page: http://elsa.berkeley.
edu/~saez/
Porter, Eduardo. “More Than Ever, It Pays to Be the Top Execu-
tive.” The New York Times (May 25, 2007): A1.
This article reports on the little-noticed fact that compensation for
top U.S. executives has not only outdistanced their companies’ or-
dinary employees but also the executives just below the top.
Sala-i-Martin, Xavier. “The World Distribution of Income:
Falling Poverty and . . . Convergence, Period.” Quarterly Jour-
nal of Economics 121, no. 2 (May 2006): 351–397.
Print Resources
229

A Columbia University professor argues that on a global scale the
gap between rich and poor has actually been narrowing. A major
factor in the global picture is the improvement in per capita in-
comes in India and China. This global finding is, of course, not in-
consistent with a widening rich-poor gap within the United States.
Smeeding, Timothy. “Poor People in Rich Nations: The United
States in Comparative Perspective.” Journal of Economic Per-
spectives 20, no. 1 (Winter 2006): 69–90.
A leading scholar in the measurement of poverty internationally
finds that in the first years of the 21st century, the United States 
has the highest per capita gross domestic product (GDP) among 
a group of 11 industrialized nations—and also the highest (or 
second-highest) poverty rate for every demographic except single
adults.
Tritch, Teresa. “The Rise of the Super-Rich.” The New York
Times (July 19, 2006). Accessible at http://select.nytimes.com/
2006/07/19/opinion/19talkingpoints.html.
This article provides a nice overview of the so-called “super-rich”
and, in the online version, many helpful links to other sources.
Wessel, David. “As Rich-Poor Gap Widens in U.S., Class Mo-
bility Stalls.” The Wall Street Journal (May 13, 2005): A1.
Wessel summarizes the new research findings that indicate, at
best, no overall change in class mobility in the United States dur-
ing the past 35 years, and less mobility than is found in a number
of European nations and Canada.
Books
The Rich-Poor Divide
Bowles, Samuel, Herbert Gintis, and Melissa Osborne Groves,
eds. Unequal Chances: Family Background and Economic Suc-
cess. New York: Russell Sage Foundation; Princeton, NJ: Prince-
ton University Press, 2005. 304 pages. ISBN 0-691-11930-9.
We have long known that, statistically speaking, parents who are
poor tend to have children who grow up to be poor, and the same
holds true for the rich. But recent research has revealed an even
stronger tendency for the status of parents to be passed on to their
230
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

children, or, to put it the other way, an even lower degree of inter-
generational mobility than we thought existed. Unequal Chances
examines this issue from various vantage points—economic,
racial, and psychological. Especially useful are Chapter 2, “The
Apple Falls Even Closer to the Tree Than We Thought,” which
summarizes the new findings on lower intergenerational mobility,
and Chapter 5, “Rags, Riches, and Race,” which reports that up-
ward mobility for blacks is much lower than for whites in the
United States. Somewhat technical in places, this book may con-
vince many readers that family background really matters.
Collins, Chuck, and Felice Yeskel. Economic Apartheid in Amer-
ica: A Primer on Economic Inequality & Insecurity, rev. ed. New
York: The New Press, 2005. 254 pages. ISBN 1-59558-015-8.
Its hyperbolic title aside, this book provides a useful guide to how
the left views wealth and income inequality in the United States.
It covers a lot of ground: the causes and consequences of inequal-
ity, the actions that are needed to reduce it, and the steps that will
be required to build a movement toward a “fair” economy. As a
radical critique of U.S. (and global) corporatist capitalism, this
volume, even with its determinedly reader-friendly approach
(plenty of boxed features, tables, and cartoons) may not win le-
gions of converts. It gets weighed down by its own ideological
baggage, especially in Chapter 4, with its explications of domi-
nance, subordination, class continuum, etc. But the rest of the
book is much livelier and should be of interest to many outside
the radical fold. The key message seems to be that as the gap
widens between those at the top of the economic heap and every-
one else, the winners are trying to change the rules in ways that
protect and enhance their advantages. With evidence and argu-
ment, the authors give this notion real plausibility.
Jacobs, Lawrence R., and Theda Skocpol, eds. Inequality and
American Democracy: What We Know and What We Need to
Learn. New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 2005. 246 pages.
ISBN 0-87154-413-X.
In 2003, a task force of the American Political Science Association
(APSA) took up the issue of rising economic inequality in the
United States and its effects on our democratic system. Some of
the biggest names in political science were recruited to join the
project. They met, they pondered, they deliberated, and this book
Print Resources
231

is the result. Broadly, the experts find that a growing concentra-
tion of economic power at the top has been accompanied by an
amplification of the political “voice” of the privileged. They can
make their voices heard partly at the ballot box—high-income in-
dividuals vote at higher rates than low-income individuals—and
partly with campaign contributions. The result is a government
more responsive to the wishes of the privileged than to the needs
of the underprivileged. Government policy did not cause the in-
equality trend, but given the heightened influence of those who
have been raised to the top rungs of the ladder, U.S. public pol-
icy now does very little to reverse or even moderate that trend.
(Other governments do more.)
Lardner, James, and David A. Smith, eds. Inequality Matters:
The Growing Economic Divide in America and Its Poisonous
Consequences. New York: The New Press, 2005. 328 pages. ISBN
1-56584-995-7.
This volume offers a progressive take on the growing inequality
between America’s haves and have-nots. The 23 short chapters
were originally presented at the “Inequality Matters” conference
at New York University in 2004; most have been revised for this
book. In addition to the income gap, authors address the educa-
tion gap, health gap, ethnic gap (differential opportunities for ad-
vancement), and the gap between what America’s democratic
process should look like and what big money has done to it.
These consistently interesting essays present as wide a range of
perspectives on inequality as the overall framework of liberal-to-
radical discontent with current trends would allow. A particu-
larly good chapter, “What the Numbers Tell Us,” by Heather
Boushey and Christian Weller, concludes with the remark that if
many of us are downplaying the magnitude of the inequality
trend, it is because “the evidence is telling us something about
America that we are not eager to hear” (p. 40).
McCarty, Nolan, Keith T. Poole, and Howard Rosenthal. Polar-
ized America: The Dance of Ideology and Unequal Riches. Cam-
bridge, MA: MIT Press, 2006. 240 pages. ISBN 0-262-13464-0.
Of all the consequences of growing economic inequality in the
United States, perhaps none is more troubling than the effect it is
having on our politics. The authors of this study begin with a
simple fact captured in a graph on page 6: from the 1970s on-
232
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

ward, both the Gini index of economic inequality and a political
polarization index moved sharply higher, with the two curves es-
sentially overlapping. “Polarization” in this context refers to
House Republicans moving rightward from the center and
House Democrats moving (somewhat) leftward. It can also be
shown that high-income voters increasingly identify with the Re-
publican Party, and low-income voters with the Democrats.
These trends do not bode well for a moderation of the inequality
trend since they have “moved the political system away from
public policy that might alleviate income inequality” (p. 165).
The final two chapters will be of greatest interest to general read-
ers. Here, the authors’ polarization theories are applied to such
policy issues as the minimum wage, estate taxes, income taxes,
Social Security, and welfare—issues on which our polarized pol-
itics have shifted us away from redistributive policies. Is there
any hope of pulling back from polarization? The authors do not
give much reason to think so.
Mishel, Lawrence, Jared Bernstein, and Sylvia Allegretto. The
State of Working America 2006/2007. Ithaca, NY: Cornell Uni-
versity Press, 2007. 426 pages. ISBN 978-0-8014-7355-5.
Issued biennially by the Economic Policy Institute, a liberal think
tank in Washington, D.C., The State of Working America has become
a trusted vade mecum for those, particularly on the liberal side of the
aisle, who want to understand how the economy is impacting
workers and families in the United States. The book is chock-full of
tables and graphs that help one make sense of economic develop-
ments across sectors and over time. One of the most startling
graphs is Figure 1I (p. 57), which shows how family incomes have
fared by quintile since 1947: the lowest quintile did quite well for a
generation (1947–73) but has badly lagged the other four quintiles
ever since 1973. Topics receiving full-chapter treatment include life-
time income and wealth mobility, the divergence between wage
growth and productivity growth, the performance of the U.S. job
market, wealth disparities, poverty in all its dimensions, regional
economic differences, and international comparisons.
Neckerman, Kathryn M., ed. Social Inequality. New York: Rus-
sell Sage, 2004. 1,017 pages. ISBN 0-87154-621-3.
This monumental work is the product of a unique research effort
begun in 2000 with funding from the Russell Sage Foundation and
Print Resources
233

the Carnegie Corporation of New York. The basic question posed
to almost 50 of the nation’s foremost social scientists (organized
into teams) was this: has the growing income gap in recent decades
produced a comparable widening between rich and poor on other
social indicators, such as health, education, family structure, and
political participation? If it has, then a self-reinforcing trend of so-
cial disadvantage may have begun that will make reversing the in-
equality trend that much more difficult. The research results
reported by the experts are, as one would expect, complex and 
nuanced—and not very encouraging. Take political participation
(part V) as an example. If the poor were becoming more politically
active, their voting and other forms of political activism could lead
to legislation that would work to their advantage. Alas, that has not
been the case: voter turnout is higher for those with more income
and education, and while turnout has declined at all income levels,
it has declined most for the poorest. Social Inequality has already be-
come a standard reference work in the study of inequality.
The New York Times. Class Matters. New York: Times Books,
2005. 288 pages. ISBN 978-0805080551.
In May and June of 2005, The New York Times ran a series of arti-
cles on class divisions in the United States. The growing rich-poor
divide was treated as one aspect of the overall topic. Various re-
porters contributed to the series, and Class Matters presents all 11
articles in one volume. Several chapters stand out: “Shadowy
Lines That Still Divide,” the series opener, provides a broad
overview of class in the United States and of the topics to be ad-
dressed in subsequent articles. The online version of this chapter—
the entire series remains available at http://www.nytimes.com/
pages/national/class—offers some remarkable interactive graph-
ics. “Life at the Top in America Isn’t Just Better, It’s Longer” looks
at the life expectancy advantage, and the survival advantage after
a medical emergency, enjoyed by those with better educations
and income levels compared with those with worse. “The Richest
Are Leaving Even the Rich Far Behind” is perhaps the most valu-
able chapter for gaining an understanding of the growing gap be-
tween rich and poor.
Sacks, Peter. Tearing Down the Gates: Confronting the Class Di-
vide in American Education. Berkeley, CA: University of Cali-
fornia Press, 2007. 376 pages. ISBN 978-0-520-24588-4.
234
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Economic inequality in the United States is bound up inextrica-
bly with educational inequality, according to Peter Sacks. Each
begets the other. This is a familiar vicious-circle refrain among
those studying the American classroom and the American class
system. What sets Sacks’s book apart from other work dealing
with the dual inequality question is its emphasis, not made clear
in the title, on the issue of unequal access to higher education.
Through numerous case studies, he demonstrates how different
are the prospects of getting a good college education for those
growing up poor and those brought up in more fortunate cir-
cumstances. The gap has much to do with the leg up that privi-
leged children enjoy from intellectual stimulation in the home,
superior instruction in their public and private schools, private
tutoring on “gatekeeping tests” like the SAT and ACT, and, obvi-
ously, their parents’ deeper pockets when the time arrives to con-
sider college. But that is only part of the story. The other part
concerns state and federal budgetary decisions, and changes in
financial aid policy by universities themselves, that have system-
atically undermined the ability of working-class students to go to
college. Sacks supports his arguments with helpful graphs and
lively prose.
Shapiro, Thomas M. The Hidden Cost of Being African Ameri-
can: How Wealth Perpetuates Inequality. New York: Oxford
University Press, 2004. 238 pages. ISBN 0-19-518138-7.
Thomas Shapiro, a sociologist at Brandeis University, has written
extensively on racial wealth differences in the United States. In
Black Wealth/White Wealth (1995), Shapiro and coauthor Melvin
Oliver described with data and documents the large, enduring
wealth differences that separate the two races. Here, the topic is
the same but the approach more personal and anecdotal. Shapiro
interviewed almost 200 families in Boston, Los Angeles, and St.
Louis to see how important family wealth (or its lack) was for
their economic advancement. The answer turned out to be: very
important. It matters particularly when young couples go to buy
their first home. Whites tend to get help on a down payment
from their parents; blacks tend not to, since their parents are
much less likely to have wealth to pass along. Larger down pay-
ments help whites secure lower interest rates and better houses
in better neighborhoods, with better schools for their children to
attend. In this and other ways, Shapiro contends, the unequal
Print Resources
235

wealth holdings of the past are reproduced in the present. Asset-
based policies could break the pattern.
Wolff, Edward N. Top Heavy: The Increasing Inequality of
Wealth in America and What Can Be Done about It, rev. ed. New
York: The New Press, 2002. 116 pages. ISBN 1-56584-665-6.
Edward Wolff, an economics professor at New York University,
has been called the nation’s foremost authority on wealth distri-
bution. This short book, originally issued as a Century Founda-
tion report, makes his knowledge available to a general audience.
Wolff explains in lay terms what wealth is; why it is at least as im-
portant a metric as income; what the historical trends have been;
how the structure of household wealth holdings has been chang-
ing; how U.S. wealth patterns compare to other countries; how
wealth is currently taxed; and how it might be taxed more di-
rectly and progressively. Wolff finds the current level of wealth
inequality “pronounced” and argues that policy remedies are ur-
gently needed.
The Rich and Their Circumstances
Conniff, Richard. The Natural History of the Rich: A Field Guide.
New York: W.W. Norton, 2002. 344 pages. ISBN 0-393-01965-9.
If the famous American economist Thorstein Veblen had been
more interested in natural history, his groundbreaking 1899 clas-
sic, The Theory of the Leisure Class, might have borne a strong re-
semblance to this book. Richard Conniff is a naturalist and
prolific journalist who writes frequently for National Geographic
and Smithsonian Magazine. In this quirky, entertaining book, he
views the rich—especially the super-rich—as a kind of sub-
species of humankind, finding many parallels between their be-
havior and that of other members of the animal kingdom,
whether chimps, apes, or hummingbirds. The rich display their
wealth in the same way that males of many species display their
feathers or other finery. They build palaces and McMansions, ac-
quire yachts and Impressionist paintings, and even arrange to be
shot into space (for $20 million). Veblen called it conspicuous
consumption, and Conniff does not improve on that term. He
does, however, use well-chosen anecdotes and examples from
the most unexpected quarters to freshen up some of Veblen’s
most basic points.
236
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Frank, Robert. Richistan: A Journey through the American
Wealth Boom and the Lives of the New Rich. New York: Crowne,
2007. 277 pages. ISBN 978-0-307-33926-3.
Robert Frank, not to be confused with the Cornell economics pro-
fessor of the same name (author of The Winner-Take-All Society), is
a journalist with expertise in wealth. Indeed, he is the “wealth re-
porter” for The Wall Street Journal, and much of the material in
Richistan has already appeared there. The premise of this book is
that America’s rich today are a different breed from earlier
decades, in the sources of their money, the diversity of their de-
mographic, and the unpredictability of their politics. We learn,
for example, that a good portion of the most recently minted mil-
lionaires and billionaires are liberal Democrats (“Learjet liber-
als”); that a billion-dollar fortune can originate just as readily in
the invention of a new brand of vodka (Grey Goose) as in the mo-
nopolization of a basic industry; and that significant numbers of
the new rich are not white males in their 60s or older. Much of the
book falls somewhere between casual empiricism and anecdote;
it could never be mistaken for social science. But that does not
make it any less enjoyable—or appalling—to read.
Frank, Robert H., and Philip J. Cook. The Winner-Take-All Soci-
ety: Why the Few at the Top Get So Much More Than the Rest of
Us. New York: Penguin, 1996. 272 pages. ISBN 978-0140259957.
This book, first published in 1995, was an early attempt to make
sense of the widening U.S. income gap that was starting to cause
concern in the late 1980s. Frank and Cook focused their attention
on the upper end of the scale, offering an analytical framework
for understanding why peak earners seemed to be leaving every-
one else—even in the top quintile—far behind. The winner-take-
all earnings pattern was particularly noticeable in certain
markets, such as entertainment, sports, and the arts. The authors
ventured several reasons why winners were “taking all,” one
being the growth of national and international media markets,
which made it essential to have a bankable “star” in one’s movie
in order to ensure box office success. With such an imperative,
$15 million paydays for Michael Douglas, Arnold Schwarzeneg-
ger, and Eddie Murphy were almost to be expected. Frank and
Cook found the winner-take-all phenomenon understandable,
but in some important ways unfortunate. The main problem is
Print Resources
237

that too many young people are drawn into these kinds of in-
dustries, full of confidence that they will be winners, and the re-
sult is a distorted allocation of resources, both human and
nonhuman.
Hacker, Andrew. Money: Who Has How Much and Why. New
York: Scribner, 1997. 254 pages. ISBN 0-684-19646-8.
Andrew Hacker, a professor emeritus in political science at
Queens College (New York City), has been lauded for his ability
to bring political numbers to life, as he did most notably in his
1992 Two Nations: Black and White, Separate, Hostile, Unequal. In his
more recent Money, the topic is economic inequality, which lends
itself even more naturally than racial inequality to elucidation by
numbers. More a collection of chapter-length essays than a
monographic development of one overriding concept, this book
has many fascinating things to say about the distribution of
American incomes, particularly those at the top. Three chapters
illuminate the heights of the U.S. income range: “1 Million a
Year,” “At the Very Top,” and “Hail to the Chief!” The last refers
to chief executive officers (CEOs) and their compensation levels
in the mid-1990s. Not only is Hacker very perceptive and skillful
in the handling of data, but he also writes exceedingly well.
Keister, Lisa A. Getting Rich: America’s New Rich and How
They Got That Way. New York: Cambridge University Press,
2005. 310 pages. ISBN 978-0-521-53667-7.
Lisa Keister, a sociologist at Duke University with a solid back-
ground in economics, presents a primer on wealth in the United
States: who has it, how they got it, and how they pass it along to
the next generation. Her dual disciplinary training serves her
well as she navigates the statistical and conceptual issues sur-
rounding this topic. In a systematic fashion, she explores the
components of wealth as ordinarily defined; reviews the long-
term trends in wealth mobility (how far people rise or fall in the
wealth rankings over time); and looks at the ethnic, family-size,
educational, geographic, and religious factors that appear to
influence one’s chances of accumulating wealth. Interesting in-
sights abound. The wealthy tend to come from families in which
there are few siblings. Their parents tend to be more highly edu-
cated than average. In terms of religious upbringing, they are
much likelier to be Jewish or Episcopalian than Baptist or any
238
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

other conservative Protestant sect. And they tend to be self-em-
ployed, that is, entrepreneurial. Keister is currently working on a
book that will explore more fully the relationship between reli-
gious belief and wealth and poverty.
Phillips, Kevin. Wealth and Democracy: A Political History of
the American Rich. New York: Broadway Books, 2002. 474
pages. ISBN 0-7679-0533-4.
In what might be seen as a sequel to his 1990 The Politics of Rich
and Poor, Kevin Phillips offers here a political and economic his-
tory of the United States as viewed through the lens of wealth.
Phillips is clearly disillusioned by the current state of American
democracy, which he sees as weakened and tainted by the power
of moneyed elites. In his telling, U.S. history presents a mixed
spectacle of democratic advancement, boosted by technological
progress and expanding trade, encountering setback after set-
back at the hands of a corrupted political system. Phillips is an
admirer of the Progressive Era muckrakers, and perhaps sees
himself following in their footsteps. (He enjoys using terms like
“plutocracy” and “plutography.”) The logic of Phillips’s argu-
ments can be hard to pin down, his tone can be overheated at
times, and his nonlinear chronology can befuddle. But his knack
for well-chosen graphs, tables, and examples, his undisguised
enthusiasm for combative populist politicians like Teddy Roo-
sevelt, and above all his high-minded take on a very serious sub-
ject make this required reading for anyone concerned about the
current state of U.S. economic polarization.
The Poor and Their Circumstances
DeParle, Jason. American Dream: Three Women, Ten Kids, and a
Nation’s Drive to End Welfare. New York: Viking, 2004. 422
pages. ISBN 0-670-89275-0.
In 1991, Bill Clinton, running for president as a new Democrat,
pledged to “end welfare as we know it.” At the close of his first
term he did so—or rather, he and a Republican Congress did so.
The welfare reform law of 1996 was a landmark in the history of
American social policy. Policy wonks on the right and left ener-
getically supported or opposed the measure prior to its passage;
in later years, both sides agreed that it had been good for some
welfare families, bad for others. This important book by a sea-
soned New York Times journalist takes the reader behind the
Print Resources
239

scenes of the legislative battles that eventually produced the new
welfare law. At the same time, it chronicles the family history and
ongoing struggles of three black women and their children in
and out of the welfare system. DeParle is a knowledgeable stu-
dent of social policy who nearly won not one but two Pulitzer
Prizes for his reporting on welfare. The candor and empathy
with which he presents the stories of Angie, Jewell, and Opal
help make this book the best possible solvent for stereotypes
about poverty and welfare.
Ehrenreich, Barbara. Nickel and Dimed: On (Not) Getting By in
America. New York: Henry Holt, 2002. 230 pages. ISBN 978-0-
80506-389-9.
Nickel and Dimed is a classic first-person account of the low-wage
labor market in the United States at the turn of the 21st century.
Although it no longer appears on the bestseller lists, it continues
to sell briskly—aided no doubt by college adoptions for courses
in sociology, economics, public policy, and women’s studies.
(There are 17 discussion questions at the end of the book.) The
premise is appealingly simple: a highly educated, well-published
author leaves her comfortable daily routines behind and applies
for a series of low-paying jobs: waitress, nursing home aide,
house cleaner, and Wal-Mart associate. Can she make ends meet
on what she is paid? Time and again, she finds that she cannot.
She also discovers that low-wage labor involves endless indigni-
ties, from lunch breaks that amount to five-minute “pit stops” at
convenience stores, to drug tests as a condition of employment,
to wage rates that do not rise to overtime levels when, by law,
they should. Ehrenreich writes with a unique blend of humor, in-
dignation, and irony. She has profoundly altered the way many
people think about low-paying jobs.
Harrington, Michael. The Other America: Poverty in the United
States. New York: Macmillan, 1962. ISBN 0-684-82678-X.
This classic work, still available in various paperback editions,
opened the nation’s eyes to the glaring social problem of poverty.
Its chapters shed light on rural poverty, black poverty, the
poverty of urban slums and skid rows, and poverty among 
the elderly. (Harrington observed that the elderly experienced
more poverty than any other age group—the opposite of what is
seen today.) In 1962, the Census Bureau did not yet calculate and
240
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

publish a national poverty rate; there was no Medicare or Medi-
caid; and the “War on Poverty” had not yet been launched.
Hence, The Other America acted as a sort of wakeup call to the na-
tion, and, incidentally, to the administration in office at the time.
President John F. Kennedy is said to have read the book, or at
least a review of it in The New Yorker, and been impressed suffi-
ciently to set in motion the anti-poverty initiative that eventually
(under President Lyndon B. Johnson) took shape in the so-called
War on Poverty. Harrington (1928–1989) was a lifelong socialist,
a fact that, in the United States, put distinct limits on his influ-
ence. Although he wrote extensively after The Other America, that
remains the work for which he is most remembered.
Iceland, John. Poverty in America: A Handbook, 2nd ed. Berke-
ley, CA: University of California Press, 2006. 223 pages. ISBN
978-0520248410.
John Iceland knows poverty statistics intimately from having
spent five years working in, and eventually heading, the Poverty
and Health Statistics Branch of the U.S. Census Bureau. He
knows the significance of the data from his professional training
as a sociologist. (He currently teaches at the University of Mary-
land.) Iceland’s handbook offers a good basic introduction to U.S.
poverty, with chapters covering such topics as how the govern-
ment measures poverty, how the public views it, what are the
characteristics of the “poor” population, what are the causes of
poverty, why poverty remains at high levels, and what policies
are available to combat it. “Social stratification” aside, Poverty in
America is refreshingly free of jargon and far more readable than
one might expect of a “handbook.” The six-page concluding
chapter is a model of compression and synthesis.
Kozol, Jonathan. Savage Inequalities: Children in America’s
Schools. New York: Harper Perennial, 1992. 262 pages. ISBN
978-0060974992.
Jonathan Kozol has been studying America’s public schools for
four decades, and he isn’t much happier with what he sees today
than he was in 1968, when he published his first book, Death at an
Early Age. All of his books are worth reading for the insights that
a keen and sensitive observer of American inequality brings to
this difficult national issue. In Savage Inequalities, Kozol details the
immense differences to be found in the educational experiences of
Print Resources
241

inner-city minority kids and suburban white kids. Some of the
most telling comments come from the disadvantaged children
themselves as they struggle to understand why they are treated so
much worse, in terms of academic programs and physical facili-
ties, than their peers in more affluent neighborhoods. A special
strength of Kozol’s book is that he allows his subjects—students,
teachers, and administrators—to speak for themselves, without
authorial filter. The clear overlap of the racial with the economic
divide in American schools, already noted in this book, is explic-
itly dealt with in Kozol’s more recent book, The Shame of the Na-
tion: The Restoration of Apartheid Schooling in America (2005).
Rainwater, Lee, and Timothy M. Smeeding. Poor Kids in a Rich
Country: America’s Children in Comparative Perspective. New
York: Russell Sage, 2003. 263 pages. ISBN 0-87154-705-8.
For social-policy reasons, and probably for sentimental ones as
well, we seem to care more about children in poverty than any
other age group. The policy reasons are related to the fact that
children who grow up in poverty go through the rest of their
lives altered by the experience; thus, policies that lift children out
of poverty could yield lifelong benefits to them and to society. Be-
cause we care about poor children, it behooves us to understand
their situation from a variety of angles, including the interna-
tional perspective. That is what Poor Kids in a Rich Country helps
us do. The authors, both authorities in the field of international
poverty research, compare child poverty in the United States to
that in 14 other developed nations. What they report is disheart-
ening. In the United States, for example, one child in five lived in
a family with income below one-half the median national income
in 1997, thus qualifying as “poor” by the European poverty yard-
stick. Their families were “not able to participate enough in com-
munity activities to be perceived, by both themselves and others,
as regular members of society” (p. 22). The second part of the
book and its appendices are more for specialists than for general
readers, but the bulk of the volume is accessible and informative.
Shipler, David K. The Working Poor: Invisible in America. New
York: Vintage, 2005. 352 pages. ISBN 978-0375708213.
To understand in a direct, personal way how people can fall into
poverty and stay there, an excellent place to begin is Shipler’s The
Working Poor. A Pulitzer-Prize-winning journalist and an observer
242
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

who combines balance and empathy, Shipler describes the lives of
a dozen or so individuals (some in couples) who struggle every
day to stay afloat in the world’s richest country. Some have expe-
rienced sexual and emotional abuse as children and never quite
recovered. Some have been poorly parented. Some are held back
by early pregnancy and childbearing. Shipler amply demon-
strates how long-lasting the cost of personal mistakes made early
in life can be, but he also makes it clear that events entirely be-
yond a person’s control can be just as damaging. An escape from
poverty can never be as easy as finding a good job, a government
program, or an affordable child care provider. Many things must
come into alignment and stay that way to ensure a successful exit
from poverty. To that end, Shipler advocates the creation of “gate-
ways” at such key institutions as schools, hospitals, and welfare
offices through which a range of services can be delivered to those
requiring them. He is also a supporter of high-quality job-training
programs, as described in the chapter “Work Works.”
Public Policy
Balkin, Karen, ed. Poverty: Opposing Viewpoints. San Diego:
Greenhaven Press, 2004. 222 pages. ISBN 0-7377-1697-5.
As a subject of policy discussion and public debate, poverty has a
matchless ability to highlight the fault lines between liberalism
and conservatism. This volume, in Greenhaven’s useful Opposing
Viewpoints series, takes up four thematic questions: “Is Poverty a
Serious Problem?” “What Are the Causes of Poverty in America?”
“How Can Poor People in the United States Be Helped?” and “Is
Worldwide Poverty a Serious Problem?” To each question, ex-
perts offer their answers, most of which hew either to the liberal
or conservative approach. Various subtopics are addressed, such
as housing discrimination, hunger, the minimum wage, and mar-
riage promotion. The worldwide poverty section is not strictly
relevant to the U.S. rich-poor gap but can be seen as a good con-
textualizing aid.
Bebchuk, Lucian, and Jesse Fried. Pay without Performance: The
Unfulfilled Promise of Executive Compensation. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press, 2004. 278 pages. ISBN 0-674-01665-3.
To an unknown and probably unknowable extent, the explosive
growth at the top of the U.S. income distribution has come in the
form of fattened CEO compensation packages. For some years
Print Resources
243

now, Lucian Bebchuk and Jesse Fried, professors at Harvard Uni-
versity and the University of California, Berkeley, respectively,
have been working on issues of corporate governance. In this im-
portant book, they take readers through chapter and verse on
how the executive compensation game is played, and why the
current “pay for performance” practices are not delivering, con-
sistently, the kind of increased shareholder value that was ex-
pected of them when they were introduced in the early 1990s.
High on the list of reasons, according to Bebchuk and Fried, is the
fact that “arms-length” bargaining between CEOs and their
boards of directors (or compensation committees) has been the ex-
ception rather than the rule. Far too often, directors fail to stand
up for the interests of shareholders when striking a pay bargain
with the top executive. They may feel sympathetic toward, or be-
holden to, that individual; they also may feel insulated from any
outrage that might result from an overly generous bargain. The
authors suggest several changes in corporate governance that
might bring a closer alignment of pay and performance.
Gates, William H., Sr., and Chuck Collins. Wealth and Our Com-
monwealth: Why America Should Tax Accumulated Fortunes.
Boston: Beacon Press, 2003. 166 pages. ISBN 0-8070-4719-8.
In 2001, when President George W. Bush and the Republican
leadership in Congress proposed that the U.S. estate tax be elim-
inated, many millionaires and even a few billionaires publicly
protested. They were led in this surprising “man bites dog” de-
velopment by the authors of Wealth and Our Commonwealth.
Collins and Gates (father of Microsoft founder Bill Gates) lay out,
in this short book, a multi-pronged argument for continuing to
tax large wealth accumulations at least once per generation. They
warn that growing inequality threatens to undermine American
democracy as well as the health of the economy. They also review
the history of the estate tax; examine the arguments and political
maneuvering against the estate tax; and lend support to the no-
tion that estate-tax repeal would take a heavy toll on charitable
contributions by the wealthy.
Heckman, James J., and Alan B. Krueger. Inequality in America:
What Role for Human Capital Policies? Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press, 2003. 370 pages. ISBN 0-262-58260-0.
244
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

The papers and discussion collected in this volume were origi-
nally presented at a 2002 symposium at Harvard. In revised form
they are uniformly first-rate. Princeton economist Alan Krueger
leads off with a summary of the inequality trend that has made
the United States so much more unequal than it was in 1973, and
the philosophical, religious, political, and economic reasons why
we care. He then proposes a variety of targeted human capital
policies, ranging from preschool interventions and class size re-
ductions to job-training programs, that might lift the trajectory of
those headed for a low-income future. James Heckman, a Nobel
laureate who teaches at the University of Chicago, takes what
might be called a more conservative approach: he (and coauthor
Pedro Carneiro) downplay the promise of the GED, college 
tuition-assistance, and Job Corps-type programs as ways to lift
up the lower end of the workforce. Rather, they see early child-
hood interventions, like the Perry Preschool Project, as smarter
investments of public funds. Comments by discussants and re-
joinders by the original authors clarify many points but leave a
distinct impression that economists are not yet in agreement on
what should be done about the growing rich-poor gap.
Pollin, Robert, and Stephanie Luce. The Living Wage: Fighting
for a Fair Economy. New York: The New Press, 1998. 250 pages.
ISBN 1-56584-588-9.
Even the most optimistic supporters of the living wage do not
see it as a cure-all for the widening chasm between the top and
bottom of the U.S. wage distribution, but many believe it has a
place in any progressive strategy for boosting the position of
low-paid workers around the country. This book, by two econo-
mists at the University of Massachusetts, Amherst, lays out the
case for and against the living wage, with a strong conclusion in
favor of it. Events have overtaken this study to some extent (it
was completed in late 1997); for example, Santa Fe, New Mexico,
received national attention in 2004 when it adopted a citywide
living wage after a fierce political fight. But the arguments and
cost-benefit calculations set out in The Living Wage are the kind
that have been, and will be, rehearsed time and again as the liv-
ing wage movement expands. The scope and features of Los An-
geles’s living wage, adopted in 1997, are covered extensively
here.
Print Resources
245

Sherraden, Michael. Assets and the Poor: A New American Wel-
fare Policy. Armonk, NY: M.E. Sharpe, 1991. 325 pages. ISBN
978-1563240669.
Michael Sherraden’s book was not written in response to grow-
ing wealth and income inequality in the United States; at the be-
ginning of the 1990s, that trend was less well recognized—and
less prolonged—than it has become today. Rather, the book grew
out of Sherraden’s concern that welfare policy had “gone off
track” and was badly in need of revision. Specifically, he argued
that welfare needed to be something more than income mainte-
nance; it needed also to be about assets. In part II of this book,
Sherraden gave his now-classic exposition of why assets matter,
and it is as worthy of study today as it was in 1991. Assets im-
prove the stability of the household, give people more of a future
orientation, promote the acquisition of human capital, help peo-
ple focus and specialize, give them a foundation for risk-taking
(in its positive sense), increase social influence, and more. For all
of these reasons, policy makers need to devise and implement
asset-building programs, such as individual development ac-
counts (a term that made its first appearance in Chapter 10 of
Sherraden’s book). Today, asset-based programs are an integral
part of every broad plan or policy to improve the circumstances
of those on the lower rungs of the economic ladder.
Wilkinson, Richard G. The Impact of Inequality: How to Make
Sick Societies Healthier. New York: The New Press, 2006. 368
pages. ISBN 978-1595581211.
Richard Wilkinson has made a name for himself on the issue of
health and inequality. In this book and other writings, he argues
that societies with large disparities in income tend to be less
healthy, with higher rates of coronary disease and shorter lives,
than societies that are more equal. This holds true even if the
more unequal nation is much wealthier on average than the more
equal one; thus, life expectancy in the United States is lower than
in Greece, a country with only half its per capita GDP. Inequality
breeds stress, social hostility, insecurity, and violence at the soci-
etal level, and, at the individual level, a range of physiological ef-
fects that can, and do, shorten lives. To put it bluntly, inequality
kills. The key to improving social health is as easy to state as it is
difficult to carry out: reduce inequality.
246
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Nonprint Resources
Web Sites
Cato Institute
http://www.cato.org
Cato and Heritage are the two conservative (Cato prefers the
term “libertarian”) think tanks in Washington, D.C., that can be
counted on for analyses and opinions downplaying the impor-
tance of the rich-poor gap and opposing nearly all policy pro-
posals aimed at narrowing it. Both have stables of experts, issue
a variety of publications, and maintain group blogs. (Cato’s blog
is fresher and more readable.)
Center on Budget and Policy Priorities (CBPP)
http://www.cbpp.org/pubs/povinc.htm
The CBPP Web site features a research section on “poverty and
income” with good coverage of many issues related to the U.S.
distribution of income. In most cases there is a two- or three-page
summary of the issue with a link to the lengthier underlying re-
port. The perspective is moderately liberal, and the online
archive extends back to 2001.
FedStats
http://www.fedstats.gov
FedStats serves as a diving board into the sea of federally gener-
ated data on a vast range of topics, including aspects of the
widening gap between rich and poor. An alphabetical list of topic
links includes such items as Food Stamps, Head Start, minimum
wage, personal wealth, poverty, union membership, and wages.
Obviously some of the links are to agencies listed below, such as
the U.S. Census Bureau.
Heritage Foundation
http://www.heritage.org/Research/welfare/povertyinequality.
cfm
This is a good starting place for anyone who wants to see how
conservatives think about income inequality in the United States.
With the trend toward greater inequality showing little sign of
Nonprint Resources
247

slackening, Heritage is issuing more memos and “backgrounders”
on the subject.
Inequality.org
http://www.demos.org/inequality
Maintained by two decidedly liberal organizations (Demos and
the Institute for Policy Studies), this site is organized in two sec-
tions: “By the Numbers” offers illuminating graphics on the rich-
poor gap in the United States, and “In the News” reports recent
developments relating to economic inequality, with an emphasis
on political and racial aspects of inequality.
Moving Ideas: The Electronic Policy Network
http://www.movingideas.org
This Web site pools content from about 185 progressive, nonprofit
organizations involved in policy research and advocacy. Click an
issue on the issue list—“poverty and wealth,” for example—and
view a page of items organized into research reports, action alerts,
articles, press releases, commentary, and a listing of organizations
that take an interest in the issue.
NewsBatch
http://www.newsbatch.com
NewsBatch calls itself “your Internet guide to an understanding of
policy issues,” and economic inequality is one of the roughly 30 is-
sues it follows. At this site, you can access recent news stories from
print media, view relevant charts (for example, the Gini coefficient),
and track congressional votes on bills relating to income inequality.
Opportunity 08
http://www.opportunity08.org
The Brookings Institution and ABC News jointly sponsor this
menu of “independent ideas for our next president.” A key pol-
icy area is labeled “our society,” and three of its subfields are rel-
evant to the rich-poor gap in the United States: poverty, social
insurance, and upward mobility. The recommendations offered
are progressive but not radical.
Robb Report
http://www.robbreport.com
248
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

The Robb Report offers a “luxury portal” to a wide range of high-
end products and services for the well-heeled. Here one may
have a look at personal aircraft, yachts, vacation trips—a chance
to play elephant polo is featured in one African tour—and, of
course, luxury residences, complete with home theaters, home
gyms, and many other amenities. This Web site makes crystal
clear how advantageous U.S. economic growth has been for
those in the top 1 percent of the income distribution.
Too Much: A Commentary on Excess and Inequality
http://www.cipa-apex.org/toomuch
Edited since 1985 by author and labor journalist Sam Pizzigati,
this site documents what some might call the wretched excess of
the wealthy. The flavor of Too Much is indicated by a section
called “Lifestyles of the Rich and Shameless.” One may sign up
to receive weekly installments of the commentary by e-mail.
United for a Fair Economy (UFE)
http://www.faireconomy.org
The UFE Web site gives a progressive take on issues tied to eco-
nomic inequality, with news updates in several categories: tax
fairness, the Responsible Wealth Project (a UFE offshoot), racial
wealth divide, estate tax, and global action. A Research Library
link brings up information on the wealth gap, low-wage work,
CEO pay, etc. “Executive Excess 2007,” an annual report co-pro-
duced by UFE and the Institute for Policy Studies and now in its
fourteenth year, can be downloaded from the site.
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
http://www.undp.org
An interest in economic inequality often springs from a concern
about poverty. To see U.S. poverty with some perspective, one
should try to place it in a global context. That suggests a visit to
the UNDP Web site, since the UNDP has a mandate to measure
global poverty and assess the various policy approaches to its al-
leviation and elimination. This Web site has links to the annual
Human Development Report issued by the UNDP, which includes
several poverty measures for all countries.
Nonprint Resources
249

U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS)
http://www.bls.gov
A good understanding of the rich-poor gap in the United States
requires a clear sense of the distribution of earnings as well as of
the legal and institutional aspects of U.S. labor markets. For these
kinds of information, one should turn, at least initially, to the BLS
Web site. It is where the government posts data on wages, bene-
fits, collective bargaining, unemployment, demographic charac-
teristics of the labor force, and much more.
U.S. Census Bureau
http://www.census.gov/hhes/www/income/income.html
This is the key stepping-off point for any study of U.S. income
trends. The Census Bureau issues authoritative income data each
year, with detailed coverage extending back to 1967. On the main
Web page are links to reports and research papers, definitions of
terms, guidance on how the income data are collected, and an
entry point for access to microdata files that allow the user to cre-
ate his or her own statistical tables. (Several of the tables in chap-
ter 6 are based on data from this Web site.) Through this site one
can also get to the federal government’s annual poverty report,
issued each August under the title “Income, Poverty, and Health
Insurance Coverage in the United States” and reported in all
major news media. (There is no comparable wealth report.)
U.S. Conference of Mayors
http://www.usmayors.org
Since 1983, the U.S. Conference of Mayors has been the most
prominent government entity in the nation taking a serious in-
terest in the problem of homelessness. At its Web site, under Re-
ports & Publications, one can download the latest annual Hunger
and Homelessness Survey, along with a press release in both print
and video versions.
U.S. Federal Reserve Board
http://www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/oss/oss2/scfindex.html
The Federal Reserve Board’s Survey of Consumer Finances is
rightly regarded as the primary source of reliable information on
the all-around financial condition of U.S. families. These surveys
have been conducted on a triennial basis since 1983, and all the
250
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

summary data are available, as well as a couple of precursor sur-
veys done in 1962 and 1963.
U.S. Internal Revenue Service
http://www.irs.gov/taxstats
Much of what we know about the personal distribution of wealth
and income in the United States comes from federal tax data, and
many of the contentious policy proposals for closing the gap be-
tween rich and poor involve taxation. For these reasons, the IRS’s
Tax Statistics Web site can be a useful source of information.
Much of the material will only make sense to a tax expert, but
some—like the categorization of different types of assets held by
the wealthy—is of general interest.
The Wealth Report
http://blogs.wsj.com/wealth
The Wall Street Journal’s official “wealth reporter,” Robert Frank,
posts observations about the rich, including examples of egre-
gious conspicuous consumption, on this blog almost every day.
Apparently the subject is inexhaustible. Frank is the author of
Richistan (see book list above).
The World Bank
http://www.worldbank.org
Along with the UNDP, the World Bank is the other international
agency issuing key statistics that might help one put U.S. poverty
(and wealth) into a global perspective. Its World Development In-
dicators is a compendium of economic data for all countries with
a population of 1 million or more, and includes per capita income
data.
Videos
America Today: Looking for the Union Label
Date: 2001
Length: 29 minutes
Price: $129.95 (VHS or DVD)
Source: Films for the Humanities & Sciences
Nearly every attempt to explain the growing gap between rich
and poor makes reference to the decline of organized labor in the
Nonprint Resources
251

United States. This video provides a basic historical and institu-
tional background to the development of the labor movement,
examines what has changed in recent decades, and features in-
terviews with various experts, including labor leaders, on why
union membership has declined so precipitously.
Combating Childhood Poverty
Date: 1995
Length: 26 minutes
Price: $129 (VHS)
Source: Insight Media
With children continuing to have the highest poverty rate of any
age group in the United States—more than one in six for the year
2006—there is good reason to focus on the youth demographic
when considering antipoverty efforts. This short video looks at
two federally funded programs in one of New York City’s poorest
neighborhoods to see what difference the government can make.
A Day’s Work, A Day’s Pay
Date: 2002
Length: 57 minutes
Price: $240 (VHS or DVD; lower cost for libraries, public
schools, or rental)
Source: New Day Films
The ultimate safety net for low-income Americans is cash wel-
fare, a joint federal-state system that was stringently reformed in
1996. Many welfare recipients were forced to accept public em-
ployment (“workfare”) in exchange for continued payments.
This video looks at the experience of three individuals who par-
ticipated in the workfare program established by New York City
under Mayor Giuliani. It follows their growing frustration with
the program and their efforts—ultimately successful—to resist it.
Eyes on the Fries: Young Workers in the Service Economy
Date: 2004
Length: 21 minutes
Price: $25 individual, $65 institutional (VHS or DVD)
Source: UC Berkeley Labor Center
A widening spread between the wages of the highest-paid and
lowest-paid Americans is mainly due to massive gains at the top,
252
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

but the proliferation of low-skill, entry-level service jobs at the
bottom is part of the story, too. Many of those jobs are taken by
the young, who tend to receive few benefits, little job security,
and almost never a union card. This video highlights the growth
of service-sector jobs in the United States and the disproportion-
ate share of them taken by young adults. In documentary style,
real workers are allowed to voice their frustrations about the
“McJobs” they hold and, on the other hand, the encouragement
they have received from San Francisco’s action in raising its min-
imum wage. The video comes with a curriculum kit that could be
of use in a post-viewing discussion.
For Richer, For Poorer
Date: 2005
Length: 25 minutes
Price: $195 (VHS or DVD); $45 (rental)
Source: Bullfrog Films
This video is about the disturbingly wide gap between rich and
poor in Brazil, a country often cited for the extent of its inequal-
ity. Brazil is not the United States, but those who express concern
about current inequality trends in the U.S. point to Brazil as a
cautionary case. President Lula da Silva has pledged to make
Brazilian society more equal in terms of education, health care,
and land distribution, and although extreme inequality remains,
the country has cut its rate of “extreme” poverty in half, meeting
a UN Millennial Development goal years ahead of schedule.
Homeless: A Contextual Case Study
Date: 2004
Length: 25 minutes
Price: $149 (DVD)
Source: Insight Media
It is important to avoid stereotypes about the homeless. Most of
the poor are not homeless, but most of the homeless almost cer-
tainly are poor. This video humanizes the homeless issue by fo-
cusing on a 40-year-old man who has been homeless for over two
decades. It does not sidestep the correlations between homeless-
ness and alcoholism and drug abuse.
Is Wal-Mart Good for America?
Date: 2005
Nonprint Resources
253

Length: 60 minutes
Price: $29.99 (VHS or DVD)
Source: Shop PBS
Although it does not address the rich-poor issue directly, this
video has much to say about the loss of well-paying jobs in the
United States as a result of globalization and the importance of
one corporation, Wal-Mart, in transforming the U.S. economic
landscape. Most consumer goods can now be manufactured more
cheaply abroad; hence, about 80 percent of Wal-Mart’s suppliers
are now located in China. American workers who exchange their
old factory jobs for “associate” positions at Wal-Mart stores expe-
rience a distinct step downward in economic security. At the same
time, four of the fifteen wealthiest individuals in America share
the same last name: Walton.
Michael Harrington and Today’s Other America: Corporate
Power and Inequality
Date: 2001
Length: 84 minutes
Price: $75 (Video rental)
Source: Filmakers Library
Michael Harrington’s The Other America, published in 1962,
shined a bright light on U.S. poverty and led, by some accounts,
to the mobilization of political will that produced President Lyn-
don B. Johnson’s War on Poverty. Harrington (1928–1989) made
a life’s work of unmasking American poverty and corporate ex-
ploitation of labor, as this engaging video makes clear. Some of
the topics the video explores are unions, migrant labor, the health
care system, and inner-city poverty. There are interviews with
notable contemporaries of Harrington, like John Kenneth Gal-
braith, William F. Buckley, and Charles Murray.
On the Edge: America’s Working Poor
Date: 2004
Length: 22 minutes
Price: $69.95 (VHS or DVD)
Source: Films for the Humanities & Sciences
This video represents an interesting collaboration between ABC’s
Nightline program and journalist David Shipler, author of The
Working Poor (see books section above). It profiles three individu-
254
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

als who struggle to get by on below-poverty-level wages and face
financial meltdown if even one minor mishap occurs. In one case,
that mishap takes the form of an unexpected automobile repair. In
the other two, loans at sky-high interest rates take their toll. Ted
Koppel interviews Shipler on the general issue of poverty among
working Americans.
Payday for CEOs
Date: 2007
Length: 60 minutes
Price: $29.95 (DVD)
Source: Shop PBS
The first segment of the Bill Moyers Journal (PBS) broadcast on
June 8, 2007 (roughly 20 minutes) deals with a specific instance of
CEO overcompensation. At least that is the view Moyers takes of
the pay awarded to the top executives of Northwest Airlines, one
of several domestic U.S. carriers that fell into bankruptcy after
9/11 and gradually worked their way out. Northwest employees
made wage concessions of 20–40 percent, had their pensions
frozen, and lost some of their health benefits. Meanwhile, their
CEO was given an annual pay package in excess of $25 million.
The segment can be viewed online, and a full transcript is also
available at the PBS Web site.
A Question of Fairness
Date: 2003
Length: 58 minutes
Price: $29.98
Source: Shop PBS
In this November 21, 2003, broadcast of the PBS program NOW,
hosted by Bill Moyers, the issue of economic inequality is con-
fronted head-on. Because Moyers has a well-earned reputation as
a liberal journalist, it comes as no surprise that he sees the United
States evolving into a two-class society, or that he locates the
source of this trend in an unfair tilting of public policy toward
corporations and against workers. Three specific cases of such
policy imbalance are explored. Especially intriguing is the saga of
a Republican governor (Alabama) who tried to revamp the most
regressive state tax system in the nation; his effort to shift the tax
burden toward those better able to bear it was roundly defeated
by voters.
Nonprint Resources
255

Take It from Me: Life after Welfare
Date: 2001
Length: 78 minutes
Price: $295 (VHS or DVD), $75 (rental)
Source: Filmakers Library
This is one of the better videos that take a sympathetic look at the
tough transitions many thousands of mothers had to make from
welfare to work after passage of the 1996 welfare reform law.
Many of the difficulties faced by the four women featured in the
video were shared by millions of the nation’s poor who were not
on welfare before or after 1996, and those difficulties have not
disappeared.
Waging a Living
Date: 2005
Length: 85 minutes
Price: $99 (VHS or DVD; video rental, $85)
Source: Filmakers Library
This well-made, powerful film has been likened to a video ver-
sion of Barbara Ehrenreich’s Nickel and Dimed account of the ex-
treme difficulty so many working Americans have in making
ends meet. It is a crisp documentary account, shot over a three-
year period, of four ethnically diverse individuals who struggle
to keep their families afloat on wages that don’t stretch far
enough. (When one mother achieves a $450 monthly pay raise
after earning an associate’s degree, she loses $600 in public assis-
tance.) There is no heavy editorializing; the subjects speak for
themselves, bluntly and at times despairingly.
Contact Information for Video 
Distributors and Vendors
Bullfrog Films
P.O. Box 149, Oley, PA 19547
(610) 779-8226 Fax: (610) 370-1978
E-mail: info@bullfrogfilms.com
http://www.bullfrogfilms.com
256
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Filmakers Library
124 E. 40th St., New York, NY 10016
(212) 808-4980 Fax: (212) 808-4983
E-mail: info@filmakers.com
http://www.filmakers.com
Films for the Humanities and Sciences
P.O. Box 2053, Princeton, NJ 08543-2053
(800) 257-5126 Fax: (609) 671-0266
E-mail: custserv@films.com
http://www.films.com
Insight Media
2162 Broadway, New York, NY 10024
(800) 233-9910 Fax: (212) 799-5309
E-mail: custserv@insight-media.com
http://www.insight-media.com
New Day Films
P.O. Box 1084, Harriman, NY 10926
(888) 367-9154 Fax: (845) 774-2945
E-mail: orders@newday.com
http://www.newday.com
PBS Home Video
P.O. Box 609, Melbourne, FL 32902-0609
(800) 531-4727 Fax: (866) 274-9043
http://shoppbs.org
UC Berkeley Labor Center
2521 Channing Way, Ste. 5555, Berkeley, CA 94720-5555
(510) 642-0323 Fax: (510) 643-4673
E-mail: laborcenter@berkeley.edu
http://laborcenter.berkeley.edu/publications
Contact Information for Video Distributors and Vendors
257


Glossary
asset-building
A policy area that focuses on strategies for helping low-
income families and individuals build up their financial assets.
assortative mating
A social pattern in which individuals marry others
who are similar in significant ways. Some believe the tendency of well-
educated, upwardly mobile men to marry women with the same char-
acteristics is contributing to growing economic inequality.
capital gain
A form of income rarely received by low-income individ-
uals but often contributing to the income of the wealthy. Such a gain oc-
curs when an asset, for example, a share of stock or a piece of land, is
sold at a higher price than was originally paid for it, the rise in value
constituting a capital gain. If tax rates on capital gains are lowered, as
happened in 2003, it is considered a favorable change for the rich.
conservative
A political-philosophical position according to which the
wide and growing gap between incomes of the rich and poor is a nor-
mal, cyclical expression of the capitalist economy. The conservative pol-
icy position on the rich-poor gap would be to let it play itself out,
without government intervention.
conspicuous consumption
A term coined by American economist
Thorstein Veblen (1857–1929) to describe showy displays of one’s wealth
in order to impress others. Such displays are often cited by those critical
of the current gap between rich and poor.
decile
One-tenth of the whole; the share of income going to the top
decile is sometimes contrasted with the share going to the bottom decile.
estate tax
A tax levied on the accumulated assets of an individual at
the time of his/her death and payable by the individual’s heirs or bene-
ficiaries. The first $2 million of the estate is exempt from the federal es-
tate tax in 2008; on amounts in excess of $2 million, the tax rate ranges
from 18 percent at the low end to 55 percent at the high end, making this
one of the most progressive taxes in the country.
Gini coefficient, Gini index
The most common yardstick of overall in-
come (or wealth) inequality for a country. A Gini of zero indicates total
259

equality; a Gini of 100—or 1 in an alternative calibration—indicates total
inequality.
household income ratio by percentile
A measure of income disper-
sion formed by dividing one income percentile by another, for example,
the 95th by the 20th. The U.S. Census Bureau computes and publishes
several such ratios annually, and they allow one to see whether there is
a trend in income dispersion (inequality).
income
The flow of money to an individual or family that sustains it
economically. Income takes various forms, including wages, salaries, in-
terest, rents, dividends, and disability payments.
income mobility
Movement upward or downward on the income
scale, usually measured as a movement from one income quintile to an-
other during a period of time that could range from one year to one gen-
eration. High income mobility is thought by some to be a reasonable
counterweight to a high degree of income inequality.
individual development account (IDA)
A strategy pioneered by soci-
ologist Michael Sherraden under which low-income individuals can put
small sums into savings accounts and have their contributions matched
by community organizations. This becomes a way to build assets and
economic security.
Kuznets’s law
The idea, presented in 1955 by economist Simon
Kuznets, that the degree of income inequality is linked to the stage of a
nation’s economic development: in the transition from a pre-industrial,
rural economy to a more urbanized, industrial economy, income in-
equality may rise, but as time goes on, it will tend to decrease. Confi-
dence in the validity of the “law” has fallen off in recent decades.
liberal
A political-philosophical position that finds the widening gap
between rich and poor disturbing, problematic, and unacceptable. A lib-
eral policy approach would favor higher taxes on the rich, lower taxes
on the poor, asset-building efforts, and more public investment in pro-
grams benefiting low-income families.
median
The middle observation in a set of data, with as many values
above as below that value. A historical series of median income values
cannot, in itself, establish a trend toward greater income inequality, but
a ratio, such as the 95th percentile to the median income, can do so.
merit scholarship
A form of financial aid used by colleges to attract
the most “meritorious” applicants (as determined by SAT scores, typi-
cally). As an alternative to the more traditional need-based forms of as-
sistance, such scholarships tend to drain dollars away from possible
support of low-income students.
net worth
The value of one’s assets minus one’s liabilities; hence, a
measure of one’s overall personal wealth.
260
Glossary

percentile
A value on a scale that runs from zero to 100 that indicates
the percentage of observations that are lower. For example, the govern-
ment says that in 2005, the 80th percentile for household incomes was
$91,705, meaning that 80 percent of U.S. households had incomes below
that amount.
plutocracy
Rule by the wealthy, not (as in democracy) by the majority
of the people; a term used by those who fear that concentrated economic
power can be translated into political power.
poverty threshold
The income level below which an individual or
family is officially categorized as poor. In many countries, the threshold
is drawn at one-half the median national income; the United States uses
a different, more complex (and outdated) threshold.
progressive tax
A tax that puts a heavier relative burden on the rich
than on the poor; for example, the U.S. income tax for single persons is
10 percent at the low end but 35 percent on annual income amounts over
$337,000.
quintile
One-fifth of the whole; in studies of income distribution, the
share of income going to the top quintile is often contrasted with the
share going to the bottom quintile.
regressive tax
A tax that puts a heavier relative burden on the poor
than on the rich; for example, the FICA (Social Security) tax takes a
larger percentage out of a minimum-wage worker’s income than it takes
from a corporate CEO’s income.
relative poverty standard
A poverty line that defines poverty as hav-
ing an income below some standard, typical measure of income. In
much of Europe, the poverty line is drawn at one-half the median in-
come; those below the line are considered poor. (The United States has a
more complicated “absolute” standard of poverty.)
socioeconomic status (SES)
The overall social condition of a family or
individual as determined by a formula that takes into account income
level, parents’ education, parents’ occupation, and sometimes other
variables. SES is considered a strong predictor of one’s life chances;
hence, a child with high SES has a better-than-average prospect of grow-
ing up to be rich, etc.
super-rich
A term used by journalists, commentators, and others that
lacks any concrete meaning but is intended to designate the very wealth-
iest people in society, for example, the top one-tenth of 1 percent in a
ranking by income or wealth.
trickle-down effect
The notion that boosting the incomes of the wealthy
will end up benefiting those lower down the income scale through a
“trickling down” of spending. This idea is sometimes brought forward in
support of tax cuts that provide big gains to the richest individuals.
Glossary
261

union premium
The difference between what a union worker earns
and what a non-union worker doing the same type of job earns. The
steady erosion of union membership and thus of union premiums may
be one cause of rising wage inequality in the United States.
wealth
The monetary value of possessions, whether tangible or finan-
cial, that individuals accumulate over time. By contrast with income,
which is an annual measure of monetary flow, wealth is a “point-in-
time” measure of accumulated value. Persons of great wealth do not
necessarily have substantial incomes, and vice versa. The most publi-
cized listing of the richest Americans (Forbes) is based on wealth.
wealth mobility
Movement upward or downward on the wealth
scale. As with income mobility, a high degree of wealth mobility is con-
sidered by some to be a reasonable compensation or trade-off for a high
actual extent of inequality.
262
Glossary

Ackerman, Bruce, 70–71, 128–129
ACORN. See Association of
Community Organizations for
Reform Now
Adams, Scott, 59
AEI. See American Enterprise Institute
AFLAC, 63
Africa, 5, 37, 80, 84–85, 89, 90, 94, 95,
159
African Americans, 13–17, 24–25, 33,
48–49, 54
Alger, Horatio, Jr., 143
biographical information on,
127–128
Allen, Paul, 136
Alstott, Anne, 70–71
biographical information on,
128–129
America Savings for Personal
Investment, Retirement, and
Education (ASPIRE), 72
American Dream, 24
American Enterprise Institute (AEI),
69, 202
American Journal of Public Health, 17
American University, 24
America’s Second Harvest (ASH), 201,
202–203
Angola, 80
“Are CEOs Overpaid?” (Becker)
document, 184–187
ASH. See America’s Second Harvest
Asia, 37, 80, 89, 90
ASPIRE. See America Savings for
Personal Investment,
Retirement, and Education
Asset-building programs, 70–72
Association of Community
Organizations for Reform Now
(ACORN), 203–204
Assortative mating, 45–46
Athletic scholarships, 21. See also
Scholarships
Australia, 69, 80, 83, 89, 90
Austria, 85, 86
Autor, David, 34, 35
Baby boomers, and wealth tax, 103
Baltimore, Maryland, 58
Bangladesh, 80, 96
Becker, Gary, 184
“Being Poor” (Scalzi)
document, 197–200
“Being Profitable Is Giving Back”
(Tamny)
document, 190–192
Belgium, 81, 85, 86, 104
Bernanke, Ben, 35, 179
Bhalla, Surjit, 92–93, 95
Births, and health personnel, 80
Bolivia, 80, 159
Borjas, George, 38–39, 64, 65
Boston, Massachusetts, 58
Boston College Center on Wealth and
Philanthropy (CWP), 204–205
Botswana, 81, 82, 159
Brazil, 5
The Brookings Institution, 23, 205
Brown v. Board of Education, 19, 
53–54
Bruckheimer, Jerry, 43
Bryant, Kobe, 14
263
Index

Buffett, Warren, 127, 194–195
biographical information on,
129–130
Burtless, Gary, 45–46
Bush, George W., 52, 54, 71, 102, 133,
149
and immigration, 64–65
and taxes, 66, 69
Bush (George W.) administration, 
144
and taxes, 26–27
Business schools, 101
CA program. See Carolina
Abecedarian program
Calderon, Olivia, 175
California, 41, 72
Cambodia, 80, 82, 96
Cambridge, Massachusetts, 54
Canada, 25, 69, 80, 83, 85, 86, 89, 90,
98, 99, 100, 104, 159
CAP. See Center for American
Progress
Capital flight, and wealth tax, 104
Capitalism, and income distribution,
46–47
Carnegie, Andrew, 192, 195
Carolina Abecedarian (CA) program,
48, 49–50
Caste system, 5
Cato Institute, 69, 205–206
CBPP. See Center on Budget and
Policy Priorities
Center for American Progress (CAP),
206–207
Center for Law and Social Policy
(CLASP), 208
Center for Social Development (CSD),
208–209
Center on Budget and Policy Priorities
(CBPP), 26, 207–208
Central African Republic, 159
The Century Foundation (TCF), 87,
209–210
CEO (chief executive officer)
compensation, 44
global, 99–100
rate of, 3–4
regulation of, 62–63
and wage inequality, 62–63
CFED. See Corporation for Enterprise
Development
Chávez, César, 139
Cheney, Dick, 133
Chief executive officers. See CEOs
Child Trust Fund, 72
Children’s Defense Fund, 210
Children’s savings account, 71–72
Chile, 5
China, 36, 90, 93–94, 95, 159
CIO. See Congress of Industrial
Organizations
Citizens for Tax Justice (CTJ), 69,
210–211
Clark, John Bates
biographical information on,
130–131
CLASP. See Center for Law and Social
Policy
Class segregation
and school segregation, 19. See also
Schools
Class size, 53. See also School(s)
Clean water, 80
Clinton, Bill, 71, 140
Cognitive gap, 20
Coleman, James, 54
Coleman Report, 53, 54
College education
and income inequality, 20–21
and middle class, 55–57
and scholarships, 20, 21, 55, 56
and socioeconomic status, 56–57
See also Education
College gap, 56
Collins, Chuck, 127, 187–188
biographical information on,
131–132
Colombia, 5
Color divide, and economic
inequality, 14
Compensatory education, 48. See also
Education
Computer technology, and skilled
labor, 34
Congo, 80
Congress of Industrial Organizations
(CIO), 39
264
Index

Conservatives
and asset-building programs, 72
and CEO compensation, 62
and Earned Income Tax Credit,
60–61
and estate tax, 69
and income distribution, xiii, 46
and income inequality, 25–26
and policy institutes, 201
and taxes, 27
Consumption, 1–2
Corporation for Enterprise
Development (CFED), 211–212
Cosby, Bill, 14
Country-level inequality, 93. See also
Income inequality, global
Crane, Jonathan, 48
CSD. See Center for Social
Development
CTJ. See Citizens for Tax Justice
Cuban Americans, 14
Culture, and income inequality, 82
CWP. See Boston College Center on
Wealth and Philanthropy
Czech Republic, 81
Death tax, 27, 69, 102. See also Estate
tax; Wealth tax
Decile, 6
Declaration of Independence, 83
Democracy, 5
Democratic Party, and immigration, 64
Demos, 57, 212
Denmark, 81, 82, 97, 98, 102
Depp, Johnny, 43
Detroit, Michigan, 58
Deunionization trend, 39–40, 59–60.
See also Labor unions
Disease, and income inequality, 17
Draut, Tamara, 57
Dutton, Robert, 175
Early childhood intervention
programs, 48–50
Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC),
60–62, 67
Earnings
of CEOs, 3–4. See also CEO
compensation
of workers, ordinary, 3–4
East Africa, 79
East Asia, 95, 96
Eastern Europe, 89, 90, 95
Ecole Normale Superieure (Paris), 6
Economic development, and income
inequality, 9–10, 82, 89–90
Economic expansion, 11
Economic growth, and income
distribution, 11
Economic inequality, 31, 155
and asset-building programs, 70–72
global, 79–81
and government, 27
and organizations, interest in, 201
positive and negative effects of, 4
and race and ethnicity, 13–17
See also Income inequality; Wealth
inequality
Economic mobility, 4–5, 23–25
global, 96–98
See also Mobility
Economic Mobility Project (EMP),
212–213
Economic Policy Institute (EPI), 22,
213–214
Economic stress, and wealth, 8
Ecuador, 80
Edelman, Marian Wright, 127
biographical information on,
132–133
Education
and class size, 53
college, and middle class, 55–57
and early childhood intervention
programs, 48–50
and economic mobility, 24
and financial aid, 21, 55–56
and high-poverty schools, 52–53
as human capital, 32–33
and income inequality, 16, 18–21,
47–57
and school busing, 53–54
and school funding, 51
and school inequality, 51–53
and school quality, 19
and wage inequality, 32–33
See also College education;
School(s)
Index
265

Educational attainment
in U.S., by socioeconomic status
and math ability, 166–168, 167
table 6.8
Edwards, John
biographical information on,
133–134
Ehrenreich, Barbara
biographical information on,
134–135
EITC. See Earned Income Tax Credit
Elementary and Secondary School
Act, 52
EMP. See Economic Mobility Project
Employment, and immigration, 38
EPI. See Economic Policy Institute
Estate tax, 103
repeal of, 26–27
and wealth distribution, 68–70
See also Taxes
“The Estate Tax ‘Recycles’
Opportunity” (Collins and
Gates, Sr.)
document, 187–190
Ethiopia, 80
Ethnicity, and economic inequality,
13–17
Europe, 4, 5, 39, 68, 87, 97, 102, 103,
159
European Union, and uniform
business rules, 104
Experience, as human capital, 32
Faircloth, Lauch, 134
Family, single-parent, 44–45
Family allowance plan, 102
Family structure, and income
distribution, 44–46
Federal income tax, 65–67
Federal Reserve Board, 179
Ferrell, Will, 43
FICA tax, 66, 67
Financial aid, 21, 55–56. See also
Scholarships
Financial assets. See Asset-building
programs
Finland, 85, 87–88, 98
Firebaugh, Glenn, 89
Florida, 41
Food Research and Action Center
(FRAC), 214
Food stamps, 86
Forbes, 7, 14, 104
Ford, Henry, 3
Fortune, 4
FRAC. See Food Research and Action
Center
France, 25, 89, 98, 99, 102, 104
Franklin, Benjamin, 128
Free trade
pros and cons of, 36–37
and wage inequality, 35–37
Freeman, Richard, 59–60
Friedman, Milton, 67
Fuchs, Victor R.
biographical information on,
135–136
Gap, between rich and poor, 3–5, 31
causes of, 32–46, 72–73
and politics, 25–28
solutions to, 46–72, 73
widening of, xiii
See also Economic inequality
Gates, Bill, 7, 127, 129, 146, 151, 194
biographical information on,
136–137
Gates, William, Sr., 132, 187–188
Geography, and income inequality, 82
George, Henry, 131
Germany, 25, 85, 86, 89, 98, 100, 102
Ghana, 82, 96
GI Bill, 70
Gilded Age, xiii, 3
Gini, Corrado, 5
biographical information on,
137–138
Gini index (Gini Coefficient), 5, 8–9,
11, 15, 47, 71, 81–82, 89, 91–92,
94, 96, 155, 157, 159. See also
Mean logarithmic deviation;
Theil index
“Giving Back, Big Time” (Nasaw)
document, 194–197
Globalization, and income inequality,
90–91
GNP. See Gross national product
Gore, Al, 134
266
Index

Government, and economic
inequality, 27
Government benefits, and poverty,
86–87
Graham, Benjamin, 129
Great Britain, 72
“The Great CEO Guarantee” (Weller
and Sabatini)
excerpt from, 182–184
Great Depression, 100
income inequality during, 10
Great Society programs, 27–28
Green, Hetty, 127
biographical information on,
138–139
Greenspan, Alan, 179
Gross national product (GNP), 11
Guatemala, 5
Guinea, 82
Haiti, 80
Harvard, 59
HDI. See Human development index
Head Start, 50
Health
and economic mobility, 25
and income inequality, 16–18
Health insurance, and economic
inequality, 14
Heckman, James, 48, 50
HERE. See Hotel Employees and
Restaurant Employees
International Union
Heritage Foundation, 69, 214–215
Hertz, Tom, 24
The Hidden Cost of Being African
American (Shapiro), 15–16
High/Scope Educational Research
Foundation, 215–216
Hispanic(s), 13–15, 19, 33, 38, 168, 168
table 6.9, 170–171 table 6.11
definition of, 14
History, and income inequality, 82
Homestead Act, 70
Hotel Employees and Restaurant
Employees International Union
(HERE), 64
Household income ratio by percentile,
6–7
Household ownership, in U.S., 2004,
166, 167 table 6.7
Housing market, and school
segregation, 19
Howell, David, 39
Huerta, Dolores, 127
biographical information on,
139–140
Human capital
definition of, 32
and funding, 33
investment in, 32–33
and superstars, 43
Human development index (HDI), 82
Human Development Report, 81
IDA. See Individual development
account
IEE. See Intergenerational elasticity of
earnings
Illinois, 41
Imagine There’s No Country: Poverty,
Inequality, and Growth in the Era
of Globalization (Bhalla), 92–93
Immigration
and employment, 38
and labor unions, 64
and skilled labor, 37–39
and wage inequality, 37–39, 63–65
and workers, low-skilled, 64
and workers, native-born, 37–39
Income
definition of, 7
and wealth, difference between,
7–8
Income distribution, xiii, 5–6, 7–8, 10,
12 fig. 1–1, 13, 26–27, 81
and assortative mating, 45–46
and capitalism, 46–47
and economic growth, 11
in English-speaking vs. non-
English-speaking countries, 99
and family structure, 44–46
global, 37, 89, 92, 93–94, 98–99
and middle class, 22–23
and socialism, 46–47
and superstars, 42–43
and taxes, 65–67
and transfer payments, 65
Index
267

Income distribution, cont.
in U.S., 1947–2000, 11, 12 graph
1–1, 13
and “vaster undertakings,” 43–44
and Wall Street traders, 43–44
Income inequality
in Africa, 84–85
and CEO compensation, 99–100
and convergence vs. divergence, 92
and economic development, 9–10,
89–90
and education, 16, 18–21, 47–57
global, 39, 81–85, 87–96, 88 fig. 3.1,
99–101, 159, 160–161 table 6.3
and globalization, 90–91
growth of, 3–5, 9
and health, 16–18
and income mobility, xiv
and labor unions, 40–41
in Latin America, 83–84
long-term trends in, 9–11
measurement of, 5–7
and politics, 25–28, 46–47
in rich countries, 1980 and 2005, 87,
88 fig. 3.1, 89
statistics on, 155
in U.S., 1967–2005, 6–7, 155,
156–157 table 6.1, 157–158 table
6.2, 159
in U.S., 2006, 5–6
in U.S., by race and Hispanic
origin, 168, 168 table 6.9
vs. poverty, 94–96
and wage distribution, 32
and wage inequality, 159
world citizen approach to, 92–94
See also Economic inequality
Income mobility
and income inequality, xiv
See also Mobility
Income tax, 103
India, 80, 90, 93–94, 96
Individual development account
(IDA), 71, 72
Indonesia, 36
Industrialization, 90, 91
Inequality and the American Public: The
Maxwell School Survey
(Stonecash)
excerpt from, 171–174
Infant mortality, 80
Inheritance tax. See Estate tax
Institute for Research on Poverty
(IRP), 202, 216
Intercountry inequality, 93. See also
Income inequality, global
Intergenerational elasticity of earnings
(IEE), 97–98
Intergenerational mobility, 24–25. See
also Mobility
Internal Revenue Service (IRS), 6, 69
International Brotherhood of
Teamsters, 64
Inverted U-curve theory, 9–10
Investment banking, 43–44
Investment income, and taxes, 26
Investments, and wealth, 9
IPO (initial public offering) specialists,
32
Ireland, 85, 86
IRP. See Institute for Research on
Poverty
IRS. See Internal Revenue Service
Italy, 85, 86, 100
Japan, 4, 5, 80, 81, 82, 87, 99, 100, 103
Johns Hopkins, 54
Johnson, Lyndon B., 27
Johnson (Lyndon B.) administration,
144
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 85
Katz, Lawrence, 34, 35
Kearney, Melissa, 34, 35
Kerry, John, 133
Kids Account plan, 72
King, Martin Luther, Jr., 133
Knowledge economy, 55
Kozol, Jonathan, 19, 52
biographical information on,
140–141
Kuznets, Simon, 9–10, 89
biographical information on,
141–142
La Crosse, Wisconsin, 54
Labor demand, and wage inequality,
33–34
Labor law, 60
Labor substitutability, 34
268
Index

Labor unions
and deunionization trend, 39–40,
59–60
and immigration, 64
and income inequality, 40–41
and membership rate, 40
and union premium, 40
and wage distribution, 39–41
and wage inequality, 59–60
LASNY. See Legal Aid Society of New
York
Latin America, 5, 37, 82, 83–84, 87, 89,
95
Latvia, 94
Lee, Spike, 14
Legal Aid Society of New York
(LASNY), 201, 217
Legal Services Corporation (LSC),
217–218
Lesotho, 81, 82, 159
“The Level and Distribution of
Economic Well-Being”
(Bernanke)
excerpt from, 179–182
Levy, Frank, 35
Levy Economics Institute of Bard
College, 218–219
Liberals
and asset-building programs, 72
and CEO compensation, 62
and Earned Income Tax Credit,
60–61
and income distribution, xiii, 47
and income inequality, 25–26
and policy institutes, 201
and taxes, 26–27
Lieberman, Joe, 134
LIS. See Luxembourg Income Study
Living standards, 11
Living wage ordinances, 58–59
opponents of, 59
See also Minimum wage
Los Angeles, California, 23, 58
LSC. See Legal Services Corporation
Luxembourg Income Study (LIS),
85–86
Manchester, Connecticut, 58
Market income, and poverty, 86
Market system, 43
Marshall, Alfred, 43
Marx, Karl, 131
Math ability, and educational
attainment, 166–168, 167 table
6.8
Mathtech, Inc., 20
Mayer, Oscar, 131
Mazumder, Bhashkar
biographical information on,
142–143
McLanahan, Sara, 127
biographical information on,
143–144
MDGs. See Millennium Development
Goals
Mean logarithmic deviation (MLD),
89. See also Gini index; Theil
index
Median income, 13, 15, 23, 85–86
Medicaid, 86
Medicare, 66, 67, 86, 103
Mellon, Andrew, 3
Mental health, and income inequality,
16–17
Merit scholarships, 21, 56. See also
Scholarships
Mexico, 36, 104, 159
Middle class, 3
and college education, 55–57
definition of, 21–22
and income distribution, 22–23
and neighborhoods and suburbs,
erosion of, 23
shrinkage of, 21–23
See also Social class
Middle East, 95
Milanovic, Branko, 91
Mill, John Stuart, 34
Millennium Development Goals
(MDGs), 81, 95–96
Milwaukee, Wisconsin, 58
Minimum wage, 27
and federal vs. state rates, 41
rates, in U.S., 1947–2006, 58, 163,
164–165 table 6.5
and Republican Party, 42
and unemployment, 41
and wage inequality, 41–42, 57–58
and women, 42
See also Living wage ordinances
Index
269

Mises, Ludwig von, 190
MLD. See Mean logarithmic deviation
Mobility
intergenerational, 24–25
See also Economic mobility; Income
mobility; Social mobility
Moderates, and income distribution,
47
Moreno, Arturo, 14
Morgan, J. P., 138–139
Mortality, and income inequality, 17,
18, 19
Murnane, Richard J., 35
NAF. See New America Foundation
NAFTA. See North American Free
Trade Agreement
Namibia, 5, 81, 82, 159
Nasaw, David, 195
National Center for Children in
Poverty (NCCP), 219
National Coalition for the Homeless
(NCH), 201, 220
National inequality, 93. See also
Income inequality, global
National Low Income Housing
Coalition (NLIHC), 220–221
National Review Online, 190
National Student Campaign against
Hunger and Homelessness
(NSCHH), 221–222
NCCP. See National Center for
Children in Poverty
NCH. See National Coalition for the
Homeless
NCLB Act. See No Child Left Behind
Act
Near-poor, 16
Negative income tax (NIT), 67
Neighborhoods, middle-class, erosion
of, 23
Net worth, 7. See also Wealth
Netherlands, 85, 102
Neumark, David, 59
New America Foundation (NAF), 72,
175, 222
New Deal programs, 27
The New Geography of Global Income
Inequality (Firebaugh), 89
New School, 39
New York State, 41, 61
New York Times, xiii, 25, 26
New York University, 27
New Zealand, 83, 89
Niger, 80
NIT. See Negative income tax
Nixon, Richard, 67
NLIHC. See National Low Income
Housing Coalition
No Child Left Behind (NCLB) Act, 52,
54–55
Nobel Prize in Economic Science, 9
North Africa, 95
North America, 80
North American Free Trade
Agreement (NAFTA), 104
North Carolina, 48
Norway, 80, 98
NSCHH. See National Student
Campaign against Hunger and
Homelessness
Nuclear family structure, 44
Oliver, Melvin, 147
Opportunity inequality, 97–98
Organizations, and economic
inequality, interest in, 201
Orshansky, Mollie, 135
biographical information on,
144–145
Osberg, Lars, 150
Pain, and income inequality, 17
Pakistan, 80, 96
Paraguay, 5
Paul, Annie, 45
Payroll tax, 66, 67
Peer influence, and student
performance, 19–20
Pell grants, 55–56. See also Scholarships
Penn State, 89
Perez, Jorge, 14
Perry Preschool (PP) program, 48–49,
50
Peru, 94
Philippines, 96
PHR. See Physicians for Human
Rights
Physicians for Human Rights (PHR),
222–223
270
Index

Piketty, Thomas, 6, 98–99
Plutocracy, 27
Policy institutes, 201–202
Politics
and income inequality, 25–28,
46–47, 82
polarization in, 25
Poor, definition of, 2–3
Poor people
and consumption, 1–2
and near-poor, 16
Poverty
global, 80, 94–96
and government benefits, 86–87
and market income, 86
in rich countries, 85–87
in U.S., by race and Hispanic
origin, 1980–2005, 170–171 table
6.11
vs. income inequality, 94–96
Poverty line, 2–3, 14, 16, 44, 85–86, 
95
Poverty threshold, 2, 16, 44
PP program. See Perry Preschool
program
Principles of Economics (Marshall), 43
Productivity, 11
Progressive tax, 10, 27, 65–66, 66–67,
68, 69, 100, 102, 103
Progressives, and income distribution,
47
Property tax, 68, 103
and school funding, 51
See also Taxes
“Q and A on California Kids
Investment and Development
Savings (KIDS) Accounts”
(Calderon)
document, 175–178
Quintile, 5–6
Race
and economic inequality, 13–17
and economic mobility, 24–25
and income inequality, 168, 168
table 6.9
and poverty, 170–171 table 6.11
and wealth inequality, 168, 169
table 6.10, 170
Radicals, and income distribution,
46–47
Rainwater, Lee, 150
Raleigh, North Carolina, 54
Randolph, A. Philip, 132
Reagan, Ronald, 40
and taxes, 66
Real estate tax. See Property tax
Regressive tax, 66, 67, 68
Reich, Robert, 35
Republican Party
and estate tax, 69
and immigration, 64
and minimum wage, 42
Rich, definition of, 2, 24
Rich countries
income inequality in, 87, 88 fig. 3.1,
89
poverty in, 85–87
Rich people, and consumption, 1
Rockefeller, John D., 3, 127, 131
biographical information on,
145–146
Roosevelt, Franklin D., 27
Roosevelt, Theodore, 103
Rosenthal, Howard, 27–28
RSF. See Russell Sage Foundation
Russell Sage Foundation (RSF),
223–224
Russia, 159
Sabatini, Kate, 182, 184
Saez, Emmanuel, 6, 98–99
Sala-i-Martin, Xavier, 93–94, 95–96
San Francisco, California, 54, 58
Sandefur, Gary, 143
Sanitation, 80
Santa Fe, New Mexico, 58–59
Savage Inequalities (Kozol), 19, 52
Savings, and wealth tax, 102, 103–104
Savings for Working Families Act, 71
Scalzi, John, 197
Scandinavia, 5, 25, 159
Schervish, Paul, 127
biographical information on,
146–147
Scholarships, 20, 21, 55, 56. See also
College education
School(s)
busing, 53–54
Index
271

School(s), cont.
and class segregation, 19
funding, and property tax, 51
high-poverty, 52–53
and income inequality, 19–20
inequality, 51–53
quality, 19
See also Education
SCSPI. See Stanford Center for the
Study of Poverty and Inequality
Securities and Exchange Commission,
63
SEIU. See Service Employees
International Union
Service Employees International
Union (SEIU), 64
SES. See Socioeconomic status
Shapiro, Thomas M., 15–16
biographical information on, 147
Sherraden, Michael, 71, 147
biographical information on, 148
Sider, Ronald J.
biographical information on, 149
Sierra Leone, 80, 81, 82, 159
Single-parent family, 44–45
Sixteenth Amendment, 103
Skill gap, 35
Skilled labor
and computer technology, 34
and immigration, 37–39
and wage inequality, 34–35
See also Workers
Smeeding, Timothy, 85–86, 127
biographical information on, 150
Smoking, and income inequality, 16
Social assistance, 86
Social class, 22
and health, 18
See also Middle class
Social development, 82
Social insurance, 86
Social mobility, 4–5. See also Mobility
Social Programs That Work (Crane), 48
Social Security, 66, 67, 86, 103
Socialism, and income distribution,
46–47
Socioeconomic status (SES)
and college education, 56–57
and educational attainment,
166–168, 167 table 6.8
and student performance, 20, 48,
53–55
South America, 80
South Asia, 95, 96
Southern Africa, 5
Southern Europe, 89
Spelman, Laura Celestia, 146
Sports, and athletic scholarships, 21.
See also Scholarships
St. Louis, Missouri, 58
Stakeholder grant, 70–71
Stanford Center for the Study of
Poverty and Inequality (SCSPI),
202, 224–225
The State of Working America 2004/2005
(Mishel, Bernstein, and
Allegretto), 22
The State of Working America 2006/2007
(Mishel, Bernstein, and
Allegretto), 42
Steinberg, Darrell, 175
Stock market, 100
Stockholders, and CEO compensation,
63
Stonecash, Jeffrey, 171
Student performance
and peer influence, 19–20
and socioeconomic status, 20, 48,
53–55
Sub-Saharan Africa, 5, 81, 82, 83, 96
Suburbs, middle-class, erosion of, 23
Success, 2
Super-rich, 6
Superstars
and human capital, 43
and income distribution, 42–43
Sweden, 69, 81, 85, 86, 102
Switzerland, 68, 69, 89, 100, 102
Symbolic analysts, 35
Tamny, John, 190
Tattinger family, 104
Tax-and-transfer system, 47
Tax Misery Index, 104
Taxes
and income distribution, 65–67
and income inequality, 26–27
wartime and postwar, 100
See also Estate tax; Property tax;
Wealth tax
272
Index

TCF. See The Century Foundation
Technology, and wage inequality,
34–35
Telecommunications, 43
Tennessee, 53
Theil index, 89, 91. See also Gini index;
Mean logarithmic deviation
Think tanks, 201–202
Title I of the Elementary and
Secondary School Act, 52
Tobago, 82
Trade. See Free trade
Training, as human capital, 32
Transfer payments, and income
distribution, 65
Trickle-down effect, 26
Trinidad, 82
Tuberculosis, 80
Tuck business school, 101
Turkmenistan, 82
Twain, Mark, 128
UFE. See United for a Fair Economy
Unemployment, and minimum wage,
41
Unemployment compensation, 86
Uniform business rules, in European
Union, 104
Union premium, 40
United for a Fair Economy (UFE), 201,
225–226
United Kingdom, 83, 85, 86, 87–88, 97,
98, 99, 100
United Nations, 79, 81–82, 95
University of California, 6, 56, 59
University of Florida, 56
University of Maryland, 103
University of Washington, 56
University of Wisconsin, 59
Upper class, 22. See also Social class
U.S. Congress, 26, 27–28, 64, 69, 103
and asset-building programs, 71
and immigration, 64–65
and minimum wage, 41, 42
U.S. Department of Education, 52
U.S. House of Representatives
and asset-building programs, 72
and CEO compensation, 63
U.S. Senate
and asset-building programs, 72
and CEO compensation, 63
and immigration, 64–65
“Vaster undertakings,” and income
distribution, 43–44
Wage distribution, 32
and labor unions, 39–41
Wage inequality
and CEO compensation, 62–63
and Earned Income Tax Credit,
60–62
and free trade, 35–37
and human capital, investment in,
32–33
and immigration, 37–39, 63–65
and income inequality, 159
and labor demand, 33–34
and labor unions, 59–60
and living wage ordinances, 58–59
and minimum wage, 41–42, 57–58
and skilled labor, 34–35
and technology, 34–35
in U.S., 1973–2005, 159, 162 table
6.4, 163
Wake County, North Carolina, 54
Wal-Mart, 60
The Wall Street Journal, xiii, 4
Wall Street traders, and income
distribution, 43–44
Walton, Samuel, 127
biographical information on, 151
Washington University, 71
Wasow, Bernard, 87
WDI. See World distribution of
income
Wealth, 31
definition of, 2, 7
and economic stress, 8
and income, difference between,
7–8
and investments, 9
“Wealth” (Carnegie)
excerpt from, 192–194
Wealth distribution, xiii, 7–8, 14–15,
103
and estate tax, 68–70
in U.S., 1962–2004, 163, 166, 166
table 6.6
and wealth tax, 68
Index
273

Wealth inequality, 3
global, 81, 101–102
growth of, 7–9
long-term trends in, 9–11
statistics on, 155
in U.S., by race, 1983–2004, 168, 169
table 6.10, 170
and wealth tax, 101–102
See also Economic inequality
Wealth line, 2
Wealth tax
global, 101–102
pros and cons of, 102, 103–104
and wealth distribution, 68
and wealth inequality, 101–102
See also Taxes
Welfare, 60, 86
Weller, Christian, 182, 184
Western Africa, 80
Western Europe, 80, 89
Wharton business school, 101
Wilkinson, Richard, 18
biographical information on,
151–152
Wilkinson hypothesis, 18
Winfrey, Oprah, 14
Wolff, Edward, 68, 102
biographical information on,
152–153
Women
and minimum wage, 42
in the workplace, rate of, 45
Woods, Tiger, 14
The Work of Nations (Reich), 35
Workers
high-wage, characteristics of, 32
low-skilled, and immigration, 
64
low-wage, characteristics of, 32
native-born, and immigration,
37–39
ordinary, earnings of, 3–4
See also Skilled labor
Workplace, women in, rate of, 45
World citizen approach, to income
inequality, 92–94. See also Income
inequality, global
World distribution of income (WDI),
93. See also Income distribution,
global
World War II, 66
income inequality during, 10
Worlds Apart: Measuring International
and Global Inequality (Milanovic),
91
Yale, 70
Ypsilanti, Michigan, 48
274
Index

About the Author
Geoffrey Gilbert is a professor of economics at Hobart and William
Smith colleges in Geneva, New York. He did his undergraduate work at
Dartmouth College and holds a Ph.D. in economics from Johns Hopkins
University. The author of two previous handbooks in the Contemporary
World Issues series, on world population and world poverty, Gilbert has
written extensively on the history of economic thought.
275

