www.ebook3000.com

Risk Assessment and Risk Communication
Strategies in Bioterrorism Preparedness

NATO Security through Science Series
This Series presents the results of scientific meetings supported under the NATO
Programme for Security through Science (STS).
Meetings supported by the NATO STS Programme are in security-related priority areas of
Defence Against Terrorism or Countering Other Threats to Security. The types of meeting
supported are generally "Advanced Study Institutes" and "Advanced Research
Workshops". The NATO STS Series collects together the results of these meetings. The
meetings are co-organized by scientists from NATO countries and scientists from NATO's
"Partner" or "Mediterranean Dialogue" countries. The observations and recommendations
made at the meetings, as well as the contents of the volumes in the Series, reflect those of
participants and contributors only; they should not necessarily be regarded as reflecting
NATO views or policy.
Advanced Study Institutes (ASI) are high-level tutorial courses to convey the latest
developments in a subject to an advanced-level audience
Advanced Research Workshops (ARW) are expert meetings where an intense but
informal exchange of views at the frontiers of a subject aims at identifying directions for
future action 
Following a transformation of the programme in 2004 the Series has been re-named and
re-organised. Recent volumes on topics not related to security, which result from meetings
supported under the programme earlier, may be found in the NATO Science Series.
Sub-Series
D. Information and Communication Security
IOS Press
IOS Press
http://www.nato.int/science
http://www.iospress.nl
Springer
Springer
E. Human and Societal Dynamics
Springer
http://www.springer.com
The Series is published by IOS Press, Amsterdam, and Springer, Dordrecht, in conjunction
 with the NATO Public Diplomacy Division.
A. Chemistry and Biology
C. Environmental Security
B. Physics and Biophysics
Series A: Chemistry and Biology 
www.ebook3000.com

edited by
Published in cooperation with NATO Public Diplomacy Division
Risk Assessment and Risk
Israel
Israel
Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer-Sheva,
Israel
and
in Bioterrorism Preparedness
Communication Strategies 
Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University,
Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, 
Israel
Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, Baltimore, MD,
Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University,
Itay Wiser
Dani Cohen
Jonathan Zenilman 
Manfred S. Green
Ran D. Balicer
U.S.A.

A C.I.P. Catalogue record for this book is available from the Library of Congress.
Published by Springer,
Printed on acid-free paper
All Rights Reserved
in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, microfilming,
of any material supplied specifically for the purpose of being entered
and executed on a computer system, for exclusive use by the purchaser of the work.
No part of this work may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted
Proceedings of the NATO Advanced Research Workshop on
June, 2005
© 2007 Springer
www.springer.com
P.O. Box 17, 3300 AA Dordrecht, The Netherlands.
recording or otherwise, without written permission from the Publisher, with the exception
ISBN 978-1-4020-5807-3 (PB)
ISBN 978-1-4020-5806-6 (HB)
ISBN 978-1-4020-5808 -0 (e-book)
Ein-Gedi, Israel 
Risk Assessment and Risk Communication in Bioterrorism
www.ebook3000.com

CONTENTS 
Part I 
RISK ASSESSMENT ............................................................... 1 
1. INTRODUCTION TO BIOTERRORISM RISK  
ASSESSMENT..................................................................................... 3 
2. SOME PUBLIC HEALTH PERSPECTIVES  
ON QUANTITATIVE RISK ASSESSMENTS  
FOR BIOTERRORISM.................................................................... 19 
3. SITUATIONAL AWARENESS IN A BIOTERROR ATTACK  
4. THE BIOTERRORISM THREAT.................................................. 45 
5. CHANGE OF MIND-SET FOLLOWING 9/11: THE FEW THAT 
ARE ALREADY WILLING TO RESORT TO WEAPONS  
OF MASS DESTRUCTION ............................................................. 55 
Yoram Schweitzer 
6. ANTIMICROBIAL PROPHYLAXIS AND PROVIDING 
SUBACUTE CARE IN THE CONTEXT  
OF A BIOTERRORISM EVENT: LESSONS LEARNED  
FROM 2001................................................................................. 67 
Jonathan Zenilman 
7. DETECTING AND RESPONDING TO BIOTERRORISM ........ 77 
Janet Martha Blatny 
8. SPECIES-NEUTRAL DISEASE SURVEILLANCE:  
A FOUNDATION OF RISK ASSESSMENT  
AND COMMUNICATION............................................................... 93 
David R. Franz 
 
 
 
Ran D. Balicer and Itay Wiser 
Edward H. Kaplan and Johan Walden 
Yair Sharan 
VIA PROBABILITY MODELING ................................................. 31 
Preface ..................................................................................................... . ix
Steve Leach 

vi
CONTENTS
Part II 
RISK COMMUNICATION................................................. 101 
9. INTRODUCTION TO BIOTERRORISM RISK  
COMMUNICATION ...................................................................... 103 
Itay Wiser and Ran D. Balicer 
10. RISK COMMUNICATION TO HEALTH-CARE  
WORKERS AS A RISK REDUCTION MEASURE  
Yoav Yehezkelli, Yoram Amsalem, and Adi Aran 
11. ANTHRAX-EURONET AND BEYOND – CHALLENGES  
12. RISK COMMUNICATION AND PUBLIC BEHAVIOR  
IN EMERGENCIES........................................................................ 131 
Yair Amikam 
13. PREVENTION STRATEGIES AND PROMOTING 
PSYCHOLOGICAL RESILIENCE TO BIOTERRORISM 
Anne Speckhard 
14. RISK COMMUNICATION AND THE COMMUNITY  
RESPONSE TO A BIOTERRORIST ATTACK: THE ROLE  
A.K.A. “THE INFORMAL SECTOR” ......................................... 163 
Marjorie Pollack 
15. INFORMATION SYSTEMS FOR RISK  
COMMUNICATION RELATED TO BIOTERRORISM .......... 177 
Manfred S. Green and Zalamn Kaufman 
Part III 
16. RISK ASSESSMENT IN SMALLPOX BIOTERRORIST 
AGGRESSION................................................................................. 195 
Marian Negut 
MEMORY TO SMALLPOX: USE OF NEW TOOLS  
YIELDS OLD RESULTS .......................................................... 205 
Jonathan Boxman, Itay Wiser, and Nadav Orr 
 
IN BIOTERRORISM...................................................................... 117 
OF SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH ON HIGH RISK AGENTS ....... 123 
THROUGH COMMUNICATION................................................. 135 
OF AN INTERNET-BASED EARLY WARNING SYSTEM  
Amanda J. Ozin and Stephen H.E. Kaufmann 
FOCUS ON SMALLPOX .................................................... 193 
17. RENEWAL OF IMMUNOLOGICAL
www.ebook3000.com

 
CONTENTS  
 vii
18. PREPARING FOR A SMALLPOX BIOTERRORIST  
ATTACK: PULSE VACCINATION  
Zvia Agur, Karen Marron, Hanita Shai, and Yehuda L. Danon 
19. A PRIORI VERSUS A POSTERIORI RISK ASSESSMENT  
Eli Stern  
20. IMPACT OF THE PROLIFERATION OF WEAPONS  
OF MASS DESTRUCTION ON THE STABILITY  
M.K. Shiyyab 
THE HEALTH-CARE SYSTEM FOR BIOTERRORISM  
Meir Oren 
ANTIBACTERIAL AGENTS AND THEIR TIME-KILL 
Abed Athamna and Ethan Rubinstein 
23. NATURAL OR INTENTIONAL FOOD CONTAMINATION? 
Daniel Cohen 
24. BIOTERRORISM EMERGENCY RESPONSE:  
Eric. K. Noji 
25. PREPAREDNESS AND RESPONSE FOR BIOTERRORISM 
Jeremy sobel 
26. RISK COMMUNICATION AND PSYCHOLOGICAL  
IMPACT: TECHNOLOGICAL AND OPERATIONAL 
Michael J. Hopmeier 
AS AN OPTIMAL STRATEGY .................................................. 219 
IN THE MIDDLE EAST .............................................................. 235 
AND NATURAL EPIDEMICS .................................................... 237
ACTIVITY  .................................................................................... 239
HOW CAN WE KNOW?  ............................................................ 241
CURRENT CONCEPTS AND CONTROVERSIES  ................ 243
INVOLVING THE FOOD SUPPLY ........................................... 245 
METHODS OF MITIGATION ................................................... 247
22. SUSCEPTIBILITY OF B. ANTHRACIS TO VARIOUS 
21. THE ROLE OF RISK ASSESSMENT IN PREPARING  
ADDITIONAL ABSTRACTS  ........................................................... 231
FOR BIOTERROR ATTACK ..................................................... 233

PREFACE
Biological weapons have been used since ancient history, mostly by armies 
in the field of battle, or in siege. Following the rapid development of bio-
logical weapons in the 20th century, bioterrorism became a new reality. In 
recent years, several incidents have occurred; perhaps the most dramatic was 
that of the anthrax envelopes in the United States in 2001. Bioterrorism can 
cause damage both directly and indirectly. The first and obvious damage is 
illness and death caused by the agent used. However, this may be a relatively 
minor part of the overall damage. Public anxiety and fear resulting from a 
bioterrorist event can have a devastating effect on the society. In dealing 
with bioterrorism, comprehensive risk assessment is necessary to ensure 
that the resources needed to deal with the incident are available. In 
addition, an effective risk communication plan must be developed in 
advance.
Risk assessment is essential to determine and prioritize potential future 
vulnerabilities based on solid facts. Careful analysis will help quantify the 
impact of possible countermeasures on the existing risks. The process of 
risk assessment includes creating possible scenarios of bioterrorism using 
present knowledge of the organisms that may be used, the preferred 
targets, methods of spread, etc. This is followed by an assessment of the 
likelihood of different scenarios, based on both the motivation of different 
terrorist groups and their capabilities in terms of laboratory knowledge, 
pathogens held, and distribution abilities. In the risk assessment, con-
sequences of possible scenarios can be estimated using methods of exposure 
assessment, data on natural epidemics, and from laboratory studies. The 
possible countermeasures against a bioterrorist event can be examined in 
the risk assessment models, and chosen accordingly. 
Since the goal of bioterrorism is to spread fear and panic among the 
public, effective risk communication is essential. Risk communication is a 
field that analyses and suggests alternative ways to communicate with the 
public in times of crisis and public risk. Good risk communication 
practices that are applied early and continually can help mitigate the panic 
and direct the public toward constructive steps thus helping them to deal 
with the consequences of a bioterrorist incident. 
In light of the risks presented by the increasing threat of bioterrorism, 
we proposed that a North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) Advanced 
Research Workshop on the subject of “The role of risk assessment and risk 
communication in bioterrorism” be held in Israel. The aim of the workshop 
was to generate discussion among leading experts in the field of risk 
www.ebook3000.com

assessment, risk communication, and bioterrorism in order to form new 
strategies and improve present strategies to deal with a bioterrorist threat. 
We hoped to create an interdisciplinary, multinational group to further 
discuss and develop risk assessment and communication policy, and 
applications. The workshop was held in the city of Eilat, situated between 
Jordan in the east and Egypt in the west. 
In the course of three days, current knowledge and future trends 
concerning risk management in bioterrorism were presented. The heart of 
the workshop was the discussion groups that took place at the end of each 
session. The final day of the workshop was dedicated to preparing a 
summary document containing the main points discussed and a plan for 
future research and development of risk management strategies. This book 
contains the papers that resulted from the workshop and it should be an 
invaluable reference for all involved in countering bioterrorism. 
Manfred S Green and Jonathan Zenilman 
Co-directors of the Workshop 
PREFACE
x

Part I 
RISK ASSESSMENT
www.ebook3000.com

INTRODUCTION TO BIOTERRORISM RISK 
ASSESSMENT
1Ran D. Balicer, MD, MPH 
2
1. 
Pre-event 
1.1. 
WHY HAS BIOTERRORISM NOT BEEN USED SO FAR  
TO PROMOTE POLITICAL AGENDAS/VIEWS? 
A quantitative risk assessment depends on there being some reliable data 
available to the analyst. A quantitative bioterrorism risk assessment would 
need data or well-informed judgments on the intent of terrorist groups or 
individuals, their technical capabilities, the attributes of pathogens or 
toxins that might be used in a biological attack, target characteristics, and 
the occurrence (frequency) of various attack scenarios. While data regarding 
target and bioagent characteristics are available, to a lesser or greater 
extent, data on bioterrorist intent and the frequency of different types of 
attacks are just about nonexistent.
This data gap apparently stems from the rarity of bioterrorist events and 
weapons of mass destruction (WMD) terrorism database, which is the 
largest unclassified one of its kind, revealed that out of 383 incidents in 
which biological, chemical, nuclear, or radiological agents were used by 
criminals or terrorists during 1900–2001, only 77 biological “events” (i.e., 
episodes involving the deliberate use of a biological agent to harm people) 
were perpetrated. Of these, just four post-1945 events generated more than 
10 casualties [1]. 
The successful implementation of a bioterrorism act would require the 
achievement of several critical steps by the terrorist: acquiring precursor 
virulent biological seed cultures, growing biological agents in culture, 
© 2007 Springer.
Preparedness, 3–17. 
3
1
2
Epidemiology Department, Faculty of Health Sciences, Ben-Gurion 
University of the Negav, Beer-Sheva, Israel 
Medicine, School of Public Health, Sackler Faculty of Medicine,
Tel Aviv University 
To illustrate, a search of the Center for Nonproliferation Studies (CNS) 
the need to better understand the motives of the terrorists themselves.
Itay Wiser: MD. Department of Epidemiology and Preventive 
M.S. Green et al. (eds.), Risk Assessment and Risk Communication Strategies in Bioterrorism 
Ran D. Balicer and Itay Wiser

4 
R.D. BALICER AND I. WISER 
process the agents into a form that can be effectively disseminated, 
improvise an agent delivery device, and carry out the dissemination 
effectively to cause mass casualties [2]. Even when the appropriate 
motivation for such an attack exists, an actual effective attack can only be 
carried out once each of these obstacles has been overcome. Obtaining the 
appropriate microorganism to initiate an event requires access, as well as 
knowledge. Restrictions in distribution of potential bioterrorist agents have 
reduced such accessibility. In addition, the most appropriate strain must be 
selected. It is speculated that one reason for the lack of success at 
disseminating anthrax by the cult Aum Shinrikio was the inadvertent 
selection of a nonpathogenic strain of Bacillus anthracis [2]. 
Reviewing small portions of the peer-reviewed literature of the past 
several years, authors have found numerous articles that might be considered 
useful to would-be bioweaponeers. Published advances in the life sciences 
that arguably have dual-use applications can be found in many diverse 
fields, including directed evolution; studies of the mechanisms of virulence 
in viruses and bacteria including human, animal, and plant pathogens; gene 
therapy technology; aerosol technology; bio-manufacturing; and so on. 
Efforts are made to limit the available data on bioterrorism agents in the 
literature, which may be used by terrorists in their attempts to produce 
agents of bioterrorism [3]. Yet some authors claim restrictions are already 
too restrictive, and may have adverse outcomes [4]. Efforts to monitor 
comprehensively all bioscience research that has potentially destructive 
applications would subsume huge swaths of science, gravely tax civilian 
research resources, and could discourage scientists from pursuing advances 
in fields important to medicine and agriculture, fields we urgently need to 
advance in order to address the grave vulnerabilities currently imposed by 
bioweapons [3]. 
Some authors further believe we grossly overestimate the importance of 
the threat of bioterrorism. They point out that we must recognize a conflict 
of interest exists, and that it is an important, though often neglected, element 
in public health priority setting. They compare these to the conflicts of 
interest in prevention of the health consequences of tobacco use or of 
environmental pollution, such as the desire for profit through the provision 
of equipment, supplies, or consultation, for prestige through the public, 
visible role in prevention or preparedness, and for power though partici-
pation in planning and execution of prevention or preparedness programs. 
The enormous federal investment in bioterrorism preparedness in the United 
States has generated enormous profit, prestige, and power to those who 
engage it [5]. 
www.ebook3000.com

5
1.1.1. Do we really believe “they” have the capabilities to execute
an attack using anthrax, smallpox?
Most authors believe the risk of a smallpox attack is fairly low. The known 
supplies of variola virus are limited, rogue states with the virus would 
probably fear “boomerang” effects or devastating retaliation, and terrorists are
unlikely to be capable of successfully handling a lethalmammalian virus [6]. 
Examining the 2001 anthrax events in hindsight, it appears that neither 
the targets of attack, nor the person or group responsible for attacks, could 
have been predetermined by any known prediction methodology. When 
scientific knowledge about probabilities is absent, thinking about possible 
outcomes takes on a particular significance [1,7]. 
One suggested partial remedy for such lack of data regarding the intent 
and ability of the perpetrators to perform an act of bioterrorism, can 
therefore be vulnerability analysis. A vulnerability analysis seeks to identify 
a valuable asset (i.e., a target) at risk of a bioterrorist attack and to concept-
ualize various ways in which it is vulnerable to such an attack (i.e., various 
attack scenarios). Accordingly, what might have been predicted in the case 
of anthrax was that the US mail system could not only be used as a means 
to deliver anthrax, but also that a letter containing anthrax spores could 
spread spores among mail workers and to other recipients of mail besides 
the intended victims, through transfer of spores from the original letter to 
1.2. 
CAN THEY REALLY SPREAD THESE AGENTS 
EFFECTIVELY?
Most biological agents (especially type A) are most effectively used as an 
aerosol. Effective delivery of an aerosolized agent requires that the particle 
size be 1–10 Pm to be able to reach the terminal bronchioles and alveoli. 
Successful aerosol dispersion of a biological agent is also inherently 
dependent on the environmental and meteorological conditions. 
Models calculating the number of casualties inflicted by an aerosol attack 
have ranged in hundreds of thousands to the millions. Theoretically an air-
craft dispersing 100 kg of anthrax over a 300 km2 area could cause three 
million deaths in a population density of 10,000 people per km. Aerosolized 
botulinum toxin has been estimated to decay at between 1% and 4% per 
min, depending on the ambient temperature. At a decay rate of 1% per min, 
tion. In the case of plague, the major shortcoming is that it is inactivated by 
in their summary of a workshop on Bioterrorism Threat Assessment and
Risk Management [1]. 
other pieces of mail. Zilinskas and colleagues further detail these concepts
substantial inactivation (t13 logs) of toxin occurs by 2 days after aerosoliza-
BIOTERRORISM RISK ASSESSMENT

6 
R.D. BALICER AND I. WISER 
sunlight. On the other hand, unlike anthrax and botulinum toxin, it is capable 
may not be needed to strike fear and uncertainty among the public [8]. 
Dissemination of a category A biological agent through the contamination 
of food and water is considered less likely as most category A agents are not 
effectively transmitted via food and water. Although category B agents can 
be transmitted by these routes, they usually cause only short-term vomiting 
and diarrhea, with a relatively quick recovery. Present public water treatment 
methods, as well as the boiling of water and cooking of food, are highly 
effective in neutralizing many biological agents. Contaminating a water or 
food supply effectively would require large amounts of toxin and bacteria to 
overcome any dilution factor. However, a recent study warns of the United 
States’ vulnerability to such an attack based on very centralized food pro-
cessing and distribution methods over large areas. Likely agents are botulinum 
toxin, Salmonella, Shigella, Escherichia coli, and Vibrio cholerae. The pro-
posed use of botulinum toxin to contaminate a public water source is of 
questionable efficacy as the amount of botulinum toxin needed to effectively 
negate any dilution factor would be enormous, as well as the fact that it is 
naturally deactivated in fresh water within 3–6 days and within 20 min of 
standard water treatment. In terms of contamination of a food supply, it 
should be noted that the toxin is inactivated by heating food to 85°C [8]. 
Infection via contact of intact skin with any of the agents is unlikely to 
result in casualties. However, if the skin integrity is compromised, the 
potential for disease exists. The recent anthrax letters resulted in 11 cases of 
cutaneous anthrax causing significant disruption and fear in postal services 
and mail handlers. Current studies suggest that thorough washing with soap 
and water is sufficient to overcome even this threat. Currently, with the 
exception of anthrax, none of the category A agents have environmental 
stability after release, especially outdoors [8]. 
Table 1 summarizes the dissemination techniques employed so far in 
bioterrorism events [2]. 
TABLE 1. Dissemination techniques employed [7] 
Type 
Terrorist 
Criminal
Other/uncertain
Total
incidents
Aerosol dissemination 
  2 
  0 
  0 
    2 
Direct injection/topical
application
  6 
10 
  0 
  16 
Contaminated food 
  1 
20 
  1 
  22 
Contaminated water 
  4 
  0 
  2 
    6 
Insect/natural vectors 
  0 
  1 
  1 
    2 
None 
10 
13 
79 
102 
Unknown
  5 
10 
  2 
  17 
Total cases 
28 
54 
85
 
 
 
of being transmitted from person to person. However, as evidenced by the 
recent anthrax letters of 2001, aerosolization of an agent via a plane or machine 
www.ebook3000.com

7
1.3. 
REGARDING SMALLPOX: WHAT NEW EVIDENCE  
WOULD JUSTIFY, ACCORDING TO CURRENTLY 
ACCEPTED MODELS AND ESTIMATES, PRE-EVENT 
VACCINATION OF THE WHOLE POPULATION OR
SPECIFIC SUBPOPULATIONS? 
The most important risks associated with pre-event smallpox vaccination 
program are the adverse events associated with significant morbidity and 
those for which there are no screening criteria to reduce risk. On the basis of 
these criteria, post-vaccinial encephalitis and the newly appreciated cardiac 
complications, especially myopericarditis, are of greatest concern [6]. 
The risk–benefit ratio associated with pre-event smallpox vaccination 
program would depend on several factors, including mainly the probability 
for an event and the potential impact of the event, which in turn is largely 
determined by the site attacked and means of dispersion. One stochastic 
model, for example, has shown pre-event vaccination of health-care workers 
proves lifesaving if the probability of a building attack exceeded 0.22 or if 
the probability of a high-impact airport attack exceeded 0.002. However, 
from a national policy standpoint, at the “breakeven” thresholds, the policy
implications of vaccination are not equivalent to the policy implications of 
forgoing vaccination. Forgoing prior vaccination means risking higher 
losses in an attack for a high probability (for instance 0.78) that there will 
be no attack and no deaths. In contrast, institutingprior vaccination ensures 
that losses will be lower, should an attack occur, but requires acceptance of 
the certainty ofmany vaccine-related deaths and considerable morbidity [9]. 
The authors of the above-cited model endorsed in their conclusions “a 
policy of vaccinating all eligible health care workers and first responders 
before an attack.” They assumed that these workers would accept the “risk 
of personal harm for the public good” and would volunteer to get vacci-
nated, which has turned out not to be the case. If civilian medical care and 
public health workers were reluctant to get vaccinated in the face of a 
much smaller risk of post-vaccinial encephalitis, will they be less reluctant 
and volunteer in the face of an additionally recognized myopericarditis risk 
of 1 in 1,800? [6]. 
BIOTERRORISM RISK ASSESSMENT

8 
R.D. BALICER AND I. WISER 
TABLE 2. Direct risks and benefits of pre-event smallpox vaccination before and 
after a smallpox outbreak [6] 
a The informed consent process emphasizes the disclosure of the individual health, 
employment, and financial risks to the vaccinee. 
b The risk of contact vaccinia will increase as vaccination becomes more widespread 
among vaccinees not well trained in infection control practices. 
c The level of trust or mistrust of health authorities will depend on several factors, 
including how honestly and effectively health officials communicate the risks, benefits, and 
trade-offs from the different stakeholder perspectives summarized in this table. 
d The post-outbreak response benefits from pre-event vaccination could be small if pre-
event planning, preparedness, and readiness are not optimal. For example, vaccinated but 
untrained public health response workers would still need to be trained, potentially delaying 
an effective response. Additionally, efficient post-outbreak mass and ring vaccination could 
mitigate the risks from lack of pre-event vaccination. 
Perspective
Benefits realized 
before an outbreak 
Benefits realized after an 
outbreak
Individual
 
 
 
Individual
(vaccinees)
Severe adverse 
reactions, including 
deatha
Psychological benefits 
(“peace of mind,” 
sense of contributing 
to public good) 
Protection against smallpox, 
including death 
 
Employment risksa
 
Financial risksa
Contact
(e.g.,
patient)
Contact vacciniab 
None 
Protection against smallpox 
from vaccinated contact 
Population
Public
health and 
medical
sectors
Contact vaccinia
b
Increased
preparedness, practice, 
and readiness from 
administering the 
vaccine and running 
vaccination clinics 
Prevaccinated vaccinatorsd
 
 
d
Increased clinical 
knowledge from 
management of 
adverse events 
Prevaccinated medical care 
teams to care for smallpox 
patientsd
Increased availability 
of vaccinia immune 
globulin
Prevaccinated public health 
response teams (investigation, 
contact tracing, vaccination)d
 
 
Increase in scientific 
knowledge from 
studying vaccinees 
Better clinical management of 
adverse reactions from mass 
vaccination
 
 
Better availability of vaccinia 
immune globulin 
General
public
Contact vaccinia 
b
Increase in scientific 
knowledge from 
studying vaccinees 
All benefits described 
previously
 
Possible decreased trust 
in health authoritiesc
Some herd immunity 
 
 
Possible increased trust 
in health authoritiesc
Increased trust in health 
authorities
 
 
Deterrent to terrorists  
(low risk)  
(very low risk)
mass vaccination campaign
More efficient and timely
an outbreak 
Risks realized before 
www.ebook3000.com

9
2. 
Once an Outbreak Occurs 
2.1.
CAN WE PREDICT THE DISSEMINATION PATTERNS AND 
MAGNITUDE OF THE OUTBREAK AT ITS FIRST STAGES? 
WHAT DATA SHOULD WE QUICKLY COLLECT TO 
FACILITATE SUCH EMERGENCY MODELING EFFORTS? 
During public health emergencies, such as bioterrorist attacks and disease 
epidemics, computerized information systems for data management, analysis, 
and communication may be needed within hours of beginning the investigation. 
Available sources of data and output requirements of the system may be 
changed frequently during the course of the investigation. Integrating data 
from a variety of sources may require entering or importing data from a 
One study suggests an approach, which attempts to reduce the 
complexity of the problem space by finding clusters of similar threats. 
Because our focus is the design of information systems, the clustering of 
threats is based on similarities in the functional requirements that each 
threat imposes on a detection system – threats with similar functional 
requirements for detection are grouped together. The goal of this approach 
is to develop a parsimonious and tractable characterization of the problem 
space for the purpose of surveillance system design, one that will facilitate 
both design of systems and the associated research in public health 
surveillance that supports system design. The consequence is that a 
designer feels confident that as long as clear specifications for detection of 
one threat in a category are met, the resulting system can detect any threat 
from the category. The potential advantages of such parsimonious charac-
more amenable to study because of availability of data, and (3) improving 
tractability of analysis without, ideally, loss of generality [11]. 
But even when we attempt to focus at one disease, major uncertainties 
hinder our ability to reach valid and robust conclusions. In the smallpox 
case, it is unclear how much residual immunity remains today as a result of 
past vaccination programs; those vaccinated 25–30 years ago are unlikely 
to possess complete immunity and a significant proportion may develop 
less severe forms of the disease, potentially changing the dynamics of 
transmission. Allowing for past immunity levels is therefore critical when 
estimating R0 from historical data. Historically, most infections occurred in 
terization are: (1) focusing more attention on a smaller, but more com- 
prehensive set of threats, (2) identifying equivalent threats that may be 
caregivers to symptomatic individuals, whether in households or hospitals  
variety of digital and paper formats. Spatial representation of data is parti-
cularly valuable for assessing environmental exposure [10]. 
BIOTERRORISM RISK ASSESSMENT

10 
R.D. BALICER AND I. WISER 
detailed data on demographics and human mobility into spatially explicit 
models offers one method by which such extrapolation can be made more 
reliable, but the scale of changes mean that much uncertainty will 
inevitably remain. With such uncertainty, it is critical that risk assessment 
studies use modern statistical methods to obtain the best possible 
parameter estimates from historical data, while allowing for changes in the 
last 30 years. However, historical data are less relevant for some key 
parameters – such as the likely scale of a bioterrorist attack, how rapidly 
the disease would be recognized, and the ability of public health 
authorities to respond. Furthermore, it is unclear how population behavior 
would change in the face of an epidemic. Before recognition of the 
outbreak, would individuals in the latter stages of prodrome have more or 
fewer contacts, compared with their historical counterparts? Once small-
pox is identified, will people voluntarily restrict their movements, or 
attempt to flee urban centers? These factors need to be explored with 
robust analysis of the sensitivity of model results and predicted optimal 
controls to parameter assumptions [12]. 
A variety of methods exist for controlling the spread of smallpox, 
ranging from different vaccination strategies to movement/contact restrictions 
placed on infectious cases and their contacts. Thus a key aspect of policy-
orientated epidemic modeling is to assess both the adequacy of current 
policy and how it might further be optimized. Optimality is principally the 
minimization of mortality and morbidity, so it is critical that models accura-
tely incorporate expected adverse event rates from vaccination. However, 
the severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) virus has shown that the 
economic costs of an epidemic can be out of all proportion to the numbers 
infected, indicating that minimizing the duration of a smallpox outbreak 
might also be a critical priority when formulating control strategy [12]. 
2.2. 
CAN WE PREDICT THE EFFECT OF INTERVENTIONS 
DURING AN EVENT? CAN WE TRUST MODELS THAT 
SUGGEST LIMITED RESPONSE (I.E., TARGETED RATHER 
THAN MASS VACCINATION FOR SMALLPOX) SHOULD
BE SUFFICIENT? 
In every scenario, policymakers must choose between several intervention 
options for controlling the emerging epidemic. Table 3 by Ferguson et al. 
summarizes the main options for controlling a smallpox attack [12]. 
[3]. It is unclear how 30 years of changes in household sizes, working pat- 
terns, and mobility would affect transmission patterns today. Incorporating 
www.ebook3000.com

11
TABLE 3. Policy options for controlling smallpox attack [12] 
Policy 
Benefits
Drawbacks
Quarantine/isolation
Quarantine and isolation of 
suspect and confirmed cases 
If isolation facilities are 
adequate, it is highly 
effective at reducing 
transmission from known 
cases
Isolation facilities 
necessary, or compliance 
with voluntary policy. 
Compulsory policies 
necessarily coercive. 
Requires rapid detection 
of cases. 
Movement restrictions 
For example, quarantine of 
neighborhoods or closure of 
schools, airports, or other 
transport systems 
Potentially useful in 
containing a small outbreak 
where community 
transmission is occurring. 
Used recently to control 
SARS spread in Hong Kong 
and Singapore 
Vaccination certificates 
issued in the past to 
prevent potential spread 
but difficult to assess 
effectiveness. Costly
and difficult to poice, 
compromised by any 
illegal movements. 
Coercive
“Ring” vaccination 
Contacts of suspect 
smallpox cases are traced 
and vaccinated when found. 
Can be coupled with policy 
of isolation of identified 
contacts
Minimizes use of vaccine, 
and hence morbidity and 
mortality caused by adverse 
reactions to vaccination 
Contacts need to be found 
at an early stage of 
incubation for vaccine
to be effective. Tracing 
needs to be highly 
effective to severely limit 
transmission 
Targeted vaccination 
For example, vaccination
of whole population in 
affected neighborhood
or city 
Highly effective during 
eradication campaign at 
containing transmission 
localized to a single 
geographic area or 
subpopulation. Reduced 
vaccine-related mortality. 
Not dependent on contact 
tracing
Effective when 
background levels of
herd immunity high, but 
few systematic data on 
effectiveness in other 
contexts. Less sparing of 
vaccine use than ring 
vaccination. Risk of 
disease spreading beyond 
targeted area 
Mass vaccination 
Vaccination of whole 
population of a country 
experiencing or threatened 
by an outbreak. 
Effective at stopping 
widespread dissemination of 
the virus across large areas 
and protecting individuals 
from infection. Not 
dependent on contact 
tracing
Large numbers need to be 
vaccinated quickly. Might 
generate unnecessary 
vaccine-related morbidity 
and mortality. If policy 
implemented rapidly, 
screening for risk factors 
for adverse reactions 
might be suboptimal 
Prophylactic vaccination 
Vaccination before
a smallpox release 
Useful for protecting 
essential ‘first responder’ 
personnel. If used for entire 
population, very effective
at stopping widespread 
dissemination of virus. Does 
not have to be implemented 
quickly. Not dependent on 
contact tracing 
If used to protect an entire 
population on an ongoing 
basis, policy has high, 
long-term cost, and a 
large number of probably 
unnecessary vaccine-
associated adverse events 
would be expected for as 
long as policy is followed 
BIOTERRORISM RISK ASSESSMENT

12 
R.D. BALICER AND I. WISER 
When attempting to choose the most appropriate of these response 
policies prior to an actual event, analyses highlight the importance of 
beliefs regarding the nature of a bioterrorist attack and response logistics, 
in addition to disease epidemiology. In the case of smallpox, several 
examples may be considered. Would an attack be small and controllable 
through traced vaccination or large enough to require mass vaccination? 
Would an attack be overt, in which case it could prove possible to respond 
immediately in a highly targeted fashion and obtain much better results or 
covert and detected only from symptomatic cases as assumed in this 
chapter? If traced vaccination was used in response to an attack, would 
tracing prove accurate and efficient (as documented for a highly unusual 
natural outbreak that occurred in a Nigerian town) or inaccurate (as 
suggested by a simulated large attack in a metropolitan area with 
population 10 million)? Could a rapid mass vaccination campaign be 
mounted soon enough after an attack occurs and with sufficiently high 
population coverage to avert most of the second-generation infections, but 
with care to avoid vaccine complications among those with contrain-
dications? Having never faced a deliberate smallpox attack, there are no 
empiric answers to questions such as these. In particular, it is an assumption
to pretend that parameters such as R0 are known, even if estimated on the 
basis of past outbreaks, because such outbreaks could bear no resemblance 
to what could occur in a bioterrorist attack [13]. 
Several models have addressed the issue of choosing the optimal 
Similar dilemmas exist regarding an anthrax attack. One dilemma is 
how to rapidly identify such an attack, while preventing false alarms and 
unnecessary expenditures. The lack of sufficient experience with bio-
terrorism related pathogens, such as anthrax, might be a leading cause of 
delay in identifying bioterrorist event due to misdiagnosis. Using risk 
assessment methods, an effort is made to identify quickly and cost-
effectively the first cases or exclude a bioterrorist event possibility. The 
main obstacle that stands in the experts’ way is the insufficient existing 
data on which to rely on [14]. 
Another dilemma in the case of anthrax, live in evaluating the trade-off 
between the consequences of antibiotic use and the consequences of failure 
to treat anthrax poses a dilemma to the treating physician. One study 
suggests that during influenza season, rapid testing for influenza should be 
response policy for smallpox outbreak. Table 4 by Ferguson et al. summa- 
rizes several of these models, along with the author’s views and comments
for each of these models [12]. 
www.ebook3000.com

13
TABLE 4. Summary of recent smallpox modeling studies [12] 
Study 
Key features 
Comments 
Meltzer, M. I., 
responses to smallpox 
as a bioterrorist 
weapon. Emerg. Inf. 
Dis. 7, 959–969 
(2001).
(1) Homogeneous mixing;
(2) stochastic; (3) no social/ 
spatial structure; (4) R0 = 1.5–3; 
(5) vaccination not directly 
modeled but in conjunction 
(7) 100 people initially 
infected
(1) Estimates required control effort 
by correlating vaccine doses used 
against number of cases in historical 
outbreaks; (2) number of doses is 
not related to the number of cases, 
0
overestimates cases because 
depletion of susceptibles is not 
modeled;(4) controls assumed to 
reduce R to 0.99, that is, program 
effectiveness is model input 
Emergency response 
to a smallpox attack: 
The case for mass 
vaccination. Proc. 
99, 10935–10940 
(2002).
(1) Homogeneous mixing in 
large population (10 million); 
(2) deterministic; (3) no 
(4) R0 = 3 for base case (range 
1–20); (5) mass vaccination 
and ring vaccination 
compared; (6) considers 
public health logistical 
constraints; (7) only those 
“asymptomatic” (that is in 
prodrome) are infectious – 
those symptomatic (with rash) 
(1) R0 assumed derived from 
historical estimates, but level of 
prodromal transmission assumed 
much greater than new best 
estimates derived from historical 
data21; (2) assumption that 
transmission occurs during the 
prodromal period biases results in 
favor of mass vaccination; (3) 
assumption of homogeneous 
mixing will also bias the results in 
favor of mass vaccination; (4) 
considers vaccine-related deaths 
individuals or other adverse events 
A. & Yang. Y. 
Containing
bioterrorist smallpox. 
Science 298,
(1) Heterogeneous mixing 
small population (2,000); (2) 
stochastic; (3) R0 = 3.2; (4) 
mass vaccination and ring 
vaccination compared;
(5) considers current residual 
herd immunity; (6) number 
initially infected = 1–10 
(1) Large number of parameters 
assumed, particularly regarding 
mixing patterns, limited sensitivity 
analysis performed; (2) relatively 
large proportion (0.05–0.5%) of 
community initially infected;
(3) model of small community of 
2,000 individuals; (4) assumption 
that >75% of transmission occurs 
during prodrome biases results in 
favor of mass vaccination 
Bozzette, S. A. et al. 
smallpox-vaccination
policy. N. Engl. 
(2003).
(1) Homogeneous mixing;  
(2) stochastic; (3) R(no control) 
= 15, 3.4 and 1.8 in hospital, 
mixed and community 
outbreaks respectively;
(R0  R (no control)); (4) 
compares mass vaccination, 
ring vaccination and 
prophylactic vaccination of 
healthcare workers; (5) 
considers vaccine-related 
adverse events; (6) number 
initially infected = 2–100,000 
(1) Assumes the effect of the control 
policies on R, based on review and 
“judgment”; that is, effectiveness of 
policies is an input into the model 
rather than an output; the model 
therefore has little explanatory or 
predictive power; (2) large number of 
parameters assumed, limited sensiti-
vity analysis performed; (3) assumes 
disease has no effect on the deple-
tion of susceptibles; (4) assessment 
of threat of attack is subjective 
J. W. & Millar, J. D. 
Damon, I., LeDuc, 
D. L. & Wein, L. M. 
Halloran, M. E., 
1428–1432 (2002). 
Longini, I. M., Nizam, (social structure included) in 
Modeling potential 
with quarantine is assumed
but to the level of susceptibility (and 
no depletion of susceptibles;
to reduce R to below 1; (6)
R ); (3) model substantially 
Kaplan, E. H., Craft, 
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 
A model for a 
J. Med. 348, 416–425 
1–100,000
are assumed to be isolated;
only in contraindicated people, and 
(8) number initially infected =   not those in noncontraindicated 
social/spatial structure;  
BIOTERRORISM RISK ASSESSMENT

14 
R.D. BALICER AND I. WISER 
performed in symptomatic patients, followed by empiric treatment for 
anthrax, pending blood culture results for those who test negative for 
influenza [15]. 
2.3. 
HOW DIFFERENT SHOULD INTENTIONALLY DISTRIBUTED 
SMALLPOX BE COMPARED TO NATURALLY OCCURRING 
SMALLPOX OUTBREAKS IN THE PAST? 
If an attack occurs in the near future, it is unlikely that a genetically 
modified strain of variola would be used. However, if the strain is 
genetically modified to increase its virulence, possible consequences could 
be even more dramatic. Unfortunately, scientific advancements over the 
last two decades have made it possible to develop genetically altered 
strains of orthopoxviruses [16]. 
Genetic engineering of viruses has become a common practice. One 
major objective of genetic manipulation is to use engineered viral vectors 
for the delivery of genetic information with therapeutic intent or to modify 
viruses so as to alter the host’s immune response. Changes in virulence and 
host range of modified viruses are generally hard to predict. However, 
when one studies the possibility of making variola virus more pathogenic, 
the research and development (R&D) work will most likely be focused on 
targets such as:
1.
Shortening the incubation period of the disease by improving the 
attachment of the virus to a host cell and accelerating virus propa-
gation in host cells 
2.
Reducing the infectious dose and increasing mortality by the 
suppression/subversion of innate and specific immune responses to the 
virus
3.
Strengthening the severity, “adding” new syndromes of infection and 
increasing mortality by widening the number of potential sites of 
infection (e.g., brain and parenchymal organs). 
These are just some of the possible targets of genetic engineering 
procedures. However, even if such work is underway in some countries, it 
is obvious that we would never obtain any “official” information on the  
work with variola virus to increase its virulence by inserting alien genes. 
At the same time, we need to know what and how this genetic engineering 
work could be performed in order to understand what protection we must 
develop against genetically engineered variola virus [16]. 
www.ebook3000.com

15
2.4. 
HOW SUSCEPTIBLE IS THE POPULATION TODAY  
TO SMALLPOX? 
Routine smallpox vaccination program in Israel instituted in 1949, 
included vaccine administration to (i) infants aged 1 year, (ii) children 
(aged 9–10 years), (iii) military recruits (aged 18 years), and (iv) new 
immigrants. After the World Health Organization (WHO) declaration on 
the eradication of smallpox in 1979, routine smallpox vaccination in Israel 
was officially discontinued in July 1980. Army recruits continued to 
receive smallpox vaccination until July 1996. A first responder revacci-
nation campaign began on September 2002 and as of May 2003, some 
22,000 doses have been administered [17]. 
Data collected during the eradication campaign showed that neutralizing 
antibodies to smallpox are persistent and may be detected 20 years or more 
after vaccination [18]. More recent studies reported that after two 
revaccinations, the antibody levels to vaccinia persist and may provide a 
sufficient level of immunity for 30–75 years [19, 20]. Similar conclusions 
were drawn by Crotty and his group. They have studied long-term B cell 
memory after smallpox vaccination in a previously (3 months to 60 years) 
vaccinated group. Their results demonstrated initial exponential decay of 
memory B cells, with a half-life of <1 year, followed by a plateau ~10-fold 
lower than peak that is stably maintained for >50 years after vaccination 
[21]. Several studies also demonstrated that memory CD4+ and CD8+ T-
cells to vaccinia antigen persist from months to decades after last smallpox 
revaccination [20–24]. Hsieh et al. showed that healthy subjects who were 
vaccinated within the last three decades and had a visible vaccination scar 
had remarkable T-cell reactivity compared to people who did not have a 
scar, or were vaccinated more than four decades ago [25]. 
Yet, the clinical significance of these studies in terms of protection 
against variola infection is not clear, and the exact level of immunity in the 
population today, 10–35 years after termination of continuous vaccination 
campaigns, is largely unknown. 
Reference
1. 
Zilinskas RA, Hope B, North DW. A discussion of findings and their possible 
implications from a workshop on bioterrorism threat assessment and risk 
management. Risk Anal 2004; 24(4):901–908. 
2. 
Haas CN. The role of risk analysis in understanding bioterrorism. Risk Anal 
2002; 22(4):671–677. 
BIOTERRORISM RISK ASSESSMENT

16 
R.D. BALICER AND I. WISER 
3. 
Kwik G, Fitzgerald J, Inglesby TV, O’Toole T. Biosecurity: responsible 
stewardship of bioscience in an age of catastrophic terrorism. Biosecur 
Bioterror 2003; 1(1):27–35. 
4. 
Atlas R, Campbell P, Cozzarelli NR, Curfman G, Enquist L, Fink G, et al. 
Statement on the consideration of biodefence and biosecurity. Nature 2003; 
421(6925):771.
5. 
Sidel VW. Bioterrorism in the United States: a balanced assessment of risk 
and response. Med Confl Surviv 2003; 19(4):318–325. 
6. 
Aragon TJ, Fernyak SE. The risks and benefits of pre-event smallpox 
vaccination: where you stand depends on where you sit. Ann Emerg Med 
2003; 42(5):681–684. 
7. 
Anand P. Public health. Decision-making when science is ambiguous. Science 
2002; 295(5561):1839. 
8. 
Karwa M, Currie B, Kvetan V. Bioterrorism: preparing for the impossible or 
the improbable. Crit Care Med 2005; 33(1 Suppl):S75–95. 
9. 
Bozzette SA, Boer R, Bhatnagar V, Brower JL, Keeler EB, Morton SC, et al. 
A model for a smallpox-vaccination policy. N Engl J Med 2003; 348(5): 
416–425.
10. Zubieta JC, Skinner R, Dean AG. Initiating informatics and GIS support for a 
field investigation of bioterrorism: the New Jersey anthrax experience. Int  
J Health Geogr 2003; 2(1):8. 
11. Wagner MM, Dato V, Dowling JN, Allswede M. Representative threats for 
research in public health surveillance. J Biomed Inform 2003; 36(3):177–188. 
12. Ferguson NM, Keeling MJ, Edmunds WJ, Gani R, Grenfell BT, Anderson RM, 
et al. Planning for smallpox outbreaks. Nature 2003; 425(6959):681–685. 
13. Kaplan EH. Preventing second-generation infections in a smallpox bioterror 
attack. Epidemiology 2004; 15(3):264–270. 
14. Schultz CH. Chinese curses, anthrax, and the risk of bioterrorism. Ann Emerg 
Med 2004; 43(3):329–332. 
15. Fine AM, Wong JB, Fraser HS, Fleisher GR, Mandl KD. Is it influenza or 
anthrax? A decision analytic approach to the treatment of patients with 
influenza-like illnesses. Ann Emerg Med 2004; 43(3):318–328. 
16. Alibek K. Smallpox: a disease and a weapon. Int J Infect Dis 2004; 8 
(2 Suppl):S3–8. 
17. Orr N, Forman M, Marcus H, Lustig S, Paran N, Grotto I, et al. Clinical and 
immune responses after revaccination of Israeli adults with the Lister strain of 
vaccinia virus. J Infect Dis 2004; 190(7):1295–1302. 
18. Fenner F, World Health Organization. Smallpox and its eradication. Geneva: 
World Health Organization, 1988. 
19. el-Ad B, Roth Y, Winder A, Tochner Z, Lublin-Tennenbaum T, Katz E, et al. 
The persistence of neutralizing antibodies after revaccination against 
smallpox. J Infect Dis 1990; 161(3):446–448. 
www.ebook3000.com

17
20. Hammarlund E, Lewis MW, Hansen SG, Strelow LI, Nelson JA, Sexton GJ, 
et al. Duration of antiviral immunity after smallpox vaccination. Nat Med 
2003; 9(9):1131–1137. 
21. Crotty S, Felgner P, Davies H, Glidewell J, Villarreal L, Ahmed R. Cutting 
edge: long-term B cell memory in humans after smallpox vaccination.  
J Immunol 2003; 171(10):4969–4973. 
22. Littaua RA, Takeda A, Cruz J, Ennis FA. Vaccinia virus-specific human 
CD4+ cytotoxic T-lymphocyte clones. J Virol 1992; 66(4):2274–2280. 
23. Demkowicz WE, Jr., Littaua RA, Wang J, Ennis FA. Human cytotoxic T-cell 
memory: long-lived responses to vaccinia virus. J Virol 1996; 70(4):2627–
2631.
24. Frelinger JA, Garba ML. Responses to smallpox vaccine. N Engl J Med 2002; 
347(9):689–690.
25. Hsieh SM, Pan SC, Chen SY, Huang PF, Chang SC. Age distribution for  
T-cell reactivity to vaccinia virus in a healthy population. Clin Infect Dis 
2004; 38(1):86–89.
BIOTERRORISM RISK ASSESSMENT

and Response, Porton Down, Salisbury, Wilts, SP4 0JG, UK 
In the context of bioterrorism and public health infrastructure public health 
professionals have a number of particular and crucial roles. These run in 
parallel with those in a wide range of other operational and strategic 
disciplines, such as those related to: 
x
More general national and international threat assessments
x
The maintenance of local, national and international resilience
x
The empowerment of emergency and essential services
Public health roles include assisting with the: 
x
Identification of potential threats (horizon scanning and surveillance) 
x
Formulation of policy 
x
Undertaking of planning 
x
Implementation of new, or the augmentation of existing, response 
capabilities
Under these headings potentially come:  
x
Improvements in diagnostics (detectors) 
x
The stockpiling of countermeasures, such as drugs and equipment 
x
The identification of existing and/or development of new systems for 
immediate response, and subsequent primary and secondary care (e.g., 
hospitals/treatment/decontamination centres), 
x
The clear delineation of lines of communication and data flows 
x
The training of responders 
19
© 2007 Springer.
M.S. Green et al. (eds.), Risk Assessment and Risk Communication Strategies in Bioterrorism 
FOR BIOTERRORISM
1.  
Background
ON QUANTITATIVE RISK ASSESSMENTS
SOME PUBLIC HEALTH PERSPECTIVES
Preparedness, 19–29. 
Health Protection Agency, Centre for Emergency Preparedness  
Steve Leach
www.ebook3000.com

S. LEACH 
x
Testing and reviewing plans through desk-based and field exercises, 
and through these exercises 
x
Updating planning and policy 
preparedness for more natural emerging infectious disease threats, such as 
those posed by severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) and pandemic 
influenza.
For the threats posed by both bioterrorism and “exotic” emerging infectious 
diseases the data and solid contemporary evidence-base on which to develop 
preparedness are usually limited or lacking. Further, and especially for 
communicable diseases, the emergent disease dynamics are also often 
likely to be nonlinear and frequently far from obvious because of the 
complexities and feedbacks in the disease and public health control 
mechanisms (Ferguson et al., 2003). Models that accurately capture what 
evidence is available (often from historical data, laboratory experiments, 
etc.), therefore, often provide indispensable tools to investigate “what if ”  
scenarios, examine alternatives control options, and develop policy and 
planning. A key benefit of using models to examine disease control options 
is their ability to explain and, with appropriate caveats and sensitivity 
analysis, predict trends at a population level from interactions and processes 
at the individual level. Models, however, have to be appropriately designed 
for the questions being addressed (Ferguson et al., 2003). 
Often, there are also useful distinctions that need to be made between 
the types of modeling that might be appropriate for more general threat-
assessment exercises and those that might be required from a public health 
perspective. This can provide some interesting communication challenges. 
For example, the potential impacts of deliberate releases on public health 
and public health systems can be orders of magnitude greater than the 
impacts that might be identified by a more general threat assessment that is 
based on the more immediate or final effects, such as the likely numbers of 
directly attributable deaths. This is true of noncommunicable agents and 
even more so for communicable agents. 
The public health process also involves assisting with:
x
Raising and maintaining general awareness 
20
Many of these public health-related activities would also be common to 
2. 
Different “Motivations” for Risk Assessment and Modeling 

anthrax, it might be sufficient to estimate the immediate number of 
casualties that might be caused by such a release, and compare these 
directly with the numbers of casualties that might be caused by other types 
of threat, such as an explosion or chemical incident. Typically for this, 
atmospheric dispersion and biological effects modeling would take into 
consideration such factors as the: 
x
Likely amount of material released 
x
Means of dispersal 
x
Particle size distribution 
x
Typical (or a range of )  meteorological conditions for the area 
x
Underlying human population densities/distributions 
x
Typical breathing rate(s) 
x
Assumed dose/response relationship for the agent 
There are considerable uncertainties in estimating much of the above, both 
from the perspective of the airborne dispersion modeling and, possibly 
more importantly, from the human effects modeling. In the case of the 
latter this arises because most of the information on which dose/response 
curves are based is derived from observations on animal species other than 
man and at high dosages. The latter are generally equal to or greater than 
the infectious dose 50% (ID50) (or lethal dose 50% – LD50), such that the 
effects of lower, but still pathogenically important, dosages have to be 
assumed from broad extrapolation. 
On top of these uncertainties is compounded the issue that many more 
people would have been geographically situated so as to have been 
potentially exposed than would eventually be expected to succumb without 
treatment (Wein et al., 2003). This has significant impacts from the point 
of view of estimating the public health difficulties that might arise from a 
deliberate release of a biological agent, and responding to it, compared to 
the basic estimation of the possible final casualties. 
Depending on what is considered to be an acceptable risk in the 
underlying population, as against the uncertainties in determining that risk 
(e.g., as an illustration only, in Figure1, an LD0.01 represents a 1 in a 
10,000 risk of becoming infected and dying without treatment – and not 
assumed here to be an acceptable risk), then the numbers potentially 
exposed could be orders of magnitude higher than those that would be 
For example, for a simple estimation of the potential threat that might be 
posed by the deliberate release of a noncommunicable agent, such as 
21
3. 
QUANTITATIVE RISK ASSESSMENTS FOR  BIOTERRORISM
Noncommunicable Agents – e.g., Anthrax 
www.ebook3000.com

S. LEACH 
become ill, it will be necessary to find and treat as efficiently as possible 
all those who have been potentially exposed. In the case of anthrax this 
should ideally be done as rapidly as possible and before symptoms begin 
to show. 
Figure 1 provides a very simple illustration of the above arguments (the 
values given on the axes are purely illustrative and based on a single 
hypothetical scenario – however, the approximate relationships shown are 
likely to hold over a considerable range of similar events). As the distance 
from the site of a release increases (x-axis) the probability of infection in 
those exposed decreases (related to the dosages of material to which they 
are exposed), but the numbers of individuals potentially exposed to the 
airborne dispersed pathogen are, to a first approximation, likely to increase 
roughly as the square of the distance (dashed line). This assumes a 
sufficiently even distribution of individuals on the ground over which the 
likely to become ill will increase much more slowly and approach a 
limiting value with distance. 
The public health-related challenges are, therefore, to estimate how far 
from the release site the risk of becoming infected might be acceptable 
(and to whom amongst the various stakeholder groups such a risk is 
acceptable), and specifically identify the potentially large numbers of 
individuals that might have been exposed at this level of risk and deliver 
treatment to them quickly. Depending on the particular biological agent 
and the preferred treatment, this has also to be balanced against the 
possible risks (e.g., side effects) of giving the treatments themselves to an 
increasingly larger number of individuals, most of who would not have 
succumbed to the biological agent without treatment anyway. As is often 
the case with this type of activity, an overarching challenge is the clear 
communication of the potential implications of the uncertainty in such 
assessments and the factors that lead to those uncertainties. 
plume of material has passed (i.e., “the effective area of the plume at 
a given dosage contour”). Moreover, the numbers of individuals that are 
expected to succumb to that exposure. This point is elaborated upon later. 
Further, since it is unlikely to be possible to distinguish between those who 
have been potentially exposed and those who will then subsequently 
22

Figure 1. Showing, for a very hypothetical deliberate release, the relationships 
n
percentage), the numbers of individuals exposed (dashed line) and the numbers 
affected (solid line). (Inset shows dosage contours LDn over the ground for a hypo-
thetical release over a population with varying density [thematically coloured]). 
Public health contingency planning greatly benefits from combining the 
type of analysis described above for a whole range of deliberate release 
scenarios with other types of probabilistic individual-based risk assessment 
techniques. These need to take into account, for example, the time it takes 
23
of infection and death without treatment for given dosages of pathogen poten-
tially received (LD , vertical arrows, where n is the probability expressed as a 
between distance from the point of the release and: the individual probability
4. 
Extending “Simple” Models for the Public Health 
Context 
QUANTITATIVE RISK ASSESSMENTS FOR  BIOTERRORISM
www.ebook3000.com

S. LEACH 
depending inversely, but not linearly, on dosage) and the time it is likely to 
take to find and deliver treatments to them. The results of such quantitative 
succumbed. In this case, for a hypothetical deliberate release over open 
terrain. There is, however, a very narrow window of opportunity following 
the deliberate release (or following the recognition of the first few cases 
after a covert release) in which it is necessary to mount a swift, efficient 
and appropriate public health response. This reinforces the perceived need 
to have in place good diagnostic and detection capabilities, as well as a 
well-planned emergency response infrastructure to rapidly deliver (ideally 
on a timescale of hours) appropriate public health countermeasures. 
For “real-time” responses to covert releases, this type of pre-planning 
analysis also demonstrates that there are further public health challenges, 
since the first evidence that a release has taken place will be the 
appearance of individuals seeking medical help. On average, these are 
likely to be those that have received the highest dosages of the biological 
agent, nearest to the site of the release. The public health challenge here 
will be to rapidly link and recognize the unusual epidemiology and 
presentation of these cases, identify the biological agent and conduct in-
depth epidemiological investigations to determine the geographic locations 
Appropriate modeling strategies will then need to be rapidly applied to 
infer the likely location and extent of the prior initial release in order to 
find and administer treatment to those other individuals who have likely 
been exposed but have yet to develop symptoms. These will likely be those 
further from the site of the initial release, and who have received lower 
dosages than the initial cases. They are also likely to have the best 
prognosis following treatment if it can be delivered in time before 
symptoms develop. This again emphasizes the need to have in place good 
diagnostic and detection capabilities and well-planned and prepared 
emergency response infrastructures. These are required not only to deliver 
treatments, but also to develop and maintain enhanced public health 
awareness of the possible manifestation of “unusual” biological agents, as 
well as to promote the epidemiological and modeling techniques that will 
be required to identify those who need treatment. 
24
to develop disease symptoms in those individuals exposed to different 
risk assessments demonstrate, for example, that even for anthrax, which
at high dosages has a relatively short incubation period, it is feasible to 
dosages of pathogen (which for anthrax can range from hours to weeks 
find and successfully treat many of those who might otherwise have 
of affected individuals at times consistent with the likely incubation 
period distribution for the biological agent, which has been identified. 

The public health impacts, and the response effort necessary to be put in 
place to mitigate or control them, can be even greater in both extent and 
duration for communicable agents. As sometimes done for more immediate, 
general, comparative threat assessments it might be (but is probably rarely) 
sufficient to simply compare the potential overall levels of initial mortality 
likely to be associated with a range of different initial release scenarios 
involving different types of agent. This, however, disregards the potential 
for onward transmission, the extent to which the initial threat might be 
amplified within the initially unexposed population, and the extent of the 
public health resources that would be required to bring a potential 
expanding epidemic under control. For public health contingency planning 
significantly more detailed modeling is required, to take into account 
requiring treatment will again number orders of magnitude higher than 
those who would be likely to eventually succumb. These numbers will also 
be considerably amplified as a consequence of the multiple contacts 
between infectious individuals and the rest of the previously unexposed 
population.
For example, this potential for amplification within the community has 
been examined using relatively simple individual-based stochastic models 
for the case of relatively small numbers of initially infected cases of 
pneumonic plague either accidentally introduced or deliberately caused 
within a population, without the knowledge or forewarning (i.e., covertly) 
of the affected community (Gani and Leach, 2004). Estimates of the extra 
burden that might occur due to the amplification of the initial release 
depend on the extent to which pneumonic plague is assumed to be 
transmissible from person to person. Analysis of historical data suggests 
that this (R0) is low, with infected individuals on average infecting about 
one further person in the absence of public health interventions. The public 
health impacts also depend on the extent to which there is an alert, prompt 
and efficient public health response. If this response is efficient and 
effective, then for each initially infected person it is possible that there 
might only be on average between a further 1.5–3 cases caused by 
25
levels of morbidity, as well as mortality, the dynamics of disease deve- 
lopment in individuals and populations following exposure, as well as 
the numbers potentially exposed not only to the initial release but also 
as contacts of any ongoing infectious cases. Those initially exposed and 
5. 
Some Further Public Health Risk Assessment Issues  
for Communicable Agents 
6. 
Pneumonic Plague 
QUANTITATIVE RISK ASSESSMENTS FOR  BIOTERRORISM
www.ebook3000.com

S. LEACH 
transmission within the community for each infection caused by the initial 
release itself. However, this could raise further to 4–10 more cases per 
initially infected case in more extreme examples. This situation could 
arise, either just by chance, and/or as a consequence of assuming values 
for R0 (a measure of the transmission rate of pneumonic plague) at the 
higher end of the range that is supported by analysis of small historical 
data-sets.
Pneumonic plague has a rapid onset from infection and short time to 
death following symptoms. Symptomatic, infectious individuals are also 
typically extremely unwell and generally not ambulatory. Consequently, 
the prospects for infectious contacts are somewhat limited (hence the low 
estimates of R0) and tended in the past to be in those family and health care 
workers who were looking after patients. In the case of health care 
workers, however, that was until such times as the disease was correctly 
diagnosed and nosocomial transmission eliminated. The prognosis for 
infected individuals given appropriate antibiotic treatment is also generally 
good, as are the prospects for the control of an outbreak. The latter is 
probably because the R0 is low, cases only become infectious once they are 
symptomatic (and therefore more obvious), and thus the contacts of 
infectious cases are also likely to be easily identified. Nevertheless, the 
potential for ongoing person-to-person transmission for agents, such as 
plague within the community for some time following an initial release 
potentially adds to the other public health consequences and the burdens of 
a deliberate release that have already been discussed for anthrax. These 
will include an even closer epidemiological investigation of cases and the 
identification of their contacts, and the delivery of antibiotic treatments to 
an even larger number of individuals than those initially exposed to the 
deliberate release (i.e., to include all of the defined contacts of every case). 
Considerable risk assessment and modeling work has also been undertaken 
for deliberate releases of the communicable agent of smallpox. In this case, 
R0 values, historically, were considerably higher than for pneumonic 
plague (Gani and Leach, 2001; Eichner and Dietz, 2003). This led some 
published assessments to conclude that mass vaccination was likely to be 
required to bring outbreaks under control most efficiently and reduce the 
extent to which the initial release was amplified in the community by 
person-to-person transmission (e.g., Kaplan et al., 2002). However, as 
stated earlier, it is necessary in these pre-planning risk assessments to take 
into account the extent to which there might be adverse events to 
26
7.
Smallpox 

vaccination and balance this against the extent to which possible epidemics 
would amplify in the community with more targeted vaccination and 
public health strategies (including, active case finding, contact tracing and 
isolation measures). More recent studies have suggested that more targeted 
approaches might be more appropriate (Eichner, 2003, Kretzschmar et al.,
2004, Eubank et al., 2004). These depend to some extent on:
x
x
reliably inferred from historical data (Ferguson et al., 2003) 
x
Particularly with respect to, among a great number of other things, 
estimates of its transmissibility (R0) and the associated contact patterns 
that would be relevant in contemporary communities 
x
The extent to which infected individuals might be infectious prior to 
symptoms becoming obvious (Fraser et al., 2004) 
x
The extent to which public health measures, such as the isolation of 
cases and the monitoring of contacts, could be maintained (Kaplan 
It will therefore be important in the early stages of an outbreak (and 
data collection, analysis and modeling, which raises further concerns that 
are particular to public health risk assessments and the estimation of the 
likely burdens that might be posed by deliberate releases of biological 
agents.
In developing models for risk assessment, therefore, it is important to 
agree with those setting policy and drawing up plans the particular scope 
applications that are anticipated for different models. It is also necessary to 
ensure that the public health and other responses that will be considered 
are feasible – an “ideal” public health solution that is not actually workable 
is rarely going to be helpful. It is also important to ensure that infectious 
disease and public health experts agree with the parameterizations and 
this it is important to engage as wide a range of stakeholders in the risk 
27
The extent of the initial release (Kaplan, 2004)
et al., 2003, Kaplan, 2004) 
subsequently throughout it) to carefully monitor all aspects of its epi- 
Whether the epidemiology of smallpox in a modern population can be 
assumptions that are to go into modeling. It is also important that they 
are prepared to be flexible and responsive in the event of a real release 
demiology and progress. This will require carefully planned systems of 
of the individual problem(s) that needs to be addressed and the 
to carefully reassess previous planning in the light of incoming epi- 
demiological data and real-time data analysis and modeling. To achieve 
8.
Conclusions 
QUANTITATIVE RISK ASSESSMENTS FOR  BIOTERRORISM
www.ebook3000.com

S. LEACH 
level early on and maintained. This in itself can pose some interesting 
challenges because of the potential sensitivities associated with some of 
this work. 
Acknowledgments
The author wishes to acknowledge the work and support of colleagues in 
the Health Protection Agency (HPA) (especially at Centre for Emergency 
Preparedness and Response – CEPR and Centre for Infections – CfI) and 
key UK academic collaborators (especially at Warwick University and 
Imperial College), and particularly the risk assessment team at CEPR 
(particularly Dr. Ray Gani). Aspects of this work have been supported by 
funding through the UK Department of Health, the UK Health Protection 
Agency and the EC Health and Consumer Protection DG (DG SANCO). 
The views expressed in the publication are those of the authors and not 
necessarily those of the Department of Health, the HPA or DG SANCO. 
References
1.
Eichner M, Dietz K. Transmission potential of smallpox: estimates based on 
detailed data from an outbreak. Am J Epidemiol 2003; 158: 110–117. 
2.
Eichner M. Case isolation and contact tracing can prevent the spread of 
smallpox. Am J Epidemiol 2003; 158: 118–128. 
3.
Eubank S, Guclu H, Kumar VS, Marathe MV, Srinivasan A, Toroczkai Z, 
Wang N. Modelling disease outbreaks in realistic urban social networks. 
Nature 2004; 429: 180–184.
4.
Ferguson NM, Keeling MJ, Edmunds WJ, Gani R, Grenfell BT, Anderson 
RM, Leach S. Planning for smallpox outbreaks. Nature 2003; 425: 681–685. 
5.
Fraser C, Riley S, Anderson RM, Ferguson NM. Factors that make an 
infectious disease outbreak controllable. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2004; 101: 
6146–6151.
6.
Gani R, Leach S. Transmission potential of smallpox in contemporary 
populations. Nature 2001; 414: 748–751. 
7.
Gani R, Leach S. Epidemiologic determinants for modeling pneumonic 
plague outbreaks. Emerg Infect Dis 2004; 10: 608–614. 
28
assessment process as possible and recognize that an iterative process
is most likely to be necessary. An iterative process is also likely to be
of greatest benefit and involve not only risk assessment, but also close
linkages with risk management and communication. Indeed, to a con-
siderable extent these activities should ideally be integrated at some

8.
Kaplan EH, Craft DL, Wein LM. Emergency response to a smallpox attack: 
the case for mass vaccination. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2002; 99: 10935–
10940.
9.
Kaplan EH, Craft DL, Wein LM. Analyzing bioterror response logistics: the 
case of smallpox. Math Biosci 2003; 185: 33–72. 
10. Kaplan EH. Preventing second-generation infections in a smallpox bioterror 
attack. Epidemiology 2004; 15: 264–270. 
11. Kretzschmar M, van den Hof S, Wallinga J, van Wijngaarden J. Ring 
vaccination and smallpox control. Emerg Infect Dis 2004; 10: 832–841. 
12. Wein LM, Craft DL, Kaplan EH. Emergency response to an anthrax attack. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2003; 100: 4346–4351. 
29
QUANTITATIVE RISK ASSESSMENTS FOR  BIOTERRORISM
www.ebook3000.com

Following the events of September 11, 2001 and the subsequent anthrax 
mailings in the United States, the threat posed by bioterrorism has received 
renewed attention by governments across the globe. Though no large-scale 
attacks have occurred as of the date of this writing, several scenarios have 
been studied in detail, including deliberate releases of smallpox [1, 2], 
anthrax [3], plague [4], and botulinum [5], among others. While the 
specifics of these scenarios differ in terms of the dispersion mechanisms of 
the infectious agents and the resulting casualties that could result, all such 
analyses emphasize the importance of early detection and rapid response in 
mitigating the consequences of a bioterror attack. 
There have been many different suggestions to detect a bioterror attack, 
ranging from the use of biosensors [6] to syndromic surveillance [7], to 
screening blood donors [8], to case identification. Once an attack has been 
Yale School of Management 
Professor of Public Health 
Yale School of Medicine 
Professor of Engineering 
Yale Faculty of Engineering 
Haas School of Business
University of California, Berkeley 
SITUATIONAL AWARENESS IN A BIOTERROR
detected and the agent has been identified, however, the key concerns 
become establishing the scale of the attack and forecasting how casualties 
will emerge over time. Such forecasts can guide the allocation of response 
resources; for example, is it necessary to add “surge capacity” to hospitals 
in the impacted area or are existing facilities adequate for expected 
caseloads. The real-time aspect of this approach enables rapid reassessment 
1. 
Introduction
© 2007 Springer.
M.S. Green et al. (eds.), Risk Assessment and Risk Communication Strategies in Bioterrorism 
31
ATTACK VIA PROBABILITY MODELING
Preparedness, 31–44. 
William N and Marie A Beach Professor of Management Sciences 
Edward H. Kaplan
Assistant Professor of Finance 
Johan Walden

monitoring, assessment, and forecasting activities as situational awareness.
example.
Suppose that the first human case in a bioterror attack has just been 
observed, and that the agent involved has been determined. As more 
human cases are reported, it is critical to ascertain answers to two 
questions: how big was the attack (i.e., how many persons were infected); 
and when did it happen. The answers to these questions can then be used to 
create forecasts of future cases, which in turn can be used for emergency 
planning (e.g., is there sufficient hospital capacity to handle expected 
future cases, or is there a need for adding surge capacity). Estimates of the 
time and size of a bioterror attack also figure prominently in determining 
when the resulting outbreak has ended (i.e., when the expected number of 
future cases is very small compared to the estimated size of the outbreak). 
Additional situational awareness questions include establishing the 
location and spatial spread of an outbreak. Also, while this chapter will 
focus on techniques derived from observing human cases over time, one 
certainly could extend these ideas to attacks that are detected via 
biosensors, syndromic surveillance, or other means. 
E.H. KAPLAN AND J. WALDEN
This chapter illustrates the basic situational awareness problem with the 
using probability models that are simple enough to evaluate in an ordinary 
aid of a recently developed model applied to a hypothetical anthrax bioterror 
attack [9]. The intent is to introduce the sorts of analyses that are possible 
spreadsheet program such as Excel. Though some specific numerical 
assumptions will be made to provide a working example, the reader should 
focus on the nature of the information one could obtain from such methods 
rather than the specific numerical results that follow from the details of this 
sense that few cases remain to be uncovered). We refer to such real-time 
provides useful guidance for deciding when the outbreak has ended (in the 
of the situation as new caseload information arrives over time, and also 
In the example to be developed, an anthrax attack infecting 100 persons has 
occurred. How will those infected in the attack reveal themselves over time? 
The key assumption employed is that the probability distribution of the 
incubation time from infection through the onset of symptoms is known. 
The Situational Awareness Problem
2. 
An Anthrax Example and Attendant Assumptions
3. 
32
www.ebook3000.com

data associated with the Swerdlovsk accidental anthrax release and via 
maximum likelihood were able to fit a lognormal distribution with median 
11 days and dispersion 2 days to the incubation time data associated with
that outbreak. Figure 1 shows the lognormal probability density with the 
parameters stated above.
It is assumed that no interventions were launched prior to detecting the 
attack, which is reasonable: in the absence of any evidence of an attack, on 
what basis would one launch an intervention? However, while inter-
ventions might be launched once an attack has been detected (e.g., 
distribution of antibiotics to persons in the vicinity of the attack), it is 
further assumed that such interventions will not have any impact on the 
Figure 1. Probability density of anthrax incubation time. 
Probability Density of Anthrax Incubation Time
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0
10
20
30
40
50
Probability Density
Days After Infection
bution. For anthrax, Brookmeyer et al. [10] studied the incubation time 
occurrence of cases during the first several days of the outbreak (as these 
cases would be among persons with sufficiently advanced infections to 
render intervention ineffective). Anthrax being a noncontagious agent, 
there will be no need to account for secondary transmission in our 
illustrative example. More complicated models allowing for secondary and 
continuing transmission (e.g., as would be the case with smallpox) can also 
be constructed, though such extensions will not be pursued in this chapter. 
Cases will thus appear in a manner consistent with this probability distri- 
33
 SITUATIONAL AWARENESS IN A BIOTERROR ATTACK

The key insight that enables one to estimate the time and size of a bio- 
terror attack from case reporting data is this: if n persons were infected 
in the attack, then the time from the attack until the 1st, 2nd, 3rd, …, nth 
cases occur would be the order statistics from the incubation time 
distribution [11]. In particular, the time from the attack to the first 
observed case would correspond to the minimum of n independent 
incubation times (where the independence reasonably assumes that the 
progression of infection in any one individual has no influence on the 
progression of infection in any other individual). Thus, if one knew the size 
of the attack, one could estimate the time of the attack by working 
backwards from the time of the first observed case. 
Of course, the size of the attack is not known, but it is possible to 
quantify prior beliefs regarding the likelihood that attacks infecting different 
numbers of individuals could occur. A Bayesian approach formally accomp-
lishes this by postulating a prior probability distribution governing the size 
of the attack. Any such distribution should be diffuse to express our 
considerable ignorance over the likelihood that any one of a wide range of 
different attack sizes would occur. An attractive choice that satisfies this 
criterion and is also easy to work with is given by the log-uniform 
distribution – that is, a distribution where the logarithm of the attack size is 
taken to be uniform between zero (an attack size of unity) and the largest 
order-of-magnitude considered reasonable for an attack of this sort (for 
recall that it is assumed that the agent used has been determined; e.g., 
anthrax). This amounts to order-of-magnitude uncertainty: the chance that 
an attack infects a number in the tens is the same as the chance that an 
attack infects a number in the hundreds, thousands, or ten thousands. 
E.H. KAPLAN AND J. WALDEN
and timing of observed cases to date. Once armed with these conditional 
distributions, further probabilistic calculations enable a forecast of the number 
of cases expected in the future, as well as computation of the probability 
that at least a certain percentage of all persons infected in the attack have 
already been observed (which is useful in deciding when the outbreak has 
essentially ended). 
Once a prior distribution for the initial attack size has been assigned, it 
then becomes a straightforward probability exercise to, in real time as new 
case reports arrive, estimate the conditional (or posterior) probability 
distributions of the attack size and time via Bayes’ rule, given the number 
The formal probability arguments involved in this approach were 
presented in [9] and are summarized in the appendix of this chapter for the 
technical reader. To show how such a model could be used in an actual 
Basic Ideas
4.
34
www.ebook3000.com

bioterror attack, we return to our anthrax example and consider what might 
happen over the course of a single outbreak. Note that all of the calculations 
involved in this example were performed using an Excel spreadsheet, 
indicating the technical ease with which the models can be implemented [9]. 
Imagine that an anthrax attack occurs that infects 100 persons. The time 
of Figure 1. To obtain a specific example, 100 incubation times were 
randomly selected from this probability distribution and ordered to create 
the “actual” occurrence of cases over time (as reported on a daily basis) 
shown in Figure 2. Using the probability models proposed, it is possible to 
estimate the conditional probability distribution of the number infected in 
the attack given the cases observed to date since the detection of the attack. 
Figures 3–7 show this distribution having observed all cases through days 
2, 5, 10, 20, and 50, respectively. From Figure 2, one can see that a total of 
8, 25, 59, 80, and 100 cases were observed as of these dates. Note how the 
uncertainty in the attack size distribution disappears over time as more 
cases are reported, that is, how the probability densities increasingly place 
most of their weight on attack sizes in the vicinity of (the true value of ) 
100 as more information is collected. This illustrates how the model is able 
to “learn” from the data (and via the incubation time distribution) over time. 
Cumulative Cases:
Actual (dots) and Forecast from End of Day 5 (dashed), 
Day 10 (solid)
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Days From First Case
Cumulative Cases
Figure 2. Cumulative actual and forecasted anthrax cases over time in the 
simulated outbreak. 
5. 
A Simulated Example
35
 SITUATIONAL AWARENESS IN A BIOTERROR ATTACK
from infection to symptoms follows the lognormal incubation time density 

Figure 3. Attack size probability distribution 2 days after seeing the first case 
(Eight cases observed in total). 
Posterior Distribution of Initial Attack Size
0
0.002
0.004
0.006
0.008
0.01
0.012
0.014
0
50
100
150
200
250
Initial Attack Size
Probability
E.H. KAPLAN AND J. WALDEN
Figure 4. Attack size probability distribution 5 days after seeing the first case (25 
cases observed in total). 
Posterior Distribution of Initial Attack Size
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
0.025
0.03
0.035
0.04
0
50
100
150
200
250
Initial Attack Size
Probability
36
www.ebook3000.com

Posterior Distribution of Initial Attack Size
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.09
0
50
100
150
200
250
Initial Attack Size
Probability
cases observed in total). 
Figure 5. Attack size probability distribution 10 days after seeing the first case (59 
Posterior Distribution of Initial Attack Size
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
0.14
0.16
0.18
0
50
100
150
200
250
Initial Attack Size
Probability
cases observed in total). 
Figure 6. Attack size probability distribution 20 days after seeing the first case (80 
37
 SITUATIONAL AWARENESS IN A BIOTERROR ATTACK

Figure 7. Attack size probability distribution 50 days after seeing the first case 
(100 cases observed in total). 
Posterior Distribution of Initial Attack Size
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0
50
100
150
200
250
Initial Attack Size
Probability
E.H. KAPLAN AND J. WALDEN
While Figures 3–7 reveal that considerable “learning” occurs over the 
course of this simulated outbreak, it is interesting that the mean attack size 
(a point estimate as it were) computed from these distributions as new 
information arrives over time is quite stable. Figure 8 plots the mean attack 
size as estimated over time from the updated probability distributions, and 
shows that the point estimates obtained do indeed hover closely about the 
true value of 100. One would expect accurate estimates once most of those 
infected in the attack have progressed to symptoms, but Figure 8 shows 
that good results are obtained much earlier. 
Considerably less information is gained regarding the timing of the 
attack. Figures 9 and 10 report the probability distribution of the time of 
the attack as measured in days prior to observing the first case after days 2 
and 50 of the outbreak. In both cases the bulk of the probability locates the 
attack to have occurred between 1 and 3 days before the first case was 
observed. The information gained from day 2 to day 50 essentially rules 
out the possibility that the attack occurred more than 3 days prior to the 
date of the first case. 
38
www.ebook3000.com

Figure 8. Expected (mean) attack size as estimated over time from detection of the 
outbreak from the first observed case. 
Estimated Attack Size Over Time
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
0
10
20
30
40
50
Days From First Case
Estimated Attack Size
Figure 9. Probability distribution of the time of attack (measured as days before 
observing the first case) 2 days after seeing the first case (Eight cases observed in 
total).
Posterior Distribution of Time of Attack
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
0.14
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
Time of Attack (Days Before First Case Observed)
Probability
39
 SITUATIONAL AWARENESS IN A BIOTERROR ATTACK

Armed with the updated probability distributions of the attack size and 
time at any point during the outbreak, it is straightforward to forecast the 
E.H. KAPLAN AND J. WALDEN
Figure 10. Probability distribution of the time of attack (measured as days before 
observing the first case) 50 days after seeing the first case (100 cases observed in 
total).
Posterior Distribution of Time of Attack
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
Time of Attack (Days Before First Case Observed)
Probability
6.  
accurate than the forecasts from day 10 (at least through the first 24 days 
of the outbreak) is specific to the example simulated and should not be 
interpreted as meaning that earlier forecasts will outperform later ones in 
general. The key point, however, is that the forecasts provide an early view 
of how those infected in the attack will reveal themselves over time, 
enabling appropriate planning for care and treatment to ensue early in the 
outbreak.
presents forecasts created 10 days post-detection. Both these forecasts 
provide sufficiently accurate pictures of downstream cases of infection to 
be useful for planning purposes. That the forecasts from day 5 are more 
occurrence of future cases. Figure 2 reports two such forecasts along with 
the simulated number of cases observed over time. The forecasts created 5 
days after the attack appeared as a dashed curve, while the solid curve 
Thus far the focus has been on estimating the time and size of a bioterror 
attack in order to predict future caseloads. However, whether or not to 
declare that an outbreak has ended is also a crucial decision. Brookmeyer 
and You [12] proposed a statistical hypothesis test based on the spacing 
7. 
Is the Outbreak Over?
40
between observed cases for deciding whether an outbreak has ended. An 
alternative approach follows directly from the Bayesian principles employed  
Forecasting Future Cases
www.ebook3000.com

outbreak (and for any value of D). For example, one can compute the proba-
bility that at least half of all cases have already occurred as of the date of 
computation, or if at least 80%, 95%, or even 100% of all cases have 
observed is referred to as the D-level outbreak completion probability. 
Figure 11 plots D-level outbreak completion probabilities for D = 0.5, 
0.75, 0.95, and 1 for the data in our simulated anthrax attack. Note that one 
is about 80% certain that at least half of all cases have occurred after day 
10 of the outbreak (and indeed, 59 cases already occurred by day 10, 
which is more than 50% of 100, the true number infected in the outbreak). 
It of course takes longer for the outbreak completion probabilities to 
approach unity as D increases; it requires 80 days and 100 observed cases 
(which in the example constitute all of the cases that could occur) to be 
occurred. The probability that at least 100D% of all cases have been 
at least 100D% of all cases have been observed at any point during the 
in the present chapter. Specifically, one can calculate the probability that
Figure 11. Į-level outbreak completion probabilities over time. 
95% certain that the outbreak is over (i.e., the D-level outbreak completion 
probability equals 95% for D = 1 only after 80 days). The method is thus 
appropriately conservative when asked if the outbreak is truly over. 
Outbreak Completion Probability
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0
20
40
60
80
100
Days From First Case
Probability
α = 1
α = 0.95
α = 0.75
α = 0.5
41
This chapter has provided a simple example showing how one can use the 
probability distribution governing the incubation time from infection 
through symptoms for a bioterror agent with observed cases in real time to 
estimate the time and size of a bioterror attack, forecast the number of 
8. 
Summary
downstream cases for planning purposes, and assess over time the extent to 
 SITUATIONAL AWARENESS IN A BIOTERROR ATTACK

which the outbreak is totally or partially complete. The computations 
required can be carried out in an Excel spreadsheet [9], as was all of the 
computing for the example presented. 
While it is hoped that that this chapter serves to convince the reader of 
the value of probability modeling in bioterror preparedness and response, 
the methods and example presented are not the final word on this subject. 
This chapter has only concerned itself with a noncontagious bioterror 
agent such as anthrax. Attack with a contagious agent such as smallpox, 
plague, or tularemia would require additional modeling to account for 
continuing transmission from those initially infected; deconvolution 
methods similar to the back calculation of human immunodeficiency virus 
(HIV) incidence from acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) 
E.H. KAPLAN AND J. WALDEN
[10]). In this instance, it would be possible to augment the modeling 
approach suggested to account for uncertainty in the incubation time 
distribution, and to statistically update this distribution and hence learn in 
real time as those infected present themselves as cases. However, although 
it is not difficult in principle, loss of precision governing the incubation 
time distribution would translate to considerable loss in precision 
regarding the forecasts of downstream cases. 
Finally, the model proposed based all inferences over time on observed 
cases of infection, yet as noted earlier there are several proposals, such as 
the use of biosensors and/or syndromic surveillance systems meant to 
speed the detection and general assessment of bioterror events. It remains 
to integrate models of the form reported in this chapter with those other 
more elaborate detection and reporting systems; doing so would be a major 
advance in the provision of decision support to those concerned with 
managing the consequences of a bioterror attack. 
reporting data would be required [13]. The approach has also assumed that 
the incubation time probability distribution is known, but while infor-
mation is available for many feared bioterror agents [14], it might be that 
for either new or modified viral or bacterial infections, the data observed in 
the outbreak itself becomes the best information describing incubation 
times (as was the case with the accidental release of anthrax in Swerdlovsk 
42
References
the case for mass vaccination. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2002; 99:10935–
10940.
2. Halloran ME, Longini IM, Nizam A, Yang Y. Containing bioterrorist smallpox. 
Science 2003; 298:1428–1432. 
3.
Wein LM, Craft DL, Kaplan EH. Emergency response to an anthrax attack.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2003; 100:4346–4351. 
1.
Kaplan EH, Craft DL, Wein LM. Emergency response to a smallpox attack: 
www.ebook3000.com

botulinum toxin in milk. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2005; 102:9984–9989. 
6.
Estacio, PL. Bio-Watch Overview. Washington, DC: Department of 
Homeland Security, 2004. Available at: https://www.nlectc.org/training/ 
nij2004/estacio.pdf
7. Das D, Metzger K, Heffernan R, Balter S, Weiss D, Mostashari F. New York 
City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene. Monitoring over-the-counter 
medication sales for early detection of disease outbreaks – New York City. 
MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2005; 54(Suppl):41–46. 
10. Brookmeyer R, Blades N, Hugh-Jones M, Henderson DA. The statistical 
analysis of truncated data: application to the Swerdlovsk anthrax outbreak. 
Biostatistics 2001; 2:233–247. 
11. David HA. Order statistics. New York: Wiley, 1970. 
12. Brookmeyer R, You X. A hypothesis test for the end of a common source 
outbreak. Biometrics 2005 (online early, doi:10.1111/j.1541-0420.2005.00421.x). 
13. Brookmeyer R, Gail MH. AIDS Epidemiology: A Quantitative Approach. 
New York: Oxford University Press, 1994. 
14. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Biological agents/diseases: category 
agentlist-category.asp#a
Appendix
This appendix summarizes the formulas used in the models of this chapter. 
For greater detail please consult [9]. The analysis centers on two random 
variables, the number infected in the attack N, and the time of the attack 
8.
Kaplan EH, Patton CA, FitzGerald WP, Wein LM. Detecting bioterror attacks 
by screening blood donors: a best-case analysis. Emerg Infect Dis 2003; 
9:909–914.
9.
Walden J, Kaplan EH. Estimating time and size of bioterror attack. Emerg 
Infect Dis 2004; 10:1202–1205. 
A. Atlanta (GA): The Centers, 2003. Available at: http://www.bt.cdc.gov/agent/ 
43
4.
Gani R, Leach S. Epidemiologic determinants for modeling pneumonic 
plague outbreaks. Emerg Infect Dis 2004; 10:608–614. 
5.
Wein LM, Liu Y. Analyzing a bioterror attack on the food supply: the case of 
(measured as time before the first observed case) A. The probability 
distribution of the incubation time from infection through symptoms is 
assumed known, and in particular the probability that an incubation time 
exceeds x is denoted by the survivor distribution S(x).
Suppose that the attack size N = n. Since the attack is detected by the 
first observed case, the probability density of the time of attack given N =n
is given by
,...
3,2,1
,0
for  
  
)
(
1
 
!

n
a
a
f
n
(1)
f (a | n)  nS (a)
 SITUATIONAL AWARENESS IN A BIOTERROR ATTACK

If the prior probability distribution for the attack size is given by p(n) = 
Pr{N = n}, then the joint probability distribution of the attack time and size 
is given by 
,...
3,2,1
,0
for  
  )
(
)
(
)
(
)
,
(
1
 
!
u
 

n
a
a
f
a
nS
n
p
n
a
f
n
 (2) 
E.H. KAPLAN AND J. WALDEN

 

¿
¾
½
¯
®
­

¿
¾
½
¯
®
­



 
k
j
j
k
n
a
S
t
a
f
a
S
a
S
k
n
n
n
a
2
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)!
(
)!
1
(
)
,
,
|
(
W
W
t
L
 
(3) 
The joint probability of observing N = n, A = a, and the data actually 
seen then equals
1
!
( , , | )
( )
(
)
(
)  for  
0,
,
1,
2...
(
)!
k
n k
j
j
n
a n
p n
S a
f a
t
a
n
k k
k
n
k
W
W

 
 


!
 




t
J
 
(4) 
Bayes’ rule then implies that the conditional probability distribution of 
the attack time and size given the data observed up to time Ĳ after the 
attack was detected is given by 
Now, suppose that by time Ĳ, an additional k–1 cases have been 
observed beyond the initial case observed at time 0 that signaled the
(days before observing the first case), the probability of observing these
additional cases at times t2, t3 … tk
t1 = 0 denotes the time
t
Ĳ
outbreak. Conditional on the attack size N = n and the attack time A = 
(where
at which the first case is observed) is given by 
44
1
0
1
!
( )
(
)
(
)
(
)!
( ,
| , )
  for 
0,
,
1,...
!
( )
(
)
(
) 
(
)!
k
n k
j
j
k
i k
j
u
i k
j
n
p n
S a
f a
t
n
k
f a n
a
n
k k
i
p i
S u
f u
t
du
i
k
W
W
W

 
f
f

 
 
 



 
!
 





¦

³
t
 
(5) 
All of the quantities of interest can be computed from Equation (5). For 
example the Į-outbreak completion probabilities can be computed as 
¬
¼
¦ ³
 
f
 
 
t
D
W
W
D
/
0
)
,
|
,
(
}
,
|
Pr{
k
k
n
a
da
n
a
f
N
k
t
t
                 for 0 <ҏ D  < 1 
(6) 
Details for computing forecasts of future cases and other quantities can 
be found in [9]. 
www.ebook3000.com

and Forecasting at Tel-Aviv University, Israel 
Non-state actors have caused significant economic and psychological 
damage using chemical and biological agents. Fortunately, such events 
have been rare; none very successful, and all have resulted in few 
casualties. Nonconventional weapons in the hand of terrorists are more 
properly termed “weapons of mass impact” rather than weapons of “mass 
casualties.”
Most analysts perceive bioterrorism as highly probable, easy to achieve, 
and likely to cause a huge number of casualties. The Biothreat picture has 
been fueled by “hysterical” predictions of natural outbreaks of very deadly 
diseases such as smallpox, Ebola, and Marburg, and threat assessments 
that tend to the extreme. The reality is that terrorism has achieved more 
with conventional means; terrorists apparently question the value of 
bioterrorism. The seemingly incongruous terrorist behavior has a strong 
rationale. A rigorous technical evaluation (Sharan et al., 2000) uncovers 
the difficulties terrorists have trying to achieve a biological weapon (BW) 
capability.
The present paper gives a balanced picture of the bioterror threat and 
discusses the impediments to non-state actors attempting to achieve this 
capability.
Inclusion of BWs in a terrorist arsenal reduces to two questions: (1) can 
the weapons be acquired from a nation state – legally or otherwise or (2) 
can the terrorist group itself develop the weapons. The issue has been 
discussed extensively. The first is a political issue; development is a technical 
matter.
Most analysts seek analogies to determine feasibility for such weapon 
© 2007 Springer.
acquisition and reach conclusions based on appreciation of the technical
45
THE BIOTERRORISM THREAT
M.S. Green et al. (eds.), Risk Assessment and Risk Communication Strategies in Bioterrorism 
Preparedness, 45–54. 
capabilities of industrialized countries. Such analyses commonly foresee 
 
1. 
Threat Assessment
The Interdisciplinary Center for Technological Analysis  
Yair Sharan

Y. SHARAN 
nonconventional weapons as attainable by terrorist groups and their use 
likely in the future. Those assessments also forecast mass casualties. 
This chapter develops a new perspective for assessing future terrorist 
capabilities. Our analysis is consistent with past Network Centric Warfare 
(NCW) experiences – particularly the terror events in Japan in the early 
1990s and the US September 11 events. It presents a more realistic 
appreciation of future capabilities and effects. 
Our objective is to determine whether a terrorist group can develop a 
capability through its own efforts. Our approach identifies and analyzes the 
technical requirements needed to develop BW and establishes whether the 
technology is within the grasp of a terrorist organization. We find some 
elements in the BW development process currently doable, some only 
possible after a huge investment, and others not likely to be mastered in 
the foreseeable future. 
An advantage of our approach is that the focus on separate technical 
steps allows identification of critical thresholds, telltales, and formulation 
of proactive and reactive defense measures. 
Figure 1 illustrates a BW development program. It breaks the develop-
ment process into seven steps beginning with acquisition of the basic 
knowledge to the actual weapon use. Specific steps include operation 
choice, acquisition of critical equipment and weapon components, manu-
facture, weaponization of the agent, storage and transport of agents and the 
weapon during manufacture, and finally weapon use in the field. The 
process is highly visible in less-developed countries and more easily 
hidden in a highly industrialized country. 
We have applied parallel versions of Figure 1 to the development of 
chemical, nuclear, and radiological weapons. To test the methodology, we 
recruited a highly trained technical chemist with an MSc degree (Sharan 
et al., 2000) and tasked him to design a chemical weapon, identify in detail 
the equipment needed and production protocols, and describe all telltales 
that would expose such a clandestine program. The exercise underscored the 
difficulties in translating theory to weapons. Moreover, it highlighted the 
dangers involved in producing and handling lethal materials. Manu-
facturing techniques and dangers are never fully discussed in the open 
literature. Mistakes are generally catastrophic. This kind of Gedanken
experiment resulted in weapons of low quality and pointed out critical steps 
46
2. 
General Analysis
www.ebook3000.com

and thus guidelines for detection and defense. The same principles apply to 
nuclear and BWs. 
The first step is for terrorists to develop a knowledge base about different 
agents, their properties and potential danger to people. It is widely held 
that a simple literature and Internet search are sufficient and a capability 
could be easily achieved. This is an exaggeration. The distance from theory 
to application in this case is enormous even if the literature is complete in 
all details which it is not (Meselson, 1999). 
Biological agents can be selected according to several considerations such as 
toxicity, resistance, disease contagiousness, their lethal versus incapacitating 
Figure 1. Technical steps for terrorist development of nonconventional weapons. 
Terrorist Knowledge Base
Agent Properties
Weapon Effects
Operation &
Agent Selection
Acquisition of Key
Components
Manufacture
Weaponization
Storage and
Transportation
Weapon Use
Agent Dispersion
47
3. 
Knowledge Gathering
4. 
Agent Selection
 THE BIOTERRORISM THREAT

Y. SHARAN 
properties, rapidity of effect, and available countermeasures. This is true 
when the terrorists have all the information and all the available means to 
produce, test, and deliver any agent. This assumption is not valid for 
terrorists with limited resources. It is more reasonable to assume that 
selection reduces to which agents are the easiest to manufacture or to 
obtain.
The main candidates for biological terrorism are likely to be anthrax, 
plague, glanders, tularemia, smallpox, T2 mycotoxin, Q fever, and botulism. 
All those agents have been extensively researched, several weaponized, 
and some (despite treaty) remain in arsenals. Some biological agents may 
be aerosolized and dispersed over large area; some agents and some 
diseases such as smallpox or plague spread person to person. The ability to 
infect beyond the primary exposures is extremely worrisome in a mobile 
global community. 
Anthrax spores are the logical first choice. The organism is easily 
produced in large quantities and its dried form is extremely stable. It has 
been produced and weaponized by different labs and its characteristics are 
well-known. It is lethal for unvaccinated people and mass vaccination is 
problematic. Serial shots are required for complete immunization and this 
requires complicated logistical preparations. 
Smallpox is highly contagious and infectious among unvaccinated 
people and no specific treatment exists. Because routine vaccination 
stopped 20 years ago, only a small fraction of the population has immunity. 
Smallpox could be introduced by terrorists that illegally obtain agents from 
repositories in the United States, Russia, or other unregistered sources. 
Plague is attractive to terrorists, because it may continue to spread in the 
population after the initial aerosol dissemination. Plague is also easily 
spread by infected vectors. Plague is however unstable at high temperature 
and in sunlight. In climates similar to Israel or California the spread 
effectiveness is low. 
Tularemia is another disease that could be chosen by terrorists to be 
disseminated during an attack, especially because it is a lethal agent and is 
infectious at lower dosage than anthrax. It is a persistent lethal contaminant 
and viable for weeks in water. 
Two toxins that could be selected by terrorists are those that cause 
botulism and mycotoxins. Botulinum toxin is the most toxic compound 
known to man and readily extracted from Bacillus and Clostridium botulinum
cultures. There is evidence that T2 mycotoxin was used in the past. 
48
www.ebook3000.com

There are several modes of acquisition of biological agents that could be 
used by terrorists: 
x The primitive way – using a natural contagious source (e.g., ill people, 
corpses, and endemic sites) 
x Self-production after mastering the needed technologies 
x Theft of agents from research labs 
x Theft of biological munitions held by military forces 
x Receipt of ready-made BWs from a sponsor state 
We concentrate on self-production or collection from natural sources.
Biological agents are very much correlated to modern microbiology. 
The development of biological agents as weapons has paralleled advances 
in basic and applied microbiology. This includes the basic knowledge that 
can enable identification of virulent pathogens suitable for aerosol delivery, 
and industrial-scale fermentation processes that produce large quantities of 
pathogens and toxins. 
Any modestly sophisticated pharmaceutical or fermentation industry 
with mass production capability for growing cultures used in commercial 
production of yeast, yogurt, beer, antibiotics, and vaccines may be a 
candidate – If accessed by terrorists – for producing pathogenic 
microorganisms. Almost all the equipment needed for the production of 
pathogens and toxins is dual-use and available on the international market. 
The potential for hiding illegal activities under the cover of legitimate 
production is real and worrisome. Small quantities of botulinum toxin, for 
example, is used as a drug for treatment of disabling diseases and for 
cosmetic applications. 
In a short time, a lab could be cleared of all suspicious material and look 
like any medical or pharmaceutical research lab. (Contamination however 
is likely to remain and be detectable.) Sterile work and even mass 
production of organisms can be done on a relatively small scale. A seed 
culture of anthrax bacteria could be grown to mass quantities in weeks. 
Most of the required production techniques are described in textbooks and 
journals. Production though is extremely hazardous, and cleanup – while 
straightforward – is strenuous and requires rigorous safety protocols.
Advanced biological technologies have spread all over the world. There 
is a large pool of highly trained “bio” personal, and methods for culturing 
large quantities of bacteria are well known. “It is impossible to tell whether 
biological research is intended for purposes of warfare until an actual agent 
is used. Some agents that can be used for biological warfare are also used 
49
5. 
Acquisition
 THE BIOTERRORISM THREAT

Y. SHARAN 
for peaceful purposes. There is nothing that is so deeply dual-use” 
(Lederberg, 1997). 
While national and international conventions restrict availability of 
agents, the system is not foolproof. For example, in March 1995, Larry 
Harris, a microbiologist and a member of the Aryan Nations used a forged 
letterhead to order samples of Yersinia pestis, the organism that causes 
plague, from the American type culture collection (ATCC) in Rockville, 
Maryland. He was caught only when it was found that he did not have the 
special equipment needed to handle the organisms. The anthrax used in the 
envelope events in the United States after 9/11 apparently involved weapon 
grade agent. 
Sites in Africa, for example, where frequent outbreaks of contagious 
disease have occurred could be of high interest to terrorist groups seeking 
starter cultures. Some events are shown in Table 1. 
TABLE 1. The African supermarket – recent outbreaks in Africa (From Dr. Julius 
Julian Lutwama, Viruses in Uganda)
Year 
Disease 
Country 
1992–1993 
Yellow fever 
Kenya 
1995 
Ebola 
Congo 
1998
Rift Valley fever 
Kenya, Uganda 
1999–2000 
Marbury 
Congo 
2000–2001 
Ebola 
Uganda 
2003 
Yellow fever 
Sudan 
2004 
Ebola 
Sudan 
Undergraduate microbiology skills can be used to isolate B. anthracis
from cattle, where the disease is endemic. Using this as the starter culture, 
in a few days a terrorist could brew several kilograms of crude slurry 
containing billions of spores in a 100-L vessel. Drying the slurry for dry 
agent production is tricky, though not impossible. Freeze drying, in which 
material is frozen and put under vacuum to remove water, is one option. 
Grinding the (slurry) powder into micron-size particles is a key challenge, 
mainly because of the risk of contamination and infection. A much easier 
approach could be to use a wet slurry agent, which when applied, will 
result in smaller numbers of casualties.
The Aum Shinrikyo cult that released the chemical agent Sarin in the 
Tokyo subway had a surprisingly well-developed technical infrastructure 
for chemical and of BWs (Kaplan, 1997). This included front companies 
for purchasing materials and equipment, well-equipped laboratories and 
50
www.ebook3000.com

extensive chemical and biological manufacturing facilities. They had more 
than 40,000 members and one billion dollars in assets. The cult had a large 
BWs program. As early as 1990, they were trying to aerosolize botulinum 
toxin. They attended unsuccessfully to harvest bacteria in Africa and in an 
expedition to Zaire they tried to obtain samples of the Ebola virus. So far, 
the substantial Aum program has not resulted in a BW arsenal. Cases in 
which anthrax was released in Tokyo caused no casualties as the agent was 
far below weapon standard (despite a reasonably effective dispersion). The 
difficulty to realize a BW capability is further shown in the case of Iraq. 
Evidence from the Iraq BW program shows the complexity of producing 
and weaponizing BW agents. Contrary to their successful chemical weapon 
program, the Iraqis failed to produce effective BWs. In the light of the 
relatively non-impressive results, it is probable that for non-state groups it 
will be even harder to succeed. 
In conclusion, several routes of acquisition are open for terrorists to try 
and produce bio-agents by themselves. Some routes can be blocked by an 
effective international system, which denies access to available sources by 
unauthorized people. Better inspection of relevant labs and industries will 
also help. We expect that availability of agents in the future to terrorists 
will be more difficult and self-development and production will remain 
very problematic. 
Special training and equipment is needed to store and transport biological 
agents safely. This is a severe impediment to most terrorist groups. Freeze-
dried storage is one preferred way to store biological agents for a long 
time. However freeze-drying an agent is not trivial, and more resources 
and skills, than those generally available to terrorists are needed. 
There are several means by which terrorists could try to deliver BW 
agents:
x
Dispersal via air within enclosed or open areas 
x
Transmission through infected vectors such as fleas, ticks, flies, or rats 
x
Contamination of foodstuffs or liquids at their source or during 
production or distribution 
BW agents are nonvolatile particulates disseminated either as liquid 
slurry, or a dry powder of freeze-dried organisms or toxins in aerosols. 
Possible delivery systems range in complexity and effectiveness from 
51
6. 
Storage and Transportation
7. 
Weapons Use and Methods of Delivery
 THE BIOTERRORISM THREAT

Y. SHARAN 
simple agricultural sprayers, up to specialized cluster warheads, carried by 
ballistic missiles.
A key factor in producing large-scale respiratory infections is the ability 
to generate a stable aerosol cloud of suspended microscopic droplets, 
containing from one to thousands of bacterial or viral particles. Effective 
respiratory infection of man requires dispersal of particles smaller than 10 Pm.
Small particles settle in the lower respiratory tract while larger particles are 
filtered or expelled by the body, although they still contaminate the environ-
ment creating a secondary health threat. 
Dissemination of biological agents using conventional munitions seems 
a simply dispersion technique, but it has certain technological difficulties 
and limitations because most biological agents are sensitive to explosive 
environments and further more are destroyed by environmental stresses 
such as ultraviolet (UV) radiation, humidity, and oxidation. 
Weather is another important consideration. High wind speeds tend to 
break up aerosol clouds. Rain or snow scavenges most aerosols from the 
atmosphere. Inversion conditions and low wind speeds (5–20 km/h) which 
occur more often during nighttime and in early morning hours are ideal 
conditions for biological agent dispersal.
Aerosols also may be produced by industrial sprayers with nozzles 
modified to generate smaller drop sizes. The aerosol could be dispersed 
along a line using an airplane or boat traveling upwind of the intended 
target, or from point sources using stationary sprayers. More sophisticated 
delivery systems could use missiles, dispensing agent-containing bomblets 
in areas upwind of a target, or spraying the agent from flying platforms 
(aircraft or unmanned aerial vehicles [UAVs]). 
A commercial aerosol disperser mounted on a truck or a car, could be 
used by terrorists to attack a city with biological agents. A quick Internet 
search reveals a wide range of agricultural sprayers and foggers. The 
quality of the equipment is surprisingly high and relatively cheap. A 
typical sprayer weighs 6 kg, costs about $350, and disperses particles in 
the range of 7–30 P. Such equipment could achieve efficiencies of 10% 
and more (some claim even 50%) based on inhalation of droplets or 
particles of diameter less than 10 Pm.
Although manufacture of a BW capable of causing mass casualties is 
not trivial; the effective delivery of a BW agent by terrorists is most likely 
even more problematic. 
Many analysts point out that biological agents could be used to poison 
reservoirs supplying drinking water. Many of the highly lethal biological 
agents are not effectively transmitted by water and are neutralized by 
chlorination and water purification processes. Contamination of a municipal 
52
water supply requires compensation for a significant dilution and hence 
www.ebook3000.com

very large quantities of biological agent are needed. So much so that 
terrorists would find acquisition, transport, and dumping of such mass 
quantifies far too difficult. Israel’s water network is well protected by 
systems which would “detect” such hazardous events. 
Food is vulnerable to contamination by terrorists. Biological agents 
could be inserted into production lines turning out packaged prepared food 
or in bulk foodstuff or beverages. However, past events like the poisoning 
of Israeli oranges or the dioxin food contamination in Belgium show that 
casualties are limited and that the health system is quick to respond to such 
events. The main effect is extreme public anxiety. 
Because biological agents are lethal in very small quantities, many sources 
in the literature estimate millions of casualties as a result of a BW attack 
on an unprotected population. However, such estimates are often based 
simply on the minimum lethal dose under optimal dispersion conditions. 
Lethality figures drop sharply, when factors such as agent concentration, 
population density, and practical dispersion characteristics under realistic 
conditions are taken into account.
Analyses (Purver, 1995) show that 50 kg of anthrax spores introduced 
into the air-conditioning system of a domed stadium could infect 70,000–
80,000 spectators within 1 h. 
OTA (1992) estimated the casualties from delivery of anthrax spores by 
a Scud-type missile and dispersal by a single aircraft. In the first case, 30 kg 
of the agent caused 30,000–100,000 casualties, and 50 kg in the second 
mode caused 420,000–1,400,000 casualties. Those calculations use simple 
dispersion models and assume a “medium” case of overcast weather and 
moderate winds. On clear windy days the estimated number of casualties 
would be lower; on clear calm nights, the estimated number of casualties 
would be higher. Based on such estimates, OTA concluded that pound for 
pound, BWs such as anthrax, plague, tularemia, and botulism could exceed 
the killing power of nuclear weapons. We note though that ideal dispersion 
conditions rarely persist long enough to achieve the situations required to 
support those casualty estimates and that (despite the low weights) 
extremely large amounts of agent are being deployed. Moreover, the 
calculation assumes an agent quality and amount that is most unlikely that 
a terrorist group to immobilize and deploy. 
We developed four basic scenarios (Sharan et al., 2000) for realistic esti-
mates of casualties and size of the area affected by a terrorist biological 
53
11
attack. The agent – consistent with a clandestine ad hoc effort – is a crude 
solution of cultivated anthrax, with a concentration of 10  spores/L. T his 
8. 
Casualty Assessment
 THE BIOTERRORISM THREAT

Y. SHARAN 
concentration represents that achievable by terrorists with little experience 
and low-tech lab or production equipment. For all risk estimates, we 
assume that the effective dose is 104 spores (inhaled). The breathing rate is 
fixed at 15 L/min corresponding to people occupied in mild office activities. 
An attack on a closed theater seating 300 people results in exposure of 
most is virtually people in high dosages ranging from a few to tens of ED50
depending on the effectiveness of the disseminator. An attack in an open 
area in which anthrax is dispersed using point source explosion results in 
far fewer casualties. 
A detailed simulation (Sharan et al., 2000) of a container of 10–24 kg of 
liquid anthrax exploding in the center of Tel-Aviv with 1% dispersion 
efficiency would cause between 10 and 90 casualties comparable to attack 
with conventional explosives. More casualties are expected if that amount 
of anthrax would be continuously dispersed from a fixed sprayer in a 
congested area. The number of casualties can reach several thousands 
depending on the weather conditions and time of attack. 
In our work, we have directed the nonconventional weapon production 
process to realistically assess the threat of bioterrorism. In contrast to 
“conventional wisdom”, we found that development and use of BWs is far 
from trivial and in most cases presents almost insurmountable obstacles to 
terrorist groups. Redirect estimates of casualties resulting from an attack 
by bioterrorists show in several scenarios effect of the order of a 
conventional event questioning the wisdom of use of such weapons. This 
does not reduce the need for vigilance and precaution, but does offer a 
more realistic assessment of risk. 
References
1. Kaplan DE. The cult at the end of the world. New York: Crown Publishers, 
1997.
2. 
Lederberg J. Infectious disease and biological weapons: prophylaxis and 
mitigation. JAMA 1997; 278:435. 
3. 
Meselson M. The problem of biological weapons. Private communication, 
April 1999. 
4. 
Sharan Y, Small R, et al. Non-conventional terrorism. June 2000, 191 p. 
E/107.
54
5. 
OTA. Technology against terrorism: structuring security. United States 
Congress, Office of Technology Assessment, Washington, DC, 1992. 
6. 
Purver R. Chemical and biological terrorism – the threat according to the 
open literature. Canadian Security Intelligence Service, 1995. 
http://www.csis-scrs.gc.ca/eng/miscdocs/purve.html
9. 
Conclusions
www.ebook3000.com

The 9/11 attack in the United States was unequivocally a formative event 
in the history of modern international terrorism, with a major effect on the 
characteristics of terrorist activity in the international arena.1 The anthrax 
attacks in the United States following the 9/11 attack, albeit not considered 
part of the Global Jihad terror campaign, aggravated the fear that we were 
at the beginning of a new era and in the midst of an all out war by all 
means available. Indeed what we have heard after the 9/11 and even more 
so following the counterattack by the US coalition in Afghanistan and later 
in Iraq is willingness to breach all the taboos, by at least some elements 
within the Global Jihad camp. Given the chance and means they will use 
every weapon, including weapon of mass destruction, they can lay their 
hands on, in order to badly hurt their declared enemies headed by the 
United States.
1
Center, 2002, p. 15 (Hebrew); English version forthcoming in June 2003: The 
globalization of terror: the challenge of al-Qaeda and the response of the inter-
national community. New Jersey: Transaction Publishers, Rutgers University Press,
Associate Researcher for INSS (Institute for National 
Security Studies). 
www.LABAT.co.il
 Yoram Schweitzer, Shaul Shay. An expected surprise: the September 11th 
attack and its ramifications. Herzliya: Mifalot Publishing. The Interdisciplinary 
pp. 49–52. 
CHANGE OF MIND-SET FOLLOWING 9/11:
RESORT TO WEAPONS OF MASS DESTRUCTION
© 2007 Springer.
M.S. Green et al. (eds.), Risk Assessment and Risk Communication Strategies in Bioterrorism 
55
Preparedness, 55–66. 
THE FEW THAT ARE ALREADY WILLING TO 
Yoram Schweitzer

Terrorism of any kind involves hurting people in order to frighten a much 
larger audience than the specific attacked target, and thereby influence 
by terrorists of weapons of mass destruction (WMD) we must keep in 
mind and not further exacerbate the existing societal fears that terrorists 
are already using to manipulate the public. Therefore, it is essential to 
define our terms carefully. Conventionally, WMD denote ominous 
weapons that up to very recently were only in the domain of states and had 
the potential to kill thousands and many more. We should not lump 
together under this category smaller-scale potential attacks with radio-
mind that we need to make a clear distinction between the various types of 
nonconventional weapons available to terrorists: chemical, radiological, 
biological, and nuclear (CBRN). Nuclear terrorism bears the most lethal 
threat which can be evaluated in terms of thousands of fatalities to 
hundreds of thousands and even more with additional catastrophic 
maladies like cancer and other kinds of injury as well as long-lasting 
environmental damage. Terrorism involving biological materials as well 
can cause high numbers of fatalities, epidemics, and contamination of 
quality, weather conditions, and the way it is dispersed and brought to its 
target. Radiological terrorism, as opposed to the use of nuclear weapons 
can cause fatalities and contamination of a very limited area, but its main 
effect will be psychological. This is true of chemical and some biological 
terrorism as well. Thus, we see devastating results if nuclear and some 
biological terrorism is engaged and much more limited lethality, but 
profound psychological impact and media attraction in the case of 
chemical, radiological, and some biological types of attacks. 
We must also distinguish between the groups and networks that may resort 
to these weapons from the majority who will probably be reluctant to use 
them. Most of the terror groups which are operative today will likely  
56
Y. SCHWEITZER
since their potential to harm is not the same. 
logical, chemical, or BWs and more lethal types of BWs and nuclear arms
In the analysis of a nonconventional terrorists threat one has to bear in 
areas and wide collateral damage. Chemical terrorism (and some bio- 
through tactics of societal fear the political process. In considering the use 
logical attacks as well, e.g., ricin) are highly dependent on the quantity, 
1. 
Terrorism – Essentially a Psychological Weapon
2. 
Organizational Concerns in the use of Weapons of Mass
Destruction
www.ebook3000.com

refrain from resorting to such weapons as their ideology is to play within 
the system and not against its existence. They have a desire to not only 
survive but also obtain achievable political goals from the system and to 
get their share of power and ultimately become political actors within the 
system.2 On the fringe of these groups there are a few groups and networks 
belonging to the Global Jihad led by al-Qaeda or closely associated with 
its ideas that have other ideological considerations and especially after 
9/11 who perceive the conflict in terms of a zero-sum game.  They are 
willing to go to any lengths to achieve their objective of total societal and 
groups that albeit their Islamic perceptions have a lot to loose and will 
probably not resort to WMD. Thus, there is a need to distinguish the 
associates from the rest. 
While trying to evaluate the potential risk of the various terror groups that 
may resort to the use of nonconventional materials and even more of WMD 
we should present some of the restraining factors that terror organizations 
take into consideration in the process of their decision making before 
choosing their targets and weaponry. Most terror organizations are inclined 
to refrain from steps that will alienate their constituency as they are looking 
for their support and usually also aspire to have international support for 
their group and actions in order to capitalize on it to exert pressure on the 
adversary government. In many cases terror organizations have a sponsoring 
state, whose broader and strategic considerations must be included in their 
decisions to act or to refrain from action or at least in the type of attacks 
they can carry out. These kinds of considerations have been playing a 
major role in the reluctance of terror organizations to engage in using 
nonconventional materials and surely WMD. 
Most of the terror groups in the world today have clear political agendas 
and specific demands and considerations that are influenced by their goals, 
but at the same time they want to preserve their survivability.3 However, 
2
Strategic Assessment,  7(4), March 2005. 
3 Ibid. 
57
political change. Yet, even in the circles of Global Jihad there are still 
specific ideological extremist groups like al-Qaeda and Zarqawi and his 
there are several organizations with ideological extremist perceptions that 
are ready to be destroyed in the process of destroying others as they 
believe that God will provide for them in the afterlife. 
 Anat Kurz. Non-conventional terrorism: availability and motivation. TAU 
 CHANGE OF MIND-SET FOLLOWING 9/11

Groups
considerations
Organization with high
probability for using NCW 
Organization with low 
probability for using 
NCW
Need for 
acknowledgment
Jihad
Ideology/international/
nihilistic
The organization is 
seeking acknowledgment 
for its existence as well 
as for its demands 
Organizational
survivability
Organizational survivability
is not crucial. The 
organizational structure is 
diffused and therefore 
flexible
Organizational
survivability is an upper 
value
State dependency The organization is not 
dependent on the support of 
the state 
The organization is very 
dependent on the support 
of the state 
Organization’s
need for 
international/local
support
Nor local or international 
support is of importance to 
the organization 
The organization gives 
high importance to both 
international and local 
support
Direct
confrontations
Direct confrontations is a 
strategy for recruiting new 
members to the 
organization
The organization is 
refraining from direct 
confrontation
Al-Qaeda and some close affiliates like Zarqawi and his associates are 
definitely looking for a full confrontation with all the means that they 
possess. This has become clearer after 9/11 and more so after the 
counterattack by the international coalition in Afghanistan and in the battle 
in Iraq as of mid-2003, as will be discussed more fully below. 
Networks that operate under al-Qaeda’s inspiration and in some cases 
with its assistance (direct and indirect) are difficult to deter as they tend to 
operate and then disintegrate and re-form in the future so their 
survivability as an existing organ has less importance for them and they do 
58
Y. SCHWEITZER
3. 
Groups Considerations and their Probable use of Weapons
of Mass Destruction
4. 
Who are the Groups that may Resort to using Weapons
of Mass Destruction?
www.ebook3000.com

not exist as tangible targets to be attacked or have vested interests to be 
compromised. Indeed, it appears that the leaders of such networks often 
operate in an ad hoc manner forming groups that consume their members 
(as “martyrs”) while their leaders disappear and reemerge in future to 
direct new operations on behalf of their ultimate mission of bringing about 
a new world order. This form of an “organization” does not have any 
tangible assets that can be attacked or a conspicuous Achilles’ heel to step 
on in order to deter it so the only option is to find and destroy.  That is 
exactly what makes this kind of networks so problematic to deal with in the 
“conventional” means used vis-à-vis the “normative” terror organizations. 
To date the world has witnessed at least one notorious case where Aum 
Shinrikio (Supreme Truth), a nihilistic sect used both chemical and 
biological material in terror attacks in Japan in 1994 and 1995. Of these, 
the deadliest one was perpetrated in Tokyo in 1995 and involved releasing 
Sarin nerve gas, which killed a dozen of Japanese and injured hundreds 
going to hospital with minor symptoms. These attacks resulted in relatively 
low number of casualties and were not emulated by other organizations. 
The reasons may lie in the fact that they did not succeed in killing a 
stunning unusual number of casualties that is necessary to give a 
nonconventional material the appeal of a mega-terror instrument and hence 
failed any gains both from public support and building up the power image 
of the group. The lack of the global dimension as for example al-Qaeda 
and its associates have seems to be the crucial factor in its limited effect. 
The Aum Shinrikio had no connections with like minded groups in the 
world and lack the transnational mechanism to spread the psychological 
warfare that would give it the extra effect which usually utilized by the 
perpetrators to install fear in the targeted population. This may also have 
had something to do with that the group lacks a coherent political agenda 
and is much more cultish and Armageddon aimed than wanting political 
concessions from government. The fact that they failed to have a profound 
impact has likely made these types of attacks less attractive to those who 
might chose to emulate them. Thus, although the attack in Japan was the 
focus of considerable media coverage, as well as many academic studies 
and articles, because of its pioneering stature, it remained an exceptional, 
marginal phenomenon that was not imitated by other terrorist organizations. 
Following 9/11 attack a small quantity of anthrax was disseminated in 
the United States by an unidentified sender who likewise failed to cause a 
59
Lessons from Recent Chemical and Biological Attacks
5. 
 CHANGE OF MIND-SET FOLLOWING 9/11

high number of casualties but succeeded in inflicting a lot of panic in the 
challenge of biological warfare. 
playing an increasingly influential role in international relations, a large 
infrequently, typically by different organizations and at significant 
intervals. Airplanes provided a ready venue for such attacks: 329 people 
were killed by the explosion of an Air India plane by Sikh terrorists in 
June 1985, and 270 people were killed in December 1988 when a Pan Am 
plane exploded over Lockerbie, Scotland, the work of Libyan agents. In 
some instances, car bombs loaded with thousands of kilograms of 
explosives and driven by suicide bombers were used to carry out attacks 
with mass casualties. The two terrorist attacks against United States 
Marines and a multinational French force in Beirut carried out by the 
Hizbollah in October 1983, which killed a total of almost 300 people, 
serve as primary examples of such attacks. 
However, mass-casualty attacks killing thousands of people have only 
been planned and attempted by terrorist groups that are Afghan alumni, led 
by Bin Laden and functioning under the auspices of al-Qaeda. According 
to the Afghan alumni’s increasingly extremist religious messianic world-
view, the indiscriminate killing of large numbers of people is permitted, 
and even desirable, when it is done “in the path of god” (“fi sabil Allah”).4
They interpret such acts as consistent with the commandments of the 
Koran and Islamic law. In this context, the transition to carrying out mega-
terror attacks can be seen as a “natural” outcome of the cultural–religious 
confrontation between them and those whom they perceive as infidels, 
chiefly, in their terms, the “Judeo–Crusader alliance.” Still, they do not 
refrain from the indiscriminate killing of others, such as Hindus in 
Kashmir and even “infidel” Muslims in Arab countries. 
4 Reuven Paz. YES to WMD: The first Islamist Fatwah on the use of weapons 
of mass destruction. PRISM Series of Special Dispatches on Global Jihad, 1, May 
2003.
60
Y. SCHWEITZER
number of terrorist attacks have been carried out around the world. Only
Since the end of the 1960s, when modern international terrorism began 
set up a national alarm towards the need to stand up to confront the 
a small number yielded highly lethal results, killing dozens and in rare
American public and confusion in the administration that was enough to 
cases hundreds of people. Exceptionally, severe attacks were carried out 
6.
9/11 – A Change in Consciousness within the Global 
Terror Organizations
www.ebook3000.com

September 11, with its score of more than 3,000 deaths, heavy economic 
damage, and dramatization of American vulnerability, was an important 
morale-boosting victory for the Afghan alumni. It also represented a new, 
higher minimum standard in escalating terror attacks, as their architects 
work towards actualizing their vision of liberating Islamic holy lands and 
establishing an Islamic caliphate throughout the world. 
Today, 5 years after September 11, one can discern an increase in 
intensity and frequency in the planning and execution of mass-casualty 
terror attacks, which reflects the profound change of consciousness that 
has taken place at the level of violence sanctioned, if not encouraged, in 
the struggle against infidels. Accordingly, we have already reached the 
initial and in this case accelerated phase of the age of nonconventional 
materials of conventional or nonconventional warfare, as legitimate. The 
execution of such attacks is primarily a function of the terrorists’ 
performance capabilities, and timing is usually determined by their degree 
of operational preparedness and their overall operational strategy of 
maximizing the economic and psychological damage to their adversaries. 
Armed with extremist ideology and an agenda of indiscriminately killing 
their enemies in masses, the Afghan alumni’s escalation within the 
unequivocal 1999 statement that he regards the acquisition of such 
weapons as mandatory and as a religious commandment only increased 
fears that the day would soon come that this threat would be transformed 
from the potential to the actual. The US attack on the Shifa pharmaceutical 
factory in Sudan, which was suspected of producing chemical substances 
for al-Qaeda, lent credibility to the threat. Another expression of senior 
al-Qaeda leaders regarding nonconventional terrorism was the September 
 Fouda, Yosri, and Nick Fielding. Masterminds of Terror: The Truth Behind 
Arcade Publishing, 2003. 
61
the Most Devastating Terrorist Attack the World Has Ever Seen. New York: 
to invest efforts in acquiring nonconventional weapons. Bin Laden’s 
international terrorism arena during the 1990s led them almost naturally 
Assessment, 6(1), May 2003. 
 Schweitzer Yoram. The age of non-conventional terrorism. TAU Strategic 
6
5
6
5
terrorism. The Afghan alumni regard mega-terror attacks, whether using 
the television program Sirri l’il-Ghaya (“top secret”),  broadcast on 
2002 television interview granted by Khaled Sheikh Mohammad to 
7. 
Preparations for Using Nonconventional Weapons
 CHANGE OF MIND-SET FOLLOWING 9/11

directions considered by al-Qaeda on the eve of the 9/11 was an attack on 
a nuclear reactor in the United States. At the time the idea was rejected out 
of apparent concern that a successful attack of this nature would unleash 
uncontainable consequences and events would rapidly spiral out of control. 
Since then, hesitations of this sort appear to have abated. 
al-Qaeda members in Afghanistan. This documentation indicated the 
readiness of al-Qaeda and its affiliates to use nonconventional materials in 
terrorist attacks aimed at killing thousands of people. The most chilling 
documentation was broadcast on CNN in August 2002, showing the 
experimental use of poisonous substances on dogs in training camps in 
Afghanistan. This documentation can be added to the testimony of arrested 
al-Qaeda members such as Ahmed Rassem (arrested while attempting to 
smuggle weapons from Canada to the northwestern United States, as part 
of his plan to blow up the Los Angeles airport on the eve of the new 
millennium), who at his trial acknowledged that he and his colleagues 
underwent training with poisonous substances. 
In addition, a number of events took place since September 11 that are 
likely to help and accelerate the formation of a “consciousness environment” 
supportive of the Afghan alumni’s desire to use nonconventional warfare 
substances in their terrorist attacks. 
x
September 2001 appears to have been caused by an act of sabotage 
French authorities went to great lengths to keep the incident quiet, 
among other reasons in order to prevent it from becoming a model for 
imitation.
x
While the anthrax attack carried out in the United States shortly after 
significant role in raising the standard of nonconventional operations, 
from chemical terrorism to biological terrorism. Despite the relatively 
small number of casualties caused by only a miniscule quantity of 
anthrax, the attack functioned primarily to highlight the potential of 
environmental damage and the blow to morale that a terrorist weapon 
of this sort can wield. 
62
Y. SCHWEITZER
The explosion at the chemical factory in Toulouse, France, in 
the factory just a few days before the explosion. The incident caused 
the death of 29 people, as well as serious environmental damage. The 
carried out by a French Islamist of North African descent hired by
an American scientist with no al-Qaeda involvement, it played a 
the 9/11 attack appears to have been an act of protest most likely by
The attack in Afghanistan uncovered numerous documents and exten- 
sive photographic documentation of training camps and hideouts of 
arrested in early March 2003 in Pakistan, acknowledged that one of the 
Al Jazeera. Khaled Sheikh, who supervised the 9/11 attack and was later 
www.ebook3000.com

sent by the organization to assess the possibilities of purchasing 
radiological material to detonate a “dirty bomb” in the United States, 
is also evidence of the operational directions of al-Qaeda in this realm.
x
The assassination of Hatab, a prominent leader of Chechneyan terrorist 
Russians in the same manner. Moreover, the Russian security forces’ 
use of fentanyl gas while storming the Moscow theater caused the 
x
The arrest of al-Qaeda and its affiliated cells in various countries 
quantity that had disappeared). A similar find occurred in March in 
France. These events reinforce the suspicion that al-Qaeda and the 
organizations it supports are preparing to wage nonconventional terror 
campaigns.
x
The death of many al-Qaeda members, including some senior leaders 
alumni’s already radical worldview with the dimension of personal 
revenge. This is likely to dispel any moral inhibitions that still 
remained regarding the use of all warfare materials at their disposal 
and motivate them to execute terrorist attacks that are much deadlier 
than the one the world witnessed on September 11, 2001. 
x
The war in Iraq which added thousands of casualties to the accumu-
lated count of Bin Laden while articulation of the justifications for 
63
immediate paralysis and eventual death of many of the captors and the 
hostages. This was perceived by the Chechneyans as an act of escala-
tion, accelerating the nonconventional phase in their own struggle
against the Russians. Indeed, a terrorist cell arrested in France at the 
end of 2002 had planned a revenge attack against Russian targets
in Europe using nonconventional materials. 
throughout Europe in early 2003  involved the January discovery in 
England of ricin (apparently only a small portion of a much larger 
Dr. Aymen al-Zawahir, Bin Laden’s deputy), enhances the Afghan 
and members of their families (e.g., the wife and daughters of
 Amit Cohen, Daphna Vardi. Europe under threat. Maariv supplement,
7 February 2003, 22–23 (Hebrew). 
organizations, with a poisonous substance concealed inside an enve- 
lope resulted in Chechneyan threats of taking revenge against the 
x
The May 2002 arrest of Jose Padillia, an American citizen who 
converted to Islam, was trained in Afghanistan by al-Qaeda, and was 
7
7
future vengeance against the Americans and their allies by noncon-
ventional means. 
 CHANGE OF MIND-SET FOLLOWING 9/11

There are clear indications of al-Qaeda’s efforts to obtain and produce 
components of NCW and Bin Laden public declaration that obtaining 
NCW capabilities is a religious duty gave it official posture. Indeed it 
seems that previously Bin Laden decided to refrain from attacking a 
nuclear plant in the United States: as he was reluctant, at that stage, to 
suffer the probable consequences. Following 9/11 the mind-set of Bin 
Laden and al-Qaeda changed regarding the use of nonconventional means 
including nuclear, given the chance they can obtain one. 
The main reasons for this change in ideology and practice include
x
of the 9/11 attack. 
x
They were likewise enraged by the American aggressive response in 
Afghanistan and now Iraq. 
x
In consequence they turned to a “zero-sum game” mood. 
x
They elevated the level of violence in their planned attacks. 
x
A religious edict (fatwa) was issued to support the use of WMD which 
made it religiously sanctified.8
x
This was followed by criticism by leading ideological figures 
regarding the previous practice of refraining from using WMD against 
the enemies. This criticism was mainly by Abu Musaab Al-Suri. In 
December 2004, Abu Musaab Al-Suri, a veteran and a prominent 
figure in the grand al-Qaeda ranks who published a 1,600 page book 
advocating a new organization of Global Jihad called “The Islamists 
Global Resistance.” In this book that was issued on the Islamic 
circulated websites he outlined his strategy of Global Jihad. In this 
document he called for the use of WMD as an effective and necessary 
weapon against the enemies of Islam. He criticized Osama Bin Laden 
for not having previously used nonconventional weapon referring to 
Bin Laden reluctance to attack an atomic site as part of the 9/11 
campaign.9
8
destruction. PRISM Series of Special Dispatches on Global Jihad, 1, May 2003. 
9
Current Trends in Islamist Ideology 2005; 2, 74–86. 
64
Y. SCHWEITZER
 Paz R. YES to WMD: the first Islamist Fatwah on the use of weapons of mass 
 Paz R. Global Jihad and WMD: between martyrdom and mass destruction. 
Al-Qaeda and its disciples worldwide were intoxicated by the success
5
8. 
The Race to the End
www.ebook3000.com

Due to the change in the character of the battle in the eyes of al-Qaeda 
and its closest allies and especially the ongoing bloody conflict in Iraq, the 
pretext for killing thousands and hundreds of thousands of Kafirs (apostates) 
among the “enemies of Islam” is permissible and even desirable. 
Therefore, one can assume that 
x
Al-Qaeda and some of its affiliated networks are the primary 
candidates for resorting to the use of nonconventional materials in 
terror attacks; if they acquire them, they will be used under the right 
circumstances.
x
Since religious approval has already been issued, the “justification” 
will be forthcoming. 
x
A breach of the “alleged taboo” and the copycat nature of terrorism 
may signal a start of a new era in global terrorism and it may either 
grow gradually to the level of small samples of nonconventional “soft” 
materials that will be used in sporadic attacks or that a major leap will 
be made by one group or network that will resort to more lethal 
materials and by that open a Pandora box which will cause an 
irretrievable tragedy. 
The first step towards such developments must be to realize that the 
state of mind of such attack has already been around so it is more a matter 
of when, by whom, and at what level it may occur rather than if. The big 
race now is to prevent the Jihadists or any like-minded from putting their 
hands on a BW or more alarmingly a nuclear device. 
One of the most significant impacts of the 9/11 attack on global terror 
organizations has been the creation of a fundamental change in the 
consciousness of the mainly Afghan alumni-led al-Qaeda and some of its 
closest affiliated networks. The unprecedented success of the 9/11 attack 
created a sense of omnipotence among al-Qaeda and its supporters and 
encouragement to continue in this path. On the other hand, the US massive 
reaction in Afghanistan and Iraq backed by the international coalition 
enraged them and gave an impetus to their desire to take revenge against 
their declared enemies. This change has been reflected not only by the 
deeds, but also by the rhetoric of terrorist organizations’ spokespersons, 
which may also signal a further escalation in the activity and readiness of 
some terrorist organizations to move forward into the “nonconventional 
terrorism era.” Nonconventional terrorism that we can expect to see in the 
65
future may be characterized on two levels of activity. The first is small-scale
9.  
Summary
 CHANGE OF MIND-SET FOLLOWING 9/11

impact is primarily psychological in nature. The second level involves 
executing a monumental attack(s) “mega-terrorism” using nonconven-
tional warfare materials in order to harm large numbers of people, cause 
long-term environmental damage, and deliver a public psychological and 
morale-crushing blow of a scope hitherto unknown. Thus, we find that in 
the period that has followed the 9/11 attack, that the standard of violence 
in terrorism has been increased significantly. The number and frequency of 
“high casualties” attacks planned or executed has been raised and the 
“taboo” surrounding terror “tolerated” lethality has likewise been removed. 
In contrast, and perhaps ironically, the public and the decision makers of 
the Western world have not experienced a change in consciousness 
regarding the nature of the threat and its degree of acuteness. Such a 
change, however, is essential to achieving the public support for an 
antiterrorism strategy that can adequately and effectively address the 
current terrorist threat. The race is on and we wait to see who will win. 
66
use of chemical, and radiological and even biological weapons whose 
Y. SCHWEITZER
www.ebook3000.com

Since 2001, development of bioterror response capacity has largely 
focused on emergency management, development of diagnostic tools and 
Professor of Medicine 
Division of Infection Diseases 
John Hopkin University School of Medicine 
© 2007 Springer.
algorithms, and ensuring capacity for acute care of casualties [1, 2]. This 
has included assuring supply of antimicrobials, vaccines, critical equipment, 
and hospital preparedness planning. The 2001 anthrax attacks demonstrated 
that subacute response, the ability of public health to mobilize screening, 
treatment, and dispensing capacity to large numbers of potentially exposed 
persons, was the major need. Despite this experience, there has been little 
planning for subacute response capacity. 
In the context of a bioterrorism event, subacute response is providing 
assessment services, counseling, preventive treatment, and follow up to 
persons with potential exposure, and who are not clinically ill. Preparing 
the subacute response poses enormous logistical challenges. In most cities, 
providers of preventive health services, for example, municipal health 
departments currently provide only minimal clinical services, and have 
little surge capacity. Therefore, careful planning is critical. 
This is a national problem. McGugh reviewed preparedness in 12 US 
metropolitan areas in 2002–2003 [3]. The vast majority of activity was in 
emergency preparedness/response activities and hospital preparedness. 
Major activities included increased disease surveillance, laboratory 
capacity, information and system technology, education, and workforce 
training (mostly for immediate disaster response). Challenges identified in 
67
Preparedness, 67–76. 
M.S. Green et al. (eds.), Risk Assessment and Risk Communication Strategies in Bioterrorism 
ANTIMICROBIAL PROPHYLAXIS AND PROVIDING
preparedness), which limited surge capacity, communications, and infor-
this review were funding shortfalls, local budget deficits (independent of 
1. 
Introduction
Jonathan Zenilman
LEARNED FROM 2001
OF A BIOTERRORISM EVENT: LESSONS 
SUBACUTE CARE IN THE CONTEXT

mation technology infrastructure, and public health staffing. “Respondents 
in some communities reported difficulties in hiring qualified public health 
workers, particularly nurses and epidemiologists, because of short supply 
and inability to offer salaries competitive with the private sector.” 
During the 2001 anthrax attacks, the health departments in the New York 
and Washington areas were presented with an enormous challenge; 
providing therapeutic treatment, preventive treatment, and counseling to 
thousands of individuals who were potentially exposed. This presented 
enormous stresses to the local health departments, but also presented oppor-
tunities for planning these types of events in the future. Their experiences 
have been extensively reviewed [4–8]. In reviewing the experience, it 
appears that the bulk of all clinical activities responding to the attacks 
were provided by direct health-care providers providing subacute care. 
Acute care hospitals, first responders, and emergency departments played 
only a minor role. This review will synthesize the reported literature 
reports, and the Baltimore Health Department experience of the 2001 
outbreak, which addressed the subacute outpatient response.
In the United States, the structure of the public health system is highly 
decentralized – providing both major advantages and disadvantages for 
disaster planning. Public health in the United States is a local and state 
function specifically delegated as such in the US Constitution. Each of the 
50 states has a health department, and within those states, there are a total 
of 3,100 local health departments, mostly at the county or municipal level. 
Over two-thirds of these departments serve small populations (less than 
50,000 individuals) and have less than seven direct employees. Because of 
changes in the US public health system over the past decades, the clinical 
capacitiy of the public health system has actually decreased. Rarely do 
public health departments provide direct clinical services in primary care, 
and typically they are limited to areas which have public health impact, 
specifically those mentioned above. For example, health departments used 
to provide large amounts of primary pediatric and prenatal care. However, 
with expansion of managed care organizations, and provision of insurance 
to children and pregnant women, the need for public health provision of 
those clinical services has declined. 
The published literature identifies five major problem areas in the 2001 
anthrax attack response, and has been most comprehensively reviewed by 
Gursky [2], and critiques published by the US Government General 
Accounting Office [1]. These include: 
J. ZENILMAN
68
www.ebook3000.com

1.
Communication to public and private health providers. Health 
providers were presented with different exposure/treatment algorithms 
and advice from different sources. For example, in Maryland, Virginia, 
and the District of Columbia, each of the three state jurisdictions and 
the CDC all provided different levels, amounts, and quality of 
information. Groups such as Johns Hopkins University, in turn 
developed protocols and algorithms, specifically to address the 
absence of information; however, these bodies were not subject to any 
specific authority or regulation.
2.
Environmental testing. Each of the different geographical areas had 
different protocols for environmental testing and development of 
treatment protocols for environmental exposure. These variations led 
to discontent, an even charges of racial discrimination. For example, 
different exposure treatment protocols were applied in the exposures at 
the US Senate and at the Washington post office, due to different 
jurisdictional authority, and differences in the type of exposure 
initially suspected. Because of the different socioeconomic classes and 
even racial/ethnic groups of the employees, the post office employees 
and their union later criticized the differential response. 
3.
Ambiguous public health authority. During the attacks, the public 
health authority to investigate, treat, and manage the outbreaks was 
somewhat ambiguous. There are multiple levels of governmental 
authorities, which were involved, multiple jurisdictions ranging from 
the county, city, and federal agencies, also involved were federal 
emergency management agencies, and the criminal investigative 
authorities at the state and local level.
4.
Coexistent criminal investigation. Early on, it became very clear that 
the anthrax attacks were criminally motivated; therefore, the Federal 
Bureau of Investigation (FBI) and local police agencies became 
involved. Since the attack sites were defined as crime scenes, law 
enforcement authorities had primary responsibility. In some cases, 
there were delays in the sharing of information. Furthermore, the 
cultures between public health and criminal investigation authorities 
are substantially different with regard to information provision. This 
experience has resulted in development of cooperative joint public 
health–law enforcement task forces for bioterrorism attack response 
and investigation. 
5.
Procurement. Demand for antimicrobials, e.g., ciprofloxacin, far 
outstripped the supplies available in the public health departments, 
hospitals, and pharmacies. Despite that availability of the national 
emergency stockpiles, there is need for planning for the interim period 
before the stockpile supplies become available (typically 24 hours). 
69
 ANTIMICROBIAL PROPHYLAXIS AND PROVIDING SUBACUTE CARE

Despite these issues, the anthrax response did require substantial rapid 
mobilization of clinical and public health resources on a level not seen in 
the United States for decades. This involved rapid assessment teams, environ-
mental assessment teams, as well as mobilization of staff and supplies 
required to provide clinical care and treatment to tens of thousands of 
exposed individuals. In contrast to outbreaks, which require vaccination or 
short-term prophylaxis, the anthrax treatment response required a long-
term course of (60 days) of antibiotics [9, 10]. There were little data on the 
use of long-term antibiotics in such a large number of individuals, as well 
as the associated problems and questions regarding compliance, behavioral 
aspects related to compliance, and potential side effects. There were a 
large number of exposed and treated individuals. This pool continually 
expanded, as a result of decisions, which were made (which may or may 
not be a problem in and of itself) that basically provided treatment to any 
individuals who were potentially exposed. Because so little was known 
about the infectivity and spread of the anthrax in the letters mailed to the 
post office and to the individual offices, as the infectivity became more 
widely known, more individuals became eligible for treatment. 
In essence all individuals who requested treatment were essentially 
treated. For example, in New York City alone 7,076 postal workers, and an 
additional 3,600 media and hospital workers were screened and offered 
treatment [5, 8]. In Washington, DC an estimated 3,400 persons were 
screened and treated [4]. These are probably underestimates, because there 
may have been individuals who were treated and not appropriately 
documented. 
Our experience in Baltimore was illustrative. Baltimore is located 40 
miles (67 km) north of Washington DC, and is considered as part of  
the Washington metropolitan planning area. On October 24, 2001, the 
Baltimore City Health Department (BCHD) was notified that 4,000 indivi-
duals would require treatment for being exposed potentially to anthrax. 
These were predominantly employees of local mail processing facilities 
and credit card payment processors, all of whom received mail from the 
impacted main post office (“Brentwood”) facility in Washington. The 
initial request from the CDC came on a Wednesday afternoon, and it was 
anticipated that clinical facilities would be in place within 24 hours to 
initiate treatment, counseling, and public health prophylaxis.
The BCHD response utilized existing clinical personnel and facilities at 
the two health centers, which house the sexually transmitted diseases 
J. ZENILMAN
70
2. 
The Baltimore Experience
www.ebook3000.com

(STD) and tuberculosis (TB) clinics, and field health services staff. 
Besides the clinic facilities themselves, three field clinics were also 
established within 24 hours at three public schools. Five days later one 
employer-based clinic was also established. This employer was a large 
credit-card payment processor with 400 employees. 
 The STD/TB clinic staff was utilized because they are employees with 
experience providing outpatient counseling, assessment, and clinical ser-
vices under a variety of nontraditional conditions. Public health clinicians 
in Baltimore are nurse-practitioners and certified physician assistants 
working under the supervision of a physician. Their clinical expertise 
includes acute disease diagnosis and management, and providing treatment 
to exposure contacts. 
Public health registrars are experienced at rapid intake procedures, 
including enquiring about relevant contact information. Public health 
disease intervention specialists are well acquainted with counseling 
functions, and also are able to provide field information and operate 
independently in field settings. Counselors and social workers, who are 
part of the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) management team, were 
mobilized to assist in counseling individuals who may be under stress 
because of the events that were taking place.
Clinical protocols were rapidly developed with a partnership between 
health departments’ senior leadership staff, infectious disease personnel 
from the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, the medical 
directors of the STD, TB, and HIV control programs, as well as nursing 
and emergency management staff. All protocols were developed in close 
consultation with existing clinical protocols available from the CDC, the 
Maryland State Department of Health and Mental Hygiene, and the Johns 
Hopkins University Infectious Disease Division. 
The field clinics were set up with multiple stations. An intake registra-
tion station was staffed by disease intervention specialists and registrars. 
Patients were then directed to the assessment station, where they were 
examined by clinicians and provided with drugs. There was no dispensing 
pharmacist on-site; health department personnel were authorized to dispense 
the antibiotics under the emergency provisions. Physician supervision was 
provided onsite, and also by radio/mobile phone contact by infectious 
disease physicians and health department senior staff. Mental health 
counseling resources were available at all operating clinical sites and were 
provided by social workers. During this period of time standard STD, TB, 
and family planning activities were suspended for 4 days because of the 
intense resources allocated to these tasks.
71
 ANTIMICROBIAL PROPHYLAXIS AND PROVIDING SUBACUTE CARE

One of the initial concerns at the beginning was drug procurement. 
Although ciprofloxacin was on formulary at the STD clinics, this is 
typically used as a single dose regimen. Therefore, initially, it would have 
been difficult to provide all patients requiring this medication with enough 
medication to last a 60-day course. Provisions were made for emergency 
procurement from the city health departments’ supplier, and additional 
resources were identified in other communities, approximately 1 hour 
away. Arrangements were made for the Baltimore Police Department to 
provide emergency escort in case that was needed (in order to provide 
rapid supply). However, because of the rapid availability of the national 
stockpile supplies, drug supplies were adequate after the first day of 
operation. In Baltimore, over 2,500 individuals received preventive 
treatment in the 4 days of operation (Baltimore City Health Department, 
unpublished data).
Public health clinicians and disease outreach staff are typically assigned to 
traditional clinical activities, which are almost exclusively performed by 
public health departments. These are STDs, TB management, family 
planning, and immunization and refugee health activities. These are the 
only direct clinical care employees employed by health departments. 
Because of their experience with field outreach, these classes of employees 
(public health nurses, physicians, interviewers, contact tracing, and 
locating personnel) have much of the field training and experience, which 
is necessary, and can be easily mobilized to address major public health 
challenges, such as a bioterror attack. Health departments need to develop 
plans to mobilize these types of employees for potential events. We should 
also assume that in a large event, hospitals and acute care providers may 
be overwhelmed with acute care casualties, and will be unable to provide 
surge capacity staffing for ambulatory care management. 
Despite the 2001 experience, the literature provides little insight into 
planning the subacute response. Interestingly, the only paper specifically 
addressing this was by Gullion [11], who identified school nurses as a 
potential resource. Focusing on a community of 500,000 in North Texas, 
she calculated that to vaccinate or treat the entire population within 5 days, 
a minimum of 1,080 professional medical or nursing staff would be 
required. She also identified that hospital nurses could not be diverted, and 
that primary care clinics would be overrun. School nurses were identified 
as a resource for the subacute response, as they can be easily trained and 
mobilized, and have experience dealing with ambulatory populations. 
72
J. ZENILMAN
3.
Resources that can be Mobilized
www.ebook3000.com

Preparing for local subacute response capacity is critical. Most emphasis to 
date has been on emergency medical services, first responders, and acute 
care. However, little planning has been implemented for establishing long-
term follow up and capacity for providing care to subacute individuals. 
Civil health authorities have few direct hires on staff that can provide 
direct clinical service. Therefore, in the event of an emergency, most civil 
health authorities would have to rely on the private sector and on volun-
teers. Because in these environments, these services may be overwhelmed 
that may be difficult to rely on. Our experience and the published reports 
from New York and Washington clearly indicate that staff at traditional 
public health services were easily trained and deployed rapidly. 
Initial issues, which we addressed in developing our response, were: 
1.
Identifying the appropriate resources, both clinical resources, personnel 
resources, and materials.
2.
Developing appropriate protocols and algorithms. This was performed 
(in my mind effectively) by groups of highly trained and diverse 
individuals, who operated well in this type of environment. 
3.
Securing supplies was a major problem, especially medications. 
However, utilizing existing channels and providing liaison with the 
police in order to perform escort services was quickly established. 
Data collection is an initial issue, which is very important. This was 
addressed more effectively in the New York outbreaks (see below). 
4.
Communication to the public of resource availability. In an environ-
ment where stress and anxiety is a major concern, demonstrating that 
the health authorities are providing effective response is both essential 
from a community health sense, but also from a political sense, in 
demonstrating that government is clearly in control and is appropriately 
responding.
Follow-up care and surveillance is an important issue, which is frequently 
overlooked in planning. For example, in 2001 one of the major challenges 
was medication adherence. The Baltimore program did not have an adherence 
or systematic adverse event monitoring program. The published experience 
in 2001 from New York, Washington, and Florida estimated similar levels 
of adherence. 
In the reported literature, over 15,000 people were treated and adherence 
was documented in all the sites [4, 6, 12]. In Florida, adherence was 31%, 
in New Jersey 61%, in the Senate Building 58%, in the Washington DC 
73
4. 
 ANTIMICROBIAL PROPHYLAXIS AND PROVIDING SUBACUTE CARE
Lessons Learned – The Subacute  Clinical Response

postal workers 64%, in New York City 21%, and in Connecticut 22%. 
Overall, approximately 44% of individuals fully completed the course of 
60 days of ciprofloxacin. Approximately 42% had intermediate adherence, 
which was most widely defined as having missed doses within the past 24 
hours to a week. Finally, one-fifth of the individuals stopped therapy prior 
to recommended completion date. The major reasons varied by the city 
and site of exposure, but included (in order of frequency) for stopping 
including adverse advents, concern of the long-term side effects, a low 
perceived risk of anthrax, and concern over the development of antibiotic 
resistance and that impact on their personal health at a later period of time. 
Of those who stopped therapy, 24% indicated that they were saving the 
antibiotics for future use. This is particularly relevant in an environment 
where drug acquisition costs are high, and where access to antimicrobial 
therapy may not be as easy as one would hope. There is also concern 
(expressed by this author and others), that antibiotics were being diverted 
to a secondary market, where they can be potentially sold. 
The ciprofloxacin adverse events frequency advent effects reported in 
2001 was similar to that reported in the literature. Allergic (analphylactoid 
for ciprofloxacin) reactions were reported with a frequency of less than 
one per thousand. The most frequently reported minor adverse events were 
fatigue, nausea and vomiting, headache, loss of libido, yeast vaginitis 
infections in women, and occasional confusion with stress or depressive 
symptoms. No tendonitis was reported. 
One of the problems in analyzing the adverse event data is the absence 
of control groups – either individuals exposed, who declined treatment, or 
a comparable group of the unexposed general population during this period 
of time. 
Qualitative research performed by CDC authors [4] and an independent 
researcher [13] indicated that adherence to the long ciprofloxacin regimen 
was positively affected by public health interventions, especially at the 
postal service, where repeated visits by the public health staff to the 
workplace were helpful. These were opportunities, which we used to ask 
about adverse advents, and also demonstrated that the health authorities 
had concern over the workers. This type of follow-up activity was 
associated with increased compliance with medication. However, also of 
quite substantial interest, was that individuals had very poor or little recall 
of the information that was provided at the initial encounter. Workers also 
were adversely affected by the poor communication and mixed messages 
J. ZENILMAN
74
5. 
Adverse Events
www.ebook3000.com

provided by different authorities, which in turn led to decreased trust and 
credibility. Therefore, information sheets and information sessions are all 
actually lost during the initial encounter presumably because of the stress 
of the initial event. 
North evaluated Senate office building workers in focus groups and 
qualitative interviews 3 months after the attacks [14]. Workers noted that 
“communications were inconsistent” over time and across different autho-
rities. This included both the internal communications and the public 
media outlet information. Recommendations include attempting to keep 
risk communication and system management consistent. No information 
was provided in this paper regarding clinical assessment and compliance. 
x
The subacute response is a critical aspect of responding to a bioterrorism 
event.
x
The subacute response frame work needs to be integrated into a 
fragmented health-care system, which is poorly equipped to deal with 
large-scale public health emergencies. 
x
Subacute clinical resource requires rapid development of clinical 
protocols and deployment of appropriate and trained personnel. 
x
Planning for logistical, organizational, and administrative support is 
required.
x
Traditional public health clinical service organizations and personnel 
resources are an overlooked resource, and often have the training and 
institutional culture to provide response capacity. 
x
Adherence is a major problem, and strategies should be developed in 
order to approve adherence especially among groups, which are highly 
under stress.
x
Clinical follow-up algorithms need to be developed and supported. 
x
Communication messages should include adherence messages, as well 
as potential information about side effects and what represents 
important and unimportant side effects. 
References
1. 
General Accounting Office. Bioterrorism. Public health response to anthrax 
incidents of 2001. Washington, DC: United States General Accounting 
Office, 2003. Report No. GAO-04-152. 
2. 
Gursky E, Inglesby TV, O’Toole T. Anthrax 2001: observations on the 
medical and public health response. Biosecur Bioterror 2003; 1(2):97–110. 
75
6. 
Lessons Learned
 ANTIMICROBIAL PROPHYLAXIS AND PROVIDING SUBACUTE CARE

3. 
McHugh M, Staiti AB, Felland LE. How prepared are Americans for public 
health emergencies? Twelve communities weigh in. Health Aff (Millwood) 
2004 May–June; 23(3):201–209. 
4. 
Shepard CW, Soriano-Gabarro M, Zell ER, Hayslett J, Lukacs S, Goldstein S, 
Factor S, Jones J, Ridzon R, Williams I, Rosenstein N. CDC adverse events 
working group. Antimicrobial postexposure prophylaxis for anthrax: adverse 
events and adherence. Emerg Infect Dis 2002 Oct; 8(10):1124–1132. 
5. 
Blank S, Moskin LC, Zucker JR. An ounce of prevention is a ton of work: 
mass antibiotic prophylaxis for anthrax, New York City, 2001. Emerg Infect 
Dis 2003 June; 9(6):615–622. 
6. 
Jefferds MD, Laserson K, Fry AM, Roy S, Hayslett J, Grummer-Strawn L, 
Kettel-Khan L, Schuchat A. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
Anthrax Adherence Team. Adherence to antimicrobial inhalational anthrax 
prophylaxis among postal workers, Washington, DC, 2001. Emerg Infect Dis 
2002 Oct; 8(10):1138–1144. 
7. 
Layton MC. Interview with Marcelle C. Layton, MD Assistant Commis-
sioner, Bureau of Communicable Disease, New York City Department of 
Health and Mental Hygiene. Interview by Madeline Drexler. Biosecur 
Bioterror 2004; 2(4):245–250. 
8.  Partridge R, Alexander J, Lawrence T, Suner S. Medical counterbioterrorism: 
the response to provide anthrax prophylaxis to New York City US postal 
service employees. Ann Emerg Med 2003 April; 41(4):441–446. 
9.  Brookmeyer R, Johnson E, Bollinger R. Modeling the optimum duration of 
antibiotic prophylaxis in an anthrax outbreak. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2003 
Aug 19; 100(17):10129–10132. 
10. Inglesby TV, Henderson DA, Bartlett JG, Ascher MS, Eitzen E, Friedlander AM, 
Hauer J, McDade J, Osterholm MT, O’Toole T, Parker G, Perl TM, 
Russell PK, Tonat K. Anthrax as a biological weapon: medical and public 
health management. Working group on civilian biodefense. JAMA 1999 May 
12; 281(18):1735–1745. 
11. Gullion JS. School nurses as volunteers in a bioterrorism event. Biosecur 
Bioterror 2004; 2(2):112–117. 
12. Williams JL, Noviello SS, Griffith KS, Wurtzel H, Hamborsky J, Perz JF, 
Williams IT, Hadler JL, Swerdlow DL, Ridzon R. Anthrax postexposure 
prophylaxis in postal workers, Connecticut, 2001. Emerg Infect Dis 2002 Oct; 
8(10):1133–1137.
13. Quinn SC, Thomas T, McAllister C. Postal workers’ perspectives on 
communication during the anthrax attack. Biosecur Bioterror. 2005; 3(3): 
207–215.
14. North CS, Pollio DE, Pfefferbaum B, Megivern D, Vythilingam M, 
Westerhaus ET, Martin GJ, Hong BA. Concerns of Capitol Hill staff workers 
after bioterrorism: focus group discussions of authorities’ response. J Nerv 
Ment Dis 2005 Aug; 193(8):523–527. 
J. ZENILMAN
76
www.ebook3000.com

Biological threat agents are infectious microorganisms such as bacteria, 
rickettsiae, fungi, viruses, or toxins with the intent to incapacitate or kill 
man, or to destroy livestock, crops, or food. The use of biological threat 
agents in biological warfare has a long history, but the recent use of 
anthrax spores in bioterrorism has urged the need for responding to such 
threats. The design of efficient and reliable detection and identification 
systems is a part of bioterrorism preparedness and response. Classical micro-
biology, immunoassays, and nucleic acid-based methods including molecular 
forensics are laboratory approaches for detecting and identifying various 
biological threat agents. These are supplementary methods needed for 
verification. However, the analysis results depend on the sample collection 
and handling. This chapter briefly summarizes some biological warfare 
and bioterrorism events, the threat posed by bioterrorism. Also, various 
methods and systems suitable for detection and identification of biological 
Biological warfare is the deliberate dispersion of infectious microorganisms 
(i.e., bacteria, rickettsiae, fungi, and viruses) or toxins with the intent to 
be produced naturally by microorganisms, plants, or animals, or even 
synthesized chemically. Biological weapons (BWs) are weapons containing 
infectious biological material and are regarded as weapons of mass destruc-
© 2007 Springer.
Establishment, P.O. Box 25, N-2027 Kjeller, Norway 
tion (WMD), or more appropriately as weapons of mass casualty [reviewed 
delivery system such as a physical weapon (i.e., standard munitions,
threat agents, with emphasis on environmental samples, are described.
in 1, 2]. A BW is more than the biological agent alone and implies a 
77
M.S. Green et al. (eds.), Risk Assessment and Risk Communication Strategies in Bioterrorism 
1.  
Abstract
2.  
Introduction
Preparedness, 77–92. 
Forsvarets forskningsinstitutt (FFI), Norwegian Defence Research 
Janet Martha Blatny
DETECTING AND RESPONDING
incapacitate or kill man, or to destroy livestock, crops or food. Toxins may 
 TO BIOTERRORISM

J.M. BLATNY 
their production is by “dual-use” equipment. For civilian purposes such 
equipment is used for production of beer, yoghurt, vaccines, and antibiotics. 
There are several barriers in obtaining an effective BW, and two of the 
major challenges are (i) the development of a sufficiently virulent and 
infectious strain for the seed stock and (ii) the selection of the most appro-
priate dissemination method of the biological threat agent. 
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) has established 
a list of biological agents and toxins that may pose a severe threat to public 
health and safety (http://www.cdc.gov/od/sap). The requirements for inclu-
ding the agent or toxin to this “select agent list” are based on the effect on 
human health of exposure, the degree of contagiousness, the availability 
and effectiveness of medical treatment, and the vulnerability of various 
populations. Since October 2005, the reconstructed 1918 pandemic influenza 
virus has been added to this list. Table 1 provides examples of potential 
biological threat agents. The Australia Group has provided guidelines and 
control lists for national export of equipment, technology, and biological 
material that could contribute to BW activities (http://www.australiagroup.net/). 
TABLE 1. Potential biological threat agents
Microorganism 
Disease 
Mortality 
Infective 
dosea
Incubation
time
Bacillus anthracis 
Anthrax 
High 
spores
Yersinia pestis 
Plague  
High 
100–500 cfu 
Francisella
tularensis
Tularemia 
Low 
10–50 cfu 
Variola major 
Smallpox  
High 
10–100 pfu 
Clostridium
botulinumb
Botulinum 
High 
0.003 Pg/kg
(LD50)
Filovirus (e.g.,
Ebola, Marburg)
Viral
hemorrhagic
fevers
High 
1–10 pfu 
missiles, vehicle, and artillery shell). The Biological and Toxin Weapon
Convention (BTWC) that entered into force in 1975 prohibits the
development, production, and stockpiling of BWs. The use of such
weapons is banned under the Geneva Protocol 1925. Still, it is strongly
believed that some terrorist organizations and certain states, which
are parties to the Convention, do possess BW programs. It is gene- 
rally believed that biological threat agents are easily acquired and that 
untreated
d
c
c
c
8,000–5,000
1–6 d 
2–3 d 
2–10 d 
7–17 d 
1–5 d 
4–21 d 
78
www.ebook3000.com

Coxiella burnetii 
Q fever 
Low 
30–3,000 cfu 
Brucella spp.
Brucellosis 
Low 
10–100 cfu 
Vibrio cholerae 
Cholera 
Low 
103–106 cfu 
Shigella spp.
Shigellosis  
Low 
10–100 cfu  
Salmonella spp. 
Salmonellosis 
Low 
10–100 cfu  
Escherichia coli
O157:H7
STEC 
Low 
<103
Ricin toxin 
 
High 
3–5 Pg/kg
(LD50)
18–24 h
a
b The toxin is the biological threat agent. 
c Contagious human to human. 
epidemic upon the residents. During the French and Indian Wars (17th 
century) blankets containing pus or dried scabs from patients infected with 
smallpox were given to the Native American tribes in order to transfer the 
disease. The Germans used biological agents for sabotage during the First 
World War such as infecting animal feed and horses intended for export. 
The Japan’s biological warfare program during the Second World War 
included experiments using plague, cholera, and plague on prisoners, 
where more than 10,000 died (Unit 731). President Nixon terminated the 
US offensive BW programs in 1970 after signing the National Security 
Decisions 35 and 44. The BW program of the Sovjetunionen still continued 
(Biopreparat) after signing the BTWC in 1972. In 1979, anthrax spores were 
accidentally released from one of the BW research facilities in Sverdlovsk 
The Rajneeshee Cult deliberately released Salmonella typhimurium at salad 
 Infective dose as aerosol [3], except for food and water pathogens [4].
The use of biological agents in warfare has a long history [reviewed in 
1]. During the Middle Age (14th century) the Tartars catapulted bodies
of plague victims over the walls of Kaffa in an attempt to initiate an 
resulting in 66 deaths [5]. This unintentional release of anthrax spores  
demonstrated the effectiveness of infection by inhalation. In 1978, 
KGB assassinated the Bulgarian writer and journalist Markov by stab- 
bing him with the tip of an umbrella containing a small pellet of ricin. 
c
10–40 d
5–60 d 
4 h–5 d 
1–7 d 
1–7 d 
10 h–3 d 
d d, days; h, hours. 
79
 DETECTING AND RESPONDING TO BIOTERRORISM
3. 
Biological Warfare and Bioterrorism Events

J.M. BLATNY 
centers in the United States, in 2001, resulted in 22 cases of anthrax in 
attackers, the vulnerability and the value of the action, and the harm of the 
numbers of casualties. The US senator Bill Frist stated at the World 
Economic Forum, Davos, January 2005 that “The greatest existential threat 
we have in the world today is biological” and that such an attack would 
occur at some time in the next 10 years. The Canadian Press reported in 
March 2005 that the military’s intelligence arm has warned the federal 
government that avian flu may be a suitable biological threat agent. The 
1918 pandemic influenza virus has recently been reconstructed by retrieving 
gene sequences from victims buried in the permafrost of Alaska and from 
SARS virus from laboratories in Singapore and Beijing were reported in 
anthrax spores by letters and the postal processing and distribution 
which five of the inhalation cases were fatal [7]. A study performed 
by the Swedish Defence Research Agency [8] showed that the majo-
biological agent [9]. There is a strong focus on the use of anthrax as a
BW. This is due to the great stability of the anthrax spores ( 80 years), 
>
the effectiveness as an infectious agent by inhalation, and the easy
dissemination of the spores. Many experts believe that biological
threat agents may be more useful for obtaining panic and anxiety
causing serious psychological impact instead of resulting in high 
preserved tissue samples [10, 11]. The 1918 flu virus killed approximately 
40 million people and might be regarded as one of the most effective
bioweapon known. Newly emerging (e.g., SARS, Hendra, Nipah, and 
avian flu) and re-emerging (e.g., West Nile, human monkeypox, 
multidrug-resistant Mycobacterium tuberculosis) pathogenic microorg-
anisms are of global concern urging the needs for national preparedness
plans, and the development and production of vaccines, antivirals,
and other therapeutics. These infectious agents could potentially be 
used in a deliberate biological attack. Three accidental escapes of the 
2003 and 2004 [12]. Gene sequences may be purchased from various
bars and supermarkets in Oregon, USA, in 1984, causing an outbreak  
of salmonellosis where 751 people fell ill [6]. The dissemination of
rity of incidents between 1960 and 1999 using biological material in
order to kill, incapacitate, or threaten, included frequent use of ricin,
HIV-infected blood, and food contaminants (e.g., Salmonella spp. and
Shigella spp.). 
80
into account; the capability (technology and skills) and intention of the 
In order to assess a bioterrorism threat several factors need to be taken
4. 
Bioterrorism Threat
www.ebook3000.com

To minimize the effects of a biological attack, public health authorities 
need to be aware of the threat biological agents may have in biological 
warfare and bioterrorism.
Physicians need to be alerted and well-trained, have a high suspicion for 
these agents, and must recognize the clinical symptoms derived from such 
an infection. Symptoms of those exposed to such agents may be nonspecific 
and resemble common flu-like diseases. Many biological threat agents are 
zoonotic. Animals may show the first symptoms of a clinical infectious 
disease after a deliberate release of a biological agent. In such cases, 
veterinarians may be the first to encounter the disease caused by a zoonotic 
threat agent.
Planning for necessary actions, national and global coordination, res-
ponsibility, enhanced law enforcement, medical countermeasures, and 
implementing efficient syndromic surveillance systems are all essential 
parts of bioterrorism preparedness. In addition, designing efficient detection 
systems for early warning, and rapid and reliable diagnostic systems con-
tributes to improve the response efforts. The avian flu outbreak in several 
Asian countries killing approximately 50 million chickens has revealed the 
need for establishing rapid molecular diagnostics for mass screening of the 
Biological threat agents may be difficult to detect and identify quickly and 
reliable both from a civilian (public health) and a military point of view. 
There is a distinction between the terms “detection” and “identification”. 
The establishment of the presence or absence of a biological agent is termed 
genes synthesis firms by e-mail requests. Few companies check and
compare the ordered sequences against sequences from biological
threat agents and there are no national regulations requiring these firms
to do so. Thus, there is a concern that terrorists may order specific viru-
lence genes and perform genetic engineering to create new or altered 
pathogenic microorganisms [13]. 
to a release of biological agents may decrease the infectious rate and
the people exposed (Figure 1). By the time the clinical symptoms have
emerged, it might be too late for treatment. In some cases, antibiotics
may be effective as postexposure prophylaxis, but this treatment needs
to start before the onset of symptoms.  
flu carriers to improve public health responses [14]. Early detection
81
 DETECTING AND RESPONDING TO BIOTERRORISM
Responding to Bioterrorism
5. 
Biological Detection and Identification
6. 

J.M. BLATNY 
detection, while identification is the determination of the precise nature of 
the biological agent. Many systems can only detect, and not identify the 
biological agent. The identification system is usually dependent on 
specific signatures (DNA, protein) of the microorganism. Identification of  
S. typhimurium as the causing strain for the deliberate outbreak of salmone-
llosis by the Rajneeshee Cult took 4 days, but it took more than a year to 
identify and confirm that only a single strain of S. typhimurium had been 
used (in addition to the confession by one of the cult members about the 
deliberate release). This illustrates that, in some cases, identification may be 
time-consuming. Many bacterial threat agents occur naturally, and some 
may be closely related to other bacteria found in the environment. Thus, it is 
necessary to distinguish between terrorist events, naturally occurring 
outbreaks, and background levels. False positives (i.e., alarm, but no agent) 
may arise when the biological detector device responds to detect and identify 
an interfering substance in the sample (contamination), which is not the 
actual biological agent. If a biological agent exists, but below an 
instrument’s threshold value for detection and identification, a false negative 
may occur. Thus, the detection and identification schemes need to be 
carefully designed.
Figure 1. Early detection of a biological threat agent may reduce the number of 
infected individuals and casualties, and may be able to provide medical treatment 
before onset of symptoms.
82
2
4
6
8
10
12
0
5
10
15
20
25
hours
days
numbers affected
infections
symptoms
casualties / 
fatalities
incubation
treatment
Detection vs clinical diagnostics
2
4
6
8
10
12
0
5
10
15
20
25
hours
days
numbers affected
incubation
infections
casualties / 
fatalities
prophylaxis and treatment
Early detection
www.ebook3000.com

A biological point detector for environmental (air) monitoring contains 
several components (Figure 2). A trigger may determine in real time any 
change in the biological background in air and discriminate between a 
biological threat agent and other particles in air, i.e., nonspecific detection. 
Particle sizers may be used as a trigger, exemplified by the Model 3321 
Aerodynamic Particle Sizer from TSI and the Fluorescence Aerodynamic 
Particle Sizer FLAPS2 from Defence R&D Canada. The FLAPS2 measures 
the intrinsic fluorescence produced by living microorganisms. Using an 
ultraviolet (UV) laser, the wavelength 266 nm excites fluorescence from the 
amino acids tryptophan and tyrosine, while 355 nm excites fluorescence 
ranging (LIDAR) may also be used as a trigger and for detecting potential 
biological threat clouds. LIDAR is regarded as a detect-to-warn system 
false alarms. So far, LIDAR is not sufficiently operative during full daylight 
and needs good environmental conditions to function efficiently. 
A collector is used for concentrating the biological particles in air 
usually into a liquid. Spores, bacteria, and viruses are usually together or 
detecting ACPLA is to collect large enough air samples through a 
collector. The impinger SpinCon® air sampler from Sceptor Industries 
collects particles at a flow rate of 450 l/min in the range of 0.2–10 µm into 
a liquid. OMNI 3000, based on the SpinCon® technology, and the Biotrace 
Intelligent Cyclone Air Sampler (ICAS) collects air with a flow rate of 300 
and 750 L/min, respectively. The BioCapture 650 from MesoSystems is a 
portable handheld air collector, suitable for first responders, sampling at a 
flow rate of 200 L/min. The efficiency of air collection is also dependent on 
the size of the particles. FFI is using both the SpinCon® and OMNI 3000 
air collector for outdoor and indoor sampling of air (Figure 3). These air 
samples are spiked with biological threat agents for polymerase chain 
characterize to a certain extent the biological origin of the aerosols. Even 
[15]. Short-range LIDARs can detect at a radius of approximately
5 km from the instrument. Most LIDARs use UV radiation at 266 nm 
or 355 nm such that biological material will fluoresce, but UV exci- 
tation may also fluoresce fuel oils, diesel, and agrochemicals causing 
Efficient and reliable biodetection depends on the selectivity and sensitivity 
of the assay and system, as well as the collection and handling of the sample. 
from the cofactor NADH. A stand-off detector, such as light detection and 
attached to dust and other particles in air. Thus, the term “agent-containing 
particles per liter of air” (ACPLA) has been adopted. The first step in 
reaction (PCR) analyses and determination of the detection limit (unpublished
results). In many biodetection devices the trigger and detector have 
overlapping or the same functions. A detector is used to determine and 
83
 DETECTING AND RESPONDING TO BIOTERRORISM
7. 
Detection Systems for Biological Threat Agents

J.M. BLATNY 
biological threat agent (described in Section 5.1.8). 
usually consists of a trigger, collector, detector, and identifier. Reliable and efficient 
Figure 2. A biological point detection system for environmental monitoring (air)
detection and identification is dependent on the type of sample, sample collection,
and sample processing.
Figure 3. The SpinCon    and OMNI 3000 collector (Sceptor Industries) located
®         
outside FFI, Kjeller, for air sampling. 
though biological agents are detected, further identification of the agent   
is usually needed. An identifier performs specific identification of the 
84
www.ebook3000.com

nonbacterial ATP (yeast, somatic, or free ATP), and to detect spores. 
Spores are deficient in ATP and a germination step is required before 
There are several methods available for identifying biological threat 
viable cells, inspection of colony morphology, and determination of antibiotic 
sensitivity. Such classical microbiology may identify the bacterial agent at 
the genus level and to a certain extent at the species level. However, these 
methods do not identify toxins, they are time-consuming, and not suitable 
for first responders.
Immunoassays include the use of specific antibodies targeted against a 
toxin or a particular antigen at the surface of a bacterial cell or spore. 
Immunological methods usually provide quick results and are suitable for 
fast screening of a large number of samples. However, the method is less 
specific and sensitive, and the detection limit may be a 100–1,000-fold 
devices are the BioVeris detection system, Meso Scale Discovery Sector PR, 
and Luminex 100.
assay combined with specific phage-associated lytic enzymes may be
used for further identification of the bacteria.
performing the bioluminescence assay [16, 17]. The bioluminescence 
higher than the infective dose [20, 22]. In general, immunoassays are
good for presumptive detection but confirmatory analysis is needed,
usually by nucleic acid-based detection methods. Antibody specificity
and affinity are often the limiting factors of immunoassays. Tetracore’s 
Biological threat agents may be present as vegetative cells, spores, or in 
a dormant state (viable but nonculturable state; VBNC) in environmental 
detection of viable bacterial cells (bioluminescence assays). Some of 
these assays have been further improved to separate bacterial ATP from
samples (such as water, air, and soil). ATP is frequently used for nonspecific 
BioThreat Alert Test strips are reagent strips using a lateral flow immuno- 
chromatography technique allowing biological threat agents to be identi- 
fied within 15 min. Examples of commercially available immunological 
agents, but there is no single approach for identification. Definitive identi- 
fication requires several methods; conventional culture-based methods
as well as clinical diagnosis of those exposed to such agents. The
cultivation of bacteria in selective growth medium allows detection of 
85
immunoassays, and nucleic acid-based methods (reviewed in [18–21]),
 DETECTING AND RESPONDING TO BIOTERRORISM
8. 
8.1.
 IMMUNOLOGICAL METHODS
Identification of Biological Threat Agents

J.M. BLATNY 
Real-time PCR is the most commonly used nucleic acid-based method for 
specific and sensitive identification of biological threat agents. PCR may 
detect as low as 10–100 cells, but this method usually requires a clean 
sample. Disruption of bacterial cells and spores is often needed in order to 
make the DNA available for amplification in the PCR assay. An effective 
sample preparation may also reduce the presence of false negatives since 
impurities from the sample may inhibit the PCR assay. Specific identification 
by PCR is obtained by using specific primers and probe combinations. 
Each probe (e.g., TaqMan probes, fluorescence resonance energy transfer 
[FRET]-prober, and molecular beacons) has a different method of separating 
the fluorophore from the quencher when reporting the amplification 
process. Different reporter dyes (fluorophores) may be attached to the probes 
allowing simultaneous identification of several biological threat agents 
(multiplex identification). The PCR assay should include internal controls 
to avoid false positive signals. Internal controls may consist of either a 
plasmid or a DNA fragment in which the amplified DNA sequence is 
Several real-time PCR assays have been outlined for a number of 
biological threat agents, and commercial kits containing the specific reagents 
are available. The target genes and regions for PCR identification are 
specifically chosen for each microorganism. For Bacillus anthracis, several 
genes located on the virulence pXO1 and pXO2 plasmids, respectively. 
However, plasmid-free B. anthracis cells will only be identified by PCR 
when using specific chromosomal targets. The closest relative of B.
anthracis is the opportunistic human pathogen B. cereus (soil bacterium) 
and the insect pathogen B. thuringiensis. These are functionally different, 
mainly distinguish by plasmid-encoded genes. The genomes of B. anthracis,
regions that may be suitable as specific targets for PCR identification
unique in the assay [23, 24].
genetic targets located on the chromosome are used for identification [25–27]
in addition to the well-known target lef, cya, pga toxin, and cap capsule 
B. cereus, and B. thuringiensis strains show a close similarity [28] 
complicating the search for unique chromosomal targets for thier differ-
entiation and identification. However, genome sequencing of many
biological threat agents has provided significant data about unique 
[29]. FFI has identified one unique chromosomal target for specific
identification of B. anthracis (unpublished results). Several real-time PCR
SmartCycler from Cepheid and the LightCycler from Roche Applied 
assays for identification of various biological threat agents listed in Table 1
have been established at FFI (exemplified in Figure 4) using either the
86
8.2. NUCLEIC ACID-BASED METHODS
www.ebook3000.com

Science (Figure 5). Idaho Technologies and Smiths detection (Bio-Seeq) 
have developed handheld PCR devices suitable for military use and first 
responders, such as Ruggedized advanced pathogen identification device 
(RAPID), and RAZOR, and Bio-Seeq, respectively. Bruker Daltonik GmbH 
has constructed a microarray system based on PCR for bioidentification. For 
review of various nucleic acid detection assays and systems see [18, 19, 21]. 
TM
(Lightcycler     ) using specific primers and probes (19). 
TM
Figure 5. Real-time PCR devices at FFI. A, Smartcycler  (Cepheid); B,
R
Lightcycler     (Roche Applied Science). 
Figure 4. Identification of Coxiella burnetti (9 Mile, phase I) by PCR
87
 DETECTING AND RESPONDING TO BIOTERRORISM

J.M. BLATNY 
PCR can detect DNA from both viable and dead cells, and thus, culture-
based methods are needed for the assessment of bacterial viability. Nucleic 
acid sequence-based amplification (NASBA) is a method in which RNA 
Biodetection equipment for use in a battlefield is different from the use in 
a civilian community. If deployed in the right place and at the right time, 
valuable information of a bioterrorism event would be provided. The Joint 
Biological Point Detection System (JBPDS) is an automatic point detector 
for real-time identification of biological threat agents within 15 min and 
suitable for military use. It contains a trigger, collector, detector, and 
identifier, and will be used by the US Air Force and Marine Corps. Integrated 
systems for identification of various biological threat agents in large areas 
(e.g., arenas, airports) and postal service systems have been constructed, 
such as the Autonomous Pathogen Detection System (APDS) from Lawrence 
Livermore National Laboratory and the BioHazard Detection System (BDS) 
from Northrop Grumman, respectively.
Other biodetection techniques in advance are light scattering surface 
plasmon resonance (LSSPR), surface–enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS), 
and matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectro-
scopy (MALDI-TOF-MS). There have been many attempts to develop 
biosensors based on electrochemics, micro-fluidics, nanocrystals (quantum 
dots), and optics, combined with immuno- and nucleic acid-based assays, 
Classification of bacterial strains is often based on the identification of 
DNA polymorphisms. When the genetic diversity within a bacterial species 
is high, it is often adequate to sequence only a few number of DNA 
instead of DNA is amplified (reviewed in [30–32]). NASBA can be   
used to detect viable cells since mRNA is specifically detected and ampli-
fied. The design of specific primers and molecular beacons is crucial
for the NASBA assay. NASBA has been widely used for virus diagnostics,
and only few reports describe the use of this technique for bacterial 
detection. This technique has been used together with liposomal-based
biosensors to identify B. anthracis, Escherichia coli, and Cryptosporidium
parvum [33–35]. FFI has used NASBA for identification of Vibrio
cholerae in water samples [36].
but only few are commercially available (reviewed in [37, 21]).
88
Integrated and Advanced Detection Methods
9. 
10. 
Molecular Forensics
www.ebook3000.com

fragments in order to classify the strain. In contrast, strains belonging to 
more homogenous species, in which little sequence divergence has occurred, 
it is necessary to sequence long DNA regions or to analyze several loci 
with high mutation rates. Variable number of tandem repeats (VNTR) is a 
linear arrangement of multiple copies of short repeated DNA sequences 
Biological threat agents for the use in biological warfare or bioterrorism 
are infectious microorganisms or toxins with the intent to incapacitate or 
kill man, or to destroy livestock, crops, or food. An essential part of bio-
terrorism preparedness and response includes the design of efficient and 
reliable systems for detection and identification of biological threat agents. 
Various biodetection systems for environmental monitoring are available. 
Many of these systems have been primarily constructed for military use. 
There is no single approach for identification of biological threat agents, 
and several methods are needed for verification.  Classical microbiology, 
immunoassays, and nucleic acid-based methods, including molecular 
forensics, are laboratory approaches for detecting, identifying, and verifying 
various biological threat agents.
References
1.
2.
that vary in length and are highly polymorphic [38]. The size of the DNA 
fragments containing VNTRs is measured by PCR. Most bacterial 
genomes contain several VNTRs, and multi-locus VNTR (MLVA)
analysis is now a suitable tool for strain typing and for tracing back
in the United States in 2001 [40, 41, 29]. The United States has recently 
established a laboratory known as the National Bioforensics Analysis
Center (NBFAC) operating together with the Federal Bureau of Inves- 
tigation (FBI) [42]. The laboratory will handle an end-to-end analysis
Atlas RM. Bioterrorism: from threat to reality. Annu Rev Microbiol 2002; 
56:167–185.
Davis RG. The ABCs of bioterrorism for veterinarians, focusing on Category 
A agents. Vet Med Today 2004; 224:1084–1095. 
to identify the B. anthracis Ames strain used in the anthrax attacks
to the origin of the bacterial agent [39]. VNTR analysis was used  
from sample collection to molecular typing. MLVA techniques have 
already been established at FFI and are used for genetic fingerprinting
of B. cereus and V. cholerae strains (unpublished results).
89
 DETECTING AND RESPONDING TO BIOTERRORISM
11.  Conclusion

J.M. BLATNY 
3.
4.
5.
6.
7. 
8. 
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15. 
16.
17. Fujinami Y, Kataoka M, Matsushita K, Sekiguchi H, Itoi T, Tsuge K, Seto 
Y. Sensitive detection of bacteria and spores using a portable bioluminescence 
ATP measurement assay system distinguishing from white powder materials. 
J Health Sci 2004; 50:126–132. 
18. 
Kortepeter M, Christopher G, Cieslak T, Culpepper R, Darling R, Pavlin J, Rowe 
J, McKee Jr. K, Eitzen Jr. E. USAMRIID’S Medical management of biological 
casualties handbook, Maryland, USA, 2001. 
Granum PE. Smittsomme sykdommer fra mat. Høyskoleforlaget, 1999. 
Meselson M, Guillemin J, Hugh-Jones M, Langmuir A, Popova V, Shelokov 
A, Yampolskaya V. The Sverdlovsk anthrax outbreak of 1979. Science 1994; 
266:1202–1208.
Török T, Tauxe R, Wise R, Livengood J, Sokolow RA. Large community 
outbreak of salmonellosis caused by intentional contamination of restaurant 
salad bars. JAMA 1997; 278:389–395. 
Jernigan DB, Raghunathan PL, Bell BP, Brechner R, Bresnitz EA, Butler 
JC, Cetron M, Cohen V, Doyle T, Fischer M, Greene C, Griffith KS, Guarner 
J, Hadler JL, Hayslett JA, Meyer R, Petersen LR, Phillips M, Pinner R, Popovic
T, Quinn CP, Reefhuis J, Reissman D, Rosenstein N, Schuchat A, Shieh  
W, Siegal L, Swerdlow DL, Tenover FC, Traeger M, Ward JW, Weisfuse 
I, Wiersma S, Yeskey K, Zaki S, Ashford DA, Perkins BA, Ostroff S, Hughes 
J, Fleming D, Koplan JP, Gerberding JL, The National Anthrax Epidemiologic 
Investigation Team. Investigation of bioterrorism-related anthrax, United 
States, 2001: Epidemiologic findings. Emerg Inf Dis 2002; 8:1019–1028. 
Melin L. Terrorism och kriminalitet. FOI report 1551-864 (in Swedish), 2000. 
Ackerman GA, Moran KS. Bioterrorism and threat assessment. The weapons 
of mass destruction commission, No. 22, 2004. 
9. 
Taubenberger JK, Reid AH, Lourens RM, Wang R, Jin G, Fanning  
TG. Characterization of the 1918 influenza virus polymerase genes. Nature 
2005; 437:889–893. 
Tumpey TM, Basler CF, Aguilar PV, Zeng H, Solorzano A, Swayne DE, Cox 
NJ, Katza JM, Taubenberger JK, Palese P, Garcia-Sastre A. Characterization 
of the reconstructed 1918 Spanish influenza pandemic virus. Science 2005; 
310:77–80.
Von Bubnoff A. The 1918 flu virus is resurrected. Nature 2005; 437:794–795.
Aldhous P. The bioweapon is in the post. New Scientist 2005; 12:8–9. 
Fung YW, Lau L, Yu AC. The necessity of molecular diagnostics for avian flu. 
Nat Biotechnol 2004; 22(3):267. 
Baxter K, Clark JM. Set lasers to…detect. NBC International, Spring 2004, pp. 
26–28. 
the screening and identification of bacteria in food and water samples. 
Biocatalysis: Fundamentals and Applications 2000; 41:27–29. 
Trudil D, Loomis L, Pabon R, Hasan JAK, Trudil CL. Rapid ATP method for 
Iqbal SS, Mayo MW, Bruno JG, Bronk BV, Batt CA, Chambers JP. A review 
of molecular recognition technologies for detection of biological threat 
agents. Biosens Bioelectron 2000; 15:549–578. 
90
www.ebook3000.com

20.
21.
22. 
23.
24.
25.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
Peruski Jr. LF, Peruski AH. Rapid diagnostic assays in the genomic biology 
era: detection and identification of infectious disease and biological weapon 
Peruski AH, Peruski Jr. LF. Immunological methods for detection and 
identification of infectious disease and biological warfare agents. Clin Diagn 
Lab Immun 2003b; 10:506–513. 
Lim DV, Simpson JM, Kearns EA, Kramer MF. Current and developing 
technologies for monitoring agents of bioterrorism and biowarfare. Clin 
Microbiol Rev 2005; 18:583–607. 
Charrel RN, la Scola B, Raoult D. Multi-pathogens sequence containing 
plasmids as positive controls for universal detection of potential agents of 
bioterrorism. BMC Microbiol 2004; 4:1–11. 
Inoue S, Noguchi A, Tanabayashi K, Yamada A. Preparation of a positive 
control DNA for molecular diagnosis of Bacillus anthracis. Jpn J Infect Dis 
2004; 57:29–32. 
Rastogi VK, Cheng T. Identification of anthrax-specific signature sequence 
from Bacillus anthracis. Proc. SPIE 2001; 4378:115–126. Chemical and 
Biological Sensing II (Gerdner, ed.). 
Bavykin SG, Lysov YP, Zakhariev V, Kelly JJ, Jackman J, Stahl DA, Cherni, 
A. Use of 16S rRNA, 23S rRNA, and gyrB gene sequences analysis to 
determine phylogenetic relationships of Bacillus cereus group microorganisms. 
J Clin Microbiol 2004; 42:3711–3730. 
Bode E, Hurtle W, Norwood D. Real-time PCR assay for a unique 
chromosomal sequence of Bacillus anthracis. J Clin Microbiol 2004; 42: 
5826–5831.
26.
Helgason E, Økstad OA, Caugant DA, Johansen HA, Fouet A, Mock M, Hegna 
I, Kolstø AB. Bacillus anthracis, Bacillus cereus, and Bacillus thuringiensis –
one species on the basis of genetic evidence. Appl Environ Microbiol 2000; 
66:2627–2630.
Fraser CM. A genomics-based approach to biodefence preparedness. Nat Rev 
2004; 5:23–33. 
Chan AB, Fox JD. NASBA and other transcription-based amplification 
methods for research and diagnostic microbiology. Rev Med Microbiol 1999; 
10:185–196.
Deiman B, van Aarle P, Sillekens P. Characteristics and applications of 
nucleic acid sequence-based amplification (NASBA). Mol Biotechnol 2002; 
20:163–179.
Cook N. The use of NASBA for the detection of microbial pathogens in food 
and environmental samples. J Microbiol Methods 2003; 53:165–174. 
Hartley HA, Baeumner AJ. Biosensor for the detection of a single viable 
B. anthracis spore. Anal Bioanal Chem 2003; 376:319–327. 
19. Ivnitski D, O’Neil DJ, Gattuso A, Schlicht R, Calidonna M, Fisher R. Nucleic 
acid approaches for detection and identification of biological warfare and 
infectious disease agents. BioTechniques 2003; 35:862–869. 
agents. BioTechniques 2003a; 35:840–846. 
91
 DETECTING AND RESPONDING TO BIOTERRORISM

J.M. BLATNY 
34.
35.
36.
37. 
39.
40.
41.
42.
38. Van Belkum A, Scherer S, van Alphen L, Verbrugh H. hort-sequence DNA 
repeats in prokaryotic genomes. Microbiol Mol Biol Rev 1998; 62:275–293. 
Lindstedt BA. Multiple-locus variable number tandem repeats analysis for 
genetic fingerprinting of pathogenic bacteria. Electrophoresis 2005; 
26:2567–2582.
Keim P, Price LB, Klevytska AM, Smith KL, Schupp JM, Okinaka R, Jackson 
PJ, Hugh-Jones ME. Multiple-locus variable-number tandem repeat analysis 
reveals genetic relationships within Bacillus anthracis. J Bacteriol 2000; 
182:2928–2936.
Read TD, Peterson SN, Tourasse N, Baillie LW, Paulson IT, Nelson KE, Tettelin 
H, Fouts DE, Eisen JA, Gill SR, Holtzapple EK, Økstad OA, Helgason  
E, Rilstone J, Wu M, Kolonay JF, Beanan MJ, Dodson RJ, Brinkac LM, Gwinn 
M, DeBoy RT, Madpu R, Daugherty SC, Scott Durkin A, Haft DH, Nelson 
WC, Peterson JD, Pop M, Khouri HM, Radune D, Benton JL, Mahamoud 
Y, Jiang L, Hance IR, Weidman JF, Berry KJ, Plaut RD, Wolf AM, Watkins 
KL, Nierman WC, Hazen A, Cline R, Redmond C, Thwaite JE, White  
O, Salzberg SL, Thomason B, Friedlander AM, Koehler TM, Hanna PC, Kolstø 
AB, Fraser CM. The genome sequence of Bacillus anthracis Ames and 
comparison to closely related bacteria. Science 2002; 296:2028–2033. 
Budowle B, Schutzer SE, Ascher MS, Atlas RM, Burans JP, Chakraborty 
R, Dunn JJ, Fraser CM, Franz DR, Leighton TJ, Morse SA, Murch RS, Ravel 
J, Rock DL, Slezak TR, Velsko SP, Walsh AC, Walters RA. Toward a system 
of microbial forensics: from sample collection to interpretation of evidence. 
Appl Environ Microbiol 2005; 71:2209–2213. 
Deisingh AK, Thompson T. Biosensors for the detection of bacteria. Can  
J Microbiol 2004; 50:69–77. 
Fykse EM, Skogan G, Davies W, Olsen JS, Blatny JM. Detection of viable 
Vibrio cholerae cells by NASBA. Manuscript in preparation, 2005. 
Baeumner AJ, Pretz J, Fang SA. universal nucleic acid sequence biosensor 
with nanomolar detection limits. Anal Chem 2004a; 76:888–894. 
Baeumner AJ, Leonard B, McElwee J, Montagna RA. A rapid biosensor for 
viable B. anthracis spores. Anal Bioanal Chem 2004b; 380:15–23. 
92
www.ebook3000.com

USA and the University of Alabama at Birmingham, AL, USA 
In late June 1999, an unusual number of dead birds were reported in the 
borough of Queens, New York City. After 6–8 weeks, an unusual number 
of human cases of encephalitis were first noted in hospitals in the area. The 
disease was soon diagnosed as St. Louis encephalitis, a mosquito-borne 
viral encephalitis, the causative agent of which does not kill birds. Appro-
announced and mosquito control began. Then, 2–3 weeks later, animal 
disease data and human disease data were integrated, and the true 
causative agent, West Nile virus, was implicated in both the bird and the 
human deaths. We will never know if, or exactly how many, lives and 
dollars might have been saved by knowing 6 weeks earlier that a new, 
deadly zoonotic arbovirus had been introduced to North America, but 
experts agree days – and sometimes even hours – make a real difference 
when dealing with infectious outbreaks. Had we been thinking in terms of 
disease – wherever it occurs – rather than just human disease, we might 
have done better. 
Two real concerns of the time in which we live are the threat of 
biological terrorism and the reality of naturally emerging disease. Risk 
assessment and communication are central to protecting lives and property 
before and during an outbreak of infectious disease, whether natural or inten-
tional. Becoming aware of any disease outbreak –natural or introduced – 
as early as possible, should be our highest priority. Only when we know 
what is going on around us can we respond and break the cycle of 
transmission. Not all microbes have the same impact across species, but 
the index case may not always be a human. Although Bacillus anthracis is 
very high on the threat list for terrorist use against humans, it is not 
typically transmissible and is thus of little concern for livestock. On the 
ximately 2 weeks after the first human cases, the “St. Louis” outbreak was 
Midwest Research Institute, MD, USA Kansas State University, KS, 
SPECIES-NEUTRAL DISEASE SURVEILLANCE:
A FOUNDATION OF RISK ASSESSMENT
AND COMMUNICATION
1. 
Introduction
© 2007 Springer.
M.S. Green et al. (eds.), Risk Assessment and Risk Communication Strategies in Bioterrorism 
93
Preparedness, 93–99. 
David R. Franz

even for wildlife. Finally, we face contagious agents, such as avian influenza 
virus, typically a disease only of birds, which through recombination has 
become a lethal human pathogen. In addition to West Nile encephalitis and 
avian flu, other recently emerged viral diseases – severe acute respiratory 
syndrome (SARS) and monkey pox – occurred first in animals. Whether a 
disease develops naturally or is introduced by a terrorist, an integrated 
network of species-neutral surveillance, supported by a deep research base 
and systems of communication between all sectors, will give days or 
weeks advanced warning of an outbreak. Therefore, monitoring the space 
where humans, animals, and microbes meet, while requiring some special 
tools and strange new agency relationships, will pay huge dividends in 
lives and resources saved. Disease surveillance and integration of the 
resulting data must be closely linked to risk assessment and communi-
cation activities. 
Biological security is fundamental to human security; human security is 
fundamental to stability in this ever smaller and more connected world. If 
we are to be as effective as we possibly can be with our risk assessment 
and communication, we must first understand the playing field. The per-
ceived threats to our biological security cover a broad spectrum world 
wide; where each of us finds ourselves on that spectrum depends to a great 
extent in which part of the world we reside. Figure 1 depicts the relative 
importance of the components of the threat spectrum: the enormous impact 
of chronic diseases such as HIV/AIDS, malaria, tuberculosis, and hepatitis; 
the potentially very significant impact of emerging disease, such as SARS 
and highly-pathogenic influenza; the potentially large impact, but low 
likelihood of bioterrorism and the emerging concern regarding the exploit-
tation of dual-use biotechnologies to cause harm. The arrows demonstrate 
regional differences in concern regarding various aspects of the threat 
spectrum. Therefore, threat perception is related to technological advance-
ment, state of public health and political factors within a given region or 
country. Where a country or region finds itself on the spectrum will change 
over time with these factors as well. 
DAVID R. FRANZ 
94
Biological Security and Human Security
2. 
other hand, a number of arthropod-borne viruses, such as Rift Valley fever 
virus could have broad implications for both livestock and humans, and 
www.ebook3000.com

Chronic
D
Disease
Emerging
Disease
Biological
Terrorism
Abuse of
Dual-use
Technologies
Fig. 1  The spectrum of biosecurity threats.  Font within spectr
Fig. 1  The spectrum of biosecurity threats.  Font within spectrum represents 
um represents 
relative health impact.  Arrows depict the differing perceptions
relative health impact.  Arrows depict the differing perceptions regarding type 
regarding type 
of threat in different regions of the world.
of threat in different regions of the world.
The International Biosecurity Spectrum of Concern
The International Biosecurity Spectrum of Concern
Advanced World Powers
Advanced World Powers
Third World Countries
Third World Countries
Technologically Advanced Democracies 
Technologically Advanced Democracies 
Chronic
D
Disease
Emerging
Disease
Biological
Terrorism
Abuse of
Dual-use
Technologies
Chronic
D
Disease
Emerging
Disease
Biological
Terrorism
Abuse of
Dual-use
Technologies
Fig. 1  The spectrum of biosecurity threats.  Font within spectr
Fig. 1  The spectrum of biosecurity threats.  Font within spectrum represents 
um represents 
relative health impact.  Arrows depict the differing perceptions
relative health impact.  Arrows depict the differing perceptions regarding type 
regarding type 
of threat in different regions of the world.
of threat in different regions of the world.
The International Biosecurity Spectrum of Concern
The International Biosecurity Spectrum of Concern
Advanced World Powers
Advanced World Powers
Third World Countries
Third World Countries
Technologically Advanced Democracies 
Technologically Advanced Democracies 
Health or economic threats to humans, animals, or both humans and animals 
caused by biological agents may also be categorized as natural, accidental, 
or intentional. Variola virus, the causative agent of smallpox, is a threat 
only to humans; eradicated from the globe nearly 30 years ago, it is no 
longer a natural threat. It could, however, be reintroduced into the human 
population intentionally or accidentally. B. anthracis, the causative agent 
of the disease anthrax, can affect both humans and animals. Because it is 
not contagious, as is variola, one would not expect there to be an accidental 
release of significance. There are, however, natural cases throughout the 
world every year and it is believed to be one of the most important agents 
for intentional warfare or terrorist release. The foot and mouth disease 
virus is the most contagious agent known to man. Although it affects only 
infects. It could be introduced naturally, accidentally, or intentionally. 
Note that, although there are examples, such as variola and the foot and 
mouth disease virus, which do not cross between humans and animals, the 
vast majority of agents, which we might have to deal with in the future 
following natural, accidental, or intentional introduction affect both 
humans and animals. 
95
an enormous negative economic impact in animal populations, which it 
cloven-hoofed animals, it has historically, and could in the future, have
 SPECIES-NEUTRAL DISEASE SURVEILLANCE
3. 
Natural vs. Intentional Disease

We often consider aerosol exposure of masses of humans in the context of 
biological terrorist threats. Granted, most of the classical threat agents – 
anthrax, tularemia, Q fever, etc. must be delivered via aerosol to efficiently 
infect large numbers of humans. Furthermore, preparing and releasing an 
agent as an effective aerosol is not a trivial technical accomplishment. 
Disease may also be introduced via food or drink. Some agents, such as 
botulinum toxin or the several bacteria, which cause enteric diseases, are 
well suited to distribution in this way. Certainly there are millions of cases 
of disease worldwide each year resulting from oral exposure through 
food or drink. We typically believe, however, that a successful intentional 
attack on our food supply will be less damaging than a successful aerosol 
attack on one of our cities. This belief is based on both the route of 
exposure and the agents typically believed to be ideal for aerosol vs. oral 
exposure. A third mode of introduction of disease into a population might 
be through insect or animal vectors. The natural introduction of West Nile 
encephalitis virus into the United States in 1999 is an example of an agent 
maintained in nature and transmitted by insects; it could have been 
introduced by insects or birds. Although there are exceptions, most of the 
agents of concern from aerosol, food and drink, or vector introduction do 
not spread easily from person to person or animal to animal; they are not 
highly contagious. A fourth category of exposure modes is that illustrated 
by the causative agents of SARS, influenza, smallpox, and foot and mouth 
disease. These need only be introduced into a population. Because of their 
propensity to multiply in the respiratory system and/or their tropism for 
cells of the respiratory tract, they can spread through a population without 
the aid of man-made aerosols, food, or insects. Therefore, in theory, highly 
contagious agents need only be introduced to one or a few members of a 
population to cause infection and even disease in many. 
In most incidences of widespread disease in a population – whether animal, 
human, or zoonotic – there is an index, or first, case followed by others. 
Depending on numerous factors, which we might simply describe as the 
epidemiological situation, the number of cases will first increase at some 
rate for a period of time and then, typically, decrease over time as well. 
Whether the disease is introduced naturally, accidentally, or intentionally, 
one of the very most important factors is discovering it as early as possible 
and understanding its spread through the population. Because many 
diseases of concern to humans are first seen in animals – West Nile 
DAVID R. FRANZ 
96
Routes of Exposure
4. 
5. 
Discovering Disease where it Begins
www.ebook3000.com

encephalitis, SARS, monkey pox, H5N1 influenza are recent examples – it 
is critical that we seek to discover disease in the species of origin. Finding 
evidence of a zoonotic disease first in animals will very likely allow pre-
ventive or prophylactic actions to be taken to protect the human population. 
The concept of species-neutral disease surveillance acknowledges that we 
must look for ‘disease’, not ‘human disease’ and ‘animal disease’. Finally, 
we live in a much smaller world than we did just a few decades ago. Trans-
portation and travel are such that an outbreak in one part of the world today 
can impact humans or animals on the other side of the globe tomorrow. 
Therefore, there is great benefit in discovering an outbreak (1) as early as 
possible, (2) in the host species of origin, and (3) in the region of origin. 
Traditionally, disease surveillance in most countries has involved a 
Ministry of Health network that monitors human disease and a Ministry of 
Agriculture, which monitors disease in animals. Even in the 21st century – 
in modern, technologically advanced democracies – it is not uncommon 
for these two activities to go on in parallel, sometimes discovering the 
same outbreak in their own species of responsibility, without effective 
communication between them. During the recent US introductions of West 
Nile virus and monkey pox, for example, communication between the 
animal health and human health professionals was less that adequate. 
Likewise, nations have been reticent to tell other nations that they have 
discovered a disease outbreak on their soil, fearing negative travel, trade, 
and economic consequences. The same attitudes and practices have been 
the norm in many nations and regions throughout the era of modern public 
health. After the hard-learned lessons described above, there is now 
evidence of cracks in the walls of parochialism and politics that have 
slowed our response to disease outbreaks for so many years at great cost in 
lives and wealth. Knowing that ~75% of emerging infections diseases and 
many of those agents traditionally selected for use as weapons are zoonotic 
– transmissible from animal to man – it only makes sense that we must 
integrate our disease surveillance efforts. The situational awareness that an 
integrated disease surveillance program provides must lie at the heart of 
modern risk assessment and communication, if we are to be prepared to 
minimize loss of life when disease outbreaks occur. 
Both the apparently increasing frequency with which we have faced newly 
emerging disease in recent years and the attacks experienced in the United 
States in 2001 have motivated a number of nations to take disease 
surveillance more seriously. Probably because we believe that we have been 
97
 SPECIES-NEUTRAL DISEASE SURVEILLANCE
6. 
How Can We Assure Awareness of an Outbreak?

successful in developing chemical sensors – and we believe that ‘bugs’ and 
‘gas’ are very similar – and because more engineers have been involved in 
recent defensive programs than medical and public health experts, environ-
mental monitoring has become and remains popular. The advantage of 
sensors is that, if they are at the right place and the right time and designed 
to identify the agent which is used, they could warn us of disease-causing 
organisms in the air we breathe even before anyone becomes ill. These 
systems can be placed in the top 40–50 population-dense centers, operating 
around the clock, all year long, for tens of millions of dollars, or low 
hundreds. As currently configured, this system will likely not warn us of 
emerging disease outbreak. A second form of surveillance, data mining, 
attempts to cast a very wide net to discover, not disease, but human 
sought. Although these passive programs can now be mechanized and 
might highlight trends and provide us enough information to help us 
their utility. Both the concept of dispersed environmental sensors and 
passive data mining may be hard to justify for the many years that the 
threat will exist for the apparently very low-incidence bioterrorism attacks. 
Amazingly, we believe that the index case of inhalational anthrax was 
discovered by an astute clinician following the mailing of B. anthracis-
laced letters in fall of 2001. There are a number of clinician-driven 
surveillance systems undergoing testing today. The greatest challenges of 
implementing an effective, clinician-driven system are probably (1) the 
difficulty we find in down-selecting to pick just the right system, (2) 
failure to have widespread connectivity throughout the various venues in 
which clinicians see patients, and (3) the time it takes from the clinicians’ 
busy schedule to input data. There are efforts underway to deal with the 
first problem, by developing one higher-level integrating information 
system that can take inputs from numerous disparate collection systems. 
Finally, (4) few clinician-driven disease surveillance systems being tested 
today integrate human and animal disease data. As with environmental 
monitoring and data mining, there are trade-offs in implementing clinician-
based surveillance systems. Although we will certainly discover evidence 
of disease wherever systems are in place, our discovery will come when 
there is already disease in the population. On the other hand, it may be 
easier to justify long-term maintenance of clinician-driven surveillance 
because these systems will be valuable across the entire biothreat spectrum 
and as preclinical diagnostics improve and find a place in the clinic, or 
even the home or workplace, we may be able to move ever closer to the 
connect the dots, the signal-to-noise problem with such systems complicates 
DAVID R. FRANZ 
98
cations purchased, emergency room visits, disease-related information 
response to a disease outbreak: ambulance calls, over-the-counter medi-
www.ebook3000.com

toring.
As we think about risk assessment, situational awareness, and com-
munication regarding the biological security threat spectrum, we must 
address a number of questions. How much information do we really need 
to prepare or respond effectively? What is the requirement, and value – of 
these systems for “warning” and for “situational awareness”? How can we 
down-select from the many systems being developed? How can we make 
systems truly dual-use? How can we integrate international systems and 
information? How can we protect patient privacy? What is the appropriate 
balance of technical and behavioral solutions? 
animals, humans and bugs collide”. Technology would allow it today; we 
must not let politics or borders stand in the way. Working together, across 
national boundaries on this, one of the most difficult and important human 
security issues of our time, will not only protect our citizens from natural 
disease, but will also build understanding and even trust that will reduce 
the likelihood that intentional outbreaks will be used against them. 
index case and even the index exposure, the goal of environmental moni-
99
its importance is unquestionable. We must watch that “spot where the 
Exactly how to accomplish this important task is not yet clear, but
 SPECIES-NEUTRAL DISEASE SURVEILLANCE

Part II 
RISK COMMUNICATION 
www.ebook3000.com

© 2007 Springer.
INTRODUCTION TO BIOTERRORISM RISK 
COMMUNICATION
1
2
1
Medicine, School of Public Health, Sackler Faculty of Medicine, 
1. 
Pre-event 
1.1.
IF SO, HOW? 
One basic paradigm that lies at the base of many risk communication 
theories claim that the more we trust the people who are supposed to 
protect and inform us, the less afraid we will be, and the less we trust 
them, the greater our fears. If the public trusts the government is dealing 
with a crisis effectively, there will be less public fear. Still, ideal sense of 
partnership and trust between authorities and the public is far from present, 
as repeated surveys have shown. A well-planned communication effort 
should provide clear precautions, reassure the public, reduce unnecessary 
distress, and limit inappropriate demands on health-care system [1–3]. 
Different views exist regarding disclosing to the public preparedness 
plans for various scenarios of bioterrorism and as to the extent in which the 
public should be involved. The older paradigm claims that people should 
know only what the communicators want them to know, in order to get 
them to behave “rationally” during a crisis – i.e., the way the communicator 
wants them to behave [2]. This model is criticized by risk communication 
experts to be “overtly manipulative” and unlikely to succeed. Risk com-
munication is more likely to succeed if it sets the more realistic goal of 
helping people understand the facts, in ways that are relevant to their own 
lives, feelings, and values, so they are empowered to put the risk in 
perspective and make more informed choices [4]. More updated models 
shift towards giving the public a sense of partnership in the emergency, 
103
Preparedness, 103–116. 
M.S. Green et al. (eds.), Risk Assessment and Risk Communication Strategies in Bioterrorism 
ON THE POTENTIAL RISK OF A BIOTERRORISM EVENT?
SHOULD WE CURRENTLY INFORM THE PUBLIC
2Ran D. Balicer, MD, MPH 
Epidemiology Department, Faculty of Health Sciences, Ben-Gurion 
University of the Negev, Beer-Sheva, Israel 
Tel Aviv University 
Italy Wiser, MD. Department of Epidemiology and Preventive 
Itay Wiser and Ran D. Balicer

I. WISER AND R.D. BALICER 
rather than conveying the minimum necessary information to keep them 
calm [5]. Some authors suggest that a citizen advisory panel, comprised of 
community members respected by and credible to their peers, can be 
affective mechanism for gaining constructive public participation and 
dialogue about possible high-concern situations [6]. 
Public health and media professionals generally agree that the public 
should be informed, and that risk communication must be tailored to fit 
specific scenarios, subpopulations and communication media. Still, no con-
sensus exists on the question of how much information should the public 
be exposed to and what is the appropriate media for it. Furthermore, the 
scarcity of bioterrorist events makes it even more difficult to reach evidence-
based conclusions. Therefore, risk communication experts rely mainly on 
behavioral theories when planning communication strategies, designing 
media messages, and analyzing public feedback. 
Growing awareness to public communication issues has revolutionized risk 
communication policies. To prepare risk communication plans at the popul-
ation level, models such as social amplification of risk model, may be 
implemented. This model is based on the theory that risk events are portrayed 
through various signs and images in the media, which interact with a range of 
psychological, social, institutional, and cultural processes that intensify or 
attenuate risk perceptions. This model may be helpful in analyzing the ability 
of agencies to work together, and it highlights the importance of incorporating 
feedback from the public and media to allow ongoing improvement. On that 
matter, recent research has established the utility of rapid polling for making 
informed government responses in an ongoing emergency [7]. 
Many of the health and risk communication theorists emphasize the 
need for the careful crafting of the message to be delivered, the choice of 
suitable and credible spokespersons, timing of message delivery, and the 
appropriate selection of communication channels [8, 9]. Others stress out 
the importance of a thorough situational analysis, consideration of the 
emotional and political climate, provision of information to meet the needs 
of the intended audience, and respect for people’s capacities [10, 11]. 
In view of the challenges associated with heterogeneous literacy among 
various subpopulations, efforts should be directed at drafting messages that 
can reach and be understood by as many target groups as possible. This 
would enhance the chances that the messages will be centrally processed 
and achieve the best results, as outlined by the elaboration likelihood model 
(ELM) [12]. The ELM is based on the individual’s ability to process a mess-
age and determine whether it is processed through “central” or “peripheral” 
route. Each route may lead to persuasive results, but the central route, 
which is correlated with high motivation and better message-processing 
104
www.ebook3000.com

mechanisms, leads to more enduring attitude and behavioral change 
[13]. Under circumstances of an attack, its mere threat may produce less 
motivation, and together with high levels of illiteracy in the American 
public, may be the cause of diminished ability to process complicated 
messages, thus leading to “peripheral route” message processing. 
At the individual level, models such as McGuire’s persuasion/com-
munication model assist in increasing the likelihood of reaching an 
effective message by analyzing the characteristics of the input message 
(agency reputation, message content, and media channel) and their effect 
on the output (levels of persuasion and behavioral change as a result). 
Studies have recently shown that most local public health and health-care 
professionals lack adequate training and resources to carry out important 
communication functions. The persuasion/communication model can serve 
a guideline for health professional training in risk communication [5, 14]. 
1.2.
Lessons from the anthrax mail bioterrorist attack stress out the need to 
prepare in advance to a bioterrorist event. Such preparedness efforts should 
include:
1.
Ensuring collaboration and integration of agencies responsible for 
communication
2.
Establish communication planning for bioterrorism preparedness 
3.
Estimate public risk perceptions 
4.
Prepare media information protocols in advance 
5.
Develop effective media-based dissemination plans 
6.
Design open, accurate, and consistent messages and ensure ethical 
approach to communication preparedness [15]. 
To maintain an effective risk communication policy, we should assess 
key elements in the public perception of risk such as familiarity of the risk, 
its potential damage, level of public uncertainty, public sense of control, 
and public trust in authorities. Legitimate sense of control can be given to 
those under threat, especially in advance of an attack, by public education, 
by public participation in the preparation process, and by providing the 
public a voice in the decisions that will affect them [6, 16]. 
The use of quantifiable scientific methods such as surveys, polls, and 
public interviews among various subpopulations can help identify the key 
risk communication messages that audiences want, need and are the most 
likely to be effective. A systematic communication program should begin 
105
BETTER RISK COMMUNICATION DURING AN EVENT? 
HOW CAN WE PREPARE NOW IN ORDER TO PERFORM 
BIOTERRORISM RISK COMMUNICATION

I. WISER AND R.D. BALICER 
with formal analyses identifying the core set of critical facts that impact 
the individuals’ decision-making process, and proceed to create, evaluate, 
and disseminate appropriate messages. Its success could be determined 
with a tracking survey, assessing public mastery of those facts [2, 17, 18]. 
Such evidence-based data is scarce. For example, the National Institute 
of Mental Health’s (NIMH, 2002) consensus report on early intervention 
after mass trauma acknowledges that the current evidence from randomized, 
well-controlled trials cannot definitively confirm or refute the effectiveness 
of such early interventions. However, even this limited evidence does 
permit several conclusions: 
1.
2.
ment of needs, the dissemination of information and the education of 
directly affected individuals and the general public, and the facilitation 
of natural support networks [19].
Rudd et al. have compared two communication efforts made by the 
government concerning the AIDS/HIV epidemic in 1988 and 2001 
postcard sent following the anthrax letters incident. Their comparison had 
uncovered several important lessons: 
1.
Although mass mailing has a limited communication medium due to 
its unidirectionality, it puts critical information in the hands of a large 
group of people and hence is a powerful tool. 
2.
Over 250 studies show that health-related print materials are far 
exceeding the reading ability of the average adult and so health 
communication efforts must be tailored to the literacy skills of the 
intended audience. 
3.
The importance of pre- and post-evaluation – developers of the anthrax 
postcard did not have as much time to seek expert advice and field-test 
their mailing, and hence some of the information presented was not 
properly understood. Generic and disease-specific communication mate-
rials should therefore be prepared and field-tested before an event 
occurs.
4.
During crisis events, the unexpected takes center stage and recom-
mended steps for developing communication efforts may not be follo-
wed rigorously. However, when communication planners abandon 
rigor in the name of expediency, effectiveness may suffer. To avoid 
the need for such a choice, the public health establishment should 
identify critical structures and processes that it could employ to im-
prove communications in times of crisis. 
106
The important elements of early intervention activities are an assess-
Any early intervention should consider the hierarchy of a victim’s
needs, including safety, food, and shelter. 
www.ebook3000.com

Several of these lessons were suggested years ago, but they have not 
been implemented into practice towards the next crisis. On 22–23 June 
2001, a senior-level exercise entitled “Dark Winter” that simulated a 
covert smallpox attack on the United States was held. First exercise of its 
kind, Dark Winter was constructed to examine the challenges that senior-
level policy makers would face if confronted with a bioterrorist attack that 
initiated outbreaks of highly contagious disease. The exercise was intended 
to increase awareness to the threat posed by biological weapons and to 
bring about actions that would improve prevention and response strategies. 
One of the conclusions from the simulation was that individual actions of 
US citizens are critical to ending the spread of contagious disease and 
therefore leaders must gain the trust and sustained cooperation of the 
American people. This conclusion, unfortunately, have been challenged 
unsuccessfully in the response to the 2001 anthrax attacks, when public 
officials failed to gain sufficient public trust and form a consistent and 
accurate risk communication to the public [20]. 
1.3. 
WHAT IS THE ROLE OF THE INTERNET IN RISK 
COMMUNICATION BEFORE AND DURING AN EVENT? 
Critiques of information dissemination in response to the events of 11 
September 2001, highlight new increasingly important role of the Internet 
as an information channel and the need for strategically coordinating what 
is often conflicting information. For example, one analysis recognized the 
importance of the Internet in providing up-to-the-minute information, but 
also its potential for increasing confusion and uncertainty through rapid, 
often-uncontrolled proliferation of information and spread of rumors. 
Others noted that information was coming from so many sources and 
transmitters, it was often more confusing and contradictory than it was helpful. 
Thus, it is all the more essential to plan carefully to ensure consistency of 
messages across channels. It is also critical to conduct research to assess how 
the media have covered past emergencies and to better understand norms and 
practices of journalists in covering emergencies [5]. 
A key advantage the Internet has over traditional media is that the 
Internet provides multiple branches of information, all accessible almost 
simultaneously, which the user can easily maneuver between. During the 
anthrax threat, the Internet also allowed for innovative communication 
devices such as interactive tutorials on anthrax self-care (such as “X-Plain 
Online” from the Patient Education Institute, 2002). Furthermore, the 
information provided could be customized for specific interest groups. For 
example, asthmatics may have had different concerns from those of the 
107
BIOTERRORISM RISK COMMUNICATION

I. WISER AND R.D. BALICER 
general population, just as postal workers had different needs from those 
of the general public during the anthrax threat. 
In the 2 days after the terrorist attacks, one out of four Internet users 
went online in addition to monitoring television and radio reports. This 
suggests that the Internet may aid in assessing the credibility of infor-
mation users have obtained from the traditional media [21]. 
The Internet also allows great scope for forward planning and dis-
semination of information. For example, the CDC now has detailed guide-
lines on anthrax management on its site, and in addition, it has published 
guidelines as to how individuals and agencies should act in the case of 
outbreaks of diseases like smallpox and typhoid [1]. 
Information on the Internet is available to users at any time of day, and 
increasingly from the home. This is especially salient given that during the 
height of the bioterrorist threat many people were likely afraid to travel 
away from home. In some cases, when a number of cities issued warnings 
of potential threat, people preferred to stay at home or close to home; one 
survey published on September 15 found that “about 9% of Americans say 
that in the first two days after the terror attacks they cancelled some travel 
plans” [21]. 
The Internet can serve also as a “therapeutic” medium as documented 
during the Gulf War. When Israeli citizens were shut in sealed rooms 
during the Persian Gulf War, some found the nascent Internet an essential 
tool in maintaining psychological stability and a way to communicate with 
the outside world [22]. 
Although the above advantages of Internet as a tool for risk 
communication, several challenges should be considered: 
1.
Internet users have no definitive way to assess web site credibility and 
accuracy, and thus can be mislead and misinterpret the risk level. As a 
result, Internet has the potential not only to help but also to harm 
effective risk communication policy. 
2.
Search engines play a key role in organizing information for the public 
during a bioterrorist attack. The Internet industry in cooperation with 
the government should develop transparent protocols for organizing 
key information during emergency situations so that credible and 
validated sites are called up first when people search for information. 
In addition, there is a need for more systematic regulatory oversight of 
web site content with the promulgation of clear industry standards, as 
is done in the television and radio industries.
3.
Several subpopulations do not have access to the Internet. The Internet 
cannot therefore be regarded as an exclusive data source in times of 
crisis.
108
www.ebook3000.com

4.
There has been limited analysis of the general impact of Internet-based 
health information on behavior. However, there is some evidence that 
health information on the Internet does affect people’s management 
and response to health risk. The Pew Internet and American Life 
Project has found that 61% of those who searched online for health 
information – or about 43 million Americans – said that the infor-
mation they found on the web improved the way they take care of 
themselves. In addition, 44% of those who found the health information 
they sought online said it affected a decision about how to treat an 
illness or condition and 38% said it lead them to ask a doctor new 
questions [21].
To summarize, the Internet can serve as an attractive risk communi-
into account its yet limited population exposure, credibility issues, and the 
1.4. 
HOW SHOULD WE EDUCATE THE MEDIA BEFORE  
AND DURING AN EVENT? 
The public health community has come to recognize that the media are 
influential actors and determinants of health behavior and outcomes [23]. 
These two groups (public health community and the media) rely on each 
other in many ways, yet have different goals. Building Credible relation-
The role of the media is central in several risk communication theories, 
such as social amplification model. This model takes under consideration 
norms and practices of news organizations that structure how events are 
reported. For instance, journalists favor “legitimated” institutional sources 
that give a sense of authority and credibility to new reports [5]. The media 
needs to be monitored consistently during an emergency to ensure that 
information being told is accurate [24]. 
Following bioterrorism preparedness exercises and the September 11 
attacks it has became evident that the public will turn to public health 
leaders for information [20]. As a result there has been growing emphasis 
on the need for a complete public health provider – media interface that 
should include pre-prepared situation specific message formats, an 
appointed public information officer. Another lesson learned from these 
experiences is that maintaining an open and proactive relationship with the 
press in an emergency may enhance message effectiveness by enhancing 
community trust [25]. 
cation tool, before and during crisis. However, Public leaders should take 
109
need for internet industry cooperation.
ship with the press can assist authorized officials to convey public mess-
ages and guidance [5]. 
BIOTERRORISM RISK COMMUNICATION

I. WISER AND R.D. BALICER 
when the public health crisis is embedded in a larger, complex story, as 
happened in the anthrax attacks that came on the heels of September 11. As 
a result, news media had less of a focus on the public health side of anthrax 
than did the CDC [26].
2. 
Once an Outbreak Occurs 
Effective risk communication is a serious challenge during crisis events. 
At such times, people have difficulty processing information and hearing, 
understanding, and remembering what they have been told. An environ-
ment of uncertainty and ambiguity leads many to a heightened sense of 
anxiety. People have a tendency to assume the worst and, as a result, their 
distrust of government and experts may also be heightened [27]. 
2.1.
WE TELL ALL THE TRUTH? ALWAYS? 
Officials may believe that they are protecting the public by withholding 
information regarding response plans on the theory that revealing these 
plans will indicate potential attackers where they can strike most effec-
tively [28]. The attacks of 2001 have shown that determined terrorists will 
identify vulnerabilities that are unknown to the public. More importantly, 
this approach ignores the role that citizens can and should play in helping 
set state and local priorities [29]. Based on experience in contemporary 
and historic outbreaks, emphasizing the public’s autonomy when imple-
menting epidemic controls can actually help minimize the number of cases 
and deaths [30, 31]. 
The Chinese severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) risk communica-
tion policy serves as an example to possible damage when withholding 
information from the public. During the SARS crisis, Chinese officials had 
withheld frequent updates from the public coupled with surreptitious disease 
containment. As the epidemic spread across China, provincial leaders with-
held information from peasants on the theory that “They just won’t 
understand” [32]. But when peasants learned their villages might be used 
to quarantine outsiders who had possibly been exposed to SARS, they 
rioted against government preparation of quarantine centers and set up 
makeshift roadblocks to keep out nonresidents.
GENERALLY, WE SHOULD TELL THE TRUTH SHOULD
110
Risk communication policy makers should take under consideration 
just information of public health importance. A recent study highlights 
the difficulty of getting public health messages through to news audiences 
that journalists’ attention is mostly to newsworthy information and not 
www.ebook3000.com

Authorities should approach members of the public as peers, as 
decision-makers who are interested in determining the nature of the danger 
and acting to reduce the chance of illness for themselves and loved ones 
[33]. Experience from the anthrax letters bioterrorist attacks shows that the 
public places more trust in updates coming from public health officials and 
physicians than from appointees who do not have health backgrounds [34]. 
Decision-makers should avoid thinking that members of the public are 
panicking when they are merely engaging in entirely understandable be-
haviors, such as seeking more information, questioning authorities, and 
undertaking precautionary measures (even if officials believe these are 
unwarranted). Rather than dismissing expressions of fear, dread, or misery, 
leaders should acknowledge people’s sense of vulnerability and ask them 
to bear the risk and work together toward solutions [35]. 
Telling all the truth sometimes might do damage as well, especially 
when providing public health “good news” that are unproved or quickly 
refuted. An excellent example is the German and Japanese announcements 
of premature termination of bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE) 
crisis. In November 2000, German agriculture minister Funke declared 
confidently that Germany was immune from BSE. Funke essentially said 
to the German public, “Trust us. You’re safe”. One week later the first sick 
cow was found. Not only did this create fear of the disease, but Funke’s 
statements damaged public trust in government, and beef sales plummeted 
nationwide [2]. Consider the German government’s response included the 
resignation of Funke, and his replacement with a green party member who 
promised to make the Ministry of Agriculture more aware of consumers’ 
concerns. These symbolic actions were not intended to deal with the 
physical risk. Rather, they recognized the peril from fear and the reality 
that public perceptions of mad cow disease were a very real part of the 
problem. This was an example of effective risk communication, with 
actions as well as words. Trust was restored, and despite subsequent 
identification of more sick cattle, within a few months beef sales had 
returned nearly to normal.
In a similar case, following the first case of BSE was confirmed in Japan 
(10 September 2001), agriculture minister Takebe foolishly promised that 
there would not be any others. The second sick animal was found just days 
later. Takebe also said that the first sick animal had not been rendered into 
protein and put into the cattle food supply, so the disease could not spread. 
Within days, the government had to admit that it was wrong and that the first 
animal had indeed been used to produce protein for cattle feed. The press 
revealed that the Japanese government had suppressed a European Union 
document that reported that Japan was at high risk for BSE, and also had 
111
BIOTERRORISM RISK COMMUNICATION

I. WISER AND R.D. BALICER 
failed to impose controls on the cattle and dairy industry to keep the disease 
from spreading. Takebe made his third mistake by trying to reassure the 
public by sacking an assistant and publicly eating beef to show that it was 
safe. Takebe did not resign. Although fewer sick cattle have been found in 
Japan than in Germany, beef sales in Japan were still off dramatically 
months later, much longer than it took for German beef sales to recover [2]. 
2.2. 
WILL WE BE ABLE TO CONTINUOUSLY UPDATE  
THE PUBLIC? 
Following the 9/11 attacks, Mayor Giuliani exemplified what leaders 
should do when faced with uncertainty. Able to offer only a rough estimate 
of 9/11 casualties early on, he indicated that the final number would be 
“more than any of us can bear, ultimately.” A question of utmost import-
ance to the public, but one that cannot be easily answered in the initial 
stages of a biological attack will be: “How many sick and dying are there?” 
As noted earlier, leaders will face a host of other questions to which there 
are no quick and sure answers, such as whether an outbreak is a precursor 
to other attacks [29]. 
Through early and frequent media briefings, a leader can demonstrate a 
commitment to keeping the public up-to-date. This practice can also help avert 
an official information void that may be filled by harmful speculation or less 
dependable sources [29]. Steps toward effective interactions with the media 
include setting aside any predisposition to see the press as intruders or 
provocateurs, establishing positive working relationships with them prior to a 
crisis, developing a pragmatic communications strategy to deal with the reality 
of 24/7/60/60 reporting, and picking and training appropriate spokespersons. 
Incorporating the press in training exercises improves understanding between 
officials and the media of their roles and challenges in a bioterrorism response. 
When an event occurs, leaders often believe that they are too busy managing 
the response to spend time with the press and, by extension, the public. 
Although there is some truth in this, decision-makers should appreciate that 
responding to the public’s concerns is not a distraction from managing the 
crisis, but rather is part and parcel of managing the crisis.
Telephone-based hotlines provide both up-to-date information to the 
public and public feedback tool. A telephone bank at CDC during an 
outbreak of Hantavirus pulmonary syndrome identified 38% of confirmed 
cases [36]. Computerization of the system would allow for timely transfer 
and analysis of complete and accurate telephone call data and perhaps 
provide a similar layer of passive surveillance for emerging bioterrorism 
events [37]. 
112
www.ebook3000.com

Hospital personnel, private practitioners, and emergency medical wor-
kers are understandably going to be interested in their well-being and that 
of their families during a health emergency. Health officials and their 
organizational collaborators should also ensure that these critical personnel 
have the information they need to reduce any unwarranted reluctance to do 
their jobs [29]. 
To summarize, providing rapid and accurate information to the public 
during a bioterrorist event is, therefore, critical to reducing uncertainty (US 
Department of Health and Human Services, 2002) and should be joined by 
the efforts of local, state, and federal governments to enhance surveillance 
for a bioterrorist attack and increase lab capacity to rapidly identify a 
bioterrorist agent [19]. 
The need for readily available health care and specially trained 
providers cannot be underestimated. The Gulf War syndrome controversy 
demonstrates how complex health issues can become after a possible CBN 
attack and how important it is for health-care providers to have up-to-date 
information. When a traumatized population cannot obtain answers to 
health questions from knowledgeable providers, misinformation fills the 
void and concerns multiply. Moreover, specially trained providers could 
maintain standardized medical records, which are important for scientific 
and medical–legal purposes [38]. 
Several experts emphasize the importance of local risk communication 
strategies to complement the information likely to be provided by national 
authorities. According to one expert, “We really don’t understand the 
psychological context in which we are delivering our messages, nor whe-
ther they are really addressing the needs of the community. We need to 
better understand [it] so we can modify our messages and target our 
outreach” [19]. 
2.3. 
HOW REASSURING SHOULD WE BE? 
At the very outset of a biological attack, leaders should prepare the 
community for conditions of uncertainty and a potentially prolonged crisis. 
Realistic descriptions of the tentative and evolving nature of authorities’ 
understanding can offset public perceptions regarding an omniscient, 
omnipotent government on the one hand, or an utterly incompetent one on 
the other. 
Over reassurance can lead to public mistrust, especially when the 
situation worsens. The anthrax letters case supplied good examples to  
it. You do not need to be an SRA president, Surgeon General, or risk 
communication guru to see problems in federal agencies’ communication 
113
BIOTERRORISM RISK COMMUNICATION

I. WISER AND R.D. BALICER 
about anthrax during the fall of 2001. Among the examples noted by 
reporters:
1.
Providing inappropriately reassuring information: Health and Human 
Services Secretary Tommy G. Thompson announced that initial victim 
Robert Stevens had probably been exposed to anthrax in the woods of 
North Carolina, even though scientists indicated that this was highly 
improbable.
2.
Downplaying uncertainty: Federal officials initially dismissed the 
possibility that mail containing anthrax could be dangerous to postal 
employees.
3.
Delaying release of information: CDC spokespeople voiced frustration 
at having little to report to the public because of the FBI’s reluctance 
to share vital information. Similarly, while FBI officials had known 
about the suspicious letters sent to NBC since September 25, New 
York City officials were first notified of the situation by a doctor who 
treated one of the victims several days later [39]. 
Reference
1. Hobbs J, Kittler A, Fox S, Middleton B, Bates DW. Communicating health 
information to an alarmed public facing a threat such as a bioterrorist attack. J 
Health Commun 2004; 9(1):67–75. 
2. Gray GM, Ropeik DP. Dealing with the dangers of fear: the role of risk 
communication. Health Aff (Millwood) 2002; 21(6):106–116. 
3. Lofstedt RE. Risk communication: the Barseback Nuclear Plant case. Energy 
Policy 1996; 24(4):689–696. 
4. Jasanoff S. Differences in national approaches to risk assessment and 
management. In: Symposium on managing the problem of industrial hazards: 
the international policy issues. Washington, DC: National Academy of 
Sciences, 1989. 
5. Wray RJ, Kreuter MW, Jacobsen H, Clements B, Evans RG. Theoretical 
perspectives on public communication preparedness for terrorist attacks. Fam 
Commun Health 2004; 27(3):232–241. 
6. Covello VT, Peters RG, Wojtecki JG, Hyde RC. Risk communication, the 
West Nile virus epidemic, and bioterrorism: responding to the communication 
challenges posed by the intentional or unintentional release of a pathogen in 
an urban setting. J Urban Health 2001; 78(2):382–391. 
7. Blendon RJ, Benson JM, Desroches CM, Weldon KJ. Using opinion surveys 
to track the public’s response to a bioterrorist attack. J Health Commun 2003; 
8(Suppl 1):83–92; discussion 148–151. 
8. Sandman PM. Hazard versus outrage in the public perception of risk. In: 
Covello V, McCallum D (eds). Effective risk communication: the role and 
114
www.ebook3000.com

responsibility of government and non-government organizations. New York: 
Plenum Press, 1989, pp. 45–49. 
9. Covello VT. Communicating risk information: a guide to environmental 
communication in crisis and non-crisis situations. In: Kolluru R (ed.). 
Environmental strategies handbook: a guide to effective policies and 
practices. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1998, pp. 359–373. 
10. Wallack L. Two approaches to health promotion in the mass media. World 
Health Forum 1990; 11(2):143–154; discussion 155–164. 
11. Backer TE, Rogers EM, Sopory P. Designing health communication 
campaigns: what works? Newbury Park, CA: Sage Publications, 1992. 
12. Zarcadoolas C, Pleasant A, Greer DS. Elaborating a definition of health 
literacy: a commentary. J Health Commun 2003; 8(Suppl 1):119–120. 
13. Petty R, Barden J, Wheeler S. The elaboration likelihood model of 
persuasion: health promotions that yield sustained behavioral change. In: 
DiClemente R, Crosby R, Kegeler M (eds). Emerging theories in health 
promotion practice and research: strategies for improving public health. San 
Francisco: Wiley, 2002, pp. 71–99. 
14. Evans RG, Crutcher JM, Shadel B, Clements B, Bronze MS. Terrorism from 
a public health perspective. Am J Med Sci 2002; 323(6):291–298. 
15. McLcan V. Partnership for public warning. A national strategy for integrated 
public warning policy and capability, 2003. 
16. Slovic P, Fischoff B, Lichtenstein S. Facts and fears: understanding perceived 
risk. In: Schwing D, Albers R (eds). Societal risk assessment: how safe is safe 
enough? New York: Plenum Press, 1980, pp. 181–216. 
17. Morgan MG. Risk communication: a mental models approach. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 2002. 
18. Fischhoff B, Gonzalez RM, Small DA, Lerner JS. Evaluating the success of 
terror risk communications. Biosecur Bioterror 2003; 1(4):255–258. 
19. Stein BD, Tanielian TL, Eisenman DP, Keyser DJ, Burnam MA, Pincus HA. 
Emotional and behavioral consequences of bioterrorism: planning a public 
health response. Milbank Q 2004; 82(3):413–455, table of contents. 
20. O’Toole T, Mair M, Inglesby TV. Shining light on “Dark Winter”. Clin Infect 
Dis 2002; 34(7):972–983. 
21. Rainie L. Pew Internet and American Life Project Report: how Americans 
used the internet after the terror attack, 2002. 
22. Ritchie EC, Friedman M, Watson P, Ursano R, Wessely S, Flynn B. Mass 
violence and early mental health intervention: a proposed application of best 
practice guidelines to chemical, biological, and radiological attacks. Mil Med 
2004; 169(8):575–579. 
23. Institute of Medicine. The Future of the Public’s health in the 21st century. 
Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 2003. 
24. Prue CE, Lackey C, Swenarski L, Gantt JM. Communication monitoring: 
shaping CDC’s emergency risk communication efforts. J Health Commun 
2003; 8(Suppl 1):35–49; discussion 148–151. 
115
BIOTERRORISM RISK COMMUNICATION

I. WISER AND R.D. BALICER 
25. Bennett P. Understanding responses to risk: some basic findings. In: Bennett 
P, Calman K (eds). Risk communication and public health. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 1999, pp. 3–19. 
26. Mebane F, Temin S, Parvanta CF. Communicating anthrax in 2001: a 
comparison of CDC information and print media accounts. J Health Commun 
2003; 8(Suppl 1):50–82; discussion 148–151. 
27. Rudd RE, Comings JP, Hyde JN. Leave no one behind: improving health and 
risk communication through attention to literacy. J Health Commun 2003; 
8(Suppl 1):104–115. 
28. Connolly C. Bioterrorism preparedness still lacking, health group concludes. 
Washington Post, 12 December 2003, A02. 
29. Leading during bioattacks and epidemics with the public’s trust and help. 
Biosecur Bioterror 2004; 2(1):25–40. 
30. Leavitt JW. Public resistance or cooperation? A tale of smallpox in two cities. 
Biosecur Bioterror 2003; 1(3):185–192. 
31. Annas GJ. Bioterrorism, public health, and civil liberties. N Engl J Med 2002; 
346(17):1337–1342.
32. Beech H. The quarantine blues: with suspected SARS patients getting 
dumped in their backyards, China’s villagers rebel. Time Asia Magazine, 19 
May 2003. 
33. Blendon RJ, Benson JM, DesRoches CM, Pollard WE, Parvanta C, Herrmann 
MJ. The impact of anthrax attacks on the American public. MedGenMed 
2002; 4(2):1. 
34. Survey shows Americans not panicking over anthrax, but starting to take 
steps to protect themselves against possible bioterrorist attacks. Harvard 
School of Public Health press release. 
35. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Crisis and emergency risk 
communication. Atlanta, GA: CDC, 2002. 
36. Tappero JW, Khan AS, Pinner RW, Wenger JD, Graber JM, Armstrong LR, 
et al. Utility of emergency, telephone-based national surveillance for 
Hantavirus pulmonary syndrome. Hantavirus Task Force. JAMA 1996; 
275(5):398–400.
37. Mott JA, Treadwell TA, Hennessy TW, Rosenberg PA, Wolfe MI, Brown 
CM, et al. Call-tracking data and the public health response to bioterrorism-
related anthrax. Emerg Infect Dis 2002; 8(10):1088–1092. 
38. Hyams KC, Murphy FM, Wessely S. Responding to chemical, biological, or 
nuclear terrorism: the indirect and long-term health effects may present the 
greatest challenge. J Health Polit Policy Law 2002; 27(2):273–291. 
39. Chess C, Celia J. Risk communication is a key to dealing effectively with 
bioterrorism. Risk Anal 2002; 22(6):1039–1040. 
116
www.ebook3000.com

CBRN Medicine Branch 
IDF Medical Corps 
A Bioterrorism act is a possibility perhaps more realistic today then ever 
before. Health-care workers will always be in the forefront of mitigating 
disease. In case the offending agent is contagious, the outbreak might 
spread from person to person, medical personnel being in specific jeopardy 
because of their increased contact with ill people. Spread among medical 
staff was an important route in propagation of the severe acute respiratory 
syndrome (SARS) epidemic in 2003. Infection control measures have 
proved invaluable in halting the progress of the epidemic. 
Fortunately, medical personnel neither encounter highly contagious 
illnesses, nor bioterrorism, in their daily practice. One must therefore 
assume that there will be increased anxiety among health-care workers in 
the face of an unfamiliar disease. A bioterrorism event can be caused by a 
vast range of agents, which differ considerably in their contagiousness and 
risk to the environment. An inappropriate perception of the true risks in 
case of a bioterrorism event might lead to improper actions being taken
, 
Understanding the real risks associated with bioterrorism events will 
serve both to diminish anxiety and uncertainty among health-care workers, 
and to allow them to take proper infection control measures, as well. 
These, in turn, will aid in prevention of further spread in case of a 
contagious agent outbreak. Instruction of the subject in peacetime, as well 
as preparing for appropriate risk communication in real time will serve this 
purpose.
© 2007 Springer.
either due to under estimation or over estimation of the risk. Work
117
M.S. Green et al. (eds.), Risk Assessment and Risk Communication Strategies in Bioterrorism 
absenteeism might be another undesirable effect. 
RISK COMMUNICATION TO HEALTH-CARE
WORKERS AS A RISK REDUCTION MEASURE
IN BIOTERRORISM
1. 
Abstract
Preparedness, 117–121. 
Yoav Yehezkelli, Yoram Amsalem, and Adi Aran

Y. YEHEZKELLI ET AL. 
Bioterrorism is a possibility perhaps more realistic today than ever before. 
Although its probability is low, consequences might be vast. The product 
Once a bioterror (BT) agent has been released it infects those who were 
primarily exposed. Secondary spread occurs as a result of person to person 
transmission in case of a contagious disease. Health-care workers contact 
with ill people, being in close are at increased risk for being infected and 
serve, unintentionally, as a vector for further transmission. In 2003, for 
example, spread among medical personnel was an important route in 
propagation of the SARS epidemic, as was in other epidemics in history. 
Diseases that are implicated as possible biowarfare (BW) agents 
according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) lists 
are quite unknown to medical teams nowadays. False or inappropriate 
perception of the risk of their spread might lead to improper use of 
protective measures, both to the side of underprotection and to the side of 
overprotection. The most extreme protective measure health-care workers 
might take is not to come to work. This of course will have deleterious effects 
on the ability of the system to cope with a bioterrorism attack. 
Fortunately, most BW agents are not contagious. Anthrax, for example, 
does not spread from person to person though it is highly stable in the 
environment, contaminates objects and even people, and might necessitate 
decontamination of exposed persons. Pneumonic plague and smallpox are 
contagious but their routes of transmission are different leading to different 
grades of contagiousness. 
Infection control measures have been used for many years. But only in 
recent years their significance has been increasingly recognized, probably 
Standard precautions are intended for all patients, regardless of their 
taking care of the patient environment and disposals. 
of multiplying the probability and the damage reflects the impact of an 
event and on how much resources should be allocated to prepare for it. 
nasocomial infections. In 1996, the current guidelines for infection control  
in hospitals were accepted (from the CDC Hospital infection control practices
Advisory Committee). These include two systems of infection control:  
standard precautions and transmission-based precautions.  
118
at any contact with body fluids wearing overgarments when needed, and 
specific illness and infective state. They consist mainly of using gloves 
because of the great increase in morbidity and mortality associated with
2. 
Introduction
3. 
Infection Control Measures
www.ebook3000.com

Transmission-based precautions are intended for patients infected with 
specific pathogens that might be transmissible. They are always being 
implemented as an adjunct to standard precautions. They include extra 
measures of PPE (personal protective equipment) targeted against the 
specific mode of transmission. In addition, they include requirements for 
specific measures for physical isolation of the patient, ranging from simple 
isolation in a private room to a complex total air system isolation in a 
negative pressure room. 
The extent of implementing protective measures should fit the mode of 
transmission of the specific agent. There are three main transmission 
mechanisms:
x
Contact transmission: Contact with the patient skin or from objects 
that have been in contact with the patient. 
x
Droplet transmission: Originating from respiratory secretions. These 
may infect in the close range (upto 1–2 meters). 
x
by air currents for quite long distances. 
Several examples of various BT agents and their mode of infectivity: 
Viral hemorrhagic fevers (VHF), smallpox, glanders, and bubonic 
plague infect via contact. 
Pneumonic plague infect by way of droplets. 
Smallpox and VHF are also airborne infections. This is the most 
fearsome mode of transmission because airborne particles might be carried 
in the air for long distances and infects people that are quite remote from 
the ill person. 
Regarding airborne infections, one should remember that proper 
respiratory protection with N-95 standard mask is not just putting it on. 
Airborne transmission: Infective droplet nuclei which might be carried 
119
Protection from airborne infections requires placing the patient in a 
negative pressure room that meets international standards (Table 1). In 
addition, medical staff must be protected by wearing a suitable mask, 
verifying their vaccination status against the specific agent (when 
applicable) and applying other protective measures. Special consideration 
should be given to respiratory protection while doing some high risk 
procedures that carries increased risk for respiratory exposure (e.g. 
endotracheal intubation, bronchoscopy). In such cases it may be wise to 
patients infected with a contagious pathogen (both naturally occurring and 
BT agents). 
use better respiratory protection. Table 1 summarizes the various protec-
tive levels and measures that should be implemented while taking care of 
 RISK COMMUNICATION TO HEALTH-CARE WORKERS 

Y. YEHEZKELLI ET AL. 
Studies have shown that unless the mask is properly fitted to the person 
there will be air leaks around the mask. 
Therefore, it is extremely important to train health-care workers with 
using the protective equipment. Otherwise the protection will not be 
appropriate and might even give the workers a false sense of security and 
render them even more prone to exposure. 
Infection control measures should be an integral part of every contingency 
plan for BW and bioterrorism. Importantly, the recommendations valid in 
medical facilities for routine medical care are also suitable for BT 
scenarios. Adherence to these guidelines on a day-to-day basis, and based 
Extra precautions should be implemented when specific agents are 
being suspected, even before the suspicion was confirmed by the 
laboratory.
Biohazard recommendations exist for the medical laboratories, as well. 
Again, their implementation on the day-to-day routine will ensure that they 
will be correctly used also in a BT event. 
Prevention of the spread of the epidemic is a major element in BT 
contingency plans. As was in the SARS epidemic, it involves designating 
specific hospitals for the infected patients, procurement of protective 
equipment, special rooms, and isolation wards. 
120
on the epidemiological features of the disease, will ensure that an infect-
The risk from BT is real but its extent should be appropriately re-
lead to appropriate protective measures being taken. Otherwise improper 
actions might be taken, both to the side of under-action leading to 
unnecessary spread and both to the side of over-action resulting in 
unnecessary isolations, increased anxiety among personnel, patients and 
relatives, and in abandonment of medical facilities by health-care workers. 
As most agents do not persist in the environment, usually there is no need 
for decontamination of patients and areas. Infectivity is usually not as high 
and because of the availability of effective prohylactic measures. Infection 
control measures in medical facilities are very important in halting the 
spread of epidemics, as was demonstrated in the SARS case. 
epidemics in developed countries, as a result of better hygienic conditions 
cognized, and appropriate perception of the risk by medical personnel will 
as thought. In modern times, plague is not expected to cause large-scale 
ious disease will not spread, even before an outbreak is recognized as 
originating from BT. 
4. 
Bioterrorism Preparedness
www.ebook3000.com

Education and training is mandatory. One of the most important factors 
in the preparedness for a bioterrorism incident is the awareness of medical 
teams to the possibility of such an unusual incident. Awareness will enable 
early recognition of a BT incident and immediate activation of emergency 
plans.
121
Knowledge of the real risks from bioterrorism will serve both to diminish 
will aid in prevention of further spread in case of a contagious agent 
outbreak. Instruction of the subject in peacetime, as well as preparing for 
appropriate risk communication in real time are key elements in minimizing 
the impact upon the health-care system in case of a BT incident. 
 
Respiratory 
protection
Overgarments 
Gloves 
Patient’s room 
Standard 
Procedures 
producing
spray/splash
Procedures
producing
spray/splash
When in 
contact with 
body fluids 
Regular room 
Contact 
Same as 
standard
Always 
Always 
Separate room
Droplet 
Surgical mask 
Same as standard 
Same as 
standard
Separate room 
Airborne 
N95 mask 
Same as standard 
Same as 
standard
Negative
pressure room 
TABLE 1. Standard and transmission-based precautions 
mentation of proper infection control measures, as well. These, in turn, 
anxiety and uncertainty among health-care workers, and will lead to imple-
5. 
Conclusion
 RISK COMMUNICATION TO HEALTH-CARE WORKERS 

Part II 
RISK COMMUNICATION 
www.ebook3000.com

questions will be addressed herein with reference to the activities and 
outlook of the “Anthrax-Euronet” – a research network formed to harmonize 
best practices in the anthrax field and to strengthen networking activities or 
the research community with public and private health sectors regarding 
preparedness to counter the threat of bioterrorism. Strategies for addressing 
the dual-use dilemma of research on dangerous pathogens (i.e., potential 
misuse of life sciences to cause harm) and the need to engage infection 
biology researchers in the task of improving risk assessment and risk commu-
nication approaches related to communicable diseases will be discussed. 
Traditionally the field of infectious disease research is bound tightly to the 
more clinical aspects of illness and disease. A focus on methods for rapid 
diagnosis and prophylactic treatments of infectious diseases teamed with 
public education and communication strategies have been the best defense 
to eliminate and/or prevent the spread of diseases. To date the number of 
infectious diseases outweighs the number of safe and effective vaccines, 
and the number of therapeutics are becoming limited by the widespread use 
of antibiotics and other medications, which have contributed to the rise in 
antimicrobial resistance in many pathogens. For the future, new diagnostic 
markers and novel prophylactic measures against infections are much 
needed to protect human and animal health. To meet these needs, the 
Max Planck Institute for Infection Biology, Dept of Immunology, 
21/22 Schumannstr. D-10117 Berlin, Germany 
Anthrax-EuroNet and beyond: How should scientific research on poten-
tially dangerous agents be conducted and coordinated? How should the 
results be disseminated to prevent the misuse of information? These 
ANTHRAX-EURONET AND BEYOND – 
CHALLENGES OF SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH
ON HIGH RISK AGENTS
1. 
Abstract
2. 
Infection Biology and 21st Century Research Priorities
2.1. 
WHAT IS INFECTION BIOLOGY?
© 2007 Springer.
M.S. Green et al. (eds.), Risk Assessment and Risk Communication Strategies in Bioterrorism 
123
Preparedness, 123–130. 
Amanda J. Ozin and Stefan H.E. Kaufmann

new paradigm in infection biology to “know our enemy and to know 
ourselves”1 will surely lead us to the new knowledge, diagnostic tools, and 
prophylactics we need to successfully combat the threat of emerging and 
reemerging infectious diseases. 
The Max Planck Institute for Infection Biology (MPIIB) was founded in 
1993 as one of the first Institutes of the Max Planck Society in reunified 
Germany, and a special state-of-the-art research facility was erected to 
work with pathogens and model infection systems. The main goal of the 
institute was to research infectious diseases in close collaboration with 
universities and clinical settings. Since its short time of operation, the 
MPIIB has expanded rapidly in its research force and is already regarded 
internationally as a centre for interdisciplinary research excellence on the 
biology of infectious diseases at the molecular and clinical level. The 
institute is located in the heart of Berlin on the historical Charité medical 
campus, where great scientists Robert Koch, Paul Ehrlich, and Emil 
Behring had made their important discoveries paving the field of infection 
research. As one can see in the schematic map of the Charité campus, the 
significant positioning of the MPIIB between the Charité hospital, Berlin’s 
renowned university hospital and medical research centre, and Germany’s 
1 Sun Tzu [circa 400–320 B.C.] contributor to “Art of War”– translation by Lionel Giles, 
MA (1910). “If you know the enemy and know yourself, you need not fear the result of a 
hundred battles. If you know yourself but not the enemy, for every victory gained you will 
also suffer a defeat. If you know neither the enemy nor yourself, you will succumb in every 
battle.”
the host at the molecular, cellular, organ, organism, and population level. It 
employs multidisciplinary approaches comprising concepts and methodo-
logies of molecular genetics, immunology, cell biology, epidemiology, 
clinical research, and protein chemistry. With today’s technology for 
sequencing and analysis of whole genomes (i.e., the entire genetic make-
up of an organism, including humans) infection biology has taken off  
in new directions using a “systems” approach to look at host–pathogen 
interactions. This holistic approach allows one to study whole organisms 
and patterns of both total gene (transcriptomics) and proteins (proteomics) 
expression pre-, post-, and during the infection and disease process. This 
relatively new field of infection biology has emerged to look more closely 
at the biology of host–pathogen interactions in relation to infectious 
diseases. Infection biology comprises scientific study of infectious agents 
(bacteria, fungi, parasites, viruses, and prions) and their interaction with 
COORDINATES ANTHRAX-EURONET
MAX PLANCK INSTITUTE FOR INFECTION BIOLOGY –
A.J. OZIN AND S.H.E. KAUFMANN
124
2.2
 
www.ebook3000.com

newly emerging and reemerging infectious diseases, such as SARS and 
possible development human pandemic influenza strain, will further 
compromise global public health and economy. Since the fear and panic 
caused by the terrorist events of 9/11 and the subsequent anthrax attacks 
via the US postal service pose new challenges for the 21st century through 
the added threat of deliberate infection by what is known as high 
consequence pathogens and toxins (HCPT).2 The subsequent “biodefense 
funding boom” has been subject of much criticism especially when many 
people are dying each year of naturally occurring infectious diseases and 
the growing concern that funding for HCPT may be diverting much needed 
funds and attention from basic research in immunology and microbiology. 
Other aspect of these “changing times” are the new considerations that 
life science researchers have to make in planning, executing, and com-
municating research, particularly, the question of how to strike a balance 
between maximizing security (i.e., biosecurity3) and minimizing the 
impacts on research to benefit public – otherwise known as the dual-use 
dilemma. In addition, there is growing public fear of biosafety and 
biocontainment issues of HCPT, especially in areas where high security 
and containment research facilities are being built up in their neighborhoods 
and with increasing media coverage of reports of accidental laboratory 
infections and mistakes in shipments of dangerous strains. Therefore, in 
2 Organisms considered to be HCPT follow the CDC proposals of classification and are 
subject to the US Select Agent laws – http://www.bt.cdc.gov/agent/agentlist-category.asp 
3 Biosecurity refers to ensuring the security of biological materials to prevent theft, illicit 
use, or release, whereas biosafety and biocontainment, denote a set of procedures and 
measures aimed at regulating the safe use and storage of biological materials to reduce 
accidental exposure or release of agents into the environment. In practical terms the 
concepts of security, safety, and containment are inseparable and integral to how infectious 
disease research should be conducted and communicated. 
From the perspective of a microbiology researcher, “times have really 
changed” and research focus in the field have shifted to the small 
percentage of the microbial world, which actually causes diseases. Indeed, 
these changes are justified since facts show that infectious diseases 
continue to be the number one cause of death worldwide. AIDS, malaria, 
and TB certainly rank as the major causes of mortality and the threats of 
Parliament buildings facilitates the goal of the institute to research 
infectious diseases in close collaboration with universities and clinical units, 
and also acts as a physical reminder of the role and responsibilities of the 
research community in both public health and policymaking. 
2.3. CHANGING TIMES – NEW PRIORITIES IN MICROBIOLOGY
RESEARCH
 ANTHRAX-EURONET AND BEYOND
125

The use of chemical and biological toxins and organisms to cause harm is 
not acceptable in our modern society. The shocking use of sarin gas in the 
Tokyo subway system (killing 12 and injuring over 6,000) and the failed 
attempts to use biological weapons such as anthrax and botulism to kill 
people by the Japanese doomsday cult Aum-Shinrikyo-Sect (1990–1995) is 
a clear break of this taboo. The more recent anthrax attacks on the US 
postal system, demonstrates that other groups are willing to cause harm 
using such nonconventional weapons. In the 21st century we are faced 
with the challenge of increased availability of know-how and biological 
materials, and rapid progress in biotechnology and genetics that makes the 
optimization, or “weaponization,” of microbial agents and toxins possible. 
Therefore, the potential misuse of advances in life science research for 
hostile purposes, or “dual-use dilemma,” is a reality that requires appro-
priate responses from the academic, private, and public sectors. There are a 
number of questions that need to be addressed to help guide researchers 
and policymakers for 21st century life science, such as: how can we 
maximize biosecurity and minimize the impact on legitimate research and 
collaborations? How should this be regulated and the regulations 
implemented.
1.
Demonstration of how to render a vaccine ineffective 
2.
Confer resistance to antibiotics or antivirals 
3.
Enhance pathogen’s virulence/render a non-pathogen virulent 
4.
Increase a pathogen’s transmissibility 
4
Confronting the Dual Use Dilemma (2003): www.nap.com – Fink Committee Report 
 National Research Council, Biotechnology Research in an Age of Terrorism 
A number of significant publications propose approaches and regu-
lations and identifies the types of high-risk research, the “Experiments of 
Concern,”4 to which these guidelines should be applied. These experiments 
include:
the context of this workshop on risk communication and risk assessment 
related to bioterrorism, the Anthrax-EuroNet is a model that demonstrates 
a “bottom-up” approach to improve research coordination and to network 
the research community to activities of the public health and policymaking 
sectors in terms of developing regulations and codes of conduct to ensure 
sensible biosecurity in HCPT research and communication. 
Security Issues and Life Sciences Research
3. 
A.J. OZIN AND S.H.E. KAUFMANN
126
Security Politics, Public Health, and the Anthrax-EuroNet,
www.ebook3000.com

supporting self-governance by scientists (i.e., self-governance vs blanket 
regulations). For example, trusting the scientists and publishers to screen 
their papers for security risks as opposed to censorship, tight regulations, 
and strict selection criteria for what can be published. In addition, it was 
suggested that research, which may fall into the above seven high-risk 
groups should be subject to some level of approval by the Institutional 
Biosafety Committees that already have the mandate to oversee recombinant 
DNA research at 400 US institutions. Moreover, the establishment of a 
National Scientific Advisory Board for Biosecurity (NSABB)5 was recently 
endorsed with the mandate to provide advice to federal departments and 
agencies on dual use issues. Another key point is the need for international 
support for biosecurity. Biological information, materials, tools, and know-
how are widely distributed therefore the application of national regulations, 
in the United States for example, would have little effect if similar 
measures were not encouraged globally. 
How does the Anthrax-EuroNet project fit into the larger European Union 
response to the threat of bioterrorism? Post-2001 anthrax attacks, the 
European Union responded by initiating a broad range of actions under the 
auspices of Public Health and Emergency Responses.6 The activities 
specific to communicable diseases focus on rapid information exchange 
and coordination of responses and ensure the availability of appropriate 
treatments. In addition, a research and development expert group was con-
vened to identify means of combating biological and chemical threats. This 
groupconsists of national representatives from the public health and 
relevant academic sectors and has the mandate to: 
5 http://www.biosecurityboard.gov/ The first official meeting was held July 1, 2005. 
6 http://europa.eu.int/comm/health/index_en.htm 
5.
Alter a pathogen’s host range 
6.
Enable evasion of diagnostic tests 
7.
Enable weaponization of pathogens and toxins 
Most seem to agree that the government should avoid implementation of 
regulations that would interfere with scientific progress and rather focus on 
3.1. 
 ANTHRAX-EURONET AND BEYOND
127
EU RESPONSES TO BIOLOGICAL AND CHEMICAL THREATS

detection, surveillance, civil protection). In this context, the Anthrax-
EuroNet project proposal addressed the gaps in knowledge related to 
vaccines and treatments of anthrax. 
In January 2004, the Anthrax-EuroNet Coordination Action (CA), 
received award of funding under the Scientific Support to Policies (SSP) 
priority aimed at strengthening international networking activities to the 
public and private sectors, and to harmonize best research practices for 
anthrax prophylaxes development. The core consortium consists of leading 
European researchers and anthrax reference centres from Germany, Italy, 
France, and the United Kingdom. Together, these researchers focused on 
the difficulties that exist in comparing results of anthrax experiments 
performed in different laboratories, such as the many different existing 
animal models, strains, and protocols. Through coordinated networking 
activities and the establishment of standards, Anthrax-EuroNet would like 
to contribute to improvements in the comparability of data results for 
development of safer vaccines and therapeutics. Anthrax-EuroNet also 
hopes to become a part of larger “network of networks,” which, in the 
future, will work to coordinate and set priorities for research into dan-
gerous pathogens.
Presently, the Anthrax-EuroNet is compiling information and performing 
pilot tests for drafting a handbook on Current and Recommended protocols 
in Anthrax Prophylaxes Research. These activities are based on the 
outcome of a questionnaire regarding key steps and source of materials in 
anthrax research methods. The questionnaire was distributed to leading 
laboratories working on these topics across the globe. Disappointingly, a 
number of labs had to refuse to participate in this effort because, in the 
absence of clear international recommendations or guidelines and, they were 
unsure of how “biosecurity issues” might impact on the exchange of sensitive 
information.8 The consortium decided that the European participants provided 
8
2004;431(7011), 883–1022. 
 Ozin AJ, Bade K, Kaufmann SH. US restrictions limit anthrax networking. Nature 
x
Inventory of current research activitiesExamine how to best exploit 
and coordinate research 
x
Identify gaps and additional research needed (short- and long-term) 
Most of the identified research needs have been addressed within the 6th 
EU Research Framework Programme (FP6) launched at the end of 2002.7
These included projects aimed at development of fundamental knowledge 
and tools to counter bioterrorism (i.e., diagnostics, prevention, treatment, 
3.2. 
SUMMARY OF ANTHRAX-EURONET CURRENT ACTIVITIES
A.J. OZIN AND S.H.E. KAUFMANN
128
7 http://fp6.cordis.lu/index.cfm?fuseaction=UserSite.FP6HomePage 
www.ebook3000.com

Other Anthrax-EuroNet activities include the organization of a symposium/ 
workshop that will convene researchers and representatives from the private and 
public health sectors to discuss research directions, research funding, and issues 
of biosecurity and scientific communication towards advancing the development 
of novel therapies and preventive measures to counter deliberate epidemics 
(Berlin, Feb. 2006). A full description of the “WHO, WHAT, and HOW” of 
There is an important triangle of risk communication related to biosecurity. 
The players are the public health sector, the policymakers, and the broader 
life sciences research community. The Anthrax-EuroNet is a project that 
aims to coordinate research in Europe and as well with global efforts to 
develop safe and effective prophylaxes for infection with Bacillus
anthracis, by natural or deliberate release. It also functions as a forum for a 
“bottom-up” approach to exchange ideas and to develop protocols for 
sharing and communicating scientific information on anthrax and other 
HCPT. It is hoped that together the research community will spread a 
“culture of responsibility” and contribute ideas on how to deal with dual 
use issues and, in addition, find ways to communicate with policymakers 
to set the agenda for research priorities and future needs in infectious 
disease research. Clearly, the development of novel strategies to combat 
the threat of infection and for accelerating the transfer of results at the 
bench into viable treatments, diagnostics, and preventive measures 
requires funding, input from the public health sector, and political support. 
New concepts and some form of regulations or guidelines for exchange of 
scientific information and materials will be necessary for 21st-century life 
sciences in the context of biosecurity. Such regulations should build  
on already existing regulations, should address the internationality of 
research, and should integrate the needs of both the research community 
and security bodies.
the project and activity updates can be found at www.anthrax-euronet.com. 
of Understanding” (MoU) until clearer regulations and ways of identifying
legitimate activities have been established). 
sufficient high quality of information necessary to complete plans to compile 
information on protocols for anthrax vaccine and therapeutics research. 
Discussions of the level of dissemination of the final handbooks are underway. 
Other important steps included meeting and exchanging ideas with those 
who could not participate in the questionnaire to find ways in the future to im-
prove communications and exchange information (i.e., use of “Memorandums
4. 
Conclusions
 ANTHRAX-EURONET AND BEYOND
129

(Finance dept MPIIB). Moreover, I would like to acknowledge the support 
from the EC under the FP6 Scientific Support to Policies priority as 
coordinated by our former project manager Dr. Paul Vossen and currently 
by Dr. Arne Flåoyen. Thank you to the consortium partners and also 
external members consisting of researchers and our governing council. 
Acknowledgments
I would like to thank those persons from the MPIIB who have participated 
in the concept, development, and administration of the project: Professor 
Stefan H.E. Kaufmann who is co- coordinator of the project, Dr. Robert 
Golinski and Dr. Karen Bade (Anthrax-Euronet office), and Birgit Arnold 
A.J. OZIN AND S.H.E. KAUFMANN
130
www.ebook3000.com

Deputy Director-General for Information and International 
Relations,
Ministry of Health, Israel 
In emergencies, the communications media have a crucial role to play in 
covering incidents and we have to know how to correctly exploit them. 
Credibility and reliability must be maintained as much as is possible within 
the inevitable constraints of secrecy, field security, and so on. 
The media’s role may be central but we must not make the mistake of 
inferring from that that in emergencies the media become part of the 
system. The media are a vital vehicle for transferring information but, even 
in emergencies, they will remain totally independent, capable of filtering 
information, voicing criticism, preferring their own sources, and so on. 
Our job is to find the common ground between the establishment and 
the media. When any incident occurs, conventional, biological, or otherwise, 
the media have a crucial role to play in getting our message across to the 
general public; if we add that a large section of the public will be sitting at 
home, the media’s role is second to none. 
When the public is suddenly exposed to a type of incident it has not met 
before, any lack of information can cause hysteria, precisely because of the 
public ignorance of the nature of this type of incident. Communication 
nowadays is a 24-hour-a-day affair, constantly available in the kitchen, the 
car, at the workplace, and at home. Especially if people are sitting shut 
inside a sealed room their only channel to the outside world is the radio or 
television. This shows us that the communications media in Israel fill more 
than just a public relations or public educational function (although this 
role in itself is of no small importance): they are also needed for getting 
messages, instruction, and guidance to the public. 
The establishment can make use of the media in a number of ways and 
for a number of purposes: 
M.S. Green et al. (eds.), Risk Assessment and Risk Communication Strategies in Bioterrorism 
© 2007 Springer.
131
RISK COMMUNICATION AND PUBLIC BEHAVIOR
IN EMERGENCIES
1.
To instruct: In times of emergency the public is hungry for instruction. 
How to act? What should or should not be done? Where can we get 
vaccination/gas masks/Lugol pills, etc. 
Preparedness, 131–133. 
Yair Amikam

2.
To educate and inform: The public have an endless appetite for 
information about the topic of the day. If it is a disease, – Where can 
we get vaccinated? Who should be vaccinated and who should not? So 
on and so forth. 
3.
To get the message across: Professionals from a variety of fields, 
briefed by the system, can be offered as expert commentators to the 
various media. 
4.
Talking down anxiety: Professionals can be put up to reduce the new 
situation to its proper proportions. The media must be given access to 
information. Information should be released in real time and must be 
credible, up to date and appropriate to the communications medium 
using it (print or electronic). 
x
Press conferences/briefings 
x
Communiqués 
x
Arranging a media station at the site of the incident 
x
Appropriate communications devices (e.g., aerials, microwave technology) 
x
Regular updates 
x
Appointing a communications liaison officer 
x
Giving out embarrassing and noncredible information. 
x
Giving out boring and unattractive information. 
x
Background noises. 
x
A harassed, crowded working environment. 
x
Not paying attention to scheduled broadcasting times. 
x
Showing inappropriate favoritism to certain media. 
x
Not keeping up the flow of information – if the supply fails the media 
will start looking for other, more available sources and there will always 
be other sources anxious to put out information competing with ours. 
x
As soon as a preliminary state of readiness has been announced, set up 
a “war room,” preferably in the Ministry of Health’s Emergency 
Services Division. 
x
A team of “commentator-pundits” should be put on notice and their 
“front line” put on stand-by for the first interviews to the media. 
132
Y. AMIKAM
x
Subcommittees should begin passing all the relevant information they 
have to the communications war-room. 
x
The director of communications for the incident should discuss with 
his commentary team whether to begin sending out preliminary mes-
1.  Useful Tools
2. 
Dangers to be Aware of:
www.ebook3000.com

x
Spokesmen for the relevant hospitals may be set in readiness. 
x
Once permission has been given, the spokesman can put out their first 
communiqué.
x
Weigh the possibility of holding a press conference for Israeli and 
foreign correspondents. 
x
According to how the incident unfolds, the main spokesman will issue 
restricted statements. 
x
Hospital spokesmen should arrange broadcast points for reporters. 
x
Each hospital should have an authorized representative, regularly 
updated by the war-room, who keeps the information flowing to 
reporters waiting at the broadcast point. 
critical elements of preparedness for emergency situations is communications 
and that we need to invest in this all necessary resources, particularly for our 
handling of the communications media. Several preparedness measures need 
to be taken: 
1.
Great amounts of information on the topic (the disease, epidemic, 
whatever it is) must be kept ready. A good idea is to set up a central 
Internet site containing as much information on the topic as can be got 
hold of. 
2.
A pool of lecturers on all subjects should be gathered, ready to be 
offered to the media when the time comes. 
3.
A 24-hour-a-day communications room should be set up, where local 
and foreign reporters (and hundreds of foreign correspondents can be 
expected to drop in on Israel when a sensational incident occurs) can 
be briefed, and from where they can send their material home. 
4.
The system should make efforts to obtain an exclusive television 
channel for its communications. 
133
pundits. All of the above is to be carried out in all necessary languages. 
war-room should issue instructions/guidance to its team of commentator-
At regular intervals and as the situation requires, the communications 
In light of all that has been said to this point, it is clear that one of the 
 RISK COMMUNICATION AND PUBLIC BEHAVIOR IN EMERGENCIES
sages to the public, and if so whether to do this by direct or indirect 
methods, and at what level. 
political, or economic – can be carried out without close media coverage, 
without reporters asking their questions and voicing their criticism. 
expertise, then the needs of both state security and the communications 
media can be satisfied. 
the communications media is common ground between everybody, and all 
the more so in times of emergency. No state action – operational, diplomatic,
All this can and must be catered for, and if it is done with professional 
In this third century of the Common Era, the vital importance of


Adjunct Associate Professor of Psychiatry 
Georgetown University Medical Center 
Professor of Psychology 
Vesalius College, Free University of Brussels 
This paper examines the challenges that governments and civil society faces in 
preparing for bioterrorist attacks – the challenges of reporting bioterrorism in 
the media, the psychological responses that are likely and how to deal with 
them, how terrorism may disrupt the political processes and how to respond to 
the needs of the population for calming, and accurate information while 
minimizing fear states and maximizing compliance with government 
instructions. It examines the psychological dimensions of mass bioterrorist 
attacks on the civil population and government responses, working first from 
the normal government expectation of panic to a more modulated recognition 

background research for this paper. 
that even when panic does occur, such as increased attachment, cohesive,  
and supportive societal behaviors in response to disaster situations. Likewise, 
this paper addresses medical, psychiatric, psychosocial, and informational 
needs that are likely to be encountered in the face of “invisible” threats and 
makes suggestions for designing risk communication strategies to address 
psychological contagion, acute and posttraumatic responses, and to maximize 
resilience in the face of the increased bioterror threats of today’s world. 
Today’s terrorists are skillful in their manipulation of mass media to amplify 
the effects of their attacks. In response, governments must be equally prepared 
and ready to remain calm and truthful in their communication in times of 
crisis, and must not compromise the core values of democracy in taking up 
the defense against terrorism. 
Special thanks to graduate student Beatrice Jacuch who assisted in some of the 
PREVENTION STRATEGIES AND PROMOTING
PSYCHOLOGICAL RESILIENCE TO 
© 2007 Springer.
M.S. Green et al. (eds.), Risk Assessment and Risk Communication Strategies in Bioterrorism 
135
Preparedness, 135–162. 
1. 
Abstract
Anne Speckhard
BIOTERRORISM THROUGH COMMUNICATION
www.ebook3000.com

radiological, or chemical threats are the most terrifying of all. Instinctively 
all people fear poisons and a lethal, or poisoning agent that is unseen and 
difficult to comprehend can quickly and easily become in the public 
consciousness an all pervasive threat that seems impossible to protect 
against even if it has touched only a small portion of the population, or is 
only a threatened action. Bioterrorism is terrifying not only in the mind of 
the ordinary citizen, but perhaps even more so in the mind of the scientist, 
because of the threat of death or serious and perhaps deforming illness by 
contagion, which spreads spontaneously beyond the original attack – 
through vectors the terrorists themselves cannot control. In the case of 
bioterrorism the agent released into society is alive and often lethal – much 
like the terrorists themselves – and continues to carry out their death threat 
beyond the original strike. In this case both the media and the biological 
agent itself amplify the original attack multiplying its terror causing 
effects. Likewise the psychological contagion that often occurs with the 
threat of or actuality of a bioterrorist attack is of paramount importance to 
consider when one looks ahead to how to promote resilience to this type of 
terrorism. This paper addresses the need for societies to think ahead and 
anticipate civilian responses to bioterrorism, to design prevention stra-
tegies, and promote resilience through communication – in the media and 
through governmental and nongovernmental channels. In this way society 
can be prepared to defend against terrorism when and if it does strike. 
unseen and sometimes even undeclared actors who attack civilian 
populations using various unconventional means in order to create the 
most horror, fear, and panic possible. In this type of psychological warfare 
civilians are targeted for political purposes in order to continually create 
and reinforce in civilian perceptions an ongoing sense of threat and dread – 
that anyone and anyplace, at anytime can be a victim. By achieving this 
aim the terrorist can force concessions, withdrawals and win on their 
deadly battleground. In nearly every case the terrorists’ main goal is to hit 
the largest possible target (symbolically or in the number of casualties) and 
by doing so use the media to amplify its horror driven message – make 
your government give in to our concessions or suffer more threats to 
civilian security. Terrorism is used to create states of fear, horror, and 
Terrorism is essentially a psychological weapon waged upon society by 
of mass destruction (WMD) and those that make use of biological, 
Of all the weapons in the terrorist arsenal those that involve weapons 
A. SPECKHARD 
136
2. 
Introduction
Terrorism as a Psychological Weapon
3.

dread not only in its immediate victims but in its wider witnessing 
audience.
continually redefining itself in response to counterterrorism measures. The 
progress and portability of high-tech weaponry and the ability to com-
municate information quickly (over Internet and telephone) has advanced 
the ability of small groups to create virtual command centers that can 
operate simultaneously and cover multiple world regions, and in doing so 
enact events of worldwide mass terrorism. Moreover biological, chemical, 
and nuclear WMD – all previously weapons of states – are increasingly 
coming within the grasp of smaller groups of actors, and terrorists have 
made clear their desire to obtain and use such weapons. 
In the fight against terrorism societies must prepare themselves for all 
variants of terrorist attack and institute policies that prevent widespread 
dread and panic, and promote resilience in the larger civil society.1 The 
defense against terrorism is in reality four-tiered. Firstly, it involves 
investing huge amounts of resources into hardening defenses in terms of 
securing buildings, airports, and civil military installations. This defense is 
important in securing key resources. Yet it has been called a placebo 
response by some because in reality, the entire nation can be a target, total 
defense is illusory and any death will achieve media coverage – thereby 
radicalizing public opinion and demonstrating the ineffectiveness of the 
security forces (Mackenzie, 2006). Secondly, tier of defense against terr-
orism includes infiltrating and destroying terrorist groups – by discovering 
and thwarting their plans ahead of time and raising questions about their 
methods and ideology within the groups (Atran, 2003; Post, 2006). 
1
society that help shape interactions amongst the population including nongovernmental 
organizations (NGOs), media, and those intermediary institutions (e.g., professional 
associations, religious groups, labor unions, citizen advocacy organizations, etc.), which 
build links between the population, provide information, analyses and political responses, 
and that give voice to various sectors of society and enrich public participation in 
democracies.
Of course civil society never acts in a vacuum or completely independent of government 
hence this paper focuses often upon how the two overlap, including through laws, policies, 
and instructions from one governing the other, as well as their interaction through the 
media, the public health service, hospitals, medical institutions, universities, think tanks, 
foundations, the legal system etc. 
 Civil society being broadly defined here as the formal and informal structures of 
The emerging threat of global terrorism is one that is dynamic and 
PREVENTION STRATEGIES AND PROMOTING PSYCHOLOGICAL RESILIENCE
137
4.
Four Tiers in the Defense Against Terrorism
www.ebook3000.com

Thirdly, for winning the “war on terrorism” societies can defend against 
terrorism by working to understand and diminish the reasons for popular 
support of terrorist groups – “debranding” the ideology2 and looking for 
and addressing the root causes. Lastly and most importantly for this paper 
is the need for society to anticipate the responses of its own citizenry to 
terror attacks of all kinds and build resilience into it so that the 
psychological effects of terrorism are minimized. 
With the advent of groups like al-Qaeda and the interest in creating terror 
attacks involving mass casualties and the use of self martyrdom missions 
many in the terrorism field have begun to speak of a “new terrorism”.3
Whether or not we are seeing a real break with old terrorists’ methods and 
goals it is certainly true that today’s terrorists function in a completely new 
global environment. With the erosion of strict borders between countries 
(particularly in the European Union) and even world regions (since the fall 
of the Soviet bloc), the advance and portability of high-tech weaponry 
including biological, chemical, and nuclear hazards, and the ease and 
speed of communication through the Internet and telephones for purposes 
of recruitment, training, and planning terror attacks – terrorists now have a 
global playing field in which even small groups of individuals can 
motivate, plan, and enact mass terrorist events. Moreover biological, 
chemical, and nuclear WMD – all previously weapons of states – not small 
groups, are increasingly coming within the grasp of smaller groups of 
actors, and terrorists have made clear their desire to obtain and use such 
weapons.
use WMD including bioterrorism (Schweitzer, 2003). In addition to the 
much publicized words of Osama bin Laden in which he stated it was a sin 
not to make use of such weapons, Shamil Basayev, leader of the Chechen 
terrorist groups has also avowed his willingness to attack his enemies with 
the same agents he believes his people have been attacked with including 
2 I am indebted to Thelma Gillen of the UK MOD for this brilliant idea of attempting to 
“debrand” an ideology, much like one might attempt to debrand a trademark. 
3 Martha Crenshaw severely criticizes this conceptualization, which she credits to Simon 
and Benjamin. 
Qaeda and its affiliates. Chillingly they have avowed their willingness to 
The most well-known and perhaps most feared global terrorists are al-
A. SPECKHARD 
138
5. 
The New Terrorism
5.1.
AVOWED INTEREST OF TERRORISTS IN BIOTERRORISM
AND WEAPONS OF MASS DESTRUCTION

bioterrorism.4 Abu Musa’ab al Suri one of the contemporary al-Qaeda ideo-
logues also advocated the use of WMD and criticized Osama bin Laden for 
not previously using them (Paz, 2005).5 Likewise Aum Shinrikyo, a non-
al-Qaeda linked group, that was active in Japan aimed to develop such 
weapons and actually shocked the world with the first mass chemical attack 
when they dispersed sarin gas in the Tokyo subway, injuring hundreds. 
Likewise two al-Qaeda affiliate groups were thwarted in their attempts to 
use a ricin like substance in London and Paris, and a failed biological 
attack was carried out in the United States when a small anti-government 
group attempted to contaminate a salad bar with Salmonella. So clearly 
there is an avowed willingness by today’s terror groups to resort to the use 
of bioterrorism. 
As far as intelligence analysts have been able to piece together when 
groups are searching for WMD they have thus far resorted to utilizing state 
sponsorship, trying to buy materials on the world black market, or resorted 
to illicit pilferage. When these activities have not worked, terror groups 
have adjusted their strategies by putting their resources into internal 
4 Reuven Paz writes, “Abu Mus’ab al-Suri – a former leading trainer and scholar of al-
Qaeda, published two signiﬁcant documents calling for a new organization of Global Jihad: 
“The Islamist Global Resistance.” One was a nine-page letter published in December 2004, 
and the other was a huge book totaling 1,600 pages about the strategy of Global Jihad} In 
his open letter to the State Department, Al-Suri talks at length about the importance of 
using WMD against the United States as the only means to ﬁght it from a point of equality. 
He even criticizes Osama bin Laden for not using WMD in the September 11 attacks: “If I 
were consulted in the case of that operation I would advise the use of planes in ﬂights from 
outside the U.S. that would carry WMD. Hitting the U.S. with WMD was and is still very 
complicated. Yet, it is possible after all, with Allah’s help, and more important than being 
possible—it is vital.” Al-Suri states that “the Muslim resistance elements [must] seriously 
consider this diĜcult yet vital direction.”
5 Reuven Paz writes, “Abu Mus’ab al-Suri – a former leading trainer and scholar of al-
Qaeda, published two signiﬁcant documents calling for a new organization of Global Jihad: 
“The Islamist Global Resistance.” One was a nine-page letter published in December 2004, 
and the other was a huge book totaling 1,600 pages about the strategy of Global Jihad} In 
his open letter to the State Department, Al-Suri talks at length about the importance of 
using WMD against the United States as the only means to ﬁght it from a point of equality. 
He even criticizes Osama bin Laden for not using WMD in the September 11 attacks: “If I 
were consulted in the case of that operation I would advise the use of planes in ﬂights from 
outside the U.S. that would carry WMD. Hitting the U.S. with WMD was and is still very 
complicated. Yet, it is possible after all, with Allah’s help, and more important than being 
possible—it is vital.” Al-Suri states that “the Muslim resistance elements [must] seriously 
consider this diĜcult yet vital direction.”
PREVENTION STRATEGIES AND PROMOTING PSYCHOLOGICAL RESILIENCE
139
5.2.
INITIAL ADVANCES TOWARD BIOTERRORIST ATTACKS
www.ebook3000.com

research and development (Hoffman, 2005). The Aum Shinrikyo group 
recruited and hired highly trained Russian scientists and set up a highly 
specialized laboratory. Likewise, information discovered in Afghanistan 
makes clear that al-Qaeda was engaged in a serious effort to develop a 
usable chemical and biological weapons capability. Seized materials 
include films of tests carried out by al-Qaeda operatives showing that the 
group achieved their goals enough to having reached the stage of limited 
testing of agents on live subjects. In the United Kingdom and France 
terrorists groups have utilized crude recipes for biological agents such as 
ricin (Hoffman, 2005; Schweitzer, 2003). In the thwarted UK case the 
group planned to smear small amounts of ricin on the door handles of 
random vehicles and thereby hoped to create mass hysteria from a few 
deaths rather than enact a mass killing. 6
Terrorists have certainly observed that it is possible to undermine public 
confidence and create mass anxiety responses by simple and even limited 
dispersal of a biological agent. The huge public reaction to the anthrax 
attacks in the United States (and indeed worldwide when one considers the 
providers) included: shutting down buildings; strangling the mail system; 
workers donning masks and rubber gloves while processing mail; 
quarantining areas, requiring employees to take precautionary strong 
antibiotics, public and private stock piling of medicines, and widespread 
anxiety about anthrax. These responses made clear that one could both 
undermine public confidence and create widespread mass distress with 
relatively few anthrax attacks (Hoffman, 2005; Speckhard, 2002a). 
Likewise the fact that it took 4 months and $41.7 million to decontaminate 
the Hart Senate Office Building and nearly $100 million to do the same in 
the Boca Raton postal facility demonstrated the high costs of responding 
to the dispersal of minute quantities of a biological agent. Terrorists 
learned from these events that rendering an important facility inoperable 
by virtue of biocontamination can have widespread and devastating social, 
psychological, and economic repercussions (Hoffman, 2005). 
6 The so-called Chechen cell of North Africans in Paris were discovered preparing ricin 
for an attack on the Russian embassy in Paris and the London group had already prepared 
large quantities of ricin for an unspecified attack. 
attacks throughout Europe which were taken seriously by emergency 
number of US embassies that were also affected, as well as the many hoax
A. SPECKHARD 
140
MASS ANXIETY WITH BIOTERRORISM
5.3.
UNDERMINING PUBLIC CONFIDENCE AND CREATING

ricin scandal it became apparent that the terrorists were more interested in 
their ability to undermine public confidence and to potentially create mass 
hysteria with a bioterrorism attack than in actually enacting a mass killing 
event. Likewise the Algerian cell’s interest in ricin appears to be based in 
their inability to achieve sufficient media impact using strictly conven-
tional attacks (Hoffman, 2005). Terrorism relies upon making a strong 
media impact and bioterrorism has that potential. 
While the war in Afghanistan made significant inroads in taking out the 
main al-Qaeda leadership, its ideology still flourishes and in the absence of 
a strong centralized leadership the movement has continued unabated. 
Recruitment, training and perhaps most important, a motivational ideology 
is daily transmitted globally via the Internet bringing on board a disparate 
(but unified by a common ideology) group of disenfranchised, alienated, 
frustrated, and even traumatized individuals living in both conflict and 
non-conflict zones willing to sign on to support and even enact terrorism. 
In terms of western security, this is particularly troublesome in Europe 
where radicalization among disenfranchised Muslim communities appears 
to be a swelling phenomenon. The unresolved conflicts and human rights 
violations in Chechnya, Palestine, Kashmir, and now in Afghanistan, Iraq, 
and Guantanamo Bay as well, all give fuel to the al-Qaeda ideology, which 
argues that Islam is under attack by corrupt western powers and militant 
jihad including attacks on civilians and self martyrdom operations is not 
only justified, but a duty. With the current ease of communication, 
lessening of technological barriers, convincing ideology, and a ready pool 
of recruits, it appears that the occurrence of a mass bioterrorism attack may 
simply be only a matter of time. 
Given this state of affairs can we anticipate the responses of our 
citizenry to bioterrorism and if so how can government and civil society 
prepare and increase societal resilience to such attacks? 
To answer this question we must acknowledge that our citizenry is far 
more resilient than they are often given credit for. The common view 
espoused by government officials and policymakers is an expectation that 
people will panic in the face of a mass terrorist event and that chaos will 
ensue. Experience with terrorism, however, does not bear that out (Wessely, 
2004), although most of our research is based on conventional versus 
During the UK trial of the al-Qaeda affiliate leaders involved in the 
PREVENTION STRATEGIES AND PROMOTING PSYCHOLOGICAL RESILIENCE
141
5.4.
MASS BIOTERRORIST ATTACK MAY BE SIMPLY 
A MATTER OF TIME
6.
Unrecognized Resilience in Society
www.ebook3000.com

bioterrorism. In nearly all civil disasters that have been studied by resear-
chers, holding aside the moments of escaping an imminent danger such as 
a fire, earthquake, hurricane, or bomb – researchers repeatedly have found 
volunteer their resources, and risk their lives to help each other. Society 
actually becomes more civil during times of disaster as social cohesion 
increases rather than decreases under threat: in the short-term attachment 
behaviors generally increase, social cohesion increases, and the heroic is 
often called forth in ordinary people (Speckhard, 2005a). We have numerous 
studies that bear this out. 
9/11 is a good example. After-the-event interviews of persons involved 
revealed that people did not take a “me first attitude”, disabled and injured 
persons were not run over by panicking hordes or left behind, abandoned 
(Furedi, 2004). On the contrary the 9/11 evacuation was self-generated, 
orderly, and without panic, and those who were hurt or disabled were carefully 
and calmly assisted and taken to emergency services (Glass and Schoch-
Spana, 2002). The explosion of the Chernobyl nuclear power plant gives us 
another window in which to view the responses of citizenry in times of mass 
disaster. When the reactor was about to explode the plant operators did not 
abandon their posts and flee like cowards to protect themselves. Instead they 
heroically fought to the last moments to shut down the reactor, to contain the 
damage – many giving their lives to do so. The Madrid train bombings give us 
another example. Witnesses state that after the first explosions passengers 
helped one another and calmly began to exit the scene. Only when repeated 
blasts occurred did some begin to run. Even then, when it became clear that 
emergency vehicles were having a hard time getting to the platform, taxi 
drivers waiting for customers did not flee in fear, but volunteered themselves 
as makeshift ambulances and ferried wounded persons to emergency care 
(Speckhard, 2004b). The same happened in the Moscow subway bombings – 
people walked calmly for long distances in the darkness, helping the wounded 
to evacuate. When terrorists bombed a crowded rock concert outside of 
Moscow – the band agreed to bravely play on, the audience followed 
instructions not to stampede in fear and the wounded were carefully attended 
to. In the Moscow theater where 800 hostages were held by Chechen suicide 
terrorists the hostages also remained calm for the most part during their ordeal 
and helped one another (Speckhard, 2004a; Speckhard et al., 2004; Speckhard
et al., 2005a, b). Even in the Beslan hostage taking crisis where hundreds of 
children were held hostage, water and toilet privileges were withheld, and 
shooting occurred in front of the hostages – there were only limited outbreaks 
in times of threat. Total strangers help each other, open their homes, 
that citizenry has become quite attachment and community-oriented 
A. SPECKHARD 
142

extremely heroic behaviors were displayed (Speckhard, 2005c). The London 
public transportation bombings also met with relative calm, with Londoners 
quickly resuming confidence in the use of public transportation (Wessely, 
2005).
Even under sustained and intense terrorist threat such as what has 
occurred in Israel during the second intifada (uprising) we witness that the 
vast majority of the population there has habituated to the threat, certainly 
making adjustments in daily living to avoid as much as possible their 
potential for being killed by terrorists – but yet carrying on with life all the 
same. While the psychological costs of living under a sustained and intense 
terror threat are still not well understood (likely causing hyperarousal states 
in many, bodily distress, etc.) we do also see that most of the Israeli 
population have on their own found ways to be resilient in the face of it. 
Terrorists aim at creating widespread horror, dread, and fear, and to divide 
society. However, it is safe to say that despite this when under threat one can 
see in civil society, at least in the short term that attachment behaviors 
generally increase, social cohesion increases, and the heroic is often called 
forth in ordinary people. 
While this is true of terrorism that involves bombs and destruction we 
know less about societal responses to bioterrorism and we may find that 
the lessons learned from one type of terrorism may not transfer as well to 
another. We still have not studied well the potential effects of a mass 
bioterrorism event in which the dread caused by the spread of an invisible, 
contagious, and potentially lethal pathogen may be horrendous and in fact 
lead to less resilient responses. In this case the spread of horror from the 
terrorist attack will be amplified not only by the mass media but also by 
the many vectors of contagious contact all of which are difficult for ordi-
nary individuals, much less medical professionals to understand and cope 
with. Likewise trying to contain a potentially lethal contagious disease, 
that has a presymptomatic incubating period, and that can be spread 
through contact with others is extremely challenging and requires societal 
cohesion and compliance with rapidly responding and well-informed govern-
ment authorities. In this case quarantines and the means of enforcing them, 
panic-driven hoarding of medicines and overwhelming the medical care 
services with “worried well” and psychosomatic individuals are issues that 
we know from other disasters might well occur and, which might severely 
impact societal resilience. Thus we cannot say in all cases we expect society 
to be resilient. When it comes to poisons, invisible toxins, and fear inducing 
contagious illness, we have to look at other incidents to draw lessons. 
of hysteria. For the most part the adults present calmed the children and some 
PREVENTION STRATEGIES AND PROMOTING PSYCHOLOGICAL RESILIENCE
143
www.ebook3000.com

When a threat is invisible and difficult to comprehend, some individuals 
may be expected to respond with fear, aggression, hysteria, and even 
psychosomatic symptoms if the fear of a potential toxic exposure becomes 
overwhelming. Such responses have been witnessed in many events and 
are well documented in the literature. After the Goiania radioactive 
incident (Brandao Mello et al., 1991), following Chernobyl (Bromet et al., 
1998; Green et al., 1994; Havenaar et al., 2002; Speckhard, 2002b), and 
after the sarin attacks in the Tokyo subway, medical systems were briefly 
overwhelmed by thousands of individuals who feared that they had the 
symptoms of poisoning, many who became psychosomatically ill. The 
explosion of the Chernobyl nuclear power plant was perhaps the most 
serious “invisible” threat to date. Likewise the Bhopal and Goiania and 
other similar incidents give us additional information making clear that 
there are unique psychological and fear responses to “invisible” toxins, 
poisons, and contaminants, as well as the widespread dread of pervasive 
and random threat that accompanies conventional terrorism. 
Not only is disease contagious but psychosocial phenomena can also 
spread as infectiously through populations as biological agents, sometimes 
wreaking as much havoc with health as the disease agents themselves. The 
processes whereby emotions, attitudes, beliefs, and behavior are spread, 
transmitted, and even leap between populations, similar to other contagious 
outbreaks like measles, chicken pox, or even the common cold is referred 
to as psychological or psychosocial contagion. Psychosocial contagion 
moves from person to person, often times requiring only a single exposure. 
Categories of contagion important for understanding potential societal 
responses to bioterrorism include emotional, behavioral and aggression 
contagions. Mood, fear, and anxiety states can be transmitted quickly through
a population as humans tend to synchronize their facial expressions, 
voices, and postures with those in their immediate environment taking on 
fear and distress states when they witness these in those around them 
(Behnke et al., 1994; Hatfield et al., 1993; Hsee et al., 1992; McDougall, 
1920). This is particularly true of children. This synchronization can occur 
in response to viewing live footage in the mass media and may be one of the 
modern day mechanisms for rapid transmission of emotional contagions. 
Behavioral contagions can also occur. For instance individuals exposed to 
violations of rules often increase their likelihood to engage in a similar or 
A. SPECKHARD 
144
7.
Biochemical and Radiological Agents
Fear of the Unseen and Unknown – Poisons, Toxins,
Contagion
8. 
Psychosocial

identical behaviors (i.e., speeding, delinquency, criminality, teenage smok-
ing, youth sex, substance abuse) (Connolly, 1993; Ennett et al., 1997; Jones, 
1998; Jones and Jones, 1995; Rowe et al., 1992). These two contagions – 
emotional and behavioral likely explain the psychology behind the 
hysterical buy out of duct tape in the United States when word got out that 
the Homeland defense report had made mention of duct tape as a useful 
means of protecting oneself from chemical and biological attacks. Similarly 
it can explain in part why many Americans were massively noncompliant 
and failed to heed public health officials instructions not to stockpile Cipro 
(flaxocin) the antibiotic used to treat anthrax, instead of following a 
general panic among many to buy out unnecessary antibiotics and perhaps 
by doing so deprive those truly in need of them. If the anthrax attacks had 
been widespread, this may have caused significant hardship for some. 
As of this writing, we see the dread and dismay caused as Avian flu 
makes its way westward, with many citizens overly worried and rejecting 
poultry products and others noncompliant due to economic concerns of 
losing livelihoods, with the long-term health and economic consequences 
still unknown. Certainly governments must plan ahead for how they would 
handle issues of quarantine if it were needed and work beforehand with the 
public to get their participation and acceptance for plans, as well as with 
the media, police, military, or national guard units that would be responsible 
for reporting on and enforcing quarantine so that as much as possible conten-
tious issues are dealt with and anticipated beforehand. Even rehearsing how a 
decontamination unit would function in a mass terror setting is important 
for small but crucial issues like deciding does everyone who goes through 
the unit have to strip naked and if so can provisions be made for segregating 
the sexes – a difficult issue for those for whom modesty is a key value; 
how do decontamination units handle the need to give up contaminated 
items including car keys – raising the issue of how does one get home; or 
how to handle the surrender of contaminated mobile phones – creating 
stresses and tensions for family members who can no longer check on and 
reassure their loved ones. Small but crucial issues like these if anticipated 
and thought through beforehand, with useful remedies built into the 
response scenarios can be arranged for the least stressful responses. New 
models of readiness are necessary to counter this threat especially when it 
pertains to biological terrorism because biological contamination raises uni-
que and difficult issues, differing dramatically from other types of terrorism. 
As psychological contagion is a very real response to the potential of 
toxic exposure, medical systems should prepare ahead for massive 
onslaughts of the “worried well”. The severe acute respiratory syndrome 
(SARS) virus crossing from Asia to Canada in a very short time – shutting 
PREVENTION STRATEGIES AND PROMOTING PSYCHOLOGICAL RESILIENCE
145
www.ebook3000.com

down an entire city; the Cyrptosporidium epidemic of 1993 in the state of 
Wisconsin; and the current epidemic with avian flu makes clear that huge 
number of people can be affected when a bio-threat spreads quickly 
through a community and that these threats raise difficult psychological 
and medical issues (Glaser, 2004). Governments and media must work 
together preparing ahead of time on how to communicate calmly in such 
crises in a manner that will offer useful preventative measures, minimize 
the potential negative effects of psychosocial contagions (including citizenry 
becoming noncompliant and aggressive), prevent mass sociogenic illness 
from occurring, and prevent overwhelming of the medical systems by 
those whose emotional state has put them in need of medical care. In the 
case of bioterrorism as we shall see this is no easy task. 
In its extreme form psychosocial contagion can spawn mass hysterical 
contagions or mass sociogenic illness – that is, the rapid spread of illness 
signs and symptoms, which has no physical basis for the symptoms and no 
known exposure to a pathogen (Bartholomew and Wessely, 2002; Cohen 
et al., 1978; Kerckhoff, 1968; Marsden, 1998). Hysterical contagions involve 
the spread by contact, including mass media exposure, of reported symptoms 
and experiences usually associated with clinical hysteria (hallucinations, 
nausea, vomiting, fainting, etc.) in the absence of exposure to a pathogen. 
Such illnesses often begin with exposure of a limited group to a biological 
contagion or chemical toxin with the others around these persons or learning 
of them responding hysterically with some form of nervous excitation, 
including a significant loss or alteration of function, and physical symptoms 
with no basis in physical etiology. These types of illness often affect 
members of a cohesive group although they can leap across groups when 
common links are made in reality or imagination. Such links are often 
made through the mass media in which one quite limited group of indi-
viduals is actually exposed to a biological or chemical toxin and has real 
symptoms but other groups fear that they too have been exposed. 
Study of these types of contagions has found that exposure to the verbal 
reporting of symptoms rather than exposure to the symptoms themselves 
was enough to pass it on to others (Colligan and Murphy, 1982), which 
makes it clear that responsible and nonhysterical news reporting is very 
necessary to contain such contagions. Often there is a sensitizing issue that 
makes populations vulnerable to psychogenic illness. In Belgium in 1999, 
a mass sociogenic illness occurred in response to tainted Coca Cola that gave 
off harmless fumes, but caused psychogenic symptoms in schoolchildren 
A. SPECKHARD 
146
9.
Mass Sociogenic Illness

and members of the general public. This may have occurred because the 
Belgian public had been sensitized by serious food scares during the pre-
vious year involving dioxin contamination in the food (Nemery et al., 2002). 
Research has also shown that when one groups feels under attack by an 
enemy it is much easier for the symptoms to spread as the “victim” group 
finds it easy to believe that they have been poisoned by their enemies 
(Bartholomew and Wessely, 2002). This occurred in Palestine (Modan et al., 
1983), Kosovo (Hay  and Foran, 1991), and recently in Chechnya. 
Recent evidence indicates people do not even have to be present at a 
terrorist event to experience posttraumatic symptoms (Speckhard, 2002a, 
b; Speckhard and Mufel, 2003). Likewise, numerous studies have shown 
2001). The impact of the 9/11 attacks was reported as far away as Italy 
(Apolone et al., 2002) and India (Ray and Malhi, 2005) and was acutely 
experienced by expatriate Americans in Belgium (Speckhard, 2002a, b; 
Speckhard and Mufel, 2003). In these studies, media and, particularly 
television exposure, was an important predictor of stress or traumatic 
symptoms in the face of terrorism second to geographic distance from the 
attacks. We must recognize that graphic images have the potential to be 
traumatic in themselves in terms of their potential to create a “witnessing” 
experience of trauma and their constant replay can also become traumatic 
as a potential victim also proved to cause stress symptoms (Dixon et al., 
1993), something that can also occur via televised images. 
Terrorists’ goals are to spread horror in behalf of their political cause and 
they reach their goal of maximum psychological impact through their 
manipulation of the mass media. The media, which is in a sense symbiotic 
with all the horrors of the world, generally responds within minutes of any 
terror attack and coverage begins immediately. In the case of a mass terror 
attack, the “talking heads” follow shortly thereafter. In most cases of mass 
terrorism it will be through these channels that the population will learn 
what has happened and form their attitudes about how bad it is, what the 
that television coverage had a profound impact on children after the Chall- 
enger explosion (Terr et al., 1999), the first Gulf War (Cantor et al., 1993), 
and the Oklahoma City bombing (Pfefferbaum et al., 2000; Pfefferbaum, 
reminders, resulting in persistent reexperiencing and hyperarousal sym-
ptoms (Hayez, 2001). Personalizing the event and reflecting on oneself 
is at this moment that governments can make or fail to make crucial 
potential effects are, what they should do, and what they should fear. It 
 
PREVENTION STRATEGIES AND PROMOTING PSYCHOLOGICAL RESILIENCE
147
and Behavioral Contagions
10.
Mass Media’s Role in Mediating Emotional 
www.ebook3000.com

interventions to the resiliency of civil society – by what they communicate 
or fail to communicate. 
Journalist Robert Frank points out that in a disaster situation people 
often “only recall from the peak moment, in the peak intensity, and far less 
attention is paid to the more accurate picture that emerges over time.” This 
then according to Frank, “creates a predisposition to think a certain way 
before the facts are fully presented and afterward then only to listen and 
retain those that confirm what was previously believed.” Unfortunately 
journalists are under pressure to get stories quickly and report the news 
with insufficient information. Frank goes on to state, “It is however, very, 
very seductive to news-workers to appear knowledgeable when you are 
not” (Speckhard, 2002b). 
Certainly the emotional and behavioral response of citizenry to an event 
of bioterrorism will depend in part on how well and calmly government 
communicates the events to citizens and directs them in useful activities 
rather than leaving an information vacuum for the media experts or 
“talking heads” to fill with emotionally fearful information. If govern-
ments wish to avoid such consequences and compete with the unbridled 
freedom of mass media to form public opinions they must be prepared and 
have their own “sound bites” and “talking heads” prepared well ahead of a 
disaster, otherwise the mass media will fill the vacuum. While the practice 
of journalists presenting incomplete stories with only half fashioned facts 
is unlikely to disappear, government and the public health systems have a 
responsibility to prepare ahead of time and be ready to provide psycho-
logical triage – both through the media and in person for the worried well 
and psychosomatic individuals who will likely overwhelm the medical faci-
lities. In the short term government and experts credibility is crucial. Once 
that is lost it is very difficult to calm arousal states in individuals who will 
not believe competing information from that they already took on board. 
Terrorists thrive on creating a mental environment in which citizens live 
in fear and dread of the next attack. Civil society can do a lot to fight this 
type of psychological tactic. One of the most important ways is for those in 
charge of information to be well prepared and to speak in a reassuring 
manner about what is both known and unknown, giving essential 
information but not creating a sense of constant danger. This is a difficult 
but necessary balance to strike. 
In providing psychological reassurance over the media, government 
needs to think ahead of time to taking advantage of the new technologies 
as well – particularly the Internet. In today’s world we must recognize that 
many people will instantly log onto the Internet in search of information 
and that rumors will abound. Public health officials should have already 
148
A. SPECKHARD 

prepared and be ready to launch (or have already launched) reliable and 
useful information via the Internet and through all other channels of mass 
media to reassure the public and instruct them for the most protective 
responses. Likewise government can make use of mobile phones, computers, 
and hand held devices that can receive transmissions with messages 
specifically aimed at them by virtue of where they are presently located.  
In the case of a contagious outbreak it is possible to transmit information 
regarding advisories of where not to travel and information about which 
hospitals and clinics in the area are free versus overwhelmed and general 
health care advice for that regional area (Hopmeier, 2006). In this case 
credibility is crucial. Government must be very careful from the beginning 
to not lose the trust of the public in announcing what is known and still 
unknown, and to address psychosomatic responses in a meaningful way that 
differentiates them from the actual illness in question. 
While state control of media is an anathema to those who hold dear the 
rights of free press and freedoms of speech, the media can take actions 
collectively to self censure sensationalist reporting that continues to ratchet 
up fears. Government spokespersons can put fears in perspective reminding 
people not to generalize from one event to all potential possibilities. For 
instance, following the February 2004 Moscow subway suicide bombing 
that killed less than 200 persons, Moscow’s Carnegie Center Dmitri Trenin 
stated, “Every time I go down into the underground I wonder if I will finish 
my journey. Now nine million people feeling they are playing Russian 
roulette” (Ostrovsky, 2004). While this was a statement of his feelings, it 
reflects the sense of psychological contagion that can occur when nine 
million people fear an event that affected only a very small proportion of 
their total. Statistically the dreaded terror event is much more unlikely to 
happen to them than many other ordinary horrors that they forget to fear. 
The same occurred with the sniper in the Washington area in the fall of 
2002, with fear of a deadly but highly unlikely threat nearly paralyzing a 
huge metropolitan area. Terrorists win when they can create a sense of 
dread of a pervasive and random threat – one that can strike anyone, 
anywhere at anytime. Invisible threats – as involved in bioterrorism have 
the most likelihood of achieving this goal. 
The Chernobyl disaster is probably the most well-known example of an 
abysmal failure by government to communicate and protect its citizenry 
and the effects of this failure are still felt today. Twenty years later the 
PREVENTION STRATEGIES AND PROMOTING PSYCHOLOGICAL RESILIENCE
149
11.
The Importance of Calm and Truthful
Communication in Times of Crisis
www.ebook3000.com

population has still not recovered from fearing what their government 
failed to protect them from and many individuals disregard competing 
causes for illnesses such as alcoholism, pollution, stress, poor nutrition, 
etc., with nearly every birth defect, many serious illnesses – especially 
cancer, and even symptoms of minor distress in the region still suspected 
and blamed on Chernobyl (Speckhard, 2002b, b). 
Most of the potential bioterrorist threats are clear – although the 
uncertainty lies as to where, when and how. Thus it is possible for 
government to think ahead to what the population needs to know to 
respond calmly and with insight. Indeed it may be wise to be already 
letting people know that smallpox vaccinations work even after exposure, 
that anthrax can be lethal upon direct exposure but is not spread 
infectiously. These bits of information can lay a foundation for calm 
responses, should the dreaded event occur, and create confidence that one 
could survive. 
In the wake of an actual mass terror event it is wise if the government 
has prepared ahead of time on who will speak and given some thought, not 
only to the facts that must be relayed, but also to that how the message is 
relayed is often as important as the message itself. The emotional tone of 
the message can create fear or calm. The Israelis’ success during the first 
Gulf War (1991) when the population was being bombarded by Scud 
missiles and directed to don gas masks (including putting them on small 
children), and retire to safe bio-sealed rooms in the event of a bioterror 
attack depended in large part on the preparation taken beforehand by 
government to disperse gas masks and to teach individuals how to take 
preventative measures to respond to bioterrorism. Likewise Israeli Army 
spokesman, Nahman Shai, whose task it was to announce to the citizenry 
instructions to don gas masks and go to shelters, performed this duty in 
such a reassuring manner that he is still remembered fondly. In providing 
this anxiety inducing information at the moment of imminent attack his 
voice remained so calm and soothing as did his demeanor that he was later 
nicknamed the “the valium of the nation.”  
Likewise when the decision was made in Israel to inoculate first 
responders (i.e., medical personnel, police officers, public health teams, 
and army soldiers) to a potential bioterrorism attack involving smallpox 
the fear surrounding doing so was addressed by the general director of the 
ministry of health, Boaz Lev, going on television and being the first to take 
the inoculation – showing by example that he had faith that it was worth 
the risks of doing so. This is a heroic example of how to communicate 
calmness in a crisis situation. 
150
A. SPECKHARD 

Often when a disaster or terrorist event occurs all the information is not 
known and the greatest psychological issue is about safety and what is 
next. Frightened citizens want to know what to expect and they need things 
explained in a way they can understand. This is difficult for government 
officials who often do not have all the information they need to respond 
immediately and do not know if the threat is ongoing. In this case it is of 
paramount importance to tell the truth. Short-term pacifications achieved 
with falsehood only create mistrust and blame later. It is far wiser to state 
clearly what is known and to admit what is still not known, making it clear 
that government is working hard to get the answers and nothing will be 
withheld to achieve maximum protection for the citizens. When explaining 
the risks of toxic and radioactive exposures it is important to speak in ways 
that put the dangers in perspective. Far more people currently die in road 
accidents than in terror attacks, radiation exposure also occurs normally at 
the dentist, while flying, etc. People can understand and respond better when 
risks are explained in terms of comprehensible and clear comparisons. 
Public health systems in the United States at least, have been losing 
funding in recent years. Without the foresight of politicians, to have made 
preparatory investments of resources and personnel, they may not be ready 
to handle a huge public health epidemic, especially one caused by bioterro-
rism. The equipment and training alone needed to competently handle a 
bioterrorism attack (in terms of rapid identification and containment) must 
be anticipated ahead of time and the need for a central command and 
control, and clear lines of communication often across many agencies must 
also be determined well in advance. These are lessons we have learned 
from other terrorist and disaster events. In the Japanese sarin attacks for 
instance the lack of emergency decontamination facilities and protective 
equipment resulted in a further secondary exposure of medical staff (135 
ambulance staff and 110 staff in the main receiving hospital reported 
symptoms). The same occurred following Chernobyl. 
In a training scenario involving multiple bombs and a potential chemical 
attack played out at the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) 
support facility in Brussels in 2005 numerous personnel who were unaware 
it was not a real event, were called to the scene – ambulances, bomb 
detonation, decontamination units, etc. who interacted with guards already 
present at the unit. It became clear in analyzing the exercise that the 
various actors could not communicate well, as the handheld radios of the 
PREVENTION STRATEGIES AND PROMOTING PSYCHOLOGICAL RESILIENCE
151
12.
Preparation and Decision Making in the Face
of Bioterrorism
www.ebook3000.com

emergency workers did not coordinate with those in the NATO support 
facility. It was also not clear who should take charge of the multiple units 
who converged upon the site and when the decontamination unit did not 
arrive (it went to another facility by accident) the entire “rescue” was 
delayed by hours. Likewise the ambulatory contaminated “victims” ran to 
ambulances who refused to take them – because they were contaminated – 
and then ran through the neighborhood.  Had it been a real chemical or 
biological attack the contaminant or pathogen would likely have been 
widely spread. 
A similar public safety exercise known as TOPOFF 2 – for “Top 
Officials 2,” sponsored by the US Department of Homeland Safety and 
State designed to test and improve US domestic response to terrorist 
incidents, carried out a fictional simultaneous attack against Chicago using 
pneumonic plague and Seattle using a radiological bomb in May 2003. 
Similar to the NATO support facility exercise the real first responders 
were not alerted ahead of time that it was a fictional attack but once on the 
scene worked simulated crime scenes and treated volunteers pretending to 
be victims. Nineteen federal agencies, as well as state and local emergency 
responders from Illinois and Washington, as well as from Canada and the 
American Red Cross were involved. The exercise provided valuable 
lessons, including the realization that multiple control centers, numerous 
liaisons, and increasing numbers of response teams only complicated the 
emergency effort. Likewise officials noted that it was essential to monitor 
and correct false media reports that might have inflamed the public to 
panic (Miller, 2003). Certainly we know from such exercises that resources 
must be devoted not only to equipment but to careful planning of how to 
respond well technically and media-wise to terrorist threats, especially 
those involving radiological, biological, and chemical terrorism. 
Most worrisome in a biological attack is the ability of government 
officials to detect unusual activity – as in new strange symptoms – and act 
early enough to contain the spread of lethal contagious disease within a 
geographical and population area in time to prevent mass casualties. This 
is extremely difficult to do as lethal contagious bioterrorist attacks will 
follow a trajectory beginning with exposure, to incubation, to latently 
symptomatic individuals to those who succumb and die. In the event of a 
biological terrorism attack public health officials working with govern-
ment will be called upon to quickly identify if they are dealing with a 
bacteria, virus, or toxin and to identify it as quickly as possible and mount 
an efficient response. Since biological infections have an incubation period 
an efficient response could mean cordoning off those who have been 
exposed and who are potentially dangerous transmitters (vectors) of the 
152
A. SPECKHARD 

disease. This could mean quarantining symptomless individuals in an 
effort to make sure that those who have been exposed and could, but are 
not necessarily proven to, be incubating disease do not spread it to others. 
It is unclear in a liberal democracy if government officials would be able 
to establish quarantines that keep people in, much less out, of a zone that 
has been identified as “exposed” to a lethal biological agent. In these cases 
one might envision in the United States, the National Guard or police 
troops called in to quarantine off a subpopulation of highly upset indivi-
duals who have families, cares, and responsibilities outside of the zone 
being quarantined (Pollack, 2006). 
Certainly, in such a scenario, we can expect extremely strong fear and 
anxiety states to be transmitted quickly through the population and much 
rule-breaking behavior. Whether or not this would mount to the point of 
contagious aggression is unknown as it has never been well tested. We do 
know, however, that the contagion of aggressive behavior has been shown 
to operate in both local and dispersed collectives, particularly within tran-
sitory and unpredictable angry crowds (mobs) (Bandura, 1973; Lachman, 
1996; Reicher, 1984) and we know from the recent riots in the Islamic 
world that such aggressive contagions can easily be mediated and whipped 
up by the mass media. 
It is unlikely that democratic governments would ever desire or strive to 
shut down media reporting of a bioterrorist attack, yet we can learn from 
other societies that have taken this tact. After the initial stages of the 
Beslan hostage-taking siege, Ossetian authorities shut down broadcasts 
from the local televisions stations in an effort to defuse some of the local 
tension of televised broadcasting of the event. Likewise psychiatric con-
sultants brought in to help with the siege realized that mothers sitting at 
home with nothing more to do than agitate and shame their husbands for 
not going to rescue their children caught in the school building had to be 
addressed. They organized meaningful tasks for the mothers and opened a 
briefing center where every three hours or so they gave reports to the 
townspeople outlining everything they knew about the siege, potential 
negotiations, the state of the children inside, and so on. While it is unlikely 
that western countries would follow suit in shutting down television 
broadcasting, and even in Beslan, cable networks, Internet, and radio 
continued to broadcast in the area, it is useful to think ahead on how to 
work with the media and how to give citizens useful tasks to help them be 
empowered to be heroic in a crisis versus feeling helpless and frustrated 
with a sense of powerless inactivity. 
Government decisions on when and what to tell, regarding attempts to 
contain the threat using quarantine strategies, whether or not to take action 
PREVENTION STRATEGIES AND PROMOTING PSYCHOLOGICAL RESILIENCE
153
www.ebook3000.com

in a bioterrorism attack during the period of incubation when there are still 
no casualties, how to educate now and during the crisis, decisions about 
putting resources into the public health system, making sure medicines and 
vaccinations are available and dispersed fairly – are all public policy issues 
that should be ethically addressed well ahead of time. Active public 
participation in such plans creates a societal investment in carrying them 
out. If this work has not been done ahead of time it may result in less 
complaint, less cohesive, and less resilient responses to terrorist threats. 
While civilians are more resilient that given credit for, a proportion of 
individuals will predictably suffer from symptoms of acute and posttrau-
matic stress when exposed to violence and death in a terrorist attack. While 
many of these responses are short-lived and resolve themselves through 
normal coping channels, some do not. The nature of a bioterrorism event, 
however, is less likely to result in acute posttraumatic stress states (unless 
there are massive numbers of deaths) than one might expect when the attack 
involves an explosion or other act of mass violence because the traumatic 
stressor is information versus a witnessed trauma. This is the difficulty 
inherent in dealing with “invisible” stressors, such as toxins, pathogens, and 
contaminants – they create fear, horror, and dread but there is often no 
clearly defined event to address, but instead an amorphous and undefined 
emotional horror. 
Acute stress responses to a bioterrorism attack are much more likely to 
include psychosocial and behavioral contagions including hysteria, somati-
zation, mass sociogenic illness outbreaks, and hysterical and possibly even 
aggressive demands for medical care, vaccines, and medicines than the 
acute posttraumatic responses often seen in response to an explosion or an 
act of violence. In all cases reassuring information and calm responses are 
the most helpful. There is a strong body of literature that demonstrates that 
intrusive psychological debriefing applied in a coercive manner in the 
immediate aftermath of traumas, is neither necessary or helpful, and some-
times even harmful, as most acute and posttraumatic symptoms to terror 
attacks decline overtime when normal coping channels are utilized 
(National Institute of Mental Health, 2002). However, this is not to say that 
the “worried well” or psychosomatic individuals who appear asking for 
help should not receive psychological triage. 
In most cases traumatized individuals and those in high arousal states 
will respond well to having their posttraumatic and acute stress symptoms 
154
A. SPECKHARD 
13.
Psychological Triage for Acute and Posttraumatic Stress

normalized – learning that it is a normal reaction to a traumatic event to 
feel fear, to even be dissociative if the fear is overwhelming, to experience 
intrusive thoughts and bodily arousal afterwards, and to engage avoidance 
strategies to little avail. Learning that these are normal responses to trauma 
often helps individuals to move beyond them more easily versus get caught 
up in additional fears and shame over why they are not feeling or acting 
normal, as well as to diminish the avoidance responses that often occur in 
those who suffer from posttraumatic reexperiencing (Speckhard, 2002a; 
Speckhard et al., 2005a, b). Likewise those who have “caught” contagious 
psychological states and somatic symptoms are often also well served to 
receive medical care assuring them they are not a victim of the biological 
contaminate, as well as reassuring them that it is normal for some indivi-
duals to “catch” fear states and for these to evidence themselves in the body. 
In this way the individual is not shamed by having somatized their stress, 
something most individuals find distressing in itself, but also receives a 
logical explanation for what is happening in their body – an explanation 
that if judged as credible (and this is crucial) allows them to calm the 
bodily arousal that is supporting the negative symptoms. When a sense of 
humor and normality is introduced, the somatizing response often lessens. 
However if the person’s real concerns are not taken seriously, and are 
ridiculed, he is accused of making up symptoms, ignored or told to go home 
as nothing is wrong, symptoms can often worsen. Fear states can increase 
causing further somatization, shame can lead to strong avoidance, and 
isolation responses or the fear can drive aggressive responses. Thus a 
balance must be struck between kindly understanding gentle humor to help 
somatizing individuals to understand how psychological contagions pass 
between persons, and firm reassurance that they are indeed not infected by 
the biocontaminate. Of course those who are most distressed and less 
responsive to short-term triage should be identified and put in contact with 
helping professionals for longer term care with particular emphasis on those 
who are seriously dissociative and children with strongly embedded somatic 
symptoms. 
The best ways to ensure that acute stress responses to a mass terrorist 
event are minimized is to move survivors as quickly as possible to safety 
and reunite family members. This can be complicated in the event of a 
bioterror attack as it can be unclear for sometime if it is safe for persons to 
be reunited and it takes some time to establish when the critical period of 
attack (and ensuing contagion) is over. Communications in all terror attack 
scenarios should be calm and clear and everything supportive that can be 
done to lower physiological states of arousal should be done. 
PREVENTION STRATEGIES AND PROMOTING PSYCHOLOGICAL RESILIENCE
155
www.ebook3000.com

hyperarousal states. Hence behaviors that are attachment oriented – calling 
family, seeking out contact with others, etc. should be encouraged in the after-
math of a terror event. The Internet may also prove to be a very useful tool 
in this regard. Following 9/11, numerous researchers made use of the Internet 
as a research tool and surprisingly found it also functioned as a therapeutic 
tool – that discussing the issues for many functioned as a social buffer.
In terms of posttraumatic sequelae to bioterrorism there are unique long-
term variants that must be taken into account. Those exposed to poisons, 
invisible toxins, radiation, and so forth often worry less about their 
“traumatic” exposure, since that was often a non-event for them at the time 
it occurred, but only took on importance retrospectively when they learned 
Since horrifying information is usually the central aspect of contamination 
stressor and there is often an absence of sensory details in the threat, the 
stressor may be said to be of a more cognitive, but equally horrifying form. 
Indeed, victims of toxic disasters often experience horror in their 
imaginations of the future. For instance, the Chernobyl victim who has a 
high radiation exposure as a child may continually see himself in the future 
as a cancer victim, or the pregnant woman exposed to a toxic contaminant 
may continually flash forward to the birth of deformed child, fearing to 
continue her pregnancy but loath to abort it. As a result survivors of toxic 
traumas develop a unique trauma-induced time distortion that is better 
understood as a “flash-forward” because it is the constant intrusion and 
reexperience in the mind of a horrifying, inescapable, and life-threatening 
event that the survivor expects to happen in the future as a result of having 
been exposed to a contaminant in the past. These flash-forwards are made 
up of repetitive and intrusive thoughts and images (similar to flashbacks) 
and create acute emotional distress and bodily agitation similar to the 
hyperaroused state typically observed with flashbacks (Speckhard, 2002b, 
2005b). This was quite common among those traumatized by Chernobyl. 
They did not evidence clear posttraumatic arousal states to the memories 
of actual exposure but instead displayed them in response to involuntary 
horrific thinking about the future, experiencing intrusive and distressing 
states about getting cancer, dying young, bearing deformed children, etc. 
(Speckhard, 2002b, 2005b). 
horrifying information about their potential exposure to a deadly con-
taminant or toxin, which now threatens to poison their entire future. 
156
A. SPECKHARD 
We know that a natural antidote to traumatic experience is attachment – 
the neurobiology of the latter antagonizes the former – calming and lowering 

pregnancy is known to often be a time fraught with worry about the health 
of the future child. One researcher wrote that the highest death toll from 
the Chernobyl disaster was not caused by direct exposure to radiation but 
abortions were provided for many women in the direct exposure area. The 
decision to abort is an extremely difficult one for many persons, parti-
cularly those with a wanted pregnancy and in instances following toxic 
exposure is often made in a relatively short time period with the potential 
for deep psychological distress afterward including impacted grief, guilt, 
and traumatic responses (Speckhard and Mufel, 2003; Speckhard and Rue, 
1993). Given that we can anticipate many of the bioterrorist threats we 
may face, we should prepare ahead of time, reassuring and giving accurate 
information concerning the potential desire to abort what may be a per-
fectly healthy pregnancy, so that unnecessary abortions of wanted preg-
nancies do not take place. 
Researchers of toxic disasters often find that mothers are often more 
worried about their children’s symptoms than children themselves (Bromet 
et al., 1998). Finding a way to reach out to mothers and reassure them 
while giving them useful strategies for finding mastery for combating their 
fears, versus feeling powerless to protect their children, can also be very 
helpful. Likewise we must address long-term fears of mothers-to-be when 
contamination of any type has occurred. Girls and young women yet to 
bear children are often stigmatized after toxic exposures. Not only do they 
often fear having deformed children, even many years afterwards, but they 
also often become the victims of the stigmatizing fears of others, which 
can diminish their ability to find suitable marriage partners. Following 
Chernobyl, the birthrate in contaminated areas as opposed to nonconta-
minated areas fell dramatically from 1991 to 2001; an effect which was 
attributed, as most likely, due to maternal anxiety about birth defects 
(World Health Organization, 2005) and many young men and women who 
had been exposed found they were shunned as marriage partners. Worries 
of being exposed to a toxin, contaminant, or pathogen especially in girls 
and young women and in regard to childbirth nearly always is an issue that 
must be addressed even long after the fact of exposure. 
Health-care workers are another vulnerable population. They form the 
front line in an often terrifying scenario caring for individuals who may 
in Europe not directly exposed (Knudsen, 1991). Likewise makeshift 
due to the huge increase in voluntary abortion following it, even in areas 
PREVENTION STRATEGIES AND PROMOTING PSYCHOLOGICAL RESILIENCE
157
contaminate them as well. They bravely risk their own health, which many 
There are also vulnerable populations to consider in a bioterrorist attack. 
Pregnant women are often overlooked in such situations even though 
14.
Support for Vulnerable Populations
www.ebook3000.com

Indeed when the Israelis decided to inoculate their first responders against 
smallpox the only fatality was a family member of a doctor who ended up 
infecting his immune-suppressed wife. The horror of potentially conta-
minating one’s own children was voiced by health-care workers after the 
SARS outbreak, as well as by those caring for contaminated individuals 
directly after the Chernobyl explosion, with workers saying that was the 
hardest part of the ordeal for them. We must take into account these very 
difficult situations our health-care workers will face, and consider ahead of 
time emergency protocols for childcare for those who take the very front 
lines in a serious bioterrorism threat, so that they can devote their complete 
energies to medical care and worry less about spreading lethal and not well 
understood disease at home. We must also find ways to support and honor 
heroic health-care workers like those who died taking care of SARS 
patients, as well as those others who volunteered to help with the SARS 
outbreak, knowing full well that to do so might be risking their lives. 
In the face of a massive bioterrorism threat we should give some 
thought to preparing psychological triage workers – mental health workers 
who have been trained ahead of time to sort through psychosomatic symp-
toms versus those needing immediate quarantine and treatment. Given the 
thousands of psychosomatic and worried individuals who have overtaken 
the health-care systems in other similar situations, mental health-care workers 
can ease the burden on health-care workers and send the worried and hys-
terical patients home with some calming reassurance, sorting through those 
who also should be referred for additional psychological assistance. 
Terrorists achieve their goals when they manage to derail political 
processes and move democracies to compromise their cherished values. As 
many terrorist attacks have been aimed at and timed with elections it is 
wise for governments to plan ahead how to respond when a candidate is 
killed, when a terror attack occurs during an election and so forth, so that 
the processes of democracy do not become derailed. The chaos of a bio-
terror attack can easily disrupt an election if voters are afraid to congregate 
in public places. It is wise to have thought ahead of time what the strategy 
would be for delaying or recounting an election in such a scenario. 
A. SPECKHARD 
158
15.
Likewise when terrorists exploit the freedoms of liberal democracies it 
is tempting to surrender civil liberties in order to stop them. While some 
liberties may have to be suspended to effectively fight terrorism, it is 
are willing and able to do by virtue of their training, but this can be 
especially difficult for health-care workers who are also parents, or who 
have elderly relatives at home, and who fear exposing their own families. 
Not Losing What We Value Most

centers, such as at Guantanamo Bay, abusing prisoners in Abu Ghraib, etc. 
simply discredits our integrity and plays into the terrorist promoting 
ideologies that support violent responses against our abuses. These things 
unleash the terrorists’ justifications for “defending” themselves through 
the use of WMD including bioterrorism. We need to always occupy the 
higher ground and continually remind, especially those who support the 
new “religiously” oriented terrorists, that Islam in particular does not 
condone killing by poison and that many scholars of the Koran takes a firm 
stance against the use of such weapons. But such statements fall on deaf 
ears if we ourselves are guilty of similar violations of morality and ethics. 
Individuals need to feel that their world is somewhat predictable and 
that they have some mastery in it. Bioterrorism involves an invisible threat 
that can create the opposite feelings: fear, horror, and dread as the actual 
contaminate spreads by biological contagion, and fear states including 
psychosomatic responses spread via psychosocial contagion. To defend 
against bioterrorism government initiatives should have been well thought 
out ahead of time, include preparatory education and a participatory 
process of the citizenry, preparation of experts who will be called on to 
help and work ahead of time with the media who will report the crisis, 
coupled with leaders whose words and actions inspire the belief that 
government is credible, calm, and acting in the public’s behalf during a 
crisis. When leaders are honest, communicate calmly, and have prepared 
their societies ahead of time to respond well to terrorism, we can expect 
resilient responses.  In times of threat and disaster populations often become 
attachment oriented and cohesive and heroic behaviors are frequently 
displayed.
The best defense against terrorism, however, is to address first and 
foremost the root causes of it and end the motivations of terrorist leaders 
and sympathizers to kill and destroy. Ultimately terrorism will not 
disappear until its root causes are addressed. Social injustices that inflame 
terrorist rhetoric must be addressed as we all work for peace and security 
in this new uncertain world. Until we achieve the ability to undermine 
terrorism by addressing its root causes, infiltrating terrorist groups and 
hardening our defenses we will have to continue to work toward strength-
ening civil society to be resilient to face this continuing threat. In the 
PREVENTION STRATEGIES AND PROMOTING PSYCHOLOGICAL RESILIENCE
159
absence of achieving this we must prepare our societies with well thought 
out plans to be as resilient as possible. 
important to recognize that going too far in this direction – detaining 
thousands of aliens following 9/11, practicing “torture lite” in detention 
www.ebook3000.com

References
1.
Atran S. Genesis of suicide terrorism. Science, p. 299, 2003. 
2.
Bandura A. Aggression: a social learning analysis. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: 
Prentice-Hall, 1973. 
3.
Bartholomew RE, Wessely S. Protean nature of mass sociogenic illness. From 
possessed nuns to chemical and biological terrorism fears. Br J Psychiatry
2002; 180: 300–306. 
4.
Behnke PR, Sawyer CR, King PE. Contagion theory and the communication of 
public speaking state anxiety. Communication Education 1994; 43: 246–251. 
5.
Brandao Mello CE, Oliveria AR, Carvalho AB. The psychological effects of 
the goiania radiation accident on the hospitalized victims. In Picks RC, Berger 
ME, O’Hara FM Jr (ed.). The medical basis for radiation accident preparedness 
iii the psychological perspective. New York: Elsevier, pp. 121–129, 1991. 
6.
Bromet EJ, Carlson G, Goidgaber D, Gluzman S. Health effects of the 
chernobyl catastrophe on mothers and children. In Green B.L. (ed.). Toxic 
contamination: the interface of psychological and physical health effects, XIV 
annual meeting of the International Society for Traumatic Stress Studies, 
Washington, DC, 1998. 
7.
Cohen BGF, Colligan MJ, Wester II W, Smith MJ. An investigation of job 
satisfaction factors in an incident of mass psychogenic illness at the 
workplace. Occupational Health Nursing, January, 10–16, 1978. 
8.
Colligan MJ, Murphy LR. A review of mass psychogenic illness in work 
settings. In Colligan MJ, Pennebaker JW, Murphy LR (ed.). Mass 
psychogenic illness. New Jersey: Erlbaum, pp. 171–182, 1982. 
9.
Connolly T, Aberg L. Some contagion models of speeding. Accid Anal Prev 
1993; 25: 57–66. 
10. Ennett ST, Flewelling RL, Lindrooth RC, Norton EC. School and neighborhood 
characteristics associated with school rates of alcohol, cigarette, and marijuana 
use. J Health Soc Behav 1997; 38: 55–71. 
11. Furedi F. Heroes of the hour. New Sci 2004; 182: 19. 
12. Glaser R. We are not immune: influenza, SARS, and the collapse of the public 
health. Harpers Magazine July: 35–42, 2004. 
13. Glass T, Schoch-Spana M. Bioterrorism and the people: how to vaccinate a 
city against panic. Clin Infect Dis 2002; 34: 217–223. 
14. Green BL, Lindy JD, Grace MC. Psychological effects of toxic contamination. 
In Ursano RJ, McCaughey BG, Fullerton CS (eds). Individual and community 
responses to trauma and disaster: the structure of human chaos. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, pp. 154–176, 1994. 
15. Hatfield E, Cacioppo JT, Rapson RL. Emotional contagion. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1993. 
A. SPECKHARD 
160
16. Havenaar JC, Julie G, Bromet EJ. Epilogue: lessons learned and unresolved 
issues in toxic turmoil: psychological and societal consequences of ecological 
disasters. In Havenaar J, Bromet E, Cwikel J (eds). Toxic turmoil: psychological 
and societal consequences of ecological disasters. New York: Kluwer Academic/ 
Plenum, pp. 259–273, 2002. 

17. Hay A, Foran J. Yugoslavia: poisoning or epidemic hysteria in kosovo? The 
Lancet 1991; 338: 1196. 
18. Hoffman B. Terrorism and the chemical, biological, radiological, nuclear 
19. Hopmeier, M. Risk communication and psychological impact; technological 
and operational methods of mitigation. In Green MS, Zenilman J, Cohen D 
(eds). Risk assessment and risk communication strategies in bioterrorism 
preparedness, 2006. 
20. Hsee CK, Hatfield E, Chemtob C. Assessments of the emotional states of 
others - conscious judgements versus emotional contagion. J Soc Clin Psychol 
1992; 11: 119–128. 
21. Jones MB. Behavioral contagion and official delinquency: epidemic course in 
adolescence. Soc Biol 1998; 45: 134–142. 
22. Jones MB, Jones DR. Preferred pathways of behavioural contagion.  
J Psychiatr Res 1995; 29: 193–209. 
23. Kerckhoff AC, Back KW. The June bug: a study in hysterical contagion. New 
York: Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1968. 
24. Knudsen LB. Legally induced abortions in Denmark after chernobyl. 
Biomedicine Pharmocother 1991; 45: 229–231. 
25. Lachman SJ. Psychological perspective for a theory of behavior during riots. 
Psychol Rep 1996; 79: 739–744. 
26. Mackenzie A . Terrorism and the placebo response. Jane’s Defense Weekly, 
February 8, 2006. 
27. Marsden P. Memetics and social contagion: two sides of the same coin? 
Journal of Memetics: Evolutionary Models of Information Transmission 
1998; 2. 
28. McDougall W. The group mind. New York: Knickerbocker Press, 1920. 
29. Miller C. Communicating at topoff 2: a keystone in terrorism response. Police 
and Security News 2003; 19(4). 
30. Modan B, Tirosh M, Weissenberg E, Acker C, et al. The arjenyattah 
epidemic. A mass phenomenon: Spread and triggering factors. The Lancet
1983; 2: 1472–1474. 
31. National Institute of Mental Health. Mental health and mass violence: 
evidence-based early psychological intervention for victims/survivors of mass 
violence: NIH publication No. 02-5138, 2002. 
32. Nemery B, Fischler B, Boogaerts M, Lison D, Willems J. The coca-cola 
incident in Belgium, June 1999. Food Chem Toxicol 2002; 40(11): 1657–1667. 
33. Ostrovsky A . Russian authorities blame Chechens as Moscow subway train 
blast kills 39. Financial Times, p. 6, February 7, 2004. 
(CBRN) threat. MIT Lecture Series, Cambridge, MA, 5 December 2005. 
PREVENTION STRATEGIES AND PROMOTING PSYCHOLOGICAL RESILIENCE
161
34. Paz R. Global jihad and WMD: between martyrdom and mass destruction. In 
Fradkin H, Haqqani H, Brown E (eds). Current trends in Islamist ideology, 
Vol. 2, Washington DC: Hudson Institute: Center on Islam, Democracy, and 
The Future of the Muslim World, pp. 74–86, 2005. 
35. Pollack M. Risk communication and the community response to a bioterrorist 
attack. In Green MS, Zenilman J, Cohen D (eds). Risk assessment and risk 
communication strategies in bioterrorism preparedness, 2006. 
www.ebook3000.com

36. Post J. Social and psychological factors in the genesis of terrorism. In 
Victoroff J (ed.).Amsterdam: IOS Press, 2006. 
37. Reicher SD. The St. Paul’s riot: an explanation of the limits of crowd action in 
terms of a social identity model. Eur J Soc Psychol 1984; 14: 1–21. 
38. Rowe DC, Chassin L, Presson CC, Edwards D, Sherman SJ. An epidemic 
model of adolescent cigarette-smoking. J Appl Soc Psychol 1992; 22: 261–285. 
39. Schweitzer Y. The age of non-conventional terrorism. Strategic assessment 6, 
No 1, May 2003. 
40. Speckhard A. Innoculating resilience to terrorism: acute and posttraumatic 
stress responses in US military, foreign & civilian services serving overseas 
after September 11 2002a; 8(2): 105–122. 
41. Speckhard A. Voices from the inside: psychological responses to toxic 
disasters. In Havenaar J, Bromet E, Cwikel J (eds). Toxic turmoil: psychological 
and societal consequences of ecological disasters. New York: Kluwer Academic/ 
Plenum, pp. 217–236, 2002b. 
42. Speckhard A. Soldiers for god: a study of the suicide terrorists in the Moscow 
hostage taking siege. In McTernan O (ed.) The roots of terrorism: contemporary 
trends and traditional analysis. Brussels: NATO Science Series, 2004a. 
43. Speckhard A. Unpublished interviews from the Madrid training bombings, 
2004b.
44. Speckhard A. Civil society’s response to mass terrorism: building resilience. 
In Gunaratna R (ed.). Combating terrorism: military and non military 
strategies. Singapore: Eastern Universities Press, 2005a. 
45. Speckhard A. Psycho-social and physical outcomes of technological disaster: 
information as a traumatic stressor. In Berkowitz N (ed.). A chernobyl reader. 
Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 2005b. 
46. Speckhard A. Unpublished Beslan interviews, 2005c. 
47. Speckhard A, Mufel N. Universal responses to abortion? Attachment, trauma 
and grief responses in women following abortion. J Prenat Perinat Psychol 
Health 2003; 18(1): 3–38. 
48. Speckhard A, Rue V. Complicated mourning: dynamics of impacted post 
abortion grief. J Prenat Perinat Psychol Health 1993; 8; 5–32. 
49. Speckhard A, Tarabrina N, Krasnov V, Akhmedova K. Research note: 
observations of suicidal terrorists in action. Terrorism and Political Violence 
2004; 16(2): 305–327. 
50. Speckhard A, Tarabrina N, Krasnov V, Mufel N. Posttraumatic and acute 
stress responses in hostages held by suicidal terrorists in the takeover of a 
Moscow theater. Traumatology 2005a; 11(1). 
A. SPECKHARD 
162
51. Speckhard A, Tarabrina N, Krasnov V, Mufel N. Stockholm effects and 
psychological responses to captivity in hostages held by suicidal terrorists. 
Traumatology 2005b; 11(2). 
52. Wessely S. Report on the NATO Russia advisory panel on mitigating the 
social and psychological consequences of chemical, biological and radiological 
terrorism. Paper presented at the NATO headquarters council meeting, 2004. 
53. Wessely S. Victimhood and resilience. N Engl J Med 2005; 353(6): 548–550. 
54. World Health Organization. Health effect of the chernobyl accident and 
special health care programmes, 2005. 

© 2007 Springer.
163
Boston, MA, USA 
Most agencies involved in disease surveillance and response to outbreaks, 
both natural and unnatural, agree that no single system provides the neces-
sary information that will lead to timely reports of unusual health events. 
Current discussions point toward the need for a “network of networks” to 
provide wide coverage into the community for early alerts of these unusual 
health events. ProMED-mail is an example of an entity operating in the 
“informal sector” and demonstrates how it can assist in the early 
communication of new or ongoing disease risks not only to the health-care 
The formal health sector has traditionally relied upon reports of disease 
received through established surveillance systems in which the information 
travels up the familiar health pyramid (see Figure 1).
According to the above model, the events leading up to an official report 
on disease occurrence requires multiple steps until the first notification to 
the formal sector occurs. A local health facility sends a report (usually on a 
weekly basis) to the next level of attention (county or district level). This 
level then sends a weekly report to the state or provincial level, which in 
turn sends a report to the national level. Finally, the national level will 
send a report to the international level, usually the regional office of the 
World Health Organization (WHO), which forwards it to WHO head-
quarters in Geneva. 
One of the challenges to getting these reports moving quickly is 
difficulty in communication between the health facility and the corres-
ponding next higher level for reporting. Another key challenge arises when 
the person(s) who is ill does not go to an official or governmental health 
sector facility for the first line of care. In many areas there are private 
M.S. Green et al. (eds.), Risk Assessment and Risk Communication Strategies in Bioterrorism 
community, but also the interested community at large, through a mode-
rated Internet-based listserv with a worldwide coverage [1, 2].
Preparedness, 163–175. 
RISK COMMUNICATION AND THE COMMUNITY
RESPONSE TO A BIOTERRORIST ATTACK: THE
1. 
Introduction
ROLE OF AN INTERNET-BASED EARLY WARNING
ProMED-mail, International Society for Infectious Diseases, 
Marjorie Pollack
SYSTEM A.K.A. “THE INFORMAL SECTOR”
www.ebook3000.com

Figure 1. Communicable disease surveillance pyramid [3]. 
official sector often does not learn about these cases until long after when 
they first present for treatment. 
Recognizing the limitations confronting the formal health sector, 
especially in the domain of communication of possible disease problems, 
the Program to Monitor Emerging Diseases, better known as ProMED was 
formed in 1994. ProMED-mail is a global electronic reporting system, 
open to all sources, for outbreaks of emerging infectious diseases and 
diseases resulting from toxin exposure. It is a moderated listserv that 
covers plant, animal, and human diseases. Subscriptions are free, and there 
is a freely accessible website at: http://www.promedmail.org. ProMED-
mail is a program activity of the International Society of Infectious 
Diseases and is a not-for-profit, non-governmental organization (NGO). 
This independent status permits ProMED to function without political 
constraints. (This translates into the ability to post reports without 
requiring the permission of a government to do so.)
At the time of this workshop (June 2005), there were more than 33,000 
subscribers to ProMED-mail from more than 150 countries. ProMED-mail 
postings are reproduced on numerous other listservs and it is estimated that 
postings will reach approximately 100,000 computers each day. All reports 
posted on ProMED-mail are screened by expert moderators. Fields of expertise 
of the moderators include viral, bacterial, fungal, and parasitic diseases; epi-
demiology and surveillance; entomology; and veterinary and plant diseases. 
provide care but are not part of the official reporting network. Hence, the 
health-care providers, some formally trained, others informally trained, who 
M. POLLACK
164

Posted reports come from a variety of sources. Official, “formal sector” 
reports from regional, national, and international public health authorities 
are often posted to provide official confirmation of an outbreak or unusual 
health event. 
However, the use of the “informal sector” is crucial for the acquisition 
of information or reports on unusual health events as they are occurring. 
The two main sources are lay press reports and anecdotal reports submitted 
by subscribers. The subscriber base in over 150 countries constitutes an 
international network of individuals with access to information on unusual 
health events (see Figure 2 for a map of ProMED-mail subscribers).
ProMED-mail subscribers include members of the international official 
(governmental) sector: the WHO and its regional offices, the Food and 
Agricultural Organization of the United Nations (FAO), and the World 
Animal Health Organization (OIE). There are Ministry of Health and 
Ministry of Agriculture personnel at the national level. It also includes 
members of the scientific community (at the project or field level, at the 
organizational level, including NGOs, and at the academic level) and non-
scientific community, including members of the lay press. Often, although 
the official health sector may not as yet have seen cases of new diseases of 
concern, the lay press publishes reports on these outbreaks. ProMED-mail 
staff and subscribers search the Internet for such reports and post them on 
the listserv. 
With subscribers in more than 150 countries, reports of unusual health 
events in one country serve as an alert for “astute clinicians” in other 
countries. The public health arena recognizes the important role of the 
astute clinician in identifying new geographic spread of diseases. 
ProMED-mail focuses on the coverage of newly described or 
undiagnosed diseases, outbreaks, epidemics of known infectious diseases, 
and the emergence of known diseases in newly defined geographic areas or 
among newly defined populations. This applies to human diseases as well 
as animal and plant diseases. Animal diseases covered include zoonotic 
diseases with known or suspected human disease potential, as well as 
purely animal diseases for their ultimate impact on economies and that 
pertaining to food security. Similarly, plant diseases are covered for their 
known impact on human health as well as for economic and food security 
issues (Table 1). Estimates are that more than 70% of newly emerging 
diseases are zoonotic in origin, resulting in “species jump” from animal to 
humans [1, 4]. Recent examples of this include the severe acute respiratory 
syndrome (SARS), avian influenza, Nipah virus encephalitis, spongiform 
encephalopathies, and monkeypox. 
165
 RISK COMMUNICATION AND THE COMMUNITY RESPONSE
www.ebook3000.com

Disease 
No. of reports 
West Nile virus 
831
Dengue 
818 
Avian influenza 
746
Foot and mouth disease 
744
Bovine spongiform encephalopathy 
695 
Cholera 
684 
Rabies 
668 
Anthrax 
599 
Unknown illness 
563
Ebola 
474 
Escherichia coli O157 
454
New variant Creutzfeldt–Jakob-disease 
405
Salmonella 
376 
Hantavirus 
336 
Yellow fever 
326
Influenza 
323 
Malaria 
322 
SARS 
249 
* As of 5 June 2005. 
Examples of increased response by the health community to heightened 
disease surveillance needs facilitated through the informal sector can be 
seen in the reporting of four recent outbreaks. 
M. POLLACK
166
Figure 2. Map of countries with ProMED-mail subscribers. 
the ommonly reported diseases* 
2.
TABLE 1. Number of ProMED-mail reports, 1994–2005, by disease, for the 18 most 
Examples of use of Informal Sector

On 10 February 2003, the following posting appeared on ProMED-mail: 
PNEUMONIA – CHINA (GUANGDONG): REQUEST 
FOR INFORMATION 
***********************************************
Date: 10 Feb 2003 
From: Stephen O. Cunnion, MD, PhD, MPH 
This morning I received this e-mail and then searched 
your archives and found nothing that pertained to it. Does 
anyone know anything about this problem? 
“Have you heard of an epidemic in Guangzhou? An 
acquaintance of mine from a teacher’s chat room lives 
there and reports that the hospitals there have been closed 
and people are dying”[5]. 
This report was the first public notification of an outbreak in southern 
China of a disease that was later called SARS. By the end of the outbreak 
in July 2003, 8,096 probable cases of SARS had been reported with 774 
deaths [6]. 
For the first month, after the outbreak, there were numerous reports and 
rumors from China about an epidemic of a severe, “atypical” pneumonia. 
On 11 March 2003, there was a ProMED-mail posting reporting an illness 
with similar symptoms in a businessman visiting Hanoi, followed by 
similar illnesses among hospital staff that had cared for him [7]. On 14 
March 2003, ProMED-mail had received the following email from an 
infectious disease physician in Ontario, Canada (unpublished e-mail): 
We have an unidentified severe respiratory illness cluster in a 
family, one of whom was in Hong Kong 14 days ago. Can you 
update me on what the illness cluster in Hanoi is please? 
The family cluster described in the above e-mail were the index cases 
for the outbreak of SARS in Ontario, Canada that by its end had affected 
251 individuals with 43 deaths. This e-mail is an excellent example of an 
astute clinician seeing cases of a new disease that appeared similar to 
reports of cases occurring on the other side of the world. 
The physicians in Ontario published their experiences with SARS and 
credited Internet-based reporting for its impact on disease identification 
and containment: 
167
 RISK COMMUNICATION AND THE COMMUNITY RESPONSE
2.1. SEVERE ACUTE RESPIRATORY SYNDROME (SARS)
www.ebook3000.com

The identification of SARS in Canada only a few weeks after an 
outbreak on another continent exemplifies the ease with which 
infectious agents can be transmitted in this era of international 
travel. It also demonstrates the importance and value of informa-
tion and alert systems such as the Department of Communicable 
Disease Surveillance Response of the World Health Organization 
[WHO] and the Disease Outbreak News Web site (http:// 
www.who.int/csr/don) and the ProMED-mail (Program for 
The sequence of events leading up to the worldwide alert about SARS 
clearly demonstrates the value of the informal sector in early disease alerts: 
10 Feb 2003 – Reports of atypical pneumonia in Guangdong 
China – Source: ProMED subscriber, plus newswire report 
(Chinese) – (informal sector).
11 Feb 2003 – Confirmation of atypical pneumonia in 
Guangdong China – Source: Official WHO report (formal 
sector), newswires (informal sector).
11 Mar 2003 – Reports of undiagnosed respiratory illness in 
hospital in Hanoi VietNam – Source: Newswire (informal sector).
14 Mar 2003 – Reports of atypical pneumonia in East Asia – 
Hong Kong, Vietnam, Singapore, China (Guangdong Province), 
Taiwan, and Ontario Canada – Source: Official (WHO, HK 
DOH, CDC Taiwan) (formal sector) hospital staff, newswires 
(informal sector).
15 Mar 2003 – Reports of SARS worldwide – Source: WHO 
advisory/alert (formal sector).
The public health community clearly acknowledges that we are long over-
due for a human influenza pandemic. It has long been theorized that new 
human influenza strains evolve as species jumps by avian influenza viruses, 
which through genetic reassortment obtain human-to-human transmissibility 
genes [9]. The appearance of a new strain of avian influenza associated 
with human illness has been a serious concern on the part of the public 
health community, as a possible precursor to the next human influenza pande-
mic. The following report was posted on ProMED-mail on 20 August 1997: 
M. POLLACK
168
by the International Society for Infectious Disease (http:// 
www.promedmail.org) [1; 8, page 2003]. 
Monitoring Emerging Diseases) reporting network sponsored 
2.2. AVIAN INFLUENZA

INFLUENZA, BIRD-TO-MAN, FIRST CASE? 
***********************************************
Date: Wed, 20 Aug 1997 
From: Emil Mikhles
Subject: Influenza Strain – Hong Kong 
The press reported today, Aug.20 1997, that a 3-year-old 
boy died after contracting an influenza strain that has 
never been seen in humans. A specimen from the boy’s 
trachea was identified as “influenza A of H4N1* strain,” 
which is known to be found mainly in birds” [10] 
* This was corrected to be H5N1 the following day [11]. 
This report focused worldwide attention on the possibility that H5N1 
would be the next pandemic influenza strain. At that time, H5N1 had been 
identified in poultry in live markets in Hong Kong and it was speculated 
that there were ongoing unreported outbreaks of H5N1 on the Chinese 
mainland [12]. During the early stages of the SARS outbreak, there were 
two cases of confirmed human illness with H5N1 among family members 
who had traveled from Fujian Province in China to Hong Kong, where 
their illness was diagnosed; a third suspected case was a family member 
who died while still in Fujian Province [13]. 
Following these human cases, the public health community followed the 
H5N1 activity in both avian and human populations. The avian H5N1 had 
first been identified in a goose in China in 1996 [14]. The next official 
report of an outbreak of H5N1 in avians was in Hong Kong, following the 
identification of a human case of H5N1 [15]. 
Following these events, there were no official reports of H5N1 activity 
until 2004. Early reports of suspected avian influenza outbreaks were 
appearing in the informal sector, as seen below: 
AVIAN INFLUENZA – INDONESIA: REQUEST FOR 
INFORMATION
****************************************
Date: 18 November 2003 
From: ProMED-mail <promed@promedmail.org> 
ProMED-mail has received a report from a reliable source 
of rumors of the occurrence of an outbreak of avian 
influenza in domestic fowl in Indonesia (West Java and 
Sumatra). The accounts of the rumored outbreak emanate 
from 2 independent sources.
Further information from any informed person or organiza-
tion in the area would be appreciated [Mod.CP] [16] 
169
 RISK COMMUNICATION AND THE COMMUNITY RESPONSE
www.ebook3000.com

The reliable source providing this report was a veterinarian working in the 
affected area, who was concerned about political and professional reper-
cussions for publicly reporting this outbreak. Job security concerns are 
often deterrents to international reporting. Through the use of the informal 
network, it was possible to alert the official sector of the suspicion of an 
avian influenza outbreak among poultry, without jeopardizing the reporting 
individual. The official report of an avian influenza outbreak ongoing in 
Indonesia was made to the OIE on 4 February 2004 [17]. In this instance 
there was a time lag of 3 months between the informal sector notification 
of a suspected outbreak and the formal sector notification. 
A similar time lag was seen with the early reports of suspected avian 
influenza in Thailand. On 5 January 2004, the following was posted on 
ProMED-mail:
AVIAN INFLUENZA – THAILAND: RFI 
*********************
Date: Sun, 5 Jan 2004 
From: ProMED-mail <promed@promedmail.org> 
Source: Malaysia Star, 5 Jan 2004 [edited] 
<http://www.thestar.com.my/news/story.asp?file=2004/1/
5/nation/7036583&sec=nation>
Penang farmers fear smuggled Thai chicks may spread 
bird flu 
-----------------------------------------------------------------
The Penang Poultry Farmers Association has voiced 
concerns about the possibility of live chicken smuggled 
from Thailand being infected with the bird flu…a report 
yesterday that the Terengganu Livestock Breeders 
Association had urged the state Veterinary Services 
Department to control the entry of chicken from Thailand 
following the detection of a virus that causes avian 
influenza among birds in that country [18]. 
The Thailand Department of Livestock refuted the above report on 9 
January 2004, stating that the outbreak was due to fowl cholera, with the 
following caveat: “However, there might have been some confusion with 
an outbreak [in] mid-November 2003, of mixed infection of fowl cholera 
(Pasteurella multocida type A) and acute pasteurellosis (Pasteurella 
haemolytica) in one layer farm [of] about 68 000 birds at Nong Bua district 
in Nakorn Sawan province” [19]. 
M. POLLACK
170

In response to the early reports on suspected avian influenza in 
Thailand, the Thai Ministry of Health increased human influenza sur-
veillance in provinces where there had been reports of major poultry die-
offs. On 23 January 2004 there were simultaneous reports confirming 
avian influenza cases in the avian population, and in three humans [20, 21]. 
Again the sequence of events involved informal sector reports leading to 
formal sector reports at a later date (approximately 18 days). This demon-
strates the importance of the communication of risk and the impact on 
heightening surveillance. 
Similar time lags were also seen with reports of avian influenza in 
Vietnam.
In May 2005, there was a posting on ProMED-mail describing an outbreak 
of Chikungunya in Mauritius and Reunion Island: 
CHIKUNGUNYA – MAURITIUS AND REUNION ISLAND 
*************************************
Date: Wed, May 18, 2005 
From: Mohammad Issack
In Mauritius, since early April 2005, several people have been 
attending the hospital and health centres of the capital city, 
Port-Louis, with fever and arthralgia of hands and feet... a rash 
was also noted. 
Chikungunya virus was suspected based on the clinical pre-
sentation, the self-limiting course, and the recent report on 
ProMED-mail of a Chikungunya virus disease epidemic in the 
Comoros Islands [22]. 
The reporting physician was an astute clinician who had heard of 
Chikungunya virus activity in a neighboring island; he decided to send speci-
mens for testing to determine whether a new outbreak in his area might be 
related. He also mentioned that the first cases in Mauritius occurred near a 
hostel where many students from the Comoros Islands were lodging [22]. 
Injecting drug users frequently present to hospital emergency rooms with 
overwhelming sepsis, a condition associated with high mortality rates. 
Because of this, hospital personnel do not generally report these deaths to 
171
 RISK COMMUNICATION AND THE COMMUNITY RESPONSE
KINGDOM
2.4. 
CLOSTRIDIUM NOVYI – INJECTING DRUG USERS UNITED 
2.3. CHIKUNGUNYA – INDIAN OCEAN
www.ebook3000.com

the official health sector as unusual events. In May 2000, ProMED-mail 
received the following report from an academic veterinarian at the 
Norwegian Army Medical School: 
ANTHRAX, HUMAN – NORWAY: RFI 
**********************************
Date: 6 May 2000 
From: Per Lausund 
The press (Norwegian Broadcasting Corp.) has reported 
that a drug addict (IV heroin) died some days ago from 
anthrax. It is reported that the heroin might have been the 
source of the bacteria, but at the same time they warn drug 
abusers to watch out for sores with black crusts and scabs. 
This sounds like cutaneous anthrax. …On the other hand, 
no more deaths or infections have been reported, and if 
this was in the drug abusers’ heroin it should affect more 
than one person. 
Anyone heard of similar cases recently? [23] 
Based on this report, there was an international alert regarding the possi-
bility of anthrax contaminated heroin, which could constitute intentional 
introduction of a biologic agent. During this heightened alert, reports 
began to surface of an increase in deaths among injecting drug users in the 
UK. On 11 May 2000 there was a newswire report of eight unexplained 
deaths among injecting drug users in Scotland [24]. 
By 15 June 2000 there had been reports of 42 cases in Scotland and 20 
cases in England and Wales. A diagnosis of disease due to infection with 
Clostridium novyi was made [25]. Full descriptions of the outbreaks were 
detailed in the literature, with mention that the initial alert was related to 
the case of anthrax in the injecting drug user in Norway [26, 27]. A total of 
26 cases in England and 82 cases in Scotland and Ireland were identified 
as related to this outbreak. Retrospective active case finding did identify 
cases prior to April 2000, further supporting the observation that the height-
ened alert for adverse health events among injecting drug users, triggered 
by the anthrax case in Norway, led to the identification of this outbreak. 
The key lessons learned from the outbreak investigations detailed above are: 
1.
We live in a global village where microbial organisms do not need 
visas for international travel. 
M. POLLACK
172
3. 
Lessons Learned

2.
No single institution has the capacity to address all needs and 
cover all bases with respect to disease surveillance. 
3.
Early alerts are important in preventing rumors and speculation, 
and in alerting the “astute clinicians” elsewhere to look for 
possible new problems in their areas. 
In the event of an intentional biologic event, a communication of the risk 
(a disease process or outbreak) will lead to earlier suspicion of the same 
problem in other geographic areas. In the case of intentional release of a 
biologic agent, the scope of geographic involvement is not initially known; 
alerting the community quickly, especially the health-care community is a 
critical step in enhancing surveillance. 
There is consensus that no one organization alone can cover all disease 
surveillance needs; a network of networks is necessary. 
Informal sector reports can lead to formal sector investigations, resulting 
in earlier identification of emerging infectious diseases. This is especially 
true when dealing with new diseases (such as Nipah virus and SARS) or in 
the identification of known diseases in new geographic areas (such as Rift 
Valley fever on the Arabian peninsula, and West Nile virus infections in 
the Americas). 
The case studies of outbreak reports presented above serve to underscore 
the important role the informal sector plays in providing early warnings of 
disease risks. ProMED-mail is a good example of drawing upon the 
resources of the informal sector, through a listserv that broadcasts alerts of 
potential health risks based on reports from individual subscribers and 
those found in the lay press. This electronic means of communication of 
potential health risks has been successful as an early warning system for 
emerging diseases to both the formal health sector as well as the 
community at large. It further demonstrates that multiple-disease-reporting 
systems are complementary and enhance the early detection of unusual 
health events.
The role of the astute clinician cannot be understated. In the event of the 
intentional release of a biologic agent, early communication of the risk 
would assist the astute clinician in early recognition of a problem in his or 
her community. 
Acknowledgments
Editorial assistance and guidance from Paul Guttry and Isaac Druker is 
very much appreciated. The ProMED-mail Editor, Associate Editors, and 
173
 RISK COMMUNICATION AND THE COMMUNITY RESPONSE
4.     Conclusions
www.ebook3000.com

Moderators must be recognized for their contributions leading to the actual 
postings on the ProMED-mail service: Lawrence Madoff, Stuart Handysides, 
Donald Kaye, Jack Woodall, Peter Cowen, J. Allan Dodds, Tam Garland, 
Martin Hughes-Jones, Larry Lutwick, Eskild Petersen, Craig Pringle, 
Michael Service, Arnon Shimshony, and Tom Yuill.
References
1.
Madoff LC. ProMED-mail: an early warning system for emerging diseases. 
CID 2004:39 (15 July) 227–232. 
2.
Woodall JP. Global surveillance of emerging diseases: the ProMED-mail 
perspective. Cad. Saúde Pública 2001; 17(Suppl.).  
3.
Australian Government Department of Health and Aging Australia’s 
notifiable diseases status, 2000: Annual report of the National Notifiable 
Diseases Surveillance System, Communicable Diseases Intelligence, June 
2000; 26(2). Available at: http://www.health.gov.au/internet/wcms/Publish-
ing.nsf/Content/cda-pubs-cdi-2002-cdi2602-cdi2602b6.htm. Accessed 2 January 
2007.
4.
Cleaveland S, Laurenson MK, Taylor LH. Diseases of humans and their 
domestic mammals: pathogen characteristics, host range and the risk of 
emergence. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 2001; 356:991–999. 
5.
ProMED-mail. Pneumonia–China (Guangdong): RFI. ProMED-mail archive 
20030210.0357. 10 February 2003. Available at: http://www.promedmail.org. 
Accessed 5 June 2005. 
6.
World Health Organization, Summary of probable SARS cases with onset 
table2004_04_21/en/index.html. Accessed 3 January 2007. 
7.
ProMED-mail. Undiagnosed illness–Vietnam (Hanoi): RFI. ProMEDmail 
archive 20030311.0595. 11 March 2003. Available at: http://www. 
promedmail.org. Accessed 5 June 2005. 
8.
Poutanen SM, Low DE, Henry B, et al. Identification of severe acute 
respiratory syndrome in Canada. N Engl J Med 2003; 348:1995–2005. 
9.
Webster RG, Bean WJ, Gorman OT, Chambers TM, Kawaoka Y. Evolution 
and ecology of influenza A viruses. Microbiol Mol Biol Rev 1992 March; 
56(1): 152–179. 
10. ProMED-mail. Influenza, bird-to-man, first case? ProMED-mail archive 
19970820.1747. 20 August 1997. Available at: http://www.promedmail.org. 
Accessed 7 January 2007. 
11. ProMED-mail. Influenza, bird-to-man, first case? (02). ProMED-mail archive 
19970821.1750. 21 August 1997. Available at: http://www.promedmail.org. 
Accessed 7 January 2007. 
12. ProMED-mail. Influenza, bird-to-man, - China (Hong Kong) (12). ProMED-
mail archive 19971209.2452. 9 December 1997. Available at: http:// 
www.promedmail.org. Accessed 7 January 2007. 
M. POLLACK
174
of illness from 1 November 2002–31 July 2003 (Based on data as of  
31 December 2003). Available at: http://www.who.int/csr/sars/country/

13. ProMED-mail. Influenza, H5N1 human case – China (Hong Kong). ProMED-
mail archive 20030219.0428. 19 February 2003. Available at: http:// 
www.promedmail.org. Accessed 7 January 2007. 
14. Sims LD et al. Origin and evolution of highly pathogenic H5N1 avian 
influenza in Asia. Vet Rec 2005; 157:159. 
15. ProMED-mail. Influenza, bird-to-man, first case? (04). Archive 19970825.1766.  
25 August 1007. Available at: http://www.promedmail.org. Accessed 7 
January 2007. 
16. ProMED-mail. Avian influenza – Indonesia: RFI. Archive 20031119.2872. 
19 November 2003. Available at: http://www.promedmail.org. Accessed 5 
June 2005. 
17. ProMED-mail. Avian influenza – Indonesia: OIE Archive 20040204.0413. 
4 February 2004. Available at: http://www.promedmail.org. Accessed 5 June 
2005. Based on a published report by OIE at a URL no longer 
accessible.(http://www.oie.int/Messages/040203IDN.htm)
18. ProMED-mail. Avian influenza – Thailand: RFI. Archive 20040105.0051. 5 
January 2004. Available at: http://www.promedmail.org. Accessed 5 June 2005. 
19. ProMED-mail. Avian influenza – Thailand (02): not confirmed. Archive 
20040109.0097. 9 January 2004. Available at: http://www.promedmail.org. 
Accessed 5 June 2005. 
20. ProMED-mail. Avian influenza, Thailand – OIE. Archive 20040124.0276. 24 
January 2004. Available at: http://www.promedmail.org. Accessed 5 June 2005. 
21. ProMED-mail. Avian influenza, human – Thailand (02): confirmed. Archive 
20040123.0262. 23 January 2004. Available at: http://www.promedmail.org. 
Accessed 5 June 2005. 
22. ProMED-mail. Chikungunya – Mauritius and Reunion Island. Archive 
20050519.1372. 19 May 2005. Available at: http://www.promedmail.org. 
Accessed 5 June 2005. 
23. ProMED-mail. Anthrax, human – Norway: RFI. Archive 20000506.0119.  
6 May 2000. Available at: http://www.promedmail.org. Accessed 5 June 2005. 
24. ProMED-mail. Unexplained deaths, human – UK (Scotland). Archive 
20000511.0717. 11 May 2000. Available at: http://www.promedmail.org. 
Accessed 5 June 2005. 
25. ProMED-mail. Unexplained deaths, drug addicts – UK: diagnosis. 
20000615.0977. 15 June 2000. Available at: http://www.promedmail.org. 
Accessed 5 June 2005. 
26. Jones JA., et al. An outbreak of serious illness and death among injecting 
drug users in England during 2000. J Med Microbiol 2002; 51: 978–984. 
27. Fischer MA. An outbreak of histiotoxic clostridial infections among injection 
drug users in Scotland and Ireland. Presented at the Intersci Conf Antimicrob 
Agents Chemother Intersci Conf Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2001 Dec 
16–19; 
41: 
abstract 
no. 
2009. 
Meeting 
abstract 
available 
at: 
http://gateway.nlm.nih.gov/MeetingAbstracts/102270101.html. Accessed 7 
January 2007. 
175
 RISK COMMUNICATION AND THE COMMUNITY RESPONSE
www.ebook3000.com

1,2
1
1
2
Israel
The goal of bioterrorism is to create panic in the population and disrupt the 
society. Risk communication can play a pivotal role in mitigating the 
effects of a bioterrorist event. Since the perception of risk is frequently no 
less important than the actual risk, the availability of reliable, credible, and 
timely information can be critical for effective risk communication. For 
this purpose, new data sources and the means of utilizing them need to be 
developed. In this chapter, we discuss the role of information systems in 
risk communication and provide examples of the type of data needed at the 
different stages of a bioterrorist event. 
In his report to Congress in November 2001, Kenneth Shine, then 
president of the National Institute of Medicine, defined the goal of the 
terrorist as “an attempt to produce fear, magnified by an exaggerated sense 
of risk …. and perpetuated by misinformation and rumors” [1]. 
Bioterrorism has characteristics which make it particularly “attractive” to 
achieve these goals, since it can dramatically increase the fear of impending 
disease and death in the entire population. In addition, the uncertainty 
surrounding a bioterror incident can generate fertile soil for sowing the 
seeds of mistrust in the ability of the authorities to control the incident. 
This mistrust is a guaranteed recipe for generating public panic, with 
resultant adverse effects on the public services and the economy. Examples 
of panic caused by bioterrorism or chemical terrorism include the 
deliberate salmonella outbreak in the United States [2], the deliberate use 
of sarin gas in Japan [3] and the distribution of anthrax spores through the 
mail in the United States [4].
Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, 
Hashomer, Israel and
© 2007 Springer.
M.S. Green et al. (eds.), Risk Assessment and Risk Communication Strategies in Bioterrorism 
INFORMATION SYSTEMS FOR RISK
COMMUNICATION RELATED TO BIOTERRORISM
1.  
Abstract
2. 
Introduction
177
Preparedness, 177–191. 
Israel Center for Disease Control, Ministry of Health, Tel 
Manfred S. Green
and  Zalman Kaufman

In order to reduce the impact of a bioterrorism event, risk management 
strategies should be implemented. These includes mitigation strategies that 
are geared toward both decreasing the impact of a future risk and coping 
strategies that are intended to relieve the impact once the risk (the event) 
has occurred [5]. Risk communication plays a major role in both these 
components. In order to be effective, risk communication should be based 
on solid data and should be informative, understandable, consistent, accurate,
complete, and timely. In this chapter, we discuss the role of information in 
developing effective risk communication in the event of a bioterrorist 
attack. This will be examined in terms of the public perception of risk and 
what are termed “acceptable” and “unacceptable” risks.
Both the type of information related to the risk and the way it is conveyed 
will influence the public’s perception of risk. The expert’s approach has 
been contrasted with the layperson’s perspective of risk [6–8]. It has been 
suggested that while the expert asks objective questions, such as whether 
there is a potential risk, what is its nature, what dose will induce a harmful 
effect and how significant is the risk, the layperson may find risk statistics 
either less important or they may take on different meanings. For example, 
risk may be perceived by the layperson in the framework of routine events, 
heavily influenced by the media. Others suggested that public reactions to 
risk often have a rationality of their own and proposed that “expert” and 
“lay” perspectives should inform each other as part of a two-way process 
[9]. From either perspective, the availability of good data will influence 
both the expert and the layman in judging the seriousness of the risk and 
whether it can be contained. 
The type of risk is also an important consideration in the public’s 
perception of risk. Fischhoff et al. [10] delineate the term they referred to 
as “acceptable risks”. These are generally voluntary risks, risks under an 
individual’s control, risks with clear benefits, risks fairly distributed, risks 
generated by a trusted source, and risks perceived to be familiar. In contrast 
he described less acceptable risks as those that are, in general, “involuntary, 
inequitably distributed, inescapable by taking personal precautions, arise 
from an unfamiliar or novel source, result from man-made, rather than 
natural sources, cause hidden and irreversible damage and poorly understood 
by science” [9]. The risk of bioterrorism would clearly fall in the latter 
category. The fact that the risk may be perceived as being associated with 
Public Perception of Risk
178
M.S. GREEN AND Z. KAUFMAN 
Acceptable and Unacceptable Risks
3. 
4. 
www.ebook3000.com

hidden and irreversible damage and poorly understood by science needs to 
be countered with the best data available. 
The overall goals of risk communication are to minimize panic and 
encourage rational behavior thus helping to minimize morbidity, mortality, 
and the impact on the social and economic infrastructure. Risk commu-
nication has been described as: “the interactive exchange of information and 
opinions throughout the risk analysis process … including the explanation of 
risk assessment findings and the basis of risk management decisions” [11]. 
Among the seven “cardinal rules of risk communication” Covello and Allen 
[12] proposed “accepting and involving the public as a partner, listening to 
the public’s specific concerns, working with other credible sources and 
meeting the needs of the media”. Chess et al. [13] stressed the need to interact 
with the community, identify, and respond to the needs of different audiences 
and recognize that people’s values and feelings are a legitimate aspect of 
health issues. In such circumstances, the availability of reliable, timely, and 
constantly updated data can help put the risk in a clearer perspective. These 
data can also be used to help predict the course of events and address the so-
called “What if ….?” factor, described by Langford et al. [14]. They 
suggested that the risk communicators should “ensure that there is a “safety 
net” of protection, should reasonable safety procedures be found inadequate 
and indicate beforehand how such arrangements will be put in place and be 
made accessible.” Such reassurances should be backed up by good data. 
As a convenient conceptual and operative framework, risk communication 
associated with a bioterrorist event may be divided into five stages, 
according to the need for data at each stage. The first stage is prior to the 
event, the second on suspicion of an event, the third on confirmation of the 
event, the fourth during the event, and the fifth following the event. At 
each stage, the public is likely to ask questions relevant to that stage. The 
main questions that are likely to be raised prior to a bioterrorist incident 
are whether in fact it can occur, and are the authorities well-prepared for 
the possibility. The main question on suspicion of an event is whether we 
are witnessing the first stages of a bioterrorist incident. The questions on 
confirmation of an incident include: where is it located, when did it start, is 
it contagious, am I at risk, and is there a cure? The questions during the 
event include: is the treatment effective, is the disease spreading, am I at 
Risk Communication
179  
 INFORMATION SYSTEMS FOR RISK COMMUNICATION RELATED TO BIOTERRORISM 
Stages in Risk Communication Associated  with
a Bioterrorist Event
5. 
6.

risk, and when will it end? The questions after the event focus on whether 
the event has really ended and is there still a risk of exposure. The ability 
of the authorities to respond adequately to these questions depends on their 
access to good data on which to base their answers. 
stage of the incident. Prior to the confirmed incident, a system which monitors 
usual morbidity patterns and assesses the possibilities of anomalies is 
important. Syndromic-type surveillance is typically based on initial nonspe-
cific signs and symptoms in patients visiting primary care physicians or 
of the incidence rates of infectious diseases prior to definitive diagnoses. 
On suspicion of an event, syndromic surveillance data could be used to 
rapidly evaluate whether there is unusual morbidity related either or both 
in time and place to the suspected cases. In the third stage, on confirmation 
of one or more cases, several data sources would be used to determine the 
current extent of the outbreak. These would include syndromic surveillance 
data, hospitalization admissions with presenting complaints, information 
on requests for blood cultures and confirmed isolates. In the fourth stage, 
during the outbreak, syndromic type data together with confirmed diagnoses 
could be used to determine the extent of both the size and geographical 
distribution of the outbreak. In the fifth stage, at the end of the outbreak, 
syndromic surveillance could be used to respond to rumors of continuation 
of the outbreak or signs of a new outbreak. In all situations, analytic methods 
such as time series analysis, geographical information system (GIS), and 
cluster analysis are helpful aids for evaluating and presenting the data. 
Theoretical examples of the kind of data that may be useful during the 
of data are shown. Figures 1a, b show the presentation of a suspicious event 
which is ruled out when examined in the perspective of historical syndromic 
surveillance data. In the third and fourth stage, Figures 2a–c show graphical 
presentation of syndromic type data demonstrating the emergence of an 
in more detail the geographical distribution of the suspected cases. At all 
stages, Figures 4a–c show the actual and predicted epidemic curves use to 
track the progress of the epidemic based on both suspected cases (including 
those based on syndromic surveillance) and confirmed cases. 
The sources of information for risk communication will depend on the 
180
M.S. GREEN AND Z. KAUFMAN 
Sources of Data for Risk Communication
7. 
emergency rooms. It is used as a crude, but early and timely monitoring 
five stages of a bioterrorist incident are shown in Figures 1–4. Three types 
and fourth stages, Figure 3 presents the results of analyses using GIS to map 
morbidity and morbidity in the rest of the country. In addition, for the third 
anomaly in a particular area compared with historical background of
www.ebook3000.com

Figure 1a. Six patients admitted to an ER in Tel Aviv, suffering from pneumonia. 
Is it unusual? 
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
01/05/05
03/05/05
05/05/05
07/05/05
09/05/05
11/05/05
13/05/05
15/05/05
17/05/05
19/05/05
21/05/05
23/05/05
25/05/05
27/05/05
29/05/05
31/05/05
02/06/05
Date
# cases
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
01/05/05
03/05/05
05/05/05
07/05/05
09/05/05
11/05/05
13/05/05
15/05/05
17/05/05
19/05/05
21/05/05
23/05/05
25/05/05
27/05/05
29/05/05
31/05/05
02/06/05
Date
# cases
181  
 INFORMATION SYSTEMS FOR RISK COMMUNICATION RELATED TO BIOTERRORISM 
Figure 1b. Compare current with past morbidity, based on syndromic surveillance 
data. 

Figure 2b. Is the incident restricted to Tel Aviv, or are people in other areas also 
at risk? Visits to community clinics due to flu-like illness at a neighboring city.
182
M.S. GREEN AND Z. KAUFMAN 
0
20
40
60
80
100
14/05/05
16/05/05
18/05/05
20/05/05
22/05/05
24/05/05
26/05/05
28/05/05
30/05/05
01/06/05
03/06/05
05/06/05
07/06/05
09/06/05
Date
# cases
0
10
20
30
40
50
14/05/05
16/05/05
18/05/05
20/05/05
22/05/05
24/05/05
26/05/05
28/05/05
30/05/05
01/06/05
03/06/05
05/06/05
07/06/05
09/06/05
Date
# cases
Exposure
Figure 2a. Visits to community clinics in Tel Aviv due to influenza-like illness, 
based on syndromic surveillance data. 
www.ebook3000.com

Figure 3. What is the exposed area?
183  
 INFORMATION SYSTEMS FOR RISK COMMUNICATION RELATED TO BIOTERRORISM 
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
15/05/05
22/05/05
29/05/05
05/06/05
12/06/05
19/06/05
26/06/05
Date
# cases
Estimated
ExposureArea
Figure 2c. Visits to community clinic due to flu-like Illness returned to baseline. 

Figure 4a. How many people have become ill and when will it end? Predictor 
Figure 4b. How many people have been diagnosed until now and when it will end?
Figure 1 could be the basis of assurance to the public that nothing unusual 
has occurred. Figure 2 could provide nonspecific data, suggesting the 
beginning of an event. Figure 3 is useful for mapping the distribution of 
184
M.S. GREEN AND Z. KAUFMAN 
models.
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
02/06/05
04/06/05
06/06/05
08/06/05
10/06/05
12/06/05
14/06/05
16/06/05
18/06/05
20/06/05
Date
# cases
Observed
Predicted
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
02/06/05
05
05
05
04/06/
06/06/
08/06/
10/06/05
12/06/05
14/06/05
16/06/05
18/06/05
20/06/05
Date of Disease Onset
# cases
Observed
Predicted
Deceased
on nonspecific signs and symptoms. At each stage, the epidemic curve 
epidemic curves based on both specific diagnoses and suspected cases based
cases to demonstrate the areas of high risk. Figure 4 show the evolving
could be used both to predict the progression of the outbreak and demonstrate
www.ebook3000.com

the decline and end of the outbreak. The figures show both what is likely to be 
seen at each stage and what the real picture will be at the end of the incident.
There are frequently misconceptions about what information should and 
should not be presented to the public. In this regard, Chess et al. [13] 
described some myths in risk communication and suggested ways to deal 
with them. This demonstrates the need for availability of good data at all 
stages in order to respond to them. They also suggested that the myth that 
we should not go to the public until we have solutions should actually be 
countered by the action to release and discuss information about risk [13]. 
This clearly implies that the authorities have access to reliable information 
and stresses the need for ongoing comprehensive data collection. Further-
A common myth they describe is that the issues are too difficult for the 
public to understand. In this situation, the availability of good data can be 
extremely useful for conveying comprehensible messages to the public. 
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
02/06/05
04/06/05
06/06/05
08/06/05
10/06/05
12/06/05
14/06/05
16/06/05
18/06/05
20/06/05
Date of disease onset
# cases
Observed
Deceased
Figure 4c. No additional new cases originating from the incident. 
Myths in Risk Communication and The Role
of Information
185  
 INFORMATION SYSTEMS FOR RISK COMMUNICATION RELATED TO BIOTERRORISM 
8. 
more, Chess et al. contend that the myth that telling the public about a risk
is more likely to unduly alarm could be countered by the argument that
you can decrease potential for alarm by giving people a chance to express
their concerns. In this regard, we need to ask whether we have adequate
data on which to base our answers?

in order to make valid risk comparisons, it is assumed that adequate 
information is available. One also has to remember that the public will 
often believe that information is being withheld. A frequent response may 
then be hostility toward the authorities, perhaps due to frustration. In any 
event, it has been proposed that in order to emphasize that the authorities 
are in control, it is a mistake to pretend that the risk is minimal or 
nonexistent [17]. Good data sources could be used to present a realistic 
evaluation of the risk.
Taig [18] has discussed the problem of overreaction or panic when new 
information about risk is made public and the difficulty in rejecting ineffec-
tive and expensive solutions that have captured the public imagination. 
Once again, availability of good data is important for gaining public trust. 
Proposed ineffective solutions can only be rejected if they can be evaluated 
in the light of good data. In specifically relating to risk communication to a 
bioterrorism incident, Sandman [19] has proposed that one should not 
“over-reassure, acknowledge uncertainty and share dilemmas”. He suggested 
that one should “acknowledge and legitimate people’s fears”. Clearly, 
good data can help to put these fears in perspective. For example, answers 
to the “what-if” questions should be backed up by data.
Availability of reliable data is critical for developing an atmosphere of 
trust between the authorities and the media. Advice on how to deal with 
media has been proposed by Donovan and Covello [20]. The suggestions 
were to speak only on what you know, say that you do not know and offer 
to get the information by a specified time. This assumes that you have 
Finally, they suggest that while activist groups are often considered to be 
responsible for stirring up unwarranted concerns, they could actually help 
to focus public anger and one should work with them rather than against 
them. Clearly, in this regard, the authorities should have better data than 
the activist groups in order to cope with their charges.
irrelevant or misleading comparisons can harm trust and credibility. Thus, 
Dealing with the Media
186
M.S. GREEN AND Z. KAUFMAN 
Dealing with Overreaction
9. 
Risk Comparisons
10. 
11. 
Covello et al. [15, 16] discussed using risk comparisons and stated that
comparisons can help put risk in perspective. However, they point out that 
www.ebook3000.com

population for the possibility for a bioterrorist attack. For example, on 
August 16, 2001, the Department of Health and Human Services issued a 
Press Release as follows: “While the exact risks are unknown …. the use 
of biological weapons by terrorists, potentially could result in life-
threatening illness on a large scale. Even a lone terrorist could cause a 
major outbreak in the population” [21]. At this stage, the public would 
want to know what mechanisms are in place for monitoring for unusual 
disease activity and what data are available to the authorities. Routine 
syndromic-type surveillance could be used as an example in this area. 
During stage 2, suspicion of a possible bioterrorist event was raised 
when a case of inhalational anthrax was diagnosed in Florida on October 4, 
2001. The media was informed the following day by United States Health 
and Human Services Secretary, Tommy Thompson, that: “An isolated case 
There is no evidence of terrorism. The man could have picked up the 
infection from his clothes and was known to have drunk water from a 
creek recently” [22]. Later, on October 4, the Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention (CDC) issued a press release: “The last case of anthrax was 
in Texas earlier this year. No need for the public to take extraordinary 
steps. No need to buy and horde medicines or antibiotics.” [23]. In fact, the 
case in Texas earlier that year was not inhalation anthrax, and the information 
was incomplete. At this stage, it could have been useful to have active 
monitoring of syndromic surveillance type data to back up the impression 
that nothing unusual had yet occurred. This would provide data for risk 
Stage 3 began with a real suspicion of a possible bioterrorist event, 
when on October 9, the press reported that a second case had been detected 
in a colleague of the first case. Nevertheless, they reported that experts 
cautioned against jumping to conclusions without backing up this statement 
access to additional data. When giving reasons why you cannot answer, the 
public should know that you are actively collecting good and compre-
hensive data. Responses to rumors can be much more effective if they are 
based on the availability of good data. 
The anthrax incident in the United States in 2001 [4] provides a good 
example of the data issues when the authorities dealt with risk communica-
tion at the different stages described above. During stage 1, about 2 months 
prior to the incident, the authorities issued statements to prepare the 
187  
 INFORMATION SYSTEMS FOR RISK COMMUNICATION RELATED TO BIOTERRORISM 
communication. 
of anthrax infection was confirmed on Thursday in a Florida hospital. 
the United States Anthrax Incident
Example of Risk Communication During
12. 

that “there may be more reports of cases. This is the disease monitoring 
system in action. The system is working” [26]. The question here is what 
monitoring system is working. The public need more detailed information 
on the system and what information it can provide.
On October 23, in a press release by the Health and Human Services 
(HHS), Secretary of Health Tommy Thompson reassured Americans that 
“they should continue to live their lives with confidence”. “He stated that 
“America’s citizens can be sure that their government agencies are ready 
to respond to biological warfare and bioterrorism quickly and effectively 
throughout the country” [27]. Once again, the public needs to know how 
the situation is being monitored, including the uncertainties, so as to be 
able to cope with surprises. 
Stage 5 was late in the course of events, and Dr. Jeffrey Koplan, Dir-
ector of the CDC, in a telebriefing on October 25 said: “People are sur-
prised that we’re learning things on a day-by-day basis. You always wish 
that you knew on day one, what you know on day 20” [25]. The public 
could reasonably ask what is it that you know on day 20 that you would 
have liked to know on day 1, and why that information was not available.  
Stage 5 was also evident on October 17, essentially at the end of the 
incident, when the Mail Service issued a press release stating that “The 
mail is safe. People shouldn’t stop using the mail because of these isolated 
incidents. We have delivered more than 2 billion items since Sept 11. Pay 
attention to incoming mail. Everyone should exercise common sense” [28]. 
Once again, the public needs to know what data were available on which 
to base this recommendation and what kind of monitoring is in place. 
spokesman for the Florida Department of Health said: “This would take a 
turn in our investigation. We were thinking more of environmental 
sources” [24]. The public’s confidence could have been bolstered by being 
told that a monitoring system was in place and examples of the type of 
temporal and spatial data being collected could be presented.
On October 11, the CDC issued a press release as follows: “CDC is far 
enough in this investigation to reassure the public that this appears to be a 
local and isolated exposure focused in one building. Nevertheless, CDC is 
not packing up and going home” [25]. By October 16, there was recog-
nition of the fact that this was likely to be a bioterrorist attack, and thus 
moved into stage 3. The CDC issued a press release in which they cautioned 
188
M.S. GREEN AND Z. KAUFMAN 
with any data [24]. Asked whether this could be related to bioterrorism, a 
www.ebook3000.com

Thus, the fact that a large percentage of the public believed that the 
government did not have access to adequate information creates a situation 
of suspicion and mistrust, a possible basis for panic responses. 
Ethical issues on risk communication need to be addressed. For example, 
what information should be supplied to the public and what information does 
the public want? Who should supply this information and in what detail? 
To what extent should information be withheld in order to avoid panic? 
Availability of good data helps the authorities to provide information to the 
public which puts the incident and its associated risks in the correct 
perspective. It also engenders confidence that the authorities are taking 
well-informed decisions. 
References
1.
Kenneth Shine, For a hearing on risk communication: national security and 
public health (testimony presented to the Subcommittee on National Security, 
Veterans Affairs, and International Relations, House Committee on 
Government Reform, Washington, DC: 29 Nov., 2001). Available at: 
www7.nationalacademies.org/ocga/testimony/Risk_Communication_Natl_
Security_Public_Health.asp. Accessed 4 July 2006.
2.
Torok T, Tauxe RV, Wise RP, et al. A large community outbreak of 
Salmonella caused by intentional contamination of restaurant salad bars. 
JAMA 1997; 278:389–395. 
In the aftermath of the incident, during stage 5, the president of the 
National Institute of Medicine, in a report to Congress on November 29, 
2001, discussed the question of information to the public. He cautioned the 
public to “seek authoritative information on anthrax from three web sites 
only … because of our concern about the amount of misinformation being 
conveyed about the anthrax incidents …and the confusion that had resulted 
from multiple sources of analysis, commentary and advice”. In retrospect, 
a Gallup Poll on October 31, 2001, found that 43% believed that the 
government was providing the public with reliable information whereas 
30% believed that the government itself lacked reliable information [29]. 
Conclusions
Communication
189  
 INFORMATION SYSTEMS FOR RISK COMMUNICATION RELATED TO BIOTERRORISM 
Public Information Sources for Risk
13. 
14.

9.
Bennett P. Understanding responses to risk: some basic findings. In: Bennett 
P and Calman K (ed.). Risk Communication of Public Health. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 1999. 
10. Fischhoff B, Lichtenstein S, Slovic P, Keeney D. Acceptable risk. Cambridge, 
MA: Cambridge University Press, 1981. 
11. Covello VT, Peters RG, Wojtecki JG, Hyde RC. Risk communication, the 
West Nile virus epidemic, and bioterrorism: responding to the communication 
challenges posed by the intentional or unintentional release of a pathogen in 
an urban setting. J Urban Health 2001; 78:382–391. 
12. Covello V, Allen F. 1988. Seven cardinal rules of risk communication. US 
Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Policy Analysis, Washington, 
DC.
13. Chess C, Hance BJ, Sandman PM. improving dialogue with communities: a 
short guide to government risk communication. Trenton, NJ: Department of 
Environmental Protection, 1988. 
14. Langford IH, Marris C, O’Riordan T. Public reactions to risks: social 
structures, images of science, and role of trust. In: Bennett P and Calman K 
(eds). Risk Communication and Public Health. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 1999. pp. 3–50. 
15. Covello V. Issues and problems in using risk comparisons for communicating 
right-to-know information on chemical risks. Environ Sci Technol 1989; 
23:1444–1449.
16. Covello V. (1998). Communicating risk information: a guide to environ-
mental communication in crisis and non-crisis situations, with principles of 
effective risk communication in crisis and noncrisis situations. In: Kolluru RV 
(ed.). Environmental strategies handbook: a guide to effective policies and 
practices. New York: McGraw-Hill. 
4.
Maillard J-M, Fischer M, McKee KT Jr., Turner LF, Cline JS. First case of 
bioterrorism-related inhalational anthrax, Florida, 2001: North Carolina 
Investigation. Emerg Infect Dis 2002; 8:1035–1038. 
5.
Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs, UK. Risk management 
strategy. Available at: www.defra.gov.uk/corporate/busplan/riskmanage/index. 
htm. Accessed 9 July 2006. 
6.
Mertz CK, Slovic P, Purchase IFH. Judgments of chemical risks: comparison 
among senior managers, toxicologists, and the public. Risk Analysis 1998; 
18:391–404.
7.
Slovic P. Perception of risk. Science 1987; 236:280–285. 
8.
Slovic P, Malmfors T, Krewski D, Mertz CK, Neil N, Bartlett S. Intuitive 
toxicology. II. Expert and lay judgments of chemical risks in Canada. Risk 
Analysis 1995; 15:661–675.
190
M.S. GREEN AND Z. KAUFMAN 
3.
Ohtani T, Iwanami A, Kasai K, Yamasue H, Kato T, Sasaki T, Kato N. Post-
traumatic stress disorder symptoms in victims of Tokyo subway attack: a  
5-year follow-up study. Psychiatry Clin Neurosci 2004; 58:624–629. 
www.ebook3000.com

23. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Press release on 4 October 2001: 
public health message regarding anthrax case. Available at: www.cdc.gov/ 
od/oc/media/pressrel/r011004.htm. Accessed 14 May 2006. 
24. Online News Hour. Second anthrax case reported in Florida. Available at: 
www.pbs.org/newshour/updates/october01/anthrax_10-8.html. Accessed 4 July 
2006.
25. Centers for Disease Control and prevention. Anthrax update: 25 October 2001, 
telebriefing transcript. Available at: www.cdc.gov/od/oc/media/transcripts/ 
t011025.html. Accessed 4 July 2006.
26. Centers for Disease Control and prevention. Press release on 16 October 
2001: update: anthrax investigations, Florida and New York. Available at: 
www.cdc.gov/od/oc/media/pressrel/r011016.htm Accessed 14 May 2006. 
27. United States Department of Health & Human Services. Secretary Thompson 
testifies on HHS readiness and role of vaccine research and development. 
Available at: www.hhs.gov/news/pree/2001pres/20011023.html. Accessed 14 
May 2006. 
28. United States Postal Service. USPS message to customers: we are taking 
every possible measure to assure safety of customers and the mail, 17 October 
2001. Available at: www.usps.com/news/2001/press/pr01_1010tips.htm. Acc-
essed 4 July 2006. 
29. Public would rather have vague terror warnings than none at all. Public 
Accessed 4 July 2006. 
18. Taig T. Benchmarking in government: case studies and principles. In: Bennett 
P and Calman K (eds). Risk Communication and Public Health. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 1999. pp. 117–132. 
19. Sandman PM. Bioterrorism risk communication policy. J Health Commun 
2003; 8(Suppl 1):146–147; discussion 148–151. 
20. Donovan E, Covello V. Risk communication student manual. Chemical 
Manufacturers’ Association, Washington, DC, 1989. 
21. United States Department of Health & Human Services. HHS initiative 
prepares for possible bioterrorism threat. Available at: www.hhs.gov/news/ 
press/2001pres/01fsbioterrorism.html. Accessed 14 May 2006. 
22. Harnden T, Fenton B. Pleas for calm in Florida as Briton catches anthrax. 
Published in the Telegraph web site on 05/10/2001. Available at: 
Accessed 14 May 2006. 
191  
 INFORMATION SYSTEMS FOR RISK COMMUNICATION RELATED TO BIOTERRORISM 
www.telegraph.co.uk/news/main.jhtml?xml=/news/2001/10/05/wanth05.xml. 
at: www.publicagenda.org/specials/terrorism/110701terror_pubopinion.htm. 
Agenda Special Edition: Terrorism. Updated 7 November 2001. Available 
17. Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry. A primer on health risk 
communication principles and practices. Available at: www.atsdr.cdc.gov/ 
HEC/primer.html. Accessed 9 July 2006. 

Part III 
FOCUS ON SMALLPOX
www.ebook3000.com

RISK ASSESSMENT IN SMALLPOX 
BIOTERRORIST AGGRESSION 
1. 
Abstract 
As many specialists pointed out, a bioterrorist attack using a smallpox 
virus becomes an increasing probability. Global susceptibility of the 
population, high transmissibility, lack of specific treatment, difficult and 
late clinical diagnosis of first cases, and impressive and severe clinical 
pictures are important factors of risk assessment in smallpox terrorist 
aggression.
Airborne, the major way of spreading, intensive and long-distance 
traveling, and absence of bioprevention measures increase dramatically the 
epidemic extension. Under these circumstances, the capacity to limit 
aggression is rapidly overcome. So, risk assessment is one of the most 
important steps of bioprevention strategy of smallpox aggression. 
“The September 11, 2001 attacks on the World Trade Center and Pentagon 
changed forever our collective thinking with regard to our vulnerability to 
terrorist attacks” [7]. Less than one month later on October 4, 2003, a 
criminal anthrax epidemic lasting almost two months demonstrated the 
reality of large impact of present-day bioterrorism. Several scenarios were 
imagined on the possible future bioterrorist attacks. Among potential 
agents variola virus was estimated as one of the most probably used [2, 5, 7]. 
2.1. 
SMALLPOX: A FORGOTTEN DISEASE? 
In 1980, World Health Organization (WHO) certified smallpox eradication 
worldwide and officially variola virus storage was restricted to two WHO 
reference laboratories: the Center for Disease Control and Prevention 
(CDC) in Atlanta, USA and State Research Center for Virology and 
Biotechnology “Vector” at Koltsovo, in Novosibirsk, Russia. All other 
© 2007 Springer.
2. 
Introduction 
195
M.S. Green et al. (eds.), Risk Assessment and Risk Communication Strategies in Bioterrorism 
Preparedness, 195–203. 
Cantacuzino, Bucharest, Romania
Marian Negut
National Institute of R&D for Microbiology & Immunology 

stocks in 1999. But in 1999, the destruction was postponed until 2002. An 
advisory Committee of variola virus research proposed a program of work 
and indefinite postponement was admitted, so nowadays live smallpox 
were held by former Soviet Union at Sergiev Posad; the secret plant, as Dr. 
Alibek said, still exists and by Dr. Henderson’s opinion remains as a focus 
of concern [9]. The black market trade in weapons of mass destruction is 
probably the only way of acquiring the virus. But this possibility exists and 
bioterrorism has no logic limits. 
2.2. 
WHY SMALLPOX? 
According to the specialists, smallpox is a “very potential bioterrorism 
choice” as: 
1.
At present, there is a high and global receptivity to variola virus. After 
eradication and more than 30 years no vaccination was performed and 
average protection postvaccination is about 5–7 years. A stock of 200 
million doses of prepared vaccine was saved for use in case of 
accidental outbreak. In the last 5 years many countries prepared 
necessary stockpile of vaccine against smallpox. But WHO does not 
recommend vaccination of individuals before the smallpox epidemic 
occurs because of side effects. Vaccinia immune globulin recomm-
ended for the treatment of serious side effects is in very limited 
quantity so that stockpiles of this globulin were suggested to be made 
2.
Contagiousness of smallpox is higher than 80%. The first generation of 
cases would rapidly spread in highly susceptible population, expanding 
each generation of cases, by a factor of 10 times or more during winter 
or spring [9]. As was recently demonstrated by pandemic spreading  
of severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS), this rapid extension of 
smallpox could be a global disaster. Long-distance traveling of un-
detected human sources could represent the major way of pandemic 
spreading of smallpox also. 
3.
Clinical picture of smallpox has always had strong psychological 
impact in “civilian population”, so this impact is expected to happen. 
Because of lack of immunoprotection a high proportion of severe 
clinical pictures involving long hospitalization is estimated. Unpredic-
table medical difficulties will be arised by the incapacity of medical 
authorities to cover these huge requirements. Mild cases will be home-
isolated increasing epidemic risk and spreading [14, 15]. 
196 
M. NEGUT
laboratories in the world were required to destroy their remaining variola 
virus stocks. In 1996, WHO General Assembly decided to destroy the 
virus stocks exist officially [16]. Immense stockpiles of variola virus 
along with smallpox vaccine [6]. 
www.ebook3000.com

4.
There is no specific antiviral treatment for smallpox. Thiosemicarbazones 
and rifampicin previously reported having therapeutic benefits proved to 
be ineffective [9]. Cidofivir, a nucleotide analog of DNA polymerase 
inhibitor, experimented in cytomegalovirus infection treatment 
suggested to be used in postexposure treatment rather for treatment of 
the diagnosed smallpox [9, 11].
5.
The reported mortality of the smallpox was higher than 30%. Hemorr-
hagic and malignant forms are uniformly fatal [9, 14]. 
6.
A violent psychosocial reaction is likely to appear at the beginning of 
the epidemic “smallpox fear.” This psychological impact is more 
stronger in the population than in some other severe transmissible 
diseases.
Medical (clinical) impressive aspects, antiepidemic restrictive measures, 
current difficulties, and social perturbances could determine a psychosocial 
crisis followed by a real civilian panic [13]. 
3. 
Risk Assessment in Smallpox Bioaggression 
The main areas of risk in smallpox bioaggression are presented in Figure 1. 
All these areas are influencing in between them in realizing very strong 
psychosocial perturbances that could degenerate in a strong panic of 
civilian population. 
It is well known that one of the main targets of bioterrorist attack is to 
produce impressive psychosocial effects followed by socioeconomic per-
turbances and social disorganization. 
This psychosocial impact influences in many aspects of clinical and 
Mortality 30%
Difficult recovery
Disabilities
No treatment
CLINICAL RISK
Severe/Impressive clinical pictures
PSYCHO-SOCIAL RISK
- Socio economic perturbanices
PSYCHO-SOCIAL IMPACT
PANIC
SAFETY TRANSPORTATION
MAXIMUM CONTAINMENT
HOSPITALIZATION AND
LABORATORY PROTECTION
BIOSAFETY BIOSECURITY RISK
PROTECTION
* NO IMMUNE PROTECTION
(HIGH RECEPTIVITY)
*RAPID SPREADING (x 10 times)/case
EPIDEMIC RISK
epidemic side effects by magnifying difficulties of medical and anti-
epidemic intervention [13]. 
Figure 1. Risk areas in smallpox bioaggression. 
RISK ASSESSMENT IN SMALLPOX BIOTERRORIST AGGRESSION 
197

CLINICAL RISK ASSESSMENT 
Clinical risk assessment is considered to be important. During the 
progression of the disease it has to take into account the following gravity 
factors in risk evaluation [5, 9, 14]. 
x
Smallpox is an exclusively human disease and nowadays any case is 
an alleged manipulation of variola virus.  
x
The illness is expected to be very severe in the majority of cases as the 
population under 40 years has no variola, “immunologic specific 
memory” (the vaccination was stopped in many countries before 
1977).
x
There is no etiologic treatment in smallpox. So the hospitalization will 
be of long duration overcoming hospital capacities in an epidemic 
situation.
x
Severe malignant and hemorrhagic forms are fatal always so mortality 
is overcoming 30% in smallpox. Immunodeficient patients, pregnancy, 
and chronic cardiac diseases are predisposing conditions to severe 
forms.
x
Clinical recognition of the illness is difficult in the first stage in the 
absence of epidemic information/suspicion. First cases will have high 
epidemic potential. 
x
Laboratory confirmation is also late in the first cases because routine 
laboratory investigation does not include such a potential etiology.
Progression of disease 
Day 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
21 
22 
23 
24 
25 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fever
 
 
 
Macules 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rash 
 
 
 
Papules 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Vesicles 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Pustules
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Scabs
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Risk 
Long hospitalization (contaminant) 
Severe forms – vital risk 
Lethality > 30% 
12
Recovery
I
N
C
U
B
A
T
I
O
N
Difficult
Scars
28
Figure 2. Smallpox – clinical risk assessment.
198
M. NEGUT 
3.1.
www.ebook3000.com

Figure 2 shows the risk during the progression of disease. Starting from 
the 10th day after contamination, the patient represents an important 
source of infection by respiratory droplets and later by the content of 
vesicles and pustules and at the end by scabs. The hospitalization in 
smallpox is compulsory in all the period of contagiousness that means 
minimum 3–4 weeks. In epidemic situation hospital capacities are 
overcome.
As the febrile onset is not specific, clinical presumption is late, when 
characteristic vesicles and pustules develop. In malignant forms, the 
diagnostic confusion is more frequent so first cases in absence of epidemic 
suspicion are “sacrificed patients” [9]. 
Laboratory identification of the virus in oropharyngeal exudate is 
possible by modern techniques (electron microscopy, immunoenzymatic 
detection, and molecular techniques) in less than 24 hours. Routine 
laboratory investigation does not include variola virus detection without 
any particular requirement. The confirmation of the first cases is late when 
virus detection is recommended from vesicles content (5–7 days of the 
progression of the disease) [3, 15]. 
No antiviral treatment is efficient in smallpox. The progression of the 
disease depends on the capacity of response of the patient. The estimated 
severity of the disease determines important vital risk. The historical 
known mortality of 30% is expected to be higher in absence of immune 
specific background [9]. 
Clinical factor will contribute substantially to increase associated 
psychosocial risk. Socioeconomic perturbances will increase psychosocial 
impact leading to “psychological mass reaction.” Risk assessment of 
psychosocial reaction is as well important as medical risk. 
Epidemic risk assessment is dominated by the high capacity of 
spreading of the disease in modern opportunities of dissemination and lack 
of any immune protection [2, 10]. 
The interdependence of the particular epidemic factors in smallpox is 
presented schematically in Figure 3. 
As global extension of SARS demonstrated recently, long-distance 
traveling nowadays represents a major risk activation of rapid spreading of 
high-risk respiratory diseases. 
RISK ASSESSMENT IN SMALLPOX BIOTERRORIST AGGRESSION 
199

Human
only
Receptives
high
Onset
Progression
Direct
-Respiratory droplets 
-Content of pustules 
vesicles
-Scabs
Contamination
 (ways) 
Indirect
-Scabs
-Contaminated dust 
(hospital mainly) 
-Contaminated objects/ 
(laundry)
VACCINATION RISK 
-Not enough vaccine 
Environment equipment
Figure 3. Epidemic risk factors in smallpox. 
200
M. NEGUT 
www.ebook3000.com

Biosafety risk 
Under the risk 
Risk of contamination* 
- Patients 
- Clinical investigation 
- Procedures (therapeutic) 
- Sampling 
Hospital
- Personnel 
- Environment
- Death – manipulation 
- Waste- management 
Sampling
Transportation/
Manipulation
- Laundry 
R
I
S
K
Laboratory
maximum
containment
(BL4)
- Personnel
- Environment
- Procedures - investigation 
- Equipment - dedicated 
Environment/negative
pressure
* Accidentally. 
Air-conditioning plane systems activate the spreading of virus by 
respiratory route. Virus dispersion in the modern huge “crowded” plains is 
very “efficient” in contaminating hundreds of people at once. Potential 
sources (unknown contaminated persons) play a huge spreading risk. 
Starting from a “first contaminated person” all the contacts incubating 
the smallpox become “secondary bioterrorists.” Assuming a transmission 
rate of 20 cases by the “secondary bioterrorists” and a rate of 50 by the 
active, initial bioterrorist, a total of 1,000 cases would be prevalent before 
the earliest possible identification of the first wave of disease. Assuming 
that the first wave were misdiagnosed or diagnosed late the next wave 
would see 20,000 such cases, followed by 400,000 cases, 8 million cases, 
and so on [3]. 
Few physicians have enough experience, essential to establish a quick and 
accurate clinical diagnosis. But the high rapid detection and isolation of the 
first cases is crucial in limiting the risk of second-generation cases and in 
this context the professional training in urgent required today [3, 8, 12]. 
Preventing smallpox by vaccination is a long-debated decision. Well-
known reverse reaction mentioned in Figure 3 is a major limiting risk 
factor in a mass vaccination campaign in the present situation. As WHO 
specialists recommended important stockpiles of specific globulin have to 
be prepared for the moment when the vaccination will be considered 
necessary [4, 15]. 
Figure 4. Smallpox: biosafety risk (extreme biosafety measures).
RISK ASSESSMENT IN SMALLPOX BIOTERRORIST AGGRESSION 
201

Biosafety biosecurity risk. Maximum security measures are recom-
mended for special designated hospitals for isolation and quarantine for 
protection of personnel and environment. Negative air pressure, fully 
isolating equipment for personnel, and continuing disinfection measures 
are recommended for limiting the risk of contamination (Figure 4). 
Laundry and waste is sterilized and strictly surveyed for safety transportation 
before incineration [11]. 
Sample transportation and laboratories manipulating variola virus 
require maximum containment (BL4 biosafety) [3, 11]. 
Smallpox became a symbol of the victory of the humanity against 
infectious diseases. Risk assessment of smallpox estimated by many 
specialists after 2001 is an alarming scenario to prevent a global 
catastrophe, because epidemic extension of very aggressive diseases has 
no borders [1, 3, 14]. 
1.
Alibek K. Biohazard. New York: Random House, 1999. 
2.
Alibek K. Smallpox: a disease and a weapon. Int J Infect Dis 2004; (Suppl 2): 
S3–S8.
3.
Baxby D. Poxviruses. In: Collier L, Balows A, Jussmen M. Arnold (eds), 
Topley and Wilson’s Microbiology and Microbial Infections, 9th edn. Vol. 1, 
London: Arnold, 1998, pp. 367–368. 
4.
Busch-Petersen E, Nagy E, Khouri PH. Smallpox – preparing for the 
emergency. Ellipse 2002; 18(3):57–68. 
5.
Cernescu C, Ruta S. Progrese in controlul si prevenirea virozelor cu potential 
bioterorist. Ed. Univ. Carol Davila, Bucuresti, 2004. 
6.
Ciufecu ES. Virusologie medicala. Ed. Medicala Nationala, Bucuresti, 2003. 
7.
Fauci SM. Foreword. In: Henderson AD, Inglesby VT, O’Toole T (eds), 
Bioterrorism: guidelines for medical and public health management. Chicago,
IL: American Medical Association, 2002. 
8.
Ferguson NM, et al. Planning for smallpox: outbreak. Nature 2003; 425 
(6959):681–685.
9.
Henderson AD, Inglesby VT, Bartlett GJ, Ascher SM, Eitzen E, Jahrcing BP, 
Hauer J, Layton M, McDade J, Osterholm TM, O’Toole T, Parker G, Perl 
MT, Russell KP, Tonat K. Smallpox as a biological weapon. In: Henderson 
AD, Inglesby VT, O’Toole T (eds), Bioterrorism: guidelines for medical and 
202
M. NEGUT 
References
public health management. Chicago, IL: American Medical Association, 
1999.
www.ebook3000.com

10. Henderson AD. Smallpox biosecurity: preventing the unthinkable. London: 
11. Lalezari JR, Staag RJ, Kuppermann BD, et al. Intravenous cidofivir for 
peripheral cytomegalovirus retinitis in patients with AIDS a randomized, 
controlled trial. Ann Intern Med 1997; 126: 257–263. 
12. Neff MJ. Variola (Smallpox) and Monkeypox viruses. In: Mandell LG, 
Bennet EJ, Dolin R (eds), Principle and practice of infectious diseases, 5th 
edn. Philadelphia: Churchill Livingstone, 2000. 
13. Negut M. Preventing is better than postfactum intervention in bioerrorism. In: 
Gazso LG, Ponto CC (eds), Radiation inactivation of bioterrorism agents. 
Amsterdam: IOS Press, 2005, pp. 89–95. 
14. Paun L. Variola (Variola Major). In: Amaltea (ed.), Boli infectioase, arme 
biologice, bioterorism. Bucuresti, 2003. 
15. Ropp LS, Esposito JJ, Loparev NV, Palumbo JG. Poxvirus Infecting Humans. 
In: Murray PR, col. (eds), Manual of clinical microbiology, 7th edn. 
Washington, DC: ASM Press, 1999. 
16. World Health Organization. The global eradication of smallpox. Final report 
of the Global commission for the certification of smallpox eradication. 
Geneva, Switzerland: WHO, 1980. 
Imperial College 2001. 
RISK ASSESSMENT IN SMALLPOX BIOTERRORIST AGGRESSION 
203

Center of Vaccine Development and Evaluation 
Medical Corps, Israel Defense Forces 
1. 
Abstract 
The threat of smallpox, and with it smallpox vaccination, ended over 30 
years ago. Since September 2001, a limited reintroduction of vaccination 
was carried out. The development of a skin reaction following vaccina 
vaccination (“take”) remains the sole indicator of immunity acquisition. 
Current vaccination policy states that immunity acquired from a one-
time vaccination remains for less than 10 years and that individuals who 
fail to develop a “take” after revaccination must be rechallenged. How-
ever, historical records show smallpox resistance over 50 years after 
vaccination. Furthermore, recent studies have found that levels of vaccinia-
specific B-cells and antibodies remain constant (after the decline of the 
initial reaction peak) over many decades while the T-cell levels steadily 
decline (half-life of 14 years) but are still identifiable for at least 50 years. 
A direct correlation has been observed between high anti-vaccinia 
antibody levels, immunity against vaccinia and variola, and lack of “take” 
during revaccination. These findings are strengthened by observations of 
immunity to vaccina illness in animals and humans lacking T-cell response 
(due to HIV syndrome or genetic defects), given high pre-exposure 
antibody levels. 
This data indicates a central role for B-cells in maintaining immune 
indicator. Old and new findings have significant implications on eval-
uation of current herd immunity and prioritization in case of resumed 
vaccination.
© 2007 Springer.
Keywords:
protection from smallpox with a contributing role for T-cells as a mem-
revaccination and evaluating new vaccines on the basis of the “take” 
M.S. Green et al. (eds.), Risk Assessment and Risk Communication Strategies in Bioterrorism 
ory component, and the problems inherent in determining the need for 
205
Preparedness, 205–218. 
Herd immunity, Immunological memory, Smallpox, Vaccinia, Vaccination. 
RENEWAL OF IMMUNOLOGICAL MEMORY
TO SMALLPOX: USE OF NEW TOOLS YIELDS
OLD RESULTS 
Jonathan Boxman, Itay Wiser, and Nadav Orr
www.ebook3000.com

J. BOXMAN  ET AL. 
2. 
Background
The smallpox disease is distinguished in the long annals of medical history 
by a number of unique characteristics. This lethal disease that has claimed 
more victims than any other disease in human history is the first infection 
against which western medicine developed an effective cure, and is also 
the only human disease that has been completely eradicated, a goal that 
was achieved by 1979 due to an international effort led by the World 
Health Organization (WHO) [1, 2]. The disease was eradicated thanks to 
the use of a vaccinia inoculum, a genetic relative to the cowpox virus, 
whose utility in vaccinating against smallpox was first demonstrated at the 
end of the 18th century by Edward Janer. 
Vaccination with the vaccinia inoculum is accompanied by a number of 
harmful side effects that posed a primary consideration in the decision to 
end routine smallpox vaccination. The events of September 11 and the 
anthrax letters led many governments to vaccinate medical personnel, as 
well as invest considerable resources in development of safer vaccines as a 
precautionary step against future bioterror attacks [3]. However, in spite of 
the immense resources invested in the revaccination campaign there is still 
no scientific consensus regarding the duration or mechanism of the immu-
nity granted by the vaccina inoculum or the appropriate immunological 
parameters to investigate these questions [4]. 
Providing answers to these questions is important in several respects: 
1.
Estimating the time-related risk for smallpox infection in a population 
that had been previously vaccinated. 
2.
Determining parameters for the effectiveness of vaccination in a 
previously vaccinated population. 
3.
Determining parameters for the effectiveness of new vaccines. 
The premise at the time of the smallpox eradication campaign was that 
vaccine-induced immunological memory to smallpox rapidly fades, with 
significant loss of protective immunity within 3–6 years [5, 6, 7, 8]. This 
concept was based on defining the appearance of a cutaneous response 
following the vaccination (“take”) as the indication of a successful vaccine-
tion, and led to several US clinics recommending an annual vaccination to 
each patient, a tri-annual vaccination to all US citizens going abroad, and a 
compulsory vaccination of Poxviridae researchers every decade.
Several studies carried out prior to the smallpox eradication clearly 
indicate that the “take” symptoms were often observed in individuals 
receiving a booster vaccination shortly (several months) after the primary 
vaccination [4]. This would seem to indicate that the correlation between the 
206

“take” and the existence of systemic protective immunity is not high. How 
then can we determine the length of protective immunity granted by the 
vaccinia inoculum, the mechanism by which it is granted and the parameters 
suitable to measuring it? 
Using Janer’s original methods, namely infection of vaccinated indi-
viduals with the variola virus and analysis of the clinical results is not of 
course appropriate to this day and age but by carrying out an epidemio-
logical analysis of prior smallpox outbreaks we can retrospectively reach 
conclusions regarding the duration of protective immunity. Furthermore, 
beyond the aspect of protective immunity to variola, the response and 
memory of the immune system to vaccinia poses an excellent model to 
study immunological memory thanks to several unique properties of the 
virus. First, vaccinia and variola do not chronically persist in their hosts – 
unlike other viruses such as EBC, Varicella, CMV, etc, [4] and do not, 
therefore, repeatedly stimulate the immune system. Furthermore, the 
eradication of the disease and the end of routine vaccinations means that 
any immunological parameters detected in individuals is the result of long-
term immunological memory rather than random asyptomatic exposure. 
3. 
Historical Perspective 
Janner originally claimed that the vaccinia inoculum provides full and 
indefinite protection versus smallpox [5]. His original report in 1798, 
concerning the development of protective immunity versus smallpox follow-
ing infection with cowpox, included case reports demonstrating persistence 
of protective immunity for 25–38 years following exposure to cowpox. 
Janner recognized that critics might claim that this was caused by background 
exposure to variola (which was endemic at the time) and stated that “had 
these experiments been conducted in a large city, or in a populous neighbor-
hood, some doubts might have been entertained; but here, where population 
is thin, and where such an event as a person’s having had the smallpox is 
always faithfully recorded, no risk of inaccuracy in this particular can arise.” 
The duration of protective immunity remained a contention point and in 
his third study, published in 1800, Janner referred again to this point 
stating, “Some there are who suppose the security from the smallpox 
obtained through the cowpox will be of a temporary nature only. This 
supposition is refuted not only by analogy with respect to the habits of 
diseases of a similar nature, but by incontrovertible facts, which appear in 
great numbers against it . . . . But among the cases I refer to, one will be 
found of a person who had the cowpox fifty-three years before the effect of
207
 RENEWAL OF IMMUNOLOGICAL MEMORY TO SMALLPOX
www.ebook3000.com

J. BOXMAN  ET AL. 
the smallpox was tried upon him. As he completely resisted it, the intervening 
period I conceive must necessarily satisfy any reasonable mind.” Needless 
to say this example did not satisfy “every reasonable mind” in Janner’s 
time and is certainly unsatisfactory today since the methodology of research 
and clinical record-keeping in use during the 18th century, combined with 
smallpox endemicity, render the quality of medical observations uncertain. 
A study with higher standards describing a smallpox outbreak in Liverpool, 
England, was carried out in the early 19th century [9, 10]. Although there 
were common estimates regarding mortality from smallpox, no fatalities 
were identified among 206 cases of individuals who received a vaccination 
less than 20 years prior to the outbreak. Individuals who were vaccinated 
20–30 years prior to the outbreak had a survival rate of 99% (330 out of 
333), while the survival rate of individuals vaccinated 30–60 years prior to 
the outbreak was 94% (361 out of 384) (Figure 1). Obviously, since these 
studies were carried out when smallpox was still endemic in Europe, the 
study population may have been exposed to the virus prior to the outbreak. 
However, results from outbreaks in the 1950s and 1960s in European 
countries where the disease had been eradicated for over a generation 
showed remarkably similar results. These limited outbreaks ware caused by 
Third World immigrants and guest-workers who reintroduced variola to  
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
% Mortality
Unvaccinated
010
1020
20+
Years since previous vaccination
208
Figure 1. Mortality amongst European cases as presented by Mack et al. [11].
These figures refer to vaccinated individuals who were symptomatic to smallpox.
Europe (actually these outbreaks were a primary cause leading to the 

Figure 2. Morbidity and mortality data from smallpox outbreaks as presented by 
Hannah et al. [10]. The data refers to symptomatic individuals.
formation of the WHO smallpox eradication program and the willingness 
of the industrialized nations to fund the program), leading to a 55% 
mortality rate in the non-vaccinated European population [6, 9, 11]. 
However, individuals who were vaccinated over 20 years prior to the 
outbreak, and manifested clinical signs had a mortality rate of under 8% 
[9, 11] (Figure 2). It should be stressed that even this low mortality 
rateonly refers to vaccinated individuals who developed clinical symptoms 
of the disease (under 4% of contacts) [11]. Therefore, the survival rate of 
individuals who were exposed to the disease more than 20 years after their 
previous vaccination was over 99%. The data from these historical studies 
was recently incorporated in a mathematical model predicting long-term 
protective immunity to smallpox [9]. The creators of the model claim that 
these results indicate that although protection from infection does decline 
in time, protection from severe illness resulting in death remains indefi-
nitely – as Janner originally claimed (Figure 1). 
3.1. 
MECHANISMS OF PROTECTIVE IMMUNITY FORMATION 
AND MAINTENANCE TO SMALLPOX
The relative importance of the humoral and cellular components of the 
immune system in providing protection from smallpox and mechanism by 
which this immunity is maintained remains a subject of fierce contention 
with significant implications for the length of protective immunity granted 
by vaccination. Smallpox’s long period of presymptomatic incubation (two 
weeks) provides a long stretch of time for T and B memory cells to expand 
and activate the mechanisms required to contain the infection, reinforcing 
Age
09
2039
2039
4059
6080
919
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
% Mortality
Unvaccinated
Vaccinated
209
 RENEWAL OF IMMUNOLOGICAL  MEMORY TO SMALLPOX
www.ebook3000.com

J. BOXMAN  ET AL. 
the assumption that protective immunity is primarily cell mediated. This is 
true for other viral infections such as hepatitis A and B, as well. 
One of the main problems in research of the immune response and 
memory to smallpox is that the tools and techniques capable of evalua-
ting the activity of immune system cells were only developed after the 
eradication of smallpox. Accordingly, our knowledge relies on measure-
ments of vaccinia specific cells whose veracity and relevance is doubtful. 
Nonetheless, much can be learned from studying the immune system response 
to vaccinia, especially by analyzing cases of immunodefecient patients and 
laboratory animals. 
The importance of T-cells in generation of immune response and 
memory following primary infection with variola remains indisputable, but 
their role in protective immunity upkeep versus reinfection is less clear. 
Mouse and ape models showed that T-cells were not required for pro-
tection from vaccinia if antibodies to the virus were already present [12, 
13]. An in-depth analysis of the relative contribution of the various 
components of the immune system to protective immunity upkeep has only 
recently become feasible thanks to the application of techniques permitting 
direct visualization and analysis of antigen specific T- and B-cells [13, 14, 
15, 16, 17, 18]. 
4. 
T-cell-Mediated Antiviral Memory 
T-cells are regarded as the primary mediators of long-term immunological 
memory, but while their vital importance in the generation of immune 
response and memory following primary infection is indisputable [18], 
their role in protective immunity upkeep has been rendered uncertain by a 
number of recent studies. A study carried out in US volunteers who were 
previously vaccinated 1–14 times revealed that the number of vaccinia 
antigen-specific T-cells declines with a half-life of 8–15 years – regardless 
of the number of booster vaccinations. The rate of decline of CD4+ cells 
summed to be lower than that of CD8+ cells but remarkably vaccinia-
specific T-cells of both types could still be detected in some individuals 75 
years postvaccination. 
Similar results were acquired in a study following up vaccinia-specific 
T-cell levels 50 years postvaccination. The T-cell half-life estimated from 
the results was 14 years [14]. These results also match measurements 
indicating a higher level of precursors to vaccinia-specific CD4+ memory 
cells than CD8+ memory cells 35 years postvaccination, and to another 
210

study where researchers encountered considerable difficulties in isolating 
CD8+ but not CD4+ T-cells 20 years postvaccination [19]. 
It is noteworthy that in contrast to these results, a murine model of 
lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (LCMV) infection showed a far 
longer maintenance of CD8+ T-cells than CD4+ T-cells. It is unclear 
whether this variance is the result of differences in the host, the virus, or 
the study methods [20]. However, considering that Poxviridae are 
commonly transported from the lungs to the rest of the body by major 
histocompatibility complex type II (MHCII) displaying phagocytic cells 
and that respiratory epithelial cells often display MHCII, a central role 
for MHCII recognizing CD4+ T-cells in maintaining the long-term 
protective immunity to smallpox seems plausible [21].
5. 
B-cell-Mediated Antiviral Memory 
Antibodies are the immune system’s first line of defense against infections. 
Indeed, antibody levels are the most widely used parameter of estimating 
the formation of protective immunity in most human vaccines [22]. Plentiful 
evidence exists for the involvement of long-lived plasma cells in the 
upkeep of antibody levels and of memory cells in the formation of the 
secondary response upon reexposure. Memory B-cells may also play a role 
in refreshing the long-lived plasma cell repertoire even in the absence of 
exposure to antigen stimulation [22]. 
What is the importance of vaccinia-specific antibody level in providing 
protective immunity from smallpox? Ape models (Rhesus macaque) 
demonstrated that the outcome of primary infection of both healthy and 
simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV) was in correlation to CD4+ T-cell 
levels. In contrast, no correlation between CD4+ T-cell levels was observed 
in secondary infection, rather, a powerful correlation was observed to with 
the pre-infection level of vaccinia-specific antibodies [13]. Likewise, a 
murine model of intranasal vaccinia infection showed T-cells to be vital in 
the generation of an initial immune response following primary infection 
but the subsequent neutralization of CD4+/CD8+ T-cells had no effect on 
the outcome of secondary infection – provided a high level of anti-vaccina 
antibodies was still present in the bloodstream [12]. 
Human studies performed in the 1950s showed that of individuals 
the mortality rate of low responders (as measured by antibody levels) was 
33% versus only 5.6% of high responders [4]. The correlation between 
antibody levels and resistance to smallpox was demonstrated again in two 
inoculated with vaccinia who then showed clinical signs of smallpox, 
211
 RENEWAL OF IMMUNOLOGICAL MEMORY TO SMALLPOX
www.ebook3000.com

J. BOXMAN  ET AL. 
smallpox infection [5, 23]. 
The dynamics of antigen-specific memory B-cells in the absence of 
reexposure to the antigen is not clearly understood. Smallpox vaccine 
offers a unique opportunity to explore this issue due to the eradication of 
the disease and the prolonged period since the last vaccinations. This 
opportunity has been utilized by a number of research groups [14, 17] who 
discovered that antibody and memory B-cell levels tend to stabilize 
following the decline of the initial peak and remain constant indefinitely 
(over 75 years). 
This dynamic is quite different from that of the T-cells, whose level 
declines at a constant rate with a half-life of 14 years [17]. Not only do the 
antibody levels to vaccinia remain constant and high in the vaccinee sera, 
the memory B-cells maintain a capability for rapid production of antibodies 
(20-fold increase) following reexposure to the vaccinia antigen [14]. 
Although booster vaccinations have led to a rapid and powerful antibody 
response, antibody levels maintained following the decline of the initial 
peak were only slightly improved by a second vaccination, with no im-
provements whatsoever following additional booster vaccinations. This 
indicates that while booster vaccinations may raise antibody levels achieved 
from a suboptimal response, there is a physiological limitation to the 
amount of antibodies an individual may maintain against any given 
antigen.
The mechanism behind the long-term maintenance of antibody 
production may be the result of activation/differentiation of memory B-
cells, the survival of long-lived plasma cells, or a combination of all of 
these factors [14]. Long-term maintenance of vaccinia-specific B-cells and 
antibodies on near-constant levels is consistent with the immunological 
memory characteristics observed from epidemiological historical back-
ground of the disease – a consistency in dictating a major role for the 
humoral portion of the immune system in maintaining protective immunity 
Data indicating the importance of pre-exposure antibody levels were 
also found in an Israel Defense Forces (IDF) Medical Corps study carried 
out in the context of a revaccination campaign versus smallpox [21]. An 
inverse correlation was found between the prevaccination vaccinia specific 
antibody levels and seroconversion (fourfold rise in antibody levels) 
deduced that individuals with high initial antibody levels suppressed the 
vaccinia infection at an early stage prior to the development of clinical 
with prevaccination antibody levels of >1:20 were better protected from 
independent studies published in the early 1970s indicating that individuals 
212
from reinfection by Poxviridae viruses (Figure 3). 
cutaneous reaction (“take”) following the vaccination (Figure 4). It can be 

symptoms and without the involvement of memory cells. Similar results 
were achieved in a study carried out in the National Institute of Allergy 
and Infectious Diseases in St. Louis, USA [16].
6. 
Discussion 
The academic and emotional controversy regarding the danger and need to 
vaccinate versus smallpox has resulted in a wide reappraisal of fundamental 
issues in immunological memory development and upkeep. When Janner 
developed the smallpox vaccine, he had neither the knowledge base nor the 
molecular tools to define the mechanisms by which his vaccine induced 
immunological memory. Furthermore, the methodology of clinical record-
keeping was not sufficiently prevalent, reliable, or uniform to evaluate the 
effectiveness of the vaccine, especially given the endemicity of the 
disease. Lacking the tools to directly measure the vaccina components of 
the immune system, or the records to correlate them with protective 
immunity, the cutaneous response (“take”) was selected as the parameter 
for postvaccination development of protective immunity. Unable to evaluate 
the long-term effectiveness of the vaccine, and facing an epidemic claiming 
many lives each year, the world’s medical authorities chose to recommend 
frequent booster vaccination, a policy that remained unchanged until the 
eradication of the disease in 1979. The events of September 11 reopened 
the public discourse and led to a large number of studies reanalyzing 
epidemiological data from the heyday of the smallpox eradication 
campaign and utilizing the new molecular tools to evaluate the humoral 
and cellular parameters associated with protective immunity to smallpox. 
The juxtaposition of these conditions now permits us, without the 
constant pressure an endemic plague asserted on earlier decision maker,  
to reevaluate smallpox vaccination policy in light of the new-old data 
emerging from these studies: 
1.
Epidemiological analysis of the imported smallpox outbreaks of the 
1950s in Europe and Liverpool, England 1902, indicate that a single 
vaccination provides a protective immunity of over 93% for 20+ years 
(Figure 3) [9, 10, 11].
2.
The number of vaccinia-specific memory B-cells remains stable over 
several years in individuals who were vaccinated more than 50 years 
ago – and they in turn maintained a steady level of vaccinia-specific 
antibodies [13, 14, 17] (Figure 3). 
3.
There is a significant correlation between the outcome of vaccinia/variola 
infection and antibody levels [23, 24]. 
213
 RENEWAL OF IMMUNOLOGICALMEMORY TO SMALLPOX
www.ebook3000.com

J. BOXMAN  ET AL. 
4.
The number of vaccinia-specific T-cells declines after initial exposure 
(half-life of 14 years) but can still be recognized after several decades 
[14, 15, 17, 19]. 
5.
No direct correlation between vaccinia-specific T- and B-cell levels 
(and antibody levels) [13]. 
6.
Protective immunity to vaccinia is provided by high levels of specific 
antibodies even with no T-cell activity [12, 13, 18]. 
Although many of these findings relate to vaccinia rather than variola, the 
weight of evidence indicates that current smallpox vaccinations provide 
protection from mortality to the overwhelming majority of the population for 
Figure 3. Diminishment of immune memory in time. Data has been taken from 
two independent studies [14, 17] with similar results. All antibodies specific to 
vaccinia stabilized after the decline of the initial peak on levels that did not 
significantly change throughout life. T-cell levels, however, decline at a half-life 
of 14 [14] or 8–15 years [17]. The rate of immune protection decline has been 
calculated by Eichner [9] based on reports from Liverpool outbreak in 1902 [10] 
in the European outbreaks of 1950–1971 [11]. 
100
10
1
%
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Years since previous innoculation
Protection from
Protection from
Antibody levels
T-cells
lethal disease
severe disease
214
over 50 years. This protection is primarily mediated by memory B-cells and 
long-lived plasma cells and to some extent by T-cells, as well. What then
are the operative conclusions that may be drawn from these assumptions? 

6.1. 
VACCINATION: INDIVIDUAL AND PUBLIC HEALTH 
CONSIDERATIONS
The difficulties in establishing a direct linkage between immune 
parameters to vaccinia and mortality from variola inhibit the use of 
antibody levels/cellular activity to determine the protective immunity of an 
individual. Certainly, statistical analysis indicating low mortality in pre-
viously vaccinated individuals shall not prevent individuals from seeking 
booster vaccinations in case of a smallpox alert. However, high protective 
immunity within a previously vaccinated population subgroup may 
determine vaccination priorities during a smallpox outbreak or alert and in 
providing booster vaccinations to individuals who do not develop a “take.” 
In this context revaccinating previously vaccinated individuals in order to 
reduce side effects may be redundant since protective immunity among 
this population is already high. 
Furthermore, the implications of prolonged protective immunity on the 
speed of smallpox expansion in the general population and the public 
health interventions necessary to contain it should be considered. One of 
the primary parameters for assessing the risk of spread of smallpox in the 
general population is R0, the average number of secondary cases infected 
by a primary case. Obviously the value of R0 is directly correlated with the 
herd immunity of the exposed population. While the existing models [6, 7, 
8, 25] dispute both the R0 in historical outbreaks and the expected R0 from 
a bioterror attack on western targets all rely on the Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention (CDC) stance regarding the rapid decline of 
vaccine efficacy, and therefore estimate vaccine protective immunity at 
18% in the UK and 20% in the United States. If protective immunity 
actually persists for 30+ years as epidemiological investigations of historical 
outbreaks indicate (Chart 3), a far larger proportion of the population may be 
affected with smallpox spread being correspondingly slower. 
6.2. 
PARAMETER FOR SUCCESS OF VACCINATION  
The cutaneous reaction (“take”) to the vaccinia compound, serves as the 
sole accepted parameter for the success of smallpox vaccination. The 
“take” is apparently a combination of the immune response to vaccinia and 
damage caused from the spread of the virus and cell destruction around the 
site of inoculation. Over the past years several researchers have demonstrated 
that lack of “take” upon revaccination is not an indication for failed 
vaccination but rather of preexisting protective immunity that eliminates 
215
 RENEWAL OF IMMUNOLOGICAL MEMORY TO SMALLPOX
www.ebook3000.com

J. BOXMAN  ET AL. 
6.3. 
EVALUATING VACCINES
Among the primary causes of ending standard vaccinations to smallpox 
was the frequency of negative side effects. These side effects are strongly 
associated with the cutaneous “take” used as a parameter of the vaccine’s 
success. Accordingly, relying on the “take” to asses new vaccines that are 
supposed to reduce side effects by attenuating the virus is problematic. 
Seroconversion or T/B-cell proliferation may prove to be a better and more 
reliable parameter of judging the effectiveness of new vaccines. 
Figure 4. Effect of prevaccination titer on portion of vaccinees who undergo 
seroconversion or develop “take.” (From Orr et al. [24].) 
References
1.
CDC. 25th anniversary of the last case of naturally acquired smallpox. 
MMWR 2002; 51:952. 
2.
Eyler JM. Smallpox in history: the birth death and impact of a dread 
disease. J lab Clin Med 142(4):216–220. 
3.
Wright ME, Fauci AS. Smallpox immunization in the 21st century, the old 
and the new. JAMA Jun 25, 2003; 289(24):3306–3308. 
% Positive
100
80
60
40
20
0
<200
200-1000
>1000
Pre-vaccination titer
216
the vaccinia virus before it can multiply. Therefore, the cost benefit of 
revaccinating individuals who do not develop a “take” (40% of revaccinated 
individuals) should be reconsidered.

4.
Slifka MK. Immunological memory to viral infection. Curr Opin Immunol 
2004 Aug; 16(4):443–450. 
5.
Bray M. New data in a 200-year investigation. Clin Infect Dis 2004 Jan 1; 
38(1):90–91. Epub Dec 8, 2003. No abstract available. 
6.
Gani R, Leach S. Transmission potential of smallpox in contemporary 
populations. Nature 2001; 414:748–751. 
7.
Meltzer MI, Damon I, LeDuc JW, Millar JD. Modeling potential responses to 
smallpox as a bioterrorist weapon. Emerg Infect Dis 2001; 7:959–969.
8.
O’Toole T, Mair M, Inglesby TV. Shining light on “Dark Winter”. Clin Infect 
Dis 2002; 34:972–983. 
9.
Eichner M. Analysis of historical data suggests long-lasting protective effects 
of smallpox vaccination. Am J Epidemiol 2003; 158:717–723. 
10. Hanna W, Baxby D. Studies in smallpox and vaccination. 1913. Rev Med 
Virol 2002; 12(4):201–209. 
11. Mack TM. Smallpox in Europe, 1950–1971. J Infect Dis 1972; 125:161–169. 
12. Belyakov IM, Earl P, Dzutsev A, Kuznetsov VA, Lemon M, Wyatt LS, 
Snyder JT, Ahlers JD, Franchini G, Moss B et al. Shared modes of protection 
against poxvirus infection by attenuated and conventional smallpox vaccine 
viruses. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2003; 100:9458–9463. 
13. Edghill-Smith Y, Venzon D, Karpova T, McNally J, Nacsa J, Tsai WP, 
Tryniszewska E, Moniuszko M, Manischewitz J, King LR et al. Modeling a 
safer smallpox vaccination regimen, for human immunodeficiency virus type 
1-infected patients, in immunocompromised macaques. J Infect Dis 2003; 
188:1181–1191.
14. Crotty S, Felgner P, Davies H, Glidewell J, Villarreal L, Ahmed R. Cutting 
Edge: long-term B cell memory in humans after smallpox vaccination. J Immunol 
2003; 171:4969–4973. 
15. Demkowicz WEJ, Littaua RA, Wang J, Ennis FA. Human cytotoxic T-cell 
memory: long-lived responses to vaccinia virus. J Virol 1996; 70:2627–2631. 
16. Frey SE, Newman FK, Yan L, Belshe RB, Response to smallpox vaccine in 
persons immunized in the distant past. JAMA 2003; 289:3295–3299. 
17. Hammarlund E, Lewis MW, Hansen SG, Strelow LI, Nelson JA, Sexton 
GJ, Hanifin JM, Slifka MK. Duration of antiviral immunity after smallpox 
vaccination. Nature Medicine 2003; 9(9):1131–1137. 
18. Xu R, Johnson AJ, Liggitt D, Bevan MJ. Cellular and humoral immunity 
against vaccinia virus infection of mice. Immunol 2004 May 15; 172(10): 
6265–6271.
19. Erickson AL, Walker CM. Class I major histocompatibility complex-
restricted cytotoxic T cell responses to vaccinia virus in humans. J Gen Virol 
1993; 74:751–754. 
20. Homann D, Teyton L, Oldstone MB. Differential regulation of antiviral T-cell 
immunity results in stable CD8+ but declining CD4+ T-cell memory. Nat 
Med 2001; 7:913–919. 
217
 RENEWAL OF IMMUNOLOGICALMEMORY TO SMALLPOX
www.ebook3000.com

J. BOXMAN  ET AL. 
21. Hegde NR, Johnson DC. Human cytomegalovirus US2 causes similar effects 
on both major histocompatibility complex class I and II proteins in epithelial 
and glial cells. J Virol 2003; 77:9287–9294. 
22. Crotty S, Ahmed R. Immunological memory in humans. Semin Immunol 
2004 Jun; 16(3):197–203. Review. 
23. Mack TM, Noble J Jr, Thomas DB. A prospective study of serum antibody 
and protection against smallpox. Am J Trop Med Hyg 1972; 21:214–218. 
24. Orr N, Forman M, Marcus H, Lustig S, Paran N, Grotto I, Klement 
E,Yehezkelli Y, Robin G, Reuveny S, Shafferman A, Cohen D. Vaccinia 
Study Group, Medical Corps, Israel Defense Force; Vaccinia Study Group, 
Israel Institute for Biological Research. Clinical and immune responses after 
revaccination of Israeli adults with the Lister strain of vaccinia virus. J Infect 
Dis 2004 Oct 1; 190(7):1295–1302. Epub Aug 30, 2004.
25. Kaplan EH, Craft DL, Wein LM. Emergency response to a smallpox attack: 
the case for mass vaccination. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2002; 99:10935–10940. 
218

PREPARING FOR A SMALLPOX BIOTERRORIST 
ATTACK: PULSE VACCINATION AS AN 
OPTIMAL STRATEGY 
1
1
1
2
1Institute for Medical BioMathematics (IMBM ) 
10 Hate’ena St.; P.O.B. 282, 60991 
Bene Ataroth, Israel 
2Kipper Institute of Immunology 
Schneider Children Medical Center; FMRC 
Petach-Tikva, 49202; Israel 
1. 
Introduction 
Events of recent years have significantly increased our awareness of the 
potential threat of a bioterrorist attack, and the smallpox variola virus has 
been identified as an “eligible candidate” for a biological warfare agent. 
Epidemiological mathematical modeling has long been recognized as a 
crucial tool for assessing the repercussions of such a viral outbreak, as well 
as for comparing possible response strategies. Several studies have applied 
mathematical models with the hope of identifying an optimal vaccination 
strategy in case of an attack [1–4]. However, these particular studies do not 
formulating policies. In fact, conclusions of certain studies contradict those 
of others. 
This inconsistency may stem from simulation results’ extreme sensiti-
vity to the value assumed for the disease’s basic reproduction rate (R0) [5], 
i.e., the number of secondary infections that an infectious individual is 
expected to produce if introduced into an entirely susceptible population. 
epidemiological data on the disease, and R0 must be estimated. However, 
as this value is dependent both on biological factors and on population 
dynamics, it is extremely difficult to assess prior to an actual epidemic. 
Each of the above-mentioned studies assumes a different value for R0,
which may account for their contradictory results: a response strategy found 
© 2007 Springer.
produce clear-cut recommendations, upon which authorities can rely when 
Because smallpox was eradicated in 1979, there is a lack of current 
219
M.S. Green et al. (eds.), Risk Assessment and Risk Communication Strategies in Bioterrorism 
Preparedness, 219-229. 
Zvia Agur , Karen Marron , Hanita Shai , 
and Yehuda L. Danon
www.ebook3000.com

Z. AGUR ET AL. 
Figure 1. Simulation results of the adapted the susceptible, exposed, infectious, 
recovered (SEIR) model: Number of infected individuals over time when disease 
is introduced into the Israeli population by one infective carrier. 
Thick line: Natural disease dynamics (no vaccination strategy is implemented). 
Thin line: Disease dynamics after implementation of one-time mass vaccination
strategy (population is vaccinated at maximum capacity for 3 days following the 
attack).
to be effective in the case of a low disease transmission rate may fall short 
when faced with a higher transmission rate. 
Furthermore, there is a fundamental limitation that compromises the 
practical value of theoretical smallpox studies to date: they examine res-
ponse strategies that address only an initial epidemic, without considering 
long-term effects of the introduction of the disease into a contemporary 
population. Theory indicates that smallpox, like many other contagious 
diseases, is characterized by decaying oscillatory dynamics, i.e., periodic 
epidemics of decreasing magnitude [6]. Thus, while a given vaccination 
strategy may succeed in curbing an outbreak immediately following the 
release of the virus it may not be able to prevent additional epidemics 
several years down the line (Figure 1). Clearly, an efficient follow-up 
strategy is no less important than initial crisis aversion. Nevertheless, most 
smallpox studies either fail to mention such a strategy, or simply assume 
that the entire population will continue to be vaccinated in the years 
following the outbreak. This type of continuous vaccination policy would 
be far from optimal, as vaccinia, the smallpox vaccine, is known to cause 
serious, and even fatal, side effects. Additionally, the vaccine carries quite 
a few contraindications: for example, it is not recommended to administer 
220

it to young children [6]. Due to these significant constraints, it becomes 
evident that a general idea for a long-term vaccination strategy is 
insufficient; this strategy must be rigorously defined. Theory implies that 
efficient control of phenomena, such as smallpox transmission, which 
display clear periodicity, should involve a periodic strategy with a period 
different from that of the phenomenon being counteracted [7, 8]. 
Based on these guidelines, we examine a vaccination strategy that has 
not yet been considered in the context of response to a smallpox bioterrorist 
attack: pulse vaccination, i.e., periodic vaccination of certain percentages 
of the susceptible population following attack. The pulse strategy has 
previously been proposed as an efficient method for measles eradication 
[9, 10]. In addition to its theoretically proven efficacy, this strategy also 
enables flexibility: the number of people vaccinated and the duration of 
time between vaccination campaigns (inter-vaccination interval) can be 
varied according to arising circumstances. This flexibility is crucial when 
dealing with a situation as sensitive as a smallpox bioterrorist attack, with 
so many unknown and unpredictable factors, e.g., the disease’s actual 
basic reproduction rate, the population’s response to an outbreak and will-
ingness to comply with vaccination campaigns, available vaccine stockpile, 
vaccine efficacy, etc. 
In this study, we compare the pulse vaccination strategy to two known 
smallpox response strategies: (i) preliminary vaccination, i.e., vaccination 
of a certain percentage of the population prior to the attack; (ii) one-time
mass vaccination, in which most of the population is vaccinated im-
mediately following the attack. Additional vaccination strategies that have 
been considered for smallpox protection are trace and ring vaccination, in
which vaccination is limited to close contacts of infected individuals. 
Though these approaches are potentially effective in large countries [11], 
they are not considered feasible in small countries with high population 
density such as Israel, and therefore we did not include them in our study. 
To compare the performance of the different vaccination strategies 
under a wide range of conditions, we adapted the susceptible, exposed, 
infectious, recovered (SEIR) epidemiological model [6] to describe the 
effects of a smallpox bioterrorist attack on the Israeli population over a 
period of 10 years. We simulate and compare the different vaccination 
strategies under the constraints of low compliance, insufficient vaccine 
stockpile, contraindications, side effects, cost of vaccination, etc. In order 
to obtain robust conclusions, we evaluate the performance of each studied 
vaccination strategy over a wide range of potential basic reproduction rate 
(R0) values (1.5  R0  30).
221
PREPARING FOR A SMALLPOX BIOTERRORIST ATTACK
www.ebook3000.com

Z. AGUR ET AL. 
It is important to note that though these simulations were carried out 
with smallpox in mind, the results are applicable to almost any infectious 
disease.
2. 
Mathematical Modeling 
We adapted a classic SEIR model for the transmission of an infectious 
disease in a spatially heterogeneous population [6]. We assume that the 
smallpox virus is introduced into the Israeli population by one infective 
carrier. The model takes into account three stages of infection [12], 
assuming that each stage has a constant duration (d1, d2, and d3 in Table 1 
respectively): (1) infected, noninfective, and vaccine sensitive; (2) infec-
ted, noninfective, vaccine-insensitive; (3) infected and infective. We define 
the basic transmission rate as: 
3
0
Nd
R
 
E
, where N is the initial population 
size. A certain fraction of infective cases die of the disease, and the 
remaining fraction eventually recovers, becoming immune to reinfection. 
recovery from the disease [13]. 
TABLE 1. Model parameters 
Parameter
Value 
Unit 
Reference
Initial susceptible population 
6,439,200 
Individuals 
 
Initial infective population 
1
Individual 
 
Birth rate 
9e–4
Death rate 
9e–4
First stage disease duration (d1) 
4  
Days 
[12] 
Second stage disease duration (d2) 
13 
Days 
[12] 
Third stage disease duration (d3) 
21 
Days 
[12] 
Disease fatality rate 
0.3 
 
[12]
Vaccine fatality rate 
10–6
 
[12] 
Rate of non-fatal vaccination side 
effects
0.001 
 
[12] 
Maximum daily vaccination capacity 
1.8e6 
Individuals 
 
Duration of pulse vaccination 
campaign
3 
Days 
 
We examine three vaccination policies as follows: (i) Preliminary 
vaccination: Different percentages of the population are vaccinated prior to 
attack, from 0% to 100% in increments of 5%; (ii) One-time mass 
vaccination: We define a “maximum vaccination capacity,” i.e., the 
The model does not consider loss of immunity following vaccination or
222

maximum number of people that can be vaccinated per day (Table 1). The 
percentage of capacity utilized (PCU) is varied between 0% and 100% in 
increments of 5%, and the duration of the vaccination campaign is varied 
between 1 and 15 days in increments of 1 day; (iii) Pulse vaccination:
PCU is varied from 0% to 100% in increments of 5%, and the interval 
between cycles is varied from 50 to 2000 days in increments of 50 days. 
Due to computational considerations, the duration of periodic vaccination 
campaigns is set as constant (3 days). 
When applying one-time mass vaccination or pulse vaccination 
strategies, priority is given to individuals who have been exposed to the 
disease but can still be effectively vaccinated. 
3. 
Strategy Assessment: The “Cost” of An Outbreak 
Theoretically, continuous vaccination of the entire population would be a 
foolproof means of preventing disease outbreak. However, as previously 
mentioned, this would not be the optimal strategy, due to the constraints 
imposed by the vaccinia vaccine [12]. In addition, it would probably not be 
reasonable to expect full compliance, especially over a long period of time 
after the initial outbreak. Therefore, an optimal strategy should not only 
prevent disease outbreak, but should allow as few individuals as possible 
to be vaccinated. 
Vaccinating fewer individuals will not only prevent side effects, but will 
be less disruptive to routine. Thus, in order to assess the efficacy of a 
particular strategy, we determine a “cost,” which takes into account the 
following factors: (i) number of deaths by infection (Dinf); (ii) number of 
infections(I); (iii) number of people vaccinated (Nvac); (iv) number of deaths 
resulting from vaccination (Dvac); (v) non-fatal side effects of vaccination 
(E); and (vi) a “stress factor”: number of post-attack vaccinations performed 
per day (S).
Each factor is attributed a “weight,” and the cost C is calculated as 
follows:
7
inf
vac
vac
W
W
C
(WD
I
N
E
2WD
)(1 Se ).
2
10

 





Where W is an “anchor weight,” which represents the ratio between the 
weight of death by infection and the number of vaccinees. This value can 
be interpreted as the number of individuals a country is willing to vaccinate 
in order to save one life. Clearly, the resulting cost is closely dependent on 
the value of these weights. Therefore, to obtain robust results, we run 
simulations over a wide range of “anchor weights” (range: 1–10,000). 
223
PREPARING FOR A SMALLPOX BIOTERRORIST ATTACK
www.ebook3000.com

Z. AGUR ET AL. 
Model parameters are presented in Table 1, where demographic para-
meters apply to the Israeli population. Additional parameter values, such as 
disease phase duration, etc. are taken from classic references. Clearly, 
disease and vaccine fatality rates are extremely influential when determining 
the trade-off between the number of vaccinees and the number of deaths by 
disease. The model’s possible sensitivity to these parameters is accounted 
for by varying the “anchor weight” applied when computing the cost (see 
above). As previously mentioned, a crucial parameter for assessing the 
effects of an outbreak is R0. However, this parameter is also extremely 
difficult to estimate, as it is dependent on dynamic factors, such as 
socioeconomic conditions [6, 12]. The basic transmission rate of smallpox 
has been estimated between 3 and 10 [14, 15], and values implemented in 
studies vary between 1.5 and 15 [2, 3]. Instead of assuming a single value 
for R0, we run simulations over a wide range of values, which vary 
between 1.5 and 30. 
3.1. 
RESULTS 
As previously described, we simulated and compared various applications 
of preliminary, one-time mass vaccination, and pulse vaccination strate-
gies. Each simulated strategy design produced a final cost, a low cost 
signifying an efficient strategy, and a relatively high cost signifying an 
inefficient strategy. Figure 2 presents the distribution of costs attained by 
each strategy simulated, for several values of R0. Different costs for the 
same strategy are achieved by varying strategy design (e.g., a preliminary
vaccination strategy in which 75% of the population is vaccinated may 
produce a lower cost than a preliminary strategy in which only 20% of the 
population is vaccinated). Figure 2 indicates that for R0 t1.5, all three 
vaccination strategies tested can potentially be efficient: if properly 
designed, they can reduce “cost” to zero. However, for R0 ! 1.5, pulse
vaccination is the only strategy that succeeds in minimizing cost. This 
result holds true even for R0 ! 10, i.e., beyond the range of values that have 
been estimated. The same qualitative results are obtained even when the 
“anchor weight” is varied, provided that the weight chosen indicates 
vaccination to be preferable over non-vaccination (Figure 3). 
224

Figure 2. Costs produced by each simulated vaccination strategy for several 
values of R0. Strategies tested: preliminary vaccination (squares), one-time mass 
vaccination (triangles), and pulse vaccination (circles). Different costs for the 
same strategy are obtained by varying strategy design. 
Though pulse vaccination can potentially be an effective strategy, 
inappropriate strategy design is likely to produce high costs (Figure 2). 
Therefore it is crucial to identify the optimal strategy design, in terms of 
PCU and the interval between “pulses.” Figure 4 presents graphs of cost as 
a function of PCU and interval between pulses for several values of R0.
3.2.
PULSE VACCINATION: FINDING THE OPTIMAL DESIGN 
225
PREPARING FOR A SMALLPOX BIOTERRORIST ATTACK
www.ebook3000.com

Z. AGUR ET AL. 
Figure 3. Costs produced by each simulated vaccination strategy for several 
values of the anchor weight (W = 3; 10; 100; R0 is 3.5). As in Figure 2, strategies 
tested are preliminary vaccination (squares),
one-time mass vaccination 
(triangles), and pulse vaccination (circles). Note that for W = 3, pulse vaccination 
is not more efficient than other strategies, but at the same time non-vaccination is 
as efficient as vaccination. For larger W values, pulse vaccination is more 
efficient.
As is evident from these graphs, for each R0 value there is a “zone” 
(shaded areas) in which costs are low, and outside of which costs rise 
suddenly. This zone is defined by a diagonal contour, which means that 
there is a critical ratio of PCU to interval between pulses above which the 
pulse strategy will effectively reduce costs, and below which the strategy 
is inefficient. This critical ratio increases in direct relation to R0 (Figure 5). 
226

Figure 4. Pulse vaccination: Cost as a function of percent vaccination capacity 
utilized and interval (in days) between pulses, for several R0 values. There is a 
critical ratio (diagonal contour) between the two, above which the strategy will be 
effective (shaded area) and below which costs rise suddenly. 
Figure 5. There is a critical ratio of percent vaccination capacity utilized to 
interval between pulses that must be exceeded in order for a pulse strategy to be 
effective. In graph: Critical ratio as a function of R0.
227
PREPARING FOR A SMALLPOX BIOTERRORIST ATTACK
www.ebook3000.com

Z. AGUR ET AL. 
4. 
Discussion 
Our study suggests that compared to one-time mass vaccination and prelim-
inary vaccination, pulse vaccination, i.e., multiple vaccination campaigns 
with precisely calculated inter-vaccination intervals, is by far the most 
promising strategy for ensuring long-term population protection against 
smallpox. Simulations show that while one-time mass vaccination and
preliminary vaccination may be effective vaccination strategies for a virus 
with a low basic reproduction rate (R0 d 1.5), a pulse vaccination strategy
can be designed so as to prevent disease outbreak for a broad range of R0
values, and over a long period of time. We analyzed the effect of the two 
crucial pulse strategy parameters – namely the coverage level and the 
inter-vaccination intervals – on the final “cost” of the outbreak, and 
reached the conclusion that there exists a critical ratio between the percent 
of vaccination capacity utilized and the interval between vaccination 
campaigns above which the strategy will be effective, and below which the 
“cost” of attack will rise suddenly. 
These results may carry significant implications for countries planning a 
response to a smallpox bioterrorist attack, or to an outbreak of any disease 
for which a vaccine exists, but about which little else is known. They 
indicate that given the realistic range of the disease’s basic reproduction 
rate and the estimated compliance level, authorities can design a detailed, 
optimal vaccination plan for years to come. This plan would be extremely 
flexible and robust: if unexpected circumstances should arise, e.g., in-
sufficient stockpiles or low compliance, maximum protection could still be 
ensured by modifying the interval between vaccination campaigns, or the 
number of people vaccinated at each campaign. Additionally, the pulse 
strategy would enable authorities to test their facilities, e.g., by initially 
vaccinating first responders, and only later the general public. This 
preparation would allow them to draw conclusions for further campaigns, 
increasing overall efficiency. 
Clearly, for both bureaucratic and psychological reasons, the 
government of a country may prefer to provide a mass or preliminary 
vaccination policy. The pulse strategy would not have to replace either of 
these strategies. Rather, it could be used as a backup strategy, and as a 
long-term policy, which would probably become increasingly necessary, 
as compliance may decrease after initial panic subsides. The critical ratio 
between the percent capacity utilized and the interval between pulses 
offers authorities quite a bit of leeway when deciding upon the timing and 
the magnitude of these campaigns. 
228

This work was supported in part by the Chai Foundation, and in part by the 
Israeli Defense Forces. 
1.
Meltzer MI, Damon I, LeDuc JW, Millar JD. Modeling potential responses to 
smallpox as a bioterrorist weapon. Emerg Infect Dis 2001; 7:959–969. 
2.
Kaplan EH, Craft DL, Wein LM. Emergency response to a smallpox attack: 
the case for mass vaccination. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2002; 99:10935–
10940.
3.
Bozette SA, Boer R, Bhatnagar V, Brower JL, Keeler E, Morton SC,  
et al. A model for a smallpox-vaccination policy. N Engl J Med 2002; 
348:416–425.
4.
Halloran ME, Longini IM, Nizham A, Yang Y. Containing bioterrorist 
smallpox. Science 2002; 298:1428–1432. 
5.
Ferguson NM, Keeling MJ, Edmunds WJ, Gani R, Grenfell BT, Anderson 
RM et al. Nature. Planning for smallpox outbreaks 2003; 425:681–685. 
6.
Anderson RM, May RM. Infectious diseases of humans: dynamics and 
control. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1991. 
7.
Agur, Z. Randomness, synchrony and population persistence. J Theor Biol 
1985; 112:677–693. 
8.
Agur, Z. Resonance and anti-resonance in the design of chemotherapeutic 
protocols. J Theor Med 1998; 1:237–245. 
9.
Agur Z, Cojocaru L, Mazor G, Anderson RM, Danon YL. Pulse mass measles 
vaccination across age cohorts. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1993; 90:11698–
11702.
10. Shulgin B, Stone L, Agur Z. Pulse vaccination strategy in the SIR epidemic 
model. Bull Math Biol 1998; 60(6):1123–1148. 
11. Fraser C, Riley S, Anderson RM, Ferguson N. Factors that make an infectious 
disease outbreak controllable. PNAS 2004; 101:6146–6151. 
12. Fenner F, Henderson DA, Arita I, Jezek Z, Ladnyi ID. Smallpox and its 
eradication. Geneva: World Health Organization, 1988. 
13. Eichner M. Analysis of historical data suggests long-lasting protective effects 
of smallpox vaccination. Am J Epidemiol 2003; 158:717–723. 
14. Gani R, Leach S. Transmission potential of smallpox in contemporary 
populations. Nature 2001; 414:748–751. 
15. Eichner M, Dietz K. Transmission potential of smallpox: estimates based on 
detailed data from an outbreak. Am J Epidemiol 2003; 158:110–117. 
229
PREPARING FOR A SMALLPOX BIOTERRORIST ATTACK
References
Acknowledgments
www.ebook3000.com

ADDITIONAL ABSTRACTS

Center for Risk Analysis, Gertner Institute, Sheba Medical Center 
and Tel Aviv University
Of course, good, high level real-time risk assessments are indispensable 
as far as reliable risk communication is concerned. 
Main approaches and methodologies for a priori deterministic and 
probabilistic risk assessment for bioterror attacks will be discussed, 
illustrating their major influence on emergency planning and preparedness. 
Definitions/descriptions, as distinct as possible, of design basis events 
(to be distinguished from beyond design basis events), are essential for 
emergency planning. Consequence modeling of the various potential 
bioterror events will possibly lead to their optimal classification/ranking 
according to severity and likelihood. One of the most crucial, rather 
urgent, tasks in case of a bioterror event, is not only to properly identify the 
particular bio-agent involved in the attack, but also to estimate the size and 
severity of the event, i.e, inter alia, the bio-agent’s main modes of dispersion 
and hence, public exposures. Such estimations serve as vital tools for any 
decision-making process, concerning the optimal measures to be taken in 
order to minimize exposures of members of the public and the population 
at large to the bio-agent. The enormous variety of potential modes of bio-
terror attacks, may lead to significant gaps and differences between real-
time and a priori risk assessments. Real-time risk assessment methodologies 
will be discussed, emphasizing the fact that they should be designed to 
provide experts with maximum flexibility to fit them to any particular, 
rather unpredictable, circumstances.
A PRIORI VERSUS A POSTERIORI RISK 
ASSESSMENT FOR BIOTERROR ATTACK
Eli Stern
233
www.ebook3000.com

appropriate responses. Of these, the least innovation and least promising 
would be a familiar rehearsal of the benefits of global arms control treaties. 
Not only are terrorists not party to these treaties; some state leakers are 
also not parties to all of them; some are, but their signature is effectively 
worthless.
Chemical and biological materials pose a growing threat. They share 
with the nuclear weapons the awful potential of being used in a single 
attack to inflict mass casualties. While rapid growth and scientific 
advances in the biotechnology sector hold out the prospect of prevention 
and cure for many diseases, they also increase opportunities for the 
States parties to the Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention (BTWC) 
should without delay return to negotiations for a credible verification 
protocol, inviting the active participation of the biotechnology industry. 
These states must also increase bilateral diplomatic pressure to universalize 
membership. Furthermore, finding approaches that support, complement, 
and reinforce the BWC without going back to failed initiatives is a real 
challenge.
Biotechnology is a fast-changing field. Convergence of factors gives 
great cause for concern. Biotech companies are not only large 
pharmaceuticals, but also small units of creative, unregulated scientists, 
rather like in information technology (IT), brilliantly pushing the scientific 
frontiers, but in many cases lacking the maturity to think through 
consequences.
development of deadly new ones. That a high-damage attack has not 
occurred is not a cause for complacency, but a call for urgent prevention. 
Greater awareness of the nature of the threat of super-terrorism since 
September 11 logically demands more serious consideration of the 
The Middle East faces all kinds of security threats. One major threat is the 
widespread escalation of conventional military hardware and the 
proliferation of WMD and their delivery systems.
Director, The cooperative Monitoring Center — Amman
235
OF MASS DESTRUCTION ON THE STABILITY 
IN THE MIDDLE EAST
IMPACT OF THE PROLIFERATION OF WEAPONS
M.K. Shiyyab

cherish their common heritage that is dominated by rationalism and sanity, 
free from religious and nationalistic fanaticism. 
Much depends on our willingness to look at the broader causes of 
terrorism, discourage state terrorism and failed regimes, and avoid 
becoming committed to the wrong regimes and wrong causes. 
The Middle East should emerge as peaceful, multinational and 
multicultural region where people respect each other’s separate identity yet 
Terrorism attacks the values that lie at the heart of the Charter of the 
United Nations: respect for human rights; the rule of law; rules of war that 
protect civilians; tolerance among peoples and nations; and the peaceful 
resolution of conflict. Terrorism flourishes in environments of despair, 
humiliation, poverty, political oppression, extremism, and human rights 
abuse; it also flourishes in contexts of regional conflict and foreign 
occupation; and it profits from weak state capacity to maintain law and 
order.
In the Middle East, the best counterterrorism strategy should buy time 
and reduce the scale of the problem. It does not bring stability and security 
in the face of the broader problems in the region unless a political solution 
has been achieved. A major breakthrough in the Arab–Israeli conflict and a 
stable Iraq could change the rules very rapidly. 
236
M.K. SHIYYAB
www.ebook3000.com

Risk Assessment and Risk Communication
Strategies in Bioterrorism Preparedness

NATO Security through Science Series
This Series presents the results of scientific meetings supported under the NATO
Programme for Security through Science (STS).
Meetings supported by the NATO STS Programme are in security-related priority areas of
Defence Against Terrorism or Countering Other Threats to Security. The types of meeting
supported are generally "Advanced Study Institutes" and "Advanced Research
Workshops". The NATO STS Series collects together the results of these meetings. The
meetings are co-organized by scientists from NATO countries and scientists from NATO's
"Partner" or "Mediterranean Dialogue" countries. The observations and recommendations
made at the meetings, as well as the contents of the volumes in the Series, reflect those of
participants and contributors only; they should not necessarily be regarded as reflecting
NATO views or policy.
Advanced Study Institutes (ASI) are high-level tutorial courses to convey the latest
developments in a subject to an advanced-level audience
Advanced Research Workshops (ARW) are expert meetings where an intense but
informal exchange of views at the frontiers of a subject aims at identifying directions for
future action 
Following a transformation of the programme in 2004 the Series has been re-named and
re-organised. Recent volumes on topics not related to security, which result from meetings
supported under the programme earlier, may be found in the NATO Science Series.
Sub-Series
D. Information and Communication Security
IOS Press
IOS Press
http://www.nato.int/science
http://www.iospress.nl
Springer
Springer
E. Human and Societal Dynamics
Springer
http://www.springer.com
The Series is published by IOS Press, Amsterdam, and Springer, Dordrecht, in conjunction
 with the NATO Public Diplomacy Division.
A. Chemistry and Biology
C. Environmental Security
B. Physics and Biophysics
Series A: Chemistry and Biology 
www.ebook3000.com

edited by
Published in cooperation with NATO Public Diplomacy Division
Risk Assessment and Risk
Israel
Israel
Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer-Sheva,
Israel
and
in Bioterrorism Preparedness
Communication Strategies 
Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University,
Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, 
Israel
Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, Baltimore, MD,
Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University,
Itay Wiser
Dani Cohen
Jonathan Zenilman 
Manfred S. Green
Ran D. Balicer
U.S.A.

A C.I.P. Catalogue record for this book is available from the Library of Congress.
Published by Springer,
Printed on acid-free paper
All Rights Reserved
in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, microfilming,
of any material supplied specifically for the purpose of being entered
and executed on a computer system, for exclusive use by the purchaser of the work.
No part of this work may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted
Proceedings of the NATO Advanced Research Workshop on
June, 2005
© 2007 Springer
www.springer.com
P.O. Box 17, 3300 AA Dordrecht, The Netherlands.
recording or otherwise, without written permission from the Publisher, with the exception
ISBN 978-1-4020-5807-3 (PB)
ISBN 978-1-4020-5806-6 (HB)
ISBN 978-1-4020-5808 -0 (e-book)
Ein-Gedi, Israel 
Risk Assessment and Risk Communication in Bioterrorism
www.ebook3000.com

CONTENTS 
Part I 
RISK ASSESSMENT ............................................................... 1 
1. INTRODUCTION TO BIOTERRORISM RISK  
ASSESSMENT..................................................................................... 3 
2. SOME PUBLIC HEALTH PERSPECTIVES  
ON QUANTITATIVE RISK ASSESSMENTS  
FOR BIOTERRORISM.................................................................... 19 
3. SITUATIONAL AWARENESS IN A BIOTERROR ATTACK  
4. THE BIOTERRORISM THREAT.................................................. 45 
5. CHANGE OF MIND-SET FOLLOWING 9/11: THE FEW THAT 
ARE ALREADY WILLING TO RESORT TO WEAPONS  
OF MASS DESTRUCTION ............................................................. 55 
Yoram Schweitzer 
6. ANTIMICROBIAL PROPHYLAXIS AND PROVIDING 
SUBACUTE CARE IN THE CONTEXT  
OF A BIOTERRORISM EVENT: LESSONS LEARNED  
FROM 2001................................................................................. 67 
Jonathan Zenilman 
7. DETECTING AND RESPONDING TO BIOTERRORISM ........ 77 
Janet Martha Blatny 
8. SPECIES-NEUTRAL DISEASE SURVEILLANCE:  
A FOUNDATION OF RISK ASSESSMENT  
AND COMMUNICATION............................................................... 93 
David R. Franz 
 
 
 
Ran D. Balicer and Itay Wiser 
Edward H. Kaplan and Johan Walden 
Yair Sharan 
VIA PROBABILITY MODELING ................................................. 31 
Preface ..................................................................................................... . ix
Steve Leach 

vi
CONTENTS
Part II 
RISK COMMUNICATION................................................. 101 
9. INTRODUCTION TO BIOTERRORISM RISK  
COMMUNICATION ...................................................................... 103 
Itay Wiser and Ran D. Balicer 
10. RISK COMMUNICATION TO HEALTH-CARE  
WORKERS AS A RISK REDUCTION MEASURE  
Yoav Yehezkelli, Yoram Amsalem, and Adi Aran 
11. ANTHRAX-EURONET AND BEYOND – CHALLENGES  
12. RISK COMMUNICATION AND PUBLIC BEHAVIOR  
IN EMERGENCIES........................................................................ 131 
Yair Amikam 
13. PREVENTION STRATEGIES AND PROMOTING 
PSYCHOLOGICAL RESILIENCE TO BIOTERRORISM 
Anne Speckhard 
14. RISK COMMUNICATION AND THE COMMUNITY  
RESPONSE TO A BIOTERRORIST ATTACK: THE ROLE  
A.K.A. “THE INFORMAL SECTOR” ......................................... 163 
Marjorie Pollack 
15. INFORMATION SYSTEMS FOR RISK  
COMMUNICATION RELATED TO BIOTERRORISM .......... 177 
Manfred S. Green and Zalamn Kaufman 
Part III 
16. RISK ASSESSMENT IN SMALLPOX BIOTERRORIST 
AGGRESSION................................................................................. 195 
Marian Negut 
MEMORY TO SMALLPOX: USE OF NEW TOOLS  
YIELDS OLD RESULTS .......................................................... 205 
Jonathan Boxman, Itay Wiser, and Nadav Orr 
 
IN BIOTERRORISM...................................................................... 117 
OF SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH ON HIGH RISK AGENTS ....... 123 
THROUGH COMMUNICATION................................................. 135 
OF AN INTERNET-BASED EARLY WARNING SYSTEM  
Amanda J. Ozin and Stephen H.E. Kaufmann 
FOCUS ON SMALLPOX .................................................... 193 
17. RENEWAL OF IMMUNOLOGICAL
www.ebook3000.com

 
CONTENTS  
 vii
18. PREPARING FOR A SMALLPOX BIOTERRORIST  
ATTACK: PULSE VACCINATION  
Zvia Agur, Karen Marron, Hanita Shai, and Yehuda L. Danon 
19. A PRIORI VERSUS A POSTERIORI RISK ASSESSMENT  
Eli Stern  
20. IMPACT OF THE PROLIFERATION OF WEAPONS  
OF MASS DESTRUCTION ON THE STABILITY  
M.K. Shiyyab 
THE HEALTH-CARE SYSTEM FOR BIOTERRORISM  
Meir Oren 
ANTIBACTERIAL AGENTS AND THEIR TIME-KILL 
Abed Athamna and Ethan Rubinstein 
23. NATURAL OR INTENTIONAL FOOD CONTAMINATION? 
Daniel Cohen 
24. BIOTERRORISM EMERGENCY RESPONSE:  
Eric. K. Noji 
25. PREPAREDNESS AND RESPONSE FOR BIOTERRORISM 
Jeremy sobel 
26. RISK COMMUNICATION AND PSYCHOLOGICAL  
IMPACT: TECHNOLOGICAL AND OPERATIONAL 
Michael J. Hopmeier 
AS AN OPTIMAL STRATEGY .................................................. 219 
IN THE MIDDLE EAST .............................................................. 235 
AND NATURAL EPIDEMICS .................................................... 237
ACTIVITY  .................................................................................... 239
HOW CAN WE KNOW?  ............................................................ 241
CURRENT CONCEPTS AND CONTROVERSIES  ................ 243
INVOLVING THE FOOD SUPPLY ........................................... 245 
METHODS OF MITIGATION ................................................... 247
22. SUSCEPTIBILITY OF B. ANTHRACIS TO VARIOUS 
21. THE ROLE OF RISK ASSESSMENT IN PREPARING  
ADDITIONAL ABSTRACTS  ........................................................... 231
FOR BIOTERROR ATTACK ..................................................... 233

PREFACE
Biological weapons have been used since ancient history, mostly by armies 
in the field of battle, or in siege. Following the rapid development of bio-
logical weapons in the 20th century, bioterrorism became a new reality. In 
recent years, several incidents have occurred; perhaps the most dramatic was 
that of the anthrax envelopes in the United States in 2001. Bioterrorism can 
cause damage both directly and indirectly. The first and obvious damage is 
illness and death caused by the agent used. However, this may be a relatively 
minor part of the overall damage. Public anxiety and fear resulting from a 
bioterrorist event can have a devastating effect on the society. In dealing 
with bioterrorism, comprehensive risk assessment is necessary to ensure 
that the resources needed to deal with the incident are available. In 
addition, an effective risk communication plan must be developed in 
advance.
Risk assessment is essential to determine and prioritize potential future 
vulnerabilities based on solid facts. Careful analysis will help quantify the 
impact of possible countermeasures on the existing risks. The process of 
risk assessment includes creating possible scenarios of bioterrorism using 
present knowledge of the organisms that may be used, the preferred 
targets, methods of spread, etc. This is followed by an assessment of the 
likelihood of different scenarios, based on both the motivation of different 
terrorist groups and their capabilities in terms of laboratory knowledge, 
pathogens held, and distribution abilities. In the risk assessment, con-
sequences of possible scenarios can be estimated using methods of exposure 
assessment, data on natural epidemics, and from laboratory studies. The 
possible countermeasures against a bioterrorist event can be examined in 
the risk assessment models, and chosen accordingly. 
Since the goal of bioterrorism is to spread fear and panic among the 
public, effective risk communication is essential. Risk communication is a 
field that analyses and suggests alternative ways to communicate with the 
public in times of crisis and public risk. Good risk communication 
practices that are applied early and continually can help mitigate the panic 
and direct the public toward constructive steps thus helping them to deal 
with the consequences of a bioterrorist incident. 
In light of the risks presented by the increasing threat of bioterrorism, 
we proposed that a North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) Advanced 
Research Workshop on the subject of “The role of risk assessment and risk 
communication in bioterrorism” be held in Israel. The aim of the workshop 
was to generate discussion among leading experts in the field of risk 
www.ebook3000.com

assessment, risk communication, and bioterrorism in order to form new 
strategies and improve present strategies to deal with a bioterrorist threat. 
We hoped to create an interdisciplinary, multinational group to further 
discuss and develop risk assessment and communication policy, and 
applications. The workshop was held in the city of Eilat, situated between 
Jordan in the east and Egypt in the west. 
In the course of three days, current knowledge and future trends 
concerning risk management in bioterrorism were presented. The heart of 
the workshop was the discussion groups that took place at the end of each 
session. The final day of the workshop was dedicated to preparing a 
summary document containing the main points discussed and a plan for 
future research and development of risk management strategies. This book 
contains the papers that resulted from the workshop and it should be an 
invaluable reference for all involved in countering bioterrorism. 
Manfred S Green and Jonathan Zenilman 
Co-directors of the Workshop 
PREFACE
x

Part III 
FOCUS ON SMALLPOX
www.ebook3000.com

An exceptional biological incident, whether natural or an intentional act of 
bioterrorism, presents a challenge at the national level primarily for the 
health-care system, although not for it alone. 
A review of the various agents, bacteria, viruses, and toxins, and the 
three categories classified by the American Centers for Disease Control 
(CDC) would suffice to denote threatening factors and possible scenarios. 
A system’s preparedness for coping successfully under such circums-
tances can be tested by its structural and process components, and by 
results – how well the system coped successfully, or failed to cope, with a 
given exceptional biological incident situation. 
Successful containment is dependent on an efficient public heath-care 
system; a monitoring system that is sufficiently sensitive and specific to 
detect and identify exceptional morbidity in real time or near real time;
lization system with a good and flexible comprehensive hospitalization
operational capability; a network of First Responders; and cooperative and
M.D., M.SC., M.P.H. Director General,
The Hillel-Yaffe Medical Center, Israel 
Chairman, The National Committee of Hospital Preparedness 
for Biological Exceptional Scenario (BW, Bioterrorism),
The Ministry of Health 
oren@hy.health.gov.il
a good primary health-care system in the community; an efficient hospita-
organizational functions, and personnel.
237
THE ROLE OF RISK ASSESSMENT IN PREPARING
BIOTERRORISM AND NATURAL EPIDEMICS
THE HEALTH-CARE SYSTEM FOR
Meir  Oren
The response capability of the public-health system is tested when the 
need arises for: an intensive epidemiological investigation on a large scale; 
a mass immunization project or a rapid distribution of drugs to an extensive 
population in a very short space of time; coordination between the various 
components of the health-care system, between the various components of 
each of the diverse agencies that interface with it, and between each of 
these agencies with the health-care system; development of the capability 

to hospitalize on a large-scale, even under conditions of isolation necessary 
to cope with any epidemic-generating agent; or to provide long-term mecha-
nical respiration for a large number of patients, including children. The 
mix of public and private hospitalization services is critically significant 
when defining the hospitalization response capability at the regional and 
national levels, as is coping with emergency situations and preventing 
panic, at the national level, among the general public, as well as among 
public health personnel. 
Preparedness and readiness for an exceptional biological incident from 
natural causes is a prerequisite for success in coping with an intentional 
incident of any kind due to bioterrorism since successful differential 
diagnosis between natural as opposed to nonnatural causes is very proble-
matic, while attempts to provide different solutions for either case are not 
recommended for reasons of logistics and intelligence analysis. 
Managing the imparting of know-how, maintaining operational alertness 
and readiness, real time or near real time monitoring of exceptional diseases, 
immediate intervention of public health agencies, and ensuring hospitali-
zation surge capacity at times of crisis are all essential at the national level. 
The degree of readiness during an emergency is modular and is made up 
of layer upon layer: readiness for an ordinary mass-injury incident, a 
toxicological or a chemical incident, a biological or a radiological incident, 
and various combinations of them all. 
Successful containment is conditional on ongoing, thorough, and com-
prehensive implementation by the health-care system, as well as by the 
whole gamut of systems that interface with it, and in the successful 
coordination between all these bodies. 
238
M. OREN
www.ebook3000.com

1
2
1The Triangle Research and Development Center, Kfar-
Qaraa, Israel and 2Infectious Diseases Unit, Sheba Medical 
Center, Tel Aviv University School of Medicine, Tel Hashomer, 
Israel
Anthrax has been the recent focus of attention as a potential biological 
warfare agent. It has been estimated that 50 kg of Bacillus anthracis spores 
released upwind over a population center of 500,000 would result in up to 
95,000 fatalities, with an additional 123,000 persons incapacitated from 
inhalational anthrax. 
Methods of prevention of inhalational anthrax include: protective masks 
capable of filtering 1–5 µm particles, appropriate sheltering, use of pre- 
and postexposure vaccination, and preventive and therapeutic antibiotic 
regimens. Recently in the United States, antibiotic prophylaxis has been 
administered to 32,000 individuals suspected to have been exposed to 
anthrax. Until the recent bioterror attack in the United States, the 
recommended antibiotics had not been tested in cases of human anthrax 
but only in a monkey model with doses of ciprofloxacin, doxycycline, and 
penicillin mimicking human pharmacokinetics. 
The importance of antibiotic prophylaxis received special interest, mainly 
because of the current shortage of vaccine and lack of commercially 
available toxin-neutralizing agents (antitoxins). 
Although the in vitro susceptibility of representative B. anthracis strains 
has been tested using a wide variety of antibiotics, little is known about the 
rate of bacterial killing by these agents. 
It is accepted that the emergence of antibiotic resistance is a global 
phenomenon that is on the increase and is partially related to extensive 
antibiotic usage. Moreover, resistant mutants may depend on the rate of 
bacterial killing; the more rapid the kill rate the less likely the chance for 
the emergence of resistant strains. In addition, rapid killing may diminish 
bacterial toxin formation, and thus reduce resulting tissue damage.
239
Abed Athamna  and Ethan Rubinstein
SUSCEPTIBILITY OF B. ANTHRACIS TO VARIOUS
ANTIBACTERIAL AGENTS AND THEIR TIME–KILL
ACTIVITY

such as other fluoroquinolones, amoxicillin, rifampicin, and quinupristin/ 
dalfopristin, as potential therapeutic agents.
References
1.
Athamna A, Athamna M, Nura A, Shlyakov E, Bast DJ, Farrell D, Rubinstein 
E. Is in vitro antibiotic combination more effective than single-drug therapy 
against anthrax? Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2005; 49:1323–1325. 
2.
Athamna A, Athamna M, Abu-Rashed N, Medlej B, Bast DJ, Rubinstein  
E. Selection of Bacillus anthracis isolates resistant to antibiotics. J Antimicrob 
Chemother 2004; 54:424–428. 
3.
Athamna A, Athamna M, Medlej B, Bast DJ, Rubinstein E. In vitro post-
antibiotic effect of fluoroquinolones, macrolides, beta-lactams, tetracyclines, 
vancomycin, clindamycin, linezolid, chloramphenicol, quinupristin/dalfopristin 
and rifampicin on Bacillus anthracis. J Antimicrob Chemother 2004; 53:609–
615.
4.
Athamna A, Massalha M, Athamna M, Nura A, Medlej B, Ofek I, Bast  
D, Rubinstein E. In vitro susceptibility of Bacillus anthracis to various 
antibacterial agents and their time-kill activity. J Antimicrob Chemother 2004; 
53:247–251.
3.
The results of our studies expand on the current spectrum of agents 
recommended for the treatment of anthrax and add several new options, 
In our studies [1–4] we determined the susceptibility and the rate of kill 
240
B. anthracis (STi and Sterne). In addition, selection of resistant isolates 
was addressed too. 
of various antibacterial agents against two nonpathogenic strains of 
A. ATHAMNA AND E. RUBINSTEIN
www.ebook3000.com

Department of Epidemiology and Preventive Medicine, 
Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University and the Tel 
Aviv University Center for the Study of Bioterrorism, Tel 
Aviv, Israel 
Salmonella and Shigella species, Escherichia coli O157:H7, Vibrio
cholerae, Cryptosporidium parvum, and Noroviruses are considered by the 
US Centers for Disease Control as potential candidates for intentional 
contamination of food and water supplies. The food- and waterborne 
dissemination of these organisms may lead to moderate to high morbidity 
rates. The case fatality rates, usually low under circumstances of natural 
exposure, could be higher when the population is exposed to significantly 
higher infectious doses of these organisms in a bioterrorism scenario. Such 
241
NATURAL OR INTENTIONAL FOOD 
an attack can remain uncovered and even be sustained because of the often 
involvement of these organisms in naturally occurring foodborne or water-
borne outbreaks. 
We propose to develop an algorithm to determine the likelihood that 
outbreaks of disease may result from intentional contamination of food. This 
algorithm will use descriptive, analytical, and molecular epidemiologic tools 
to characterize the outbreaks. High scoring will be given to unusual 
characteristics related to the pathogen, its mode of transmission, and the 
affected population, revealed by the epidemiological investigation of the 
outbreaks. The validity of the criteria used for differentiation can be aug-
mented by an extensive search of the scientific literature to establish 
reference ranges for characteristics of naturally occurring outbreaks and 
laboratory studies to assess the probability that suspected food items can be 
potential vehicles for the epidemic transmission of specific pathogens. 
CONTAMINATION? HOW CAN WE KNOW?
Daniel Cohen

Centers for Disease Control & Prevention (CDC), Washington, DC 
providing $2.9 billion for the Department of Health and Human Services 
(HHS), a tenfold increase in the department’s funding for bioterrorism 
preparedness. The funds have been used to develop comprehensive 
bioterrorism preparedness plans, upgrade infectious disease surveillance 
and investigation through the Health Alert Network (HAN), enhance the 
readiness of hospital systems to deal with large numbers of casualties, 
On January 10, 2002, President Bush signed appropriations legislation 
BIOTERRORISM EMERGENCY RESPONSE:
CURRENT CONCEPTS AND CONTROVERSIES
expand public health laboratory and communications capacities, and im-
prove connectivity between hospitals and city, local, and state health 
departments to enhance disease reporting. As the lead federal agency is 
preparing for the threat of bioterrorism, HHS will work closely with states, 
local government, and the private sector to build the needed new public 
health infrastructure, and to accelerate research into likely bioterror 
diseases. As a reflection of the need for broad-based public health in-
volvement in terrorism preparedness and planning, staff from different 
agencies in HHS participated in developing a strategic weapons of mass 
destruction (WMD) plan, including the Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention (CDC), Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA), 
and Office of Emergency Preparedness. The CDC will target state and 
local programs supporting bioterrorism, infectious diseases, and public 
health emergency preparedness activities state-wide. The HRSA will 
provide funding, which will be used by states to create regional hospital 
plans to respond in the event of a bioterrorism attack.
Future goals of federal public health preparedness efforts include:
x
Having at least one epidemiologist in each metropolitan area with 
a population greater than 500,000 
x
Developing an education and training plan that will reach health 
professionals, emergency room physicians and nurses, local public 
243
Eric K. Noji
www.ebook3000.com

This presentation outlines steps for strengthening public health and health-
care capacity to protect the population against these dangers. The health-
care industry and traditional health-care organization must join with public 
health departments, law enforcement and intelligence, emergency manage-
ment, and defense agencies to address potential national security threats. 
health officials, and the public with information relating to bio-
terrorism, new and emerging diseases, and other infectious agents 
x
Targeting bioterrorism research to new vaccines, antiviral drugs, 
and new diagnostic tools to better protect against biologics 
244
E.K. NOJI

by centralized production and processing, and wide distribution of 
products. The proportion of foods that are imported is steadily increasing 
in most countries. Thus, deliberate contamination of a food product at a 
single major point of production, processing, or distribution could cause an 
outbreak with many illnesses dispersed over wide geographic areas. 
Depending on the biological agent and contaminated food, such an outbreak 
could present variously as a slow, diffuse, and initially unremarkable 
increase in sporadic cases, one or more localized outbreaks, or an explosive 
epidemic suddenly producing a large number of illnesses. Early detection 
of any foodborne outbreak is critical, because the rapidity with which the 
contaminated food is identified, the public warned, the food removed from 
circulation, and appropriate medical treatment is recommended may 
reduce the number and severity of illnesses. In the United States, the 
existing public health structure at the local, state, and federal level detects 
and responds to well over 1,000 foodborne disease outbreaks annually, 
often in collaboration with foods safety regulatory authorities and state 
departments of agriculture. The detection and control of a bioterrorist 
event involving the food supply would depend to a large extent on this 
public health infrastructure. Preparedness for such an event, therefore, 
entails augmenting the traditional public health infrastructure’s activities 
of disease surveillance, laboratory detection and diagnosis, and outbreak 
investigation and control, along with disaster and mass casualty response 
and mitigation capacity. Successful control of an outbreak of naturally 
occurring or deliberate foodborne disease will require timely, frank, and 
uniform communication messages by authorities. 
Foodborne and Diarrheal Diseases Branch, Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA, USA 
Deliberate contamination of food with biologic agents has already been 
perpetrated in the United States. The food supply is increasingly characterized 
PREPAREDNESS AND RESPONSE FOR
BIOTERRORISM INVOLVING THE FOOD SUPPLY
245
Jeremy Sobel
www.ebook3000.com

The purpose of this communication is primarily threefold: 
1.
Educate the population prior to an event so they have the knowledge, 
skills, and abilities to effectively respond 
2.
Inform the public during an event so they have accurate information, 
and the level of noise is decreased 
3.
Direct the public so they can apply their knowledge, skills, and 
abilities effectively and in a concerted manner 
While there are many tried and true approaches to crisis communication, 
the advent of new technologies, especially over the last 5 years, is now and 
will in the future have enormous impact on out abilities to communicate. 
For decades, the major forms of communication were “static” in that they 
were either non-changing but portable (i.e., newspapers) or dynamic yet 
fixed (i.e., television). Radio, during the latter part of the 20th century 
became more portable, as well as dynamic, but the information content (or 
bandwidth) was low due to the single mode of communication, sound. 
Today, with the advent of the Internet, the ubiquitous presence of cell 
phones, pagers, and Blackberries (or Blueberries) the ability to provide an 
almost unlimited quantity of data, but more importantly information is 
becoming more and more common. This is not merely an issue for the 
developed nations, but populations around the world. 
President, Unconventional Concepts, Inc., USA 
Key to response to any incident is the ability to protect and defend the 
population from harm. However, no matter the level of investment, in 
either time or resources, it will never be possible to fully perform this task 
without enlisting the aid of the population itself. Paramount in working 
with a population is the ability to effectively communicate with them; 
without communication, we have chaos. 
RISK COMMUNICATION AND PSYCHOLOGICAL
METHODS OF MITIGATION
247
IMPACT: TECHNOLOGICAL AND OPERATIONAL
Michael J. Hopmeier

This presentation will briefly discuss some of the key issues that have 
traditionally been central to the idea of crisis communication, and also 
discuss the added dimensions, considerations, and opportunities inherent in 
today’s new communication technologies. 
248
M.J. HOPMEIER
www.ebook3000.com

