STARMAN JONES
  by Robert A. Heinlein
Copyright 1953 by Robert A. Heinlein
Published by Ballantine Books
All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright
Conventions. Published in the United States of America by Ballantine Books, a
division of Random House, Inc., New York, and simultaneously in Canada by
Random House of Canada Limited, Toronto.
This edition published by arrangement with Charles Scribner's Sons
First Ballantine Books Edition: February 1975
ISBN 0-345-32811-6
For my friend Jim Smith
CONTENTS
1.   The _Tomahawk_
2.   Good Samaritan
3.   Earthport
4.   The Astrogators' Guild
5.   ". . . Your Money and My Know-How . . ."
6.   "Spaceman" Jones
7.   Eldreth
8.   Three Ways to Get Ahead
9.   Chartsman Jones
10.  Garson's Planet
11.  "Through the Cargo Hatch"
12.  Halcyon
13.  Transition
14.  Anywhere
15.  "This Isn't a Picnic"
16.  "--Over a Hundred Years--"
17.  Charity
18.  Civilization
19.  A Friend in Need
20.  "--A Ship Is Not Just Steel--"
21.  The Captain of the _Asgard_
22.  The _Tomahawk_

STARMAN JONES
1
THE TOMAHAWK
Max liked this time of day, this time of year. With the crops in, he
could finish his evening chores early and be lazy. When he had slopped the
hogs and fed the chickens, instead of getting supper he followed a path to a
rise west of the barn and lay down in the grass, unmindful of chiggers. He had
a book with him that he had drawn from the county library last Saturday,
Bonforte's _Sky Beasts: A Guide to Exotic Zoology_, but he tucked it under his
head as a pillow. A blue jay made remarks about his honesty, then shut up when
he failed to move. A red squirrel sat on a stump and stared at him, then went
on burying nuts.
Max kept his eyes to the northwest. He favored this spot because from it
he could see the steel stilts and guide rings of the Chicago, Springfield, &
Earthport Ring Road emerge from a slash in the ridge to his right. There was a
guide ring at the mouth of the cut, a great steel hoop twenty feet high. A
pair of stilt-like tripods supported another ring a hundred feet out from the
cut. A third and last ring, its stilts more than a hundred feet high to keep
it level with the others, lay west of him where the ground dropped still more
sharply into the valley below. Half way up it he could see the power-link
antenna pointing across the gap.
On his left the guides of the C.S.&E. picked up again on the far side of
the gap. The entering ring was larger to allow for maximum windage deviation;
on its stilts was the receptor antenna for the power link. That ridge was
steeper; there was only one more ring before the road disappeared into a
tunnel. He had read that, on the Moon, entrance rings were no larger than
pass-along rings, since there was never any wind to cause variation in
ballistic. When he was a child this entrance ring had been slightly smaller
and, during an unprecedented windstorm, a train had struck the ring and
produced an unbelievable wreck, with more than four hundred people killed. He
had not seen it and his father had not allowed him to poke around afterwards
because of the carnage, but the scar of it could still be seen on the lefthand
ridge, a darker green than the rest.
He watched the trains go by whenever possible, not wishing the
passengers any bad luck--but still, if there should happen to be a
catastrophe, he didn't want to miss it.
Max kept his eyes fixed on the cut; the _Tomahawk_ was due any instant.
Suddenly there was a silver gleam, a shining cylinder with needle nose burst
out of the cut, flashed through the last ring and for a breathless moment was
in free trajectory between the ridges. Almost before he could swing his eyes
the projectile entered the ring across the gap and disappeared into the
hillside--just as the sound hit him.
It was a thunderclap that bounced around the hills. Max gasped for air.
"Boy!" he said softly. "Boy, oh boy!" The incredible sight and the impact on

his ears always affected him the same way. He had heard that for the
passengers the train was silent, with the sound trailing them, but he did not
know; he had never ridden a train and it seemed unlikely, with Maw and the
farm to take care of, that he ever would.
He shifted to a sitting position and opened his book, holding it so that
he would be aware of the southwestern sky. Seven minutes after the passing of
the _Tomahawk_ he should be able to see, on a clear evening, the launching
orbit of the daily Moonship. Although much father away and much less dramatic
than the nearby jump of the ring train it was this that he had come to see.
Ring trains were all right, but spaceships were his love--even a dinky like
the moon shuttle.
But he had just found his place, a description of the intelligent but
phlegmatic crustaceans of Epsilon Ceti IV, when he was interrupted by a call
behind him. "Oh, Maxie! Maximilian! Max . . . mil . . . _yan!_"
He held still and said nothing.
"_Max!_ I can see you, Max--you come at once, hear me?"
He muttered to himself and got to his feet. He moved slowly down the
path, watching the sky over his shoulder until the barn cut off his view. Maw
was back and that was that--she'd make his life miserable if he didn't come in
and help. When she had left that morning he had had the impression that she
would be gone overnight--not that she had said so; she never did--but he had
learned to read the signs. Now he would have to listen to her complaints and
her petty gossip when he wanted to read, or just as bad, be disturbed by the
slobbering stereovision serials she favored. He had often been tempted to
sabotage the pesky SV set--by rights with an ax! He hardly ever got to see the
programs he liked.
When he got in sight of the house he stopped suddenly. He had supposed
that Maw had ridden the bus from the Corners and walked up the draw as usual.
But there was a sporty little unicycle standing near the stoop--and there was
someone with her.
He had thought at first it was a "foreigner"--but when he got closer he
recognized the man. Max would rather have seen a foreigner, any foreigner.
Biff Montgomery was a hillman but he didn't work a farm; Max couldn't remember
having seen him do any honest work. He had heard it said that Montgomery
sometimes hired out as a guard when one of the moonshine stills back in the
hills was operating and it might be so--Montgomery was a big, beefy man and
the part might fit him.
Max had known Montgomery as long as he could remember, seen him loafing
around Clyde's Corners. But he had ordinarily given him "wagon room" and had
had nothing to do with him--until lately: Maw had started being seen with him,
even gone to barn dances and huskings with him. Max had tried to tell her that
Dad wouldn't have liked it. But you couldn't argue with Maw--what she didn't
like she just didn't hear.
But this was the first time she had ever brought him to the house. Max
felt a slow burn of anger starting in him.
"Hurry up, Maxie!" Maw called out. "Don't stand there like a dummy." Max
reluctantly moved along and joined them. Maw said, "Maxie, shake hands with
your new father," then looked roguish, as if she had said something witty. Max
stared and his mouth sagged open.
Montgomery grinned and stuck out a hand. "Yep, Max, you're Max
Montgomery now--I'm your new pop. But you can call me Monty."
Max stared at the hand, took it briefly. "My name is Jones," he said
flatly.
"Maxie!" protested Maw.
Montgomery laughed jovially. "Don't rush him, Nellie my love. Let Max
get used to it. Live and let live; that's my motto." He turned to his wife.
"Half a mo', while I get the baggage." From one saddlebag of the unicycle he
extracted a wad of mussed clothing; from the other, two flat pint bottles.
Seeing Max watching him he winked and said, "A toast for the bride."
His bride was standing by the door; he started to brush on past her. She

protested, "But Monty darling, aren't you going to--"
Montgomery stopped. "Oh. I haven't much experience in these things.
Sure." He turned to Max--"Here, take the baggage"--and shoved bottles and
clothes at him. Then he swung her up in his arms, grunting a bit, and carried
her over the threshold, put her down and kissed her while she squealed and
blushed. Max silently followed them, put the items on the table and turned to
the stove. It was cold, he had not used it since breakfast. There was an
electric range but it had burned out before his father had died and there had
never been money to repair it. He took out his pocket knife, made shavings,
added kindling and touched the heap with an Everlite. When it flared up he
went out to fetch a pail of water.
When he came back Montgomery said, "Wondered where you'd gone. Doesn't
this dump even have running water?"
"No." Max set the pail down, then added a couple of chunks of cord wood
to the fire.
His Maw said, "Maxie, you should have had dinner ready."
Montgomery interceded pleasantly with, "Now, my dear, he didn't know we
were coming. And it leaves time for a toast." Max kept his back to them,
giving his full attention to slicing side meat. The change was so overwhelming
that he had not had time to take it in.
Montgomery called to him. "Here, son! Drink your toast to the bride."
"I've got to get supper."
"Nonsense! Here's your glass. Hurry up."
Montgomery had poured a finger of amber liquid into the glass; his own
glass was half full and that of his bride at least a third. Max accepted it
and went to the pail, thinned it with a dipper of water.
"You'll ruin it."
"I'm not used to it."
"Oh, well. Here's to the blushing bride--and our happy family! Bottoms
up!"
Max took a cautious sip and put it down. It tasted to him like the
bitter tonic the district nurse had given him one spring. He turned back to
his work, only to be interrupted again. "Hey, you didn't finish it."
"Look, I got to cook. You don't want me to burn supper, do you?"
Montgomery shrugged. "Oh, well--the more for the rest of us. We'll use
yours for a chaser. Sonny boy, when I was your age I could empty a tumbler
neat and then stand on my hands."
Max had intended to sup on side meat and warmed-over biscuits, but there
was only half a pan left of the biscuits. He scrambled eggs in the grease of
the side meat, brewed coffee, and let it go at that. When they sat down
Montgomery looked at it and announced, "My dear, starting tomorrow I'll expect
you to live up to what you told me about your cooking. Your boy isn't much of
a cook." Nevertheless he ate heartily. Max decided not to tell him that he was
a better cook than Maw--he'd find out soon enough.
Presently Montgomery sat back and wiped his mouth, then poured himself
more coffee and lighted a cigar. Maw said, "Maxie, dear, what's the dessert?"
"Dessert? Well--there's that ice cream in the freezer, left over from
Solar Union Day."
She looked vexed. "Oh, dear! I'm afraid it's not there."
"Huh?"
"Well, I'm afraid I sort of ate it one afternoon when you were out in
the south field. It was an awfully hot day."
Max did not say anything, he was unsurprised. But she was not content to
leave it. "You didn't fix any dessert, Max? But this is a _special_ occasion."
Montgomery took his cigar out of his mouth. "Stow it, my dear," he said
kindly. "I'm not much for sweets, I'm a meat-and-potatoes man--sticks to the
ribs. Let's talk of pleasanter things." He turned to Max. "Max, what can you
do besides farm?"
Max was startled. "Huh? I've never done anything else. Why?"
Montgomery touched the ash of the cigar to his plate. "Because you are

all through farming."
For the second time in two hours Max had more change than he could
grasp. "Why? What do you mean?"
"Because we've sold the farm."
Max felt as if he had had a rug jerked out from under him. But he could
tell from Maw's face that it was true. She looked the way she always did when
she had put one over on him--triumphant and slightly apprehensive.
"Dad wouldn't like that," he said to her harshly. "This land has been in
our family for four hundred years."
"Now, Maxie! I've told you I don't know how many times that I wasn't cut
out for a farm. I was city raised."
"Clyde's Corners! Some city!"
"It wasn't a farm. And I was just a young girl when your father brought
me here--you were already a big boy. I've still got my life before me. I can't
live it buried on a farm."
Max raised his voice. "But you promised Dad you'd . . ."
"Stow it," Montgomery said firmly. "And keep a civil tongue in your head
when you speak to your mother--and to me."
Max shut up.
"The land is sold and that's that. How much do you figure this parcel is
worth?"
"Why, I've never thought about it."
"Whatever you thought, I got more." He gave Max a wink. "Yes, sir! It
was a lucky day for your mother and you when she set her cap for me. I'm a man
with his ear to the ground. I knew why an agent was around buying up these
worn-out, worthless pieces of property. I . . ." 
"I use government fertilizers."
"Worthless I said and worthless I meant. For farming, that is." He put
his finger along his nose, looked sly, and explained. It seemed that some big
government power project was afoot for which this area had been
selected--Montgomery was mysterious about it, from which Max concluded that he
didn't know very much. A syndicate was quietly buying up land in anticipation
of government purchase. "So we held 'em up for five times what they expected
to pay. Pretty good, huh?"
Maw put in, "You see, Maxie? If your father had known that we would ever
get . . ." 
"Quiet, Nellie!"
"But I was just going to tell him how much . . ."
"'Quiet!' I said."
She shut up. Montgomery pushed his chair back, stuck his cigar in his
mouth, and got up. Max put water on to heat for the dishes, scraped the plates
and took the leavings out to the chickens. He stayed out quite a spell,
looking at the stars and trying to think. The idea of having Biff Montgomery
in the family shook him to his bones. He wondered just what rights a
stepfather had, or, rather a step-stepfather, a man who had married his
stepmother. He didn't know.
Presently he decided that he had to go back inside, much as he hated to.
He found Montgomery standing at the bookshelf he had built over the stereo
receiver; the man was pawing at the books and had piled several on the
receiver. He looked around. "You back? Stick around, I want you to tell me
about the live stock."
Maw appeared in the doorway. "Darling," she said to Montgomery, "can't
that wait till morning?"
"Don't be in a hurry, my dear," he answered. "That auctioneer fellow
will be here early. I've got to have the inventory ready." He continued to
pull books down. "Say, these are pretty things." He held in his hands half a
dozen volumes, printed on the finest of thin paper and bound in limp plastic.
"I wonder what they're worth? Nellie, hand me my specs."
Max advanced hastily, reached for them. "Those are mine!"
"Huh?" Montgomery glanced at him, then held the books high in the air.

"You're too young to own anything. No, everything goes. A clean sweep and a
fresh start."
"They're mine! My uncle gave them to me." He appealed to his mother.
"Tell him, Maw."
Montgomery said quietly, "Yes, Nellie, set this youngster
straight--before I have to correct him."
Nellie looked worried. "Well, I don't rightly know. They did belong to
Chet."
"And Chet was your brother? Then you're Chet's heir, not this young
cub."
"He wasn't her brother, he was her brother-in-law!"
"So? No matter. Your father was your uncle's heir, then, and your mother
is your father's heir. Not you, you're a minor. That's the law, son. Sorry."
He put the books on the shelf but remained standing in front of them.
Max felt his right upper lip begin to twitch uncontrollably; he knew
that he would not be able to talk coherently. His eyes filled with tears of
rage so that he could hardly see. "You . . . you _thief!_"
Nellie let out a squawk. "Max!"
Montgomery's face became coldly malignant. "Now you've gone too far. I'm
afraid you've earned a taste of the strap." His fingers started unbuckling his
heavy belt.
Max took a step backward. Montgomery got the belt loose and took a step
forward. Nellie squealed, "Monty! _Please!_"
"Keep out of this, Nellie." To Max he said, "We might as well get it
settled once and for all who is boss around here. Apologize!"
Max did not answer. Montgomery repeated, "Apologize, and we'll say no
more about it." He twitched the belt like a cat lashing its tail. Max took
another step back; Montgomery stepped forward and grabbed at him.
Max ducked and ran out the open door into darkness. He did not stop
until he was sure that Montgomery was not following. Then he caught his
breath, still raging. He was almost sorry that Montgomery had not chased him;
he didn't think that anyone could match him on his home grounds in the dark.
He knew where the wood pile was; Montgomery didn't. He knew where the hog
wallow was. Yes, he knew where the well was--even _that_.
It was a long time before he quieted down enough to think rationally.
When he did, he was glad it had ended so easily, Montgomery outweighed him a
lot and was reputed to be a mean one in a fight.
If it _had_ ended, he corrected. He wondered if Montgomery would decide
to forget it by morning. The light was still on in the living room; he took
shelter in the barn and waited, sitting down on the dirt floor and leaning
against the planks. After a while he felt terribly tired. He considered
sleeping in the barn but there was no fit place to lie down, even though the
old mule was dead. Instead he got up and looked at the house.
The light was out in the living room, but he could see a light in the
bedroom; they were still awake, surely. Someone had closed the outer door
after his flight; it did not lock so there was no difficulty getting in, but
he was afraid that Montgomery might hear him. His own room was a shed added at
the kitchen end of the main room, opposite the bedroom, but it had no outside
door.
No matter--he had solved that problem when he had first grown old enough
to wish to get in and out at night without consulting his elders. He crept
around the house, found the saw horse, placed it under his window, got on and
wiggled loose the nail that held the window. A moment later he stepped
silently down into his own room. The door to the main part of the house was
closed but he decided not to risk switching on the light; Montgomery might
take it into his head to come out into the living room and see a crack of
light under his door. He slipped quietly out of his clothes and crawled into
his cot.
Sleep wouldn't come. Once he began to feel that warm drowsiness, then
some tiny noise had brought him wide, stiff awake. Probably just a mouse--but

for an instant he had thought that Montgomery was standing over his bed. With
his heart pounding, he sat up on the edge of his cot, still in his skin.
Presently he faced up to the problem of what he was to do--not just for
the next hour, not just tomorrow morning, but the following morning and all
the mornings after that. Montgomery alone presented no problem; he would not
voluntarily stay in the same county with the man. But how about Maw?
His father had told him, when he had known that he was dying, "Take care
of your mother, son." Well, he had done so. He had made a crop every
year--food in the house and a little money, even if things had been close.
When the mule died, he had made do, borrowing McAllister's team and working it
out in labor.
But had Dad meant that he had to take care of his stepmother even if she
remarried? It had never occurred to him to consider it. Dad had told him to
look out for her and he had done so, even though it had put a stop to school
and did not seem to have any end to it.
But she was no longer Mrs. Jones but Mrs. Montgomery. Had Dad meant for
him to support Mrs. Montgomery?
Of course not! When a woman married, her husband supported her.
Everybody knew that. And Dad wouldn't expect him to put up with Montgomery. He
stood up, his mind suddenly made up.
The only question was what to take with him.
There was little to take. Groping in the dark he found the rucksack he
used for hunting hikes and stuffed into it his other shirt and his socks. He
added Uncle Chet's circular astrogation slide rule and the piece of volcanic
glass his uncle had brought back for him from the Moon. His citizen's
identification card, his toothbrush, and his father's razor--not that he
needed _that_ very often--about completed the plunder.
There was a loose board back of his cot. He felt for it, pulled it out
and groped between the studs--found nothing. He had been hiding a little money
from time to time against a rainy day, as Maw couldn't or wouldn't save. But
apparently she had found it on one of her snooping tours. Well, he still had
to leave; it just made it a little more difficult.
He took a deep breath. There was something he _must_ get . . . Uncle
Chet's books . . . and they were still (presumably) on the shelf against the
wall common with the bedroom. But he _had_ to get them, even at the risk of
meeting Montgomery.
Cautiously, most slowly, he opened the door into the living room, stood
there with sweat pouring down him. There was still a crack of light under the
bedroom door and he hesitated, almost unable to force himself to go on. He
heard Montgomery muttering something and Maw giggle.
As his eyes adjusted he could see by the faint light leaking out under
the bedroom door something piled at the outer door. It was a deadfall alarm of
pots and pans, sure to make a dreadful clatter if the door were opened.
Apparently Montgomery had counted on him coming back and expected to be ready
to take care of him. He was very glad that he had sneaked in the window.
No use putting it off--he crept across the floor, mindful of the squeaky
board near the table. He could not see but he could feel and the volumes were
known to his fingers. Carefully he slid them out, being sure not to knock over
the others.
He was all the way back to his own door when he remembered the library
book. He stopped in sudden panic.
He couldn't go back. They might hear him this time--or Montgomery might
get up for a drink of water or something.
But in his limited horizon, the theft of a public library book--or
failure to return it, which was the same thing--was, if not a mortal sin, at
least high on the list of shameful crimes. He stood there, sweating and
thinking about it.
Then he went back, the whole long trek, around the squeaky board and
tragically onto one he had not remembered. He froze after he hit it, but
apparently it had not alarmed the couple in the room beyond. At last he was

leaning over the SV receiver and groping at the shelf.
Montgomery, in pawing the books, had changed their arrangement. One
after another he had to take them down and try to identify it by touch,
opening each and feeling for the perforations on the title page.
It was the fourth one he handled. He got back to his room hurrying
slowly, unbearably anxious but afraid to move fast. There at last, he began to
shake and had to wait until it wore off. He didn't chance closing his door but
got into his clothes in the dark. Moments later he crept through his window,
found the saw horse with his toe, and stepped quietly to the ground.
His shoes were stuffed on top of the books in his rucksack; he decided
to leave them there until he was well clear of the house, rather than chance
the noise he might make with his feet shod. He swung wide around the house and
looked back. The bedroom light was still on; he started to angle down toward
the road when he noticed Montgomery's unicycle. He stopped.
If he continued he would come to the road the bus passed along. Whether
he turned right or left there, Montgomery would have a fifty-fifty chance of
catching him on the unicycle. Having no money he was dependent on Shank's
ponies to put distance under him; he could not take the bus. 
Shucks! Montgomery wouldn't try to fetch him back. He would say good
riddance and forget him!
But the thought fretted him. Suppose Maw urged him? Suppose Montgomery
wouldn't forget an insult and would go to any trouble to "get even"?
He headed back, still swinging wide of the house, and cut across the
slopes toward the right of way of the C.S.&E.
2
GOOD SAMARITAN
He wished for a light, but its lack did not bother him much. He knew
this country, every slope, almost every tree. He stayed high, working along
the hillside, until he reached the exit ring where the trains jumped the gap,
and there he came out on the road used by the ring road's maintenance crews.
He sat down and put on his shoes.
The maintenance road was no more than a track cut through trees; it was
suited to tractor treads but not to wheels. But it led down across the gap and
up to where the ring road disappeared in the tunnel through the far ridge. He
followed it, making good time in the born mountaineer's easy, loose-jointed
walk.
Seventy minutes later he was across the gap and passing under the
entrance ring. He went on until he was near the ring that marked the black
entrance to the tunnel. He stopped at what he judged to be a safe distance and
considered his chances.
The ridge was high, else the rings would have been built in a cut rather
than a tunnel. He had often hunted on it and knew that it would take two hours
to climb it--in daylight. But the maintenance road ran right through the hill,
under the rings. If he followed it, he could go through in ten or fifteen
minutes.
Max had never been through the ridge. Legally it was trespass--not that
that bothered him, he was trespassing now. Occasionally a hog or a wild animal

would wander into the tunnel and be trapped there when a train hurtled
through. They died, instantly and without a scratch. Once Max had spotted the
carcass of a fox just inside the tunnel and had ducked in and salvaged it.
There were no marks on it, but when he skinned it he found that it was a mass
of tiny hemorrhages. Several years earlier a man had been caught inside; the
maintenance crew brought out the body.
The tunnel was larger than the rings but no larger than necessary to
permit the projectile to ride ahead of its own reflected shock wave. Anything
alive in the tunnel could not avoid the wave; that unbearable thunderclap,
painful at a distance, was so loaded with energy as to be quick death close
up.
But Max did not want to climb the ridge; he went over the evening
schedule of trains in his mind. The _Tomahawk_ was the one he had watched at
sundown; the _Javelin_ he had heard while he was hiding in the barn. The
_Assegai_ must have gone by quite a while ago though he didn't remember
hearing it; that left only the midnight _Cleaver_. He then looked at the sky.
Venus had set, of course, but he was surprised to see Mars still in the
west. The Moon had not risen. Let's see--full moon was last Wednesday. Surely
. . .
The answer he got seemed wrong, so he checked himself by taking a
careful eyesight of Vega and compared it with what the Big Dipper told him.
Then he whistled softly--despite everything that had happened it was only ten
o'clock, give or take five minutes; the stars could not be wrong. In which
case the _Assegai_ was not due for another three-quarters of an hour. Except
for the faint chance of a special train he had plenty of time.
He headed into the tunnel. He had not gone fifty yards before he began
to be sorry and a bit panicky; it was as dark as a sealed coffin. But the
going was much easier as the bore was lined to permit smooth shockwave
reflections. He had been on his way several minutes, feeling each step but
hurrying, when his eyes, adjusting to complete darkness, made out a faint grey
circle far ahead. He broke into a trot and then into a dead run as his fear of
the place piled up.
He reached the far end with throat burned dry and heart laboring; there
he plunged downhill regardless of the sudden roughening of his path as he left
the tunnel and hit the maintenance track. He did not slow up until he stood
under stilt supports so high that the ring above looked small. There he stood
still and fought to catch his breath.
He was slammed forward and knocked off his feet.
He picked himself up groggily, eventually remembered where he was and
realized that he had been knocked cold. There was blood on one cheek and his
hands and elbows were raw. It was not until he noticed these that he realized
what had happened; a train had passed right over him.
It had not been close enough to kill, but it had been close enough to
blast him off his feet. It could not have been the _Assegai_; he looked again
at the stars and confirmed it. No, it must have been a special-- and he had
beaten it out of the tunnel by about a minute.
He began to shake and it was minutes before he pulled himself together,
after which he started down the maintenance road as fast as his bruised body
could manage. Presently he became aware of an odd fact; the night was silent.
But night is never silent. His ears, tuned from babyhood to the sounds
and signs of his hills, should have heard an endless pattern of little night
noises--wind in the leaves, the scurrying of his small cousins, tree frogs,
calls of insects, owls.
By brutal logic he concluded correctly that he could not hear--"deef as
a post"--the shock wave had left him deaf. But there was no way to help it, so
he went on; it did not occur to him to return home. At the bottom of this
draw, where the stilts were nearly three hundred feet high, the maintenance
road crossed a farm road. He turned down hill onto it, having accomplished his
first purpose of getting into territory where Montgomery would be less likely
to look for him. He was in another watershed now; although still only a few

miles from home, nevertheless by going through the ridge he had put himself
into a different neighborhood.
He continued downhill for a couple of hours. The road was hardly more
than a cart track but it was easier than the maintenance road. Somewhere
below, when the hills gave way to the valley where the "foreigners" lived, he
would find the freight highway that paralleled the ring road on the route to
Earthport-- Earthport being his destination although he had only foggy plans
as to what he would do when he got there.
The Moon was behind him now and he made good time. A rabbit hopped onto
the road ahead, sat up and stared, then skittered away. Seeing it, he
regretted not having brought along his squirrel gun. Sure, it was worn out and
not worth much and lately it had gotten harder and harder to buy the slugs
thrown by the obsolete little weapon--but rabbit in the pot right now would go
mighty nice, mighty nice! He realized that he was not only weary but terribly
hungry. He had just picked at his supper and it looked like he'd breakfast on
his upper lip.
Shortly his attention was distracted from hunger to a ringing in his
ears, a ringing that got distressingly worse. He shook his head and pounded
his ears but it did not help; he had to make up his mind to ignore it. After
another half mile or so he suddenly noticed that he could hear himself
walking. He stopped dead, then clapped his hands together. He could hear them
smack, cutting through the phantom ringing. With a lighter heart he went on.
At last he came out on a shoulder that overlooked the broad valley. In
the moonlight he could make out the sweep of the freight highway leading
southwest and could detect, he thought, its fluorescent traffic guide lines.
He hurried on down.
He was nearing the highway and could hear the rush of passing freighters
when he spotted a light ahead. He approached it cautiously, determined that it
was neither vehicle nor farm house. Closer approach showed it to be a small
open fire, visible from uphill but shielded from the highway by a shoulder of
limestone. A man was squatting over it, stirring the contents of a can resting
on rocks over the fire.
Max crept nearer until he was looking down into the hobo jungle. He got
a whiff of the stew and his mouth watered. Caught between hunger and a
hillman's ingrown distrust of "foreigners" he lay still and stared. Presently
the man set the can off the fire and called out, "Well, don't hide there! Come
on down."
Max was too startled to answer. The man added, "Come on down into the
light. I won't fetch it up to you."
Max got to his feet and shuffled down into the circle of firelight. The
man looked up. "Howdy. Draw up a chair."
"Howdy." Max sat down across the fire from the tramp. He was not even as
well dressed as Max and he needed a shave. Nevertheless he wore his rags with
a jaunty air and handled himself with a sparrow's cockiness.
The man continued to stir the mess in the can then spooned out a sample,
blew on it, and tasted it. "About right," he announced. "Four-day mulligan,
just getting ripe. Find yourself a dish." He got up and picked over a pile of
smaller cans behind him, selected one. Max hesitated, then did the same,
settling on one that had once contained coffee and appeared not to have been
used since. His host served him a liberal portion of stew, then handed him a
spoon. Max looked at it.
"If you don't trust the last man who used it," the man said reasonably,
"hold it in the fire, then wipe it. Me, I don't worry. If a bug bites me, he
dies horribly." Max took the advice, holding the spoon in the flames until the
handle became too hot, then wiped it on his shirt.
The stew was good and his hunger made it superlative. The gravy was
thick, there were vegetables and unidentified meat. Max didn't bother his head
about the pedigrees of the materials; he simply enjoyed it. After a while his
host said, "Seconds?"
"Huh? Sure. Thanks!"

The second can of stew filled him up and spread through his tissues a
warm glow of well-being. He stretched lazily, enjoying his fatigue. "Feel
better?" the man asked.
"Gee, yes. Thanks."
"By the way, you can call me Sam."
"Oh, my name is Max."
"Glad to know you, Max."
Max waited before raising a point that had been bothering him. "Uh, Sam?
How did you know I was there? Did you hear me?"
Sam grinned. "No. But you were silhouetted against the sky. Don't ever
do that, kid, or it may be the last thing you do."
Max twisted around and looked up at where he had lurked. Sure enough,
Sam was right. He'd be dogged!
Sam added, "Traveled far?"
"Huh? Yeah, quite a piece."
"Going far?"
"Uh, pretty far, I guess."
Sam waited, then said, "Think your folks'll miss you?"
"Huh? How did you know?"
"That you had run away from home? Well, you have, haven't you?"
"Yeah. Yeah, I guess I have."
"You looked beat when you dragged in here. Maybe it's not too late to
kill the goose before your bridges are burned. Think about it, kid. It's rough
on the road. I know."
"Go back? I won't ever go back!"
"As bad as that?"
Max stared into the fire. He needed badly to get his thoughts straight,
even if it meant telling a foreigner his private affairs--and this soft-spoken
stranger was easy to talk to. "See here, Sam, did you ever have a stepmother?"
"Eh? Can't remember that I ever had any. The Central Jersey Development
Center for State Children used to kiss me good night."
"Oh." Max blurted out his story with an occasional sympathetic question
from Sam to straighten out its confusion. "So I lit out," he concluded. "There
wasn't anything else to do. Was there?"
Sam pursed his lips. "I reckon not. This double stepfather of yours--he
sounds like a mouse studying to be a rat. You're well shut of him."
"You don't think they'll try to find me and haul me back, do you?"
Sam stopped to put a piece of wood on the fire. "I am not sure about
that."
"Huh? Why not? I'm no use to him. He doesn't like me. And Maw won't
care, not really. She may whine a bit, but she won't turn her hand."
"Well, there's the farm."
"The farm? I don't care about that, not with Dad gone. Truthfully, it
ain't much. You break your back trying to make a crop. If the Food
Conservation Act hadn't forbidden owners to let farm land fall out of use, Dad
would have quit farming long ago. It would take something like this government
condemnation to make it possible to find anybody to take it off your hands."
"That's what I mean. This joker got your mother to sell it. Now my brand
of law may not be much good, but it looks as if that money ought to come to
you."
"What? Oh, I don't care about the money. I just want to get away from
them."
"Don't talk that way about money; the powers-that-be will have you shut
up for blasphemy. But it probably doesn't matter how you feel, as I think
Citizen Montgomery is going to want to see you awful bad."
"Why?"
"Did your father leave a will?"
"No. Why? He didn't have anything to leave but the farm."
"I don't know the ins and outs of your state laws, but it's a sure thing
that at least half of that farm belongs to you. Possibly your stepmother has

only lifetime tenure in her half, with reversion to you when she dies. But
it's a certainty that she can't grant a good deed without your signature.
Along about time your county courthouse opens up tomorrow morning the buyers
are going to find that out. Then they'll come high-tailing up, looking for
her--and you. And ten minutes later this Montgomery hombre will start looking
for you, if he hasn't already."
"Oh, me! If they find me, can they make me go back?"
"Don't let them find you. You've made a good start."
Max picked up his rucksack. "I guess I had better get moving. Thanks a
lot, Sam. Maybe I can help you someday."
"Sit down."
"Look, I had better get as far away as I can."
"Kid, you're tired out and your judgment has slipped. How far can you
walk tonight, the shape you're in? Tomorrow morning, bright and early, we'll
go down to the highway, follow it about a mile to the freighters' restaurant
south of here and catch the haulers as they come out from breakfast, feeling
good. We'll promote a ride and you'll go farther in ten minutes than you could
make all night."
Max had to admit that he was tired, exhausted really, and Sam certainly
knew more about these wrinkles than he did. Sam added, "Got a blanket in your
bindle?"
"No. Just a shirt . . . and some books."
"Books, eh? Read quite a bit myself, when I get a chance. May I see
them?"
Somewhat reluctantly Max got them out. Sam held them close to the fire
and examined them. "Well, I'll be a three-eyed Martian! Kid, do you know what
you've got here?"
"Sure."
"But you ought not to have these. You're not a member of the
Astrogators' Guild."
"No, but my uncle was. He was on the first trip to Beta Hydrae," he
added proudly.
"No foolin'!"
"Sure as taxes."
"But you've never been in space yourself? No, of course not."
"But I'm going to be!" Max admitted something that he had never told
anyone, his ambition to emulate his uncle and go out to the stars. Sam
listened thoughtfully. When Max stopped, he said slowly, "So you want to be an
astrogator?"
"I certainly do."
Sam scratched his nose. "Look, kid, I don't want to throw cold water,
but you know how the world wags. Getting to be an astrogator is almost as
difficult as getting into the Plumbers' Guild. The soup is thin these days and
there isn't enough to go around. The guild won't welcome you just because you
are anxious to be apprenticed. Membership is hereditary, just like all the
other high-pay guilds."
"But my uncle was a member."
"Your uncle isn't your father."
"No, but a member who hasn't any sons gets to nominate someone else.
Uncle Chet explained it to me. He always told me he was going to register my
nomination."
"And did he?"
Max was silent. At the time his uncle had died he had been too young to
know how to go about finding out. When his father had followed his uncle
events had closed in on him--he had never checked up, subconsciously
preferring to nurse the dream rather than test it. "I don't know," he said at
last. "I'm going to the Mother Chapter at Earthport and find out."
"Hmmm--I wish you luck, kid." He stared into the fire, sadly it seemed
to Max. "Well, I'm going to grab some shut-eye, and you had better do the
same. If you're chilly, you'll find some truck back under that rock

shelf--burlap and packing materials and such. It'll keep you warm, if you
don't mind risking a flea or two."
Max crawled into the dark hole indicated, found a half-way cave in the
limestone. Groping, he located the primitive bedding. He had expected to be
wakeful, but he was asleep before Sam finished covering the fire.
He was awakened by sunlight blazing outside. He crawled out, stood up
and stretched the stiffness out of his limbs. By the sun he judged it to be
about seven o'clock in the morning. Sam was not in sight. He looked around and
shouted, not too loudly, and guessed that Sam had gone down to the creek for a
drink and a cold wash. Max went back into the shelter and hauled out his
rucksack, intending to change his socks.
His uncle's books were missing.
There was a note on top of his spare shirt: "Dear Max," it said, "There
is more stew in the can. You can warm it up for breakfast. So long--Sam P.S.
Sorry."
Further search disclosed that his identification card was missing, but
Sam had not bothered with his other pitiful possessions. Max did not touch the
stew but set out down the road, his mind filled with bitter thoughts.
3
EARTHPORT
The farm road crossed under the freight highway; Max came up on the far
side and headed south beside the highway. The route was marked by "NO
TRESPASS" signs but the path was well worn. The highway widened to make room
for a deceleration strip. At the end of its smooth reach, a mile away, Max
could see the restaurant Sam had mentioned.
He shinnied over the fence enclosing the restaurant and parking grounds
and went to the parking stalls where a dozen of the big land ships were lined
up. One was quivering for departure, its flat bottom a few inches clear of the
metallic pavement. Max went to its front end and looked up at the driver's
compartment. The door was open and he could see the driver at his instrument
board. Max called out, "Hey, Mister!"
The driver stuck his head out. "What's itching you?"
"How are the chances of a lift south?"
"Beat it, kid." The door slammed.
None of the other freighters was raised off the pavement; their control
compartments were empty. Max was about to turn away when another giant scooted
down the braking strip, reached the parking space, crawled slowly into a
stall, and settled to the ground. He considered approaching its driver, but
decided to wait until the man had eaten. He went back toward the restaurant
building and was looking through the door, watching hungry men demolish food
while his mouth watered, when he heard a pleasant voice at his shoulder.
"Excuse me, but you're blocking the door."
Max jumped aside. "Oh! Sorry."
"Go ahead. You were first." The speaker was a man about ten years older
than Max. He was profusely freckled and had a one-sided grin. Max saw on his
cap the pin of the Teamsters' Guild. "Go on in," the man repeated, "before you
get trampled in the rush."

Max had been telling himself that he might catch Sam inside--and, after
all, they couldn't charge him just for coming in, if he didn't actually _eat_
anything. Underlying was the thought of asking to work for a meal, if the
manager looked friendly. The freckled-faced man's urging tipped the scales; he
followed his nose toward the source of the heavenly odors pouring out the
door.
The restaurant was crowded; there was one vacant table, for two. The man
slid into a chair and said, "Sit down." When Max hesitated, he added, "Go
ahead, put it down. Never like to eat alone." Max could feel the manager's
eyes on him, he sat down. A waitress handed them each a menu and the hauler
looked her over appreciatively. When she left he said, "This dump used to have
automatic service--and it went broke. The trade went to the _Tivoli_, eighty
miles down the stretch. Then the new owner threw away the machinery and hired
girls and business picked up. Nothing makes food taste better than having a
pretty girl put it in front of you. Right?"
"Uh, I guess so. Sure." Max had not heard what was said. He had seldom
been in a restaurant and then only in the lunch counter at Clyde's Corners.
The prices he read frightened him; he wanted to crawl under the table.
His companion looked at him. "What's the trouble, chum?"
"Trouble? Uh, nothing."
"You broke?" Max's miserable expression answered him. "Shucks, I've been
there myself. Relax." The man waggled his fingers at the waitress. "Come here,
honey chile. My partner and I will each have a breakfast steak with a fried
egg sitting on top and this and that on the side. I want that egg to be just
barely dead. If it is cooked solid, I'll nail it to the wall as a warning to
others. Understand me?"
"I doubt if you'll be able to get a nail through it," she retorted and
walked away, swaying gently. The hauler kept his eyes on her until she
disappeared into the kitchen. "See what I mean? How can machinery compete?"
The steak was good and the egg was not congealed. The hauler told Max to
call him "Red" and Max gave his name in exchange. Max was pursuing the last of
the yolk with a bit of toast and was considering whether it was time to broach
the subject of a ride when Red leaned forward and spoke softly. "Max-- you got
anything pushing you? Free to take a job?"
"What? Why, maybe. What is it?"
"Mind taking a little run southwest?"
"Southwest? Matter of fact, I was headin' that way."
"Good. Here's the deal. The Man says we have to have two teamsters to
each rig--or else break for eight hours after driving eight. I can't; I've got
a penalty time to meet--and my partner washed out. The flathead got taken
drunk and I had to put him down to cool. Now I've got a check point to pass a
hundred thirty miles down the stretch. They'll make me lay over if I can't
show another driver."
"Gee! But I don't know how to drive, Red. I'm awful sorry."
Red gestured with his cup. "You won't have to. You'll always be the
off-watch driver. I wouldn't trust little _Molly Malone_ to somebody who
didn't know her ways. I'll keep myself awake with Pep pills and catch up on
sleep at Earthport."
"You're going all the way to _Earthport?_"
"Right."
"It's a deal!"
"Okay, here's the lash up. Every time we hit a check point you're in the
bunk, asleep. You help me load and unload--I've got a partial and a pick-up at
Oke City-- and I'll feed you. Right?"
"Right!"
"Then let's go. I want to scoot before these other dust jumpers get
underway. Never can tell, there might be a spotter." Red flipped a bill down
and did not wait for change.
The _Molly Malone_ was two hundred feet long and stream lined such that
she had negative lift when cruising. This came to Max's attention from

watching the instruments; when she first quivered and raised, the dial marked
ROAD CLEARANCE showed nine inches, but as they gathered speed down the
acceleration strip it decreased to six.
"The repulsion works by an inverse-cube law," Red explained. "The more
the wind pushes us down the harder the road pushes us up. Keeps us from
jumping over the skyline. The faster we go the steadier we are."
"Suppose you went so fast that the wind pressure forced the bottom down
to the road? Could you stop soon enough to keep from wrecking it?"
"Use your head. The more we squat the harder we are pushed
up--inverse-cube, I said."
"Oh." Max got out his uncle's slide rule. "If she just supports her own
weight at nine inches clearance, then at three inches the repulsion would be
twenty-seven times her weight and at an inch it would be seven hundred and
twenty-nine, and at a quarter of an inch--"
"Don't even think about it. At top speed I can't get her down to five
inches."
"But what makes her go?"
"It's a phase relationship. The field crawls forward and Molly tries to
catch up--only she can't. Don't ask me the theory, I just push the buttons."
Red struck a cigarette and lounged back, one hand on the tiller. "Better get
in the bunk, kid. Check point in forty miles."
The bunk was thwartships abaft the control compartment, a shelf above
the seat. Max climbed in and wrapped a blanket around himself. Red handed him
a cap. "Pull this down over your eyes. Let the button show." The button was a
teamster's shield, Max did as he was told.
Presently he heard the sound of wind change from a soft roar to a sigh
and then stop. The freighter settled to the pavement and the door opened. He
lay still, unable to see what was going on. A strange voice said, "How long
you been herding it?"
"Since breakfast at Tony's."
"So? How did your eyes get so bloodshot?"
"It's the evil life I lead. Want to see my tongue?"
The inspector ignored this, saying instead, "Your partner didn't sign
his trick."
"Whatever you say. Want me to wake the dumb geek?"
"Umm . . . don't bother. You sign for him. Tell him to be more careful."
"Right."
The _Molly Malone_ pulled out and picked up speed. Max crawled down. "I
thought we were sunk when he asked for my signature."
"That was on purpose," Red said scornfully. "You have to give them
something to yap about, or they'll dig for it."
Max liked the freighter. The tremendous speed so close to the ground
exhilarated him; he decided that if he could not be a spaceman, this life
would not be bad--he'd find out how high the application fee was and start
saving. He liked the easy way Red picked out on the pavement ahead the speed
line that matched the _Molly's_ speed and then laid the big craft into a
curve. It was usually the outermost line, with the _Molly_ on her side and the
horizon tilted up at a crazy angle.
Near Oklahoma City they swooped under the ring guides of the C.S.&E.
just as a train went over--the _Razor_, by Max's calculations. "I used to herd
those things," Red remarked, glancing up.
"You _did?_"
"Yep. But they got to worrying me. I hated it every time I made a jump
and felt the weight sag out from under me. Then I got a notion that the train
had a mind of its own and was just waiting to turn aside instead of entering
the next guide ring. That sort of thing is no good. So I found a teamster who
wanted to better himself and paid the fine to both guilds to let us swap.
Never regretted it. Two hundred miles an hour when you're close to the ground
is enough."
"Uh, how about space ships?"

"That's another matter. Elbow room out there. Say, kid, while you're at
Earthport you should take a look at the big babies. They're quite something."
The library book had been burning a hole in his rucksack; at Oklahoma
City he noticed a postal box at the freight depot and, on impulse, dropped the
book into it. After he had mailed it he had a twinge of worry that he might
have given a clue to his whereabouts which would get back to Montgomery, but
he suppressed the worry--the book _had_ to be returned. Vagrancy in the eyes
of the law had not worried him, nor trespass, nor impersonating a licensed
teamster--but filching a book was a sin.
Max was asleep in the bunk when they arrived. Red shook him. "End of the
line, kid."
Max sat up, yawning. "Where are we?"
"Earthport. Let's shake a leg and get this baby unloaded."
It was two hours past sunrise and growing desert hot by the time they
got the _Molly_ disgorged. Red stood him to a last meal. Red finished first,
paid, then laid a bill down by Max's plate. "Thanks, kid. That's for luck. So
long." He was gone while Max still had his mouth hanging open. He had never
learned his friend's name, did not even know his shield number.
Earthport was much the biggest settlement Max had ever seen and
everything about it confused him--the hurrying self-centered crowds, the
enormous buildings, the slidewalks in place of streets, the noise, the desert
sun beating down, the flatness--why, there wasn't anything you could call a
hill closer than the skyline!
He saw his first extra-terrestrial, an eight-foot native of Epsilon
Gemini V, striding out of a shop with a package under his left arms--as
casually, Max thought, as a farmer doing his week's shopping at the Corners.
Max stared. He knew what the creature was from pictures and SV shows, but
seeing one was another matter. Its multiple eyes, like a wreath of yellow
grapes around the head, gave it a grotesque faceless appearance. Max let his
own head swivel to follow it.
The creature approached a policeman, tapped the top of his cap, and
said, "Excuse me, sahr, but can you tirect me to the Tesert Palms Athletic
Club?" Max could not tell where the noise came out.
Max finally noticed that he seemed to be the only one staring, so he
walked slowly on, while sneaking looks over his shoulder--which resulted in
his bumping into a stranger. "Oh, excuse me!" Max blurted. The stranger looked
at him. "Take it easy, cousin. You're in the big city now." After that he
tried to be careful.
He had intended to seek out the Guild Hall of the Mother Chapter of
Astrogators at once in the forlorn hope that even without his books and
identification card he might still identify himself and find that Uncle Chet
had provided for his future. But there was so much to see that he loitered. He
found himself presently in front of Imperial House, the hotel that guaranteed
to supply any combination of pressure, temperature, lighting, atmosphere,
pseudogravitation, and diet favored by any known race of intelligent
creatures. He hung around hoping to see some of the guests, but the only one
who came out while he was there was wheeled out in a pressurized travel tank
and he could not see into it.
He noticed the police guard at the door eyeing him and started to move
on--then decided to ask directions, reasoning that if it was all right for a
Geminian to question a policeman it certainly must be all right for a human
being. He found himself quoting the extra-terrestrial. "Excuse me, sir, but
could you direct me to the Astrogators' Guild Hall?"
The officer looked him over. "At the foot of the Avenue of Planets, just
before you reach the port."
"Uh, which way do . . ."
"New in town?"
"Yeah. Yes, sir."
"Where are you staying?"
"Staying? Why, nowhere yet. I just got here. I . . ."

"What's your business at the Astrogators' Hall?"
"It's on account of my uncle," Max answered miserably.
"Your uncle?"
"He . . . he's an astrogator." He mentally crossed his fingers over the
tense.
The policeman inspected again. "Take this slide to the next
intersection, change and slide west. Big building with the guild sunburst over
the door--can't miss it. Stay out of restricted areas." Max left without
waiting to find out how he was to know a restricted area. The Guild Hall did
prove easy to find; the slidewalk to the west ducked underground and when it
emerged at its swing-around Max was deposited in front of it.
But he had not eyes for it. To the west where avenue and buildings ended
was the field and on it space ships, stretching away for miles--fast little
military darts, stubby Moon shuttles, winged ships that served the satellite
stations, robot freighters, graceless and powerful. But directly in front of
the gate hardly half a mile away was a great ship that he knew at once, the
starship _Asgard_. He knew her history, Uncle Chet had served in her. A
hundred years earlier she had been built out in space as a space-to-space
rocket ship; she was then the _Prince of Wales_. Years passed, her tubes were
ripped out and a mass-conversion torch was kindled in her; she became the
_Einstein_. More years passed, for nearly twenty she swung empty around Luna,
a lifeless, outmoded hulk. Now in place of the torch she had Horst-Conrad
impellers that clutched at the fabric of space itself; thanks to them she was
now able to touch Mother Terra. To commemorate her rebirth she had been dubbed
_Asgard_, heavenly home of the gods.
Her massive, pear-shaped body was poised on its smaller end, steadied by
an invisible scaffolding of thrust beams. Max knew where they must be, for
there was a ring of barricades spotted around her to keep the careless from
wandering into the deadly loci.
He pressed his nose against the gate to the field and tried to see more
of her, until a voice called out, "Away from there, Jack! Don't you see that
sign?"
Max looked up. Above his head was a sign: RESTRICTED AREA. Reluctantly
he moved away and walked back to the Guild Hall.
4
THE ASTROGATORS' GUILD
Everything about the hall of the Mother Chapter was to Max's eyes
lavish, churchlike, and frightening. The great doors opened silently as he
approached, dilating away into the walls. His feet made no sound on the
tesselated floor. He started down the long, high foyer, wondering where he
should go, when a firm voice stopped him. "May I help you, please?"
He turned. A beautiful young lady with a severe manner held him with her
eye. She was seated behind a desk. Max went up to her. "Uh, maybe you could
tell me, Ma'am, who I ought to see. I don't rightly know just . . ."
"One moment. Your name, please?" Several minutes later she had wormed
out of him the basic facts of his quest. "So far as I can see, you haven't any
status here and no excuse for appealing to the Guild."

"But I told you . . ."
"Never mind. I'm going to put it up to the legal office." She touched a
button and a screen raised up on her desk; she spoke to it. "Mr. Hanson, can
you spare a moment?"
"Yes, Grace?"
"There is a young man here who claims to be a legacy of the Guild. Will
you talk with him?"
The voice answered, "Look, Grace, you know the procedures. Get his
address, send him on his way, and send his papers up for consideration."
She frowned and touched another control. Although Max could see that she
continued to talk, no sound reached him. Then she nodded and the screen slid
back into the desk. She touched another button and said, "Skeeter!"
A page boy popped out of a door behind her and looked Max over with cold
eyes. "Skeeter," she went on, "take this visitor to Mr. Hanson."
The page sniffed. "Him?"
"Him. And fasten your collar and spit out that gum."
Mr. Hanson listened to Max's story and passed him on to his boss, the
chief legal counsel, who listened to a third telling. That official then
drummed his desk and made a call, using the silencing device the girl had
used.
He then said to Max, "You're in luck, son. The Most Worthy High
Secretary will grant you a few minutes of his time. Now when you go in, don't
sit down, remember to speak only when spoken to, and get out quickly when he
indicates that the audience is ended."
The High Secretary's office made the lavishness that had thus far filled
Max's eyes seem like austerity. The rug alone could have been swapped for the
farm on which Max grew up. There was no communication equipment in evidence,
no files, not even a desk. The High Secretary lounged back in a mammoth easy
chair while a servant massaged his scalp. He raised his head as Max appeared
and said, "Come in, son. Sit down there. What is your name?"
"Maximilian Jones, sir."
They looked at each other. The Secretary saw a lanky youth who needed a
haircut, a bath, and a change of clothes; Max saw a short, fat little man in a
wrinkled uniform. His head seemed too big for him and Max could not make up
his mind whether the eyes were kindly or cold.
"And you are a nephew of Chester Arthur Jones?"
"Yes, sir."
"I knew Brother Jones well. A fine mathematician." The High Secretary
went on, "I understand that you have had the misfortune to lose your
government Citizen's Identification. Carl."
He had not raised his voice but a young man appeared with the speed of a
genie. "Yes, sir?"
"Take this young man's thumb print, call the Bureau of
Identification--not here, but the main office at New Washington. My
compliments to the Chief of Bureau and tell him that I would be pleased to
have immediate identification while you hold the circuit."
The print was taken speedily; the man called Carl left. The High
Secretary went on, "What was your purpose in coming here?" Diffidently Max
explained that his uncle had told him that he intended to nominate him for
apprenticeship in the guild.
The man nodded. "So I understand. I am sorry to tell you, young fellow,
that Brother Jones made no nomination."
Max had difficulty in taking in the simple statement. So much was his
inner pride tied to his pride in his uncle's profession, so much had he
depended on his hope that his uncle had named him his professional heir, that
he could not accept at once the verdict that he was nobody and nothing. He
blurted out, "You're _sure?_ Did you look?"
The masseur looked shocked but the High Secretary answered calmly, "The
archives have been searched, not once, but twice. There is no possible doubt."
The High Secretary sat up, gestured slightly, and the servant disappeared.

"I'm sorry."
"But he _told_ me," Max said stubbornly. "He said he was going to."
"Nevertheless he did not." The man who had taken the thumb print came in
and offered a memorandum to the High Secretary, who glanced at it and waved it
away. "I've no doubt that he considered you. Nomination to our brotherhood
involves a grave responsibility; it is not unusual for a childless brother to
have his eye on a likely lad for a long time before deciding whether or not he
measures up. For some reason your uncle did not name you."
Max was appalled by the humiliating theory that his beloved uncle might
have found him unworthy. It could not be true--why, just the day before he
died, he had said--he interrupted his thoughts to say, "Sir-- I think I know
what happened."
"Eh?"
"Uncle Chester died suddenly. He meant to name me, but he didn't get a
chance. I'm sure of it."
"Possibly. Men have been known to fail to get their affairs in order
before the last orbit. But I must assume that he knew what he was doing."
"But--"
"That's all, young man. No, don't go away. I've been thinking about you
today." Max looked startled, the High Secretary smiled and continued, "You
see, you are the second 'Maximilian Jones' who has come to us with this
story."
"Huh?"
"Huh indeed." The guild executive reached into a pocket of his chair,
pulled out some books and a card, handed them to Max, who stared
unbelievingly.
"Uncle Chet's books!"
"Yes. Another man, older than yourself, came here yesterday with your
identification card and these books. He was less ambitious than you are," he
added dryly. "He was willing to settle for a rating less lofty than
astrogator."
"What happened?"
"He left suddenly when we attempted to take his finger prints. I did not
see him. But when you showed up today I began to wonder how long a procession
of 'Maximilian Jones's' would favor us. Better guard that card in the
future--I fancy we have saved you a fine."
Max placed it in an inner pocket. "Thanks a lot, sir." He started to put
the books in his rucksack. The High Secretary gestured in denial.
"No, no! Return the books, please."
"But Uncle Chet gave them to me."
"Sorry. At most he loaned them to you--and he should not have done even
that. The tools of our profession are never owned individually; they are
loaned to each brother. Your uncle should have turned them in when he retired,
but some of the brothers have a sentimental fondness for having them in their
possession. Give them to me, please."
Max still hesitated. "Come now," the guildsman said reasonably. "It
would not do for our professional secrets to be floating around loose,
available to anyone. Even the hairdressers do not permit that. We have a high
responsibility to the public. Only a member of this guild, trained, tested,
sworn, and accepted, may lawfully be custodian of those manuals."
Max's answer was barely audible. "I don't see the harm. I'm not going to
get to use them, it looks like."
"You don't believe in anarchy, surely? Our whole society is founded on
entrusting grave secrets only to those who are worthy. But don't feel sad.
Each brother, when he is issued his tools, deposits an earnest with the
bursar. In my opinion, since you are the nearest relative of Brother Jones, we
may properly repay the earnest to you for their return. Carl."
The young man appeared again. "The deposit monies, please." Carl had the
money with him--he seemed to earn his living by knowing what the High
Secretary was about to want. Max found himself accepting an impressive sheaf

of money, more than he had ever touched before, and the books were taken from
him before he could think of another objection.
It seemed time to leave, but he was motioned back to his chair.
"Personally, I am sorry to disappoint you, but I am merely the servant of my
brothers; I have no choice. However . . ." The High Secretary fitted his
finger tips together. "Our brotherhood takes care of its own. There are funds
at my disposal for such cases. How would you like to go into training?"
"For the _Guild?_"
"No, no! We don't grant brotherhood as charity. But for some respectable
trade, metalsmith, or chef, or tailor--what you wish. Any occupation not
hereditary. The brotherhood will sponsor you, pay your 'prentice fee and, if
you make good, lend you your contribution when you are sworn in."
Max knew he should accept gratefully. He was being offered an
opportunity free that most of the swarming masses never got on any terms. But
the cross-grained quirk in him that had caused him to spurn the stew that Sam
had left behind made this generous offer stick in his craw. "Thanks just the
same," he answered in tones almost surly, "but I don't rightly think I can
take it."
The High Secretary looked bleak. "So? It's your life." He snapped his
fingers, a page appeared, and Max was led quickly out of the Hall.
He stood on the steps of the Guild Hall and wondered dejectedly what he
should do next. Even the space ships on the field at the foot of the street
did not attract; he could not have looked at one without feeling like crying.
He looked to the east instead.
A short distance away a jaunty figure leaned against a trash receptacle.
As Max's eyes rested on the man he straightened up, flipped a cigarette to the
pavement, and started toward him.
Max looked at him again. "Sam!" It was undoubtedly the wayfarer who had
robbed him--well dressed, clean shaved--but Sam nonetheless. Max hurried
toward him.
"Howdy, Max," Sam greeted him with an unembarrassed grin, "how did you
make out?"
"I ought to have you arrested!"
"Now, now--keep your voice down. You're making yourself conspicuous."
Max took a breath and lowered his voice. "You stole my books."
"_Your_ books? They weren't yours--and I returned them to their owners.
You want to arrest me for that?"
"But you . . . Well, anyhow you . . ."
A voice, civil, firm, and official, spoke at Max's elbow. "Is this
person annoying you, sir?" Max turned and found a policeman standing behind
him. He started to speak, then bit off the words as he realized the question
had been addressed to Sam.
Sam took hold of Max's upper arm in a gesture that was protective and
paternal, but quite firm. "Not at all, officer, thank you."
"Are you sure? I received word that this chico was headed this way and
I've had my eye on him."
"He's a friend of mine. I was waiting for him here."
"As you say. We have a lot of trouble with vagrants. They all seem to
head for Earthport."
"He's not a vagrant. He's a young friend of mine from the country and
I'm afraid he's gotten a bit confused. I'll be responsible."
"Very well, sir."
"Not at all." Max let himself be led away. When they were out of earshot
Sam said, "That was close. That nosy clown would have had us both in the bull
pen. You did all right, kid--kept your lip zipped at the right time."
They were around the corner into a less important street before Sam let
go his grip. He stopped and faced Max, grinning. "Well, kid?"
"I should a' told that cop about you!"
"Why didn't you? He was right there."
Max found himself caught by contradictory feelings. He was angry with

Sam, no doubt about it, but his first unstudied reaction at seeing him had
been the warm pleasure one gets from recognizing a familiar face among
strangers--the anger had come a split second later. Now Sam looked at him with
easy cynicism, a quizzical smile on his face. "Well, kid?" he repeated. "If
you want to turn me in, let's go back and get it over with. I won't run."
Max looked back at him peevishly. "Oh, forget it!"
"Thanks. I'm sorry about it, kid. I really am."
"Then why did you do it?"
Sam's face changed suddenly to a sad, far-away look, then resumed its
cheerful cynicism. "I was tempted by an idea, old son--every man has his
limits. Some day I'll tell you. Now, how about a bit to eat and a gab? There's
a joint near here where we can talk without having the nosies leaning over our
shoulders."
"I don't know as I want to."
"Oh, come now! The food isn't much but it's better than mulligan."
Max had been ready with a stiff speech about how he would not turn Sam
in, but he certainly did not want to eat with him; the mention of mulligan
brought him up short. He remembered uneasily that Sam had not inquired as to
_his_ morals, but had shared his food.
"Well . . . okay."
"That's my boy!" They went on down the street. The neighborhood was a
sort to be found near the port in any port city; once off the pompous Avenue
of the Planets it became more crowded, noisier, more alive, and somehow warmer
and more friendly despite a strong air of "keep your hand on your purse."
Hole-in-the-wall tailor shops, little restaurants none too clean, cheap
hotels, honky-tonks, fun arcades, exhibits both "educational" and
"scientific," street vendors, small theaters with gaudy posters and sounds of
music leaking out, shops fronting for betting parlors, tattoo parlors fronting
for astrologers, and the inevitable Salvation Army mission gave the street
flavor its stylish cousins lacked. Martians in trefoil sunglasses and
respirators, humanoids from Beta Corvi III, things with exoskeletons from
Allah knew where, all jostled with humans of all shades and all blended in
easy camaraderie.
Sam stopped at a shop with the age-old symbol of three golden spheres.
"Wait here. Be right out."
Max waited and watched the throng. Sam came out shortly without his
coat. "Now we eat."
"Sam! Did you pawn your coat?"
"Give the man a cigar! How did you guess?"
"But . . . Look, I didn't know you were broke; you looked prosperous.
Get it back, I'll . . . I'll pay for our lunch."
"Say, that's sweet of you, kid. But forget it. I don't need a coat this
weather. Truth is, I was dressed up just to make a good impression at--well, a
little matter of business."
Max blurted out, "But how did you . . .", then shut up. Sam grinned.
"Did I steal the fancy rags? No. I encountered a citizen who believed in
percentages and engaged him in a friendly game. Never bet on percentages, kid;
skill is more fundamental. Here we are."
The room facing the street was a bar, beyond was a restaurant. Sam led
him on through the restaurant, through the kitchen, down a passage off which
there were card rooms, and ended in a smaller, less pretentious dining room;
Sam picked a table in a corner. An enormous Samoan shuffled up, dragging one
leg. Sam nodded, "Howdy, Percy." He turned to Max. "A drink first?"
"Uh, I guess not."
"Smart lad. Lay off the stuff. Irish for me, Percy, and we'll both have
whatever you had for lunch." The Samoan waited silently. Sam shrugged and laid
money on the table, Percy scooped it up.
Max objected, "But I was going to pay."
"You can pay for the lunch. Percy owns the place," he added. "He's
offensively rich, but he didn't get that way by trusting the likes of me. Now

tell me about yourself, old son. How you got here? How you made out with the
astrogators . . . everything. Did they kill the fatted calf?"
"Well, no." There seemed to be no reason not to tell Sam and he found
that he wanted to talk. Sam nodded at the end.
"About what I had guessed. Any plans now?"
"No. I don't know what to do now, Sam."
"Hmm . . . it's an ill wind that has no turning. Eat your lunch and let
me think."
Later he added, "Max, what do you _want_ to do?"
"Well . . . I wanted to be an astrogator . . ."
"That's out."
"I know."
"Tell me, did you want to be an astrogator and nothing else, or did you
simply want to go into space?"
"Why, I guess I never thought about it any other way."
"Well, think about it."
Max did so. "I want to space. If I can't go as an astrogator, I want to
go anyhow. But I don't see how. The Astrogators' Guild is the only one I stood
a chance for."
"There are ways."
"Huh? Do you mean put in for emigration?"
Sam shook his head. "It costs more than you could save to go to one of
the desirable colonies--and the ones they give you free rides to I wouldn't
wish on my worst enemies."
"Then what do you mean?"
Sam hesitated. "There are ways to wangle it, old son--if you do what I
say. This uncle of yours--you were around him a lot?"
"Why, sure."
"Talked about space with you?"
"Certainly. That's all we talked about."
"Hmm . . . how well do you know the patter?"
5
". . . YOUR MONEY AND MY KNOW-HOW . . ."
"The patter?" Max looked puzzled. "I suppose I know what everybody
knows."
"Where's the worry hole?"
"Huh? That's the control room."
"If the cheater wants a corpse, where does he find it?"
Max looked amused. "That's just stuff from SV serials, nobody talks like
that aboard ship. The cook is the cook, and if he wanted a side of beef, he'd
go to the reefer for it."
"How do you tell a 'beast' from an animal?"
"Why, a 'beast' is a passenger, but an animal is just an animal, I
guess."
"Suppose you were on a ship for Mars and they announced that the power
plant had gone blooie and the ship was going to spiral into the Sun? What
would you think?"

"I'd think somebody was trying to scare me. In the first place, you
wouldn't be 'on' a ship--'in' is the right word. Second, a spiral isn't one of
the possible orbits. And third, if a ship was headed for Mars from Earth, it
couldn't fall into the Sun; the orbit would be incompatible."
"Suppose you were part of a ship's crew in a strange port and you wanted
to go out and look the place over. How would you go about asking the captain
for permission?"
"Why, I wouldn't."
"You'd just jump ship?"
"Let me finish. If I wanted to hit dirt, I'd ask the first officer; the
captain doesn't bother with such things. If the ship was big enough, I'd have
to ask my department head first." Max sat up and held Sam's eye. "Sam--you've
been spaceside. Haven't you?"
"What gave you that notion, kid?"
"What's your guild?"
"Stow it, Max. Ask me no questions and I'll sell you no pigs in a poke.
Maybe I've studied up on the jive just as you have."
"I don't believe it," Max said bluntly.
Sam looked pained. Max went on, "What's this all about? You ask me a
bunch of silly questions--sure, I know quite a bit about spaceside; I've been
reading about it all my life and Uncle Chet would talk by the hour. But what
of it?"
Sam looked at him and said softly, "Max--the _Asgard_ is raising next
Thursday--for starside. Would you like to be in her?"
Max thought about it. To be in the fabulous _Asgard_, to be heading out
to the stars, to be--he brushed the vision aside. "Don't talk that way, Sam!
You know I'd give my right arm. Why needle me?"
"How much money have you?"
"Huh? Why?"
"How much?"
"I haven't even had time to count it." Max started to haul out the wad
of bills he had been given; Sam hastily and unobtrusively stopped him.
"Psst!" he protested. "Don't flash a roll in here. Do you want to eat
through a slit in your throat? Keep it down!"
Startled, Max took the advice. He was still more startled when he
finished the tally; he had known that he had been given quite a lot of money
but this was more than he had dreamed. "How much?" Sam persisted. Max told
him, Sam swore softly. "Well, it will just have to do."
"Do for what?"
"You'll see. Put it away."
As Max did so he said wonderingly, "Sam, I had no idea those books were
so valuable."
"They aren't."
"Huh?"
"It's malarkey. Lots of guilds do it. They want to make it appear that
their professional secrets are precious, so they make the candidate put up a
wad of dough for his reference books. If those things were published in the
ordinary way, they'd sell at a reasonable price."
"But that's right, isn't it? As the Worthy High Secretary explained, it
wouldn't do for just anybody to have that knowledge."
Sam made a rude noise and pretended to spit. "What difference would it
make? Suppose you still had them--you don't have a ship to conn."
"But . . ." Max stopped and grinned. "I can't see that it did any good
to take them away from me anyhow. I've read them, so I know what's in them."
"Sure you know. Maybe you even remember some of the methods. But you
don't have all those columns of figures so you can look up the one you need
when you need it. That's what they care about."
"But I do! I read them, I tell you." Max wrinkled his forehead, then
began to recite: "'Page 272, Calculated Solutions of the Differential Equation
of Motion by the Ricardo Assumption--" He began to reel off a series of

seven-place figures. Sam listened in growing surprise, then stopped him.
"Kid, you really remember that? You weren't making it up?"
"Of course not, I _read_ it."
"Well, I'll be a beat up . . . Look, you're a page-at-a-glance reader?
Is that it?"
"No, not exactly. I'm a pretty fast reader, but I do have to read it.
But I don't forget. I never have been able to see how people forget. I can't
forget anything."
Sam shook his head wonderingly. "I've been able to forget a lot of
things, thank Heaven." He thought for a moment. "Maybe we should forget the
other caper and exploit this talent of yours. I can think of angles."
"What do you mean? And what other caper?"
"Hmm . . . no, I was right the first time. The idea is to get away from
here. And with your funny memory the chances are a whole lot better. Even
though you sling the slang pretty well I was worried. Now I'm not."
"Sam, stop talking riddles. What are you figuring on?'
"Okay, kid, I'll lay it on the table." He glanced around, leaned
forward, and spoke even more quietly. "We take the money and I spread it
around carefully. When the _Asgard_ raises, we're signed on as crewmen."
"As apprentices? We wouldn't even have time for ground school. And
besides you're too old to 'prentice."
"Use your head! We don't have enough to pay one apprentice fee, let
alone two, in any space guild--and the _Asgard_ isn't signing 'prentices
anyhow. We'll be experienced journeymen in one of the guilds, with records to
prove it."
When the idea soaked in, Max was shocked. "But they put you in jail for
that!"
"Where do you think you are now?"
"Well, I'm not in jail. And I don't want to be."
"This whole planet is one big jail, and a crowded one at that. What
chance have you got? If you aren't born rich, or born into one of the
hereditary guilds, what can you do? Sign up with one of the labor companies."
"But there are non-hereditary guilds."
"Can you pay the fee? You've got a year, maybe two until you're too old
to 'prentice. If you were sharp with cards you might manage it--but can you
earn it? You should live so long! Your old man should have saved it; he left
you a farm instead." Sam stopped suddenly, bit his thumb. "Max, I'll play
fair. Your old man did leave you a fair start in life. With the money you've
got you can go home, hire a shyster, and maybe squeeze that Montgomery item
out of the money he swindled for your farm. Then you can buy your
apprenticeship in some guild. Do it, kid. I won't stand in your way." He
watched Max narrowly.
Max reflected that he had just refused a chance to pick a trade and be
given a free start. Maybe he should reconsider. Maybe . . . "No! That's not
what I want. This . . . this, uh, scheme of yours; how do we do it?"
Sam relaxed and grinned. "My boy!"
Sam got them a room over Percy's restaurant. There he coached him. Sam
went out several times and Max's money went with him. When Max protested Sam
said wearily, "What do you want? To hold my heart as security? Do you want to
come along and scare 'em out of the dicker? The people I have to reason with
will be taking chances. Or do you think you can arrange matters yourself? It's
your money and my know-how . . . that's the partnership."
Max watched him leave the first time with gnawing doubts, but Sam came
back. Once he brought with him an elderly, gross woman who looked Max over as
if he were an animal up for auction. Sam did not introduce her but said, "How
about it? I thought a mustache would help."
She looked at Max from one side, then the other. "No," she decided,
"that would just make him look made up for amateur theatricals." She touched
Max's head with moist, cold fingers; when he drew back, she admonished, "Don't
flinch, honey duck. Aunt Becky has to work on you. No, we'll move back his

hair line above his temples, thin it out on top, and kill its gloss. Some
faint wrinkles tattooed around his eyes. Mmm . . . that's all. Mustn't overdo
it."
When this fat artist was through Max looked ten years older. Becky asked
if he wanted his hair roots killed, or would he prefer to have his scalp
return to normal in time? Sam started to insist on permanence, but she brushed
him aside. "I'll give him a bottle of 'Miracle Gro'--no extra charge, it's
just rubbing alcohol--and he can make a big thing of using it. How about it,
lover? You're too pretty to age you permanently."
Max accepted the "Miracle Gro"--hair restored or your money back.
Sam took away his citizen's identification card, returned with another
one. It had his right name, a wrong age, his right serial number, a wrong
occupation, his own thumb print, and a wrong address. Max looked at it
curiously. "It looks real."
"It should. The man who made it makes thousands of real ones--but he
charges extra for this." That night Sam brought him a book titled _Ship
Economy_ and embossed with the seal of the Guild of Space Stewards, Cooks, and
Purser's Clerks. "Better stay up all night and see how much you can soak up.
The man it belongs to won't sleep more than ten hours even with the jolt Percy
slipped into his nightcap. Want a pill to keep you awake?"
"I don't think so." Max examined it. It was in fine print and quite
thick. But by five in the morning he had finished it. He woke Sam and gave it
back, then went to sleep, his head buzzing with stowage and dunnage, moment
arms and mass calculations, hydroponics techniques, cargo records, tax forms,
diets, food preservation and preparation, daily, weekly, and quarterly
accounts, and how to get rats out of a compartment which must not be
evacuated. Simple stuff, he decided--he wondered why such things were
considered too esoteric for laymen.
On the fourth day of his incarceration Sam fitted him out with spaceside
clothes, none of them new, and gave him a worn plastileather personal record
book. The first page stated that he was an accepted brother of the Stewards,
Cooks, and Purser's Clerks, having honorably completed his apprenticeship. It
listed his skills and it appeared that his dues had been paid each quarter for
seven years. What appeared to be his own signature appeared above that of the
High Steward, with the seal of the guild embossed through both. The other
pages recorded his trips, his efficiency ratings, and other permanent data,
each properly signed by the first officers and pursers concerned. He noted
with interest that he had been fined three days pay in the _Cygnus_ for
smoking in an unauthorized place and that he had once for six weeks been
allowed to strike for chartsman, having paid the penalty to the Chartsmen &
Computers Guild for the chance.
"See anything odd?" asked Sam.
"It all looks funny to me."
"It says you've been to Luna. Everybody's been to Luna. But the ships
you served in are mostly out of commission and none of the pursers happens to
be in Earthport now. The only starship you ever jumped in was lost on the trip
immediately after the one you took. Get me?"
"I think so."
"When you talk to another spaceman, no matter what ship he served in,
it's not one you served in--you won't be showing this record to anybody but
the purser and your boss anyhow."
"But suppose _they_ served in one of these?"
"Not in the _Asgard_. We made darn sure. Now I'm going to take you out
on an evening of gaiety. You'll drink warm milk on account of your ulcer and
you'll complain when you can't get it. And that's just about all you'll talk
about--your symptoms. You'll start a reputation right now for being
untalkative; you can't make many mistakes with your mouth shut. Watch
yourself, kid, there will be spacemen around you all evening. If you mess it
up, I'll leave you dirtside and raise without you. Let me see you walk again."
Max walked for him. Sam cursed gently. "Cripes, you still walk like a

farmer. Get your feet out of those furrows, boy."
"No good?"
"It'll have to do. Grab your bonnet. We'll strike while the iron's in
the fire and let the bridges fall where they may."
6
"SPACEMAN" JONES
The _Asgard_ was to raise the next day. Max woke early and tried to wake
Sam, but this proved difficult. At last the older man sat up. "Oh, what a
head! What time is it?"
"About six."
"And you woke me? Only my feeble condition keeps me from causing you to
join your ancestors. Go back to sleep."
"But today's the day!"
"Who cares? She raises at noon. We'll sign on at the last minute; that
way you won't have time to make a slip."
"Sam? _How do you know they'll take us?_"
"Oh, for Pete's sake! It's all arranged. Now shut up. Or go downstairs
and get breakfast--but don't talk to anybody. If you're a pal, you'll bring me
a pot of coffee at ten o'clock."
"And breakfast?"
"Don't mention food in my presence. Show some respect." Sam pulled the
covers up over his head.
It was nearly eleven thirty when they presented themselves at the gate
of the port; ten minutes later before the bus deposited them at the base of
the ship. Max looked up at its great, bulging sides but was cut short by a
crewman standing at the lift and holding a list. "Names."
"Anderson."
"Jones."
He checked them off. "Get in the ship. You should have been here an hour
ago." The three climbed into the cage; it swung clear of the ground and was
reeled in, swaying, like a bucket on a well rope.
Sam looked down and shuddered. "Never start a trip feeling good," he
advised Max. "It might make you sorry to be leaving." The cage was drawn up
inside the ship; the lock closed after them and they stepped out into the
_Asgard_. Max was trembling with stage fright.
He had expected to be sworn into the ship's company by the first
officer, as called for by law. But his reception was depressingly
unceremonious. The crewman who had checked them into the ship told them to
follow him; he led them to the Purser's office. There the Chief Clerk had them
sign and thumbprint the book, yawning the while and tapping his buck teeth.
Max surrendered his forged personal record book, while feeling as if the
deception were stamped on it in bold letters. But Mr. Kuiper merely chucked it
into a file basket. He then turned to them. "This is a taut ship. You've
started by very nearly missing it. That's a poor start."
Sam said nothing. Max said, "Yessir."
The Chief Clerk went on, "Stow your gear, get your chow, and report
back." He glanced at a wall chart. "One of you in D-112, the other in E-009."

Max started to ask how to get there, but Sam took his elbow and eased
him out of the office. Outside he said, "Don't ask any questions you can
avoid. We're on Baker deck, that's all we need to know." Presently they came
to a companionway and started back down. Max felt a sudden change in pressure,
Sam grinned. "She's sealed. Won't be long now."
They were in D-112, an eight-man bunkroom, and Sam was showing him how
to set the lock on the one empty locker when there was a distant call on a
loudspeaker. Max felt momentarily dizzy and his weight seemed to pulse. Then
it stopped. Sam remarked, "They were a little slow synchronizing the field--or
else this bucket of bolts has an unbalanced phaser." He clapped Max on the
back. "We made it, kid."
They were in space.
E-009 was down one more deck and on the far side; they left Sam's gear
there and started to look for lunch. Sam stopped a passing engineer's mate.
"Hey, shipmate--we're fresh caught. Where's the crew's mess?"
"Clockwise about eighty and inboard, this deck." He looked them over.
"Fresh caught, eh? Well, you'll find out."
"Like that, huh?"
"Worse. A madhouse squared. If I wasn't married, I'd 'a' stayed
dirtside." He went on his way.
Sam said, "Ignore it, kid. All the oldtimers in a ship claim its the
worst madhouse in space. A matter of pride." But their next experience seemed
to confirm it; the serving window in the mess room had closed at noon, when
the ship lifted; Max mournfully resigned himself to living with a tight belt
until supper. But Sam pushed on into the galley and came out presently with
two loaded trays. They found empty places and sat down.
"How did you do it?"
"Any cook will feed you if you let him explain first what a louse you
are and how by rights he doesn't have to."
The food was good--real beef patties, vegetables from the ship's
gardens, wheat bread, a pudding, and coffee. Max polished his platter and
wondered if he dared ask for seconds. He decided against it. The talk flowed
around him and only once was there danger that his tyro status might show up,
that being when a computerman asked him a direct question as to his last trip.
Sam stalled it off. "Imperial survey," he answered briefly. "We're both
still covered."
The computerman grinned knowingly. "Which jail were you in? The Imperial
Council hasn't ordered a secret survey in years."
"This one was so secret they forgot to tell you about it. Write 'em a
letter and burn them out about it," Sam stood up. "Finished, Max?"
On the way back to the Purser's Office Max worried as to his probable
assignment, checking over in his mind the skills and experience he was alleged
to have. He need not have worried; Mr. Kuiper, with a fine disregard for such
factors, assigned him as stableman.
The _Asgard_ was a combined passenger liner and freighter. She carried
this trip Hereford breeding stock, two bulls and two dozen cows, and an
assortrnent of other animals consigned for ecologic and economic reasons to
colonies--pigs, chickens, sheep, a pair of Angora goats, a family of llamas.
It was contrary to Imperial policy to plant most terrestrial fauna on other
planets; the colonials were expected to establish economy with indigenous
flora and fauna--but some animals have been bred for so many generations for
the use of man that they are not easily replaced by exotic creatures. On Gamma
Leonis VI (b), New Mars, the saurians known locally as "chuckleheads" or
"chucks" could and did replace Percherons as draft animals with greater
efficiency and economy--but men disliked them. There was never the familial
trust that exists between horses and men; unless a strain of chucks should
develop a degree of rapport with men (which seemed unlikely) they would
eventually die out and be replaced by the horse, for the unforgivable sin of

failing to establish a firm treaty with the most ravenous, intolerant, deadly,
and successful of the animals in the explored universe, Man.
There was also a cage of English sparrows. Max never did find out where
these noisy little scavengers were believed to be necessary, nor was he
acquainted with the complex mathematical analysis by which such conclusions
were reached. He simply fed them and tried to keep their quarters clean.
There were cats in the _Asgard_, too, but most of these were free
citizens and crewmen, charged with holding down the rats and mice that had
gone into space along with mankind. One of Max's duties was to change the sand
boxes on each deck and take the soiled ones to the oxydizer for processing.
The other cats were pets, property of passengers, unhappy prisoners in the
kennel off the stables. The passengers' dogs lived there, too; no dogs were
allowed to run free.
Max wanted to look back at Earth and see it as a shrinking globe in the
sky, but that was a privilege reserved for passengers. He spent the short
period when it would have been possible in hauling (by hand) green timothy hay
from the hydroponics airconditioning plant to the stables and in cleaning said
stables. It was a task he neither liked nor disliked; by accident he had been
assigned to work that he understood.
His immediate boss was the Chief Ship's Steward, Mr. Giordano. Mr. "Gee"
split the ship's housekeeping with Mr. Dumont, Chief Passengers' Steward;
their domains divided at Charlie deck. Thus Mr. Dumont had passengers'
quarters, officers' country, offices, and the control and communication
stations, while Giordano was responsible for everything down (or aft) to but
not including the engineering space--crew's quarters, mess, and galley,
stores, stables and kennel, hydroponics deck, and cargo spaces. Both worked
for the Purser, who in turn was responsible to the First Officer.
The organization of starships derived in part from that of military
vessels, in part from ocean liners of earlier days, and in part from the
circumstances of interstellar travel. The first officer was boss of the ship
and a wise captain did not interfere with him. The captain, although by law
monarch of his miniature world, turned his eyes outward; the first officer
turned his inward. As long as all went well the captain concerned himself only
with the control room and with astrogation; the first officer bossed
everything else. Even astrogators, communicators, computermen, and chartsmen
were under the first officer, although in practice he had nothing to do with
them when they were on duty since they worked in the "worry hole" under the
captain.
The chief engineer was under the first officer, too, but he was nearly
an autonomous satrap. In a taut, well-run ship he kept his bailiwick in such
shape that the first officer did not need to worry about it. The chief
engineer was responsible not only for the power plant and the Horst-Conrad
impellers but for all auxiliary engineering equipment wherever located--for
example the pumps and fans of the hydroponics installations, even though the
purser, through his chief ship's steward, took care of the farming thereof.
Such was the usual organization of starship liner-freighters and such
was the _Asgard_. It was not identical with the organization of a man-of-war
and very different from that of the cheerless transports used to ship convicts
and paupers out to colonies that were being forced--in _those_ ships, the
purser's department was stripped to a clerk or two and the transportees did
all the work, cooking, cleaning, handling cargo, everything. But the _Asgard_
carried paid passengers, some of whom measured their wealth in megabucks; they
expected luxury hotel service even light-years out in space. Of the three main
departments of the _Asgard_, astrogation, engineering, and housekeeping, the
Purser's was by far the largest.
A first officer could reach that high status from chief astrogator, from
chief engineer, or from purser, but only if he were originally an astrogator
could he go on to captain. The three officer types were essentially
mathematicians, business managers, or physicists; a captain necessarily had to
be able to practice the mathematical skill of astrogation. First Officer

Walther, as was usually the case with a liner, had formerly been a purser.
The _Asgard_ was a little world, a tiny mobile planet. It had its
monarch the captain, its useless nobility the passengers, its technical and
governing class, and its hewers of wood and drawers of water. It contained
flora and fauna in ecological balance; it carried its miniature sun in its
power plant. Although its schedule contemplated only months in space, it was
capable of staying in space indefinitely. The chef might run out of caviar,
but there would be no lack of food, nor of air, nor of heat and light.
Max decided that he was lucky to be assigned to Mr. Giordano rather than
to Chief Clerk Kuiper. Mr. Kuiper supervised his clerks minutely, but Mr. Gee
did not often stir his fat frame out of his office-stateroom. He was a jovial
boss--provided everything ran to suit him. Mr. Gee found it an effort to go
all the way down to the stables; once he became convinced that Max was giving
the animals proper care and keeping the place clean he gave up inspecting,
merely requiring Max to report daily. This gave Giordano more time for his
principal avocation, which was distilling a sort of vodka in a cubby in his
stateroom, using materials grown in the hydroponds--also in his charge. He
carried on a clandestine trade in his product with the crew. By keeping his
mouth shut and his ears open Max learned that this was a usual prerogative of
a chief ship's steward, ignored as long as the steward had the judgment to
limit his operations. The ship, of course, had a wine mess and bar, but that
was for the "beasts"--crewmen could not patronize it.
"I was once in a ship," Sam told Max, "where the First clamped
down--busted up the still, busted the steward to cleaning decks, and generally
threw the book." He stopped to puff on his cigar, a gift from the passenger
steward; they were hiding out in Max's stables, enjoying a rest and a gab.
"Didn't work out."
"Why not?"
"Use your head. Forces must balance, old son. For every market there is
a supplier. That's the key to the nutshell. In a month there was a still in
durn near every out-of-the-way compartment in the ship and the crew was so
demoralized it wasn't fit to stuff vacuum. So the Captain had a talk with the
First and things went back to normal."
Max thought it over. "Sam? Were you that ship's steward?"
"Huh? What gave you that idea?"
"Well . . . you've been in space before; you no longer make any bones
about it. I just thought--well, you've never told me what your guild was, nor
why you were on dirt, or why you had to fake it to get back to space again. I
suppose it's none of my business."
Sam's habitual cynical smile gave way to an expression of sadness. "Max,
a lot of things can happen to a man when he thinks he has the world by the
tail. Take the case of a friend of mine, name of Roberts. A sergeant in the
Imperial Marines, good record, half a dozen star jumps, a combat decoration or
two. A smart lad, boning to make warrant officer. But he missed his ship
once--hadn't been on Terra for some time and celebrated too much. Should have
turned himself in right away, of course, taken his reduction in rank and lived
it down. Trouble was he still had money in his pocket. By the time he was
broke and sober it was too late. He never quite had the guts to go back and
take his court martial and serve his sentence. Every man has his limits."
Max said presently, "You trying to say you used to be a marine?"
"Me? Of course not, I was speaking of this guy Richards, just to
illustrate what can happen to a man when he's not looking. Let's talk of more
pleasant things. Kid, what do you plan to do next?"
"What do you mean?"
"Well, what do you figure on doing after this jump?'
"Oh. More of the same, I guess. I like spacing. I suppose I'll try to
keep my nose clean and work up to chief steward or chief clerk."
Sam shook his head. "Think it through, kid. What happens when your

record in this ship is mailed to the guild? And another copy is mailed to the
Department of Guilds and Labor?"
"_What?_"
"I'll tell you. Maybe nothing happens at first, maybe you can space for
another cruise. But eventually the red tape unwinds, they compare notes and
see that while your ship lists you as an experienced steward's mate, there
isn't any Max Jones in their files. Comes the day you ground at Terra and a
couple of clowns with sidearms are waiting at the foot of the lift to drag you
off to the calabozo."
"But Sam! I thought it was all fixed?"
"Don't blow a gasket. Look at me, I'm relaxed--and it applies to me,
too. More so, for I have other reasons we needn't go into to want to let
sleeping dogs bury their own dead. As for it being 'all fixed,' it
is--everything I promised. You're here, aren't you? But as for the files: old
son, it would have taken ten times the money to tamper with guild files, and
as for locating a particular microfilm in New Washington and substituting a
fake that would show the record you are supposed to have--well, I wouldn't
know how to start, though no doubt it could be done, with enough time, money,
and finesse."
Max felt sensations almost identical with those he had experienced when
Montgomery had announced that the farm was sold. Despite his menial position
he liked it aboard ship, he had had no intention of ever doing anything else.
He got along with his boss, he was making friends, he was as cozy as a bird in
its nest. Now the nest was suddenly torn down. Worse, he was in a trap.
He turned white. Sam put a hand on his shoulder. "Stop spinning, kid!
You're not in a jam."
"Jail--"
"Jail my aunt's Sunday hat! You're safe as dirt until we get back. You
can walk away from the _Asgard_ at Earthport with your wages in your pocket
and have days at least, maybe weeks or months, before anyone will notice,
either at the guild mother hall or at New Washington. You can lose yourself
among four billion people. You won't be any worse off than you were when you
first ran into me--you were trying to get lost then, remember?--and you'll
have one star trip under your belt to tell your kids about. Or they may never
look for you; some clerk may chuck your trip record into the file basket and
leave it there until it gets lost rather than bother. Or you might be able to
persuade a clerk in Mr. Kuiper's office to lose the duplicates, not mail them
in. Nelson, for example; he's got a hungry look." Sam eyed him carefully, then
added, "Or you might do what I'm going to do."
Only part of what Sam had said had sunk in. Max let the record play back
and gradually calmed down as he began to understand that his situation was not
entirely desperate. He was inclined to agree about Nelson, as Nelson had
already suggested indirectly that sometimes the efficiency marks on the ship's
books were not necessarily the ones that found their way into the permanent
records--under certain circumstances. He put the idea aside, not liking it and
having no notion anyhow of how to go about offering a bribe.
When he came, in his mental play back, to Sam's last remark, it brought
him to attention. "What are _you_ going to do?"
Sam eyed the end of his cigar stub. "I'm not going back."
This required no diagram to be understood. But, under Imperial decrees,
the suggested offense carried even heavier punishment than faking membership
in a guild. Deserting was almost treason. "Keep talking," Max said gruffly.
"Let's run over where we touch this cruise. Garson's Planet--domed
colonies, like Luna and Mars. In a domed colony you do exactly what the
powers-that-be say, or you stop breathing. You might hide out and have a new
identity grafted on, but you would still be in the domes. No good, there's
more freedom even back on Terra. Nu Pegasi VI, Halcyon--not bad though pretty
cold at aphelion. But it is still importing more than it exports which means
that the Imperials run the show and the locals will help dig out a wanted man.
Now we come to Nova Terra, Beta Aquarii X-- and that, old son, is what the

doctor ordered and why the preacher danced."
"You've been there?"
"Once. I should have stayed. Max, imagine a place like Earth, but
sweeter than Terra ever was. Better weather, broader richer lands . . .
forests aching to be cut, game that practically jumps into the stew pot. If
you don't like settlements, you move on until you've got no neighbors, poke a
seed in the ground, then jump back before it sprouts. No obnoxious insects.
Practically no terrestrial diseases and no native diseases that like the
flavor of our breed. Gushing rivers. Placid oceans. Man, I'm telling you!"
"But wouldn't they haul us back from there?"
"Too big. The colonists _want_ more people and they won't help the
Imperials. The Imperial Council has a deuce of a time just collecting taxes.
They don't even try to arrest a deserter outside the bigger towns." Sam
grinned. "You know why?"
"Why?"
"Because it didn't pay. An Imperial would be sent to Back-and-Beyond to
pick up someone; while he was looking he would find some golden-haired
daughter of a rancher eyeing him--they run to eight or nine kids, per family
and there are always lots of eligible fillies, husband-high and eager. So
pretty quick he is a rancher with a beard and a new name and a wife. He was a
bachelor and he hasn't been home lately--or maybe he's married back on Terra
and doesn't want to go home. Either way, even the Imperial Council can't fight
human nature."
"I don't want to get married."
"That's your problem. But best of all, the place still has a comfortable
looseness about it. No property taxes, outside the towns. Nobody would pay
one; they'd just move on, if they didn't shoot the tax collector instead. No
guilds--you can plow a furrow, saw a board, drive a truck, or thread a pipe,
all the same day and never ask permission. A man can do anything and there's
no one to stop him, no one to tell him he wasn't born into the trade, or
didn't start young enough, or hasn't paid his contribution. There's more work
than there are men to do it and the colonists just don't care."
Max tried to imagine such anarchy and could not, he had never
experienced it. "But don't the guilds object?"
"What guilds? Oh, the mother lodges back earthside squawked when they
heard, but not even the Imperial Council backed them up. They're not
fools--and you don't shovel back the ocean with a fork."
"And that's where you mean to go. It sounds lovely," Max said wistfully.
"I do. It is. There was a girl--oh, she'll be married now; they marry
young--but she had sisters. Now here is what I figure on--and you, too, if you
want to tag along. First time I hit dirt I'll make contacts. The last time I
rate liberty, which will be the night before the ship raises if possible, I'll
go dirtside, then in a front door and out the back and over the horizon so
fast I won't even be a speck. By the time I'm marked 'late returning' I'll be
hundreds of miles away, lying beside a chuckling stream in a virgin
wilderness, letting my beard grow and memorizing my new name. Say the word and
you'll be on the bank, fishing."
Max stirred uneasily. The picture aroused in him a hillbilly
homesickness he had hardly been aware of. But he could not shuffle off his
proud _persona_ as a spaceman so quickly. "I'll think about it."
"Do that. It's a good many weeks yet, anyhow." Sam got to his feet. "I'd
better hurry back before Ole Massa Dumont wonders what's keeping me. Be seeing
you, kid--and remember: it's an ill wind that has no turning.

7
ELDRETH
Max's duties did not take him above "C" deck except to service the cats'
sand boxes and he usually did that before the passengers were up. He wanted to
visit the control room but he had no opportunity, it being still higher than
passengers' quarters. Often an owner of one of the seven dogs and three cats
in Max's custody would come down to visit his pet. This sometimes resulted in
a tip. At first his cross-grained hillbilly pride caused him to refuse, but
when Sam heard about it, he swore at him dispassionately. "Don't be a fool!
They can afford it. What's the sense?"
"But I would exercise their mutts anyhow. It's my job." He might have
remained unconvinced had it not been that Mr. Gee asked him about it at the
end of his first week, seemed to have a shrewd idea of the usual take, and
expected a percentage--"for the welfare fund."
Max asked Sam about the fund, was laughed at. "That's a very interesting
question. Are there any more questions?"
"I suppose not."
"Max, I like you. But you haven't learned yet that when in Rome, you
shoot Roman candles. Every tribe has its customs and what is moral one place
is immoral somewhere else. There are races where a son's first duty is to kill
off his old man and serve him up as a feast as soon as he is old enough to
swing it--civilized races, too. Races the Council recognizes diplomatically.
What's your moral judgment on that?"
Max had read of such cultures--the gentle and unwarlike Bnathors, or the
wealthy elephantine amphibians of Paldron who were anything but gentle,
probably others. He did not feel disposed to pass judgment on nonhumans. Sam
went on, "I've known stewards who would make Jelly Belly look like a
philanthropist. Look at it from his point of view. He regards these things as
prerogatives of his position, as rightful a part of his income as his wages.
Custom says so. It's taken him years to get to where he is; he expects his
reward."
Sam, Max reflected, could always out-talk him.
But he could not concede that Sam's thesis was valid; there were things
that were right and others that were wrong and it was not just a matter of
where you were. He felt this with an inner conviction too deep to be
influenced by Sam's cheerful cynicism. It worried Max that he was where he was
as the result of chicanery, he sometimes lay awake and fretted about it.
But it worried him still more that his deception might come to light.
What to do about Sam's proposal was a problem always on his mind.
The only extra-terrestrial among Max's charges was a spider puppy from
the terrestrian planet Hespera. On beginning his duties in the _Asgard_ Max
found the creature in one of the cages intended for cats; Max looked into it
and a sad, little, rather simian face looked back at him. "Hello, Man."
Max knew that some spider puppies had been taught human speech, after a
fashion, but it startled him; he jumped back. He then recovered and looked
more closely. "Hello yourself," he answered. "My, but you are a fancy little
fellow." The creature's fur was a deep, rich green on its back, giving way to
orange on the sides and blending to warm cream color on its little round
belly.
"Want out," stated the spider puppy.
"I can't let you out. I've got work to do." He read the card affixed to
the cage: "Mr. Chips" it stated, _Pseudocanis hexapoda hesperae_, Owner: Miss

E. Coburn, A-092; there followed a detailed instruction as to diet and care.
Mr. Chips ate grubs, a supply of which was to be found in freezer compartment
H-118, fresh fruits and vegetables, cooked or uncooked, and should receive
iodine if neither seaweed nor artichokes was available. Max thumbed through
his mind, went over what he had read about the creatures, decided the
instructions were reasonable.
"_Please_ out!" Mr. Chips insisted.
It was an appeal hard to resist. No maiden fayre crying from a dungeon
tower had ever put it more movingly. The compartment in which the cats were
located was small and the door could be fastened; possibly Mr. Chips could be
allowed a little run--but later; just now he had to take care of other
animals.
When Max left, Mr. Chips was holding onto the bars and sobbing gently.
Max looked back and saw that it was crying real tears; a drop trembled on the
tip of its ridiculous little nose; it was hard to walk out on it. He had
finished with the stables before tackling the kennel; once the dogs and cats
were fed and their cages policed he was free to give attention to his new
friend. He had fed it first off, which had stopped the crying. When he
returned, however, the demand to be let out resumed.
"If I let you out, will you get back in later?"
The spider puppy considered this. A conditional proposition seemed
beyond its semantic attainments, for it repeated, "Want out." Max took a
chance.
Mr. Chips landed on his shoulder and started going through his pockets.
"Candy," it demanded. "Candy?"
Max stroked it. "Sorry, chum. I didn't know."
"Candy?"
"No candy." Mr. Chips investigated personally, then settled in the crook
of Max's arm, prepared to spend a week or more. It wasn't, Max decided, much
like a puppy and certainly not like a spider, except that six legs seemed
excessive. The two front ones had little hands; the middle legs served double
duty. It was more like a monkey, but felt like a cat. It had a slightly spicy
fragrance and seemed quite clean.
Max tried talking to it, but found its intellectual attainments quite
limited. Certainly it used human words meaningfully but its vocabulary was not
richer than that which might be expected of a not-too-bright toddler.
When Max tried to return it to its cage there ensued twenty minutes of
brisk exercise, broken by stalemates. Mr. Chips swarmed over the cages,
causing hysterics among the cats. When at last the spider puppy allowed itself
to be caught it still resisted imprisonment, clinging to Max and sobbing. He
ended by walking it like a baby until it fell asleep.
This was a mistake. A precedent had been set and thereafter Max was not
permitted to leave the kennel without walking the baby.
He wondered about the "Miss Coburn" described on the tag as Mr. Chips'
owner. All of the owners of cats and dogs had shown up to visit their pets,
but Mr. Chips remained unvisited. He visualized her as a sour and
hatchet-faced spinster who had received the pet as a going-away present and
did not appreciate it. As his friendship with the spider puppy grew his mental
picture of Miss E. Coburn became even less attractive.
The _Asgard_ was over a week out and only days from its first spatial
transition before Max had a chance to compare conception with fact. He was
cleaning the stables, with Mr. Chips riding his shoulder and offering advice,
when Max heard a shrill voice from the kennel compartment. "Mr. _Chips!_
Chipsie! Where are you?"
The spider puppy sat up suddenly and turned its head. Almost immediately
a young female appeared in the door; Mr. Chips squealed, "Ellie!" and jumped
to her arms. While they were nuzzling each other Max looked her over. Sixteen,
he judged, or seventeen. Or maybe even eighteen--shucks, how was a fellow to
tell when womenfolk did such funny things to their faces? Anyhow she was no
beauty and the expression on her face didn't help it any.

She looked up at him and scowled. "What were you doing with Chipsie?
Answer me that!"
It got his back fur up. "Nothing," he said stiffly. "If you will excuse
me, ma'am, I'll get on with my work." He turned his back and bent over his
broom.
She grabbed his arm and swung him around. "Answer me! Or . . . or--I'll
tell the Captain, that's what I'll do!"
Max counted ten, then just to be sure, recalled the first dozen 7-place
natural logarithms. "That's your privilege, ma'am," he said with studied
calmness, "but first, what's your name and what is your business here? I'm in
charge of these compartments and responsible for these animals--as the
Captain's representative." This he knew to be good space law, although the
concatenation was long.
She looked startled. "Why, I'm Eldreth Coburn," she blurted as if anyone
should know.
"And your business?"
"I came to see Mr. Chips--of course!"
"Very well, ma'am. You may visit your pet for a reasonable period," he
added, quoting verbatim from his station instruction sheet. "Then he goes back
in his cage. Don't disturb the other animals and don't feed them. That's
orders."
She started to speak, decided not to and bit her lip. The spider puppy
had been looking from face to face and listening to a conversation far beyond
its powers, although it may have sensed the emotions involved. Now it reached
out and plucked Max's sleeve. "Max," Mr. Chips announced brightly. "Max!"
Miss Coburn again looked startled. "Is that your name?"
"Yes, ma'am. Max Jones. I guess he was trying to introduce me. Is that
it, old fellow?"
"Max," Mr. Chips repeated firmly. "Ellie."
Eldreth Coburn looked down, then looked up at Max with a sheepish smile.
"You two seem to be friends. I guess I spoke out of turn. Me and my mouth."
"No offense meant I'm sure, ma'am."
Max had continued to speak stiffly; she answered quickly, "Oh, but I was
rude! I'm sorry--I'm always sorry afterwards. But I got panicky when I saw the
cage open and empty and I thought I had lost Chipsie."
Max grinned grudgingly. "Sure. Don't blame you a bit. You were scared."
"That's it--I was scared." She glanced at him. "Chipsie calls you Max.
May I call you Max?"
"Why not? Everybody does--and it's my name."
"And you call me Eldreth, Max. Or Ellie."
She stayed on, playing with the spider puppy, until Max had finished
with the cattle. She then said reluctantly, "I guess I had better go, or
they'll be missing me."
"Are you coming back?"
"Oh, of course!"
"Ummm . . . Miss Eldreth . . ."
"Ellie."
"--May I ask a question?" He hurried on, "Maybe it's none of my
business, but what took you so long? That little fellow has been awful
lonesome. He thought you had deserted him."
"Not 'he'--'she'."
"Huh?"
"Mr. Chips is a girl," she said apologetically. "It was a mistake anyone
could make. Then it was too late, because it would confuse her to change her
name."
The spider puppy looked up brightly and repeated, "'Mr. Chips is a
girl.' Candy, Ellie?"
"Next time, honey bun."
Max doubted if the name was important, with the nearest other spider
puppy light-years away. "You didn't answer my question?"

"Oh. I was so mad about that I wanted to bite. They wouldn't let me."
"Who's 'they'? Your folks?"
"Oh, no! The Captain and Mrs. Dumont." Max decided that it was almost as
hard to extract information from her as it was from Mr. Chips. "You see, I
came aboard in a stretcher--some silly fever, food poisoning probably. It
couldn't be much because I'm tough. But they kept me in bed and when the
Surgeon did let me get up, Mrs. Dumont said I mustn't go below 'C' deck. She
had some insipid notion that it wasn't proper."
Max understood the stewardess's objection; he had already discovered
that some of his shipmates were a rough lot--though he doubted that any of
them would risk annoying a girl passenger. Why, Captain Blaine would probably
space a man for that.
"So I had to sneak out. They're probably searching for me right now. I'd
better scoot."
This did not fit in with Mr. Chips' plans; the spider puppy clung to her
and sobbed, stopping occasionally to wipe tears away with little fists. "Oh,
dear!"
Max looked perturbed. "I guess I've spoiled him-- her. Mr. Chips, I
mean." He explained how the ceremony of walking the baby had arisen.
Eldreth protested, "But I must go. What'll I do?"
"Here, let's see if he--she--will come to me." Mr. Chips would and did.
Eldreth gave her a pat and ran out, whereupon Mr. Chips took even longer than
usual to doze off. Max wondered if spider puppies could be hypnotized; the
ritual was getting monotonous.
Eldreth showed up next day under the stern eye of Mrs. Dumont. Max was
respectful to the stewardess and careful to call Eldreth "Miss Coburn." She
returned alone the next day. He looked past her and raised his eyebrows.
"Where's your chaperone?"
Eldreth giggled. "La Dumont consulted her husband and he called in your
boss--the fat one. They agreed that you were a perfect little gentleman,
utterly harmless. How do you like that?"
Max considered it. "Well, I'm an ax murderer by profession, but I'm on
vacation."
"That's nice. What have you got there?"
It was a three-dimensional chess set. Max had played the game with his
uncle, it being one that all astrogators played. Finding that some of the
chartsmen and computermen played it, he had invested his tips in a set from
the ship's slop chest. It was a cheap set, having no attention lights and no
arrangements for remote-control moving, being merely stacked transparent trays
and pieces molded instead of carved, but it sufficed.
"It's solid chess. Ever seen it?"
"Yes. But I didn't know you played it."
"Why not? Ever play flat chess?"
"Some."
"The principles are the same, but there are more pieces and one more
direction to move. Here, I'll show you.
She sat tailor-fashion opposite him and he ran over the moves. "These
are robot freighters . . . pawns. They can be commissioned anything else if
they reach the far rim. These four are starships; they are the only ones with
funny moves, they correspond with knights. They have to make interspace
transitions, always off the level they're on to some other level and the
transition has to be related a certain way, like this--or this. And this is
the Imperial flagship; it's the one that has to be checkmated. Then there is .
. ." They ran through a practice game, with the help of Mr. Chips, who liked
to move the pieces and did not care whose move it was.
Presently he said, "You catch on pretty fast."
"Thanks."
"Of course, the _real_ players play four-dimensional chess."
"Do you?"
"Well, no. But I hope to learn some day. It's just a matter of holding

in your mind one more spatial relationship. My uncle used to play it. He was
going to teach me, but he died." He found himself explaining about his uncle.
He trailed off without mentioning his own disappointment.
Eldreth picked up one of the starship pieces from a tray. "Say, Max,
we're pretty near our first transition, aren't we?"
"What time is it?"
"Uh, sixteen twenty-one--say, I'd better get upstairs."
"Then it's, uh, about thirty-seven hours and seven minutes, according to
the computer crew."
"Mmm . . . you seem to know about such things. Could you tell me just
what it is we do? I heard the Astrogator talking about it at the table but I
couldn't make head nor tail. We sort of duck into a space warp; isn't that
right?"
"Oh no, not a space warp. That's a silly term--space doesn't 'warp'
except in places where _pi_ isn't exactly three point one four one five nine
two six five three five eight nine seven nine three two three eight four six
two six four three three eight three two seven, and so forth--like inside a
nucleus. But we're heading out to a place where space is _really_ flat, not
just mildly curved the way it is near a star. Anomalies are always flat,
otherwise they couldn't fit together--be congruent."
She looked puzzled. "Come again?"
"Look, Eldreth, how far did you go in mathematics?"
"Me? I flunked improper fractions. Miss Mimsey was very vexed with me."
"Miss Mimsey?"
"Miss Mimsey's School for Young Ladies, so you see I can listen with an
open mind." She made a face. "But you told me that all you went to was a
country high school and didn't get to finish at that. Huh?"
"Yes, but I learned from my uncle. He was a great mathematician. Well,
he didn't have any theorems named after him--but a great one just the same,
_I_ think." He paused. "I don't know exactly how to tell you; it takes
equations. Say! Could you lend me that scarf you're wearing for a minute?"
"Huh? Why, sure." She removed it from her neck.
It was a photoprint showing a stylized picture of the solar system, a
souvenir of Solar Union Day. In the middle of the square of cloth was the
conventional sunburst surrounded by circles representing orbits of solar
planets, with a few comets thrown in. The scale was badly distorted and it was
useless as a structural picture of the home system, but it sufficed. Max took
it and said, "Here's Mars."
Eldreth said, "You read it. That's cheating."
"Hush a moment. Here's Jupiter. To go from Mars to Jupiter you have to
go from here to here, don't you?"
"Obviously."
"But suppose I fold it so that Mars is on top of Jupiter? What's to
prevent just stepping across?"
"Nothing, I guess. Except that what works for that scarf wouldn't work
very well in practice. Would it?"
"No, not that near to a star. But it works fine after you back away from
a star quite a distance. You see, that's just what an anomaly is, a place
where space is folded back on itself, turning a long distance into no distance
at all."
"Then space _is_ warped."
"No, no, no! Look, I just folded your scarf. I didn't stretch it out of
shape! I didn't even wrinide it. Space is the same way; it's crumpled like a
piece of waste paper--but it's not warped, just crumpled. Through some extra
dimensions, of course."
"I don't see any 'of course' about it."
"The math of it is simple, but it's hard to talk about because you can't
see it. Space--_our_ space--may be crumpled up small enough to stuff into a
coffee cup, all hundreds of thousands of light-years of it. A four-dimensional
coffee cup, of course."

She sighed. "I don't see how a four-dimensional coffee cup could even
hold coffee, much less a whole galaxy."
"No trouble at all. You could stuff this sheer scarf into a thimble.
Same principle. But let me finish. They used to think that nothing could go
faster than light. Well, that was both right and wrong. It . . ."
"How can it be both?"
"That's one of the Horst anomalies. You can't go faster than light, not
in our space. If you do, you burst out of it. But if you do it where space is
folded back and congruent, you pop right back into our own space again--but a
long way off. How far off depends on how it's folded. And that depends on the
mass in the space, in a complicated fashion that can't be described in words
but can be calculated."
"But suppose you do it just anywhere?"
"That's what happened to the first ones who tried it. They didn't come
back. And that's why surveys are dangerous; survey ships go poking through
anomalies that have been calculated but never tried. That's also why
astrogators get paid so much. They have to head the ship for a place you can't
see and they have to put the ship there just under the speed of light and they
have to give it the gun at just the right world point. Drop a decimal point or
use a short cut that covers up an indeterminancy and it's just too bad. Now
we've been gunning at twenty-four gee ever since we left the atmosphere. We
don't feel it of course because we are carried inside a discontinuity field at
an artificial one gravity--that's another of the anomalies. But we're getting
up close to the speed of light, up against the Einstein Wall; pretty soon
we'll be squeezed through like a watermelon seed between your finger and thumb
and we'll come out near Theta Centauri fifty-eight light-years away. Simple,
if you look at it right."
She shivered. "_If_ we come out, you mean."
"Well . . . I suppose so. But it's not as dangerous as helicopters. And
look at it this way: if it weren't for the anomalies, there never would have
been any way for us to reach the stars; the distances are too great. But
looking back, it is obvious that all that emptiness couldn't be real--there
_had_ to be the anomalies. That's what my uncle used to say."
"I suppose he must have been right, even if I don't understand it." She
scrambled to her feet. "But I do know that I had better hoof it back upstairs,
or Mrs. Dumont may change her mind." She hugged Mr. Chips and shoved the
little creature into Max's arms. "Walk the baby--that's a pal."
8
THREE WAYS TO GET AHEAD
Max intended to stay awake during the first transition, but he slept
through it. It took place shortly after five in the morning, ship's time. When
he was awakened by idlers' reveille at six it was all over. He jerked on his
clothes, fuming at not having awakened earlier, and hurried to the upper
decks. The passageways above Charlie deck were silent and empty; even the
early risers among the passengers would not be up for another hour. He went at
once to the Bifrost Lounge and crossed it to the view port, placed there for
the pleasure of passengers.

The stars looked normal but the familiar, age-old constellations were
gone. Only the Milky Way, our own galaxy, seemed as usual--to that enormous
spiral of stars, some hundred thousand light-years across, a tiny displacement
of less than sixty light-years was inconsequential.
One extremely bright yellow-white star was visible; Max decided that it
must be Theta Centauri, sun of Garson's Planet, their first stop. He left
shortly, not wanting to chance being found loafing in passengers' country. The
sand boxes which constituted his excuse were then replaced with greater speed
than usual and he was back in crew's quarters in time for breakfast.
The passage to Garson's Planet took most of a month even at the high
boost possible to Horst-Conrad ship. Eldreth continued to make daily trips to
see Mr. Chips--and to talk with and play 3-dee chess with Max. He learned that
while she had not been born on Hespera, but in Auckland on Terra, nevertheless
Hespera was her home. "Daddy sent me back to have them turn me into a lady,
but it didn't take."
"What do you mean?"
She grinned. "I'm a problem. That's why I've been sent for. You're in
check, Max. Chipsie! Put that back. I think the little demon is playing on
your side."
He gradually pieced together what she meant. Miss Mimsey's school had
been the third from which she had been expelled. She did not like Earth, she
was determined to go home, and she had created a reign of terror at each
institution to which she had been entrusted. Her widower father had been
determined that she must have a "proper" education, but she had been in a
better strategic position to impose her will--her father's Earthside attorneys
had washed their hands of her and shipped her home.
Sam made the mistake of joshing Max about Eldreth. "Have you gotten her
to set the day yet, old son?"
"Who set what day?"
"Now, now! Everybody in the ship knows about it, except possibly the
Captain. Why play dumb with your old pal?"
"I don't know what you are talking about!"
"I wasn't criticizing, I was admiring. I'd never have the nerve to plot
so high a trajectory myself. But as grandpop always said, there are just three
ways to get ahead; sweat and genius, getting born into the right family, or
marrying into it. Of the three, marrying the boss's daughter is the best,
because-- Hey! Take it easy!" Sam skipped back out of range.
"Take that back!"
"I do, I do. I was wrong. But my remarks were inspired by sheer
admiration. Mistaken, I admit. So I apologize and withdraw the admiration."
"But . . ." Max grinned in spite of himself. It was impossible to stay
angry at Sam. Sure, the man was a scamp, probably a deserter, certainly a
belittler who always looked at things in the meanest of terms, but-- well,
there it was. Sam was his friend.
"I knew you were joking. How could I be figuring on getting married when
you and I are going to . . ."
"Keep your voice down." Sam went on quietly, "You've made up your mind?"
"Yes. It's the only way out, I guess. I don't want to go back to Earth."
"Good boy! You'll never regret it." Sam looked thoughtful. "We'll need
money."
"Well, I'll have some on the books."
"Don't be silly. You try to draw more than spending money and they'll
never let you set foot on dirt. But don't worry--save your tips, all that Fats
will let you keep, and I'll get us a stake. It's my turn."
"How?"
"Lots of ways. You can forget it."
"Well . . . all right. Say, Sam, just what did you mean when you--I
mean, well, suppose I did want to marry Ellie--I don't of course; she's just a
kid and anyhow I'm not the type to marry--but just supposing? Why should
anybody care?"

Sam looked surprised. "You don't know?"
"Why would I be asking?"
"You don't know who she is?"
"Huh? Her name's Eldreth Coburn and she's on her way home to Hespera,
she's a colonial. What of it?"
"You poor boy! She didn't mention that she is the only daughter of His
Supreme Excellency, General Sir John FitzGerald Coburn, O.B.E., K.B., O.S.U.,
and probably X.Y.Z., Imperial Ambassador to Hespera and Resident Commissioner
Plenipotentiary?"
"_Huh?_ Oh my gosh!"
"Catch on, kid? With the merest trifle of finesse you can be a
remittance man, at least. Name your own planet, just as long as it isn't
Hespera."
"Oh, go boil your head! She's a nice kid anyhow."
Sam snickered. "She sure is. As grandpop used to say, 'It's an ill wind
that gathers no moss.'"
The knowledge disturbed Max. He had realized that Eldreth must be well
to do--she was a passenger, wasn't she? But he had no awe of wealth.
Achievement as exemplified by his uncle held much more respect in his eyes.
But the notion that Eldreth came from such an impossibly high stratum--and
that he, Maximilian Jones, was considered a fortune-hunter and social climber
on that account--was quite upsetting.
He decided to put an end to it. He started by letting his work pile up
so that he could say truthfully that he did not have time to play three-dee
chess. So Ellie pitched in and helped him. While he was playing the
unavoidable game that followed he attempted a direct approach. "See here,
Ellie, I don't think you ought to stay down here and play three-dee chess with
me. The other passengers come down to see their pets and they notice. They'll
gossip."
"Pooh!" 
"I mean it. Oh, you and I know it's all right, but it doesn't look
right."
She stuck out her lower lip. "Am I going to have trouble with you? You
talk just like Miss Mimsey."
"You can come down to see Chipsie, but you'd better come down with one
of the other pet owners."
She started to make a sharp answer, then shrugged, "Okay, this isn't the
most comfortable place anyhow. From now on we play in Bifrost Lounge,
afternoons when your work is done and evenings."
Max protested that Mr. Giordano would not let him; she answered quickly,
"Don't worry about your boss. I can twist him around my little finger." She
illustrated by gesture.
The picture of the gross Mr. Gee in such a position slowed up Max's
answer, but he finally managed to get out, "Ellie, crew members can't use the
passenger lounge. It's . . ."
"They can so. More than once, I've seen Mr. Dumont having a cup of
coffee there with Captain Blaine."
"You don't understand. Mr. Dumont is almost an officer, and if the
Captain wants him as his guest, well, that's the Captain's privilege."
"You'd be my guest."
"No, I wouldn't be." He tried to explain to her the strict regulation
that crew members were not to associate with passengers. "The Captain would be
angry if he could see us right now--not at you, at me. If he caught me in the
passengers' lounge he'd kick me all the way clown to 'H' deck."
"I don't believe it."
"But . . ." He shrugged. "All right. I'll come up this evening. He won't
kick me, actually; that would be beneath him. He'll just send Mr. Dumont over
to tell me to leave, then he'll send for me in the morning. I don't mind being
fined a month's pay if that is what it takes to show you the way things are."
He could see that he had finally reached her. "Why, I think that's

perfectly rotten! Everybody is equal. Everybody! That's the law."
"They are? Only from on top."
She got up suddenly and left. Max again had to soothe Mr. Chips, but
there was no one to soothe him. He decided that the day that he and Sam
disappeared over a horizon and lost themselves could not come too soon.
Eldreth returned next day but in company with a Mrs. Mendoza, the
devoted owner of a chow who looked much like her. Eldreth treated Max with the
impersonal politeness of a lady "being nice" to servants, except for a brief
moment when Mrs. Mendoza was out of earshot.
"Max?"
"Yes, Miss?"
"I'll 'Yes, Miss' you! Look, Max, what was your uncle's name? Was it
_Chester_ Jones?"
"Why, yes, it was. But why . . ."
"Never mind." Mrs. Mendoza rejoined them. Max was forced to drop it.
The following morning the dry-stores keeper sought him out. "Hey, Max!
The Belly wants you. Better hurry--I think you're in some sort of a jam."
Max worried as he hurried. He couldn't think of anything he had done
lately; he tried to suppress the horrid fear that Ellie was involved.
It was clear that Mr. Giordano was not pleased but all that he said was,
"Report to the Purser's Office. Jump." Max jumped.
The Purser was not there; Mr. Kuiper received him and looked him over
with a cold eye. "Put on a clean uniform and make it quick. Then report to the
Captain's cabin."
Max stood still and gulped. Mr. Kuiper barked, "Well? Move!"
"Sir," Max blurted, "I don't know where the Captain's cabin is."
"What? I'll be switched! Able deck, radius nine oh and outboard." Max
moved.
The Captain was in his cabin. With him was Mr. Samuels the Purser, Mr.
Walther the First Officer, and Dr. Hendrix the Astrogator. Max concluded that
whatever it was he was about to be tried for, it could be nothing trivial. But
he remembered to say, "Steward's Mate Third Class Jones reporting, sir."
Captain Blaine looked up. "Oh, yes. Find a chair." Max found one, sat
down on the edge of it. The Captain said to the First Officer, "Under the
circumstances, Dutch, I suppose it's the best thing to do-- though it seems a
little drastic. You agree, Hal?"
The Purser agreed. Max wondered just how drastic it was and whether he
would live through it.
"We'll log it as an exception, then, Doc, and I'll write up an
explanation for the board. After all, regulations were made to be broken.
That's the end of it." Max decided that they were simply going to space him
and explain it later.
The Captain turned back to his desk in a manner that signified that the
meeting was over. The First Officer cleared his throat. "Captain . . ." He
indicated Max with his eyes.
Captain Blaine looked up again. "Oh, yes! Young man, your name is
Jones?"
"Yessir."
"I've been looking over your record. I see that you once tried out for
chartsman for a short time in the _Thule?_"
"Uh, yes, Captain."
"Didn't you like it?"
"Well, sir." Max asked himself what Sam would say when confronted by
such a ghost. "It was like this . . . to tell you the truth I didn't do much
except empty ash trays in the Worry--in the control room." He held his breath.
The Captain smiled briefly. "It can sometimes work out that way. Would
you be interested in trying it again?"
"What? Yes, _sir!_"
"Dutch?"
"Captain, ordinarily I see no point in a man striking twice for the same

job. But there is this personal matter."
"Yes, indeed. You can spare him, Hal?"
"Oh, certainly, Captain. He's hardly a key man where he is." The Purser
smiled. "Bottom deck valet."
The Captain smiled and turned to the Astrogator. "I see no objection,
Doc. It's a guild matter, of course."
"Kelly is willing to try him. He's short a man, you know." 
"Very well, then . . ."
"Just a moment, Captain." The Astrogator turned to Max. "Jones . . . you
had a relative in my guild?"
"My uncle, sir. Chester Jones."
"I served under him. I hope you have some of his skill with figures."
"Uh, I hope so, sir."
"We shall see. Report to Chief Computerman Kelly."
Max managed to find the control room without asking directions, although
he could hardly see where he was going.
9
CHARTSMAN JONES
The change in Max's status changed the whole perspective of his life.
His social relations with the other crew members changed not entirely for the
better. The control room gang considered themselves the gentry of the crew, a
status disputed by the power technicians and resented by the stewards. Max
found that the guild he was leaving no longer treated him quite as warmly
while the guild for which he was trying out did not as yet accept him.
Mr. Gee simply ignored him--would walk right over him if Max failed to
jump aside. He seemed to regard Max's trial promotion as a personal affront.
It was necessary for him to hit the slop chest for dress uniforms. Now
that his duty station was in the control room, now that he must pass through
passengers' country to go to and from work, it was no longer permissible to
slouch around in dungarees. Mr. Kuiper let him sign for them; his cash would
not cover it. He had to sign as well for the cost of permission to work out of
his guild, with the prospect of going further in debt to both guilds should he
be finally accepted. He signed cheerfully.
The control department of the _Asgard_ consisted of two officers and
five men--Dr. Hendrix the Astrogator, his assistant astrogator Mr. Simes,
Chief Computerman Kelly, Chartsman First Class Kovak, Chtsmn 2/C Smythe, and
computermen Noguchi and Lundy, both second class. There was also "Sack"
Bennett, communicator first class, but he was not really a part of the control
gang, even though his station was in the Worry Hole; a starship was rarely
within radio range of anything except at the very first and last parts of a
trip. Bennett doubled as Captain Blaine's secretary and factotum and owed his
nickname to the often-stated belief of the others that he spent most of his
life in his bunk.
Since the _Asgard_ was always under boost a continuous watch was kept;
not for them were the old, easy days of rocket ships, with ten minutes of
piloting followed by weeks of free fall before more piloting was required.
Since the _Asgard_ carried no apprentice astrogator, there were only two

officers to stand watches (Captain Blaine was necessarily an astrogator
himself, but skippers do not stand watches); this lack was made up by Chief
Computerman Kelly, who stood a regular watch as control officer-of-the-watch.
The other ratings stood a watch in four; the distinction between a computerman
and a chartsman was nominal in a control room dominated by "Decimal Point"
Kelly--what a man didn't know he soon learned, or found another ship.
Easy watches for everyone but Max--he was placed on watch-and-watch for
instruction, four hours on followed by four hours off in which he must eat,
keep himself clean, relax, and--if he found time--sleep.
But he thrived on it, arriving early and sometimes having to be ordered
out of the Worry Hole. Not until much later did he find out that this stiff
regime was Kelly's way of trying to break him, discover his weakness and get
rid of him promptly if he failed to measure up.
Not all watches were pleasant. Max's very first watch was under Mr.
Simes. He crawled up the hatch into the control room and looked around him in
wonderment. On four sides were the wonderfully delicate parallax cameras.
Between two of them Lundy sat at the saddle of the main computer; he looked up
and nodded but did not speak. Mr. Simes sat at the control console, facing the
hatch; he must have seen Max but gave no sign of it.
There were other instruments crowded around the walls, some of which Max
recognized from reading and from seeing pictures, some of which were strange--
tell-tales and gauges from each of the ship's compartments, a screen to
reproduce the view aft or "below," microphone and controls for the ship's
announcing system, the "tank" or vernier stereograph in which plates from the
parallax cameras could be compared with charts, spectrostellograph,
dopplerscope, multipoint skin temperature recorder, radar repeater for
landing, too many things to take in at once.
Overhead through the astrogation dome was the starry universe. He stared
at it, mouth agape. Living as he had been, inside a steel cave, he had hardly
seen the stars; the firmament had been more with him back home on the farm.
"Hey! You!"
Max shook his head and found Mr. Simes looking at him. "Come here." Max
did so, the assistant astrogator went on, "Don't you know enough to report to
the watch officer when you come on duty?"
"Uh--sorry, sir."
"Besides that, you're late." Max slid his eyes to the chronometer in the
console; it still lacked five minutes of the hour. Simes continued, "A sorry
state of affairs when crewmen relieve the watch later than the watch officer.
What's your name?"
"Jones, sir."
Mr. Simes sniffed. He was a red-faced young man with thin, carroty hair
and a sniff was his usual conversational embellishment, at least with juniors.
"Make a fresh pot of coffee."
"Aye aye, sir." Max started to ask where and how, but Mr. Simes had gone
back to his reading. Max looked helplessly at Lundy, who indicated a direction
with his eyes. Behind the chart safe Max found a coffee maker and under it
cups, saucers, sugar, and tins of cream.
He burned himself before getting the hang of the gear's idiosyncrasies.
Mr. Simes accepted the brew without looking at him. Max wondered what to do
next, decided to offer a cup to Lundy. The computerman thanked him quietly and
Max decided to risk having one himself, since it seemed to be accepted. He
took it over beside the computer to drink it.
He was still doing so when the watch officer spoke up. "What is this? A
tea party? Jones!"
"Yes, sir?"
"Get the place policed up. Looks as if a herd of chucks had been
wallowing in it."
The room seemed clean, but Max found a few scraps of paper to pick up
and stuff down the chute, after which he wiped already-gleaming brightwork. He
had started to go over things a second time when Lundy motioned him over. Max

then helped Lundy change plates in the parallax cameras and watched him while
he adjusted the electronic timer. Mr. Simes pushed the ready button himself,
which seemed to be his sole work during the watch.
Lundy removed the plates and set them up in the tank for chart
comparison, took the readings and logged them. Max gave him nominal help and
gathered some notion of how it was done, after which he again wiped
brightwork.
It was a long watch. He went to his bunk drained of the elation he had
felt.
But watches with Dr. Hendrix and with Chief Kelly were quite different.
The Worry Hole was a jolly place under Kelly; he ruled as a benevolent tyrant,
shouting, cursing, slandering the coffee, slurring his juniors and being
sassed back. Max never touched a polish rag when Kelly was at control; he was
kept too busy not merely helping but systematically studying everything in the
room. "We haven't a condemned thing to do," Kelly shouted at him, "until we
hit Carson's Folly. Nothing to do but to ride this groove down until we hit
dirt. So you, my laddy buck, are going to do plenty. When we get there you are
going to know this condemned hole better than your mother knew your father--or
you can spend your time there learning what you've missed while your mates are
dirtside getting blind. Get out the instruction manual for the main computer,
take off the back plate and get lost in them wires. I don't want to see
anything but your ugly behind the rest of this watch."
Within ten minutes Kelly was down on his knees with him, helping him
trace the intricate circuits.
Max learned, greatly assisted by his photographic memory and still more
by the sound grounding in theory he had gotten from his uncle. Kelly was
pleased. "I reckon you exaggerated a mite when you said you hadn't learned
anything in the _Thule_."
"Well, not much."
"Johansen have the Worry Hole when you were striking?"
"Uh, yes." Max hoped frantically that Kelly would not ask other names.
"I thought so. That squarehead wouldn't tell his own mother how old he
was."
There came a watch when Kelly trusted him to do a dry run for a
transition approach on the computer, with Noguchi handling the tables and
Kelly substituting for the astrogator by following records of the actual
transition the ship had last made. The programming was done orally, as is the
case when the astrogator is working under extreme pressure from latest data,
just before giving the crucial signal to boost past the speed of light.
Kelly took it much more slowly than would happen in practice, while
Noguchi consulted tables and called out figures to Max. He was nervous at
first, his fingers trembling so that it was hard to punch the right keys--then
he settled down and enjoyed it, feeling as if he and the machine had been born
for each other.
Kelly was saying, "--times the binary natural logarithm of zero point
eight seven oh nine two." Max heard Noguchi's voice call back the datum while
he thumbed for the page--but in his mind Max saw the page in front of his eyes
long before Noguchi located it; without conscious thought he depressed the
right keys. 
"Correction!" sang out Kelly. "Look, meathead, you don't put in them
figures; you wait for translation by Noggy here. How many times I have to tell
you?"
"But I did--" Max started, then stopped. Thus far he had managed to keep
anyone aboard the _Asgard_ from learning of his embarrassingly odd memory.
"You did what?" Kelly started to clear the last datum from the board,
then hesitated. "Come to think of it, you can't possibly feed decimal figures
into that spaghetti mill. Just what _did_ you do?"
Max knew he was right and hated to appear not to know how to set up a
problem. "Why, I put in the figures Noguchi was about to give me."
"How's that again?" Kelly stared at him. "You a mind reader?"

"No. But I put in the right figures."
"Hmm . . ." Kelly bent over the keyboard. "Call 'em off, Noggy." The
computerman reeled off a string of ones and zeroes, the binary equivalent of
the decimal expression Kelly had given him; Kelly checked the depressed keys,
his lips moving in concentration. He straightened up. "I once saw a man roll
thirteen sevens with honest dice. Was it fool luck, Max?"
"No."
"Well! Noggy, gimme that book." Kelly went through the rest of the
problem, giving Max raw data and the operations to be performed, but not
translating the figures into the binary notation the computer required. He
kept thumbing the book and glancing over Max's shoulder. Max fought off stage
fright and punched the keys, while sweat poured into his eyes.
At last Kelly said, "Okay. Twist its tail." Max flipped the switch which
allowed the computer to swallow the program and worry it for an instant; the
answer popped out in lights, off or on--the machine's equivalent of binary
figures.
Kelly translated the lights back into decimal notation, using the
manual. He then glanced at the recorded problem. He closed the record book and
handed it to Noguchi. "I think I'll have a cup of coffee," he said quietly and
walked away.
Noguchi reopened it, looked at the lights shining on the board and
consulted the manual, after which he looked at Max very oddly. Max saw Kelly
staring at him over a cup with the same expression. Max reached up and cleared
the board entirely; the lights went out. He got down out of the computerman's
saddle. Nobody said anything.
Max's next watch was with Dr. Hendrix. He enjoyed watches with the
Astrogator almost as much as those with Kelly; Dr. Hendrix was a friendly and
soft-spoken gentleman and gave as much attention to training Max as Kelly did.
But this time Kelly lingered on after being relieved--in itself nothing, as
the Chief Computerman frequently consulted with, or simply visited with, the
Astrogator at such times. But today, after relieving the watch, Dr. Hendrix
said pleasantly, "Kelly tells me that you are learning to use the computer,
Jones?"
"Uh, yes, sir."
"Very well, let's have a drill." Dr. Hendrix dug out an old astrogation
log and selected a transition-approach problem similar to the one Max had set
up earlier. Kelly took the manual, ready to act as his "numbers boy"--but did
not call the translations. Max waited for the first one; when it did not come,
he read the figures from the page shining in his mind and punched them in.
It continued that way. Kelly said nothing, but wet his lips and checked
what Max did each time the doctor offered a bit of the problem. Kovak watched
from nearby, his eyes moving from actor to actor.
At last Dr. Hendrix closed the book. "I see," he agreed, as if it were
an everyday occurrence. "Jones, that is an extremely interesting talent. I've
read of such cases, but you are the first I have met. You've heard of Blind
Tom?"
"No, sir."
"Perhaps the ship's library has an account of him." The Astrogator was
silent for a moment. "I don't mean to belittle your talent, but you are not to
use it during an actual maneuver. You understand why?"
"Yes, sir. I guess I do."
"Better say that you are not to use it unless you think an error has
been made--in which case you will speak up at once. But the printed tables
remain the final authority."
"Aye aye, sir."
"Good. See me, please, in my room when you come off watch."
It was "day time" by the ship's clocks when he went off watch. He went
to the passageway outside Dr. Hendrix's room and waited; there Ellie came
across him. "Max!"
"Oh. Hello, Ellie." He realized uncomfortably that he had not seen her

since his tentative promotion.
"Hello he says!" She planted herself in front of him. "You're a pretty
sight--with your bloodshot eyes matching the piping on your shirt. Where have
you been? Too good for your old friends? You haven't even been to see
Chipsie."
He had been, once, although he had not run into Ellie. He had not
repeated the visit because the shipmate who had replaced him had not liked
being assigned as chambermaid to cows, sheep, llamas, _et al._; he had seemed
to feel that it was Max's fault. "I'm sorry," Max said humbly, "but I haven't
had time."
"A feeble excuse. Know what you are going to do now? You're going
straight to the lounge and I am going to trim your ears--I've figured out a
way to box your favorite gambit that will leave you gasping."
Max opened his mouth, closed it, opened it again. "No."
"Speak louder. You used a word I don't understand."
"Look, Ellie, be reasonable. I'm waiting for Dr. Hendrix and as soon as
he lets me go I've got to get some sleep. I'm about ten hours minus."
"You can sleep any time."
"Not when you're standing four hours on and four off. You nap anytime
you get a chance."
She looked perplexed. "You don't mean you work every other watch? Why,
that's criminal."
"Maybe so but that's how it is."
"But--I'll fix that! I'll speak to the Captain."
"Ellie! Don't you dare!"
"Why not? Captain Blaine is old sugar pie. Never you mind, I'll fix it."
Max took a deep breath, then spoke carefully. "Ellie, don't say anything
to the Captain, not anything. It's a big opportunity for me and I don't mind.
If you go tampering with things you don't understand, you'll ruin my chances.
I'll be sent back to the stables."
"Oh, he wouldn't do that."
"You don't understand. He may be an 'old sugar pie' to you; to me he is
the Captain. So don't."
She pouted. "I was just trying to help."
"I appreciate it. But don't. And anyhow, I can't come to the lounge,
ever. It's off limits for me."
"But I thought--I think you're just trying to avoid me. You run around
up here now and you dress in pretty clothes. Why not?"
They were interrupted by Dr. Hendrix returning to his room. "Morning,
Jones. Good morning, Miss Coburn." He went on in. 
Max said desperately, "Look, Ellie, I've got to go." He turned and
knocked on the Astrogator's door.
Dr. Hendrix ignored having seen him with Ellie. "Sit down, Jones. That
was a very interesting exhibition you put on." The Astrogator went on, "I'm
curious to know how far your talent extends. Is it just to figures?"
"Why, I guess not, sir."
"Do you have to study hard to do it?"
"No, sir."
"Hmm . . . We'll try something. Have you read--let me see--any of the
plays of Shakespeare?"
"Uh, we had _Hamlet_ and _As You Like It_ in school, and I read _A
Winter's Tale_. But I didn't like it," he answered honestly.
"In that case I don't suppose you reread it. Remember any of it?"
"Oh, certainly, sir."
"Hmm--" Dr. Hendrix got down a limp volume.
"Let me see. Act two, scene three; Leontes says, 'Nor night nor day nor
rest: it is but weakness . . .'"
Max picked it up. ". . . it is but weakness to bear the matter thus;
mere weakness. If the cause were not in being . . ." He continued until
stopped.

"That's enough. I don't care much for that play myself. Even the
immortal Will had his off days. But how did you happen to have read that book
of tables? Shakespeare at his dullest isn't that dull. I've never read them,
not what one would call 'reading.'"
"Well, sir, Uncle Chet had his astrogation manuals at home after he
retired and he used to talk with me a lot. So I read them."
"Do I understand that you have memorized the entire professional library
of an astrogator?"
Max took a deep breath. "Well, sir, I've read them."
Dr. Hendrix took from his shelves his own tools of his profession. He
did not bother with the binary tables, that being the one Max had shown that
he knew. He leafed through them, asked Max questions, finally identifying what
he wanted only by page number. He closed the last of them. "Whew!" he
commented, and blinked. "While I am aware that there are numerous cases of
your talent in the history of psychology, I must admit it is disconcerting to
encounter one." He smiled. "I wonder what Brother Witherspoon would think of
this."
"Sir?"
"Our High Secretary. I'm afraid he would be shocked; he has conservative
notions about protecting the 'secrets' of our profession."
Max said uncomfortably, "Am I likely to get into trouble, sir? I didn't
know it was wrong to read Uncle's books."
"What? Nonsense. There are no 'secrets' to astrogation. You use these
books on watch, so does every member of the 'Worry' gang. The passengers can
read them, for all I care. Astrogation isn't secret; it is merely difficult.
Few people are so endowed as to be able to follow accurately the mathematical
reasoning necessary to plan a--oh, a transition, let us say. But it suits
those who bother with guild politics to make it appear an arcane
art--prestige, you know." Dr. Hendrix paused and tapped on his chair arm.
"Jones, I want you to understand me. Kelly thinks you may shape up."
"Uh, that's good, sir."
"But don't assume that you know more than he does just because you have
memorized the books."
"Oh, no, sir!"
"Actually, your talent isn't necessary in the control room. The virtues
needed are those Kelly has-- unflagging attention to duty, thorough knowledge
of his tools, meticulous care for details, deep loyalty to his job and his
crew and his ship and to those placed over him professionally. Kelly doesn't
need eidetic memory, ordinary good memory combined with intelligence and
integrity are what the job takes--and that's what I want in my control room."
"Yes, sir."
The Astrogator hesitated. "I don't wish to be offensive but I want to
add this. Strange talents are sometimes associated with ordinary, or even
inferior, mentality--often enough so that the psychologists use the term
'_idiot savant_.' Sorry. You obviously aren't an idiot, but you are not
necessarily a genius, even if you can memorize the Imperial Encyclopedia. My
point is: I am more interested in your horse sense and your attention to duty
than I am in your phenomenal memory."
"Uh, I'll try, sir."
"I think you'll make a good chartsman, in time." Dr. Hendrix indicated
that the interview was over; Max got up. "One more thing."
"Yes, sir?"
"There are excellent reasons of discipline and efficiency why crew
members do not associate with passengers."
Max gulped. "I know, sir."
"Mind your P's and Q's. The members of my department are careful about
this point--even then it is difficult."
Max left feeling deflated. He had gone there feeling that he was about
to be awarded something--even a chance to become an astrogator. He now felt
sweated down to size.

10
GARSON'S PLANET
Max did not see much of Sam during the weeks following; the stiff
schedule left him little time for visiting. But Sam had prospered.
Like all large ships the _Asgard_ had a miniature police force,
experienced ratings who acted as the First Officer's deputies in enforcing
ship's regulations. Sam, with his talent for politics and a faked
certffication as steward's mate first class, managed during the reshuffle
following Max's transfer to be assigned as master-at-arms for the Purser's
department. He did well, treading on no toes, shutting his eyes to such
violations as were ancient prerogatives and enforcing those rules of
sanitation, economy, and behavior which were actually needed for a taut, happy
ship . . . all without finding it necessary to haul offenders up before the
First Officer for punishment--which suited both Mr. Walther and the crew. When
Stores Clerk Maginnis partook too freely of Mr. Gee's product and insisted on
serenading his bunk mates, Sam merely took him to the galley and forced black
coffee down him--then the following day took him down to 'H' deck, laid his
own shield of office aside, and gave Maginnis a scientific going over that
left no scars but deeply marked his soul. In his obscure past Sam had learned
to fight, not rough house, not in the stylized mock combat of boxing, but in
the skilled art in which an unarmed man becomes a lethal machine.
Sam had selected his victim carefully. Had he reported him Maginnis
would have regarded Sam as a snoop, a mere busybody to be outwitted or defied,
and had the punishment been severe he might have been turned into a permanent
discipline problem--not forgetting that reporting Maginnis might also have
endangered a sacred cow, Chief Steward Giordano. As it was, it turned Maginnis
into Sam's strongest supporter and best publicist, as Maginnis's peculiar but
not unique pride required him to regard the man who defeated him as "the
hottest thing on two feet, sudden death in each hand, a _real_ man! No
nonsense about old Sam--try him yourself and see how _you_ make out. Go on, I
want to lay a bet."
It was not necessary for Sam to set up a second lesson.
A senior engineer's mate was chief master-at-arms and Sam's nominal
superior; these two constituted the police force of their small town. When the
technician asked to go back to power room watch-standing and was replaced by
an engineer's mate third, it was natural that Walther should designate Sam as
Chief Master-at-Arms.
He had had his eye on the job from the moment he signed on. Any police
chief anywhere has powers far beyond those set forth by law. As long as Sam
stayed well buttered up with Mr. Kuiper, Mr. Giordano, and (to a lesser
extent) with Mr. Dumont, as long as he was careful to avoid exerting his
authority in either the engineering spaces or the Worry Hole, he was the most
powerful man in the ship--more powerful in all practical matters than the
First Officer himself since he was the First Officer's visible presence.
Such was the situation when the ship grounded at Garson's Planet.
Garson's Planet appears to us to be a piece of junk left over when the
universe was finished. It has a surface gravity of one-and-a-quarter, too much

for comfort, it is cold as a moneylender's heart, and it has a methane
atmosphere unbreathable by humans. With the sky swarming with better planets
it would be avoided were it not an indispensable way station. There is only
one survey Horst congruency near Earth's Sun and transition of it places one
near Theta Centauri--and of the thirteen planets of that sun, Carson's Planet
possesses the meager virtue of being least unpleasant.
But there are half a dozen plotted congruencies accessible to Theta
Centauri, which makes Carson's Planet the inevitable cross-roads for trade of
the Solar Union.
Max hit dirt there just once, once was plenty. The colony at the space
port, partly domed, partly dug in under the domes, was much like the Lunar
cities and not unlike the burrows under any major Earth city, but to Max it
was novel since he had never been on Luna and had never seen a big city on
Terra other than Earthport. He went dirtside with Sam, dressed in his best and
filled with curiosity. It was not necessary to put on a pressure suit; the
port supplied each passenger liner with a pressure tube from ship's lock to
dome lock.
Once inside Sam headed down into the lower levels. Max protested, "Sam,
let's go up and look around."
"Huh? Nothing there. A hotel and some expensive shops and clip joints
for the pay passengers. Do you want to pay a month's wages for a steak?"
"No. I want to see _out_. Here I am on a strange planet and I haven't
_seen_ it at all. I couldn't see it from the control room when we landed and
now I haven't seen anything but the inside of a trans tube and this." He
gestured at the corridor walls.
"Nothing to see but a dirty, thick, yellow fog that never lifts. Worse
than Venus. But suit yourself. I've got things to do, but if you don't want to
stick with me you certainly don't have to."
Max decided to stick. They went on down and came out in a wide, lighted
corridor not unlike that street in Earthport where Percy's restaurant was
located, save that it was roofed over. There were the same bars, the same
tawdry inducements for the stranger to part with cash, even to the tailor shop
with the permanent "CLOSING OUT" sale. Several other ships were in and the
sector was crowded. Sam looked around. "Now for a place for a quiet drink and
a chat."
"How about there?" Max answered, pointing to a sign reading THE BETTER
'OLE. "Looks clean and cheerful."
Sam steered him quickly past it. "It is," he agreed, "but not for us."
"Why not?"
"Didn't you notice the customers? Imperial Marines."
"What of that? I've got nothing against the Imperials."
"Mmm . . . no," Sam agreed, still hurrying, "but those boys stick
together and they have a nasty habit of resenting a civilian who has the bad
taste to sit down in a joint they have staked out. Want to get your ribs
kicked in?"
"Huh? That wouldn't happen if I minded my own business, would it?"
"Maybe. Maybe not. Suppose a hostess decides that you're 'cute'--and the
spit-and-polish boy she was with wants to make something of it? Max, you're a
good boy--but there just ain't no demand for good boys. To stay out of trouble
you have to stay away from it."
They threaded their way through the crowd for another hundred yards
before Sam said, "Here we are-- provided Lippy is still running the place."
The sign read THE SAFE LANDING; it was larger but not as pleasant as THE
BETTER 'OLE.
"Who's Lippy?"
"You probably won't meet him." Sam led the way in and picked out a
table.
Max looked around. It looked like any other fifth-rate bar grille.
"Could I get a strawberry soda here? I've had a hankering for one for ages--I
used always to get one Saturdays when I went to the Corners."

"They can't rule you out for trying."
"Okay. Sam, something you said--you remember the story you told me about
your friend in the Imperials? Sergeant Roberts?"
"Who?"
"Or Richards. I didn't quite catch it."
"Never heard of the guy."
"But . . ."
"Never heard of him. Here's the waiter."
Nor had the humanoid Sirian waiter heard of strawberry soda. He had no
facial muscles but his back skin crawled and rippled with embarrassed lack of
comprehension. Max settled for something called "Old Heidelberg" although it
had never been within fifty light-years of Germany. It tasted to Max like cold
soap suds, but since Sam had paid for it he nursed it along and pretended to
drink it.
Sam bounced up almost at once. "Sit tight, kid. I won't be long." He
spoke to the barman, then disappeared toward the back. A young woman came over
to Max's table.
"Lonely, spaceman?"
"Uh, not especially."
"But _I_ am. Mind if I sit down?" She sank into the chair that Sam had
vacated.
"Suit yourself. But my friend is coming right back."
She didn't answer but turned to the waiter at her elbow. "A brown
special, Giggles."
Max made an emphatic gesture of denial. "No!"
"What's that, dear?"
"Look," Max answered, blushing, "I may look green as paint--I am,
probably. But I don't buy colored water at house prices. I don't have much
money."
She looked hurt. "But you have to order or I can't sit here."
"Well . . ." He glanced at the menu. "I could manage a sandwich, I
guess."
She turned again to the waiter. "Never mind the special, Giggles. A
cheese on rye and plenty of mustard." She turned back to Max. "What's your
name, honey?"
"Max."
"Mine's Dolores. Where are you from?"
"The Ozarks. That's Earthside."
"Now isn't that a coincidence! I'm from Winnipeg-- we're neighbors!"
Max decided that it might appear so, from that distance. But as Dolores
babbled on it became evident that she knew neither the location of the Ozarks
nor that of Winnipeg, had probably never been on Terra in her life. She was
finishing the sandwich while telling Max that she just adored spacemen, they
were so romantic, when Sam returned.
He looked down at her. "How much did you take him for?"
Dolores said indignantly, "That's no way to talk! Mr. Lipski doesn't
permit . . ."
"Stow it, kid," Sam went on, not unkindly. "You didn't know that my
partner is a guest of Lippy. Get me? No 'specials,' no 'pay-me's'--you're
wasting your time. Now how much?"
Max said hastily, "It's okay, Sam. All I bought her was a sandwich."
"Well . . . all right. But you're excused, sister. Later, maybe."
She shrugged and stood up. "Thanks, Max."
"Not at all, Dolores. I'll say hello to the folks in Winnipeg."
"Do that."
Sam did not sit down. "Kid, I have to go out for a while."
"Okay."
Max started to rise, Sam motioned him back. "No, no. This I'd better do
by myself. Wait here, will you? They won't bother you again--or if they do,
ask for Lippy."

"I won't have any trouble."
"I hope not." Sam looked worried. "I don't know why I should fret, but
there is something about you that arouses the maternal in me. Your big blue
eyes I guess."
"Huh? Oh, go sniff space! Anyway, my eyes are brown."
"I was speaking," Sam said gently, "of the eyes of your dewy pink soul.
Don't speak to strangers while I'm gone."
Max used an expression he had picked up from Mr. Gee; Sam grinned and
left.
But Sam's injunction did not apply to Mr. Simes. Max saw the assistant
astrogator appear in the doorway. His face was redder than usual and his eyes
looked vague. He let his body revolve slowly as he surveyed the room.
Presently his eyes lit on Max and he grinned unpleasantly.
"Well, well, well!" he said as he advanced toward Max. "If it isn't the
Smart Boy."
"Good evening, Mr. Simes." Max stood up.
"So it's 'good evening, Mr. Simes'! But what did you say under your
breath?'
"Nothing, sir."
"Humph! I know! But I think the same thing about you, only worse." Max
did not answer, Simes went on, "Well, aren't you going to ask me to sit down?"
"Have a seat, sir," Max said without expression.
"Well, what do you know? The Smart Boy wants me to sit with him." He
sat, called the waiter, ordered, and turned back to Max. "Smart Boy, do you
know why I'm sitting with you?"
"No, sir."
"To put a flea in your ear, that's why. Since you pulled that
hanky-panky with the computer, you've been Kelly's
hair-faired--fair-haired--boy. Fair-haired boy," he repeated carefully. "That
gets you nowhere with me. Get this straight: you go sucking around the
Astrogator the way Kelly does and I'll run you out of the control room.
Understand me?"
Max felt himself losing his temper. "What do you mean by 'hanky-panky,'
Mr. Simes?"
"You know. Probably memorized the last half dozen transitions--now
you've got Kelly and the Professor thinking you've memorized the book. A
genius in our midst! You know what that is? That's a lot of . . ."
Fortunately for Max they were interrupted; he felt a firm hand on his
shoulder and Sam's quiet voice said, "Good evening, Mr. Simes."
Simes looked confused, then recognized Sam and brightened. "Well, if it
isn't the copper. Sit down, Constable. Have a drink."
"Don't mind if I do." Sam pulled up another chair.
"Do you know Smart Boy here?"
"I've seen him around."
"Keep your eye on him. That's an order. He's very, very clever. Too
clever. Ask him a number. Pick a number between one and ten."
"Seven."
Mr. Simes pounded the table. "What did I tell you? He memorized it
before you got here. Someday he's going to memorize one and they'll stencil it
across his chest. You know what, Constable? I don't trust smart boys. They get
ideas."
Reinforced by Sam's calming presence Max kept quiet. Giggles had come to
the table as soon as Sam joined them; Max saw Sam write something on the back
of a menu and pass it with money to the humanoid. But Mr. Simes was too busy
with his monologue to notice. Sam let him ramble on, then suddenly
interrupted. "You seem to have a friend here, sir."
"Huh? Where?"
Sam pointed. At the bar Dolores was smiling and gesturing at the
assistant navigator to join her. Simes focused his eyes, grinned and said,
"Why, so I do! It's my Great Aunt Sadie." He got up abruptly.

Sam brushed his hands together. "That disposes of that. Give you a bad
time, kid?"
"Sort of. Thanks, Sam. But I hate to see him dumped on Dolores. She's a
nice kid."
"Don't worry about her. She'll roll him for every thin he has on
him--and a good job, too." His eyes became hard. "I like an officer who acts
like an officer. If he wants to pin one on, he should do it in his own part of
town. Oh, well." Sam relaxed. "Been some changes, eh, kid? Things are
different from the way they were when we raised ship at Terra."
"I'll say they are!"
"Like it in the Worry gang?"
"It's more fun than I ever had in my life. And I'm learning fast--so Mr.
Kelly says. They're a swell bunch--except for _him_." He nodded toward Simes.
"Don't let him worry you. The best soup usually has a fly in it. Just
don't let him get anything on you."
"I sure don't intend to."
Sam looked at him, then said softly, "Ready to take the dive?"
"Huh?"
"I'm getting our stake together. We'll be all set."
Max found it hard to answer. He had known that his transfer had not
changed anything basic; he was still in as much danger as ever. But he had
been so busy with the joy of hard, interesting work, so dead for sleep when he
was not working, that the subject had been pushed back in his mind. Now he
drew patterns on the table in the sweat from the glasses and thought about it.
"I wish," he said slowly, "that there was some way to beat it."
"There is a way, I told you. Your record gets lost."
Max raised his eyes. "What good would that do? Sure, it would get me
another trip. But I don't want just another trip; I want to stay with it." He
looked down at the table top and carefully sketched an hyperboloid. "I'd
better go with you. If I go back to Terra, it's the labor companies for
me--even if I stay out of jail."
"Nonsense."
"What?"
"Understand me, kid. I'd like to have you with me. A time like that,
having a partner at your elbow is the difference between--well, being down in
the dumps and being on top. But you can stay in space, with a record as clean
as a baby's."
"Huh? How?"
"Because you are changing guilds. Now only _one_ paper has to get
lost--your strike-out record with the stewards, cooks, and clerks. And they
will never miss it because you aren't on their books, anyhow. You start fresh
with the chartsmen and computers, all neat and legal."
Max sat still and was tempted. "How about the report to the Department
of Guilds and Labor?"
"Same thing. Different forms to different offices. I checked. One form
gets lost, the other goes in--and Steward's Mate Jones vanishes into limbo
while Apprentice Chartsman Jones starts a clean record."
"Sam, why don't _you_ do it? With the drag you've got now you could
switch to . . . uh, well, to . . ."
"To what?" Sam shook his head sadly. "No, old son, there is nothing I
can switch to. Besides, there are reasons why I had better be buried deep." He
brightened. "Tell you what--I'll pick my new name before I take the jump and
tell you. Then some day, two years, ten, twenty, you'll lay over at Nova Terra
and look me up. We'll split a bottle and talk about when we were young and
gay. Eh?"
Max smiled though he did not feel happy. "We will, Sam. We surely will."
Then he frowned. "But, Sam, I don't know how to wangle the deal--and you'll be
gone."
"I'll fix it before I leave. I've got Nelson eating out of my hand now.
Like this: half cash down and half on delivery--and I'll fix it so that you

have something on him--never mind what; you don't need to know yet. When you
ground at Earthport, he asks you to mail the reports because you are going
dirtside and he has work to finish. You check to see that the two reports you
want are there, then you give him his pay off. Done."
Max said slowly, "I suppose that's best."
"Quit fretting. Everybody has a skeleton in the closet; the thing is to
keep 'em there and not at the feast." He pushed an empty glass aside. "Kid,
would you mind if we went back to the ship? Or had you planned to make a night
of it?"
"No, I don't mind." Max's elation at setting foot on his first strange
planet was gone--Garson's Hole was, he had to admit, a sorry sample of the
Galaxy.
"Then let's get saddled up. I've got stuff to carry and I could use
help."
It turned out to be four fairly large bundles which Sam had cached in
public lockers. "What are they?" Max asked curiously.
"Tea cozies, old son. Thousands of them. I'm going to sell 'em to
Procyon pinheads as skull caps." Somewhat affronted, Max shut up.
Everything coming into the ship was supposed to be inspected, but the
acting master-at-arms on watch at the lock did not insist on examining the
items belonging to the Chief Master-at-Arms any more than he would have
searched a ship's officer. Max helped Sam carry the bundles to the stateroom
which was the prerogative of the ship's chief of police.
11
"THROUGH THE CARGO HATCH"
From Garson's Planet to Halcyon around Nu Pegasi is a double dogleg of
three transitions, of 105, 487, and 19 light-years respectively to achieve a
"straight line" distance of less than 250 light-years. But neither
straight-line distance nor pseudo-distance of transition is important; the
_Asgard_ covered less than a light-year between gates. A distance "as the crow
flies" is significant only to crows.
The first transition was barely a month out from Carson's Planet. On
raising from there Kelly placed Max on a watch in three, assigning him to
Kelly's own watch, which gave Max much more sleep, afforded him as much
instruction (since the watch with Simes was worthless, instruction-wise), and
kept Max out of Simes' way, to his enormous relief. Whether Kelly had planned
that feature of it Max never knew--and did not dare ask.
Max's watch was still an instruction watch, he had no one to relieve nor
to be relieved by. It became his habit not to leave the control room until
Kelly did, unless told to do so. This resulted in him still being thrown into
the company of Dr. Hendrix frequently, since the Astrogator relieved the Chief
Computerman and Kelly would usually hang around and chat . . . during which
time the Astrogator would sometimes inquire into Max's progress.
Occasionally the Captain would show up on Dr. Hendrix's watch. Shortly
after leaving Garson's Planet Dr. Hendrix took advantage of one such occasion
to have Max demonstrate for Captain Blaine and First Officer Walther his odd
talent. Max performed without a mistake although the Captain's presence made

him most self-conscious. The Captain watched closely with an expression of
gentle surprise. Afterwards he said, "Thank you, lad. That was amazing. Let me
see--what is your name?"
"Jones, sir."
"Jones, yes." The old man blinked thoughtfully. "It must be terrifying
not to be able to forget--especially in the middle of the night. Keep a clear
conscience, son."
Twelve hours later Dr. Hendrix said to him, "Jones, don't go away. I
want to see you."
"Yes, sir."
The Astrogator spoke with Kelly for a few moments, then again spoke to
Max. "The Captain was impressed by your vaudeville act, Jones. He is wondering
whether you have any parallel mathematical ability."
"Well--no, sir. I'm not a lightning calculator, that is. I saw one in a
sideshow once. He could do things I couldn't."
Hendrix brushed it aside. "Not important. I believe you told me that
your uncle taught you some mathematical theory?"
"Just for astrogation, sir."
"What do you think I am talking about? Do you know how to compute a
transition approach?"
"Uh, I think so, sir."
"Frankly, I doubt it, no matter how much theoretical drill Brother Jones
gave you. But go ahead."
"_Now_, sir?"
"Try it. Pretend you're the officer of the watch. Kelly will be your
assistant. I'll just be audience. Work the approach we are on. I realize that
we aren't close enough for it to matter--but you are to assume that the safety
of the ship depends on it."
Max took a deep breath. "Aye aye, sir." He started to get out fresh
plates for the cameras.
Hendrix said, "No!"
"Sir?"
"If you have the watch, where's your crew? Noguchi, help him."
"Aye aye, sir." Noguchi grinned and came over. While they were bending
over the first camera, Noguchi whispered, "Don't let him rattle you, pal.
We'll give him a good show. Kelly will help you over the humps."
But Kelly did not help; he acted as "numbers boy" and nothing else, with
no hint to show whether Max was right, or wildly wrong. After Max had his
sights and had taken his comparison data between plates and charts he did not
put the problem through the computer himself, but let Noguchi man the machine,
with Kelly translating. After a long time and much sweat the lights blinked
what he hoped was the answer.
Dr. Hendrix said nothing but took the same plates to the tank and
started to work the problem again, with the same crew. Very quickly the lights
blinked on again; the Astrogator took the tables from Kelly and looked up the
translation himself. "We differ only in the ninth decimal place. Not bad."
"I was wrong only in the ninth place, sir?"
"I didn't say that. Perhaps I was more in error."
Max started to grin, but Dr. Hendrix frowned. "Why didn't you take
doppler spectra to check?"
Max felt a cold chill. "I guess I forgot, sir."
"I thought you were the man who never forgot?"
Max thought intuitively--and correctly--that two kinds of memory were
involved, but he did not have a psychologist's jargon with which to explain.
One sort was like forgetting one's hat in a restaurant, that could happen to
anyone; the other was being unable to recall what the mind had once known.
Hendrix went on, "A control room man must not forget things necessary to
the safety of the ship. However as an exercise you solved it very well--except
that you have no speed. Had we been pushing close to the speed of light, ready
to cross, your ship would have been in Hades and crashed in the River Styx

before you got the answer. But it was a good first try."
He turned away. Kelly jerked his head toward the hatch and Max went
below.
As he was falling asleep Max turned over in his mind the notion that Dr.
Hendrix might even be thinking of him for-- Oh no! He put the thought aside.
After all, Kelly could have done it; he had seen him do early approaches many
times, and faster, too. Probably Noguchi could have done it.
Certainly Noguchi could have done it, he corrected. After all, there
weren't any "secrets."
As they approached the first anomaly the easy watch in three for
officers and watch in four for the men changed to watch-and-watch, with an
astrogator, an assistant, a chartsman, and a computerman on each watch. Max
was at last assigned to a regular watch; the first watch was Dr. Hendrix
assisted by Chartsman 1/c Kovak, Max as chartsman of the watch and Noguchi on
the computer; the other watch was Mr. Simes assisted by Chief Kelly, Smythe as
chartsman and Lundy as computerman. Max noticed that Dr. Hendrix had assigned
his "first team" to Simes and had taken the less experienced technicians
himself. He wondered why, but was pleased not to be working for Simes.
He learned at last why they called it the "Worry Hole." Dr. Hendrix
became a frozen-masked automaton, performing approach correction after
correction and demanding quick, accurate, and silent service. During the last
twenty hours of the approach the Astrogator never left the control room, nor
did anyone else other than for short periods when nominally off watch. Simes
continued to take his regular watch but Dr. Hendrix hung over him, checking
everything that he did. Twice he required the junior astrogator to reperform
portions of his work and once elbowed him aside and did it himself. The first
time it happened Max stared--then he noticed that the others were careful to
be busy doing something else whenever Dr. Hendrix spoke privately to Simes.
The tension grew as the critical instant approached. The approach to an
anomalous intraspatial transition can hardly be compared to any other form of
piloting ever performed by human beings, though it might be compared to the
impossible trick of taking off in an atmosphere plane, flying a thousand miles
blind--while performing dead reckoning so perfectly as to fly through a narrow
tunnel at the far end, without ever seeing the tunnel. A Horst congruency
cannot be seen, it can only be calculated by abstruse mathematics of effects
of mass on space; a "gateway" is merely unmarked empty space in vaster
emptiness. In approaching a planet an astrogator can see his destination,
directly or by radar, and his speed is just a few miles per second. But in
making a Horstian approach the ship's speed approaches that of light--and
reaches it, at the last instant. The nearest landmarks are many billions of
miles away, the landmarks themselves are moving with stellar velocities and
appear to be crowding together in the exaggerated parallax effects possible
only when the observer is moving almost as fast as is his single clue to
location and speed--the wave fronts of the electromagnetic spectrum.
Like searching at midnight in a dark cellar for a black cat that isn't
there.
Toward the last Kelly himself was on the computer with Lundy at his ear.
Smythe and Kovak were charting, passing new data to Dr. Hendrix, who was
programming orally to the computer crew, setting up the problems in his head
and feeding them to the electronic brain almost without delay. The power room
was under his direct control now; he had a switch led out from the control
console in each hand, one to nurse the ship along just below speed of light,
the other to give the _Asgard_ the final kick that would cause her to burst
through.
Max was pushed aside, no task remained in which there was not someone
more experienced. On a different level, Simes too had been pushed aside; there
was place for only one astrogator at the moment of truth.
Of all those in the Worry Hole only Captain Blaine seemed to be relaxed.

He sat in the chair sacred to him, smoking quietly and watching Hendrix. The
Astrogator's face was gray with fatigue, greasy with unwashed sweat. His
uniform was open at the collar and looked slept in, though he certainly had
not slept. Max looked at him and wondered why he had ever longed to be an
astrogator, ever been foolish enough to wish to bear this undivided and
unendurable burden.
But the doctor's crisp voice showed no fatigue; the endless procession
of numbers marched out, sharp as print, each spoken so that there could be no
mistake, no need to repeat, "nine" always sounded as one syllable, "five"
always stretched into two. Max listened and learned and wondered.
He glanced up through the dome, out into space itself, space shown
distorted by their unthinkable speed. The stars ahead, or above, had been
moving closer together for the past several watches, the huge parallax effect
displacing them to the eye so that they seemed to be retreating in the very
sector of the sky they were approaching. They were seeing by infra-red waves
now, ploughing into oncoming wave trains so fast that doppler effect reduced
heat wave lengths to visible light.
The flood of figures stopped. Max looked down, then looked up hastily as
he heard Dr. Hendrix say, "Stand by!"
The stars seemed to crawl together, then instantly they were gone to be
replaced without any lapse of time whatever by another, new and totally
different starry universe.
Hendrix straightened up and sighed, then looked up. "There's the Albert
Memorial," he said quietly. "And there is the Hexagon. Well, Captain, it seems
we made it again." He turned to Simes. "Take it, Mister." He let the Captain
go first, then followed him down the hatch.
The control gang went back to easy watches; the next transition was many
days away. Max continued as chartsman-of -the-watch in place of Kovak, who
temporarily replaced Dr. Hendrix while the Astrogator got a week of rest:
There was truly not much to do during the early part of a leg and the doctor's
superb skill was not needed. But Max greatly enjoyed the new arrangements; it
made him proud to sign the rough log "M. Jones, Chtsmn o/W." He felt that he
had arrived--even though Simes found fault with him and Kelly continued to
drill him unmercifully in control room arts.
He was surprised but not apprehensive when he was told, during an
off-watch period, to report to the Astrogator. He put on a fresh uniform,
slicked his hair clown, and went above "C" deck. "Apprentice Chartsman Jones
reporting, sir."
Kelly was there, having coffee with the Astrogator. Hendrix acknowledged
Max's salutation but left him standing. "Yes, Jones." He turned to Kelly.
"Suppose you break the news."
"If you say so, sir." Kelly looked uncomfortable. "Well, Jones, it's
like this--you don't really belong in my guild."
Max was so shocked that he could not answer. He was about to say that he
had thought--he had understood--he hadn't known-- But he got nothing out;
Kelly continued, "The fact is, you ought to buck for astrogator. The Doctor
and I have been talking it over."
The buzzing in his head got worse. He became aware that Dr. Hendrix was
repeating, "Well, Jones? Do you want to try it? Or don't you?"
Max managed to say, "Yes. Yes, sir."
"Good. Kelly and I have been watching you. He is of the opinion and so
am I that you may, just possibly, have the latent ability to develop the skill
and speed necessary. The question is: do _you_ think so?"
"Uh . . . that is-- I hope so, sir!"
"So do I," Hendrix answered dryly. 'We shall see. If you haven't, you
can revert to your own guild and no harm is done. The experience will make you
a better chartsman." The Astrogator turned to Kelly. "I'll quiz Jones a bit,
Kelly. Then we can make up our minds."
"Very good, sir." Kelly stood up.
When the Chief Computerman had gone Hendrix turned to his desk, hauled

out a crewman's personal record. To Max he said harshly, "Is this yours?"
Max looked at it and gulped. "Yes, sir."
Dr. Hendrix held his eye. "Well? How good a picture is it of your career
thus far? Any comment you want to make?"
The pause might have been a dozen heart beats, though to Max it was an
endless ordeal. Then a catharsis came bursting up out of him and he heard
himself answering, "It's not a good picture at all, sir. It's phony from one
end to the other."
Even as he said it, he wondered why. He felt that he had kicked to
pieces his one chance to achieve his ambition. Yet, instead of feeling tragic,
he felt oddly relaxed.
Hendrix put the personal record back on his desk. "Good," he answered.
"Very good. If you had given any other answer, I would have run you out of my
control room. Now, do you want to tell me about it? Sit down."
So Max sat down and told him. All that he held back was Sam's name and
such details as would have identified Sam. Naturally Dr Hendrix noticed the
omission and asked him point blank.
"I won't tell you, sir."
Hendrix nodded. "Very well. Let me add that I shall make no attempt to
identify this, ah, friend of yours-- if by chance he is in this ship."
"Thank you, sir."
There followed a considerable silence. At last Hendrix said, "Son, what
led you to attempt this preposterous chicanery? Didn't you realize you would
be caught?"
Max thought about it. "I guess I knew I would be, sir--eventually. But I
wanted to space and there wasn't any other way to do it." When Hendrix did not
answer Max went on. After the first relief of being able to tell the truth, he
felt defensive, anxious to justify himself--and just a little bit irked that
Dr. Hendrix did not see that he had simply done what he _had_ to do--so it
seemed to Max. "What would you have done, sir?"
"Me? How can I answer that? What you're really asking is: do I consider
your actions morally wrong, as well as illegal?"
"Uh, I suppose so, sir."
"Is it wrong to lie and fake and bribe to get what you want? It's worse
than wrong, it's undignified!"
Dr. Hendrix chewed his lip and continued. "Perhaps that opinion is the
sin of the Pharisees . . .. my own weakness. I don't suppose that a young,
penniless tramp, such as you described yourself to be, can afford the luxury
of dignity. As for the rest, human personality is a complex thing, nor am I a
judge. Admiral Lord Nelson was a liar, a libertine, and outstandingly
undisciplined. President Abraham Lincoln was a vulgarian and nervously
unstable. The list is endless. No, Jones, I am not going to pass judgment; you
must do that yourself. The authorities having jurisdiction will reckon your
offenses; I am concerned only with whether or not you have the qualities I
need."
Max's emotions received another shock. He had already resigned himself
to the idea that he had lost his chance. "Sir?"
"Don't misunderstand me." Hendrix tapped the forged record. "I don't
like this. I don't like it at all. But perhaps you can live down your mistake.
In the meantime, I badly need another watch officer; if you measure up, I can
use you. Part of it is personal, too; your uncle taught me, I shall try to
teach you."
"Uh, I'll try, sir. Thank you."
"Don't thank me. I'm not even feeling particularly friendly to you, at
the moment. Don't talk with anyone. I'll ask the Captain to call a guild
meeting and he and Mr. Simes and I will vote on you. We'll make you a
probationary apprentice which will permit the Captain to appoint you to the
temporary rank of merchant cadet. The legalities are a bit different from
those of the usual route as you no doubt know."
Max did not know, though he was aware that officers sometimes came up

"through the cargo hatch"--but another point hit him. "Mr. Simes, sir?"
"Certainly. By this procedure, all the astrogators you serve with must
pass on you."
"Uh, does it have to unanimous, sir?"
"Yes."
"Then-- Well, sir, you might as well forget it. I mean, I appreciate
your willingness to, uh, but . . ."  His voice trailed off.
Dr. Hendrix smiled mirthlessly. "Hadn't you better let me worry about
that?"
"Oh. Sorry, sir."
"When it has been logged, I'll notify you. Or 'when and if,' if you
prefer."
"Yes, sir." Max stood up. "Sir? There were, uh, a couple of other things
I wondered about."
Hendrix had turned back to his desk. He answered, "Well?" somewhat
impatiently.
"Would you mind telling me--just for my curiosity--how you caught me?"
"Oh, that. No doubt you've given yourself away to several people. I'm
sure Kelly knows, from the subjects he avoided. For example, I once heard
Lundy mention to you Kiefer's Ritz on Luna. Your answer, though noncommittal,
implied that you did not really know what dive he was talking about--and it is
impossible for a spaceman not to know that place, its entrance faces the east
lock to the space port."
"Oh."
"But the matter came to the top of my mind in connection with this." He
again indicated the false record. "Jones, I deal in figures and my mind can no
more help manipulating them for all the information they contain than I can
help breathing. This record says that you went to space a year before your
uncle retired--I remember what year that was. But you told me that your uncle
had trained you at home and your performance bore out that statement. Two sets
of alleged facts were contradictory; need I add that I was fairly sure of the
truth?"
"Oh. I guess I wasn't very smart?'
"No, you weren't. Figures are sharp things, Jones. Don't juggle them,
you'll get cut. What was the other matter?"
"Well, sir, I was kind of wondering what was going to happen to me. I
mean about _that_."
"Oh," Hendrix answered indifferently, "that's up to the Stewards &
Clerks. My guild won't take action concerning a disciplinary matter of another
guild. Unless, of course, they call it 'moral turpitude' and make it stick."
With that faint comfort Max left, Nevertheless he felt easier than he
had at any time since he had signed on. The prospect of punishment seemed less
a burden than constantly worrying about getting caught. Presently he forgot it
and exulted in the opportunity--at last!--to take a crack at astrogator.
He wished he could tell Sam . . . or Ellie.
12
HALCYON

The probationary appointment was logged later that same day. The Captain
called him in, swore him in, then congratulated him and called him "Mister"
Jones. The ceremony was simple, with no spectator but Hendrix and the
Captain's secretary.
The commonplaces attendant on the change were, for a while, more
startling to Max than the promotion itself. They started at once. "You had
better take the rest of the day to shake down, Mr. Jones," the Captain said,
blinking vaguely. "Okay, Doc?"
"Certainly, sir."
"Good. Bennett, will you ask Dumont to step in?"
The Chief Passengers' Steward was unblinkingly unsurprised to find the
recent steward's mate third a ship's officer. To the Captain's query he said,
"I was planning to put Mr. Jones in stateroom B-014, sir. Is that
satisfactory?"
"No doubt, no doubt."
"I'll have boys take care of his luggage at once."
"Good. You trot along with Dumont, Mr. Jones. No, wait a moment. We must
find you a cap." The Captain went to his wardrobe, fumbled around. "I had one
that would do here somewhere."
Hendrix had been standing with his hands behind him. "I fetched one,
Captain. Mr. Jones and I wear the same size, I believe."
"Good. Though perhaps his head has swelled a bit in the past few
minutes. Eh?"
Hendrix grinned savagely. "If it has, I'll shrink it." He handed the cap
to Max. The wide gold strap and sunburst the Astrogator had removed;
substituted was a narrow strap with tiny sunburst surrounded by the qualifying
circle of the apprentice. Max thought it must be old insignia saved for
sentimental reasons by Hendrix himself. He choked up as he mumbled his thanks,
then followed Dumont out of the Captain's cabin, stumbling over his feet.
When they reached the companionway Dumont stopped. "There is no need to
go down to the bunkroom, sir. If you will tell me the combination of your
locker, we'll take care of everything."
"Oh, gee, Mr. Dumont! I've got just a small amount of truck. I can carry
it up myself."
Dumont's face had the impassivity of a butler's. "If I may make a
suggestion, sir, you might like to see your stateroom while I have the matter
taken care of." It was not a question; Max interpreted it correctly to mean:
"_Look, dummy, I know the score and you don't. Do what I tell you before you
make a terrible break!_"
Max let himself be guided. It is not easy to make the jump from crewman
to officer while remaining in the same ship. Dumont knew this, Max did not.
Whether his interest was fatherly, or simply a liking for correct protocol--or
both--Dumont did not intend to allow the brand-new junior officer to go lower
than "C" deck until he had learned to carry his new dignity with grace. So Max
sought out stateroom B-014.
The bunk had a real foam mattress and a spread. There was a tiny wash
basin with running water and a mirror. There was a bookshelf over the bunk and
a wardrobe for his uniforms. There was even a shelf desk that let down for his
convenience. There was a telephone on the wall, a buzzer whereby he could
summon the steward's mate on watch! There was a movable chair all his own, a
wastebasket, and--yes!-- a little rug on the deck. And best of all, there was
a door with a lock.
The fact that the entire room was about as large as a piano box bothered
him not at all.
He was opening drawers and poking into things when Dumont returned.
Dumont was not carrying Max's meager possessions himself; that task was
delegated to one of his upper-decks staff. The steward's mate followed Dumont
in and said, "Where shall I put this, sir?"
Max realized with sudden embarrassment that the man waiting on him had
eaten opposite him for past months. "Oh! Hello, Jim. Just dump it on the bunk.

Thanks a lot."
"Yes, sir. And congratulations!"
"Uh, thanks!" They shook hands. Dumont let that proper ceremony persist
for a minimum time, then said, "That's all now, Gregory. You can go back to
the pantry." He turned to Max. "Anything else, sir?"
"Oh, no, everything is fine."
"May I suggest that you probably won't want to sew insignia on these
uniforms yourself? Unless you are better with a needle than I am," Dumont
added with just the right chuckle.
"Well, I guess I could."
"Mrs. Dumont is handy with a needle, taking care of the lady passengers
as she does. Suppose I take this one? It can be ready and pressed in time for
dinner."
Max was happy to let him. He was suddenly appalled by a terrifying
notion--he was going to have to eat in the Bifrost Lounge!
But there were further disturbances before dinner. He was completing the
small task of stowing his possessions when there came a knock on the door,
followed immediately by someone coming in. Max found himself nose to nose with
Mr. Simes.
Simes looked at the cap on his head and laughed. "Take that thing off
before you wear out your ears."
Max did not do so. He said, "You wanted me, sir?"
"Yes. Just long enough, Smart Boy, to give you a word of advice."
"Yes?"
Simes tapped himself on the chest. "Just this. There is only one
assistant astrogator in this ship--and I'm it. Remember that. I'll still be it
long after you've been busted back to sweeping up after cows. Which is where
you belong."
Max felt a flush crawl up his neck and burn his cheeks. "Why," he asked,
"if you think that, didn't you veto my appointment?"
Simes laughed again. "Do I look like a fool? The Captain says yes, the
Astrogator says yes--should I stick my neck out? It's easier to wait and let
you stick your neck out--which you will. I just wanted to let you know that a
dinky piece of gold braid doesn't mean a thing. You're still junior to me by
plenty. Don't forget it."
Max clenched his jaw and did not answer. Simes went on, "Well?"
"'Well' what?"
"I just gave you an order."
"Oh. Aye aye, Mr. Simes. I won't forget it. I certainly won't."
Simes looked at him sharply, said, "See that you don't," and left. Max
was still facing his door, clenching his fists, when Gregory tapped on the
door. "Dinner, sir. Five minutes."
Max delayed as long as he could, wishing mightily that he could slide
down to Easy deck and take his usual place in the warm, noisy, relaxed comfort
of the crew's mess. He hesitated in the lounge doorway, paralyzed with stage
fright. The beautiful room was blazing with light and looked unfamiliar; he
had never been in it save in early morning, to change the sandbox located down
the pantry passage--at which times only standing lights were burning.
He was barely in time; some of the ladies were seated but the Captain
was still standing. Max realized that he should be near his chair, ready to
sit down when the Captain did--or as soon as the ladies were seated, he
amended--but where should he go? He was still jittering when he heard his name
shouted. "Max!"
Ellie came running up and threw her arms around his neck. "Max! I just
heard. I think it's _wonderful!_" She looked at him, her eyes shining, then
kissed him on both cheeks.
Max blushed to his ears. He felt as if every eye was turned on him--and
he was right. To add to his embarrassment Ellie was dressed in formal evening

dress of Hesperan high style, which not only made her look older and much more
female, but also shocked his puritanical hillbilly standards.
She let go of him, which was well but left him in danger of collapsing
at the knees. She started to babble something, Max did not know what, when
Chief Steward Dumont appeared at her elbow. "The Captain is waiting, Miss," he
said firmly.
"Bother to the Captain! Oh, well--see you after dinner, Max." She headed
for the Captain's table. Dumont touched Max's sleeve and munnured, "This way,
sir."
His place was at the foot of the Chief Engineer's table. Max knew Mr.
Compagnon by sight but had never spoken to him. The Chief glanced up and said,
"Evening, Mr. Jones. Glad to have you with us. Ladies and gentlemen, our new
astrogation officer, Mr. Jones. On your right, Mr. Jones, is Mrs. Daigler. Mr.
Daigler on her right, then--" and so on, around the table: Dr. and Mrs.
Weberbauer and their daughter Rebecca, Mr. and Mrs. Scott, a Mr. Arthur,
Senhor and Senhora Vargas.
Mrs. Daigler thought it was _lovely_, his being promoted. And so _nice_
to have more young people at the table. She was much older than Max but young
enough to be handsome and aware of it. She wore more jewels than Max had ever
seen and her hair was lacquered into a structure a foot high and studded with
pearls. She was as perfectly finished and as expensive as a precision machine
and she made Max uncomfortable.
But he was not yet as uncomfortable as he could be. Mrs. Daigler
produced a wisp of a handkerchief from her bosom, moistened it and said, "Hold
still, Mr. Jones." She scrubbed his cheek. "Turn your head." Blushing, Max
complied.
"There, that's better," Mrs. Daigler announced. "Mama fixed." She turned
away and said, "Don't you think, Mr. Compagnon, that science, with all the
wonderful things they do these days, could discover a lip paint that wouldn't
come off?"
"Stop it, Maggie," her husband interrupted. "Pay no attention, Mr.
Jones. She's got a streak of sadism as wide as she is."
"George, you'll pay for that. Well, Chief?"
The Chief Engineer patted his lips with snowy linen. "I think it must
already have been invented, but there was no market. Women like to brand men,
even temporarily."
"Oh, bosh!"
"It's a woman's world, ma'am."
She turned to Max. "Eldreth is a dear, isn't she? I suppose you knew her
'dirtside'?--as Mr. Compagnon calls it."
"No, ma'am."
"Then how? I mean, after all, there isn't much opportunity. Or is
there?"
"Maggie, stop pestering him. Let the man eat his dinner."
Mrs. Weberbauer on his other side was as easy and motherly as Mrs.
Daigler was difficult. Under her soothing presence Max managed to start
eating. Then he noticed that the way he grasped a fork was not the way the
others did, tried to change, made a mess of it, became aware of his untidy
nails, and wanted to crawl under the table. He ate about three hundred
calories, mostly bread and butter.
At the end of the meal Mrs. Daigler again gave her attention to him,
though she addressed the Chief Engineer. "Mr. Compagnon, isn't it customary to
toast a promotion?"
"Yes," the Chief conceded. "But he must pay for it. That's a
requirement."
Max found himself signing a chit presented by Dumont. The price made him
blink--his first trip might be a professional success, but so far it had been
financial disaster. Champagne, iced in a shiny bucket, accompanied the chit
and Dumont cut the wires and drew the cork with a flourish.
The Chief Engineer stood up. "Ladies and gentlemen--I give you

Astrogator Jones. May he never misplace a decimal point!"
"Cheers !"--"Bravo!"--"Speech, speech!"
Max stumbled to his feet and muttered, "Thank you."
His first watch was at eight o'clock the next morning. He ate breakfast
alone and reflected happily that as a watch stander he would usually eat
either before or after the passengers. He was in the control room a good
twenty minutes early.
Kelly glanced up and said, "Good morning, sir."
Max gulped. "Er--good morning, Chief!" He caught Smythe grinning behind
the computer, turned his eyes hastily away.
"Fresh coffee, Mr. Jones. Will you have a cup?" Max let Kelly pour for
him; while they drank Kelly quietly went over the details--acceleration
schedule, position and vector, power units in use, sights taken, no special
orders, etc. Noguchi relieved Smythe, and shortly before the hour Dr. Hendrix
appeared.
"Good morning, sir."
"Good morning, Doctor."
"Morning." Hendrix accepted coffee, turned to Max. "Have you relieved
the officer of the watch?"
"Uh, why no, sir."
"Then do so. It lacks less than a minute of eight."
Max turned to Kelly and shakily saluted. "I relieve you, sir."
"Very well, sir." Kelly went below at once. Dr. Hendrix sat down, took
out a book and started to read. Max realized with a chilly feeling that he had
been pushed in, to swim or not. He took a deep breath and went over to
Noguchi. "Noggy, let's get the plates ready for the middle o' watch sights."
Noguchi glanced at the chronometer. "As you say, sir."
"Well . . . I guess it is early. Let's take a few dopplers."
"Aye aye, sir." Noguchi climbed out of the saddle where he had been
loafing.
Max said in a low voice, "Look, Noggy, you don't have to say 'sir' to
me."
Noguchi answered just as quietly. "Kelly wouldn't like it if I didn't.
Better let it ride."
"Oh." Max frowned. "Noggy? How does the rest of the Worry gang feel
about it?"
Noguchi did not pretend not to understand. He answered, "Shucks, they're
all rooting for you, if you can swing it."
"You're sure?"
"Certain. Just as long as you don't try to make a big hairy thing out of
yourself like--well, like some I could mention." The computerman added, "Maybe
Kovak isn't exactly cheering. He's been having a watch of his own, you
know--for the first time."
"He's sore?"
"Not exactly. He couldn't expect to keep it long anyhow, not with a
transition coming up. He won't go out of his way to give you trouble, he'll be
fair."
Max made a mental note to see what he could do to swing Kovak over to
his side. The two manned the dopplerscope, took readings on stars forward of
vector, checked what they found by spectrostellograph, and compared both with
standard plates from the chart safe. At first Max had to remember that he was
in charge; then he got so interested in fussy details of measurements that he
was no longer self-conscious. At last Noguchi touched his sleeve. "Pushing ten
o'clock, sir. I'd better get set up."
"Huh? Sure, go ahead." He reminded himself not to help Noggy; the
chartsman has his prerogatives, too. But he checked the set up just as Hendrix
always did, as Simes rarely did, and as Kelly sometimes did, depending on who
had made it.

After they had gotten the new data Max programmed the problem on paper
(there being plenty of time), then called it off to Noguchi at the computer.
He thumbed the book himself, there being no "numbers boy" available. The
figures were as clear in his recollection as ever, but he obeyed Hendrix's
injunction not to depend on memory.
The result worried him. They were not "in the groove." Not that the
_Asgard_ was far out, but the discrepancy was measurable. He checked what he
had done, then had Noguchi run the problem again, using a different
programming method. The result came out the same.
Sighing, he computed the correction and started to take it to Hendrix
for approval. But the Astrogator still paid no attention; he sat at the
console, reading a novel from the ship's library.
Max made up his mind. He went to the console and said, "Excuse me, sir.
I need to get there for a moment." Hendrix got up without answering and found
another seat. Max sat down and called the power room. "Control officer
speaking. I intend to increase boost at eleven o'clock. Stand by for time
check."
Hendrix must have heard him, he thought, but the Astrogator gave no
sign. Max fed in the correction, set the control chronometer to execute his
wishes at eleven plus-or-minus nothing.
Shortly before noon Simes showed up. Max had already written his own
log, based on Noguchi's log, and had signed it "M. Jones." He had hesitated,
then added "C. O. o/W." Simes went to Dr. Hendrix, saluted, and said, "Ready
to relieve you, sir."
Hendrix spoke his first word since eight o'clock. "He's got it."
Simes looked non-plussed, then went to Max. "Ready to relieve you." Max
recited off the situation data while Simes read the log and the order book.
Simes interrupted him while he was still listing minor ship's data. "Okay, I
relieve you. Get out of my control room, Mister." Max got out. Dr. Hendrix had
already gone down.
Noguchi had loitered at the foot of the ladder. He caught Max's eye,
made a circle with thumb and finger and nodded. Max grinned at him, started to
ask a question; he wanted to know if that discrepancy was a booby trap,
intentionally left in by Kelly. Then he decided that it would not be fitting;
he'd ask Kelly himself, or figure it from the records. "Thanks, Noggy."
That watch turned out to be typical only in the one respect that Dr.
Hendrix continued to require Max to be officer of the watch himself. He did
not again keep quiet but rode Max steadily, drilling him hour after hour,
requiring him to take sights and set up problems continuously, as if the
_Asgard_ were actually close to transition. He did not permit Max to program
on paper but forced him to pretend that time was too short and that data must
immediately go into the computer, be acted on at once. Max sweated, with
remote controls in each fist and with Hendrix himself acting as "numbers boy."
The Astrogator kept pushing him for speed, speed, and more speed--never at the
sacrifice of accuracy, for any error was unforgivable. But the goal was always
greater speed.
Once Max objected. "Sir, if you would let me put it right into the
machine, I could cut it down a lot."
Hendrix snapped, "When you have your own control room, you can do that,
if you think it wise. Now you'll do it _my_ way."
Occasionally Kelly would take over as his supervisor. The Chief
Computerman was formal, using such phrases as, "May I suggest, sir--" or "I
think I'd do it this way, sir." But once he broke out with, "Confound it, Max!
Don't ever pull a dumb stunt like that!"
Then he started to amend his remarks. Max grinned. "Please, Chief. For a
moment you made me feel at home. Thanks."
Kelly looked sheepish. "I'm tired, I guess. I could do with a smoke and
some java."
While they were resting Max noted that Lundy was out of earshot and
said, "Chief? You know more than I'll ever learn. Why didn't _you_ buck for

astrogator? Didn't you ever get a chance?"
Kelly suddenly looked bleak. "I once did," he said stiffly. "Now I know
my limitations." Max shut up, much embarrassed. Thereafter Kelly reverted to
calling him Max whenever they were alone.
Max did not see Sam for more than a week after he moved up to Baker
deck. Even then the encounter was chance; he ran across him outside the
Purser's office. "Sam!"
"Good morning, sir!" Sam drew up in a smart salute with a broad grin on
his face.
"Huh? 'Good morning, sir' my foot! How's it going, Sam?"
"Aren't you going to return my salute? In my official capacity I can
report you, you know. The Captain is very, very fussy about ship's etiquette."
Max made a rude noise. "You can hold that salute until you freeze, you
clown."
Sam relaxed. "Kid, I've been meaning to get up and congratulate you--but
every time I find you're on watch. You must live in the Worry Hole."
"Pretty near. Look, I'll be off this evening until midnight. What do you
say I stop down to see you?"
Sam shook his head. "I'll be busy."
"Busy how? You expecting a jail break? Or a riot, maybe?"
Sam answered soberly, "Kid, don't get me wrong-- but you stick to your
end of the ship and I'll stick to mine. No, no, keep quiet and listen. I'm as
proud as if I had invented you. But you can't fraternize in crew's quarters,
not even with the Chief Master-at-Arms. Not yet."
"Who'll know? Who's to care?"
"You know blamed well that Giordano would love to tell Kuiper that you
didn't know how to behave like an officer--and Old Lady Kuiper would pass it
along to the Purser. Take my advice. Have I ever thrown you a curve?"
Max dropped the matter, though he badly wanted a chin with Sam. He
needed to tell him that his faked record had been breached and to consult with
him as to probable consequences.
Of course, he considered as he returned to his stateroom, there wasn't a
thing to keep him from carrying out his orginal intention of jumping ship with
Sam at Nova Terra--except that it was now no longer possible to imagine it. He
was an officer.
They were approaching the middle transition; the control room went on
watch-and-watch. But still Dr. Hendrix did not take the watch; Simes and Jones
alternated. The Astrogator stood every watch with Max but required him to do
the work and carry the responsibility himself. Max sweated it out and learned
that practice problems and study of theory were nothing like having it matter
when he had no way and no time to check. You had to be _right_, every time--
and there was always doubt.
When, during the last twenty-four hours, the Worry gang went on
continuous watch, Max thought that Dr. Hendrix would push him aside. But he
did not. Simes was pushed aside, yes, but Max took the worry seat, with
Hendrix bending over him and watching everything he did, but not interfering.
"Great heavens!" Max thought. "Surely he isn't going to let me make this
transition? I'm not ready for it, not yet. I'll never keep up."
But data was coming too fast for further worry; he had to keep
processing it, see the answers, and make decisions. It was not until twenty
minutes before transition that Hendrix pushed him aside without a word and
took over. Max was still recovering when they burst through into a new sky.
The last approach-and-transition before Halcyon was much like the
second. There were a couple of weeks of easy watches, headed by Simes, Jones,

and Kovak, with both Kelly and Hendrix getting a little rest. Max liked it,
both on and off watch. On watch he continued to practice, trying to achieve
the inhuman speed of Dr. Hendrix. Off watch he slept and enjoyed himself. The
Bifrost Lounge no longer terrified him. He now played three-dee with Ellie
there, with Chipsie on his shoulder, giving advice. Ellie had long since waved
her eyes at Captain Blaine and convinced him that a pet so well behaved, so
well house-broken, and in particular so well mannered (she had trained the
spider puppy to say, "Good morning, Captain," whenever it saw Blaine)--in all
respects so civilized should not be forced to live in a cage.
Max had even learned to swap feeble repartee with Mrs. Daigler, thinking
up remarks and waiting for a chance. Ellie was threatening to teach him to
dance, although he managed to stall her until resumption of watch-and-watch
before transition made it impossible.
Again he found himself shoved into the worry seat for the last part of
the approach. This time Dr. Hendrix did not displace him until less than ten
minutes before burst through.
On the easy drop down to Halcyon Ellie's determination won out. Max
learned to dance. He found that he liked it. He had good rhythm, did not
forget her instructions, and Ellie was a fragrant, pleasant armful. "I've done
all I can," she announced at last. "You're the best dancer with two left feet
I've ever met." She required him to dance with Rebecca Weberbauer and with
Mrs. Daigler. Mrs. Daigler wasn't so bad after all, as long as she kept her
mouth shut--and Rebecca was cute. He began to look forward to the fleshpots of
Halcyon, that being Ellie's stated reason for instructing him; he was to be
conscripted as her escort.
Only one thing marred the final leg; Sam was in trouble. Max did not
find out about it until after the trouble broke. He got up early to go on
watch and found Sam cleaning decks in the silent passages of passenger
quarters. He was in dungarees and wearing no shield. "Sam!"
Sam looked up. "Oh. Hi, kid. Keep your voice down, you'll wake people."
"But Sam, what in Ned are you doing?"
"Me? I seem to be manicuring this deck."
"But why?"
Sam leaned on his broom. "Well, kid, it's like this. The Captain and I
had a difference of opinion. He won."
"You've been busted?"
"Your intuition is dazzling."
"What happened?"
"Max, the less you know about it the better. Don't fret. _Sic transit
gloria mundi_--Tuesday is usually worse."
"But-- See here, I've got to grab chow and go on watch. I'll look you up
later."
"Don't."
Max got the story from Noguchi. Sam, it appeared, had set up a casino in
an empty storeroom. He might have gotten away with it indefinitely had it
remained a cards-and-dice set up, with a rake off for the house-- the "house"
being the Chief Master-at-Arms. But Sam had added a roulette wheel and that
had been his downfall; Giordano had come to suspect that the wheel had less of
the element of chance than was customary in better-run gambling halls--and had
voiced his suspicion to Chief Clerk Kuiper. From there events took an
inevitable course.
"When did he put in this wheel?"
"Right after we raised from Garson's Planet." Max thought uncomfortably
of the "tea cozies" he had helped Sam bring aboard there. Noguchi went on,
"Uh, didn't you know, sir? I thought you and him were pretty close before--you
know, before you moved up decks."
Max avoided an answer and dug into the log. He found it under the
previous day, added by Bennett to Simes' log. Sam was restricted to the ship

for the rest of the trip, final disciplinary action postponed until return to
Terra. 
That last seemed to mean that Captain Blaine intended to give Sam a
chance to show good behavior before making his recommendation to the
guilds--the Captain was a sweet old guy, he certainly was. But "restricted"?
Then Sam would never get his chance to run away from whatever it was he was
running away from. He located Sam as soon as he was off watch, digging him out
of his bunkroom and taking him out into the corridor.
Sam looked at him sourly. "I thought I told you not to look me up?"
"Never mind! Sam, I'm worried about you. This 'restricted' angle . . .
it means you won't have a chance to--"
"_Shut up!_" It was a whisper but Max shut up. "Now look here," Sam went
on, "Forget it. I got my stake and that's the important point."
"But . . ."
"Do you think they can seal this ship tight enough to keep me in when I
decide to leave? Now stay away from me. You're teacher's pet and I want to
keep it that way. I don't want you lectured about bad companions, meaning me."
"But I want to help, Sam. I . . ."
"Will you kindly get up above 'C' deck where you belong?"
He did not see Sam again that leg; presently he stopped worrying about
it. Hendrix required him to compute the planetary approach--child's play
compared with a transition--then placed Max at the conn  when they grounded.
This was a titulary responsibility since it was precomputed and done on
radar-automatic. Max sat with the controls under his hands, ready to override
the autopilot--and Hendrix stood behind him, ready to override him--but there
was no need; the _Asgard_ came down by the plotted curve as easy as descending
stairs. The thrust beams bit in and Max reported, "Grounded, sir, on
schedule."
"Secure."
Max spoke into the ship's announcers. "Secure power room. Secure all
space details. Dirtside routine, second section."
Of the four days they were there he spent the first three nominally
supervising, and actually learning from, Kovak in the routine ninety-day
inspection and overhaul of control room instruments. Ellie was vexed with him,
as she had had different plans. But on the last day he hit dirt with her,
chaperoned by Mr. and Mrs. Mendoza.
It was a wonderful holiday. Compared with Terra, Halcyon is a bleak
place and Bonaparte is not much of a city. Nevertheless Halcyon is an
earth-type planet with breathable air, and the party from the _Asgard_ had not
set foot outdoors since Earthport, months of time and unthinkable light-years
behind. The season was postaphelion, midsummer, Nu Pegasi burned warm and
bright in blue sky. Mr. Mendoza hired a carriage and they drove out into
green, rolling countryside behind four snuffling little Halcyon ponies. There
they visited a native pueblo, a great beehive structure of mud, conoid on
conoid, and bought souvenirs--two of which turned out to have "Made in Japan"
stamped inconspicuously on them.
Their driver, Herr Eisenberg, interpreted for them. The native who sold
the souvenirs kept swiveling his eyes, one after another, at Mrs. Mendoza. He
twittered some remarks to the driver, who guffawed. "What does he say?" she
asked.
"He was complimenting you."
"So? But how?"
"Well . . . he says you are for a slow fire and no need for seasoning;
you'd cook up nicely. And he'd do it, too," the colonist added, "if you stayed
here after dark."
Mrs. Mendoza gave a little scream. "You didn't tell us they were
_cannibals_. Josie, take me back!"
Herr Eisenberg looked horrified. "Cannibals? Oh, no, lady! They don't
eat each other, they just eat us-- when they can get us, that is. But there
hasn't been an incident in twenty years."

"But that's worse!"
"No, it isn't, lady. Look at it from their viewpoint. They're civilized.
This old fellow would never break one of their laws. But to them we are just
so much prime beef, unfortunately hard to catch."
"Take us back at once! Why, there are hundreds of them, and only five of
us."
"Thousands, lady. But you are safe as long as Gneeri is shining." He
gestured at Nu Pegasi. "It's bad juju to kill meat during daylight. The spirit
stays around to haunt."
Despite his reassurances the party started back. Max noticed that
Eldreth had been unfrightened. He himself had wondered what had kept the
natives from tying them up until dark.
They dined at the Josephine, Bonaparte's best (and only) hotel. But
there was a real three-piece orchestra, a dance floor, and food that was at
least a welcome change from the menus of the Bifrost Lounge. Many ship's
passengers and several officers were there; it made a jolly party. Ellie made
Max dance between each course. He even got up his nerve to ask Mrs. Daigler
for a dance, once she came over and suggested it.
During the intermission Eldreth steered him out on the adjacent balcony.
There she looked up at him. "You leave that Daigler hussy alone, hear me?"
"Huh? I didn't do anything."
She suddenly smiled warmly. "Of course not, you big sweet ninny. But
Ellie has to take care of you." She turned and leaned on the rail. Halcyon's
early night had fallen, her three moons were chasing each other. The sky
blazed with more stars than can be seen in Terra's lonely neighborhood. Max
pointed out the strange constellations and showed her the departure direction
they would take tomorrow to reach transition for Nova Terra. He had learned
four new skies so far, knew them as well as he knew the one that hung over the
Ozarks--and he would learn many more. He was already studying, from the
charts, other skies they would be in this trip.
"Oh, Max, isn't it _lovely!_"
"Sure is. Say, there's a meteor. They're scarce here, mighty scarce."
"Make a wish! Make a wish quick!"
"Okay." He wished that he would get off easy when it came to the
showdown. Then he decided that wasn't right; he ought to wish old Sam out of
his jam--not that he believed in it, either way.
She turned and faced him. "What did you wish?"
"Huh?" He was suddenly self-conscious. "Oh, mustn't tell, that spoils
it."
"All right. But I'll bet you get your wish," she added softly.
He thought for a moment that he could have kissed her, right then, if he
had played his cards right. But the moment passed and they went inside. The
feeling stayed with him on the ride back, made him elated. It was a good old
world, even if there were some tough spots. Here he was, practically a junior
astrogator on his first trip--and it hadn't been more than weeks since he was
borrowing McAllister's mules to work the crop and going barefooted a lot to
save shoes.
And yet here he was in uniform, riding beside the best-dressed girl in
four planets.
He fingered the insignia on his chest. Marrying Ellie wasn't such an
impossible idea now that he was an officer--if he ever decided to marry. Maybe
her old man wouldn't consider an officer--and an astrogator at
that--completely ineligible. Ellie wasn't bad; she had spunk and she played a
fair game of three-dee-- most girls wouldn't even be able to learn the rules.
He was still in a warm glow when they reached the ship and were hoisted
in.
Kelly met him at the lock. "Mr. Jones--the Captain wants to see you."
"Huh? Oh. G'night, Ellie--I'll have to run." He hurried after Kelly.
"What's up?"
"Dr. Hendrix is dead."

13
TRANSITION
Max questioned Kelly as they hurried up to the Captain's cabin.
"I don't know. I just don't know, Max." Kelly seemed close to tears. "I
saw him before dinner--he came into the Hole to check what you and Kovak have
been doing. He seemed all right. But the Purser found him dead in his bunk,
the middle of the evening." He added worriedly, "I don't know what is going to
happen now."
"What do you mean?"
"Well . . . if I was captain, I'd lay over and send for a relief. But I
don't know."
For the first time Max realized that this change would make Mr. Simes
the astrogator. "How long would it take to get a relief?"
"Figure it out. The _Dragon_ is about three months behind us; she'd pick
up our mail. A year about." In the contradictions of interstellar travel the
ships themselves were the fastest method of communication; a radio message
(had such a silly thing been attempted) would have taken more than two
centuries to reach Earth, a like time for a reply.
Max found the Captain's cabin open and crowded with officers, all
standing around, saying nothing, and looking solemn; he slipped inside without
announcing himself and tried to be inconspicuous. Kelly did not go in. Captain
Blaine sat at his desk with head bent. Several stragglers, members of the gay
party at the Josephine, arrived after Max; First Officer Walther checked them
off with his eyes, then said quietly to Blaine, "Ship's officers all present,
sir."
Captain Blaine raised his head and Max was shocked to see how old he
looked. "Gentlemen," he said in a low voice, "you know the sad news. Dr.
Hendrix was found dead in his room this evening. Heart attack. The Surgeon
tells me that he passed on about two hours before he was found--and that his
death was probably almost painless."
His voice broke, then he continued. "Brother Hendrix will be placed in
his last orbit two hours after we raise ship tomorrow. That is how he would
have wished it, the Galaxy was his home. He gave unstintingly of himself that
men should ride safely among the stars."
He paused so long that Max thought that the old man had forgotten that
others were present. But when he resumed his voice was almost brisk. "That is
all, gentlemen. Astrogators will please remain."
Max was not sure that he counted as an astrogator but the use of the
plural decided him. First Officer Walther started to leave; Blaine called him
back. When the four were alone, the Captain said, "Mr. Simes, you will take
over head-of-department duties at once. Mr., uh . . ."; his eyes rested on
Max.
"Jones, sir."
"Mr. Jones will assume your routine duties, of course. This tragedy
leaves you short-handed; for the rest of this trip I will stand a regular
watch."
Simes spoke up. "That isn't necessary, Captain. We'll make out."

"Perhaps. But those are my wishes."
"Aye aye, sir."
"Prepare to lift on schedule. Any questions?"
"No, sir."
"Goodnight, gentlemen. Dutch, stay a moment, please?"
Outside the door Simes started to turn away; Max stopped him. "Mr.
Simes?"
"Huh? Yes?"
"Any instructions for me, sir?"
Simes looked him over. "You stand your watch, Mister. I'll handle
everything else."
The next morning Max found a crepe armband on his desk and a notice from
the First Officer that mourning would continue for one week. The _Asgard_
raised on schedule, with the Captain sitting quietly in his chair, with Simes
at the control console. Max stood near the Captain, with nothing to do. Aside
from the absence of Hendrix all was routine--except that Kelly was quite
bad-tempered. Simes, Max admitted, handled the maneuver smartly--but it was
precomputed, anyone could have done it; shucks, Ellie could have been sitting
there. Or Chipsie.
Max had the first watch. Simes left him after enjoining him not to
deviate from schedule without phoning him first. An hour later Kovak relieved
Max temporarily and Max hurried to the passenger lock. There were five
honorary pall bearers, the Captain, Mr. Walther, Simes, Max, and Kelly. Behind
them, crowding the passageways, were officers and most of the crew. Max saw no
passengers.
The inner door of the lock was opened; two steward's mates carried the
body in and placed it against the outer door. Max was relieved to see that it
had been wrapped in a shroud covering it completely. They closed the inner
door and withdrew.
The Captain stood facing the door, with Simes and the First Officer
standing guard on one side of the door and, on the other side facing them, Max
and Kelly. The Captain flung one word over his shoulder: "Pressure!"
Behind stood Bennett wearing a portable phone; he relayed the word to
the power room. The pressure gauge over the lock door showed one atmosphere;
now it started to crawl upward. The Captain took a little book from his pocket
and began to read the service for the dead. Feeling that he could not stand to
listen Max watched the pressure gauge. Steadily it climbed. Max reflected that
the ship had already passed escape speed for the Nu Pegasi system before he
had been relieved; the body would take an open orbit.
The gauge reached ten atmospheres; Captain Blaine closed his book. "Warn
the passengers," he said to Bennett.
Shortly the loudspeakers sounded: "All hands! All passengers! The ship
will be in free fall for thirty seconds. Anchor yourselves and do not change
position." Max reached behind him, found one of the many hand holds always
present around an airlock and pulled down so that his grip would keep his feet
in contact with the deck. A warning siren howled--then suddenly he was
weightless as the ship's boost and the artificial anomalous gravity field were
both cut out.
He heard the Captain say loudly and firmly, "'Ashes to ashes, dust to
dust.' Let the body be cast forth."
The pressure gauge dropped suddenly to zero and Dr. Hendrix was launched
into space, there to roam the stars for all eternity.
Max felt weight again as the power room brought them back to
ship-normal. The pressure gauge showed gradually building pressure. People
turned away and left, their voices murmuring low. Max went up and relieved the
watch.
The following morning Simes moved into Dr. Hendrix's cabin. There was
trouble with First Officer Walther about it--Max heard only third-hand

reports-- but the Captain upheld Simes; he stayed in the Astrogator's
quarters. The Worry Hole settled into routine not much different from what had
gone before, except that Simes' personality spread through everything. There
had never been a posted watch list before; Kelly had always assigned the
crewmen and the Doctor had simply informed the top-watch standers orally of
his wishes. Now a typed list appeared:
FIRST WATCH Randolph Simes, Astrogator
SECOND WATCH Captain Blaine
    (M. Jones, acting apprentice, under instruction)
THIRD WATCH Kelly, Ch. Cmptrmn.
    (_signed_) Randolph Simes, Astrogator
Below was a four-watch list for crewmen, also signed by Simes.
Max looked at it and shrugged it off. It was obvious that Simes had it
in for him, though he could not figure out why. It was equally obvious that
Simes did not intend to let him do any astrogation and that Max's chances of
being accepted in time as a fullfledged brother had now, with the death of Dr.
Hendrix, sunk to zero. Unless, of course, Captain Blaine overrode Simes and
forced a favorable report, which was extremely unlikely. Max again began to
think of going along with Sam at Nova Terra.
Well, in the meantime he'd stand his watches and try to stay out of
trouble. That was that.
There was only one transition to be made between Halcyon and Nova Terra,
a leap of ninety-seven light-years three weeks out from Halcyon at a boost of
seventeen gravities--the boost always depended on the distance from the star
to the gateway, since the purpose was to arrive there just under the speed of
light. The Worry Hole stayed on a watch in three for the officers and one in
four for crewmen for the first two weeks. Captain Blaine showed up each watch
but seemed quite willing for Max to carry out the light duties of that portion
of the leg. He gave little instruction--when he did, he was likely to wander
off into anecdotes, amusing but not useful.
Max tried to continue his own drill, carrying out the routine middle o'
watch computation as if it were the frantic matter it would have been near
transition. Captain Blaine watched him, then said mildly, "Don't get yourself
into a state, son. Always program on paper when possible--always. And take
time to check. Hurrying causes mistakes." Max said nothing, thinking of Dr.
Hendrix, but carried out the orders.
At the end of his first watch under the Captain Max signed the log as
usual. When Simes came on watch four hours later, Max was dug out of bed and
required to report to the control room. Simes pointed to the log. "What's the
idea, Mister?"
"Of what, sir?"
"Signing the log. You weren't officer of the watch."
"Well, sir, the Captain seemed to expect it. I've signed a lot of logs
and he's always approved them in the past."
"Hmm-- I'll speak to the Captain. Go below."
At the end of his next watch, having received no instructions, Max
prepared the log and took it to the Captain. "Sir? Do you want to sign this?
Or shall I?"
"Eh?" Blaine looked at it. "Oh, I suppose I had better. Always let a
head of department do things his own way if possible. Remember that when you
are a skipper, son." He signed it.
That settled it until the Captain started a habit of not being there,
first for short periods, then for longer. The time came when he was absent at
the end of the watch; Max phoned Mr. Simes. "Sir, the Captain isn't here. What
do you want me to do?"
"So what? It's his privilege to leave the control room."
"But Kelly is ready to relieve and the log isn't signed. Shall I sign
it? Or shall I phone him?"

"Phone him? Jumping jeepers, no! Are you crazy?"
"What are your orders, sir?"
Simes was silent, then answered, "Print his name, then sign under it 'By
direction'--and after this use your head."
They changed to watch-and-watch for the last week. Max continued under
the Captain; Kelly assisted Simes. Once the shift was made Blaine became
meticulous about being present in the control room and, when Max started to
make the first computation, gently pushed him aside. "I had better take over,
lad. We're getting closer now."
So Max assisted him--and became horrifyingly aware that the Captain was
not the man he must once have been. His knowledge of theory was sound and he
knew all the short cuts--but his mind tended to wander. Twice in one
computation Max had to remind him diplomatically of details. Yet the Old Man
seemed unaware of it, was quite cheerful.
It went on that way. Max began to pray that the Captain would let the
new Astrogator make the transition himself--much as he despised Simes. He
wanted to discuss his misgivings with Kelly--there was no one else with whom
it would have been possible--but Kelly was on the opposite watch with Simes.
There was nothing to do but worry.
When the last day arrived he discovered that Captain Blaine neither
intended to take the ship through himself nor to let Simes do it; he had a
system of his own. When they were all in the Worry Hole the Captain said, "I
want to show you all a wrinkle that takes the strain out of astrogating. With
no reflections on our dear brother, Dr. Hendrix, while he was a great
astrogator, none better--nevertheless he worked too hard. Now here is a method
taught me by my own master. Kelly, if you will have the remote controls led
out, please."
He had them seat themselves in a half circle, himself, Simes, and Max,
around the saddle of the computer, with Kelly in the saddle. Each of them was
armed with programming forms and Captain Blaine held the remote-control
switches in his lap. "Now the idea is for us each to work a sight in
succession, first me, then Mr. Simes, then Mr. Jones. That way we keep the
data flowing without strain. All right, lads, start pitching. Transition
stations everyone."
They made a dry run, then the Captain stood up. "Call me, Mr. Simes, two
hours before transition. I believe you and Mr. Jones will find that this
method gives you enough rest in the meantime."
"Yes, sir. But Captain--may I make a suggestion?"
"Eh? Certainly, sir."
"This is a fine system, but I suggest that Kelly be put in the
astrogating group instead of Jones. Jones is not experienced. We can put Kovak
in the saddle and Lundy on the book."
Blaine shook his head. "No. Accuracy is everything, sir, so we must have
our best operator at the computer. As for Mr. Jones, this is how he must get
experience--if he gets rattled, you and I can always fill in for him." He
started to leave, then added, "But Kovak can alternate with Kelly until I
return. Mustn't have anyone getting tired, that way mistakes are made."
"Aye aye, sir."
Simes said nothing more to Max. They started working sights,
alternately, using written programming on printed forms. The sights were
coming in on a twenty-minute schedule, giving each of them forty minutes for a
problem if he cared to take it. Max began to think that the Captain's method
did have its points. Certainly Dr. Hendrix had worked himself to death-- ships
did not wear out but men did.
He had plenty of time to work not only his own problems, but those of
Simes. The data came out orally and there was nothing to keep Max from
programming Simes' sights in his head and checking on what went into the
computer. So far as he could see Simes was doing all right--though of course
there was no real strain involved, not yet.
They ate sandwiches and drank coffee where they sat, leaving their seats

only for five minutes or so at a time. Captain Blaine showed up twenty minutes
early. He smiled and said cheerily, "Everyone happy and relaxed? Now we really
get down to it. I have just time for a cup of coffee."
A few minutes later he sat down and took over the control switches from
Simes. The sights were coming through on a ten-minute schedule now, still
ample time. Max continued to work them all, his own on paper and the others in
his head. He was always through in time to catch the data for the next sight,
program it mentally and check translations as Lundy thumbed the book. It gave
him a running picture of how closely they were in the groove, how much hunting
they were having to do in approaching their invisible target. It seemed to him
that Simes tended to over-correct and that the Captain was somewhat
optimistically under-correcting, but neither was so far out as to endanger the
ship.
Maybe he was wrong about the Captain--the Old Man seemed to steady down
when it mattered. His own corrections, he was glad to see, the Captain applied
without question.
After more than an hour with transition forty-five. minutes away Captain
Blaine looked up and said, "All right, boys, we're getting close. Slam them to
us as fast as you can now."
Smythe and Kovak, with Noguchi and Bennett running for them, slipped
into high gear; data poured out in a steady stream. Max continued to work
every sight, programming his own in his head and calling off figures faster
than he wrote them down. He noticed that Simes was sweating, sometimes erasing
and starting over. But the figures Simes called out agreed with what Max
thought they should be, from his own mental programming. Captain Blaine seemed
relaxed, though he had not speeded up materially and sometimes was still using
the computer when Max was ready to pour his sight into it.
At one point Simes spoke too rapidly, slurring his figures, Lundy
promptly said, "Repeat, sir!"
"Confound it! Clean out your ears!" But Simes repeated. The Captain
glanced up, then bent back to his own problem. As soon as the computer was
free Captain Blaine called his own figures to Lundy. Max had already set up
the Captain's sight in his mind, was subconsciously listening while watching
Simes.
An alarm bell rang in his mind. "Captain! I don't check you!"
Captain Blaine stopped. "Eh?"
"That program is wrong, sir."
The Captain did not seem angry. He simply handed his programming board
to Simes. "Check me, sir."
Simes glanced quickly at the figures. "I check you, sir!"
Blaine said, "Drop out, Jones. Mr. Simes and I will finish."
"But--"
"Drop out, Mister!"
Max got out of the circle, seething inside. Simes' check of the
Captain's set up hadn't meant anything, unless Simes had listened to and
remembered (as Max had) the data as it came in. The Captain had transposed an
eight and a three in the fifth and sixth decimal places--the set up would look
okay unless one knew the correct figures. If Simes had even bothered to check
it, he added bitterly.
But Max could not keep from noting and processing the data in his mind.
Simes' next sight should catch the Captain's error; his correction should
repair it. It would be a big correction, Max knew; traveling just under the
speed of light the ship clipped a million miles in less than six seconds.
Max could see Simes hesitate as the lights from his next sight popped up
on the computer and Lundy translated them back. Why, the man looked
frightened! The correction called for would push the ship extremely close to
critical speed--Simes paused, then ordered less than half the amount that Max
believed was needed.
Blaine applied it and went on with his next problem. When the answer
came out the error, multiplied by time and unthinkable velocity, was more

glaring than ever. The Captain threw Simes a glance of astonishment, then
promptly made a correction. Max could not tell what it was, since it was done
without words by means of the switch in his lap.
Simes licked the dryness from his lips. "Captain?"
"Time for just one more sight," Blaine answered. "I'll take it myself,
Mr. Simes."
The data were passed to him, he started to lay his problem out on the
form. Max saw him erase, then look up; Max followed his gaze. The pre-set on
the chronometer above the computer showed the seconds trickling away. "Stand
by!" Blaine announced.
Max looked up. The stars were doing the crawling together that marked
the last moments before transition. Captain Blaine must have pressed the
second switch, the one that would kick them over, while Max was watching, for
the stars suddenly blinked out and were replaced instantaneously by another
starry firmament, normal in appearance.
The Captain lounged back, looked up. "Well," he said happily, "I see we
made it again." He got up and headed for the hatch, saying over his shoulder,
"Call me when you have laid us in the groove, Mr. Simes." He disappeared down
the hatch.
Max looked up again, trying to recall from the charts he had studied
just what piece of this new sky they were facing. Kelly was looking up, too.
"Yes, we came through," Max heard him mutter. "But _where?_"
Simes also had been looking at the sky. Now he swung around angrily.
"What do you mean?"
"What I said," Kelly insisted. "That's not any sky I ever saw before."
"Nonsense, man! You just haven't oriented yourself. Everybody knows that
a piece of sky can look strange when you first glance at it. Get out the flat
charts for this area; we'll find our landmarks quickly enough."
"They are out, sir. Noguchi."
It took only minutes to convince everyone else in the control room that
Kelly was right, only a little longer to convince even Simes. He finally
looked up from the charts with a face greenish white. "Not a word to anybody,"
he said. "That's an order--and I'll bust any man who slips. Kelly, take the
watch."
"Aye aye, sir."
"I'll be in the Captain's cabin." He went below to tell Blaine that the
_Asgard_ had come out in unknown space--was lost.
14
ANYWHERE
Two hours later Max climbed wearily up into the Worry Hole. He had just
had a bad half hour, telling the truth as he saw it. Captain Blaine had been
disinclined to blame anyone but himself, but had seemed stunned and
bewildered. Simes had been nasty. His unstated logic seemed to be that, since
it could not possibly be his fault and since it was unthinkable to blame the
Captain, it must be Max's fault. Since Max had been relieved some minutes
before transition, his theory seemed to be that Max had caused it by making a
disturbance as they were approaching the critical instant--joggled their

elbows, so to speak.
Mr. Walther had been present, a mute judge. They spoke of matters'
outside his profession; he had seemed to be studying their faces. Max had
stuck doggedly to his story.
He found Kelly still on watch. Kovak and Smythe were taking
spectrograms; Noguchi and Lundy were busy with papers. "Want to be relieved?"
he said to Kelly.
Kelly looked troubled. "I'm sorry, but you can't."
"Huh?"
"Mr. Simes phoned while you were on your way up. He says you are not to
stand duty until further notice."
"He did? Well, I'm not surprised."
"He also said that you were to stay out of the control room."
Max made a violent statement about Simes. He added, "Well, it was nice
while it lasted. Be seeing you."
He turned away but Kelly stopped him. "Don't be in a hurry, Max. He
won't be up for a while. I want to know what happened. From the computer I
can't tell what goes on."
Max told him, drawing on his memory for the figures. Kelly nodded at
last. "That confirms what I've been able to dig out. The Captain flubbed with
a transposition--easy to do. Then Simes didn't have the guts to make a big
correction when it came around to him. But one more thing you don't know.
Neither do they--yet."
"Huh? What?"
"The power room recorder shows it. Guenther had the watch down there and
gave it to me over the phone. No, I didn't tell him anything was wrong. I just
asked for the record; that's not unusual. By the way, any excitement down
below? Passengers blowing their tops?"
"Not when I came up."
"Won't be long. They can't keep this quiet forever. Back to my
story--things were already sour but the Captain had one last chance. He
applied the correction and a whopping big one. But he applied it with the
wrong sign, just backwards."
Profanity was too weak. All Max could say was, "Oh, my!"
"Yeah. Well, there's the devil to pay and him out to lunch."
"Any idea where we are?"
Kelly pointed to Kovak and Smythe at the spectrostellograph. "They're
fishing, but no bites. Bright stars first, B-types and O's. But there is
nothing that matches the catalogues so far."
Noguchi and Lundy were using a hand camera. Max asked, "What are _they_
doing?"
"Photographing the records. All of 'em--programming sheets, the rough
data from the chartsmen, the computer tape, everything."
"What good will that do?"
"Maybe none. But sometimes records get lost. Sometimes they even get
changed. But not this time. I'm going to have a set of my own."
The unpleasant implications of Kelly's comments were sinking into Max's
mind when Noguchi looked up. "That's all, Boss."
"Good." Kelly turned to Max. "Do me a favor. Stick those films in your
pocket and take them with you. I want them out of here. I'll pick them up
later."
"Well . . . all right." While Noguchi was unloading the camera Max added
to Kelly, "How long do you think it will take to figure out where we are,
checking spectra?"
Kelly looked more troubled than ever. "Max, what makes you think there
is anything to find?"
"I don't follow you."
"Why should anything out there . . ." He made a sweeping gesture. ". . .
match up with any charts we've got here?"
"You mean," Max said slowly, "that we might not be in our own galaxy at

all? Maybe in another, like the Andromeda Nebula, say?"
"Maybe. But that's not all. Look, Max, I'm no theoretical physicist,
that's sure, but so far as I know all that theory says is that when you pass
the speed of light you have to go out of your own space, somewhere else.
You've become irrelevant and it won't hold you. But _where_ you go, unless you
are set just right for a Horst congruency, that's another matter. The theory
doesn't say. Does it?"
Max's head started to ache. "Gee, I don't know."
"Neither do I. But since we weren't set to duck back into our own space
at another point, we may be anywhere. And I mean _anywhere_. We may be in some
other space-time totally unconnected with our own." He glanced up at the
strange stars.
Max went below feeling worse than ever. He passed Simes going up; the
Astrogator scowled at him but did not say anything. When Max reached his
stateroom he put the films in a drawer--then thought about it, removed the
drawer and cached them in dead space behind the drawer.
Max stayed in his room and worried. He fretted over being kept out of
the control room, wanting very badly himself to check the sky for known stars.
B- and O-type stars--well, that was all right, but there were half a dozen
other ways. Globular star clusters, now-- they'd be easy to identify; snag
four of them and you'd know where you were as clear as reading a street sign.
Then it would be just a case of fining it down, because you'd know what to
look for and where. After which you'd high-tail it for the nearest charted
congruency, whether it took you a week or a year. The ship couldn't _really_
be lost.
But suppose they weren't even in the right galaxy?
The thought dismayed him. If that were the case, they'd never get home
before the end of time. It was chased out by another thought--suppose Kelly's
suspicion had been correct, that this was an entirely different universe,
another system of space and time? What then? He had read enough philosophical
fancies to know that there was no theoretical reason for such to be
impossible; the Designer might have created an infinity of universes, perhaps
all pretty much alike--or perhaps as different as cheese and Wednesday.
Millions, billions of them, all side by side from a multidimensional point of
view.
Another universe might have different laws, a different speed of light,
different gravitational ballistics, a different time rate--why they might get
back to find that ten million years had passed and Earth burnt to a cinder!
But the light over his desk burned steadily, his heart pumped as always,
obeying familiar laws of hydraulics, his chair pressed up against him--if this
was a different sort of space the differences weren't obvious. And if it _was_
a different universe, there was nothing to be done about it.
A knock came at the door, he let Kelly in and gave him the chair,
himself sitting on the bed. "Any news?"
"No. Golly I'm tired. Got those pix?"
Max took out the drawer, fished around behind it, gave them to Kelly.
"Look, Chief, I got an idea."
"Spill it."
"Let's assume that we're in the right galaxy, because--" 
"Because if we ain't, there isn't any point in trying!"
"Well, yes. All right, we're in the Milky Way. So we look around, make
quick sample star counts and estimate the distance and direction of the
center. Then we try to identify spectra of stars in that direction, after
deciding what ones we ought to look for and figuring apparent magnitudes for
estimated distance. That would . . ."
"--save a lot of time," Kelly finished wearily. "Don't teach your
grandpop how to suck eggs. What the deuce do you think I've been doing?"
"Oh. Sorry."

"Don't be. It's more than our revered boss thought of. While I been
trying to work he's been bellyachin' around, finding fault, and trying to get
me to say that he was dead right in everything--worrying about himself instead
of worrying about his ship. Pfui! By the way, he grabbed the records just like
I thought he would--'to show the Captain.' _He_ says." Kelly stood up. "I'd
better go."
"Don't rush. I'll ring for coffee."
"Running out of my ears now." Kelly took the films from his pocket and
looked at them dutifully. "I had Noggy make two shots of everything; this is a
double set. That's a good hidey-hole you've got. What say we stick one set in
there and let it cool? Never can tell."
"Kelly, you aren't really expecting trouble over those records? Seems to
me we've got trouble enough with the ship being lost."
"Huh? Max, you're going to make a good officer some day. But you're
innocent. Now I'm a suspenders _and_ belt man. I like to take as few chances
as possible. Doc Hendrix--rest his soul!--was the same way." Kelly waited
until Max had returned the spare set to the space back of the drawer, then
started to leave. He paused.
"One thing I forgot to tell you, Max. We happened to come out pretty
close to a star and a G-type at that."
"Oh." Max considered it. "Not one we know?"
"Of course not, or I would have said so. Haven't sized it yet, but
figuring normal range in the G's we could reach it in not less than four
weeks, not more than a year, at high boost. Thought you'd like to know."
"Well, yes. Thanks. But I can't see that it makes much difference."
"No? Doesn't it seem like a good idea to have a Sol-type star, with
maybe Earth-type planets around it, not far off?"
"Well . . ."
"It does to me. The Adam-and-Eve business is rugged at best--and we
might be in for a long stay." With that he left.
No steward's mate came to tell Max it was time for dinner; when he
noticed that it was past time, he went to the lounge. Most of the passengers
were already seated, although some were standing around talking. It was
impossible to miss the feeling of unrest in the room. Max saw that the Captain
was not at his table, nor was Mr. Walther at his. As he headed for his own
table a Mr. Hornsby tried to grab his arm. Max shook him off. "Sorry, sir. I'm
in a hurry."
"Wait a minute! I want to ask you . . ."
"Sorry." He hurried on and sat down. Chief Engineer Compagnon was not at
the table, but the usual passengers were present. Max said, "Good evening,"
and reached for his soup spoon, just to keep busy.
There was no soup to be toyed with, nor were there rolls and butter on
the table, although it was ten minutes past the hour. Such things simply did
not happen in Chief Steward Dumont's jurisdiction. Come to think about it,
Dumont was not in sight.
Mrs. Daigler put a hand on his arm. "Max? Tell me, dear--what is this
silly rumor going around?"
Max tried to maintain a poker face. "What rumor, ma'am?"
"You must have heard it! After all, you're in astrogation. They say that
the Captain turned the wrong corner or something and that we're falling into a
star."
Max tried to give a convincing chuckle. "Who told you that? Whoever it
was probably couldn't tell a star from his elbow."
"You wouldn't fool your Aunt Maggie?"
"I can assure you positively that the _Asgard_ is not falling into a
star. Not even a small star." He turned in his chair. "But it does look like
something's fallen into the galley. Dinner is awfully late."
He remained turned, trying to avoid further questions. It did not work.

Mr. Arthur called out sharply, "Mr. Jones!"
He turned back. "Yes?"
"Why stall us? I have been informed authoritatively that the ship is
lost."
Max tried to look puzzled. "I don't follow you. We seem to be in it."
Mr. Arthur snorted. "You know what I mean! Something went wrong with
that whatyoumucallit--transition. We're lost."
Max put on a school-teacherish manner, ticking off points on his
fingers. "Mr. Arthur, I assure you that the ship is in absolutely no danger.
As for being lost, I assure you just as firmly that if we are, the Captain
neglected to tell me so. I was in the control room at transition and he seemed
quite satisfied with it. Would you mind telling me who has been spreading this
story? It's a serious thing, starting such rumors. People have been known to
panic."
"Well . . . it was one of the crew. I don't know his name."
Max nodded. "I thought so. Now in my experience in space . . ." He went
on, quoting from his uncle. ". . . I have learned that the only thing faster
than light is the speed with which a story can spread through a ship. It
doesn't have to have any foundation, it spreads just the same." He looked
around again. "I wonder what has happened to dinner? I'd hate to go on watch
hungry."
Mrs. Weberbauer said nervously, "Then we are all right, Maxie?"
"We're all right, ma'am."
Mrs. Daigler leaned toward him again and whispered, "Then why are you
sweating, Max?"
He was saved by a steward's mate rushing up to the table and starting to
deal out plates of soup. Max stopped him when he came around and said quietly,
"Jim, where's Dumont?"
Out of the corner of his mouth the waiter said, "Cooking."
"Huh? Where's the chef?"
The steward's mate leaned down and whispered, "Frenchy is boiled as a
judge. I guess he couldn't take it. You know."
Max let him go. Mr. Arthur said sharply, "What did he tell you?"
"I was trying to find out what went wrong in the galley," Max answered.
"Seems the cook incapacitated himself." He spooned up a mouthful of the soup.
"From the taste I'd say he had burned his thumb in this so-called chowder.
Pretty bad, isn't it?"
Max was saved from further evasions by the arrival of the First Officer.
Mr. Walther went to the Captain's table and banged on a glass with a spoon.
"Your attention, please!"
He waited for quiet, then took a paper from his pocket. "I have an
announcement to make on behalf of the Captain. Those of you who are familiar
with the theory of astrogation are aware that space is changing constantly,
due to the motions of the stars, and that consequently no two trips are
exactly alike. Sometimes it is necessary, for this reason, to make certain
changes in a ship's routing. Such a circumstance has arisen in this present
trip and the _Asgard_ will be somewhat delayed in reaching her next
destination. We regret this, but we can't change the laws of nature. We hope
that you will treat it as a minor inconvenience--or even as additional
vacation, in the friendly and comfortable atmosphere of our ship. Please
remember, too, that the insurance policy accompanying your ticket covers you
completely against loss or damage you may be cost through the ship being
behind schedule."
He put away the paper; Max had the impression that he had not actually
been reading from it. "That is all that the Captain had to say, but I want to
add something myself. It has come to my attention that someone has been
spreading silly rumors about this minor change in schedule. I am sorry if any
of you have been alarmed thereby and I assure you that I will take very strict
measures if the originator can be identified." He risked a dignified smile.
"But you know how difficult it is to trace down a bit of gossip. In any case,

I want to assure you all that the _Asgard_ is in no danger of any sort. The
old girl was plying space long before any of us were born, she'll still be
going strong after we all die of old age--bless her sturdy bones!" He turned
and left at once.
Max had listened in open-mouthed admiration. He came from country where
the "whopper" was a respected literary art and it seemed to him that he had
never heard a lie told with more grace, never seen one interwoven with truth
with such skill, in his life. Piece by piece, it was impossible to say that
anything the First Officer had said was untrue; taken as a whole it was a flat
statement that the _Asgard_ was not lost--a lie if he ever heard one. He
turned back toward his table mates. "Will someone pass the butter, please?"
Mr. Arthur caught his eye. "And you told us," he said sharply, "that
nothing was wrong!"
Mr. Daigler growled, "Lay off him, Arthur. Max did pretty well, under
the circumstances."
Mrs. Weberbauer looked bewildered. "But Mr. Walther said that everything
was all right?"
Daigler looked at her with compassion. "We're in trouble, Mama
Weberbauer. That's obvious. But all we can do is keep calm and trust the
ship's officers. Right, Max?"
"I guess that's right, sir."
15
"THIS ISN'T A PICNIC"
Max kept to his room that evening and the next day, wishing neither to
be questioned by passengers nor to answer questions about why he had been
relieved of duty. In consequence he missed the riot, having slept through it.
He first heard of it when the steward's mate who tended his room showed up
with a black eye. "Who gave you the shiner, Garcia?"
"I'm not sure, sir. It happened in the ruckus last night."
"Ruckus? What ruckus?"
"You mean you don't know?"
"This is the first I've heard of it. What happened?"
Garcia Lopez stared at the overhead. "Well--I wouldn't want to say too
much. You know how it is-- nobody wants to testify against a mate. No?"
"Who asked you to peach on a mate? You don't have to mention names--but
what happened?"
"Well, sir. Some of those chicos, they ain't got much sense." Slowly Max
learned that the unrest among the crew had been greater than that among the
passengers, possibly because they understand more clearly the predicament.
Some of them had consulted with Giordano's poor-man's vodka, then had decided
to call on the Captain in a body and demand straight talk. The violence had
taken place when the master-at-arms had attempted to turn them back at the
companionway to "C" deck.
"Anybody hurt?"
"Not what you'd call hurt. Cut up a little. I picked this up . . ." He
touched his eye tenderly. ". . . from being too anxious to see what was going
on. Slats Kovak busted an ankle."

"Kovak! Why would _he_ be in it?" It did not make sense that a member of
the Worry gang should take part in anything so unreasonable.
"He was coming down, coming off watch, I guess. Maybe he was backing up
the constable. Or maybe he just got caught in the swinging doors. Your friend
Sam Anderson was sure in the thick of it."
Sam! Max felt sick at heart--Sam in trouble _again!_ "You're sure?"
"I was there."
"Uh, he wasn't leading it, was he?"
"Oh, you got me wrong, M-- Mr. Jones. He settled it. I never see a man
who could use his hands like that. He'd grab two of 'em . . . _clop!_ their
heads would come together. Then he would grab two more."
Max decided to come out of hiding and do two things; look up Kovak, find
out how he was and what he might need or want, and second, look up Sam. But
before he could leave Smythe arrived with a watch list to initial. He found
that he was assigned watch-and-watch with Simes--and that he himself was due
on watch immediately. He went up, wondering what had caused Simes to relent.
Kelly was in the control room; Max looked around, did not see Simes.
"You got it, Chief?"
"Until you relieve me. This is my last watch."
"How's that? Are you his pet peeve now?"
"You could say so. But not the way you think, Max. He drew up a watch
list with him and me heel-and-toe. I politely pointed out the guild rules,
that I wasn't being paid to take the responsibility of top watch."
"Oh, brother! What did he say?"
"What could he say? He could order me in writing and I could accept in
writing, with my objection to the orders entered in the log--and his neck is
out a yard. Which left him his choice of putting you back on the list, asking
the Captain to split it with him, or turning his cap around and relieving
himself for the next few weeks. With Kovak laid up it didn't leave him much
choice. You heard about Kovak?"
"Yes. Say, what was that?" Max glanced over where Noguchi was loafing at
the computer and lowered his voice. "Mutiny?"
Kelly's eyes grew round. "Why, as I understand it, sir, Kovak slipped
and fell down a companionway."
"Oh. Like that, huh?"
"That's what it says in the log."
"Hmm . . . well, I guess I had better relieve you. What's the dope?"
They were in orbit under power for the nearby G-type star; the orders
were entered in the Captain's order book . . . in Simes' handwriting but with
Captain Blaine's signature underneath. To Max it looked shaky, as if the Old
Man had signed it under emotional stress. Kelly had already placed them in the
groove. "Have we given up trying to find out where we are?" Max asked.
"Oh, no. Orders are to spend as much time as routine permits on it. But
I'll lay you seven to two you don't find anything. Max, this is somewhere else
entirely."
"Don't give up. How do you know?"
"I feel it."
Nevertheless Max spent the watch "fishing." But with no luck.
Spectrograms, properly taken and measured, are to stars what fingerprints are
to men; they can be classified and comparisons made with those on file which
are most nearly similar. While he found many which matched fairly closely with
catalogued spectra, there was always the difference that makes one identical
twin not quite like his brother.
Fifteen minutes before the end of the watch he stopped, and made sure
that he was ready to be relieved. While waiting he thought about the
shenanigan Kelly had pulled to get him back on duty. Good old Kelly! He knew
Kelly well enough to know that he must not thank him; to do so would be to
attribute to the Chief Computerman a motive which was "improper"--just wink
the other eye and remember it.
Simes stomped in five minutes past the hour. He said nothing but looked

over the log and records of observations Max had made. Max waited several
minutes while growing more and more annoyed. At last he said, "Are you ready
to relieve me, sir?"
"All in good time. I want to see first what you've loused up this time."
Max kept his mouth shut. Simes pointed at the log where Max had signed it
followed by "C.O. o/W." "That's wrong, to start with. Add 'under
instruction.'"
Max breathed deeply. "Whose instruction, sir?"
"Mine." 
Max hesitated only momentarily before answering, "No, sir. Not unless
you are present during my watch to supervise me."
"Are you defying me?"
"No, sir. But I'll take written orders on that point . . . entered in
the log."
Simes closed the log book and looked him slowly up and down. "Mister, if
we weren't short-handed you wouldn't be on watch. You aren't ready for a top
watch--and it's my opinion that you won't ever be."
"If that's the way you feel, sir, I'd just as lief go back to chartsman.
Or steward's mate."
"That's where you belong!" Simes' voice was almost a scream. Noguchi had
hung around after Lundy had relieved him; they both looked up, then turned
their heads away.
Max made no effort to keep his answer private. "Very good, sir. Will you
relieve me? I'll go tell the First Officer that I am surrendering my temporary
appointment and reverting to my permanent billet."
Max expected a blast. But Simes made a visible effort to control himself
and said almost quietly, "See here, Jones, you don't have the right attitude."
Max thought to himself, "What have I got to lose?" Aloud he said,
"You're the one who doesn't have the right attitude, sir."
"Eh? What's that?"
"You've been riding me ever since I came to work in the Hole. You've
never bothered to give me any instruction and you've found fault with
everything I did. Since my probationary appointment it's been four times
worse. You came to my room and told me that you were opposed to my
appointment, that you didn't want me . . ."
"You can't prove that!"
"I don't have to. Now you tell me that I'm not fit to stand the watch
you've just required me to stand. You've made it plain that you will never
recommend me for permanent appointment, so obviously I'm wasting my time. I'll
go back to the Purser's gang and do what I can there. Now, will you relieve
me, sir?"
"You're insubordinate."
"No, sir, I am not. I have spoken respectfully, stating facts. I have
requested that I be relieved--my watch was over a good half hour ago--in order
that I may see the First Officer and revert to my permanent billet. As allowed
by the rules of both guilds," Max added.
"I won't let you."
"It's my option, sir. You have no choice."
Simes' face showed that he indeed had no choice. He remained silent for
some time, then said more quietly, "Forget it. You're relieved. Be back up
here at eight o'clock."
"Not so fast, sir. You have stated publicly that I am not competent to
take the watch. Therefore I can't accept the responsibility."
"Confound it! What are you trying to do? Blackmail me?
Max agreed in his mind that such was about it, but he answered, "I
wouldn't say so, sir. You can't have it both ways."
"Well--I suppose you are competent to stand this sort of watch. There
isn't anything to do, actually."
"Very good, sir. Will you kindly log the fact?"
"Huh?"

"In view of the circumstances, sir, I insist on the letter of the rules
and ask you to log it."
Simes swore under his breath, then grabbed the stylus and wrote quickly.
He swung the log book around. There!"
Max read: "M. Jones is considered qualified to stand a top watch in
space, not involving anomaly. (s) R. Simes, Astrogator."
Max noted the reservation, the exception that would allow Simes to keep
him from ever reaching permanent status. But Simes had stayed within the law.
Besides, he admitted to himself, he didn't want to leave the Worry gang. He
comforted himself with the thought that since they were all lost together it
might never matter what Simes recommended.
"Quite satisfactory, sir."
Simes grabbed the book. "Now get out. See that you're back here on
time."
"Aye aye, sir." Max could not refrain from having the last word,
standing up to Simes had gone to his head. "Which reminds me, sir: will you
please relieve me on time after this?"
"_What?_"
"Under the law a man can't be worked more than four hours out of eight,
except for a logged emergency."
"Go below!"
Max went below, feeling both exultant and sick. He had no taste for
fights, never had; they left him with a twisted lump inside. He burst into his
room, and almost fell over Sam.
"Sam!"
"The same. What's eating you, boy? You look like the goblins had been
chasing you."
Max flopped on his bunk and sighed. "I feel that way, too." He told Sam
about the row with Simes.
Sam nodded approval. "That's the way to deal with a jerk like
that--insult him until he apologizes. Give him lumps enough times and he'll
eat out of your hand."
Max shook his head dolefully. "Today was fun, but he'll find some way to
take it out on me. Oh, well!"
"Not so, my lad. Keep your nose clean and wait for the breaks. If a man
is stupid and bad-tempered-- which he is, I sized him up long ago--if you are
smart and keep _your_ temper, eventually he leaves himself wide open. That's a
law of nature."
"Maybe." Max swung around and sat up. "Sam-- you're wearing your shield
again."
Sam stuck his thumb under the badge of office of Chief Master-at-Arms.
"Didn't you notice?"
"I guess I was spinning too fast. Tell me about it-- did the First
decide to forgive and forget?"
"Not precisely. You know about that little excitement last night?"
"Well, yes. But I understand that officially nothing happened?"
"Correct. Mr. Walther knows when to pull his punches."
"What did happen? I heard you cracked some skulls together."
"Nothing much. And not very hard. I've seen ships where it would have
been regarded as healthy exercise to settle your dinner. Some of the lads got
scared and that made them lap up happy water. Then a couple with big mouths
and no forehead got the inspiration that it was their right to talk to the
Captain about it. Being sheep, they had to go in a flock. If they had run into
an officer, he could have sent them back to bed with no trouble. But my
unfortunate predecessor happened to run into them and told them to disperse.
Which they didn't. He's not the diplomatic type, I'm afraid. So he hollered,
'Hey, Rube!' in his quaint idiom and the fun began."
"But where do you figure? You came to help him?"
"Hardly. I was standing at a safe distance, enjoying the festivities,
when I noticed Mr. Walther's bedroom slippers coming down the ladder.

Whereupon I waded in and was prominent in the ending. The way to win a medal,
Max, is to make sure the general is watching, then act."
Max grinned. "Somehow I hadn't figured you for the hero type."
"Heaven forbid! But it worked out. Mr. Walther sent for me, ate me out,
told me that I was a scoundrel and a thief and a nogoodnick--then offered me
my shield back if I could keep order below decks. I looked him in the eye, a
sincere type look, and told him I would do my best. So here I am."
"I'm mighty pleased, Sam."
"Thanks. Then he looked me in the eye and told me that he had reason to
suspect--as if he didn't know!-- that there might be a still somewhere in the
ship. He ordered me to find it, and then destroy any liquor I found."
"So? How did Mr. Gee take that?"
"Why, Fats and I disassembled his still and took the pieces back to
stores, then we locked up his stock in trade. I pleaded with him not to touch
it until the ship was out of its mess. I explained that I would break both his
arms if he did."
Max chuckled. "Well, I'm glad you're back in good graces. And it was
nice of you to come tell me about it." He yawned. "Sorry. I'm dead for sleep."
"I'll vamoose. But I didn't come to tell you, I came to ask a question."
"Huh? What?"
"Have you seen the Skipper lately?"
Max thought back. "Not since transition. Why?"
"Nor has anyone else. I thought he might be spending his time in the
Worry Hole."
"No. Come to think, he hasn't been at his table either--at least when
I've been in the lounge."
"He's been eating in his cabin." Sam stood up. "Very, very interesting.
Mmm . . . I wouldn't talk about it, Max."
Simes was monosyllabic when Max relieved him. Thereafter they had no
more words; Simes acted as if Max did not exist except for the brief
formalities in relieving. The Captain did not show up in the control room.
Several times Max was on the point of asking Kelly about it, but each time
decided not to. But there were rumors around the ship--the Captain was sick,
the Captain was in a coma, Walther and the Surgeon had relieved him of duty,
the Captain was constantly at his desk, working out a new and remarkable way
to get the ship back to where it belonged.
By now it was accepted that the ship was lost, but the time for hysteria
had passed; passengers and crew were calm and there seemed to be general
consent that the decision to put down around the solar-type star toward which
they were headed was the only reasonable decision. They were close enough now
that it had been determined that the star did have planets-- no G-class star
had ever been found to be without planets, but to pick them up on a
stereoplate was consoling.
It came to a choice between planet #3 and planet #4. Bolometric readings
showed the star to have a surface temperature slightly over 6000 Kelvin,
consistent with its spectrum; it was not much larger than Father Sol;
calculated surface temperatures for the third and fourth planets gave a
probability that the third might be uncomfortably hot whereas number four
might be frigid. Both had atmospheres.
A fast hyperboloid swing past both settled the matter. The bolometer
showed number three to be too hot and even number four to be tropical. Number
four had a moon which the third did not--another advantage for four, for it
permitted, by examining the satellite's period, an easy calculation of its
mass; from that and its visible diameter its surface gravity was a matter of
substitution in classic Newtonian formula . . . ninety-three percent of
Earth-normal, comfortable and rather low in view of its over ten-thousand-mile
diameter. Absorption spectra showed oxygen and several inert gases.
Simes assisted by Kelly placed the _Asgard_ in a pole-to-pole orbit to

permit easy examination--Max, as usual, was left to chew his nails.
The Captain did not come to the control room even to watch this
maneuver.
They hung in parking orbit while their possible future home was examined
from the control room and stared at endlessly from the lounge. It was in the
lounge that Ellie tracked Max down. He had hardly seen her during the
approach, being too busy and too tired with a continuous heel-and-toe watch
and in the second place with much on his mind that he did not want to have
wormed out of him. But, once the orbit was established and power was off,
under standard doctrine Simes could permit the watch to be taken by
crewmen--which he did and again told Max to stay out of the control room.
Max could not resist the fascination of staring at the strange planet;
he crowded into the lounge along with the rest. He was standing back and
gazing over heads when he felt his arm grabbed. "Where have you been?"
"Working." He reached out and caressed Chipsie; the spider puppy leaped
to his shoulders and started searching him.
"Hmmmph! You don't work all the time. Do you know that I sent _nine_
notes to your room this past week?"
Max knew. He had saved them but had not answered. "Sorry."
"Sorry he says. Never mind-- Max, tell me all about it." She turned and
looked out. "What have they named it? Is there anybody on it? Where are we
going to land? _When_ are we going to land? Max, aren't you _excited?_" 
"Whew! They haven't named it yet--we just call it 'the planet' or
'number four.' Kelly wants to name it 'Hendrix.' Simes is hedging; I think he
wants to name it after himself. The Captain hasn't made any decision that I
know of."
"They ought to name it 'Truth' or 'Hope' or something like that. Where
is the Captain, Max? I haven't seen the old dear for _days_."
"He's working. This is a busy time for him, of course." Max reflected
that his evasion might be true. "About your other questions, we haven't seen
any signs of cities or towns or anything that looks like civilization."
"What do you mean by 'civilization'? Not a lot of dirty old cities
surely?"
Max scratched his head and grinned. "You've got me. But I don't see how
you could have it, whatever it is, without cities."
"Why not? Bees have cities, ants have cities, challawabs have cities.
None of them is civilized. I can think of a lovely civilization that would
just sit around in trees and sing and think beautiful thoughts."
"Is that what you want?"
"No, it would bore me to death. But I can think about it, can't I? You
didn't say when we were going to land?"
"I don't know. When they decide it's safe."
"I wish they would hurry. Isn't it thrilling? Just like  Robinson
Crusoe, or Swiss Family Robinson--I can't keep those two straight. Or the
first men on Venus."
"They died."
"So they did. But we won't, not on--" She waved her hand at the lovely
green and blue and cloudy-white globe. "--not on, uh, I'm going to call it
'Charity' because that's what it looks like."
Max said soberly, "Ellie, don't you realize this is serious?" He kept
his voice low in order not to alarm others. "This isn't a picnic. If this
place doesn't work out, it might be pretty awful."
"Why?"
"Look, don't quote me and don't talk about it. But I don't think any of
us will ever get home again."
She sobered momentarily, then shrugged and smiled. "You can't frighten
me. Sure, I'd like to go home--but if I can't, well, Charity is going to be
good to us. I know it." 
Max shut up.

16
"--OVER A HUNDRED YEARS--"
The _Asgard_ landed on Charity the following day. Eldreth affixed her
choice by the statistical process of referring to the planet by that name,
assuming that it was official, and repeating it frequently.
When word was passed that landing would commence at noon, ship's time,
Max went to the control room and simply assumed that it was his right to be
present. Simes looked at him sourly but said nothing-- for an evident reason:
Captain Blaine was present.
Max was shocked at his appearance. The Captain seemed to have aged ten
to fifteen years since the bad transition. In place of his habitual cheerful
expression was one that Max had trouble tagging--until he recalled that he had
seen it on horses, on horses too old to work but still working--head bent,
eyes dull, mute and resigned against a fate both inescapable and unbearable.
The old man's skin hung loose, as if he had not eaten for days or weeks. He
seemed hardly interested in what was going on around him.
He spoke only once during the maneuver. Just before the chronometer
showed noon Simes straightened up from the console and looked at his skipper.
Blaine lifted his head and said in a hoarse whisper, "Take her down, Mister."
An Imperial military ship in landing on a strange spot would normally
guide a radar-beacon robot down first, then home in on the beacon. But the
_Asgard_ was a merchant liner; she expected to land nowhere but at ports
equipped with beams and beacons and other aids. Consequently the landing was
made blind by precomputed radar-automatic and was planned for an open valley
selected by photograph. The planet was densely wooded in most areas, choice
was limited.
Simes presented a picture of the alert pilot, hands poised at the
controls, eyes on the radar screen portraying the view below them, while
racked in front of him were comparison photographs, radar and visual. The let
down was without incident; starry black sky gave way to deep purple, then to
blue. There was not even a jar as the ship touched, for its private gravity
inside its Horstian field kept them from feeling impressed acceleration. Max
knew they were down when he saw Simes cut in the thrust beams to cradle the
ship upright.
Simes said to the microphone, "Power room, start auxiliaries and secure.
All hands, dirtside routine, first section." He turned to Blaine. "Grounded,
Captain."
Blaine's lips shaped the words, "Very good, sir." He got up and shuffled
toward the hatch. When he had gone Simes ordered, "Lundy, take stand-by watch.
The rest of you clear the control room."
Max went down with Kelly. When they reached "A" deck Max said
grudgingly, "It was a smart landing I'll have to admit."
"Thanks," said Kelly.
Max glanced at him. "So you calculated it?"
"I didn't say that. I just said, 'Thanks.'"
"So? Well, you're welcome." Max felt his weight pulse and suddenly he
was a trifle lighter. "They cut the field. Now we're really down."
He was about to invite Kelly into his room for the inevitable coffee

when the ship's speakers sounded: "All hands! All passengers! Report to
Bifrost Lounge for an important announcement. Those on watch are ordered to
listen in by phone."
"What's up?" asked Max.
"Why wonder? We'll go see."
The lounge was crowded with passengers and crew. First Officer Walther
stood near the Captain's table, counting the crowd with his eyes. Max saw him
speak to Bennett, who nodded and hurried away. The large view port was across
the lounge from Max; he stretched on his toes and tried to see out. All he
could see was hilltops and blue sky.
There was a lessening of the murmur of voices; Max looked around to see
Bennett preceding Captain Blaine through the crowd. The Captain went to his
table and sat down; the First Officer glanced at him, then cleared his throat
loudly. "Quiet, please."
He went on, "I've called you together because Captain Blaine has
something he wants to say to you." He stopped and stepped back respectfully.
Captain Blaine slowly stood up, looked uncertainly around. Max saw him
square his thin shoulders and lift his head. "Men," he said, his voice
suddenly firm and strong. "My guests and friends--" he went on, his voice
sinking. There was a hush in the lounge, Max could hear the Captain's labored
breathing. He again asserted control of himself and continued, "I have brought
you . . . I have brought you as far as I can. . ." His voice trailed off. He
looked at them for a long moment, his mouth trembling. It seemed impossible
for him to continue. The crowd started to stir.
But he did continue and they immediately quieted. "I have something else
to say," he began, then paused. This pause was longer, when he broke it his
voice was a whisper. "I'm sorry. God keep you all." He turned and started for
the door.
Bennett slipped quickly in front of him. Max could hear him saying
quietly and firmly: "Gangway, please. Way for the Captain." No one said
anything until he was gone, but a woman passenger at Max's elbow was sobbing
softly.
Mr. Walther's sharp, clear voice rang out. "Don't go away, anyone! I
have additional announcements to make." His manner ignored what they had all
just seen. "The time has come to sum up our present situation. As you can see,
this planet is much like our Mother Earth. Tests must be made to be sure that
the atmosphere is breathable, and so forth; the Surgeon and the Chief Engineer
are making them now. But it seems likely that this new planet will prove to be
eminently suitable for human beings, probably even more friendly than Earth.
"So far, we have seen no indications of civilized life. On the whole,
that seems a good thing. Now as to our resources-- The _Asgard_ carries a
variety of domestic animals, they will be useful and should be conserved as
breeding stock. We have an even wider variety of useful plants, both in the
ship's hydroponic gardens and carried as seeds. We have a limited but adequate
supply of tools. Most important of all the ship's library contains a fair
cross-section of our culture. Equally important, we ourselves have our skills
and traditions . . ."
"Mr. Walther!"
"Yes, Mr. Hornsby?"
"Are you trying to tell us that you are dumping us here?"
Walther looked at him coldly. "No. Nobody is being 'dumped' as you put
it. You can stay in the ship and you will be treated as a guest as long as the
_Asgard_-- or you yourself--is alive. Or until the ship reaches the
destination on your ticket. If it does. No, I have been trying to discuss
reasonably an open secret; this ship is lost."
A voiceless sigh went through the room. All of them knew it, but up till
now it had not been admitted officially. The flat announcement from a
responsible officer echoed like the sentence of a court.
"Let me state the legal position," Mr. Walther went on. "While this ship
was in space you passengers were subject to the authority of the Captain, as

defined by law, and through him you were subject to me and the other ship's
officers. Now we have landed. You may go freely . . . or you may stay. Legally
this is an unscheduled stopover; if the ship ever leaves here you may return
to it and continue as passengers. That is my responsibility to you and it will
be carried out. But I tell you plainly that at present I have no hope to offer
that we will ever leave here--which is why I spoke of colonizing. We are
lost."
In the rear of the room a woman began to scream hysterically, with
incoherent sounds of, ". . . home! I want to go home! Take me . . ."
Walther's voice cut through the hubbub. "Dumont! Flannigan! Remove her.
Take her to the Surgeon."
He continued as if nothing had happened. "The ship and the ship's crew
will give every assistance possible, consistent with my legal responsibility
to keep the ship in commission, to aid any of you who wish to colonize.
Personally I think . . ."
A surly voice cut in, "Why talk about 'law'? There is no law here!"
Walther did not even raise his voice. "But there is. As long as this
ship is in commission, there is law, no matter how many light-years she may be
from her home port. Furthermore, while I have no authority over any who choose
to leave the ship, I strongly advise you to make it your first act dirtside to
hold a town meeting, elect officers, and found a constitutional government. I
doubt that you can survive otherwise."
"Mr. Walther."
"Yes, Mr. Daigler?"
"This is obviously no time for recriminations . . ."
"Obviously!"
Daigler grinned wryly. "So I won't indulge, though I could think of
some. But it happens that I know something professionally about the economics
of colonizing."
"Good! We'll use your knowledge."
"Will you let me finish? A prime principle in maintaining a colony out
of touch with its supply base is to make it large enough. It's a statistical
matter, too small a colony can be overwhelmed by a minor setback. It's like
going into a dice game with too little money: three bad rolls and you're sunk.
Looking around me, it's evident that we have much less than optimal minimum.
In fact--"
"It's what we have, Mr. Daigler."
"I see that. I'm not a wishful thinker. What I want to know is, can we
count on the crew as well?"
Mr. Walther shook his head. "This ship will not be decommissioned as
long as there are men capable of manning it. There is always hope, no matter
how small, that we may find a way home. It is even possible that an Imperial
survey ship might discover us. I'm sorry--no."
"That isn't quite what I asked. I was two jumps ahead of you, I figured
you wouldn't let the crew colonize. But can we count on their help? We seem to
have about six females, give or take one, who will probably help to carry on
the race. That means that the next generation of our new nation is going to be
much smaller. Such a colony would flicker and die, by statistical
probability--unless every man jack of us works ten hours a day for the rest of
his life, just to give our children a better chance of making it. That's all
right with me, if we all make an all-out try. But it will take all the
manpower we have to make sure that some young people who aren't even born yet
get by thirty years from now. Will the crew help?" 
Mr. Walther said quietly, "I think you can count on it."
"Good enough."
A small, red-faced man whose name Max had never learned interrupted.
"Good enough, my eye! I'm going to sue the company, I'm going to sue the
ship's officers individually. I'm going to shout it from the . . ." Max saw
Sam slipping through the crowd to the man's side, the disturbance stopped
abruptly.

"Take him to the Surgeon," Mr. Walther said wearily. "He can sue us
tomorrow. The meeting is adjourned."
Max started for his room. Eldreth caught up with him. "Max! I want to
talk with you."
"All right." He started back toward the lounge.
"No, I want to talk privately. Let's go to your room."
"Huh? Mrs. Dumont would blow her top, then she'd tell Mr. Walther."
"Bother with all that! Those silly rules are dead. Didn't you listen at
the meeting?"
"You're the one who didn't listen."
He took her firmly by the arm, turned her toward the public room. They
ran into Mr. and Mrs. Daigler coming the other way. Daigler said, "Max? Are
you busy?"
"Yes," answered Eldreth.
"No," said Max.
"Hmm . . . you two had better take a vote. I'd like to ask Max some
questions. I've no objection to your being with us, Eldreth, if you will
forgive the intrusion. 
She shrugged. "Oh, well, maybe you can handle him. I can't."
They went to the Daiglers' stateroom, larger and more luxurious than
Max's and possessing two chairs. The two women perched on the bed, the men
took the chairs. Daigler began, "Max, you impress me as a man who prefers to
give a straight answer. There are things I want to know that I didn't care to
ask out there. Maybe you can tell me."
"I will if I can."
"Good. I've tried to ask Mr. Simes, all I get is a snottily polite brush
off. I haven't been able to get in to see the Captain--after today I see that
there wouldn't have been any point anyhow. Now, can you tell me, with the
mathematics left out, what chance we have to get home? Is it one in three, or
one in a thousand--or what?"
"Uh, I couldn't answer it that way."
"Answer it your own way."
"Well, put it this way. While we don't know where we are, we know
positively where we aren't. We aren't within, oh, say a hundred light-years of
any explored part of the Galaxy."
"How do you know? It seems to me that's a pretty big space to be
explored in the weeks since we got off the track."
"It sure is. It's a globe twelve hundred trillion miles thick. But we
didn't have to explore it, not exactly."
"Then how?"
"Well, sir, we examined the spectra of all first magnitude stars in
sight--and a lot more. None of them is in our catalogues. Some are giants that
would be first magnitude anywhere within a hundred light-years of them--they'd
be certain to be in the catalogues if a survey ship had ever been that close
to them. So we are absolutely certain that we are a long, long way from
anywhere that men have ever been before. Matter of fact, I spoke too
conservatively. Make it a globe twice as thick, eight times as big, and you'd
still be way over on the conservative side. We're _really_ lost."
"Mmm . . . I'm glad I didn't ask those questions in the lounge. Is there
any possibility that we will ever know where we are?"
"Oh, sure! There are thousands of stars left to examine. Chief Kelly is
probably shooting one this minute."
"Well, then, what are the chances that we will eventually find
ourselves?"
"Oh, I'd say they were excellent--in a year or two at the outside. If
not from single stars, then from globular star clusters. You realize that the
Galaxy is a hundred thousand light-years across, more or less, and we can see
only stars that are fairly close. But the globular clusters make good
landmarks, too." Max added the mental reservation, _if we aren't in the wrong
galaxy_. There seemed no point in burdening them with that dismaying

possibility.
Daigler relaxed and took out a cigar. "This is the last of my own brand,
but I'll risk smoking it now. Well, Maggie, I guess you won't have to learn
how to make soap out of wood ashes and hog drippings after all. Whether it's
one year or five, we can sweat it out and go home."
"I'm glad." She patted her ornate coiffure with soft, beautifully
manicured hands. "I'm hardly the type for it."
"But you don't understand!"
"Eh? What's that, Max?"
"I didn't say we could get back. I just said I thought it was fairly
certain we would find out where we are."
"What's the difference? We find out, then we go home."
"No, because we _can't_ be less than a hundred light-years from explored
space."
"I don't see the hitch. This ship can do a hundred light-years in a
split second. What was the longest leap we made this cruise? Nearly five
hundred light-years, wasn't it?"
"Yes, but--" Max turned to Eldreth. "You understand? Don't you?"
"Well, maybe. That folded-scarf thing you showed me?"
"Yes, yes. Mr. Daigler, sure the _Asgard_ can transit five hundred
light-years in no time--or any other distance. But _only_ at calculated and
surveyed congruencies. We don't know of any within a hundred light-years, at
least . . . and we won't know of any even if we find out where we are because
we know where we _aren't_. Follow me? That means that the ship would have to
travel at top speed for something over a hundred years and maybe much longer,
just for the first leg of the trip."
Mr. Daigler stared thoughtfully at his cigar ash, then took out a pen
knife and cut off the burning end. "I'll save the rest. Well, Maggie, better
study up on that homemake soap deal. Thanks, Max. My father was a farmer, I
can learn." 
Max said impulsively, "I'll help you, sir."
"Oh yes, you did tell us that you used to be a farmer, didn't you? You
should make out all right." His eyes swung to Eldreth. "You know what I would
do, if I were you kids? I'd get the Captain to marry you right away. Then
you'd be all set to tackle colonial life right."
Max blushed to his collar and did not look at Ellie. "I'm afraid I
can't. I'm a crew member, I'm not eligible to colonize."
Mr. Daigler looked at him curiously. "Such devotion to duty. Well, no
doubt Ellie can take her pick among the single men passengers."
Eldreth smoothed her skirt demurely. "No doubt."
"Come, Maggie. Coming, Eldreth?"
17
CHARITY
"Charityville" was a going concern within a week. It had a mayor, Mr.
Daigler, a main street, Hendrix Avenue, even its first wedding, performed by
the mayor in the presence of the villagers--Mr. Arthur and little Becky
Weberbauer. The first cottage, now building, was reserved for the newlyweds.

It was a log cabin and a very sloppy job, for, while there were those among
them who had seen pictures or had even seen log cabins, there was no one who
had ever built one before.
There was an air of hope, of common courage, even of gaiety in the new
community. The place was fragrant with new starts, forward-looking thoughts.
They still slept in the ship and breakfasted there, then carried their lunches
and labored mightily, men and women alike, through the short day--Charity spun
on her axis in twenty-one-plus hours. They returned at nightfall, dined in the
ship, and some found energy to dance a bit before going to bed.
Charity seemed to be all that her name implied. The days were balmy, the
nights were mild--and beautiful beyond anything yet found in the Galaxy. Its
star (they simply called it "the Sun") was accompanied by more comets than had
yet been seen around any star. A giant with a wide tail stretched from zenith
to western horizon, diving at their Sun. Another, not yet so grand but awesome
enough to have caused watchers for the end of the world on Earthly hilltops,
approached from the north, and two more decorated the southern sky with lace
of icy fire.
Concomitant with comets was, necessarily, an equal abundance of meteors.
Every night was a shower of falling stars, every day ended like Solar Union
Day with a display of fireworks.
They had seen no dangerous animals. Some of the settlers reported seeing
centaurlike creatures about the size of Shetland ponies, but they seemed timid
and had scurried away when discovered. The prevalent life form appeared to be
marsupial mammals in various sizes and shapes. There were no birds, but there
was another sort of flying life not found elsewhere-- jellyfishlike creatures
four or five feet high with dangling tendrils, animated balloons. They
appeared to have muscular control over their swollen bladders for they could
rise and fall, and could even, by some not evident means, go upwind against a
gentle breeze--in higher winds they anchored to treetops, or floated free and
let the wind carry them.
They seemed curious about Charityville and would hang over a work site,
turning slowly around as if to see everything. But they never got within
reach. Some of the settlers wanted to shoot one down and examine it; Mayor
Daigler forbade it.
There was another animal too--or might be. They were called "peekers"
because all that anyone had seen was something that ducked quickly behind a
rock or tree when anyone tried to look. Between the possibly mythical peeker
and the ubiquitous balloons the colonists felt that their new neighbors took a
deep but not unfriendly interest in what they were doing.
Maggie Daigler--she was "Maggie" to everyone now--had put away her
jewels, drawn dungarees from ship's stores, and chopped off her hair. Her
nails were short and usually black with grime. But she looked years younger
and quite happy.
In fact, everyone seemed happy but Max.
Ellie was avoiding him. He cursed himself and his big mouth thrice daily
and four times at night. Sure, Daigler had spoken out of turn--but was that
any reason for him to open his mouth and put his foot in it? Of course, he had
never figured on marrying Ellie-- but shucks, maybe they were stuck here
forever. "Probably," not "maybe," he corrected. The ban on joining the colony
would be let up in time--in which case, what was the sense in getting in bad
with the only eligible girl around?
An astrogator ought to be a bachelor but a farmer needed a wife. Mighty
nice to have some one cooking the turnip greens and jointing a chicken while a
man was out in the fields. He ought to know--Maw had let it slide often
enough. Ellie wouldn't be like Maw. She was strong and practical and with just
a little teaching would do all right.
Besides she was about the prettiest thing he ever saw, if you looked at
her right.
When Mr. and Mrs. Dumont, by special dispensation, joined the colony it
caused him to act. Since the steward and stewardess would have no duties in a

ship without passengers no one could reasonably object--but it gave Max an
approach. He went to see the First Officer.
"Probationary Apprentice Jones, sir."
Walther glanced up. "I think I'd say 'Assistant Astrogator Jones' if I
were you. Closer to the facts. Come in."
"Uh, that's what I wanted to speak with you about, sir."
"So? How?"
"I want to revert to my billet."
"Eh? Why would you rather be a chartsman than an astrogator? And what
difference does it make--now?"
"No, sir. I'm electing to resume my permanent appointment, steward's
mate third."
Walther looked amazed. "There must be more to this. Explain yourself."
With much stammering Max explained his trouble with Simes. He tried to
be fair and finished with the dismal feeling that he had sounded childish.
Walther said, "You're sure about this? Mr. Simes has said nothing to me about
you."
"He wouldn't, sir. But it's true. You can ask Kelly."
Walther thought for a while. "Mr. Jones, I wouldn't attach too much
importance to this. At your age these conflicts of personality often seem more
serious than they are. My advice is to forget it and do your work. I'll speak
to Mr. Simes about his keeping you out of the control room. That isn't proper
and I am surprised to hear it."
"No, sir."
"'No, sir' what?"
"I want to return to steward's mate."
"Eh? I don't understand you."
"Because, sir, I want to join the colony. Like Chief Steward Dumont."
"Oh . . . A light begins to dawn." Walther slapped the desk
emphatically. "Absolutely no! Under no circumstances."
"Sir?"
"Please understand me. This is not discrimination. If you were a
steward's mate and nothing else, I would consider your request--under the
special circumstances which I believe pertain. But you are an astrogator. You
know our situation. Dr. Hendrix is dead. Captain Blaine--well, you have seen
him. He may recover, I cannot plan on it. Mr. Jones, as long as there is any
faint hope that this ship will ever lift again, as long as we have crew to
work her, no astrogator, no chartsman, no computerman will be relieved from
duty for any reason whatsoever. You see that, don't you?"
"I guess so, sir. Uh, aye aye, sir."
"Good. By the way, keep this to yourself, but as soon as the colony can
get along without us temporarily, I want the ship placed in a parking orbit so
that you specialists can maintain a search. You can't work very well through
this atmosphere, can you?"
"No, sir. Our instruments were designed for open space."
"So we must see that you get it." The First Officer sat silent, then
added, "Mr. Jones--Max, isn't it? May I speak to you man to man?"
"Uh? Certainly, sir."
"Mmm . . . Max, this is none of my business, but treat it as fatherly
advice. If you have an opportunity to marry--and want to--you don't have to
join the colony to do it. If we stay, it won't matter in the long run whether
you are crew or a charter member of the village. If we leave, your wife goes
with you."
Max's ears burned. He could think of nothing to say.
"Hypothetical question, of course. But that's the proper solution."
Walther stood up. "Why don't you take the day off? Go take a walk or
something. Fresh air will do you good. I'll speak to Mr. Simes."
Instead, Max went looking for Sam, did not find him in the ship,
discovered that he had gone dirtside. He followed him down and walked the half
mile to Charityville.

Before he reached the building that was being worked on he saw a figure
separate itself from the gang. He soon saw that it was Eldreth. She stopped in
front of him, a sturdy little figure in dirty dungarees. She planted her feet
and set fists on her hips.
"Uh, howdy, Ellie."
"Up to your old tricks! Avoiding me. Explain yourself."
The injustice of it left him stuttering. "But . . . Now see here, Ellie,
it's not that way at all. You've been . . ."
"A likely story. You sound like Chipsie caught with her hand in a candy
dish. I just wanted to tell you, you reluctant Don Juan, that you have nothing
to worry about. I'm not marrying anyone this season. So you can resume the
uneven tenor of your ways."
"But, Ellie . . ." he started desperately.
"Want me to put it in writing? Put up a bond?" She looked fiercely at
him, then began to laugh, wrinkling her nose. "Oh, Max, you large lout, you
arouse the eternal maternal in me. When you are upset your face gets as long
as a mule's. Look, forget it."
"But, Ellie . . . Well, all right."
"Pals?"
"Pals."
She sighed. "I feel better. I don't know why, but I don't like to be on
the outs with you. Where were you going?"
"Uh, nowhere. Taking a walk."
"Fine. I'll go too. Half a sec while I gather in Chipsie." She turned
and called, "Mister Chips! Chipsie!"
"I don't see her."
"I'll get her." She ran off, to return quickly with the spider puppy on
her shoulder and a package in her hand. "I picked up my lunch. We can split
it."
"Oh, we won't be gone that long. Hi, Chipsie baby."
"Hi, Max. Candy?"
He dug into a pocket, found a sugar cube that he had saved several days
ago for the purpose; the spider puppy accepted it gravely and said, "Thank
you."
"Yes, we will," Ellie disagreed, "because some of the men saw a herd of
those centaur ponies the other side of that ridge. It's quite a hike."
"I don't think we ought to go that far," he said doubtfully. "Won't they
miss you?"
"I've been doing my share. See my callouses?" She stuck out a grimy paw.
"I told Mr. Hornsby that I was suddenly come down with never-get-overs and he
would have to find somebody else to hold while he hammered."
He was pleased to give in. They went up rising ground and into an arroyo
and soon were in a grove of primitive conifers. Mr. Chips jumped down from
Ellie's shoulders and scurried up a tree. Max stopped. "Hadn't we better catch
her?"
"You worry too much. Chipsie wouldn't run away. She'd be scared to
death. Chipsie! Here, honey!"
The spider puppy hustled through branches, got directly above them,
dropped a cone on Max. Then she laughed, a high giggle. "See? She just wants
to play."
The ridge was high and Max found that his hillbilly's wind had been lost
somewhere among the stars. The arroyo meandered slowly upwards. He was still
woodsman enough to keep a sharp eye out for landmarks and directions. At weary
last they topped the crest. Ellie paused. "I guess they're gone," she said
disappointedly, staring out over flatter country below them. "No! Look over
there. See them! About two dozen little black dots."
"Uh huh. Yeah."
"Let's go closer. I want a good look."
"I wonder if that's smart? We're a far piece from the ship and I'm not
armed."

"Oh, they're harmless."
"I was thinking of what else might be in these woods."
"But we're already in the woods, and all we've seen are the hobgoblins."
She referred to the balloonlike creatures, two of which had trailed them up
the arroyo. The humans had grown so used to their presence that they no longer
paid them any attention.
"Ellie, it's time we went back."
"No."
"Yes. I'm responsible for you. You've seen your centaurs."
"Max Jones, I'm a free citizen. You may be starting back; I'm going to
have a close look at those underslung cow ponies." She started down.
"Well-- Wait a moment. I want to get my bearings." He took a full look
around, fixed the scene forever in his mind, and followed her. He was not
anxious to thwart her anyhow; he had been mulling over the notion that this
was a good time to explain why he had said what he had said to Mr.
Daigler--and perhaps lead around to the general subject of the future. He
wouldn't go so far as to talk about marriage-- though he might bring it up in
the abstract if he could figure out an approach.
How did you approach such a subject? You didn't just say, "There go the
hobgoblins, let's you and me get married!"
Ellie paused. "There go the hobgloblins. Looks as if they were heading
right for the herd."
Max frowned. "Could be. Maybe they talk to them?"
She laughed. "Those things?" She looked him over carefully. "Maxie, I've
just figured out why I bother with you."
Huh? Maybe she was going to lead up to it for him. "Why?"
"Because you remind me of Putzie. You get the same puzzled look he
does."
"'Putzie?' Who is Putzie?"
"Putzie is the man my father shipped me off to Earth to get me away
from--and the reason I crushed out of three schools to get back to Hespera.
Only Daddy will probably have shipped him off, too. Daddy is tricky. Come
here, Chipsie. Don't go so far."
She continued, "You'll love Putzie. He's nice. Stop it, Chipsie."
Max despised the man already. "I don't like to fret you," he said, "but
it's a long way to Hespera."
"I know. Let's not borrow trouble." She looked him over again. "I might
keep you in reserve, if you weren't so jumpy."
Before he could think of the right answer she had started down.
The centaurs--it seemed the best name, though the underparts were not
much like horses and the parts that stuck up were only vaguely
humanoid--clustered near the foot of the hill, not far out from the trees.
They weren't grazing, it was hard to tell what they were doing. The two
hobgoblins were over the group, hovering as if in interest just as they did
with humans. Ellie insisted on going to the edge of the clearing to see them
better.
They reminded Max of clowns made up to look like horses. They had silly,
simple expressions and apparently no room for a brain case. They appeared to
be marsupials, with pouches almost like bibs. Either they were all females or
with this species the male had a pouch too. Several little centaurs were
cavorting around, in and out the legs of their elders.
One of the babies spied them, came trotting toward them, sniffling and
bleating. Behind it the largest adult pulled out of the herd to watch the
young one. The colt scampered up and stopped about twenty feet away.
"Oh, the darling!" Ellie said and ran out a few feet, dropped to one
knee. "Come here, pet. Come to mama."
Max started for her. "Ellie! Come back here!"
The large centaur reached into its pouch, hauled out something, swung it
around its head like a gaucho's throwing rope. "Ellie!"
He reached her just as it let go. The thing struck them, wound around

and held them. Ellie screamed and Max struggled to tear it loose--but they
were held like Laocon.
Another line came flying through the air, clung to them. And another.
Mr. Chips had followed Ellie. Now she skittered away, crying. She
stopped at the edge of the clearing and shrilled, "Max! Ellie! Come _back_.
_Please_ back!"
18
CIVILIZATION
Ellie did not faint nor grow hysterical. After that involuntary scream,
her next remark was simply, "Max, I'm sorry. My fault."
The words were almost in his ear, so tightly were they tied together by
the clinging ropes. He answered, "I'll get us loose!" and continued to strain
at their bonds.
"Don't struggle," she said quietly, "It just makes them tighter. We'll
have to talk our way out of this."
What she said was true; the harder he strained the tighter the
pythonlike bonds held them. "Don't," Ellie pleaded. "You're making it worse.
It's hurting me." Max desisted.
The largest centaur ambled up and looked them over. Its broad simple
face was still more ludicrous close up and its large brown eyes held a look of
gentle astonishment. The colt approached from the other side and sniffed
curiously, bleated in a high voice. The adult bugled like an elk; the colt
shied sideways, then rejoined the herd on a dead run.
"Take it easy," Ellie whispered. "I think they were scared that we would
hurt the baby. Maybe they'll just look us over and let us go."
"Maybe. But I wish I could get at my knife."
"I'm glad you can't. This calls for diplomacy."
The rest of the herd came up, milled around and looked them over, while
exchanging calls that combined bugling, whinnying, and something between a
cough and a snort. Max listened. "That's language," he decided.
"Of course. And how I wish I had studied it at Miss Mimsey's."
The largest centaur leaned over them, smoothed at their bonds; they
became looser but still held them. Max said sharply, "I think they are going
to untie us. Get ready to run."
"Yes, boss."
Another centaur reached into its built-in pouch, took out another of the
ropelike things. It dropped to its fore knees, flipped the end so that it
curled around Max's left ankle. The end seemed to weld into a loop, hobbling
Max as effectively as a bowline knot; Ellie was treated the same way. The
biggest centaur then patted their bonds, which fell off and writhed gently on
the ground. It picked them up and stuffed them into its pouch.
The centaur which had hobbled them wrapped the ends of their tethers
around its upright trunk, they merged into a belt. After an exchange of sour
bugle calls with the leader, it patted the leashes, . . . which then stretched
like taffy, becoming quite twenty feet long and much more slender. Max pressed
his knife on Ellie and said, "Try to cut yourself loose. If you can, then run
for it. I'll keep them busy."

"No, Max."
"Yes! Dawggone it, quit being a brat! You've made enough trouble."
"Yes, Max." She took the knife and tried to saw through the strange rope
near her ankle. The centaurs made no attempt to stop her, but watched with the
same air of gentle astonishment. It was as if they had never seen a knife, had
no notion of what one was. Presently she gave up. "No good, Max. It's like
trying to slice duraplastic."
"Why, I keep that knife like a razor. Let me try."
He had no better luck. He was forced to stop by the herd moving
out--walk or be dragged. He managed to close the knife while hopping on one
foot to save his balance. The group proceeded at a slow walk for a few steps,
then the leader bugled and the centaurs broke into a trot, exactly like
ancient cavalry.
Ellie stumbled at once and was dragged. Max sat down, managed to grab
his hobble and hang on while shouting, "Hey! Stop!"
Their captor stopped and looked around almost apologetically. Max said,
"Look, stupid. We can't keep up. We're not horses," while helping Ellie to her
feet. "Are you hurt, kid?"
"I guess not." She blinked back tears. "If I could lay hands on that
hay-burning oaf, he'd be hurt--plenty!"
"You skinned your hand."
"It won't kill me. Just tell him to slow down, will you?"
Seeing them on their feet the monster immediately started to trot again.
Down they went again, with Max trying to drag them to a halt. This time the
leader trotted back from the main herd and consulted their custodian. Max took
part, making up in vehemence what he lacked in semantic efficiency.
Perhaps he was effective; their keeper slowed to a fast walk, letting
the others go ahead. Another centaur dropped back and became a rear guard. One
of the animated balloons, which had continued to hover over the herd, now
drifted back and remained over Max and Ellie.
The pace was just bearable, between a fast walk and a dogtrot. The route
led across the open, flat floor of the valley and through knee-high grass. The
grass saved them somewhat, as the centaur leading them seemed to feel that a
fall or two every few hundred yards represented optimum efficiency. He never
seemed impatient and would stop and let them get up, but always started off
again at a clip brisk for humans. Max and Ellie ceased trying to talk, their
throats being burned dry by their panting efforts to keep up. A tiny stream
meandered through the bottom of the valley; the centaur jumped easily across
it. It was necessary for the humans to wade. Ellie paused in midstream, leaned
down and started to drink. Max objected, "Ellie! Don't drink that--you don't
know that it's safe."
"I hope it poisons me so I can lie down and die. Max, I can't go much
farther."
"Chin up, kid. We'll get out of this. I've been keeping track of where
we've gone." He hesitated, then drank also, being terribly thirsty. The
centaur let them, then tugged them on.
It was as far again to the rising ground and forest on the other side.
They had thought that they were as tired as they could be before they started
up hill; they were mistaken. The centaur was agile as a goat and seemed
surprised that they found it difficult. Finally Ellie collapsed and would not
get up; the centaur came back and stirred her roughly with a three-toed hoof.
Max struck him with both fists. The centaur made no move to retaliate
but looked at him with that same stupid astonishment. Their rear guard came up
and conversed with it, after which they waited for perhaps ten minutes. Max
sat down beside Ellie and said anxiously, "Feeling any better?"
"Don't talk."
Presently the guard edged between them and drove Max back by stepping on
him, whereupon the other centaur tugged on Ellie's leash. It contracted and

she was forced to scramble to her feet. The centaurs let them rest twice after
that. After an endless time, when the local sun was dropping low in the west,
they came out on flat table land, still heavily wooded. They continued through
trees for a distance which Max's count of paces told him was under a mile but
seemed like ten, then stopped.
They were in a semi-clearing, a space carpeted with fallen needles.
Their guard came up to the other centaur and took from him the end of Max's
leash, flipped it around the base of a tree, to which it clung. The other
centaur did the same with Ellie's leash to another tree about forty feet away.
Having done so, they roughly urged the two together, while stopping to stroke
their bonds until they were stretched out very thin. It allowed Max and Ellie
enough slack that they might have passed each other.
This did not seem to please the centaurs. One of them shifted Max's
leash farther back into the surrounding bushes, dragging him with it. This
time at the extreme limit allowed by their bonds they were about six feet
apart. "What are they doing?" asked Ellie.
"Looks like they don't want us to combine forces."
Finished, the centaurs trotted away. Ellie looked after them, began to
sob, then cried openly, tears running down her dirty face and leaving tracks.
"Stow it," Max said harshly. "Sniffling will get us nowhere."
"I can't help it," she bawled. "I've been brave all day--at least I've
tried to be. I . . ." She collapsed face down and let herself go.
By getting down prone and stretching Max could just reach her head. He
patted her tangled hair. "Take it easy, kid," he said softly. "Cry it out, if
you'll feel better."
"Oh, Maxie! Tied up . . . like a dog."
"We'll see about that." He sat up and examined his tether.
Whatever the ropelike leash was, it was not rope. It had a smooth shiny
surface which reminded him more of a snake, though the part that wound around
his ankle showed no features; it simply flowed around his ankle and merged
back into itself.
He lifted the bight and detected a faint throbbing. He stroked it as he
had seen the centaurs do and it responded with flowing pulsations, but it
neither shrank nor grew longer, nor did it loosen its grip. "Ellie," he
announced, "This thing is _alive_."
She lifted a woebegone face. "What thing?"
"This rope."
"Oh, that! Of course."
"At least," he went on, "if it isn't, it's not really dead." He tried
his knife again, there was no effect. "I'll bet if I had a match I could make
it cry 'Uncle.' Got an Everlite, Ellie?"
"I don't smoke."
"Neither do I. Well, maybe I can make a fire some other way. Rubbing two
sticks together, or something."
"Do you know how?"
"No." He continued stroking and patting the living rope, but, though he
always got a response in pulsations, he did not seem to have the right touch;
the bond stayed as before. He was continuing this fruitless attempt when he
heard his name called. "Max! Ellie!"
Ellie sat up with a jerk. "Chipsie! Oh, Max, she followed us. Come here,
darling!"
The spider puppy was high above them in a tree. She looked carefully
around, then scurried down, making the last ten feet a flying leap into
Ellie's arms. They cuddled and made soft noises, then Ellie straightened up,
her eyes shining. "Max, I feel so much better."
"So do I." He added, "Though I don't know why."
The spider puppy announced gravely, "Chipsie follow."
Max reached across and petted her. "Yes, Chipsie did. Good girl!"
Ellie hugged the spider puppy. "I don't feel deserted now, Max. Maybe
everything will come out all right."

"Look, Ellie, we're not in too bad a spot. Maybe I'll find the
combination to tickle these ropes or snakes or whatever so they'll give up. If
I do, we'll sneak back tonight."
"How would we find our way?"
"Don't worry. I watched every foot of the way, every change of
direction, every landmark."
"Even in the dark?"
"Easier in the dark. I know these stars--I sure ought to. But suppose we
don't get loose; we still aren't licked."
"Huh? I don't relish spending my life tied to a tree."
"You won't. Look--I think these things are just curious about us. They
won't eat us, that's sure--they probably live on grass. Maybe they'll get
bored and turn us loose. But if they don't, it'll be rough on them."
"Huh? Why?"
"Because of Mr. Walther and George Daigler--and Sam, Sam Anderson;
that's why. They're probably beating the bushes for us right now. We are less
than ten miles from the ship--five by a straight line. They'll find us. Then
if these silly-looking centaurs want to get tough, they'll learn about modern
weapons. They and their fool throwing ropes!"
"It might take a long time to find us. Nobody knows where we went."
"Yes," he admitted. "If I had a pocket radio. Or some way to signal. Or
even a way to build a fire. But I don't."
"I never thought. It just seemed like going for a stroll in the park."
Max thought darkly that he had tried to warn her. Why, even the hills
around home weren't safe if a body didn't keep his eyes peeled . . . you could
run into a mean old bobcat, or even a bear. Person like Ellie never 'ud had
enough hard knocks to knock sense into her, that was her trouble.
Presently he admitted that he himself hadn't looked for grief from
anything as apparently chuckled-headed and harmless as these centaur things.
Anyhow, as Sam would say, no use cryin' over spilt milk when the horse was
already stolen.
"Ellie."
"Huh?"
"Do you suppose Chipsie could find her way back?"
"Why, I don't know."
"If she could, we could send a message."
Chipsie looked up. "Back?" she inquired. "Please back. Go home."
Ellie frowned. "I'm afraid Chipsie doesn't talk that well. She'd
probably just hiccup and get incoherent."
"I don't mean that. I know Chipsie is no mental giant. I . . ."
"Chipsie is smart!"
"Sure. But I want to send a written message and a map." He fumbled in a
pocket, pulled out a stylus. "Do you have any paper?"
"I'll see." She found a folded paper in a dungaree pocket. "Oh, dear! I
was supposed to take this to Mr. Giordano. Mr. Hornsby will be so vexed with
me."
"What is it?"
"A requisition for number-ten wire."
"It doesn't matter now." He took the paper, scratched out the
memorandum, turned it over and began to draw, stopping to consult the pictures
filed in his mind for distances, which way the local sun lay, contours, and
other details.
"Max?"
"Quiet, can't you?" He continued to sketch, then added: "URGENT--to
First Officer Walther: Eldreth Coburn and self captured by centaurs. Be
careful and watch out for their throwing ropes. Respectfully, M. Jones." He
handed it to Ellie. "That ought to do it. Is there any way to fasten it to
her? I sure don't want her to drop it."
"Mmm . . . let me see. Turn your back, Max."
"Why?"

"Don't be difficult. Turn your back."
He did so, shortly she said, "All right now." He faced her and she
handed him a ribbon. "How's this?"
"Swell!" They managed to tie the ribbon, with the note folded and firmly
attached, around Mr. Chips' waist, anchoring it to a middle limb . . . not too
easy as the spider puppy seemed to think it was a game and was ticklish as
well.
"There! Stop squirming, Chipsie, and listen. Ellie wants you to go
home."
"Home?"
"Yes, home. Go back to the ship."
"Ellie go home?"
"Ellie can't go home."
"No."
"Honey, you've _got_ to."
"No."
"Look, Chipsie. You find Maggie and tell her Ellie said to give you some
candy. You give Maggie this." She tugged at the tied note.
"Candy?"
"Go home. Find Maggie. Maggie will give you candy."
"Ellie go home."
"Please, Chipsie."
"Ellie," Max said urgently, "something is coming."
Eldreth looked up, saw a centaur coming through the trees. She pointed.
"Look, Chipsie! They're coming! They'll catch Chipsie! Go home! Run!"
The spider puppy squealed in terror and scurried for the trees. Once on
a branch she looked back and whimpered. "Go home!" screamed Ellie. "Find
Maggie!"
Mr. Chips shot a glance at the centaur, then disappeared. They had no
time to worry further, the centaur was almost up to them. He glanced at them
and went on by; it was what followed the centaur that grabbed their attention.
Ellie suppressed a shriek. "Max! They've caught everybody."
"No," he corrected grimly. "Look again." The gathering gloom had caused
him to make the same mistake; it seemed that the entire ship's company trotted
after the centaur in single file, ankle leashed to ankle by living ropes. But
only the first glance gave such an impression. These creatures were more than
humanoid--but such degraded creatures had never sailed between the stars.
They shuffled quickly along like well-trained animals. One or two looked
at Ellie and Max in passing, but their stares were bovine, incurious. Small
children not on leash trotted with their mothers, and once Max was startled to
see a wrinkled little head peeping out of a pouch--these man-creatures were
marsupials, too.
Max controlled a desire to retch and as they passed out of sight he
turned to Ellie. "Gosh!"
"Max," Eldreth said hoarsely, "do you suppose we've died and gone to our
punishment?"
"Huh? Don't be silly. Things are bad enough."
"I mean it. That was something right out of Dante's Inferno." 
Max was swallowing uneasily and not feeling good-tempered. "Look, you
can pretend you're dead if you want to. Me, I'm alive and I mean to stay so.
Those things weren't men. Don't let it throw you."
"But they _were_ men. Men and women and children."
"No, they weren't. Being shaped like us doesn't make them men. Being a
man is something else entirely." He scowled. "Maybe the centaurs are 'men.'"
"Oh, no--"
"Don't be too sure. They seem to run things in this country."
The discussion was cut short by another arrival. It was almost dark and
they did not see the centaur until he entered their clearing. He was followed
by three of the--Max decided to call them 'men' though he resented the
necessity--followed by three men. They were not on leashes. All three were

bearing burdens. The centaur spoke to them; they distributed what they
carried.
One of them set down a large clay bowl filled with water in the space
separating Max and Ellie. It was the first artifact that any human had seen on
Charity and did not indicate a high level of mechanical culture, being crudely
modeled and clearly not thrown on a potter's wheel; it held water, no more
could be said for it. A second porter dumped a double armful of small fruits
beside the bowl. Two of them splashed into the bowl, he did not bother to fish
them out.
Max had to look twice to see what the third slave was carrying. It
looked as if he had three large ovoid balls slung by ropes in each of his
hands; second inspection showed them to be animals about the size of opossums
which he carried by their tails. He went around the clearing, stopping every
few feet and lifting one of his burdens to a lower branch. When he had
finished they were surrounded by six small creatures, each hanging by its
tail. The centaur followed the slave, Max saw him stroke each animal and press
a spot on its neck. In each case the entire body of the little animal lit up,
began to shine like a firefly with soft silvery light.
The clearing was softly illuminated thereby--well enough, Max thought,
to read large print. One of the hobgoblins balloons came sailing silently
between trees and anchored to a point thirty feet above them; it seemed to
settle down for the night.
The centaur came over to Max and prodded him with a hoof, snorting
inquiringly. Max listened carefully, then repeated the sound. The centaur
answered and again Max mimicked. This useless exchange continued for a few
phrases, then the centaur gave up and left, his train trotting after him.
Ellie shivered. "Phew!" she exclaimed, "I'm glad they're gone. I can
stand the centaurs, a little, but those men . . . ugh!"
He shared her disgust; they looked less human close up, having hair
lines that started where their eyebrows should have been. They were so
flat-headed that their ears stuck up above their skulls. But it was not this
that had impressed Max. When the centaur had spoken to him Max had gotten his
first good look into a centaur's mouth. Those teeth were never meant for
munching grain, they were more like the teeth of a tiger--or a shark.
He decided not to mention this. "Say, wasn't that the same one that was
leading the herd that caught us?"
"How would I know? They all look alike."
"But they don't, any more than two horses look alike."
"Horses all look alike."
"But . . ." He stopped, baffled by a city viewpoint at which
communication failed. "I think it was the same one."
"I can't see that it matters."
"It might. I'm trying to learn their language."
"I heard you swallowing your tonsils. How did you do that?"
"Oh, you just remember what a sound sounds like, then do it." He threw
his head back and made a very plaintive sound.
"What was _that?_"
"A shote stuck in a fence. Little shote by the name of Abner I had
once."
"It sounds tragic."
"It was, until I helped him loose. Ellie, I think they've bedded us down
for the night." He gestured at the bowl and the fruit beside it. "Like feeding
the hogs."
"Don't put it that way. Room service. Room service and maid service and
lights. Food and drink." She picked up one of the fruits. It was about the
size and shape of a cucumber. "Do you suppose this is fit to eat?"
"I don't think you ought to try it. Ellie, it would be smart not to eat
or drink anything until we are rescued."
"Well, maybe we could go hungry but we certainly can't go without water.
You die of thirst in a day or two."

"But we may be rescued before morning."
"Maybe." She peeled the fruit. "It smells good. Something like a
banana."
He peeled one and sniffed it. "More like a pawpaw."
"Well?"
"Mmm-- Look here, I'll eat one. If it hasn't made me sick in a half
hour, then you can try one."
"Yes, sir, boss man." She bit into the one she held. "Mind the seeds."
"Ellie, you're a juvenile delinquent."
She wrinkled her nose and smiled. "You say the sweetest things! I try to
be."
Max bit into his. Not bad--not as much flavor as a pawpaw, but not bad.
Some minutes later he was saying, "Maybe we should leave some for breakfast?"
"All right. I'm full anyway." Ellie leaned over and drank. Without words
they had each concluded that the cloying meal required them to risk the water.
"There, I feel better. At least we'll die comfortably. Max? Do you think we
dare sleep? I'm dead."
"I think they are through with us for the night. You sleep, I'll sit
up."
"No, that's not fair. Honest, what good would it do to keep watch? We
can't get away."
"Well . . . here, take my knife. You can sleep with it in your hand."
"All right." She reached across the bowl and accepted it. "Good night,
Max. I'm going to count sheep."
"Good night." He stretched out, shifted and got a tree cone out of his
ribs, then tried to relax. Fatigue and a full stomach helped, the knowledge of
their plight hindered--and that hobgoblin hanging up there. Maybe _it_ was
keeping watch--but not for their benefit.
"Max? Are you asleep?"
"No, Ellie."
"Hold my hand? I'm _scared_."
"I can't reach it."
"Yes, you can. Swing around the other way."
He did so, and found that he could reach over his head past the water
bowl and clasp her hand. "Thanks, Max. Good night some more."
He lay on his back and stared up through the trees. Despite the half
light given by the luminiferous animals he could see stars and the numerous
meteor trails crisscrossing the sky. To avoid thinking he started counting
them. Presently they started exploding in his head and he was asleep.
The light of the local sun through the trees awakened him. He raised his
head. "I wondered how long you would sleep," Eldreth announced. "Look who's
here."
He sat up, wincing with every move, and turned around. Mr. Chips was
sitting on Ellie's middle and peeling one of the papaya-like fruits. "Lo,
Maxie."
"Hello, Chipsie." He saw that the note was still tied to her. "Bad
girl!"
Mr. Chips turned to Ellie for comfort. Tears started to leak out. "No,
no," corrected Ellie. "Good girl. She's promised to go find Maggie as soon as
she finishes breakfast. Haven't you, dear?"
"Go find Maggie," the spider puppy agreed.
"Don't blame her, Max. Spider puppies aren't nocturnal back home. She
just waited until we were quiet, then came back. She couldn't help it. I found
her sleeping in my arm."
The spider puppy finished eating, then drank daintily from the bowl. Max
decided that it didn't matter, considering who had probably used it before
they had. This thought he suppressed quickly. "Find Maggie," Mr. Chips
announced.

"Yes, dear. Go straight back to the ship as fast as you can and find
Maggie. Hurry."
"Find Maggie. Hurry fast. 'Bye, Maxie." The spider puppy took to the
trees and scampered away in the right direction.
"Do you think she'll get there?" asked Max.
"I think so. After all, her ancestors found their way through forests
and such for a lot of generations. She knows it's important; we had a long
talk."
"Do you really think she understands that much?"
"She understands about pleasing me and that's enough. Max, do you
suppose they can possibly reach us today? I don't want to spend another night
here."
"Neither do I. If Chipsie can move faster than we can . . ."
"Oh, she can."
"Then maybe--if they start quickly."
"I hope so. Ready for breakfast?"
"Did Chipsie leave anything?"
"Three apiece. I've had mine. Here."
"Sure you're lying? There were only five when we went to sleep." She
looked sheepish and allowed him to split the odd one. While they were eating
he noticed a change. "Hey, what became of the over-sized lightning bugs?"
"Oh. One of those awful creatures came at dawn and carried them away. I
was set to scream but he didn't come close to me, so I let you sleep."
"Thanks. I see our chaperone is with us." The hobgoblin still hung in
the tree tops.
"Yes, and there have been peekers around all morning, too."
"Did you get a look at one?"
"Of course not." She stood up, stretched and winced. "Now to see what
beautiful surprises this lovely day brings forth." She made a sour face. "The
program I would pick is to sit right here and never lay eyes on anything until
George Daigler shows up with about a dozen armed men. I'd kiss him. I'd kiss
all of them."
"So would I."
Until well past noon Eldreth's chosen schedule prevailed, nothing
happened. They heard from time to time the bugling and snorting of centaurs
but saw none. They talked in desultory fashion, having already disposed of
both hopes and fears, and were dozing in the sunshine, when they suddenly came
alert to the fact that a centaur was entering the clearing.
Max felt sure that it was the leader of the herd, or at least that it
was the one who had fed and watered them. The creature wasted no time, making
it clear with kicks and prods that they were to allow themselves to be leashed
for travel.
Never once were they free of the living ropes. Max thought of attacking
the centaur, perhaps leaping on his back and cutting his throat. But it seemed
most unlikely that he could do it quietly enough; one snort might bring the
herd down on them. Besides which he knew no way to get free of their bonds
even if he killed the centaur. Better wait--especially with a messenger gone
for help.
They were led, falling and being dragged occasionally, along the route
taken by the party of slaves. It became apparent that they were entering a
large centaur settlement. The path opened out into a winding, well-tended road
with centaurs going both directions and branching off onto side roads. There
were no buildings, none of the outward marks of a civilized race--but there
was an air of organization, of custom, of stability. Little centaurs scampered
about, got in the way, and were ordered aside. There was activity of various
sorts on both sides of the road and grotesque human slaves were almost as
numerous as centaurs, carrying burdens, working in unexplained fashions--some
with living-rope bonds, some allowed to run free. They could not see much
because of the uncomfortable pace they were forced to maintain.
Once Max noted an activity on his side of the road that he wished to see

better. He did not mention it to Ellie, not only because talking was difficult
but because he did not wish to worry her--but it had looked like an outdoor
butcher shop to him. The hanging carcasses were not centaurs.
They stopped at last in a very large clearing, well filled with
centaurs. Their master patted the lines that bound them and thereby caused
them to shorten until they were fetched close to his sides. He then took his
place in a centaur queue.
A large, grizzled, and presumably elderly centaur was holding court on
one side of the "square." He stood with quiet dignity as single centaurs or
groups came in succession before him. Max watched with interest so great that
he almost lost his fear. Each case would be the cause of much discussion, then
the centaur chieftain would make a single remark and the case would be over.
The contestants would leave quietly. The conclusion was inescapable that law
or custom was being administered, with the large centaur as arbiter.
There was none of the travesties of men in the clearing but there were
underfoot odd animals that looked like flattened-out hogs. Their legs were so
short that they seemed more like tractor treads. They were mostly mouth and
teeth and snuffling snouts, and whatever they came to, if it was not a
centaur's hoof, they devoured. Max understood from watching them how the area,
although thickly inhabited, was kept so clean; these scavengers were animated
street cleaners.
Their master gradually worked up toward the head of the line. The last
case before theirs concerned the only centaur they had seen which did not seem
in vibrant health. He was old and skinny, his coat was dull and his bones
stuck pitifully through his hide. One eye was blind, a blank white; the other
was inflamed and weeping a thick ichor.
The judge, mayor, or top herd leader discussed his case with two younger
healthy centaurs who seemed to be attending him almost as nurses. Then the
boss centaur moved from his position of honor and walked around the sick one,
inspecting him from all sides. Then he spoke to him.
The old sick one responded feebly, a single snorted word. The chief
centaur spoke again, got what seemed to Max the same answer. The chief backed
into his former position, set up a curious whinnying cry.
From all sides the squatty scavengers converged on the spot. They formed
a ring around the sick one and his attendants, dozens of them, snuffling and
grunting. The chief bugled once; one attendant reached into its pouch and
hauled forth a creature curled into a knot, the centaur stroked it and it
unwound. To Max it looked unpleasantly like an eel.
The attendant extended it toward the sick centaur. It made no move to
stop him, but waited, watching with his one good eye. The head of the slender
thing was suddenly touched to the neck of the sick centaur; he jerked in the
characteristic convulsion of electric shock and collapsed.
The chief centaur snorted once--and the scavengers waddled forward with
surprising speed, swarming over the body and concealing it. When they backed
away, still snuffling, there were not even bones.
Max called out softly, "Steady, Ellie! Get a grip on yourself, kid."
She answered faintly, "I'm all right."
19
A FRIEND IN NEED

For the first time they were turned loose. Their master tickled their
bonds, which dropped from their ankles. Max said softly to Ellie, "If you want
to run for it, I'll keep them busy."
Ellie shook her head. "No good. They'd have me before I went fifty feet.
Besides--I can't find my way back."
Max shut up, knowing that she was right but having felt obliged to
offer. The chief centaur inspected them with the characteristic expression of
gentle surprise, exchanged bugling comments with their captor. They were under
discussion for some time, there appeared to be some matter to be decided. Max
got out his knife. He had no plan, other than a determination that no centaur
would approach either one of them with that electric-shock creature, or any
other menace, without a fight.
The crisis faded away. Their captor flicked their leashes about their
ankles and dragged them off. Fifteen minutes later they were again staked out
in the clearing they had occupied. Ellie looked around her after the centaur
had gone and sighed. "'Be it ever so humble . . .' Max, it actually feels good
to get back here."
"I know."
The monotony that followed was varied by one thing only: fading hope and
mounting despair. They were not treated unkindly; they were simply domestic
animals--fed and watered and largely ignored. Once a day they were given water
and plenty of the native papayas. After the first night they no longer had the
luxury of "artificial" light, nor did the hobgoblin hang over their clearing.
But there was no way of escape, short of gnawing off a leg and crawling away.
For two or three days they discussed the possibility of rescue with
mounting anxiety, then, having beaten the subject to death they dropped it; it
simply added to their distress. Ellie rarely smiled now and she had quit her
frivolous back talk; it seemed that it had finally gotten through her armor
that this could happen to Eldreth Coburn, only daughter of the rich and almost
all-powerful Mr. Commissioner Coburn--a chattel, a barnyard animal of monsters
themselves suitable only for zoos.
Max took it a little more philosophically. Never having had much, he did
not expect much--not that he enjoyed it. He kept his worst fear secret. Ellie
referred to their status as "animals in a zoo" because most of their visitors
were small centaurs who came sniffling and bleating around with a curiosity
that their elders seemed to lack. He let her description stand because he
believed their status worse than that--he thought that they were being
fattened for the table.
One week after their capture Eldreth declined to eat breakfast and
stayed silent all morning. All that Max could think of to say evoked only
monosyllables. In desperation he said, "I'll beat you at three-dee and spot
you two starships."
That roused her. "You and who else?" she said scornfully. "And with
what?"
"Well, we could play it in our heads. You know-- blindfold."
She shook her head. "No good. You'd claim your memory was better than
mine and I wouldn't be able to prove you were cheating."
"Nasty little brat."
She smiled suddenly. "That's better. You've been too gentle with me
lately--it depresses me. Max, we could make a set."
"How?"
"With these." She picked up one of many tree cones that littered the
clearing. "A big one is a flagship. We can pick various sizes and break the
thingamajigs off and such."
They both got interested. The water bowl was moved aside so that it no
longer occupied the center of the space marked by the limits of their tethers
and the no-man's-land between them was brushed free of needles and marked with
scratches as boards. The boards had to be side by side; they must stack them

in their minds, but that was a common expedient for players with good
visualization when using an unpowered set--it saved time between moves.
Pebbles became robots; torn bits of cloth tied to cones distinguished
sides and helped to designate pieces. By midafternoon they were ready. They
were still playing their first game when darkness forced them to stop. As they
lay down to sleep Max said, "I'd better not take your hand. I'd knock over men
in the dark."
"I won't sleep if you don't--I won't feel safe. Besides, that gorilla
messed up one board changing the water."
"That's all right. I remember where they were."
"Then you can just remember where they all are, Stretch out your arm."
He groped in the darkness, found her fingers. "Night, Max. Sleep tight."
"Good night, Ellie."
Thereafter they played from sunup to sundown. Their owner came once,
watched them for an hour, went away without a snort. Once when Ellie had
fought him to a draw Max said, "You know, Ellie, you play this game awfully
well--for a girl."
"Thank you too much."
"No, I mean it. I suppose girls are probably as intelligent as men, but
most of them don't act like it. I think it's because they don't have to. If a
girl is pretty, she doesn't have to think. Of course, if she can't get by on
her looks, then--well, take you for example. If you . . ."
"_Oh!_ So I'm ugly, Mr. Jones!"
"Wait a minute. I didn't say that. Let's suppose that you were the most
beautiful woman since Helen of Troy. In that case, you would . . ." He found
that he was talking to her back. She had swung round, grabbed her knees, and
was ignoring him.
He stretched himself to the limit of his tether, bound leg straight out
behind him, and managed to touch her shoulder. "Ellie?"
She shook off his hand. "Keep your distance! You smell like an old
goat."
"Well," he said reasonably, "you're no lily yourself. You haven't had a
bath lately either."
"I know it!" she snapped, and started to sob. "And I hate it. I just . .
. h- h- _hate_ it. I look _awful_."
"No, you don't. Not to. me."
She turned a tear-wet and very dirty face. "Liar."
"Nothing wrong that some soap and water won't fix."
"Oh, if only I had some." She looked at him. "You aren't at your best
yourself, Mr. Jones. You need a haircut and the way your beard grows in
patches is ghastly."
He fingered the untidy stubble on his chin. "I can't help it."
"Neither can I." She sighed. "Set up the boards again."
Thereafter she beat him three straight games, one with a disgraceful
idiot's mate. He looked at the boards sadly when it was over. "And you are the
girl who flunked improper fractions?"
"Mr. Jones, has it ever occurred to you, the world being what it is,
that women sometimes prefer not to appear too bright?" He was digesting this
when she added, "I learned this game at my father's knee, before I learned to
read. I was junior champion of Hespera before I got shanghaied. Stop by
sometime and I'll show you my cup."
"Is that true? Really?"
"I'd rather play than eat--when I can find competition. But you're
learning. Someday you'll be able to give me a good game."
"I guess I don't understand women."
"That's an understatement."
Max was a long time getting to sleep that night. Long after Eldreth was
gently snoring he was still staring at the shining tail of the big comet,
watching the shooting star trails, and thinking. None of his thoughts was
pleasant.

Their position was hopeless, he admitted. Even though Chipsie had failed
(he had never pinned much hope on her), searching parties should have found
them by now. There was no longer any reason to think that they would be
rescued.
And now Ellie was openly contemptuous of him. He had managed to hurt her
pride again--again with his big, loose, flapping jaw! Why, he should have told
her that she was the prettiest thing this side of paradise, if it would make
her feel good--she had mighty little to feel good about these days!
Being captive had been tolerable because of her, he admitted--now he had
nothing to look forward to but day after day of losing at three-dee while
Ellie grimly proved that girls were as good as men and better. At the end of
it they would wind up as an item in the diet of a thing that should never have
been born.
If only Dr. Hendrix hadn't died!
If only he had been firm with Ellie when it mattered.
To top it off, and at the moment almost the worst of all, he felt that
if he ate just one more of those blasted pawpaws it would gag him.
He was awakened by a hand on his shoulder and a whisper in his ear.
"Max!"
"What the--?"
"_Quiet!_ Not a sound."
It was Sam crouching over him--Sam!
As he sat up, sleep jarred out of him by adrenalin shock, he saw Sam
move noiselessly to where Ellie slept. He squatted over her but did not touch
her. "Miss Eldreth," he said softly.
Ellie's eyes opened and stared. She opened her mouth, Max was terrified
that she might cry out. Sam hastily signed for silence; she looked at him and
nodded. Sam knelt over her, seemed to study something in the shadow-laced
moonlight, then took out a hand gun. There was the briefest of low-energy
discharges, entirely silent, and Ellie stood up--free. Sam returned to Max.
"Hold still," he whispered. "I don't want to burn you." He knelt over Max's
bound ankle.
When the gun flared Max felt an almost paralyzing constriction around
his ankle, then the thing fell off. The amputated major part contracted and
jerked away into the shadows. Max stood up. "How--"
"Not a word. Follow me." Sam led off into the bushes with Ellie behind
him and Max following closely. They had gone only twenty yards when there was
a whimpering cry of "Ellie!" and the spider puppy landed in Eldreth's arms.
Sam turned suddenly.
"Keep her quiet," he whispered, "for your life."
Ellie nodded and started petting the little creature, crooning to it
voicelessly. When Chipsie tried to talk, she silenced it, then stuffed it
inside her shirt. Sam waited these few moments, now started on without
speaking.
They proceeded for several hundred yards as near silently as three
people who believe their lives hang on it can manage. Finally Sam stopped.
"This is as far as we dare go," he said in a low voice. "Any farther in the
dark and I'd be lost. But I'm pretty sure we are outside their sleeping
grounds. We'll start again at the first light."
"How did you get here in the dark, then?"
"I didn't. Chips and I have been hiding in thick bushes since
midafternoon, not fifty feet from you."
"Oh." Max looked around, looked up at the stars. "I can take us back in
the dark."
"You can? It 'ud be a darn good thing. These babies don't stir out at
night--I think."
"Let me get in the lead. You get behind Ellie."
It took more than an hour to get to the edge of the tableland. The

darkness, the undergrowth, the need for absolute silence, and the fact that
Max had to take it slowly to keep his bearings despite his photographic memory
all slowed them down. The trip downhill into the valley was even slower.
When they reached the edge of the trees with comparatively flat
grassland in front Sam halted them and surveyed the valley by dim moonlight.
"Mustn't get caught in the open," he whispered. "They can't throw those snakes
too well among trees, but out in the open--oh, brother!"
"You know about the throwing ropes?"
"Sure."
"Sam," whispered Ellie. "Mr. Anderson, why did . . ."
"Sssh!" he cautioned. "Explanations later. Straight across, at a
dogtrot. Miss Eldreth, you set the pace. Max, pick your bearings and guide us.
We'll run side by side. All set?"
"Just a minute." Max took the spider puppy from Eldreth, zipping it
inside his shirt as she had done. Mr. Chips did not even wake up, but moaned
softly like a disturbed baby. "Okay."
They ran and walked and ran again for a half hour or more, wasting no
breath on words, putting everything into gaining distance from the centaur
community. Knee-high grass and semi-darkness made the going hard. They were
almost to the bottom of the valley and Max was straining to spot the stream
when Sam called out, "Down! Down flat!"
Max hit dirt, taking it on his elbows to protect Chips; Ellie flopped
beside him. Max turned his head cautiously and whispered, "Centaurs?"
"No. Shut up."
A hobgoblin balloon, moving at night to Max's surprise, was drifting
across the valley at an altitude of about a hundred feet. Its course would
take it past them, missing them by perhaps a hundred yards. Then it veered and
came toward them.
It lost altitude and hovered almost over them. Max saw Sam aim
carefully, steadying his pistol with both bands. There was momentarily a faint
violet pencil from gun to hobgoblin; the creature burst and fell so close by
that Max could smell burned meat. Sam returned his weapon and got to his feet.
"One less spy," he said with satisfaction. "Let's get going, kids."
"You think those things spy?"
"'Think'? We know. Those polo ponies have this place _organized_. Pipe
down and make miles."
Ellie found the stream by falling into it. They hauled her out and waded
across, stopping only to drink. On the other bank Sam said, "Where's your left
shoe, Miss Eldreth?"
"It came off in the brook."
Sam stopped to search but it was useless; the water looked like ink in
the faint light. "No good," he decided. "We could waste the whole night.
You're due for sore feet--sorry. Better throw away your other shoe."
It did not slow them until they reached the far ridge beyond which lay
Charityville and the ship. Soon after they started up Ellie cut her right foot
on a rock. She did her best, setting her jaw and not complaining, but it
handicapped them. There was a hint of dawn in the air by the time they reached
the top. Max started to lead them down the arroyo that he and Ellie had come
up so many year-long days ago. Sam stopped him. "Let me get this straight.
This isn't the draw that faces the ship, is it?"
"No, that one is just north of this." Max reconstructed in his mind how
it had looked from the ship and compared it with his memory of the photomap
taken as the ship landed. "Actually a shoulder just beyond the next draw faces
the ship."
"I thought so. This is the one Chips led me up, but I want us to stay in
the trees as long as possible. It'll be light by the time we'd be down to the
flat."
"Does it matter? There have never been any centaurs seen in the valley
the ship is in."
"You mean you never saw any. You've been away, old son. We're in danger

now--and in worse danger the closer we get to the ship. Keep your voice down--
and lead us to that shoulder that sticks out toward the ship. If you can."
Max could, though it meant going over strange terrain and keeping his
bearings from his memory of a small-scale map. It involved "crossing the
furrows," too, instead of following a dry water course--which led to impasses
such as thirty-foot drops that had to be gone painfully around. Sam grew edgy
as the light increased and urged them to greater speed and greater silence
even as Ellie's increasingly crippled condition made his demands harder to
meet.
"I really am sorry," he whispered after she had to slide and scramble
down a rock slope, checking herself with bare and bloody feet. "But it's
better to get there on stumps than to let them catch you."
"I know." Her face contorted but she made no sound. It was daylight by
the time Max led them out on the shoulder. Silently he indicated the ship, a
half mile away. They were about level with its top.
"Down this way, I think," he said quietly to Sam. 
"No."
"Huh?"
"Chilluns, it's Uncle Sam's opinion that we had better lie doggo in
those bushes, holding still and letting the beggar flies bite us, until after
sundown."
Max eyed the thousand yard gap. "We could run for it."
"And four legs run faster than two legs. We've learned that lately."
The bushes selected by Sam grew out to the edge of the shoulder. He
crawled through them until he reached a place where he could spy the valley
below while still hidden. Ellie and Max wriggled after him. The ground dropped
off sharply just beyond them. The ship faced them, to their left and nearer
was Charityville.
"Get comfortable," Sam ordered, "and we'll take turns keeping guard.
Sleep if you can, this will be a long watch."
Max tried to shift Mr. Chips around so that he might lie flat. A little
head poked out of his collar. "Good morning," the spider puppy said gravely.
"Breakfast?"
"No breakfast, hon," Ellie told her. "Sam, is it all right to let her
out?"
"I guess so. But keep her quiet." Sam was studying the plain below. Max
did the same.
"Sam? Why don't we head for the village? It's closer."
"Nobody there. Abandoned."
"What? Look, Sam, can't you tell us now what's happened?"
Sam did not take his eyes off the plain. "Okay. But hold it down to
whispers. What do you want to know?"
That was a hard one--Max wanted to know everything. "What happened to
the village?"
"Gave it up. Too dangerous."
"Huh? Anybody caught?"
"Not permanently. Daigler had a gun. But then the fun began. We thought
that all they had were those throwing snakes and that we had scared them off.
But they've got lots more than that. Things that burrow underground, for
example. That's why the village had to be abandoned."
"Anybody hurt?"
"Well . . . the newlyweds were already in residence. Becky Weberbauer is
a widow."
Ellie gasped and Sam whispered sharply to be quiet. Max mulled it over
before saying, "Sam, I don't see why, after they got my message, they didn't .
. ."
"What message?"
Max explained. Sam shook his head. "The pooch got back all right. By
then we knew you were missing and were searching for you--armed, fortunately.
But there was no message."

"Huh? How did you find us?"
"Chips led me, I told you. But that was all. Somebody stuffed her into
her old cage and that's where I found her yesterday. I stopped to pet her,
knowing you were gone, Miss Eldreth--and found the poor little thing nearly
out of her mind. I finally got it through my head that she knew where you two
were. So . . ." He shrugged.
"Oh. But I can't see," Max whispered, "why you risked it alone. You
already knew they were dangerous; you should have had every man in the ship
with you, armed."
Sam shook his head. "And we would have lost every man. A sneak was
possible; the other wasn't. And we had to get you back."
"Thanks. I don't know how to say it, Sam. Anyhow, thanks."
"Yes," added Ellie, "and stop calling me 'Miss Eldreth.' I'm Ellie to my
friends."
"Okay, Ellie. How are the feet?"
"I'll live."
"Good." He turned his head to Max. "But I didn't say we _wanted_ to get
you back, I said we _had_ to. You, Max. No offense, Ellie."
"Huh? Why me?"
"Well . . ." Sam seemed reluctant. "You'll get the details when you get
back. But it looks like you'll be needed if they take the ship off. You're the
only astrogator left."
"Huh? What happened to Simes?"
"_Quiet!_ He's dead."
"For Pete's sake." Max decided that, little as he liked Simes, death at
the hands of the centaurs he would not have wished on any human; he said so.
"Oh, no, it wasn't that way. You see, when Captain Blaine died . . ."
"The Captain, _too?_"
"Yes."
"I knew he was sick, I didn't know he was that sick."
"Well, call it a broken heart. Or honorable hara-kiri. Or an accident. I
found an empty box for sleeping pills when I helped pack his things. Maybe he
took them, or maybe your pal Simes slipped them in his tea. The Surgeon
certified 'natural causes' and that's how it was logged. What is a natural
cause when a man can't bear to live any longer?"
Ellie said softly, "He was a good man."
"Yes," agreed Sam. "Too good, maybe."
"But how about Simes?"
"Well, now, that was another matter. Simes seemed to feel that he was
crown prince, but the First wouldn't stand for it. Something about some films
the Chief Computerman had. Anyhow, he tried to get tough with Walther and I
sort of broke his neck. There wasn't time to be gentle," Sam added hastily.
"Simes pulled a gun."
"Sam! You aren't in trouble?"
"None, except here and now. If we--quiet, kids!" He peered more sharply
through the bushes. "Not a sound, not a movement," he whispered. "It may miss
us."
A hobgoblln was drifting down from north, paralleling the ridge above
and out from it, as if it were scouting the high land. Max said in Sam's ear,
"Hadn't we better scrunch back?"
"Too late. Just hold still."
The balloon drifted abreast of them, stopped, then moved slowly toward
them. Max saw that Sam had his gun out. He held his fire until the hobgoblin
hovered above them. The shot burned needles and branches but it brought down
the thing.
"Sam! There's another one!"
"Where?" Sam looked where Max pointed. The second hobgoblin apparently
had been covering the first, higher and farther out. Even as they watched it
veered away and gained altitude.
"Get it, Sam!"

Sam stood up. "Too late. Too far and too late. Well, kids, away we go.
No need to keep quiet. Sit down and slide, Ellie; it'll save your feet some."
Down they went, scattering rocks and tearing their clothes, with Mr.
Chips on her own and enjoying it. At the bottom Sam said, "Max, how fast can
you do a half mile?"
"I don't know. Three minutes."
"Make it less. Get going. I'll help Ellie."
"No."
"You get there! You're needed."
"No!"
Sam sighed. "Always some confounded hero. Take her other arm."
They made a couple of hundred yards half carrying Eldreth, when she
shook them off. "I can go faster alone," she panted.
"Okay, let's go!" Sam rasped.
She proved herself right. Ignoring her injured feet she pumped her short
legs in a fashion which did not require Max's best speed to keep up, but
nevertheless kept him panting. The ship grew larger ahead of them. Max saw
that the cage was up and wondered how long it would take to attract attention
and get it lowered.
They were half way when Sam shouted, "Here comes the cavalry! Speed it
up!"
Max glanced over his shoulder. A herd of centaurs--a dozen, two dozen,
perhaps more--was sweeping toward them from the hills on a diagonal plainly
intended to cut them off. Ellie saw them too and did speed up, with a burst
that momentarily outdistanced  Max.
They had cut the distance to a few hundred yards when the cage swung
free of the lock and sank lazily toward the ground. Max started to shout that
they were going to make it when he heard the drum of hooves close behind. Sam
yelled, "Beat it, kids! Into the ship." He stopped.
Max stopped too, while shouting, "_Run_, Ellie!
Sam snarled, "Run for it, I said! What can _you_ do? Without a gun?"
Max hesitated, torn by an unbearable decision. He saw that Ellie had
stopped. Sam glanced back, then backhanded Max across the mouth. "Get moving!
Get her inside!"
Max moved, gathering Ellie in one arm and urging her on. Behind them Sam
Anderson turned to face his death . . . dropping to one knee and steadying his
pistol over his left forearm in precisely the form approved by the manual.
20
"--A SHIP IS NOT JUST STEEL--"
The cage hit the ground, four men swarmed out as Max stumbled inside and
dumped Ellie on the floor. The door clanged shut behind them, but not too
quickly for Mr. Chips. The spider puppy ran to Ellie, clutched her arm and
wailed. Eldreth tried to sit up.
"You all right?" Max demanded.
"Uh, sure. But . . ." She shut up as Max whirled around and tried to
open the cage door.
It would not open. It was not until then that he realized that the lift

was off the ground and rising slowly. He punched the "stop" control.
Nothing happened, the car continued upward. About ten feet off the
ground it stopped. Max looked up through the grille roof and shouted, "Hey! In
the lock, there! Lower away!"
He was ignored. He tried the door again--uselessly, as its safety catch
prevented it being opened when the cage was in the air. Frustrated and
helpless, he grabbed the bars and looked out. He could see nothing of Sam. The
centaurs were milling around in the middle distance. He saw one stumble and go
down and then another. Then he saw the four men who had passed him. They were
on their bellies in fair skirmish line not far from the cage, each with a
shoulder gun and each firing carefully. The range was not great, about three
hundred yards; they were taking steady toll. Each silent, almost invisible
bolt picked off a centaur.
Max counted seven more centaur casualties--then the monsters broke and
ran, scattering toward the hills. The firing continued and several more
dropped before distance made firing uncertain.
Somebody shouted, "Hold your fire!" and one of the men stumbled to his
feet and ran toward the center of the battle. The others got up and followed
him.
When they came back they were carrying something that looked like a
bundle of clothing. The cage lowered to the ground, they came inside and laid
it gently on the floor. One of them glanced at Eldreth, then quickly removed
his jacket and laid it over Sam's face. Not until then did Max see that it was
Mr. Walther.
The other three were Mr. Daigler, a power man whom Max knew only by
sight, and Chief Steward Giordano. The fat man was crying openly. "The filthy
vermin!" he sobbed. "He never had a chance. They just rode him down and
trompled him." He choked, then added, "But he got at least five of 'em." His
eyes rested on Max without recognition. "He made 'em pay."
Eldreth said gently, "Is he dead?"
"Huh? Of course. Don't talk silly." The steward turned his face away.
The car bumped to a stop. Walther looked in through the lock and said
angrily, "Get those bystanders out of the way. What is this? A circus?" He
turned back. "Let's get him in, men."
As he was bending to help, Max saw Eldreth being led away by Mrs.
Dumont. Tenderly they carried Sam in and deposited him on the deck where the
Surgeon was waiting. Walther straightened up and seemed to notice Max for the
first time. "Mr. Jones? Will you see me in my stateroom as quickly as
possible, please?"
"Aye aye, sir. But . . ." Max looked down at his friend. "I'd like to .
. ."
Walther cut him short. "There's nothing you can do. Come away." He added
more gently, "Make it fifteen minutes. That will give you time for a wash and
a change."
Max presented himself on time, showered, his face hastily scraped, and
in clean clothes--although lacking a cap. His one cap was somewhere in the far
valley, lost on capture. He found Chief Engineer Compagnon and Mr. Samuels,
the Purser, with the First Officer. They were seated around a table, having
coffee. "Come in, Mr. Jones," Walther invited. "Sit down. Coffee?"
"Uh, yes, sir." Max discovered that he was terribly hungry. He loaded
the brew with cream and sugar.
They sat for a few minutes, talking of unimportant matters, while Max
drank his coffee and steadied down. Presently Walther said, "What shape are
you in, Mr. Jones?"
"Why, all right, I guess, sir. Tired, maybe."
"I imagine so. I'm sorry to have to disturb you. Do you know the
situation now?"
"Partly, sir. Sam told me . . . Sam Anderson . . ." His voice broke.
"We're sorry about Anderson," Mr. Walther said soberly. "In many ways he
was one of the best men I ever served with. But go on."

Max recounted what Sam had had time to tell him, but shortened the
statements about Simes and Captain Blaine to the simple fact that they were
dead. Walther nodded. "Then you know what we want of you?"
"I think so, sir. You want to raise the ship, so you want me to
astrogate." He hesitated. "I suppose I can."
"Mmm . . . yes. But that's not all."
"Sir?"
"You must be Captain."
All three had their eyes fixed on him. Max felt lightheaded and for a
moment wondered what was wrong. Their faces seemed to swell and then recede.
He realized vaguely that he had had little to eat and almost no sleep for many
hours and had been running on nerve--yes, that must be what was wrong with
him. From a long distance away he heard Walther's voice: ". . . utterly
necessary to leave this planet without delay. Now our legal position is clear.
In space, only an astrogation officer may command. You are being asked to
assume command responsibility while very young but you are the only qualified
person-- therefore you _must_ do it."
Max pulled himself together, the wavering figures came into focus. "Mr.
Walther?"
"Yes?"
"But I'm not an astrogator. I'm just a probationary apprentice.
Chief Engineer Compagnon answered him. "Kelly says you're an
astrogator," he growled.
"Kelly is more of an astrogator than I am!"
Compagnon shook his head. "You can't pass judgment on yourself." Samuels
nodded agreement.
"Let's dispose of that," Walther added. "There is no question of the
Chief Computerman becoming captain. Nor does your rank in your guild matter.
Line of command, underway, necessarily is limited to astrogators. You are
senior in that line, no matter how junior you feel. At this moment, I hold
command--until I pass it on. But I can't take a ship into space. If you refuse
. . . well, I don't know what we will have to do. I don't know."
Max gulped and said, "Look, sir, I'm not refusing duty. I'll
astrogate--shucks, I suppose it's all right to call me the astrogator, under
the circumstances. But there is no reason to pretend that I'm captain. You
stay in command while I conn the ship. That's best, sir--I wouldn't know how
to _act_ like a captain."
Walther shook his head. "Not legally possible."
Compagnon added, "I don't care about the legalities. But I know that
responsibility can't be divided. Frankly, young fellow, I'd rather have Dutch
as skipper than you--but he can't astrogate. I'd be delighted to have Doc
Hendrix--but he's gone. I'd rather hold the sack myself than load it on
you--but I'm a physicist and I know just enough of the math of astrogation to
know that I couldn't in a lifetime acquire the speed that an astrogator _has_
to have. Not my temperament. Kelly says you've got it already. I've shipped
with Kelly a good many years, I trust him. So it's your pidgin, son; you've
got to take it--and the authority that goes with it. Dutch will help--we'll
all help--but you can't duck out and hand him the sack."
Mr. Samuels said quietly, "I don't agree with the Chief Engineer about
the unimportance of legal aspects; most of these laws have wise reasons behind
them. But I agree with what else he says. Mr. Jones, a ship is not just steel,
it is a delicate political entity. Its laws and customs cannot be disregarded
without inviting disaster. It will be far easier to maintain morale and
discipline in this ship with a young captain--with all his officers behind
him--than it would be to let passengers and crew suspect that the man who must
make the crucial decisions, those life-and-death matters involving the
handling of the ship, that this all-powerful man nevertheless can't be trusted
to command the ship. No, sir, such a situation would frighten me; that is how

mutinies are born."
Max felt his heart pounding, his head was aching steadily. Walther
looked at him grimly and said, "Well?"
"I'll take it." He added, "I don't see what else I can do."
Walther stood up. "What are your orders, Captain?"
Max sat still and tried to slow his heart. He pressed his fingers to
throbbing temples and looked frightened. "Uh, continue with routine. Make
preparations to raise ship."
"Aye aye, sir." Walther paused, then added, "May I ask when the Captain
plans to raise ship?"
He was having trouble focusing again. "When? Not before
tomorrow--tomorrow at noon. I've got to have a night's sleep." He thought to
himself that Kelly and he could throw it into a parking orbit, which would get
them away from the centaurs--then stop to figure out his next move.
"I think that's wise, sir. We need the time."
Compagnon stood up. "If the Captain will excuse me, sir, I'll get my
department started."
Samuels joined him. "Your cabin is ready, sir--I'll have your personal
effects moved in in a few minutes."
Max stared at him. He had not yet assimilated the side implications of
his new office. Use Captain Blaine's holy of holies? Sleep in his bed? "Uh, I
don't think that's necessary. I'm comfortable where I am."
Samuels glanced at the First Officer, then said, "If you please,
Captain, this is one of the things I was talking about when I said that a ship
is a delicate political entity."
"Eh?" Max thought about it, then suddenly felt both the burden descend
on him and the strength to meet it. "Very well," he answered, his voice
deepening. "Do it."
"Yes, sir." Samuels looked at him. "Also, Captain--if you wish it--I'll
have Lopez stop in and trim your hair."
Max pushed locks back of his ear. "It _is_ shaggy, isn't it? Very well."
The Purser and the Chief Engineer left. Max stood for a moment
uncertainly, not sure what his next cue was in this new role. Walther said,
"Captain? Can you spare me a few more minutes?"
"Oh, certainly." They sat down and Walther poured more coffee. Max said,
"Mr. Walther? Do you suppose we could ring the pantry and get some toast? I
haven't eaten today."
"Why, surely! Sorry, sir." Instead of ringing, the First Officer phoned
and ordered a high tea. Then he turned to Max. "Captain, I didn't give you all
the story--nor did I wish to until we were alone."
"So?"
"Don't misunderstand me. My turning over command to you did not depend
on these other matters--nor is it necessary for your officers to know
everything that the Captain knows . . . even your department heads."
"Uh, I suppose not."
Walther stared at his coffee. "Have you heard how Mr. Simes happened to
die?"
Max told him what little he had learned from Sam. Walther nodded. "That
is essentially correct. Mmmm . . . It is not good to speak ill of the dead,
but Simes was an unstable character. When Captain Blaine passed on, he took it
for granted that he was immediately captain of this ship."
"Well--I suppose it looked that way to him, from the legal standpoint."
"Not at all! Sorry to correct you, Captain, but that is one hundred
percent wrong."
Max frowned. "I guess I'm dumb--but I thought that was the argument that
was used on me?"
"No, sir. The ship being on the ground, command devolved on me, the
senior. I am not required to turn command over to an astrogator until--and

_unless_-- the ship goes into space. Even then it is not automatically a
matter of turning it over to the senior astrogating officer. I have a clearly
defined responsibility, with numerous adjudicated cases in point: I must turn
command over only to a man I believe can handle it.
"Now I have long had doubts about Mr. Simes, his temperament, I mean.
Nevertheless, in this emergency, I would have found it terribly hard not to
turn command over to him, once it was decided to raise ship. But before we
lost the Captain I had had occasion to dig into Mr. Simes' ability as an
astrogator--partly as a result of a conversation with you. I talked with
Kelly--as you have gathered, Kelly is very well thought of. I believe I know
now how that last transition went sour; Kelly took pains to show me. That and
the fact that Kelly told me bluntly that there wasn't a member of the Worry
gang willing to go into space under Mr. Simes made me decide that, if it ever
came up, I'd let this ship sit here forever before I would let Simes be
captain. That was just thinking ahead; the Captain was sick and prudence
forced me to consider possibilities.
"Then the Captain did die--and Simes announced that he was captain. The
fool even moved into the cabin and sent for me. I told him he was not in
command and never would be. Then I left, got witnesses and took my chief of
police along to eject him. You know what happened. Your life isn't the only
one that Anderson saved; I owe him mine, too."
Walther abruptly changed the subject. "That phenomenal trick of memory
you do--computing without tables or reference books. Can you do it all the
time?"
"Uh? Why, yes."
"Do you know all the tables? Or just some of them?"
"I know all the standard tables and manuals that are what an astrogator
calls his 'working tools.'" Max started to tell about his uncle, Walther
interrupted gently.
"If you please, sir. I'm glad to hear it. I'm _very_ glad to hear it.
Because the only such books in this ship are the ones in your head."
Kelly had missed the books, of course--not Walther. When he disclosed
his suspicions to Walther the two conducted a search. When that failed, it was
announced that one (but only one) set was missing; Walther had offered a
reward, and the ship had been combed from stern to astrodome--no manuals.
"I suppose he ditched them dirtside," Walther finished. You know where
that leaves us--we're in a state of seige. And we'd find them only by accident
if we weren't. So I'm very glad you have the same confidence in your memory
that Kelly has."
Max was beginning to have misgivings--it is one thing to do something as
a stunt, quite another to do it of necessity. "It isn't that bad," he
answered. "Perhaps Kelly never thought of it, but logarithms and binary
translation tables can probably be borrowed from engineering--with those we
could fudge up methods for any straight hop. The others are needed mostly for
anomalous transitions."
"Kelly thought of that, too. Tell me, Captain, how does a survey ship go
back after it penetrates a newly located congruency?"
"Huh? So _that_ is what you want me to do with the ship?"
"It is not for me," Walther said formally, "to tell the Captain where to
take his ship."
Max said slowly, "I've thought about it. I've had a lot of time to think
lately." He did not add that he had dwelt on it nights in captivity to save
his reason. "Of course, we don't have the instruments that survey ships carry,
nor does applied astrogation go much into the theory of calculating
congruencies. And even some survey ships don't come back."
"But . . ." They were interrupted by a knock on the door. A steward's
mate came in and loaded the table with food. Max felt himself starting to
drool.

He spread a slice of toast with butter and jam, and took a big bite.
"My, this is good!"
"I should have realized. Have a banana, sir? They look quite good--I
believe hydroponics has had to thin them out lately."
Max shuddered. "I don't think I'll ever eat bananas again. Or pawpaws."
"Allergic, Captain?"
"Not exactly. Well . . . yes."
He finished the toast and said, "About that possibility. I'll let you
know later."
"Very well, Captain."
Shortly before the dinner hour Max stood in front of the long mirror in
the Captain's bedroom and looked at himself. His hair was short again and two
hours sleep had killed some of his fatigue. He settled a cap on his head at
the proper angle--the name in the sweat band was "Hendrix"; he had found it
laid out with one of his own uniforms to which captain's insignia had been
added. The sunburst on his chest bothered him--that he was indeed captain he
conceded, even though it seemed like a wild dream, but he had felt that he was
not entitled to anything but the smaller sunburst and circle, despite his four
stripes.
Walther and Samuels had been respectful but firm, with Samuels citing
precedents that Max could not check on. Max had given in.
He looked at himself, braced his shoulders, and sighed. He might as well
go face them. As he walked down the companionway to the lounge he heard the
speakers repeating, "All hands! All passengers! Report to Bifrost Lounge!"
The crowd made way for him silently. He went to the Captain's table--his
table!--and sat down at its head. Walther was standing by the chair. "Good
evening, Captain."
"Evening, Mr. Walther."
Ellie was seated across from him. She caught his eye and smiled. "Hello,
Ellie." He felt himself blushing.
"Good evening, Captain," she said firmly. She was dressed in the same
high style she had worn the first time he had ever seen her in the lounge; it
did not seem possible that this lady could be the same girl whose dirty face
had looked at him over three-dee boards scratched in dirt.
"Uh, how are your feet?"
"Bandages and bedroom slippers. But the Surgeon did a fine job. I'll be
dancing tomorrow."
"Don't rush it."
She looked at his stripes and his chest. "You should talk."
Before he could answer the unanswerable Walther leaned over and said
quietly, "We're ready, Captain."
"Oh. Go ahead." Walther tapped on a water glass.
The First Officer explained the situation in calm tones that made it
seem reasonable, inevitable. He concluded by saying, ". . . and so, in
accordance with law and the custom of space, I have relinquished my temporary
command to your new captain. Captain Jones!"
Max stood up. He looked around, swallowed, tried to speak, and couldn't.
Then, as effectively as if it had been a dramatic pause and not desperation,
he picked up his water tumbler and took a sip. "Guests and fellow crewmen," he
said, "we can't stay here. You know that. I have been told that our Surgeon
calls the system we are up against here 'symbiotic enslavement'-- like dog to
man, only more so, and apparently covering the whole animal kingdom on this
planet. Well, men aren't meant for slavery, symbiotic or any sort. But we are
too few to win out now, so we must leave."
He stopped for another sip and Ellie caught his eye, encouraging him.
"Perhaps someday other men will come back--better prepared. As for us, I am
going to try to take the _Asgard_ back through the . . . uh, 'hole' you might
call it, where we came out. It's a chancy thing. No one is forced to come

along--but it is the only possible way to get home. Anyone who's afraid to
chance it will be landed on the north pole of planet number three--the evening
star we have been calling 'Aphrodite.' You may be able to survive there,
although it is pretty hot even at the poles. If you prefer that alternative,
turn your names in this evening to the Purser. The rest of us will try to get
home." He stopped, then said suddenly, "That's all," and sat down.
There was no applause and he felt glumly that he had muffed his first
appearance. Conversation started up around the room, crewmen left, and
steward's mates quickly started serving. Ellie looked at him and nodded
quietly. Mrs. Mendoza was on his left; she said, "Ma--I mean 'Captain'--is it
really so dangerous? I hardly like the thought of trying anything _risky_.
Isn't there something else we can do?"
"No."
"But surely there must be?"
"No. I'd rather not discuss it at the table."
"But . . ." He went on firmly spooning soup, trying not to tremble. When
he looked up he was caught by a glittering eye across the table, a Mrs.
Montefiore, who preferred to be called "Principessa"--a dubious title.
"Dolores, don't bother him. We want to hear about his adventures--don't we,
Captain?"
"No."
"Come now! I hear that it was terribly _romantic_." She drawled the word
and gave Ellie a sly, sidelong look. She looked back at Max with the eye of a
predatory bird and showed her teeth. She seemed to have more teeth than was
possible. "Tell us _all_ about it!"
"No."
"But you simply _can't_ refuse!"
Eldreth smiled at her and said, "Princess darling-- your mouth is
showing."
Mrs. Montefiore shut up.
After dinner Max caught Walther alone. "Mr. Walther?"
"Oh--yes, Captain?"
"Am I correct in thinking that it is my privilege to pick the persons
who sit at my table?"
"Yes, sir."
"In that case--that Montefiore female. Will you have her moved, please?
Before breakfast?"
Walther smiled faintly. "Aye aye, sir."
21
THE CAPTAIN OF THE ASGARD
They took Sam down and buried him where he had fallen. Max limited it to
himself and Walther and Giordano, sending word to Ellie not to come. There was
a guard of honor but it was armed to kill and remained spread out around the
grave, eyes on the hills. Max read the service in a voice almost too low to be
heard--the best he could manage.
Engineering had hurriedly prepared the marker, a pointed slab of
stainless metal. Max looked at it before he placed it and thought about the

inscription. "Greater love hath no man"?--no, he had decided that Sam wouldn't
like that, with his cynical contempt of all sentimentality. He had considered,
"He played the cards he was dealt"--but that didn't fit Sam either; if Sam
didn't like the cards, he sometimes slipped in a whole new deck. No, this was
more Sam's style; he shoved it into the ground and read it:
    IN MEMORY OF
SERGEANT SAM ANDERSON
    LATE OF THE
  IMPERIAL MARINES
"_He ate what was set before him_."
Walther saw the marker for the first time. "So that's how it was?
Somehow I thought so."
"Yes. I never did know his right name. Richards. Or maybe Roberts."
"Oh." Walther thought over the implication. "We could get him
reinstated, sir, posthumously. His prints will identify him."
"I think Sam would like that."
"I'll see to it, sir, when we get back."
"_If_ we get back."
"If you please, Captain--when we get back."
Max went straight to the control room. He had been up the evening before
and had gotten the first shock of being treated as captain in the Worry Hole
over with. When Kelly greeted him with, "Good morning, Captain," he was able
to be almost casual.
"Morning, Chief. Morning, Lundy."
"Coffee, sir?"
"Thanks. About that parking orbit--is it set up?"
"Not yet, sir."
"Then forget it. I've decided to head straight back. We can plan it as
we go. Got the films?"
"I picked them up earlier." They referred to the films cached in Max's
stateroom. Simes had managed to do away with the first set at the time of
Captain Blaine's death; the reserve set was the only record of when and where
the _Asgard_ had emerged into this space, including records of routine sights
taken immediately after transition.
"Okay. Let's get busy. Kovak can punch for me."
The others were drifting in, well ahead of time, as was customary in
Kelly's gang. "If you wish, sir. I'd be glad to compute for the Captain."
"Kovak can do it. You might help Noguchi and Lundy with the films."
"Aye aye, sir." Data flowed to him presently. He had awakened twice in
the night in cold fright that he had lost his unique memory. But when the data
started coming, he programmed without effort, appropriate pages opening in his
mind. The problem was a short departure to rid themselves of the planet's
influence, an adjustment of position to leave the local sun "behind" for
simpler treatment of its field, then a long, straight boost for the
neighborhood in which they had first appeared in this space. It need not be
precise, for transition would not be attempted on the first pass; they must
explore the area, taking many more photographic sights and computing from
them, to establish a survey that had never been made.
Departure was computed and impressed on tape for the autopilot and the
tape placed in the console long before noon. The ship had been keeping house
on local time, about fifty-five standard minutes to the hour; now the ship
would return to Greenwich, the time always kept in the control room--dinner
would be late and some of the "beasts" would as usual reset their watches the
wrong way and blame it on the government.
They synchronized with the power room, the tape started running, there
remained nothing to do but press the button a few seconds before preset time
and thereby allow the autopilot to raise ship. The phone rang, Smythe took it
and looked at Max. "For you, Captain. The Purser."

"Captain?" Samuels sounded worried. "I dislike to disturb you in the
control room."
"No matter. What is it?"
"Mrs. Montefiore. She wants to be landed on Aphrodite."
Max thought a moment. "Anybody else change his mind?"
"No, sir."
"They were all notified to turn in their names last night."
"I pointed that out to her, sir. Her answers were not entirely logical."
"Nothing would please me more than to dump her there. But after all, we
are responsible for her. Tell her no.
"Aye aye, sir. May I have a little leeway in how I express it?"
"Certainly. Just keep her out of my hair."
Max flipped off the phone, found Kelly at his elbow. "Getting close,
sir. Perhaps you will take the console now and check the set up? Before you
raise?"
"Eh? No, you take her up, Chief. You'll have the first watch."
"Aye aye, Captain." Kelly sat down at the console, Max took the
Captain's seat, feeling self-conscious. He wished that he had learned to smoke
a pipe--it looked right to have the Captain sit back, relaxed and smoking his
pipe, while the ship maneuvered.
He felt a slight pulsation and was pressed more firmly into the chair
cushions; the _Asgard_ was again on her own private gravity, independent of
true accelerations. Moments later the ship raised, but with nothing to show it
but the change out the astrodome from blue sky to star-studded ebony of space.
Max got up and found that he was still holding an imaginary pipe, he
hastily dropped it. "I'm going below, Chief. Call me when the departure sights
are ready to compute. By the way, what rotation of watches do you plan on?"
Kelly locked the board, got up and joined him. "Well, Captain. I had
figured on Kovak and me heel-and-toe, with the boys on one in three. We'll
double up later."
Max shook his head. "No. You and me and Kovak. And we'll stay on one in
three as long as possible. No telling how long we'll fiddle around out there
before we take a stab at it."
Kelly lowered his voice. "Captain, may I express an opinion?"
"Kelly, any time you stop being frank with me, I won't have a chance of
swinging this. You know that."
"Thank you, sir. The Captain should not wear himself out. You have to do
all the computing as it is." Kelly added quietly, "The safety of your ship is
more important than--well, perhaps 'pride' is the word."
Max took a long time to reply. He was learning, without the benefit of
indoctrination, that a commanding officer is not permitted foibles commonplace
in any other role; he himself is ruled more strongly by the powers vested in
him than is anyone else. The Captain's privileges--such as chucking a tiresome
female from his table--were minor, while the penalties of the inhuman job had
unexpected ramifications.
"Chief," he said slowly, "is there room to move the coffee mess over
behind the computer?"
Kelly measured the space with his eye. "Yes, sir. Why?"
"I was thinking that would leave room over here to install a cot."
"You intend to sleep up here, sir?"
"Sometimes. But I was thinking of all of us--you shave up here half the
time, as it is. The watches for the next few weeks do not actually require the
O.W. to be awake most of the time, so we'll all doss off when we can. What do
you think?"
"It's against regulations, sir. A bad precedent . . . and a bad
example." He glanced over at Noguchi and Smythe.
"You would write it up formal and proper, for my signature, citing the
regulation and suspending it on an emergency basis 'for the safety of the
ship.'"
"If you say so, sir."

"You don't sound convinced, so maybe I'm wrong. Think it over and let me
know."
The cot appeared and the order was posted, but Max never saw either
Kelly or Kovak stretched out on the cot. As for himself, had he not used it,
he would have had little sleep.
He usually ate in the control room as well. Although there was little to
do on their way out to rendezvous with nothingness but take sights to
determine the relations of that nothingness with surrounding sky, Max found
that when he was not computing he was worrying, or discussing his worries with
Kelly.
How did a survey ship find its way back through a newly calculated
congruency? And what had gone wrong with those that failed to come back?
Perhaps Dr. Hendrix could have figured the other side of an uncharted
congruency using only standard ship's equipment--or perhaps not. Max decided
that Dr. Hendrix could have done it; the man had been a fanatic about his
profession, with a wide knowledge of the theoretical physics behind the
routine numerical computations--much wider, Max was sure, than most
astrogators.
Max knew that survey ships calculated congruencies from both sides,
applying to gravitational field theory data gathered on the previously unknown
side. He made attempts to rough out such a calculation, then gave up, having
no confidence in his results--he was sure of his mathematical operations but
unsure of theory and acutely aware of the roughness of his data. There was
simply no way to measure accurately the masses of stars light-years away with
the instruments in the _Asgard_.
Kelly seemed relieved at his decision. After that they both gave all
their time to an attempt to lay out a "groove" to the unmarked point in the
heavens where their photosights said that they had come out--in order that
they might eventually scoot down that groove, arriving at the locus just below
the speed of light, then kick her over and hope.
A similar maneuver on a planet's surface would be easy--but there is no
true parallel with the situation in the sky. The "fixed" stars move at high
speeds and there are no other landmarks; to decide what piece of featureless
space corresponds with where one was at another time requires a complicated
series of calculations having no "elegant" theoretical solutions. For each
charted congruency an astrogator has handed to him a table of precalculated
solutions--the "Critical Tables for Charted Anomalies." Max and Kelly had to
fudge up their own.
Max spent so much time in the control room that the First Officer
finally suggested that passenger morale would be better if he could show
himself in the lounge occasionally. Walther did not add that Max should wear a
smile and a look of quiet confidence, but he implied it. Thereafter Max
endeavored to dine with his officers and passengers.
He had of course seen very little of Eldreth. When he saw her at the
first dinner after Walther's gentle suggestion she seemed friendly but
distant. He decided that she was treating him with respect, which made him
wonder if she were ill. He recalled that she had originally come aboard in a
stretcher, perhaps she was not as rugged as she pretended to be. He made a
mental note to ask the Surgeon--indirectly, of course!
They were dawdling over coffee and Max was beginning to fidget with a
desire to get back to the Worry Hole. He reminded himself sharply that Walther
expected him not to show anxiety--then looked around and said loudly, "This
place is like a morgue. Doesn't anyone dance here these days? Dumont!"
"Yes, Captain?"
"Let's have some dance music. Mrs. Mendoza, would you honor me?"
Mrs. Mendoza tittered and accepted. She turned out to be a disgrace to
Argentina, no sense of rhythm. But he piloted her around with only minor
collisions and got her back to her chair, so timed that he could bow out
gracefully. He then exercised the privilege of rank by cutting in on Mrs.
Daigler. Maggie's hair was still short but her splendor otherwise restored.

"We've missed you, Captain."
"I've been working. Short-handed, you know."
"I suppose so. Er . . . Captain, is it pretty soon now?'
"Before we transit? Not long. It has taken this long because we have had
to do an enormous number of fiddlin' calculations--to be safe, you know."
"Are we _really_ going home?"
He gave what he hoped was a confident smile. "Absolutely. Don't start
any long book from the ship's library; the Purser won't let you take it
dirtside."
She sighed. "I feel better."
He thanked her for the waltz, looked around, saw Mrs. Montefiore and
decided that his obligation to maintain morale did not extend that far.
Eldreth was seated, so he went to her. "Feet still bothering you, Ellie?"
"No, Captain. Thank you for asking."
"Then will you dance with me?"
She opened her eyes wide. "You mean the Captain has time for po' li'l
ole me?"
He leaned closer. "One more crack like that, dirty face, and you'll be
tossed into irons."
She giggled and wrinkled her nose. "Aye aye, Captain, sir."
For a while they danced without talking, with Max a little overpowered
by her nearness and wondering why he had not done this sooner. Finally she
said, "Max? Have you given up three-dee permanently?"
"Huh? Not at all. After we make this transit I'll have time to play--if
you'll spot me two starships."
"I'm sorry I ever told you about that. But I do wish you would say hello
to Chipsie sometimes. She was asking this morning, 'Where Maxie?'"
"Oh, I _am_ sorry. I'd take her up to the control room with me
occasionally, except that she might push a button and lose us a month's work.
Go fetch her."
"The crowd would make her nervous. We'll go see her."
He shook his head. "Not to your room."
"Huh? Don't be silly. I've got no reputation left anyhow, and a captain
can do as he pleases."
"That shows you've never been a captain. See that vulture watching us?"
He indicated Mrs. Montefiore with his eyes. "Now go get Chipsie and no more of
your back talk."
"Aye aye, Captain."
He scratched Chipsie's chin, fed her sugar cubes, and assured her that
she was the finest spider puppy in that part of the sky. He then excused
himself.
He was feeling exhilarated and oddly reassured. Seeing Mr. Walther
disappearing into his room, he paused at the companionway and on impulse
followed him. A matter had been worrying him, this was as good a time as any.
"Dutch? Are you busy?"
The First Officer turned. "Oh. No, Captain. Come in."
Max waited during the ceremonial coffee, then broached it. "Something on
my mind, Mr. Walther--a personal matter."
"Anything I can do?"
"I don't think so. But you're a lot more experienced than I am; I'd like
to tell you about it."
"If the Captain wishes."
"Look, Dutch, this is a 'Max' matter, not a 'Captain' matter."
Walther smiled. "All right. But don't ask me to change my form of
address. I might pick up a bad habit."
"Okay, okay." Max had intended to sound out Walther about his phony
record: had Dr. Hendrix reported it? Or hadn't he?
But he found it impossible to follow that line; being a captain had
forced him into a different mold. "I want to tell you how I got into this
ship." He told it all, not suppressing Sam's part now that it no longer could

hurt Sam. Walther listened gravely.
"I've been waiting for you to mention this, Captain," he said at last.
"Dr. Hendrix reported it to me, in less detail, when he put you up for
apprentice astrogator. We agreed that it was a matter that need not be raised
inside the ship."
"It's what happens after we get back that frets me. If we get back."
"When we get back. Are you asking for advice? Or help? Or what?"
"I don't know. I just wanted to tell you."
"Mmmm . . . there are two alternatives. One we could handle here, by
altering a not very important report. In which . . ."
"No, Dutch. I won't have phony reports going out of the _Asgard_."
"I was fairly certain you would say that. I feel the same way, except
that I would feel obligated for-- well, various reasons--to cover up for you
if you asked it."
"I once intended to arrange a phony on it. I even felt justified. But I
can't do it now."
"I understand. The remaining alternative is to report it and face the
music. In which case I'll see it through with you--and so will the Chief
Engineer and the Purser, I feel sure."
Max sat back, feeling warm and happy. "Thanks, Dutch. I don't care what
they do to me . . . just as long as it doesn't keep me out of space."
"I don't think they'll try to do that, not if you bring this ship in.
But if they do--well, they'll know they've been in a fight. Meantime try to
forget it."
"I'll try." Max frowned. "Dutch? Tell me the truth, what do _you_ think
about the stunt I pulled?"
"That's a hard question, Captain. More important is, how do you feel
about it?"
"Me? I don't know. I know how I used to feel--I felt belligerent."
"Eh?"
"I was always explaining--in my mind of course-- why I did it,
justifying myself, pointing out that the system was at fault, not me. Now I
don't want to justify myself. Not that I regret it, not when I think what I
would have missed. But I don't want to duck out of paying for it, either."
Walther nodded. "That sounds like a healthy attitude. Captain, no code
is perfect. A man must conform with judgment and commonsense, not with blind
obedience. I've broken rules; some violations I paid for, some I didn't. This
mistake you made could have turned you into a moralistic prig, a 'Regulation
Charlie' determined to walk the straight and narrow and to see that everyone
else obeyed the letter of the law. Or it could have made you a permanent
infant who thinks rules are for everyone but him. It doesn't seem to have had
either effect; I think it has matured you."
Max grinned. "Well, thanks, Dutch." He stood up. "I'll get back up to
the Hole and mess up a few figures."
"Captain? Are you getting enough sleep?"
"Me? Oh, sure, I get a nap almost every watch."
"Minus four hours, Captain." Max sat up on the cot in the control room,
rubbing sleep out of his eyes. The _Asgard_ was in the groove, had been
boosting along it for days, working up to that final burst that would squeeze
them out of this space and into another--one they knew or some other,
depending on how well their "fudging" had conformed to the true structure of
the universe.
Max blinked at Kelly. "How long have you been up here?"
"Not long, Captain."
"Did you get _any_ sleep?"
"Well, now, Captain . . ."
"Forget it, you're incorrigible. Got one ready?"
"Yes, sir."

"Shoot." Max sat on the cot while they passed data to him, eyes closed
while he programmed the problem and translated it into the binary numbers the
computer understood. He had not been out of the Hole more than a few minutes
at a time for days. He would doze between sights, wake up and process one,
then lie down again.
He had kept Kelly and Kovak on watch-and-watch as long as
possible--although it was hard to get Kelly to rest. Lundy, Smythe, and
Noguchi had continued to rotate, overlapping when the going got faster in
order to help each other with plate changing and readings. For Max there could
be no relief; he must process each sight, supplying from his card-file memory
the information in the missing manuals.
All the Worry gang were there but Lundy. He came up as Max finished and
ordered the correction. "Compliments of cookie," he announced, setting down a
gallon of ice cream.
"What flavor?" asked Max.
"Chocolate chip, sir."
"My favorite. Just remember when you are dishing it that efficiency
marks will be coming up one of these days."
"Now, Captain, that's not fair. The Chief has a lot more mass to feed
than you have."
"And I have a very high metabolic rate," announced Noguchi. "I need
more."
"Noggy, you have a built-in space warp in each leg. We'll let Kelly dish
it and hope that pride will restrain him." Max turned to Kelly. "What schedule
are we on?"
"Twenty minutes, Captain."
"Think we need that so soon?"
"Just to be safe, sir."
"Okay." They ran another sight and ate the ice cream, after which Max
shifted them to transition stations. Kelly did not take the computer. A key
punched by Kovak gave the same answer as one punched by Kelly, and Max wanted
Kelly on the vernier stereograph where his long experience could make the best
of poor data. Lundy assisted Kelly, with Smythe and Noguchi shooting and
running.
At minus two hours Max called Compagnon, told him that they were
narrowing down; the Chief Engineer assured him that he would nurse boost and
vector himself from there on. "Good hunting, Captain."
On a ten minute schedule Max still found it easy, though he had to admit
he wasn't as fresh as a still-warm egg. But he was kept comfortably busy and
the corrections were pleasantly small--Compagnon must be doing a real job down
there. When the preset on the computer said less than one hour to zero, he
stood up and stretched. "Everybody all set. Somebody wake up Noggy. Everybody
got a pepper pill in him? And who's got one for me?"
Kovak leaned back and handed him one, Max popped it into his mouth and
downed it with a swig of coffee. "Grab a last sandwich if you're going to. All
right, gang--let's hit it!"
The data flowed in a steady stream. After a while Max began to tire. He
would no more than pick one correction off the lights on the computer and feed
it to the power room than Kelly would have more data ready. A correction
showed up that seemed off the curve, as if they were "hunting" excessively. He
glanced back at the lights before applying it--then realized that a new set of
data was being offered.
"Repeat!" he called out.
Kelly repeated. Max ran the figures over in his mind and found that they
meant nothing to him. What had that last correction implied? Had he used a
legitimate method in surveying this anomaly? Could you even call it surveying?
Was this what a survey ship did to get out? How could they expect a man to. .
. .
"Captain!" Kelly said sharply.
He shook his head and sat up. "Sorry. Hold the next one." With a feeling

of panic he reviewed the data in his mind and tried to program. He knew at
last how it felt to have the deadline bearing down fast as light-- and to lose
confidence.
He told himself that he must abort--slide past under the speed of light,
spend weeks swinging back, and try again. But he knew that if he did, his
nerve would never sustain him for a second try.
At that bad moment a feeling came over him that someone was standing
behind his chair, resting hands on his shoulders--quieting him, soothing him.
He began clearly and sharply to call off figures to Kovak.
He was still calling them out with the precision of an automaton twenty
minutes later. He accepted one more sight, digested it, sent it on to Kovak
with his eyes on the preset. He applied the correction, a tiny one, and called
out, "Stand by!" He pressed the button that allowed the chronometer to kick it
over on the microsecond. Only then did he look around, but there was no one
behind him.
"There's the Jeep!" he heard Kelly say exultantly. "And there's the Ugly
Duckling!" Max looked up. They were back in the familiar sky of Nu Pegasi and
Halcyon.
Five minutes later Kelly and Max were drinking cold coffee and cleaning
up the remains of a plate of sandwiches while Noguchi and Smythe completed the
post-transition sights. Kovak and Lundy had gone below for a few minutes
relief before taking the first watch. Max glanced again at the astrodome. "So
we made it. I never thought we would."
"Really, Captain? There was never any doubt in my mind after you took
command."
"Hmmm! I'm glad you didn't know how I felt."
Kelly ignored this. "You know, sir, when you are programming your voice
sounds amazingly like the Doctor's."
Max looked at him sharply. "I had a bad time there once," he said
slowly. "Shortly before zip."
"Yes, sir. I know."
"Then-- Look, this was just a _feeling_, you see? I don't go for ghosts.
But I had the notion that Doc was standing over me, the way he used to,
checking what I did. Then everything was all right."
Kelly nodded. "Yes. He was here. I was sure he would be."
"Huh? What do you mean?" Kelly would not explain. He turned instead to
inspect post-transition plates, comparing them happily with standard plates
from the chart safe--the first such opportunity since the ship was lost.
"I suppose," said Max when Kelly was through, "that we had better rough
out an orbit for Nu Pegasi before we sack in." He yawned. "Brother, am I
dead!"
Kelly said, "For Nu Pegasi, sir?"
"Well, we can't shoot for Halcyon itself at this distance. What did you
have in mind?"
"Nothing, sir."
"Spill it."
"Well, sir, I guess I had assumed that we would reposition for transit
to Nova Terra. But if that is what the Captain wants--"
Max drummed on the chart safe. It had never occurred to him that anyone
would expect him to do anything, after accomplishing the impossible, but to
shape course for the easy, target-in-sight destination they had left from,
there to wait for competent relief.
"You expected me to take her on through? With no tables and no help?"
"I did not intend to presume, Captain. It was an unconscious
assumption."
Max straightened up. "Tell Kovak to hold her as she goes. Phone Mr.
Walther to see me at once in my cabin."
"Aye aye, sir."

The First Officer met him outside his cabin. "Hello, Dutch. Come in."
They entered and Max threw his cap on his desk. "Well, we made it."
"Yes, sir. I was watching from the lounge."
"You don't seem surprised."
"Should I be, Captain?"
Max sprawled in his easy chair, stretching his weary back muscles. "You
should be. Yes, sir, you should be."
"All right. I'm surprised."
Max looked up and scowled. "Dutch, where is this ship going now?"
Walther answered, "The Captain has not yet told me."
"Confound it! You know what I mean. Our schedule calls for Nova Terra.
But there is Halcyon sitting right over there--a blind man could find it with
a cane. What destination did you have in mind when you boosted me into
command? Tell me what you expected then? Before you tagged me."
"I had in mind," Walther answered, "getting a captain for the _Asgard_."
"That's no answer. See here, the passengers have a stake in this. Sure,
I had to take this risk for them, no choice. But now there is a choice.
Shouldn't we tell them and let them vote on it?"
Walther shook his head emphatically. "You don't ask passengers anything,
sir. Not in a ship underway. It is not fair to them to ask them. You _tell_
them."
Max jumped up and strode the length of the cabin. "'Fair,' you say.
Fair! It's not fair to _me_." He swung and faced Walther. "Well? You're not a
passenger. You're my First Officer. What do you think we should do?"
Walther stared him in the eye. "I can't decide that for the Captain.
That is why you are Captain."
Max stood still and closed his eyes. The figures stood out clearly, in
neat columns. He went to his phone and savagely punched the call for the
control room. "Captain speaking. Is Kelly still there? Oh-- good, Chief. We
reposition for Nova Terra. Start work--I'll be up in a minute."
22
THE TOMAHAWK
Max liked this time of day, this time of year. He was lying in the grass
on the little rise west of the barn, with his head propped up so that he could
see to the northwest. If he kept his eyes there, on the exit ring of the
C.S.&E. Ring Road, he would be able, any instant now, to see the _Tomahawk_
plunge out and shoot across the gap in free trajectory. At the moment he was
not reading, no work was pushing him, he was just being lazy and enjoying the
summer evening.
A squirrel sat up near by, stared at him, decided he was harmless and
went about its business. A bird swooped past.
There was a breathless hush, then suddenly a silver projectile burst out
of the exit ring, plunged across the draw and entered the ring on the far
side--just as the sound hit him.
"Boy, oh boy!" he said softly. "It never looks like they'd make it."
It was all that he had climbed the rise to see, but he did not get up at
once. Instead he pulled a letter from his pocket and reread the ending: ". . .

I guess Daddy was glad to get me back in one piece because he finally
relented. Putzie and I were married a week ago-- and oh Max, I'm so _happy!_
You must visit us the next time you hit dirt at Hespera." She had added, "P.S.
Mr. Chips sends her love--and so do I."
Quite a gal, Ellie. She usually got her own way, one way or another. He
felt a bit sorry for Putzie. Now if they had all stayed on Charity . . .
Never mind--an astrogator ought not to get married. Fondly he fingered
the sunburst on his chest. Too bad he had not been able to stay with the
_Asgard_-- but of course they were right; he could not ship as assistant in a
ship where he had once been skipper. And assistant astrogator of the
_Elizabeth Regina_ was a good billet, too; everybody said the _Lizzie_ was a
taut ship.
Besides that, not every young A.A. had a new congruency to his credit,
even now being surveyed. He had nothing to kick about. He didn't even mind the
whopping big fine the Council of the Guilds had slapped on him, nor the
official admonition that had been entered in his record. They had let him stay
in space, which was the important thing, and the admonition appeared right
along with the official credit for the "Hendrix" congruency.
And, while he didn't argue the justice of the punishment--he'd been in
the wrong and he knew it--nevertheless the guilds were set up wrong; the rules
ought to give everybody a chance. Some day he'd be senior enough to do a
little politicking on that point.
In the meantime, if he didn't get moving, he'd have to buy that taxi.
Max got up and started down the slope. The helicab was parked in front of the
house and the driver was standing near it, looking out over the great raw gash
of the Missouri-Arkansas Power Project. The fields Max once had worked were
gone, the cut reached clear into the barn yard. The house was still standing
but the door hung by one hinge and some kid had broken all the windows. Max
looked at the house and wondered where Maw and the man she had married were
now?--not that he really cared and no one around Clyde's Corners seemed to
know. They had told him at the courthouse that Maw had collected her half of
the government-condemnation money and the pair of them had left town.
Probably their money was gone by now--Max's half of the money was gone
completely, it hadn't quite paid his fine. If they were broke, maybe
Montgomery was having to do some honest work, for Maw wasn't the woman to let
a man loaf when she was needing. The thought pleased Max; he felt he had a
score to settle with Montgomery, but Maw was probably settling it for him.
The driver turned toward him. "Be a big thing when they get this
finished. You ready to go, sir?"
Max took a last glance around. "Yes. I'm all through here."
They climbed into the cabin. "Where to? Back to the Corners?"
Max thought about it. He really ought to save money--but shucks, he
would save plenty this next trip. "No, fly me over to Springfield and drop me
at the southbound ring road station. I'd like to make it in time to catch the
_Javelin_."
That would put him in Earthport before morning.

