the Blonde from Barsoom
By ROBERT F. YOUNG
Illustrated by SUMMERS
 
The Tarks were attacking, the bosomy princess was clinging to him in
terror, and Harold Smith realized he was at the end of his plot-line.
What a dilemma! And what an opportunity!!

 
FOR the most part, all Harold Worthington Smith's Martian stories ever netted him were standard
rejection slips, but ev-ery now and then one or another of the editors to whom he sub-mitted them would
pen him a brief note to the effect that his writing indicated an unusually vivid imagination. However, they
invariably added, his dia-logue was stilted, his heroines were dimensionally impossible, and his stories
were wish-fulfill-ment reveries in a Burroughs vein—unredeemed, unfortunate-ly, by Burroughs'
high-flown puritanical idealism.
Harold agreed with them wholeheartedly on point no. 1. Thanks to his ability to achieve total
identification with his pro-tagonists, he did have an unusu-ally vivid imagination. Take this very minute, for
instance: His main character—Thon Carther the Earthman—was standing on the ocher moss of the
Martian dead-sea bottom beside the big-breasted blond princess whom he had rescued from Tarkia
some two thousand words ago, fear-lessly awaiting the oncoming horde of Tarks. But it wasn't really
Thon Carther who was standing there, it was Harold Worthington Smith—a tall, tanned and handsome
Harold Worthington Smith, to be sure, but Harold Worthington Smith just the same.
On points no. 2 and 3, however —be it said forthwith—he did not agree. He had, moreover, written
to the editors in question and said so. A Burroughs influ-ence, he had said, was an essen-tial ingredient in
the makeup of any science-fiction writer, and he was reasonably certain that he didn't exhibit one any
more than half a dozen other scribes he could name. And as for his heroines being dimensionally
imposs-ible, such an attitude merely betrayed an inherent geocentric-ism: simply because 46-21-46
females didn't exist on Earth was no reason to take it for granted that they didn't exist on Mars. (He
discreetly avoided any reference to point no. 4: there were times when he wondered about his dialogue
himself.)
 
 
IT was a warm afternoon in August. His wife had gone to visit her sister, giving him tem-porary
respite from her nag-ging, and there was no sound in the apartment except the steady-hum of the electric
fan and the sporadic clacking of the ancient typewriter. Altogether it was one of those rare moments
when it was possible for his imagination to take over completely. It was, in fact, though he was not yet
aware of it, the climactic mo-ment in his career as a creative writer.
The Tark horde was rapidly closing in, and Thon Carther/ Harold Worthington Smith de-cided it was
high time he drew his sword. Glockety-clack-clack. The blond princess, who hailed from the triple cities
of Hydro-gen and whose name was Thejah Doris, moved closer to him, and her golden shoulder brushed
his sinewy arm. A tingling phalanx of thrills charged up and down his backbone. Clack-clackety--clack.
Clack!
"Fear not, my princess," he said. "This noble sword has tasted the blood of many a Tark and is keen
for the taste of the blood of many more!"
"My chieftain," she breathed, moving even closer.
He hefted the big sword, and the rays of the declining sun danced brightly on its burnished surface.
For all its size, it was as light as a yardstick in his big brown masculine hand. The fore-most Tark rider
was very close now. Startlingly close, Thon--Smith realized with a start—and startlingly realistic. The
malevo-lent green features stood out with dismaying clarity, and the tusks of the elongated eyeteeth
gleamed with terrifying vivid-ness.
Wildly Thon-Smith felt for his typewriter. Next he felt for his desk. Finally he looked around him for
the familiar walls of the apartment. They, too, had disap-peared. A shudder shot through his tall, tanned
body. Something awful had happened.
Something even more awful was going to happen if he didn't do something and do it soon, for the
Tarks, looming building-tall astride their six-legged mounts, were almost upon them. He re-membered the
plot just in time, and seizing Thejah Doris around her slender waist, he gave a mighty leap that carried

them—thanks to the tenuous Martian gravity—over the entire green horde to a resilient section of the
dead-sea bottom a hundred feet behind the rearmost rider. It was, he reflected, somewhat of a deus ex
machina stratagem now that he came to think of it; but now was no time to be hyper-critical.
 
THE Tark horde had become a mass of chlorophyllic bodies, white tusks and squeal-ing mounts.
The warriors in the front ranks had tele-reined their toats before those in the middle ranks had wised up
to what had happened, and those in the rear ranks still hadn't wised up. Cha-os reigned. Thon-Smith was
not slow to take advantage of the situation which he had so for-tuitously provided. He was still upset
over his missing typewrit-er, his missing desk, and his missing apartment, not to men-tion his missing
civilization, but there would be time for recon-naissance later. Right now there was the little matter of
Escape to be taken care of.
Briefly he referred to his men-tal synopsis of the plot. Oh, yes, there was an atmosphere boat hidden
in the mound of desic-cated algae before which his leap had conveniently ter-minated. (Another deus ex
machina stratagem, he thought with annoyance; but again he reminded himself that now was no time to
be quibbling over the literary aspects of the situation.)
"Come, my princess," he said, taking Thejah Doris' arm.
"Lead on, my chieftain!"
The atmosphere boat was there, just as he had visualized it. After uncovering it, they boarded its
narrow deck, and soon they were rising into the darkening sky, once again thwarting the Tarks, who had
reorganized their ranks and were charging with redoubled ferocity toward the mound.
Thejah Doris lay down beside him on the comfortable pilot's couch. "At last we are alone!" she
breathed in her Martian-Hungarian accent.
Reconnaissance could wait, Thon-Smith decided quickly. There were worse fates after all than
writing oneself so complete-ly into one's stories that one could not extricate oneself. "My princess," he
said, directing the prow of the atmosphere boat to-ward the littoral of an ancient continent and slipping
his arm beneath her bare shoulders.

Immediately there came a frenzied scratching from the small forward cabin, and before he could even
gain his feet a great eight-legged creature with multi-fanged, slavering jaws leaped upon him and began
ca-ressing his face with its long tongue. His faithful Droola! He winced. He'd forgotten all about his
faithful watchdog. But a plot was a plot, and like any other scheme of things you had to go along with it.
"Droola," he said. "Good old faithful Droola!"
 
PRESENTLY the nearer moon appeared and began its hurt-ling journey across the night sky. Stars
winked into cold clean brightness. The atmosphere boat reached the mainland, floated over shadow-filled
ravines and moon-kissed hilltops. The argent ribbon of a canal showed in the distance.
Thon-Smith's heartbeat quick-ened as he thought of the next, sequence. He could hardly wait till the
canal was beneath them, till the time came to guide the boat down to the argent sward that bordered the
farther bank. He stepped lightly down to the soft turf and lifted Thejah Doris down beside him. He
answered her questioning eyes: "A swim will refresh us, my princess. It will sharpen our senses and
re-double our chances of eluding our persistent pursuers."
"But I cannot swim, my chief-tain."
The externals did not call for a leer at this point; nevertheless. he had a hard time averting one. "Fear
not, my princess," he said. "I, Thon Carther, will instruct you."
They walked together to the bank and stood there hand in hand. Behind them, Droola leaped from
the deck and went romping up and down the es-planade. The nearer moon was high in the sky now, and
the farther moon was just beginning to show above the hills. "First," Thon-Smith said, "we must remove
our accouterments. They will weigh us down in the water and make movement well nigh impossible."
"All of them, my chieftain?" 
"Yes, my princess, all of them."
She raised her hand to the gossamer thread that held her Martian equivalent of a halter in place.
Abruptly the muffled thun-der of padded toat hooves sound-ed in the distance.
Her hand dropped like a stone. "The Tarks!" she cried. "Oh, my chieftain, the mortal enemies of my
people are close upon our heels!"
He choked back his disap-pointment. How could he have forgotten? He, the author, the creator!
"Quickly," he said, seiz-ing her arm. "Into the atmosphere boat. The canal will not stop them!"
 
BY the time they gained the deck the foremost rank of the Tark horde had reached the opposite
bank. The green war-riors did not pause for so much as a second, but goaded their mounts into the
water. Once in the canal, Tark and toat became as one, and the horde took on the aspect of a school of
gigantic green porpoises, leaping in and out of the water with incredible swiftness, reaching the other
bank in a matter of minutes. But by then Thon-Smith and Thejah Doris were rising once again into the
night sky. The romping Droola discovered their depar-ture just in time, and with a mighty leap managed
to gain the after deck and scramble to safety.
As soon as the craft gained sufficient altitude Thon-Smith threw it into fastflight and aligned the prow
with the canal bank. The cool night air became a cold wind and the countryside blurred beneath them. He
main-tained the speed till he was sure their pursuers could no longer overtake them, then he cut down to
slowflight and returned his attention to Thejah Doris.
She was lying on her side, gazing at him admiringly. Again he slipped his arm beneath her shoulders,
but he had no sooner done so when Droola, still shiv-ering from the wind of fast-flight, bounded forward
and snuggled between them.
The interruption was essential to the story's word count, but just the same it was frustrating. Even
Thejah Doris looked put out, though she didn't say anything. Instead, she turned and reclined upon her
back, hands clasped behind her head, and let the two moons vie with one an-other to do justice to her
charms. It was an interesting contest to watch, and soon Thon-Smith became engrossed. He became so
engrossed, in fact, that he failed to see the tower till it was too late.

It was a tall tower—remarka-bly tall when you considered the altitude of the atmosphere boat. He
yanked the tiller savagely, but their momentum was too great, and a moment later the bow crumpled
against stone. The deck tilted abruptly, and he barely managed to grab Thejah Doris before she tumbled
over the low rail, and it was all he could do to maintain his balance till the rapidly sinking craft came
opposite the dark aperture of a window. He leaped lightly to the sill, his Martian princess in his arms, and
stepped into the musty gloom of a lofty chamber.
 
THE faithful Droola was not so fortunate. It essayed the leap, but missed the sill by a good two
feet. (He'd been plan-ning on getting rid of Droola for a long time.) Dutifully he lis-tened for the sound of
the faith-ful body striking the ground, but when, an appropriate time later, the sound came, he could not
summon the emotional re-sponse which the plot called for. All he could manage was a sort of vague
contrition which was immediately negated by the real-ization that at last he and Thejah Doris were really
alone.
She had discovered tapers on the dusty shelves that lined one wall of the chamber, and now she lit
three of them and set them upon the rough wooden table that stood in the middle of the stone floor.
"There is nothing to fear, my chieftain," she said. "This is one of the deserted lock-towers once
maintained by the ancient Mii when Mars was young and great barges plied her blue canals. Above us is
the control room itself, from which the mighty locks, now rusted and fallen to ruin, were manipulated by
the ancient Miian tenders. Now the towers stand silent and forlorn, the havens of occasional wandering
bards who find the lofty rooms and empty echoing stairways conducive to their search for the
ever-elusive Muse."
He stared at her. It was, he had to admit, rather incongru-ous phraseology to be issuing from the lips
of a blonde who, for all her royal blood, still looked more like a burlesque queen than she did a princess.
Well, no matter. "You look lovely by candlelight," he said.
"You are very gallant, my chieftain."
She lit another candle and went over and placed it in a wall niche beside an ancient sleeping couch.
She turned and faced him. "At last we are alone."
He started toward her, arms outstretched. Simultaneously the thunder of padded toat hooves
sounded in the distance.
"The Tarks!" Thejah Doris cried, eluding him and running to the window. "They've seen our light! Oh,
my chieftain, the mortal enemies of my people threaten us once again!"
"Oh, for Pete's sake!" Thon-Smith said, throwing up his hands. "No wonder my stories get
bounced!"
 
RESIGNEDLY he went over and joined her at the win-dow. Sure enough, the Tark horde was
back in the running again. Wearily he explored his mind for the next sequence. All he could find were the
words, END OF PART ONE. That was when he remembered that he'd been trying his hand at a serial
and had neglected to plot it beyond the first installment.

"Oh, my chieftain, what are we going to do?"
He did not answer. He was thinking—thinking furiously. If a writer could write himself so completely
into a story that he became physically involved in it, was there any reason why he couldn't extricate
himself by writing a factual account of his real life?
It was worth a try. The alter-native was to plot Installment Two, and somehow he didn't feel quite up
to it. Installment One had been rather an enervating experience.
Abruptly another thought struck him: Why a factual ac-count?
He remembered his dingy lit-tle apartment, his dilapidated typewriter, his collection of re-jection
slips, his nagging, flat-chested wife — Suddenly he looked at Thejah Doris standing beside him with
heaving breast, anxiously watching the relent-less approach of the Tarks.
Why a factual account indeed!
He concentrated. When he had the plot firmly fixed in his mind he sat down at the table to write. A
momentary crises arose. There was no paper, no pen, not even a pencil. Then he remembered what
Thejah Doris had said about the wandering bards, and he began searching for a draw-er. Even Martian
poets needed something to write on. Presently he found one and pulled it out. Sure enough, it contained
sever-al sheets of parchment-like pa-per, a long quill pen and a small vial of black fluid.
The thunder of padded toat hooves was growing louder by the minute. "Oh, my chieftain, what are
we going to do!" The-jah Doris cried again.
"We're going to swap serials," Thon-Smith said, and began to write.
 
* * *
 
IT was a fine bright morning.  Harold Worthington Smith awoke late and lay for a while watching
the robins flitting among the branches of the box elder outside his bedroom win-dow. Then he got up and
slipped leisurely into his lounging robe. Yawning, he stepped across the hall to his study. Below him in the
kitchen his wife was hum-ming happily, and he could smell coffee perking, wheatcakes fry-ing and
sausage sizzling.
He entered his study and walked over to the desk. He sat down. There were three long thin letters
lying beside his solid gold typewriter where his wife had placed them. He opened them nonchalantly. The
first one was from The Edgar Rice Burroughs Reader and contained a check for $750.00, the second
was from Dead-Sea Bottom Stories and contained a check for $2500.00, and the third was from Red
Planet Stories and contained a check for $5000.00.
The phone rang. He picked it up. "HWS speaking."
"Good morning, sir. This is Parker, of Mammalian Blonde Stories. Regarding that last piece you
were kind enough to let us have a look at, would $10,000.00 be—"
"Sorry," Harold Worthington Smith said, "I never discuss business matters before break-fast. Call me
back later."
Click.
"Harold," his wife called from the foot of the stairs, "there's an editor outside."
"Another one?"
"Yes. Shall I let him in?"
"I suppose so. Tell him I'll try to give him a minute while I'm having my coffee."
He stacked the checks neatly and placed them on the large pile of checks to the right of the gold
typewriter. He made a men-tal note to try to make the bank today. Checks were a nuisance when you let
too many of them accumulate. He threw the three long thin envelopes into the wastebasket marked "Long
Thin Envelopes." It was full again, he noticed. He could have sworn he'd just emptied it a day or two
ago.
His wife came running up the stairs. "Harold, two more edi-tors just drove up! Shall I let them in,
too?"
"You might as well," Harold Worthington Smith said. "If you don't, they'll just hang around the door

all day and make a nui-sance of themselves." He looked at her critically. She'd come through remarkably
well. If any-thing she was even better stacked than she'd been before. "Tell them I'll be down present-ly,
princess. And put some clothes on. For now," he added.
After she had gone he looked the study over carefully. When he was sure that no traces of his
previous reality were present he descended slowly and majestical-ly to the hall where the three editors
humbly awaited him.
 
THE END
 

