Robert F. Young, whose most recent appearances here were "Above This Race
of Men" (January, 1976) and "Ghur R'hut Urr" (June, 1976), returns with a
novella for us in which he retraces the events of Xenophon's Anabasis from a
unique point of view, making it this time—
 
ALEC'S ANABIS
ROBERT F. YOUNG
 
 
Illustrated by Steve Fabian
 
WHEN HE SAW the driverless scythed chariot bearing down on him, "Alexander the
Lacedaemonian" did the only thing he could do: he jaited.
Historically speaking, he had no more business being in its path than he had being in the Battle of
Cunaxa.
He wouldn't have been in its path if "Doris the Boeotian" hadn't thrown a stone at the runaway horse,
causing it to shy.
The year was 401 B.C., and Alec, who worked for a twenty-first century A. D. pastacular company
named YoreCo, had been assigned the job of pasttaping the sequence of events re-corded by Xenophon
in his Anabasis. Alec had journeyed to ancient Lydia via Transworld Timelines and, upon arriving in the
capital city of Sardis, had joined the army of Greek mer-cenaries that comprised part of the
heterogeneous forces Cyrus the Younger had mustered to overthrow his brother, Artaxerxes the King.
From there, Alec had accompanied the Cyreian expedition through Lydia, Phrygia, Cilicia, Syria and
Arabia, into Babylonia, where the Battle of Cunaxa took place.
When they heard that Artaxerxes's armies were preparing to attack, the ten thousand Greek
mercenaries had formed their line near the east bank of the river Euphrates. The troops of Clearchus
constituted the extremity of the right wing, those of Menon the extremity of the left. Numbered among
the taxeis, or battalions, in be-tween was the taxis of Proxenus, among whose peltasts were included
"Alexander the Lacedaemonian" and "Duris the Boeotian". On the Greeks' left were arrayed the rest of
the Cyreian armies, commanded by Cyrus's best friend, Ariaeus. In the forefront, Cyrus himself headed
some six hundred heavily armed horsemen.
Late in the afternoon Artaxerxes's armies could be seen advancing northward over the alluvial plain,
preceded by a line of scythed chariots, so called because of the scythe-blades projecting obliquely from
their axletrees.
Everything Alec's eyes and ears took in, the tiny tape recorder hidden in the ridge of his
custom-made hel-met took in also. A slender dark-haired Athenian, whom he recognized as Xenophon,
rode out and exchanged a few words with the would-be king, then rode back and rejoined the Greek
ranks. A short while later, Cyrus pounded off with his cavalry toward the center of the Persian line. By
this time, the opposing forces were less than an eighth of a mile apart.
Shouting "A! la! la! la!" at the tops of their voices, the Greeks began to advance. To augment the
stentorian battle cry, those so equipped began banging their lances against their shields. The troops facing
them were those of Tissaphernes, Artaxerxes's second in command. As one, they broke ranks and fled.
The scythed-chariot drivers, no less intimidated, abandoned their vehicles and fol-lowed, and the terrified
horses came plunging into the Greek lines, drag-ging the lethal carts behind them.
Alec, who had boned up on the battle before booking passage for Sar-dis, had known what was
going to happen, and quickly got out of the path of the nearest horse and chariot. But he hadn't known

that "Doris the Boeotian" wanted him out of the pic-ture. He still could have evaded the horse after the
stone caused it to veer right, but the spinning scythe-blades were another matter. He had to jait—jump
ahead in time—and he did.
Rematerializing on the plain ap-proximately forty-eight hours in the future, he moved six paces to the
left, tucked his javelin under his arm and, using his shield to deflect the warm wind blowing up from the
south, lit one of the precious cigarettes he kept in an inner pocket of his leathern vest next to the compact
cartridge case that held his micro-tapes. Water spar-kled in the irrigation ditches that crisscrossed the
region; the river Euphrates mirrored the blue Mesopotamian sky; distant trios and quartets of date palms
formed ar-boreal bouquets. The Cyreian forces were long gone, and all that remained of Artaxerxes's
armies were a few scattered wicker shields and a dead horse.
Jaiting was a common accomplish-ment in the twenty-first century: ev-erybody could do it. In fact,
karate contests incorporating it had replaced tennis as America's No. 1 spectator sport. Nevertheless,
Alec didn't think that "Duris the Boeotian"—who, it was now clear, was an agent-assassin employed by
either PastCo or AgoCo, YoreCo's two rival companies—would jump ahead in time and try to finish
what he'd started. Jait-jbit contests involved two arenas, one present and one future, which, of course;
was the reason for their popularity. But this was 401 B.C. If the Greeks were to see a pair of peltasts
repeatedly dis-appearing and reappearing on the battlefield, there would be a lot of questions to answer,
regardless of who the winner was, and perhaps an accusation of murder to contend with as well.
So Alec smoked his nicotineless, tarless, tobacco-flavored cigarette with a relatively untroubled
mind, and not till it was half gone did he stub it out and stash the butt in the inner pocket of his vest. Then
he jbited—jumped back in time—rematerializing in the Greek ranks 2.1250 seconds after he'd
disappeared. Both horse and chariot missed him by a comfortable margin, "Doris the Boeotian's" face
fell, and he and Alec set out with their fellow peltasts and hoplites in pursuit of Tis-saphernes's fleeing
forces.
Meanwhile, Cyrus led his cavalry into the phalanx guarding Artaxerxes, put it to rout and wounded
Artaxerxes in the chest. It was Cyrus's final act in his ambitious bid for the throne, for a moment later a
javelin struck him beneath the right eye, and he tumbled lifeless from his horse. The Persians cut off his
head and his right hand. The moment Ariaeus heard the news he abandoned the Ten Thousand and fled
northward with the rest of the Cyreian armies, Artaxerxes in pursuit.
 
THE GREEKS, busily engaged in try-ing to overtake Tissaphernes, knew nothing of the death of
Cyrus nor of the retreat of Ariaelis, and Alec, mindful of the Ten Commandments of time travel, did not
enlighten them. Victorious in their own right, they as-sumed that the battle was going in Cyrus's favor, and
when Artaxerxes returned after plundering the Cyreian base camp and united his troops with those of
Tissaphernes, they attacked the combined forces with such feroc-ity that Artaxerxes was forced to order
a retreat.
The Ten Thousand followed their demoralized foe as far as a small vil-lage at the base of a hill. On
the hill-top Artaxerxes's cavalry could be seen dispersing, and Clearchus, realizing that there was nothing
to be gained in continuing the pursuit, ordered the Greeks to stack arms and rest. Alec took advantage of
the lull, sought out "Doris the Boeotian" and told him in Aeolic that he'd like a word with him in private.
Presently the two men faced each other near the bank of an irrigation ditch, out of earshot but not out
of sight of their nearest comrades-in--arms. "Doris the Boeotian" stood half a head taller than Alec and
was half again as broad. His nose was more Roman than Grecian, and he had small porcine eyes the
color of clay.
Abandoning Aeolic, Alec asked out-right in Anglo-American, "PastCo or AgoCo?"
"Doris the Boeotian" grinned. "PastCo. I gave myself away, didn't I?"
"You had me fooled completely be-fore you threw that stone, and I can't figure out why you threw it.
Granted, if you'd succeeded in getting me killed and had taken possession of my helmet and micro-tape
cartridges, PastCo would have acquired the past-acular by default. But why didn't you wait till after I'd
finished pasttaping the pastacular? Till after we'd reached Trebisond?"
"Because I think I can do a better job than you've been doing. You're an atavism. Pastacular

audiences aren't interested in watching a bunch of greasy Greeks marching, eating and sleeping. It's what
they do when they shack up in the villages that counts. You haven't been out of camp once since we left
Sardis!"
Stung, Alec said, "I don't think you'd know enough to tape a sore fin-ger, to say nothing of a
pastacular."
"Maybe not. But I'm going to give it a try. So watch yourself, Mr. Alex-ander Vincent Henry. Old
buddy. Before long, I'm going to be breath-ing down the back of your neck again."
"While you're breathing down the back of my neck," Alec said, "make sure no one's breathing down
the back of yours."
"There won't be. If there was an AgoCo agent around, I'd have spotted him long before this."
"Thanks. I'll sleep better nights now that I know I've got only one agent-assassin to worry about."
"Doris" glowered at him for a moment, then turned and walked away.
 
II
Sarai
 
LEFT ALONE, Alec wondered for at least the hundredth time why the Bureau of Historitravel had
abolished the free-enterprise system with re-spect to pasttravel and had taken over the distribution of
pastacular equip-ment. If the three pastacular com-panies could pasttape a particular series of pastevents
without having to pull strings to obtain an exclusive franchise, agent-assassins like "Duris the Boeotian"
would be relegated to the ranks of the unemployed.
In addition to its other duties, the Bureau also monitored Transworld Timelines, but only routinely.
Anyone could visit any part of the past so long as he took nothing with him (other than contraceptives)
that would clash with the period he planned to visit. And if he wished to cheat a little, there were
free-lance timeship operators called "timers" who, for the right dollar, would take him anywhen he
wanted to go with no questions asked. But most people were too poor to time-travel, and the few who
could afford to generally limited their past-excursions to twentieth-century Dis-neyland.
Alec decided to pasttape the village at the base of the hill and he set off toward it across the
intervening fields and ditches. It turned out to be de-serted, but that was all right: it would still provide
good background. He was pasttaping a picturesque street—that is to say, walking along it, look-ing this
way and that—when a faint click came from the ridge of his hel-met, apprising him that the micro-tape
cartridge in the hidden tape-recorder needed replacing. After mak-ing the change, he put the replaced
cartridge in the cartridge case. Each cartridge contained ten micro-tapes. There were five cartridges
altogether—just enough to cover the Up March (Anabasis)—Sardis to Cunaxa—and the Down March
(Katabasis)—Cunaxa to Trebisond. Thus far, he had filled two.
He had just returned the cartridge case to the inner pocket of his vest when a girl ran out of a nearby
brick-and-bitumen, dwelling and threw herself at his feet.
Her peri-like face was thin, her large eyes brown and imploring. Gaz-ing up at him, she began talking
rapidly in one of the Achaemenian dialects he had hypno-taught himself while preparing for his
assignment. "My name is Sarai, O Great One. Take pity on me! My people would have sold me to
Orontes, had not the armies of Cyrus appeared. Now they have fled, disdaining to take me with them
because I am no longer of any worth to them. Let me accompany you, O Great One, wherever you go. I
will cook for you and pour your barley-wine. I will gather the choicest fruits along the way, I—"
"Stop it!" Alec interrupted, finally finding his voice. "I'm nothing but a common peltast and I couldn't
take you with me even if I wanted to, and I don't. So stop groveling and get to your feet!"
Eyes still fixed on his face, she obeyed. A red and blue shawl par-tially covered her long black hair,
and the two colors were repeated in the rest of her apparel—the red in her loose-fitting blouse and the
blue in her calf-length skirt. She was barefoot. He estimated her age at about sixteen.
She launched another entreaty: "But if you leave me here I will surely perish, O Great One! I have
neither barley-meal nor milk, nor any means of getting them. I am alone and frightened and without

friends. If my people return and find me here they will drive me away, or, even worse, sell me to the first
fat prince who comes along. I am hungry, I am frightened, I do not know what to do."
Alec looked at her helplessly: He was a good ten years older than she was, which made him
responsible for her in a way. Not only that, she re-minded him a little of his kid sister—an eventuality
sufficient in it-self to swing the balance in her favor.
"Can you coo?" he asked.
She stared at him. "Coo?"
"Yes. Coo. The Greek army has no food with it at the moment, but in a little while we'll be returning
to our base camp. So if you'll follow at a dis-creet distance and wait on the out-skirts, I'll bring you
something to eat."
"But why must I make a noise like a turtledove?"
"So I can find you without you hav-ing you show yourself to the soldiers."
"But why shouldn't I show myself to the soldiers?"
"Because you shouldn't—that's why. Now stop asking questions and listen: the camp of the
camp-followers is separate from the main camp. Wait outside it on the side toward the river and far
enough away so the dogs won't bother you, and every little while coo like this." He demon-strated. "Try
it."
"Coo," she said. "Coo! Coo! Coo!"
"That's fine. When I hear you, I'll know where to look and I'll give you the food."
However, he gave her no food that night. He'd forgot that Artaxerxes's armies had plundered Cyrus's
supplies. Angrily he pasttaped the looted wagons and the fuming Greeks; then, confiscating a blanket that
the Persians had overlooked, he left the main camp and began skirting the camp of the camp-followers.
"Coo!" Sarai said suddenly, almost in his ear. "Coo! Coo! Coo!"
He handed her the blanket, told her that thanks to Artaxerxes no food was available, gave her a
half-daric and told her to go hack to her village. Promptly she spread the blanket on the ground, lay
down on half of it and covered herself with the other half. "Good night, O Great One," she said.
He sighed. Then he pulled her to her feet, took back the half-daric, wrapped the blanket around her
shoulders and led her into the camp-followers' camp. There, for a full daric, he bought wagon-space for
her from a Greek weapons-repairman named Anytus and exacted from the old man a solemn promise to
keep a fatherly eye on her. After making arrangements with a sandal-maker to make her a pair of
sandals, he re-turned to the main camp, the richer—or the poorer—for having gained one Babylonian
slave girl.
 
THE NEXT MORNING the Greeks learned that Cyrus had been killed and that Ariaeus had
retreated and was now encamped on the outskirts of the village of Iterna, some twenty stadia distant.
Clearchus proposed the Ariaeus try for the throne himself, and Menon and Cheirisophus left for the
Cyreian camp to broach the idea to Ariaeus. No sooner had they left than envoys arrived from the camp
of the King with orders for the Greeks to surrender. Clearchus told them that the word wasn't contained
in any of the Greek dialects, and sent them packing.
Later in the day, the Greeks slaughtered some of the baggagecattle and began barbecuing the choicer
cuts over fires built of wicker shields they had collected on the battlefield the day before. Alec selected a
steak that looked reason-ably tender, impaled it on the point of his javelin and roasted it till it was well
done; then he sought out Sarai in the camp of the camp-followers. He found her kneeling beside an
irriga-tion ditch. She had just washed her hair and was combing it with a makeshift comb fashioned of
reeds. Wet, it was even darker than he re-membered it, and fell in black and glistening waterfalls past her
peri-like face and patterned her shoulders with black arabesques. She looked more like a princess than a
peasant, and he should have been pleased. Instead, he was annoyed, and he handed her the steak
without a word, and walked away.
When he got back to the main camp, Menon and Cheirisophus had returned from Iterna. Ariaeus,
they said, considered himself unworthy of the throne of Persia, and suggested that, since he planned to
move his armies northward in the morning, the Greeks join him at once. Clearchus convinced the other

generals that this would be the most sensible course to follow, pointing out that the Greek army was
stranded in the center of a hostile empire, Zeus alone knew how many parasangs from home, and that the
armies of Ariaeus would afford them some protection at least. Ac-cordingly, the Ten Thousand reformed
their ranks and, on the alert for a possible attack by Tissaphernes, marched cross-country to Iterna.
There, the two forces were drawn up, a boar, a bull and a ram were sac-rificed, and Clearchus and
Ariaeus took formal oaths not to betray each other.
Alec, aware of the worthlessness of Ariaeus's oath, looked on with cynical eyes from the ranks of
Proxenus's pel-tasts. Down the line from him, "Doris the Boeotian" also looked on, his face impassive.
Since the scythed-chariot incident, the two men had steered clear of each other, but it was a tem-porary
detente at best.
To date, Alec had made only one friend—an Arcadian named Pasion. As far back as Sardis he'd felt
that Pasion could he trusted, and since it was comme i faut for Greek soldiers to have buddies, he had
made the Arca-dian his.
After the arms had been stacked, he and his friend prepared for sleep in the tent they shared. They
had just lain down on their woolen blankets when Pasion, without preamble, said, "I find it strange,
Alexander, that a peltast with a slave such as yours pre-fers not to sleep with her."
Jolted, Alec sat up. "What makes you think I have a slave?"
"This morning when you took a portion of meat into the camp of the camp-followers I followed you
at a distance. I reasoned that you would not go to such lengths to appease the appetite of a common
Cyprian, and that this being so, you must have found someone more worthwhile. I reasoned furthermore
that since you have disdained even casting a glance at any of the women in the villages we have quartered
in, this slave of yours would be worth looked at—even from afar. I was right."
"You don't understand," Alec said. "She's not my slave. She forced her-self on me. She means
nothing to me."
"In that case," Pasion said, starting to get up, "I will sleep with her my-self."
Alec seized his arm and pulled him back down. He got up himself. "I've changed my mind. I'll sleep
with her. And you, Pasion, if you know what's good for you, will stay away from her."
He rolled up his blanket and put his helmet back on. Pasion regarded him with puzzled eyes. Then his
eyes cleared and he smiled a knowing smile. "Forgive me, Alexander. I did not know you were in love
with her." But I'm not in love with her! Alec started to say. Then he changed his mind and left the tent.
There was no way under the sun he could convince Pasion that he was going to sleep be-side Sarai, not
with her, nor that his sole motive was to protect her. Be-sides, he wasn't sure that it would be wise to
convince him. The fourth Time Commandment might be a paraphrased bromide, but the pasttraveler who
consistently broke it seldom got back to when he came from. You will not, when in Rome, behave
contrary to the way which the Romans behave.
He found Sarai sitting just within the perimeter of firelight cast by a big bonfire round which sat a
number of Greek soldiers and a half dozen "wa-gon women" drinking barleywine out of bowls. Behind
her in the shadows loomed the burly figure of old Anytus.
Alec pulled her to her feet. "It's time you were in bed," he said.
He tossed the weapons-repairman another Daric and told Sarai to lead the way to the old man's
wagon. She didn't say a word till they reached it; then, gazing up into his eyes, "Are we going to sleep as
one, O Great One?" she asked.
He was scandalized. "Of course we're not!" He climbed up into the wagon bed, saw that she had
already spread her blanket, and spread his own beside it. Despite his best ef-forts, it overlapped hers.
He reached down and took her hand. "Up we go."
Standing beside him in the star-light, she said, "I did not think you would come tonight, O Great One.
I thought you hated me."
"My name is Alexander, I'm not great, and I don't hate you in the least." He glanced down at her feet.
"Didn't that sandal-maker make your shoes yet?"
"He will have them finished tomor-row."
Alec removed his helmet, automat-ically turning off the pressure-switch, that activated and

deactivated the battery-powered micro-tape recorder. Then he lay down on his blanket and Sarai lay
down on hers. After bidding her good-night, he closed his eyes. A long while later, still wide awake, he
opened them and stole a look at her. Her starlit face, relaxed in sleep, seemed a dead ringer for his kid
sis-ter's. Not his kid sister's face as it was today, for Marianne had left her teens behind her, but as it had
been that fateful day when she had told him the Terrible Truth. The thought of the Terrible Truth made
him wince. At the same time, it intensified his feel-ing of responsibility for Sarai. He would have to find a
good home for her, that was all there was to it. Maybe he could find a respectable family in one of the
villages who would be willing to adopt her. A kid like her had no business following an army. Yes, he
would find a good home for her, that was what he would do.
 
III
Thanatos
 
CLEARCHUS and Ariaeus decided to conduct the retreat along a different route from that
followed on the Up March and to try to reach the Greek colony of Trebisond on the Euxine Sea.
After leaving the village of Iterna, the Cyrean armies headed northward toward Media. On the
afternoon of the second day, the Greeks discerned a number of baggage cattle grazing on a distant
hillside. Obviously Artaxer-xes's armies could not be far off, and it was probable that the King had the
Cyreian forces under surveillance.
That night, the Greeks quartered in a group of villages from which, unfor-tunately, the villagers had
fled, taking their comestibles and their livestock with them. Early the next morning, two envoys arrived
from the camp of the King with word that Artaxerxes wished to negotiate a truce. Clearchus stalled,
saying that his men were hungry and not in the mood for truces, and the envoys obligingly guided them to
a village farther north where food was available. They were joined later by the armies of Ariaeus.
Within the next few days, with Tis-saphernes acting in the role of plenipotentiary, a truce was agreed
upon. Artaxerxes promised to conduct the Ten Thousand safely back to Greece and to provide them
whenever possible with the opportun-ity to purchase provisions. In return, the Greek generals promised
that their men would forebear pillaging.
Precisely what role Ariaeus and his armies were to play was not made clear.
Tissaphernes returned to the Per-sian camp to make arrangements for an escort. Twenty-one days
passed. Ariaeus was visited repeatedly by rel-atives who were part of Artaxerxes's retinue and who
assured him that the King did not hold his .complicity against him. Not surprisingly, the Greek generals,
who already dis-trusted Tissaphernes, began to dis-trust Ariaeus also, and when the former arrived with
one Persian army and Orontes, Artaxerxes's brother-in-law, arrived with another, Clearchus issued
orders for the Greeks to march as far from their escort as possible and to keep a discreet distance
between themselves and the armies of Ariaeus. Five days later, after crossing a wide canal, the Ten
Thousand reached the river Tigris. They had dropped considerably behind both their escort and the
armies of Ariaeus, and neither of the two forces was anywhere to he seen. A bridge, con-sisting of
thirty-seven flat-bottomed boats lashed together, spanned the stream, and Clearchus, assuming that
Tissaphernes, Orontes and Ariaeus had already crossed over it and being in no hurry to cross over it
himself, ordered the Greeks to make camp next to a park-like forest.
The forest fringed the western environs of the city of Sitace. Clearchus, in keeping with the terms of
the truce, ordered the city placed offlimits and sentries posted at intervals
along the edge of the forest. Desirous of pasttaping the city if for no other reason than to discredit “Duris
the Boeotian's" snide remark concerning his pasttaping ability, Alec tried to talk one of the sentries into
letting him pass. In vain. He was standing disconsolately by the arms pile when Xenophon and Proxenus
appeared walking side by side along the forest's edge. Just as they came opposite the arms pile, a sentry
hurried up to them escorting a frightened looking individual in Persian apparel. "This man, O Proxenus,"
the sentry said, "claims to be a messenger from Ariaeus and desires to speak to you.” Proxenus
dismissed the sentry and turned to the messenger. "Speak then."

The man stepped forward. "Ariaeus has sent me to warn you that there is a body of Tissaphernes's
troops en-sconced in the forest with orders to attack the Greek forces. He also wishes me to advise you
to post a guard on the bridge over the Tigris, as Tissaphernes plans to demolish it during the night."
Neither Proxenus nor Xenophon made an immediate answer. Suddenly Xenophon looked in Alec's
direction with dark eyes that contained parti-cles of starlight. "What is your judg-ment in the matter,
peltast?"
Hiding his astonishment, Alec ap-proached the two young men, one of whom was soon to die and
the other of whom would someday set down his own version of the words he was about to hear. "I
consider the mes-sage to be self-contradictory," Alec said, instinctively employing the dialect Xenophon
had asked the ques-tion in—Attic. "If the Persians hidden in the forest should attack us and force us to
retreat, it will be to their advantage if we retreat across the bridge and into the arms of the rest of
Tissaphernes's forces. So what advan-tage would a demolished bridge give them? If, on the other hand,
we should be victorious and force them to retreat, they will need the bridge themselves."
There was a short silence. Then, "Who are you, peltast?" Xenophon asked.
"Alexander the Lacedaemonian."
The Athenian's eyes seemed to gather more particles of starlight. "You will please accompany us to
the tent of Clearchus. It is his responsibil-ity to decide what should be done in this matter."
Four of the dramatis personae were already present in Clearchus' tent—Clearchus himself, Agias,
Menon and Socrates—and the entry of Xenophon, Proxenus, Alec and the messenger raised the total to
eight. There was yet another player, one whom only Alec could see. He wore a black cowl and his name
was Thanatos. First he would hover be-hind Clearchus, then behind Agias, then behind Menon, then
behind Socrates end then behind Proxenus.
Xenophon had the messenger re-peat what he had said at the arms pile. Then he had Alec repeat
what he had said. Clearchus listened atten-tively to both men. When they finished he went into a brown
study, mentally sorting through the data ac-cumulated during thirty years of mili-tary campaigns. Finally he
said, "I do not think that there is a body of Tis-saphernes's troops hidden in the forest. I think that
Tissaphernes, em-ploing Ariaeus as a tool, is trying to dissuade us from demolishing the bridge by
threatening to demolish it himself, thereby implying that he wants it demolished. For if we did demolish it,
we would have for de-fenses the river Tigirs on one side and the canal on the other, and simulta-neously
we would obtain for ourselves an excellent refuge abounding in all the provisions we would need. It is
clear that Tissaphernes has not been to Greece, else he would realize that the Ten Thousand would never
dream of remaining in this wretched country one moment longer than is absolutely necessary. I think it is
safe to con-clude that the bridge is not en-dangered, but we will post a guard upon it in the unlikely event
that it is."
Clearchus proved to be right: no at-tempt was made to demolish the bridge, and no attack
materialized. After an uneventful night, the Greeks crossed the Tigris and were rejoined by Ariaeus,
Tissaphernes and Orontes. The march through Media was resumed, and ten days later the armies
encamped near the Assyrian village of Adanti, the birthplace of Cyrus's mother, Parysatis. Tis-saphernes,
to show his contempt for Cyrus, declared the village in bounds and told the Greeks to help them-selves
to anything and anyone they wanted.
 
IV
Jait-Jbit
 
STILL SMARTING from "Duris the Boeotian's" snide remark, Alec resol-ved to get as much of
the forthcoming action on pasttape as possible, and shortly after dusk set out for the vil-lage with his
buddy Pasion. He also had another reason for visiting the vil-lage: to find a home for Sarai.
He had been sleeping beside her all this while in old Anytus's wagon, and increasingly of late he had
found himself wide awake and gazing up at the stars when he should have been dead to the world. He
was at a loss to explain his insomnia, but was certain it derived at least in part from the re-sponsibility

incurred by her presence on the march.
It was his intention to try to get on the good side of one of the Assyrian families by protecting them
from the marauding Greeks. Judging from the shouting and the screaming already in progress, there
should be no end of opportunities.
The shouting and the screaming in-creased both in frequency and in vol-ume as he and Pasion neared
the out-lying houses. In places, torchlight al-leviated the deepening darkness, and in the vacillating
radiance Greek sol-diers could be seen dashing in and out of doorways and bearing off girls, barley-wine
and comestibles, in that order of importance.
A terrified girl ran past Alec and Pasion, veered right, and disappeared among a small grove of trees.
A mo-ment later, a drunken Greek ap-peared, looking wildly this way and that. Alec, tempted to crack
the man over the head with the shaft of his javelin, did the next best thing and pointed in the direction
opposite to that the girl had gone in. Her pursuer took the bait, but Alec's act of chivalry did her no good,
for Pasion, when Alec made no move to do so, took after her himself.
Disgusted, Alec continued on alone. The starlit street in which he presently found himself was a place
of moving shapes and shadows, harsh laughter, shouts and screams. He passed through a shoulder-wide
alley to a second street, found a similar scene with an almost identical sound-track. A second alley
brought him to a third street just in time to see a figure dodge into the entrance of a house across the way.
The house, although one-storied and flat-roofed like all the others, had an air of opulence about it
that its neighbors lacked. Moreover, it seemed to say, "Yes, Sarai would be happy here."
He crossed the street and stepped through the entrance (the house, like many such Assyrian
dwellings, had no doors). Finding himself in a pitch-black hallway, he felt his way along the right wall till
he came to a heavily curtained archway. Boldly, he drew the curtain aside.
Before him lay a large room hung with rich tapestries depicting lion hunts, and dimly illuminated by the
glowing coals of a brazier that stood in the center of the floor. Beyond the brazier lay four empty pallets,
and huddled against the wall beyond them were three figures. A fourth figure—that of an adult
male—stood just to the right of the archway and was in the process of bringing a heavy staff down upon
Alec's head.
Alec caught the blow on his shield and knocked the staff from the man's hands. Then, noting his
attacker's As-syrian attire and deducing that he was the head of the house, he herded him across the
room to where the three fig-ures were huddled against the wall. One of them was that of a woman in her
thirties, one of a girl in her mid-teens, and one of a boy around ten.
The head of the house had dropped to his knees and was talking rapidly in a tongue similar to Sarai's.
He was not a rich man, he said, but Alec was welcome to everything he owned, so long as he did not
harm his wife and children. "I've no intention of harm-ing anybody," Alec said, "so stop groveling and
stand up." When the man obeyed, he told him about Sarai. "If you'll agree to adopt her and will promise
to treat her as though she were your own child, I promise to protect both you and your house till the
Greeks depart."
"It will be done! It will be done!"
"I'll bring her here tomorrow. Now go to bed and get some sleep." He seized the teenaged girl's arm.
"Not you," he said. "I want you beside me."
He sat down with his back against the wall and pulled her down beside him. When she shrank away
from him, he assured her that she had noth-ing to fear. He kept his shield at-tached to his left arm and
rested his javelin across his knees. Let the Greeks come—he was ready for them.
The night began to drag. Occasionally, soldiers tramped past in the street, laughing and singing. They
were probably foraging by this time, having satiated their more immediate appetites. When, around
midnight, two of them came stumbling down the hallway and drew the curtain, Alec was waiting for them
just within the archway, one arm around the girl to show them his intentions were no more honorable than
theirs, the other gripping his javelin to demonstrate that he, had no intentions of sharing his oasis.
They were so drunk they nearly fell into the room. "Ho, Simmias," one of them said, "we have
blundered into the abode of a peltast." "Let us be-gone," said the other, and they staggered back out into
the street.

Alec drew the curtain, crossed the room, reattached his shield to his left arm and sat back down
against the wall. The girl sat down next to him without having to be told. She no longer shrank from him,
he noticed. As a matter of fact, she was beginning to shrink toward him. She looked a little like his kid
sister. The way Marianne used to look when she was that age. All of a sudden he found himself hating the
Ten Thousand; hat-ing all the armies that had gone be-fore them and all the armies that would come after;
all masses of men, in short, who, the moment law and order disappeared, behaved like apes. Toward
morning, by which time the girl had shrunk so close to him that her head was lying on his shoulder, he
found himself hating himself.
He was new to this kind of assign-ment. His previous ones had involved relatively tame past events,
such as the Signing of the Declaration of In-dependence, The Boston Tea Party and The Landing of the
Pilgrims on Plymouth Rock. He had enjoyed pasttaping The Landing immensely, and afterward he had
talked YoreCo into letting him pasttape the Pilgrims' first winter in the New World. The Pilgrims' First
Winter had been a box-office fiasco, but Alec had loved it, and before YoreCo withdrew it from the
closed-circuit networks he viewed it seventeen times.
Toward morning, a faint rustling sound brought him out of a fitful sleep. The coals in the brazier had
long since turned to ashes, but dawn showed through a high window on the streetside wall, and the room
was filled with gray light. A burly figure stood in the archway—the figure of a peltast, javelin drawn back
for the cast.
Alec gripped his own javelin and jaited.
 
"JAITING , although it came under the general heading of time travel, was in actuality a defense
mechanism that had taken root in the human psyche somewhere in the late 1950's. 
It attained full growth shortly after the second fin de siecle when the electricars that were inundating
the market became more numerous than the internal combustion species they had supplanted. They were
nowhere near as mighty as their predecessors, but their numbers more than compensated for their
individual puniness, and the full- and part-time
pedestrians who had begun to breathe easier saw suddenly that the war they thought they'd won had only
just begun.
The first pedestrian to jait was a harried businessman in Ashtabula, O, who, absent-mindedly
crossing the street a second after the light changed, found himself in the path of two electricars, one
bearing down on him from his left and the other from his right. They, no doubt, would man-age to miss
each other, but neither could possibly miss him, and for him to jump forward or backward in space
would merely put him fully in the path of either. Forward or backward in space, yes—but not forward or
backward in time. It is improbable that he reasoned this out before he jaited, but jait he did,
rematerializing in the same spot approximately forty-eight hours later when the light, for-tuitously, was
green. He then finished crossing the street and, albeit dazed and disbelieving, jumped back
intime—“jbited"—as effortlessly as he had jumped forward in it. The round trip consumed slightly more
than two seconds—1.0625 to jait and 1.0625 to jbit.
A rash of similar occurrences swept the U.S. and, ultimately, the whole world. Awakened to the fact
that they were no longer prisoners of time, the human race proceeded to perfect their new ability to a
point where they could jait-jbit at will. The aver-age "jump-range" was forty-eight hours; generally the
jaiter could sus-tain his presence in the future for about fifty minutes; after that, if he didn't jbit voluntarily,
he was automatically catapulted back to the mo-ment he had jaited from, plus 2.1250 seconds.
Horse racing languished and died out. Bookies jumped off the roofs of ten-story buildings. OTB
parlors were converted into pool halls. The Dow Jones Index rose to an all-time high, fell to an all-time
low.
Learned men everywhere put on their thinking caps. Learned papers began deluging learned journals.
There were lengthy extrapolations of Godel's world-lines, endless explora-tions of quantum mechanics,
and in-terminable excursions into the field of extra-dimensional electromagnetic emanations. But for the
most part the learned papers merely served to demonstrate that the learned men who wrote them knew
no more about the nature of jait-jbiting than the rest of the jait-jbiters did.

One theory was advanced, how-ever, that held at least a teaspoonful of water. It derived from
Kant's Trans-cendental Aesthetic, and proposed that when a person jaited he unconsciously freed
himself from his a priori interpretation of reality and—still unconsciously—moved to a different point in
the noumenon. When he jbited, he simply reversed his steps.
 
REMATERIALIZING in the room some forty-eight hours in the future, Alec found the four members
of the Assy-rian family sleeping peacefully on their pallets. "Doris the Boeotian" was nowhere to be seen.
Alec's first thought was for the safety of the family. To ensure that none of them would be
accidentally injured, he left the room, ran down the hallway and out into the street.
In doing so, he did exactly what “Duris" had figured he would do. The PastCo agent, having a
shorter-than--average jump-range, had jaited, left the house and stationed himself just to the right of the
entrance. But in his eagerness to jab Alec with his javelin, he jabbed too soon. The point missed its mark
and only grazed Alec's leathern vest.
Alec jbited and leaped to the left the moment he rematerialized. But "Doris" had again
outmaneuvered him. The PastCo agent had jbited a split-second earlier and had rematerialized a
split-second sooner and was there waiting for Alec to arrive. Moreover, when he jabbed with his javelin
he jagged to the right (Alec's left) of where Alec had been, Alec's shield saved him this time, but not
al-together: in deflecting the jab he lost his balance and fell flat on his back.
During the fleeting second before he jaited he tried to think what his next move would be if he were
"Doris" and had a shorter-than--average jump-range. He thought he knew.
Re-arriving in the future, he jbited the moment he became visible; then he got to his feet and ran
around to the back of the house. He tossed his shield aside, pulled himself up onto the roof of an
adjoining shed and from there gained the roof of the house proper. He walked across it to the front of the
house and stationed him-self just behind the spot where he es-timated "Doris" would be. Then he jaited.
He rematerialized some three feet behind "Duris's" broad back. The PastCo agent was staring
disbeliev-ingly down into the street where, a few moments ago, a decoy in the form of his opponent had
appeared, only to disappear a split-second after he cast his javelin. The javelin, its point buried deep in
the hard-packed earth, marked the spot where the decoy had been.
Alec brought the shaft of his own javelin down on "Duris's" helmet with all his might, and the
agent-assassin went tumbling off the roof. Halfway to the ground, unconsciousness annul-led his future
reality, and he van-ished.
After descending from the roof, Alec retrieved his shield and returned to the street. "Doris" was lying
on his back and was out cold. Alec con-templated him for some time. If ever a coup de grace was in
order, one was now, but he was utterly incapable of delivering it. Justified or not, such an act would still
amount to murder.
He examined "Duris's" limbs, hopeful that one of them, at least, had been broken. None had. His
back, then? Alec didn't think so. Nor his neck either. Some problems solve themselves; some, you can
solve; others, you have to carry with you wherever you go. Alec sighed. Then, employing the thong he
used for slinging his javelin, he bound the agent-assassin's wrists tightly to-gether. Clustered in the
doorway of the house, the Assyrian family, awakened probably by the girl, watched with wide eyes.
Suddenly "Doris" gasped and sat up. He stared uncomprehendingly up at Alec's face. Alec smiled
benignly clown on him. He waited till the man's eyes cleared, then, "You have two choices," he said.
"You can jait, and gamble that you can get your hands free before I show up and kill you, or you can
accompany me back to camp, where I promise to release you, and where you can start explain-ing to
your captain what became of your javelin, and also, since it doesn't appear to be anywhere in the
present, what happened to your shield."
"Doris" got slowly to his feet. Sev-eral deep breaths were enough to restore the wind that had been
knocked from his lungs but fell far short of restoring the wind that had been knocked out of his sails.
"You're a fool," he said without conviction.
"Next time I won't be. You can count on it."
"Doris" said no more. A trumpet sounded in the distance, and the two men headed back to camp.

 
V
Harassment
 
“I REFUSE TO GO," Sarai declared.
"I am not an old shoe that you can cast aside without a moment's notice!"
"But I'm not casting you aside," Alec said desperately. "I've found a home for you."
"Well, I am not going to live in it!"
The sun was climbing into the blue morning sky. The Greek army was preparing to march. The
camp-followers were reloading their wag-ons. Not only was there no time to argue, Alec, who in
addition to having been up all night had had no break-fast either, was disinclined to. Sling-ing Sarai over
his shoulder, he set out once more for the village of Adanti.
Immediately she began to kick and scream. The camp-followers inter-rupted their preparations to
watch the show. Attracted by the screams, half a dozen scrawny dogs converged on Alec and began
harassing his heels. Despite all this, he probably would have been able to keep his temper if, just as he
entered the encompassing fields, Sarai hadn't got free.
How she managed it, he had no idea. One moment she was lying across his shoulder; the next she
was lying on the ground before him; and the next she was up and running back toward the camp of the
camp-followers.
He took after her and tackled her. Angrily, he pulled her to her feet and began shaking her. A wave
of raucous laughter came from the camp of the camp-followers, augmenting his anger, and he continued
shaking her. Then, to his consternation, he found himself kissing her.
She kissed him back. Repeatedly. At last he came to his senses and drew away. He let go of her
arms. Somehow, standing there before him, her eyes faintly misted, she no longer reminded him quite so
much of his kid sister. Moreover, he had badly underestimated her age. She ap-peared to be seventeen,
rather than sixteen. In fact, she might even be eighteen. Maybe even nineteen.
Could she possibly be twenty-one?
Angry once again, this time at the direction of his thoughts, he seized her wrist. "Come on!"
She said not a word as he led her over the fields to the village. Only when the Assyrian family ran to
meet them did she break her silence. "Take me with you, Alexander—please!"
He saw that she was crying, and for a moment he weakened. But the problem that her presence on
the march had posed before was as noth-ing to the problem it would pose now. "I'm sorry," he said
brusquely, "but I can't. Goodby, Sarai."
He turned quickly and walked away. "It is not that you can't, it is that you are afraid!" she called after
him. Then she began to cry again, and he walked as fast as he could to escape the sound of her sobs.
The morning mist should have dissipated long ago, yet it continued to rise round him, making it difficult to
see. It occurred to him to wipe his eyes, and when he did so, the mist disap-peared.
 
A FIVE DAYS' MARCH brought the Cyreian forces and their escort to the river Zabatus. Camp
was made, and Clearchus, concerned over his men's increasing distrust of the Persians, ar-ranged a
meeting with Tissaphernes. After Clearchus outlined the situation Tissaphernes proposed that a second
meeting be held and that all the Greek officers attend it so that the problem could be discussed more
fully. Clearchus agreed. Some of the other Greek generals, however, were skeptical, and when the time
came only Menon, Proxenus, Socrates and Agias, plus some twenty captains, ac-companied him. The
execution took place in Tissaphernes's tent. It was swift and efficient. After the five gen-erals lay dead,
the twenty captains who had waited outside were sys-tematically massacred.
When the news reached the Greek camp, the Greeks panicked, officers and "enlisted men" alike.
Except Xenophon.
But, strictly speaking, Xenophon was neither. The Athenian, or so it was said, had joined the Greek
mer-cenaries at the behest of his friend Proxenus and against the wishes of his tutor Socrates. While

generally looked upon as an officer, he had never re-ceived an official appointment.
It was he who confronted Ariaeus, Artaozus and Mithridates when they rode into the camp of the
demoralized Greeks at the head of a detachment of cavalry and demanded that the Ten Thousand lay
down their arms. Only Clearchus, Agias and Socrates had been executed, they said. Proxenus and
Menon had been spared and would eventually be freed. Xenophon, who knew better, demanded that
they be freed at once.
Ariaeus, Artaozus and Mithridates, who had expected instant compliance, blinked. "The King will not
take kindly to this," Ariaeus said.
"I did not intend that he should."
Again, the three Persians blinked. Then, angrily, they wheeled their horses and rode off at the head of
their horsemen.
That night Xenophon convened the surviving generals in his tent. "Why is it," he asked, "that men
become blind when they most need to see?
"It is true that we are stranded leaderless in a hostile country," he continued. "But leaders can be
re-placed, and were we not stranded be- fore this terrible thing occurred? And consider: Before, we did
not know for certain who our enemies were: now we do. Before, we were parties to a truce that forbade
us to rape the land: now the truce has been violated and we can take anything we need. Granted, we no
longer have guides; but could worse guides be found than those we had?
"Now, you are probably thinking, `Yes, but we are surrounded by two forces—the armies of
Ariaeus as well as the armies of Tissaphernes.' But were we not similarly surrounded be-fore? And is it
sensible to fear the armies of Tissaphernes, which we ourselves put to rout, and is it any more sensible to
fear the armies of Ariaeus, which put themselves to rout? The tragic deaths of Clearchus and the others
are to be regretted, but we have merely to tear aside the veil that fear has blinded us with to see that
Tissaphernes's treachery has bettered, not worsened, our plight."
Morale was restored. That same night, new generals were appointed: Timasion of Troy to replace
Clear-chus, Xanthicles of Achaia to replace Socrates, Cleanor of Arcadia to replace Agias, Philesius of
Achaia to re-place Menon, and Xenophon of Athens to replace Proxenus. New cap-tains were
appointed also. One of them was "Alexander of Lacedaemon".
Alec's initial astonishment when a messenger brought him the news was as nothing compared to his
sub-sequent astonishment when Xenophon summoned him to his tent and informed him he was to be his
aide. He was delighted as well as as-tonished. As the Athenian's aide, he would be able to pasttape the
author-hero of the Anabasis-Katabasis practically twenty-four hours a day.
Overwhelmed, he said, "But why, Xenophon? Why, with so many sea-soned officers to choose
from, did you choose someone like myself? Only a few short moments ago I was a mere peltast."
Xenophon, resplendent in brand new military grab that he must have packed all the way from Athens,
smiled. "For the same reason I saw to it that you were appointed locharch. Because you can think. I
saw this at once at the arms pile at Sitace. Most of the other captains and a large number of the generals,
I regret to say, cannot. Oh, they think they can. But what they actually do is reshape reality to accord
with the specifica-tions of their predilections. It will be good having someone at my side who can
distinguish between a javelin with a point and one with a hook. I shall expect you in my tent at sunrise."
Alec thanked him and left. As Ile was making his way toward his and Pasion's tent, a faint click came
from his helmet ridge, informing him that micro-tape cartridge no. 3 had run its course. He replaced it by
starlight, after ascertaining no one was in the immediate vicinity. The cartridge case now contained
three-fifths of the raw material for pastacular Y-709, tenta-tively titled "The Trek of the Ten Thousand".
It occurred to him that it might not be proper for a captain to sleep in the same tent with a peltast. He
decided that he didn't much care whether it was or not, and when he reached the tent he crawled in
beside the Arca-dian, who was already asleep, and laid aside his helmet, which he hadn't bothered to put
back on. He closed his eyes.
Now that he no longer had Sarai to worry about, he expected to get a good night's sleep for a
change. In this, he was thwarted. Something kept creeping up to the back doorway of his mind every
time he dozed off, and ringing the doorbell; then run-ning away when he opened the door. It kept

harassing him all night, and he was wide awake when the trumpet sounded reveille, the identity of his
caller still unknown.
Xenophon convened the generals, both the old and the new, and prop-osed that all tents and
carriages be burned to expedite the retreat. He also proposed that the Ten Thousand march in square
formation with the camp-followers and baggage-cattle in their midst. Three days march to the north, he
said, was a large village named Diessa where provisions could be obtained.
The Greek army had no sooner crossed the Zabatus than Mithridates, heading a sizeable body of
cavalry and a detachment of bowmen, began harassing the two taxeis commanded by Xenophon that
comprised the Greeks' rear. Lacking cavalry of his own, Xenophon was unable to re-taliate, so that night
he augmented his taxeis with half a hundred horse-men and a company of slingers. The next morning
Mithridates, upon receiving a dose of his own medicine, dropped back.
The line of march began bordering the east bank of the Tigris. After the Greek army passed the
deserted city of Mespila, Tissaphernes staged an at-tack that, thanks to the accuracy of Xenophon's
slingers, got nowhere. Arriving in Diessa, the Greeks loaded up with provisions and pressed on. On the
fifth day of the march they en-tered a range of hills, where they were harassed by Tissaphernes.
Tis-saphernes continued his harassment tactics on the plain beyond, entered the foothills of the
Carduchian mountains and occupied a height below which the Greeks, hemmed in by the Tigris on their
left, would have to pass. Xenophon, however, foiled him by occupying the height just above, whereupon
Tissaphernes, typically, fled.
The mountains loomed closer and closer on the Greeks' right. Inevita-bly, river and mountains met,
and they found themselves in a cul de sac, the river being too deep to ford and the mountains, at this
point, being too precipitous to cross. Perceiving their predicament, Tissaphernes at-tacked, hut he was
too overcautious to take full advantage of the situation and the Greeks managed to break through his lines
and retreat south-ward. Safe for the moment, they set-tled down in a group of deserted vil-lages and
licked their wounds.
Again Xenophon convened the gen-erals. He outlined the situation for them. Babylonia and Media
lay to the south, Susa and Ecbatana to the east, Lydia and Ionia to the west, and Ar-menia to the north.
To proceed in the direction of Susa and Ecbatana would mean going the long way around; to proceed in
the direction of .Lydia and Ionia would necessitate fording the river, a virtually impossible task; while to
proceed in the direction of Albania would involve crossing the Carduchian mountains and coping with the
savage Carduchi.
It was finally decided that an at-tempt should be made to cross the mountains. If it was successful,
the Tigris could be forded near its source. Two wild boars and an ass were sac-rificed. From their
marmoreal palace high on the shining slopes of Olym-pus, the gods watched the weary Greeks reform
their ranks and move out. If they were propitiated, they gave no sign.
 
VI
Rain
 
XENOPHON'S Anabasis says that after the Greeks surmounted the first summits, the Carduchi
deserted their villages in the windings and recesses below, and fled.
Afterward, however, the savage mountain people reorganized and at-tacked the descending Greeks
from the rear, killing and wounding a large number of Xenophon's men.
Half the baggage-cattle were aban-doned in an effort to augment the ar-my's mobility. After filing
through a narrow pass, the Greeks entered a second sequence of hills. There were a number of minor
skirmishes, but for the most part the Carduchi seemed to be biding their time. Toward evening, a wind
sprang up, and the tempera-ture began to drop. Sometime during the night, rain began to fall. It was still
falling when the Greeks rolled out of their sodden blankets and con-fronted the new day.
The march was resumed. The rain continued to fall, and showed no sign of abating. The Carduchi
confined their activities to harassing the Greeks' rearmost taxeis, and more of Xenohpon's men were

killed and wounded. That night, the Athenian brought before the other generals two Carduchi whom his
men had cap-tured. The other generals interro-gated the two prisoners separately. They asked the first
whether he knew of another route that the Greeks might follow. When he said No, he was decapitated in
the presence of the second. When asked the same ques-tion, the second answered, "Yes, I know of
such a route, and I will be honored to lead the way myself. But at one point there is a height that must be
taken if a successful passage is to be made. I will conduct you there. Gladly."
The Greeks moved out early the next morning, following the new route. Alec's first impression, when
he saw the height, was of' a mac-rocosmic potato some cloud-tall giant had dug halfway out of the earth
and left to rot in the sun. It was afternoon by then, and the rain was still falling. When Xenophon called
for volun-teers, Alec was one of the first to step forward. As he did so, he thought he saw the Athenian
frown. Then, glanc-ing down the long line of volunteers, he frowned himself, and wished he hadn't been
quite so eager to pasttape the forthcoming assault. For "Doris the Boeotian" had also stepped for-ward.
A taxis consisting of five lochoi, or companies, was formed. Timasion of Troy commanded the
taxis, and the five lochoi were commanded respec-tively by Aristonymus of Methydrium, Agasias of
Stymphalus, Callimachus of Parrhasia, Aristeas of Chios and "Alex-ander of Lacedaemon".
Numbered among Aristeas's peltasts was "Doris the Boeotian".
 
WHEN THE CARDUCHI perceived the Greeks intent, they began rolling boulders down the side of
the moun-tain. The assault force, however, had been divided into two teams, and by this time the
foremost team, which consisted of' the lochoi of Aristeas, Callimachus and Alec, were halfway to the
summit, having followed a more direct and less conspicuous route.
The "potato" had resolved into slopes made muddy by the rain, which still continued to fall, and,
higher up, gaunt precipices scarred by treacherous trails. Aristeas com-manded the advance company
and Alec the rear. Toward dusk, the former breasted an eminence and surprised a body of Carduchi
who, be-lieving themselves safe, had sat down to warm themselves around a com-munal bonfire. They
fought with commendable ferocity till they saw they were outnumbered; then they fled down the
mountainside like frightened goats.
Aristeas and Callimachus thought that the eminence was the summit, but they soon perceived that
there was another eminence above it. How-ever, darkness had descended, so the final assault had to be
put off till morning. A message was sent to Timasion of Troy updating him on their position and
suggesting that Aristonymus and Agasias storm the summit from the other side of the mountain.
At dawn the advance was resumed. The rain had ceased during the night and had been supplanted
by a gray mist. The trail was so badly eroded that in some places it was necessary to proceed single file.
The mist didn't help matters either, although from Alec's point of view it was an asset rather than a
liability. It gave the height a Gothic air and added a mys-terious quality to the deep ravines and serpentine
windings far below. In a word, it provided atmosphere.
Absorbed in pasttaping the background, Alec forgot about the ac-tion, and in the process committed
an unforgivable sin: he fell behind his own troops. He did not even notice when an abrupt turning of the
narrow trail hid the rearmost of them from view. Enthusiastically he pasttaped a distant misted precipice,
faced the steep slope of the height and pasttaped a gaunt growth of trees a dozen feet above the trail. A
long-ago rivening of the rocks had produced a narrow fissure opposite where he stood. As he pasttaped
it, his eyes caught a sudden movement in the shadows, a dull gleam of bronze. His absorption in his art
disintegrated abruptly and he leaped to one side just in time to avoid being impaled on a javelin.
Grinning, a burly peltast with por-cine eyes stepped out of the fissure, and vanished.
Jaited.
Alec jaited too. Rematerializing on the narrow trail 1.0625 seconds later, he dodged into the fissure.
In doing so, he staked his life on the assumption that "Duris the Boeo-tian" would not be there
awaiting him. "Doris" wasn't.
The fissure extended into the cliff for about ten feet before the two walls came together. Alec
positioned him-self with his back against the juncture and, reasonably safe for the moment, tried to
anticipate his opponent's next move.

To do so, he needed to know not only where the PastCo agent was, but when.
He got nowhere until, suddenly, he remembered the growth of trees he had pasttaped two days ago.
The trees would provide an excellent position from which to cast a javelin, and pro-vide protection as
well. Moreover, they would give "Doris" an advantage analogous to that provided him by the Assyrian
rooftop.
It was a good bet, then, that after jaiting the PastCo agent had climbed the slope and positioned
himself be-hind the trees. His shorter-than--average jump-range would have permitted him to do this
easily before Alec rematerialized, and he could hardly have failed to see Alec dodge into the fissure.
But if he was stationed behind the trees waiting for Alec to come out, was he still in the future or had
he jumped back to the present?
It was a critical question.
The answer, Alec was certain, lay in the tendency of most jait-jbit com-batants to avoid the obvious.
At this stage of the game, the parallel be-tween the present contest and the previous one was almost
exact. In the previous one, "Doris" had stationed himself in the future, thus, at first thought, for him to
have done so in the present one would constitute the acme of obviousness.
But not on second thought. Granted, his stationing himself in the future would be an obvious
stratagem. But wouldn't his doing just the oppo-site be an even more obvious stratagem?
Logic, then, favored his being in the future. But it didn't guarantee the fact. Alec shrugged. Life was
chary when it came to handing out guaran-tees. Without further hesitation, he jbited.
He rematerialized in the fissure ap-proximately three seconds after "Duris" had stepped out of it and
jaited, and exactly 2.1250 seconds after he himself had jaited from the narrow trail. The only noticeable
dif-ference between the two points in time was the character of the morning mist. In the future, it
was—would be—skimmed milk; in the present, it was pea soup. This much, at least, was in Alec's favor
if he'd guessed wrong.
He moved to the mouth of the fis-sure and, raising his shield till he could just see over its bronze rim,
began backing out onto the trail. Mist-shrouded, grotesque, the height took shape above him. The trees
came gradually into view, gaunt, ghost-like, unreal. Something gleamed among them, pierced the morning
mist like lightning from the fingertips of Zeus. That which is obvi-ous to one man is seldom obvious to
another: the structure Alec had built faltered on its false foundation and came crashing down upon him,
brick by logical brick.
His shield was as authentic as mod-ern technology had been—would be—able to make it, but its
authen-ticity was its Achilles' heel; a bronze rim, four layers of imitation bull's hide and a bronze boss fall
abysmally short of impenetrableness. The layers of ersatz hide slowed the javelin's momentum, but
enough remained to allow the point to imbed itself deeply in his left shoulder. The double im-pact
knocked him flat on his back, and the third impact—that of his back against solid slate—tore the javelin
from his shoulder and his shield from his left arm and sent both weapons hurtling into the depths below.
But he still had his own javelin and he still had full use of his right arm. A dream-like calm settled over
him as he watched "Duris the Boeotian" de-scend the slope, cautiously at first and then with increasing
confidence. Watched him advance along the nar-row ledgelike trail. Watched with half-closed eyes,
watched without moving a muscle. He waited—waited till he could see the globules of sweat upon the
PastCo agent's upper lip; till the man's soaring confidence reduced to near zero his reactive ability to jait.
And then, with a single flowing movement that consumed the last morsel of his strength, he sat up, drew
back his right arm and cast his javelin straight toward "Duris's" chest.
"Duris's" right foot was mere inches from the edge of the trail and he had lifted the rock over his head
preparatory to bashing out Alec's brains. However, he managed to elude the javelin by twisting his upper
body to the left. Unfortunately for him, the maneuver threw him off balance, and when he got rid of the
rock in the only way he could without dropping it on his head—i.e., by casting it forward—he lost the
last of his equilibrium. Perhaps he could have jaited, but he didn't—probably be-cause he realized
Thanatos would jait too. Presently he began to scream as, arms flailing, he topped backward into
nothingness. It was a long scream, the longest Alec had ever heard. It cut off abruptly, like a broken
sound track.

 
IT BEGAN TO RAIN AGAIN. Alec lay upon his back, and the falling rain was cold upon his face.
It came down steadily. It formed Lilliputian lakes on the rocky trail, and the lakes overflowed their banks
and created Lilliputian rivers, and the rivers flowed all around him. From far above came the sound of a
trumpet. It was followed by the fierce battle cry of the Greeks—"Eleleu! Eleleu!"—as they stormed the
summit.
His left shoulder had gone numb a moment after "Duris's" javelin had pierced it. Now, feeling began
to come back. As yet, there was no pain—only a remote throbbing that seemed less a part of him than
the ground on which he lay, than the fall-ing rain. Suddenly, and for no appa-rent reason, he jbited
mentally to the scene of his first jait-jbit encounter with "Doris", rematerializing in the Assyrian house
where he had left Sarai. Ile saw again the room in which he had spent the night; saw "Duris" standing in
the dawn-lit doorway. Once again, he jaited . . . saw the four pallets lying on the floor and the four
sleeping forms upon them ...
"Sarai," he whispered into the fall-ing rain. "Sarai."
No, she had not been there. And she should have been. The moment had been two days in the
future—two days, almost, since he had farmed her out and gone his way with the Ten Thousand. There
should have been five pallets, not four. Five sleeping forms ...
What had they done to her, these people' who had seemed so eager to take her in? What had he
done to her in his haste to be rid of her? Had he killed her too—killed her in the same way he had killed
his kid sister? By shirking the responsibility she en-tailed? He had known all along what kind of a crowd
Marianne had been traveling with, and yet he had let her go on traveling with it because her absorption
with her new friends had kept her out of his hair; had freed him from her. He was completely to blame for
what had happened to her and he was completely to blame for whatever had happened to Sarai. Their
blood was on his hands.
His hands were lying on his chest. Lifting his head, he looked at them. Yes, there was blood on them.
The blood of Sarai and Marianne. He tried to wash the blood away by splashing them in the Lilliputian
lakes and riv-ers, hut it was no use and when he looked at them again there was more blood on them
than before and his left shoulder was a deep dark well of pain. It was going to be a hard winter, this first
one of the New World. He was glad that he would be able to spend it with the Pilgrims; glad that he
would be able to suffer with them and go without. Spring would be late in coming, but it would come,
and he would give thanks when the last snows melted and the first birds sang. Thanks for the suffering
that had been inflicted upon him, the suffering that would wash the blood from his hands, the blood of
Sarai and Marianne.
 
WHEN XENOPHON, at the head of a detachment of Rhodesian slingers, found him, his mind
cleared briefly and he said, "See to it, Xenophon, that Pasion wears my helmet instead of his own and
order him to wear it at all times, except when he sleeps." Then the moment of clarity faded and he was
back home in his study, wait-ing for Marianne to come in and tell him the Terrible Truth; and then, for
some mysterious reason, the study dissolved and he was standing in a golden field, kissing a girl with
night-black hair; and then the field dissolved too, and with it the girl Sarai, and log walls, their chinks filled
with mud, rose round him, and it was night, and cold. Cold night, night cold, cold night.
 
VII
Reunion
 
THE NIGHT ENDURED for eight days. Toward dawn, Alec had a "dream". In it, Xenophon
came into the tent where he was sleeping, and said, "Let us talk about your little sister, Alex-ander."
The tent was poorly lighted, and Alec had difficulty seeing the Athe-nian's face. "How did you know
I have a little sister, Xenophon?"
"During your moments of fever you have spoken much, and it is wise that we discuss this matter now

so that your recovery will not he further de-layed. How many summers has your little sister seen?"
"Twenty-two."
"Then she is not really such a little sister after all."
"No."
Xenophon leaned over the pallet where Alec lay. "But having married very young, she is unhappy—is
that not so?"
"Yes, Xenophon. She is unhappy." 
"How many children has she borne?"
"Three."
"And are all of them ugly and mal-formed?"
Indignant, Alec tried to sit up. He discovered that he couldn't. "No, Xenophon, they are not ugly and
mal-formed. They are beautiful."
"But do you not find it strange that this unhappy sister of yours who was married so young to a man
she was not suited for and who was not suited for her should have borne three beautiful children?"
"It—it is strange in a way, I sup-pose."
"Your sister cries frequently, does she not? And wishes she were dead?"
Again Alec tried to sit up. This time, he almost succeeded. "She never cries!" he said. "And far from
wishing she were dead, she loves life more than anyone I've ever known!"
"But do you not find this strange also? That a woman who is unhappily married to a man she does not
love and who does not love her should never cry and should have an over-whelming desire to live?"
Alec did not answer.
"Do you think it is possible that your sister may be happy?" Xenophon asked. "That through sheer
good for-tune she may have married someone for whom she was ideally suited and who was ideally
suited for her?"
"But she had to marry him, don't you see? And it was my fault! Our par-ents were killed in an
accident when she was fifteen. That made me automatically responsible for her. And I failed to live up to
that responsibility. I failed her! Every time I look at another girl I see her face! Every time I—"
Xenophon raised his hand. "I have seen you torture yourself long enough, Alexander. Ever since we
found you on the mountainside you have been crying out over and over not about the crime which 'Duds
the Boeotian' clearly committed against you, but about imaginary crimes you yourself committed against
your sister and against a slave girl named Sarai. Do you not understand that if the presence of tears
denotes unhappi-ness, their absence can very well de-note the exact opposite? Do you not understand
that if a desire to die de-notes despair, a desire to live must almost of necessity denote a lack of despair?
And do you not know that a husband and wife who are deeply in love are more apt to have beautiful
children than a husband and wife who are not? Your crimes are made of mists, Alexander—the one
against your `little' sister, and by extention, the one against the slave girl Sarai. So sleep, and cry out no
more."
 
WHEN ALEC NEXT AWOKE, it was dawn, and Pasion was standing beside his pallet. Through
the goatskin walls of the tent came the multifarious sounds an army makes when it is getting ready to
move. There were shouts, curses, the whinnying of horses and the rattling of weaponry. In the
background there was another sound—a roaring rushing sound, as of great quantities of water flowing.
He must have frowned, for Pasion knelt beside him and said, "It is the river Centrites that you hear,
Alexan-der. Eight days have passed since you were wounded, and the army has crossed the Carduchian
Mountains." Alec's first thought was for his hel-met. At first glance, there was noth-ing to distinguish the
one upon his friend's head from a thousand others of similar design; but a second glance revealed the
technological nuances that marked it unmistakably as a pro-duct of YoreCo's Special Equipment Shop.
His next thought was for his micro-tape cartridge case. Panic touched him when he realized that his
leath-ern vest had been removed, then re-ceded when he saw the vest lying be-side the pallet. A quick
palpation of the inside pocket assured him that the case was still there, and simple logic assured him that
the tapes were too.

He fought to keep his relief from showing on his face. "Whose tent is this, Pasion?" he asked.
"Xenophon's. You would appear to be his favorite captain, Alexander, since it is the only tent the
army has, and seems to have been obtained for your benefit alone, as Xenophon sel-dom sleeps in it
himself. Yes, I would say definitely that you are his favorite captain. Else why did he delegate me, the
same day you were wounded, to oversee your recovery, and relieve me of all other duties?"
A deep lethargy dulled Alec's curiosity, and he said only, "Have we crossed the Centrites?"
"No. We are still on the Cardu-chian side. The Carduchi still threaten our rear, and on the heights
across the river there is an army of Arme-nians, Mardians and Chaldeans waiting for us to attempt a
crossing. Downstream there is a place where we can more easily ford the stream: that is why we are
moving out."
A Cilician slave entered the tent, bearing a steaming bowl of noisome gruel. He knelt down opposite
Pa sion and began spoon-feeding the pa-tient. The gruel had a familiar taste that resurrected in Alec's
mind memories of having been similarly fed during his eight-day bout with the in-fection engendered by
"Duris's" dirty javelin point. As soon as the Cilician slave departed, two Syrian slaves came in carrying a
crude litter made of saplings and sheepskins. Under Pa-sion's directions, they lifted the pa-tient upon it
and bore him outside.
The slanting sunlight blasted Alec's retinas and for a while he could not see much of anything. Then,
gradu-ally, he made out the ranks of Greek soldiers that were being formed, and presently, beyond them,
he saw the gleaming ribbon of the Centrites, and the sheer cliffs that comprised the opposite bank. Upon
the clifftops he distinguished the tiny figures of horses and horsemen.
The litter swayed soporifically as the bearers bore it along the river bank in the army's wake. The
river widened, grew shallower. The wily Xenophon had divided the army into two main groups—super
taxeis, as it were—one under his command, the other under Cheirisophus's. Cheirisophus's half entered
the stream first, and Xenophon's half remained behind with the camp-followers and the baggage-cattle.
The Carduchi, high in the hills behind, unleashed successive volleys of ar-rows, all of which fell short. The
Greeks crossing the river began shouting A! la! la! la!", the peltasts and hoplites hanging their lances
against their shields. But the Arme-nian, Mardian and Chaldean troops, who had abandoned the heights
and formed their line directly opposite their advancing foe, did not budge.
Then the wily Xenophon led a large body of cavalry upstream and made as if to cross at the site of
the recently struck camp. Immediatley the forces facing Cheirisophus, fearing they might be outflanked,
retreated. In-stead of pursuing them, Cheirisophus, when he gained the Armenian side of the river,
charged the heights, where only a token force remained, and took them with ease.
Meanwhile, Xenophon came back downstream and drove off the Car-duchian bowmen, who had
ventured partway down the hillsides. Af-terward, the camp-followers and the baggage-cattle began
crossing the river. Alec's bearers set their burden down on the lip of the gently sloping bank and awaited
their turn. The camp-followers were a colorful lot. Somehow they had managed to hang onto one of their
wagons and had ac-complished the herculean task of get-ting it across the mountains. Drawn by a team
of oxen, it lurched alarm-ingly as it entered the river, regained it equilibrium as the water rose past the
hubs of its flimsy wheels. Alec recognized it as old Anytus's.
Presently he saw old Anytus him-self. The weapons-repairman was wad-ing behind the wagon,
thigh-deep in water. Wading beside him, hip-deep, was a girl. A slender girl with a peri-like face and
long black hair. A girl wearing a red blouse and a blue skirt, frayed and faded from innumerable
washings. A girl with a red-and-blue shawl draped over her shoulders. Her name got as far as his lips,
but for the life of him he couldn't utter it, and then, intuitively, she turned and looked straight at where he
lay, prop-ped painfully on one elbow, and when she recognized him she gave a little cry and began
floundering through the water, falling once and vanishing from view, and finally run-ning up the bank and
kneeling beside him, crying, "Alexander, Alexander, I did not know you were ill!"
Still he could not utter her name, but there was a good reason now, a sound reason, for his lips were
cov-ered with hers. The river water that drenched her hair ran down upon his face and neck. It was only
when she raised her head to catch her breath, when, defying the law of gravity and his own weakness, he
put his arms around her waist, that the name at last found freedom. "Sarai."

Tears began intermingling with the river water that fell like rain upon his face. "I would have stayed in
the vil-lage, O Alexander, but I could not bear to be so far apart from you. I ran away as soon as you left
and came back to the camp of the camp-followers. I promised Anytus that I would cook and wash for
him if he would take me along, and he agreed. Dear Alexander, I hope you are not angry with me."
He looked up into her large brown eyes, realized for the first time how deep they were. Saw for the
first time the promises they held. "I'm glad you ran away."
She fell to kissing him again, then abruptly drew back. He saw her blush; then he, too, became aware
that they had an audience. It was quite a large one, consisting, in addi-tion to the two bearers, of several
hundred grinning peltasts and several hundred grinning hoplites. Sitting On his horse a short distance
away, re-garding the reunion with luminous dark eyes, was Xenophon himself.
Alec found himself not only equal to the occasion hut capable of taking advantage of it. "I request,
Xenophon," he said, "that in addition to the favors you have already accorded me you accord me one
more. I would like to have this slave girl at my side for the remainder of the march in order that I may
look after her."
Zenophon smiled. "It would seem, Alexander, that you need more look-ing after than she, but how
better could such a purpose be served? Re-quest granted."
 
VIII.
Snow
 
TWO DAYS AFTER entering Ar-menia, the Ten Thousand passed around the source of the
Tigris. At this point, Tiribazus, the deputy-governor, put in his appearance. The Greek generals met with
him and agreed, in exchange for his promise not to interfere with the march, to re-frain from vandalizing
any of the vil-lages in their path. Three days later, with Tiribazus following at a discreet distance with a
large body of cavalry, the Greek army arrived at the palace of Sequanor and quartered in the vil-lages
encompassing it.
That night, it snowed heavily, and in the morning none of the men wanted to get up. To shame them
into doing so, Xenophon began cut-ting wood. Pasion was the first to follow his example, and soon he
and Sarai had a roaring fire going in front of Alec's/Xenophon's tent. Meanwhile, Alec, who had
recuperated sufficiently to do for himself, discovered that some time during the night his micro-tape
cartridge case had been stolen.
He knew it had been in the pocket of' his leathern vest last night because he had replaced it there
after insert-ing the fifth and final cartridge in "Pasion's" helmet while the Arcadian was out foraging and
while Xenophon, during one of his rare visits to the tent, was napping on the pallet he had procured for
Sarai. Sarai had re-marked on what a strange little box it was and had asked what it was for, and Alec
had answered, "To keep strange little things in."
Clearly, "Doris the Boeotian" had been wrong in assuming AgoCo didn't have an agent-assassin on
the March. Just as clearly, that agent was either Sarai or Pasion.
Sarai could safely be ruled out. AgoCo would hardly have sent a nine-teen- or even a twenty-one
year old girl on a mission that involved a 3,000 mile hike. It was true that she hadn't shown up till half of it
was over, but the second half was by far the more arduous, and it was unlikely that a twenty-first century
American girl would be able to survive it. The fact that Sarai had managed to survive it thus far merely
served to argue that she was what she both seemed and claimed to be—a Babylonian peasant girl.
That left Pasion. Pasion slept just within the doorway of the tent and had strict orders to rouse
Xenophon and/or Alec should anyone try to en-ter. Since Alec removed his vest each night before going
to bed and used it to augment his rather thin blanket, the Arcadian could easily have lifted the cartridge
case after Alec and Sarai had fallen asleep. Xenophon had left early in the evening, so there would have
been no witnesses.
Before passing judgment on his friend, however, Alec inspected the tent's goatskin walls. None of
them had been cut. Next, he went outside and checked the tent stakes. All were securely in place, nor

were there any footprints in the snow.
It had to be Pasion. Not only was he the logical candidate, he was the only candidate.
It was he who had made friends with Alec, not the other way around as it had at first seemed.
Probably he hadn't intended to steal the cartridge case till the Ten Thousand reached Trebisond, but
when Alec's helmet had been handed to him outright he had changed his mind and decided to pasttape
the rest of the pastacular himself. To do so, he had needed the fifth and final micro-tape cartridge, and
not knowing Alec had secretly inserted it, he had stolen the case.
Alec still might have had doubts concerning his friend's guilt had there not been still another factor. In
ac-cepting Alec's helmet, Pasion had turned over his own for Alec to wear. Now that Alec was up and
about, Pa-sion should have asked for his own back. He hadn't.
Alec sighed. He supposed he could expect to be assassinated any minute of the day or night now.
But he rather expected Pasion would hold off till they got to Trebisond. He was, after all, responsible for
Alec's well -being, and would be the first to hear about it if something untoward hap-pened to his charge.
For the time being, Alec decided to wait and watch.
 
THE FOLLOWING MORNING, after again quartering in the villages, the Ten Thousand reformed
their ranks and resumed the march. Tiribazus proved no more trustworthy than had Tissaphernes—an
eventuality. that surprised no one—and set up an am-bush in a range of rolling hills; but Xenophon,
anticipating such a move, went on ahead with a taxis of peltasts and a detachment of cavalry, attacked
the deputy-governor's forces from the rear and put them to rout. Three days later, the Greek army
crossed the Euphrates near its source.
Now, a fierce north wind began to blow. More snow fell, and the wind piled it into knee-deep drifts.
Many of the baggage-cattle began dropping from exhaustion. On the fourth day after the crossing, some
of the men began collapsing from malnutrition and fatigue. The rest staggered on on frostbitten feet,
blinded by the white-ness of the snow.
On the evening of the fifth day, Cheirisophus, in the lead, look over a group of Armenian villages.
Several were set aside for Xenophon's rear taxeis, which were being harassed by the remnants of
Tiribazus's cavalry. When the inhabitants of one of them turned out to be inhospitable, Poly-crates, one
of Xenophon's captains, asked permission to move in on it with a company of peltasts. Xenophon gave
his okay, but suggested that Polycrates wait till morning. Despite the rigors of the march, Alec had fully
recuperated, and, sick of waiting for Pasion to make some untoward move, decided to provide the
Arcadian with an ideal opportunity. So he asked Xenophon if he could accompany Polycrates. When
Xenophon said he could, Pasion, as Alec had antici-pated, promptly insisted that he be al-lowed to go
along. After a moment's hesitation, Xenophon gave his ap-proval.
The company set forth in a gray morning murk. Predictably, Pasion wasted no time in gaining Alec's
side. "Have you ever visited Arcadia, Alex-ander?" he asked.
"No."
"I hope someday you will. It is lovely there. The greenness of the fields is surpassed in beauty only by
the greenness of the olive groves, the blueness of the sea only by the blueness of the sky."
The nostalgia sounded genuine, but Alec didn't buy it. The company, by this time, had reached the
perimeter of the village. The houses were un-derground, but the warmth rising from them had melted the
snow, be-traying their location. As the peltasts moved in, scores of Armenian peas-ants armed with clubs
and spears boiled out of a dozen well-like doorways.
The peltasts met them head-on, and hand-to-hand combats, became the order of the day. Alec,
keeping a wary eye on Pasion, engaged an ape-like Armenian wielding a heavy cudgel. He was about to
jait-jbit and overcome the man from behind when Pasion leaped between them and caught the
Armenian's descending cudgel on his shield. The force of the blow knocked the Arcadian to his knees
and broke the straps that held the shield on his left arm. The Arme-nian raised the cudgel for a second
blow. Alec jaited, got behind the Armenian, jbited and grabbed the cudgel. Twisting it free from the
man's grasp, he hit him over the head with it. The Armenian collapsed. A few moments later, hostilities
came to an end as those of the villagers who were still on their feet took to their heels and disappeared

into the gray murk.
The Armenian's cudgel, if it had connected with "Pasion's" helmet, would have demolished the tape
re-corder hidden in its ridge. It had been a close call, both for Pasion and the pastacular.
Alec helped the Arcadian to his feet. It was the latter who spoke first. "You move with the swiftness
of Zeus' lightning, Alexander. I owe you my life."
Alec sighed. "No more than I owe you mine."
And it was so. Further proof of Pa-sion's innocence was unnecessary.
Nevertheless, Alec exacted it. "I would like my helmet back," he said.
"And I, mine. Yours hums some-times and makes my head ache." The exchange was made. "Your
thoughts seem far away, Alexander."
Alec's thoughts were. They had flown all the way back to Adanti, to a moment he had half forgot.
Again he left the camp of the camp-followers carrying a dark-haired girl across his shoulder. Again she
appeared ab-ruptly on the ground before him. No, not abruptly. The time-lapse could be stated more
specifically than that. Exactly 2.1250 seconds after she van-ished from his shoulder.
Jait-jbit, jbit-jait, the name of the game was "Dissimulate".
 
IX
Aphrodite Pandemos
 
THE CHASTE SLOPES of Olympus had become an anathema to her azure eyes. The marmoreal
palace of Zeus a fulsome rookery.
"Was it for this I rose from the sea?" she asked the other gods and goddesses one day. "To languish
here and supervise sex from on high?
"Look below and to the east. Do you see that execrable mortal standing there? Ever since the Battle
of Cunaxa he's had at his very fingertips the most luscious piece of ass you ever saw, and not once has he
fucked her—not once! It's enough to bring a love goddess to tears. Not long ago, he even tried to get rid
of her, and now, just as he was starting to get turned on, a complication has arisen and turned him back
off.
"Well, I'm not going to let it hap-pen that way! This time, I'm going to do my supervising on the
scene. Farewell Zeus, Hera, Hephaestus, Apollo, Athena, Ares, Artemis, Hermes, Hestia, Helios,
Selene, Iris, Hebe, Ganymede, Poseidon and Am-phitrite. I go to join the Ten Thousand on their march
to the Euxine Sea!"
 
HALF-STARVED, half-frozen, half-dead, the Ten Thousand took up pro tempore residence in the
underground Armenian villages. They were forced to share their quarters with the villag-ers' livestock as
well as with the vil-lagers, but there was an abundance of food and warmth and wine.
As Xenophon's aide, Alec had been assigned a room of his own. Sarai had already moved into it, but
he put off doing so till evening, phrasing and rephrasing in his mind the bitter ac-cusation he intended to
hurl at her the minute he stepped in the door.
The room was at the end of a long tunnel-like corridor. The door con-sisted of a heavy curtain of
sewn-together goatskins. He paused outside it, breathing a little hard. Then, im-pulsively, he drew it aside
and step-ped into the room.
He paused.
The room was about eight feet long by six feet wide, and the pallet on which Sarai was lying took up
most of the floorspace. As a matter of fact, in stepping into the room he had almost stepped on her.
A primitive oil lamp hanging from a rafter cast unreliable light from wall to wall. When his eyes grew
accus-tomed to it, he saw one of Sarai's sandals lying in one corner of the room and the other in the
opposite corner. It was as though she had kicked them off.
Just to the right of the doorway lay a tangle of garments comprising a red blouse, a blue skirt and
what looked like a pair of cotton drawers. It was at this point that he confronted the fact that the girl lying

face down on the pallet didn't have a stitch on and that the part of her he'd almost stepped on was her
bare behind.
He must have gasped for she turned over on her back and looked up at him.
"Sarai, what in the world. . ."
"All—all of a sudden the room grew so warm that I could not stand my clothes on another moment. I
just had to take them off. I—I know it is unseemly for you to find me like this, Alexander, but as long as
you have. . ." She smiled tentatively and raised her arms.
Around him bastions crumbled, ramparts fell. He realized suddenly that he was removing his vest.
"It—it is kind of warm in here at that."
"Let me help you with your skirt."
 
"DOES IT HURT, Sarai?"
"It hurts wonderful."
"I wanted you before, I wanted you all along, hut I—"
"I wanted you too."
"Not as much as I wanted you." 
"More."
"Think of all the time we wasted." 
"Are we going to make up for it Alexander?"
"Every seond of it."
"Ohhhh. Push harder, Alexander." 
"I am pushing hard.”
"Harder, harder, harder! Ohhhhh." 
"Sarai, I think I'm—"
"Oh, Alexander. Ohhhhhhhhh!" 
"Sarai!"
 
“ YOU READY again already, Alexander?"
"Yes. Let's try it from the side this time.”
"All right."
 
"I LIKED IT that way, Alexander. Let's do it that way again.”
"Come on."
 
"SARAI, I thought I heard someone laughing. Was it you?"
"No."
"That's funny. I. could swear it came from someone right here in this room. From a woman."
"Alexander, it's getting hard again!" "How should we do it this time?" "The same way as before."
 
SOMETIME DURING the night, he awakened. The lamp had gone out hours ago, and he lay for a
long time staring up into, the darkness. Beside him, Sarai slept soundly. He reached over and rested his
hand upon her belly. It was soft and warm and moist. Desire for her stirred in him again. How could he
conceivably have thought that this sweet, passionate, warm, wanting, outrageously luscious creature was
an agent-assassin? That she had stolen his cartridge case and planned to kill him? Surely he must have
been out of his mind!
In the morning, he wasn't quite so sure. Had she really taken off all her clothes because the room was
warm, he wondered, or had she done so to deflect his thoughts from the missing cartridge case? Perhaps
he was the victim of a subterfuge designed to keep him so busy exploring the hills and dales of her body
that he wouldn't have time to explore the windings and turnings of her mind.
Her clothes were still lying in a tangled heap by the door, and for a moment he was tempted to go
through them on the chance that the case might be hidden in a secret pocket. But he couldn't quite bring

himself to do so.
His doubts continued to build up throughout the day as he accom-panied Xenophon on a tour of the
villages and helped the Athenian obtain an accurate count of the wounded and the sick. By evening, the
doubts had built up to such an extent that his head was beginning to ache; but the moment he returned to
his under-ground room and saw Sarai lying on the pallet, they disappeared and did not reappear till
morning.
Thus it was throughout the seven days the Ten Thousand quartered in the villages. Thus it was
throughout the remainder of the march.
After leaving the villages, the Ten Thousand passed through the ter-ritories of the Phasiani, the Taochi
and the Chalybes, climbed the slopes Df Mount Theches and saw the distant sheen of the Euxine Sea.
After fight-ing their way through the country of the Macrones, they arrived at last at Trebisond.
The Greeks proceeded to celebrate their arrival by holding a series of gymnastic games—a weird
way, if you asked Alec, to commemorate the con-clusion of a 3,000 mile hike. Mean-wile, credit was
arranged for by Xenophon, and on the outskirts of the colony a second sea appeared—a sea of tents.
Shortly, shopping excursions to Trebisond became a daily affair.
Alec had a week to wait before making rendezvous with the Trans-world Timelines ship that
"stopped" twice yearly in the hills southwest of the city. A week to find his missing cartridge case. A
week to make up his mind whether Sarai was the AgoCo agent-assassin who had stolen it.
And she—if she was the AgoCo agent-assassin—had a week to com-plete her assignment.
In view of the fact that she was the only logical candidate, she had to be the agent-assassin. He was
perfectly well aware of this—when he was away from her. But when they were alone together in the new
tent Xenophon had bought for them, he was aware only that he was in love with her; and instead of
spending his time trying to figure out a way to trick her into be-traying herself, he spent it trying to fig-ure
out a way to sneak her aboard the Transworld Timelines ship and take her back to the twenty-first
cen-tury with him.
The days went by. The nights—
 
"SHALL WE do it from the side again, Alexander?"
"Do you want to?"
"Yes."
"Slide your leg up a little higher." 
"Like this?"
"That's it. There.”
"Oh."
"Turn toward me a little more. There.”
"Ohhhhhh."
"I'm going to roll you over now—all right?"
"Hurry, Alexander. Hurry." 
"There."
"Oh, Alexander. Ohhhhhhhh!"
 
ON THE EVE of the seventh day when Alec suggested that they go for a walk, Sarai asked him to
hand her the new tunic he'd bought for her in the colony several days ago and charged to Xenophon's
account. It was lying in the middle of the floor where she'd stepped out of it. When he picked it up, an
object fell out of its inside pocket, which was odd, because when he'd bought it it hadn't had an inside
pocket, or an outside one, for that matter. The object was odd too—for 401 B.C. No, it wasn't his
missing cartridge case, it was a small vial. Of pills.
He picked it up.
There was no prescription label, but it wasn't hard to figure out what the pills were for.
Sarai snatched the vial out of his hand. Grabbed her tunic.
Without looking at her, he got into the tunic he had bought for himself when he bought hers. But he

had to look at her eventually, and when he finally did he saw that she was looking at him. She was fully
dressed, and the vial was safely out of sight. In the vac-illating light coming from the oil lamp affixed to the
center tent pole her peri-like face seemed to be falling apart.
"Oh Alexander, I'm so sorry!"
Alec shifted to Anglo-American. "What's your real name?"
She shifted as easily as he had. "Sarah Smith."
He stepped closer to her and held out his hand. "If you'll give me the cartridge case, I'll leave, and try
to forget any of this ever happened. Or maybe you haven't got it with you. Maybe you hid it in old
Anytus's wa-gon.”
She stared at him. "You mean that oblong little box I asked what was for? I haven't got it. I didn't
even know it was a cartridge case!"
"Liar!"
She winced hut she didn't drop her eyes. "Very well, I'm a liar. But I'm not lying now. I had to lie
before or you wouldn't have taken me on the March, and even as it was, you almost didn't. And after
that, I had to keep on lying. I knew you were with the Ten Thousand—I obtained a copy of your dossier
from YoreCo before I left the present. My parents are rich, and rich girls can usually get just about
anything they want, except, of course, the things they really want. From your dossier I learned all about
you, and decided you were just the sort of person I needed to see me safely through the Down March. I
pin- pointed the time almost to the hour when the Greek army was in the vi-cinity of the village
Artaxerxes's forces had fled through, and I hired a 'timer' to bring me back. I knew your face by heart
from the photo contained in your dosier, and I was going to follow the Greek army when it returned to
camp, and somehow seek you out. I knew that if I put on a good enough act you'd buy it, and that you
wouldn't dream of leaving me defense-less among ten thousand men. But I didn't have to find you:
instead, you found me, entirely by accident of course. All I had to do from that point on was lie, lie, lie,
and so I lied, lied, lied in that silly language I'd hypno-taught myself along with half a dozen others. And
you believed me. So ut-terly that even when I jait-jbited while you were carrying me to that wretched
Assyrian village you still didn't catch on. Look at me! Look at this monstrous prevaricator! This
de-ceiver, this dissimulator. Look at her and try to believe that she'd go to such preposterous lengths for
the sake of a histori-thesis!"
"A histori-thesis?"
"Yes. On Books Two, Three and Four of the Anabasis. The Katabasis. I'm majoring in Greek
history and happen to have total recall, and I guess I've always liked doing things nobody else would
dream of doing. Anyway, I decided that for my histori-thesis I'd do an eye-witness ac-count of the
Retreat of the Ten Thousand. So I booked return-passage on the Transworld Timelines ship that's due
here tomorrow morning and hired a 'timer'. Then—"
"Then you went to the corner pharmacy and refilled your instant birth-control pill
prescription—right?"
"That's a dirty implication to make, Mr. Alexander Vincent Henry! It just so happens that 
enlightened twenty-first century girls carry instant BeeSees with them at all times, but coming from an
old-fashioned neo-Victorian family, you wouldn't know that. And coming from an old-fashioned
neo-Victorian family, you wouldn't know either that when a girl falls in love with someone and
experi-ences an overwhelming desire for him, she has as much right to make advances as he has,
especially when he doesn't know enough to. It's bad enough that you should think I'm a common thief
without thinking I'm a common tart too!"
"I don't think you're a common thief'," Alec said. "I think you're an uncommon one. And I also think
that before this night is out you're prob-ably going to try to kill me, or hire someone to do the job for you,
so that you can take possession of' the final micro-tape cartridge and so AgoCo can acquire the franchise
for the past-acular by reason of YoreCo's sub-sequent default."
She had taken a backward step and her face, so ruddy a moment ago from the sun and the wind,
was now white. "You think I'm one of those horrible agent-assassins? Alec, you can't be-lieve such a
thing!"

"Oh yes I can." Alec held out his hand again. "Give me the case. I know you have it hidden
somewhere. If it's in old Anytus's wagon, we'll go to the camp of the camp followers and you can hand it
over to me there."
For want of a better weapon she tore off one of her sandals and, before he caught on to her
intention, brought it down with all her might upon his palm. "There's your case, Mr. Alexander Vincent
Henry! The only case you're ever going to get from me!" She turned her back on him. "Go away! You
neo-Victorian hypocrite! You seducer. You—you sex fiend!"
Alec blinked. Then someone coughed just outside the tent flap. A discreet moment later Pasion
stepped into the tent. "Xenophon requests your presence, Alexander."
Shaking his right hand to quell the tingling of the palm, Alec pointed to Sarai with his left. He shifted
from Anglo-American to Doric. "Keep her here till I get back, Pasion," he said unthinkingly. Then he
strode out into the night, the richer—or the poorer—for having lost one Babylo-nian slave girl.
 
X.
Apologia
 
XENOPHON'S TENT was considerably larger than any of the others and was pitched on slightly
higher ground. Alec found the Athenian sitting at a portable wooden table, a roll of papyrus before him, a
reed pen and a small cruse of ink adjacent to his right hand. He had purchased a new mili-tary outfit in
Trebisond that was even more resplendent than the one he'd packed from Athens, and lie fairly shone in
the combined radiance of a pair of klieg-like oil lamps.
After the two men exchanged greet-ings, Alec sat down on a bench oppo-site the Athenian. Casually
Xenophon reached beneath the folds of his golden mantle, withdrew the missing cartridge case and laid it
on the table. Alec gasped.
Sure, Pasion would have roused him if an outsider had entered the tent. But not if Xenophon had
en-tered it. And if' Xenophon, after re-moving the case from Alec's vest, had sworn the Arcadian to
secrecy. Pasion naturally would have told no one.
"Why, Xenophon?"
"You are an intelligent man, Alexander, and so, indubitably, are your masters. Yet you failed to
anticipate that someday one of your enemies would, by making greater use of the simultaneity of time,
gain an insuper-able advantage in the profit war you are waging.
"Let me elaborate. You, for the sake of simplicity, shall be this enemy. Very well. You find among
your slaves a husband and wife who have known semi-poverty all their lives. The woman is with child,
and the advanced science of your era en-ables you to determine that the child will be a male. You then
hold the prospect of riches before the man's and the woman's eyes—not great riches, but modest ones,
for to some-one who has never owned a half--daric, a full daric represents a for-tune. You then present
your proposal, and they accept it. Then, after teach-ing them all they will need to know, you send them
back to a point in the past that precedes the Expedition of Cyrus by some thirty years. The child is born,
and the parents rear him in accordance with their instructions, preparing him throughout his youth for a
mission whose full meaning is beyond his comprehension because he belongs to a different thought-world
than they, but a mission which he should nevertheless be able to com-plete. The parents name this
child—perhaps by accident, perhaps by design—`Xenophon', and they explain to him exactly what he
must do when the time comes and assure him that after he has done it he can, if he wishes, remain in the
age to which the mission ultimately will lead him and in which he rightfully belongs. Are you beginning to
understand, Alexander?"
Dazed, Alec said, "I think so . . . I think your parents' so-called masters probably gambled on your
turning out to be the real Xenophon. But why are you telling me all this when the main purpose of your
mission is to murder me?"
"That is no longer so, Alexander. It is no longer so because of three reasons, none of which my
parents' masters took into consideration. In my youth. I was walking down a nar-row thoroughfare one

day when a barefoot old man with crooked legs and a misshapen face barred my path and asked me
where men were made honorable and good. When I could not answer, he said, 'Follow me, and find
out'. I followed him and became his pupil. The pupils of Socrates, Alex-ander, do not commit murder.
"The second reason is that the soci-ety of which I am a part is a vastly different one from the one that
molded my parents. I do not say it is a better society; I say only that, being a product of it, I cannot act in
quite the same way that I could were I a product of yours. Nor am I any longer compelled to. Freedom
from poverty has had an ennobling effect upon my parents—my father, in fact, has at-tained the status of
knight. Although they instructed me in accordance with the wishes of their masters, they told me that
when the time came to com-plete my mission, the manner of its completion, or whether I completed it or
not, would be entirely up to me."
"And the third reason?"
Xenophon ran his fingers over the chrome-plated surface of the cartridge case. "What would I do in
an age capable of workmanship such as this, Alexander? In an age capable of re-cording reality on tiny
spools no larger than a pebble? I would be fit only to sweep floors or to carry out refuse. Both you and
my parents are honor-bound not to reveal my future to me, so I do not know whether even in my own
age I shall amount to more than I already have. But I do know this: in your age, I would amount to
nothing, and even though I am a quiet man, given mainly to hunting and fishing and to philosophi-cal
thought, to amount to nothing would be more than I could endure. Nor would I be able to endure the
feeling of inferiority which would be bound to be my lot were I to pay even a brief visit to an age so
vastly superior to my own. So you see, Alex-ander, even if I were capable of murdering you, there
would be no point in my doing so."
"One thing still puzzles me," Alec said. "If it was your intention to re-turn the cartridge case to me,
why did you steal—why did you appro-priate it in the first place?"
Xenophon smiled. "I thought that would be clear to you by now. I appropriated it in order to
safeguard it. The play which its contents contain is even more important to me than to you. I am the
protagonist, am I not?"
Alec sat there stunned. "I see now why you made me your aide," he said finally. And then, "When did
you first find out I wasn't quite what I seemed to be?"
"At the arms pile near Sitace when you, a supposed Lacedaemonian, ad-dressed me in Attic. I failed
to detect `Duris the Boeotian' in time, or I would have seen to it that he was ex-pelled from the Greek
army. The play became increasingly important to me. When you named Pasion to wear your helmet, I
arranged for him to be near me; and after you recovered from your wound and fever, I made cer-tain, by
appropriating your cartridge case, that the major part of the march, at least, would live for pos-terity.
Like all men who wish to rise above mediocrity, I am vain. I want to be remembered and admired. I
have kept notes since the beginning of the expedition, and probably someday I shall write an account of
all the events that occurred and of my part in them; but what I write, no matter how excellent it may he,
can never compare to the records con-tained in the cartridges in this case and in the cartridge in your
helmet." He shoved the case across the table. "Take it, Alexander. Do not let it out of your sight. I hope
you will forgive me for whatever distress my vanity may have caused you, and I hope you have not
mistakenly accused someone else of an act that was entirely my own doing."
"Sarai!" Alec gasped. He stood up. "I must go, Xenophon. I have indeed accused someone else."
Xenophon sighed. "It is as I feared, then. I wish I could help you, but I cannot. I can only give you
advice. When dealing with a woman, never be forthright or outspoken. Be de-vious."
"Thanks," Alec said. "I'll try to re-member."
 
XI.
Alexander the Greatest
 
IN HIS and Sarai's tent he found a bewildered Pasion but no Sarai. "One moment she was here,
Alexander, the next, she was gone. I cannot under-stand how she could have disappeared right before

my eyes."
"I can," Alec said. "And I think I know where she can be found."
He looked at his friend, remember-ing the hardships they had endured together, the adventures they
had shared. "Good-by, Pasion," he said.
"You would follow her then? And never return?"
"Never."
“Then it must be so. She will make a fine wife for you, this Babylonian slave girl—if you can convince
her you are none of the things she said you were when I asked her what had gone wrong between you."
"I have a plan, Pasion."
"Farewell then, Alexander. I will sacrifice a goat and a sheep upon my return to Arcadia, that she
may bear you many fine sons."
The time station lay four miles southwest of the city. Like all such stations, it consisted of a concealed
locator-unit—buried, in this instance, in a grassy hillside—that beamed a signal over a radius of ten miles
dur-ing the twenty-four hour period that preceded the timeship's arrival. The signal grew louder when you
neared it, fainter when you moved away, but never did it become noticeable enough to be attributed by
the unini-tiated to anything more than a mild ringing of the ears.
When Alec reached the hillside, Sarai was already there. It was dawn, and in her chic Grecian tunic
she looked like a modern office-girl wait-ing for an electribus to arrive and whisk her off to work.
He had one cigarette left. He lit it nervously, and went over and stood beside her. "Well anyway,
Miss Smith," he said, "for once, I won't have to do any cutting."
Miss Smith did not even so much as turn her head.
"You see," he elaborated, "the per-son who does the pasttaping always gets first crack at the cutting,
just in case there happens to be something personal on the tapes that he wouldn't want the general public
to see. But I don't think there's anything that per-sonal on these tapes. Do you, Miss Smith?"
Did his eyes deceive him, or did she give a little start?
"Most of the really personal scenes," he went on, "are incomplete in any case, because sooner or
later I'd remember to take off my helmet. Then, too, sometimes we'd remember to extinguish the lamp.
Not always, but sometimes. Do you remember that time in our underground love-nest when you—"
"Alexander Henry, this is outright blackmail!"
He looked at her sideways. "Of course, if I had a good enough reason, I might consider eliminating
them. But it would have to be a real good reason. Such as preserving them for exclusive inclusion in a
certain His-Her micro-tape album that hasn't come into existence yet but which very well could if a
certain party would consent for a certain other party to make an honest woman of her and to become her
slave."
For a moment she stood there star-ing at him. Then, just as the timeship shimmered into view on the
fifth-century B.C. hillside, she threw her arms around his neck and kissed him.
"Oh Alexander, you're the Greatest!" she said.
—ROBERT  F. YOUNG
 
 

