PRODUCTION PROBLEM
 
'THE MAN FROM TIMESEARCH, Inc. is here, sir." 
"Show him in," Bridgemaker told the robutler. 
The man from Timesearch halted just within the doorway. Nervously he shifted the oblong package
be was carrying from one band to the other. "Good morning, Honorable Bridgemaker." 
"Did you find the machine?' Bridgemaker demanded. 
“I—I'm afraid we failed again, sir. But we did locate another one of its products." The man handed
Bridgemaker the package. 
Bridgemaker waved his arm in an angry gesture that included the whole room, "But you've already
brought me hundreds of its products!" he shouted. "What I want is the machine itself so I can make my
own products!" 
"I'm afraid, Honorable Bridgemaker, that the machine never existed. Our field men have explored the
Pre-Technological Age, the First Technological Age, and the early years of our own age; but even though
they witnessed some of the ancient technicians at work, they never caught a glimpse of the machine." 
'But if the ancient technicians could create something without a machine, I could too," Bridgemaker
said. "And since I can't, the machine had to exist. Go back at once!" 
"Yes, Honorable Bridgemaker," The man bowed and withdrew. 
Bridgemaker tore open the package. He glanced at the product, then set the controls on his
Language Adjustor, Duplicator and Alterator machine. 
While he waited, he brooded on the irony of his life. Ever since he was a small boy he had hungered
hopelessly for one vocation. Now that success in a totally different vocation had made him financially
independent, he had focused all his energies into the attainment of his first love. But all he'd got for his
trouble was a roomful of ancient products, and even though he'd increased his financial independence by
duplicating and distributing those products, the basic frustration still remained: he was a secondhand artist
and he wanted desperately to be a firsthand artist. 
He went over to one of the shelves that wainscoted the room and glanced at some of his vicarious
creations: A Farewell to Arms, by Chamfer Bridgemaker . . . Five Little Peppers and How They
Grew, by Chamfer Bridgemaker . . . The Odyssey, by Chamfer Bridgemaker . . . Ivanhoe, by Chamfer
Bridgemaker—
There was a loud plop! as the first copy of Tom Swift and His Electric Locomotive came out of
the Language Adjustor, Duplicator and Alterator machine. 
Bridgemaker sat down to read his latest masterpiece. 
 
 

