
Robert Nozick

The Major Conservative and Libertarian Thinkers series aims to 
show that there is a rigorous, scholarly tradition of social and 
political thought that may be broadly described as ‘conserva-
tive’, ‘libertarian’ or some combination of the two. 
The series aims to show that conservatism is not simply a reac-
tion against contemporary events, nor a privileging of intuitive 
thought over deductive reasoning; libertarianism is not simply 
an apology for unfettered capitalism or an attempt to justify a 
misguided atomistic concept of the individual. Rather, the think-
ers in this series have developed coherent intellectual positions 
that are grounded in empirical reality and also founded upon 
serious philosophical refl ection on the relationship between the 
individual and society, how the social institutions necessary for a 
free society are to be established and maintained, and the impli-
cations of the limits to human knowledge and certainty. 
Each volume in the series presents a thinker’s ideas in an 
accessible and cogent manner to provide an indispensable work 
for both students with varying degrees of familiarity with the 
topic as well as more advanced scholars. 
The following 20 volumes that make up the entire Major 
Conservative and Libertarian Thinkers series are written by interna-
tional scholars and experts: 
The Salamanca School  
 Andre Azevedo Alves and 
José Manuel Moreira 
Thomas Hobbes  
R. E. R. Bunce 
John Locke  
Eric Mack 
David Hume  
Christopher J. Berry 
Adam Smith  
James Otteson 
Edmund Burke  
Dennis O’Keeffe 
Alexis de Tocqueville  
Alan S. Kahan 
Herbert Spencer  
Alberto Mingardi 
Ludwig von Mises  
Richard Ebeling 
Joseph A. Schumpeter  
John Medearis

F. A. Hayek  
Adam Tebble 
Michael Oakeshott  
Edmund Neill 
Karl Popper  
Philip Parvin 
Ayn Rand  
Mimi Gladstein 
Milton Friedman  
William Ruger 
Russell Kirk  
John Pafford 
James M. Buchanan  
John Meadowcroft 
The Modern Papacy  
Samuel Gregg 
Murray Rothbard  
Gerard Casey 
Robert Nozick  
Ralf Bader 
Of course, in any series of this nature, choices have to be made 
as to which thinkers to include and which to leave out. Two of 
the thinkers in the series – F. A. Hayek and James M. Buchanan – 
have written explicit statements rejecting the label ‘conservative’. 
Similarly, other thinkers, such as David Hume and Karl Popper, 
may be more accurately described as classical liberals than either 
conservatives or libertarians. However, these thinkers have been 
included because a full appreciation of this particular tradition 
of thought would be impossible without their inclusion; conser-
vative and libertarian thought cannot be fully understood with-
out some knowledge of the intellectual contributions of Hume, 
Hayek, Popper and Buchanan, among others. Although no list of 
conservative and libertarian thinkers can be perfect, it is hoped 
that the volumes in this series come as close as possible to provid-
ing a comprehensive account of the key contributors to this 
particular tradition. 
John Meadowcroft
King’s College London

This page intentionally left blank 

Robert Nozick
Ralf M. Bader
Major Conservative and 
Libertarian Thinkers
Series Editor: John Meadowcroft
Volume 11

2010
The Continuum International Publishing Group Inc
80 Maiden Lane, New York, NY 10038
The Continuum International Publishing Group Ltd
The Tower Building, 11 York Road, London SE1 7NX
www.continuumbooks.com
Copyright © Ralf M. Bader 2010
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored 
in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, 
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, 
without the written permission of the publishers.
ISBN: 978-0-8264-2429-7
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Bader, Ralf M.
Robert Nozick / Ralf M. Bader.
p. cm. --  (Major conservative and libertarian thinkers ; v.11.)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN-13: 978-0-8264-2429-7 (hardcover : alk. paper)
ISBN-10: 0-8264-2429-5 (hardcover : alk. paper)
1. Nozick, Robert. Anarchy, state, and Utopia.  2. State, The. 
3. Civil rights.  4. Anarchism.  5. Utopias.  6. Human rights.  I. Title.
JC571.N683B33 2010
320.101–dc22
2009051365
Typeset by Newgen Imaging Systems Pvt Ltd, Chennai, India
Printed in the United States of America

To my brother

This page intentionally left blank 

Contents
Acknowledgements 
x
Series Editor’s Preface  
xi
Note on Citation 
xiii
1. Biography 
1
2. Critical Exposition 
10
3. Reception and Infl uence 
73
4. Relevance 
111
Bibliography 
132
Index 
135

Acknowledgements
For helpful comments, criticisms and suggestions, I would 
like to thank Andrew Buchan, Asher Dresner, Chris Freiman, 
Dan Halliday and John Meadowcroft. I would also like to 
express my gratitude to Nigel Ashford, Elaine Hawley and 
the IHS for all their help and support.

Series Editor’s Preface
In the second half of the twentieth century libertarian 
and conservative ideas enjoyed an enormous resurgence. 
The fact that twelve of the twenty subjects in this series 
published their major works after 1940 is evidence of this 
revival. No thinker contributed more to this development 
than the Harvard philosopher Robert Nozick. Nozick’s 
book Anarchy, State, and Utopia moved libertarianism from 
a relatively neglected subset of political philosophy to the 
centre of the discipline as one of the most cogent critiques 
of social democracy and egalitarian liberalism. Indeed, the 
publication of Anarchy, State, and Utopia in 1974, along with 
the publication of John Rawls’ A Theory of Justice in 1971, is 
widely credited with revitalizing the discipline of political 
theory which many scholars felt had become stale and 
largely detached from real world concerns of policy and 
politics.
In this outstanding volume Ralf M. Bader of the Univer-
sity of St Andrews shows why Nozick’s Anarchy, State, and 
Utopia proved to be so important and so infl uential. In 
Anarchy, State, and Utopia, Nozick developed a rights-based 
account of libertarianism to show that a minimal state can 
legitimately arise, that nothing more than a minimal state 
is justifi ed, and that the minimal state is not only morally 
right but can also be an inspiring ‘meta-utopia’. It was in 
particular the second part of Anarchy, State, and Utopia, 

xii 
Preface
written as a response to Rawls’ similarly groundbreaking 
A Theory of Justice, that turned out to have a lasting impact 
on political philosophy. There, Nozick argued that justice 
could only ever be procedural and any attempt to achieve 
a particular pattern of distribution must infringe people’s 
basic rights to dispose of their justly-acquired resources as 
they saw fi t. Nozick used the memorable example of the 
wealth acquired by the basketball player Wilt Chamberlain 
in a fi ctional scenario to illustrate his ‘entitlement theory 
of justice’, showing how Chamberlain had acquired his 
wealth via a series of just steps and that therefore his new 
wealth (and the new overall distribution of wealth) must 
be considered just. 
By setting out Nozick’s thought in an extremely lucid and 
accessible manner, this volume makes a crucial contribu-
tion to the Major Conservative and Libertarian Thinkers series. 
It presents Nozick’s contributions to political philosophy 
in the context of his work in analytical philosophy. It also 
provides a biography of Nozick and considers the initial 
reception and long-term infl uence of his work. Certainly no 
account of libertarian thought would be complete without 
a thorough treatment of the contribution made by Nozick. 
This volume will prove indispensable to those relatively 
unfamiliar with Nozick’s work as well as more advanced 
scholars. 
John Meadowcroft
King’s College London

Note on Citation
Unless otherwise indicated, all citations refer to Robert 
Nozick’s Anarchy, State, and Utopia (Nozick: 1974).

This page intentionally left blank 

1
Biography
Nozick’s life
Robert Nozick was born on 16 November 1938 in Brooklyn, 
the son of a Russian Jewish immigrant family. He became 
interested in philosophy as an undergraduate at Columbia. 
In particular, it was as a result of taking an introductory 
course on Western Civilization by Syndney Morgenbesser 
that Nozick began to be seriously engaged with philosophy. 
Morgenbesser was a highly respected philosopher who was 
well known for his wit and sharp criticism. He did not pub-
lish very much, but had a huge impact on his students. 
Nozick was fascinated by Sydney Morgenbesser and greatly 
admired his skill in fi nding problems and dealing with 
philosophical issues. Nozick attended as many courses by 
Morgenbesser as possible and described his degree as a 
‘major in Morgenbesser’.
After completing his degree at Columbia in 1959, 
Nozick went to Princeton for graduate studies. There, he 
received his M.A. in 1961 and completed his Ph.D. in 1963 
under the supervision of Carl Hempel. Hempel was a 
famous German philosopher of science and an important 
advocate of logical empiricism. Nozick’s dissertation, The 
Normative Theory of Individual Choice, is a technical work 
which deals with issues about the rationality of theory 

2 
Robert Nozick
choice in science. The dissertation is much inspired by 
Hempel’s work on explanation and scientifi c theories. 
Later on, Nozick would return to some of these themes in 
his book The Nature of Rationality.
From 1963 to 1965, Nozick taught at Princeton as an 
assistant professor. He then moved to Harvard where he 
stayed for two years, followed by two years of teaching as 
an associate professor at Rockefeller University from 1967 
to 1969. After his short stay at Rockefeller, Nozick returned 
to Harvard to become a full professor in 1969, at the age 
of 30, where he remained for the rest of his life. He was 
the chair of the Philosophy Department from 1981 to 
1984. In 1985 he was awarded the Arthur Kingsley Porter 
Professorship of Philosophy and in 1998 he was named 
Joseph Pellegrino University Professor.
Nozick acquired fame through the publication of his 
masterpiece Anarchy, State, and Utopia in 1974. In this book, 
Nozick advances his libertarian political and moral theory. 
Together with John Rawls’s A Theory of Justice, it constitutes 
a keystone of twentieth-century political philosophy that 
was crucial to the revival of the discipline. His work made 
libertarianism respectable and helped to set the agenda 
for political theory up to the present day. It has generated 
much discussion and has been taken seriously by a broad 
range of thinkers.
Early on Nozick was a committed socialist. At school, he 
joined Norman Thomas’s Socialist Party. While an under-
graduate at Columbia, he founded the local chapter of 
the Student League for Industrial Democracy (which 
would later change its name to Students for a Democratic 
Society). Growing up, he had simply taken socialism for 
granted and was never confronted with well-worked out 
arguments in favour of capitalism. It was only after starting 

 
Biography 
3
graduate studies at Princeton that he was introduced to 
pro-capitalist ideas. In particular, arguments with his friend 
Bruce Goldberg had familiarized him with libertarian 
theory. An important catalyst in his shift towards libertar-
ian political philosophy was a conversation with Murray 
Rothbard around 1968 (cf. p. xv). Goldberg invited him 
along to a meeting of the Circle Bastiat, where Nozick’s 
discussion with Rothbard made him realize the strength 
of libertarianism and the importance of the anarchist’s 
challenge to the idea that states can be legitimate.
Initially, he wanted to refute libertarian views. Yet, ulti-
mately he was convinced by the arguments, becoming a 
libertarian with reluctance. Many of the considerations 
and arguments that led to this change are presented in 
Anarchy, State, and Utopia. The book was mostly written 
while Nozick was a fellow at the Center for the Advanced 
Study in Behavioral Sciences at Palo Alto in 1971–1972. 
While in Stanford, he intended to work on the problem of 
free will and he describes Anarchy, State, and Utopia as ‘an 
accident’ (Nozick: 1997, p. 1).
Part I of Anarchy, State, and Utopia arose out of a talk 
given to a Stanford student group in which Nozick pre-
sented some thoughts on how a state would arise out of the 
state of nature. The fi rst part tries to take up the anarchist’s 
challenge by showing that it is possible for a state to arise 
in a legitimate way. Part II is the result of a series of lec-
tures given at Harvard as part of a course entitled ‘Capital-
ism and Socialism’ that Nozick co-taught with Michael 
Walzer. In this part, Nozick develops his entitlement theory 
of justice and criticizes his colleague John Rawls, respond-
ing to his book A Theory of Justice which was published in 
1971. Nozick tries to draw the boundaries of legitimate 
state action, by arguing that considerations regarding 

4 
Robert Nozick
justice do not warrant any extension of the state beyond 
the minimal state. Part III is based on an essay on utopia 
that was presented at a meeting of the American Philo-
sophical Association. In this part, Nozick sketches a liber-
tarian utopia, whereby the utopia amounts to a framework 
for utopia, that is, a framework in which people can pur-
sue their own utopias.
Anarchy, State, and Utopia was awarded the National Book 
Award in 1975 and is widely acclaimed as one of the most 
important contributions to political philosophy in the 
twentieth century. The Times Literary Supplement named 
it as one of ‘The Hundred Most Infl uential Books Since 
the War’. Nozick’s theories have been subjected to much 
criticism and a huge amount of secondary literature has 
been generated. Nozick never responded to any of the 
criticisms on the basis that he ‘did not want to spend my 
life writing “The Son of Anarchy, State, and Utopia,” “The 
Return of the Son of . . .,” etc. I had other philosophical 
questions to think about’ (Nozick: 1997, p. 2). 
These other questions were concerned with more 
abstract philosophical issues, which he discusses in his 
book Philosophical Explanations, published in 1981. This 
book was Nozick’s next big project. It was awarded the 
Ralph Waldo Emerson Award of Phi Beta Kappa. Again, 
Nozick managed to produce a wide-ranging and fascinat-
ing book that has had an important impact on the philo-
sophical landscape. In particular, his truth-tracking theory 
of knowledge and his closest-continuer account of per-
sonal identity have created large secondary literatures and 
have been reprinted in many anthologies and collections.
Philosophical Explanations is divided into three main sec-
tions: Metaphysics, Epistemology and Value. In the Intro-
duction, Nozick sets out his characteristic philosophical 
methodology. For him, philosophy should not primarily 

 
Biography 
5
be concerned with arguments that are aimed at proving 
a particular thesis. Philosophers should not focus on con-
vincing opponents of the theory, but rather be concerned 
with the exploration of conceptual connections, as well as 
with explanations of how things can be possible. In Part I, 
Nozick tackles some of the fundamental problems of 
metaphysics, including the question why there is some-
thing rather than nothing. He also proposes his infl uential 
closest-continuer approach for dealing with problems of 
personal identity. In Part II, he is concerned with episte-
mology and puts forward his famous truth-tracking account 
of knowledge and his discussion of scepticism. Part III is 
based on the theme of value, which includes discussions 
of free will, the foundations of ethics and the meaning 
of life.
The Examined Life was published in 1989. This is an 
accessible, popular, non-technical and wide-ranging book 
that is concerned with the meaning of life. Nozick dis-
cusses a broad range of issues, such as politics, happiness, 
love, reality, democracy and meaning. As we will see later 
on, in this book Nozick distances himself from the extreme 
form of libertarianism that he had espoused in Anarchy, 
State, and Utopia.
His next book, The Nature of Rationality, was published 
in 1993. It incorporates his Tanner Lectures on Human 
Values, entitled ‘Decisions of Principle, Principles of Deci-
sion’, that Nozick gave at Princeton University in 1991. 
It is a technical work that focuses on rational choice the-
ory, decision theory and game theory. In this book, Nozick 
provides the canonical form of Newcomb’s Problem which 
he had already discussed in his Ph.D. dissertation and 
which had a signifi cant infl uence on decision theory. It 
also includes an important discussion of symbolic value 
that infl uenced his approach to political philosophy. It was 

6 
Robert Nozick
as a result of thinking about decision theory that Nozick 
would come to appreciate the symbolic value of certain 
political actions, such as outlawing voluntary slavery, which 
then served to moderate his libertarianism.
In 1997 a collection of essays was published under the 
title Socratic Puzzles. These essays cover a broad range of 
topics, including discussions of coercion, Austrian meth-
odology, moral structures, Newcomb’s Problem, animal 
rights, as well as philosophical fi ction.
In the spring of 1997 he delivered the prestigious John 
Locke lectures at Oxford University. The title of his lecture 
series was ‘Invariance and Objectivity’. This was later to 
become the core of his fi nal book Invariances: The Structure 
of the Objective World, which was published in 2001. This is 
a technical and specialized book that deals with questions 
about objectivity and truth. More precisely, Nozick pro-
vides a discussion of relativism about truth, an account of 
objectivity as invariance under various transformations, a 
sceptical discussion of necessary truths, as well as an evolu-
tionary account of consciousness and ethics. The book 
includes a number of discussions of recent scientifi c theo-
ries and discoveries, in particular of quantum mechanics. 
A reviewer in The Economist nicely described the experi-
ence of reading this book as feeling ‘like a social chess 
player accompanying a grandmaster down the tables at a 
simultaneous display, struggling to follow each game while 
listening to him explain how chess would work in six 
dimensions’.
During his career, Nozick received many academic hon-
ours. He was a fellow of the American Academy of Arts and 
Sciences, a member of the Council of Scholars of the 
Library of Congress, a corresponding fellow of the British 
Academy and a senior fellow of the Society of Fellows at 

 
Biography 
7
Harvard. He was president of the American Philosophical 
Association’s Eastern Division and in 1998 he received the 
Presidential Citation from the American Psychological 
Association. He held fellowships from the Guggenheim 
Foundation, the Rockefeller Foundation, the National 
Endowment for the Humanities, and the Center for 
Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences.
Robert Nozick died on 23 January 2002 at the age of 63 
as a result of stomach cancer that had been diagnosed in 
1994.
Nozick’s approach to philosophy
Nozick had a very distinctive approach to philosophy that 
is refl ected in his manner of argumentation, in his style of 
writing, in the scope of subjects he discussed as well as in 
the range of sources he drew on. He described his style of 
argumentation as ‘philosophical exploration’ (p. xii), see-
ing himself as being engaged in an open-ended inquiry 
that does not purport to give any defi nitive answers. He 
does not present his views in a unifi ed and monolithic 
system and sometimes it is not clear to what extent there is 
a larger system, rather than there merely being a collec-
tion of refl ections and explorations. His primary concern 
is to explore the conceptual landscape, to try out new 
things, raise doubts, suggest solutions and identify connec-
tions. As a result of raising new problems and identifying 
novel avenues of inquiry, he often leaves the reader with 
more questions than answers. This approach is nicely 
summed up in his famous quote that ‘[t]here is room for 
words on subjects other than last words’ (p. xii).
While his early work fi ts squarely into mainstream ana-
lytic philosophy, he became somewhat critical of certain 

8 
Robert Nozick
features of this philosophical approach. Already in Anarchy, 
State, and Utopia we fi nd a critical description of analytic 
philosophy (p. x). He slowly drifted away from an emphasis 
on arguments that try to convince an opponent to explor-
ing issues, opening up possibilities and trying to uncover 
interesting conceptual connections. Nozick describes his 
approach as non-coercive philosophy that attempts to 
explain rather than convince and that aims at understand-
ing rather than proof. This differentiation from analytic 
philosophy becomes more marked in some of his later 
works, in particular in less technical work such as The 
Examined Life.
His inventive and explorative approach to philosophy 
is refl ected in his style of writing. Though often technical, 
his works are always enjoyable to read. His writing is 
very lively and does not amount to a rigid exposition of 
a philosophical system. He is particularly skilful in fi nding 
memorable and convincing examples and thought experi-
ments. The Wilt Chamberlain example and the ‘experi-
ence machine’ thought experiment are two cases in point, 
which we will be discussing later on. He was also adept 
in fi nding expressions that manage to convey a great 
deal of meaning and get integrated into standard philo-
sophical discourse, such as his notion of ‘truth-tracking’ in 
epistemology.
While being inventive, witty and playful, his argumen-
tation is at the same time highly sophisticated and often 
makes use of technical and formal tools. For example, 
in Anarchy, State, and Utopia he avails himself of decision 
theory, game theory and economic theory, appealing in 
particular to evolutionary accounts and invisible-hand 
explanations. Nozick adopts a very ecumenical approach, 
drawing on a wide array of different sources and utilizing 

 
Biography 
9
various techniques and formal methods developed in dif-
ferent disciplines. He takes insights and inspiration from 
subjects ranging from Buddhism to evolutionary biology, 
from literature to quantum mechanics, from economics to 
sociology.
Nozick had wide-ranging interests and published on a 
diverse set of topics. He is a fascinating, deep and original 
thinker, who engaged with a broad range of subjects, always 
fi nding interesting and insightful ways of approaching 
philosophical problems, while drawing on many different 
sources. Though he is often classifi ed as a political philoso-
pher, this is a label that he himself rejected since most of 
his work was concerned with other issues. He covered an 
extensive range of topics both in research and in teaching. 
He taught a wide variety of courses, including courses on 
capitalism, the Russian revolution, evolutionary biology and 
the meaning of life and only once in his life did Nozick 
teach the same course twice.

2
Critical Exposition
Famously, Nozick begins his book Anarchy, State, and Utopia 
with the claim: ‘Individuals have rights, and there are 
things no person or group may do to them (without violat-
ing their rights)’ (p. ix). This claim constitutes the basis of 
Nozick’s political philosophy and moral outlook. His book 
is an attempt to examine the implications of this claim for 
our understanding of the legitimate functions of the state, 
while also providing support in favour of this moral out-
look and criticisms of alternative views. He intends to assess 
whether the existence of a state can be justifi ed at all and 
what functions it can legitimately perform. In particular, 
he takes the anarchist’s challenge seriously and raises the 
question whether the acceptance of individual rights leaves 
any room for legitimate governments. He argues against 
the anarchist’s claim that every form of government is 
illegitimate, that states are intrinsically immoral and that 
only anarchy constitutes a justifi ed societal arrangement. 
Having defended the legitimacy of the state, he then chal-
lenges the dominant view by showing that only a minimal 
state is legitimate and that anything more extensive vio-
lates rights.
Nozick summarizes the main conclusions of his book by 
saying that ‘a minimal state, limited to the narrow functions 
of protection against force, theft, fraud, enforcement of 

 
Critical Exposition 
11
contracts, and so on, is justifi ed; that any more extensive 
state will violate persons’ rights not to be forced to do cer-
tain things, and is unjustifi ed; and that the minimal state 
is inspiring as well as right’ (p. ix). That is, the state is not 
intrinsically immoral, but can arise in a legitimate manner. 
In other words, the anarchist’s challenge can be met inso-
far as we can fi nd room for a legitimate state that is com-
patible with individual rights. (This is what Nozick attempts 
to establish in Part I.) Nonetheless, rights place important 
constraints on any legitimate state, thereby ensuring that 
only a minimal state is justifi ed. If a state transgresses the 
narrow boundaries defi ned by rights, then it becomes an 
illegitimate state since it violates the rights of individuals. 
(This is the conclusion of Part II.) Moreover, Nozick con-
tends, a minimal state that complies with these moral 
restrictions constitutes an attractive ideal since it is a frame-
work for utopia. Not only is a minimal state the only legiti-
mate state, it is also an inspiring state. (This is argued for 
in Part III.)
This is a radical political philosophy that has many 
important implications. For example, it implies that the 
state is not permitted to coerce people to help others and 
is not allowed to coerce people for their own good. Neither 
altruistically nor paternalistically inspired intervention is 
justifi ed. The welfare of other people or of oneself does not 
constitute an adequate ground for justifying interference. 
Rights are side constraints on actions and trump all com-
peting considerations, such as considerations of equality 
or welfare. Redistributionist policies are consequently ruled 
out as illegitimate. The same holds for various regulations 
attempting to modify the behaviour of individuals by ren-
dering actions that are deemed to be undesirable either 
more expensive or even outright illegal. Such prohibitions, 

12 
Robert Nozick
regulations and paternalistic policies are ruled out by the 
rights of individuals. In short, there is no room for redistri-
bution or paternalism within a Nozickian state.
This criticism and rejection of coercion and force is 
combined with an emphasis on voluntarism that is present 
throughout Nozick’s works. He wants to minimize the use 
of force and coercion, restricting its legitimate employ-
ment to the protection of individual rights. Governments, 
as well as individuals, are not permitted to restrain or 
constrain others for altruistic or paternalistic reasons. This 
does not, however, imply that non-coercive strategies for 
the achievement of these goals are ruled out. On the con-
trary, they can be praiseworthy and we might have non-
enforceable duties to engage in them. The only thing that 
is problematic is the attempt to achieve these goals by 
coercive means, in particular by means of the coercive 
apparatus of the state.
Nozick does not deny that we have obligations to help 
others. He only denies that these obligations are enforce-
able, that we can be coerced to fulfi l them and that it is the 
role of the state to achieve these goals. ‘In no way does 
political philosophy or the realm of the state exhaust the 
realm of the morally desirable or moral oughts. . . . [R]ights 
are not the whole of what we want a society to be like, or of 
how we morally ought to behave toward one another’ 
(Nozick: 1981, p. 503). Accordingly, it is important to keep 
in mind that Nozick is restricting his focus in Anarchy, State, 
and Utopia to those obligations that are enforceable since 
they are the proper subject matter of political philosophy.
Thus, we can capture the key features of his political phi-
losophy, by noting that it is (i) a theory based on individual 
rights, that (ii) allows that a minimal state is justifi ed, while 
(iii) restricting state action such that nothing more than 

 
Critical Exposition 
13
a minimal state can be legitimate, claiming that (iv) such a 
state is inspiring and right. These are the four key aspects 
of Nozick’s political philosophy. The present chapter will 
follow this progression, beginning with an outline of the 
moral theory that Nozick adopts, followed by his response 
to the anarchist’s challenge. We will then look at the limits 
of the state that Nozick identifi es, which restrict legitimate 
state actions to those of a minimal state, before assessing 
his view that such a minimal state is an inspiring ideal. The 
chapter concludes with a brief analysis of the evolution of 
Nozick’s thought after the publication of Anarchy, State, 
and Utopia.
Accordingly, our discussion in this chapter will more-or-
less follow the mode of presentation that Nozick makes 
use of in Anarchy, State, and Utopia. The only difference 
being that instead of dividing the discussion into three 
parts, we divide it into fi ve by adding a separate discussion 
of Nozick’s moral philosophy, as well as a description of his 
thought post-Anarchy, State, and Utopia. The reason for the 
former alteration is that Nozick does not provide a unifi ed 
and systematic account of morality. Instead, his discussion 
of such issues is spread throughout Anarchy, State, and 
Utopia as well as some of his other writings. It will be useful 
to try to synthesize these various statements since a system-
atic account of Nozick’s ethical thought will be important 
for evaluating and understanding the rest of his project.
A few methodological disclaimers are in order. Due to 
considerations of space, we will only focus on Nozick’s 
main line of argumentation in favour of the minimal state 
and against any more extensive state. This requires us to 
leave aside many of Nozick’s insightful and fascinating tan-
gential discussions and intellectual excursions, such as his 
treatment of animal rights, his discussion of the Marxist 

14 
Robert Nozick
theory of exploitation, and his account of demoktesis 
(‘ownership of the people, by the people and for the peo-
ple’, cf. p. 290). Similarly, we will not consider in detail 
Nozick’s lengthy critique of Rawls’s A Theory of Justice as 
well as other sometimes technical discussions, but only 
integrate them into the systematic exposition of Nozick’s 
positive contribution when relevant. Moreover, Nozick’s 
discussions of ethics and politics in his other writings will 
be largely ignored, except when pertinent to the issues dis-
cussed in Anarchy, State, and Utopia.
The moral foundation
For Nozick political philosophy is applied moral philosophy. 
Moral philosophy provides the constraints within which a 
political theory can be formulated and the principles from 
which such a theory emerges. ‘Moral philosophy sets the 
background for, and boundaries of, political philosophy. 
What persons may and may not do to one another limits 
what they may do through the apparatus of a state, or do 
to establish such an apparatus’ (p. 6). Moreover, morality 
does not only set the limits of politics, but only by refer-
ence to moral considerations can the state be justifi ed. 
‘The moral prohibitions it is permissible to enforce are the 
source of whatever legitimacy the state’s fundamental 
coercive power has’ (p. 6). The moral legitimacy of the 
state, if it has any, derives from the enforcement of moral 
prohibitions. The state can only be morally justifi ed inso-
far as it enforces certain moral requirements.
Moral philosophy forms the foundation upon which 
political philosophy is built. Hence, in order to gain a 
proper understanding of Nozick’s political theory, we must 
have a good grasp of his moral philosophy. Accordingly, we 

 
Critical Exposition 
15
need to be clear about Nozick’s views as to what moral pro-
hibitions there are, what limits are placed on individuals 
by morality, what the status of them is and where they come 
from. These issues will be addressed in the fi rst part of 
this chapter, where we will provide an outline of the moral 
theory that is presented in Anarchy, State, and Utopia, sup-
plemented by arguments and considerations that Nozick 
develops in other works when these are of relevance.
Rights considered as side constraints
The defi ning feature of Nozick’s moral philosophy, which 
is already revealed in the opening line of Anarchy, State, 
and Utopia, is that he advances a theory of individual rights. 
Within his moral theory, rights occupy a fundamental 
position and are considered as side constraints. By adopt-
ing this view of rights, Nozick distinguishes himself from 
(i) theories that do not appeal to rights, (ii) theories that, 
though appealing to rights, only accord rights a derivative 
position, and (iii) theories that, though including rights 
in a non-derivative manner, do not consider rights as side 
constraints, but rather include them in the moral goals. 
That is, Nozick is dealing with a rights-based theory of 
morality, according to which rights are non-derivative and 
have the status of absolute side constraints. These side 
constraints impose limits on what can legitimately be done. 
Certain actions or kinds of actions are ruled out as imper-
missible since they confl ict with the rights of individuals.
The idea that rights are side constraints is central to 
Nozick’s project. He distinguishes two ways in which a 
moral theory can integrate certain considerations, namely 
as moral constraints or as moral goals. The notions of 
moral goals and moral side constraints pertain to the form 
or structure of a moral theory. On the one hand, a theory 

16 
Robert Nozick
can include a feature in the moral goal that is to be 
achieved. The feature is treated as an end and the theory 
tells us to act in such a way that the end is realized in an 
optimal manner. Here we have a goal-directed structure, 
whereby an end is identifi ed that is to be achieved. On the 
other hand, a theory can integrate a feature as a moral 
constraint. The theory tells us to act in such a way that the 
constraints are not violated. Here we are dealing with a 
constraint-based structure, whereby constraints are speci-
fi ed that need to be respected.
Side constraints integrate a feature into a moral theory 
without including it as a goal or end that is to be achieved, 
but rather as a constraint upon actions. The moral con-
straints are not part of the goals that our actions should 
accomplish. Instead, these constraints limit how goals are 
to be achieved. Side constraints do not tell us what goals 
we should pursue, but only tell us which actions are per-
missible in the pursuit of our goals, whatever these goals 
may be. They rule out certain possible courses of action 
as impermissible, rather than positively prescribing which 
actions are to be performed. In other words, side con-
straints are not concerned with the ends that are to be 
achieved, but rather with the means that one is permitted 
to use in the achievement of ends.
Nozick argues that accounts of morality that are purely 
goal-directed and do not include any side constraints are 
problematic since they do not respect the inviolability of 
persons. It is in the nature of purely goal-directed theories 
that there will be cases in which they require us to sacrifi ce 
individuals to achieve the goals of the moral theory. They 
do not accord individuals an inviolable status but tell us to 
treat people as mere means if this is required for achieving 
the moral goal in an optimal manner. This is particularly 

 
Critical Exposition 
17
clear, for example, in the case of utilitarianism. Utilitarian-
ism is a theory that has a purely goal-directed structure, 
whereby utility is identifi ed as the moral goal which ought 
to be maximized. We can easily imagine cases where the 
maximization of utility requires sacrifi cing the well-being 
and possibly even the life of an individual for the sake of 
maximizing overall utility. Nozick here mentions the well-
known example that utilitarianism might require an inno-
cent person to be punished to stop a mob from going on 
a vengeful rampage (cf. p. 28).
In order to avoid such unpalatable consequences, we 
need to include rights into our moral theory. Rights carve 
out a protected sphere around individuals, thereby mak-
ing individuals inviolable. They refl ect moral boundaries 
that are not to be transgressed. Including rights into a 
moral theory ensures that individuals ought not to be 
treated as mere means. Nozick argues that respecting the 
inviolability of persons requires us to accept a rights-based 
moral theory that treats rights as moral constraints.
Here it might be objected that if we care about rights, 
then we should try to minimize the violation of rights 
and accordingly include rights into the moral goal. Since 
rights are important, they should feature in the goals of 
the moral theory, rather than being treated as moral side 
constraints. The goals should specify that rights are to be 
respected and that rights violations are to be minimized. 
Put differently, the objection states that it is not the case 
that purely goal-directed theories per se fail to respect the 
inviolability of persons, but only unsophisticated ones that 
do not include rights in the moral goals.
Nozick rejects this suggestion and claims that it is not 
adequate to integrate rights into the moral goals. He argues 
that while rights are necessary for giving a satisfactory 

18 
Robert Nozick
account that is not subject to these problems, the inclusion 
of rights is not suffi cient. Even granting rights a non-
derivative status is not suffi cient. To avoid these problems 
rights have to be included in the correct manner, namely 
insofar as they are treated as side constraints. We can 
account for the inviolability of persons only if we consider 
rights as moral constraints on actions, rather than includ-
ing rights in the moral goals that are specifi ed by the 
theory.
The problem with goal-directed rights-based theories 
is that they do not succeed in capturing the inviolability 
of persons. The reason for including rights into our moral 
theory in the fi rst place was to recognize certain moral 
boundaries between individuals, the violation of which 
is deemed unacceptable. The problem was that purely 
goal-directed moral theories, such as utilitarianism, classi-
fi ed certain actions that involved treating people as mere 
means as being permissible or even required. Accordingly, 
rights are included into the theory to capture the inviola-
bility of persons. However, including rights into the moral 
goals and arguing that rights violations ought to be mini-
mized does not in fact allow us to avoid this problem 
and does not capture the inviolability of persons. Indeed, 
this view is subject to the very same problems that it was 
intended to solve.
Rather than having a case where the minimization of 
disutility requires us to violate certain moral boundaries 
and treat an individual as a mere means in our pursuit of 
the moral goal, we now end up in a situation where the 
minimization of rights violations requires us to violate 
certain moral boundaries and treat an individual as a mere 
means towards achieving this moral goal. In such cases, 
rights violations can be justifi ed in terms of the prevention 

 
Critical Exposition 
19
of other rights violations. For instance, ‘someone might 
try to justify his punishing another he knows to be innocent 
of a crime that enraged a mob, on the grounds that puni-
shing this innocent person would help to avoid even 
greater violations of rights by others, and so would lead 
to a minimum weighted score for rights violations in the 
society’ (p. 29).
If rights are included into the moral goal, then rights 
violations can be weighed up against each other, even if 
rights are granted a fundamental status. In Nozick’s term, 
we end up with a ‘utilitarianism of rights’ (p. 28) that suf-
fers from the same problems that the appeal to rights was 
supposed to solve. Thus we can see that the same problems 
reoccur at the level of rights and this holds independently 
of whether rights are given a derivative or a fundamental 
status. No matter how rights are understood, the moral 
theory will not account for the inviolability of persons 
as long as rights are included into the moral goals. This 
utilitarianism of rights does not adequately respect the 
moral status of individuals and does not capture the moral 
boundaries separating different persons.
The problem of not being able to respect the inviolabil-
ity of persons is a structural problem pertaining to purely 
goal-directed theories per se that cannot be solved by spec-
ifying particular goals or modifying our understanding 
of the goals. The conclusion is that purely goal-directed 
moral theories cannot capture the inviolability of persons. 
The reasons for rejecting simple goal-directed accounts, 
such as utilitarianism, are reasons for rejecting purely goal-
directed moral theories per se. A different kind of moral 
theory is required in order to make room for the inviola-
bility of persons. To do so, we need to include moral con-
straints into our theory, rather than only specifying the 

20 
Robert Nozick
goals that are to be achieved. It is not enough to have a 
rights-based theory. It is not even enough to have rights-
based theory whereby rights are granted a fundamental 
status. To get a moral theory that respects the inviolability 
of persons, rights have to be treated as side constraints.
What we need are side constraints since these impose 
moral restrictions the transgression of which cannot be 
justifi ed in terms of the prevention of other transgressions. 
Side constraints rule out a utilitarianism of rights since 
they are not concerned with maximizing rights compliance, 
but instead place restrictions upon permissible actions. 
Rights are not included as part of the moral goals, as hap-
pens in utilitarianism, but rather constrain the achieve-
ment of goals. Only if we have such side constraints do we 
have a moral theory that places an absolute restriction 
upon treating people as mere means.
It should be noted that whether side constraints really 
are absolute in a strict sense is a problem that Nozick 
sidesteps. ‘The question of whether these side constraints 
are absolute, or whether they may be violated in order to 
avoid catastrophic moral horror, and if the latter, what the 
resulting structure might look like, is one I hope largely 
to avoid’ (p. 30, footnote). While it is clear that a moral 
theory should include rights, and while it is clear that side 
constraints are superior to other conceptions that allow 
for a utilitarianism of rights, it is nonetheless diffi cult to 
bite the bullet and claim that side constraints may never 
legitimately be infringed upon. Those who allow for excep-
tions in cases of catastrophes manage to avoid the counter-
intuitive consequences that follow from an absolutist 
conception of side constraints. However, they face the 
daunting task of giving a principled account of side con-
straints that is not ad hoc and that makes them neither 

 
Critical Exposition 
21
absolute nor subject to maximization (cf. Nozick: 1981, 
p. 495).
The basis of libertarian side constraints
Nozick argues that rights are side constraints that refl ect 
the inviolability of persons. These side constraints embody 
the libertarian prohibition on aggression, ruling out redis-
tribution and paternalism as being morally impermissible. 
Individual rights prohibit the use of force and the threat 
of force except in cases of self-defence. We have seen 
Nozick’s arguments to the effect that we need to include 
rights into our moral theory as side constraints if we are 
to respect the inviolability of persons and avoid cases in 
which people are treated as mere means in the achieve-
ment of a moral goal. It is now time to turn to the question 
of why we should accept the inviolability of persons and 
why the side constraints following therefrom should turn 
out to be libertarian side constraints. That is, on the one 
hand, the question arises as to what it is that gives rise to 
moral constraints, what counts as the basis of rights and 
why we should consider persons as inviolable. On the other 
hand, there is the question why the required side con-
straints are the libertarian side constraints that rule out 
redistribution and paternalism.
To begin with, it is important to note that Nozick is 
not engaged in a foundational project whereby individual 
rights are deduced from a set of self-evident axioms. He 
does not start from ground zero to build up a moral the-
ory. Instead, he puts forward an intuitively appealing posi-
tion and attempts to work out its consequences, showing 
that it leads to a coherent and attractive account of politi-
cal philosophy, while also providing criticisms of the avail-
able alternatives. Nonetheless, he does provide us with 

22 
Robert Nozick
some insight into the source and basis of rights. In parti-
cular, he considers a Kantian grounding for rights. ‘Side 
constraints upon action refl ect the underlying Kantian 
principle that individuals are ends and not merely means; 
they may not be sacrifi ced or used for the achieving of 
other ends without their consent. Individuals are inviolable’ 
(pp. 30–31).
The Kantian principle tells us to treat individuals as ends, 
rather than merely treating them as means. This requires 
us to treat them as beings that have dignity, beings that 
freely choose how to act and that can set ends for them-
selves. In other words, treating them as ends requires us to 
respect their freedom, to respect their choices, to respect 
the ends that they have set for themselves. They are not 
merely to be considered as means or tools that can be used 
for the achievement of our ends, but as beings that have 
their own ends that they themselves have chosen. Indivi-
duals should not be coerced since coercion amounts to 
treating them as mere means. Coercion involves making 
people do things that they have not chosen to do. It makes 
them into means for the achievement of these ends. They 
are used as tools for achieving ends that are alien to them. 
They are coerced into doing things that they have not set 
as ends for themselves. To treat individuals as ends, on the 
contrary, amounts to respecting the ends that they have set 
for themselves, to respecting their choices and not inter-
fering with their freedom. We should let others pursue 
their ends in the way they see fi t, rather than manipulating 
them for our own ends or imposing ends upon them that 
they have not chosen for themselves.
Since individuals ought to be treated as ends and not as 
mere means, it follows that they should not be coerced to 
do things against their will. Individuals themselves deter-
mine their lives and no one can legitimately force them to 

 
Critical Exposition 
23
live in a particular way. We cannot legitimately impose 
ends upon them. This means that paternalistic interven-
tions are prohibited. People ought to be free to lead their 
lives the way they want (as long as they do not violate the 
rights of someone else). We cannot tell them how to live. 
We can only suggest to them how they should live. We can 
try to convince them to act in certain ways. However, in 
the end, they always have to set their own ends and freely 
accept or reject our suggestions and recommendations. 
Thus, the fact that individuals are ends and not mere 
means gives rise to the libertarian prohibition on paterna-
listic interferences. Coercion is ruled out and the freedom 
of individuals has to be respected. Side constraints refl ect 
the fact that we have to respect that different people have 
their own projects to pursue, that they have to set their 
own ends and lead their lives the way they see fi t.
Thus, in order to respect the inviolability of persons, we 
have to treat individuals as ends and not as mere means. 
Doing so requires us to not violate their rights, to not inter-
fere with their choices, but to let them freely decide which 
ends to pursue and how to live their lives. The question 
now arises why persons are inviolable in this sense, what 
it is that makes it necessary that they be treated as ends. 
Nozick approaches this question by considering some of 
the traditional answers that have been given, such as the 
claim that individuals are rational, possess free will or are 
moral agents. He is not satisfi ed with any of these answers. 
Each trait considered on its own seems insuffi cient to 
give rise to moral constraints. Just because someone is 
rational or because someone possesses free will does not 
mean that that person ought not to be treated in certain 
ways. Instead of opting for one of these traditional answers, 
he suggests that we should consider them collectively and 
add as an additional feature the ability to shape one’s life 

24 
Robert Nozick
in accordance with some overall conception that one has 
chosen. The reason why this collection of capacities and 
characteristics matters and gives rise to moral constraints, 
Nozick conjectures, ‘is connected with that elusive and dif-
fi cult notion: the meaning of life. A person’s shaping his 
life in accordance with some overall plan is his way of giving 
meaning to his life; only a being with the capacity to so 
shape his life can have or strive for meaningful life’ (p. 50).
Hence, persons are beings who can shape their lives 
according to a conception or plan that they themselves 
have framed. They thereby possess the capacity to impart 
meaning to their lives and it is because of this that they are 
inviolable, that they should be treated as ends and not as 
mere means. By respecting their rights, we respect and 
adequately respond to the fact that people have the capac-
ity to shape their lives and strive for meaning. As he puts 
it in one of his later works, recognizing ‘a domain of auto-
nomy constitutes responsiveness to a value-seeking self’ 
(Nozick: 1981, p. 503). This line of argument requires an 
account of what matters in life and what makes life mean-
ingful. Nozick discusses these issues at length in some of 
his other writings, in particular in Philosophical Explanations 
and in The Examined Life. In Anarchy, State, and Utopia, we 
fi nd some indication as to why the voluntary adopting 
of ends is so important, why it matters that people freely 
set ends for themselves and actively pursue them as they 
see fi t.
Nozick argues that what gives meaning to life is more 
than just the experiences had by the individual. A mean-
ingful life is spent not just as a passive recipient of expe-
riences, but as an active agent who can shape his life 
according to the plans that he has adopted. This emphasis 
on leading one’s life is supported by Nozick’s thought 

 
Critical Exposition 
25
experiment involving an ‘experience machine’. Nozick 
devises a thought experiment that is intended to discredit 
the claim made by utilitarians that all that matters are 
experiences. He asks us to consider a scenario in which 
we have the option of plugging into machines that can 
make us have any experiences whatsoever. The question 
then arises whether we should plug into such a machine. 
The utilitarian will be committed to the claim that we 
should plug in. This is because these machines allow us 
to maximize pleasurable experiences and this is all that 
matters for the utilitarian.
Nozick, however, wants to say that there is something 
wrong about plugging into such a machine, that there is 
more to a worthwhile and meaningful life than being a 
subject of pleasurable experiences. In particular, being 
plugged into such a machine undermines our status of 
being active agents who lead their own lives. As Nozick 
notes: ‘What is most disturbing about them [i.e. experi-
ence machines] is their living of our lives for us’ (p. 44). In 
other words, the thought experiment brings out the impor-
tance of activity and achievement. A person is not just a 
passive locus of utility, a subject of experiences. Instead, 
a person is an autonomous being who decides how to live 
his or her life, who sets and pursues ends. The importance 
of leading a life, of pursuing projects that one has chosen 
and of achieving goals that one has set for oneself is left 
out by utilitarian accounts. Utilitarianism is thus problem-
atic in that it treats individuals merely as (passive) loci of 
utility. Instead, we should take account of the importance 
of autonomous agency and of leading and shaping one’s 
life since these features are crucial aspects of a meaningful 
life. Violating the rights of individuals and failing to treat 
them as ends amounts to undercutting their ability to 

26 
Robert Nozick
impart meaning to their lives and to treating them as mere 
things or tools the lives of which do not have any meaning 
and real signifi cance of their own.
Nozick supplements these Kantian considerations, by 
appealing to the separateness of persons. Not only do we 
have to respect that individuals have their own lives to lead 
and their own ends to set, we also have to respect the sepa-
rateness of persons and take seriously the moral bounda-
ries that separate persons. That is, in addition to respecting 
the importance of leading one’s own life and of setting 
ends for oneself, we have to respect that different people 
are separate and have different and separate lives to live. 
This means for Nozick that one should recognize that 
there is no social entity to which one can appeal in order 
to justify the sacrifi ce of an individual’s good. ‘There are 
only individual people, different individual people, with 
their own individual lives. Using one of these people for 
the benefi t of others, uses him and benefi ts the others. 
Nothing more. What happens is that something is done to 
him for the sake of others. Talk of an overall social good 
covers this up’ (p. 33). 
The separateness of persons ensures that the Kantian 
principle not only rules out paternalism but also gives rise 
to the libertarian side constraint against redistribution, 
against sacrifi cing an individual for the sake of other peo-
ple. In particular, Nozick appeals to the distinctness of indi-
viduals in order to criticize an argument in favour of forced 
redistribution. One may try to motivate redistribution by 
claiming that inter-personal redistribution is on a par with 
intra-personal redistribution. The defender of redistribu-
tion can try to argue that sacrifi cing one person’s well-being 
for the greater social good is analogous to the unproble-
matic intra-personal case which consists in an individual 
sacrifi cing current pleasure for future happiness.

 
Critical Exposition 
27
This argument, however, is undercut by the separateness 
of persons. Individuals are distinct and have separate lives 
to live. There is no ‘social entity’ and consequently ‘no 
moral balancing act can take place among us’ (p. 33). The 
bad that is done to one person is not cancelled out by 
the good done to another person in the way that the sacri-
fi ce of pleasure by my present self is cancelled out by the 
additional pleasure of my future self. There is a crucial dif-
ference between an inter-personal and an intra-personal 
redistribution. An intra-personal transfer, which is con-
cerned with the case of earlier and later selves, seems 
entirely unproblematic. There is nothing wrong with mak-
ing a present sacrifi ce for a future good. This situation is 
radically different from an inter-personal transfer, where 
something is taken from one person and given to another. 
In such a case, one person is made to sacrifi ce his or her 
well-being for that of another person, which is morally 
problematic since it involves treating that person as a mere 
means. There is no balancing of different people, no social 
entity of which the two are parts. This is unlike the person 
case, where an earlier and a later self are both parts of the 
same entity, namely a single person. The moral difference 
between these two cases thus derives from the fact that 
distinct persons are separate moral entities that are sepa-
rated by moral boundaries. Hence, when combined with 
the separateness of persons, the Kantian idea that people 
should be treated as ends and not as mere means gives 
rise to moral boundaries that ought not to be transgressed. 
In particular, we can see that redistribution involves a trans-
gression of a moral boundary and is therefore illegitimate.
Thus, we have seen that Nozick appeals to Kantian con-
siderations about the inviolability of persons, as well as to 
the notion of the separateness of persons, to argue in favour 
of libertarian side constraints. The Kantian considerations 

28 
Robert Nozick
rule out paternalistic interventions since such interven-
tions violate the autonomy of individuals and do not reco-
gnize that they have their own lives to lead, that they have 
to set and pursue their own ends in order to impart mean-
ing to their lives. When joined with the separateness of 
persons and the denial of the existence of a social entity, 
they also rule out redistributive interventions. This is 
because the separateness of persons undermines the idea 
that moral balancing acts can take place between persons 
and that there are intersocietal sacrifi ces that are equally 
unobjectionable as interpersonal sacrifi ces. Accordingly, 
all cases of redistribution will be cases of treating some 
people as mere means for bettering the situation of other 
people. Thus, Nozick holds that individuals are inviolable 
and have their own and separate lives to live and that neither 
paternalistic nor redistributive interventions are morally 
permissible.
Against anarchy
We have seen that Nozick’s moral theory includes a strong 
understanding of libertarian rights, which are considered 
as moral side constraints on actions. Accepting such indi-
vidual rights makes it questionable whether there can be a 
legitimate state at all, whether the state can be justifi ed. 
Nozick takes the anarchist’s challenge seriously and devotes 
the fi rst part of Anarchy, State, and Utopia to an attempt to 
refute the anarchist.
State of nature theorizing
‘The fundamental question of political philosophy, one 
that precedes questions about how the state should be 

 
Critical Exposition 
29
organized, is whether there should be any state at all’ (p. 4). 
Nozick thinks that we cannot simply take the legitimacy 
of the state for granted. Instead, the state has to be justi-
fi ed and the anarchist’s challenge has to be met. This chal-
lenge is two-fold in nature. On the one hand, the anarchist 
claims that the state is intrinsically immoral. On the other, 
he argues that the state is a sub-optimal outcome and that 
we would be better off without a state. Nozick attempts to 
meet both of these challenges. The fi rst challenge is met 
by showing that the state can arise without violating any 
rights. To show that states can arise in a legitimate way, i.e. 
in a way that does not involve rights violations, is not yet to 
provide positive justifi cation for their existence. To fully 
justify the state we need to show not only that it is not intrin-
sically immoral but also that it is good. This is what Nozick 
tries to do. ‘If one could show that the state would be supe-
rior even to this most favored situation of anarchy, the best 
that realistically can be hoped for, or would arise by a pro-
cess involving no morally impermissible steps, or would be 
an improvement if it arose, this would provide a rationale 
for the state’s existence; it would justify the state’ (p. 5).
Roughly speaking, Nozick’s strategy consists in giving 
an argument to the effect that a state would arise by means 
of an invisible-hand process without violating any rights. 
He argues that a state would arise out of a state of nature 
by means of a process that does not require any explicit 
intention to create a state. Instead, a state would be the 
spontaneous and unintended outcome of the actions of 
individuals in the state of nature. As he puts it, we would 
‘back into the state without really trying’.
It is important to note that Nozick is not interested in 
the justifi cation of any existing state, but in ‘explanatory 
political theory’. He attempts to provide a fundamental 

30 
Robert Nozick
explanation of the political realm, that is, an explanation 
of the political realm in purely nonpolitical terms. An ade-
quate theory of a state of nature that describes ‘how a state 
would arise from that state of nature will serve our explana-
tory purposes, even if no actual state ever arose that way’ (p. 7). 
This explanatory project partly accounts for why Nozick 
provides an invisible-hand argument rather than a consent-
based justifi cation of the state. It is not because he consid-
ers a state founded on explicit consent to be problematic. 
Rather, it is because this would be a trivial case of a legiti-
mate state that would not satisfy Nozick’s explanatory pur-
poses. A consent-based account, unlike an invisible-hand 
argument, does not constitute a fundamental explanation. 
It does not explain the political realm in non-political terms 
since the state is the intended result of a social contract. 
‘Invisible-hand explanations of phenomena thus yield 
greater understanding than do explanations of them as 
brought about by design as the object of people’s inten-
tions’ (p. 19). Nozick does not just want to show that we 
could consent to a state and thereby give rise to a legiti-
mate state. Instead, he attempts to establish that we would 
act in certain ways that give rise to a state, without anyone 
intending to bring about a state.
Moreover, the absence of actual consent makes a consent-
based account largely irrelevant when it comes to assessing 
existing states, while an invisible-hand approach allows for 
relevance since the process is less distant from the actual 
process. Nozick classifi es an explanation as a ‘potential 
explanation’ if it is one that does not fi t the actual situa-
tion but would be the correct explanation if things were 
different. Such an explanation shows how the state could 
have arisen, but not how it actually did arise. The relevance 
of a potential explanation decreases the more remote the 

 
Critical Exposition 
31
process that it invokes is from the actual process. Both 
consent-based accounts as well as Nozick’s invisible-hand 
explanation are potential explanations. Yet, since the 
invisible-hand explanation is closer to the actual process 
than a consent-based explanation is, it is more relevant to 
what is actually going on (cf. pp. 293–294).
From anarchy to the minimal state
Nozick’s discussion begins with the state of nature, with an 
anarchic situation in which individuals enforce their own 
rights. Nozick is willing to grant the anarchist a favourable 
description of the state of nature. He allows that there 
will be a general compliance with the dictates of morality. 
There will not be perfect compliance, but in most cases 
people will know what is right and will act accordingly. 
The cases when confl icts arise lead to what Locke called 
the inconveniences of the state of nature. These inconve-
niences primarily have to do with the administration of 
justice. Individuals will be biased when they judge their 
own case and there will be no impartial arbiter to settle 
disputes and provide backing for agreements. Moreover, 
individuals might lack the power to enforce their rights. 
Locke argued that we need to set up a state to deal with 
these problems.
Nozick, however, suggests that various private solutions 
can be devised to deal with these inconveniences. The state 
of nature has inconveniences, but it also has solutions to 
deal with them. In particular, people will join together to 
form mutual-protection associations. These will then evolve 
into professionalized protection agencies, due to the bene-
fi ts of the division of labour and of specialization. Initially 
there will be several such associations or companies in 

32 
Robert Nozick
a certain geographical region. However, after some time 
we will end up with a single dominant protective agency. 
The reason that Nozick provides in favour of this claim 
is that the value of being a client of a particular agency 
depends on the strength of that agency relative to other 
agencies, thereby making it rational for individuals to 
become clients of the strongest protection agency. ‘Out 
of anarchy, pressed by spontaneous groupings, mutual-
protection associations, division of labor, market pressures, 
economies of scale, and rational self-interest there arises 
something very much resembling a minimal state or a group 
of geographically distinct minimal states’ (pp. 16–17).
Is the dominant agency a state? Nozick answers this ques-
tion in the negative. A dominant protection agency fails to 
satisfy two conditions that are required for classifying as a 
state since (i) it does not claim a monopoly on the use 
of force and since (ii) it does not provide universal cover-
age but only protects its clients. More precisely, a private 
protection agency does not announce that it will punish 
everyone who uses force without express permission of 
the agency. Hence, it does not claim a monopoly on the 
use of force and thus does not constitute a state. Moreover, 
private agencies differ from states in that they only protect 
their members. It does not provide protection to everyone 
within its territory, but restricts its services to its clients 
who have paid for protection. In other words, the pres-
ence of independents who are not members of the domi-
nant agency undermines both of these features since they 
enforce their own rights.
In order to become a state the dominant agency would 
have to claim a monopoly and prohibit independents 
from enforcing their rights. Additionally, it would have to 
provide them with protective services to ensure universal 
coverage which would involve charging its clients in order 

 
Critical Exposition 
33
to provide this extra coverage. In this way the dominant 
agency would become a state. Yet, both steps seem morally 
problematic. On the one hand, the anarchist claims that 
the protective agency cannot legitimately prohibit inde-
pendents from enforcing their rights. It does not seem to 
be morally permissible for an agency to claim or enforce a 
monopoly on the use of force. Claiming such a monopoly 
amounts to a violation of the rights of independents. On 
the other hand, taking resources from its clients to provide 
universal coverage seems to be an illegitimate form of 
redistribution that is in violation of a side constraint. Nozick, 
however, argues that both of these problems can be over-
come and that a dominant agency can claim a monopoly 
and provide universal coverage without violating rights.
Nozick argues that independents can be prohibited from 
enforcing their rights since this kind of private enforce-
ment is risky. Protective agencies have a duty to their 
customers to protect their procedural rights. They have 
to make sure that their clients are judged according to 
fair and reliable procedures. Given the uncertainty and 
risk involved in letting independents enforce their rights, 
Nozick claims that the protection of procedural rights 
requires prohibiting independents from enforcing their 
rights. ‘Since the dominant protective association judges 
its own procedures to be both reliable and fair, and believes 
this to be generally known, it will not allow anyone to 
defend against them. . . . Although no monopoly is claimed, 
the dominant agency does occupy a unique position by 
virtue of its power’ (p. 108). In this way we end up with a de 
facto monopoly. This is not a de jure monopoly since eve-
ryone has the same rights. It is not the case that the domi-
nant agency has a special right that others lack. Instead, 
everyone has the same right of prohibiting others from 
using risky and unreliable methods. It simply happens to 

34 
Robert Nozick
be the case that the dominant agency is in a position in 
which it is the only one who can make use of that right. We 
end up in a situation whereby the right of prohibiting the 
use of procedures deemed to be risky is such that the exer-
cise of this right by the dominant agency prevents others 
from exercising it. This is because the right ‘includes the 
right to stop others from wrongfully exercising the right, 
and only the dominant power will be able to exercise the 
right against all others’ (p. 109).
Prohibiting independents from enforcing their rights, 
however, requires the agency to compensate the independ-
ents for not being allowed to exercise their rights, which 
can be done by providing them with protection services 
free of charge. ‘The clients of the protective agency, then, 
must compensate the independents for the disadvantages 
imposed upon them by being prohibited self-help enforce-
ment of their own rights against the agency’s clients’ (p. 110). 
Nozick emphasizes that the resulting state is not a redis-
tributive state. While the agency charges its clients to pay 
for protecting independents, this is not a redistributive 
activity. In order to judge whether an activity is redistribu-
tive, we need to assess the rationale for the activity rather 
than only assessing whether resources are taken from some 
and given to others. Since the provision of services to inde-
pendents paid for by clients is based on the principle of 
compensation rather than on a redistributive principle 
that aims to achieve a certain distributive pattern, it fol-
lows that the resulting minimal state is not a redistributive 
state.
Thus, we started with anarchy and ended up with a mini-
mal state. Out of anarchy emerges a dominant protective 
agency. This agency will become an ultraminimal state 
since it will claim a de facto monopoly on the use of force, 

 
Critical Exposition 
35
given that it is going to prohibit independents from enforc-
ing their rights against its clients. The ultraminimal state 
then has to be transformed into a minimal state since it 
must compensate the independents for having prohibited 
them from enforcing their rights by giving them free 
coverage. This implies that the provision of protection 
services has universal coverage. In this way the two features 
that were lacking have been met and we end up with a 
minimal state that is not based on redistributive principles 
but on the principle of compensation.
Nothing more than the minimal state
In the preceding part, we saw that Nozick thinks that 
the anarchist’s challenge can be met and that a state can 
come into existence without violating anyone’s rights. 
While Nozick believes that states can be legitimate, he also 
strongly defends the view that their legitimate functions 
are very restricted and that a minimal state is the only state 
that is justifi ed. In order to defend this view, he provides a 
critique of some alternative conceptions of the state which 
grant it a more extensive role. Many reasons have been pro-
posed as to why a minimal state is supposedly insuffi cient. 
Nozick’s primary target is the claim that a more extensive 
state is required to achieve distributive justice. According 
to this proposal, a state must do more than protect life, 
liberty and property, by ensuring that a just distribution of 
goods obtains.
To begin with, Nozick points out that the very notion of 
distributive justice fails to be neutral. This is because the 
notion of ‘distribution’ suggests the idea that the goods 
that people possess have somehow been distributed and 

36 
Robert Nozick
that this distribution may not have been adequate, thereby 
implying a need for re-distribution. Nozick rejects this 
conception on the basis that there is no central distribu-
tion of goods. He notes that ‘we are not in the position of 
children who have been given portions of pie by someone 
who now makes last minute adjustments to rectify careless 
cutting’ (p. 149). No one is in charge of allocating all 
the resources and determining what different people 
get. Instead, the possessions of individuals are determined 
by the multitude of actions and interactions among differ-
ent individuals. People have the possessions they do, not 
because they have been distributed or allocated to them, 
but because they have acquired them from other people. 
To rectify this bias, Nozick suggests the notion of a ‘hold-
ing’. Rather than holdings being somehow distributed by 
some centralized mechanism, the set of holdings emerges 
out of the voluntary exchanges and interactions among 
individuals.
Theories of justice
The problem of justice is to fi nd out under what condi-
tions the holdings of particular people are in conformity 
with the demands of justice. Before criticizing alternative 
accounts, Nozick fi rst proceeds to specify what he consid-
ers to be the correct theory of justice in holdings, which he 
labels the ‘entitlement theory of justice’. This theory con-
sists of three components, namely (i) principles of justice 
in acquisition, (ii) principles of justice in transfer and 
(iii) principles of justice in rectifi cation. The fi rst set of 
principles specifi es the conditions under which unowned 
resources may be appropriated, that is, the conditions under 
which initial holdings may justly be acquired. The second 

 
Critical Exposition 
37
set of principles characterizes how holdings can be justly 
transferred from one person to another or how a holding 
may appropriately be returned to the condition of being 
unowned. Finally, the third set of principles is concerned 
with the question of how past injustices can be rectifi ed, 
specifying how violations of the previous two sets of prin-
ciples are to be dealt with. These three sets of principles 
exhaust the account of justice and fully determine the con-
ditions under which particular sets of holdings are just.
In setting out the entitlement theory, Nozick does not 
provide us with the particular principles of justice and 
does not engage in the diffi cult task of specifying the pre-
cise conditions of the various principles. Instead, he only 
sets out the formal structure of the entitlement theory, 
specifying what kinds of principles it requires. This is for 
the most part suffi cient for his aims since he does not 
intend to give a fully worked out account of justice. Instead, 
he simply wants to characterize the structure of the entitle-
ment conception in order to be able to distinguish it 
from the end-state and patterned conceptions of justice 
which he will criticize later on. In this way, he can under-
mine alternative conceptions of justice that require a more 
extensive state, while specifying the framework of his enti-
tlement theory which is perfectly compatible with a mini-
mal state (cf. pp. 202–203).
While not providing a detailed account of any of 
these principles, Nozick discusses the issue of appropria-
tion at some length. The problem of appropriation is how 
unowned resources initially get appropriated, how a moral 
claim to an unowned object can arise. Nozick takes Locke’s 
dis cussion of appropriation as a starting point. In the 
Second Treatise Locke argued that it is possible to acquire a 
property right in something that was previously unowned 

38 
Robert Nozick
by mixing one’s labour with it. He argues that we own our-
selves as well as our labour and that by mixing something 
that we own, namely our labour, with something that is 
unowned, namely the object, we come to own the object. 
This account faces numerous diffi culties and Nozick raises 
several objections to it that focus on why the mixing of 
labour gives rise to ownership, on what the mixing of labour 
consists in, and on how far the property rights extend. For 
example, he asks why I get to own the whole thing with 
which I mix my labour, rather than losing my labour or 
only acquiring partial ownership in the object. Similarly, he 
asks why enclosing a piece of land by building a fence gives 
rise to a property right to the enclosed land, rather than 
only to the land immediately underneath the fence.
Rather than trying to respond to these objections to 
Locke’s account, Nozick rejects the idea that appropria-
tion requires the mixing of labour with unowned objects. 
Unfortunately, Nozick does not specify any other condition 
that could replace the one proposed by Locke. All that 
we are told is that the principles of justice in acquisition 
specify the procedures by means of which individuals 
can acquire legitimate claims over unowned objects. What 
exactly these procedures involve, however, is something 
that Nozick does not tell us.
Whatever these procedures may turn out to be, the ques-
tion will arise whether there are any limits on appro-
priation, whether there are any restrictions on what and 
how much can be appropriated. In discussing this ques-
tion, Nozick again takes Locke’s theory as a starting point. 
According to Locke, appropriation is only justifi ed on 
condition that it leaves enough and as good for others 
to appropriate. Nozick thinks that this proviso is too 
restrictive and that it ignores the fact that appropriation is 
generally benefi cial for everyone insofar as private pro perty 

 
Critical Exposition 
39
rights give rise to incentive structures that ensure that 
overall welfare is increased. Accordingly, Nozick proposes 
his own proviso to the effect that an appropriation is justi-
fi ed on condition that it leaves no one worse off than they 
would have been had the resource remained unowned. 
That is, the private ownership of a resource must be suffi -
ciently benefi cial to ensure that those who are no longer at 
liberty to use the resource are not worsened by the appro-
priation. This condition should not be understood as a 
utilitarian justifi cation of property but as a condition that 
ensures that others are not harmed by an appropriation 
(cf. p. 177).
The proviso not only affects original acquisition, but 
also casts a ‘historical shadow’ on the transfer of property 
(cf. pp. 179–181). The limits on acquiring holdings by 
original acquisition also constitute limits on acquiring 
holdings by voluntary exchange. In particular, transfers 
of holdings may not lead to a situation whereby anyone 
is worse off than he would have been had those holdings 
remained unowned. For instance, if the original appropri-
ation of all the water holes in a desert is ruled out by the 
proviso, then the acquisition of all these water holes by 
transfer is equally ruled out by the historical shadow of the 
proviso. Accordingly, it turns out that being voluntary 
is not a suffi cient condition for a transfer to be justice-
preserving – it also has to satisfy the proviso. If the proviso 
is violated, then one of two things needs to happen. Either 
compensation is due to bring it about that the position 
of others is no longer worsened. Or there will be limits 
on how the owner may use his property, namely he may 
use it only in such a way that the position of others is not 
worsened. For instance, the owner may not exclude others 
from using the property or may only charge them a limited 
amount.

40 
Robert Nozick
This proviso allows Nozick to avoid counter-intuitive 
consequences that would otherwise arise in cases in which 
someone appropriates all the supply of a vital resource. 
Without the proviso, we would end up in a situation 
whereby others would be completely dependent on the 
person possessing this resource. Nozick, however, can say 
that such appropriations are not problematic since the 
proviso ensures that the person may not use his property 
in any way that worsens the situation of others relative to 
the baseline situation in which they are at liberty to use 
these things. It is important to note that property rights 
are not overridden in such cases by considerations con-
cerning the well-being of others. Instead, the proviso is 
internal to the theory of property, which means that rights 
are restricted by the proviso rather than being overridden. 
Put differently, this means that there are no considerations 
extraneous to the theory of property that could trump 
property rights (cf. p. 180). Nozick can accordingly still 
accept that property rights are absolute (possibly except-
ing cases of ‘catastrophic moral horror’) since the proviso 
operates on the content of these rights.
While Nozick’s discussion of how property rights arise is 
rather sketchy, and while many questions and problems 
still have to be dealt with, he points out that alternative 
accounts are no better off. Everyone has to give a theory of 
property rights and provide an account as to how objects 
can be appropriated. Simply stating that property is not 
private but communal does not solve this problem. A theo-
retical justifi cation and explanation of property rights still 
has to be given. It has to be explained how a moral right 
over objects arises and this has not been achieved by any of 
Nozick’s opponents.
The principles of justice in transfer constitute the next 
component of the entitlement theory. They are intended 

 
Critical Exposition 
41
to specify the conditions under which we can move from 
one just set of holdings to another set of holdings in a jus-
tice-preserving manner. This includes, on the one hand, a 
characterization of the processes of transferring holdings 
that are justifi ed. For Nozick, these processes include volun-
tary exchanges as well as gifts. On the other hand, these 
principles describe the kinds of processes whereby a new set 
of holding arises in a manner that is in violation of justice. 
Such processes include fraud, theft and coerced transfers.
Again, Nozick does not discuss these processes and pro-
cedures in any detail. He does, however, respond to the 
common objection that many apparently voluntary 
exchanges fail to preserve justice since they do not really 
classify as being voluntary, given that one of the persons 
involved in the exchange only has a very limited set of 
options. For example, it is often claimed that a choice 
between starving to death and accepting to work for a 
low wage is not a real choice and that the acceptance 
of the contract is not a voluntary action. Nozick responds: 
‘Whether a person’s actions are voluntary depends on 
what it is that limits his alternatives. . . . Other people’s 
actions place limits on one’s available opportunities. 
Whether this makes one’s resulting action non-voluntary 
depends upon whether these others had the right to act as 
they did’ (p. 262). This means that whether an action 
is voluntary does not depend on the range of options 
available to the agent, but instead upon how the choice 
situation arose. If everyone acted within their rights and 
someone ends up fi nding himself in an unpalatable choice 
situation, then that person is not coerced no matter 
how limited and unpleasant the available choices turn out 
to be. For a choice to be involuntary, the choice situation 
must have arisen in a way that violates the rights of the 
person making the choice.

42 
Robert Nozick
Finally, Nozick provides a brief discussion of issues per-
taining to the rectifi cation of past injustices. He raises a 
number of important issues, such as the question whether 
‘an injustice [can be] done to someone whose holding was 
itself based upon an unrectifi ed injustice’ (p. 152) and the 
question as to how far back one must go ‘in wiping clean 
the historical slate of injustices’ (p. 152). However, he does 
not provide any answers to these questions but only states 
that an ideal theory of rectifi cation would make use of 
various subjunctive conditionals to ascertain what would 
have happened had the injustices not occurred. The lack 
of historical and subjunctive information, as well as the 
absence of a worked out theory of rectifi cation severely 
restricts the applicability of the entitlement theory to real 
world cases. Nozick notes that ‘one cannot use the analysis 
and theory presented here to condemn any particular 
scheme of transfer payments, unless it is clear that no 
considerations of rectifi cation of injustice could apply to 
justify it. Although to introduce socialism as the punish-
ment for our sins would be to go too far, past injustices 
might be so great as to make necessary in the short run 
a more extensive state in order to rectify them’ (p. 231).
Thus, according to Nozick, justice in holdings is deter-
mined by the three sets of principles that determine jus-
tice in acquisition, transfer and rectifi cation. Whether a 
set of holdings is in conformity with justice depends upon 
whether the way it arose was in conformity with these prin-
ciples. A holding is just if and only if it has been arrived 
at by actions conforming to the principles of justice. These 
principles are justice-preserving, which means that if a set 
of holdings is just, then any application of these principles 
ensures that justice is preserved such that the outcome is 
just as well. ‘A distribution is just if it arises from another 

 
Critical Exposition 
43
just distribution by legitimate means’ (p. 151). According 
to the entitlement theory, one cannot arrive at an unjust 
set of holdings from a just set of holdings if the former was 
arrived at from the latter only by just steps. An injustice 
must have occurred at some point in arriving at a parti-
cular set of holdings in order for that set of holdings to 
be unjust.
The entitlement theory is a historical conception of 
justice. This means that the justice of a set of holdings 
is determined by how it arose, by the historical processes 
from which it resulted. This conception is to be contrasted 
with time-slice or end-state principles of justice, which are 
studied in welfare economics. These kinds of principles 
are not concerned with the historical genesis of a particu-
lar distribution, but only with its structural characteristics. 
They characterize justice in terms of how the holdings are 
distributed at a time or over an interval of time. In other 
words, they are merely concerned with the question of who 
ends up with which holdings. As a result, these accounts 
do not make room for particular entitlements to particu-
lar holdings, but treat structurally identical distributions as 
being equally just. They are thereby distinctly ahistorical. 
This is problematic since we often consider it relevant how 
a set of holdings arose, for example when we distinguish 
the situation in which a person has acquired an object as 
a gift from the situation in which he has acquired it by 
theft. The situations are identical as regards the distribu-
tion of goods insofar as the same person ends up with the 
same object. Yet, while the former situation is unproblem-
atic, the latter is to be condemned. The difference between 
these situations that explains this moral difference is to be 
located in the historical processes that gave rise to them. 
While gift-giving is justice-preserving, theft is not a legitimate 

44 
Robert Nozick
principle of transfer. Accordingly, we can see that whether 
people are entitled to something depends on how they got 
it. ‘In contrast to end-result principles of justice, historical 
principles of justice hold that past circumstances or actions 
of people can create differential entitlements or differen-
tial deserts to things’ (p. 155).
While the entitlement theory is a historical conception 
of justice and as such needs to be distinguished from 
end-state principles of justice, we must also distinguish it 
from other historical accounts. In particular, the entitle-
ment theory has to be differentiated from patterned con-
ceptions of justice. These conceptions specify some natural 
dimension or set of dimensions along which sets of hold-
ings are supposed to be patterned. ‘Let us call a principle 
of distribution patterned if it specifi es that a distribution 
is to vary along some natural dimension, weighted sum of 
natural dimensions, or lexicographic ordering of natural 
dimensions’ (p. 156). Well-known examples of patterned 
accounts include the principles that holdings should be 
distributed in accordance with need, merit or marginal 
contribution. It should be noted that even though many 
patterned principles have historical elements, some turn 
out to be ahistorical, for example the principle to distrib-
ute in accordance with IQ.
Though Nozick is not particularly clear about the rela-
tions between the different accounts of justice, we can see 
that there is a fundamental distinction between structural 
and procedural conceptions of justice. Structural theories 
can be distinguished into different kinds depending on 
whether the structuring principle is supplied by some 
independent dimension or variable in accordance with 
which holdings should be structured or whether the struc-
turing principle is only concerned with relative holdings. 

 
Critical Exposition 
45
The former are patterned conceptions, while the latter are 
end-state theories. Thus, we can identify three main cate-
gories of theories of justice, namely theories dealing with 
(i) end-states, (ii) patterns and (iii) entitlements. Theories 
of types (i) and (ii) are structural in nature, while type 
(iii) theories are procedural.
More precisely, end-states are concerned with the struc-
tural features of the distribution of holdings. They tell us 
to look at the distributional matrix and assess whether the 
distribution satisfi es certain structural constraints, whether 
holdings are distributed in the right proportions. Patterned 
accounts of justice, on the contrary, require us to take into 
consideration additional features that go beyond the infor-
mation contained within the distributional matrix. They 
require us to assess some independent dimension or set 
of dimensions according to which distributions should 
be patterned. These accounts thereby connect the struc-
tural features of the distribution with structural features 
of another variable or a set of variables that is taken to 
provide a pattern. We can give a more fi ne-grained classifi -
cation by distinguishing theories that appeal to a single 
dimension from those that make use of multiple dimensions 
and then differentiate the latter according to the ways in 
which the dimensions are weighted or ordered. Moreover, 
patterned accounts can be divided into historical and 
ahistorical theories, depending upon whether the dimen-
sion used for structuring the holdings is a historical dimen-
sion or not. When dealing with accounts that pattern along 
multiple dimensions, mixed theories also become possible 
in that some of the dimensions are historical while others 
are ahistorical.
Thus, end-state and patterned theories are different kinds 
of structural conceptions of justice. End-state conceptions 

46 
Robert Nozick
can be considered as limiting cases of patterned concep-
tions. In the case of such theories the structuring principle 
or pattern is not provided by some independent dimension. 
They do not require us to structure the distribution of 
holdings according to certain independent characteristics, 
but to structure it according to structural principles that 
only appeal to features of the distributional matrix. This 
means that we can lump the various end-state and pat-
terned conceptions together since they are all structural 
in nature. This is important for Nozick because it enables 
him to argue in favour of the entitlement view by criticiz-
ing structural conceptions of justice per se. He can reject 
all theories that are structural in nature, without having 
to deal with particular theories on a case by case basis. The 
rejection of structural theories then implies that we should 
instead adopt a procedural account that specifi es the pro-
cesses that determine whether a distribution is just.
Nozick’s entitlement theory is, of course, such a proce-
dural conception. It is a historical account that looks at the 
processes by which a distribution has arisen. It does not 
specify any structural features, but is purely procedural in 
nature. The entitlement theory does not specify any natural 
dimension along which distributions should be patterned. 
Nor does it structure holdings according to independently 
given structuring principles. Instead, the principles of 
justice specify processes whereby just entitlements can be 
generated, without specifying how things have to turn out. 
Whatever satisfi es the principles is just, no matter how 
holdings end up being distributed. The sets of holdings 
generated in accordance with Nozick’s principles of justice 
are likely to have many strands of different patterns run-
ning through them. This is because many of the individual 
transactions that give rise to any particular set of holdings 
will be based on particular patterns. However, there is no 

 
Critical Exposition 
47
overarching pattern to which it is likely to conform or to 
which it needs to conform. The conformity or lack of con-
formity to any such patterns is of no relevance to the justice 
of the set of holdings, to the question whether people are 
entitled to the holdings that they do possess. ‘The system 
of entitlements is defensible when constituted by the indi-
vidual aims of individual transactions. No overarching aim 
is needed, no distributional pattern is required’ (p. 159).
An important feature of the entitlement theory is that 
entitlements at a time do not depend on what other 
people are entitled to at that time. ‘The entitlement prin-
ciple of justice in holdings satisfi es both the deletion and 
the addition conditions; the entitlement principle is non-
organic and aggregative’ (p. 210). This is because entitle-
ments are not based on proportions or ratios, but on 
historical processes. Having been legitimately acquired is 
suffi cient for being entitled to the holding, independently 
of whatever might be happening elsewhere. Hence, neither 
the addition of new people into the distribution, nor the 
deletion of people already in the distribution in any way 
alters entitlements. In short, entitlements are not extrinsi-
cally sensitive (except insofar as we are dealing with the 
proviso and its ‘historical shadow’). They do not depend 
upon how many other people there are or what holdings 
those other people have.
Most patterned principles of justice, however, do not 
satisfy either the addition condition or both conditions. 
This means that a change in how many other people there 
are can change the justness of the distribution. On such 
accounts, a person’s legitimately acquired holdings can 
suddenly fail to comply with the pattern, simply as a result 
of the deletion or addition of other people in the distri-
bution. That person’s holdings will accordingly suddenly 
become unjust without him (or anyone else) having done 

48 
Robert Nozick
anything wrong. A further implication of this extrinsic 
sensitivity is that the justice of holdings depends on the 
comparison class. Thus, a distribution within a society may 
conform to the structural conditions of justice, while a 
set which contains this distribution, such as the global dis-
tribution, may fail to do so. This raises the diffi cult ques-
tion for pattern theorists as to which comparison class is 
the correct one, a diffi cult question that the entitlement 
theorist does not have to face since entitlements are not 
affected by what happens elsewhere.
Nozick criticizes patterned conceptions for their implicit 
assumption that goods are up for grabs, that their status 
is as if they had come into existence ex nihilo. He argues 
that it is not the case that we have goods and then need 
to distribute them in accordance with some pattern. We 
are not dealing with a situation where manna comes from 
heaven and then has to be distributed. There is no social 
pie that needs to be divided and allocated to different 
people. The entitlement theory strongly rejects the separa-
tion of production and distribution. Manna does not fall 
from heaven. Instead, things have to be produced. Produc-
tion, however, gives rise to entitlements that preclude the 
distribution of the produced goods. Holdings come into 
existence with entitlements attached to them. An object 
produced by someone is not available for distribution since 
that person is entitled to it (assuming that he was entitled 
to the resources used in the production). The differential 
contributions to the ‘social pie’ give rise to differential 
entitlements (cf. p. 160 & p. 198).
Against patterns
The main argument against end-state and patterned 
accounts of justice is that liberty upsets patterns. Any pattern 

 
Critical Exposition 
49
that is imposed can only be kept up by prohibiting acts 
that undermine the pattern or by constantly redistributing 
to bring the pattern back into existence. Nozick wants to 
argue that in order to bring about and maintain a patterned 
distribution, one has to ‘forbid capitalist acts between 
consenting adults’ (p. 163). To illustrate this point, Nozick 
gives his famous Wilt Chamberlain example.
We begin with the pattern theorist’s favoured distribution 
D1. This may be a distribution in accordance with need, an 
equal distribution or the implementation of some other 
pattern. Wilt Chamberlain then signs a contract with a bas-
ketball team, specifying that 25 cents from the price of 
each ticket will go to him. During the course of the season, 
one million people come to watch Wilt Chamberlain, hap-
pily paying the ticket price since they get a great deal of 
satisfaction out of seeing him play. At the end of the sea-
son, we have a new distribution D2 in which Chamberlain 
will end up with $250,000 from the ticket sales and will 
accordingly be much richer than other people.
Now, Nozick asks whether D2 is just. ‘If D1 was a just 
distribution, and people voluntarily moved from it to D2, 
transferring parts of their shares they were given under D1 
(what was it for if not to do something with?), isn’t D2 also 
just?’ (p. 161). Prima facie, it seems that D2 is a perfectly 
just distribution. It arose out of a completely just situation, 
namely D1, by voluntary means. Individuals voluntarily 
decided to transfer some of the resources they possessed 
under D1, thereby bringing about D2. While seeming 
innocuous, this transformation from D1 to D2 will be trou-
blesome to pattern theorists. This is because there is no 
guarantee that the voluntary transactions of individuals 
are going to preserve the pattern. In fact, it is highly likely 
that these voluntary transfers will upset the pattern.

50 
Robert Nozick
Thus, we started from a distribution that was in accord-
ance with a particular pattern and by means of voluntary 
steps arrived at a distribution that no longer fi ts the pattern. 
Accordingly, we can see that liberty upsets patterns. ‘To 
maintain a pattern one must either continually interfere 
to stop people from transferring resources as they wish to, 
or continually (or periodically) interfere to take from 
some persons resources that others for some reason chose 
to transfer to them’ (p. 163).
The Wilt Chamberlain example raises two clusters of 
problems for the pattern theorist. On the one hand, the 
advocate of a patterned account of justice must explain 
what went wrong in this example. We began with a just 
starting point and moved by apparently just steps, given 
that they were all voluntary, to an unjust outcome. The 
pattern theorist needs to explain where injustice crept 
in. He needs to give an account as to why the outcome is 
unjust. No plausible story seems to be forthcoming and 
it appears counter-intuitive to judge D2 to be unjust. In 
particular, it is not clear what about D2 it is that is unac-
ceptable. Nothing seems to have gone wrong and no one 
can complain about D2. All transactions leading to D2 
were voluntary and were effected from a just starting point. 
The people performing the actions cannot complain since 
they voluntarily brought them about. If they are unhappy 
with the outcome, then they have no one to blame but 
themselves, which means that no injustice has occurred, 
no injustice has been done to them.
The pattern theorist might try to argue that, while those 
engaged in the interactions have no cause for complaint, 
these actions can have negative impacts on third parties, 
resulting in an injustice. However, there does not seem to 
be any basis for complaint by a third party. They still have 

 
Critical Exposition 
51
the same share as before (cf. pp. 161–162). No one has 
been made worse off by the exchanges since we are con-
cerned with Pareto improvements. Pareto improvements 
are harmless and it is strange to claim that they can be the 
source of injustice. That is, we are dealing with voluntary 
exchanges whereby no one is made worse off. As a result of 
the exchange, it simply is the case that some people are 
better off than they were before the exchange took place, 
but this does not happen at the expense of anyone else. 
There are no negative effects on third parties, which means 
that they have no cause for complaint.
On the other hand, the pattern theorist must impose 
restrictions on the behaviour of individuals and must argue 
for continuous interference. In order to preserve the pat-
tern, there must be a signifi cant reduction in the range of 
permissible options. This seems inappropriate and unjusti-
fi ed. Justice should not require us to interfere with liberty 
in such a signifi cant way. In addition, the imposition of 
such restrictions is highly costly since it amounts to prohib-
iting large numbers of mutually benefi cial exchanges. The 
pattern theorist will have to rule out many Pareto improve-
ments and deem them unacceptable. The need to prohibit 
capitalist acts among consenting adults and the high costs 
imposed on society as a result of prohibiting many mutu-
ally benefi cial exchanges are deeply troubling and counter-
intuitive consequences of patterned theories of justice.
To preserve a pattern, voluntary transfers that are going 
to undermine the pattern must be prohibited. Since most 
uses of the resources are likely to upset the pattern, there 
is hardly anything that can be done with the resources. 
That is, there is only a limited number of possibilities 
of employing resources without upsetting patterns, which 
means that the pattern theorist has to put into place a 

52 
Robert Nozick
signifi cant number of restrictions and prohibitions. This 
then gives rise to the question as to what the reason was for 
giving the resources to people under D1 in the fi rst place. 
If they are not allowed to freely exchange and transfer the 
resources that have been distributed to them, then what 
was the point of bringing about D1 at all? Being allocated 
resources that one cannot freely employ is not particularly 
appealing. As Nozick notes: ‘Patterned distributional prin-
ciples do not give people what entitlement principles do, 
only better distributed. For they do not give the right to 
choose what to do with what one has’ (p. 167). The pat-
terned theories only consider people as recipients of 
resources, not as agents who make use of them. Thus, in 
the same way that patterned principles do not look at 
where things come from and how they were produced, so 
they do not look at what things are used for. They ignore 
both the production as well as the utilization of goods, 
focusing instead merely on the distribution of possessions.
From this we can see that the position advocated by the 
defender of patterns appears to be to some extent self-
undermining. His theory is partly self-defeating in that the 
restrictions and interferences required for maintaining 
the pattern undermine some of the original justifi cation 
for implementing the pattern in the fi rst place. A pattern 
theorist demands that we distribute R in accordance with 
pattern P. It may be asked why R should be distributed, 
why R is considered to be fi t for distribution, why holdings 
of R are subject to the distributive pattern P. A reasonable 
response will be that R should be distributed because it is 
of value, because it can be gainfully employed. The gainful 
employability of R is what gives a point to distributing it.
Now, the Chamberlain example shows that pattern 
theorists end up in a situation where R is distributed to 

 
Critical Exposition 
53
individuals according to some pattern but where these 
individuals are not allowed to use it in a way that upsets 
the pattern, which means that there is not much that they 
can do with it. R is distributed but cannot be utilized except 
in a restricted manner. People are given resources that 
they cannot use as they deem fi t. However, if the resources 
cannot be utilized in a gainful manner, then there is not 
much point in distributing them in the fi rst place. If most 
ways of gainfully utilizing the resource are prohibited, 
then there is not much value in possessing it and there is 
consequently not much point in distributing it.
Hence, the very benefi ts which warranted the distribu-
tion of R in the fi rst place cannot be properly gained from 
having received R. This is because the distributive princi-
ple P rules out the employment of R in a way that upsets 
the pattern. The reasons for distributing R to begin with, 
the reasons for treating R as a resource that is to be sub-
jected to P, are partly undermined by distributing R in 
accordance with P. We treat R as worthy of distribution 
because it can be gainfully employed. Distributing it in 
accordance with P, however, precludes many ways of gain-
fully employing it, thereby to some extent undermining 
the rationale for distributing it in the fi rst place.
After having presented the Wilt Chamberlain example, 
Nozick goes on to provide further arguments against pat-
terned conceptions of justice and thereby against the need 
for a more-than-minimal state to achieve distributive justice. 
He argues that it is not only the case that the preservation 
of patterns requires the prohibition of many capitalist acts 
among consenting adults or the continual interference 
and redistribution of resources. In addition, the imple-
mentation of patterns often requires some form of taxa-
tion of income from labour and such taxation is on a par 

54 
Robert Nozick
with forced labour. Nozick argues that ‘patterned princi-
ples of distributive justice involve appropriating the actions 
of other persons. Seizing the results of someone’s labor is 
equivalent to seizing hours from him and directing him 
to carry on various activities’ (p. 172). Taxation involves 
taking the product of one’s labour. Taking the income of 
n hours of work from a person amounts to taking n hours 
from that person. It is like forcing the person to work 
n hours for a purpose he has not chosen.
Given that income taxation involves changing the incen-
tive structure in such a way that people have to work 
n hours more to achieve their goals, it may be objected 
that it is not a form of forced labour since it gives people 
the choice how much to work and what kind of work to 
do. In other words, it can be objected that taxation only 
reduces the range of alternatives and it does not involve 
forcing people to do particular things. Moreover, if income 
taxation only applies to earnings above a certain amount, 
then taxation can be avoided altogether. However, Nozick 
replies that income taxation does involve forcing people 
since it is a case of coercion that involves a violation of 
the side constraint against aggression. ‘The fact that others 
intentionally intervene, in violation of a side constraint 
against aggression, to threaten force to limit the alterna-
tives . . . makes the taxation system one of forced labor and 
distinguishes it from other cases of limited choices which 
are not forcings’ (p. 169).
Thus, taxation on income from labour involves forcing 
people to work for purposes that they have not chosen. 
The implementation of patterned principles then gives 
people a claim on the labour of other people. This is 
because it gives them a claim on a certain portion of the 

 
Critical Exposition 
55
total social product that has been produced by the labour 
of individuals. To give people an enforceable claim on the 
product of the labour of other people amounts to giving 
people partial ownership in other people. It amounts to a 
claim on their work, a claim on their time. This contra-
venes the thesis of self-ownership. ‘End-state and most pat-
terned principles of distributive justice institute (partial) 
ownership by others of people and their actions and labor. 
These principles involve a shift from the classical liberal’s 
notion of self-ownership to a notion of (partial) property 
rights in other people’ (p. 172).
In addition, Nozick notes that taxation on income from 
labour fails to be neutral since it discriminates against peo-
ple with expensive tastes. Nozick contrasts the situation of 
someone who prefers seeing a movie with someone who 
prefers looking at a sunset. The fi rst person will have to 
work to earn money for the ticket, while the second person 
will not have to earn any extra money. Taxation on income 
from labour will ensure that the former person will have 
to work extra to satisfy his preferences, while the latter per-
son can avoid the income tax without any prejudice to his 
happiness. Those who need to earn more money to satisfy 
their desires will have to pay more income tax which means 
that they will have to work more for purposes that others 
have set for them. Those who do not have to work much to 
satisfy their desires, on the contrary, can easily avoid this 
burden. Yet, there seems to be no principled reason for 
discriminating against those who have expensive tastes. 
‘Why should we treat the man whose happiness requires 
certain material goods or services differently from the man 
whose preferences and desires make such goods unneces-
sary for his happiness?’ (p. 170). 

56 
Robert Nozick
Moral luck, equality and entitlements
One of the most forceful objections to the entitlement 
theory is that this conception of justice is undermined by 
the arbitrariness of natural assets and social circumstances. 
In his discussion of the ‘system of natural liberty’, which is 
similar to the entitlement theory, John Rawls notes that 
this system is to be rejected because ‘it permits distributive 
shares to be improperly infl uenced by [natural and social 
contingencies, which are] so arbitrary from a moral point 
of view’ (quoted in Nozick: 1974, p. 213). The argument 
is that sets of holdings under an entitlement regime are 
signifi cantly infl uenced by natural endowments and social 
circumstances, which are morally arbitrary. In other words, 
what people end up with is largely determined by morally 
arbitrary factors. Accordingly, Rawls claims that we should 
nullify the effects of natural endowments and social 
contingencies.
Nozick’s response begins by noting that there is a per-
spicuous absence in Rawls’s discussion of the choices that 
people make. While natural endowments and social cir-
cumstances may be arbitrary, it does not straightforwardly 
follow that what we do with these endowments and how 
we develop them is arbitrary. Because the choice situation 
is arbitrary does not automatically imply that the choices 
made within this situation are equally arbitrary. In response, 
it may be suggested that the choices themselves are deter-
mined by the natural and social contingencies and that 
how people use their endowments is shaped by these con-
tingencies. However, Nozick replies: ‘This line of argument 
can succeed in blocking the introduction of a person’s 
autonomous choices and actions (and their results) only 
by attributing everything noteworthy about the person 
completely to certain sorts of “external” factors’ (p. 214). 

 
Critical Exposition 
57
To claim that choices are equally arbitrary as the natural 
and social contingencies amounts to denigrating the 
autonomy, dignity and worth of individuals. If individuals 
cannot claim responsibility for their choices, then there 
does not seem to be any room left for treating them as 
moral agents, which is contrary to the spirit of Rawls’s own 
theory.
The claim that natural endowments and social circum-
stances are arbitrary from a moral point of view can be 
appealed to in two different ways. ‘Whereas the positive 
argument attempts to establish that the distributive effects 
of natural differences ought to be nullifi ed, the negative 
one, by merely rebutting one argument that the differences 
oughtn’t to be nullifi ed, leaves open the possibility that 
(for other reasons) the differences oughtn’t be nullifi ed’ 
(p. 216).
A positive argument attempts to establish that differ-
ences resulting from morally arbitrary factors should be 
neutralized. Such an argument starts with a premise as to 
how holdings should be distributed and then points out 
that natural differences do not meet these standards. It 
thence concludes that distributive differences deriving 
from these natural differences should be nullifi ed. Nozick 
identifi es a number of premises that could be used in a 
positive argument, namely (i) that persons should morally 
deserve their holdings, (ii) that holdings should be distrib-
uted in accordance with a pattern that is not morally arbi-
trary, or (iii) that holdings should be equal unless there 
is a moral reason to the contrary. The problem with posi-
tive arguments is that these premises are simply assumed 
and not in any way supported. Moreover, all of these 
premises amount to patterned conceptions of justice and 
are as such subject to Nozick’s critiques. In the absence of 

58 
Robert Nozick
an argument to the effect that holdings should be distrib-
uted according to some pattern or to the effect that equal-
ity is to be the default position, the arbitrariness of natural 
differences can at best feature in a negative argument.
A negative argument tries to undermine an argument 
that attempts to justify distributive differences resulting 
from natural differences. If someone attempts to claim 
that people deserve their differential holdings on the basis 
that these holdings derive from their talents, then the 
negative argument undermines this claim. It does this by 
pointing out that talents are not deserved given that they 
are a matter of brute luck. Accordingly, the negative argu-
ment does not provide any support for nullifying or neu-
tralizing distributive differences. It simply states that such 
differences are not supported by considerations of desert. 
In the end this leads to a neutral position, whereby the 
distributive differences seem to be neither justifi ed nor 
unjustifi ed.
In his response to the negative argument Nozick draws 
our attention again to the important distinction between 
desert and entitlement. There are many things we are enti-
tled to that we do not deserve and there are things we do 
deserve to which we are not entitled. Desert and entitle-
ment are different notions and, according to Nozick, dis-
tributive justice is concerned with entitlement and not 
desert. Desert is a dimension that can govern patterns, but 
patterns are to be rejected as bases for distribution. While 
he takes the negative argument seriously as a critique of 
theories that appeal to desert, he argues that it is ineffec-
tive against the entitlement theory. That is, the negative 
argument only undermines certain patterned conceptions, 
but has no bearing when it comes to the entitlement 
theory.

 
Critical Exposition 
59
Since we can have entitlements without desert, we can 
have differential entitlements without having differential 
deserts. An important consequence is that there is no need 
to deserve that which is utilized in acquiring an entitle-
ment. We only need to be entitled to those things that are 
used in this way and while we may not deserve our talents, 
we are entitled to them, given that we accept the thesis of 
self-ownership. To deny that we are entitled to our talents 
would be tantamount to denying self-ownership. ‘Whether 
or not people’s natural assets are arbitrary from a moral 
point of view, they are entitled to them, and to what fl ows 
from them’ (p. 226). Entitlements over our talents allow 
us to gain entitlements over other things, even though we 
might not deserve either our talents or the things we have 
acquired. Since justice is concerned with entitlements and 
not with deserts, no injustices arise in this way.
Moreover, not only is it the case that we can be entitled 
to differential holdings without deserving those holdings, 
there is a good case to be made to the effect that desert is 
possible after all since desert need not go all the way down. 
Otherwise, desert would be entirely impossible. In fact, 
Nozick notes that not only desert would be impossible, but 
that there would not be anything that would retain moral 
relevance. If something’s being arbitrary from a moral 
point of view were to automatically imply its moral irrele-
vance, then our very existence would be morally irrelevant. 
‘If nothing of moral signifi cance could fl ow from what was 
arbitrary, then no particular person’s existence could be 
of moral signifi cance’ (p. 226, footnote). 
Instead, it seems that moral signifi cance can emerge. 
The things giving rise to moral signifi cance may obtain for 
arbitrary reasons without thereby losing their moral sig-
nifi cance. Nozick points out that the claim that something 

60 
Robert Nozick
is arbitrary from a moral point of view is ambiguous. ‘It 
might mean that there is no moral reason why the fact 
ought to be that way, or it might mean that the fact’s being 
that way is of no moral signifi cance and has no moral 
consequences’ (p. 227). Only the former reading applies 
to our existence and our talents. While there is no moral 
reason to the effect that we should exist or that we should 
have those talents which we do have, this does not under-
mine the fact that our existence and our talents are of 
moral signifi cance and have moral consequences.
The minimal state as an inspiring utopia
Nozick argues that a minimal state can be justifi ed and 
that anything that goes beyond such a minimum is illegiti-
mate. This understanding of the state is primarily negative, 
placing restrictions on the functions of the state, rather 
than identifying a positive and worthy role that it should 
fulfi l. Nonetheless, Nozick believes this view of the state 
not only to be morally right but also to be inspiring. 
According to him, a minimal state is an inspiring utopia 
towards which we should strive.
The account of utopia is not only supposed to render 
the minimal state more interesting and attractive, but also 
to constitute an independent argument in favour of the 
minimal state. It is not merely a supplement, but an argu-
ment for libertarianism in its own right. Nozick claims that 
there is a convergence of the results of the different parts 
of the book. In the fi nal part, the minimal state is not advo-
cated on the basis of moral arguments that appeal to indi-
vidual rights. Instead, it is shown to be an inspiring form 
of social organization that can respect the diversity and 

 
Critical Exposition 
61
individuality of different people, enabling everyone to live 
in accordance with their conception of the good life.
This independent role of the framework of utopia is 
particularly important given the absence of a detailed and 
well worked out foundation of Nozick’s moral philosophy. 
The arguments for the minimal state considered as a 
framework for utopia do not rely on the contentious 
understanding of rights that Nozick appeals to in the prior 
parts. Nozick thinks that even those who reject the starting 
point of individual rights should advocate the minimal 
state insofar as it amounts to a framework for utopia that 
permits different people to form varying communities and 
attempt to realize their respective utopian conceptions in 
a peaceful manner.
The best possible world
Nozick begins his discussion by examining the notion of 
utopia. Utopia is the best possible world. It is the ideal state 
of affairs. Since we are concerned with political philoso-
phy, the question of what classifi es as the best possible 
world becomes a question of institutional design or institu-
tional evaluation, namely the question of which set of insti-
tutions would count as the best. While utopia is the best 
possible world, the question arises for whom this world 
is the best. What is best for me need not be best for you. 
Utopia should not simply be the best world for a particular 
person or certain group of people, but should rather be 
the best possible world for each of us.
The question then is: What is the best possible world 
for each of us? Nozick provides an answer to this question 
by devising a possible worlds model whereby a person 
can imagine a possible world and all the people therein. 

62 
Robert Nozick
Each person in that world has the same powers of imagin-
ing and is given the choice to stay in that world or imagine 
his own world. This process is then repeated again and 
again. If stable worlds should arise, then these worlds 
will have the property of being such that no person in 
that world can imagine a better world (that he believes 
would also be stable). This surely fi ts our understanding of 
utopia. A utopian world is a world which is such that there 
is no other world anyone would rather be in. ‘If there are 
stable worlds, each of them satisfi es one very desirable 
description by virtue of the way the worlds have been set 
up; namely, none of the inhabitants of the world can imag-
ine an alternative world they would rather live in’ (p. 299).
Having described this abstract model, Nozick then tries 
to apply it to the actual world. In reality we are, of course, 
not able to move from world to world, but are restricted to 
the world we happen to be in. Nonetheless, we can fi nd a 
real-world analogue for these imagined possible worlds, 
namely associations. An association is a collection of peo-
ple subject to certain rules and is thus similar to a possible 
world. People can create associations and leave them to 
create new associations or join existing ones, which is simi-
lar to the procedure of imagining new worlds or joining 
existing worlds. It should be noted though that there are 
a number of differences between the model and its real-
world analogue, such as the existence of transaction costs 
involved in moving from one community to another and 
the fact that communities impinge upon another whereas 
possible worlds are isolated.
While there are these disanalogies, it nonetheless seems 
that the analogies are strong enough for the possible worlds 
model to have explanatory relevance. In particular, it 
seems that we can transfer the idea that a stable association 

 
Critical Exposition 
63
will be such that no member of that association would 
rather be in any other association, given that people are 
free to create, exit and join communities. Utopia then is 
achieved if all associations satisfy this condition. ‘In our 
actual world, what corresponds to the model of possible 
worlds is a wide and diverse range of communities . . . a 
society in which utopian experimentation can be tried, dif-
ferent styles of life can be lived, and alternative visions of 
the good can be individually and jointly pursued’ (p. 307).
Individuality, diversity and the minimal state
Thus, Nozick conceives of utopia as a diverse collection of 
stable associations. This is in confl ict with traditional uto-
pian conceptions that advance the claim that there is one 
best possible world, one stable association. Nozick rejects 
this view and instead conceives of utopia as a framework that 
encompasses a large number of different communities.
On the one hand, we need a plurality of communities 
because people differ. Given the vast diversity of human 
beings, it becomes questionable whether there is one best 
way to live one’s life that is applicable to everyone. Indi-
viduals differ signifi cantly and it seems that there is not one 
best way of living that applies equally to all of them. There 
are different best lives for different people. This is a fact 
that is not respected by traditional utopian theories. They 
simply assume that their conception of the good applies to 
everyone. This, however, is inappropriate and the utopian 
vision does not turn out to be the best possible world for 
each of us, but only for a small sub-section of society. ‘The 
conclusion to draw is that there will not be one kind of com-
munity existing and one kind of life led in utopia. Utopia 
will consist of utopias, of many different and divergent 

64 
Robert Nozick
communities in which people lead different kinds of lives 
under different institutions’ (pp. 311–312). We thus need 
a range of different communities so that different people 
can have their best possible world.
On the other hand, even if one conception of the good 
life were the best, we would still need a plurality of commu-
nities to identify what that best way of life would be. Even if 
we assume that there is one substantive utopia, there is still 
the problem of fi nding out what this is. Not only is it the 
case that traditional utopian theories do not adequately 
take into account the diversity of individuals. In addition, 
they face serious epistemological problems. Given the 
complexity of human life, the claim of having identifi ed 
the optimal way of living seems downright presumptuous. 
Nozick argues that the framework of utopia can be seen as 
an excellent mechanism for discovering the best way of 
life. What makes it a good mechanism for overcoming 
these epistemological problems is that the framework is 
a fi ltering device rather than a design device.
Design devices directly specify the characteristics of the 
intended outcome. They specify what the product is sup-
posed to be like. We can see that it is hard to come up with 
an account of all the characteristics that the best commu-
nity must have. Given the vast complexity and diversity of 
human beings and their interactions, it follows that there 
are so many factors to be taken into consideration that the 
task of designing the perfect society becomes practically 
impossible. Accordingly, one should not try to make use of 
design devices, but rather turn to fi ltering devices.
Filtering devices work by means of various fi lters that 
weed out inappropriate products from a large set of alter-
natives. A fi ltering device has two components, namely 
one that specifi es how alternatives are to be generated and 

 
Critical Exposition 
65
one that specifi es the fi ltering processes that operate on 
the generated alternatives. Ideally, we want a process in 
which the alternatives that are generated, as well as the 
fi lters that operate on these alternatives, become more 
and more sophisticated as the process goes on. We thereby 
end up with an evolutionary process in which a large range 
of different communities are designed and then tested. 
Such a system of experimentation and of trial and error 
will allow us to identify which conceptions are feasible 
and worth pursuing. ‘The operation of the framework for 
utopia we present here thus realizes the advantages of a 
fi ltering process incorporating mutually improving inter-
action between the fi lter and the surviving products of the 
generating process, so that the quality of generated and 
nonrejected products improves’ (p. 317). The framework 
allows us to continuously improve the communities we are 
living in, rather than expecting us to set down once and 
for all the ideal community.
Thus, we have seen that traditional utopian accounts 
are problematic because of the fact that individuals differ 
signifi cantly which suggests that there is no objectively best 
life that fi ts everyone. Moreover, we have seen that, even if 
we were to assume that there is such a thing as a best life, 
we would not be able to identify it by means of design 
devices. For Nozick, the adequate response to this predica-
ment does not consist in giving up utopian theorizing. 
Instead, one should move to a further level of abstraction. 
In particular, this involves identifying what is the common 
ground among various non-coercive utopias. In this way, 
one can provide a meta-utopia, a framework for utopia 
within which the particular utopian visions of different 
people can be realized. Nozick then argues that this frame-
work is embodied by the minimal state. The minimal state 

66 
Robert Nozick
retains what is good and inspiring about utopianism, with-
out being prone to the diffi culties that particular utopian 
visions face.
In order to achieve utopia, what we need to do is to 
implement the conditions that are requisite for having 
associations that are such that no one would rather be in 
another association. This is done by ensuring that people 
have the freedom to leave associations, to experiment and 
to create new communities. People must be able to try out 
different ways of living and to decide for themselves which 
association they would like to be a member of. These func-
tions are, of course, the functions fulfi lled by the minimal 
state. The minimal state provides the framework for utopia, 
the framework within which each of us is able to pursue his 
or her own utopia. ‘Utopia is a framework for utopias, a 
place where people are at liberty to join together voluntar-
ily to pursue and attempt to realize their own vision of the 
good life in the ideal community but where no one can 
impose his own utopian vision upon others. The utopian 
society is the society of utopianism’ (p. 312).
This framework is compatible with a wide variety of 
utopian conceptions. In particular, it does not require that 
associations be governed by capitalist or libertarian norms, 
but allows associations that are based on non-libertarian 
and even anti-libertarian utopias. As Nozick notes ‘in a 
free society people may contract into various restrictions 
which the government may not legitimately impose upon 
them’ (p. 320). There is no requirement for associations 
to adopt libertarian norms in their internal dealings. All 
that is required is that membership be voluntary. It is only 
the external dealings with other associations that are gov-
erned by the norms of the libertarian framework. Accord-
ingly, associations may do things that states may not do. 

 
Critical Exposition 
67
While states may not make use of redistributive or pater-
nalistic policies, voluntary associations can implement 
such policies. That is, voluntary associations can impose 
requirements on their members that states could not 
impose on their citizens.
Ensuring that different people can pursue their own 
utopian schemes requires us to rule out the use of coer-
cion to realize utopian visions. Nozick distinguishes three 
kinds of utopian views, namely (i) imperialistic views that 
condone or require the use of force in getting other peo-
ple to subscribe to their views, (ii) missionary views that 
want others to adopt their views but require that this adop-
tion be voluntary and not forced and (iii) existential views 
that are neutral with respect to the views held by others. 
It is only the fi rst kind that is in confl ict with the frame-
work of utopia. Imperialistic utopian views countenance 
the attempt to forcefully impose their particular vision of 
society on other people. The use or threat of force is, how-
ever, ruled out by the framework. This means that the 
framework excludes the realization of imperialistic utopias 
by coercive means. Only the voluntary adoption or rejec-
tion of life-styles and the voluntary joining as well as exit-
ing of communities is permitted by the framework. Both 
missionary and existential accounts are fully compatible 
with this framework since they respect the requirement 
that the choice of life-style be voluntary. This is because 
missionary conceptions attempt to convince other people 
to freely adopt their conception and join their community, 
while existential conceptions hold a neutral stance towards 
other communities since, for them, all that matters is that 
they themselves follow their vision of society.
For Nozick then the minimal state is not inspiring by 
what it does, but rather by what it allows, by what it enables 

68 
Robert Nozick
to take place. It is a society that evolves within the confi nes 
of a minimal state that is inspiring, rather than the mini-
mal state itself. Such a state allows for the coexistence of 
widely diverging views of human fl ourishing. It does not 
specify a blueprint to which society has to conform, but 
allows individuals to live their lives as they see fi t. Moreover, 
what is also inspiring is the moral outlook underlying 
the commitment to the minimal state. It is the dignity and 
autonomy of individuals that stands behind the inviolable 
rights that the minimal state is supposed to protect. This 
gives rise to the ideal of a non-coercive society in which the 
dignity of individuals is respected. In such a society, indi-
viduals can freely act and decide how to shape their lives.
Beyond Anarchy, State, and Utopia
After the publication of Anarchy, State, and Utopia, Nozick 
did not write any other substantial work on political phi-
losophy and did not respond to any of the criticisms that 
were directed against his theory. Instead, we only get occa-
sional comments and observations on issues relating to 
political theory, some of which have been taken as indica-
tions of a recantation of his commitment to libertarianism. 
For example, in The Examined Life Nozick makes several 
remarks critical of his earlier libertarian views. ‘The liber-
tarian position I once propounded now seems to me seri-
ously inadequate, in part because it did not fully knit the 
humane considerations and joint cooperative activities it 
left room for more closely into its fabric. It neglected the 
symbolic importance of an offi cial political concern with 
issues or problems’ (Nozick: 1989, pp. 286–287). Similarly, 
in The Nature of Rationality, Nozick says that ‘[t]he political 

 
Critical Exposition 
69
philosophy presented in Anarchy, State, and Utopia ignored 
the importance to us of joint and offi cial serious symbolic 
statement and expression of our social ties and concern 
and hence . . . is inadequate’ (Nozick: 1993, p. 32).
More precisely, his dissatisfaction with the radical liber-
tarianism presented in Anarchy, State, and Utopia derives 
from considerations regarding symbolic value and symbolic 
meaning. Nozick’s account of rationality includes a con-
cern for symbolic utility. He identifi es a rule for rational 
decision making which he calls ‘maximizing decision-value’, 
whereby the decision-value consists of causal, evidential 
and symbolic utility. It is symbolic utility that was ignored 
in his earlier writings and that is supposedly in confl ict 
with radical libertarianism. ‘The libertarian view looked 
solely at the purpose of government, not at its meaning; 
hence, it took an unduly narrow view of purpose, too’ 
(Nozick: 1989, p. 288).
‘The point is not simply to accomplish the particular 
purpose – that might be done through private contribu-
tions alone – or to get the others to pay too – that could 
occur through stealing the necessary funds from them – 
but also to speak solemnly in everyone’s name, in the name 
of the society, about what it holds dear’ (Nozick: 1989, 
p. 298). Thus, Nozick came to the view that political insti-
tutions can play an important role in that they express 
and symbolize commitments. Political institutions do not 
simply perform certain functions and achieve certain goals 
but, in doing so, have an expressive nature. To publicly 
adopt a purpose involves the expression of a certain com-
mitment and such expressions have value that needs to be 
taken into consideration. It is the symbolic value of joint 
commitments that libertarians have ignored when assess-
ing the value and role of political institutions.

70 
Robert Nozick
The question now arises to what extent this recognition 
of the symbolic value of politics is in confl ict with and under-
mines the libertarianism that was advocated in Anarchy, 
State, and Utopia. It seems that the confl ict is relatively 
minimal. Considerations pertaining to symbolic value only 
affect certain extreme cases, leaving the core of libertari-
anism intact. Rather than undermining libertarianism, the 
recognition of symbolic value leads at most to a milder 
form of libertarianism. That is, the symbolic value of poli-
tics is not fundamentally at odds with the main thrust of 
libertarianism. In fact, the cases where symbolic value has 
a signifi cant role to play are primarily cases that pertain 
to the importance of freedom. Nozick claims that consid-
erations based on symbolic value can be invoked to favour 
anti-discrimination laws and limits on freedom of speech 
and assembly, i.e. against hate speech (cf. Nozick: 1989, 
p. 291). He argues that we need to positively express the 
value of freedom and our commitment to the dignity of 
individuals. This means that we must prohibit practices 
that confl ict with and directly undermine freedom or 
that denigrate the dignity of individuals. We are thus not 
dealing with an independent constraint placed upon the 
rights and freedoms of individuals, but with a constraint 
that derives from a commitment to those very rights and 
freedoms.
This interpretation is supported by Nozick’s statement 
made in an interview conducted by Julian Sanchez in 
2001. There he said that he never stopped calling himself 
a libertarian. ‘What I was really saying in The Examined 
Life was that I was no longer as hardcore a libertarian as 
I had been before. But the rumors of my deviation (or 
apostasy!) from libertarianism were much exaggerated. 
I think [Invariances] makes clear the extent to which I still 

 
Critical Exposition 
71
am within the general framework of libertarianism, espe-
cially the ethics chapter and its section on the “Core 
Principle of Ethics”.’
Thus, there does not seem to be a fundamental confl ict 
and it appears that certain forms of libertarianism can 
be reconciled with a commitment to symbolic value. None-
theless, Nozick’s position on symbolic value seems to be 
problematic from the viewpoint of Anarchy, State, and 
Utopia. It is only in conjunction with a modifi cation of the 
underlying moral theory that considerations regarding 
symbolic value could lead Nozick to change his views.
First, it should be noted that invoking symbolic value 
does not in any way affect conclusions established on the 
basis of individual rights. Since rights are considered as 
side constraints, it follows that they clearly trump symbolic 
concerns. If taxation involves a rights-violation, then taxa-
tion is morally illegitimate even if the resources collected 
through taxation are utilized to express certain commit-
ments in a way that possesses symbolic value. If someone 
has a right to express hateful speech, then it is illegitimate 
to prevent that person from expressing himself even if 
this prevention has symbolic value since it symbolizes our 
commitment to the value and dignity of individuals. As 
mentioned at the beginning of this chapter, moral philo-
sophy determines the boundaries of political philosophy. 
Symbolic value may play an important role in assessing 
the value of public as well as private actions within these 
boundaries. However, it cannot justify the transgression 
of these boundaries. This means that a commitment to 
symbolic value is on its own insuffi cient to moderate the 
libertarian account of the role of the state that Nozick 
developed in Anarchy, State, and Utopia. Only in conjunc-
tion with a weakening of the status of individual rights, 

72 
Robert Nozick
resulting from the abandoning of a strict Kantian theory, 
could this moderation take place.
Second, while there may be a role for government that 
has been ignored, namely to express certain commitments 
the expression of which possesses symbolic value, Nozick 
has not made it clear that there are no private alternatives 
for this role. That is, the expression of these commitments 
does not seem to exclusively pertain to the government. 
In fact, it appears that voluntary expression is much more 
powerful than coerced expression. Moreover, Nozick seems 
to be relying on an overly optimistic understanding of 
politics and the public realm in his remarks about sym-
bolic value.
While not returning to political philosophy, Nozick did 
work on issues about ethics, in particular in Philosophical 
Explanations and in Invariances. Particularly noteworthy is 
the abandonment of the broadly Kantian account of moral-
ity that we saw in Anarchy, State, and Utopia. Instead of work-
ing out the details of his Kantian approach to ethics, he 
decided to try out various different approaches to morality. 
In Philosophical Explanations there is a great emphasis on 
value understood as organic unity, while he favours an 
evolutionary approach in his last book Invariances. The 
abandonment of Kantianism somewhat softened his liber-
tarianism. While still remaining a libertarian, his views were 
no longer quite as radical and as strict anymore. Giving up 
a Kantian position leads to a less absolutist account, whereby 
rights are no longer understood as side constraints that 
place rigid restrictions on actions, thereby making more 
room for various other values.

3
Reception and Infl uence
Anarchy, State, and Utopia has had a signifi cant impact 
and still infl uences the way political philosophy is done. 
Together with John Rawls’s A Theory of Justice, it has largely 
shaped political philosophy for the last 35 years and con-
tinues to be one of the classics of political theory.
The book received instant acclaim due to the contro-
versial nature of Nozick’s theory and due to the clarity 
and strength of the arguments that Nozick provides in 
support of his unconventional views and his criticisms 
of the mainstream. As Steiner notes, ‘this book is the best 
piece of sustained analytical argument in political philoso-
phy to have appeared in a very long time. Moreover it is, 
in its way, an extremely moving book, not the least because 
of the engaging manner in which it is written’ (Steiner: 
1977, p. 120). 
While Nozick’s work is much respected, its reception has 
been largely critical. Waldron nicely describes the reaction 
to the publication as ‘universally hostile acclaim’ (Waldron: 
1982, p. 1277). The book is held in high regard and widely 
praised but the theory Nozick propounds is mostly rejected. 
The secondary literature is vast but for the most part criti-
cal. The debate is rather one-sided and it is rarely the case 
that Nozick’s side is taken. Nozick himself did not contri-
bute to this debate, but rather focused his attention on 
other philosophical issues. Moreover, there were not many 

74 
Robert Nozick
other philosophers taking up and defending Nozick’s views. 
Nozick has not produced a new school of thought. Unlike 
Rawls, he does not have many followers. This seems to be 
in line with what Nozick wanted to achieve. He wanted to 
get people to think about certain issues, to present inter-
esting arguments and to challenge the received wisdom. 
He wanted to say something without saying last words.
The reason why it was so well received and why it gener-
ated so much discussion, despite the fact that the critiques 
were rarely answered, is that it poses a serious challenge to 
the mainstream. As we have seen, Nozick does not develop 
a monolithic system and does not engage in a foundational 
project. He is rather involved in trying out ideas, raising 
possibilities and criticizing the prevailing orthodoxy. Nozick 
sketches an alternative way of thinking about justice, while 
criticizing several fundamental assumptions held by the 
mainstream. Rather than providing a complete system of 
thought, Nozick presented many powerful objections to 
a number of widely accepted views. Accordingly, ‘a great 
deal of Nozick’s importance lies in his waking others from 
their dogmatic slumbers’ (Wolff: 1991, p. 118).
As a result, the reception of Anarchy, State, and Utopia 
has been somewhat skewed so far in that most discussions 
amount to responses to Nozick’s critiques. Most of those who 
engage with this book attempt to undermine or weaken 
Nozick’s arguments against end-state or patterned con-
ceptions of justice. Accordingly, there has been a dispro-
portionate focus on the second part of Anarchy, State, and 
Utopia. It is Nozick’s entitlement theory and historical con-
ception of justice, his critique of Rawls and his defence of 
a Lockean theory of property that have received the most 
attention. This means that the larger picture has to some 
extent been underappreciated.

 
Reception and Infl uence 
75
While the ideas discussed in the second part are highly 
signifi cant contributions, the other parts of his work should 
not be neglected even though they are more exploratory 
in nature and deal with issues that are slightly tangential to 
mainstream concerns. Only once the work is considered 
as a whole is it possible to really appreciate its value not 
merely as a response to Rawls and as setting out an alter-
native to patterned conceptions of justice, but rather as a 
substantive and comprehensive approach to political phi-
losophy. The critique of anarchism and the discussion of 
utopia are highly original contributions that should be 
appreciated in their own right. In particular, the account 
of utopia brings out the positive vision which underlies 
Nozick’s project and which informs the rest of his book. 
Focusing solely on the critiques of the mainstream only 
gives us a partial picture.
This chapter constitutes an assessment of Nozick’s impact 
on and signifi cance for political philosophy. We will exam-
ine the way in which Anarchy, State, and Utopia was received, 
by giving an account of which aspects of the Nozickian 
project have been accepted, criticized or neglected. In the 
next chapter we will then assess the relevance of Nozick’s 
political philosophy by determining which of his key argu-
ments, approaches and positions have been shown to be 
problematic and which are still viable.
Critique of rights-based libertarianism
Nozick’s political philosophy rests on a somewhat shaky 
moral basis that has not been properly worked out and 
defended. The absence of a basis for individual rights has 
been the target of many criticisms and a common attitude 

76 
Robert Nozick
to Anarchy, State, and Utopia is that, as Nagel puts it, Nozick 
gives us ‘libertarianism without foundations’, that the 
Nozickian project lacks a solid moral basis and can as such 
be easily dismissed. Yet, this kind of critique is somewhat 
misguided since it misunderstands the purpose of Nozick’s 
book. Nozick does not attempt to provide a foundational 
project that starts from self-evident and undeniable axioms 
and then builds up a moral and political theory leading to 
libertarian conclusions. Nozick is fully aware of the limita-
tions of his arguments. ‘This book does not present a pre-
cise theory of the moral basis of individual rights’ (p. xiv; 
also cf. p. 9). Instead, he starts with the intuitively plausible 
view that individuals have rights and that these rights give 
rise to constraints on how other people may act. Nozick 
then works out what political philosophy follows from 
this plausible starting point, trying to show that a minimal 
state and nothing more than a minimal state can be justi-
fi ed given the constraints imposed by this understanding 
of individual rights.
Moreover, Nozick does provide some support in favour 
of a rights-based approach, even if it does not amount to 
a full-fl edged defence of individual rights. He does not 
simply assert that individuals have rights and then leaves 
it at that. Instead, he appeals to the separateness and invio-
lability of persons, to the Kantian idea that individuals are 
ends and not means, as well as to the inadequacy of goal-
directed, consequentialist theories, such as utilitarianism, 
to support his understanding of rights. Nozick also gives 
good arguments as to how one should conceive of rights, 
what status they have and what structure a rights-based 
theory should embody. In particular, these arguments estab-
lish that if one accepts a rights-based account, then one 
should understand rights as side constraints. Accordingly, 
we can see that Nozick’s understanding of individual rights 

 
Reception and Infl uence 
77
considered as side constraints is not baseless and unsup-
ported. Nozick does adduce a number of convincing con-
siderations in favour of his view, even though he does not 
provide a watertight foundation.
Furthermore, only some of Nozick’s arguments for liber-
tarianism depend upon this contested premise. His criti-
cisms of Rawls’s views and those of other liberal egalitarians 
are based on claims and theories accepted by the defend-
ers of these views. These criticisms provide support to lib-
ertarianism insofar as one can arrive there by elimination, 
leaving some form of libertarianism as the default position. 
This is particularly clear when assessing the entitlement 
theory of justice. The distinction between procedural and 
end-state or patterned conceptions of justice is an exhaus-
tive and exclusive distinction. This implies that adequate 
critiques of the latter views leave the entitlement theory 
as the sole competitor. If Nozick’s critiques of structural 
theories of justice are suffi cient to establish the entitlement 
theory, then the lack of secure foundations will to some 
extent turn out to be unproblematic. This is because one 
can then arrive at libertarianism by eliminative arguments, 
rather than by foundational arguments.
This style of argumentation can be found throughout 
Anarchy, State, and Utopia. Many of Nozick’s arguments are 
internal criticisms of other positions that show that these 
positions are incoherent or somehow self-undermining 
and self-defeating. He is willing to base his arguments and 
critiques on the same assumptions as his opponents, rather 
than providing external criticisms that could be accused 
of begging the question. For example, Nozick accepts the 
stringency of individual rights and is willing to grant the 
anarchist an optimistic description of the state of nature. 
He attempts to derive the minimal state from a state of 
nature in which the behaviour of individuals is largely in 

78 
Robert Nozick
conformity with the requirements of morality. Similarly, 
a number of his arguments against Rawls are based on 
the separateness of persons to which Rawls is also commit-
ted (though it is not always clear whether they have the 
same understanding of the separateness of persons or 
whether they merely use the same term). Likewise, Nozick’s 
Wilt Chamberlain argument against patterned theories of 
justice takes as its starting point a patterned conception 
of justice and then shows how such a conception is self-
undermining, given that the upholding of a pattern requires 
measures that are unacceptable to pattern theorist and 
that confl ict with the aims that underlie the patterned 
conceptions.
Additionally, there is independent support for Nozick’s 
libertarianism coming from his argument that the mini-
mal state is a framework for utopia. The argument for the 
meta-utopia is not based on moral considerations and does 
not rely on contentious claims about individual rights. 
This again shows that not all justifi cation for the minimal 
state has to proceed in a foundationalist manner. Getting 
the right result, namely an inspiring and realistic meta-
utopia, provides an independent reason for accepting 
the minimal state and suggests that the premises appealed 
to in the other arguments are correct. That is, if the argu-
ments are valid and the conclusion correct, then this sug-
gests that the premises are also correct and that the 
arguments are consequently sound.
While most critics were content to point out the lack 
of secure foundations for individual rights, a number of 
people have attempted to provide detailed objections to 
Nozick’s arguments. Scheffl er, for example, criticizes the 
connection between libertarian rights and the meaning of 
life that Nozick attempts to establish. Scheffl er argues that 

 
Reception and Infl uence 
79
giving people negative rights may not be the best way to go 
about if one wants to guarantee that they are in a position 
to lead meaningful lives. He claims that ‘if the capacity to 
live a meaningful life is a uniquely valuable characteristic, 
and if we say that beings with this characteristic have rights, 
in virtue of which there are constraints on the way others 
must behave, then presumably the function of the rights is 
to safeguard the ability of beings with this valuable charac-
teristic to develop it’ (Scheffl er: 1981, pp. 158–159). Rather 
than focusing on negative rights, Scheffl er thinks that the 
best way to ensure that people can live meaningful lives 
is by granting them welfare rights. ‘If the meaning of life is 
our concern, then starvation, not taxation, is our worthy 
foe’ (Scheffl er: 1981, p. 161).
While Scheffl er is right in pointing out that conside-
rations pertaining to the meaning of life fi t naturally into 
teleological conceptions of ethics that favour welfare 
rights, Nozick’s invocation of the meaning of life has a 
fundamentally different character which ensures that 
Scheffl er’s objection does not constitute an internal criti-
cism of Nozick’s theory. In particular, according to Nozick 
the connection between individual rights and the mean-
ing of life is not supposed to be based on the idea that 
having individual rights somehow gives one the capacity 
to live a meaningful life or that we have rights in order to 
be able to live meaningful lives. Rights are not means for 
ensuring that people can live meaningful lives, which is 
what Scheffl er assumes in his favouring welfare rights over 
negative rights. It is not the case that living a meaningful 
life is the goal that is to be achieved and that rights are 
the means that permit us to attain this goal. Rather, it is in 
virtue of the fact that human beings are agents whose lives 
can have meaning that we need to respect their choices, 

80 
Robert Nozick
that we have to let them decide how to live their lives. 
Human beings have the status of being ends in themselves, 
rather than mere means, because they have the capacity 
to live meaningful lives. As Nozick explains in his book 
Philosophical Explanations, rights arise if we have to be 
responsive to certain moral characteristics of other people 
whereby our compliance can be enforced. The relevant 
characteristic that gives rise to this ethical-pull is that of 
being a value-seeking self. It is the possession of the capac-
ity to shape one’s life that exerts a moral pull on us, requir-
ing us to respect the autonomy of such a value-seeking self 
and to treat it as an end rather than as a mere means. 
Accordingly, rights derive from the possibility of meaning-
ful living, rather than being means for achieving a mean-
ingful life.
Against the legitimate state
Most criticisms of Nozick’s arguments in favour of the 
legitimacy of a minimal state have come from libertarian 
anarchists. Writers such as Childs, Rothbard, Barnett and 
Mack have argued that Nozick is unable to meet the anar-
chist’s challenge. Even the minimal state violates the rights 
of individuals and is accordingly illegitimate. Nozick’s der-
ivation of the state has been criticized on the basis that his 
claims about dominant protective agencies are inadequate 
and that his views about prohibition and compensation 
are in confl ict with his understanding of rights as absolute 
side constraints.
In particular, it has been argued that Nozick’s move to 
the dominant protective agency is problematic. He does 
not provide any substantive support for his claim that a 

 
Reception and Infl uence 
81
dominant protective agency will emerge. While it seems 
correct that we will end up in a situation in which different 
agencies will be dominant in different geographical regions 
if agencies should decide to engage in armed confl icts 
in case they should disagree about how to settle disputes 
between their clients, this is not the most plausible account 
of the behaviour of protective agencies. An alternative and 
more likely option is that we end up with a stable situation 
in which different protective agencies compete peacefully 
with each other. In order to avoid violent confl icts, they 
will enter agreements as to how disputes are to be resolved. 
For example, they may agree to comply with the judge-
ments of certain arbitration agencies. The separation of 
arbitration and enforcement signifi cantly reduces the risk 
of confl ict and it is in the long-term interest of protective 
agencies to respect the decisions made by arbitration 
agencies.
These agreements between different agencies, pace 
Nozick, do not however imply that we are dealing with a 
situation in which ‘[t]hough different agencies operate, 
there is one unifi ed federal judicial system of which they 
are all components’ (p. 16). Instead, there can be different 
arbitration agencies and different protective agencies 
which compete with each other. There can still be large 
differences between the agencies. Different agencies can 
enforce different rules, provide different services, charge 
different fees, entertain different customer bases, function 
according to different organizational principles, and can 
vary in various other ways. There is no particularly strong 
reason why we have to end up with a dominant protective 
agency, a single provider that has a de facto monopoly. 
Thus, it is still a possibility that anarchy is a feasible and 
superior alternative.

82 
Robert Nozick
Both the transition from the dominant agency to the 
ultraminimal state and the transition therefrom to the min-
imal state have been criticized. On the one hand, Nozick’s 
appeal to procedural rights to justify prohibiting inde-
pendents from enforcing their rights has been claimed to 
be problematic. Some critics have objected that there are 
no such things as procedural rights. Barnett, for example, 
argues against procedural rights, noting that the legitimacy 
of self-defence is a question of fact. If someone’s rights 
were infringed, then that person may legitimately defend 
himself. The question is whether rights were infringed and 
not what the epistemic state of the agent is or what proce-
dures were used in assessing guilt. ‘The rights of the parties 
are governed by the objective fact situation. The problem 
is to discern what the objective facts are, or, in other words, 
to make our subjective understanding of the facts conform 
to the objective facts themselves’ (Barnett: 1977, p. 17). 
Determining who is right and who is wrong is a practical 
matter and not an issue of procedural rights.
Paul criticizes the idea that there are procedural rights 
by pointing to the infi nitely regressive character of such 
rights. If one has a procedural right to the effect that one 
is to be judged according to fair and reliable procedures, 
then the question arises whether one has a procedural 
right to the effect that the assessment of the procedure be 
fair and reliable. That is, if we have a right regarding the 
procedure used to establish whether we are guilty or not, 
then it would seem that we should also have a right regard-
ing the second-order procedure that is used to establish 
whether the fi rst-order procedure used to establish whether 
we are guilty or not is fair and reliable and so on ad infi ni-
tum. We end up in a situation in which ‘[e]ach rights 
violation is potentially encumbered with an infi nite set of 
decision procedures’ (Paul: 1981, p. 73).

 
Reception and Infl uence 
83
On the other hand, it has been argued that prohibiting 
independents from enforcing their own rights cannot 
be justifi ed even if compensation is granted, given that 
rights are side constraints. Mack has argued that the 
compensation principle, which is crucial to Nozick’s argu-
ment against the anarchist, is in confl ict with Nozick’s anti-
consequentialist position. This principle is in danger of 
undermining the moral boundaries that give rise to side 
constraints. If consistently implemented, the compensa-
tion principle would allow for various forms of interven-
tion that would be deemed unacceptable by Nozick.
The compensation principle ensures that we end up 
with an outcome-oriented conception of rights, according 
to which ‘a boundary specifi es a level of well-being and the 
permissibility of others’ actions depends upon the effect 
of those actions upon the subject’s wellbeing. . . . This 
shift to an outcome oriented conception of rights should 
make it diffi cult for Nozick to sustain his anti-paternalism’ 
(Mack: 1981, p. 187). As long as a paternalistic interven-
tion does not have a negative effect on the well-being of 
a subject, that subject has no cause for complaint. The 
permissibility of such intervention will depend on how it 
affects well-being and not on whether it involves coercion. 
This outcome-oriented conception is to be contrasted with 
a strictly deontic account of rights, according to which ‘a 
boundary is a frontier which others do wrong to cross and 
accompanying benefi ts do not right such wrongs’ (Mack: 
1981, p. 187).
Nozick thus faces a dilemma. Either he retains his com-
pensation principle, in which case he can no longer rule 
out paternalistic interventions that do not move the sub-
ject to a lower indifference curve. Or he sticks to the strictly 
deontic account that seems to be much more in line with 
his Kantian foundations, in which case he will have to give 

84 
Robert Nozick
up the compensation principle. Giving up the compensa-
tion principle would require him to recant the claim that 
the dominant protective agency can legitimately prohibit 
independents from enforcing their rights as long as ade-
quate compensation is given to them. This would under-
mine a key step in the derivation of the minimal state.
Moreover, the fact that the ultraminimal state has to 
provide compensation for prohibiting independents casts 
doubt on Nozick’s claim that the minimal state can arise 
without violating any rights. Prima facie, it seems that com-
pensation is only due if a wrong has been done. ‘The dis-
advantage to independents resulting from the monopoly 
of force is morally wrong. It is for this reason that the inde-
pendents deserve compensation’ (Holmes: 1981, p. 61). 
This suggests that it is wrong to prohibit independents 
from enforcing their rights, that prohibition is illegitimate 
and involves the violation of a right, namely the right of 
self-defence. Accordingly, it turns out that the process by 
which the minimal state arises does involve morally illegiti-
mate steps after all, even if the wrongs that have been done 
are compensated for.
Finally, the explanatory relevance of Nozick’s hypotheti-
cal story has been questioned. While it is conceivable that 
a minimal state could have arisen in the way depicted by 
Nozick, it is not clear why this should be of any signifi cance 
since no actual state has arisen in this way. As Miller notes, 
‘to say of a state that it could have arisen by such means 
is actually to say very little’ (Miller: 2002, p. 19). Moreover, 
if what we are concerned with is the mere possibility of a 
legitimate state, it would seem to be suffi cient to appeal to 
the possibility of a state coming into existence as a result 
of explicit consent since this would not violate any rights. 
Explicit consent would also do more in the way of justifying 

 
Reception and Infl uence 
85
the state than an invisible-hand account since it would 
show that those setting up the state consider it as having 
positive value. An invisible-hand explanation does not 
have this virtue since it is compatible with its being the 
case that the emergence of the state is deemed to be a 
deterioration since ‘it does not follow from the fact that 
people individually have reason to choose to sign up with 
the largest agency in their geographic region that collec-
tively they have reason to applaud its emergence as a domi-
nant agency’ (Miller: 2002, p. 21). Thus, it seems that a 
hypothetical account has less justifi catory strength than a 
historical account, and that, even though an invisible-hand 
explanation has certain explanatory virtues since it can 
take the form of a fundamental explanation that explains 
the political realm in non-political terms, it has less justifi -
catory strength than an explicit consent explanation.
More than the minimal state?
Nozick’s entitlement theory and his critique of patterned 
conceptions of justice have had a signifi cant impact on 
political philosophy. All three aspects of the entitlement 
theory, namely the principles of justice in acquisition, 
transfer and rectifi cation, have been criticized on numer-
ous occasions.
To begin with, many people have pointed out the lack 
of an account of original acquisition. Without a theory of 
acquisition, the entitlement theory would break down. 
‘Before capitalist acts between consenting adults can take 
place in an orderly way, there must be solitary capitalist 
acts. Acquisition precedes transfer’ (O’Neill: 1981, p. 320). 
Nozick raises a number of forceful objections against 

86 
Robert Nozick
Locke’s theory of appropriation, which states that prop-
erty can be acquired by mixing one’s labour with some-
thing that is unowned. However, he does not put forward 
a positive theory to replace the one proposed by Locke. 
Instead, he simply gives a revised version of the Lockean 
proviso. The modifi ed proviso replaces the condition that 
there be enough and as good left for others with the con-
dition that no one be made worse off by the appropriation 
than they would have been had the resource remained 
unowned.
This confronts Nozick with a dilemma. Either compliance 
with the proviso is seen as a necessary condition on justi-
fi ed acquisition, in which case we lack a theory of appro-
priation since we have only been given one necessary 
condition and no suffi cient conditions. Or compliance 
with the proviso amounts to a suffi cient condition insofar 
as an act of appropriation can be justifi ed simply in virtue 
of not violating the proviso, in which case Nozick’s theory 
would not be very plausible. Taking compliance with the 
proviso to be a suffi cient condition would make any appro-
priation of unowned resources justifi ed, unless it were to 
clash with the Nozickian proviso. However, not making 
other people worse off does not appear to be suffi cient to 
give rise to property rights. In particular, it does not seem 
suffi cient to establish the absolute property rights over 
particular things that Nozick needs for his entitlement 
theory. There seems to be a need for something more to 
give rise to a right, to a claim on other people.
Moreover, the proviso has been criticized by a number of 
people, most notably by G. A. Cohen. Cohen claims that 
Nozick does not provide any arguments for taking the 
situation in which the object remains unowned as the base-
line for assessing appropriations. Instead, he suggests that 
different schemes of appropriation should be considered. 

 
Reception and Infl uence 
87
That is, we should consider whether anyone will be worse 
off by the actual appropriation relative to other schemes of 
appropriation. If person X appropriates resource R, we 
should not only assess whether Y is worse off as a result of 
the appropriation than Y would have been had R remained 
unowned, but also assess whether Y is worse off than Y 
would have been had Y appropriated R or had X and Y 
jointly appropriated R. Nozick has not given us any argu-
ments for accepting the baseline that he has picked and 
the one he has chosen may well turn out to be too weak.
In response, Mack has argued that Nozick does not 
consider the proviso as being a suffi cient condition for an 
appropriation to be just, but only as a necessary condition. 
‘The fact that a set of holdings satisfi es the proviso is 
not itself the primary vindication of those holdings; rather, 
this fact rebuts a particular challenge against presump-
tively justifi ed holdings’ (Mack: 2002, p. 100). Whether 
an appropriation is just is determined by the principles of 
justice in acquisition. These principles specify the proce-
dures by means of which unowned resources can be appro-
priated. The performance of the relevant kinds of actions 
is suffi cient for an appropriation to be justifi ed, as long 
as it does not violate the proviso. Accordingly, it is the prin-
ciples of justice in acquisition that are doing the justifi ca-
tory work. Compliance with the proviso does not confer 
justifi cation on an appropriation. It is not the case that 
an appropriation is justifi ed because it complies with the 
proviso. Rather, the justifi cation results from the process 
of appropriation.
Given this understanding of the role of the proviso, it 
becomes possible to deal with Cohen’s challenge that 
Nozick’s baseline ignores alternative schemes of appro-
priation. Mack points out that Cohen’s critique is based on 
‘a moral equivalence between what has arisen and what 

88 
Robert Nozick
might have arisen. . . . Now this proposition about what 
matters could, in some fi nal analysis, be correct. What is 
extraordinary, however, is that a critique of a historical 
entitlement doctrine should take as a premise the proposi-
tion that the history of a set of holdings does not count’ 
(Mack: 2002, p. 102). Cohen’s invocation of alternative 
scenarios of appropriation assumes that there is nothing 
about the actual scenario that gives rise to special claims, 
nothing that privileges the actual appropriation over 
counterfactual appropriations. An actual appropriation is 
simply treated as being on a par with a counterfactual 
appropriation. This, however, is inappropriate in the con-
text of the entitlement theory since the principles of 
justice in acquisition specify how rights arise out of the 
performance of certain actions. Appropriators have a 
claim in virtue of what they have done. For these claims to 
arise, the actions obviously have to be performed in the 
actual world. This implies that an appropriation in a coun-
terfactual scenario does not give rise to any claims. It is 
the actual historical processes that give rise to property 
rights and that confer justifi cation upon appropriations, 
making counterfactual appropriations irrelevant.
Accordingly, Nozick should not be understood as treat-
ing compliance with the proviso as a suffi cient condition. 
Instead, an appropriation is justifi ed if it takes place by 
means of procedures specifi ed by the principles of justice 
in acquisition. Unfortunately, Nozick does not specify what 
these principles are. Apart from the proviso, he does not 
specify any necessary or suffi cient conditions. This means 
that he does not give us a theory of appropriation, but 
only an outline of such a theory. This is problematic since 
acquisition lies at the foundation of the entitlement theory. 
While Nozick does not provide us with a worked-out theory 

 
Reception and Infl uence 
89
of original acquisition, it should be taken into consideration 
that he is in the same boat as pretty much everyone else. 
‘We should note that it is not only persons favoring private 
property who need a theory of how property rights legiti-
mately originate’ (p. 178). Every political philosophy and 
every account of justice in holdings needs a theory of prop-
erty rights and a theory of original acquisition and no one 
has given a plausible account yet. While Nozick’s view faces 
problems, there is a signifi cant lack of better alternatives.
A different kind of criticism focusing on the proviso has 
been raised by Lyons and Waldron. They question whether 
the Nozickian proviso can be properly integrated into 
Nozick’s rights-based moral framework, given that it seems 
to be introducing non-deontic considerations. ‘The under-
lying idea is that property arrangements must accommo-
date the basic needs and interests (Nozick would probably 
say the rights) of others’ (Lyons: 1981, p. 368). Similarly, 
Waldron argues that Nozick’s ‘theory begins with the 
assumption that the formation and justifi cation of property 
entitlements must be responsive to concerns about well-
being that are not embodied in property rights’ (Waldron: 
2005, p. 100). Accordingly, it seems that property rights 
are no longer fundamental but are subordinated to con-
siderations regarding welfare. This is at odds with Nozick’s 
deontological framework and threatens to undermine the 
purely procedural character of the entitlement theory.
Nozick is aware of these diffi culties and tries to circum-
vent them by arguing that the proviso is not an end-state 
principle since ‘it focuses on a particular way that appro-
priative actions affect others, and not on the structure of 
the situation that results’ (p. 181). Accordingly, there can 
be structurally identical distributions that differ in whether 
they involve violations of the proviso. This can happen as 

90 
Robert Nozick
long as the counterfactuals concerning these distributions 
differ. In particular, this happens if in one distribution 
some individuals would have been better off than they 
actually are had a particular resource remained unowned, 
while the corresponding counterfactual does not hold for 
the other distribution even though these distributions 
have the same structure. Thus, we can see that what matters 
for the proviso is not the structure of the resulting distribu-
tion but the effect of the appropriation, whereby this effect 
is assessed by comparing the actual scenario with the coun-
terfactual scenario that would have obtained had the 
resource remained unowned.
In addition, we can see that satisfying the proviso is a 
matter of not harming others, rather than of accommodat-
ing their needs and interests. The proviso does not specify 
any positive rights that others have, but instead amounts 
to a condition that others are not to be harmed by an 
appropriation. Put differently, it is neither the case that 
people have a right to a particular level of welfare that has 
to be guaranteed, nor that there are basic interests and 
needs that have to be met. The restriction on appropriation 
is essentially a no-harm condition and is thereby simply 
an instance of the general condition that our actions are 
not to result in harm to other people. In the same way that 
we are not to harm other people by killing or injuring 
them, we are not to harm them by appropriative acts that 
make them worse off than they would have been had the 
resource remained unowned, i.e. by appropriative acts 
that fail to satisfy the proviso.
We saw in the previous chapter that the principles of 
justice in transfer form a crucial aspect of the entitlement 
theory. These principles specify which transfers are justice-
preserving and thereby determine how we can get from 

 
Reception and Infl uence 
91
one set of holdings that is just to another set that is also 
just. Nozick’s main argument in favour of a procedural 
account that treats all voluntary transfers (that do not 
violate the proviso) as being just was the Wilt Chamberlain 
example. This example is supposed to establish that it is 
not reasonable to reject the entitlement theory.
Nozick’s claim that liberty upsets patterns has been criti-
cized on the basis that individuals could choose to act in 
such a way as to not upset the pattern. In this case, no inter-
ference would be required. ‘Nozick must concede that it is 
possible a pattern may remain reasonably stable even given 
voluntary transactions’ (Wolff: 1991, p. 82). This objection 
is somewhat misplaced. Even if there would not be any 
need for signifi cant interferences with the choices of indi-
viduals, it would still be the case that a large range of volun-
tary transfers would have to be prohibited, namely all those 
which would upset the pattern. While individuals in this 
imagined situation would not want to upset the pattern, 
the real point is that they could upset the pattern without 
doing any wrong. Put differently, Nozick allows that hold-
ings can conform to patterns, but claims that justness is not 
to be based on any patterns. Thus, the crucial argument is 
not that liberty necessarily upsets patterns (though Nozick 
does think that it is likely that liberty upsets patterns, given 
that it would be practically impossible to co-ordinate the 
actions of a large number of individuals such as to main-
tain a pattern, cf. p. 163), but that it would be legitimate 
for people to upset the pattern. Nozick wants to argue that 
voluntary transfers are justice-preserving and that they can 
upset a pattern, which implies that justness is not a matter 
of conforming to any pattern. Accordingly, the justness is 
not based on the structure of the distribution, but on the 
procedures that give rise to the distribution.

92 
Robert Nozick
It has been objected on a number of occasions that the 
Wilt Chamberlain example presupposes Nozick’s under-
standing of rights, rather than establishing it. This would 
render the Wilt Chamberlain argument dialectically inef-
fective. Holdings are justly distributed under D1 and Nozick 
claims that D2 is also just since we arrive at it by means of 
voluntary transfers. The transition is effected by individu-
als voluntarily exchanging some of the holdings that they 
are entitled to under D1. This claim has been criticized 
since it presupposes that the individuals have full capitalist 
ownership rights over the resources they received under 
D1, i.e. that they can do whatever they want with their 
holdings. Nagel objects that Nozick ‘erroneously inter-
prets the notion of a patterned principle as specifying 
a distribution of absolute entitlements (like those he believes 
in) to the wealth or property distributed’ (Nagel: 1981, 
p. 201; also cf. Cohen: 1995, p. 28).
Put differently, the criticism states that ownership rights 
do not necessarily imply an unrestricted right to transfer. 
‘Different conceptions of justice differ not only in how 
they would apportion society’s holdings but in what rights 
individuals have over their holdings once they have been 
apportioned’ (Ryan: 1981, p. 331). Nozick’s example thus 
presupposes libertarian rights and in particular the right 
that one can do with one’s holdings whatever one wants. 
Unless it can be shown that individuals have an unrestricted 
right to transfer the holdings that they have received under 
D1, it will not be the case that the transition to D2 is justice-
preserving. ‘The argument presupposes, so does not dem-
onstrate, that it is wrong to interfere to restore disturbed 
patterns or end-states, and that such restorations are always 
redistributive and violate individuals’ property rights. But it 
is just these property rights which have yet to be established’ 

 
Reception and Infl uence 
93
(O’Neill: 1981, pp. 308–309). There is thus an urgent need 
for an argument that establishes full capitalist property 
rights. Nozick, however, does not provide any principles of 
appropriation that establish such property rights.
In response, one can note that it would at the very least 
be counter-intuitive to claim that all voluntary transfers 
that upset patterns, including seemingly harmless transfers 
such as gift-giving, are unjust. While Nozick does believe in 
full capitalist rights, his argument against patterned theo-
ries does not require such rights. It only requires that there 
be some kinds of transfers, such as gift-giving, that are 
justice-preserving in virtue of their procedural properties. 
Given that the correct procedure is followed, the outcome 
is just even if it upsets the pattern. The idea that some 
voluntary transfers are justice-preserving even if they upset 
a pattern has been accepted by some of Nozick’s critics. 
For example, Wolff states: ‘Despite the problems raised, 
however, we should acknowledge that we must permit at 
least some voluntary transfers, unless, as Nozick repeatedly 
reminds us, we wish to prohibit “gift-giving and other 
loving behaviour”’ (Wolff: 1991, p. 88). 
The signifi cance of this concession, however, has not 
been fully appreciated. Wolff does not seem to be aware 
that this is to concede that patterned conceptions cannot 
be upheld. At least, no pure patterned theories can be 
upheld. There may still be room for patterns in specifying 
what makes the initial distribution just, but the specifi ca-
tion of what makes ulterior distributions just will be in 
terms of the procedures that give rise to these distribu-
tions. In other words, conceding Nozick’s point regarding 
voluntary transfers still leaves room for a patterned account 
of original acquisition, but it implies a commitment to a 
procedural account of justice in transfer. This does not 

94 
Robert Nozick
mean that we automatically end up with Nozick’s entitle-
ment theory, but only that we have to accept some form of 
procedural rather than structural account of the princi-
ples of transfer. Which kinds of voluntary transfers are con-
sidered to be justice-preserving will then determine the 
precise nature of the procedural theory. Nozick believes 
that all voluntary transfers are justice-preserving. Other 
procedural accounts that only admit a restricted range of 
voluntary transfers are also possible and it seems that Wolff 
has such a restriction in mind.
Admitting that some voluntary transfers are justice-
preserving implies that the resulting theory will no longer 
be a structural account. This means that a distribution can-
not be judged to be just or unjust by simply considering 
the relative holdings of different individuals. Instead, one 
will have to look at how the distribution arose and assess 
whether the transfers leading to that distribution satisfi ed 
the procedural conditions. This also implies that pretty 
much any possible set of holdings, no matter how unequal, 
may turn out to be just as long as it has arisen in the correct 
manner and as long as it does not violate the proviso. For 
example, if the transfer of holdings through gifts is consid-
ered to be justice-preserving, then we can end up with a just 
distribution whereby one person controls most resources 
if these have been acquired as a result of gift-giving.
A further reply to the criticism that Nozick’s argument 
presupposes full capitalist ownership rights has been given 
by Roderick Long. He questions whether the rights people 
have over the holdings they receive under D1 can still be 
called ownership rights, given the severity of the restrictions 
that pattern theorists must impose. If someone has received 
certain holdings but is not allowed to transfer or utilize 
them in any way that upsets the pattern, then it becomes 

 
Reception and Infl uence 
95
dubious whether that person can be said to own those 
holdings (cf. Long: 2002). 
Furthermore, we can note that these rights are extremely 
fl eeting given that pattern theories generally fail to satisfy 
the addition and deletion conditions (cf. pp. 209–210). 
Thus, the ‘property rights’ accorded by pattern theories 
are highly restrictive and unstable, which makes it ques-
tionable whether they properly classify as ownership rights 
at all. These points are connected to the argument we gave 
in the previous chapter, showing that the Wilt Chamberlain 
argument establishes that pattern theories are partly self-
defeating. This is because the restrictions on transfers 
required to maintain the pattern partly undermine the 
point of distributing in the fi rst place. Thus the rights that 
people do have over their holdings under D1 seem so 
insignifi cant that it seems inappropriate to call them own-
ership rights and that it becomes questionable why they 
are valuable at all.
Independently of considerations regarding ownership, 
the Wilt Chamberlain example is intended to show that 
justice, as construed by the pattern theorist, is in confl ict 
with liberty. Even if it were granted that critics are correct 
in pointing out that Nozick cannot make claims about 
redistribution being unjust since this would presuppose 
the entitlement theory, it would seem that this would not 
fully defuse the Wilt Chamberlain example. Redistributing 
to maintain the pattern would not be unjust if people were 
to have highly restricted ‘ownership’ rights over their hold-
ings. Yet, the maintaining of a pattern would nonetheless 
be problematic due to infringements of liberty and inter-
ferences with people’s lives. Nozick argues that upholding 
a pattern requires signifi cant interferences in people’s lives 
and requires the prohibition of many voluntary actions. 

96 
Robert Nozick
This is problematic independently of whether or not such 
restrictions and interferences classify as infringements of 
people’s property rights.
In response to this line of argument, it has been pointed 
out by Cheyney Ryan that, even though pattern theorists 
have to impose restrictions on what people may do with 
their holdings, ‘whether or not this lack of freedom consti-
tutes an infringement on personal liberty depends on the 
rights we have over the holding in question’ (Ryan: 1981, 
p. 330). Given Nozick’s rights-based defi nition of liberty, 
it follows that there is no infringement of liberty in the 
absence of the infringement of rights. Nozick argues that 
people are only free to do those things they have a right 
to do. Accordingly, Nozick cannot uphold the claim that 
the maintaining of patterns involves the infringement of 
liberty unless he presupposes capitalist ownership rights. 
‘To prove that liberty upsets patterns, Nozick must under-
take the burden of proving that people do have the right 
to make whatever transfers they wish. Liberty is no longer 
fundamental’ (Wolff: 1991, p. 96). Put differently, a pattern 
theorist who adopts Nozick’s rights-based defi nition of lib-
erty can argue that patterns are not in confl ict with liberty 
since we only have rights to transfer holdings in ways that 
do not upset the pattern. Since transfers that upset pat-
terns are unjust, we are not free to perform such transfers. 
Consequently, the prohibition of these transfers will not 
constitute a restriction on liberty understood in this mora-
lized sense.
If the rights-based defi nition of liberty is relinquished, 
a different problem arises. It will then be the case that the 
entitlement theory is also in confl ict with liberty. This is 
because capitalist property rights can be seen as inhibiting 
freedom, given that they impose boundaries on what other 

 
Reception and Infl uence 
97
people can do and restrict the range of alternatives open 
to individuals. Capitalist property rights reduce freedom 
by imposing constraints on what other people can do. ‘Any 
given set of rights (such as private property rights) insures 
some freedoms (such as the freedom to exchange) but 
also thwarts others (the freedom of others to use property 
now privately owned)’ (Ryan: 1981, p. 340).
This means that Nozick faces a dilemma. On the one 
hand, he can retain his rights-based defi nition of liberty, in 
which case questions of liberty cannot be settled unless 
questions of right have been settled. Accordingly, he will 
have to presuppose capitalist ownership rights in order to 
claim that the maintaining of a pattern infringes liberty. 
This, however, would imply that the Wilt Chamberlain 
example presupposes rather than establishes the entitle-
ment theory. As a result, the argument would be dialecti-
cally ineffective since it would be begging the question 
against those who reject full capitalist ownership rights. 
On the other hand, he can give up the rights-based defi ni-
tion of liberty, in which case he would be justifi ed in claim-
ing that liberty upsets patterns, but his opponents would 
be equally correct in pointing out that liberty also upsets 
entitlements. Any theory of property that places restrictions 
on what people can do would be in confl ict with liberty 
understood in this non-moralized sense. The best Nozick 
could then do is to try to argue that the entitlement theory 
gives us more freedom and places less restrictions on what 
can be done, or that the freedoms it gives us are more 
important and the restrictions less onerous than those 
resulting from patterned theories.
While the pattern theorist can consistently claim that 
maintaining a pattern does not restrict liberty, he must 
nonetheless impose signifi cant restrictions on a range of 

98 
Robert Nozick
intuitively unproblematic actions. While such a position is 
coherent, it is still counterintuitive since it imposes high 
costs on society by prohibiting a large number of mutually 
benefi cial exchanges. These restrictions give rise to the 
self-defeating character of pattern theories that we have 
pointed to previously. Property matters according to pat-
tern theorists because of its benefi cial effects. However, 
it is not suffi cient that people possess property for these 
effects to arise. Instead, they must be able to use it and 
exchange it and this they cannot do if the restrictions 
required for maintaining patterns are put in place.
Another prominent objection to Nozick’s claim that lib-
erty upsets patterns is that within a Rawlsian framework 
justice only applies to the basic structure of society, which 
implies that there is no commitment to constant redistri-
bution and interference to maintain a pattern (cf. Pogge: 
1989, p. 29; Kukathas and Pettit: 1990, pp. 89–90). Put dif-
ferently, if what it takes for a society to be just is for its basic 
institutional structure to be just, then the divergence of 
a distribution of holdings from a pattern does not consti-
tute an injustice that has to be prohibited or rectifi ed. ‘It is 
a mistake to focus attention on the varying relative posi-
tions of individuals and to require that every change, con-
sidered as a single transaction viewed in isolation, be in 
itself just. It is the arrangement of the basic structure which 
is to be judged, and judged from a general point of view’ 
(Rawls: 1971, pp. 87–88; also cf. Rawls: 1977, p. 164).
Mack has responded to this objection by pointing out 
that ‘for the pattern theorist, the justice of the basic struc-
ture and its activities still ultimately turns on that structure’s 
propensity to bring about the pattern of holdings that is 
the ultimate justifying purpose of that basic structure’ 
(Mack: 2002, p. 85). Unless the basic structure prohibits 

 
Reception and Infl uence 
99
moving from D1 to D2 or requires that D2 be converted 
into a distribution D3 that is again in conformity with the 
pattern, it will not do its job of bringing about the desired 
pattern of holdings and will consequently turn out to be 
unjust.
Waldron provides a similar argument, noting that even 
though a Rawlsian is not committed to reallocating hold-
ings in case they should diverge from the pattern since 
society will be governed by the basic structure, it is none-
theless the case that he will have to ask himself whether 
we can ‘change the institutional structure (including the 
structure of property entitlements, if there are any) so as 
to render it more likely in the future that the normal oper-
ation of our economy will yield distributions [that conform 
more closely to the pattern]’ (Waldron: 2005, p. 107). If 
it is possible to modify the institutional structure in such 
a way, for instance by prohibiting voluntary exchanges 
that upset the pattern or by requiring the reallocation of 
resources to restore the pattern, then this is something 
that justice requires. In other words, if we are concerned 
with the basic structure of society, then a patterned con-
ception of justice does not tell us to intervene and reallo-
cate resources to reinstate the pattern, but tells us to alter 
the basic structure. Intervention will consequently still be 
demanded by a patterned conception of justice but will 
now be directed at the basic structure rather than directly 
at the distribution of holdings.
A related objection is that pattern theorists do not 
require constant interference since ‘they tend to advocate 
an approximation of the preferred pattern, the value of 
which is tempered by the value of liberty, and vice versa’ 
(Hailwood: 1996, p. 33; also cf. Wolff: 1991, pp. 88–90). 
Pattern theories are usually understood as involving the 

100 
Robert Nozick
redistribution of holdings according to predictable and 
publicly known rules, by means of some form of progres-
sive taxation that is combined with welfare benefi ts, rather 
than the strict and rigid implementation of a pattern. 
While such a taxation scheme interferes with liberty to 
some extent, it will not amount to the constant and intru-
sive interference with people’s lives that Nozick depicts.
It is true that, all things considered, a pattern theorist 
need not be committed to such extensive interference 
since other considerations, such as the rule of law, can 
function as mitigating factors. Nonetheless, such extensive 
interference is required as far as justice is concerned and 
this surely speaks against a patterned theory of justice. 
In other words, the fact that the counter-intuitive conse-
quences of a theory of justice are mitigated by other com-
ponents of a political philosophy does not change the fact 
that the theory of justice has highly counter-intuitive conse-
quences. It seems that a theory of justice should be able to 
stand on its own. It should not be something that is defec-
tive and that needs to be supplemented to be rendered 
acceptable.
Moreover, this implies that such pattern theorists have to 
make trade-offs and cannot be fully committed to distribu-
tive justice. They will have to balance justice against other 
considerations and can at best approximate what they 
would consider to be a just distribution. This is something 
an entitlement theorist does not have to do. Nozick’s polit-
ical philosophy does not consist of different components 
that confl ict and have to be weighed up against each other. 
As a result, Nozick can be unreservedly committed to lib-
erty, justice and the rule of law. The different components 
of his theory are fully compatible and no trade-offs need to 
be made.

 
Reception and Infl uence 
101
A further criticism of the Wilt Chamberlain example is 
that Nozick ignores signifi cant negative effects on third 
parties that result from moving from D1 to D2. Nozick 
claims that third parties are unaffected by the change and 
have no cause for complaint because their shares remain 
the same. This view is criticized by Cohen. He argues that 
‘a person’s effective share depends on what he can do with 
what he has, and that depends not only on how much he 
has but on what others have and on how what others have 
is distributed’ (Cohen: 1995, pp. 26–27). Thus, while the 
shares of third parties remain the same, Cohen wants to 
say that an injustice can arise in the change from D1 to D2 
since the way holdings are distributed will have effects on 
third parties and will determine what can be done with 
those shares. Certain individuals, such as Wilt Chamberlain, 
will have access to signifi cant resources under D2 and can 
use them in ways that are detrimental to third parties. In 
other words, Cohen argues that changes in the distribu-
tion of resources can lead to changes in the power rela-
tions that negatively affect third parties, thereby giving rise 
to injustice.
Nozick’s response to this claim is that while it is indeed 
true that Wilt Chamberlain has a great deal of resources 
under D2 and is consequently in a position to do things 
that others were not able to do individually under D1, it 
was nonetheless the case that others could jointly do those 
very same things under D1 (cf. p. 162, footnote). There is 
thus an important sense in which effective shares of third 
parties remain the same. No new powers have emerged 
that were not already implicitly contained in the previous 
distribution. The range of things that could be done under 
D1 is the same as that which obtains under D2. All that has 
changed is which individuals or groups of individuals can 

102 
Robert Nozick
do these things. Accordingly, there is no cause for com-
plaint by third parties. Moreover, Nozick notes that the 
objection focusing on effects on third parties does not 
apply to ‘distributions of ultimate intrinsic noninstrumen-
tal goods (pure utility experiences, so to speak) that are 
transferable’ (p. 162, footnote). The transfer of such non-
instrumental goods cannot affect the effective shares of 
third parties, which means that voluntary exchanges are 
justice-preserving at least for these goods.
In addition to the Wilt Chamberlain example, Nozick 
put forward an argument to the effect that income taxa-
tion constitutes a violation of self-ownership and that it 
is on a par with forced labour. According to patterned 
accounts of justice, the holdings that are allocated to indi-
viduals are specifi ed by some pattern. The pattern deter-
mines how the social product is to be distributed among 
different people and what share of the product is due to 
particular people. Patterned theories thereby give individ-
uals a claim on the social product, which means that they 
have a claim on the activities and products of other people. 
This then makes them part owners in other people. Accord-
ingly, patterned theories are in confl ict with self-ownership. 
They are incompatible with the idea that ‘every person is 
morally entitled to full private property in his own person 
and powers. This means that each person has an extensive 
set of moral rights . . . over the use and fruits of his body 
and capacities’ (Cohen: 1995, p. 117).
Cohen claims that this argument based on the self-
ownership thesis is the most fundamental argument in 
favour of libertarianism. ‘[T]he primary commitment of 
[Nozick’s] philosophy is not to liberty but to the thesis 
of self-ownership. . . . “Libertarianism” affi rms not free-
dom as such, but freedom of a certain type, whose shape is 

 
Reception and Infl uence 
103
delineated by the thesis of self-ownership’ (Cohen: 1995, 
p. 67). Wolff makes a similar claim, arguing that the ‘right 
to liberty is, on this view, purely formal. It is, in essence, 
merely the right to do what you have a right to do’ (Wolff: 
1991, p. 96). The Wilt Chamberlain example tries to draw 
a connection between freedom and justice, but claims 
about freedom depend on rights, given the rights-based 
defi nition of freedom. These rights are the rights of self-
ownership and it is they that determine what counts as an 
infringement of liberty. Accordingly, the Wilt Chamberlain 
argument is effective only to the extent to which it is 
based on the self-ownership thesis, which implies that no 
independent argument from freedom against patterned 
accounts is to be found.
Cohen grants that Nozick is correct in pointing out that 
taxation of earnings from labour amounts to instituting 
partial ownership in other people. Self-ownership is not 
‘consistent with a directive that, whenever I use [my talents] 
for my own benefi t, I must, to a stated extent, use them 
to benefi t others too: that is the essence of redistributive 
income taxation. I do not (fully) own myself if I am required 
to give others (part of) what I earn by applying my powers’ 
(Cohen: 1995, p. 216). Accordingly, those in favour of redis-
tributive income taxation need to reject the self-ownership 
thesis.
Though Cohen accepts that he cannot refute the self-
ownership thesis, he claims to be able to show that the 
denial of it is relatively unproblematic. He attempts to 
do this by establishing that the intuitive support for self-
ownership actually derives from other principles that are 
separable from self-ownership and that can be preserved 
even when the self-ownership thesis is rejected. In parti-
cular, he claims that the appeal of self-ownership derives 

104 
Robert Nozick
from confl ating the idea of being a self-owner with the 
ideas of (i) not being a slave, (ii) possessing autonomy and 
(iii) not being used merely as a means (cf. Cohen: 1995, 
p. 230). While all these three features are highly important, 
Cohen claims that they are separable from self-ownership 
and can therefore be retained even when the self-ownership 
thesis is denied.
A characteristic feature of the entitlement theory that 
is not shared by many other conceptions is that it implies 
a commitment to there being entitlements to particular 
things. People are entitled to particular things that they 
have appropriated, created or received. It is not just that 
they are entitled to a particular quantity of goods or to a 
particular amount of holdings, but that they have entitle-
ments to particular objects.
Davis provides an interesting critique of this aspect of 
the entitlement theory, arguing that it causes problems for 
the defi nition of a just distribution as well as for the prin-
ciples of rectifi cation (cf. Davis: 1981). His critique appeals 
to cases that involve the destruction of objects that have 
been illegitimately acquired. Davis argues that a situation 
in which someone steals certain things and then destroys 
them satisfi es Nozick’s defi nition of justice since the hold-
ings of everyone have been arrived at in a just manner. 
In particular, the thief does not have any holdings that 
have been unjustly acquired since all the stolen goods were 
destroyed. Accordingly, Nozick’s defi nition needs to be 
amended. In particular, it turns out that Nozick’s claim 
that a distribution is just if everyone’s holdings have been 
justly acquired is problematic and cannot deal with the 
cases invoked by Davis.
While this characterization of the entitlement theory is 
problematic, Nozick’s recursive defi nition of a just distribu-
tion that is specifi ed in terms of the three sets of principles 

 
Reception and Infl uence 
105
of the entitlement theory can adequately handle these 
cases. The reason for the inadequacy of the former defi ni-
tion is that it only looks at the holdings people do have and 
not the holdings that people do not have. This oversight is 
rectifi ed by the latter defi nition since it is concerned with 
the manner in which we move from one set of holdings to 
another, whereby this includes processes by which people 
divest themselves of properties. Thus, the set of holdings 
resulting from the destruction of unjustly acquired objects 
is unjust since some of the steps leading to it contravene 
the principles of justice in transfer.
While Nozick’s recursive defi nition can handle the cases 
described by Davis, the principle of rectifi cation lacks the 
resources to deal with such cases. That is, cases involving 
the destruction of illegitimately acquired property give 
rise to problems for the principle of rectifi cation. This is 
because the objects to which people were entitled have 
been destroyed and consequently cannot be returned to 
their rightful owners. There is nothing for the principles 
of rectifi cation to do in such cases. Davis suggests that 
Nozick can overcome this diffi culty by appealing to the 
compensation principle. This, however, will imply that we 
no longer have a pure entitlement theory. We no longer 
look at the particular objects to which people are entitled 
but rather assess the utility that they derive from the objects 
and compensate them if they have been wronged, not by 
returning the particular objects to which they are entitled, 
but by ensuring that they end up on the same indifference 
curve. The compensation principle thereby introduces a 
utility criterion into the principles of rectifi cation of the 
entitlement theory that seems to be at odds with the rights-
based account of justice.
A common objection against Nozick’s project is that the 
entitlement theory is largely irrelevant since we lack the 

106 
Robert Nozick
requisite historical and counterfactual information to ascer-
tain which set of holdings would be just. Accordingly, we 
are unable to implement the principle of rectifi cation, 
which means that we will not be able to rectify past injus-
tices and bring about a just distribution. While the entitle-
ment theory might be an interesting account of how things 
should work under ideal conditions, it does not seem to be 
applicable to the real world.
Schmidtz has pointed out that ‘[v]oluntary transfer can-
not cleanse a tainted title of original sin, but any injustice 
in the result will have been preexisting, not created by the 
transfer. We are fated to live in a world of background 
injustice. . . . Still, Nozick thinks, it remains possible for 
moral agents, living ordinary lives, to abide by his princi-
ple of just transfer and, to that extent, to have clean hands’ 
(Schmidtz: 2005, pp. 160–161). Thus, the entitlement the-
ory and the principles of justice in transfer in particular 
are still of importance, even if it is not possible in practice 
to comprehensively apply this theory to bring about a just 
set of holdings. In other words, the principles of just trans-
fer tell us how we can avoid making things worse, allowing 
those who abide by these principles to live with a clear con-
science. That is, if we follow the entitlement theory as far 
as our epistemic situation allows, then we know at a mini-
mum that we are not creating further injustices. In addi-
tion, we can note that there are cases where no injustices 
have occurred that could compromise the applicability of 
the entitlement theory, as happens for instance when we 
are dealing with certain cases of intellectual property rights 
(cf. pp. 181–182). Problems regarding the rectifi cation of 
past injustices do not matter when it comes to questions 
concerning newly created holdings. With respect to these 
holdings at least, the entitlement theory can be followed 
comprehensively in practice.

 
Reception and Infl uence 
107
Problems with the meta-utopia 
Nozick’s discussion of utopia has unfortunately been much 
neglected. It has not generated a great deal of discussion 
and has accordingly only been subjected to a small num-
ber of criticisms, most of which have focused on practical 
concerns regarding the applicability of the framework to 
the actual world.
One criticism that has been raised on several occasions 
is that market mechanisms will lead to a situation in which 
we end up with a dominant culture. ‘Could a community 
that wanted a lot of redistribution survive the departure of 
the wealthy members whose moral principles are weaker 
than their desire for wealth? . . . [C]ould a community 
maintain its dedication to an austere life of virtue if it 
were surrounded by the fl ashy temptations of American 
capitalism?’ (Singer: 1981, p. 38). Nozick’s description of 
the framework suggests that we end up with an inspiring 
pluralistic society consisting of a large number of diverse 
associations in which different people pursue their own 
utopian visions. Nozick’s critics, however, maintain that 
the pressure of the market will lead to the emergence of a 
dominant culture, namely a vulgar, consumption-oriented 
capitalist culture. There is then seen to be a need for poli-
tical action to ensure that certain ways of life will not die 
out. This will require an extensive state that raises taxes to 
subsidize such endangered communities and that shields 
them from the competitive pressure of the market.
Nozick’s reply would probably be that freedom comes 
with responsibility, that people have to pay the price of 
their choices and that they should not impose their prefer-
ences on others. Of course, some forms of life may die out. 
People will decide that living in a certain way is too costly, 
that it is not worth it. The framework for utopia is a good 

108 
Robert Nozick
mechanism for fi nding out the real price of a life-style. 
It allows us to identify what its costs and benefi ts are and 
then lets people decide whether they are willing to pay this 
price. This seems much better than imposing a life-style on 
people who or not willing to pay its price or than subsidiz-
ing the life-style of a particular group at the expense of 
a large number of people who do not benefi t from it and 
do not agree with it.
Moreover, Nozick would be likely to respond that there 
is going to be a suffi cient degree of pluralism. After all, 
one of his arguments for the meta-utopia is that people are 
so diverse that there is no single way of living that is best 
for all of them. People ‘differ in temperament, interests, 
intellectual ability, aspirations, natural bent, spiritual quests, 
and the kind of life they whish to lead. They diverge in 
the values they have and have different weightings for the 
values they share’ (pp. 309–310). Within the framework this 
diversity among people will give rise to a plurality of diverse 
associations since individuals will have the freedom to 
experiment, to create, exit and join non-coercive associa-
tions. Finally, even if a dominant culture were to emerge, 
this would not be a problem as long as it is not enforced or 
imposed against people’s will. What is the problem if every-
one should decide to live similar life-styles regulated by 
similar rules? It is not evident that there is a problem since 
it is their choice. They have to decide how to live their lives.
To this it can be objected that ‘Nozick’s vision of utopia 
fails to deal with the fundamental Marxist objection to 
classical liberalism: people make choices, but they do so 
under given historical circumstances which infl uence their 
choices. We do not enable people to govern their lives 
by giving them a “free” choice within these limits while 
refusing to do anything about the contexts in which these 

 
Reception and Infl uence 
109
choices are made’ (Singer: 1981, pp. 38–39). But if volun-
tary choices are not enough, then what is it that should be 
done? Imposing a certain way of life on individuals against 
their will is unlikely to achieve much good. Moreover, it 
is not clear why we should presume that those doing the 
imposing are not equally subject to the corrupting infl u-
ences. Yet, to some extent Nozick does engage with this 
criticism. He wants to make sure that people are adequately 
informed of the various possibilities that are available, 
and that they not remain members of their associations 
ignorant of the alternatives. This applies in particular to 
children. While Nozick is aware of the diffi culties, he does 
not provide any answers to them.
While most objections are concerned with practical 
problems regarding the implementation of the framework 
for utopia, Simon Hailwood has raised a number of criti-
cisms focusing on the theoretical aspects of the framework. 
In particular, he questions whether Nozick is able to pro-
vide an account of the framework for utopia that does not 
appeal to any moral considerations and consequently pro-
vides independent support for the minimal state. Hailwood 
thinks that Nozick smuggles in various moral premises in 
developing and defending the meta-utopia. On the one 
hand, Nozick seems to presuppose that we should be neu-
tral between different conceptions of the good. This neu-
trality is important since he rules out imperialistic utopian 
conceptions because they fail to be neutral. Similarly, Mack 
has claimed that Nozick’s argument only applies to utopians 
‘whose ideal does not include the use of coercion against 
others as an end valuable in itself or as a necessary prelude 
to utopia. In this respect the argument is not independent 
of the voluntarism central to natural rights theory’ (Mack: 
1975, p. 10).

110 
Robert Nozick
On the other hand, Nozick requires a criterion for best-
ness given that he analyses utopia as the best possible world. 
The requisite criterion seems to be a moral criterion. Not 
only is it a moral criterion, but it appears that Nozick has 
to appeal to broadly consequentialist considerations to 
specify which world is the best of all possible worlds. With-
out this consequentialist axiology, Nozick would lack a 
value-scale that would allow him to give a non-vacuous 
account of the framework of utopia. This gives rise to the 
question as to whether this argument is compatible with 
the deontological picture defended in the rest of the book. 
That is, Nozick’s analysis suggests a consequentialist crite-
rion of bestness understood in terms of preference satis-
faction that is ‘at odds with the anti consequentialism of 
the rest of Anarchy, State, and Utopia’ (Hailwood: 1996, p. 77).

4
Relevance
There is no doubt that Nozick’s work has had and will con-
tinue to have a signifi cant impact on political philosophy. 
Anarchy, State, and Utopia is a fascinating book that is full of 
interesting ideas, compelling examples, thought-provoking 
suggestions, trenchant criticisms and powerful arguments. 
It is not a dogmatic statement of a doctrine, but the unfold-
ing of a philosophical position by one of the greatest phi-
losophers of the twentieth century. The central messages 
of the book remain highly relevant and important, even if 
in most cases there is still a great deal of work to be done 
in order to arrive at a satisfactory position.
This chapter attempts to give an assessment of what is 
still viable within the Nozickian project. It tries to set out 
what lines of research are still open, which aspects of his 
work have been unjustly neglected and ignored and what 
parts of this project have survived the criticisms. In short, 
this chapter gives an account of the legacy of Robert 
Nozick. While many of Nozick’s critiques of other positions 
and arguments are insightful and worth keeping in mind, 
in this chapter we will mainly focus on some of the positive 
arguments, assumptions and approaches that Nozick makes 
use of in Anarchy, State, and Utopia.

112 
Robert Nozick
Rights-based libertarianism
Nozick’s work reinvigorated rights-based libertarianism, 
showing that this can be a highly fruitful research agenda. 
Rights-based approaches were prominent in the early 
modern period, in particular within the context of theistic 
moral frameworks where moral laws were considered to be 
divinely ordained. However, they had become neglected 
in recent times and were instead replaced by consequential-
ist accounts that primarily appeal to economic arguments. 
‘With the exception of Robert Nozick, no major theorist in 
the Anglo-Saxon world for almost a century has based his 
work on the concept of a right’ (Tuck: 1979, p. 1). 
A distinctive feature of Nozick’s project is that he 
advocates the minimal state on the basis of considerations 
regarding rights. Nozick does not follow the majority of 
contemporary libertarians and classical liberals in giving 
an economic, effi ciency-based argument for libertarianism 
that depends on implicit or explicit utilitarian presupposi-
tions. Instead, he places great importance on individual 
rights and the need to respect the separateness and dignity 
of persons. He suggests that we should consider rights as 
side constraints, thereby avoiding a utilitarianism of rights. 
All this is done in a non-theistically based framework since 
he provides a natural rights understanding of morality that 
does not depend on theistic premises. Accordingly, his 
project can be considered as a modernized, agnostic or 
atheistic version of the Lockean project.
Rights-based libertarianism has several advantages that 
are nicely exhibited by Nozick’s arguments. To begin with, 
a rights-based approach is appealing because of the role it 
accords to the dignity of human beings. It thereby gives a 
central role to the value of individuals. Individuals are not 

 
Relevance 
113
merely treated as loci of utilities but as inviolable beings 
that have intrinsic worth. The rights-based approach takes 
the dignity of individuals as the starting point and then 
assesses what rights follow therefrom and what kinds of 
political systems are compatible with these rights. A neces-
sary condition on the legitimacy of a political system is that 
it respects the dignity of individuals. Respecting rights is 
the sine qua non of any mode of social organization.
By appealing to rights, we can defend a normative system 
that is not dependent on problematic utilitarian assump-
tions or presuppositions. While rights-based approaches 
face problems when it comes to providing a foundation for 
individual rights, these problems seem less troublesome 
than the diffi culties faced by utilitarians. Nozick’s argu-
ments against utilitarianism and other consequentialist 
theories are quite decisive, leaving rights-based approaches 
as the best candidates for normative theories that wish to 
take seriously the inviolability and separateness of persons.
Rights-based libertarianism does not make the justifi ca-
tion (or lack thereof) of the state contingent on empirical 
matters of facts. The legitimacy of the state does not boil 
down to a question of effi ciency and is therefore not an 
empirical question. Instead, it can be dealt with in an a 
priori manner. We can identify rights and assess what social 
arrangements are compatible with these rights, without 
appealing to empirical contingencies. This gives us a clear-
cut account of which actions are right and wrong, permit-
ted and forbidden. It thus allows us to give a clear-cut 
answer as to whether the state is legitimate at all and what 
functions it may legitimately perform. Of course, we still 
need to look at empirical matters of fact to assess whether 
any particular state does comply with these constraints, in 
particular whether the state has arisen in an appropriate 

114 
Robert Nozick
way. The normative question, however, can be settled inde-
pendently of these empirical matters and can be given a 
clear-cut answer.
A further advantage is that rights-based arguments pro-
vide a more robust foundation for libertarianism. Such 
arguments for libertarianism cannot be avoided by simply 
responding that economic effi ciency can be sacrifi ced for 
some other good, such as equality. Rights constitute the 
side constraints within which various values play a role. 
Such values, however, cannot override the constraints 
deriving from individual rights and accordingly cannot 
justify the transgression of these moral boundaries. In 
other words, rights are prior to other values. This implies 
that a rights-based version of libertarianism is resistant to 
the invocation of various values. This, however, is not the 
case when giving an effi ciency-based argument for the 
minimal state.
In short, adopting a rights-based approach allows us to 
give a more plausible, more appealing and more robust 
argument in favour of libertarianism that is not contingent 
on empirical facts and that cannot easily be avoided by 
invoking other values.
Any such understanding of libertarianism faces the prob-
lem of fi nding an adequate foundation for these negative 
rights that are considered as side constraints if one is to 
avoid Nagel’s charge of advocating libertarianism without 
foundations. As discussed previously, Anarchy, State, and 
Utopia is not intended as a foundational project. Rather, it 
is supposed to show what conclusions can be derived from 
the intuitively plausible starting point that individuals do 
have rights. Nonetheless, Nozick’s discussion of rights is 
highly relevant for other theorists attempting to provide a 
rights-based account. This applies to the moral arguments 
that Nozick invokes in favour of a rights-based approach, 

 
Relevance 
115
as well as to the problems he identifi es which rights-based 
theories need to address.
Nozick makes a convincing case for treating rights as side 
constraints. Rights are supposed to place limits on actions. 
They are supposed to refl ect moral boundaries that should 
not be crossed. However, unless rights are treated as side 
constraints, they are unable to fulfi l this role since it will be 
legitimate to violate rights and to transgress moral boun-
daries as long as this minimizes the overall level of rights 
violations. This utilitarianism of rights is unacceptable and 
does not suffi ciently respect the inviolability of persons. 
The same considerations that made us reject utilitarianism 
and appeal to rights speak against allowing a utilitarianism 
of rights. Accordingly, rights ought not to be included in 
the end that is to be achieved. Rather, they should be 
understood as side constraints on actions that are not to 
be transgressed. They constrain the way in which ends are 
to be achieved, rather than featuring in the end that is to 
be achieved.
Moreover, Nozick’s other discussions of ethics, in partic-
ular in Philosophical Explanations, are helpful in under-
standing what role rights can play in an ethical theory and 
how a foundation of them might be provided. In particu-
lar, his distinction between ‘ethical-pull’ and ‘ethical-push’ 
is of importance for ethical theories in general and rights-
based accounts in particular. Ethical constraints can have 
two sources, namely the agent and the one acted upon. 
Ethical-pull is the normative force that specifi es how a per-
son is to be treated by others in virtue of the moral status 
of that person. The nature of the person acted upon 
imposes constraints on how he should be treated. Ethical-
push, on the contrary, is the normative force that specifi es 
how an agent should treat other people in virtue of the 
moral status that the agent himself possesses. The nature 

116 
Robert Nozick
of the agent imposes constraints upon how he should act. 
In particular, he should act in such a way as is appropriate 
for the kind of person he is. That is, normative considera-
tions derive both from the nature of the agent doing the 
acting and the nature of the person who is acted upon. 
These considerations seem to favour a rights-based moral 
theory, insofar as it adequately accounts for the ethical-pull 
deriving from the dignity of persons. The ethical-pull is 
represented in the moral theory in the form of rights that 
constitute side constraints on actions.
Furthermore, the relation between the different levels 
of ethics outlined in The Examined Life and in Invariances, 
is helpful for rights-based approaches. Nozick specifi es 
different layers of a moral system, whereby the goals at 
higher levels are to be achieved without violating the con-
straints and undermining the goals of the lower levels. He 
starts with (i) an ethic of respect, followed by (ii) an ethic 
of responsiveness, (iii) an ethic of care and fi nally (iv) an 
ethic of light. This kind of layered approach allows us to 
integrate rights-based deontological considerations into 
a broader ethical system. The core area of ethics, which 
forms the most fundamental layer, is characterized by 
rights and is based on deontological considerations. The 
other levels have different sources and give rise to differ-
ent moral structures. As regards political philosophy, the 
main focus will be on the core of ethics since only rights 
bring with them correlative duties that are enforceable 
and accordingly belong into the political realm.
Taking anarchism seriously
Nozick differs from many contemporary political philoso-
phers due to the fact that he takes anarchism seriously. 

 
Relevance 
117
This difference arises as a result of his strong emphasis on 
individual rights. Given these rights, it becomes question-
able whether there is any room for a legitimate state. The 
strict understanding of rights and the importance accorded 
to voluntary consent seem to preclude the possibility of 
a legitimate state that is not based on explicit consent. 
Nozick recognizes this and consequently takes seriously 
the anarchist’s challenge. As a result, he inquires as to how, 
if at all, a legitimate state can arise in the absence of explicit 
consent.
The question whether and under which conditions a 
legitimate state can arise is an important foundational 
question. Yet, this question is often ignored. Most political 
theorizing takes place on the implicit assumption that 
states can be legitimate, that they should exist and that 
they should perform various functions. The question then 
is simply seen to be what the state should do and how it 
should do it, rather than whether there should be a state 
at all. This implicit assumption is often not questioned. 
Instead, the existence and justifi cation of the state is sim-
ply taken for granted. Nozick points out that this implicit 
assumption is quite a weighty assumption and that there is 
a serious question at issue here that ought to be addressed.
Not only is there an implicit assumption that states can 
be and often are legitimate, but there is also an implicit 
assumption that the state is necessary for achieving a desir-
able social condition. Many people simply assume that 
we need a state. The idea that a peaceful prospering co-
operative society could be possible in the absence of a state 
is seen as anathema. The state is considered to be a neces-
sity and only few people treat it is a necessary evil. The 
absence of a state is generally equated with disorder and 
chaos. Hobbes’s claim that life would be nasty, brutish and 

118 
Robert Nozick
short if there were no state to provide and enforce laws is 
widely accepted without being supported by arguments.
Nozick’s direct engagement with the anarchist’s challenge 
brings out these implicit assumptions about the legitimacy 
and necessity of a state. Accordingly, we can identify two 
important questions that need to be addressed. On the 
one hand, there is the question regarding the normative 
status of the state, namely whether the existence of a state 
can be justifi ed at all. On the other, there is the empirical/
descriptive question whether a state is required or whether 
anarchy is a feasible option. The anarchist’s challenge 
raises the question whether (i) the state can be legitimate 
and whether (ii) anarchy constitutes a viable practical 
alternative.
The normative debate about anarchy has traditionally 
been construed as being centred around the question 
whether there is any political obligation and whether states 
can ever be legitimate. Nozick engages with this debate 
but gives it a different slant. He is not primarily interested 
in the question as to what duties and obligations individu-
als have vis-à-vis the state. Rather, he inquires what the state 
can legitimately do to individuals. He tries to identify what 
the limitations on the state are and then assess whether 
they are so extensive as to render it incapable of existing or 
functioning. In other words, he takes a distinctive approach 
that differs markedly from the traditional discussion. His 
approach consists in focusing on what protective agencies 
are justifi ed in doing towards individuals, rather than in 
assessing whether individuals have political obligations. 
In particular, he addresses the question as to whether these 
agencies can prohibit individuals from enforcing their 
own rights as well as from joining or forming alternative 
agencies. Thus, we can see that the normative issue has two 

 
Relevance 
119
aspects, one focusing on the duties of the individuals, 
while the other is concerned with the prerogatives of states 
and protective agencies.
Nozick also takes anarchism seriously as a mode of social 
organization. He does not dismiss the idea that an anarchi-
cal society could be a fl ourishing and successful society. 
The debate about anarchism is not just concerned with 
questions about rights, obligations and the legitimate use 
of force. It also addresses the question what the most feasi-
ble social system is to accommodate various forms of life. 
Nozick takes anarchism seriously as a model of society. 
Something very close to anarchism is considered as an 
ideal, a utopia towards which we should strive. Nozick does 
think that a minimal state is required, but he does not 
dismiss the possibility of a functioning anarchical system.
Within the libertarian tradition, the different sides of 
this debate are described as the anarchists and the minar-
chists. Many libertarians do acknowledge the attractiveness 
of anarchy, both in moral terms due to the minimization 
of the use of force and in social terms due to the diversity 
and voluntariness of social interactions. Nonetheless, many 
see it as not being feasible and accordingly treat govern-
ment as a necessary evil. The anarchist takes a different 
stance and believes that governments are dispensable. He 
argues that a stable and peaceful system based on volun-
tary co-operation is possible in the absence of a state and 
that such a system will be preferable over other modes 
of social co-operation that appeal to the coercive power of 
the state.
This then leads to the descriptive debate about anarchy, 
insofar as the question arises whether anarchy can be a sta-
ble societal arrangement. The question at issue is whether 
anarchy is tenable or whether we will inevitably end up 

120 
Robert Nozick
with a dominant rights-enforcement agency that will hold 
a monopoly of power. Here we have to assess whether 
Nozick’s account of the rise of the state is correct or 
whether there can be a stable situation in which different 
rights-enforcement agencies compete peacefully. In par-
ticular, this raises the question of the possibility of self-
enforcing mechanisms that are effective in the absence of 
third-party enforcement. This is a fascinating debate, draw-
ing on various disciplines ranging from economics to his-
tory, and no verdict has been reached yet (cf. Stringham: 
2007).
Justice and entitlements
Nozick’s discussion of justice is the most important part of 
his work and has generated a great deal of discussion. The 
arguments in favour of the entitlement theory are highly 
innovative and controversial. The historical conception of 
justice that Nozick develops has had an important impact. 
It constitutes a radical alternative to the patterned concep-
tions that are so commonplace. Together with the claim 
that liberty upsets patterns, this view is a serious competi-
tor in the debate about justice. If Nozick’s arguments were 
to be successful, then they would undermine the vast 
majority of existing conceptions of justice (since these are 
patterned conceptions).
Nozick provides an insightful and helpful classifi cation 
of different conceptions of justice, distinguishing end-state 
theories from (historical as well as ahistorical) patterned 
accounts and contrasting them with the entitlement the-
ory. As we saw previously, the fundamental distinction that 
is to be drawn is one that distinguishes between structural 
and procedural conceptions of justice. This distinction is 
helpful from a taxonomical point of view, allowing us to 

 
Relevance 
121
bundle together various conceptions of justice by identify-
ing their fundamental characteristics. Moreover, it enables 
us to consider the problem of justice in holdings in terms 
of the generic features of differing conceptions of justice. 
Rather than having to assess each conception individually, 
we can discuss different types of theories that are charac-
terized by certain generic features.
The main contribution that Nozick made to the debate 
about justice is the development of the entitlement theory 
and his critique of competing accounts. The entitlement 
theory is a radical alternative to the standard theories. 
Nozick has put on the table an alternative way of thinking 
about justice. He has put into doubt the idea that justice 
is a matter of patterns and that the only question is 
which pattern it is that needs to be implemented. Rather 
than considering justice as a matter of conforming to some 
fi xed pattern, it becomes an issue of the procedures that 
give rise to a set of holdings.
The entitlement theory that Nozick has sketched needs 
to be developed, defended and elaborated. While its for-
mal features have been clearly delimited in that it consists 
of three sets of principles dealing with appropriation, 
transfer and rectifi cation, the details of these various prin-
ciples still have to be worked out. There is a need to pro-
vide actual principles, rather than simply specify what kinds 
of principles are required. Moreover, there is an interest-
ing question as to whether there are other procedural 
accounts that are distinct from the entitlement theory. If 
such conceptions should exist, the question would arise 
whether these accounts require a more extensive state.
In order for the entitlement theory to be viable, it must 
provide an adequate account of original acquisition. The 
account of acquisition forms the basis of the entitlement 
theory. As discussed above, there are a number of problems 

122 
Robert Nozick
with Nozick’s discussion of initial acquisition. It is not clear 
how entitlements to particular objects are to arise, what 
the extent is of the rights that are acquired in this way and 
what baseline should be used for assessing whether the 
appropriation satisfi es the proviso. Though these are seri-
ous problems, it should be kept in mind that patterned 
conceptions are no better off in that they need to give an 
account of appropriation as well.
While it is in need of elaboration and while various 
diffi culties regarding appropriation and rectifi cation need 
to be dealt with, it is clear that the entitlement theory is a 
serious competitor in the debate about justice and that it 
constitutes a radical and fruitful departure from the tradi-
tional way of thinking about justice.
The argument that liberty upsets patterns and the argu-
ment that taxation on earnings from labour is on a par with 
forced labour have put signifi cant pressure on patterned 
conceptions of justice. If successful, these arguments would 
show that pattern theorists are committed to restricting 
freedom and giving up the idea of self-ownership. The 
high costs of these commitments would strongly support 
the entitlement theory.
These two arguments identify two problematic features 
of pattern theories, namely that they are static and extrin-
sically sensitive. On the one hand, the Wilt Chamberlain 
example shows that pattern theorists do not leave room for 
change, but are rigid and static. They specify an outcome 
that is to be achieved, rather than a dynamic process. Once 
the desired pattern has been implemented, there is noth-
ing more to do. Changes will have to be resisted since they 
are likely to upset the pattern. The entitlement theory, on 
the contrary, is a procedural account and is thereby able to 
accommodate change. It is essentially dynamic, specifying 

 
Relevance 
123
how distributions can be transformed in a way that is 
justice-preserving.
On the other hand, the forced labour analogy shows 
the extent to which patterned theories make the justness 
of a person’s holdings dependent on what holdings other 
people have. The holdings that a person receives according 
to a pattern do not soley depend on his actions and interac-
tions, but on what the social product is. Individuals receive 
a share of the social product, whereby their share is deter-
mined by some pattern. As a result, people have a claim on 
a share of the social product, even though this is the prod-
uct of the work and effort of other people. This implies 
that patterns give individuals claims on other people. The 
entitlement theory, on the contrary, does not make entitle-
ments dependent on what other people are entitled to at 
that time. It thereby does not give people claims on other 
people and is consequently compatible with self-ownership.
Both of the arguments need to be substantiated. As 
regards the Wilt Chamberlain example, there is the ques-
tion as to what notion of freedom is at issue and to what 
extent a certain conception of property rights is presup-
posed in making the argument. If a rights-based defi nition 
of liberty is at issue and if this should presuppose an 
account of property rights, then the entitlement theory will 
wholly rest on the account of initial acquisition. Further-
more, one has to assess the costs associated with patterned 
accounts that go beyond the restrictions on liberty, but 
that derive from their static nature which requires the 
prohibition of mutually benefi cial exchanges and which 
gives rise to the partially self-defeating character of pattern 
theories. As regards the analogy to forced labour, the ques-
tion arises as to what role is to be accorded to self-ownership 
and as to what extent patterns give rise to claims on other 

124 
Robert Nozick
people and thereby to partial ownership in other people. 
Moreover, there is the question whether taxation is a case 
of coercion equivalent to forced labour even though peo-
ple can choose how much they are going to work and what 
kind of work they are going to do.
Nozick’s discussion of the moral arbitrariness of talents 
and social circumstances is insightful and highly relevant 
to the contemporary debate about luck-egalitarianism. 
Rawls argued that society should be arranged in such a 
manner as to neutralize the morally arbitrary effects of 
differences in natural talents and social circumstances. 
This view has been adopted and worked out in much detail 
by a number of political theorists, resulting in a position 
that is described as luck-egalitarianism. This position states 
that morally arbitrary differences should be neutralized 
and that matters of brute luck should not give rise to dif-
ferences in resources, welfare or well-being. Distributions 
should be sensitive to choices, but not to natural endow-
ments. However, these luck-egalitarian positions devel-
oped from Rawls’s starting point are equally susceptible to 
Nozick’s challenges as the view originally propounded by 
Rawls himself. As we saw, Nozick distinguishes between a 
positive and negative argument that appeals to this kind 
of arbitrariness. While positive arguments are inadequate, 
negative arguments can be used to criticize certain pat-
terned conceptions of justice but are ineffective against 
the entitlement theory.
More precisely, a positive argument attempts to establish 
that differences should be neutralized to the extent to 
which they derive from differences in natural talents and 
from social circumstances that are due to brute luck. This 
kind of argument is problematic since it presupposes a 

 
Relevance 
125
presumption in favour of equality, which is a premise that 
is neither defended by Rawls nor by his luck-egalitarian 
successors. To point out that certain differences are the 
results of brute luck does not in any way imply that these 
differences ought to be neutralized.
Given this failure to present successful positive argu-
ments, luck-egalitarians are at best able to give negative 
arguments that undercut arguments in favour of differen-
tial holdings. Such negative arguments point out that 
differences in natural talents giving rise to differential 
holdings are not deserved, thereby ensuring that the dif-
ferential holdings are not deserved. This then implies that 
arguments which try to justify differential holdings by 
pointing out that they are correlated with differences in 
talents fail. Thus, the negative arguments undercut certain 
patterned accounts of justice. However, these arguments 
are ineffective against the entitlement theory. This is 
because the entitlement theory is not a patterned concep-
tion of justice. It is concerned with what people are enti-
tled to and not with what they deserve. Since we are entitled 
to our talents (given a commitment to self-ownership), we 
are entitled to the differential holdings resulting from the 
exercise of our talents even if these differential holdings 
are not deserved.
Thus, Nozick’s discussion shows that the fact that certain 
differences are due to brute luck simply implies that these 
differences are neither justifi ed nor unjustifi ed. The dif-
ferences are simply a matter of luck and there is nothing 
about luck per se that implies that it should be eradicated 
or that differences resulting therefrom should be neutral-
ized. An independent argument to the effect that luck 
should be neutralized is required to justify redistribution. 

126 
Robert Nozick
More precisely, an argument would have to be given that 
shows that holdings should be patterned in a luck-insensitive 
manner. Such an argument would have to establish that all 
differences could only be legitimate to the extent to which 
they are deserved. This kind of patterned account, how-
ever, is subject to Nozick’s critiques and the luck-egalitarian 
arguments are ineffective against the entitlement view.
The meta-utopia
Nozick’s account of the framework for utopia as an inspir-
ing ideal of libertarianism has been much neglected. 
Nonetheless, it contains important insights and is highly 
interesting and original. Two aspects of this discussion, 
in particular, are of lasting relevance and import, namely 
his attempt to (i) identify a realistic libertarian utopia 
that consists in a meta-utopia and to (ii) develop a frame-
work that respects the diversity of people and renders the 
non-coercive pursuit of differing utopian conceptions 
compatible.
Nozick recognizes the importance of providing a posi-
tive vision that goes beyond the negative injunction not 
to violate rights and not to expand the minimal state. 
Libertarianism is not only morally right but also inspiring. 
As Nozick argues, libertarianism promises more than just 
being the most effi cient system. It promises even more 
than being the only morally justifi ed political arrangement. 
In addition to these important considerations, it is also 
a highly inspiring vision of society. It is an ideal towards 
which we should strive.
Showing the ways in which the minimal state is inspiring 
and how it constitutes an ideal towards which we should 

 
Relevance 
127
strive is an important task. While being utopian, Nozick’s 
positive view has the advantage of being realistic as well, 
insofar as it is a meta-utopia that is not based on the prob-
lematic assumptions of particular utopian visions. In this 
way it is a distinctively non-utopian utopia. It thereby man-
ages to combine the appeal and attractiveness deriving 
from particular utopian schemes, without suffering from 
their impracticality and lack of realism.
The framework for utopia shows that there is more to 
libertarianism than a critique of government. It shows that 
there is an inspiring positive understanding of society and 
of human interactions. This meta-utopia is one that can be 
shared by many people precisely because it is a framework 
for utopia that allows the fl ourishing of different non-
coercive forms of life. It is not just a negative political phi-
losophy that tries to place constraints on the state. It also 
contains a distinctive positive vision of what a good society 
would look like. What makes it peculiar and differentiates 
it from other utopian ideals is that it is a framework for 
utopia. It is not a dogmatic and fi xed conception of how 
things should be done that needs to be imposed on those 
who hold different conceptions of the good. Instead, it is 
fl exible and can be embraced by different people that 
have different conceptions of what counts as a good life.
This ideal does not describe a particular society and 
does not specify particular social relations. Instead, it is 
concerned with the structural features of the society. The 
libertarian cannot and does not want to give a blue-print 
for society. He does not want to specify a pattern to which 
society has to conform. He does not make detailed claims 
about how things will work out or how they should work 
out. Instead, the particularities are left to spontaneous 
social forces. The ideal society is specifi ed by a process that 

128 
Robert Nozick
satisfi es certain structural constraints, rather than being 
specifi ed by some pattern or end-state. The ideal society is 
the outcome of the voluntary and peaceful actions and 
interactions of different individuals.
These structural constraints place substantive constraints 
on actions and thereby place restrictions on ways of life. In 
particular, the framework for utopia rules out the imple-
mentation of imperialistic utopian visions by means of 
coercion, i.e. the coercive imposition of utopian concep-
tions onto others. As a result of these structural features, 
the meta-utopian vision is substantive enough to allow for 
criticisms of coercive ways of life. It provides a standard 
by means of which we can assess different conceptions of 
the good and which allows us to rule out the coercive 
imposition onto others as being impermissible. This fea-
ture of the framework for utopia gives it a distinctive advan-
tage over other libertarian accounts, such as Kukathas’s 
ideal of a liberal archipelago, which lack the resources to 
criticize coercive conceptions of the good. Accordingly, 
the meta-utopia allows us to provide an inspiring vision of 
society that is appealing to people holding different con-
ceptions of the good, while at the same time being suffi -
ciently substantive to rule out coercive utopian practices.
The fl exible nature of the meta-utopia leads us to the 
second noteworthy aspect of Nozick’s account, namely 
the importance of dealing with differing conceptions of 
the good. The framework for utopia is compatible with a 
broad range of differing conceptions of the good. This 
view of the good society takes seriously the diversity and 
individuality of different people. This is especially impor-
tant in heterogeneous societies, such as in multicultural 
societies, where there are signifi cant differences between 
the value systems of different individuals. The framework 

 
Relevance 
129
for utopia is a framework within which these different con-
ceptions of the good can peacefully co-exist and fl ourish.
The compatibility with a large number of differing uto-
pian schemes, namely all those that are not coercive, is 
advantageous in several respects. First of all, it allows every-
one to try to pursue his vision of what the best life is for 
him. No one is forced to live a life he does not want to live. 
No one is forced to accept a certain value system. Accord-
ingly, the diversity and individuality of different people 
can be accommodated by a diversity of ways of life.
Second, as Nozick argues, we can show that the frame-
work for utopia is a great fi lter device for identifying 
and testing conceptions of the good. That is, we can give 
Millian arguments about the instrumental value of free-
dom and diversity. If everyone can freely choose how to 
live his life, then it is likely that there will be many experi-
ments in living. No static order will be imposed. Instead, 
different ways of life will be tried out. Some of them will 
fl ourish, while others will perish. Conceptions of the good 
will be subjected to trial and error, allowing people to 
experiment and discover, to learn and imitate.
Third, while Nozick does not make use of moral consid-
erations to argue in favour of his meta-utopia, we can note 
that the framework is inspiring because it is a non-coercive 
and non-paternalistic system that is characterized by a high 
degree of tolerance. It respects the autonomy of indivi-
duals (as long as they do not interfere with the autonomy 
of others). It allows people to pursue their conception of 
the good. It lets them do what they think is best. It thereby 
treats them as rational and autonomous agents.
While the structure of the framework for utopia is clear, 
many problems need to be addressed and various details 
still need to be worked out. In particular, there is the problem 

130 
Robert Nozick
of motivating the idea that we should be neutral between 
different conceptions of the good, as well as the closely 
related problem of justifying the prohibition on the coer-
cive pursuit of utopian visions. Additionally, there are many 
issues pertaining to the implementation of the framework 
for utopia. For example, it is unclear whether the frame-
work requires us to make people accept values associated 
with the minimal state, notably property rights and free-
dom of choice, and what should be done about concep-
tions of the good that are explicitly anti-capitalistic but yet 
non-coercive. Are they not coerced by the meta-utopia to 
accept capitalistic norms and values embodied by the 
minimal state? Then there are problems relating to trans-
action costs involved in moving from one association to 
another, issues pertaining to the availability of information 
about alternative associations, problems pertaining to the 
existence of a real exit option and the possibility of impos-
ing costs on members to discourage them from exiting 
associations, as well as issues about educating children and 
ensuring that they can voluntarily choose which association 
to join. Moreover, there is a question of how far tolerance 
should go, for example whether associations countenanc-
ing voluntary slavery should be tolerated.
The framework for utopia is a realistic meta-utopia. It is 
utopian in the positive sense of being an inspiring ideal 
towards which we should strive. It is an ideal of the best 
possible world for each of us. At the same time it is not 
utopian in the negative sense of being unrealistic and 
hopelessly idealistic. This is because the implementation 
of the framework does not require the conversion of large 
segments of mankind. It is not necessary to overcome vari-
ous obstacles, whether they regard the moral character or 
education of the people or whether certain technological 

 
Relevance 
131
progress needs to be previously achieved. Moreover, it does 
not need a radical reshaping of society but can be achieved 
in a piecemeal manner. The minimal state can be achieved 
by gradually minimizing the state, rather than requiring a 
wholesale revolutionary modifi cation of social and political 
structures. That being said, there are nonetheless obstacles 
towards the establishment of the minimal state and utopia 
cannot be gained cheaply but requires social and political 
activism in order to overcome vested interests.
The framework for utopia thus exhibits an interesting 
and fruitful combination of realism, radicalism and utopi-
anism. It is based on realistic assumptions about the diver-
sity and individuality of different people. Accordingly, it 
does not make implausible assumptions about human 
nature. At the same time, it is radical since it implies a con-
ception of society that is fundamentally at odds with ours. 
Signifi cant changes will be required, if the framework for 
utopia is to be realized in practice. Moreover, it is utopian 
in the sense of being an idealistic and inspiring vision that 
captures the idea of being the best possible world for each 
of us.

Bibliography
Barnett, R. E. (1977), ‘Whither anarchy: has Robert Nozick justi-
fi ed the state?’ Journal of Libertarian Studies, 1 (1), pp. 15–21.
Cohen, G. A. (1995), Self-Ownership, Freedom, and Equality. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Davis, L. (1981), ‘Nozick’s entitlement theory’, in J. Paul (ed.), 
Reading Nozick: Essays on Anarchy, State, and Utopia. Totowa, NJ: 
Rowman & Littlefi eld Publishers, pp. 344–354.
Hailwood, S. A. (1996), Exploring Nozick: Beyond Anarchy, State, 
and Utopia. Aldershot: Avebury.
Holmes, R. (1981), ‘Nozick on anarchism’, in J. Paul (ed.), Reading 
Nozick: Essays on Anarchy, State, and Utopia. Totowa, NJ: Rowman 
& Littlefi eld Publishers, pp. 57–67.
Kukathas, C. and Pettit, P. (1990), Rawls: A Theory of Justice and Its 
Critics. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Long, R. T. (2002), ‘Robert Nozick, philosopher of liberty’. The 
Freeman: Ideas on Liberty, 52 (9), pp. 30–33.
Lyons, D. (1981), ‘The new Indian claims and original rights 
to land’, in J. Paul (ed.), Reading Nozick: Essays on Anarchy, 
State, and Utopia. Totowa, NJ: Rowman & Littlefi eld Publishers, 
pp. 355–379.
Mack, E. (1975), ‘Review of Anarchy, State, and Utopia’. Reason 
Magazine, November 1975, pp. 6–12.
—(1981), ‘Nozick on unproductivity: the unintended conse-
quences’, in J. Paul (ed.), Reading Nozick: Essays on Anarchy, 
State, and Utopia. Totowa, NJ: Rowman & Littlefi eld Publishers, 
pp. 169–190.
—(2002), ‘Self-ownership, Marxism, and egalitarianism – Part 1: 
challenges to historical entitlement’. Politics, Philosophy, and 
Economics, 1 (1), pp. 75–108.
Miller, D. (2002), ‘The justifi cation of political authority’, in 
D. Schmidtz (ed.), Robert Nozick. Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, pp. 10–33.

 
Bibliography 
133
Nagel, T. (1981), ‘Libertarianism without foundations’, in J. Paul 
(ed.), Reading Nozick: Essays on Anarchy, State, and Utopia. 
Totowa, NJ: Rowman & Littlefi eld Publishers, pp. 191–205.
Nozick, R. (1974), Anarchy, State, and Utopia. New York: Basic Books.
—(1981), Philosophical Explanations. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press.
—(1989), The Examined Life: Philosophical Meditations. New York: 
Simon & Schuster.
—(1993), The Nature of Rationality. Princeton, NJ: Princeton Uni-
versity Press.
—(1997), Socratic Puzzles. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press.
—(2001), Invariances: The Structure of the Objective World. Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press.
O’Neill, O. (1981), ‘Nozick’s entitlements’, in J. Paul (ed.), Reading 
Nozick: Essays on Anarchy, State, and Utopia. Totowa, NJ: Rowman 
& Littlefi eld Publishers, pp. 305–322.
Paul, J. (1981), ‘The withering of Nozick’s minimal state’, in 
J. Paul (ed.), Reading Nozick: Essays on Anarchy, State, and Utopia. 
Totowa, NJ: Rowman & Littlefi eld Publishers, pp. 68–76.
Pogge, T. (1989), Realizing Rawls. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University 
Press.
Rawls, J. (1971), A Theory of Justice. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press.
—(1977), ‘The basic structure as subject’. American Philosophical 
Quarterly, 14 (2), pp. 159–165.
Ryan, C. C. (1981), ‘Yours, mine, and ours: property rights and 
individual liberty’, in J. Paul (ed.), Reading Nozick: Essays on 
Anarchy, State, and Utopia. Totowa, NJ: Rowman & Littlefi eld 
Publishers, pp. 323–343.
Scheffl er, S. (1981), ‘Natural rights, equality, and the minimal 
state’, in J. Paul (ed.), Reading Nozick: Essays on Anarchy, State, 
and Utopia. Totowa, NJ: Rowman & Littlefi eld Publishers, 
pp. 148–168.
Schmidtz, D. (2005), ‘History and pattern’, in E. F. Paul, F. D. Miller 
and J. Paul (eds), Natural Rights Liberalism from Locke to Nozick. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 148–177.
Singer, P. (1981), ‘The right to be rich or poor’, in J. Paul (ed.), 
Reading Nozick: Essays on Anarchy, State, and Utopia. Totowa, NJ: 
Rowman & Littlefi eld Publishers, pp. 37–53.

134 
Bibliography
Steiner, H. (1977), ‘Anarchy, State, and Utopia: book review’. Mind, 
86 (341), pp. 120–129.
Stringham, E. (2007), Anarchy and the Law. New Brunswick, NY: 
Transaction Publishers.
Tuck, R. (1979), Natural Rights Theories: Their Origin and Develop-
ment. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Waldron, J. (1982), ‘Ours by right: review of Reading Nozick’. 
Times Literary Supplement, 19th November 1982, p. 1277.
—(2005), ‘Nozick and Locke: fi lling the space of rights’, in 
E. F. Paul, F. D. Miller and J. Paul (eds), Natural Rights Liberal-
ism from Locke to Nozick. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, pp. 81–110.
Wolff, J. (1991), Robert Nozick: Property, Justice, and the Minimal 
State. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.

anarchism 28–35, 80–5, 
118–20
anarchist’s challenge 29
compensating 
independents 34–5, 83–4
consent-based 
justifi cation 30–1, 84–5
political obligation 118–19
protection agencies 31–2, 
80–1
the state of nature 31
Barnett, R. 82
Cohen, G.A. 86–8, 101–2, 
102–4
compensation principle 34–5, 
83–4, 105
Davis, L. 104–5
distributive justice
addition and deletion 
conditions 47–8, 95
end-state principles 43–6
justice in holdings 35–6
pattern principles 44–6
entitlement theory 36–43
contrasted with 
desert 58–60
historical theory 46–7 
justice in acquisition 37–40, 
85–9
justice in rectifi cation 42, 
104–6
justice in transfer 40–1, 
90–102, 106
proviso on 
appropriation 38–40, 
86–90
equality and moral 
arbitrariness 56–60, 
124–6
experience machine 24–6
fi lter and design 
devices 64–5
framework for utopia 60–8, 
107–10
and complexity 64–5
and diversity 63–4, 108, 
128–9
as independent 
argument 60–1, 78, 109
possible worlds model of 
utopia 61–3
rules out coercion 67, 109, 
128
Goldberg, B. 3
Hailwood, S. 99–100, 109–10
Hempel, C. 1–2
Holmes, R. 84
inviolability of persons 16–20
and the meaning of 
life 23–6, 78–80
treating people as 
ends 22–3
Index

136 
Index
invisible-hand 
explanations 84–5
and explanatory political 
theory 29–30
liberty
rights-based 
defi nition 95–8, 102–3
upsets patterns 48–53, 
91–100
Locke, J. 31, 37–9
Long, R. 94–5
Lyons, D. 89
Mack, E. 83–4, 87–8, 98–9, 
109
Miller, D. 84–5
Morgenbesser, S. 1
Nagel, T. 76, 92
Nozick, R.
later views on 
libertarianism 68–72
life 1–7
methodology 7–9
non-enforceable 
obligations 12
O’Neill, O. 85, 91–2
paternalism 11–12, 22–3
Paul, J. 82
Rawls, J. 2–3, 98–100
redistribution 11–12, 26–8, 34
rights
as absolute 20
basis of 21–8, 75–80
procedural rights 33, 82
rights-based 
libertarianism 112–16
as side constraints 15–20, 
83–4, 115
utilitarianism of 
rights 19–20, 115
Ryan, C.C. 92, 96–7
Scheffl er, S. 78–80
Schmidtz, D. 106
self-ownership 54–5, 59, 
102–4, 123
separateness of persons 26–8
Singer, P. 109
symbolic value 69–72
taxation on income
as forced labour 53–5, 
102–4, 123–4
as non-neutral 55
utilitarianism 17, 25, 112–13
Waldron, J. 89, 99
Wilt Chamberlain 
example 49–53, 91–103, 
122–3
and the basic 
structure 98–100
pattern theories as partly 
self-undermining 51–3, 
95
and third parties 50–1, 
101–2
Wolff, J. 91, 93–4, 96, 103

