BLOWN BUDS OF
BARREN FLOWERS
 
A highly unusual science fiction story that will test the stretches of your
imagination and add credence to the sage observation that love is blind.
 
By Robert F. Young
 
Illustrated by Gene Boyer
 
Remembering the bracelet Drei had dropped, High slipped it onto his left wrist so he wouldn't forget
to give it back to her. Then he angled his dinghy between a yellow skiff and an aqua-marine outboard,
leaped up on the main pier and secured his line. He turned his back on Vanderlee Bay and the distant
silhouette of his cruiser, made his way to the slip and walked along it to an outthrust rampart of the Main
Mansion. A disdainful doorway loomed before him; the rampart rose forbiddingly above it, Palla-dian
windows aflame with crimson Mira's fading light. Awed de-spite himself, he wondered if Drei would be
there to greet him.
They had met just last night, when the first star appeared. He had been leaning on the cruiser's
starboard rail, staring down into the water, and suddenly he had seen the pale blur of her face. At first he
thought it was a water flower (they were common in the freshwater lakes of Skjold), but the illusion
dissolved in a trice when she surged up the boarding ladder and stepped over the rail into the light of the
decklamp. Water rivuleted down her tunic-like swimsuit and lovely legs, glistened on her face. Something
gleamed on her left wrist. She said, "I hope you don't mind my dropping up to see you. It gets awfully
lonely down there in the deep."
It was spring: the night was cool. He fetched a blanket from the cabin but she evaded him when he
tried to slip it round her shoulders. "Can't you see I'm a fish?" she said.
"You look more like a naiad to me."
"Naiads are fish. I know the point has never come up, but what else could they be?"
"Rich girls who like to play games."
She laughed. "I'm a fish."
Where her gills should have been glistened the rich texture of smooth, uninterrupted skin. Her nose
was slightly pointed but not in the least piscine. Her eyes were a liquid blue, and large and far apart.
Soaking wet, her long black hair streamed down to her shoulders, patterning her pectorals with black
arabesques.
Behind her, beyond the dark expanse of the bay, shone the lights of the Vanderlee compound.
Arching overhead were the storybook constellations of Skjold—the Squirrel, the Goose and the
Salamander; the Cricket and the Owl.
High said, "I think you're a Vanderlee fish. That you decided to find out how a mere mortal like me
spends his evenings." 
"How do you spend them?"
"Fishing."
"You landed a whopper tonight."
"Yes, but I won't be allowed to keep her."
She laughed again. "My name is Drei and I hereby invite you to dinner tomorrow night." And she
turned and dived over the rail and vanished beneath the waters of the bay.
He wasn't impressed when she didn't resurface during the long underwater swim to shore. The
Nesbreds might not be quite as rich as the Vanderlees, but they too attended the best Earth schools, and
all the best Earth schools featured courses in under-water endurance (why, no one knew). More stars
had come out (Skjold had no moon), and at length he saw her climb out of the water onto one of the

many piers and blend into the background of the Vanderlee compound. Not long afterward, the lights of
the compound began to wink out, and soon but a handful remained. It was said that the Vanderlees went
to bed with the chickens.
"Dear High Nesbred," Thar Vanderlee XII had written in his letter to High: "Now that Earth school's
behind you, why don't you breeze across the lake someday soon and pay us a visit?" An atypical epistle
indeed to receive from the head of a clannish family of reputed immortals that for nearly three centuries
had pretended their neighbors—the Haskins to the east, the Elbs to the west, and the Nes-breds just
across the lake—did not exist.
But no more atypical, High sup-posed, than the invitation he'd re-ceived from Drei.
She was standing in the disdainful doorway waiting. "Hi, fisherman." 
"Hello, fish."
They ascended a spiral stairway side by side, High tall and straight in his form-cut blues, Drei aglow
in a gold-en gown. "I brought your bracelet back. I found it lying on the deck this morning."
"It's not mine—it's yours." She held up her left wrist. "This one's mine."
It was identical to High's—a self-adjusting filigreed golden band mount-ed with an exquisite golden
cylinder. "A gift? Why?"
"All Vanderlees wear them when they're young."
"I'm a Nesbred."
"Nesbred, Sesbred, it becomes you just the same."
The stairway brought them to a thick-carpeted corridor that in turn brought them to a mammoth
reception hall illumined by a Magellanic Cloud-like chandelier suspended from a black ceiling studded
with coruscating cut-glass stars. The room was populated with Vanderlees, young and old, all of whom
had far-apart liquid eyes like Drei's. Fascinated, High flowed with her from group to group. "My cousin,
Floretta," "My uncle Dande-lac," "My great aunt Guinevera," "The Matriarch," "The Patriarch" (the
Matri-arch and the Patriarch appeared to be in their sixties; "Actually, they're crowding one hundred and
thirty-five," Drei whispered into High's ear), "My third cousin Elred," "My great great aunt Evangella," .. .
"Mother, Dad, this is Mr. Nesbred."
Tall, boy-faced Thar Vanderlee XII said, "Welcome to Vanderlea, High."
Lovely Thora Vanderlee said, "You're even handsomer than the photos of you in your scrapbook." 
"You kept a scrapbook of me?"
"Drei did. Even though you attended different Earth schools."
"You scholastic record's quite impressive," Thar said. "In fact, I'm a little awed by it."
A washed muzhik ("muzhik" was a term the early Vanderlees had lifted from Old Russian to describe
Skjold's ignorant indi-genes) had entered the room bearing a tray of glasses filled with effervescent wine.
Thora, Drei and Thar took one apiece. High followed suit. He tasted his. The wine was water.
 
 
Thar said, "We hope you'll stay with us at least a fortnight."
High said lightly, attempting to hide his astonishment, "I may stum-ble onto your secret."
Thar didn't bat an eye. "We Van-derlees have no secrets. We are the victims of tall tales told by our
mu-zhiks."
High studied the boyish face. Far-apart blue eyes, like Drei's. Clear, almost creamy complexion. Not
a seam, not a wrinkle anywhere. "I may even stumble onto your subterranean spa."
Thar laughed. "Maybe you al-ready have. Will you stay? At least until tomorrow."
Drei said, "Of course he will." She took High's arm. "Come on, it's time for dinner."
The fish and the fisherman, High thought. Which was which?
Who had landed whom?
After a frugal meal served at a table as long as High's cruiser, the children were chased off to bed
and the adults retired to the "Entertain-ment Hall," a vast chamber consist-ing of a glossy dance floor and
chairs and couches arranged along the walls. Vapid dance music began ema-nating from hidden

speakers, and High danced dutifully with the Van-derlee females he had met. At length he danced with
Drei, only to be cut in almost immediately by her cousin Elred, who was half a head taller than he and
some fifty pounds heavi-er. Promptly High cut back in, saw Elred's flaccid face redden and felt the giant's
gaze burning into his back as he whirled Drei away.
"Your cousin doesn't like me." 
"That's because he's a distant enough cousin to be eligible." 
"Eligible for what?"
"For mating with me. He doesn't know yet that he's been ruled out."
High stared at her. Suddenly mel-low chimes sounded—eight of them. "It's bedtime," Drei
announced. "You're staying, of course."
"I'll have to return to the cruiser for my things."
"That's been taken care of. They're in your room in the east wing."
His room was next to hers. She helped him arrange his things in volu-minous closets and towering,
hand-crafted chests of drawers. Afterward he half expected her to climb into his bed, but apparently
there were con-ventions that even the Vanderlee ar-rogance dared not trample, for she merely kissed
him lightly on the cheek, said good-night and left.
Not only did the Vanderlees go to bed with the chickens, they got up with them. Breakfast consisted
of a gritty cereal submerged in onrus—a near-equivalent of goat's milk—and accompanied, or perhaps
compen-sated for, by individual pots of deli-cious tea. When it was over, Thar Vanderlee said, "Come
along, High—I'll show you Vanderlea."
Seated beside his host in a noise-less ground-skimmer, High surveyed vast fields strikingly similar to
the Nesbreds' own. The Vanderlees mu-zhiks were already at work in them, operating complex agrarian
ma-chines whose mechanical processes their muddled minds couldn't begin to comprehend but whose
simplistic controls were made to order for blunt fingers and callused hands. Skirting a cluster of wretched
izbas, Thar said, "Not only did I want to show you Vanderlea, I felt I owed it to you to disperse some of
the Van-derlee mystique."
High said, "I hope you're not go-ing to try to sell me the notion that regimen by itself enabled the
Matri-arch and the Patriarch to live nearly one hundred and thirty-five Skjold years and left them looking
like a pair of healthy sixty-year-olds. And left you looking like an eighteen--year-old boy at the age
of—shall we say?—forty-five."
Thar smiled. "No, I'm not. Al-though regimen was a contributing factor. There is a spa, High, as I
im-plied last night. And it's located be-neath the Main Mansion, just as the muzhiks say. But don't go
looking for it, because all you'll find will be pipes and pumps: it became an ad-junct of the compound's
plumbing system long ago. You drank its wa-ters last night—before, during and after dinner. You drank
them this morning in your tea. One doesn't bathe in fountains of youth, High. One drinks their contents."
"And lives forever?"
Thar either failed to hear the question or chose to ignore it. He continued to drive. More fields. More
muzhiks. More izbas. At length he said, "The artesian lake that feeds the spa is the habitat of a short-lived
microorganism  deposited there aeons ago, we think, by life forms from another island universe for whom
the organism functioned as a nutritive symbiont indispensable to their survival during their stay on Skjold.
But that is pure conjecture.
"When introduced into the hu-man body in sufficient quantities, these microorganisms retard tissue
breakdown and assist homeostasis. Since they can reproduce themselves only in their natural habitat, the
body's supply must be constantly replenished. When this is done, se-nescence is slowed, and its usual
ac-companiments, such as sarcomata, carcinomata, arteriosclerosis, osteo-arthritis, hypertension and
heart dis-ease, are absent. Mind you, I said `retard' and 'assist': the microorgan-isms don't stop
senescence. But combined with the commonsense way of life we Vanderlees follow, they permit us to
grow old slowly and to live well beyond the maximal human life span."
The skimmer was circumventing a huge pasture in which orange and black brillen cattle were grazing
in the bright and sparkling air. To the right stretched an uncultivated field whose rows of little hummocks
and awry cairns denoted it as a muzhik burial ground. High pointed to it. "Why don't they live well

beyond their maximal life span instead of dying prematurely in their mid-thir-ties? Physically, they're no
different from us."
"Maybe they did once. The rea-son they don't anymore should be obvious. The Vanderlees, ever
since they settled the land, have reserved the waters of the spa for themselves. Not out of selfishness, I
assure you, but because of the extraordinarily high muzhik birthrate.
"I can anticipate your next ques-tion: Why don't we share the spa with our neighbors? If you'll think
for a moment, you'll see why. If we shared it with them, eventually we'd have to share it with everybody,
and eventually the artesian lake would go dry. But there's also a psychological reason behind our
reluctance to share it, or introduce its microorganisms into other bodies of water. Any possession,
tangible or intangible, is valuable only when held by a certain few. The moment it becomes the property
of the many, it becomes worthless. I think it was Ortega y Gasset who said that. Anyway, the one thing
that sets the Vanderlees apart from the rest of the worlds—or from the rest of the rich, if you pre-fer—is
the distinction arising from their relative longevity. Surely you can't blame us for not wanting to throw that
distinction away."
"No, I suppose not," High said.
The pasture, with its grazing cat-tle, was behind them. In the distance up ahead, beyond muzhik
dotted fields and scattered clusters of izbas, the Vanderlee compound was sharp-ly defined against the
brisk blueness of the lake and the benign blueness of the morning sky. When High made no further
comment, Thar said, "It's said that the waters of the spa take effect overnight, that they cast the world in
a different light. Does the world seem any different to you to-day than it did yesterday, High?"
"There's a sparkling quality about the air that wasn't there be-fore, and I don't think the sun ever
shone quite so bright."
"Already you've acquired the Vanderlee vision! But I think in your case it's partly attributable to the
fact that you're young and to the possibility that you've fallen in love ... I hope you'll remain with us, High.
For good."
"Why?"
"Our motive will become evident all too soon. Will you stay?"
And marry Drei? The question hadn't been asked, but it had been implied. High shelved the mystery
of the Vanderlees' motivation and thought about Drei. About living to be one hundred and thirty-five.
Nat-urally he would live that long any-way, but why take chances?
"I think I'm thirsty," he said.
Drei, wearing a burnt orange tu-nic that cupped her breasts and made sequins of her rose-red
nipples, cor-nered him after lunch. "This after-noon, you're mine," she said.
Moments later, seated beside her in her green-gold ground-skimmer, he watched a dozen fields flash
by as she cut across them to a grassy thor-oughfare that led straight inland to a distant range of hills. The
hills crept forth on green-sandaled feet to meet them. Glancing back, High saw that a second skimmer
had left the com-pound. It did not overtake them, perhaps because it couldn't. When they entered the
hills, it vanished from view, and he forgot all about it.
The thoroughfare narrowed, wound this way and that among ever more numerous trees. Drei glanced
at him sideways. "How're we doing, god?"
"I'm not a god."
"You're on your way to becom-ing one—that is, if you opt to stay."
"I've already opted to—as though you didn't know. But gods live for-ever—not to a measly one
hundred and thirty-five."
"So they do. But don't use the Matriarch and Patriarch as criteria. They're nothing but a couple of
kids. Didn't Dad fill you in?"
He stared at her. But a tortuous tree-lined stretch of road was pre-empting her attention and she did
not look back. "I thought he did."
He let several seconds go by; then, when she made no further comment, he asked, "Just how old do
you peo-ple get to be?"
"I think," she said, "that I'd best refer you to my father for the answer to that one. Meanwhile—"

She drove down into a wooded valley, turned off the thoroughfare, skimmed across a flower-pied
mead-ow and over a knoll and stopped near the bank of a twinkling tree-shaded stream. She got out and
so did he, and they sat down on a flat rock and removed their shoes and dangled their feet in the water.
He kissed her lips and then her roseate cheeks. He alternated among them like a bee buzzing from flower
to flower, be-came lost in a warm wilderness rich with nectar and scented with frank-incense and myrrh.
He could have all of it if he wished, and he wished.
In the midst of his meandering, a stunning blow on the back of his head sent him sprawling into the
stream. The coldness of the water shocked him, and he flopped over onto his back and braced himself
on his elbows. On the bank, Drei was screaming imprecations at a tall young man with a flaccid face and
lackluster—though unquestionably Vanderlee—eyes.
Staring up at that face, into those eyes, High understood at last why he had been proffered the
Vanderlee longevity.
Cousin Elred was a defective.
Probably there were others—among the children, most likely.
The Vanderlees hadn't pan-icked—that wasn't their style. But they were taking steps to counter the
increased homozygosity that centu-ries of inbreeding had brought about.
He, High, insofar as he knew, was the first.
Others like him would follow. Haskens, even Elbs. All carefully pre-selected, all meticulously
screened. The waters of the spa would be shared—but reluctantly and only to the extent necessary to
reduce the likelihood of more Elreds.
High crawled out of the stream. Elred, awed by Drei's anger, had taken a backward step. He took
an-other, but before he quite completed it, High launched himself head fore-most, butting the giant in the
stom-ach. Both men went down, Elred with an astonished grunt. High was first to his feet; when Elred
was half-way to his, High's right fist homed in precisely on target. You could al-most hear the glass
shatter. High roll-ed the log that had been Elred into the stream, and it became Elred again, Elred sitting
up and sputter-ing.
Slowly he got to his feet and wad-ed over to the bank. He regarded High dully for a moment, then
walked around him and over the knoll. Presently the susurrus of a skimmer skimming over meadow grass
could be heard. The sound fad-ed away.
High turned toward Drei. The sparkling quality of the ambiant air seemed to have intensified. The
sky, the trees, the grass—all had acquired a Van Gogh vividness of hue. The sunlight poured down upon
the earth in a vast bright cataract that disintegrated, when it struck the ground, into a trillion motes of
pur-est gold—
And Drei—she stood there wait-ing, rose-lipped, fresh-faced, strain-ing toward him even as he
strained toward her ... And suddenly he knew that for every man there is a moment that towers—will
always tower—high above all others, and that this was his.
They stood on the bank, beside the stream, amid the whispering of the grass and the sighing of the
wind in the trees; and the wilderness flowed with milk and honey, and there was frankincense, too, and
myrrh—
But there was a voice in the wil-derness, and the voice, even though it was Drei's, robbed the
moment of some of its splendor. Don't use the Matriarch and Patriarch as criteria, the voice said.
They're nothing but a couple of kids.
Night found High in the corridor leading to the Main Mansion's west wing.
The corridor was red-carpeted, il-lumined by occasional electric can-dles on low beam. A
movement up ahead caught his eye, and presently a female muzhik emerged from the dimness. She
bowed to him as they passed, and High strode on, more confidently, and a few moments later reached
the base of a flight of stairs.
He ascended them boldly, arrived at the mouth of a long hallway, its walls interrupted at wide
intervals by closed doors. He paused before the first door. He doubted whether whatever lay beyond it
would differ substantially from whatever lay be-yond the others, and, finding it un-locked, he opened it
and stepped inside.

A long rectangular room, win-dowless and dimly lit. Two rows of converti-beds; an aisle running
be-tween them. Above the headboard of each bed, a small recessed shelf illumined by a little nightlight
and containing a tiny rack filled with what at first glance appeared to be diminutive golden test tubes.
All of the beds were occupied. Stepping over to the nearest one, High leaned above the occupant.
He saw the face and head of an old, old man or woman (it was impossible to tell which, for the head was
hairless) whose skin was drawn so tightly over the frontal, nasal and zygomatic bones as to lend the
aspect of a skull. Although bald, the top of the head was not featureless: at the approxi-mate juncture of
the frontal and parietal bones, the end of a small cylinder protruded—a cylinder, High suddenly saw,
exactly like the ones in the rack on the recessed shelf which he had taken for diminutive test tubes, and
exactly like the one mounted on his bracelet.
The body proper, covered by heavy blankets, brought to mind a bag of bones. Only an almost
imper-ceptible rising and falling of the blan-kets indicated the presence of life.
Thar Vanderlee I?
Raising his eyes to the recessed shelf, High saw that the rack holding the cylinders was stamped with
tiny numerals, one for each notch. The first notch was empty.
Glancing at the next bed, he saw that its occupant also had a small hole trephined in his/her skull from
which the end of a golden cylinder protruded.
Far down the room, one of the sleepers stirred. ``Two," it whispered hoarsely. "Two."
A female muzhik, whose presence High hadn't suspected, materialized out of the dimness, went over
to the whisperer and withdrew a cylinder from its head, replacing it with one she selected from the shelf
above the headboard. After returning the orig-inal cylinder to the rack, she with-drew and blended back
into the dim-ness.
Shuddering, High walked down the aisle, looking at each of the sleep-ers. He remembered Daudet's
story, Les Vieux. "The Old Ones." Here were the old old ones.
The room was greenhouse-warm. He wiped moisture from his fore-head with his handkerchief. "Sort
of unsettling, isn't it," a voice behind him said, and turning, he saw Thar Vanderlee standing there in silken
dressing gown and soundless slip-pers.
"That's because you're viewing Paradise from the outside," Thar went on. "If you'd waited till
tomor-row, I'd have brought you here myself."
"The cylinders—they're some form of bio-recorders, aren't they?"
"’Tiograms,' we call them. The products of one of our electronics concerns on earth. They're our
solu-tion to the problem of terminal de-pression."
Another of the dreamers stirred. "Two," it whispered. "Two."
"Individual bedtimes are em-ployed so that a single attendant can service an entire ward," Thar
ex-plained. "In the morning, the beds are reconverted into chairs as the retirees sequentially awaken."
"They—they sit up?"
Thar nodded. "The walls are 3V screens which, when activated, de-pict Vanderlea as it was during
their heyday. They're served breakfast, lunch and dinner and they sit and reminisce about the best days of
their lives and gradually their mem-ories fade away, and when night comes they're ready to relive their
youths again for what seems the first time ever. Marvelous, don't you think?"
Horrified, High said, "How long does this go on? Forever?"
Thar shook his head. "No. I didn't lie to you, High. The mere fact that no Vanderlee has ever died of
natural causes doesn't mean none ever will. Death can be delayed but not denied. Such reasoning,
how-ever, is far beyond the intellectual horizon of the muzhiks, and I sup-pose the Vanderlee practice of
cre-mating those of their relatives who die of unnatural causes hasn't brought that horizon any closer."
High asked, "When does terminal depression set in?"
"In our case, at about the age of one hundred and fifty. Sometimes sooner."
High thought of Swinburne's "Garden":
I am weary of days and hours, 
Blown buds of barren flowers, 
Desires and dreams and powers 

And every thing but sleep—
Aloud, he said, "But it's inhuman to keep someone alive when he wants to die."
"Not when it's in keeping with his wishes. When he reaches one hun-dred, every Vanderlee is
required to choose between the antidote and the disease."
"And if he chooses the disease?"
"None ever has, so it's a problem we've never had to contend with. And I don't think that once he's
opted for the antidote any Vanderlee has ever regretted his choice. The Matriarch and Patriarch are a
case in point. They're scheduled to leave for Earth next month to undergo the necessary surgery for
placement of cortices. It's a simple operation and they don't dread it in the least. More-over, they're
looking forward eager-ly to their forthcoming retirement. And why not? Who doesn't want to regain his
lost youth?"
"I don't," High said.
Thar smiled. "How can you tell? You haven't lost it yet."
High was looking at his bracelet—at the "filigreed" band and mounted cylinder he'd unthinkingly
assumed comprised a simple talisman. Thar touched it lightly. "The band trans-fers the intake of the five
senses to the cylinder. The cylinders are good for approximately twenty-eight hours—after that, they
have to be replaced. The replaced ones are stored in our Youth Bank under the owner's name along with
precis of each one's contents. At age eighty, the owner selects the ten that con-tain the moments he'd
most like to relive and arranges them in chrono-logical order.
"Relife," Thar continued, "is ex-perienced on a twenty-eight-hour-to--one time scale, so during a
standard ten-hour sleep period, a retiree can become reacquainted with virtually all the best moments of
his youth. We wanted the preservation of your moments to begin as soon as possi-ble, High—that's why
Drei left your bracelet on the deck when she first visited you. The moment you slip-ped it onto your
wrist, biogramming began."
High said coldly, "You wasted your time. I'll marry Drei—I love her. And I'll remain in Vanderlea.
But I'll never permit a biogram receptacle to be inserted in my cerebral cortex. Ever. And when I reach
the age of one hundred, I'm going to choose the disease. And when I start crowd-ing one hundred and
fifty and want to die, I'm going to die! By my own hand, if necessary!"
"Of course," Thar said gently. "And die you will, High, if that is still your wish. Come, I'll take you
back to your room."
They descended the stairs to-gether and walked side by side along the corridor that led to the east
wing. "Never," High murmured over and over. "Never, never, never—
"Ever, ever, ever—"
END OF BIOGRAM #1
Ask attendant to insert Biogram #2 "Two," he whispered in the dim-ness. "Two. . ."
 
 

