Eastcliff was dying of a disease that was impervious to modern medications. And so he found
himself on a river of the planet known as Silver Dollar, heading upstream towards a remarkable
clinic staffed by witch doctors with medical degrees. 
 
The Tents of Kedar
BY
ROBERT F. YOUNG
 
Eastcliff had been on the river three days before there was any noticeable convergence of its distant
banks. Even then he wasn't certain whether the river had really begun to narrow or whether his eyes were
misinforming him. He needed tangible proof that the launch was moving upstream, not merely holding its
own against the current, and what a man needs often influences what he sees — or what he thinks he
sees — especially when he is dying. 
There were times when Eastcliff found himself thinking of the river as a lake. The illusion was
reinforced by the almost imperceptible current, bolstered by the middle-of-the-stream course he had fed
into the A.P. so that he might remain as aloof as possible from the forested banks and the scattered
Ebononese villages. His desire for privacy accrued in large part from his nature, but there was a practical
reason behind it as well. Although the equatorial region of Silver Dollar could not properly be classified
as a primitive wilderness, the bush country through which the river ran and on whose southern edge the
Eastcliff plantation lay constituted relatively unknown territory; and although the Order of Chirurgeons,
for want of an orthodox governmental body, functioned as an authority of sorts, the bush-blacks who
swore fealty to it were for the most part only half civilized. 
Eastcliff spent the long, hot days reading and remembering, wearing dark glasses to protect his
sensitive eyes from the river's glare. He did not read evenings. He sat in the stern, distinguishable from the
darkness only by the glowing ends of the cigarettes he smoked, listening to the throb of the launch engine
and the susurrus of the wake, staring at the shifting star-patterns on the water. Increasingly of late he had
been able to find beauty in the commonplace — in the symmetrical serrations of a leaf, in the shy
pinkness that preceded the first rays of the morning sun, in the gray mists that materialized each evening
and shrouded the distant banks. 
On the fourth evening, as the launch was passing a promontory that was too insignificant to have
triggered a course adjustment, the mists parted and a native driuh appeared. Four bush-blacks plied
hand-carved paddles and a fifth manned a crude wooden tiller. In the prow a woman stood. She was tall
and thin, and possessed the erect, almost rigid posture of her race. A bright red kerchief half hid her
night-black hair and she carried a small crimson satchel in her right hand. She was wearing a calico
half-skirt and halter; sandals woven of yellow filamentous reeds encased her feet. 
She waved to Eastcliff, who was leaning on the port rail smoking a cigarette. He did not wave back,
but stared coldly down at the driuh and its Ebononese occupants, trying to analyze an irrational deja vu
which the woman had somehow evoked. The launch had not been built for speed, and the lean and
muscular paddlers had no trouble pulling the driuh alongside and holding it in position by seizing the
bottom bar of the rail. "I wish transportation to the clinic," the woman called up to Eastcliff. "You will be
amply repaid." 
He wasn't surprised that she knew his destination. The Eastcliff plantation employed bush-blacks
recruited from all parts of Ebonon and was inextricably tied into the "bramblevine" that connected every
village, every biayau, every farm in the territory. All Eastcliff, his ailing mother, his sister or his
brother-in-law had to do was cough, and every bush-black in the country would know about it in a
matter of hours. But although the woman knew he was going to the clinic, she could not possibly know
why. Both the chirurgeons and the "bush-doctors" adhered rigidly to the equivalent of a Hippocratic
Oath, and the bush-doctor whom Eastcliff had consulted and who, after diagnosing his illness, had
radioed the clinic, would not have dreamed of violating his privacy. 

"You will be amply repaid," the woman called up again when Eastcliff made no answer. "And I will
not be in your way." 
She spoke English excellently. Many bush-blacks found the language unconquerable. She had high,
wide cheekbones, and their width was emphasized by the thinness of her cheeks. Her complexion was so
utterly clear that the blue-blackness of her skin appeared translucent. 
"I have no accommodations for a passenger," Eastcliff said. 
"I will gladly sleep on the deck." 
He sighed. The prospect of having his privacy invaded by a bush-black female dismayed him. But he
couldn't risk offending a manifestly respected member of the race that supplied the laborers and the
menials without which the Eastcliff Empire would languish and die. "Very well," he said at last. "You may
come on board." 
She tossed up her crimson satchel and he caught it and set it on the deck. Then, hiding his revulsion
to the best of his ability, he reached down, gave her his hand and helped her climb over the rail. "Thank
you," she said, straightening her half-skirt. "My name is Sefira."
The driuh dropped swiftly behind, turned and headed back toward the promontory. Eastcliff did not
bother to divulge his own name; she undoubtedly knew it anyway. Carrying her satchel, he led the way
below deck to the single cabin and set the satchel on the bunk. "You can sleep here. I have a
comfortable deckchair that unfolds into a bed, and I much prefer to sleep in the open in any case." 
The tone of his voice forbade argument. That, and the almost tangible aura of authority that covered
him like a mantle. It was the famous Eastcliff authority, compounded of arrogance, opportunism and
irresistibility, that had minted the seemingly worthless wilderness that the more favored a Andromedae VI
colonials had spurned, and had given the planet its name. 
He got blankets from the inbuilt bureau (the river nights were chilly), tossed two of them on the bunk
and slung one over his shoulder. Then, aware of Sefira's gaze upon him, he turned reluctantly and faced
her. He found himself looking into her eyes. They were black, but the blackness was alien to his
experience. It was a four-dimensional blackness — it had to be — and he felt that he was gazing into
infinite space; that although no stars were visible, thousands of them shone brightly just beyond the
periphery of his gaze. But the analogy was unsatisfactory. Space connotated absolute zero — coldness
and indifference. But here before him, commingled with a poignant Weitschmerz and glowing warmly in
the night of his life, were compassion and human kindness of a dimension he had not dreamed existed;
and here before him, too, half hidden in the deep darkness, was something else — a quality he knew
well, yet could not recognize. 
As he stood there staring into her eyes, deja vu smote him again, with such force this time that he
nearly staggered. And suddenly he understood its cause: this woman — this blacker-than-black
Ebononese from the bush, with her grotesque clothes and her primitive perfume, reminded him of his
dead wife. It was impossible; it was execrable. But it was true. 
Angrily he turned away. "Good night," he said. Then, remembering the thinness of her face: “The
galley's next door if you're hungry." 
"Thank you. I will have coffee ready when you awake." 
 
* * *
 
Every night when Eastcliff fell asleep it was like dying, because the odds were even that he would
never awake. But he was used to dying; he had been dying now for weeks; and if it bothered him more
than usual as he lay on the unfolded deckchair beneath the stars, it was because the clinic was so close.
Because during his journey upstream he had weighed the skepticism with which the colonials regarded
the curative powers of the chirurgeons and found it to be a product of apartheid and rumor rather than of
fact. Because, through the persistent mists of his own skepticism, he perceived the possibility that these
revered female witch doctors of the bush, these black Isoldes with their magic potions, might be able to
accomplish that which orthodox medicine could not. 
As he died and the stars went out, he dreamed as he always did of the summer of his life and of

Anastasia wafting through it like a gentle wind, breathing through his castle window and enveloping him
while he slept, permeating his life and softening the austerity of his existence. Mornings, she had brought
him orange juice while he sat upon the patio gazing out over the dawn lawn; evenings, she had mixed
martinis when the day's work was done. And every afternoon there had been tea — tea brewed as only
she could brew it — dew-sweet, mellow, as golden as the sun. 
She was awed by him when she first arrived at the plantation. His full name was Ulysses Eastcliff III;
he owned, or would upon the death of his mother, one hundred thousand acres of rich river-silted land
upon which flourished, to the tune of four harvests a year, the farinaceous grain that constituted Silver
Dollar's staff of life. But her awe of him, had she but known it, fell far short of his awe of her. It should
not have. The Ebonon colonials were justifiably, if aggressively proud of the new country they had
created so far from home and, mindful of the inequities of the past, were forever proclaiming that theirs
was the ultimate in democratic societies; but no one knew better than he that they were lying in their teeth
— that he, Eastcliff, was King. As such, he should have been totally unaffected by the beautiful
commoner who stood before him, as indifferent toward her as though she had been made of clay. 
He had not been. Looking into her gold-brown eyes, simultaneously seeing the swirls and undulations
of her dark-red hair, he had found it impossible to believe that anything as earthly as an employment
agency could be responsible for her presence in his office. She was fresh from the slopes of Olympus, the
daughter of a modern-day Zeus, begot by him of the star-bedight maid of spring. And she was so young,
so heart-breakingly, so poignantly young. It had frightened him that first time when he had seen his rude
hands upon her smooth and flawless flesh, and he had been afraid that she would be repelled by his
no-longer-youthful body. She had not been. There had been no real reason for her to have been. He had
but just turned forty, and he had been lean and hard, and he had not yet become host for the lethal
schizomycetes of Meiskin's disease. 
His atherosclerotic mother had resented Anastasia at first. The girl had no family, her background
was vague. Surely such as she was no fit vehicle through which to perpetuate the Eastcliff name.
Eastcliff's sister, too, had resented her in the beginning, while his brother-in-law had been cruelly
contumelious — until Eastcliff took him behind the stables and beat him nearly to death. But in less than a
month Anastasia won all of them over; as for Eastcliff, he had already toppled like a tall, gnarled oak.
There had been women in his life — many of them — but they had been mere mistresses: the plantation
had been his one true love. No more. Two months after Anastasia became his private secretary, she
became his wife, and the night of his life had brightened to day. 
 
Eastcliff came back from death at dawn. Sefira was already up and about. She had brewed coffee
in the galley, and when she saw he was awake, she brought him a cup, smiling shyly. "Good morning." 
The coffee didn't taste remotely like the kind he made. For this, he was grateful. It was strong, but
not in the least bitter, and she had added just enough milk to color it. "How did you know I take no
sugar?" he asked, sitting sideways on the deckchair, resting the cup on his knee. 
"You look like the sort of man who mightn't." 
"What sort of man is that?" 
She smiled. "The sort of man like you." 
The first rays of the rising sun, splashing suddenly upon the river and turning the gray deck of the
launch to gold, brought out the intensity of her blackness, emphasizing that unanalyzable quirk of
pigmentation that made the members of the Ebononese race seem not merely black but blue. Her skin
glistened, and he realized she had bathed in the river while he still slept. Her black hair glistened too,
falling, without a kerchief to restrain it, to her shoulders. It was freshly combed. 
He saw how close the banks were: overnight, the river had narrowed to half its former width and the
current had doubled in strength. He knew the clinic must be close. The bush-doctor who had diagnozed
his illness and made an appointment for him had said when Eastcliff informed him he would travel by
boat, "Not long after the river narrows you will come to an abrupt bend. The clinic is just beyond the
bend. By now, a chirurgeon will already have been assigned to your case." 

He did not need the information now; he had Sefira to guide him. It occurred to him that he hadn't
asked her why she was going to the clinic. He did so. 
"I work there," she said. 
"Oh." 
"And you?" 
He saw no reason to hide the truth. "I have Meiskin's disease. It's not contagious," he added quickly. 
"It is not incurable either." 
'Why do you say that?" 
"Because you act like a doomed man." 
He regarded her silently for some time; then he drank the rest of his coffee and went below deck to
wash up. 
When he emerged from the lavatory he saw that Sefira had come down to the galley. 'What would
you wish to eat?" she asked. 
"Nothing. I prefer to face my chirurgeon with an empty stomach and a clear mind." 
"You will not find her that formidable." 
'Do many colonials visit the clinic?" 
"You will be the first." 
He was surprised. "I find that hard to believe." 
"You should not. It is very difficult for a man, even when he is dying, to seek help from a member of
a race he considers, despite incontrovertible evidence to the contrary, to be different from and therefore
inferior to his own. Even you, who are the first, have no doubt pinned your hopes upon the chirurgeons'
putative magic rather than upon their knowledge of medicine." 
"But they're witch doctors!" 
"If you like. But they are witch doctors with medical degrees. Port D'argent is not the only spaceport
on Silver Dollar." 
"But they go into trances. They —" 
"It is unfortunate so many wrong words have been applied to them." 
"But they themselves applied the Ebononese word they're known by. And the only English word that
fits it dates back to medieval times on Earth when wounded knights were cared for by ignorant
noblewoman employing God knows what kind of techniques and medicines!" 
"The Ebononese chirurgeons are neither ignorant nor noble. It is unfortunate that a more realistic
translation could not have been made." 
"I've even heard it said," Eastcliff said sardonically, "that they wear masks." 
"You will see." 
 
Deja vu racked him again, and he left the galley abruptly and returned to the deck. The banks were
little more than half a mile apart now, and the current had again doubled in strength. The launch lumbered
upstream like a pregnant water buffalo, its engine, revved up by the A.P. to meet the challenge, klonking
rhythmically. He disliked traveling by air, and he had chosen the launch with comfort in mind rather than
speed. He hadn't really cared whether he ever reached the clinic, hadn't really believed that the potions of
the chirurgeons would be any more effective against Meiskin's schizomycetes than the powerful
antibiotics prescribed by his internist. He did not tell his family he had the disease, and when he set out
for the clinic he said only that he was going fishing. His internist, when Eastcliff had visited him last, had
given him three months. That was ten weeks ago. The launch, in all probability, would turn out to be his
funeral barge. 
 
The river continued to narrow but no abrupt bend appeared. Sefira had come back on deck, and
Eastcliff could have asked her how much farther they had yet to go. However, he did not. She stood
leaning against the starboard rail, gazing at the bank. Once, she waved to a group of bush-blacks walking
single file along a trail that bordered the river. Apparently they knew her, for all of them waved back. 
Toward midmorning, she said, “We are quite close now." 

Looking up ahead, Eastcliff saw the bend. But he knew shame rather than relief. Meiskin's disease
was endemic to Ebonon alone, but thus far only a few Ebonon colonials had contracted it. All of them,
apparently, had had the courage to spurn the clinic and die in dignity in their own beds. All of them
except him. 
The launch, still keeping meticulously to the middle of the stream, began rounding the bend. On either
side, towering trees, flashing with the multicolored patterns of parakeets in flight, extended frond-laden
branches over the river, as though seeking to make contact. Inland, similar trees marched in serried
battalions to low, grass-covered hills. Beyond the bend the river widened, and the hills receded into misty
distances. On the right sprawled a bush-black village from whose waterfront a sturdy pier, lined with
driuhs, protruded. It was no different basically from a dozen other native villages Eastcliff had seen:
wretched huts haphazardly constructed of sticks and stones and vines, and roofed with overlapping
fronds; a maze of narrow streets, no two of them running in the same direction. Only the clinic, rising
beyond the bedlam of primitive buildings, made it distinguishable from its innumerable cousins of the
bush. 
"Clinic" was a misnomer. Dimensionally, at least, the institution more nearly corresponded to a
hospital. By native standards, it was undoubtedly a modern, soul-satisfying edifice. By Eastcliff's, it was
an architectural atrocity. The building material consisted almost exclusively of blue clay that had been
dredged from the river bottom and molded into large rectangular blocks. Structurally, the building
seemed sound enough, and the natural coloring supplied by the blocks was inoffensive to the eye; but it
was painfully evident to Eastcliff that the builders had gone about their task without a vestige of a plan.
From all indications, they had begun with a square, one-storied structure, amply large enough, no doubt,
to have accommodated the chirurgeons first patients. But as the patients multiplied, additions had been
tacked on, stories added; and then, as the need for more and more space continued, additions had been
added to additions and, in those cases where the foundations could support the extra weight, stories to
stories. The result was a hodgepodge of conterminous structures, no two of them the same height, that
sprawled back into the bush and out of sight and that exceeded the village in size. 
Eastcliff docked without undue difficulty between two driuhs. Sefira had gone below; now she
re-appeared on deck, wearing her bright red kerchief and carrying her crimson satchel. In her new
surroundings, her calico half-skirt and halter seemed less grotesque. 
A crowd had begun gathering on the pier. She paused by the rail, gazing into Eastcliff's eyes as
though searching for something. Whatever it was, she did not seem to find it. "Thank you for bringing me
upriver," she said. Then her eyes left his and she looked out over the people on the pier. "'I am black but
comely,'" he thought he heard her murmur. "'As the tents of Kedar. As the curtains of Solomon."' Her
eyes lowered to the gathering crowd. 'They are so curious — my people. That is because they are so
empty. So hollow." She returned her eyes to his. "Thank you again for your kindness." She hesitated,
then turned abruptly, climbed over the rail and stepped down to the pier. 
"Good-by," he called after her, mildly surprised that she had not offered him money for her passage.
He watched her make her way through the crowd, enter one of the village streets and disappear, and as
he watched, deja vu overwhelmed him so utterly that his throat constricted and his vision blurred. It was
as though he had just said good-by to Anastasia — not to a bush-black female whom he would probably
forget before tomorrow. 
Irony added itself to his distress, rendering it the more acute. For he had never said good-by to
Anastasia — he had never had the chance. They had gone to sleep one night in each other's arms and he
had awakened to find her gone. Gone from his bed, gone from his house, gone from his demesne. Half
out of his mind when she did not return, he had contacted the territorial governor and ordered him to
initiate a discreet search. The search yielded nothing in the matter of her whereabouts, but it yielded a
number of unappetizing items concerning her past. She had arrived on Silver Dollar slightly more than a
year ago and overnight had become the highest priced and most sought-after whore on the Port D'argent
waterfront. Two months before she showed up in Eastcliff's office, she had abruptly forsaken her chosen
profession, taken a speed course in secretarial work, provided herself with a fictitious and purposely
ambiguous background, and registered with Port D'argent's only employment agency. It was as though

she had known in advance that the job she presently obtained as Eastcliff's private secretary would be
available. 
Half numb from these blows, Eastcliff received yet another in the form of a bank statement. He had
opened a $100,000 checking account in Anastasia's name: the statement showed she had written exactly
one check for exactly that amount, converting it to cash. In the same mail he received a letter from
Anastasia with no return address demanding that he deposit a second $100,000 in the account. He did
so at once, then stationed himself in the bank's lobby, waiting for her to show up. He waited there every
day for a week in vain. Then news came of her in the form of an official report relayed to him through the
governor's office. She had gone back into the bush to shack up with two bush-blacks and had been
accidentally killed one night when they fought over her. When Eastcliff heard the news he got his
crocrifle, hunted the two men down and blew both their heads off. There were no witnesses, and so the
incident failed to make the bramblevine. But it made the governor's office by way of Eastcliff himself, and
the governor decided that for the sake of the Eastcliff name and Port D'argent's interstellar reputation the
Anastasia affair should be "cosmetized." The bodies of the two bush-blacks were secretly cremated, that
of Anastasia given to Eastcliff for private burial, while information was inserted in the Port D'argent Police
Department files and given to the Port D'argent Spacetimes to the effect that Anastasia, after obtaining an
annulment of her marriage, had left Silver Dollar on a ship bound for Earth. 
But although Eastcliff had escaped juridical justice, he had not escaped poetic justice. Less than a
month after murdering Anastasia's two lovers, he discovered he had Meiskin's disease. 
 
A tall bush-black wearing a blue ankle-length cowl and reed sandals emerged from the crowd on
the pier and approached the launch. His wrinkled face was thin, his black eyes cold and uncompromising.
"Ulysses East-cliff?" 
Eastcliff nodded. 
"A room awaits you at the clinic. As you already know, a chirurgeon has been assigned to your case.
If you will accompany me —" 
Eastcliff went below deck, packed a few personal items in a small bag, returned topside, closed and
locked the hatch and joined the blue-cowled man on the pier. The latter led the way through the crowd,
and presently they entered one of the village streets. There were naked children underfoot, and
half-naked mothers with sagging breasts watched from dark doorways, some of them nursing their
young. 
Viewed up close, the clinic was even less prepossessing than when viewed from afar. A flagstone
walk crossed an expanse of sun-bleached sward to a porte-cochere as unsightly as it was unnecessary,
and a crude double-door gave into a featureless foyer. Beyond the foyer, however, the complexion of the
clinic changed. The corridor down which the blue-cowled man led Eastcliff had been scrubbed till walls
and floor and ceiling seemed to emanate a bluish glow. Illumination was provided by primitive fluorescent
tubes inset in the ceiling. Immaculate white doors interrupted the walls at regular intervals. Most of them
were open and gave glimpses of neat, square rooms furnished with bed, cabinet and chair. Each bed
contained a bush-black patient. Some were supine; others were sitting up, apparently on the way back to
recovery. 
Young bush-black women wearing green caps and green knee-length dresses were making the
morning rounds, some of them carrying trays of medications. They appeared to be modern medications,
and no doubt were — products, probably, of one of the pharmaceutical laboratories of a neighboring
province. But they left him unimpressed. Modern medications did not necessarily imply a modern
hospital. 
The point was academic in any case. Meiskin's disease was impervious even to ultramodern
medications. 
A tall hush-black woman clad in blue passed Eastcliff and his escort, and Eastcliff knew without
needing to be told that she was one of the chirurgeons. She wore a hood rather than a cap, and her gown
fell all the way to her ankles. A veil-like gauze mask covered her nose and mouth and chin, its immaculate

whiteness in sharp contrast with the rest of her attire. It was true, then, about the masks. What wasn't
true was the widely circulated rumor that the masks were on the order of the grotesque affairs worn in
olden days by Afro witch doctors. 
At the corridor's end, a stairway right-angled upward to a low-ceilinged second story. Eastcliff had
to stoop to enter the room to which the blue-cowled man conducted him. Like the others he had seen, it
contained a bed, a cabinet and a chair. A refuse container stood beside the bed. Wearily he sat down on
the chair; when he looked back at the doorway he saw that the blue-cowled man had been supplanted
by a timid girl wearing a green cap and a green dress. 
Diffidently she asked him to undress and don the hospital gown she had brought. He obeyed, hiding
to the best of his ability the revulsion her nearness evoked in him: He did not fool her any more than he
had fooled Sefira. He sat on the side of the bed and she took a sample of his blood from his right arm.
He saw that her hands were trembling and realized that she was terrified of him. When she finished she
said in a trembling voice, "The chirurgeon that is assigned to you will come see you as soon as analysis is
been made." She almost ran from the room. 
He lit a cigarette, smoked for a while, then threw the butt on the floor. He lay back on the bed,
covered himself with its single sheet and clasped his hands behind his head. He stared up at the scrubbed
blue ceiling, realizing how tired, how exhausted he was. The river journey had consumed what little
energy the Meiskin schizomycetes had left him. The brightness of the still-cool morning came through the
room's only window, and the ceiling reflected it into his eyes, sending splinters of pain into his retinas. He
had removed his dark glasses upon entering the clinic, but he did not bother to get them out of his coat on
the chair beside the bed. Instead he continued to stare masochistically up at the ceiling. Hypersensitivity
to light was the prelude to the blindness that in turn was the prelude to the death that came seconds later.
Meiskin, after isolating his precious bacterium, had dealt lovingly with the inexorable progression of the
disease in a learned paper in a learned journal that learned researchers like himself subscribed to. His fate
was assured. Like Raynaud's, like Addison's, like Parkinson's.... 
Eastcliff must have slept. The morning coolness had given way to the asphyxiating warmth of midday,
and he was no longer alone in the room. 
Just within the doorway, a statue stood — tall, blue-gowned, white-masked. And above the mask,
black depths of eyes into which he had gazed before. 
Sefira. 
She walked over to the bed with that effortless grace of hers and took his pulse with long, cool
fingers. "Why?" he demanded. 'Why didn't you tell me you were my chirurgeon?" 
She did not look into his eyes. "If I had, would you have continued your journey?" 
"No." 
"So I did not tell you." 
"What were you doing in the bush?" 
"All chirurgeons live in the bush. It is our home. I live near where you took me on board." 
"And you commute by driuhs?" 
"We reside here at the clinic except on our days off; then we depend on driuhs. Yesterday was my
day off. Yesterday evening, you came along." 
He said, "You knew I was coming, didn't you." 
"Yes, of course. I had been assigned to you, had I not? And now I have good news for you. The
tests we made of your blood show conclusively that the vaccine series was successful." 
"What vaccine series?" 
Without answering, she withdrew an ampule from a pocket of her gown and rolled up his right
sleeve. He felt a faint prick; a moment later she tossed the empty ampule into the waste container by the
bed. "That was the first of the supplementary injections. There will be seven more, which my assistants
will administer at two and one-half hour intervals. A spinal tap will then be made, but it will be routine. By
tomorrow morning, you will be cured." 
"That's preposterous! Meiskin's disease can't be cured overnight!" 
"According to your colonial doctors, it cannot be cured at all. Besides, I did not say it could be cured

overnight. Be patient. In the morning, the administrator will explain everything to you. Now, I must go." 
In the doorway, she paused and looked back at him. Looked, for the first time since entering the
room, into his eyes. Looking back into hers, he knew once again, during the brief interval before she
turned and vanished down the corridor, the depth and breadth of them; the Weltschmerz and the
boundless compassion — and, yes, the love she bore him. And knew something else as well. They were
the eyes of a saint. 
 
The blue-cowled man sat alone in the ground-floor room to which Eastcliff had been directed. Only a
desk, patterned with a parellelogram of morning sunlight, indicated that the room was an office. The
blue-cowled man sat behind the desk. He motioned Eastcliff into a chair opposite him. 
"How do you feel?" 
"Reborn," Eastcliff said. 
The blue-cowled man handed him a small sealed envelope. "It is from Sefira. There is no need for
you to read it now. It will be better if you wait till you are on the river." 
"Where is she?" 
"She has returned to her home in the bush. The chirurgeons' code is a rigid one. It does not
countenance a chirurgeon's falling in love with a patient. When this occurs, she must confess her
transgression to her superiors and disqualify herself. Yours was Sefira's last case." 
Eastcliff said coldly, "What manner of a woman would fall in love with a man the moment she set
eyes on him?" 
"It did not happen quite that way. This will become clear to you presently. 
"Our name for the malady that afflicted you is 'Blinding Light.' Back here in the bush we have been
coping with it successfully for generations, although the identity of its carrier continues to remain unknown
to us. Were the results not so tragic, we would find it amusing indeed that a silly scientist from Earth
should have presumed to give it his name and have pronounced it uncurable. 
"Beginning at the age of five and continuing to the age of twenty, all Ebononese are periodically given
an oral vaccine. There are a few, of course, who out of superstitious fear hide from our bush-doctors and
contract the disease in later life, but even in these cases it isn't fatal because we are blessed with our
chirurgeons. A chirurgeon preincarnates herself in the body of the victim, if sex permits, or in the body of
someone close to the victim, if sex does not, and administers the equivalent of the vaccine series before
the victim contracted the disease. The victim will still contract it, not only because a paradox would be
involved if he didn't but because a vaccine series administered over the space of a few months isn't as
effective as one administered over the usual fifteen-year period. Thus, the series must be supplemented
later on by a series of injections – 'booster shots,' you would call them. Meanwhile, although the
symptoms continue to be present, the damage done will be negligible. 
"This ability of the chirurgeons to project themselves mentally — spiritually, if you prefer — back in
time is an inborn gift. Ebononese men are never born with it, and only a few Ebononese women. It is
limited in that the chirurgeon can take over only the mind and body of a member of her own sex and in
that her maximum pre-incarnation range is considerably less than an a Andromedae VI year. But this still
enables her to treat or pretreat all diseases retroactively, including Blinding Light. In your case, as often
happens, one of our bush-doctors made the diagnosis; thus Sefira, the moment she was assigned to you,
had merely to preincarnate herself in the body of someone closely enough associated with you to enable
her to incorporate the vaccine series in your food and drinks. The vaccine itself she obtained by courier
from the clinic. In effect, you were cured before you came here, even though your symptoms still
persisted. Yesterday and last night, you received the booster shots." 
"In whose body?" Eastcliff said hoarsely. 
"In this respect, Sefira's task was somewhat difficult. Your mother would not do: she simply wasn't
well enough. Your sister had to be ruled out because of the demands made upon her by her husband. So
Sefira had to employ the body of an outsider. She was forced, finally, to make use of a prostitude named
—" 
“No!" Eastcliff shouted, half rising from his chair. 

The blue-cowled man shrugged. "Very well, I will not mention your ex-wife's name. It isn't relevant in
any case. What is relevant is that preincarnation can be sustained for only a limited length of time. Such
'trances,' as our people insist upon calling them, are extremely exhausting. Objectively, they endure for
only several hours, but subjectively the chirurgeon experiences the same time interval as that of the
person she inhabits. So you see, even if the chirurgeons' code had permitted Sefira to remain in your
wife's body, she couldn't have done so. She had to return to the present. 
"We are not gods, and we can't change the past. What was, was. What is, is. Nevertheless, before a
chirurgeon is permitted to preincarnate herself in a person's body, we run a check on the
post-preincarnation history of that person. Thus we knew — know —that after Sefira's departure from
your wife's body, your wife obtained an annulment and left the planet. This is regrettable, but —" 
Eastcliff was on his feet, gripping the edges of the desk. "You know nothing!" he screamed. "Nothing
but lies!" 
"We know what the records tell us," the blue-cowled man continued unperturbedly. "If something
befell your wife that they don't tell, we can hardly be held responsible. We could not be in any case,
because whatever happened had already happened. As I said, we are not gods. We are healers. Nothing
more, nothing less. Sefira erred in permitting her host to marry you. But, you see, she couldn't have done
otherwise because in one sense her host had already married you. Her real error — if it can be called
that was in falling in love with you, something she didn't foresee. All she meant to do, as your secretary
and later as your wife, was to administer the vaccine series and save your life." 
'Then why didn't she tell me!" Eastcliff cried. 
"Why didn't she indeed! If she had said to you, 'Beneath this ethnically beautiful exterior so dear to
your ethnocentric heart lies the soul of a bush-black witch doctor come to cure you of a disease you have
yet to contract,' what would your reaction have been?" 
Eastcliff flung his chair across the room. "Damn your sanctimonious clinic! Damn your sanctimonious
soul!" He threw money on the desk, handfuls of it, and walked out. 
 
On the river, moving downstream in the lingering morning coolness, beneath the green overhanging
fronds, Eastcliff felt his anguish fade to a faint but throbbing pain. He opened Sefira's letter. 
 
Now all has been made clear to you. Except why I met you on the river. I wanted to see you
one more time as a woman; I could not help myself. For this, I must be forgiven, for I was, for an
entire month, your wife. I am the part of her that loved you, but not the part you loved. 
There is a pier at the tip of the promontory near where you took me on board. A path leads up
from it through the bush to my house. If you would care to stop by on your way home, I will have
hot coffee waiting for you on the stove. 
—Sefira 
 
The path was narrow, wound senselessly among the trees, through bramblevines laden with red, red
berries. Eastcliff smelled forest flowers, the morning dampness of the underbrush. He smelled smoke, and
presently he glimpsed the house through the low-hanging foliage of the trees. It was a small house, hardly
more than a hut. He had seen a thousand such. There would be a wood stove, a table and a chair.
Perhaps two chairs. The floor would be dirt. He halted behind the final fringe of trees. 
He pictured her sitting by the window in her cheap calico half-skirt and halter. Waiting. He saw the
pot of coffee steaming on the stove. He realized that his hands were trembling, and he thrust them into his
coat pockets to still them. 
 
I am black, but comely ... as the tents of Kedar, as the curtains of Solomon—
Look not upon me because I am black—
Because the sun has scorched me.... 
 
A pebbled path lined with whitewashed stones led up to the door. To all that was left of Anastasia.

He would say to his mother, in the coolness of the stately Eastcliff portico, "Look, I have brought her
back. She did not die after all." To his sister, "Behold! the real Anastasia!" And they would stare down
their broad aristocratic noses, and in the graveyard beyond the garden his father would turn in the black
earth, bare bones groaning, outraged hubris flaming fiercely in the eyeless sockets of his skull. And the
household bush-blacks would peer through the windows in exalted consternation and the bramblevine
would vibrate with the earth-shaking implication of the news. 
He turned his back on the hut and retraced his steps to the pier. Aboard the launch again, his
homeward journey resumed, he sat listlessly in his deckchair, staring at the dark brown water. He did not
eat. The day passed swiftly; mists materialized along the ever-receding banks. Night fell, and he went on
sitting there, distinguishable from the darkness only by the glowing ends of the cigarettes he smoked. 
He had no son. Soon, his best years would be behind him. Probably there would never be a Ulysses
Eastcliff IV. So be it. No bush-black nigger was going to be the instrument of perpetuating the Eastcliff
name. 
Not even the one who had given him his life, who loved him as deeply as he still loved the poor dead
whore whose soul she once had been. The launch slipped smoothly through the blackness of the night;
the river whispered in its wake. Above, the stars shone coldly down. 
 
 
 

