Nathaniel Worth had good reason to cut himself off from all 
contact with other men . . . but he'd forgotten what it was—!
 
THE JOURNAL OF
NATHANIEL WORTH
ROBERT F. YOUNG
 
Illustrated by Steve Fabian
 
October 6th, 1877:
HAVING BEEN coddled during my youth and provided with a private tutor until the age of
twenty-one, I was late in stepping forth into the world; hence, it is not surprising that I should have found
the world little to my liking. "The oppressor's wrong, the proud man's contumely, the pangs of dispriz'd
love,"—all grow unendur-able after a time, and upon coming into a modest fortune during my twenty-fifth
year after the tragic death of both my parents in a train derail-ment, I decided to free myself once and
forever from the derision that was my lot, and to realize that sweet dream of seclusion to which I had long
been host. The small offshore is-land which I have purchased here in the western section of the state and
the mansion which I have had built thereon have devoured the lion's share of my inheritance, but the
supplies which I have set by will sus-tain me for at least twelve months, by the end of which time I hope
to have attained a self-sufficiency comparable to that attained by the late Mr. Thoreau. I shall by no
means, how-ever, strive for the simplicity about which he became so rhapsodic. Hav-ing lived in luxury
all my life, I in-tend to go on doing so.
My mansion was built in accor-dance with plans drawn up by myself, and it is appointed throughout
with custom-made furniture and supplied with custom-made equipment. No doubt, the architecturally
cynical would refer to it deprecatingly as an "American Gothic monstrosity", but I am disinclined to take
seriously the biased opinions of soi-disant experts, regardless of their calling; hence, to me, my mansion
is an edifice of rare and wondrous beauty. Its single steepled tower is centrally located and enhances the
magnificence of the facade; its gable roof, in addition to two great chimneys, boasts a trio of identical
cupolas; its mullioned win-dows are the last word in elegance. Situated at it is in a grove of haw-thorn
trees (a species which abounds on the island to the virtual exclusion of all others), with its gray stone
walls and steepled tower, its aura of impregnability, it calls to mind a medieval castle.
 
 
This impression is even more pronounced when one is approaching the island from the wooded
mainland—a perspective which I value highly, as it will not be mine again for many months to come. I
shall return to civilization for supplies once a year—definitely no more often than that—but to all intents
and pur-poses, I have forsaken forever the company of my fellowmen. Nor is it likely that I shall be
plagued by vis-itors. The only settlement in the vicinity—the village of W—,—is located at least fifteen
miles inland, and neither its inhabitants nor the hus-bandmen, who work the surrounding farms, are apt to
take time off from their dawn-to-dusk labors to swim or fish. Further to ensure my privacy, I had all my
work done by workmen and artisans from the city of B—, and saw to it that they, as well as my supplies,
material, furniture and equipment, came by lake schooner rather than overland. Neither the vil-lagers nor
the husbandmen are aware of my existence.
It is my intention to spend my time climbing further out on the vari-ous branches of knowledge to
which my tutor gave me access. My library is my pride and joy. I employed a printing concern to turn out
personal editions of every volume in my pos-session, and they stand now, row upon row, on shelves
scarcely newer than they are, awaiting my perusal. I anticipate, then, a life of scholarly pursuits, to be

interrupted only by those tasks necessary to the mainte-nance of my island demesne and to the
replenishment of my larder. Perhaps, if the mood strikes me, I shall write a volume or two for
post-humous publication and leave the mss. in the hands of the same person to whom I have bequeathed
my property—a distant cousin (distant in the sense that he lives faraway) whom I have never met and
who is my only living relative. The idea of being a literary giant has always appealed to me.
The custom-manufactured clock on my study mantel is chiming mid-night, and the embers in the
study fireplace are growing gray. Putting my mansion in order has depleted my physical resources, and I
am exhausted; therefore, I shall bring to a close this initial entry in my journal before I begin nodding over
the page.
 
November 10th:
ONE'S INTELLECTUAL perceptions can become blunted from excessive probing; hence, I spent
this afternoon not in broadening my academic hori-zon, but in exploring my island de-mesne. I knew not
nearly as much about it as I had surmised, and was disconcerted, while walking along the base of the
shale cliffs that comprise its southern shore, to come upon a natural cave.
I say "disconcerted" rather than "surprised" (although I experienced surprise too), because there was
a quality about the high, narrow mouth that evoked an unpleasant association in my mind. While under
the guid-ance of my tutor. I was constrained to study the Anglo-Saxon epic poem, Beowulf, and to
render my own trans-lation of its passages, and I fear that the ordeal has left its mark on me. For an
ordeal it was. I disliked in-tensely the atmosphere of pessimistic gloom that pervades the crude,
al-literative lines, and the monster Grendel filled me with unspeakable horror. That this horror still resides
in my mind is borne out by the fact that when I viewed the cave mouth I saw not the entrance to a
perfectly ordi-nary fissure in the cliffs but the underwater entrance to Grendel's grotto, which he shared
with his hideous dam.
However, I did not let my dis-quietude dissuade me from exploring the cave's interior. What a drear
place it is, with its gray shale walls and perpetually dripping ceiling! It is much wider than its narrow
entrance would lead one to believe, and ex-tends deep into the cliffs. Truly, it could accommodate
creatures of the fearful dimensions of Grendel and his dam, and would be a fit abode for them as well. I
shall never go near it again. No Beowulf am I!
After leaving the place, I circled the rest of the way round the island, finding it, to my amazement, to
he much larger than indicated by the land company's survey. The survey map shows a length of about
three miles and a width of about one and a half. I am positive that these figures are grossly inaccurate and
some time in the near future I am going to pace off both distances.
The weather has turned apprecia-bly colder and I live in daily expecta-tion of the first snowfall. I was
going to write "dread", but I realized, to my delight, that I do not in the least dread the coming of winter.
Why should I? At my written behest, the workmen who assisted the artisans in the construction of my
mansion cut and split me a year's supply of wood; I am well-stocked with oil for my lamps; and my
larder is full. No grass-hopper am I, Nathaniel Worth, but the wisest and most provident of ants. Come
then, fierce breath of Boreas. Swirl your white skirts, then, Old Dame Winter. Nathaniel Worth fears you
not!
 
December 24th:
STRANGE INDEED, but until a mo-ment ago I was unaware that tonight is Christmas Eve! A
three-year old Christmas issue of Ballou's Monthly Magazine, included by chance in a case of books
which I just got around to opening, drew aside the curtain that my severance from society had lowered
before my cognizance, and let the wondrous light shine through.
But it has turned out to be not quite so wondrous a light after all. Christmas Eve is something more
than a date on a calendar. It is warm firelight and heady wine and the creak of runners on hard-packed
snow. It is the sound of laughter, the rosiness of cheeks—smiles, gaiety and good cheer. I have the

firelight and the wine, but while the one is warm and the other heady, neither is quite enough.
But together, they will suffice. What do I want with smiles?—with gaiety and good cheer? Of what
worth is a drop of kindness if it must be paid for with a pitcherful of ridicule? Let them have their precious
Christ-mas Eves—I shall be content with mine.
But the mood lingers, despite all I can do to dispel it. The Christmas issue of Ballou's Monthly lies
beside my journal, opened to the first page, and on the first page there is a black--and-white drawing of
an attractive young lady with a spray of mistletoe in her hair. The spray is arranged so that it seems to be
part of her coif-feur, and around her shoulder, another spray is arranged so that it gives the impression of
being a design in her V-necked, high-collared blouse. The drawing is entitled "The Mis-tletoe", and
illustrates a poem of the same title that begins on the next page. In common with all the literary trash
which such periodicals abound with, the poem is probably simplistic and sentimental, and I shall never
read it. Nevertheless, I find my eyes returning again and again to the pic-tured young lady. Can it be that
I have forgotten so soon that the likes of her are not for me, never have been and never will be? I will
throw her into the fire this very moment and watch the flames blacken her loveliness, watch the ashes of
her drift up into my Christmas chimney! No shadows out of the past shall be per-mitted to darken
Nathaniel Worth's hard-won Lebensraum!
 
January 6th, 1878:
THE WINTER is becoming increas-ingly severe and during the past week the cold has been so
intense that I have been forced to spend all of my time indoors. I find this largely to my liking;
nevertheless, for the past few days a strange restlessness has afflicted me, sending me on several
occasions to pacing my study floor. Perhaps, in shutting myself off from everything and everyone that
would in any way bring to mind my malad-justment, I have unwittingly obviated that maladjustment and in
the process undermined my motivation for being here. If this be true—if I have, in-deed, put my sense of
inferiority to rout—then I shall do everything pos-sible to maintain my new status quo, restlessness or no
restlessness. Is not the reality of anything dependent upon the presence of its opposite? Could there be
coldness if there were no warmth? We say a young lady has light hair, but could she have light hair if
there were no darkness to compare it to? We call a large hill a mountain, but would the distinction exist if
all hills were large? If all men had been giants since the beginning of time, would there have been such a
word in any of the languages? And would there be such names as "Polyphemus", "Goliath", "Ymir" and
"Paul Bunyan" in folklore and reli-gion? I submit that there would not be, and I submit further that the
very existence of such names strongly suggests that their holders were of euhemeristic origin.
 
January 29th:
A BRIEF THAW has permitted me to pace off my island. I discovered its true length to be
approximately seven miles and its true width to be approximately three and one-half—dimensions
markedly at variance with those recorded by the land-company surveyor. I have altered the figures on
the survey map to conform with my findings, not out of any desire to enhance the commercial value of my
property, but to assuage my craving for accuracy—a craving that is as much a part of my makeup as my
craving for seclusion. The commercial value of my property concerns me not at all, since I have not the
slightest intention of selling it and care not one iota whether or not the distant cousin, into whose hands it
will fall upon my demise, profits from its acquisition.
 
February 19th:
TWO WEEKS of sub-zero temperatures have climaxed a wintry act of betrayal begun late in
December: the lake is completely frozen over—or that part of it, at least, which separates my demesne
from the mainland. No longer does my tiny ship of state ride serene and inaccessible upon a watery
waste, but lies locked instead in the rigid embrace of a snowcovered desert that anyone can cross with

ease. It is, without doubt, a development which I should have foreseen; but had I foreseen it, would there
have been anything I could have done to avert it? Besides, my is-land was never truly inaccessible to
begin with: all one ever needed to gain its shores was a small boat or a proficiency in the art of swimming.
It was just that being surrounded by water gave me a sense of security. Now, that sense has departed,
and, to make matters worse, the five months I have spent in my own company have made me even less
desirous of coming into contact with my fellow-men than when I first arrived here. If I see a visitor
approaching across the ice, I shall surely secure my shutters and lock my doors, and perhaps se-cret
myself in the cellar till he—or she—departs.
 
February 26th:
FOR THREE weeks now, Old Dame Winter has been swirling her white skirts with scarcely a
moment's re-spite, and, as I write this, the gusts of her sub-zero breath are shaking the house. I have
hardly budged from my chair before the fire all day long, and I dread making the trek upstairs to my
unheated tower bed-chamber. The lake, I fear, will remain frozen well into spring.
 
March 15:
A SPELL of relatively warm weather has set in, and all day long the wind has been sweeping up
from the south. The ice, however, has yet to reveal the faintest fissure. Still, I cannot complain: no human
has yet appeared upon my horizon, and it is unlikely that one will. I was wise indeed to choose a retreat
so remote from the haunts of men, although my motivation for doing so eludes me at the moment. Why
did I so desperately want to be alone? What did I have to fear from creatures like myself? A glance back
through my journal en-tries provides me with not the faintest clue. "The oppressor's wrong, the proud
man's contumely, the pangs of dispriz'd love,"—are not these afflic-tions the lot of all of us? More
confus-ing yet, I cannot, in retrospect, recall a single instance of any of them—and yet my determination
to remain here for the rest of my life is stronger than ever. It may well be that I no longer fear or dislike
my fellowmen, but it is nevertheless apparent that I want no part of them.
 
April 3rd:
THE VERNAL EQUINOX has long since passed, but Old Dame Winter still lingers in the land.
Her days, how-ever, are numbered: her skirts are bedraggled now, and her icy shouts few and far
between. Soon, she will he gone.
Deo gratias!
 
April 21st:
THE SNOW is no more than a memo-ry, but the cursed ice still remains! It is porous, and rotten to
the core; but to anyone intrepid enough to essay the crossing, it could still serve as a bridge between the
mainland and my island. (I am more at a loss than ever to understand my aversion to visitors. Why should
I, Nathaniel Worth, of sound mind and body, dread the sight of mortals like myself?)
 
April 25th:
THE ICE is breaking up at last! Spring, in her infinite compassion, has at last taken pity on one,
Nathaniel Worth!
 
April 26th:
MY EXCESSIVE brachiations in the tree of knowledge having temporarily depleted my mental

reserves, I de-cided today to begin my garden. The workmen who, at my written behest, cut and. split
me a year's supply of wood, also, at that same behest, cleared and spaded up a sizable plot of ground
behind my mansion. I have been reworking the soil all day, and have found the task, after my winter of
physical desuetude, somewhat ar-duous. However, I do not mind. It was good to be outdoors, watching
my island come to life around me. As I worked, a large robin came and perched in the hawthorn tree by
the back porch and surveyed its surround-ings, no doubt with a good nesting-site in mind. It is more than
welcome to take up residence wherever it chooses. No one will bother it here—not in Nathaniel Worth's
de-mesne. Tomorrow, I am going into the woods to cut some saplings for poles, after which I am going
to try my hand at birdhouse building. It will serve as an excellent hobby and make my life even more
complete than it has already become.
April 30th:
I AM NOT ALONE on my island after all, nor have I been from the beginning! Goddess-tall, she
stands, this giantess whom I came upon this afternoon. She is magnificent! Beautiful! No, not merely
beautiful, for the very bounteousness of her beauty renders her sublime.
The cave in the cliffs would have told me of her presence, had I but examined it more closely; but no,
in my irrational repugnance I confined myself to a mere cursory appraisal, and then departed posthaste.
And all because of an absurd association! No Grendel she, this lean and lovely giantess—no, nor
Grendel's dam!
I came upon her quite by accident when my quest for tall, straight sap-lings took me into the vicinity
of the island's southern shore, and it was awe, rather than physical fear, that kept me from revealing
myself to her. She was kneeling upon a strip of sandy beach, not far from the begin-ning of the cliffs,
roasting a catch of lake trout over a driftwood fire. Nearby, lay a crude fishing pole of considerable
length. Despite the dis-tance between us (I had halted within the fringe of the forest), and despite the fact
that she was kneeling, her great size was at once manifest to me, and I estimated her height to be about
twice my own. I am six feet, two.
Her hair is bright yellow and falls in tangled tresses to her shoulders. Her eyes, as nearly as I could
ascer-tain from such a distance, are light blue. With its rather high cheekbones and gently rounded chin,
her face, for all its thinness (obviously she has been half-starving all winter while I sat basking before my
fire, warm and well-fed!), is a uniquely attractive one. Her single tunic-like garment is ragged and torn,
and corroborates the story of deprivation told by the hol-lows in her cheeks. Her feet are bare.
She devoured the trout—probably they were still half raw—without re-moving them from the crude
spit she had fashioned. Afterward, I followed her at a discreet distance down the beach and along the
base of the cliffs, and watched her slip into the dark and dismal confines of her cavern-home. Then I
hurried back through the lengthening afternoon-shadows to my mansion, picking up on the way the
several saplings I had cut, and began penning this entry. To think that a giantess shares my island
king-dom! I can barely contain my excite-ment!
 
May 1st (morning):
AS IS MY WONT, whenever I am confronted by the seemingly inexplicable, I wasted no time in
climbing out upon the branch of knowledge in-volved. My library, fortunately, is well-stocked with
volumes devoted to folklore and fable, as well as to re-lated religious material, and a single night's
expenditure of midnight oil has enabled me to come up with a theory that not only explains my gian-tess'
presence, but which throws con-siderable light upon the subject of giants in general. It is euhemeristic in
nature, and breaks down as follows:
Imprimis. There is a race of giants inhabiting the face of the earth and their precursors were the
so-called gods described in the Younger Edda—the giant-gods of the Asgard pantheon. Successive
generations of this basic race spread throughout the whole of civilization, giving rise to the various legends
with which the folklores of all countries abound, and in some cases finding their way into the major
religions" (e.g., the race of Rephaim, alluded to in 2 Samuel 5:18).

Secondly. This race of giants was progressively outnumbered by the various races of normal men,
and as a result the giants were persecuted and forced into exile. Their size was a hindrance rather than an
advantage, for it did them but little good against the vastly superior numbers of their foes, and in many
cases merely suc-ceeded in intensifying their foes' hatred. Normal men crave monsters, and tend to
indulge that craving whenever they view the outsize. Burke betrays this tendency when, in On the
Sublime and Beautiful, he says, "It is impossible to suppose a giant the object of love. When we let our
imagination loose in romance, the ideas we naturally annex to that size are those of tyranny, cruelty,
injus-tice, and everything horrid and abom-inable." I am disposed to believe that if there are monsters on
the face of the earth, normal men alone are responsible for them. Charles Byrne is well over eight feet tall,
and he is unquestionably of human origin; but are his other dimensions in proportion to his great height?
Indeed they are not. He is a beanpole, not a giant—a true monster if there ever was one.
Thirdly. The descendants of the giant-gods of the Asgard pantheon were the true discoverers of
America. They sailed here in some manner of seaworthy craft thousands of years be-fore the Pinta, the
Nina and the Santa Maria left the harbor of Palos, Spain. This is borne out in American-Indian folklore,
where they are referred to by such names as Oh-Mah, Sasquatch and Wendigo.
Fourthly. Throughout history, most giants have been benevolent. Our own Paul Bunyan is an example
of this sort of giant, although very little is known about his true stature be-cause of the grossly
exaggerated tales ignorant and impressionably lumber-jacks have recounted concerning his legendary
exploits. However, there have been malevolent giants too. Polyphemus was one. So were Gren-del and
Grendel's dam. Goliath was probably characterized as malevolent for the sole reason that he was on the
wrong side. But malevolent or not, none of these giants, with the excep-tion of Grendel and his dam,
were monsters.
Finally. With her yellow hair and blue eyes, the young giantess whom I have discovered here on my
island is a living testimony to the Scandinavian ancestry I have predicated. I do not, of course, know her
exact reason for living all alone in a cave, but I am sure that it is directly or indirectly re-lated to the
persecution of her people, which I have outlined above.
I can scarcely wait to make contact with her.
 
May 1st (afternoon):
THIS MORNING, I came upon her footprints not far from my mansion and concluded, after
examining them, that she had approached the house as closely as she dared and had stood there in the
darkness, gazing into my study window all the while I was burning my midnight oil! Undoubt-edly, she
has been aware of my pres-ence all along, but has been afraid to reveal herself because I am normal, and
hence a creature to be feared. As though she need fear me!
Following her footprints to the cave in the cliffs, I made an additional discovery: some of them were
flecked with blood. A giantess with bleeding feet! For some reason, it was almost too much for me to
bear, and when I came within view of the cave mouth I could hardly refrain from walking boldly up to it
and calling out to her. That I did not do so can be attributed to my fear of alarming her and frightening her
away. Somehow, I must contact her in such a manner as to convince her that I am no vain and boasting
Beowulf, no cruel Ulysses, no merciless David; that I have no sling hidden behind my back, or fiery stake
or vaunted sword.
But how?
 
May 1st (evening):
UNABLE ANY LONGER to endure the thought of the blood-flecked footprints and their
implications, I returned this afternoon along the island's littoral to the southern shore and crept around the
base of the cliffs till I obtained a good view of the cave. Crouching down behind a pile of fallen shale, I
began observing the entrance, trying to peer into the interior in the hope of catching sight of its huge
occupant. I maintained this uncomfortable posi-tion for about an hour without seeing any signs of life, and

I was about to stand up and approach the cave openly when a Lilliputian avalanche comprised of broken
shale came rat-tling down the cliff-face and scattered all around me. Looking upward, I found myself
gazing directly into the bluest pair of eyes that I had ever seen, and I realized that all the while I had been
lying there at the base of the cliff, trying to observe her, the giantess had been lying on the top of the cliff,
observing me.
That the dislodging of the shale had been accidental was borne out unequivocally by the expression
of star-tlement upon her face. And yet she did not withdraw her head, as I momentarily feared she might
do, but continued to look down at me as though I were as strange a phenome-non in her eyes as she was
in mine. Here, then, was the opportunity I so desperately needed—the opportunity to prove to her that
my intentions were amicable, and that, far from wanting to harm her, I wanted to help her. To accomplish
this end, I had but a single weapon at my dis-posal, and I made haste to employ it to its maximum extent.
I smiled at her, and into the smile I put all the warmth and the kindness and the good will that I possess.
For a long time my effort went un-rewarded. Fright continued to distort her countenance, and there
was a quantity of panic in her eyes that re-fused, at first, to disperse. At length, however, the lovely
Brobdingnagian face lost some of its rigidity, the blue eyes some of their fear, and the smile that presently
broke forth upon her lips was as warm and friendly as the sun coming up over a hill, and filled with a
wistfulness so poignant that it wrenched my heart.
Without taking my eyes from her face, I arose to my feet, moving slowly so as not to alarm her, and
called up to her in the gentlest tone of voice I could manage. "Please don't be frightened," I said. "I mean
you no harm. My name is Nathaniel Worth and I wish to help you."
I was not surprised when my words evoked not the slightest glimmer of understanding in her blue
eyes. Liv-ing as she had all her life as far from the haunts of normal humans as pos-sible, she could hardly
be expected to be familiar with the English language, and probably knew only the language of the giants.
This assumption was strengthened, if not actually substan-tiated, when, at length, she uttered several
words which I was certain were related to one of the Scandina-vian tongues. Being unversed in any of
them, however, I found her words as unintelligible as she had found mine, and oral communication
be-tween us ceased before it had even begun.
Undaunted, I resorted to the uni-versal language of signs, managing, by means of a series of rather
strenuous gesticulations, to make her under-stand that I wished her to proceed back along the top of the
cliffs and meet me on the beach. She appeared undecided for a moment, and the panic that had so
recently departed from her eyes, returned. Presently, however, it went away again, and she nodded, and
withdrew her head.
I cannot describe the medley of emotions that beset me as I made my way back along the base of the
cliffs toward that memorable rendezvous. That fear was a major ingredient, I cannot deny, for, despite
my stanch conviction that the malevolence of giants has been unjustifiably imputed to them my lesser
mortals, I could not quell the atavistic dread of the outsize that mounted within me with every step I took.
Nor can I describe the entirely different medley of emo-tions that overwhelmed me when, rounding the
last shale shoulder of the cliffs, I saw her standing on the beach less than a dozen feet away. I know only
that my fear transmuted once and for all to awe, and that for many moments I could not move from the
spot where my suddenly paralyzed legs had stranded me.
Hugeness viewed from a distance differs from hugeness viewed at close range. Size is relative, and
cannot be fully appreciated without a nearby familiar object to use as a criterion. In this case, the familiar
object was one which by its very nature was best cal-culated to give me maximum aware-ness of the
diverse dimensions in-volved: my own body.
As I stated earlier, I am six feet, two inches in height—a giant in my own right; and yet this giantess
tow-ers over me not by merely twice my height, but by twice my height and almost half again besides!
Fully fif-teen feet tall, she stands, and every part of her—every line, every curve, every hollow—is in
exquisite propor-tion to her stature. Her legs, colossal columns though they may be in one sense, are the
legs of a young and lovely girl; her arms, for all her un-dernourishment, possess an almost Grecian
symmetry; her breasts are lofty, landscaped hills upon the bur-geoning countryside of her body; while her
neck is a gleaming white pillar round which float cloud-like tresses of her yellow hair and above which

flowers the blue-eyed beauty of her Brobdingnagian face.
How long I stood there unmoving, I do not know. Perhaps I would be standing there yet, had not the
panic come back into her eyes and jarred me out of my paralysis. Recovering myself, I smiled up at her
reassur-ingly, and the smile she gave me in return was even warmer than her first had been, and its
wistfulness even more acute. It was the sort of smile you see upon the lips of a forsaken child—a smile
that simultaneously proffers friendship and begs friend-ship in return. It told me what I had to do. “Come
with me," I said, and, stepping forward, reached up and took her hand.
I led her along the beach and thence into the grove of hawthorn trees where my mansion stands. She
accompanied me like a docile little girl. Upon setting eyes upon the house (probably the first time she had
viewed it in daylight), she gasped, and, again like a little girl—an en-chanted one, this time—pressed both
hands against her breast.
Throughout our walk, I had been concentrating on the problem which accommodating so huge a
creature in so relatively small a dwelling pre-sented, and had arrived finally at the only solution. Indicating
that I wished her to remain where she was, I went inside, and, after proceeding directly to the drawing
room, shoved all the furniture it contained into the library. Next, I made several trips upstairs and brought
down all my extra mat-tresses and bedding, after which I made a bed for her upon the drawing-room
floor. This task com-pleted to my satisfaction, I opened the front door and beckoned to her to come
inside.
Fortunately, my ceilings are high, my halls and doorways wide. She had considerable difficulty gaining
the drawing room, of course—I had ex-pected that—but with practice she will be able to get in and out
of it with ease; and, while its height does not permit her to stand up straight, its length and width are more
than ample for her to move about and to stretch out full-length upon her bed. And she will never he cold:
I shall see to it that on chill nights there is al-ways a fire burning in the drawing-room fireplace, and, as
soon as I find the time, I am going to sew some of the blankets which I gave her into a master blanket
with which she can cover herself. Certainly, her new quarters are vastly superior to the dark and dismal
cave in which she has been shivering for God knows how long, and certainly, the warm meal that I
prepared for her excelled by far the primitive fare to which she has been accustomed. She must have
been half-starved, poor thing, judging from the way she wolfed the food down. Fortunately, I have a
large platter which makes an adequate plate for her to eat from; my largest cup, however, is hardly more
than a thim-ble in her huge hand, while my eat-ing utensils are useless to her.
She is resting now as I write this in my study, and her breathing is a soft summer wind in the next
room. Be-fore she lay down, I heated water for her so that she could soak her cut and bleeding feet, and
I confess that car-rying in the wooden tub—the largest in my possession—and then filling it, pailful by
pailful, has worn me out. But I do not mind. Indeed, I find it somehow exhilarating to wait upon so
magnificent a creature, and the almost dog-like gratitude that comes into her eyes each time she looks at
me is a far greater reward than any I have ever received for services rendered in the past. In addition to
the cuts upon her feet, there are numerous deep scratches on her arms and shoulders—put there,
probably, by the cruel thorns of the hawthorn trees. What a terrible world this is, where giants must hide
themselves from the sight of normal men and suf-fer in drafty caves and hostile forests! I shall never
condone it—never!
The summer wind sighs in the next room, grows softer. She sleeps—my little-girl giantess sleeps.
 
May 8th:
HER NAME is Frederika. I have shortened it to Erika.
She has grown more beautiful since I have taken her in. Good food has filled out the hollows in her
cheeks and set roses to blooming in their stead. Kindness has driven away—forever, I hope—the fear
that once resided in her eyes. The scratches on her arms and shoulders still linger, but her feet have
healed completely (though what to do about shoes for her is a problem that dismays me). When she
walks now, there is a queenly majesty about her, and her tread, once timid, is now firm and purposeful.
We go walking together often, when my studies and her sewing permit (she has fashioned herself a

de-lightful tunic out of a spare pair of hangings to replace her old one), and sometimes I take her hand
and some-times she takes mine, and we breast hills side by side and share each new vista that bursts
upon us. Occasion-ally, she forgets to match her pace with mine, and I find myself being half-dragged
alone at her side; then she will remember, and laugh ten-derly down at me, after which she will walk so
slowly that even I could outdistance her if I so desired.
I am more fearful now of visitors than I was before. The reason behind my original fear is buried
somewhere in the hinterlands of my mind; now, I fear because of her. Were my fellow-men ever to learn
of her presence here on the island, she would have to seek out another sanctuary and I might never see
her again. This, I do not believe I could endure. I have made it as clear to her as the lan-guage of signs
permits that, should she see a boat approaching, she must hide, and I am sure she understands. In all
probability, her natural instincts would cause her to hide anyway; but there is no way for me to keep the
lake under constant surveillance, hence either of us can be caught unawares at any time.
I have been trying to teach her En-glish, but thus far I have made not the slightest progress. Perhaps I
shall have to give up and learn her tongue instead, if I can persuade her to teach it to me. In any event, I
am not par-ticularly concerned: a communication seems to exist between us that tran-scends all ordinary
forms—a communi-cation compounded of a reciprocity of feelings, of likes and dislikes, of hopes and
fears. A most remarkable rapport. It is there each time our eyes meet, each time there is a touching of
our hands; each time a bird of unusual hue rises out of the brush before us, or a ray of sunlight slants a
certain way through an unpremeditated pat-tern of branches and trees.
I have never known a spring as sweet as this one. Mayflowers vie with one another in their efforts to
give off the headiest fragrance and to adorn themselves in the pleasantest possible colors. The buds on
the trees seem eager to burst forth and take over their duties as leaves. The sun seems anxious to warm
the land, and the rain, when it comes in the night, falls gently upon the face of the earth, as though
reluctant to risk injuring a single blade of grass or a single meadowflower.
It is night and it is raining now, and the rain is a gentle susurrus in the hawthorn tree without my study
window. In the next room, Erika lies contentedly upon the bed I have made for her, secure in the room
which I have assured her is her very own. She is looking at the illustrations in one of my encyclopaedia
sets, and although I cannot see her eyes, I know that they are' wide with won-derment. What is this new
quality that pervades the house and enriches the very air I breathe—this quality compounded of warmth
and wanted-ness, of tenderness and peace? Whence came it? Why? It does not matter. It is enough that
it is here.
 
May 11th:
OUR WALKS CONTINUE, and I sense an awakening in my young giantess, a coming into being
of emotions she has never known before. All day long, lines from Baudelaire's La Geante have kept
running through my mind:
 
Du temps que la Nature en sa verve puissante
Concevait cheque jour des enfants monstrueux,
J'eusse aime vivre aupres dune geante,
Comme aux pieds (Tune reine un chat voluptueux.
 
J'eusse aime voir son corps fleurir avec son ame
Et grandir librement dans ses terribles jeux,
Deviner si son Coeur couve une sombre flarnine
Aux humides brouillards qui nagent dans ses yeux—
 
She is glorious, my geante! The spring sun has caressed her creamy skin and given it tones of gold.
A comelier hue than the sun itself is her lustrous yellow hair. When she runs and plays, it dances about
her face in bright abandon, and when the wind is brisk, it sometimes streams straight out behind her.

Gaiety has taken up permanent residence in her blue eyes and makes them sparkle like a starlit summer
sea. I do not believe that in all my life I have ever seen anyone quite so happy or so carefree.
My own happiness is less efferves-cent in nature. It pervades me like a warm ray of sunlight, glowing
quietly throughout my entire being and turn-ing the most prosaic of happenings into moments of wonder
and delight. Until I met Erika, I did not know that such moments could exist; but then, I had never been in
love before, or, if I had, had never had my love returned.
Yes, I love Erika, and Erika loves me. I can see her love kindling in her eyes each time she looks at
me. I can feel it in the touch of her hand, sense it in the way she walks when she knows that I am
watching. But our love for one another has in it none of the passion ordinarily present in such
relationships. It has the tenderness, yes, and the affection and the con-cern; but it is on a much more
exalted plane than the purely physical, perhaps because of our mutual knowl-edge that it could not
otherwise en-dure. This, I do not know. I only know that our love exists, and that is all I need to know.
We still "converse" in the universal language of signs. My language seems to be beyond her powers
to master, while hers—why, I do not know—eludes me utterly. Perhaps I do not want to learn it;
perhaps I want our relationship to remain exactly the way it is. Half of loving someone lies in not knowing
everything there is to know about her. Knowing everything there is to know about someone often ushers
in disillusionment, just as physical intimacy often ushers in car-nality. I have kissed my geante many times
upon the cheek, and she has kissed me many times on mine; but we do not know each other's lips.
 
May 22nd:
IN MY ABSORPTION with Erika, I had forgotten my garden completely, and it was only when I
saw her in it this morning, working the soil with a spade, which in her giantess-hands seemed toy-like,
that I remembered. I went out and worked beside her, and now—thanks to our combined ef-forts (hers
Herculean, mine on a much smaller scale)—we will be able to begin planting tomorrow. So there will be
a crop after all—a small one, perhaps, but enough of a one to aug-ment our provisions sufficiently to see
us through the winter. I had hoped, also, to augment them by felling some of the small game with which
the is-lands abounds, but discovered to my dismay that I have mislaid the only firearm I brought with
me—an excel-lent Morse magazine rifle. Well, there is nothing for it, I suppose; in any case, I do not
intend to return to civilization for supplies till next spring. By then, perhaps, I will have devised some
means of snaring enough small game to round out our diet, although we must go sparingly on such items
as salt and sugar and flour. Yes, it is still with me—this fear of my fellowmen. I had thought it gone, but it
is not. It is present in Erika too, and to a much greater degree: I can tell from the look that sometimes
comes into her eyes when she gazes across the water to the mainland. But in her such an attitude is
understandable. She has reason to fear my fellowmen. I have not.
 
June 9th:
THE LAKE has warmed to such an extent that bathing in it is now possi-ble, and during the last
few days Erika and I have been trying our hand at swimming. She is as inept in the science as I am, and
we have spent many a merry hour laughing uproariously at each other's awkward efforts, rendered the
more awkward by our heavy underclothing. When we tire of our pastime, we come out of the water and
lie down side by side on the beach and let the therapeutic sunlight lull us to sleep. Each time, I am
reminded of the closing lines of Baudelaire's wistful reverie—
 
Et parfois en ete quand les soleils malsains,
Lasse, la font s'etendre a travers la campagne,
Dormir nonchalamment a rombre de ses reins,
Comme un hameau paisible an pied dune montagne—
 
And each time I am, indeed, "a quiet village sleeping at the foot of a hill".

 
June 11th:
Then by headlands afroth with foam, 
Came Grendel with monstrous mien, 
Eager once more his blood-thirst toslake
In Hrothgar's antlered hall
 
I CAN THINK of no better way to describe the coming of this blond and bearded giant who has
invaded our island than by recourse to my own rendition of Beowulf; no better way to convey the horror
that overwhelmed me when I ran to the window in re-sponse to Erika's scream and saw him striding up
from the shore toward the mansion. The whiteness of Erika's face would have told me, if her ter-rified
scream had not already done so, that here was the one whom she feared above and beyond all others,
that here was the creature responsible for the naked terror I had sometimes seen come into her eyes
when she gazed across the water toward the mainland. We were able to bolt all the doors and secure all
the shutters before the monster got here, but it is at best but a temporary measure. In his fury, he has
already torn down the verandah, and now he is hammering on the front door with his huge, hairy fists.
Soon, it will give way before him. Erika cowers on the drawing-room floor, weeping, and I am at a loss
as to what to do. Clearly, this blond ogre is a suitor whom she has rejected and who wishes to do her
physical harm, perhaps kill her. Equally clearly, I must protect her. But how?
The pounding on the door increases in din, and the whole house trembles. Grendel's roars of rage
rattle the win-dowpanes. I must act without further delay.
 
Midnight:
ALL Is LOST—all. I write this by lantern-light in Erika's cave, lying in her arms. Each time I
breathe, my shattered ribs pierce my lungs, and I am constantly spitting blood. Sporadically, from the
distance, come the pain-crazed screams of the blinded Grendel as he stalks, mortally wounded, about the
island, searching for his nemesis.
I am his nemesis. I, Nathaniel Worth, put out this vindictive ogre's eyes.
The idea came to me when, tiring of pounding on the door, he smashed open one of the shutters and
thrust his great hand through the window-pane. The afternoon had been unsea-sonably cool, and I had
built a fire in the hearth to ward off the chill. I had been stirring it, intending to add more wood, when
Erika's scream and the shattering of glass drew my atten-tion to the window. The poker I was using had
grown so hot I could barely hold onto it; rushing to her side, I thrust its glowing end into Grendel's
questing hand, and the huge fingers instinctively closed around it. The scream that burst forth from the
giant's throat was compounded as much of rage as it was of pain; nevertheless, he withdrew his hand and
desisted, for the moment, in his attempts to batter down the house. This provided me with the time I
needed to carry out the plan that the incident had given birth to.
Directing Erika to build up the fire, I slipped out into the backyard and brought back two of the
saplings I had cut and trimmed for birdhouse-poles. After sharpening their bases, I bound them together
with stout wire and thrust the two pointed ends into the flames. One fiery stake had been enough for
Ulysses, but my Polyphemus had two eyes.
He began pounding on the door again, more furiously than before, and I started fanning the fire,
directing Erika to do likewise. The pointed ends were flaming when I carried the poles upstairs, and I
inadvertently set fire to one of the hangings in the hall. I did not stop to extinguish the flames—there was
no time—but plunged into the front room, which formed the base of the tower and overlooked the front
entrance. Unfas-tening the shutters, I flung them wide. Grendel's eyes, almost on a level with my own,
presented a per-fect target as I thrust the fiery pole-ends through the windowpane. I could not miss—nor
did I.
He screamed, fell back, raising his hands to the scorched sockets where his eyes had been. As he

did so, one of his mighty forearms struck the lashed-together poles, which had been wrenched from my
grasp, and sent them crashing against my chest with such force that I was catapulted across the room and
crashed into the wall. After that, darkness came, and when at last it dissipated I found my-self down on
the beach, cradled in Erika's arms. Grendel's screams were resounding through the night, and my beloved
mansion, set ablaze by the very weapon with which I had sought to save it, was a flaming pyre
brightening the sky.
Sobbing, Erika set me gently down and tried to launch Grendel's heavy boat. But he had drawn it so
far up on the shore that even her great strength was unequal to the task. The screams crescendoed, and,
desisting in her efforts, she picked me up again and made her way along the beach to the beginning of the
cliffs and thence along their base to the cave. She saved as many things from the fire as she could, but she
concentrated on those items which she believed I trea-sured most; hence, while I have my journal and the
steel box in which I keep it, and pen and ink with which to write and a lantern to see by, we have no
blankets to ward off the damp chill of the cave, and nothing what-soever to eat. I have tried as best I
could to persuade her to take my small boat and row to the mainland. But she refuses to do so, and I
know why. She is as aware as I am that I am dying, and she is determined not to leave my side. I also
know that after I am dead, she will remain here till she dies too. I know these things because of this
wondrous love that ex-ists between us—this radiant love that reduces ordinary love to the mere flickering
of a candle flame, this un-selfish love that has enriched both our lives; this love that is a love which can
only come into being between two outcasts—two children of the night.
 
Later:
GRENDEL'S screams have died away, and all is still. Somehow I know that he is dead. Perhaps
the near-dead have perceptions in such matters that the living are denied. As I write this, Erika's arm
creeps round my shoulders and her gentle fingers caress my face. Wearily, I lay my head upon the soft
slope of her breast. Are those stars I see in the cavern-sky? They wink out, one by one. The light from
the lantern dims. Good night, sweet, gentle gêante, good night ...
 
ADDENDUM
THE FOREGOING JOURNAL came into my hands through a friend who happens to be a
descendant of the cousin to whom Nathaniel Worth bequeathed his island, and who recently inherited the
property himself. Previous generations of his family had always regarded the place as a white
elephant—an attitude traceable to their attachment to the state where they live and to their disdain for the
other forty-nine—and, aside from posting the land, they ignored it utterly. My friend, however,
recognized at once the island's potential as a beach resort and journeyed posthaste to the village of W—,
rented a small boat and set forth to explore his property.
He was intrigued by the ruins of Nathaniel Worth's dwelling, although they consist of but little more
than a rubbish-choked cellar; but it wasn't until he came upon the cave in the cliffs and found and read the
journal that his curiosity really became aroused. Knowing my interest in gigantism, he brought his find to
me at once, along with three items that he had dug out of the files of the vil-lage of W—'s only
newspaper. He maintains that, while these three items are the only ones that could conceivably tie in with
the journal, none of them makes sense; and he also maintains that the two skeletons that he found in the
cave beside the journal make even less sense.
I submit that both the items and the skeletons make excellent sense.
Let us go back to the journal for a moment. In the entry dated January 6th, 1878, Worth asks the
following rhetorical questions: "Is not the re-ality of anything dependent upon the presence of its
opposite? Could there be coldness if there were no warmth? We say a young lady has light hair, but
could she have light hair if there were no darkness to compare it to? We call a large hill a mountain, but
would the distinction exist if all hills were large? And giants—are not giants subject to relativity too? If all
men had been giants since the begin-ning of time, would there have been such a word in any of the

languages?"
A very neat bit of reasoning, when you consider that the reasoner was entering into as classical an act
of self-deception as any man has ever pulled on himself. At that particular moment, in fact, he was half
aware of what he really was and half aware of what he really wasn't.
What was he then, aside from the combination snob and simpering sentimentalist his lucubrations
reveal him to be?
Consider his choice of an island, the dominant tree of which is the hawthorn.
Consider the Scandinavian charac-teristics of Erika.
Consider his "mislaying" of his Morse magazine rifle—a rifle that, in common with all rifles, could be
miniaturized only to a degree in keep-ing with the diameter of its bore.
Consider the fact that the rubbish-choked cellar that my friend examined was not a large one.
Consider that when a man creates a reality that pleases him and lets that reality get the upper hand,
he will make every single object, animate or inanimate, that subsequently enters into that reality conform
to that reali-ty.
Now, consider the three news items. The first is dated April 22nd, 1878, and describes the
disappearance of a Swedish immigrant girl from the house of her husband, one Lars Nilsson, whom she
had recently jour-neyed to America to marry. The sec-ond is dated June 14th, 1878, and de-scribes the
disappearance of Lars Nilsson from the village and its envi-rons. The third is dated November 3rd,
1903, and describes the discov-ery of a man's skeleton upon the nearby island of M—.
I think that we can safely assume that the skeleton mentioned in the final item was that of Lars
Nilsson, and I think that we can also safely as-sume that one, of the two skeletons that my friend found in
the cave is that of Nilsson's Swedish immigrant bride, who undoubtedly was guilty of the crime of being
mentally retarded, who probably, before fleeing across the ice to the island, had never had a kind word
spoken to her in all her life, and who probably had been se-verely beaten by her husband time and time
again.
We now have one skeleton left—a diminutive one that my friend be-lieves to be that of the woman's
child. However, there is no evidence that would indicate either that she had a child, or was with child at
the time of her disappearance. All of which leads up to the key question: Whose skele-ton is it?
Well, it could hardly be that of a six-foot, two-inch man, which seem-ingly rules out its being
Nathaniel Worth's.
But it could, conceivably, be that of a two-foot, six-inch dwarf.
—ROBERT F. YOUNG
 

