
Ann Gadzikowski
Robotics
for Young Children
STEM Activities 
and Simple Coding

Published by Redleaf Press 
10 Yorkton Court
St. Paul, MN 55117
www.redleafpress.org
© 2018 by Ann Gadzikowski
All rights reserved. Unless otherwise noted on a specific page, no portion of this publication may be 
reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photo­
copying, recording, or capturing on any information storage and retrieval system, without permission 
in writing from the publisher, except by a reviewer, who may quote brief passages in a critical article 
or review to be printed in a magazine or newspaper, or electronically transmitted on radio, television, 
or the Internet.
First edition 2018
Cover design by Jim Handrigan
Cover photograph by Monica Kass Rogers
Interior design by Percolator
Typeset in FF Tisa Pro
Interior photography by Monica Kass Rogers and Ann Gadzikowski
Printed in the United States of America
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Gadzikowski, Ann, author.
Title: Robotics for young children : STEM activities and simple coding / Ann Gadzikowski.
Description: First edition. | St. Paul, MN : Redleaf Press, 2017. | Includes bibliographical references. 
Identifiers: LCCN 2017023634 (print) | LCCN 2017041119 (ebook) | ISBN 9781605545455 (ebook) | 
ISBN 9781605545448 (paperback)
Subjects: LCSH: Robotics—Study and teaching (Early childhood)—Activity programs. | 
BISAC: EDUCATION / Teaching Methods & Materials / Science & Technology. | 
EDUCATION / Preschool & Kindergarten. | EDUCATION / Teaching Methods & Materials / 
Mathematics. | EDUCATION / Computers & Technology.
Classification: LCC TJ211.26 (ebook) | LCC TJ211.26 .G33 2017 (print) | DDC 372.35/8—dc23
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2017023634

To Beth Dirkes and Leslie Morrison, my crackerjack teammates at the 
Center for Talent Development, in appreciation for your insights, 
encouragement, and inspiration


vii
 Contents 
Acknowledgments 
 xi
Introduction 
 1
Simone and the Evil Robot 
 1
Why Robotics? 
 3
The Innovation Economy 
 5
Computer Science as a Core Subject Area 
 5
Computer Science Framework 
 6
Powerful Ideas 
 6
Computational Thinking 
 7
Constructivism and Developmentally Appropriate Practice 
 8
Preparing to Teach Robotics 
 10
Give Me Back My Caps! 
 12
Basic Terms and Concepts 
 14
How to Use This Book 
 15
The Hundred Languages of Children 
 16
Chapter 1: What Is a Robot? 
 19
The Important Thing about Robots 
 19
Activity 1.1  Famous Robots 
 20
Activity 1.2  Machine Faces 
 22
Activity 1.3  Make a Robot Face 
 24
Activity 1.4  Talk Like a Robot 
 26
Activity 1.5  Robot Dance Party 
 27
Activity 1.6  Robot Picture Books 
 28
Activity 1.7  Take Apart a Machine or Robot 
 30
Activity 1.8  Clay Robots 
 32
Activity 1.9  What Is Metal? 
 33
Activity 1.10  Magnets—Is It Metal? 
 35
Activity 1.11  Build with “Metal” Blocks 
 36
Activity 1.12  Robots in Real Life 
 37
Activity 1.13  Be the Boss of a Robot 
 39
Activity 1.14  Is This a Robot? 
 39
Activity 1.15  Robot Dramatic Play 
 41
Activity 1.16  Questions about Robots 
 42

viii
CONTENTS
Chapter 2: How Do We Build Robots? 
 45
Thinking Like an Engineer 
 45
Hexbugs: A Robot Case Study 
 45
Activity 2.1  Robot Free Play 
 46
Activity 2.2  Real or Robot? 
 47
Activity 2.3  Compare Robot to Robot 
 49
Activity 2.4  Robot Hospital 
 50
Activity 2.5  Robot Take-Aparts 
 51
Activity 2.6  Electron Game 
 53
Activity 2.7  Power Conversations 
 55
Activity 2.8  Things That Light Up 
 56
Activity 2.9  Circuit Sets 
 57
Activity 2.10  Simple Machines 
 58
Activity 2.11  Daisy’s Wild Ride 
 60
Activity 2.12  Ramps 
 60
Activity 2.13  Marble Runs 
 62
Activity 2.14  Wheels 
 62
Activity 2.15  Study a Bicycle 
 63
Activity 2.16  Gears 
 64
Activity 2.17  Design Thinking 
 66
Activity 2.18  The Most Magnificent Thing 
 67
Activity 2.19  Kinesthetic Machine—Car Wash 
 67
Activity 2.20  Water Table Car Wash 
 68
Activity 2.21  Car Wash with Blocks and Pipe Cleaners 
 69
Activity 2.22  The Domino Effect 
 69
Activity 2.23  Rube Goldberg Contraption 
 70
Activity 2.24  Troubleshooting with Rosie Revere 
 70
Activity 2.25  Mistake Party 
 71
Chapter 3: How Do We Tell Robots What to Do? 
 73
Developing Spatial Intelligence 
 73
Activity 3.1  Checkerboard Play 
 74
Activity 3.2  The Big Grid 
 75
Activity 3.3  Follow the Arrows 
 76
Activity 3.4  Map Books 
 77
Activity 3.5  Meet the Bee-Bots 
 78
Activity 3.6  Bee-Bot Hokey Pokey 
 81
Activity 3.7  Turn Round and Round 
 83

CONTENTS
ix
Activity 3.8  Create a Path 
 84
Activity 3.9  Meet a Friend 
 85
Activity 3.10  Invent a Programming Language 
 86
Activity 3.11  Synchronize! 
 88
Activity 3.12  Bee-Bot Dance 
 90
Activity 3.13  DIY Grid 
 91
Activity 3.14  Meet Cubetto 
 92
Activity 3.15  The Cubetto Function Line 
 95
Activity 3.16  Code-a-pillar 
 96
Activity 3.17  Robot Turtle Board Game 
 97
Activity 3.18  People Patterns 
 98
Activity 3.19  Pattern Blocks 
 99
Activity 3.20  Arrow Maps 
 101
Activity 3.21  Program Your Parents 
 102
Activity 3.22  Rebus Stories 
 103
Activity 3.23  Daisy the Dinosaur 
 105
Activity 3.24  Kodable 
 107
Activity 3.25  ScratchJr 
 108
Activity 3.26  Other Coding Apps 
 109
Activity 3.27  Build Your Code 
 110
Chapter 4: How Do Robots Help Us? 
 113
Imagining a Better World 
 113
Activity 4.1  Robot Helpers 
 114
Activity 4.2  Robot Pets 
 115
Activity 4.3  Robot Doctors 
 117
Activity 4.4  Robot Arm 
 117
Activity 4.5  Yuck! 
 119
Activity 4.6  Robot Car 
 120
Activity 4.7  Fast and Faster 
 122
Activity 4.8  Robot Directions 
 123
Activity 4.9  Brave Robots 
 123
Activity 4.10  Robot Friends 
 124
Activity 4.11  Sensors—How Robots See 
 125
Activity 4.12  Flying Robots 
 126
Activity 4.13  What Is a Drone? 
 127
Activity 4.14  Swimming Robots 
 127
Activity 4.15  Robots in Space 
 128
Activity 4.16  Robot Wishes 
 129

x
CONTENTS
Chapter 5: How Can We Learn More about Robots? 
 131
Robotics and Computer Science in Elementary School and Beyond 
 131
Activity 5.1  Scratch Animation 
 131
Activity 5.2  Hopscotch 
 132
Activity 5.3  Digital Game Design 
 132
Activity 5.4  Hour of Code 
 133
Activity 5.5  Code.org Code Studio 
 134
Activity 5.6  Hello Ruby 
 134
Activity 5.7  Web Design and App Invention 
 134
Activity 5.8  Lego WeDo, EV3, and VEX 
 135
Activity 5.9  First Lego League 
 136
Activity 5.10  Makerspaces 
 136
Activity 5.11  Ready, Set, Design 
 137
Activity 5.12  Interview a Robot Expert 
 138
Activity 5.13  Visit a Science Museum 
 138
Activity 5.14  Visit a Robotics Lab 
 139
Activity 5.15  Follow a Robot Blog 
 139
Activity 5.16  Girls in STEM 
 140
Recommended Resources 
 141
STEM Resources 
 141
Robotics Resources 
 141
Coding Resources 
 142
Resources for Families 
 142
Recommended Robotic Devices and Kits 
 142
Picture Books Used in Activities 
 143
Glossary of Key Terms 
 144
References 
 146

xi
Acknowledgments
I’m grateful to the many educators and experts who have helped me learn about 
robots and understand the potential of computer science in early childhood edu­
cation. Many thanks to Frances Judd for first introducing me to the term “tangible 
tech” and to Brian Puerling for showing me that technology can be a powerful tool 
for intentional teachers. Thank you to Chip Donohue, Tamara Kaldor, Amanda 
Armstrong, and the Erikson TEC Center for all the fantastic resources and profes­
sional development opportunities. 
I’m indebted to the many robotics and computer science instructors at the 
Center for Talent Development (CTD) who have informed my work. Years ago, Eric 
Simon was the first robotics teacher I ever observed. I watched his fourth graders 
struggle to build and program a LEGO Mindstorms robot that would open a door. 
None of them were successful, but it was one of the most powerful and challeng­
ing learning experiences I had ever seen. From “How Things Work” instructor 
Tony Perry I learned the value of taking machines apart. I learned about Scratch 
programming from Brian Myers, Stephen Blood, and David Green. More recently, 
when we began piloting robotics and coding courses in the early childhood class­
rooms of the CTD summer Leapfrog program, I benefited from the feedback and 
ideas I received from teachers like Amanda Burns, Nina Diehl, Tess Heerema, Leah 
Johnston, Amy Lindgren, Victoria Livingston, and Kathleen Mercury. Thank you, 
also, to the Northwestern University faculty members on the Leapfrog Advisory 
Committee, in particular Dr. Michael Peshkin for robotics and mechanical engi­
neering expertise, Dr. Michael Horn for his understanding of thoughtful uses of 
emerging technologies, Dr. David Uttal and Kinari Atit for insights on spatial cog­
nition and symbolic representations, and Dr. Alexis Lauricella and Sarah Pila for 
expertise on the impact of media technology on young children. And, of course, 
I’m very grateful to the young children I taught and observed as I developed and 
piloted the activities in this book. They were my best teachers.
Thank you to my editors and friends at Redleaf Press, including David Heath, 
Laurie Herrmann, Kara Lomen, and Christine Zuchora-Walske. And finally, thank 

xii
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
you to my family for their love and support. As I wrote this book, I often thought 
of my brother Mark and his passion for computers and engineering from a young 
age. I remember how, when we were kids in the 1970s, he used to carry a big box 
of punch cards to an after-school computer club. Can you believe how far we’ve 
come?

1
Introduction
Simone and the Evil Robot
As early childhood professionals, we can learn a lot about how children think by 
observing their play. Sometimes an observation will reveal what children under­
stand about robots. Here’s an example: Simone, age five, and Daniel, age four, are 
playing together on their preschool playground. The day is cold and windy, but the 
children are warm, bundled into heavy coats, snow pants, and boots. 
“You be my puppy, Daniel,” says Simone.
“Beep, beep!” replies Daniel, swinging his arms stiffly. “I’m not a puppy. I’m a 
robot.”
Simone says, “You can be a robot puppy.” 
Daniel plops down onto the frozen grass and crawls on all fours. “Ruff, ruff! 
Beep, beep!” He shouts, “Ruff, beep, ruff, beep! I’m a robot puppy!”
Simone watches him and smiles. “Okay, puppy robot, come here! Come and sit.”
Daniel crawls to Simone’s feet. The heavy snow pants slow his movements. This 
makes his progress seem even more mechanical and robotlike.
“Ouch,” says Daniel as his knees bump a stick.
“Hurry, puppy. Sit here,” says Simone.
“Beep, beep, beep!” Daniel sits on his haunches and looks up at Simone.
“Roll over, puppy robot!” Simone commands.
Daniel looks at the cold ground covered with sticks and rocks. “No! Beep, beep, 
no roll over!”
“You have to do it,” says Simone. “You’re my robot puppy.”
“No,” repeats Daniel, shaking his head.
“Then I’ll unplug your battery and turn off your wires,” counters Simone.
“So what?” says Daniel. “I’m not that kind of a robot puppy. I’m an evil robot 
puppy.” He stands up. “I can do whatever I want! I’m going to crash the whole 
world!” Daniel runs away, laughing. Simone scowls at him, but soon she takes off 
too, happily following Daniel. The chase is on, and a new game has begun.

2
INTRODUCTION
This observation of Daniel and Simone demonstrates what these children 
understand and believe about robots. The children’s pretend play and conversa­
tions show that they both have an interest in robots, as do many young children. 
Robots loom large in modern media—​in movies, television shows, and digital 
games. Both children and adults often encounter robot characters in advertising 
and popular culture. 
But what specific concepts do Daniel and Simone understand about robots? 
Let’s look more closely at what they said and how they played. The interaction 
between Simone and Daniel the robot puppy demonstrates that both children 
understand the concept of commands. People control robots by commands. This 
means that when you tell the robot what to do, the robot will do what you say. At 
least it’s supposed to! Daniel’s robot puppy was not so obedient, but real working 
robots are programmed to comply with specific commands.
Simone’s comment “Then I’ll unplug your battery and turn off your wires” 
demonstrates another accurate understanding about robots. She knows that 
robots have a power source. In real life, as well as in pretend play, batteries often 
power robots.
The children’s actions and comments in this scenario also demonstrate a com­
mon misunderstanding about robots: robots can defy commands. Daniel pretends 
that his robot is “evil,” or dangerous. It’s true that robots, or really any electronic 
devices, often frustrate us when they don’t work properly. But robots are machines 
made by people and programmed to do what people tell them to do. They are not 
monsters. One of our challenges and responsibilities as educators is teaching chil­
dren accurate information and dispelling misconceptions. Robotics activities like 
the ones in this book will help children develop scientifically accurate understand­
ings of the advanced technology in the world around them.
The Daniel and Simone scenario also demonstrates how to effectively engage 
young children in science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM) learning: 
through play and through stories. The activities in this book will introduce chil­
dren to computer science, coding, and robotics concepts using child-​centered 
and play-​based experiences that are grounded in developmentally appropriate 
practices.

INTRODUCTION
3
Why Robotics? 
If you look around you right now, do you see any robots? You may not be sitting 
next to an evil robot puppy like our young friend Daniel, but you probably are 
not far from a programmable electronic device, such as a laptop, tablet, or smart­
phone. You may also be near a programmable thermostat, an alarm clock, a coffee­
maker, or other common household appliance. Robotic devices—​in other words, 
machines programmed by computer code—​are all around us. Robots vacuum 
floors and assemble cars. They frost cupcakes in factories and see through walls at 
construction sites. Robots can even help doctors perform surgery. 
We teach children about the weather, about the rain that splashes onto their 
boots and the sun that warms their skin. We teach children about plants and ani­
mals, about the seeds that grow into tall trees and the pets that make them smile. 
We teach children about stories and counting, about letters and numbers, building 
a foundation of skills for later success in reading and math. But computer science 
topics, such as coding and robotics, are rarely included in an early childhood cur­
riculum. Even in kindergarten through grade twelve, exposure to computer science 
is limited (Google Inc. and Gallup Inc. 2016). So why don’t we teach young children 
about machines and computers, about the robots and devices that make their lives 
safer, easier, and perhaps more interesting and more entertaining? Prior to 2010, 
when the launch of the Apple iPad heralded a new wave of accessible devices with 
touch screens and other child-​friendly features, we simply didn’t have the tools to 
teach computer science using developmentally appropriate practices. Now we do, 
but most early childhood teachers do not yet have the training, experience, models, 
and resources to know how to teach tech topics to young children. This book is an 
effort to change that. Here you’ll find basic explanations so you can understand 
introductory computer science concepts well enough to engage in conversations 
with young children. You’ll also find guidelines and tips for using developmentally 
appropriate computer science activities in early childhood classrooms.
Let’s start from square one. The field of robotics engineering involves two 
kinds of work: building robots and programming robots. Building robots requires 
knowledge of design engineering as well as mechanical and electrical engineering. 
Programming robots requires knowledge of coding and computer science. These 
terms and topics—​“computer science,” “coding,” “robotics,” “engineering”—​can 
sound intimidating, even to adults. Early childhood educators, especially those 

4
INTRODUCTION
who are baby boomers or members of Generation X, are not always confident 
in their own understanding of computer science terms. Many adults are digital 
immigrants, while the children we teach are often digital natives. A digital immi­
grant is someone who grew up without access to personal computers, tablets, and 
smartphones—​someone (like me) who had to learn how to use these tools inten­
tionally, as an adult. A digital native is someone who never knew a world without 
these tools. For example, have you ever noticed how some young children today 
will often walk up to an ordinary TV and swipe at the screen with their fingers, as 
if the TV screen were a touch screen? Children born after 2010, the year the iPad 
was introduced, often develop expectations and understandings of electronic 
devices that many of us digital immigrants never consider. And yet we still have a 
responsibility, as educators, to prepare children to be successful in the twenty-​first-​
century world in which they live, even if this task challenges us to learn something 
new ourselves.
Rest assured that we can teach young children about robotics using the same 
developmentally appropriate methods and practices we use to teach children 
about other subjects. Keep in mind that we are building the foundation for later 
learning. It’s a foundation of skills and experiences that children can use later, for 
more advanced studies of computer science and design engineering. We are not 
reinventing how we teach, only adding some new ideas regarding what we teach. 
We are building a foundation and creating a pathway for later learning.
Let’s look at it this way. We don’t teach preschoolers geometry, but we do teach 
them about triangles. We teach them that a triangle has three sides, that triangles 
come in different sizes. We teach young children that a triangle can have a corner, 
or angle, that’s just like a corner of a square (a right angle). We teach them that tri­
angles can be placed together to make other shapes, such as squares or even stars. 
We can agree that it is developmentally appropriate to teach children these con­
cepts about triangles—​through play, through games, through stories, and maybe 
even through some teacher-​facilitated lessons or demonstrations. It would be silly 
to make children wait for a high school geometry class to learn about triangles. We 
know that triangles are all around them every day.
The same is true of robotics and computer science. Children see and sometimes 
even use machines and computers, smartphones and robots, all around them every 
day. It would be silly to make them wait until they take computer science classes 
in high school or college to learn the basic concepts. We can easily introduce 

INTRODUCTION
5
them to foundational computer science concepts through play, through games, 
through stories, and maybe even through some teacher-​facilitated lessons or 
demonstrations.
The Innovation Economy 
Another important reason for introducing robotics to young children is the urgent 
need for innovative and independent thinkers in a technology-​ and information-​
driven economy. If the twentieth century was the age of industry, then the twenty-​
first century is the age of information. Young children today are growing up in a 
time when any question they can think up will have a thousand answers on the 
web. Our responsibility as educators is to help them make sense of all this informa­
tion. We must teach them how to think critically about the sources of information, 
how to choose what information is important and true, and how to make good 
use of the information they have. As Alison Gopnik argues in her New York Times 
opinion piece “What Babies Know about Physics and Foreign Languages,” the chal­
lenges children will face in the future will require a creative learning process that 
sparks curiosity and innovation rather than a traditional teacher-​directed learning 
process. Gopnik writes, “Parents and policy makers care about teaching because 
they recognize that learning is increasingly important in an information age. But 
the new information economy, as opposed to the older industrial one, demands 
more innovation and less imitation, more creativity and less conformity” (Gopnik 
2016). The activities in this book support this kind of learning. I can’t think of a 
better example of innovative and creative learning than figuring out how to build 
and program a robot.
Computer Science as a Core Subject Area 
Don’t just take my word for it. Leaders and researchers at all levels of the US educa­
tion system recognize that STEM learning must be a top priority in order to prepare 
students for twenty-​first-​century careers. The National Math and Science Initiative 
(NMSI) reports that in 2018, the United States will be short as many as three million 
high-​skilled workers in STEM fields (NMSI, accessed 2017). Robotics is a topic that 
incorporates all aspects of STEM learning: science (physics), technology (coding), 
engineering (design, mechanical, and electrical), and math (geometry, data, 

6
INTRODUCTION
algorithms). The study of robotics aligns well with Common Core State Standards 
(CCSS) and Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS) that emphasize critical 
thinking, communication, collaboration, and creativity. In particular, the coding 
aspects of robotics help prepare children for higher-​level computer science studies, 
a top priority for many school districts such as Chicago Public Schools, where com­
puter science is now a required core subject area (CPS 2016).
Computer Science Framework 
Fortunately, we now have an important new tool for creating computer science cur­
ricula and developing plans and policies for computer science learning. This tool, 
the K–12 Computer Science Framework, was developed through a collaboration of key 
technology education organizations, such as the Computer Science Teachers Asso­
ciation, NMSI, and Code.org. The Framework, released in October 2016, provides 
conceptual guidelines to inform the development of computer science standards 
and curriculum and build capacity for teaching computer science (K12CSF 2016).
While the Framework focuses on grades kindergarten through twelve, it includes 
a detailed chapter on computer science in early childhood education. This chapter 
is readable and affirming to early childhood teachers who are familiar with devel­
opmentally appropriate practice. For example, one of the essential statements 
of the Framework is the assertion that play is the pedagogical bedrock of all early 
learning environments (K12CSF 2016). In fact, the Framework presents play as one 
of five “powerful ideas” that are relevant and significant in computer science learn­
ing at the early childhood level. These five ideas are play, patterns, problem solving, 
representation, and sequencing. The framework authors state that when these five 
powerful ideas are applied to computer science, learning becomes “a natural exten­
sion of children’s everyday engagement with their environment and builds on what 
educators already do in their daily practice” (K12CSF 2016, 185).
Powerful Ideas 
The term “powerful ideas” in the context of computer science learning is not a new 
one. Seymour Papert, author of the groundbreaking book Mindstorms: Children, 
Computers, and Powerful Ideas, coined this term (Papert 1980). More recently, “pow­
erful ideas” has been a core concept in the work of Marina Umaschi Bers, a pioneer 

INTRODUCTION
7
of early childhood robotics. Bers elaborates on the meaning and use of the term 
“powerful ideas” in the context of children’s early learning experiences in robotics. 
She states that powerful ideas “afford new ways of thinking” related to both con­
tent and process—​both what children learn and how they learn it (Bers 2008, 23). 
For example, activity 1.7 in this book involves taking apart a clock. The powerful 
ideas children may develop during this activity are related both to what parts the 
children discover inside the clock (gears, a spring, a bell, a pendulum) and to the 
learning process itself (deconstruction—​the taking apart of things to reveal new 
information and new questions). 
The emphasis on play as a powerful idea in pre-​K computer science aligns the 
Framework with developmentally appropriate practices in obvious ways. An exam­
ination of the other powerful ideas demonstrates additional connections with 
the core concepts of high-​quality early childhood education: patterns, problem 
solving, representation, and sequencing. Recognizing and creating patterns helps 
children make sense of their world when they organize objects and information 
using common features (Bers 2008). Children engage in problem-​solving pro­
cesses every day; these experiences become valuable learning opportunities when 
they make mistakes and construct new knowledge through trial and error, and 
when their teachers help facilitate learning and reflection through open-​ended 
questions (Bers 2008). Children learn representation when they use symbols, such 
as letters of the alphabet, to represent sounds and meaning. Similarly, in computer 
science, many different kinds of symbols (such as arrows, shapes, text, and num­
bers) can represent algorithms (Bers 2008). The final powerful idea, sequencing, is 
already a core concept in any early childhood curriculum. When children learn to 
get dressed or sing a song or tell a story, they are learning a sequence. In computer 
science as well, children learn to arrange events, ideas, and objects in a specific 
order to achieve a desired outcome.
Computational Thinking 
Beyond the pre-​K level, the Framework emphasizes the importance of developing 
computational thinking. Computational thinking refers to strategic ways of think­
ing, such as breaking a large problem into smaller pieces for analysis. Computa­
tional thinking does not mean thinking like a computer. Rather, it means thinking 
in ways that allow you to use a computer effectively as a tool. 

8
INTRODUCTION
Here’s an example of computational thinking at the preschool level. Suppose a 
group of children are playing in the block corner, constructing a garage for toy cars. 
One of the children suggests they build a ramp so the cars can drive from the floor 
up to the roof. These particular children have built ramps before, and they know 
that in addition to the usual rectangle blocks (units) and square blocks (half units), 
they will need a lot of triangle or wedge blocks to build a ramp. All the blocks are 
in sloppy piles around the floor, and one of the children decides to take on the job 
of triangle hunter. She crawls around on the floor collecting half a dozen triangle 
blocks in a basket. Armed with an ample supply of triangle blocks, she begins the 
ramp construction. With very little conversation—​simply a shared understand­
ing of how to build a ramp—​this group of children used computational thinking 
to evaluate the task ahead of them. The child who collected the triangle blocks 
identified one of the key challenges (finding enough triangles), and by collecting 
the essential pieces in one place, she enabled the group to complete the task more 
efficiently. 
Breaking down a task into key pieces is the kind of analysis that’s an impor­
tant element in computational thinking. Children need to experience this type of 
problem solving to develop a foundation of skills and understandings that prepare 
them for more advanced computer science and robotics learning later in their 
schooling. As this example illustrates, computational thinking is a way of ana­
lyzing a problem. While people can learn computational thinking without a com­
puter, an ability to apply computational thinking to complex tasks and problems is 
useful in learning computer programming.
Constructivism and Developmentally 
Appropriate Practice 
While we can all probably agree that computer science is an important area of 
study in the twenty-​first century, many educators and families still feel some dis­
comfort about including robotics in an early childhood curriculum. I recall my own 
experience years ago, when I was working as the director of a child care program 
that was affiliated with a Mennonite congregation. The culture and traditions of 
this program—​demonstrated in each classroom by the simple wooden toys, the 
plants indoors, the garden outdoors, and the prevalence of natural materials and 
fabrics in the environment—​did not allow for any consideration of computers 

INTRODUCTION
9
in the classroom. Of course, this was in the 1990s, when classroom computers 
were huge and children had to manipulate a keyboard or mouse to play a simple 
game. The electronic devices available for young children now, as you will see in 
chapter 3, are much more accessible and more appropriate for children’s bodies 
and minds. 
While it may seem like these devices have appeared quite suddenly, the prog­
ress toward developmentally appropriate technology has been a slow, steady jour­
ney, traveled by many great minds. In fact, we can easily trace the robotic devices 
on the cutting edge today, such as the Bee-​Bot or Cubetto robots described in 
chapter 3, back to Jean Piaget and the core of a constructivist education philosophy. 
David Elkind, renowned child psychologist, details this path in the foreword to 
Bers’s book Blocks to Robots: Learning with Technology in the Early Childhood Class­
room. Elkind describes Piaget, the creator of constructivism, a theory of cognitive 
development centering on the idea that children learn through direct physical 
experience, through play and through their interactions with their environment. 
Piaget mentored Papert, and Papert mentored Bers (Bers 2008). Both Papert and 
Bers, as I mentioned earlier, have used the term “powerful ideas” to describe the 
wide impact of computer science experiences on other kinds of learning. The 
Piaget-​Papert-​Bers pathway is a direct link from the original development of con­
structivist theory to the hands-​on robotics activities and curricula springing up 
today everywhere you look. 
Bers and her colleagues, such as Michael Horn at the DevTech Lab at Tufts 
University, use the term “tangible programming” or “tangible tech” to describe the 
hands-​on constructivist experiences now available to young children. Bers and 
Horn write, “Our work is rooted in notions of developmentally appropriate practice 
(DAP), a perspective within early childhood education concerned with creating 
learning environments sensitive to children’s social, emotional, physical, and cog­
nitive development” (Bers and Horn 2010, 50). My own experience developing and 
implementing robotics curricula with young children supports this notion. When 
given the right tools, young children can engage in developmentally appropriate 
computer science and engineering activities.
If developmentally appropriate robots seem surprising or implausible to you, 
you’re not alone. In 2009, after twenty years of teaching and directing preschool 
and child care programs, I took a position as a program coordinator at Northwest­
ern University’s Center for Talent Development (CTD). My job was, and still is, to 

10
INTRODUCTION
develop and implement enrichment courses for academically gifted and talented 
children. I run programs for children as young as three years old. Previously, my 
areas of expertise in curriculum were language and literacy. In my position at CTD, 
my work has focused on STEM topics. I came to the right place at the right time. I 
began developing computer science and robotics curricula for young children just 
as developmentally appropriate devices and apps became available for classroom 
use. When I started working at CTD, our coding and robotics courses were pretty 
much limited to Lego robotics and Scratch animation at the third-​ and fourth-​
grade levels. But by 2015 we began offering coding and robotics courses at all 
levels, starting at pre-​K. We were able to do this because developmentally appro­
priate tools like Bee-​Bots and apps like Kodable became more readily available. I’ve 
now developed and implemented coding and robotics courses at the pre-​K level in 
many different settings, which have reached hundreds of children. The activities 
in this book are a result of that experience.
Preparing to Teach Robotics 
You don’t need to know about robotics or computer science to begin implementing 
the activities in this book. Any teacher with an open mind, a curiosity about how 
things work, and the ability to ask good questions can generate the powerful ideas 
described by Bers. Teaching robotics to young children requires a disposition, not a 
credential. By “disposition,” I mean a state of readiness, a readiness to engage with 
children in a problem-​solving process. This disposition is so much more important 
than content knowledge. That’s because the specific content of robotics and com­
puter science curricula—​the devices, the hardware, the apps, and the program­
ming languages—​is constantly evolving and changing. People are continually 
developing new technologies. The robotics landscape will already be different and 
new by the time you finish reading this book. The best way to prepare ourselves 
to teach in this changing landscape is to nurture and demonstrate an openness to 
learning and a willingness to engage in problem-​solving processes.
Another important disposition is a willingness to learn from children. We must 
abandon the notion that we, as teachers, are always the experts. Remember, many 
of us are digital immigrants teaching digital natives. Although robotics and coding 
are topics I’ve studied for years, when I’m teaching technology to young children, I 
often find myself in a position where the children know more than I do. For many 

INTRODUCTION
11
early childhood teachers, that position can be very uncomfortable. We are accus­
tomed to being the fountains of knowledge in our classrooms. “This is how you tie 
your shoes. This fruit is called an apricot. Birds fly south in the winter.” But young 
children today have an advantage over us when it comes to technology. They are 
often brave when we are cautious. They fearlessly experiment with and master new 
technological devices and tasks. That fearlessness—​the ability to experiment rap­
idly with trial and error—​often allows children to learn new technology concepts 
more quickly than adults can.
Letting go of being the expert is hard. For guidance in this, we can look to our 
colleagues in gifted education. Teachers who work with academically gifted and 
talented children are more accustomed than early childhood educators to the expe­
rience of teaching students who are smarter than the teachers themselves are. For 
example, imagine teaching a classroom of students who can read fluently at age 
four, perform calculus at age seven, or breeze through a whole year of high school 
chemistry in three weeks at age twelve. Working in gifted education requires 
teachers who are able to serve as guides and facilitators, not experts. 
Through my experience in both early childhood education and gifted edu­
cation, I’ve come up with a way to describe teaching from a disposition that’s 
open to learning alongside children, as their guide and facilitator. I like to call it 
“relationship-​based robotics.” As we introduce children to the topics of robotic 
engineering and computer science, we are in a collaborative relationship with the 
children, learning along with them. Our role as teachers is to guide the process of 
discovery, provide meaningful and accurate resources, ask great questions, and be 
prepared to respond and to listen.
The word “relationship” in the term “relationship-​based robotics” refers to 
the relationships in the classroom—​between you and the children, among the 
children themselves, and between the children and the other mentors and helpers 
they encounter through the learning process, such as parents and neighborhood 
experts. The word “relationship” also refers to the relationships among the expe­
riences and concepts of robotics activities. While each activity has its individual 
value, the role of the teacher in a relationship-​based robotics curriculum is to help 
children make connections among diverse experiences. 
In addition, the word “relationship” refers to the relationships between the 
robotics learning in the early childhood classroom and the larger robotics and 
computer science issues and concepts in the world outside the classroom. In 

12
INTRODUCTION
relationship-​based robotics, we are teaching children to be good digital citizens. 
We can do this by helping them think about what kind of world we are creating 
with tech tools. We hope that what children learn about computer science when 
they are young will ultimately help them understand and improve the world in 
which we live. The young children in our classrooms today may someday figure out 
how technological tools can help keep people healthy, protect the environment, or 
make other important changes and improvements. As early childhood educators, 
our role is to empower children to be innovators and creators, not passive con­
sumers of whatever new tech gadgets come along. Ethical questions about how to 
change the world for the better are at the heart of relationship-​based robotics. The 
activities in chapter 4 address these questions directly. Even very young children 
can think about how robots might help make people safer and healthier. Even pre­
schoolers can use critical thinking to evaluate whether a robot, toy, or app is useful, 
helpful, or beautiful. 
Give Me Back My Caps! 
When I began learning more about technology and how to teach young children 
computer science concepts, I was surprised to discover that I actually knew more 
than I thought I did. You too may find that you already know a lot about computer 
science, coding, and robotics. In my work training teachers to implement technol­
ogy programs, I’ve found that teachers, especially old-​school teachers like me, feel 
reassured when we can connect familiar classroom tools and activities with inno­
vations in robotics and computer science. I like to use the picture book Caps for Sale 
to demonstrate these connections. 
Caps for Sale, written by Esphyr Slobodkina and first published in 1940, is 
the story of a peddler who sells caps. Many early childhood teachers have fond 
associations with this book. They may remember it from their own childhoods or 
from reading it to children in class. When I am conducting a teacher workshop 
on the topic of technology and I pull out a worn copy of Caps for Sale, the teachers 
visibly relax. Here is something they know, something that feels familiar and 
comfortable. 
Before we review the story together, I ask the teachers, “How is the experience 
of the peddler similar to the experience of a computer programmer?” I ask them 
to take a moment to imagine a computer programmer at work. What does the 

INTRODUCTION
13
programmer do all day? Often the teachers imagine someone sitting in a cubicle, 
looking at a screen, tapping lines of code on a keyboard. How could this image have 
anything in common with Slobodkina’s old peddler in Caps for Sale?
In the story, the peddler carries his wares, the caps, on the top of his head, 
stacked one on top of the other. The peddler always stacks the caps in the same 
order: first his own checked cap, then the gray caps, then the brown caps, then the 
blue caps, and then the red caps on top. One day the peddler encounters a frustrat­
ing challenge. He takes a nap under a tree and wakes to discover that while he was 
sleeping, a group of monkeys stole his caps. The tree was filled with monkeys, and 
each monkey wore one of the peddler's caps.
The peddler shakes his finger at the monkeys and commands them, “You 
monkeys you, you give me back my caps!” (Slobodkina 1987, 30). The monkeys, of 
course, shake their fingers back at him, mirroring his actions. Then the peddler 
begins to get frustrated, and the situation escalates. He shakes his fists and shouts, 
and he stamps his feet. In each case, the monkeys imitate his actions. They do not 
give the peddler his caps. At last the peddler becomes so angry that he takes his 
own checked cap off his head, throws it on the ground, and begins to walk away. 
Then what do the monkeys do? They take off their caps and throw them to the 
ground! The peddler is able to collect his caps and return to his rounds.
How is the experience of the peddler similar to the experience of a computer 
programmer? Most of us can recognize that the peddler uses a series of commands 
to try to get what he wants. The word “command” is a programming term, but 
even those of us who don’t work with computers have heard the word before. 
Also familiar is the level of frustration the peddler experiences. Many of us have 
become angry while trying in vain to accomplish something with a computer. The 
peddler’s experience with the monkeys is remarkably similar to the debugging or 
troubleshooting process a programmer might use to try to solve a problem with 
computer code. 
Who would have guessed that a popular picture book published more than 
seventy-​five years ago would demonstrate core computer science concepts such 
as commands and troubleshooting? And yet, it does. As you can see, many of the 
ideas at the core of computer science and robotics learning may already be familiar 
to early childhood educators. But perhaps we simply haven’t encountered them 
in a technological context. Remember, a key disposition for teaching robotics 
to young children is a willingness to abandon the role of the expert. We are all 

14
INTRODUCTION
learning together. Our job is to guide the children along the path, but we will all 
walk the path together.
Basic Terms and Concepts 
Robotics activities fall under the category of STEM learning. Every robotics activity 
has some connection to each of the four STEM subject areas, but technology and 
engineering are probably the most obvious connections. The term “technology” 
is often used synonymously with the term “computer science.” The formal defi­
nition of “technology” includes any kind of machine or equipment invented to 
solve a problem (such as a wind-​up alarm clock), while the formal definition of 
“computer science” is restricted to the study of devices that are programmed by 
computer code. Informally, however, people often use both terms to refer to any­
thing related to computers and electronics. In this book, I’ll usually use the term 
“technology” broadly to include both computer science and engineering, such as 
mechanical engineering, and “computer science” to refer specifically to computer 
programming–related topics. The term “coding” is often used broadly to mean all 
things related to computers, but coding is actually a more specific task. To code, 
or to write code, means to program a computer. You may be familiar with the term 
“code” as related to secret codes or Morse code. A code is a sequence of symbols, 
such as letters or numbers, that represent meaning. Coding in computer science is 
an active process in which the programmer makes decisions about what to accom­
plish and then writes or creates a code to make that happen. Some of the robotics 
devices introduced in chapter 3 involve coding at an introductory level. 
What makes robotics so exciting for young children is that a robot is a tangible 
thing that can be built or moved or manipulated in some way. The three-​dimensional, 
real-​world characteristics and processes of robotics involve engineering—​the “E” in 
“STEM.” Building robots and robotic devices may involve many different subcatego­
ries of engineering, depending on the materials and structures used. These different 
kinds of engineering include mechanical engineering, electrical engineering, and 
design engineering. For most young children, these tangible, concrete aspects of 
building, manipulating, and maneuvering are more meaningful than the abstract 
coding aspects. For this reason, we’ll focus on engineering first, in chapter 2, before 
we move on to coding or programming activities in chapter 3.

INTRODUCTION
15
How to Use This Book 
The activities in this book are presented in five chapters. The activities appear in an 
intentional sequence. This sequence builds a foundation of understanding intro­
ductory robotics concepts to prepare children for a lifetime of learning in computer 
science and engineering. In general, the sequence progresses from the familiar to 
the novel, from what children already know about their world to ideas and experi­
ences that may be new. And yet there’s no need to follow the exact order of activi­
ties in this book. Use the table of contents to choose the activities that seem most 
relevant to the interests and abilities of the children in your care. Dip in and out, 
experiment, and see what works for you. Model an open and investigative process 
for the children as you explore the concepts and materials in this book.
Think of this book as a cookbook. Skip around and try the activities that seem 
most intriguing and appealing to you and the children. The activities in chapter 1 
(“What Is a Robot?”) are like appetizers, whetting the children’s interest in robots. 
Chapter 2 (“How Do We Build Robots?”) is like the first course, a beginning yet 
satisfying portion of robotics information and experiences. Chapter 3 (“How Do 
We Tell Robots What to Do?”) is like the main course. The activities in this chapter, 
which introduce real coding experiences with actual robotic devices, are the real 
meat of the book. Chapter 4 (“How Do Robots Help Us?”) is like the dessert, adding 
an extra layer of understanding of how robots can make the world a sweeter and 
better place. Finally, chapter 5 (“How Can We Learn More about Robots?”) is like a 
late-​night snack—​some added taste and nutrition that comes later, after the meal 
has been digested. 
Here is a brief description of the core content of each chapter:
Chapter 1: What Is a Robot? 
The activities in this chapter foster creative and critical thinking about what makes 
a robot a robot. We can emphasize some core characteristics (robots are pro­
grammed by people, robots have power, robots have jobs to do) when we introduce 
children to robotics, but children’s own original ideas, observations, and defini­
tions are valuable and important too.

16
INTRODUCTION
Chapter 2: How Do We Build Robots?
The activities in this chapter focus on engineering. Most involve hands-​on, open-​
ended construction with a variety of materials. These experiences introduce chil­
dren to core ideas in physics and engineering, such as simple machines and the 
design engineering process.
Chapter 3: How Do We Tell Robots What to Do?
People tell robots what to do through programming, also known as coding. We give 
robots commands using different kinds of programming languages. The activities 
in this chapter introduce children to coding-​related concepts, such as identifying 
patterns and creating a sequence. You can conduct many of these activities with­
out specialized equipment. This chapter also provides guidance for introducing 
children to tangible tech devices like Bee-​Bots and Cubetto, as well as introductory 
coding apps such as Kodable and ScratchJr.
Chapter 4: How Do Robots Help Us?
At the core of relationship-​based robotics is the idea that we can use robots to 
help change the world and make it better. The activities in this chapter focus on 
how robots can help people, animals, and our environment. These activities are 
intended for children who have already had some experience thinking about 
robots and who enjoy imagining what they can do with robots.
Chapter 5: How Can We Learn More about Robots?
The activities and resources in this chapter provide guidance on helping children 
transition from an introductory understanding of computer science to higher-​level 
learning in elementary, middle, and high school. These ideas could also be mean­
ingful for children in after-​school enrichment programs.
The Hundred Languages of Children 
The activities in this book can function within many different curriculum models. 
They lend themselves easily to theme-​based curriculum units on the topics of 
robots, machines, building, construction, and so on. For teachers working in pro­
grams that use an emergent curriculum model or a project-​based model, these 
activities can serve as your go-​to resource when children demonstrate an interest 

INTRODUCTION
17
in how things work. In my own experience learning about and practicing project-​
based learning experiences, I am frequently inspired by the Reggio Emilia concept 
of the “hundred languages of children.” Loris Malaguzzi, the visionary founder of 
Italy’s Reggio Emilia schools, famously said that children have a hundred differ­
ent ways of thinking, playing, speaking, and listening. Robotics activities inspire 
children to develop even more new languages—​languages made up of codes and 
patterns, of metal and blocks, of shapes and movements. The concept of the hun­
dred languages aligns perfectly with the powerful idea of representation in the 
Framework.
While some early childhood teachers may fear that introducing technology to 
young children will silence their creativity, the Reggio Emilia schools have proven 
otherwise. In the book The Hundred Languages of Children: The Reggio Emilia Expe­
rience in Transformation, there is a wonderful story describing the meaningful and 
developmentally appropriate use of robotics in an emergent project. The children 
observed from a classroom window that during a storm, a branch had broken from 
a tree. The children wanted to find a way for the branch to communicate with its 
“mother,” the tree. With guidance from their teachers, the children were able to 
use a robotics kit to record an audio track and attach a light sensor to the branch 
so that when the sun rose each morning, the branch would say to the tree, “Good 
morning, Mommy” (Forman 2012, 345). This is the kind of meaningful experience 
at the heart of relationship-​based robotics.


19
1
What Is a Robot?
The Important Thing about Robots
The Important Book, written by Margaret Wise Brown and illustrated by Leonard 
Weisgard, was first published in 1949. The book describes the essential heart of 
everyday objects or experiences with poetic simplicity. “The important thing about 
a spoon is that you eat with it. It’s like a little shovel. . . . The important thing about 
rain is that it is wet” (Brown 1999, 1–4). If Margaret Wise Brown were writing The 
Important Book today, I think she might include something like this: “The impor­
tant thing about a robot is that you program it. It’s a machine that will do what you 
tell it to do. A robot might have a face or arms, but it’s not alive. You use a computer 
to tell the robot what to do. But the important thing about a robot is that you pro­
gram it.”
The activities in this chapter help teachers observe and listen to children to 
gain some understanding of what children already know and believe about robots. 
These activities also promote children’s critical thinking about what makes a robot 
a robot and dispel some of the misconceptions about robots. One misconception 
both children and adults often hold is that robots might, at any moment, become 
crazed or evil, out of control, on the fritz. The image of the evil or dangerously 
malfunctioning robot has been a staple of stories in popular culture for a long 
time, especially since the creepy robotic computer HAL in Stanley Kubrick’s 1968 
film 2001: A Space Odyssey. The image of the evil robot appears in children’s litera­
ture and media as well, from the out-​of-​control robot in Katie Van Camp’s picture 
book CookieBot! to the evil robots in the animated Transformers movies. Children 
and adults need to know that robots are machines invented and programmed by 
humans. We tell robots what to do by creating commands in the form of com­
puter code. Most of the activities in this chapter are open-​ended and give children 

20
CHAPTER 1
opportunities to develop their own imaginative ideas and inventions. But one core 
idea teachers can emphasize is this notion that people build and control robots, 
and that every child has the power to learn how to become a robotics engineer.
Activity 1.1
Famous Robots 
Many young children already have some ideas about what a robot is and what a 
robot can do. They’ve seen TV shows and movies about robots, such as BB-​8 from 
Star Wars: The Force Awakens. Most, if not all, of these robot characters are fictional, 
but they may have some features and characteristics that are based on existing 
technology. Asking questions about these famous robot characters will help reveal 
children’s thinking about robots. These conversations may also help children 
discover and identify the important and essential characteristics of robots. Con­
versations about famous robots on TV or in movies will also challenge children to 
develop critical thinking skills about what’s real and possible and what’s pretend 
and unlikely to happen in real life. These conversations can be both reassuring and 
inspiring for children.
As you discuss famous robots, you can build your conversations around these 
big questions:
▸▸What kinds of robots are in books, on TV, in movies, or in video games?
▸▸Are robots real?
▸▸How can we figure out what’s real and what’s pretend?
▸▸What is a robot, anyway?
These conversations may come up spontaneously, when children talk about a 
movie they saw or when a child comes to school with a robot T-​shirt or toy. You can 
use this opportunity as a teachable moment and begin a conversation about robots 
on the spot. These conversations can take place in groups or one-​on-​one. A smaller 
rather than larger group of children at a center or during snack would probably 
work best for developing conversations in which everyone can participate.

21
WHAT IS A ROBOT?
A conversation about famous robots could also be a preplanned activity at story 
time or in a learning center. Find a picture book, movie poster, or action figure 
that represents a robot from a well-​known movie or story. The Star Wars robots 
are well known among young children. Some other robot characters they might 
know include Baymax from the movie Big Hero 6, WALL-​E or EVE from the movie 
WALL-​E, Rodney Copperbottom from the movie Robots, Rescue Bots from the 
Transformers cartoons, the robot dog Goddard in The Adventures of Jimmy Neutron 
TV show, Rolie Polie Olie from the William Joyce picture book and TV show Rolie 
Polie Olie, or the robot dog from the PBS Kids show Ready Jet Go!
This activity is simply about having meaningful conversations with children. 
Conversations about robots can be long or short. You may begin a conversation 
about robots one day, without much interest from the children. And then another 
day, you find that something sparks the children’s imagination, and you’re able to 
have a much longer conversation.
These conversations are informal preassessments of children’s thinking. Ask­
ing children open-​ended questions about robots will tell you what they already 
know about robots and what they want to know. Listening carefully to their 
answers will provide helpful guidance and insights as you prepare to teach the 
other activities in this book.
You may want to document these conversations by taking notes, writing down 
children’s responses word for word, or recording the conversations with audio or 
video recordings or digital photographs.
Here are some discussion questions about robots you can ask children:
▸▸(Point to a robot picture or toy.) Have you seen this robot before? 
What can you tell me about this robot?
▸▸What can this robot do?
▸▸Can this robot talk and make noises? What does this robot say?
▸▸Can this robot move around? How does it move?
▸▸Where does this robot live?
▸▸What is this robot made of?
▸▸Is this robot real or pretend? How do you know?

22
CHAPTER 1
▸▸How is this robot similar to a real, living person? How is it different 
from a person?
▸▸Do you like this robot? Why or why not?
Be aware that some children may have had experiences viewing robot movies 
or shows that are frightening for young children, such as the Terminator movies. 
If children express or show fear and anxiety about these robots, the role of the 
teacher is to be direct and reassuring, emphasizing that these robots are not real 
and can’t hurt them. Teachers can share with families the fears children express 
in these conversations, along with positive feedback about the importance of lis­
tening to children and establishing what they already know and understand about 
robots.
If children show an interest in expanding the conversations, create a robot 
photo album or poster. Print out images of robots and invite children to arrange 
and glue them onto paper. Ask children to dictate labels and descriptions of each 
robot. Put the pages together into a book or display them as posters.
Activity 1.2
Machine Faces 
While most of the robots children see in the media are humanoid, many real robots 
do not have faces. Young children may have a hard time understanding that a 
robot doesn’t have to have a face. This activity, which promotes critical thinking, 
will help children develop an understanding that there is more than one way for a 
robot to look. This understanding will build a foundation for deeper explorations 
of robotics later on.
This activity also plays with the ways in which people tend to personify machines 
and inanimate objects. Humans seem to have a natural desire to see the human 
form and faces all around them. "Pareidolia" is the term for the human tendency 
to see faces or other familiar patterns in the environment. When you look at the 
pattern of bolts on your lawn mower and see them as two eyes, a nose, and a mouth, 
that’s an example of pareidolia. In this activity, children can have some fun with the 
idea of machines with faces as you continue to explore the characteristics of robots.

23
WHAT IS A ROBOT?
As you explore the personification of machines with children, here are some 
big questions to consider and discuss:
▸▸Do robots always have faces?
▸▸Can a machine have a face?
▸▸What is a face? Why do people need faces?
This activity may arise as a spontaneous teachable moment, when a conversa­
tion leads to the topic of faces. This could also be a planned activity or a discussion 
for circle time or a learning center. To prepare, collect images of machines with 
faces. Here are some sources you could use: 
•• www.technocrazed.com/amazing-​faces-​hidden-​in-​everyday-​objects
-​photo-​gallery
•• www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-​2265793/Who-​looking-​Even
-​mundane-​everyday-​objects-​reveal-​friendly-​face.html
•• www.nydailynews.com/life-​style/hidden-​faces-​everyday-​objects
-​gallery-​1.1248057
Visit these sites and prepare the photos in advance. Many websites have adver­
tisements that are not appropriate for young children to view.
When you begin talking with children about robots, they may express the idea 
(based on what they’ve seen in movies or on TV) that robots share many physical 
characteristics with people. Many of the robot characters they’ve seen have arms, 
legs, and faces. This activity provides an opportunity to explore the idea that some 
robots and machines have faces or can be imagined with faces. It also provides an 
opportunity for children to compare robots to the machines they see in their own 
environment at school or at home.
Invite a small group of children to look at images of robot characters, perhaps 
revisiting the images from the previous activity. Ask children to identify the eyes, 
nose, and mouth on each robot face. Then show children a few images of hidden 
faces on machines and everyday objects, like those on the websites listed previously.
Go on a face hunt around your classroom or school to see if children can find 
faces hidden in everyday objects. Take photos of what the children find. Use the 

24
CHAPTER 1
results of your face hunt to encourage children to compare robots to familiar 
machines, such as clocks, cars, refrigerators, TVs, vacuum cleaners, and so on. 
Draw children’s attention to how many machines they and their families use each 
day. Begin a list called “Machines We Know” and post it in the classroom. This list 
may be important later, when children are learning more about how things work.
Activity 1.3
Make a Robot Face 
In the previous activity, children imagined faces on machines and appliances. In 
this activity, children add paper features to machines to create faces of their own 
design. Both of these activities build on children’s natural tendency to personify 
objects. The activities provide opportunities to talk about the similarities and dif­
ferences among people, machines, computers, and robots.
As you continue to explore the idea of robot faces with children, here are some 
questions to consider and discuss:
▸▸Can a machine have a face?
▸▸What is a face? 
▸▸What are the features on a face, and what do they do?
▸▸Are machines like people? In what ways?
This activity, making robot faces, is a natural extension of the previous activity. 
In fact, the children may, at some point, spontaneously ask to add paper faces or 
features to machines once they start noticing the machines in their environment. 
To prepare for this activity, gather markers and sticky notes (or paper and tape) for 
making eyes, noses, and mouths to attach onto machines. (Avoid stickers or tape 
that would be difficult to remove later.)
To begin, invite the children to look for machines, computers, and appliances 
in their environment—​both large and small, such as refrigerators, telephones, lap­
tops, air conditioners, or clocks. Ask the children, “Does this machine have a face?” 
See if the machine already has any features that look like they could be eyes, a nose, 

25
WHAT IS A ROBOT?
or a mouth. Have the children stick paper eyes, nose, or mouth to the machine to 
make it look like it has a face.
The children may also enjoy giving each machine a name and creating stories 
about the machines with faces. Ask questions that will inspire the children to think 
about the personalities of the machines. For example, ask, “If this machine could 
talk, what would it say?” Invite the children to dictate stories individually or as a 
group.
Don’t be afraid to encourage children’s imaginative and fictional ideas about 
machines, computers, and robots. This kind of activity builds a foundation for 
later robotics learning because it draws children’s attention to the visible features 
of machines and the machine’s parts and functions. If children ask questions or 
seem curious about how the machine works and how it is made, make note of these 
questions and begin an inquiry process for investigating the answers. Many of the 
activities in chapter 2 of this book (“How Do We Build Robots?”) will use an inquiry-​
based learning process to help build children’s knowledge of how machines and 
robots are made.

26
CHAPTER 1
Activity 1.4
Talk Like a Robot 
In the previous two activities, as the children imagine and create faces for the 
appliances and tech devices in their world, they are essentially making friends with 
machines. A natural extension of these experiences is to imagine what a machine 
would sound like if it could speak to us. 
As you continue to explore the characteristics of machines and robots with 
children, here are some big questions to consider and ask:
▸▸If a machine could talk, what would it say?
▸▸What would a machine’s voice sound like?
▸▸Is a talking machine a robot? 
▸▸What language do robots use?
▸▸What makes a robot a robot?
This activity is another natural extension of the previous activities, in which 
children imagine machines that have some of the same characteristics as people. 
The children may, at some point, spontaneously begin speaking in mechanical 
voices during these activities and conversations. They may have seen movies or 
animations in which machines or robots speak, and the children may have some 
preconceived notions about the tone, speed, and articulations of a robot voice or a 
machine voice.
For this activity there are no special materials to prepare ahead of time, but 
you may choose to make audio or video recordings of the children’s voices and 
conversations.
To begin, point to a machine (with or without a face) in your school environ­
ment and ask the children, “If this machine could talk, what would it sound like?” 
Or point to one of the robot images or toys used in a previous activity and ask, 
“How does this robot talk?” Invite the children to talk like robots and machines. 
Children will likely speak in mechanical voices, with a flat tone and a slow, even 
pace. Describe what you hear. For example, “That voice sounds different from 
your regular voice. Your machine voice sounds very plain and flat. I don’t hear 

27
WHAT IS A ROBOT?
any excitement in your voice when you talk like that.” Ask the children, “How do 
you know a machine would talk like this?” and “Why would a robot have a voice 
like that?” 
The purpose of this activity is to generate interest in the characteristics, func­
tions, and structures of machines and robots. You don’t need to explain to the 
children exactly how robot voices are generated, though some children will have 
ideas about that. Make note of children’s observations, guesses, and ideas as you 
continue to nurture their curiosity about robots and how they work.
The children may enjoy trying out their robot voices during regular classroom 
activities. Invite the children to sing a familiar song, such as “Twinkle, Twinkle, 
Little Star,” in their robot voices. The children may also enjoy pretending to move 
like robots. Choose a song with motions, such as “Head and Shoulders, Knees and 
Toes,” and invite the children to move like robots. Or, the next time your group is 
making a transition, such as going outdoors to play, invite the children to walk like 
robots. Later, when children learn more about how real robots move, you can look 
back on these earlier understandings and make comparisons and observations 
about what the children are learning about robots.
Activity 1.5
Robot Dance Party 
Here’s an active and kinesthetic way to extend children’s thinking about robots and 
how they move: a robot dance party! 
You can offer this activity as an option for free play, indoors or outdoors. The 
robot dance party also makes for a fun, active movement option on a cold or rainy 
day. You’ll need a music source, such as a CD or digital music player, and plenty of 
room to dance. When you’re selecting music for the robot dance party, you could 
choose any songs (from any genre) that are appropriate for young children. Elec­
tronic music, created using computers or synthesizers, is also a great choice. Chil­
dren may be able to make a connection between the artificial sounds of electronic 
music and the artificial movements of a robot, especially if they have seen robots 
and heard electronic music as soundtracks on TV and in movies. A few examples of 
electronic instrumental music are the songs “Breaking Away” by the band Ratatat 
and “A New Error” by Moderat.

28
CHAPTER 1
To begin, turn on the music and invite the children to dance “like robots.” Some 
children may not have any prior knowledge or experience about how robots move, 
but some may have seen videos or cartoons of robots and may have some ideas 
about how a robot might move. If children need suggestions or ideas, here are 
some questions to ask:
▸▸How do robots move?
▸▸How is a robot different from a person? 
How is it the same?
▸▸How would you dance if your legs were made out of metal or plastic?
▸▸How would you dance if you had wheels instead of legs?
If you feel that the children need a visual prompt to help them think about how 
robots might move, show them a video of a Nao robot dancing. The Nao is a human­
oid robot that has performed internationally with professional dancers. There are 
many Nao dance videos available online, such as this one: www.ted.com/talks
/bruno_maisonnier_dance_tiny_robots.
Moving like robots leads naturally to deeper conversations about the character­
istics of robots. Build conversations around open-​ended questions. For example, 
ask, “What makes a robot move like that?” and “How are a robot’s legs different 
from your legs?”
Make note of children’s observations, guesses, or knowledge about the design 
and the materials of a robot, especially if children use specific terms for parts, such 
as “hinges” or “bolts” or “metal.” You can explore and develop these terms and 
ideas in later activities.
Activity 1.6
Robot Picture Books 
Finding a good read-​aloud story about robots is a surprisingly difficult task. Most 
nonfiction books about robots are much too advanced for young children, and 
most fictional picture books don’t demonstrate computer science or engineering 

29
WHAT IS A ROBOT?
concepts accurately. Few picture books offer engaging read-​aloud stories that will 
spark creative, critical thinking around this essential question: “What is a robot?”
One notable exception is Me and My Robot, written by Tracey West and illus­
trated by Cindy Revell. This book tells the story of a boy named Reese as he and his 
robot work to help locate a lost kitten. Reese’s robot begins the search by asking 
questions to find out the characteristics of a kitten. Although the text does not 
incorporate any programming terms, the lines of dialogue between Reese and 
his robot serve as the computer code or commands that direct the actions of the 
robot. After Reese explains to his robot that a kitten is an animal, the robot finds 
an animal—in this case, a big dog. The robot responded to the command to find an 
animal successfully, but now Reese must refine his code. Reese describes the kitten 
as small. Later, when even greater detail is needed to narrow the search, he tells the 
robot that a kitten is also soft and furry. Reese gives verbal commands to his robot 
in a manner that’s similar to the way computer programmers write lines of code. 
Here’s a list of recommended robot picture books:
•• Boy and Bot by Ame Dyckman
•• Clink by Kelly DiPucchio
•• If I Had a Robot by Dan Yaccarino
•• If I Had a Robot Dog by Andrea 
Baruffi
•• I Like Robots by Olga Kilicci
•• Mama Robot by Davide Cali
•• Me and My Robot by Tracey West
•• My Robot by Eve Bunting
•• Rafa Was My Robot by Alexandra 
Dellevoet
•• Robot Dog by Mark Oliver
•• Robot Rumpus by Sean Taylor
•• The Robot Alphabet by Amanda 
Baehr Fuller
•• The Robot Book by Heather Brown
•• Robots at Home by Christine 
Zuchora-​Walske
•• Robots Everywhere by Denny Hebson
•• Robots, Robots Everywhere! by Sue 
Fliess
•• Robot Zot! by Jon Scieszka
•• Rolie Polie Olie by William Joyce
•• Snowbots by Aaron Reynolds
•• Wendel’s Workshop by Chris Riddell
•• Wodney Wat’s Wobot by Helen Lester

30
CHAPTER 1
Before and after reading a robot picture book, ask the children questions such 
as these:
▸▸What is a robot?
▸▸How is a robot like a person?
▸▸What can robots do?
▸▸What materials do you think this robot is made of? 
▸▸How is this robot like a person? How is it like a machine?
Generate conversations that will help children make connections between the 
previous activities and the robots presented in the books. Note children’s com­
ments and questions about robots as documentation of the children’s learning 
and thinking. Look for opportunities to develop a working definition of the word 
“robot.” Begin a chart or poster with the phrase “A robot is” and create a running 
list of children’s ideas. You can refer back to this list, add to it, and edit it as chil­
dren’s understanding of robots deepens and grows.
Activity 1.7
Take Apart a Machine or Robot
In this activity, you will demonstrate for the children how a simple machine can be 
taken apart. Any kind of take-​apart activity provides an opportunity for children to 
learn how things work and to develop an understanding that machines and robots 
are made up of many different parts. Old clocks and fans make great take-​aparts 
because they usually have large, visible gears and other parts that turn.
An adult must carefully supervise and facilitate a take-​apart activity. Young 
children usually do not have the dexterity and small-​motor skills to use tools and 
manipulate small pieces of machines and appliances safely. This activity is best 
done at a table with a small group of children.
Prep the take-​apart machine ahead of time to ensure the activity will be suc­
cessful. Check online for information about possible hazardous materials in the 

31
WHAT IS A ROBOT?
item you are taking apart. Beware of electronic devices, such as TV sets, that may 
contain hazardous materials. A good resource for information about safely taking 
apart household items is the Instructables website: www.instructables.com/howto
/take+apart.
As mentioned previously, clocks and fans are ideal for a take-​apart activity. 
Many electronic and mechanical toys also make for good take-​aparts.
You will likely need a set of screwdrivers in different sizes to remove screws and 
open up the cover of the device or machine. Practice removing the cover ahead of 
time so you’ll be ready to demonstrate this step for the children.

32
CHAPTER 1
Prepare some small bins or trays for placing the smaller parts, hardware, and 
other components that you remove from the machine. The bins and trays can be 
used to pass the parts around the table so the children can look at them closely.
Before taking the machine apart, ask the children to make some guesses or pre­
dictions about what they will find inside. Then take off the cover of the device and 
look inside. Ask children what they see. If possible, document the process, along 
with their observations, using audio or video recordings and photos.
If possible, give children active roles in the take-​apart process. They may be able 
to help you turn the screwdriver to loosen a screw or help gather bolts into a box. 
Be sure to pass around the parts for children to look at closely. You may also 
want to provide magnifying glasses or flashlights to help children with their 
observations.
During and after the take-​apart activity, ask open-​ended questions such as 
these:
▸▸What’s inside a machine?
▸▸What are the parts of a machine?
▸▸How do we take things apart?
Afterward, look for opportunities for children to incorporate tools and hard­
ware into their play. Many toy stores and school supply companies sell plastic or 
wooden nuts-​and-​bolts sets as well as tool sets.
Activity 1.8
Clay Robots 
In this activity, children build their own robots out of clay or dough and use real 
metal parts to add features to their robots. Making clay robots is a safe way for chil­
dren to enjoy a sensory experience with authentic hardware components.
This activity will challenge children to further explore the essential question 
“What is a robot?” Building robots out of clay and hardware also explores questions 
such as “What is the structure (shape and form) of a robot?” and “What are the 
parts of a robot?”

33
WHAT IS A ROBOT?
For this activity, you will need soft 
clay or dough and hardware, such as 
nuts, bolts, and washers.
Place hardware on a tray or on paper 
plates and invite children to incorporate 
the metal pieces into their clay robots. 
Often the children will use the hardware 
to create faces and other features on 
their robots. The children can save and 
take home their creations, or you could 
instruct the children, as part of the pro­
cess, to take apart their creations and 
put the hardware back in the trays to be 
used again.
To extend and expand on children’s 
ideas and creations, you can introduce 
other materials to incorporate. Here are 
some recommended items:
•• toothpicks
•• strings
•• wire
•• bottle caps
Activity 1.9
What Is Metal? 
As you engage in conversations about machines and robots with children, they will 
likely make some observations about the colors and textures of the materials from 
which the devices are made. Some young children may already be familiar with the 
word “metal” and may know a little bit about what it means. They may know that 
metal can be a hard and shiny material, that it often appears silver or gray in color, 
or that most cars and trucks are made primarily out of metal. 

34
CHAPTER 1
In this activity, children explore the characteristics of metal and develop hands-​
on experience identifying objects made out of metal. As you explore the concept of 
metal with children, consider and discuss these big questions:
▸▸What is metal?
▸▸What is metal good for?
▸▸Why would someone choose to make something out of metal?
▸▸How is metal different from other materials, such as cloth or wood?
For this activity, you will need the following materials:
•• a variety of metal objects found around school or home
•• a basket or box for collecting things
•• removable stickers or sticky notes
Begin by placing several metal items on a table. Ask children to explore the 
items and think about what all these things have in common. Items might include 
a spoon, a pan, a piece of foil, or a toy car made out of metal. Ask, “How are all these 
things the same?”
After the children have had an opportunity to touch and talk about the metal 
objects, ask the children if they have any ideas about what all the objects have 
in common. For very young children (three or four years old), who might not 
yet be familiar with the word “metal,” you could guide the children to notice the 
silver color as something the items have in common. Children who are a bit older 
may be able to identify the common material and use the word “metal” without 
prompting. Take your time, listen to the children, and see how the conversation 
develops.
Once children have identified the common material as metal, invite them to 
hunt for metal in the classroom or school environment. You could give them a box 
or basket to collect metal things, or they could attach a sticker or sticky note to 
larger items or items like doorknobs that are attached to other things. Take photos 
or make lists to document children’s discoveries.
The children’s conversations around the question “Is this metal?” will lead 
naturally to some discussion of the characteristics of metal. Initially children may 

35
WHAT IS A ROBOT?
be focused solely on color; they may believe that all silver things are metal or that 
metal is always silver. Additional experiences, conversations, and observations 
will help challenge and expand children’s thinking. Some children will be able to 
begin noticing other characteristics, such as a shiny surface. This activity is a good 
introduction to the next activity, which involves using magnets to help identify 
what is metal and what is not.
Activity 1.10
Magnets—​Is It Metal? 
Magnets are fascinating tools. Magnets are made out of metal, and magnets are 
attracted to certain kinds of metal. Many young children have played with mag­
netic toys, such as magnetic tiles, but they may not have been aware that the plastic 
pieces contain magnets that stick to one another. In many magnetic construction 
toys, the magnets are hidden or difficult to see. Children may not be aware that 
the toys have magnets inside of them. For this activity, the best type of magnet to 
use is a large, strong horseshoe or bar magnet. These large magnets, which are not 
connected to or part of a toy or construction set, allow children to see and explore 
the specific characteristics of magnets. You will also need different kinds of small 
objects, some metal and some not, as well as two bins or baskets. (Label the con­
tainers with words or symbols to designate “metal” and “not metal.”)
As you invite the children to explore the magnets, consider and discuss these 
big questions:
▸▸What is metal?
▸▸What is a magnet?
▸▸How do magnets interact with metal?
This activity works well when you introduce the materials and demonstrate the 
activity in a large group, and then make the materials available for children to use 
on their own in a learning center. Introduce this activity to children in a large group 
by asking the children, “What is metal?” Document their answers on a chart or list. 
Then ask, “How do you know if something is metal or not?” 

36
CHAPTER 1
Show children a magnet and say, “I have a tool that will help us figure out if 
something is metal. It’s called a magnet.” Demonstrate how a magnet will attract 
or stick to something that is metal. Invite children to use the magnets to help them 
figure out which items are metal and which are not.
A related activity that children may enjoy is hiding or burying metal items in a 
bin of rice or other loose material and using magnets to find the items.
Depending on what objects you use for these activities, the children may dis­
cover that a magnet will not attract some types of metal, such as copper pennies. 
This discovery can lead to a conversation about different kinds of metals. Magnets 
are attracted to metals like iron and nickel. Magnets are not attracted to metals like 
copper, silver, or aluminum.
Activity 1.11
Build with “Metal” Blocks 
Cooking foil is a wonderful classroom material for young children because it is 
flexible. Children can bend and mold foil into different shapes. Most cooking foil 
is made out of aluminum, which is not attracted to magnets. 
In this activity, you will observe what happens when you cover wooden blocks 
in foil and invite children to construct “metal” buildings and machines. Playing 
with foil-​covered blocks allows children to continue to explore the big question 
“What is metal?” Here are other big questions to consider and discuss:
▸▸What is metal?
▸▸What is wood?
▸▸How are wood and metal different? 
How are they the same?
Introduce this activity to the whole group, then make the materials available in 
the block area during free play. You will need at least one roll of cooking foil, as well 
as a set of wooden blocks. (Standard unit blocks work best.)
To prepare, cover some wooden unit blocks with foil ahead of time. Then show 
children the blocks and ask, “How are these different from the blocks you know? 

37
WHAT IS A ROBOT?
What are they made out of?” Then invite the children to build and experiment with 
the foil-​covered blocks.
Observe the children’s play. It may be interesting to note if the foil influences the 
ways in which the children build and play with blocks. Are the children more likely 
to build machines or robots when the blocks are shiny and smooth like metal? 
During or after block play, ask the children, “Which is better for building? Metal 
or wood? Why do you think so?”
As an extension of this activity, the children may be interested in covering some 
of the blocks with foil themselves. Or they may want to use foil in other ways, to 
bend and shape and make things.
As another extension activity, invite children to compare similar items made 
out of wood and metal side by side, such as a wooden spoon and a metal spoon. 
Encourage children to touch and hold the items and compare how they feel in their 
hands. Which one feels smoother? Which one feels heavier? Which spoon would 
you rather use to eat your dinner, and why?
Activity 1.12
Robots in Real Life 
Up to this point, you and the children have probably been using the words “robot” 
and “machine” interchangeably. Now it’s time to offer an activity that will expose 
children to the idea that a robot is not an ordinary machine. It is programmable. 
A robot has a brain called a computer (or computer chip, known technically as an 
integrated circuit). People program a robot by giving it commands. We tell robots 
what to do.
In this activity, you will introduce children to a real robot, a machine with an 
operating system (a computer) that runs it and tells it what to do. A smartphone, 
an ATM, and a Roomba (robotic vacuum cleaner) are a few examples that are likely 
to be present already in the lives of young children.
A Roomba is an especially good example of a real robot because it not only has 
a computer chip or circuit board, but it also moves around. Movement, as you may 
have observed during some of the previous activities, such as activity 1.5 (Robot 
Dance Party) is an essential characteristic of a robot.

38
CHAPTER 1
This activity will inspire conversations around many of the big questions about 
robots:
▸▸What is a robot?
▸▸What can a robot do?
▸▸What robots do you know?
▸▸Do families need robots? Why or why not?
This activity works best as a planned group activity, introduced when you see 
that children are noticing and thinking about the ways we program robots. You will 
need a device that demonstrates many, if not all, of the essential characteristics of 
a robot: it is programmable (has a computer or computer chip); it has a practical 
function (provides some kind of helpful service to people); and it performs some 
kind of action or movement (or makes a sound). The easiest example to find within 
your reach is probably a smartphone or tablet, though a device that moves would 
be even better. Perhaps there is an ATM within walking distance; the children will 
observe how the machine has mechanisms for reading a card and dispensing cash. 
Or perhaps you have access to a Roomba or another programmable household 
device.
To begin, gather the children and tell them that you have a robot you’d like them 
to meet. Show them the device you have chosen for the activity. Demonstrate how 
it works. If children say, “That’s not a robot,” ask them, “Why isn’t this a robot?” If 
possible, make the device talk or perform an action in response to a command. Use 
the word “command” frequently as you explain how the device works. This is an 
important vocabulary word for children to learn as they grow to understand that 
programming a robot means that we create a command that tells it what to do. 
Suggest, “Let’s tell this robot what to do,” and ask, “What command can we give this 
robot?” Then invite children to draw or make a model of the robot out of clay. Invite 
the children to dictate a description of the robot. 

39
WHAT IS A ROBOT?
Activity 1.13
Be the Boss of a Robot 
To deepen and clarify children’s understanding of how we program robots, revisit 
the picture book described in activity 1.6, Me and My Robot by Tracey West. Revisit­
ing this story after children have some experience observing and experiencing the 
concept of commands can lead to some fruitful discussion of the big question “How 
do we tell robots what to do?”
Read the story aloud, then invite the children to act out the story, taking on the 
roles of the boy, Reese; his robot, Robot; and Reese’s friend Lucy. Other children can 
play the roles of the animals in the story: the dog, some ants, a squirrel, a rabbit, 
and, of course, the kitten. Read the story again and have the story actors move and 
speak the dialogue as best they can.
Afterward, ask the children, “Who was in charge of the robot? Who told the 
robot what to do?” Discuss how Reese’s robot is similar to the real robot you 
observed in the previous activity. A robot is something you command.
Next, children may enjoy playing a robot version of the game Simon Says. Have 
the children be the robots, and you, as Simon, be the programmer. Use the term 
“command” to describe the instructions that Simon gives during the game. Say, for 
example, “Robots, here is your first command. Simon says put your hands on your 
head.” 
Activity 1.14
Is This a Robot? 
In this activity, you will present children with a variety of objects. Each one demon­
strates at least one characteristic of a robot. You will ask the children, “Is this a 
robot? Why or why not?” There are no right or wrong answers. The conversations 
and explorations will develop children’s critical thinking skills as they evaluate and 
compare the objects and consider many of the most important foundational char­
acteristics of robots. This activity will address the following big questions: 

40
CHAPTER 1
▸▸What is a robot?
▸▸What is a machine?
▸▸What is a computer?
▸▸What’s the difference between a machine and a robot?
▸▸Are all machines robots? Are all robots machines?
▸▸What’s the difference between a robot and a computer?
You will need a variety of objects, each one demonstrating a characteristic of a 
robot. Here is a suggested combination:
•• something that looks like a robot but doesn’t actually work, such as a wooden 
or rubber robot toy or a picture of a robot
•• a simple machine—​something that serves a purpose but is not programmable, 
such as a real or toy clock, a pencil sharpener, a stapler, or a coffeemaker
•• something that is programmable, such as a computer, smartphone, or tablet 
(I use an old, broken smartphone for this activity so I can let children play 
with it and not worry that it will be damaged.)
•• something that looks like a part of a robot, such as a plastic toy robot hand 
or toy grabber
This activity works well as a morning provocation, an activity presented to 
children as they are arriving in the classroom. You can invite children to touch and 
play with the objects and engage in conversations about what is a robot and what 
is not. For each item, ask the children, “Is this a robot?” Ask them to explain their 
thinking. Document children’s responses by making an audio or video recording 
or taking notes.
Based on the children’s ideas, create a documentation board or poster in 
response to the question “What is a robot?” Or, if you have already started this doc­
umentation (as suggested in activity 1.6), use this opportunity to revisit and revise 
your classroom definition of the word “robot.”

41
WHAT IS A ROBOT?
Here are some of the important ideas children may begin to develop:
▸▸A robot is a machine. It’s made out of parts. 
Some of the parts are metal.
▸▸A robot is not a person. A robot moves, 
but it’s not alive.
▸▸A robot has a job to do. People make robots do things. People tell robots what 
to do. If you give a command to a robot, it will do what you want it to do.
Activity 1.15
Robot Dramatic Play 
If you’ve been implementing some of the introductory activities in this book, 
reading stories about robots, and having exciting conversations about robots, the 
children may already be pretending to be robots as part of free play and outdoor 
play. In this activity, you and the children will make a simple robot costume out of 
foil and cardboard to use as a prop during pretend play.
Children can prepare the robot costume as a project in the art area, then use the 
box or boxes in the dramatic play area during free play. The suggested materials for 
this activity include the following:
•• cardboard boxes large enough for children to wear as a costume 
(Cut holes in advance for children’s head and arms if worn over the 
torso, or cut an opening for the child’s face if worn as a helmet.)
•• large roll of foil
•• glue
•• tape
•• stickers 

42
CHAPTER 1
To begin, invite children to cover and decorate the boxes with foil and stickers. 
Guide the children to flatten the sheets of foil against the sides of the box or boxes 
and secure them with glue or tape. Use stickers or other craft items to make robot 
features, such as buttons or switches, nuts and bolts, or battery packs.
When the costumes are complete and the glue is dry, the children can take turns 
wearing the robot costumes and pretending to be robots. As children play, observe 
their actions, listen to their dialogue, and write down what you see and hear as 
a story. Begin with the phrase “Once there was a robot.” Share the story with the 
children at group time. 
An observed story based on children’s pretend play might read something like 
this: “Once there was a robot named Elliot. He was friends with a kitten and a turtle. 
They lived in a cave and ate ice cream. Except robots don’t eat ice cream. They eat 
rocks for their batteries. The robot never went to sleep. His eyes were always open.”
Activity 1.16
Questions about Robots 
The previous activities in this chapter have encouraged children to think about 
what they already know about robots and extend that knowledge through play, 
exploration, and stories. Children have only just begun a lifelong journey learning 
about technology. Before continuing with new activities, take a moment to ask the 
children what else they want to know about robots. Use these questions to guide 
your next steps. You could do this activity as a large group during story time or 
circle time, or in smaller groups or even individually during free play or meals.
Begin a list titled “Questions We Have about Robots.” Encourage children to 
contribute their thoughts and ideas. Ask them, “What do you still want to know 
about robots?” and “What questions do you have about robots?” 
Post the list on the wall of the classroom and add to it as new questions sponta­
neously arise. You may also want to invite family members to add to the list.
Use the list of questions to help you decide which activities to implement in 
chapters 2 through 5 of this book. Using an inquiry-​based learning structure, the 
direction and topics of the curriculum are aligned with the children’s interests and 
are responsive to the children’s curiosity and questions.



45
2
How Do We Build Robots?
Thinking Like an Engineer
This chapter offers ideas and activities for introducing children to robot construc­
tion. It includes basic concepts related to mechanical engineering, spatial reason­
ing, physics, and design engineering.
Young children often have a keen interest in how things work. Through con­
struction and deconstruction experiences, children learn how parts make up a 
whole. This is true of a simple wooden puzzle, and it’s true of a complex robotic 
device. What makes a robot different from a wooden puzzle, however, is that 
a robot, like many other mechanical devices, moves and has power. Exploring 
motion and power is the focus of many of these activities.
Hexbugs: A Robot Case Study 
In each of the next activities, we’ll conduct a case study of one particular type of 
robotic toy. In my experience leading these activities with young children, I often 
have used robotic toys called Hexbugs. Hexbugs are bio-​inspired robots. Many 
of the Hexbug robots are designed, built, and programmed to mimic creatures 
that exist in the living world. The Hexbug line of toys includes a variety of differ­
ent kinds of creatures. The Nano is modeled after a common cockroach. There 
are also Hexbug spiders, larvae, and ants. Hexbug AquaBots are robots that can 
swim. Any robotic toy would work well for these first five activities in our robot 
case study, but these examples use Hexbugs because of the variety of types, sizes, 
and designs of the creatures. The simplest and smallest Hexbug toys, such as the 
Nano, are also less expensive than larger, more complex robotic toys currently on 
the market.

46
CHAPTER 2
Activity 2.1
Robot Free Play 
The first step in introducing young children to a new device or toy is simply to allow 
time and space for free play. Children will not be ready to discuss, observe, analyze, 
and reflect on how the devices work until they’ve had a chance to touch, manipu­
late, and play with these fascinating creatures. As mentioned earlier, the examples 
used in this activity are Hexbugs. 
As children explore these toys, they can ponder the following big questions:
▸▸What can robot toys do?
▸▸How do they work?
▸▸How do they move?
First, gather several robotic toys, enough for a small group of children to use 
together. Here are some recommended models of Hexbug toys (see www.hexbug
.com):
•• Hexbug Nano
•• Hexbug Scarab
•• Hexbug Fire Ant
And here are some other robotic toy options:
•• WowWee robotic animals, cars, or dinosaurs (http://wowwee.com)
•• Fisher-Price Bright Beats baby toys (www.fisher-​price.com/en_US/baby
/fpbaby/bright-​beats/index.html) 
Most young children are fascinated by robotic toys and are eager to play with 
them. When you first introduce robotic toys to young children, you may need to 
establish a plan for sharing the toys, perhaps including a sign-​up sheet and a time 
limit for each child. Teacher supervision and support will help children understand 
that even the most durable electronic toys need careful handling. Establishing 

47
HOW DO WE BUILD ROBOTS?
some simple rules and developmentally appropriate expectations for the use 
of electronic toys now will help the children understand and enjoy using more 
sophisticated devices later. 
Take note of children’s questions and comments as they play with the robotic 
toys. What fascinates them most? Are they curious about how the devices work 
or how they’re made? Pay careful attention to comments on how the devices 
move and any use of words related to the device’s power source, such as “power,” 
“battery,” “strong,” or “fast.” You’ll be able to build on these comments and ques­
tions in the next activities.
Activity 2.2
Real or Robot? 
This activity challenges children to think about how robots are similar to and dif­
ferent from real, living things. Hexbug insects work well for this activity because 
many are bio-​inspired robots, made to look like real insects and engineered to 
move like real insects.

48
CHAPTER 2
As children explore these toys, they can ponder the following big questions:
▸▸How is a robot like a living thing?
▸▸How is a robot different from a living thing?
▸▸How can we know what is alive and what is not alive?
For this activity, you’ll need the following materials:
•• robotic toys, such as Hexbugs
•• images, videos, or examples of the living creatures on which the robotic toys 
are modeled (For insects, such as ants or cockroaches, you can purchase real 
bugs preserved in plastic from school supply companies such as Celestron: 
www.celestron.com/browse-​shop/microscopes/microscope-​accessories
/other-​microscope-​accessories.)
Show the children an image, video, or example of a living creature that is simi­
lar to the robotic toy. For example, the Hexbug Nano is designed to look and move 
like a cockroach. For comparison, you could show the children a video of a cock­
roach, such as www.youtube.com/watch?v=iowSdSCSUwY.
After viewing the video or image, invite the children to observe how the robotic 
toy looks and moves. Invite the children to move their own bodies in ways that 
imitate the robots. Discuss the similarities and differences between the living crea­
ture and the robot. How is this robot similar to the living thing? How is this robot 
different from the living thing? Take note of the children’s ideas and observations.
Some children may enjoy drawing a picture of the robot and a picture of the 
living creature. The process of drawing a picture will help children observe and 
think about the specific characteristics and details. Some children may also enjoy 
making clay models of the robots and the creatures.

49
HOW DO WE BUILD ROBOTS?
Activity 2.3
Compare Robot to Robot 
For this activity, you will need two different kinds of robotic toys. The purpose of 
this activity is to draw children’s attention to the different structures and designs of 
robots and challenge children to make observations, develop ideas, and draw some 
initial conclusions about how robots are made and how the form or structure of the 
robot influences how the robot moves.
As children explore these toys, they can ponder the following big questions:
▸▸How are these two robots different from each other?
▸▸What do these robots have in common?
As children play with the robots side by side, discuss the ways in which the 
robots are similar and the ways in which they are different. Ask open-​ended ques­
tions that will draw children’s attention to the design, structure, and movement of 
the robots:
▸▸What do you notice about how these robots look?
▸▸Are they the same size? Or is one bigger and one smaller?
▸▸What do you notice about how these robots move?
▸▸Does one move faster than the other? Which one is faster?
▸▸What do you notice about the pieces and parts of these robots and how 
the pieces are put together?
As children notice details about how the robots look and how they are made, 
some of the children may comment on the materials used to make the robots. If a 
robotic toy has any metal parts, you may want to connect these observations and 
experiences to activities 1.9, 1.10, and 1.11 in the previous chapter.

50
CHAPTER 2
Activity 2.4
Robot Hospital 
Most robotic toys, such as Hexbugs, will eventually malfunction in some way. The 
battery will run out of power, or a part will loosen, and suddenly the toy no longer 
works or doesn’t work as well as it once did. Fortunately, these malfunctions can 
become teachable moments in the classroom. 
When children create a robot hospital for malfunctioning robots, they can pon­
der the following big questions:
▸▸Why do robots sometimes stop working?
▸▸How do we fix broken robots?
For this activity, you’ll need the following materials:
•• a broken robotic toy
•• extra batteries
•• screwdrivers of various sizes
When a robotic toy stops working properly, invite the children to create a robot 
hospital. The children may enjoy creating a welcoming hospital-​like environment 
that’s similar to a human hospital, with a soft blanket or bed on which the robot can 
rest. The children may also enjoy using dramatic play props, such a doctor’s coat 
and toy stethoscope, to pretend that they are taking care of the broken robot as a 
doctor would care for a patient in a hospital. 
Start a conversation with the children about what they think is wrong with the 
robot. Some children might have ideas that are fanciful or based on a personifica­
tion of the robot, such as “The robot has the flu” or “The robot has a broken heart.” 
Some children might have ideas that are more accurate, based on their observa­
tions and experiences with machines and robots, such as “It needs a new battery” 
or “The wires might be loose.”
With any battery-​powered toy, a weak or dead battery is often the cause of a mal­
function. If you have extra batteries that are the right size for this particular robotic 
toy, suggest that changing the battery is an option, and invite the children to help 

51
HOW DO WE BUILD ROBOTS?
you try to fix the toy. In most cases, a Phillips screwdriver will be the only equip­
ment you need to change the battery. The manufacturer’s website may provide 
specific details about what type of battery is needed and how to change it. Young 
children will probably not yet have the dexterity to assist with the tools, but you can 
give them turns to help by holding a flashlight or handing off the tools while you or 
another adult changes the battery.
If changing the battery does not fix the toy, discuss with the children other ideas 
they may have for why the toy is not working. Brainstorm possibilities and make a 
list of the children’s ideas. A related topic of discussion that might interest the chil­
dren is whether a broken robot is still fun to play with and whether it still has any 
value. Sometimes children have very interesting opinions and responses to such 
questions and enjoy debating the pros and cons of keeping a broken toy.
Activity 2.5
Robot Take-​Aparts 
If one of your robotic toys is broken, and changing the battery does not get it run­
ning again, the next step could be to take the device apart. Opening up the device 
and examining the inside can be an educational experience for all involved. The 
process may or may not reveal why the device stopped working. Regardless, chil­
dren will learn firsthand about the parts and pieces of a robot.
As children take apart a robot, they can ponder the following big questions:
▸▸What’s inside a robot?
▸▸How do robots work?
▸▸What are the parts of a robot, and how do they fit together?
For this activity, you’ll need a broken robotic toy. You’ll also need a set of screw­
drivers and other basic tools.
Taking apart any toy or electronic device requires direct adult supervision. In 
fact, the adult’s role is to lead and demonstrate the process. The children are pri­
marily observers in this process. 

52
CHAPTER 2
The first challenge in taking apart a toy is removing the cover or opening up 
the case. High-​quality toys are very durable. They’re designed and built to prevent 
children from accidentally or intentionally taking them apart. You may need to 
carefully study the device before you can determine the best course of action. 
Often, the first step is opening up the battery case. This opening may be more 
obvious than other openings, especially if this is a toy that regularly requires fresh 
batteries. 
After you’ve removed the battery, additional openings or screws that you could 
not see from the outside may become visible. Once the case or cover is open, here 
are some of the parts or components you might see:
Motor  A typical toy motor looks like a silver metal cylinder. You may be able 
to see a prong or axle sticking out from one end of the cylinder. There may 
also be two wires attached to the motor. Often, one wire is blue and the other 
is red.
Circuit board  A circuit board supports and connects the electronic com­
ponents of the toy. It has a flat base called a substrate that’s often made of 
fiberglass. This base is covered with copper layers or lines and a thin top layer 
called solder mask, which is usually green in color. The circuit board may 
have symbols or numbers printed on it (Hord, accessed 2017).
Speakers or lightbulbs  If the toy makes sounds or lights up, you may be 
able to see small speakers or lightbulbs. There will be wires connecting the 
speakers and lightbulbs to the other components.
Hardware  Look for hardware that supports the movement of the device. 
You may see wheels, joints, hinges, or screws.
As you progress through the take-​apart process, pause as each new piece is 
exposed and let each child view the device. Ask discussion questions:
▸▸What parts do you see?
▸▸What is the color, shape, or size of that part?
▸▸What do you think is the function of that part? What does it do?
▸▸What materials do you think that part is made of? Do you think it’s made 
of metal?

53
HOW DO WE BUILD ROBOTS?
▸▸Have you ever seen anything like this before?
▸▸Does this part or piece remind you of anything else you’ve seen before?
You may come across an obvious, visible problem, such as a cracked piece or a 
frayed wire, that you can identify as the cause of the malfunction. Even if you can’t 
identify the problem, the children will learn from seeing the parts inside the toy 
and identifying the characteristics of these parts.
Research more information about the names, functions, and structures of 
various parts. One helpful resource may be the children’s families. Some family 
members may have experience with electronic devices in their professional roles, 
through hobbies, or simply from their own experience building and fixing things 
at home. Help the children think of questions they can ask their families to gather 
more information. You may want to send a note home about this or post a notice 
in the classroom.
Activity 2.6
Electron Game 
The part of a toy that many children may be able to identify and recognize is the 
battery. So many familiar household devices depend on batteries for power that 
even very young children have probably heard the word “battery” before and have 
seen adults change or charge batteries.
Batteries are not safe for children to touch and play with, because batteries 
contain chemicals and because they create an electrical charge. But children 
may be curious about how batteries work. This activity provides children with a 
kinesthetic explanation of how electrons flow through a circuit from one battery 
terminal to the other.
As children play the electron game, they can ponder the following big 
questions:
▸▸What is a battery?
▸▸How is it made?
▸▸How does it work?

54
CHAPTER 2
For this activity, you will need pictures of batteries in different shapes and sizes. 
In a small group, show children some images of batteries. Ask children to talk 
about what they see in the pictures. Explain that a battery is a container full of 
chemicals. Chemicals are powerful materials. Batteries have two terminals, or 
points. One is positive and one is negative. The battery’s power comes from tiny 
particles called electrons. The electrons flow from one terminal to the other as fast 
as they can, over a wire or other connection.
To play a group electron game, you’ll need plenty of space, such as a playground 
or gym. Explain to the children that you are all going to pretend to be a giant battery 
together. Have the children form a circle and hold hands. Tell the children that the 
circle they have formed is a circuit, and that the electrons can now travel along the 
circle or circuit. To demonstrate the way an electron can travel along a circuit, have 
the children send a gentle hand squeeze from one friend to another, all around the 
circle. Some children may have played a “friendship squeeze” game like this before, 
but in this case the point of the game is to show how a complete and connected 
circle or circuit is necessary for an electron to move and carry electricity.
Next, invite one of the children to come into the middle of the circle to play the 
role of a dancing electron. This part of the game is similar to a traditional freeze 
dance game. The electron in the middle can move around and dance in any cho­
sen way, but only when the circuit is fully connected. The child playing the role of 
the electron has to keep an eye on the circle and notice when the circuit becomes 
broken. The teacher could play the role of a circuit breaker, or a child could be 
assigned as a circuit breaker. Direct the children to join hands, and when the cir­
cuit is complete invite the “electron” to move. After a minute or two, the “circuit 
breaker” should let go of one or both hands and “break” the circle. At that moment, 
the “electron” must freeze. Practice this several times, rotating the roles of the 
electron and the circuit breaker. If your group enjoys the game and is ready for an 
additional challenge, the children in the circuit could also move, by all rotating in 
one direction, while the electron is dancing in the center. Again, the electron in the 
middle must freeze each time the circuit is broken.
A discussion of batteries and how they work may naturally lead to more ques­
tions about power, what it is, and where it comes from. The next activity, 2.7, fea­
tures these ideas.

55
HOW DO WE BUILD ROBOTS?
Activity 2.7
Power Conversations 
As children learn more about how batteries provide power, they may become more 
curious about other sources of power. They may ask the following big questions:
▸▸What is power?
▸▸What is energy?
▸▸Where do power and energy come from?
▸▸What is electricity?
When conversations about power arise, ask questions that will challenge chil­
dren to think about other machines and devices in their environment and what 
other sources of power might exist besides batteries. For example, you could spark 
a new conversation by demonstrating how you use a switch to turn on a light or 
how you plug a computer into an outlet. Ask the children, “Where do you think this 
light gets its power? Where do you think this computer gets its power?”
Some children may already know the word “electricity.” You can explain that 
electric energy travels through wires, just like the power from a battery can travel 
through wires. A battery is a small container that stores electricity.
Ask children, “What else needs power or energy?” Some children may suggest 
vehicles, like cars or trucks. Some children may suggest people and animals. These 
ideas can open up new conversations about other sources of energy, such as fuel 
or food.
A discussion of power and energy among young children can sometimes lead 
to ideas about superpowers or superheroes. Don’t worry if children’s ideas about 
power are based on fantasy rather than fact. Explore these ideas with the same seri­
ousness and interest as you would approach a discussion of batteries and electric­
ity. Ask open-​ended questions, such as “What kind of power do you wish you had?” 

56
CHAPTER 2
Activity 2.8
Things That Light Up 
Flashlights, projectors, and things that light up make energy visible in exciting 
ways. Playing with light, color, and shadow is a tangible way for children to exper­
iment with sources of power and energy. As children do so, they can ponder the 
following big questions:
▸▸Where does light come from?
▸▸What makes things light up?
▸▸What can we do with light?
For this activity, you will need a variety of things that light up, such as the 
following:
•• flashlights 
•• a projector
•• a light table
•• light-​up toys, such as a Lite Brite or glow sticks
During free play at learning centers, provide things that light up as one option 
for open-​ended play. Use a tent or a separate, darkened space to help the light of the 
toys or devices be more visible. 
Observe children’s play and listen to their conversations about light. During or 
after play, ask children open-​ended questions that will prompt them to make con­
nections with what they are learning about power and energy:
▸▸Where does the light come from?
▸▸How does the light work?
▸▸What kind of power does the light need in order to shine?
▸▸Why is some light brighter than other lights? What makes it so bright?

57
HOW DO WE BUILD ROBOTS?
Take note of children’s comments and ideas. Use this information to help you 
shape your decisions about next steps in your curriculum.
Activity 2.9
Circuit Sets 
If the children continue to demonstrate an interest in learning more about power, 
energy, and electricity, you might offer them educational toys made specifically for 
exploring these concepts. As children play with circuit sets, they can ponder the 
following big questions:
▸▸How does electricity work?
▸▸What can we do with electricity?
▸▸How do we make things that will really work?
If your budget allows the purchase of specialized educational materials, several 
sets on the market allow children to build their own simple circuits:
Snap Circuits  Components snap together on a plastic frame. Each compo­
nent contains a separate function, such as a switch or a light. Each piece is 
numbered and color-​coded. Just follow the pictures in the manual to create 
specific projects, such as a doorbell or light. The recommended age for Snap 
Circuits is eight years and older, but younger children could use them with 
guidance and supervision. (www.snapcircuits.net)
MakerBloks  MakerBloks are similar to Snap Circuits but are geared toward 
a younger age group. Each block contains a magnet, so the blocks can 
connect easily to other blocks and form a fully functioning circuit. For exam­
ple, children can connect a battery block to an LED block to create a light. 
(https://makerbloks.com/#/explore)
littleBits  littleBits building blocks are magnetic, like MakerBloks, but are 
smaller in size, like Snap Circuits. The littleBits website includes STEM lesson 
plans for teachers. (http://littlebits.cc)

58
CHAPTER 2
Squishy Circuits  Squishy Circuits use playdough to teach the basics of 
electrical circuits. The set includes recipes for two kinds of dough: one that is 
conductive (electricity flows through it) and one that is insulating (electricity 
cannot flow through it). The set also includes LED lights and a battery pack. 
(https://squishycircuits.com)
Activity 2.10
Simple Machines 
The next seven activities in this chapter demonstrate concepts of physical science 
that are called simple machines. Simple machines include the following: 
•• inclined plane, also known as a ramp
•• wedge, a tool used to separate, such as a knife, ax, or needle
•• lever, a pole, rod, or plank used to lift something, such as a crowbar
•• screw, as found on a jar lid, drill, or lightbulb
•• pulley, a wheel combined with a rope or cord that can be used to lift 
objects up and down
•• wheel and axle, one of the most important inventions in the history 
of the world
A simple machine uses a single applied force to do work against a single load 
force. Work is the amount of energy needed to move an object. To move the object 
farther, you need to do more work (Idaho Public Television, accessed 2014).
It’s neither necessary nor developmentally appropriate to teach children 
the names and definitions of simple machines, but it is helpful for teachers to 
understand that these devices are the building blocks of mechanical engineering. 
Teachers need to know that children benefit from hands-​on experimentation with 
simple machines. Through this experimentation, they begin developing an under­
standing of how things move when we apply force or energy.

59
HOW DO WE BUILD ROBOTS?
As early childhood educators, we can provide the materials and learning envi­
ronments where these explorations can take place. We can ask questions and 
make comments that help children become good observers and testers of physical 
science phenomena.
For inspiration in helping children observe the movement of objects, we 
can turn to Friedrich Froebel, the “father of kindergarten.” In the 1800s, Froebel 
developed a sequence of learning tools he called “gifts” for use in early childhood 
classrooms. The first gift is a simple ball. Norman Brosterman (1997, 42) writes in 
Inventing Kindergarten, a comprehensive history of Froebel’s work creating the first 
kindergarten, “Perfect in form, the ball, or sphere, was the practical expression of 
stability and the material expression of motion. By grasping, rolling, dropping, hid­
ing, and swinging the ball, the child gained intuitive and experiential knowledge 
of object, space, time, color, movement, attraction, union, independence, and grav­
ity.” A simple ball has just as much to teach us in the twenty-​first century. These 
same concepts of motion—​how a three-​dimensional sphere moves through space 
and down to Earth—​are relevant foundational concepts for all STEM learning.
As children play with a ball, they can explore the following big questions:
▸▸How do things move?
▸▸Why do things move?
▸▸What happens when we throw a ball?
▸▸What happens when we roll a ball?
▸▸How does the movement of our arm affect the movement of the ball?
You can do this activity with a large group, small group, or with just one child. It 
involves playing a simple game of catch, either throwing or rolling a ball back and 
forth, in a circle with a group of children or across from a single child. What makes 
this activity meaningful is the way you draw children’s attention to the movement 
of the ball. 
As you throw the ball, ask, “How does the ball move? Does it go up? Does it go 
down? Does it travel in a straight line? What happens when I throw hard? What 
happens when I throw gently?”
Before, during, or after you throw the ball back and forth, ask children to draw 
a line on a piece of paper or a whiteboard to show how a ball travels through the 

60
CHAPTER 2
air. You may notice that once children have watched the ball carefully, they will 
change the way they draw the lines. The children may also enjoy watching and 
discussing this video showing a robot that can catch a ball: www.youtube.com
/watch?v=83eGcht7IiI.
Activity 2.11
Daisy’s Wild Ride 
Finding picture books that demonstrate physics and engineering concepts can be 
challenging. Often children’s science books are either too high-​level in content, or 
the story does not represent the science concepts accurately. One rare exception is 
Daisy’s Wild Ride by Bob Graham. In this story, a child sends her pet pig, Daisy, down 
a hill in a wagon. The wagon hits a bump and stops, but the force of the downhill 
motion propels Daisy forward until she lands (happily) in a puddle of mud. The 
story beautifully demonstrates Newton’s first law of motion: an object in motion 
will continue in motion with the same speed in the same direction unless acted 
upon by an unbalanced force. In Daisy’s case, the unbalanced force is the mud pud­
dle. For young children, the important idea is recognizing that often, for something 
to stop moving, something else must get in its way. 
Activity 2.12
Ramps 
It’s easy to find an example of one simple machine, the inclined plane, in an early 
childhood classroom. Just look in the block corner. A typical set of unit blocks 
includes half-​unit triangles, quarter-​unit triangles, and unit-​block ramps.
As children play with these blocks, they can ponder the following big questions:
▸▸What is a ramp?
▸▸How do we use ramps?

61
HOW DO WE BUILD ROBOTS?
▸▸Are all ramps the same? 
▸▸If not, what are some of the differences?
▸▸How does the shape of the ramp affect the way a car or ball rolls?
In a small group of children, take one block in each shape—​the half-​unit trian­
gle, the quarter-​unit triangle, and the unit-​block ramp—​and set them down on the 
floor or on a tabletop. Ask the children to describe what they see. You may want to 
document their answers on paper or in an audio or video recording. Ask children 
open-​ended questions to help them notice the details in size and shape, such as 
“How are these blocks the same? How are they different?”
Invite the children to play with the blocks by rolling a toy car down each ramp. 
You may want to add some other blocks to help build a platform or road at the top 
and bottom of the ramp. Ask children to evaluate the way each type of ramp func­
tions when a car is rolling down it: “If you were driving this car, which ramp would 
you want to drive on? Why?”

62
CHAPTER 2
During this discussion, children may talk about the steepness of the ramps. 
They may not yet have the words to describe what they see, and will likely use ges­
tures to demonstrate the concept. If they are curious and engaged in the activity, 
teach them the word “steep.” Show them that the quarter-​unit triangles are very 
steep, the ramps are not very steep, and the half-​unit triangles are in between. 
Some children may be ready to learn the word “angle” as well. You can draw the 
angle of each ramp on a piece of paper by laying the block on the page and tracing 
the angle of the ramp. For children who are ready for an advanced challenge, show 
them how to use a protractor to measure the angle. 
Activity 2.13
Marble Runs 
Marble runs are construction toys that allow children to build a path for a marble 
to travel through tubes and holes. Many commercial marble run sets are available 
through toy stores and school supply catalogs. Marble runs are wonderful toys that 
provide a fun, hands-​on experience with Newton’s laws of motion.
I also recommend the National Association for the Education of Young Chil­
dren (NAEYC) publication Ramps and Pathways: A Constructivist Approach to Physics 
with Young Children by Rheta DeVries and Christina Sales. This book provides many 
exciting ideas for expanding children’s play and STEM learning through the use of 
marble runs made out of cove molding, unit blocks, and a variety of other novel 
and open-​ended materials. DeVries and Sales also present a detailed and cogent 
description of constructivist physical science concepts and teaching strategies. 
(See also Betty Zan and Rosemary Geiken’s excellent article on the same topic at 
www.naeyc.org/files/naeyc/Ramps_Pathways.pdf.)
Activity 2.14
Wheels 
Most young children enjoy playing with wheeled toys such as cars, trucks, 
and trains. In most high-​quality early childhood classrooms, children have 

63
HOW DO WE BUILD ROBOTS?
opportunities to play with wheeled toys every day, indoors and out. Sometimes 
children develop the misconception that wheeled toys are for boys, not girls, so 
make sure the girls in your classroom have plenty of opportunities to play with 
wheeled toys too. 
Here are a few suggestions for extending children’s learning during play with 
wheels:
Ask thought-​provoking questions about wheels:  “What is a wheel? 
Why do we need wheels? How do wheels work?”
Compare wheels:  Find a toy with big wheels and a toy with small wheels 
and ask children to compare them side by side. Ask children to predict 
which toy will move faster—​the one with the big wheels or the one with 
the smaller wheels. Then test the toys in a race to see if their predictions 
were correct.
Learn from broken toys:  If a wheeled toy happens to break, use this event 
as a teachable moment. A broken toy may now have the pieces exposed, 
allowing the children to better see and understand how an axle connects 
two wheels. 
Activity 2.15
Study a Bicycle 
The Reggio Emilia schools in Italy are regarded as an international model for a proj­
ect approach to early childhood education. The Reggio Emilia teachers frequently 
use bicycles in their classrooms to inspire conversations about how things work. In 
fact, the entire city of Reggio Emilia, Italy, engaged in an intergenerational project 
in which citizens of every age were invited to create drawings and other presenta­
tions of an ordinary bicycle (Ceppi et al. 2014).
Bring a bicycle into your classroom and observe the children’s reactions. The 
conversations could spark many interesting projects and representations.
For more information about the Reggio Emilia perspective and the project 
approach, see Peggy Martalock’s article “What Is a Wheel?” at www.southernearly
childhood.org/upload/pdf/Dimensions_Vol40_3_Martalock.pdf.

64
CHAPTER 2
Activity 2.16
Gears 
Gears are a special kind of wheel. A gear is a wheel with teeth all around its rim. 
The teeth mesh together with the teeth on another gear. When one gear moves, 
its teeth push on the teeth of the other gear and make the gear turn (LA Tech STEP 
2007).
As children play with toy gear sets in this activity, they can ponder the following 
big questions:
▸▸What is a gear?
▸▸How do gears work?
▸▸What can we make with gears?
Many early childhood classrooms include plastic gear sets as a play option. 
Many school supply stores advertise gears as a valuable STEM teaching tool. (For 
example, see www.learningresources.com/category/brand/gears-​gears-​gears.do.) 
Yet I’ve observed that in many classrooms, children rarely choose the gear sets. My 
experience is that children as young as three, four, and even five years old often 
need some support and guidance to learn how to use gears in a satisfying way. 
Without guidance, children are likely to use the gears as simple wheels. They may 
construct a car that rolls on four gears as wheels, or they may place the gears on a 
pegboard in a pleasing pattern or tower. But they don’t always take advantage of the 
teeth on the gears and place the gears close enough together so that the movement 
of one gear will turn another gear.
I recommend that you give children many opportunities to play with gears in 
whatever way they choose. But if you observe that children quickly lose interest in 
the gears or that their play doesn’t utilize the gears’ teeth and their unique function 
and power, take a moment to direct the children’s attention to the gear structure 
and gently suggest some options for interesting construction projects. 
In a small group, place a gear next to an ordinary wheel and ask children to 
compare the two kinds of wheels. Hold up the gear and ask, “What’s special about 
this wheel?” Show the children how one gear can be placed next to another. 
Explain and demonstrate that a gear is a wheel with teeth, bumps that stick out all 

65
HOW DO WE BUILD ROBOTS?
around the rim of the wheel. Gears can make things move. When a gear turns, its 
teeth can push on the teeth of another gear. 
Many machines and vehicles have gears, but often the gears are hidden inside 
the machine, where children cannot see them. One notable exception to this is a 
penny press. Many children have seen a penny press machine at tourist attractions 
or amusement parks. You put a penny in, pay an additional fee, and then you can 
turn a handle and watch the big gears turn inside the machine. The turning gears 
push the penny press together, and the result is a penny printed with a design 
related to the park or tourist attraction. For example, here’s an image of the inside 
of a penny press at a science museum. 
As you discuss the uses of gears in the real world, ask children if they have 
ever pressed a penny when they were on vacation or visiting a special place. For 
many children, this question will provide a meaningful connection to the real-​life 
applications of gears. Invite the children to use the toy gears to create a model of a 
penny press.

66
CHAPTER 2
Activity 2.17
Design Thinking 
The term “design thinking” has gained popularity in industry, arts, and education. 
It describes a creative process that emphasizes experimentation and collaboration 
(Chao 2015). While there’s no single definition of a design thinking process, it usu­
ally involves the following steps:
•• Ask a question.
•• Imagine a solution.
•• Make a plan.
•• Create something.
•• Test it out and seek feedback.
•• Improve it.
•• Share it with others.
The design thinking process is circular, not linear; it never ends. Design think­
ing allows for endless iterations and innovation (EIE, accessed 2017). 
What does design thinking have to do with early childhood education? How is 
design thinking relevant to our work with young children?
I think there are many elements of play that are already aligned with design 
thinking. I also believe that the most important idea from design thinking that can 
be applied to early childhood education is the circular process. We are all works in 
progress, and the children are continually learning, testing, improving.
In practice, I have one key suggestion for teachers for nurturing design think­
ing in your classroom: don’t clean up. Or at least clean up less. Look for opportuni­
ties to allow children to revisit their projects over the course of many different play 
sessions. Whether children are building with blocks, painting on an easel, poking 
toothpicks into a ball of clay, or building a robot out of wire and bottle caps, try to 
find a protected space where the children can leave the work and come back to it 
again later. The passage of time allows children to reflect and reconsider, to incor­
porate new ideas, and to add new collaborators to the process. 

67
HOW DO WE BUILD ROBOTS?
Activity 2.18
The Most Magnificent Thing 
You wouldn’t send preschoolers to Stanford University’s Institute of Design to learn 
design thinking, but you could read them Ashley Spires’s 2014 picture book, The 
Most Magnificent Thing. This story of a little girl who wants to invent a contraption 
out of spare parts, a “most magnificent thing,” is a wonderful demonstration of a 
design thinking process from a child’s point of view. The young protagonist imag­
ines and plans, then creates half a dozen iterations of her contraption. But none of 
them comes close to the vision in her head. She grows frustrated and almost gives 
up, but with the support of her neighbors and friends, she is able to make a fresh 
start and finally finish the project to her satisfaction. This book is a must-​read for 
any classroom that values innovation and creativity.
Activity 2.19
Kinesthetic Machine—​Car Wash 
Visiting a drive-​through car wash is an experience that many young children have 
shared with their families. Even children who have not seen a car wash before 
understand that cars get dirty and need to be washed. How cars get washed makes 
a rich topic of study and discussion among children. It also offers a meaningful 
connection between families’ ordinary experiences and the design and function of 
machines and robots.
As children explore the idea of a car wash, they can ponder the following big 
questions:
▸▸How do cars get dirty? How do they get clean?
▸▸How does a car wash work?
▸▸What kinds of machines are in a car wash?
Discuss the parts of a car wash or read a picture book about a car wash, such 
as Car Wash by Sandra Steen and Susan Steen. Then invite the children to act out 

68
CHAPTER 2
the motions of the different machines in a car wash. Some of the children will be 
machines or robots, and some of the children will be cars going through the car 
wash.
Line up the children who will be the machines and assign them roles. Have the 
children make suggestions and demonstrate how they will move to dramatize the 
different machine functions, such as sprayer, soaper, scrubber, and dryer. Then 
have the rest of the children take turns pretending to be cars that drive through the 
car wash. The “cars” can crawl along the floor next to the machines.
Here are some other car wash picture books to try:
•• The Scrubbly-​Bubbly Car Wash by Irene O’Garden
•• Car Wash Kid by Cathy Goldberg Fishman
•• Curious George Car Wash by Margaret Rey and H. A. Rey
•• Dad’s Car Wash by Harry A. Sutherland
•• Henry Helps Wash the Car by Beth Bracken
•• Isabel’s Car Wa$h by Sheila Bair
Activity 2.20
Water Table Car Wash 
Extend the exploration and discussion of car washing machines by creating a 
miniature car wash in the water table, using real soap and water to wash toy cars. 
Children can pretend that squirt bottles are spraying machines. After the toy cars 
are clean and removed from the water table, children can blow air through drink­
ing straws to simulate the power dryers.

69
HOW DO WE BUILD ROBOTS?
Activity 2.21
Car Wash with Blocks and Pipe Cleaners 
Another way to extend learning in the car wash topic is to add cars and pipe clean­
ers (chenilles) to the block corner. Invite children to create a drive-​through car 
wash for the toy cars. They can bend the flexible pipe cleaners into the shape of 
brushes, sprayers, dryers, and water pipes. 
Children may also be interested in viewing a video that shows the machines in 
a drive-​through car wash, such as this Science Channel video: www.youtube.com
/watch?v=8s3FiQDUaUQ.
Activity 2.22
The Domino Effect 
For many children, knocking down their block structure is just as much fun as 
building it. Why do children enjoy knocking things down? Perhaps they just like 
making a big noise. But maybe they also benefit from observing how objects move 
as they fall, how they bump into each other, and what they look like when they 
come to rest in a new position. This is another real-​life demonstration of Newton’s 
laws of motion in an early childhood classroom.
Children who enjoy knocking things down may enjoy the challenge of creating 
a line of dominoes and watching how knocking over one domino will cause a chain 
reaction, making the rest of them fall in a wave. Standard-​size dominoes are small 
and may be difficult for young children to manipulate. Oversize dominoes are 
available for purchase from many school supply stores. You could also use standard 
unit blocks to create a domino effect.
Many entertaining and fascinating domino videos are available online, such as 
the following:
•• a video showing a variety of colorful and creative domino tricks: 
www.youtube.com/watch?v=ARM42-​eorzE
•• a video of a domino demonstration at the Maryland Science Center:
www.youtube.com/watch?v=L7AVoJTkvec

70
CHAPTER 2
Activity 2.23
Rube Goldberg Contraption 
Rube Goldberg was a cartoonist in the mid-​1900s. He was famous for his drawings 
of imagined contraptions. Each contraption accomplished a simple task using a 
complex series of cause-​and-​effect machines. Today many artists, engineers, and 
designers enjoy creating their own Rube Goldberg machines as a playful way to 
learn and demonstrate concepts of motion, physics, and mechanical engineering. 
Here’s an example of a Rube Goldberg contraption that was created for a commer­
cial advertising GoldieBlox toys: www.youtube.com/watch?v=IIGyVa5Xftw.
Most young children do not yet have the skills, knowledge, and dexterity to 
create elaborate Rube Goldberg machines. But with some guidance, they could 
create contraptions that incorporate two or more of the activities and ideas already 
presented in this chapter. For example, your class could set up a chain reaction of 
dominoes activated by a car rolling down a ramp (a combination of activity 2.12 and 
2.22). What other activities could you combine?
Activity 2.24
Troubleshooting with Rosie Revere 
The activities and suggestions in this book emphasize the important role of mak­
ing mistakes in learning the STEM concepts involved in robotics. Whether we call 
it troubleshooting, debugging, revising, or messing up, the ability to take a learning 
risk, to experiment, and then to observe, evaluate, and acknowledge where the 
results did not meet the expectations or vision for the task, is an essential part of 
STEM learning and design thinking.
The picture book Rosie Revere, Engineer by Andrea Beaty beautifully illustrates 
the value of making mistakes, learning from them, and then moving on. Keep this 
book handy and pull it out whenever a child needs encouragement to keep trying 
to overcome obstacles and frustrations. In the story, little Rosie loves inventing giz­
mos and gadgets, but she is overcome by doubt and disappointment when her new­
est invention, a cheese-​copter, crashes. Her beloved aunt Rose praises her “brilliant 

71
HOW DO WE BUILD ROBOTS?
first flop” and encourages her to keep improving her inventions, explaining that we 
can only fail when we stop trying new ideas.
Activity 2.25
Mistake Party 
The best way to respond to mistakes is to celebrate them as learning opportunities. 
And the best way to celebrate any occasion is with a fun party. Why not throw a 
mistake party? 
Begin a class log on a big piece of poster paper. Write down the most wonderful 
mistakes the children make and what they learned from these mistakes. The list 
might include things like these:
•• Maria spilled her milk cup, learned not to fill it so high.
•• James knocked over Peter’s tower, learned to build a little farther away.
•• Luna counted the spoons 1-​3-​2, learned to say 1-​2-​3.
Once you’ve collected a nice variety of mistakes, throw a mistake party with 
treats, music, and dancing. Invite the children’s families to attend. Invite guests to 
tell about wonderful mistakes they made. Read The Most Magnificent Thing or Rosie 
Revere, Engineer (from activities 2.18 and 2.24). Above all, treat each mistake lightly, 
as a welcome bump along the road to discovery.


73
3
How Do We Tell Robots 
What to Do?
Developing Spatial Intelligence
The activities in this chapter focus on the actual coding, or programming, of 
robots. People tell robots what to do by creating commands represented by a code, 
or programming language. With many of the educational robots described in this 
chapter, such as the Bee-​Bot, the programming language is simple. To program the 
Bee-​Bot, young children push buttons labeled with simple symbols on its back. In 
this case, arrows pointing in the direction of travel represent the programming lan­
guage. As children grow older and learn more about robots and computer science, 
they will have opportunities to learn more complex programming languages, such 
as Scratch, Java, or Python. 
Many of the robotic devices and coding apps currently available for young chil­
dren focus on teaching children how to navigate a grid. Imagine a checkerboard 
marked with evenly measured squares. A beginning experience in coding often 
involves figuring out how to move a robot forward one space on a grid or, in the 
case of a coding app such as Kodable or Lightbot, to move an animated character 
one space forward on a virtual game board.
Navigating a grid is just one kind of spatial skill. Spatial skill, also known as 
spatial reasoning or spatial intelligence, means figuring out how we move through 
space, how objects or shapes move or are positioned in space, and the relationships 
between different objects or positions in space. The term “space” means any area 
that exists—​a tabletop, a room, a city, the world. Spatial reasoning skills allow us 
to read maps, diagrams, charts, and graphs (Kris 2015). 

74
CHAPTER 3
Young children develop spatial reasoning skills and spatial intelligence through 
play using blocks, puzzles, and board games. They also develop these skills 
through drawing and three-​dimensional art experiences, and by moving their 
bodies indoors and out. While many of the activities in this chapter involve spe­
cific robotic and coding devices and tools, the first four focus simply on the devel­
opment of spatial reasoning skills and learning to navigate a grid using ordinary 
classroom materials.
Activity 3.1
Checkerboard Play 
In this activity, children play freely with small blocks and toys on an ordinary 
checkerboard or on a paper grid. Children need not know how to play checkers, nor 
do they need to move their toys as they would in a game of checkers. You will prob­
ably notice, however, that when children play with toys on a checkerboard surface, 
they do tend to organize and move the toys in a linear fashion. 
For this activity, you will need the following materials:
•• checkerboard or a checkerboard-​like grid drawn on paper or cardboard
•• small blocks
•• small toys, such as animal, dinosaur, or people figures
As children play with toys on a checkerboard, they can ponder the following 
big questions: 
▸▸How can we play with toys on a checkerboard? 
How do we move the toys from space to space?
▸▸How is playing on a checkerboard different from playing 
on a plain tabletop?
Another option is to cover the tabletop with oversize graph paper and allow 
the children to draw lines on the paper as they play. They may create lines that 

75
HOW DO WE TELL ROBOTS WHAT TO DO?
represent roads, landmarks, walls, or furniture. This spontaneous mapmaking 
process creates opportunities for deepening spatial reasoning skills.
Activity 3.2
The Big Grid 
This activity brings the checkerboard grid outdoors and engages children in a kin­
esthetic, full-​body learning experience. As children play on a giant grid, they can 
ponder the following big questions:
▸▸What is a grid?
▸▸How do we move on a grid? In what direction 
can we move?
▸▸How is moving on a grid different from moving on a space without a grid?
For this activity, you will need the following materials:
•• sidewalk chalk
•• large outdoor space with a surface for chalk drawing
•• yarn, yardstick, cardboard box (optional)
•• playground ball(s)
Draw a large checkerboard-​like grid outdoors using sidewalk chalk. Each 
square in the grid should be large enough for a child to stand inside it. Your school 
may already have a foursquare grid on the playground. You could expand or sub­
divide that grid with chalk.
If you would like to ensure an even grid with straight lines, use a long length of 
yarn and a yardstick. Hold or tape the yarn to the ground as a guide for drawing a 
straight line. Use a yardstick to measure the grid lines. Use any rectangular object, 
such as a book or a cardboard box, to check your right angles.

76
CHAPTER 3
The children may enjoy helping you. Tell them you’re making a grid for playing. 
Provide dotted lines to guide the path of the chalk. 
Once the grid is finished, invite children to play in any way they please. As in 
the previous activity, they will likely adapt how they move to follow or align with 
the grid lines. 
Use spatial reasoning vocabulary to describe what you see. Help the children 
identify when they are moving forward, backward, and sideways. You may intro­
duce directionality, using the words “right” and “left,” but be aware that most 
young children will not be able to identify right and left consistently until they are 
in first or second grade. The goal here is to help children understand that moving 
right or left means moving to one side or the other.
Add a bouncing ball to the outdoor play. Invite children to bounce a ball in 
their own square and then bounce it in another nearby square. Help the children 
identify where the ball has bounced—​to the front, to the back, to one side, or to the 
other side.
Activity 3.3
Follow the Arrows 
Arrows are important symbols. Understanding how to read and use arrows will 
benefit children as they learn to program robots. Arrows are frequently used in 
tangible tech devices and beginning coding apps and games.
As children explore the uses and meaning of arrows, they can ponder the fol­
lowing big questions:
▸▸What is an arrow?
▸▸How do people use arrows in our world?
For this activity, you will need large arrows drawn or printed onto pieces of 
paper, card stock, or index cards. Use one arrow per page or card, the bigger the 
better.
You could introduce the arrows to the children in an open way. For example, lay 
them out on a table or on the floor as a provocation that allows children to respond 

77
HOW DO WE TELL ROBOTS WHAT TO DO?
in any way they choose. Or you could introduce the arrow cards during group time 
by asking, “What do you think this symbol means?” Most children have probably 
seen arrows before and already understand that an arrow points in a direction 
to tell us which way to go. Invite the children to play with the arrows and place 
them around the school in ways that they think will be helpful to visitors and to 
one another. For example, ask, “How can we place the arrows in a way that will 
show people how to find the bathroom?” You could also encourage the children to 
use the arrows to play a form of hide-​and-​seek. One child hides, and another uses 
arrows (and no spoken words) to show a third child (or the teacher) how to find the 
hidden child.
Draw arrows on the playground using sidewalk chalk, as part of a checkerboard 
grid or free-​form design. You might begin with a teacher-​created example and 
invite children to follow the path. Then allow children to draw their own paths for 
you or their friends to follow.
Activity 3.4
Map Books 
Reading and creating maps is a challenging task for young children. One fun, 
familiar way to introduce children to the concept of maps is through picture books. 
The following list provides some recommendations.
Map Books
•• As the Crow Flies: A First Book of 
Maps by Gail Hartman
•• Follow That Map! A First Book of 
Mapping Skills by Scot Ritchie
•• Henry’s Map by David Elliot
•• Mapping Penny’s World by 
Loreen Leedy
•• Me on the Map by Joan Sweeney
•• My Map Book by Sara Fanelli
•• There’s a Map on My Lap! 
All about Maps by Tish Rabe

78
CHAPTER 3
Books That Can Be Used to Talk about Maps 
and Going from One Place to Another
•• 10 Little Rubber Ducks by Eric Carle
•• Big Bug by Henry Cole
•• Katy and the Big Snow by Virginia 
Lee Burton
•• Lucy in the City by Julie Dillemuth
•• Madlenka by Peter Sís
•• Madlenka’s Dog by Peter Sís
•• Madlenka: Soccer Star by Peter Sís
•• Rosie’s Walk by Pat Hutchins
•• Shrinking Mouse by Pat Hutchins
•• Up, Down, and Around by Katherine 
Ayres
•• Yellow Ball by Molly Bang
All the books listed here lend themselves well to a follow-​up activity that 
engages children in making their own maps on paper in ways that parallel the con­
cepts in the books. One way to help children experiment with making a maplike 
drawing (if not an actual map) is providing graph paper instead of plain drawing 
paper and offering rubber stamps and ink pads for creating landmarks. These 
tools will help scaffold and support children as they learn to create a map. The 
tools allow children to simply draw lines and arrows between the landmarks. Don’t 
worry if the children are not yet able to create a representation of an actual space 
or place. That will come over time, as their experience with maps, drawings, and 
spatial reasoning expands and develops.
Activity 3.5
Meet the Bee-​Bots 
This activity introduces children to a robotic device designed to teach coding 
concepts to children. I recommend Bee-​Bot robots because they are very durable, 
and I have direct experience using them with children as young as three years old 
(www.bee-​bot.us). There are other similar tools on the market, such as the Code 
& Go Robot Mouse (www.learningresources.com/product/learning+essentials
-​-​8482-​+programmable+robot+mouse.do) and the Fisher-​Price Code-​a-​pillar 

79
HOW DO WE TELL ROBOTS WHAT TO DO?
(www.fisher-​price.com/en_US/brands/think-​and-​learn/products/Think-​and
-​Learn-​Code-​a-​pillar).
These robots are called tangible tech because they are stand-​alone programma­
ble devices. You don’t need a computer or tablet to use them. Children don’t need to 
interact with a screen or keyboard to tell the robots what to do. They tell the robot 
what to do by pushing buttons or, in the case of the Code-​a-​pillar, by attaching toy 
pieces together. Each push of a button or section of the chain is a command. The 
commands make up a sequence (also known as an algorithm, or a set of instructions), 
and that sequence becomes the code. In this way, children learn to program a robot.
The tangible tech robots are different from the mechanical toys suggested 
for use in chapter 2. Toys like Hexbugs or WowWee robotic animals are prepro­
grammed at the factory to perform specific actions. The children are not the pro­
grammers. Bee-​Bots and the other tangible tech tools are interactive. They allow 
children to take the lead and code the robots to perform a sequence of commands.
As children play with tangible tech robots, they can ponder the following big 
questions:
▸▸What can robots do?
▸▸How do we tell robots what to do?
Bee-​Bots and other educational coding devices often come with lesson plans, 
educator resources, scripts, and tools for direct instruction. I recommend that you 
first give children an opportunity to explore the devices without any instruction. 
This is inquiry-​based learning at its best. Children will discover how the devices 
work through a constructivist, exploratory process, using trial and error.
Have the children use the robots in pairs. If you have more than one device, you 
could make space for two or three pairs of children to interact on the floor. Turn 
on the Bee-​Bot using the on-​off switch on the bottom of the device. Then hand the 
Bee-​Bot to a child and see what happens. In most cases, children will figure out how 
to make the Bee-​Bot go within a minute or two. They may not yet understand how 
to create a sequence of commands, but they will be satisfied immediately by their 
ability to make it move.
Each Bee-​Bot has seven buttons on its back. The green GO button in the middle 
makes it go. But the Bee-​Bot will not know how or where to go unless you first give 
it a command. Most children will quickly figure out through trial and error that 

80
CHAPTER 3
the four orange arrow buttons let the user command the robot to travel in a certain 
direction. To move forward one space, for example, you press once on the arrow 
pointing forward and then press GO.
There are also two blue buttons. The blue X button clears the code, and the blue 
button with parallel lines is a pause button. As children explore the device and try 
out different commands and sequences of commands, you may want to press the X 
button occasionally, when you know a child is ready to start a new sequence. Chil­
dren who are just learning how to use the Bee-​Bot will not yet understand that each 
time they add a command to the sequence and press GO, the Bee-​Bot will continue 
to remember and perform all the commands previously included in the sequence. 
Pressing the X button when children are ready to start a new turn will help children 
make a cause-​and-​effect connection between the orange motion buttons and the 
movements of the Bee-​Bot.
Most children will be engaged in playing with the Bee-​Bots even before they 
understand how to create a sequence of commands intentionally. Allow children 
plenty of time to explore the Bee-​Bots on multiple occasions before moving on to 
the other activities in this chapter, in which you will demonstrate specific coding 
strategies and concepts.
Once children consistently show understanding of how the buttons work, then 
it is time to move on to some of the next activities. You’ll know the children are 
ready when their play with the Bee-​Bot becomes more intentional. They will say 
things like “I can make the Bee-​Bot go forward now.” Alternatively, if children seem 

81
HOW DO WE TELL ROBOTS WHAT TO DO?
frustrated and no longer want to play with the Bee-​Bot, that is an indicator that 
they need some guidance and are ready for next steps. In my own experience work­
ing with children and Bee-​Bots, the children are rarely frustrated. Their questions 
and comments, such as “How do I make it follow me?” will lead to further activities, 
exploration, and learning.
Activity 3.6
Bee-​Bot Hokey Pokey 
Once they have had opportunities to play with a Bee-​Bot in an open-​ended way and 
have started to understand how a Bee-​Bot works, most children will benefit from 
some teacher-​guided learning about how to program these robots. In this activity, 
the teacher provides a playful demonstration that helps children become more 
intentional in planning and creating a sequence of commands.
As children do this activity, they can ponder the following big questions:
▸▸Can a robot dance?
▸▸How do we program a Bee-​Bot to move 
“in” and “out,” as in the hokey pokey?
This is a teacher-​led and teacher-​facilitated activity. Do it with the whole group 
of children at once. Hold up one of the Bee-​Bots and ask the children, “Do you think 
we could program this Bee-​Bot to do the hokey pokey?” Sing the song and invite the 
children to demonstrate the movements along with you. For the purposes of this 
demonstration, we won’t move individual arms or legs, just the whole body.
As you stand in a circle and sing the song together, have the children act out 
the motions by moving their “whole self.” Have the children jump in, then out, and 
then in again. Next, have everyone shake and turn around. For the last action, have 
the children clap their hands during the final words of the song.
Then ask the children for suggestions. How can we tell the Bee-​Bot to move in, 
or move forward? If the children have had experience playing with a Bee-​Bot, they 
will likely know that pushing the forward arrow button and then pressing GO will 
make the Bee-​Bot move forward.

82
CHAPTER 3
Then ask the children how to tell the Bee-​Bot to move out, or move backward. 
Some will likely be able to suggest that you need to press the backward arrow but­
ton and then press GO. If a child makes another suggestion, one that is wrong or 
different, go ahead and try that one too. This will be an opportunity to demonstrate 
trial-​and-​error troubleshooting.
The children may think that to make the Bee-​Bot go in and then out, they will 
need to follow a sequence like this: 
1.	Press forward. 
2.	Press GO. 
3.	Press backward. 
4.	Press GO.
You may need to explain to the children that the Bee-​Bot can remember more 
than one command at a time. In fact, Bee-​Bots can remember up to forty com­
mands in a sequence. It’s not necessary to press GO after each command.
Once you have successfully demonstrated how to program the Bee-​Bot to go in 
and out, have the children dance and sing the first two lines of the song with the 
Bee-​Bot.
If the children seem interested in programming the Bee-​Bot to dance the whole 
song, you have an interesting challenge to consider. The Bee-​Bot does not have 
a “shake it all about” button. Ask the children for ideas about how to solve this 
problem. They may suggest using the turn commands to make the Bee-​Bot turn 
back and forth, right and left. If so, you’ll discover that you need to slow down the 
pace of the singing during that part of the song as you wait for the Bee-​Bot to finish 
shaking all about. The children might also suggest that the Bee-​Bot rest during that 
part of the song while they do the shaking all about. This suggestion offers a great 
opportunity to demonstrate how the pause button works. 
As a result, the full sequence of commands, or code, for a Bee-​Bot hokey pokey 
may go something like this:
1.	Press forward.
2.	Press backward.
3.	Press forward.
4.	Press pause.
5.	Press pause.
6.	Press turn right.
7.	Press turn right.
8.	Press turn right.
9.	Press turn right.
10.	Press GO.
That’s what coding’s all about!

83
HOW DO WE TELL ROBOTS WHAT TO DO?
Activity 3.7
Turn Round and Round 
The hokey pokey activity demonstrates to children an important use of the turn 
command. Not only can you use the turn command one time to make the Bee-​Bot 
turn in a new direction, you can also use the turn command four times in a row to 
make the Bee-​Bot turn all the way around in a circle.
As children continue to play with the Bee-​Bot, they can ponder the following 
big questions:
▸▸How does the Bee-​Bot turn command work?
▸▸What’s the difference between the turn button 
on one side and the turn button on the other side?
The hokey pokey activity may inspire children to experiment with the turn 
commands without any teacher prompting. Some children, however, may need 
additional guidance and encouragement to experiment. You could say to the child, 
“I’m not sure I remember what we did before. Can you help me figure out how to tell 
the Bee-​Bot to turn all the way around?” Or you could demonstrate turning your 
body all around and ask the child, “Can you make the Bee-​Bot do what I just did?”
Encourage the children to count out loud and determine exactly how many 
times they need to push the turn button to make the Bee-​Bot turn all the way 
around. The children may need your reminder or instructions to use the clear (X) 
button each time they start over with a new sequence of commands.
At some point, the children will likely discover that the Bee-​Bot can turn all the 
way around in both directions. You could press the turn right button four times 
(and press GO), or you could press the turn left button four times (and press GO). 
This makes for a natural opportunity to introduce or remind the children that we 
have words for each direction; one is “right” and one is “left.” Some children will 
be ready to explore this concept, and others will not. For now, all they really need to 
understand is that the buttons make Bee-​Bot turn in opposite directions.
When children are in the process of deciding which direction they would like 
to make the Bee-​Bot turn, ask them to demonstrate with their own bodies. They 
will either turn to the right (clockwise) or turn to the left (counterclockwise). Then 
ask the children to make the Bee-​Bot match their own movements and travel in the 

84
CHAPTER 3
same direction. Even if the children don’t yet understand right, left, clockwise, or 
counterclockwise, they will probably still enjoy the challenge of making the Bee-​
Bot match their own movements.
Activity 3.8
Create a Path 
As the children gain more experience programming the Bee-​Bot, they will develop 
a clearer understanding of how to execute a sequence of commands. They will also 
become more intentional in how they use the Bee-​Bot. Some of the children may 
be ready to program the Bee-​Bot to follow a specific path—​in other words, to travel 
from one point to another.
As children do this activity, they can ponder the following big questions:
▸▸How do we program a Bee-​Bot to get from one place to another?
▸▸How do we troubleshoot or debug our code when we find 
that our program is not quite right?
To do this activity, you will need the following materials: 
•• Bee-​Bot(s) 
•• painter’s tape or sidewalk chalk
Create a brief, simple story in which the Bee-​Bot is the main character. Per­
haps the children have already done this during their play with and conversations 
about the Bee-​Bots. For example, if one of the children pretends that the Bee-​Bot is 
looking for a flower, make up a little story that goes “Once upon a time, a Bee-​Bot 
needed pollen from a flower. It found a flower, and it was very happy. The end.” 
Then invite the children to program the Bee-​Bot to act out the story. Use two 
props to represent the starting point and the ending point. A block could be the 
hive where the Bee-​Bot lives, and a piece of colored paper could be the flower. 
Challenge the children to program the Bee-​Bot to travel from the starting point to 
the ending point.

85
HOW DO WE TELL ROBOTS WHAT TO DO?
At first, make the path between the two points simple and direct, like a straight 
line. Once the children can successfully complete that challenge, reposition the 
starting and ending points to make the programming more difficult.
At some point, the child or children may struggle to complete the task success­
fully. This struggle offers a great opportunity to talk with children about trouble­
shooting or debugging. Tell the children that computer programmers and robotic 
engineers are continually making mistakes and improving their code. This is a 
natural part of the programming process. 
If the children express frustration with not being able to see or remember their 
code, go to activity 3.10 (Invent a Programming Language). If the children seem to 
enjoy following short paths, try the next activity, 3.9 (Meet a Friend).
Activity 3.9
Meet a Friend 
This activity is essentially the same as 3.8 (Create a Path). But in this activity, 
instead of using objects to show the starting and ending points, you use people. 
This creates a more social activity. The robot literally connects people. Using peo­
ple instead of objects also makes a more exciting and unpredictable programming 
experience, because people often move around. 
Be sure to show or remind the children that you can add commands to your 
sequence without starting over. For example, if you program the Bee-​Bot to move 
forward four spaces, your code would include these commands:
1.	Press forward.
2.	Press forward.
3.	Press forward.
4.	Press forward.
5.	Press GO.
But if you discover that after the Bee-​Bot travels four spaces forward, you want it 
to turn right and move forward in that direction, you don’t have to clear your code. 
You can simply add those two commands:

86
CHAPTER 3
1.	Press forward.
2.	Press forward.
3.	Press forward.
4.	Press forward.
5.	Turn right.
6.	Press forward.
7.	Press GO.
Then, when you press GO, the Bee-​Bot will perform all six commands in a 
sequence.
Activity 3.10
Invent a Programming Language 
One benefit of a tangible tech device is that it is screenless. Children engage directly 
with the device; there is no need to view a screen on a smartphone, tablet, laptop, or 
desktop computer. The challenge, however, is that the device offers no visual rep­
resentation of the commands the user has chosen and programmed by pushing the 
buttons on the back of the Bee-​Bot. There is no visual record or history of the code. 
When you purchase a Bee-​Bot from the manufacturer, some of the packages come 
with a set of cardboard command cards. You can line up these cards in a sequence 
on the floor or tabletop to create a visual record of the code. But I encourage you 
to hold off on introducing the cards to the children. Let them discover the need 
to keep a record of their code, to create a programming language that represents 
the Bee-​Bot commands. Rest assured that the children will discover this need as a 
natural part of their play process. This independent discovery will have much more 
meaning and importance than an introduction by a teacher.
As children play with the Bee-​Bots, they can ponder the following big questions:
▸▸How do we remember what buttons we pushed on the Bee-​Bot?
▸▸How many ways can we show our code?
▸▸What is a programming language?

87
HOW DO WE TELL ROBOTS WHAT TO DO?
For this activity, you will need the following materials: 
•• Bee-​Bot(s) 
•• whatever materials children find or suggest to show their code (paper and 
crayons, colored blocks, arrow cards, pegs and pegboard, beads and string)
As the children gain more experience playing with the Bee-​Bots, their play will 
become more and more intentional. The commands they choose and the buttons 
they push will become less random and more deliberate as they make decisions 
about where they want the Bee-​Bot to travel. They may want the Bee-​Bot to move 
between obstacles on the floor, or they may want the Bee-​Bot to visit another 
Bee-​Bot friend. The children will use trial and error to figure out how to program 
the Bee-​Bot. Mistakes will occur, and the code will need changing or revising. 
This revising or troubleshooting process will require reflection. The children will 
need to remember what commands they used, but most children will not be able 
to remember more than a few commands at a time. They will discover the need 
to remember or record the commands. They may express this directly in words, 
such as “I can’t remember what buttons I pushed!” Or they may simply become 
frustrated. Help children articulate what they need. For example, say, “You need 
a way to remember your code. You need a way to see your code so you know what 
buttons you pushed.”
This is an exciting moment of discovery. The children will have discovered the 
need for a programming language. A programming language is any language peo­
ple use to talk to computers or robots. At a more sophisticated level of computer 
science, there are languages such as Java and Python that have specific conven­
tions, patterns, and syntax. At this introductory level of tangible tech, the Bee-​Bot 
programming language, as represented by the buttons on the back of the device, is 
made up of symbols such as arrows and an X. 
Ask the children, “What can we do to remember or show our code?” Some chil­
dren may be able to articulate their ideas. Some may suggest that you write down 
arrows and Xs on a piece of paper. Some may remember the arrow cards you used 
in activity 3.3. Some children may have other novel and creative ideas. In my expe­
rience teaching with Bee-​Bots, I’ve seen children represent their code with small 
plastic dinosaurs lined up in a row; each dinosaur was facing in the direction of the 
arrow or command. I’ve also seen children use markers laid out on the floor in a 

88
CHAPTER 3
particular sequence of commands; the marker 
cap on each marker pointed in the direction of 
the command. 
At some point in the process of creating a 
code to represent Bee-​Bot commands, you may 
want to go ahead and introduce the Bee-​Bot 
command cards from the manufacturer. The 
cards are well designed. Children can place 
them in a row to represent a long string of 
commands. But keep challenging children to 
think of their own ways to represent their code, 
such as placing colored blocks or puzzle pieces 
in a row, adding beads to a string, or lining up 
pegs on a pegboard. Each color could represent 
a direction or a command; for example, green 
means forward, red means back, blue means 
right, and orange means left.
Activity 3.11
Synchronize! 
To synchronize means to coordinate the movements of two things, or to make them 
move together in the same way at the same time. Children may enjoy the challenge 
of synchronizing Bee-​Bots, or programming multiple Bee-​Bots to do exactly the 
same movements at the same time. This requires communication and collabora­
tion among the children.
As children work together to synchronize Bee-​Bots, they can ponder the follow­
ing big questions:
▸▸What does the word “synchronize” mean?
▸▸How do we synchronize our Bee-​Bots?

89
HOW DO WE TELL ROBOTS WHAT TO DO?
For this activity, you will need two or more Bee-​Bots. Conduct the activity with 
a small group of children. The size of your group depends on how many Bee-​Bots 
you have. I think three or four children make the ideal group size, but you could try 
this with as few as two or as many as six children in a group.
Explain to the children that you are going to learn to synchronize the Bee-​
Bots. Explain that to synchronize means to make things happen at the same time. 
You may want to demonstrate a sequence of synchronized movements using your 
own body, perhaps with another adult. For example, announce and move together 
to a simple sequence such as the following: step forward, step back, turn right, 
turn left. 
Give each child or pair of children a Bee-​Bot. Have the children line up on the 
floor in a row. Assign a command leader, a child who will decide and announce the 
sequence of commands. Invite that child to demonstrate the program that every­
one will follow. The sequence should be fairly short so everyone will have a chance 
both to lead and follow. The leader will announce the code while programming a 
Bee-​Bot, pausing after each command to give everyone a chance to do the same. 
For example, the leader might say, “Press forward,” push the forward button on the 
Bee-​Bot, and pause a moment while the other children push their forward buttons 
too. After five or six commands, it’s time to test the synchronization. The leader can 
say, “Ready, set, go!” If everyone presses GO at the same time, the Bee-​Bots should 
move in a fairly synchronized fashion. The children may need to troubleshoot the 
process to ensure that they’ve all coded their Bee-​Bots with the exact same com­
mands and that everyone presses GO at the same time. Repeat this activity until 
everyone has had a chance to be the leader.
This synchronization activity provides an opportunity for children to observe 
how the Bee-​Bots are calibrated. The word “calibrated” means that the distance a 
Bee-​Bot travels each time it executes a forward or backward command is always 
roughly the same (about six inches). The children may spontaneously note the fact 
that the Bee-​Bots all travel at the same speed and cover the same distance. If the 
topic comes up, you may choose to introduce activity 3.13 (DIY Grid), in which the 
children measure and mark the space the Bee-​Bot travels.

90
CHAPTER 3
Activity 3.12
Bee-​Bot Dance 
In this activity, we take synchronization one step further. In addition to synchro­
nizing the Bee-​Bots, the children synchronize their own bodies to match the 
movements of the Bee-​Bots. As they do so, they can ponder the following big 
questions:
▸▸Can we move our bodies like a Bee-​Bot?
▸▸How do we make Bee-​Bots dance?
For this activity, I recommend you use only two Bee-​Bots so you’ll have enough 
floor space for the children to move around. Depending on the size of your class­
room, you may also want to limit each group to three or four children.
Have the children synchronize the movements of two Bee-​Bots in the same 
manner as activity 3.11. After they have tested and debugged the sequence of com­
mands and are satisfied that the Bee-​Bots are ready, have the children stand up and 
move their bodies to match the movements of the Bee-​Bots. They may need you 
to demonstrate or point out to them that when the Bee-​Bot moves backward, its 
face still points forward. Sometimes when children are imitating the Bee-​Bots, the 
direction of their movement is synchronized correctly, but their orientation—​the 
way they are facing—​is not. This activity may be surprisingly difficult for children, 
as it involves both kinesthetic and spatial reasoning. But children will probably still 
have fun trying it.
Add music! When we call the Bee-​Bot movements a “dance” and perform the 
actions along with music, the rhythm and choreography of the Bee-​Bot actions 
becomes more lively and interesting. Music may inspire children to come up with 
new combinations of commands to coordinate with specific songs.

91
HOW DO WE TELL ROBOTS WHAT TO DO?
Activity 3.13
DIY Grid 
Synchronization activities call attention to the fact that Bee-​Bots all move at pretty 
much the same pace and cover the same distance. The manufacturer calibrates the 
devices to do so. The space a Bee-​Bot travels each time it moves forward or back­
ward is about six inches. 
You can purchase a grid (a large mat marked with six-​inch squares) from the 
Bee-​Bot supplier. If you are following an inquiry approach that allows children to 
investigate, explore, and discover through play, you may want to wait to introduce 
the grid until after children notice and take interest in the distance the Bee-​Bot 
travels. In fact, the children may enjoy making their own grid or map.
As children play with Bee-​Bots and observe their movements, they can ponder 
the following big questions:
▸▸How far does a Bee-​Bot travel each time it moves?
▸▸How can we measure or draw the distance a Bee-​Bot travels?
▸▸How do we make a map or grid that shows how a Bee-​Bot moves?
To do this activity, you will need the following materials:
•• Bee-​Bot(s)
•• large paper and markers, or painter’s tape
•• ruler or a nonstandard measuring tool, such as a unit block
With a small group of children, demonstrate how a Bee-​Bot moves forward 
one space or one command. Ask the children, “How far does the Bee-​Bot go?” If 
the children have had any previous experience with measurement, they may have 
some ideas or suggestions. If not, ask them, “How can we show or measure how far 
a Bee-​Bot goes each time it moves forward?” You could put the Bee-​Bot on a piece 
of paper and mark with a crayon or pencil the spot where the front of the Bee-​Bot 
is positioned before it moves, and then mark the spot where it is positioned after 
it moves one space forward. You could measure that distance with a ruler, or you 
could ask the children to find an object in the room that matches that length. 

92
CHAPTER 3
A standard unit block, for example, is five and one-​half inches long—​almost the 
same distance a Bee-​Bot will travel.
Use painter’s tape on the floor, or use a big piece of paper and a marker, to cre­
ate a line or path for the Bee-​Bot to follow. Mark with tape or a line at each interval 
where the Bee-​Bot stops or pauses. The children probably will not be able to do this 
independently. They will need a teacher to lead and facilitate this process, but they 
can be active participants.
After you’ve marked the intervals on the line, add perpendicular lines at the 
intervals. Then add some additional grid lines until you have a Bee-​Bot–size grid. 
Invite children to play with the Bee-​Bots on the grid in an open-​ended way. The grid 
lines will provide a visible structure for the Bee-​Bot movements and allow children 
to become even more intentional about programming the Bee-​Bots.
Once you’ve made a grid for the Bee-​Bots, help the children make connections 
between the Bee-​Bot grid and the checkerboard play from activities 3.1 and 3.2. 
Revisit the big grid from activity 3.2 outdoors, this time using the arrow cards 
from activity 3.3 to represent the children’s movements as they move their own 
bodies from one square to another. They may enjoy programming one another or 
programming their teacher in the same way they have created commands for the 
Bee-​Bots. For example, one child could take the arrow cards and lay them down in 
a sequence of commands: move forward, move right, move forward, move right. 
The other child or adult, who is playing the role of the Bee-​Bot, stands on the grid 
and jumps or steps from one square to another, following the code: move forward, 
move right, move forward, move right.
Activity 3.14
Meet Cubetto 
Bee-​Bots are not the only educational robotic device available for schools to pur­
chase. While you’re reading this book, more are being invented and marketed. You 
can do the activities in the first part of this chapter (activities 3.1 through 3.13) with 
any device that you can program to navigate a grid. 
Another device you could use is the Code & Go Robot Mouse (www.learning
resources.com/product/learning+essentials-​-​8482-​+programmable+robot

93
HOW DO WE TELL ROBOTS WHAT TO DO?
+mouse.do). The Robot Mouse is a bit smaller and less expensive than the Bee-​
Bot. Unlike the Bee-​Bot, the Robot Mouse does not use a rechargeable battery. The 
Robot Mouse needs three AAA batteries, which you must replace when they wear 
out. I have often used this tool with children, but the Robot Mouse has one feature 
I do not like: the red button is a random command. When you use this command 
in your code, you can’t predict what action it will do. I feel this feature undermines 
children’s understanding of logic—​the ability to plan and predict as they create 
code—​that children develop as they play with these devices. When I use the Robot 
Mouse with children, I usually tape over the red button so they can’t use it.
A number of wonderful robotic devices are appropriate for young children 
but require the use of a tablet or smartphone. One example is Dash and Dot from 
Wonder Workshop (www.makewonder.com). Another example is the popular 
Sphero BB-​8 robot (www.sphero.com). These devices can be used in classrooms, 
but they require the additional hardware of a tablet or smartphone to program and 
operate the devices. 
I recommend the Bee-​Bot robots to teachers and schools because they require 
no additional hardware. They are true tangible tech because they are screenless. 
Many would argue that children are already spending too much time looking at 
screens at school and at home. Any opportunity to teach computational thinking, 
logic, and robotics engineering concepts away from screens is a welcome alter­
native. And, as described in activity 3.10, the absence of a screen challenges the 
children to come up with their own creative ways to represent their code, a twenty-​
first-​century example of Loris Malaguzzi’s “hundred languages of children.”
There is one other tangible tech device, in addition to the Bee-​Bot, that I fre­
quently recommend. It is the Cubetto (www.primotoys.com). Cubetto is a small 
robot on wheels, similar to the Bee-​Bot. The design is simple and appealing. In fact, 
this product meets Montessori standards as a beautiful and functional classroom 
tool. Unlike the Bee-​Bot, the Cubetto does not have buttons on its back. The robot 
comes with a board. Each command, such as “move forward” or “turn right,” is 
represented by a colorful block. Children place the command blocks on the board 
in a sequence. There is a wireless connection between the board and the robot. 
When the child presses the GO button on the board, the Cubetto robot performs 
the sequence of commands.
Like the Bee-​Bot, Cubetto is sold with a number of different grid mats, called 
maps. The maps are beautifully designed as well. They represent different kinds of 

94
CHAPTER 3
settings, such as outer space or underwater. However, I recommend that teachers 
provide frequent opportunities for children to play with the Cubetto in an open-​
ended manner before introducing the maps or a homemade grid. This allows chil­
dren to discover on their own what the robot can do, as well as imagine their own 
stories or scenarios.
I also recommend the Cubetto “Teacher’s Guide,” which is a free download­
able resource found here: www.primotoys.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/04
/Cubetto_teachers_guide.pdf. The teacher’s guide describes how to introduce the 
Cubetto robot to young children as a “friendly robot” that will follow their instruc­
tions and do what they tell it to do. You can demonstrate how the blocks work or 
allow the children to experiment and learn through trial and error. Most young 
children will be able to figure out how to make the Cubetto move in a short time. 
The “Teacher’s Guide” suggests that you start with a three-​block sequence, until the 
children become more familiar with the programming process.

95
HOW DO WE TELL ROBOTS WHAT TO DO?
Activity 3.15
The Cubetto Function Line 
The Cubetto robot has one exceptional feature that most other robotic devices 
currently on the market don’t offer. The Cubetto board has a function line. In com­
puter science, the word “function” is a special coding term. A function is a shortcut, 
a way of abbreviating your code to make it more efficient. Sometimes programmers 
use the word “elegant” to describe code that is written with great efficiency and 
simplicity. 
The Cubetto function line allows the user to place up to four command blocks 
inside a special area on the pegboard designated as the function line, and then 
use a single block, the blue function block, to represent all the commands in the 
function line. For example, suppose you want the Cubetto robot to move forward 
four times. You would place four green forward blocks on the function line, then 
place the one blue function block at the beginning of the programming queue. 
When you press GO and activate your program, the Cubetto robot moves forward 
four times. 

96
CHAPTER 3
Now suppose you want the robot to move forward four times, turn left, then 
move forward four times, turn right, and then move forward again four times. 
Because you already have four forward blocks on your function line, all you would 
need to include in your queue are the following blocks:
1.	Function block
2.	Turn left block
3.	Function block
4.	Turn right block
5.	Function block
You have abbreviated your code, which consists of fourteen commands, and 
represented it with only five blocks in your queue. This concept of using a function 
line to create elegant code may seem sophisticated to a nonprogrammer, but the 
Cubetto robot allows young children to gain hands-​on experience with this coding 
challenge through a developmentally appropriate play experience.
Activity 3.16
Code-​a-​pillar 
In summer 2016, the Fisher-​Price toy company introduced a coding device called 
Code-​a-​pillar (www.fisher-​price.com/en_US/brands/think-​and-​learn/products
/Think-​and-​Learn-​Code-​a-​pillar). The Code-​a-​pillar is recommended for children 
ages three to six. This device is truly a tangible tech experience because it requires 
no additional hardware, such as a tablet, laptop, or smartphone. Children take an 
active role in programming the toy to move and make sounds. Each segment of the 
caterpillar-​like robot represents a different command, such as “move forward” or 
“turn right.” Little hands can easily snap the pieces together to create a sequence 
from the front to the back. When the child presses the GO button near the head of 
the Code-​a-​pillar, the robot will perform the commands in order. 
When I tested this device for use in early childhood classrooms, the issue I 
encountered is that the robot is very loud. Every time you press GO, the device 
plays music and makes loud beeps and other robotic sounds. This could be a real 
distraction in a busy early childhood classroom. It could also be overwhelming for 
children who are sensitive to sensory stimulation. 

97
HOW DO WE TELL ROBOTS WHAT TO DO?
I wrote to Fisher-​Price and asked if there is a way to mute or eliminate the 
sounds. The company responded to say that was not possible in the current design. 
However, recently I found a way to hack the Code-​a-​pillar and disable the sound. I 
removed the batteries and opened up the main section of the device by unscrewing 
the four silver screws with a Phillips screwdriver. I couldn’t fully remove the cover 
from the base, because wires connect the main device to the lights and the speaker 
on the underside of the cover. But I was able to identify the blue wire that connects 
the speaker to the main device, and I simply snipped that wire. Now my Code-​a-​
pillar is completely silent, but all the other functions still work perfectly. 
I predict that Fisher-​Price will continue to improve this product and eventually 
offer versions that allow users to adjust the volume or mute the sounds. I do think 
this device has a lot of potential for teaching children how to code a robot—​to 
create a sequence of commands that tell a robot what to do. Many of the other 
activities included in this book could be done successfully using a Code-​a-​pillar. 
Activity 3.17
Robot Turtle Board Game 
Here’s an idea for another screen-​free experience that engages children in cod­
ing. Robot Turtles is a board game with cards and playing pieces made of good 
old-​fashioned cardboard. No electronic devices are required to play this game, 
although an e-​book is sold separately by the game company. Children as young as 
four years can play the game at an introductory level, with an adult facilitator.
The game board looks a bit like a checkerboard, with grid lines. Each player has 
a cardboard turtle as a playing piece. The object of the game is to program your 
turtle to get to a jewel. Command cards represent your program. One playing card 
represents each command, such as “move forward” or “turn right.” Players select 
their cards one at a time to “code” the movements of their turtles.
The game instructions suggest that the adult be the one to actually move the 
turtle across the board, because that’s similar to how a real computer works. The 
programmer tells the computer what to do. However, my experience playing this 
game shows that children really like to move their own game pieces. No matter 

98
CHAPTER 3
who moves the pieces, children will still learn about how to create a sequence of 
code, or an algorithm, that directs the path of the turtle.
What I love most about this game is the Bug card that can be played at any time 
to fix or “de-​Bug” your code. This feature makes debugging and mistakes a normal 
part of the process, just like STEM learning in real life.
For children who are older or ready for additional challenges, you can introduce 
walls by adding obstacle cards to the board. The website www.robotturtles.com 
also provides sample mazes and user-​generated mazes that you can use to add a 
greater challenge. 
Activity 3.18
People Patterns 
This activity and the next four are “unplugged” activities. They are activities that 
introduce young children to many of the same STEM concepts and ideas they can 
learn through robotic devices like Bee-​Bots and Cubetto, yet without the need to 
purchase new equipment. You can do these activities with materials and people 
found in any early childhood classroom.
For this activity, you will need three or four small dolls or people figures. You 
will show the children how they can position the toys in a line to show what you 
want your friend, or your teacher, to do. 
As children make people patterns, they can ponder the following big questions:
▸▸How can we use toys to show other people what we want them to do?
▸▸How might we position a toy to show a motion?
▸▸Does the order of the toys matter? Why or why not?
Show a small group of children the dolls and explain that you are going to teach 
them a new way to play with the dolls. Tell the children, “You can place the dolls in 
a row to show people how to move.” Place three dolls in a row—​one facing forward, 
one facing to the right, and one facing to the left. Have the children stand up and 
follow along as you demonstrate the movements represented by the sequence of 

99
HOW DO WE TELL ROBOTS WHAT TO DO?
dolls. Stand facing forward, turn to one side, then turn to the other side. The chil­
dren don’t need to know the words “right” and “left,” only that they turn one way 
first and turn the other way next.
Invite one of the children to move the three dolls another way, and have the 
group act out that sequence of actions too. Point to each doll as you perform each 
action so that the children get a sense of the sequence from left to right, one action 
at a time.
The children may come up with their own ideas for actions that the dolls or 
people figures can represent. If the dolls bend, the children could create a sequence 
that includes sitting down and then standing up. If the legs on the dolls don’t bend, 
the sequence could include lying down. 
You could introduce other toys to symbolize other movements. A toy rabbit 
could represent a hop, for example. Or, instead of motions, the toys could represent 
animal sounds. For example, a cow could symbolize mooing, a pig could symbolize 
oinking, and so on. 
The important thing is that the children learn to read the code from left to right. 
Then they perform each action in the order represented by the order of the toys.
Activity 3.19
Pattern Blocks 
Most early childhood classrooms are equipped with colored building blocks or 
parquetry tiles that are used for open-​ended construction and patterning play. You 
can use these materials to teach children how to create a sequence of commands (a 
code). But instead of programming a robot, the children will program each other. 
As they do so, children can ponder the following big questions:
▸▸How can we use shapes and colors to show how we move?
▸▸How can we create a code with blocks or tiles?
In a small group, create a simple sequence of three colored blocks, shapes, or 
parquetry tiles. Set the sequence in a row on a tabletop or on the floor. For example, 
you might arrange the following: 

100
CHAPTER 3
1.	Triangle
2.	Circle
3.	Triangle
Explain to the children that each shape represents an action, something we can 
do. For example, you could say that the triangle means clap your hands. The circle 
means blow a kiss. Demonstrate the sequence to the children as you point to each 
shape:
1.	Point to the triangle and clap your hands.
2.	Point to the circle and blow a kiss.
3.	Point to the triangle and clap your hands.
Invite the children to do the actions along with you. Then ask one of the chil­
dren to change the order of the three blocks. Perhaps now the order is this:
1.	Triangle
2.	Triangle
3.	Circle
Invite the children to read the sequence and do the actions with you, like this:
1.	Point to the triangle and clap your hands.
2.	Point to the triangle and clap your hands.
3.	Point to the circle and blow a kiss.
Invite the children to add more circles or more triangles to the sequence. Then 
challenge the children to act out the new, longer sequence.
Once the children have learned how to create a sequence of commands and act 
them out using the two variables you suggested, see if they can come up with their 
own ideas. Perhaps a square will mean touch your nose, or a diamond will mean 
stamp your feet.

101
HOW DO WE TELL ROBOTS WHAT TO DO?
Some children may also show an interest in using the color of the block to carry 
some meaning in the code. If a block is red, that could mean you must do the action 
quickly. If it’s blue, that could mean do it slowly.
As children learn to play with these variables and variations, they are creating 
more complex algorithms. An algorithm is a set of instructions for completing a 
task or solving a problem. This is what computer programmers do when they cre­
ate code for robots to execute specific actions and functions. A sequence of code is 
an algorithm.
Activity 3.20
Arrow Maps 
Earlier in this chapter, children learned to use the universal symbol of the arrow to 
show the direction of travel. They posted large arrows on a wall or laid them on the 
floor. The placement of the arrows in the environment provided context clues that 
helped the children understand how to interpret the arrows.
In this activity, children learn to create a sequence of arrows on a piece of paper 
that they carry in their hands. As they do so, they can ponder the following big 
questions:
▸▸What is an arrow?
▸▸How do people use arrows?
For this activity, you will need an arrow template and markers, crayons, or pen­
cils. An arrow template is a linear grid with just eight spaces, such as this:

102
CHAPTER 3
Use this template to draw a few short and simple arrow sequences. For example, 
the first time children use this grid, fill in only two or three squares with arrows. 
Start on the top left and move from left to right, top to bottom. A simple introduc­
tory sequence might be left arrow, right arrow, left arrow. 
Hand the page to a child. Stand behind the child to offer guidance as the child 
figures out how to follow the arrows. Point to the left arrow in the first space and 
say, “Turn this way.” Show the child how to turn in the direction of the arrow. Then 
point to the right arrow in the second space and say, “Turn this way.” Show the child 
how to turn in the direction of the second arrow. Then point to the left arrow in the 
third space and say, “Turn this way.” Show the child how to turn in the direction of 
the arrow.
Learning to read and follow the arrow instructions may be challenging for 
some children. They may be more interested in creating arrow instructions for 
you and watching you follow them. This interaction will be similar to what hap­
pens when a child begins learning to write letters and hands a page of randomly 
ordered but carefully written letters to an adult and asks, “What did I write?” In 
this case, however, the adult can probably make some sense of the child’s instruc­
tions. Meanwhile, the child gets the satisfaction of having the power to tell an 
adult what to do.
Some children may have difficulty drawing their own arrows. If that occurs, 
you can purchase arrow rubber stamps or arrow stickers from many office supply 
stores.
Activity 3.21
Program Your Parents 
You can share with families any of the three previous activities (3.18 through 3.20). 
Families can do these “coding” activities together at home. Take photos of chil­
dren’s people codes or block codes. Make some blank copies of arrow templates. 
Send these home to families, or plan for an unplugged coding activity for your next 
family meeting or event.

103
HOW DO WE TELL ROBOTS WHAT TO DO?
Activity 3.22
Rebus Stories 
This activity reinforces the concept of a symbol—​a drawing or figure that rep­
resents something else. This activity also reinforces the idea that people use sym­
bols in a sequence to create meaning. The meaning can be code for a robot or, in 
this case, the meaning can be a story.
As you read a rebus story with the children, they can ponder the following big 
question: 
▸▸What stories can we tell with pictures?
For this activity, you will need the following materials:
•• variety of rubber stamps
•• ink pads with washable ink
•• paper
•• pencils, crayons, or markers
In a rebus story, a picture represents words or letters. Reading rebus stories in 
books and creating our own rebus stories on paper helps reinforce the concept of 
symbols. It also teaches children that something small can represent something 
bigger, just like the code we create in computer programming. 
Read a rebus story out loud to a small group of children, pointing to each of 
the small pictures as you read the text. Each issue of Highlights magazine usually 
features a rebus. Your local library may also carry rebus books, such as The Rebus 
Treasury by Jean Marzollo or the Rebus Read-​Along Story series by Alyssa Satin 
Capucilli.
Invite the children to create and dictate their own rebus stories using rubber 
stamps for the pictures. First, the children may enjoy just experimenting with 
the rubber stamps and making their own pictures and patterns on paper. As they 
work, ask, “Who has some words to add to their story?” Offer to write the words 
on the page, next to the stamped pictures children have already created, or write 
the words first and then have the children add a stamped picture to each sentence. 

104
CHAPTER 3
Don’t worry if the inked pictures do not align correctly with the text you write. The 
important idea here is that children have an experience using small pictures or 
icons as symbols.
Coding Apps and Websites 
The last five activities in this chapter describe digital tools, such as applica­
tions (apps) or websites, that teach children how to code. If you have tablets or 
laptops available for your classroom, you may want to consider these digital 
coding tools. You don’t need to have a device for every child in your class. In 
fact, research shows that children learn more when they work in pairs on 
tablets than when they use tablets alone (Blackwell 2015).
Any use of digital tools in an early childhood classroom must be carefully 
considered. A good place to start is the joint position statement created by 
NAEYC and the Fred Rogers Center (FRC) for Early Learning and Children’s 
Media at Saint Vincent College. This statement is titled Technology and Inter­
active Media as Tools in Early Childhood Programs Serving Children from Birth 
through Age 8. For guidance on whether to use coding apps with young chil­
dren, we can look to this section of the statement:
Developmentally appropriate teaching practices must always guide the 
selection of any classroom materials, including technology and interac­
tive media.
Teachers must take the time to evaluate and select technology and 
media for the classroom, carefully observe children’s use of the materi­
als to identify opportunities and problems, and then make appropriate 
adaptations. They must be willing to learn about and become familiar 
with new technologies as they are introduced and be intentional in the 
choices they make, including ensuring that content is developmentally 
appropriate and that it communicates anti-​bias messages. (NAEYC and 
FRC 2012, 6)
The three primary apps that I describe and recommend here (Daisy 
the Dinosaur, Kodable, and ScratchJr) meet NAEYC guidelines in that 
they have been reviewed and evaluated by respected educators and advo­
cacy groups such as Common Sense Media. In the Leapfrog program 
I coordinate at Northwestern University, we have used these apps in 
classrooms over the past two years. I’ve worked with about fifty different 

105
HOW DO WE TELL ROBOTS WHAT TO DO?
Activity 3.23
Daisy the Dinosaur 
Daisy the Dinosaur is a free educational app available for iPads. (Visit www.daisy
thedinosaur.com.) Currently it is not available for Android tablets. 
The app teaches children to create a sequence of commands that will program 
the animated character of Daisy the Dinosaur to perform various actions. The app 
uses block programming, which means that each command appears on the screen 
as a labeled color block. Children use the touch screen to move the blocks or com­
mands from the left side, where the menu of commands appears, to the desktop or 
workspace on the top right side of the screen. The code becomes stacked vertically 
from top to bottom. When you press play, Daisy performs the commanded actions.
instructors, and our coding courses have served almost one thousand 
children. We’ve observed the children’s use of these tools, and we even 
invited a research team to study how our youngest students use the apps. 
I feel confident recommending them to other educators, with one caveat: 
In our Leapfrog classrooms, we limit the amount of time children use 
tech devices to ensure that children’s classroom experience, even in the 
coding classes, is well balanced with other kinds of play and learning. We 
use the coding activities in one small learning center that the children 
visit in small groups. 
A reliable and respected source of app and game reviews is the non­
profit organization Common Sense. You can find it on the web at www
.commonsensemedia.org.
Common Sense is the leading independent nonprofit organization 
dedicated to helping kids thrive in a world of media and technology. We 
empower parents, teachers, and policymakers by providing unbiased 
information, trusted advice, and innovative tools to help them harness 
the power of media and technology as a positive force in all kids’ lives. 
(Common Sense, accessed 2017)

106
CHAPTER 3
Daisy the Dinosaur is a great app for beginning coders because the animation 
is simple, with few distractions. Daisy is the only character, and the background 
never changes. The yellow sun always shines in Daisy’s world. 
The problem with using Daisy the Dinosaur with young children is that the 
blocks are labeled with text instead of with symbols or icons. Prereaders will have 
a harder time using this app, at least initially, than children who can read. The good 
news is that, in my experience, children learn how to use the app more by trial and 
error than by reading. They quickly figure out that the first block at the top of the 
commands menu is the move command even if they are not able to read the word 
“move.” In fact, the children are so highly motivated to learn how to animate Daisy 
with code that many develop the ability to read the words as sight vocabulary even 
before they have learned the names of the letters or how to decode text. 
In classrooms where we have used Daisy the Dinosaur with prereaders, we have 
created a poster that gives the children a key for understanding the commands. 
The Daisy the Dinosaur app also introduces children to two important coding 
concepts: looping and conditions. The repeat command is an example of looping. 
The when command is an example of conditions.

107
HOW DO WE TELL ROBOTS WHAT TO DO?
Activity 3.24
Kodable 
Kodable is an educational game that teaches coding. The player must create a 
sequence of commands to guide a little, fuzzy creature through a maze to capture 
coins. This app is available for both iPads and Android tablets. (Visit www.kodable
.com.)
The app is free for the introductory level of play. But if you want the option 
to progress to more complex levels, you will find pricing options for schools and 
school districts. You can also try out Kodable online in a web-​based tutorial here: 
https://game.kodable.com/hour-​of-​code.
I recommend the introductory level of Kodable as a great introduction to cod­
ing for young children. No reading is required to play the game. The children use 
a finger on the touch screen to move the commands, each indicated by an arrow 
that points up, down, left, or right. The menu of arrow commands appears on the 
top right, and the player moves each command to the workspace on the top left. 
The game has a built-​in tutorial that helps players learn what to do. For example, 
if the player needs to select the up arrow next, that arrow begins to glow and pulse, 
directing the player’s attention to that command. 
Young children seem to enjoy the fuzzy characters in the game. In our Leapfrog 
classrooms where we use Kodable, the children make their own Kodable creatures 
to take home by gluing googly eyes onto yarn pom-​poms.

108
CHAPTER 3
Activity 3.25
ScratchJr 
ScratchJr is a free educational app available for both iPads and Android tablets. 
(Visit www.scratchjr.org.) But ScratchJr is more than just a game or a lesson in cod­
ing. ScratchJr is a programming language that allows children to create animated 
stories and games. The ScratchJr programming language is made up of individual 
blocks that children move on the touch screen with a finger. The programming 
blocks snap together in a sequence to make the characters move, speak, sing, and 
make sound effects. 
ScratchJr offers a big menu of different characters to animate and backgrounds 
to choose. It also includes tools for children to draw their own characters and back­
grounds or to take photos of themselves or their friends and family to incorporate 
into their stories.
ScratchJr was inspired by the popular Scratch programming language for older 
children (https://scratch.mit.edu). One of the lead creators of ScratchJr was Marina 
Umaschi Bers, mentioned in the introduction of this book as one of the leading 
minds in developmentally appropriate robotics and tangible tech. She is a co­­
author, with Mitchel Resnick, of The Official ScratchJr Book: Help Your Kids Learn to 
Code, an excellent resource for how to get started teaching ScratchJr.

109
HOW DO WE TELL ROBOTS WHAT TO DO?
Activity 3.26
Other Coding Apps 
You can try a number of other well-​reviewed educational apps that teach coding to 
children. These include Lightbot and The Foos. 
Lightbot is a game in which the player chooses commands represented by 
arrows to program an animated robot to travel on a small grid to reach a light­
bulb. When each challenge is successfully completed, the lightbulb will glow. The 
introductory “Hour of Code” version of Lightbot is free but the full app requires a 
purchase. For more information about Lightbot, visit https://lightbot.com. 
The Foos is a game in which players (ages four years and older) earn points by 
programming the animated characters to accomplish different tasks. This app is 
available for purchase for both iPads and Android tablets. For more information 
about The Foos, visit http://thefoos.com. A CodeSpark curriculum has been devel­
oped for The Foos and is available to download at http://thefoos.com/coding
-​resources-​for-​you.

110
CHAPTER 3
Activity 3.27
Build Your Code 
Parents and educators often express concern about screen time. A growing body 
of evidence indicates that children of all ages are spending more and more time 
engaging with screens at home and at school (Joan Ganz Cooney Center, accessed 
2017). 
This doesn’t necessarily mean that we should eliminate screens. However, we 
do need to make sure that the digital tools we use are safe and effective learning 
tools, and that they are developmentally appropriate for young children.
I believe that one way we can make the most of children’s digital learning 
experiences is to look for every opportunity to help children make meaningful 
connections between the virtual, digital world and the real, tangible world. We 
already know, through the work of the Reggio Emilia schools and the followers of 
Lilian Katz’s project approach, that when children are challenged to represent what 
they know using more than one medium, their learning becomes much deeper and 
more meaningful. The same must be true when children move from the digital to 
the tangible and back again from the tangible to the digital.
I can share one successful experience I’ve observed from the Leapfrog coding 
classes where I work at Northwestern University. We noticed that many children 
are fascinated by the digital world-​building game Minecraft. While Minecraft is 
not appropriate for young children due to the intensity and complexity of some of 
the features, every child seems fascinated by the Minecraft idea that you can build 
whatever you need out of colored cubes. 
A world-​building app called Toca Builders is, in some ways, a kinder and gentler 
version of Minecraft. (Visit https://tocaboca.com/app/toca-​builders.) 
In Toca Builders, the user builds structures out of cubes, just as in Minecraft. 
But there are no zombies or other frightening features. In our Leapfrog classrooms, 
we’ve created cross-​media learning experiences that allow children to build a 
virtual structure in Toca Builders and then build that same or similar structure in 
the real world using foam cube blocks. We’ve also done this activity the other way 
around. A child can build a tangible structure with blocks in the real world and 
then use the Toca Builders app to make a virtual replica of the structure. 

111
HOW DO WE TELL ROBOTS WHAT TO DO?
I believe that cross-​media learning experiences like these will become even 
more essential for deep learning as classrooms and curricula become more digital 
and virtual. Children will always need to learn with their hands as well as with their 
brains. 


113
4
How Do Robots Help Us?
Imagining a Better World 
Learning about robots is a valuable experience relevant to all aspects of STEM 
education. Most children enjoy learning how robots work, how they’re made, and 
how to program them. But does the value of robotics extend beyond the classroom? 
Some might argue that robots are only a trend or fad. Do we really need robots 
in our lives, or are we perhaps just caught up in a consumer-​driven society that 
continually develops fancier electronic devices so tech companies can make more 
money?
When I hear people say that we would all be better off without advanced tech­
nology like computers and robots, I think about what happens when someone 
is injured or ill and gets rushed to a hospital emergency room. Computerized or 
robotic tools like digital thermometers, MRI machines, and laser scalpels are essen­
tial to saving lives and helping people heal and stay well. Advancements in health 
care alone are a cogent argument for the benefits of technology and, specifically, 
robotics. Improved efficiency and safety in industry and transportation are other 
examples of ways computers and robots help make the world a better place.
The activities in this chapter help children imagine how robots can play a pos­
itive role in their own lives, in the lives of the people they love, and in the lives of 
people all over the world. “A high-​quality computing education equips pupils to 
use computational thinking and creativity to understand and change the world” 
(UK Department for Education 2013). Let’s help children create a world where 
robots are heroes, not villains; where children use their hands and brains to inno­
vate and invent; and where everyone has a role in creating solutions and advance­
ments that improve all our lives.

114
CHAPTER 4
The ideas in this chapter extend children’s growing understanding of robotics. 
These activities and resources will help children apply their ideas and skills to 
new situations and contexts. Rather than following a prescribed sequence, these 
activities are intended to provide a path based on children’s emergent interests. 
Read through this chapter, and then be a vigilant observer and listener for cues 
in children’s play and conversations that indicate they are ready to pursue one of 
these topics.
Activity 4.1
Robot Helpers 
To develop or extend a conversation about how robots might help people, read 
aloud the picture book Robot Rumpus by Sean Taylor. In this fanciful story, a fam­
ily enlists the help of a team of silly robots to accomplish a variety of household 
chores. The robots include Cook-​bot, Wash-​bot, Dry-​bot, and Clean-​bot. When the 
sensors on Wash-​bot malfunction, chaos ensues. The book is funny, colorful, and 
engaging, though not an accurate representation of how robots really work. 
Afterward ask the children, “Could this story really happen? Why or why not?” 
Listen to their responses without correcting any misconceptions. Engaging in a 
conversation that challenges children to articulate why they believe something 
helps develop critical thinking. 
Then show children the photos in the nonfiction picture book Robots at Home by 
Christine Zuchora-​Walske. The robots in this book are real-​life examples of useful 
robots that serve families.
Here’s another nonfiction resource about helpful robots: “The Year in Robots” 
by Bob Tedeschi (http://www.nytimes.com/2014/12/25/garden/10-​home-​robots
-​to-​lighten-​your-​domestic-​chores.html). This New York Times photo-​essay shows 
examples of robots that can do the following jobs:
•• water your lawn
•• scrub your floors
•• rock your baby

115
HOW DO ROBOTS HELP US?
•• clean your grill
•• mow your lawn
•• clean your cat’s litter box
Once children have had a chance to learn more about real robots that can help 
people clean and do chores, revisit the book Robot Rumpus. Talk again about what 
could really happen and what is pretend. Some of the children’s ideas and opinions 
may have changed or evolved in interesting ways.
Activity 4.2
Robot Pets 
Can a robot provide comfort and companionship? This is a question to explore 
through reading stories, viewing video clips, discussion, and play.
Andrea Baruffi’s picture book If I Had a Robot Dog provides a great introduction 
to the topic of robot pets. After reading it with the children, ask them to think about 
the similarities and differences between a robot dog and a real dog. Write children’s 
ideas on a two-​column chart or Venn diagram.
If possible, compare an actual robot to an actual dog, or a toy robot dog to a 
stuffed animal toy dog. Here are some examples:
•• Tekno robotic puppy (www.tekno-​robotics.com/robotic-​puppy5g)
•• Paw Patrol toys (https://shop.spinmaster.com/store/us/paw-​patrol/_/N-​q3emjg) 
•• FurReal Friends (www.hasbro.com/en-​us/brands/furreal)
I don’t recommend purchasing these toys for ongoing classroom use. Most are 
not durable enough to last long in a busy early childhood classroom. But if you can 
borrow one for demonstration purposes, that would be ideal.
Some robotic toy dogs have fur, and some do not. That sensory difference will 
likely be a significant point of discussion for the children.
Some engineers have developed robots that provide comfort, companionship, 
and other pet-​like services to humans. One example is the SpotMini robot dog 

116
CHAPTER 4
(http://thekidshouldseethis.com/post/boston-​dynamics-​new-​spotmini-​robot). 
Another example is PARO, a therapeutic robot that looks like a baby seal. (See www
.parorobots.com and www.nytimes.com/video/us/1247468152153/bonding-​with
-​paro.html.)
If you plan to use the PARO video mentioned here, remember this important 
note about using Internet videos in an early childhood classroom. Most young 
children are visual learners. Educational videos can bring exciting new ideas and 
inspiration into your classroom. Early childhood educators have a responsibility to 
carefully consider the role of media in the lives of young children. Use the princi­
ples outlined in the NAEYC position paper on the use of technology and interactive 
media as a guide for making these decisions (www.naeyc.org/files/naeyc/file
/positions/PS_technology_WEB2.pdf).
In my experience, viewing a short video (three to five minutes long) can be an 
engaging and informative tool for helping children understand STEM topics. I 
think of these videos as a supplement to the children’s core learning experience, 
not the centerpiece of the activity. I recommend using a short video to introduce a 
new topic, to begin a new conversation, to demonstrate an example of a new idea, 
or to inspire a creative project.
The videos suggested in this book provide examples and information that 
can’t be found in other media, such as picture books. Always screen videos before 
showing them to children. When you’re preparing to use an Internet video in your 
classroom, be sure to prepare the screen and browser window so that ads, pop-​ups, 
and other potentially inappropriate content are not visible to children. For exam­
ple, when you’re viewing YouTube videos, the thumbnails of promoted videos that 
appear on the right side of the screen are often inappropriate for children, even 
when the primary video is clearly intended for a young audience. Open the video 
in full-​screen mode before showing it to children, or download the video to your 
desktop. You may also want to consider ad-​blocking software for your school or for 
the personal device you use when you’re teaching.

117
HOW DO ROBOTS HELP US?
Activity 4.3
Robot Doctors 
As you guide children in exploring ways robots can help make the world better and 
safer, one topic that might come up is the use of robots in health care. Robotic sur­
gical devices are gaining sophistication and effectiveness, but the topic of surgery 
can be frightening to children and difficult to understand. I don’t recommend initi­
ating a discussion on the topic of robotic surgery, but if children bring it up, perhaps 
because they’ve seen something about it on TV or because a family member has had 
some direct experience with robotic surgery, here is a child-​friendly resource: http://
thekidshouldseethis.com/post/a-​surgical-​robot-​delicately-​stitches-​a-​grape-​back
-​together. This is a video demonstration of robotic surgery on a grape.
Activity 4.4
Robot Arm 
At the age of fourteen, Easton LaChappelle used Lego blocks, fishing wire, and a 3-​D 
printer to invent a robotic arm. It was a significant improvement on existing technol­
ogies because it could be built at a fraction of the cost of prosthetic devices then on 
the market. This BBC video describes Easton’s design process: www.bbc.com/future
/story/20151026-​a-​teens-​mind-​controlled-​arm-​could-​make-​prosthetics-​cheaper.
I recommend this video for educators as an inspirational example of the power 
of tinkering and creative exploration. The content and vocabulary are probably 
too advanced for most young children. For young children, it’s hard to find devel­
opmentally appropriate print or video resources that describe the amazing robotic 
devices, such as prosthetic arms and legs, that have been invented to help people 
with disabilities. Many of the stories and videos mention the accidents or illnesses 
that caused limb loss or paralysis. Even a brief mention of this kind of accident or 
illness might be difficult for young children to take in.
And yet most young children have seen or heard about artificial arms or 
legs, as well as wheelchairs and other devices that help people live more active 
and productive lives. Some of the children in your classroom may have family 

118
CHAPTER 4
members who need or use these kinds of devices. If the topic of robotic arms or 
legs seems relevant to the children in your class, or if a child asks about it, I have 
two recommendations.
First, this video describes an amazing project that allows children to design 
and make their own robotic limbs using components similar to Lego toys: http://
thekidshouldseethis.com/post/a-​prosthetic-​system-​that-​lets-​kids-​make-​their
-​own-​lego-​robot-​limbs. Another way to approach the topic of assistive devices is 
through animals. There are many charming stories and videos about pets, espe­
cially dogs, who have lost the use of one or more limbs and have received some kind 
of assistive device, usually on wheels, to help them move around. Here’s a great 
example: www.youtube.com/watch?v=4txTwafKlKc.
In the classroom, watch for a teachable moment related to assistive technolo­
gies. If a doll loses an arm or leg, for example, or a toy bird loses its wing, instead 
of throwing the toy away, ask the children if they can invent an artificial limb or 

119
HOW DO ROBOTS HELP US?
another type of device, real or pretend, to help the toy move or become whole 
again. Materials like Lego blocks, straws, craft sticks, cardboard, and masking tape 
may inspire children to design and build an exciting and innovative robotic or 
assistive device for a toy.
Activity 4.5
Yuck! 
The conversations you have with the children about robots and the picture books 
about robots that you read to them will probably touch upon the idea that robots do 
things people don’t like to do. For example, in Dan Yaccarino’s book If I Had a Robot, 
the boy imagines a robot that will take over all his unwanted tasks, such as cleaning 
the house, feeding the dog, practicing piano, and even kissing his Aunt Louise.
In real life, robots actually do perform many tasks in industry and manufac­
turing that people don’t like to do, such as moving or manipulating chemicals and 
other dangerous materials. In this activity, children gain some direct experience in 
the benefits and challenges of having robots do human work. As they do so, they 
can ponder the following big questions:
▸▸How can robots help us?
▸▸What jobs can robots do?
▸▸How do we design and build robots that work?
For this activity, you will need the following materials:
•• bin or water table
•• washable household items or toys of various sizes and shapes, such as 
utensils, Lego blocks, coins, or cups
•• large quantity of hair gel, pancake syrup, vegetable oil, or other sticky or goopy 
substance, enough to coat the bottom of the bin and the items in the bin
•• toy robot arm, toy grabber, kitchen tongs, or ice tongs 

120
CHAPTER 4
Place the household items or toys in the bin and cover them with a thin layer 
of hair gel or other goopy substance. Say to the children, “Now we need to pick up 
these items. Would you like to pick them up with your fingers, or would you rather 
have a robot do it for you?”
Invite the children to use the robot 
arm, grabber, or tongs to pick up the 
items. As the children do this task, ask 
them open-​ended questions that will 
help them identify the challenges of 
picking up small items, large items, 
smooth items, rough items, or bumpy 
items. Also, ask questions that help chil­
dren evaluate the design and function 
of the robotic arm, grabber, or tongs: 
▸▸How does this tool work? 
▸▸Is this a good tool for this job? 
Why or why not? 
▸▸How could we make a robot that 
would do this job for us? 
What would the robot look like? 
▸▸What parts and pieces would the robot have? 
▸▸What materials would the robot be made of?
Invite children to draw a picture of a robot that would be good at picking up 
sticky things or slippery things.
Activity 4.6
Robot Car 
The topic of self-​driving cars has been at the top of tech and business news recently. 
According to Fortune magazine, today’s five-​year-​old will grow up in a world where 

121
HOW DO ROBOTS HELP US?
we will all routinely order an autonomous self-​driving car using an app on our 
smartphones. The car will quickly pick us up and drop us off at our destination as 
we enjoy a stress-​free, energy-​efficient ride (Korosec 2016). 
Currently there are only a few children’s books in print that discuss the topic 
of self-​driving cars. Certainly, as the technology becomes more widely used, more 
books will be written and published. For now, check out the following:
•• Self-​Driving Cars by Katie Marsico
•• Self-​Driving Cars by Christine Zuchora-​Walske
In addition, Daimler, the parent company of automaker Mercedes-​Benz, has 
published an e-​book for children that introduces the concept of self-​driving cars. 
It’s titled Where Do Cars Go at Night? You can access the children’s book free online 
using this link: http://issuu.com/moovellab/docs/151105_wdcgan_inhalt.
I would argue that the concept of self-​driving cars is not at all strange to young 
children. When preschool children play with toy cars, usually the car itself is the 
main character in their pretend scenarios. Children rarely include the role of the 
driver in their pretend play with toy cars, unless the toy car is large and detailed 
enough to include a space for a toy driver to sit and a window or door that allows 
the child to place the driver in the car. 
The characteristic of self-​driving cars that might be most interesting and mean­
ingful to young children is the way that self-​driving cars can potentially eliminate 
or reduce traffic jams. When human-​driven cars are stopped at a traffic light and 
the light turns green, the driver of the first car moves her car forward first, then 
the second car begins moving, and then the third. When a row of automated cars 
is stopped at a traffic light and the light turns green, the cars begin to move in syn­
chronized fashion, kind of like a train. You might demonstrate this concept with 
children in an early childhood classroom by comparing a toy train with linked cars 
to individual toy cars. Or you could let this concept emerge during children’s spon­
taneous play and then facilitate a conversation that helps children observe and 
understand how vehicles move when their movements are synchronized.
Another way to connect children’s play and the concept of self-​driving or 
robotic cars is to invite children to create a traffic jam with toy vehicles. Most 
children will welcome the opportunity to create a crazy mess of cars moving in all 
directions. Then challenge children to think of a way to solve that problem and 

122
CHAPTER 4
keep the traffic jam from happening. Would children change how the roads are 
laid out? Would they change the way the roads come together? Would they change 
the traffic lights or signals? Would they change the cars’ speed? These questions 
will help children analyze a complex problem, break it down into different ideas or 
variables, and brainstorm potential solutions.
As children do this activity, they can ponder the following big questions:
▸▸Can a robot drive a car?
▸▸How could you create a robot or a computer 
that could drive a car?
▸▸Would a car driven by a robot look or work 
differently than a car driven by a person?
As a follow-​up activity, I recommend the logic game Rush Hour. It engages 
children in the kinds of logical and computational thinking that parallel the pro­
gramming of self-​driving cars. It is recommended for ages eight years and up (www
.thinkfun.com/products/rush-​hour). Rush Hour Jr. is recommended for ages five 
years and up (www.thinkfun.com/products/rush-​hour-​jr). Rush Hour can also be 
played free online here: www.thinkfun.com/play-​online/rush-​hour.
Activity 4.7
Fast and Faster 
Factories use robotic devices to help speed up the manufacturing process. Robots 
can often work faster and more efficiently than human beings. Here are three 
child-​friendly videos that demonstrate how robots are used in industry:
•• Lego factory robots: http://thekidshouldseethis.com/post/inside-​the-​lego
-​factory-​the-​robots-​machines-​that-​make-​lego
•• ultrafast robots: http://thekidshouldseethis.com/post/two-​ultra-​fast-​robots
-​pick-​place-​batteries-​to-​form-​group-​patterns
•• robots decorating a cake: http://thekidshouldseethis.com/post/automated
-​cake-​icing-​and-​decorating-​machines

123
HOW DO ROBOTS HELP US?
After watching one of these videos, children may enjoy the challenge of trying 
to accomplish a familiar task at top speed. Find a simple physical task, such as 
putting together a puzzle or placing pegs in a pegboard. Have children perform the 
task at a regular pace, and time them with a stopwatch or clock. Then have them 
do it again, speeding up as much as they can. Compare how long they took to do it 
the first time to how long it took them the second time. Then ask, “Did you make 
any mistakes when you tried to go faster? Did you drop anything or have trouble 
making things fit?” This experience will help inform children’s understanding of 
the challenges and benefits of automating a task.
Activity 4.8
Robot Directions 
Many young children have observed adults ask for and receive directions from a 
voice-​activated GPS navigation system or smartphone while they are driving. This 
is another example of an electronic device that helps people. 
In a small group, ask children if they have ever seen anyone ask for directions 
using a computer or a phone. If you have a tablet, smartphone, or other device 
available, demonstrate for the children how navigation apps work. Even if you are 
not driving in a car, you can still show the children how to ask for directions to a 
location and hear how the device tells you to navigate. For example, on an iPhone, 
you could ask Siri for directions to the closest grocery store or library. Invite the 
children to take turns asking for directions to landmarks they know.
Ask the children to describe the automated voice they hear when they use these 
devices. Does it sound like a real person? Why or why not?
Activity 4.9
Brave Robots 
While the Transformer films and cartoons include conflict, suspense, and violence 
that are not suitable for young children, children of all ages seem to be familiar with 
Transformer characters and toys. Almost any discussion of robots among children 

124
CHAPTER 4
over the age of two will inevitably include some reference to a Transformer. In case 
you are still in the dark about these creatures, Transformers are robotic creatures 
from another planet that can transform into other kinds of machines. For exam­
ple, the Transformer hero and leader, Optimus Prime, is a broad-​shouldered robot 
with the profile of a muscular superhero. Optimus Prime is able to transform into 
a souped-​up semitrailer.
As part of your conversations with children about robots that help people, ask 
the children, “Can a robot be brave?” Some of the children may enthusiastically 
say yes and use Transformers as an example. This is a great opportunity to lead the 
children to a discussion about how robots and machines might help people in real 
life. Robots are frequently used in situations that would be dangerous for humans. 
Firefighting robots provide one great example: 
•• This article includes a photo of a robotic device that helps fight forest fires: 
http://wildfiretoday.com/2015/12/11/firefighting-​robots.
•• This video shows a snakelike, water-​spraying robot that may someday be 
used by firefighters to put out fires: www.allonrobots.com/firefighting
-​robots.html.
•• And here’s a video of a wheeled robot called Quince. Quince goes into an 
area damaged by an earthquake to see if the area is safe: www.youtube.com
/watch?v=taKbsFRNRT4.
Activity 4.10
Robot Friends 
Many children’s picture books about robots tell stories in which a robot character 
develops a friendship with a child. One example is Robot, Go Bot! by Dana Meachen 
Rau. In this story, a girl builds a robot out of spare parts. The girl and her robot play 
together happily until the robot grows tired of being bossed around. The robot 
frowns and looks very unhappy until the girl treats the robot with more kindness 
and lets the robot have a turn on a swing. The two characters in the story interact 
in the way two human friends would interact. The story is a sweet lesson in the 
golden rule: treat others the way you would like to be treated. The illustrations are 

125
HOW DO ROBOTS HELP US?
colorful and the story is engaging, but be aware that Robot, Go Bot! could actually 
undermine children’s understanding of the real relationship between people and 
robots. You may need to remind children that robots are programmable. We create 
commands using code, and the robots perform those commands. 
And yet both children and adults enjoy personifying machines. Some of us 
name our cars and blow kisses to our coffee machines. We become fond of the tools 
that help us lead happy and productive lives. There’s nothing wrong with thinking 
of robots as our friends, especially when they look and move like people. In fact, 
here’s an example of a robot that the developers claim is so friendly, helpful, and 
intelligent that it will become part of your family: www.jibo.com. The Jibo robot 
can take family photos and videos, read and send messages, turn on your lights and 
appliances, order your dinner, and even read you a bedtime story.
Activity 4.11
Sensors—​How Robots See 
The educational robots introduced in chapter 3, such as Bee-​Bot and Cubetto, do 
not have sensors. But as children begin to learn more about and gain more experi­
ence with robotic devices, they may become aware that some robots can respond 
to their environment. Sensors allow robots to see lights and colors, to hear sounds 
and voices, and to detect motion. Some robots can even smell and taste.
In the world of educational robots, an example of a robot with a sensor is the 
tiny Ozobot (http://ozobot.com). The Ozobot can follow a line of color drawn on a 
piece of paper. The Ozobot rolls across the page as its color sensors read the code 
represented by the pattern of colors.
Lego Mindstorms EV3 robots also have light and color sensors that allow 
them to follow a line. EV3 kits are commonly used in First Lego League clubs and 
after-​school enrichment programs. If your conversations with children lead to a 
discussion of how robots see or hear, you can introduce them to the world of Lego 
robots by inviting an older child from a local Lego club to visit your classroom or 
by watching one of these videos:
•• a video of Segway-​style robotic devices made with Lego robotic parts and 
sensors: www.youtube.com/watch?v=5fNYDkjgO4M 

126
CHAPTER 4
•• a video demonstrating the use of the color sensor in Lego EV3 robotic kits: 
www.youtube.com/watch?v=8wzXIhEF7V4 
•• a video of a robotics competition hosted at University of Nevada: 
www.youtube.com/watch?v=yTRy6P1SbjA
Activity 4.12
Flying Robots 
The practical uses of flying robots are described in the nonfiction picture book 
Weather Robots by Christine Zuchora-​Walske. You could use the photos and ideas in 
this book to initiate a conversation about how robots help people understand and 
predict the weather. If your classroom has a morning ritual that includes talking 
about the weather, that would be a good time to connect what people need to know 
and what robots can do. 
For example, ask the children to make a weather prediction: “Do you think it 
will rain today? Why or why not?” Then you might wonder out loud, “I wish I could 
fly into the clouds and look to see if rain is coming.” Some children may laugh, but 
some might find that idea fascinating. Ask the children, “Would you like to fly into 

127
HOW DO ROBOTS HELP US?
a rain cloud or a storm cloud? Why or why not?” If any of the children recognize 
that flying into a storm might be dangerous, that’s a good opportunity for making 
the robot connection. Ask, “What about a robot? Could we send a robot into a storm 
cloud?” At this point, it might be helpful to use photos from a nonfiction book like 
Weather Robots to help children imagine how a flying robot might work.
Children may also enjoy viewing the beauty and complexity of the flying robot 
featured in this video: http://thekidshouldseethis.com/post/8755755598.
Activity 4.13
What Is a Drone? 
Drones are so commonly used now by hobbyists and professional photographers 
that many young children have heard the term “drone” and have seen drones in 
action. A drone is a remote-​controlled flying device. It has no pilot or passenger.
Here are two fascinating child-​friendly examples of drones:
•• tiny drones with four propellers called nano quadrotors: 
http://thekidshouldseethis.com/post/16922370178
•• a flying robot orchestra: http://thekidshouldseethis.com
/post/84441470252
Activity 4.14
Swimming Robots 
Chapter 2 of this book recommends Hexbugs for classroom use as an example of 
bio-​inspired robots. The same company that makes Hexbugs also makes swim­
ming robots called AquaBots. The Hexbug AquaBots come in several different vari­
eties. The one with the simplest design, the basic AquaBot single fish, provides a 
great example of the use of sensors (www.hexbug.com/aquabot/hexbug-​aquabot
-​8482-​single.html).

128
CHAPTER 4
 When you drop this robotic fish into a bathtub or fish tank, it begins to swim. 
This is because the AquaBot has two pressure sensors, one on each side of its body. 
When there is equal pressure on both sides, the fish’s tail begins to move.
This toy inspires an exciting example of inquiry-​based learning. When you don’t 
tell children about the sensors or explain how the sensors work, you challenge and 
inspire them to observe and test until they can begin to develop their own ideas 
about how the fish knows it’s in the water. At first, most of us will guess that it’s the 
water itself that triggers the movement, that the fish knows when it is wet. Some 
children, however, may be able to figure out on their own that there are pressure 
sensors on the sides of the fish, through careful observation and testing.
As an extension activity, children may enjoy testing their own “sensors.” Have 
children touch the contents of three bowls with three different textures or sensa­
tions. I suggest one filled with water, just like the environment of the AquaBot; 
one bowl filled with something wet but somewhat solid like soggy noodles or 
gelatin; and one filled with a dry and loose substance like rice or sand. Have the 
children close their eyes and dip their hands in each of the substances. Ask them 
to say “Now!” when they can feel the substance on both sides of their hand. Ask, 
“How did you know your hand was in the water (or other substance)? What did it 
feel like? Could you feel any pressure on your skin? Can you imagine what it might 
feel like to be the AquaBot in the water? Can you imagine the gentle pressure it 
feels on its sensors?”
Children may also enjoy viewing videos of more complex examples of swim­
ming robots:
•• air penguin: www.youtube.com/watch?v=jPGgl5VH5go
•• robotic jellyfish: www.youtube.com/watch?v=N-​O8-​N71Qcw
Activity 4.15
Robots in Space 
If children’s pretend play and conversations demonstrate an interest in space 
travel, you can probably find several nonfiction children’s books about the use of 
robots for space exploration at your local library, such as these two: 

129
HOW DO ROBOTS HELP US?
•• Robots in Space by Nancy Furstinger
•• Robots in Space by Kathryn Clay
The example that young children usually find most interesting is the Mars rover. 
Here are a few videos you might share with children:
•• “Testing with a Martian Dune Buggy”: http://thekidshouldseethis.com
/post/27554318150
•• “Mars Science Laboratory (Curiosity Rover) Mission Animation”: 
http://thekidshouldseethis.com/post/8395436365
•• “Testing a Space Rover under Alaskan Ice”: http://thekidshouldseethis.com
/post/testing-​a-​space-​rover-​under-​alaskan-​ice
Activity 4.16
Robot Wishes 
Invite children to make robot wishes. This activity can help children make mean­
ingful connections between what they are learning about robots and how their 
ideas and inventions might help change the world in the future.
A robot wish is the seed of an idea that might someday turn into an invention. 
Start a sentence that begins “I wish I had a robot that could . . .” and invite the chil­
dren to finish the sentence. Write down children’s ideas on a poster or in a book.
When children encounter a challenge or frustration, offer a “robot wish” as a 
way to brainstorm solutions. For example, if a child drops a basket of crackers and 
creates a mess on the floor, the child might wish for a robot to help sweep the floor.
Sometimes robot wishes can spark real and immediate solutions. Robot wishes 
can also help us recognize that sometimes we can solve our problems on our own 
and that, in fact, sometimes it’s even better to offer comfort and assistance to one 
another without a robot’s help.


131
5
How Can We Learn More 
about Robots?
Robotics and Computer Science in 
Elementary School and Beyond
The resources and activities in this chapter provide a pathway for continuing 
robotics, computer science, and STEM learning beyond early childhood. For young 
children with advanced abilities and interests in computer science and robotics, 
this information will help teachers and families differentiate and provide chal­
lenges beyond a more typical early childhood level. These resources and activ­
ities may also be valuable to educators who create and implement after-​school 
and enrichment programs for children in the primary grades. Additionally, the 
information may be helpful to guide professional development tools for teachers 
who are interested in advancing their own knowledge and expertise in STEM and 
computer science.
Activity 5.1
Scratch Animation
Scratch is a free visual programming language developed for educational use by 
computer scientists at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology more than a 
decade ago. The ScratchJr app described in chapter 3 was more recently designed 
as a tool for young children. However, the original Scratch tools, curriculum, and 
online community are still widely used to teach and develop coding skills for 

132
CHAPTER 5
children starting around age eight. The Scratch website (https://scratch.mit.edu) 
also offers extensive resources for teachers and families.
Activity 5.2
Hopscotch 
Hopscotch is a free drag-​and-​drop programming app that allows children to create 
their own animated stories and games (www.gethopscotch.com). Hopscotch is 
similar to ScratchJr but is a bit more challenging. Hopscotch tools and tutorials 
are focused more on creating games, while ScratchJr is more about creating and 
telling stories. 
Activity 5.3
Digital Game Design 
Many children are inspired to learn how to code because they enjoy playing digital 
games and would like to create their own. Digital gaming is an exciting and popular 
area of exploration for older children. Everywhere you look, new apps and tools are 
available to teach children how to create their own digital games. The options can 
be overwhelming. I recommend Blockly Games as an introductory tool, because it 
provides a quick sample of different kinds of games and coding tasks. I also recom­
mend Gamestar Mechanic: 
•• Blockly Games (https://blockly-​games.appspot.com): To explore the different 
kinds of games that can be played and created using code, Google created the 
website Blockly Games.
•• Gamestar Mechanic (https://gamestarmechanic.com): Gamestar Mechanic is 
a web-​based digital game creator for use by schools or individuals. The online 
design activities teach children the fundamentals of game design. Recently 
PBS Kids teamed up with Gamestar Mechanic to create a version for younger 
children called Gamestar Mechanic Jr, available online at http://pbskids.org
/gamestarmechanicjr.

133
HOW CAN WE LEARN MORE ABOUT ROBOTS?
Activity 5.4
Hour of Code 
Hour of Code is an initiative created by a collaborative of tech giants, 
including Facebook, Apple, and Microsoft. Its goal is to inspire stu­
dents of all backgrounds to learn how to code and to develop skills and expertise 
in computer science. This initiative has reached over 100 million students in more 
than 180 countries.
The official global Hour of Code takes place annually in early December, but an 
amazing variety of Hour of Code tutorials are available online all year long (https://
code.org/learn). While the Star Wars, Minecraft, and Frozen animated tutorials 
were clearly created for children, adults are encouraged to try an Hour of Code 
tutorial too. If you have no background in computer science or feel intimidated by 
the swift pace of tech innovation, completing an Hour of Code tutorial can help you 
feel more confident about learning and understanding coding concepts. You may 
be surprised at how easy and fun coding can be.
Hour of Code has many educational partners, and the list keeps growing. One of 
the most prominent partners is Khan Academy, an excellent source of free online 
courses and STEM resources (www.khanacademy.org/hourofcode).
Other Hour of Code partner tutorials provide fun, free samples of new coding 
apps, such as the following:
•• CodeMonkey
•• CS First
•• The Foos
•• Lightbot
•• Run Marco!
•• Scratch
•• Tynker

134
CHAPTER 5
Activity 5.5
Code.org Code Studio 
Code.org, the host site of Hour of Code, also provides an exceptional series of free 
coding exercises and games called Code Studio (https://studio.code.org) that teach 
students the basics of programming. The core offerings include four Computer 
Science Fundamentals courses for students, starting at age four. 
More recent additions to Code Studio include accelerated courses for children 
ages ten to eighteen and a JavaScript App Lab for ages thirteen and older.
Activity 5.6
Hello Ruby 
Hello Ruby is both a children’s book by Linda Liukas and a website (www.helloruby
.com). Ruby’s story and activities teach children strategies for computational think­
ing, such as how to break down a big problem into smaller tasks. 
Activity 5.7
Web Design and App Invention
As children develop more advanced coding skills, they may become interested in 
creating a website or an app. Khan Academy provides free online computer science 
courses. The introductory web design courses teach students hypertext markup 
language (HTML), the programming language used to create web pages (www
.khanacademy.org/computing/computer-​programming/html-​css). Code Academy 
is another free site with similar offerings (www.codecademy.com/courses/web
-​beginner-​en-​HZA3b/0/1). For app design, MIT App Inventor is an app creation 
tool for beginning programmers. MIT App Inventor does not require an under­
standing of HTML. Programmers simply drag and drop blocks using a graphic 
interface (http://appinventor.mit.edu/explore).

135
HOW CAN WE LEARN MORE ABOUT ROBOTS?
Activity 5.8
Lego WeDo, EV3, and VEX 
For a long time, Lego robotics kits were pretty much the only option for kids who 
wanted to learn how to build and code a robot. Lego Mindstorms robotics kits were 
first introduced around 2000. There have been several versions and updates over 
the years. Lego EV3 kits are the current version of Mindstorms (www.lego.com
/en-​us/mindstorms/about-​ev3). Lego WeDo kits are a simpler version of Mind­
storms (https://education.lego.com/en-​us/elementary/shop/wedo-​2). EV3 is con­
sidered appropriate for middle school students, and WeDo for elementary school 
students. Both WeDo and EV3 kits come with the hardware to build a variety of 
robots, including the corresponding software to download to a laptop or tablet. 
Lego now faces competition from many different robotics kits and systems mar­
keted to both schools and families. For example, Innovation First International, the 
corporation that manufactures and sells Hexbug toys, also markets VEX EDR, a 
robotics design platform, and kits that are comparable to Lego Mindstorms (www
.vexrobotics.com). The February/March 2017 issue of Make: magazine includes a 
helpful guide to the growing field of robot kits (see “Which Robotics Kit Is Right 
for You? ” Volume 55): http://makezine.com/tag/make55.

136
CHAPTER 5
Activity 5.9
First Lego League 
In most US schools, robotics and computer science are not yet part of the core 
curriculum. When elementary, middle, and high school students are exposed to 
robotics, it’s often in the form of a robotics club that meets after school. First Lego 
League is an international network of robotics teams led by volunteer coaches 
(www.firstlegoleague.org). The league provides a structure for meets where teams 
compete against one another to design and code robots in response to specific 
challenges and specifications. 
Activity 5.10
Makerspaces 
A makerspace is a place where inventors and tinkerers can explore new ideas 
using many different kinds of open-​ended materials. The maker movement began 
among adults who enjoyed building electronic gadgets as a hobby. The innova­
tive maker spirit and the opportunities for design thinking and STEM learning in 
maker­spaces has created an interest in bringing the maker experience to younger 
and younger students. 
Many of the activities presented in this book are already aligned with a maker 
philosophy. For more information about makerspaces and how to integrate maker 
ideas into your classroom, check out these essential maker resources.
Books
•• The Art of Tinkering: Meet 150+ Makers Working at the Intersection of Art, 
Science, and Technology by Karen Wilkinson and Mike Petrich 
•• Design, Make, Play: Growing the Next Generation of STEM Innovators 
edited by Margaret Honey and David E. Kanter
•• Invent to Learn: Making, Tinkering, and Engineering in the Classroom 
by Sylvia Libow Martinez and Gary S. Stager

137
HOW CAN WE LEARN MORE ABOUT ROBOTS?
•• Make Space: How to Set the Stage for Creative Collaboration by Scott Doorley 
and Scott Witthoft 
Article
•• “Making with Young Children: An Introduction” (www.naeyc.org/tyc
/making-​young-​learners-​intro) 
Websites 
•• Make: (http://makezine.com)
•• Instructables (www.instructables.com)
•• Thinkers & Tinkers (http://hernbergm.wix.com/maker-​movement)
Activity 5.11
Ready, Set, Design
Ready, Set, Design is a fun and easy group activity that introduces and illustrates 
design thinking. The activity could be implemented with adults as well as with 
children as young as first or second grade. This technique could be adapted easily 
for younger children. I recommend it as a team-​building activity with teachers.
The activity is fairly simple. You divide participants into small groups and give 
each group a paper bag filled with a small amount of three different kinds of con­
struction materials:
•• fastener items (such as rubber bands or paper clips)
•• surface items (such as coffee filters or index cards)
•• structure items (such as straw or foil)
You also give each team a challenge written on an index card, such as “Make 
something that carries water” or “Make something that helps people stay healthy.” 
The group has a short period of time to work. Participants must quickly brainstorm 
and create a prototype for some kind of invention that will meet the challenge. 

138
CHAPTER 5
Ready, Set, Design was created by the Cooper Hewitt, Smithsonian Design 
Museum to teach design thinking. You can learn about this technique here: www
.cooperhewitt.org/2011/09/09/ready-​set-​design. You can find the full instructions 
here: http://cdn.cooperhewitt.org/2011/09/02/Ready%20Set%20Design%20vX
.pdf.
Activity 5.12
Interview a Robot Expert 
Children who develop a particular interest in robotics and computer science benefit 
from the opportunity to meet and talk with role models who are working in this 
field. If you live near a college or university with an engineering program, look on 
the school’s website for a listing of the robotics faculty. Most robotics engineers 
would be thrilled to talk with children about their work. Here’s an example of an 
online talk with Dr. Michael Peshkin, a robotics professor at Northwestern Univer­
sity: www.youtube.com/watch?v=Rz8HwWCJFVw&feature=youtu.be.
Activity 5.13
Visit a Science Museum 
Science museums are fantastic resources for families and educators. To find a 
science museum near you, use this tool provided by the Association of Science-​
Technology Centers: www.astc.org/about-​astc/about-​science-​centers/find-​a
-​science-​center.
Here are a few of my favorite science museums:
•• New York Hall of Science in Queens, New York City (http://nysci.org)
•• Museum of Science and Industry in Chicago, Illinois (www.msichicago.org)
•• Carnegie Science Center in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania (www.carnegiescience
center.org)

139
HOW CAN WE LEARN MORE ABOUT ROBOTS?
Even if you don’t live near a science museum or science center, the websites for 
these organizations often provide amazing free STEM resources and lesson plans 
for educators.
Activity 5.14
Visit a Robotics Lab 
Many major universities have robotics labs where faculty and students build robots 
and conduct research. Some of these are occasionally open to the public. Here are 
two examples of robotics labs:
•• Stanford Robotics Lab (http://cs.stanford.edu/groups/manips)
•• Robotics at UT Austin (https://robotics.utexas.edu)
If you can’t visit a robotics lab in person, the website for the MIT Computer Sci­
ence and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory provides a virtual tour: www.csail.mit
.edu/about/tour/virtual/Robotics_Lab.
Activity 5.15
Follow a Robot Blog 
For inspiration and information, follow a robotics group or blog online. Here are 
some notable examples:
•• Classroom Robotics (http://classroomrobotics.blogspot.com)
•• Popular Science: Robotics (www.popsci.com/find/robotics)
•• Robohub (http://robohub.org)

140
CHAPTER 5
Activity 5.16
Girls in STEM 
Unfortunately, girls are significantly underrepresented in STEM classrooms. 
According to the US Department of Education, high school boys are much more 
likely than girls are to enroll in challenging STEM courses such as calculus, statis­
tics, and physics (US DOE 2012). In college, young women are also a minority in 
STEM majors. And although women represent 48 percent of the total workforce 
after college, more than 75 percent of all STEM jobs are still held by men (Beede 
et al. 2011). If we want to encourage girls to pursue STEM studies and careers, we 
need to start early, before they encounter obstacles or bias that might make them 
turn away from challenging learning opportunities. As early childhood educators, 
we need to be aware that sometimes girls need a little extra encouragement to visit 
the block corner or build a robot.
Here are two resources that can help you encourage girls in STEM pursuits:
•• Girls Who Code (https://girlswhocode.com) is a nonprofit organization 
dedicated to closing the gender gap in technology. It operates coding clubs 
and summer camps all over the United States. 
•• “Girls and Robotics” (www.edutopia.org/blog/girls-​and-​robotics-​mary-​beth
-​hertz) is an article that encourages educators to help girls become involved 
in robotics.

141
Recommended Resources
 STEM Resources 
Erikson TEC Center
Resources for early childhood educators to help strengthen 
children’s digital literacy
https://teccenter.erikson.edu
Fred Rogers Center
Resources on early learning and children’s media
www.fredrogerscenter.org
Joan Ganz Cooney Center
Research center that focuses on media technology and its 
impact on children’s learning in a digital age
www.joanganzcooneycenter.org
National Association for the Education of Young Children Science, 
Technology, Engineering, and Math Resources for Early Childhood
STEM resources for educators and families
www.naeyc.org/STEM
National Science Teachers Association
Resources for science teachers at all grade levels
www.nsta.org
 Robotics Resources 
Carnegie Mellon Robotics Academy
Research and resources for robotics teachers
www.education.rec.ri.cmu.edu/content/lego
Early Childhood Robotics Network
A site for educators that was founded by the DevTech Research Group 
at Tufts University
http://tkroboticsnetwork.ning.com

142
RECOMMENDED RESOURCES
NASA Robotics Alliance Project
Robotics news and resources from the National Aeronautics and Space 
Administration
https://robotics.nasa.gov
 Coding Resources 
Code.org
Nonprofit collaborative providing extensive computer science resources
https://code.org
Common Sense Education
Resources for teachers such as app reviews and teaching strategies
www.commonsense.org/education
K–12 Computer Science Framework
Guiding practices and concepts, including a chapter specific to 
early childhood education
https://k12cs.org
 Resources for Families 
Common Sense Media
Media reviews and resources for families
www.commonsensemedia.org
Raising Digital Natives
Resources for parents from Devorah Heitner, author of Screenwise
www.raisingdigitalnatives.com
 Recommended Robotic Devices and Kits
Bee-Bot
www.bee-bot.us
Primo Cubetto
www.redleafpress.org/Cubetto-Playset-Coding-Robot-P1892.aspx

RECOMMENDED RESOURCES
143
Code-a-Pillar
http://fisher-price.mattel.com/shop/en-us/fp/think-learn-code-a-pillar-dkt39
Hexbugs
www.hexbug.com
Robot Turtles Board Game
www.robotturtles.com
Snap Circuits
www.snapcircuits.net
Lego WeDo 
(recommended in Section 5 for older children)
https://education.lego.com/en-us/shop/wedo%202
 Picture Books Used in Activities
Car Wash by Sandra Steen and Susan Steen
Daisy’s Wild Ride by Bob Graham
If I Had a Robot by Dan Yaccarino
If I Had a Robot Dog by Andrea Baruffi
Me and My Robot by Tracey West
The Most Magnificent Thing by Ashley Spires
Robot Rumpus by Sean Taylor
Robots at Home by Christine Zuchora-Walske
Rosie Revere, Engineer by Andrea Beaty
Weather Robots by Christine Zuchora-Walske
* See also the list of recommended robot picture books in activity 1.6.

144
GLOSSARY
Glossary of Key Terms 
algorithm: a set of step-by-step instructions for completing a task
app: a type of software for a mobile device, such as a tablet or smartphone
calibration: the process of adjusting for precise standardization of measure­
ment; a robot may be calibrated to travel a certain distance with each command
code: a system of symbols for communication; in computer science, a code is a 
set of instructions written in a programming language 
computational thinking: the ability to organize a problem so that it can be 
represented by logical steps
conditions or conditionals: a feature of a programming language that directs 
the computer to follow the coded instructions based on whether certain criteria 
are met; conditions may be described using the words “if” and “then”
dimension: in mathematics, dimension is the measurement in one direction; 
two-dimensional or 2-D objects, which are flat, can be measured in two direc­
tions, and three-dimensional or 3-D objects, which are solid, can be measured 
in three directions
directionality: in the context of spatial reasoning, directionality is the relation­
ship between the position of an object and the various directions of potential 
travel or movement, such as right, left, forward, or back
drag and drop: a method for using an app or playing a digital game that allows 
the user to manipulate objects or text using a mouse or, in the case of a touch 
screen, a finger
function: in computer programming, a procedure or routine that has been 
created and stored for later use
grid: a network of uniformly placed horizontal and vertical lines
hardware: the physical components of a computer or robot

GLOSSARY
145
interface: the place where two systems meet and communicate, such as the 
interface between people and computers; in computer programming, the word 
“interface” is often used to generally describe the overall experience of the user 
in regards to a specific application, device, or platform
Internet: the global collection of connected computer networks
loop: a programming structure that repeats a sequence of instructions
platform: in computer science, the operating system or architecture that makes 
the applications available to the user
program: a set of instructions that a computer or robot uses to complete a task; 
programming refers to the process of creating a program
sequence: a particular order of events or things, one following another
software: programs that run on a computer or computing system
spatial reasoning: a category of thinking skills related to how objects are posi­
tioned or move in three dimensions; the term “spatial intelligence” refers to the 
ability to understand spatial relationships and perform spatial reasoning tasks
symbol: an image, mark, or character that represents an object, process, or idea
synchronization: the operation and coordination of two or more objects or 
processes at the same time
troubleshooting or debugging: a systematic process of solving a problem or 
correcting an error
visual programming: any programming language that allows the user to create 
programs by manipulating program elements graphically; may also be called 
block programming

146
REFERENCES
References
Beaty, Andrea. 2013. Rosie Revere, Engineer. New York: Abrams.
Beede, David, Tiffany Julian, David Langdon, George McKittrick, Beethika Khan, 
and Mark Doms. 2011. Women in STEM: A Gender Gap to Innovation: Executive 
Summary. Washington, DC: Economics and Statistics Administration, 
US Department of Commerce. ESA Issue Brief #04-11. www.esa.doc.gov/sites
/default/files/womeninstemagaptoinnovation8311.pdf.
Bers, Marina Umaschi. 2008. Blocks to Robots: Learning with Technology in the Early 
Childhood Classroom. New York: Teachers College Press.
Bers, Marina Umaschi, and Michael S. Horn. 2010. “Tangible Programming in 
Early Childhood: Revisiting Developmental Assumptions through New Tech­
nologies.” In High-Tech Tots: Childhood in a Digital World, edited by Ilene R. 
Berson and Michael J. Berson, 49–69. Charlotte, NC: Information Age 
Publishing.
Blackwell, C. K. 2015. “iPads in Kindergarten: The Effect of Tablet Computers on 
Young Children’s Academic Achievement.” Paper presented at the 65th Annual 
Conference of the International Communication Association, San Juan, PR, 
May. 
Brosterman, Norman. 1997. Inventing Kindergarten. New York: Harry N. Abrams. 
Brown, Margaret Wise. 1999. The Important Book. New York: HarperCollins.
Ceppi, Giulio, Graziano Delrio, Elena Giacopini, et al. 2014. Bikes . . . Lots! Reggio 
Emilia, Italy: Reggio Children.
Chao, Grace. 2015. “What Is Design Thinking?” Stanford Daily, May 15. 
www.stanforddaily.com/what-is-design-thinking.
Common Sense. 2017. “Our Mission.” Common Sense Media. Accessed January 19. 
www.commonsensemedia.org/about-us/our-mission.
CPS (Chicago Public Schools). 2016. “New CPS Computer Science Graduation 
Requirement to Prepare Students for Jobs of the Future.” http://cps.edu/News
/Press_releases/Pages/PR2_02_24_2016.aspx.
EIE (Engineering Is Elementary). 2017. “The Engineering Design Process.” Accessed 
January 13. www.eie.org/eie-curriculum/engineering-design-process.

REFERENCES
147
Forman, George. 2012. “The Use of Digital Media in Reggio Emilia.” In The Hundred 
Languages of Children: The Reggio Emilia Experience in Transformation, 3rd ed., 
edited by Carolyn Edwards, Lella Gandini, and George Forman, 343–56. Santa 
Barbara, CA: Praeger.
Google Inc. and Gallup Inc., 2016. Trends in the State of Computer Science in U.S. 
K-12 Schools. Accessed May 15, 2017. http://services.google.com/fh/files/misc
/trends-in-the-state-of-computer-science-report.pdf.
Gopnik, Alison. 2016. “What Babies Know about Physics and Foreign Languages.” 
New York Times, July 30. http://nyti.ms/2aCYCAW.
Hord, Mike. 2017. “PCB Basics.” Sparkfun. Accessed January 12. https://learn
.sparkfun.com/tutorials/pcb-basics.
Idaho Public Television. 2014. “Simple Machines: Facts.” Science Trek. Accessed 
January 21. http://idahoptv.org/sciencetrek/topics/simple_machines/facts.cfm.
Joan Ganz Cooney Center. 2017. “Initiatives.” Accessed January 19. 
www.joanganzcooneycenter.org/initiatives.
Korosec, Kirsten. 2016. “There’s Now a Children’s Book about Self-Driving Cars.” 
Fortune, October 18. http://fortune.com/2016/10/18/children-self-driving-cars.
Kris, Deborah Farmer. 2015. “Steps to Help Foster a Preschooler’s Spatial Reason-
ing Skills.” KQED Mind/Shift. https://ww2.kqed.org/mindshift/2015/12/16
/steps-to-help-foster-a-preschoolers-spatial-reasoning-skills.
K12CSF (K–12 Computer Science Framework). 2016. K–12 Computer Science Frame­
work. https://k12cs.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/09/K–12-Computer-Science
-Framework.pdf.
LA Tech STEP. 2007. “What Is a Gear?” Louisiana Tech University. www.latech.edu
/latechstep/p/pf/gi.pdf.
NAEYC and FRC (National Association for the Education of Young Children and 
Fred Rogers Center for Early Learning and Children’s Media at Saint Vincent 
College). 2012. Technology and Interactive Media as Tools in Early Childhood Pro­
grams Serving Children from Birth through Age 8. www.naeyc.org/files/naeyc
/file/positions/PS_technology_WEB2.pdf.
NMSI (National Math and Science Initiative). 2017. “Why STEM Education Matters.” 
Accessed January 3. https://www.nms.org/Portals/0/Docs/Why%20Stem
%20Education%20Matters.pdf.
Papert, Seymour. 1980. Mindstorms: Children, Computers, and Powerful Ideas. 
New York: Basic Books.

148
REFERENCES
ScratchEd. 2017. “Computational Thinking.” Accessed January 5. http://scratched
.gse.harvard.edu/ct/files/CT_Definitions.pdf.
Sessions, Larry. 2016. “Seeing Things That Aren’t There.” EarthSky. http://earthsky
.org/human-world/seeing-things-that-arent-there.
Slobodkina, Esphyr. 1987. Caps for Sale: The Tale of a Peddler, Some Monkeys, and 
Their Monkey Business. New York: HarperCollins.
UK Department for Education. 2013. “National Curriculum in England: Computing 
Programmes of Study.” www.gov.uk/government/publications/national
-curriculum-in-england-computing-programmes-of-study/national
-curriculum-in-england-computing-programmes-of-study.
US DOE (US Department of Education). 2012. “Gender Equity in Education: 
A Data Snapshot.” Office for Civil Rights. www2.ed.gov/about/offices/list/ocr
/docs/gender-equity-in-education.pdf.
West, Tracey. 2003. Me and My Robot. New York: Penguin Young Readers.

Other Redleaf Press Books by Ann Gadzikowski
Creating a Beautiful Mess: Ten Essential Play Experiences for a Joyous Childhood
Challenging Exceptionally Bright Children in Early Childhood Classrooms
Story Dictation: A Guide for Early Childhood Professionals

