ROGER ZELAZNY
 
Death and the Executioner
 
 
Like  a  number  of  other  writers,  the  late  Roger  Zelazny
began  publishing  in  1962  in  the  pages  of  Cele
Goldsmith’s  Amazing.  This  was the  so-called  “Class  of
‘62,”  whose  membership  also  included  Thomas  M.
Disch, Keith Laumer, and Ursula K. Le Guin. Everyone in
that “class” eventually achieved prominence, but some of
them  would  achieve  it  faster  than  others,  and  Zelazny’s
subsequent career  was one  of  the most  meteoric  in the
history of SF. The first Zelazny story to attract wide notice
was “A Rose for Ecclesiastes,” published in 1963 (it was
later selected by vote of the SFWA membership  as one
of  the  best  SF  stories  of  all  time).  By  the  end  of  that
decade,  he had won two  Nebula  Awards  and  two  Hugo
Awards and was widely regarded as one of the two most
important  American  SF  writers  of  the  sixties  (the  other
was  Samuel  R.  Delany).  By  the  end  of  the  1970s,
although  his critical  acceptance  as an important  science
fiction writer had dimmed, his long series of novels about
the  enchanted  land  of  Amber—beginning  with  Nine
Princes  in  Amber—had  made  him  one  of  the  most
popular  and best-selling  fantasy  writers  of  our time,  and
inspired fan clubs and fanzines worldwide.
 
Zelazny’s  approach  to  fantasy  was  similar  to  the
brisk,  wise-cracking,  anachronistic  slant of  the de  Camp
and Pratt “Harold Shea” stories such as The Incomplete
Enchanter,  but  in  a  somewhat  different  key,  with  less
emphasis  on  whimsy  (very  few  authors,  with  the
exception of de Camp and Pratt, T. H. White,  and Lewis
Carroll, were ever really able to use whimsy successfully)
and  more  emphasis  on  action  and  on  dramatic—and
often  quite  theatrical—showdowns  between  immensely
powerful  adversaries.  Still,  the  Zelazny  hero  (who  was
often  fundamentally  the  same  person,  whether  he  was
called  Corwin  or Conrad  or Sam)  faces  his supernatural
foes  with  genial  good  sense,  unperturbed  calm,  and  a
store of self-deprecating humor, always quick with a quip

or a wry witticism, and although the Zelazny hero himself
is  almost  always  a  being  of  immense  power  and
resources (which must help in maintaining your sangfroid
 when confronting fear-some demons and monsters),  he
frequently defeats his enemies  by outwitting  them  rather
than by the brute use of either phys-ical might or magical
potency. In fact, the typical Zelazny hero,  in both  fantasy
and science fiction, can usually be  thought  of  as a more
benign  and  genial  version  of  the  Trickster,  a  wry,
pipe-smoking  Coyote,  who,  although  he  sometimes
admits to being  scared  or bewildered,  is usually several
moves ahead of his opponents all the way to the end  of
the game.
 
The  multivolume  Amber  series,  of  course,  is
probably Zelazny’s most important sustained contribution
to  fantasy,  although  it’s  worth  noting  that  the  first  few
volumes of the series were pub-lished as science fiction
novels by an established science fiction line. By the time
of  Zelazny’s  death,  however,  the Amber  books  seemed
much  more  centrally  categorizable  as  fantasy,  although
the  story  line  would  occasionally  touch  bases  with  our
modern-day  Earth,  or  employ  some  high-tech  gadget,
almost  as  though  Zelazny  was  deliberately  trying  to
muddy  the  waters…which  indeed  perhaps  he  was,  as
there  are fantasy  elements  in  almost  all  of  his  “science
fiction” books and science fictional elements in almost all
of  his  “fantasy”  books,  and  it’s  difficult  to  believe  that
these  weren’t  deliberate  aesthetic  choices  on  Zelazny’s
part.
 Indeed,
 Zelazny’s
 other
 sustained
 fantasy
series—actually  launched  before  the  Amber  books—an
uncompleted  sequence  of  stories  about  the  adventures
of  Dilvish  the  Damned  (collected  in  Dilvish,  the
Damned),  is  much  more  firmly  and  unambiguously
cen-tered  at  the  heart  of  Sword  &  Sorcery,  but  is  also,
perhaps  as  a  result,  considerably  less  interesting  and
successful; Zelazny him-self seemed to lose interest in it
for long stretches at a time, pro-ducing only one  novel—
The Changing Land--and a few  stories  in the sequence
throughout  the  last  few  decades  of  his  life.  One  could
argue  that  Zelazny’s  most  popular,  successful,  and
influ-ential  singleton  novel,  Lord  of  Light,  although  also
ostensibly a sci-ence fiction novel, functions as well as a

fantasy novel as it does as an SF novel; in fact, the book
probably  makes  more  logical  sense  as a fantasy  than  it
does as a plausible science fiction sce-nario, and I  can’t
help  but  wonder  if  it  is  an  example  of  an  au-thor
“disguising” a fantasy book as science fiction  in order  to
make  it  saleable  under  the  market  conditions  of  the
time—al-though  again,  this  may  also  be  just  another
example of Zelazny, with his Trickster hat on, deliberately
blurring the borderlines between the two genres, perhaps
smiling  at the thought  of  some  future  critic  trying  to  sort
things out.
 
Whatever  the  truth  of  that,  the  vivid,  suspenseful,
and evoca-tive  story  that follows,  one  of  a  sequence  of
individually  pub-lished  magazine  stories  that  were  later
melded
 into
 Lord
 of
 Light,
 certainly
 feels
 like
fantasy—and,  considered  as  fantasy,  is  a  lyri-cal,
inventive,  and  gorgeously
 colored
 one,  one  that
demon-strates that, although we all have an Appointment
with Death,  some  of  us are considerably  more  reluctant
to  go  than  others,  and  put  up  a  good  deal  more  of  a
fight…perhaps  enough  of  a  fight  to  give  even  Death
himself pause.
 
Zelazny  won  another  Nebula  and  Hugo  Award  in
1976  for  his  novella  “Home  Is  the  Hangman,”  another
Hugo in 1982 for his story “Unicorn Variation” and one in
1986  for  his novella  “24  Views  of  Mt.  Fuji,  by  Hokusai,”
and a final Hugo  in 1987  for  his  story  “Permafrost.”  His
other  books,  in  addition  to  the  multi-volume  Amber
series,  include  This  Immortal,  The  Dream  Master,  Isle
of the Dead, Jack of Shadows, Eye of Cat, Doorways in
the  Sand,  Today  We  Choose  Faces,  Bridge  of  Ashes,
To  the  in  Ilalbar,  Roadmarks,  Changeling,  Madwand,
and  A  Might  in  the  Lonesome  October,  and  the
collections Four for Tomorrow,  The  Doors  of His  Face,
the  Lamps  of  His  Mouth  and  Other  Stories,  The  Last
Defender  of Camelot,  Unicorn  Varia-tions,  and Frost  &
Fire. Among his last books  are two collaborative  novels,
A  Farce  to  Be  Reckoned  With,  with  Robert  Sheckley,
and  Wilderness,  with  Gerald  Hausman,  and,  as  editor,
two  anthologies,  Wheel  of  Fortune  and  Warriors  of
Blood and Dream. Zelazny died in 1995.

 
* * * *
 
There is no disappearing of the true Dhamma
until a false Dhamma arises in the world. 
When the false Dhamma arises, he makes the 
true Dhamma to disappear.
—Samyutta-nikaya (II, 224)                
 
Near the city of Alandil there was a rich grove of blue-barked trees, hav-ing
purple foliage like feathers. It was famous for its beauty and the shrinelike
peace of its shade. It had been the property of the merchant Vasu until his
conversion, at which time he had presented it to the teacher variously
known as Mahasamatinan, Tathagatha and the Enlightened One. In that
wood did this teacher abide with his followers, and when they walked forth
into the town at midday their begging bowls never went unfilled.
 
There was always a large number of pilgrims about the grove. The
believers, the curious and those who preyed upon the others were
constantly passing through it. They came by horseback, they came by boat,
they came on foot.
 
Alandil was not an overly large city. It had its share of thatched huts,
as well as wooden bungalows; its main roadway was unpaved and rut-ted; it
had two large bazaars and many small ones; there were wide fields of
grain, owned by the Vaisyas, tended by the Sudras, which flowed and
rippled, blue-green, about the city; it had many hostels (though none so fine
as the legendary hostel of Hawkana, in far Mahartha), because of the
constant passage of travelers; it had its holy men and its storytellers; and it
had its Temple.
 
The Temple was located on a low hill near the center of town,
enor-mous gates on each of its four sides. These gates, and the walls
about them, were filled with layer upon layer of decorative carvings,
showing musicians and dancers, warriors and demons, gods and
goddesses, ani-mals and artists, lovemakers and half-people, guardians
and devas. These gates led into the first courtyard, which held more walls
and more gates, leading in turn into the second courtyard. The first
courtyard contained a little bazaar, where offerings to the gods were sold. It
also housed numerous small shrines dedicated to the lesser deities. There
were begging beggars, meditating holy men, laughing children, gossiping
women, burn-ing incenses, singing birds, gurgling purification tanks and
humming pray-o-mats to be found in this courtyard at any hour of the day.

 
The inner courtyard, though, with its massive shrines dedicated to the
major deities, was a focal point of religious intensity. People chanted or
shouted prayers, mumbled verses from the Vedas, or stood, or knelt, or lay
prostrate before huge stone images, which often were so heavily
gar-landed with flowers, smeared with red kumkum paste and surrounded
by heaps of offerings that it was impossible to tell which deity was so
im-mersed in tangible adoration. Periodically, the horns of the Temple were
blown, there was a moment’s hushed appraisal of their echo and the clamor
began again.
 
And none would dispute the fact that Kali was queen of this Temple.
Her tall, white-stone statue, within its gigantic shrine, dominated the inner
courtyard. Her faint smile, perhaps contemptuous of the other gods and
their worshipers, was, in its way, as arresting as the chained grins of the
skulls she wore for a necklace. She held daggers in her hands; and poised
in mid-step she stood, as though deciding whether to dance be-fore or slay
those who came to her shrine. Her lips were full, her eyes were wide. Seen
by torchlight, she seemed to move.
 
It was fitting, therefore, that her shrine faced upon that of Yama, god
of Death. It had been decided, logically enough, by the priests and
ar-chitects, that he was best suited of all the deities to spend every minute
of the day facing her, matching his unfaltering death-gaze against her own,
returning her half smile with his twisted one. Even the most devout
gen-erally made a detour rather than pass between the two shrines; and
after dark their section of the courtyard was always the abode of silence
and stillness, being untroubled by late worshipers.
 
From out of the north, as the winds of spring blew across the land,
there came the one called Rild. A small man, whose hair was white, though
his years were few—Rild, who wore the dark trappings of a pilgrim, but
about whose forearm, when they found him lying in a ditch with the fever,
was wound the crimson strangling cord of his true profession: Rild.
 
Rild came in the spring, at festival-time, to Alandil of the blue-green
fields, of the thatched huts and the bungalows of wood, of unpaved
road-ways and many hostels, of bazaars, and holy men and storytellers, of
the great religious revival and its Teacher, whose reputation had spread far
across the land—to Alandil of the Temple, where his patron goddess was
queen.
 
* * * *
 

Festival-time.
 
Twenty years earlier, Alandil’s small festival had been an almost
exclusively local affair. Now, though, with the passage of countless
travel-ers, caused by the presence of the Enlightened One, who taught the
Way, of the Eightfold Path, the Festival of Alandil attracted so many
pilgrims that local accommodations were filled to overflowing. Those who
pos-sessed tents could charge a high fee for their rental. Stables were
rented out for human occupancy. Even bare pieces of land were let as
camping sites.
 
Alandil loved its Buddha. Many other towns had tried to entice him
away from his purple grove: Shengodu, Flower of the Mountains, had
of-fered him a palace and harem to come bring his teaching to the slopes.
But the Enlightened One did not go to the mountain. Kannaka, of the
Serpent River, had offered him elephants and ships, a town house and a
country villa, horses and servants, to come and preach from its wharves.
But the Enlightened One did not go to the river.
 
The Buddha remained in his grove and all things came to him. With
the passage of years the festival grew larger and longer and more
elabo-rate, like a well-fed dragon, scales all a-shimmer. The local Brahmins
did not approve of the antiritualistic teachings of the Buddha, but his
pres-ence filled their coffers to overflowing; so they learned to live in his
squat shadow, never voicing the word tirthika—heretic.
 
So the Buddha remained in his grove and all things came to him,
including Rild.
 
Festival-time.
 
The drums began in the evening on the third day.
 
On the third day, the massive drums of the kathakali began their
rapid thunder. The miles-striding staccato of the drums carried across the
fields to the town, across the town, across the purple grove and across the
wastes of marshland that lay behind it. The drummers, wearing white 
mundus, bare to the waist, their dark flesh glistening with perspiration,
worked in shifts, so strenuous was the mighty beating they set up; and
never was the flow of sound broken, even as the new relay of drummers
moved into position before the tightly stretched heads of the instruments.
 
As darkness arrived in the world, the travelers and townsmen who had
begun walking as soon as they heard the chatter of the drums began to

arrive at the festival field, large as a battlefield of old. There they found
places and waited for the night to deepen and the drama to begin, sip-ping
the sweet-smelling tea that they purchased at the stalls beneath the trees.
 
A great brass bowl of oil, tall as a man, wicks hanging down over its
edges, stood in the center of the field. These wicks were lighted, and
torches flickered beside the tents of the actors.
 
The drumming, at close range, was deafening and hypnotic, the
rhythms complicated, syncopated, insidious. As midnight approached, the
devotional chanting began, rising and falling with the drumbeat, work-ing a
net about the senses.
 
There was a brief lull as the Enlightened One and his monks arrived,
their yellow robes near-orange in the flamelight. But they threw back their
cowls and seated themselves cross-legged upon the ground. After a time,
it was only the chanting and the voices of the drums that filled the minds of
the spectators.
 
When the actors appeared, gigantic in their makeup, ankle bells
jan-gling as their feet beat the ground, there was no applause, only rapt
at-tention. The kathakali dancers were famous, trained from their youth in
acrobatics as well as the ages-old patterns of the classical dance, knowing
the nine distinct movements of the neck and of the eyeballs and the
hun-dreds of hand positions required to reenact the ancient epics of love
and battle, of the encounters of gods and demons, of the valiant fights and
bloody treacheries of tradition. The musicians shouted out the words of the
stories as the actors, who never spoke, portrayed the awesome exploits of
Rama and of the Pandava brothers. Wearing makeup of green and red, or
black and stark white, they stalked across the field, skirts billowing, their
mirror-sprinkled halos glittering in the light of the lamp. Occasion-ally, the
lamp would flare or sputter, and it was as if a nimbus of holy or unholy light
played about their heads, erasing entirely the sense of the event, causing
the spectators to feel for a moment mat they themselves were the illusion,
and that the great-bodied figures of the cyclopean dance were the only real
things in the world.
 
The dance would continue until daybreak, to end with the rising of the
sun. Before daybreak, however, one of the wearers of the saffron robe
ar-rived from the direction of town, made his way through the crowd and
spoke into the ear of the Enlightened One.
 
The Buddha began to rise, appeared to think better of it and reseated
himself. He gave a message to the monk, who nodded and departed from

the field of the festival.
 
The Buddha, looking imperturbable, returned his attention to the
drama. A monk seated nearby noted that he was tapping his fingers upon
the ground, and he decided that the Enlightened One must be keeping time
with the drumbeats, for it was common knowledge that he was above such
things as impatience.
 
When the drama had ended and Surya the sun pinked the skirts of
Heaven above the eastern rim of the world, it was as if the night just passed
had held the crowd prisoner within a tense and frightening dream, from
which they were just now released, weary, to wander this day.
 
The Buddha and his followers set off walking immediately, in the
direction of the town. They did not pause to rest along the way, but passed
through Alandil at a rapid but dignified gait.
 
When they came again to the purple grove, the Enlightened One
instructed his monks to take rest, and he moved off in the direction of a
small pavilion located deep within the wood.
 
* * * *
 
The monk who had brought the message during the drama sat within the
pavilion. There he tended the fever of the traveler he had come upon in the
marshes, where he walked often to better meditate upon the pu-trid
condition his body would assume after death.
 
Tathagatha studied the man who lay upon the sleeping mat. His lips
were thin and pale; he had a high forehead, high cheekbones, frosty
eye-brows, pointed ears; and Tathagatha guessed that when those eyelids
rose, the eyes revealed would be of a faded blue or gray. There was a
quality of— translucency?—fragility perhaps, about his unconscious form,
which might have been caused partly by the fevers that racked his body, but
which could not be attributed entirely to them. The small man did not give
the impression of being one who would bear the thing that Tatha-gatha now
raised in his hands. Rather, on first viewing, he might seem to be a very old
man. If one granted him a second look, and realized then that his colorless
hair and his slight frame did not signify advanced age, one might then be
struck by something childlike about his appearance. From the condition of
his complexion, Tathagatha doubted mat he need shave very often.
Perhaps a slightly mischievous pucker was now hidden somewhere
between his cheeks and the corners of his mouth. Perhaps not, also.
 

The Buddha raised the crimson strangling cord, which was a thing
borne only by the holy executioners of the goddess Kali. He fingered its
silken length, and it passed like a serpent through his hand, clinging slightly.
He did not doubt but that it was intended to move in such a man-ner about
his throat. Almost unconsciously, he held it and twisted his hands through
the necessary movements.
 
Then he looked up at the wide eyed monk who had watched him,
smiled his imperturbable smile and laid the cord aside. With a damp cloth,
the monk wiped the perspiration from the pale brow.
 
The man on the sleeping mat shuddered at the contact, and his eyes
snapped open. The madness of the fever was in them and they did not truly
see, but Tathagatha felt a sudden jolt at their contact.
 
Dark, so dark they were almost jet, and it was impossible to tell where
the pupil ended and the iris began. There was something extremely
un-settling about eyes of such power in a body so frail and effete.
 
He reached out and stroked the man’s hands, and it was like touching
steel, cold and impervious. He drew his fingernail sharply across the back
of the right hand. No scratch or indentation marked its passage, and his nail
fairly slid, as though across a pane of glass. He squeezed the man’s
thumbnail and released it. There was no sudden change of color. It was as
though these hands were dead or mechanical things.
 
He continued his examination. The phenomenon ended somewhat
above the wrists, occurred again in other places. His hands, breast,
ab-domen, neck and portions of his back had soaked within the death bath,
which gave this special unyielding power. Total immersion would, of
course, have proved fatal; but as it was, the man had traded some of his
tactile sensitivity for the equivalent of invisible gauntlets, breastplate,
neck-piece and back armor of steel. He was indeed one of the select
as-sassins of the terrible goddess.
 
“Who else knows of this man?” asked the Buddha.
 
“The monk Simha,” replied the other, “who helped me bear him here.”
 
“Did he see”—Tathagatha gestured with his eyes toward the crimson
cord—”that?” he inquired.
 
The monk nodded.
 

“Then go fetch him. Bring him to me at once. Do not mention
any-thing of this to anyone, other than that a pilgrim was taken ill and we are
tending him here. I will personally take over his care and minister to his
illness.”
 
“Yes, Illustrious One.”
 
The monk hurried forth from the pavilion.
 
Tathagatha seated himself beside the sleeping mat and
waited.           
 
* * * *
 
It was two days before the fever broke and intelligence returned to those
dark eyes. But during those two days, anyone who passed by the pavil-ion
might have heard the voice of the Enlightened One droning on and on, as
though he addressed his sleeping charge. Occasionally, the man himself
mumbled and spoke loudly, as those in a fever often do.
 
On the second day, the man opened his eyes suddenly and stared
upward. Then he frowned and turned his head.
 
“Good morning, Rild,” said Tathagatha.
 
“You are…?” asked the other, in an unexpected baritone.
 
“One who teaches the way of liberation,” he replied.
 
“The Buddha?”
 
“I have been called such.”
 
“Tathagatha?”
 
“This name, too, have I been given.”
 
The other attempted to rise, failed, settled back. His eyes never left
the placid countenance. “How is it that you know my name?” he finally
asked.
 
“In your fever you spoke considerably.”
 
“Yes, I was very sick, and doubtless babbling. It was in that cursed

swamp that I took the chill.”
 
Tathagatha smiled. “One of the disadvantages of traveling alone is
that when you fall there is none to assist you.”
 
“True,” acknowledged the other, and his eyes closed once more and
his breathing deepened.
 
Tathagatha remained in the lotus posture, waiting.
 
When Rild awakened again, it was evening. “Thirsty,” he said.
 
Tathagatha gave him water. “Hungry?” he asked.
 
“No, not yet. My stomach would rebel.”
 
He raised himself up onto his elbows and stared at his attendant.
Then he sank back upon the mat. “You are the one,” he announced.
 
“Yes,” replied the other.
 
“What are you going to do?”
 
“Feed you, when you say you are hungry.”
 
“I mean, after that.”
 
“Watch as you sleep, lest you lapse again into the fever.”
 
“That is not what I meant.”
 
“I know.”
 
“After I have eaten and rested and recovered my strength—what
then?”
 
Tathagatha smiled as he drew the silken cord from somewhere
beneath his robe. “Nothing,” he replied, “nothing at all,” and he draped the
cord across Rild’s shoulder and withdrew his hand.
 
The other shook his head and leaned back. He reached up and
fingered the length of crimson. He twined it about his fingers and then about
his wrist. He stroked it.
 

“It is holy,” he said, after a time. 
 
“So it would seem.”
 
“You know its use, and its purpose?”‘
 
“Of course.”
 
“Why then will you do nothing at all?”
 
“I have no need to move or to act. All things come to me. If anything
is to be done, it is you who will do it.”
 
“I do not understand.”
 
“I know that, too.”
 
The man stared into the shadows overhead. “I will attempt to eat
now,” he announced.
 
Tathagatha gave him broth and bread, which he managed to keep
down. Then he drank more water, and when he had finished he was
breathing heavily.
 
“You have offended Heaven,” he stated.
 
“Of that, I am aware.”
 
“And you have detracted from the glory of a goddess, whose
supremacy here has always been undisputed.”
 
“I know.”
 
“But I owe you my life, and I have eaten your bread ...”
 
There was no reply.
 
“Because of this, I must break a most holy vow,” finished Rild. “I
can-not kill you, Tathagatha.”
 
“Then I owe my life to the fact that you owe me yours. Let us consider
the life-owing balanced.”
 
Rild uttered a short chuckle. “So be it,” he said.

 
“What will you do, now that you have abandoned your mission?”
 
“I do not know. My sin is too great to permit me to return. Now I, too,
have offended against Heaven, and the goddess will turn away her face
from my prayers. I have failed her.”
 
“Such being the case, remain here. You will at least have company in
damnation.”
 
“Very well,” agreed Rild. “There is nothing else left to me.”
 
He slept once again, and the Buddha smiled.
 
* * * *
 
In the days that followed, as the festival wore on, the Enlightened One
preached to the crowds who passed through the purple grove. He spoke of
the unity of all things, great and small, of the law of cause, of becom-ing
and dying, of the illusion of the world, of the spark of the atman, of the way
of salvation through renunciation of the self and union with the whole; he
spoke of realization and enlightenment, of the meaninglessness of the
Brahmins’ rituals, comparing their forms to vessels empty of content. Many
listened, a few heard and some remained in the purple grove to take up the
saffron robe of the seeker.
 
And each time he taught, the man Rild sat nearby, wearing his black
garments and leather harness, his strange dark eyes ever upon the
En-lightened One.
 
Two weeks after his recovery, Rild came upon the teacher as he
walked through the grove in meditation. He fell into step beside him, and
after a lime he spoke.
 
“Enlightened One, I have listened to your teachings, and I have
listened well. Much have I thought upon your words.”
 
The other nodded.
 
“I have always been a religious man,” he stated, “or I would not have
been selected for the post I once occupied. After it became impossible for
me to fulfill my mission, I felt a great emptiness. I had failed my goddess,
and life was without meaning for me.”
 

The other listened, silently.
 
“But I have heard your words,” he said, “and they have filled me with a
kind of joy. They have shown me another way to salvation, a way which I
feel to be superior to the one I previously followed.”
 
The Buddha studied his face as he spoke.
 
“Your way of renunciation is a strict one, which I feel to be good. It
suits my needs. Therefore, I request permission to be taken into your
com-munity of seekers, and to follow your path.”
 
“Are you certain,” asked the Enlightened One, “that you do not seek
merely to punish yourself for what has been weighing upon your
con-science as a failure, or a sin?”
 
“Of that I am certain,” said Rild. “I have held your words within me and
felt the truth which they contain. In the service of the goddess have I slain
more men than purple fronds upon yonder bough. I am not even count-ing
women and children. So I am not easily taken in by words, having heard too
many, voiced in all tones of speech—words pleading, arguing, cursing. But
your words move me, and they are superior to the teachings of the
Brahmins. Gladly would I become your executioner, dispatching for you
your enemies with a saffron cord—or with a blade, or pike, or with my
hands, for I am proficient with all weapons, having spent three lifetimes
learning their use—but I know that such is not your way. Death and life are
as one to you, and you do not seek the destruction of your enemies. So I
request entrance to your Order. For me, it is not so difficult a thing as it
would be for another. One must renounce home and family, origin and
property. I lack these things. One must renounce one’s own will, which I
have already done. All I need now is the yellow robe.”                         
 
“It is yours,” said Tathagatha, “with my blessing.”
 
* * * *
 
Rild donned the robe of a buddhist monk and took to fasting and
med-itating. After a week, when the festival was near to its close, he
departed into the town with his begging bowl, in the company of the other
monks. He did not return with them, however. The day wore on into evening,
the evening into darkness. The horns of the Temple had already sounded
the last notes of the nagaswaram, and many of the travelers had since
de-parted the festival.
 

For a long while, the Enlightened One walked the woods, meditating.
Then he, too, vanished.
 
Down from the grove, with the marshes at its back, toward the town of
Alandil, above which lurked the hills of rock and around which lay the
blue-green fields, into the town of Alandil, still astir with travelers, many of
them at the height of their revelry, up the streets of Alandil to-ward the hill
with its Temple, walked the Buddha.
 
He entered the first courtyard, and it was quiet there. The dogs and
children and beggars had gone away. The priests slept. One drowsing
attendant sat behind a bench at the bazaar. Many of the shrines were now
empty, the statues having been borne within. Before several of the oth-ers,
worshipers knelt in late prayer.
 
He entered the inner courtyard. An ascetic was seated on a prayer
mat before the statue of Ganesha. He, too, seemed to qualify as a statue,
mak-ing no visible movements. Four oil lamps flickered about the yard, their
dancing light serving primarily to accentuate the shadows that lay upon
most of the shrines. Small votive lights cast a faint illumination upon some
of the statues.
 
Tathagatha crossed the yard and stood facing the towering figure of
Kali, at whose feet a tiny lamp blinked. Her smile seemed a plastic and
moving thing, as she regarded the man before her.
 
Draped across her outstretched hand, looped once about the point of
her dagger, lay a crimson strangling cord.
 
Tathagatha smiled back at her, and she seemed almost to frown at
that moment.
 
“It is a resignation, my dear,” he stated. “You have lost this round.”
 
She seemed to nod in agreement.
 
“I am pleased to have achieved such a height of recognition in so
short a period of time,” he continued. “But even if you had succeeded, old
girl, it would have done you little good. It is too late now. I have started
some-thing which you cannot undo. Too many have heard the ancient
words. You had thought they were lost, and so did I. But we were both
wrong. The religion by which you rule is very ancient, goddess, but my
protest is also that of a venerable tradition. So call me a protestant, and
remem-ber—now I am more than a man. Good night.”

 
He left the Temple and the shrine of Kali, where the eyes of Yama
had been fixed upon his back.
 
* * * *
 
It was many months before the miracle occurred, and when it did, it did not
seem a miracle, for it had grown up slowly about them.
 
Rild, who had come out of the north as the winds of spring blew
across the land, wearing death upon his arm and the black fire within his
eyes— Rild, of the white brows and pointed ears—spoke one afternoon,
after the spring had passed, when the long days of summer hung warm
beneath the Bridge of the Gods. He spoke, in that unexpected baritone, to
answer a question asked him by a traveler.
 
The man asked him a second question, and then a third.
 
He continued to speak, and some of the other monks and several
pilgrims gathered about him. The answers following the questions, which
now came from all of them, grew longer and longer, for they became
para-bles, examples, allegories.
 
Then they were seated at his feet, and his dark eyes became strange
pools, and his voice came down as from Heaven, clear and soft, melodic
and persuasive.
 
They listened, and then the travelers went their way. But they met and
spoke with other travelers upon the road, so that, before the summer had
passed, pilgrims coming to the purple grove were asking to meet this
dis-ciple of the Buddha’s, and to hear his words also.
 
Tathagatha shared the preaching with him. Together, they taught of
the Way of the Eightfold Path, the glory of Nirvana, the illusion of the world
and the chains that the world lays upon a man.
 
And then there were times when even the soft-spoken Tathagatha
listened to the words of his disciple, who had digested all of the things he
had preached, had meditated long and fully upon them and now, as though
he had found entrance to a secret sea, dipped with his steel-hard hand into
places of hidden waters, and then sprinkled a thing of truth and beauty upon
the heads of the hearers.
 
Summer passed. There was no doubt now that there were two who

had received enlightenment: Tathagatha and his small disciple, whom they
called Sugata. It was even said that Sugata was a healer, and that when his
eyes shone strangely and the icy touch of his hands came upon a twisted
limb, that limb grew straight again. It was said that a blind man’s vision had
suddenly returned to him during one of Sugata’s sermons.
 
There were two things in which Sugata believed: the Way of Salvation
and Tathagatha, the Buddha.
 
“Illustrious One,” he said to him one day, “my life was empty until you
revealed to me the True Path. When you received your enlightenment,
before you began your teaching, was it like a rush of fire and the roaring of
water and you everywhere and a part of everything—the clouds and the
trees, the animals in the forest, all people, the snow on the mountaintop and
the bones in the field?”
 
“Yes,” said Tathagatha.
 
“I, also, know the joy of all things,” said Sugata.
 
“Yes, I know,” said Tathagatha.
 
“I see now why once you said that all things come to you. To have
brought such a doctrine into the world—I can see why the gods were
en-vious. Poor gods! They are to be pitied. But you know. You know all
things.”
 
Tathagatha did not reply.             
 
* * * *
 
When the winds of spring blew again across the land, the year having gone
full cycle since the arrival of the second Buddha, there came one day from
out of the heavens a fearful shrieking.
 
The citizens of Alandil turned out into their streets to stare up at the
sky. The Sudras in the fields put by their work and looked upward. In the
great Temple on the hill there was a sudden silence. In the purple grove
beyond the town, the monks turned their heads.
 
It paced the heavens, the one who was born to rule the wind…From
out of the north it came—green and red, yellow and brown…Its glide was a
dance, its way was the air…
 

There came another shriek, and then the beating of mighty pinions as
it climbed past clouds to become a tiny dot of black.
 
And then it fell, like a meteor, bursting into flame, all of its colors
blaz-ing and burning bright, as it grew and grew, beyond all belief that
any-thing could live at that size, that pace, that magnificence…
 
Half spirit, half bird, legend darkening the sky.
 
Mount of Vishnu, whose beak smashes chariots.
 
The Garuda Bird circled above Alandil.
 
Circled, and passed beyond the hills of rock that stood behind the
city.
 
“Garuda!” The word ran through the town, the fields, the Temple, the
grove.
 
If he did not fly alone; it was known that only a god could use the
Garuda Bird for a mount.
 
There was silence. After those shrieks and that thunder of pinions,
voices seemed naturally to drop to a whisper.
 
The Enlightened One stood upon the road before the grove, his
monks moving about him, facing in the direction of the hills of rock.
 
Sugata came to his side and stood there. “It was but a spring ago…”
he said.
 
Tathagatha nodded.
 
“Rild failed,” said Sugata. “What new thing comes from Heaven?”
 
The Buddha shrugged.
 
“I fear for you, my teacher,” he said. “In all my lifetimes, you have
been my only friend, Your teaching has given me peace. Why can they not
leave you alone? You are the most harmless of men, and your doctrine the
gen-tlest. What ill could you possibly bear them?”
 
The other turned away.
 

At that moment, with a mighty beating of the air and a jagged cry from
its opened beak, the Garuda Bird rose once more above the hills. This
time, it did not circle over the town, but climbed to a great height in the
heavens and swept off to the north. Such was the speed of its passing that
it was gone in a matter of moments.
 
“Its passenger has dismounted and remains behind,” suggested
Sugata.
 
The Buddha walked within the purple grove.
 
* * * *
 
He came from beyond the hills of stone, walking.
 
He came to a passing place through stone, and he followed this trail,
his red leather boots silent on the rocky path.
 
Ahead, there was a sound of running water, from where a small
stream cut across his way. Shrugging his blood-bright cloak back over his
shoul-ders, he advanced upon a bend in the trail, the ruby head of his
scimitar gleaming in his crimson sash.
 
Rounding a corner of stone, he came to a halt.
 
One waited ahead, standing beside the log that led across the
stream.
 
His eyes narrowed for an instant, then he moved forward again.
 
It was a small man who stood there, wearing the dark garments of a
pilgrim, caught about with a leather harness from which was suspended a
short, curved blade of bright steel. This man’s head was closely shaven,
save for a small lock of white hair. His eyebrows were white above eyes
that were dark, and his skin was pale; his ears appeared to be pointed.
 
The traveler raised his hand and spoke to this man, saying, “Good
afternoon, pilgrim.”
 
The man did not reply, but moved to bar his way, positioning himself
before the log that led across the stream.
 
“Pardon me, good pilgrim, but I am about to cross here and you are
making my passage difficult,” he stated.

 
“You are mistaken, Lord Yama, if you think you are about to pass
here,” replied the other.
 
The One in Red smiled, showing a long row of even, white teeth. “It is
always a pleasure to be recognized,” he acknowledged, “even by one who
conveys misinformation concerning other matters.”
 
“I do not fence with words,” said the man in black.
 
“Oh?” The other raised his eyebrows in an expression of
exaggerated inquiry. “With what then do you fence, sir? Surely not that
piece of bent metal you bear.”
 
“None other.”
 
“I took it for some barbarous prayer-stick at first. I understand that this
is a region fraught with strange cults and primitive sects. For a moment, I
took you to be a devotee of some such superstition. But if, as you say, it is
indeed a weapon, then I trust you are familiar with its use?”
 
“Somewhat,” replied the man in black.
 
“Good, then,” said Yama, “for I dislike having to kill a man who does
not know what he is about. I feel obligated to point out to you, however, that
when you stand before the Highest for judgment, you will be ac-counted a
suicide.”
 
The other smiled faintly.
 
“Any time that you are ready, deathgod, I will facilitate the passage of
your spirit from out its fleshy envelope.”
 
“One more item only, then,” said Yama, “and I shall put a quick end to
conversation. Give me a name to tell the priests, so that they shall know for
whom they offer the rites.”
 
“I renounced my final name but a short while back,” answered the
other. “For this reason, Kali’s consort must take his death of one who is
name-less.”
 
“Rild, you are a fool,” said Yama, and drew his blade.
 
The man in black drew his.

 
“And it is fitting that you go unnamed to your doom. You betrayed your
goddess.”
 
“Life is full of betrayals,” replied the other, before he struck. “By
opposing you now and in this manner, I also betray the teachings of my new
master. But I must follow the dictates of my heart. Neither my old name nor
my new do therefore fit me, nor are they deserved—so call me by no
name!”
 
Then his blade was fire, leaping everywhere, clicking, blazing.
 
Yama fell back before this onslaught, giving ground foot by foot,
mov-ing only his wrist as he parried the blows that fell about him.
 
Then, after he had retreated ten paces, he stood his ground and
would not be moved. His parries widened slightly, but his ripostes became
more sudden now, and were interspersed with feints and unexpected
attacks.
 
They swaggered blades till their perspiration fell upon the ground in
showers; and then Yama began to press the attack, slowly forcing his
op-ponent into a retreat. Step by step, he recovered the ten paces he had
given.
 
When they stood again upon the ground where the first blow had
been struck, Yama acknowledged, over the clashing of steel, “Well have
you learned your lessons, Rild! Better even than I had thought!
Congratula-tions!”
 
As he spoke, his opponent wove his blade through an elaborate
dou-ble feint and scored a light touch that cut his shoulder, drawing blood
that immediately merged with the color of his garment.
 
At this, Yama sprang forward, beating down the other’s guard, and
delivered a blow to the side of his neck that might have decapitated him.
 
The man in black raised his guard, shaking his head, parried another
attack and thrust forward, to be parried again himself.
 
“So, the death bath collars your throat,” said Yama. “I’ll seek entrance
elsewhere, then,” and his blade sang a faster song, as he tried for a
low-line thrust.
 

Yama unleashed the full fury of that blade, backed by the centuries
and the masters of many ages. Yet, the other met his attacks, parrying
wider and wider, retreating faster and faster now, but still managing to hold
him off as he backed away, counterthrusting as he went.
 
He retreated until his back was to the stream. Then Yama slowed and
made comment:
 
“Half a century ago,” he stated, “when you were my pupil for a brief
time, I said to myself, ‘This one has within him the makings of a master.’
Nor was I wrong, Rild. You are perhaps the greatest swordsman raised up
in all the ages I can remember. I can almost forgive apostasy when I
witness your skill. It is indeed a pity…”
 
He feinted then a chest cut, and at the last instant moved around the
parry so that he lay the edge of his weapon high upon the other’s wrist.
 
Leaping backward, parrying wildly and cutting at Yama’s head, the
man in black came into a position at the head of the log that lay above the
crevice that led down to the stream.
 
“Your hand, too, Rild! Indeed, the goddess is lavish with her
protec-tion. Try this!”
 
The steel screeched as he caught it in a bind, nicking the other’s
bicep as he passed about the blade.
 
“Aha! There’s a place she missed!” he cried. “Let’s try for another!”
 
Their blades bound and disengaged, feinted, thrust, parried, riposted.
 
Yama met an elaborate attack with a stop-thrust, his longer blade
again drawing blood from his opponent’s upper arm.
 
The man in black stepped up upon the log, swinging a vicious head
cut, which Yama beat away. Pressing the attack then even harder, Yama
forced him to back out upon the log and then he kicked at its side.
 
The other jumped backward, landing upon the opposite bank. As
soon as his feet touched ground, he, too, kicked out, causing the log to
move.
 
It rolled, before Yama could mount it, slipping free of the banks,
crash-ing down into the stream, bobbing about for a moment, and then

fol-lowing the water trail westward.
 
“I’d say it is only a seven- or eight-foot jump, Yama! Come on
across!” cried the other.
 
The deathgod smiled. “Catch your breath quickly now, while you
may,” he stated. “Breath is the least appreciated gift of the gods. None sing
hymns to it, praising the good air, breathed by king and beggar, master and
dog alike. But, oh to be without it! Appreciate each breath, Rild, as though it
were your last—for that one, too, is near at hand!”
 
“You are said to be wise in these matters, Yama,” said the one who
had been called Rild and Sugata. “You are said to be a god, whose
kingdom is death and whose knowledge extends beyond the ken of
mortals. I would question you, therefore, while we are standing idle.”
 
Yama did not smile his mocking smile, as he had to all his opponent’s
previous statements. This one had a touch of ritual about it.
 
“What is it that you wish to know? I grant you the death-boon of a
question.”
 
Then, in the ancient words of the Katha Upanishad, the one who had
been called Rild and Sugata chanted:
 
“ ‘There is doubt concerning a man when he is dead. Some say he
still exists. Others say he does not. This thing I should like to know, taught
by you.’ 
 
Yama replied with the ancient words, “ ‘On this subject even the gods
have their doubts. It is not easy to understand, for the nature of the atman
is a subtle thing. Ask me another question. Release me from this boon!’ “
 
“ ‘Forgive me if it is foremost in my mind, oh Death, but another
teacher such as yourself cannot be found, and surely there is no other boon
which I crave more at this moment.’ “
 
“ ‘Keep your life and go your way,’ “ said Yama, plunging his blade
again into his sash. “ ‘I release you from your doom. Choose sons and
grandsons; choose elephants, horses, herds of cattle and gold. Choose
any other boon—fair maidens, chariots, musical instruments. I shall give
them unto you and they shall wait upon you. But ask me not of death.’ “
 
“ ‘Oh Death,’ “ sang the other, “ ‘these endure only till tomorrow. Keep

your maidens, horses, dances and songs for yourself. No boon will I
ac-cept but the one which I have asked—tell me, oh Death, of that which
lies beyond life, of which men and the gods have their doubts.’ “
 
Yama stood very still and he did not continue the poem. “Very well,
Rild,” he said, his eyes locking with the other’s, “but it is not a kingdom
subject to words. I must show you.”
 
They stood, so, for a moment; and then the man in black swayed. He
threw his arm across his face, covering his eyes, and a single sob escaped
his throat.
 
When this occurred, Yama drew his cloak from his shoulders and cast
it like a net across the stream.
 
Weighted at the hems for such a maneuver, it fell, netlike, upon his
opponent.
 
As he struggled to free himself, the man in black heard rapid footfalls
and then a crash, as Yama’s blood-red boots struck upon his side of the
stream. Casting aside the cloak and raising his guard, he parried Yama’s
new attack. The ground behind him sloped upward, and he backed far-ther
and farther, to where it steepened, so that Yama’s head was no higher than
his belt. He then struck down at his opponent. Yama slowly fought his way
uphill.
 
“Deathgod, deathgod,” he chanted, “forgive my presumptuous
ques-tion, and tell me you did not lie.”
 
“Soon you shall know,” said Yama, cutting at his legs.
 
Yama struck a blow that would have run another man through,
cleav-ing his heart. But it glanced off his opponent’s breast.
 
When he came to a place where the ground was broken, the small
man kicked, again and again, sending showers of dirt and gravel down upon
his opponent. Yama shielded his eyes with his left hand, but then larger
pieces of stone began to rain down upon him. These roiled on the ground,
and, as several came beneath his boots, he lost his footing and fell,
slip-ping backward down the slope. The other kicked at heavy rocks then,
even dislodging a boulder and following it downhill, his blade held high.
 
Unable to gain his footing in time to meet the attack, Yama rolled and
slid back toward the stream. He managed to brake himself at the edge of

the crevice, but he saw the boulder coming and tried to draw back out of its
way. As he pushed at the ground with both hands, his blade fell into the
waters below.
 
With his dagger, which he drew as he sprang into a stumbling crouch,
he managed to parry the high cut of the other’s blade. The boulder
splashed into the stream.
 
Then his left hand shot forward, seizing the wrist that had guided the
blade. He slashed upward with the dagger and felt his own wrist taken.
 
They stood then, locking their strength, until Yama sat down and rolled
to his side, thrusting the other from him.
 
Still, both locks held, and they continued to roll from the force of that
thrust. Then the edge of the crevice was beside them, beneath them,
above them. He felt the blade go out of his hand as it struck the stream
bed.
 
When they came again above the surface of the water, gasping for
breath, each held only water in his hands.
 
“Time for the final baptism,” said Yama, and he lashed out with his left
hand.
 
The other blocked the punch, throwing one of his own.
 
They moved to the left with the waters, until their feet struck upon rock
and they fought, wading, along the length of the stream.
 
It widened and grew more shallow as they moved, until the waters
swirled about their waists. In places, the banks began to fall nearer the
surface of the water.
 
Yama landed blow after blow, both with his fists and the edges of his
hands; but it was as if he assailed a statue, for the one who had been Kali’s
holy executioner took each blow without changing his expression, and he
returned them with twisting punches of bone-breaking force. Most of these
blows were slowed by the water or blocked by Yama’s guard, but one
landed between his rib cage and hipbone and another glanced off his left
shoulder and rebounded from his cheek.
 
Yama cast himself into a backstroke and made for shallower water.
 

The other followed and sprang upon him, to be caught in his
imper-vious midsection by a red boot, as the front of his garment was
jerked forward and down. He continued on, passing over Yama’s head, to
land upon his back on a section of shale.
 
Yama rose to his knees and turned, as the other found his footing and
drew a dagger from his belt. His face was still impassive as he dropped
into a crouch.
 
For a moment their eyes met, but the other did not waver this time.
 
“Now can I meet your death-gaze, Yama,” he stated, “and not be
stopped by it. You have taught me too well!”
 
And as he lunged, Yama’s hands came away from his waist, snapping
his wet sash like a whip about the other’s thighs.
 
He caught him and locked him to him as he fell forward, dropping the
blade; and with a kick he bore them both back into deeper water.
 
“None sing hymns to breath,” said Yama. “But, oh to be without it!”
 
Then he plunged downward, bearing the other with him, his arms like
steel loops about his body.
 
Later, much later, as the wet figure stood beside the stream, he
spoke softly and his breath came in gasps:
 
“You were—the greatest—to be raised up against me—in all the ages
I can remember… It is indeed a pity…”
 
Then, having crossed the stream, he continued on his way through
the hills of stone, walking.
 
* * * *
 
Entering the town of Alandil, the traveler stopped at the first inn he came to.
He took a room and ordered a tub of water. He bathed while a ser-vant
cleaned his garments.
 
Before he had his dinner, he moved to the window and looked down
into the street. The smell of slizzard was strong upon the air, and the
bab-ble of many voices arose from below.
 

People were leaving the town. In the courtyard at his back,
prepara-tions for the departure of a morning caravan were being made.
This night marked the end of the spring festival. Below him in the street,
business-men were still trading, mothers were soothing tired children and a
local prince was returning with his men from the hunt, two fire-roosters
strapped to the back of a skittering slizzard. He watched a tired prostitute
discussing something with a priest, who appeared to be even more tired,
as he kept shaking his head and finally walked away. One moon was
al-ready high in the heavens—seen as golden through the Bridge of the
Gods—and a second, smaller moon had just appeared above the horizon.
There was a cool tingle in the evening air, bearing to him, above the smells
of the city, the scents of the growing things of spring: the small shoots and
the tender grasses, the clean smell of the blue-green spring wheat, the
moist ground, the roiling freshet. Leaning forward, he could see the Temple
that stood upon the hill.
 
He summoned a servant to bring his dinner in his chamber and to
send for a local merchant.
 
He ate slowly, not paying especial attention to his food, and when he
had finished, the merchant was shown in.
 
The man bore a cloak full of samples, and of these he finally decided
upon a long, curved blade and a short, straight dagger, both of which he
thrust into his sash.
 
Then he went out into the evening and walked along the rutted main
street of the town. Lovers embraced in doorways. He passed a house
where mourners were wailing for one dead. A beggar limped after him for
half a block, until he turned and glanced into his eyes, saying, “You are not
lame,” and then the man hurried away, losing himself in a crowd that was
passing. Overhead, the fireworks began to burst against the sky, sending
long, cherry-colored streamers down toward the ground. From the Temple
came the sound of the gourd horns playing the nagaswaram music. A man
stumbled from out a doorway, brushing against him, and he broke the
man’s wrist as he felt his hand fall upon his purse. The man uttered a curse
and called for help, but he pushed him into the drainage ditch and walked
on, turning away his two companions with one dark look.
 
At last, he came to the Temple, hesitated a moment and passed
within.
 
He entered the inner courtyard behind a priest who was carrying in a
small statue from an outer niche.

 
He surveyed the courtyard, then quickly moved to the place occupied
by the statue of the goddess Kali. He studied her for a long while, draw-ing
his blade and placing it at her feet. When he picked it up and turned away,
he saw that the priest was watching him. He nodded to the man, who
immediately approached and bade him a good evening.          
 
“Good evening, priest,” he replied.
 
“May Kali sanctify your blade, warrior.”
 
“Thank you. She has.”
 
The priest smiled. “You speak as if you knew that for certain.”
 
“And that is presumptuous of me, eh?”
 
“Well, it may not be in the best of taste.”
 
“Nevertheless, I felt her power come over me as I gazed upon her
shrine.”                                                                                                                 
            
 
The priest shuddered. “Despite my office,” he stated, “that is a
feeling of power I can do
without.”                                                                          
 
“You fear her power?”
 
“Let us say,” said the priest, “that despite its magnificence, the shrine
of Kali is not so frequently visited as are those of Lakshmi, Sarasvati,
Shakti, Sitala, Ratri and the other less awesome goddesses.”
 
“But she is greater than any of these.”
 
“And more terrible.”
 
“So? Despite her strength, she is not an unjust goddess.”
 
The priest smiled. “What man who has lived for more than a score of
years desires justice, warrior? For my part, I find mercy infinitely more
attractive. Give me a forgiving deity any day.”
 
“Well taken,” said the other, “but I am, as you say, a warrior. My own

nature is close to hers. We think alike, the goddess and I. We generally
agree on most matters. When we do not, I remember that she is also a
woman.”
 
“I live here,” said the priest, “and I do not speak that intimately of my
charges, the gods.”
 
“In public, that is,” said the other. “Tell me not of priests. I have drunk
with many of you, and know you to be as blasphemous as the rest of
mankind.”
 
“There is a time and place for everything,” said the priest, glancing
back at Kali’s statue.
 
“Aye, aye. Now tell me why the base of Yama’s shrine has not been
scrubbed recently. It is dusty.”
 
“It was cleaned but yesterday, but so many have passed before it
since then that it has felt considerable usage.”
 
The other smiled. “Why then are there no offerings laid at his feet, no
remains of sacrifices?”
 
“No one gives flowers to Death,” said the priest. “They just come to
look and go away. We priests have always felt the two statues to be well
situated. They make a terrible pair, do they not? Death, and the mistress of
destruction?”
 
“A mighty team,” said the other. “But do you mean to tell me that no
one makes sacrifice to Yama? No one at all?”
 
“Other than we priests, when the calendar of devotions requires it,
and an occasional townsman, when a loved one is upon the deathbed and
has been refused direct incarnation—other than these, no, I have never
seen sacrifice made to Yama, simply, sincerely, with goodwill or affection.”
 
“He must feel offended.”
 
“Not so, warrior. For are not all living things, in themselves, sacrifices
to Death?”
 
“Indeed, you speak truly. What need has he for their goodwill or
affection? Gifts are unnecessary, for he takes what he wants.”
 

“Like Kali,” acknowledged the priest. “And in the cases of both deities
have I often sought justification for atheism. Unfortunately, they mani-fest
themselves too strongly in the world for their existence to be denied
effectively. Pity.”
 
The warrior laughed. “A priest who is an unwilling believer! I like that.
It tickles my funny bone! Here, buy yourself a barrel of soma—for
sacri-ficial purposes.”
 
“Thank you, warrior. I shall. Join me in a small libation now—on the
Temple?”
 
“By Kali, I will!” said the other. “But a small one only.”
 
He accompanied the priest into the central building and down a flight
of stairs into the cellar, where a barrel of soma was tapped and two beakers
drawn.
 
“To your health and long life,” he said, raising it.
 
“To your morbid patrons—Yama and Kali,” said the priest.
 
“Thank you.”
 
They gulped the potent brew, and the priest drew two more. “To warm
 your throat against the night.”
 
“Very good.”
 
“It is a good thing to see some of these travelers depart,” said the
priest. “Their devotions have enriched the Temple, but they have also tired
the staff considerably.”
 
“To the departure of the pilgrims!”
 
“To the departure of the pilgrims!”
 
They drank again.
 
“I thought that most of them came to see the Buddha,” said Yama.
 
“That is true,” replied the priest, “but on the other hand, they are not
anxious to antagonize the gods by this. So, before they visit the purple
grove, they generally make sacrifice or donate to the Temple for prayers.”

 
“What do you know of the one called Tathagatha, and of his
teach-ings?”
 
The other looked away. “I am a priest of the gods and a Brahmin,
warrior. I do not wish to speak of this one.”
 
“So, he has gotten to you, too?”
 
“Enough! I have made my wishes known to you. It is not a subject on
which I will discourse.”
 
“It matters not—and will matter less shortly. Thank you for the soma.
Good evening, priest.”
 
“Good evening, warrior. May the gods smile upon your path.”
 
“And yours also.”
 
Mounting the stairs, he departed the Temple and continued on his
way through the city, walking.
 
* * * *
 
When he came to the purple grove, there were three moons in the
heav-ens, small camplights behind the trees, pale blossoms of fire in the
sky above the town, and a breeze with a certain dampness in it stirring the
growth about him.
 
He moved silently ahead, entering the grove.
 
When he came into the lighted area, he was faced with row upon row
of motionless, seated figures. Each wore a yellow robe with a yellow cowl
drawn over the head. Hundreds of them were seated so, and not one
ut-tered a sound.
 
He approached the one nearest him.
 
“I have come to see Tathagatha, the Buddha,” he said.
 
The man did not seem to hear him.
 
“Where is he?”
 

The man did not reply.
 
He bent forward and stared into the monk’s half-closed eyes. For a
moment, he glared into them, but it was as though the other was asleep, for
the eyes did not even meet with his.
 
Then he raised his voice, so that all within the grove might hear him:
 
“I have come to see Tathagatha, the Buddha,” he said. “Where is
he?”
 
It was as though he addressed a field of stones.
 
“Do you think to hide him in this manner?” he called out. “Do you think
that because you are many, and all dressed alike, and because you will not
answer me, that for these reasons I cannot find him among you?”
 
There was only the sighing of the wind, passing through from the back
of the grove. The light flickered and the purple fronds stirred.
 
He laughed. “In this, you may be right,” he admitted. “But you must
move sometime, if you intend to go on living—and I can wait as long as any,
man.”
 
Then he seated himself upon the ground, his back against the blue
bark of a tall tree, his blade across his knees.
 
Immediately, he was seized with drowsiness. His head nodded and
jerked upward several times. Then his chin came to rest upon his breast
and he snored.
 
Was walking, across a blue-green plain, the grasses bending down to
form a pathway before him. At the end of this pathway was a massive tree,
a tree such as did not grow upon the world, but rather held the world
together with its roots, and with its branches reached up to utter leaves
among the stars.
 
At its base sat a man, cross-legged, a faint smile upon his lips. He
knew this man to be the Buddha, and he approached and stood before him.
 
“Greetings, oh Death,” said the seated one, crowned with a
rose-hued aureole that was bright in the shadow of the tree.
 
Yama did not reply, but drew his blade.

 
The Buddha continued to smile, and as Yama moved forward he
heard a sound like distant music.
 
He halted and looked about him, his blade still upraised.
 
They came from all quarters, the four Regents of the world, come
down from Mount Sumernu: the Master of the North advanced, followed by
his Yakshas, all in gold, mounted on yellow horses, bearing shields that
blazed with golden light; the Angel of the South came on, followed by his
hosts, the Kumbhandas, mounted upon blue steeds and bearing sapphire
shields; from the East rode the Regent whose horsemen carry shields of
pearl, and who are clad all in silver; and from the West there came the One
whose Nagas mounted blood-red horses, were clad all in red and held
before them shields of coral. Their hooves did not appear to touch the
grasses, and the only sound in the air was the music, which grew louder.
 
“Why do the Regents of the world approach?” Yama found himself
saying.
 
“They come to bear my bones away,” replied the Buddha, still smiling.
 
The four Regents drew rein, their hordes at their backs, and Yama
faced them.
 
“You come to bear his bones away,” said Yama, “but who will come
for yours?”
 
The Regents dismounted.
 
“You may not have this man, oh Death,” said the Master of the North,
“for he belongs to the world, and we of the world will defend him.”
 
“Hear me, Regents who dwell upon Sumernu,” said Yama, taking his
Aspect upon him. “Into your hands is given the keeping of the world, but
Death takes whom he will from out the world, and whenever he chooses. It
is not given to you to dispute my Attributes, or the ways of their working.”
 
The four Regents moved to a position between Yama and
Tathagatha.
 
“We do dispute your way with this one, Lord Yama. For in his hands
he holds the destiny of our world. You may touch him only after having
overthrown the four Powers.”

 
“So be it,” said Yama. “Which among you will be first to oppose me?”
 
“I will,” said the speaker, drawing his golden blade.                    
 
Yama, his Aspect upon him, sheared through the soft metal like butter
and laid the flat of his scimitar along the Regent’s head, sending him
sprawling upon the ground.
 
A great cry came up from the ranks of the Yakshas, and two of the
golden horsemen came forward to bear away their leader. Then they turned
their mounts and rode back into the North.
 
“Who is next?”
 
The Regent of the East came before him, bearing a straight blade of
silver and a net woven of moonbeams. “I,” he said, and he cast with the net.
 
Yama set his foot upon it, caught it in his fingers, jerked the other off
balance. As the Regent stumbled forward, he reversed his blade and struck
him in the jaw with its pommel.
 
Two silver warriors glared at him, then dropped their eyes, as they
bore their Master away to the East, a discordant music trailing in their wake.
 
“Next!” said Yama.
 
Then there came before him the burly leader of the Nagas, who threw
down his weapons and stripped off his tunic, saying, “I will wrestle with you,
deathgod.”
 
Yama laid his weapons aside and removed his upper garments.
 
All the while this was happening, the Buddha sat in the shade of the
great tree, smiling, as though the passage of arms meant nothing to him.
 
The Chief of the Nagas caught Yama behind the neck with his left
hand, pulling his head forward. Yama did the same to him; and the other did
then twist his body, casting his right arm over Yama’s left shoulder and
behind his neck, locking it then tight about his head, which he now drew
down hard against his hip, turning his body as he dragged the other
for-ward.
 
Reaching up behind the Naga Chief’s back, Yama caught his left

shoul-der in his left hand and then moved his right hand behind the
Regent’s knees, so that he lifted both his legs off the ground while drawing
back upon his shoulder.
 
For a moment he held this one cradled in his arms like a child, then
raised him up to shoulder level and dropped away his arms.
 
When the Regent struck the ground, Yama fell upon him with his
knees and rose again. The other did not.
 
When the riders of the West had departed, only the Angel of the
South, clad all in blue, stood before the Buddha.
 
“And you?” asked the deathgod, raising his weapons again.
 
“I will not take up weapons of steel or leather or stone, as a child
takes up toys, to face you, god of death. Nor will I match the strength of my
body against yours,” said the Angel. “I know I will be bested if I do these
things, for none may dispute you with arms.”
 
“Then climb back upon your blue stallion and ride away,” said Yama,
“if you will not fight.”
 
The Angel did not answer, but cast his blue shield into the air, so that
it spun like a wheel of sapphire, growing larger and larger as it hung above
them.
 
Then it fell to the ground and began to sink into it, without a sound, still
growing as it vanished from sight, the grasses coming together again
above the spot where it had struck.
 
“And what does that signify?” asked Yama.
 
“I do not actively contest. I merely defend. Mine is the power of
pas-sive opposition. Mine is the power of life, as yours is the power of
death. While you can destroy anything I send against you, you cannot
destroy everything, oh Death. Mine is the power of the shield, but not the
sword. Life will oppose you, Lord Yama, to defend your victim.”
 
The Blue One turned then, mounted his blue steed and rode into the
South, the Kumbhandas at his back. The sound of the music did not go with
him, but remained in the air he had occupied.
 
Yama advanced once more, his blade in his hand. “Their efforts came

to naught,” he said. “Your time is come.”
 
He struck forward with his blade.
 
The blow did not land, however, as a branch from the great tree fell
between them and struck the scimitar from his grasp.
 
He reached for it and the grasses bent to cover it over, weaving
themselves into a tight, unbreakable net.
 
Cursing, he drew his dagger and struck again.
 
One mighty branch bent down, came swaying before his target, so
that his blade was imbedded deeply in its fibers. Then the branch lashed
again skyward, carrying the weapon with it, high out of reach.
 
The Buddha’s eyes were closed in meditation and his halo glowed in
the shadows.
 
Yama took a step forward, raising his hands, and the grasses knotted
themselves about his ankles, holding him where he stood.
 
He struggled for a moment, tugging at their unyielding roots. Then he
stopped and raised both hands high, throwing his head far back, death
leaping from his eyes.
 
“Hear me, oh Powers!” he cried. “From this moment forward, this
spot shall bear the curse of Yama! No living thing shall ever stir again upon
this ground! No bird shall sing, nor snake slither here! It shall be barren and
stark, a place of rocks and shifting sand! Not a spear of grass shall ever be
upraised from here against the sky! I speak this curse and lay this doom
upon the defenders of my enemy!”
 
The grasses began to wither, but before they had released him there
came a great splintering, cracking noise, as the tree whose roots held
to-gether the world and in whose branches the stars were caught, as fish in
a net, swayed forward, splitting down its middle, its uppermost limbs
tear-ing apart the sky, its roots opening chasms in the ground, its leaves
falling like blue-green rain about him. A massive section of its trunk toppled
to-ward him, casting before it a shadow dark as night.
 
In the distance, he still saw the Buddha, seated in meditation, as
though unaware of the chaos that erupted about him.
 

Then there was only blackness and a sound like the crashing of
thun-der.
 
* * * *
 
Yama jerked his head, his eyes springing open.
 
He sat in the purple grove, his back against the bole of a blue tree, his
blade across his knees.
 
Nothing seemed to have changed.
 
The rows of monks were seated, as in meditation, before him. The
breeze was still cool and moist and the lights still flickered as it passed.
 
Yama stood, knowing then, somehow, where he must go to find that
which he sought.
 
He moved past the monks, following a well-beaten path that led far
into the interior of the wood.
 
He came upon a purple pavilion, but it was empty.
 
He moved on, tracing the path back to where the wood became a
wilderness. Here, the ground was damp and a faint mist sprang up about
him. But the way was still clear before him, illuminated by the light of the
three moons.
 
The trail led downward, the blue and purple trees growing shorter and
more twisted here than they did above. Small pools of water, with float-ing
patches of leprous, silver scum, began to appear at the sides of the trail. A
marshland smell came to his nostrils, and the wheezing of strange
creatures came out of clumps of brush.
 
He heard the sound of singing, coming from far up behind him, and
he realized that the monks he had left were now awake and stirring about
the grove. They had finished with the task of combining their thoughts to
force upon him the vision of their leader’s invincibility. Their chant-ing was
probably a signal, reaching out to—
 
There!
 
He was seated upon a rock in the middle of a field, the moonlight
falling full upon him.

 
Yama drew his blade and advanced.
 
When he was about twenty paces away, the other turned his head.
 
“Greetings, oh Death,” he said.
 
“Greetings, Tathagatha.”
 
“Tell me why you are here.”
 
“It has been decided that the Buddha must die.”
 
“That does not answer my question, however. Why have you come
here?”
 
“Are you not the Buddha?”
 
“I have been called Buddha, and Tathagatha, and the Enlightened
One, and many other things. But, in answer to your question, no, I am not
the Buddha. You have already succeeded in what you set out to do. You
slew the real Buddha this day.”
 
“My memory must indeed be growing weak, for I confess that I do not
remember doing this thing.”
 
“The real Buddha was named by us Sugata,” replied the other.
“Before that, he was known as Rild.”
 
“Rild!” Yama chuckled. “You are trying to tell me that he was more
than an executioner whom you talked out of doing his job?”
 
“Many people are executioners who have been talked out of doing
their jobs,” replied the one on the rock. “Rild gave up his mission willingly
and became a follower of the Way. He was the only man I ever knew to
re-ally achieve enlightenment.”
 
“Is this not a pacifistic religion, this thing you have been spreading?”
 
“Yes.”
 
Yama threw back his head and laughed. “Gods! Then it is well you are
not preaching a militant one! Your foremost disciple, enlightenment and all,
near had my head this afternoon!”

 
A tired look came over the Buddha’s wide countenance. “Do you think
he could actually have beaten you?”
 
Yama was silent a moment, then, “No,” he said.
 
“Do you think he knew this?”
 
“Perhaps,” Yama replied.
 
“Did you not know one another prior to this day’s meeting? Have you
not seen one another at practice?”
 
“Yes,” said Yama. “We were acquainted.”
 
“Then he knew your skill and realized the outcome of the encounter.”
 
Yama was silent.
 
“He went willingly to his martyrdom, unknown to me at the time. I do
not feel that he went with real hope of beating you.”
 
“Why, then?”
 
“To prove a point.”
 
“What point could he hope to prove in such a manner?”
 
“I do not know. I only know that it must be as I have said, for I knew
him. I have listened too often to his sermons, to his subtle parables, to
believe that he would do a thing such as this without a purpose. You have
slain the true Buddha, deathgod. You know what I am.”
 
“Siddhartha,” said Yama, “I know that you are a fraud. I know that you
are not an Enlightened One. I realize that your doctrine is a thing which
could have been remembered by any among the First. You chose to
res-urrect it, pretending to be its originator. You decided to spread it, in
hopes of raising an opposition to the religion by which the true gods rule. I
ad-mire the effort. It was cleverly planned and executed. But your biggest
mistake, I feel, is that you picked a pacifistic creed with which to oppose an
active one. I am curious why you did this thing, when there were so many
more appropriate religions from which to choose.”
 
“Perhaps I was just curious to see how such a countercurrent would

flow,” replied the other.
 
“No, Sarn, that is not it,” answered Yama. “I feel it is only part of a
larger plan you have laid, and that for all these years—while you pretended
to be a saint and preached sermons in which you did not truly believe
your-self—you have been making other plans. An army, great in space, may
offer opposition in a brief span of time. One man, brief in space, must
spread his opposition across a period of many years if he is to have a
chance of succeeding. You are aware of this, and now that you have sown
the seeds of this stolen creed, you are planning to move on to another
phase of opposition. You are trying to be a one-man antithesis to Heaven,
opposing the will of the gods across the years, in many ways and from
behind many masks. But it will end here and now, false Buddha.”
 
“Why, Yama?” he asked.
 
“It was considered quite carefully,” said Yama. “We did not warn to
make you a martyr, encouraging more than ever the growth of this thing you
have been teaching. On the other hand, if you were not stopped, it would
still continue to grow. It was decided, therefore, that you must meet your
end at the hands of an agent of Heaven—thus show-ing which religion is the
stronger. So, martyr or no, Buddhism will be a second-rate religion
henceforth. That is why you must now die the real death.”
 
“When I asked ‘Why?’ I meant something different. You have
an-swered the wrong question. I meant, why have you come to do this
thing, Yama? Why have you, master of arms, master of sciences, come as
lackey to a crew of drunken body-changers, who are not qualified to polish
your blade or wash out your test tubes? Why do you, who might be the
freest spirit of us all, demean yourself by serving your inferiors?”
 
“For that, your death shall not be a clean one.”
 
“Why? I did but ask a question, which must have long since passed
through more minds than my own. I did not take offense when you called
me a false Buddha. I know what I am. Who are you, deathgod?”
 
Yama placed his blade within his sash and withdrew a pipe, which he
had purchased at the inn earlier in the day. He filled its bowl with tobacco, lit
it, and smoked.
 
“It is obvious that we must talk a little longer, if only to clear both our
minds of questions,” he stated, “so I may as well be comfortable.” He
seated himself upon a low rock. “First, a man may in some ways be

su-perior to his fellows and still serve them, if together they serve a
common cause which is greater than any one man. I believe that I serve
such a cause, or I would not be doing it. I take it that you feel the same way
con-cerning what you do, or you would not put up with this life of miserable
asceticism—though I note that you are not so gaunt as your followers. You
were offered godhood some years ago in Mahartha, as I recall, and you
mocked Brahma, raided the Palace of Karma, and filled all the
pray-machines of the city with slugs…”
 
The Buddha chuckled. Yama joined him briefly and continued, “There
are no Accelerationists remaining in the world, other than yourself. It is a
dead issue, which should never have become an issue in the first place. I
do have a certain respect for the manner in which you have acquitted
yourself over the years. It has even occurred to me that if you could be
made to realize the hopelessness of your present position, you might still
be persuaded to join the hosts of Heaven. While I did come here to kill you,
if you can be convinced of this now and give me your word upon it,
promising to end your foolish fight, I will take it upon myself to vouch for
you. I will take you back to the Celestial City with me, where you may now
accept that which you once refused. They will harken to me, because they
need me.”
 
“No,” said Sarn, “for I am not convinced of the futility of my position,
and I fully intend to continue the show.”
 
The chanting came down from the camp in the purple grove. One of
the moons disappeared beyond the treetops.
 
“Why are your followers not beating the bushes, seeking to save
you?”
 
“They would come if I called, but I will not call. I do not need to.”
 
“Why did they cause me to dream that foolish dream?”
 
The Buddha shrugged.
 
“Why did they not arise and slay me as I slept?”
 
“It is not their way.”
 
“You might have, though, eh? If you could get away with it? If none
would know the Buddha did it?”
 

“Perhaps,” said the other. “As you know, the personal strengths and
weaknesses of a leader are no true indication of the merits of his cause.”
 
Yama drew upon his pipe. The smoke wreathed his head and eddied
away to join the fogs, which were now becoming more heavy upon the land.
 
“I know we are alone here, and you are unarmed,” said Yama.
 
“We are alone here. My traveling gear is hidden farther along my
route.”
 
“Your traveling gear?”
 
“I have finished here. You guessed correctly. I have begun what I set
out to begin. After we have finished our conversation, I will depart.”
 
Yama chuckled. “The optimism of a revolutionary always gives rise to
a sense of wonder. How do you propose to depart? On a magic carpet?”
 
“I shall go as other men go.”
 
“That is rather condescending of you. Will the powers of the world
rise up to defend you? I see no great tree to shelter you with its branches.
There is no clever grass to seize at my feet. Tell me how you will achieve
your departure?”
 
“I’d rather surprise you.”
 
“What say we fight? I do not like to slaughter an unarmed man. If you
actually do have supplies cached somewhere nearby, go fetch your blade.
It is better than no chance at all. I’ve even heard it said that Lord Siddhartha
was, in his day, a formidable swordsman.”
 
“Thank you, no. Another time, perhaps. But not this time.”
 
Yama drew once more upon his pipe, stretched, and yawned. “I can
think of no more questions then, which I wish to ask you. It is futile to argue
with you. I have nothing more to say. Is there anything else that you would
care to add to the conversation?”
 
“Yes,” said Sarn. “What’s she like, that bitch Kali? There are so many
different reports that I’m beginning to believe she is all things to all men—”
 
Yama hurled the pipe, which struck him upon the shoulder and sent a

shower of sparks down his arm. His scimitar was a bright flash about his
head as he leapt forward.
 
When he struck the sandy stretch before the rock, his motion was
arrested. He almost fell, twisted himself perpendicularly and remained
standing. He struggled, but could not move.
 
“Some quicksand,” said Sarn, “is quicker than other quicksand.
Fortunately, you are settling into that of the slower sort. So you have
considerable time yet remaining at your disposal. I would like to prolong the
conversation, if I thought I had a chance of persuading you to join with me.
But I know that I do not—no more than you could persuade me to go to
Heaven.”
 
“I will get free,” said Yama softly, not struggling. “I will get free
somehow, and I will come after you again.”
 
“Yes,” said Sarn, “I feel this to be true. In fact, in a short while I will
instruct you how to go about it. For the moment, however, you are
some-thing every preacher longs for—a captive audience, representing the
op-position. So, I have a brief sermon for you, Lord Yama.”
 
Yama hefted his blade, decided against throwing it, thrust it again into
his sash.
 
“Preach on,” he said, and he succeeded in catching the other’s eyes.
 
Sarn swayed where he sat, but he spoke again:
 
“It is amazing,” he said, “how that mutant brain of yours generated a
mind capable of transferring its powers to any new brain you choose to
occupy. It has been years since I last exercised my one ability, as I am at
this moment—but it, too, behaves in a similar manner. No matter what body
I inhabit, it appears that my power follows me into it also. I un-derstand it is
still that way with most of us. Sitala, I hear, can control tem-peratures for a
great distance about her. When she assumes a new body, the power
accompanies her into her new nervous system, though it comes only
weakly at first. Agni, I know, can set fire to objects by staring at them for a
period of time and willing that they burn. Now, take for example the
death-gaze you are at this moment turning upon me. Is it not amaz-ing how
you keep this gift about you in all times and places, over the centuries? I
have often wondered as to the physiological basis for the phe-nomenon.
Have you ever researched the area?”
 

“Yes,” said Yama, his eyes burning beneath his dark brows.
 
“And what is the explanation? A person is born with an abnormal
brain, his psyche is later transferred to a normal one and yet his abnormal
abil-ities are not destroyed in the transfer. Why does this thing happen?”
 
“Because you really have only one body-image, which is electrical as
well as chemical in nature. It begins immediately to modify its new
phys-iological environment. The new body has much about it which it treats
rather like a disease, attempting to cure it into being the old body. If the
body which you now inhabit were to be made physically immortal, it would
someday come to resemble your original body.”
 
“How interesting.”
 
“That is why the transferred power is weak at first, but grows stronger
as you continue occupancy. That is why it is best to cultivate an Attribute,
and perhaps to employ mechanical aids, also.”
 
“Well. That is something I have often wondered about. Thank you. By
the way, keep trying with your death-gaze—it is painful, you know. So that is
something, anyway. Now, as to the sermon—a proud and arrogant man,
such as yourself—with an admittedly admirable quality of didacti-cism about
him—was given to doing research in the area of a certain dis-figuring and
degenerative disease. One day he contracted it himself. Since he had not
yet developed a cure for the condition, he did take time out to regard
himself in a mirror and say, ‘But on me it does look good.’ You are such a
man, Yama. You will not attempt to fight your condition. Rather, you are
proud of it. You betrayed yourself in your fury, so I know that I speak the
truth when I say that the name of your disease is Kali. You would not give
power into the hands of the unworthy if that woman did not bid you do it. I
knew her of old, and I am certain that she has not changed. She cannot
love a man. She cares only for those who bring her gifts of chaos. If ever
you cease to suit her purposes, she will put you aside, deathgod. I do not
say this because we are enemies, but rather as one man to another. I know.
Believe me, I do. Perhaps it is unfortunate that you were never really young,
Yama, and did not know your first love in the days of spring…The moral,
therefore, of my sermon on this small mount is this—even a mirror will not
show you yourself, if you do not wish to see. Cross her once to try the truth
of my words, even in a small matter, and see how quickly she responds,
and in what fashion. What will you do if your own weapons are turned
against you, Death?”
 
“You have finished speaking now?” asked Yama.

 
“That’s about it. A sermon is a warning, and you have been warned.”
 
“Whatever your power, Sarn, I see that it is at this moment proof
against my death-gaze. Consider yourself fortunate that I am weak-ened—”
 
“I do indeed, for my head is about to split. Damn your eyes!”
 
“One day I will try your power again, and even if it should still be proof
against my own, you will fall on that day. If not by my Attribute, then by my
blade.”
 
“If that is a challenge, I choose to defer acceptance. I suggest that
you do try my words before you attempt to make it good.”
 
At this point, the sand was halfway up Yama’s thighs.
 
Sarn sighed and climbed down from his perch.
 
“There is only one clear path to this rock, and I am about to follow it
away from here. Now, I will tell you how to gain your life, if you are not too
proud. I have instructed the monks to come to my aid, here at this place, if
they hear a cry for help. I told you earlier that I was not going to call for help,
and that is true. If, however, you begin calling out for aid with that powerful
voice of yours, they shall be here before you sink too much farther. They
will bring you safely to firm ground and will not try to harm you, for such is
their way. I like the thought of the god of death being saved by the monks
of Buddha. Good night, Yama, I’m going to leave you now.”
 
Yama smiled. “There will be another day, oh Buddha,” he stated. “I
can wait for it. Flee now as far and as fast as you can. The world is not large
enough to hide you from my wrath. I will follow you, and I will teach you of
the enlightenment that is pure hellfire.”
 
“In the meantime,” said Sam, “I suggest you solicit aid of my
followers or learn the difficult art of mudbreathing.”
 
He picked his way across the field, Yama’s eyes burning into his
back.
 
When he reached the trail, he turned. “And you may want to mention
in Heaven,” he said, “that I was called out of town on a business deal.”
 
Yama did not reply.

 
“I think I am going to make a deal for some weapons,” he finished,
“some rather special weapons. So when you come after me, bring your
girlfriend along. If she likes what she sees, she may persuade you to switch
sides.”
 
Then he struck the trail and moved away through the night, whistling,
beneath a moon that was white and a moon that was golden.
 
* * * *

