The Philosophy of 
Mathematics
ISSN 2399-2883 (online)
ISSN 2514-3808 (print)
Ontology and 
the Foundations 
of Mathematics
Penelope Rush
of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108592505
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 194.176.167.34, on 27 Jan 2022 at 20:35:14, subject to the Cambridge Core terms

of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108592505
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 194.176.167.34, on 27 Jan 2022 at 20:35:14, subject to the Cambridge Core terms

Elements in the Philosophy of Mathematics
edited by
Penelope Rush
University of Tasmania
Stewart Shapiro
The Ohio State University
ONTOLOGY AND THE
FOUNDATIONS OF
MATHEMATICS
Talking Past Each Other
Penelope Rush
University of Tasmania
of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108592505
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 194.176.167.34, on 27 Jan 2022 at 20:35:14, subject to the Cambridge Core terms

University Printing House, Cambridge CB2 8BS, United Kingdom
One Liberty Plaza, 20th Floor, New York, NY 10006, USA
477 Williamstown Road, Port Melbourne, VIC 3207, Australia
314–321, 3rd Floor, Plot 3, Splendor Forum, Jasola District Centre,
New Delhi – 110025, India
103 Penang Road, #05–06/07, Visioncrest Commercial, Singapore 238467
Cambridge University Press is part of the University of Cambridge.
It furthers the University’s mission by disseminating knowledge in the pursuit of
education, learning, and research at the highest international levels of excellence.
www.cambridge.org
Information on this title: www.cambridge.org/9781108716932
DOI: 10.1017/9781108592505
© Penelope Rush 2022
This publication is in copyright. Subject to statutory exception
and to the provisions of relevant collective licensing agreements,
no reproduction of any part may take place without the written
permission of Cambridge University Press.
First published 2022
A catalogue record for this publication is available from the British Library.
ISBN 978-1-108-71693-2 Paperback
ISSN 2399-2883 (online)
ISSN 2514-3808 (print)
Cambridge University Press has no responsibility for the persistence or accuracy of
URLs for external or third-party internet websites referred to in this publication
and does not guarantee that any content on such websites is, or will remain,
accurate or appropriate.
of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108592505
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 194.176.167.34, on 27 Jan 2022 at 20:35:14, subject to the Cambridge Core terms

Ontology and the Foundations of Mathematics
Talking Past Each Other
Elements in the Philosophy of Mathematics
DOI: 10.1017/9781108592505
First published online: January 2022
Penelope Rush
University of Tasmania
Author for correspondence: Penelope Rush, penny.rush@outlook.com
Abstract: This Element looks at the problem of inter-translation between
mathematical realism and anti-realism and argues that so far as realism
is inter-translatable with anti-realism, there is a burden on realists to
show how their posited reality diﬀers from that of the anti-realists. It
also argues that an eﬀective defence of just such a diﬀerence needs
a commitment to the independence of mathematical reality, which in
turn involves a commitment to the ontological access problem – the
problem of how knowable mathematical truths are identiﬁable with
a reality independent of us as knowers. Speciﬁcally, if the only access
problem acknowledged is the epistemological problem – that is, the
problem of how we come to know mathematical truths – then nothing
is gained by the realist notion of an independent reality and in eﬀect,
nothing distinguishes realism from anti-realism in mathematics.
Keywords: realism, anti-realism, independence, inter-translatability, truth
© Penelope Rush 2022
ISBNs: 9781108716932 (PB), 9781108592505 (OC)
ISSNs: 2399-2883 (online), 2514-3808 (print)
of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108592505
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 194.176.167.34, on 27 Jan 2022 at 20:35:14, subject to the Cambridge Core terms

Contents
1 What Are We Talking About?
1
2 Inter-translatability
5
3 Two Access Problems
9
4 Independence
19
5 Justiﬁcation
33
Bibliography
45
of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108592505
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 194.176.167.34, on 27 Jan 2022 at 20:35:14, subject to the Cambridge Core terms

1 What Are We Talking About?
There is an age-old question running through the philosophy of mathematics:
are numbers (or any of the structures that mathematics studies) invented or
discovered?1 The primary focus of this Element will not be to cover or to
contribute to this debate (at least, not directly) but rather to focus on the question
itself, which, as we will see, is by no means as clear as it may at ﬁrst seem.
We will look at a number of core concepts and issues, all of which need to be
addressed in some way in order to even begin to understand what exactly we are
talking about – what exactly we are asking – when we posit the question in the
ﬁrst place.
This discussion could range over a great deal – far more than can be
addressed in an introductory Element such as this. Similarly, it could take
many possible assumptions or positions as its starting point. For example, it
could begin with the assumption that the question is fundamentally philosoph-
ical and so has not much to do with the actual practice of mathematics. Or, it
could look at the question, in the ﬁrst place, as primarily a question for linguis-
tics. It could take the question to be ethical – about what we value and why; or it
could situate the question as properly formal – perhaps one that should initially
be asked within the realm of, say, logical and mathematical symbols. The list
goes on. What we take as the initial range of the question, or where we begin
when we begin to try to understand it, will affect what we take as the main
concepts and issues with which it interacts.
I do not claim to have identiﬁed the only proper way to begin our investiga-
tion, but hope it will highlight its complexity and depth, and so the importance
of examining it in the ﬁrst place.
The initial focus here – what we might initially take the question to be about –
will be on the status of that which provides the foundations of mathematics as it
is practised, in particular as it is practised as true. An immediate point to note is
that we cannot survey all practising mathematicians to determine just how many
do indeed practise mathematics as though it is true; but it is safe to say that there
is enough interest in the question among practitioners of both mathematics and
the philosophy of mathematics, who accept that our usual inclination is to
believe in the truth of such claims as 2 + 2 = 4, to justify the focus on the
truth of mathematics taken here.
To push the point, the sort of truth generally ascribed to mathematical
statements is an especially trustworthy truth – scientiﬁc, logical, and
1 For an introduction to this introductory question, see www.youtube.com/watch?
v=ujvS2K06dg4&list=TLPQMTcwNjIwMjHV9PBJnA4ltA&index=4
1
Ontology and the Foundations of Mathematics
of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108592505
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 194.176.167.34, on 27 Jan 2022 at 20:35:14, subject to the Cambridge Core terms

mathematical truths are generally held in higher regard than, say, social or
sociological truths.
This focus will further narrow to the historically important and continuing
debate between two main positions on just what might constitute this truth,
namely ‘constructivism’ and ‘Platonism’. These positions within the philoso-
phy of mathematics roughly line up with what has commonly been called, in
other philosophical ﬁelds, ‘anti-realism’ and ‘realism’ respectively. In broad
strokes, the former takes the truth of mathematics to be constituted by human
activity, language, minds, and so on – that is to say, it takes the position that the
truth of mathematics largely depends on us. The latter takes the truth of
mathematics to be independent of humans – such that it is, as Michael Resnik
puts it (swapping out the word ‘logical’ with the word ‘mathematical’),
[t]he doctrine that statements attributing mathematical [author’s addition] . . .
properties or relationships . . . are true or false independently of our holding
them to be true, our psychology, our linguistic and inferential conventions, or
other facts about human beings. (Boghossian and Peacocke, p. 334)
Both these characterisations have their problems, and both have been con-
tested as to whether they are the best frameworks within which we can or should
characterise the differences between the two positions. So the central focus
here, within the focus on these two positions, will be on just how best to
understand and articulate their differences.
An immediate impact of the broad-brush characterisation we’ve just offered is
that each position so characterised comes with its own strengths and weaknesses
regarding the core concerns of the philosophy of mathematics. For anti-realism,
thought of as encompassing the idea that mathematical truth is constituted (or
constructed) by humans somehow, there is an immediate problem regarding the
strength of this truth – how, for instance, if we adopt this position, can we account
for the notion that the truth of mathematical statements is especially trustworthy
and somehow different to other apparently human-constructed or human-
dependent truths?
On the other hand, mathematical realism, thought of as encompassing the
idea that mathematical truth is broadly independent of humans, encounters an
immediate problem of access – for instance, how, if we adopt this position, can
we know that we’ve managed to discover the ‘real’ mathematical truths, as
opposed to, say, those we ﬁnd most useful to us or perhaps to a small set
determined by our own intellectual, biological functioning? Worse, how can
we know if we’re even close to discovering independent truth in an abstract ﬁeld
such as mathematics? If we’ve no way of accessing truth via empirical data,
tests or our basic senses, how can that truth be conﬁrmed or trusted?
2
Philosophy of Mathematics
of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108592505
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 194.176.167.34, on 27 Jan 2022 at 20:35:14, subject to the Cambridge Core terms

But each position thus characterised also has its own particular advantages.
Mathematical realism has the advantage of explaining, or at least articulating,
the sort of strong, trustworthy truth generally attributed to mathematical claims.
And, mathematical anti-realism has the advantage of explaining, or at least
articulating the way we access mathematical truths – after all, if that truth is in
essence our creation, all we need do is study relevant features of our own human
biology, mind, and so on to see how we arrive at what we’ve come to believe as
true in mathematics.
To better see why the relationship between these two positions is an important
question within the philosophy of mathematics, note that while much has been
written on the impacts of taking one or the other of realism or anti-realism
regarding the truth of mathematics, there is a clear way in which the two
positions themselves are, on closer inspection, quite difﬁcult to distinguish
from one another.
And so, our initial way into understanding the question itself runs quite
quickly up against a thorny problem: what do you, the constructivist (or, broadly
put, anti-realist), really mean when you ask whether mathematics is invented or
discovered, and what do you, the realist, really mean when you ask the same
thing? And how can we tell when we’ve understood each position as it would
understand itself?
Of course, it is important to note that I intend ‘constructivism’ (which I take
as broadly as possible here: i.e. as an instance of ‘anti-realism’ at large) and
‘realism’ to be cover terms for an immense array of particular positions within
each camp, many of which are, again, quite different from each other. And some
philosophers of mathematics would take this broad approach to be a mistake at
the outset.2 But the focus of this Element is not on separating the myriad speciﬁc
positions in the literature, but on what happens at the very beginning – on how
any one enquirer can (or cannot) understand the question of inquiry itself, and so
whether or not ‘the’ question can make any sense in the ﬁrst place.
Section 2 will focus on this conundrum – highlighting the extent to which the
two (broad-brushed) positions may in fact be unable to be distinguished, or to be
distinguished along the lines to which proponents on either side would agree.
This is a signiﬁcant problem: without agreed-on terms for the debate, the debate
is stopped before it begins.
Stewart Shapiro notes this (1997), arguing that non-revisionist, anti-realist
programs (i.e. programs that seek to retain and explain most of mathematics as it
stands) are inter-translatable with classical logic, or traditional mathematics
complete with its apparent realist commitments to numbers, sets and other
2 Thanks to an anonymous referee for highlighting this point.
3
Ontology and the Foundations of Mathematics
of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108592505
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 194.176.167.34, on 27 Jan 2022 at 20:35:14, subject to the Cambridge Core terms

mathematical things. That’s actually the way that anti-revisionist, anti-realist
programs work in the ﬁrst place – by translating apparently problematic number
(etc.) talk into talk of other, apparently less problematic stuff. But, as we’ll
shortly explore in more depth, this translation works both ways: so anytime
I like, I can equate your talk of mental constructions with my talk of numbers
and vice versa.
Shapiro then argues that the problems associated with each program are inter-
translatable also. So constructivism, for instance, ends up saddled with the same
problems regarding epistemological access as traditional realism. This is all due
to the fact that each non-revisionist, anti-realist program has to posit abstracts or
use the notion of ‘possibility’ in a semi-concrete sense. But, the reference to
semi-concrete abstract notions is as vexing a problem for the anti-realist as it is
for the realist. That is, there is as much an access problem for anti-realism as for
realism,
just
insofar
as
anti-realism
inter-translates
with
traditional
mathematics.
On the basis (mentioned earlier) that inter-translation works both ways, the
problems each position encounters run in the opposite direction also: that is, so
far as realism is inter-translatable with anti-realism, there is a burden on the
mathematical realist to show how their posited reality differs from that of the
anti-realist.
Ultimately, this Element argues that an effective defence of just such
a difference needs a commitment to the notion of ‘independence’ regarding
mathematical reality (or, at least a commitment to agree on what this might
mean), which in itself involves a commitment to what we’ll call the ‘onto-
logical’ access problem as a genuine problem – essentially, this is the problem
of how knowable mathematical truths are identiﬁable with a reality independent
of us as knowers.
Section 3 outlines two ways in which we might understand what such
‘access’ might mean and explores some of the ways in which ‘ontological’
access has been conﬂated with what should, I suggest, be identiﬁed as some-
thing
else
entirely,
namely
‘epistemological’
access.
Ontology
and
Epistemology are two well established ﬁelds of study within the philosophical
tradition. Broadly, the former deals with what is, and the latter with knowledge.
The hope is that mapping the boundaries and potentially shared terms of
Ontology and Epistemology along the potential division of constructivism
and realism helps tease out what we may really be debating when we ask the
question under investigation.
Section 3 speciﬁcally argues that if the ontological problem (recall, this is
identiﬁed here as the problem of how knowable mathematical truths are identi-
ﬁable with a reality independent of us as knowers) is defused, side-stepped or
4
Philosophy of Mathematics
of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108592505
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 194.176.167.34, on 27 Jan 2022 at 20:35:14, subject to the Cambridge Core terms

conﬂated with the ‘epistemological’ problem – that is, the problem of how we
come to know mathematical truths – then it appears that nothing is gained by the
realist notion of an independent reality and, in effect, nothing then distinguishes
realism from anti-realism (or constructivism) in mathematics. That is, if the
epistemological problem is the only playing ground for skirmishes between
realism and anti-realism in mathematics, then the problem of effectively distin-
guishing the two positions remains.
That problem is not small. It boils down to this: that the ‘what-is-perceived’
and ‘what-existed-prior-to-that-perception’ must (initially at least) be distin-
guishable from each other, then shown to be (at least reliably to be believed as)
one and the same when we ‘get it right’. This is the ontological access problem
for traditional (physical) realism and is precisely why such realism is the
sceptic’s favourite target. In the realist story, it is in the separability of inde-
pendent reality (or, in Fregean terms, ‘the referent’) from our constructions or
objects of belief, or our experiences of the ‘mode of presentation’, that the
strong sense of objectivity and justiﬁcation reside. The corresponding access
problem is about overcoming this separateness while nonetheless retaining
what is gained by that separateness itself.
Section 4 then examines how this all might help us agree on a notion of
‘independence’ able to effectively distinguish between the two sides of the
debate and so overcome the twin problems of their talking past one another and
their inter-translatability.
Section 5 argues that the notion of an independent mathematical reality will
meet similar inter-translatability problems as covered in earlier sections, unless
it does some sort of extra (or differentiable) work. This section argues that this
differentiable work needs an appeal to a certain notion of what it is to be justiﬁed
in mathematics.
The terrain here is very broad indeed, and is intended to be, as the Element is
a discussion of the very broad strokes in which we might situate various
positions regarding the foundations of mathematics, or better still with which
each such position may be distinguished along our very general understanding
of the initial question.
2 Inter-translatability
Looking at the ‘inter-translatability’ phenomenon in more detail, we return to
what Shapiro argued are the best of the anti-realist programs – that is, those that
seek to explain most of mathematics as it stands. To ﬂesh out the argument
a little more, note again that Shapiro argues that such programs involve at least
as many of the epistemic and semantic problems as are involved in realism:
5
Ontology and the Foundations of Mathematics
of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108592505
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 194.176.167.34, on 27 Jan 2022 at 20:35:14, subject to the Cambridge Core terms

In a sense the problems are equivalent – for example, a common maneuver
today is to introduce a ‘primitive’ such as a modal operator, in order to reduce
ontology. The proposal is to trade ontology for ideology. However in the
context at hand – mathematics – the ideology introduces epistemic problems
quite in line with the problems with realism. The epistemic difﬁculties with
realism are generated by the richness of mathematics itself. (p. 5)
Recall that the speciﬁc sort of realism that Shapiro (1997) defends is holistic,
which is why he does not address the ontological access problem from ﬁrst
principles, or ‘from without’ as it were.
Rather, his defence of his ontology of structures is via an argument extending
Wright’s notion of entitlement to the successor principle and thence to ﬁnite
cardinality structure and the natural number structure:
Wright argues that ‘Entitlement of cognitive project does not . . . extend to
matters of ontology’. At least in the case at hand, basic arithmetic, I would say
that it does. S [a generalized person interested in the nature of mathematics]
has reason to believe in the existence of the (ante rem) ﬁnite cardinality
structures, and also in the existence of the natural number structure. The
entitlement to the successor principle is a key element in the justiﬁcation for
the existence claim. (Shapiro, 2011, 146)
Wright’s notion of entitlement is a general one – very loosely put, it grants
justiﬁcation to a belief just so long as denying that belief would be irrational or
harmful to our overall life and our attempt to understand the world we
encounter.3 Shapiro (2011) gives a similarly holistic argument in which it is
argued that our ability to coherently discuss a mathematical structure is evi-
dence that it exists (p. 147).
In line with the equivalence argument presented at the beginning of this
section, this Element suggests that the difﬁculties generated by equivalence
itself and in turn by the sort of holistic realism that the equivalence argument
supports, are arguably greater than the difﬁculties generated by a more trad-
itional Platonism. Granted – the burden on the latter is both ontological and
epistemological. The burden on the former, however, is to show how the
ontology/ideology trade-off works in the realist’s favour, speciﬁcally how it
differentiates realism from anti-realism, or minimally, if perhaps an independ-
ent reality is stipulated, how that stipulation (given equivalence) avoids the
ontological access problem. On the other hand, insofar as the ontological
problem can be set aside, the burden on the holistic realist is then to show
how (given equivalence) the mathematical reality posited is any different from
the ideological universe of mathematical objects in anti-realism.
3 For more on this, see Wright (2004).
6
Philosophy of Mathematics
of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108592505
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 194.176.167.34, on 27 Jan 2022 at 20:35:14, subject to the Cambridge Core terms

That is, Shapiro has shown that denying the existence of mathematical
objects requires at least as much philosophical justiﬁcation as asserting it. But
to this we can add that asserting the holistic ante rem existence of mathematical
structures similarly requires just as much philosophical justiﬁcation as asserting
a more traditional Platonist position (i.e. both do, just insofar as they stipulate
the independence of those structures, encounter the ontological access prob-
lem), but that the latter has the added advantage of being more than an ideology/
ontology swap. That is, the latter retains an emphasis on the principal means by
which realism may be differentiated from anti-realism – the concept of inde-
pendence as a live, continuing issue, one that is unresolvable via inter-
translatability arguments. So long as the cat on the mat is taken to independently
exist, the best explanation of our corresponding belief that the cat is on the mat
is provided by an account in which the ontological access problem remains
acute: that is, one in which there is an inherent gap between what we know, how
we know, and what, independently, is so.
The argument here, then, in some more detail, begins where Shapiro seeks to
establish that an anti- realist who proposes to avoid a commitment to the
existence of abstract objects such as numbers, sets or structures, is ultimately
no better off – particularly on the epistemic front – than a realist who embraces
the notion that such objects actually exist.
Insofar as it challenges the anti-realist notion that mathematics is about no
more than linguistic or logical notions we are already familiar with, this argu-
ment is a powerful tool for the realist. But just so far as it challenges these anti-
realist notions it jeopardises the realist’s own proposed notion that mathematics
is about an actual rather than a possible reality, especially any kind of non-
derivative, independent realm.
The argument that Shapiro puts forward begins by showing that the anti-
realist programs he examines and the realist’s commitment to real abstract
objects are, in fact, equivalent. That is, he shows that ‘any insight that modalists
[the particular group of anti-realists to whom Shapiro directs his argument]
claim for their system can be immediately appropriated by realists and vice
versa.
Moreover, the epistemological problems get “translated” as well’ (p. 219).1
Very basically rendered, the argument compares a possible mathematical
realm (one built from a plural quantiﬁer, a contractibility quantiﬁer, or an
operator for logical possibility) with a real mathematical realm (of structures,
individual objects, or simply an independent reality). This comparison shows
that each is as problematic as the other.
For example, in ﬁctionalism, abstract objects – like sets and numbers – are
exchanged for a primitive notion of logical possibility (and uncountably many
7
Ontology and the Foundations of Mathematics
of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108592505
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 194.176.167.34, on 27 Jan 2022 at 20:35:14, subject to the Cambridge Core terms

points and regions; Shapiro, 1997, 223), but Shapiro notes that there are direct,
trivial translations from the ﬁctionalists’ language into the realists’ and vice
versa. The translation from realism to ﬁctionalism is simply a matter of inserting
modal operators in appropriate places, and perhaps conjoining axioms. For
example, the translation of a sentence (x) would be of the form ◊(alpha & (x)*)
where alpha is a conjunction of axioms from the background mathematical
theory, and (x)* is a variant of x. For the converse, simply replace possibility
with satisﬁability. A subformula of the form ‘phi is possible’ becomes ‘phi is
satisﬁable’. Modal structuralism is similarly tackled on page 229, Charles
Chihara’s ‘constructibility’ quantiﬁer is tackled on page 230, and George
Boolos’ plural quantiﬁcation is tackled on page 233. Boolos proposes plural
quantiﬁers as a way of interpreting second-order quantiﬁers – that is, instead
of reading these as saying ‘there is a class’ or ‘there is a property’, to read them
as saying something like ‘there are objects’ or ‘there are people’. But ‘here too
there are straightforward translations between the standard metalanguage,
with classes and no plurals, and the classless language with plural quantiﬁers’
(p. 234).
In short, as mentioned earlier, typically an anti-realist tries to replace abstract
entities (numbers, functions, set, etc.) in mathematics with talk of something
apparently more acceptable. But so long as such attempts also try to account for
all or most of mathematics as it is practised, they wind up having to quantify
over all of whatever they talk about (or quantify over); for example, they may
use a plural quantiﬁer, a constructibility quantiﬁer, or an operator for logical
possibility, or they may quantify over proofs. However, all of these are also
abstract objects, so we can ask all the same questions of these replacements as
we did of the realist’s numbers, structures, and so on. And this is just exactly
why we wind up with inter-translatability.
Given this situation, Shapiro concludes that we might as well opt for the real
realm. This is primarily because this option minimises the ‘ideology’ needed to
explain the realm in question (given that a real realm takes mathematics at face
value), is the ‘most perspicuous and natural’ interpretation and, not least,
explains why mathematics is done as though it is about independently real
objects.
This is an issue for these sorts of anti-revisionist programs, of course, because
whatever type of ‘mental constructions’ you might want to propose instead of
mathematical-type objects, you still wind up needing to talk of these directly
and, in comparably problematic ways, to account for mathematics as we know
it. Haim Gaifman (2012) makes the same point when he says that (potential anti-
realist) mathematicians ask questions about ‘the provability of a sentence’ or
‘the consistency of a theory’ as though such questions have deﬁnite answers.
8
Philosophy of Mathematics
of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108592505
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 194.176.167.34, on 27 Jan 2022 at 20:35:14, subject to the Cambridge Core terms

But then they’re talking about proof in just the same way that mathematical
realists talk about other abstract mathematical stuff like numbers or sets.
So if we try to reduce all number/set talk to talk of constructible or apparently
more accessible things like proofs, we don’t avoid talk of mathematical things;
in a sense, we just rename them.
I accept the arguments here and take it as true that modal anti-realism (where
‘modal anti-realism’ encompasses all the programs Shapiro reviews) is, in an
important sense, equivalent to ante rem structuralism.
But the arguments show more than this. Again, equivalence goes both ways.
Unless something more than a reduced ideology sets it apart from its anti-realist
counterparts, ante rem structuralism inherits the features of modal anti-realism,
including, for example, the particular burden of explaining why mathematics
can legitimately be taken at face value at all – how, for example, its objects are
still as bona ﬁde as any objects in the natural or physical world. And these sorts
of questions mean that the realist camp now also has to take on board precisely
what Shapiro hoped to avoid – an increased ideology.
So the proposed ‘trade off . . . between a vast ontology and an increased
ideology’ (Shapiro 1997, 218) has more ramiﬁcations than are at ﬁrst apparent.
The trade-off does, as Shapiro claims, mean that any possible reality inherits all
the problems of an actual reality, especially since a possible ontology is, in the
end, no smaller or less problematic than its real counterpart.
But the trade-off also means that a real or actual ontology is, for all intents and
purposes, equivalent to a possible ontology – unless something extra sets the
former apart from the latter – and so is not (without further argument) real in
quite the same way it intended, crucially including not as independent physical
reality. That is, it is not easy to see how such an actual reality is in any way
independent – either of the constructed or possible reality it is equivalent to or,
by extension, of the quantiﬁers and concepts from which a possible ontology is
derived.
3 Two Access Problems
In the introduction to his 1997 book, Shapiro outlines a number of desiderata for
a philosophy of mathematics. These begin with the assertion that mathematical
assertions ought to be taken literally, that is, ‘at face value’ (p. 3). This desider-
atum, for Shapiro, suggests realism in mathematics for two reasons. First,
mathematical assertions tend to talk about mathematical objects as though
they exist. The second is that scientiﬁc assertions tend to talk about scientiﬁc
objects as though they exist, and scientiﬁc language is effectively inseparable
from mathematical language.
9
Ontology and the Foundations of Mathematics
of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108592505
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 194.176.167.34, on 27 Jan 2022 at 20:35:14, subject to the Cambridge Core terms

Speciﬁcally, since model theoretic semantics applies to ordinary and scien-
tiﬁc language, the argument is that this same model theoretic semantics ought to
apply to mathematical language.
This means that the initial desideratum boils down to two separate desid-
erata. The ﬁrst – realism in ontology – arises from the fact that model
theoretic semantics has the singular terms of its language denoting objects
and the variables ranging over a domain of discourse. Taking mathematics at
face value, then, means taking mathematical objects to exist. The second –
realism in truth-value – arises from the fact that the model theoretic frame-
work attributes to each well-formed, meaningful sentence a determinate and
non-vacuous truth-value, either true or false. Thus, the primary requirement
that Shapiro places on his own account is ‘to develop an epistemology for
mathematics while maintaining the ontological and semantic commitments
[above]’ (p. 4).
Since then, Shapiro has reafﬁrmed this realism (2011, 130):
According to my ante rem structuralism, the subject-matter of a branch of
mathematics is a structure, or class of structures, that exist objectively,
independently of the community of mathematicians and scientists, their
minds, languages, forms of life, etc . . . So ante rem metaphysics of
mathematics.
Frege gave similar arguments for the existence of mathematical objects and
for the truth of mathematical theorems (see Linnebo (2018), section 2.1).
Frege’s argument points out that mathematical language seems to refer to
objects in much the same way that ordinary language does. This argument
rests on the notion that certain subject-predicate phrases in ordinary, or natural
language can only apparently be tested for truth or falsity – and perhaps can only
be understood at all if any given hearer or translator supposes that there is such
a subject to be found in the ‘real’ world, and that the properties of that subject
can be discovered through scientiﬁc or empirical investigation. For example,
the truth of a claim that ‘Dogs are four-legged’ can be investigated by referring
to actual dogs and their supposed properties. Frege points out that given a great
many mathematical claims have the same semantic structure (e.g. ‘Natural
numbers are divisible’), the burden should be on anyone insisting these two
types of claims are to be treated differently, rather than on anyone who treats
them similarly – that is, rather than on anyone who treats both as referring to
objects in the world to be investigated as to their supposed properties.
Of course, the hitch here is that the idea that we can ‘discover’ mathematical
truths in the same way that we can discover empirical or physical truths begs the
question – or the problem – of access.
10
Philosophy of Mathematics
of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108592505
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 194.176.167.34, on 27 Jan 2022 at 20:35:14, subject to the Cambridge Core terms

We’ve still no real answer to the question, ‘But how do we discover math-
ematical truths?’.
Note, though, that Frege (e.g. in his 1970 essay) separates the ‘mode of
presentation’ (aka the ‘sense’) whereby an individual or a community comes
to ‘see’ an object from the object itself (aka the ‘referent’). His famous example
notes that without such a distinction, identity claims such as ‘Hesperus is
Phosphorous’ would be rendered inexplicable. It seems fair to expect that,
given Frege’s argument has weight, a similar arrangement should hold for the
‘referring’ to mathematical objects.
Frege gives a nice example (also in his 1970 essay) explaining the roles of the
referent, the mode of presentation, and the ‘knowing’ human. His example is
a human looking at the moon through a telescope. Frege asks us to understand
the ‘mode of presentation’ here as that which lies between, or mediates the
subjective experience of that human and the moon itself. So the mode of
presentation, in this example, is what is provided by the telescope – linking
a subjective human experience to an objective, real moon.
This is important because Shapiro’s ﬁrst desideratum incorporates a robust
type of existence for mathematical reality – that is, the notion that the way in
which mathematicians take mathematical objects to exist can be understood as
the way in which we humans take objective reality to exist generally: that is, (at
least) as independent of ‘the community . . . their minds, languages, forms of
life, etc.’.
3.1 The Problem of the ‘Mode of Presentation’
Again, traditionally, the primary philosophical appeal of this sort of realism
corresponds directly to its primary problem, that is, the access problem.
According to MacBride (2008, 156, quoted in Shapiro (2011, 131)), the prob-
lem runs something as follows:
a face-value or realist interpretation of mathematics appears to make
a mystery of how mathematicians access truths about the mathematical
domain. To access them it appears that mathematicians must do the impos-
sible: they must transcend their own concrete natures to pass over to the
abstract domain.
But there is more than one way to interpret the access problem for realism.
Shapiro (2011, 132) interprets it thus:
When proposing a philosophy of mathematics, one must surely say some-
thing about epistemology. That is, one must indicate how it is that mathemat-
ics is known. This epistemology should dovetail with the metaphysics and
ontology of the presented view. If you say that mathematics is about ps, then
11
Ontology and the Foundations of Mathematics
of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108592505
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 194.176.167.34, on 27 Jan 2022 at 20:35:14, subject to the Cambridge Core terms

your epistemology should show how it is that mathematicians manage to
know things about these ps. An ontological realist has it that mathematics is
about a realm of abstract objects, places in ante rem structures . . . So an
advocate of such a view . . . should say something about how the mathemat-
ician comes to know things about places in ante rem structures. Hartry Field
correctly says that the realist must explain how it is that mathematicians
manage to have reliable beliefs about mathematical objects. Hence the access
problem.
But this interpretation, as we can see from noting Frege’s three-way distinc-
tion, actually contains more than one problem. There is, on the one hand, the
problem of accessing a reality the nature of which is as posited: real, objective,
abstract and independent. Call this the ontological problem. On the other hand,
there is the nature of our access itself: of our beliefs and knowledge of such
objects. Call this the epistemological problem. To return to the moon for
a moment: our telescope-viewing human could ask herself two questions.
One: is the moon itself an independently existing object with properties all of
its own, regardless of how it happens to appear to me? And two: can I rely on the
telescope and my own capabilities to provide me with sensible, coherent beliefs
about what is true of the moon itself?
The ontological problem takes seriously the notion that the status of the
posited reality as accessed and as simply there – that is, as part of our ontology –
is an important part of the realist’s position and so needs direct defence. Here,
this problem is generated as much (if not more) by the status of the posited
reality as independent as it is by its status as mathematical (abstract, seemingly
not apt for empirical investigation, etc.).
Note that this problem is still an access problem, but it focuses on the type of
thing we are supposed to access rather than on the mode of access itself: that is,
if the type of thing we are supposed to access is mathematical – independent of
ourselves, abstract, and so on – then knowing when we have actually accessed it
(as opposed, say, to some construction or projection of our own making or to
a moonish smear on a telescope’s lens) is the problem.
One typical objection or formulation of the ontological access problem runs
along these lines: if the posited realm is indeed real, we should be able to know
about it; but how could we possibly know about such a reality, one which is
independent, abstract, apparently acausal and objective? If no satisfactory
answer is found, so this argument goes, then we must conclude that that realm
is not real, or at least not in the speciﬁc way proposed (or, alternatively, that the
type of reality or non- reality it has is moot).
Of course, if the realist position on mathematical reality is already that it does
not actually exist as independent, abstract, objective and so on, or only possibly
12
Philosophy of Mathematics
of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108592505
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 194.176.167.34, on 27 Jan 2022 at 20:35:14, subject to the Cambridge Core terms

so exists (or that its actual reality or non-reality is moot), then this formulation
of the ontological access problem will not arise. But if a realist position does
incorporate a claim that mathematical reality is real in the speciﬁc way most
often associated with Platonism, that is, as independent, objective and abstract
(and so on), then that realist position is vulnerable to a version of the ontological
problem – just so long as its proponent wishes to retain or defend that claim.
On the other hand, there is the epistemological problem. This is what Shapiro
focuses on most in his cashing out of the access problem. The focus of the
epistemological problem is on how we can defend our belief that we know
truths or indeed anything about the mathematical realm posited.
This problem is addressed by showing that we can reasonably believe or
ought to believe in the existence of the type of reality posited. Shapiro (1997,
2011) sets out to answer this particular access problem. Regarding the onto-
logical access problem, he says (2011, 135):
The goal of my book was not to provide a deductive argument, from com-
monly accepted premises, whether mathematical or non-mathematical, to the
conclusion that ante rem structures exist and that we have the appropriate
‘access’ to them.
But arguably this approach emphasises the epistemological problem and sets
aside the component of the ontological problem which addresses whether or not
we know that what we experience (or intuit, or believe in as real, independent
and objective) is indeed what we may reasonably deduce it is. Without directly
addressing this problem, realist accounts run up against the problem of inter-
translatability and so ultimately carry with them a burden to defend the posited
reality as real, independent, objective and so on: that is, as precisely the sort of
thing Shapiro posits and the positing of which most characterises the realist
position in philosophy. But so long as such a reality is defended, the further
ontological problem – whether or not what we ‘see’ or access is what is (aside
from the end result of any of our means and methods of such ‘seeing’) – cannot
be set aside. This is why Frege’s distinction is important to a realist: the referent
itself is what is, and is apart from its mode of presentation – aka what we
reasonably believe is true.
The telescope-viewing human takes herself to reasonably believe that she
sees the moon: a real, independent subject that she can investigate. But she has
at her disposal only the apparatus of the telescope. She might ask whether her
faith in that apparatus and in what it tells her of what she believes is the moon
itself is reliable or trustworthy. This is the epistemological access problem.
Were she then to ask whether what she believes she is seeing – an independ-
ently, objectively real moon – is in fact what she is seeing, something that in fact
13
Ontology and the Foundations of Mathematics
of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108592505
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 194.176.167.34, on 27 Jan 2022 at 20:35:14, subject to the Cambridge Core terms

does exist apart from any and all of her endeavours to understand it, then she’d
be engaging with the ontological problem.
Hartry Field, in a discussion of Hilary Putnam’s view on the ontological
problem for realists regarding the mathematical realm, spells this out clearly:
In basic outline [for mathematics], the argument is this:
[ia] There is nothing in our inferential practice that could determine that our
term ‘set’ singles out the entire set theoretic universe V rather than a suitably
closed subset of V.
[ib] Even on the assumption that it singles out the whole set theoretic universe
V, there is nothing in our inferential practice that could determine that our
term [ε] singles out the membership relation E on Vas opposed to some other
relation on V that obeys the axioms we have laid down.
[ii] The indeterminacy in [ia] and [ib] is sufﬁcient to leave indeterminate
the truth value of typical undecidable sentences of set theory (Field 2001,
317).
This argument suggests that there is no way, akin to the empirical process by
which the morning star and the evening star (Hesperus and Phosphorous) were
identiﬁed as one and the same, that might decide which realm of mathematical
referents we should or do refer to, because there is no way of settling on which
‘modes of presentation’ that afford us ‘access’ to that referent.
As Field (2001, 334) puts it:
[T]here are lots of properties and relations that the mathematical objects in
this universe can stand in; and there isn’t a whole lot [at least not once we get
beyond a certain ﬁnite conception of natural numbers] to determine what we
should take our mathematical predicates to stand for, beyond that they make
the mathematical sentences we accept true . . . for example, whatever choice
we make for the size of the continuum (as long as it’s consistent with the rest
of our set theory), we can ﬁnd properties and relations for our set- theoretic
vocabulary to stand for that will make that choice true and the others false . . .
so the continuum could be aleph 23 or aleph 817.
Field (2001, 335) adds:
the ‘full blooded platonism’ of Balaguer . . . [says that there] isn’t just
a single universe of sets, but many different ones existing side-by-side:
some in which the continuum has size 23, some in which it has size 817, and
so on [for more on this, see Balaguer 1998]. Also, as we’ve seen, Putnam’s
argument has it that even a view on which there is a single universe of sets,
independent of the mind and existing prior to our probing, ultimately must
yield the same anti-objectivist consequence as do these other views: for
even if there is a single universe of pre-existing sets, there are multiple
relations on it that are candidates for what we mean by membership, so that
the effect of many universes is achievable in a single universe. ‘Multiple
14
Philosophy of Mathematics
of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108592505
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 194.176.167.34, on 27 Jan 2022 at 20:35:14, subject to the Cambridge Core terms

universe’ views and ‘mind-dependent objects’ views merely have the virtue
of making the anti-objectivist consequence manifest.
One more view with the same anti-objectivist consequence is the ﬁctionalist
view, mentioned in Section 2, in which there are no mathematical objects at all.
Again, this gives rise to the same limitation on objectivity: without a clear
defence of mathematical objects, separable from their ‘mode of presentation’,
the realist philosopher of mathematics cannot adequately address the onto-
logical access problem – that is, the problem of how we might see through the
mode of presentation to the thing in itself, as itself. But, as Field argues, without
a clear defence of mathematical objects as independently and objectively exist-
ing, then anything goes, so long as that ‘anything’ meets the requirements of
consistency (in a broad sense), though, of course, some ﬁctions are more useful
or beautiful than others.
Tangentially, Mount Everest has (at least) two names, ‘Chomolungma’ and
‘Sagarmatha’ (MEGS, 2020), reﬂecting two distinct epistemological experi-
ences of one and the same reality. And so our being able to understand that the
two names refer to the one mountain presents just the sort of identity claim
Frege was concerned to explain via his ‘mode of presentation’. The Putnam/
Field argument just presented suggests that we have no analogous ‘mode of
presentation’ (separable from the real referent itself) to explore when it comes to
mathematical referents.4
3.2 Why Realism?
One way to defend realism is to appeal to its capacity to minimise ideology and
to explain the practice of mathematicians and their beliefs. But, as is implicit in
Shapiro’s inter-translatability arguments discussed earlier, these aims can be
served as well by a belief in an independent reality as by a direct defence of the
existence of that reality itself. Given that the ontological problem does indeed
arise whenever an independently existing reality is posited, why posit such
a realm in the ﬁrst place?
Traditionally, the appeal of realism lies in the explanatory and justiﬁcatory
power of its proposed connection between what we know and what exists
independently of us. In essence, such a reality justiﬁes our beliefs about it
(presuming access is achieved) simply because, since it is not us, we know we
did not make it up, and we can hope we did not get our beliefs about it wrong.
The justiﬁcation provided by the traditional realist account of reality is not just
4 Interestingly, Mt Everest has recently been declared two feet taller than previously believed
(smithsonianmab.com, 10 December 2020), a result of China and Nepal’s ‘joint measuring’ of the
mountain.
15
Ontology and the Foundations of Mathematics
of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108592505
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 194.176.167.34, on 27 Jan 2022 at 20:35:14, subject to the Cambridge Core terms

of our practices and beliefs but of these practices and beliefs as independently
correct (as opposed to workable or justiﬁed on other, perhaps pragmatic,
perhaps deductive grounds.)
To anticipate: due to the inter-translatability of our belief in an independent
realm with its anti- realist counterparts, perhaps it is not in our belief or even in
our knowledge of such a realm, but in the particular sort of justiﬁcatory work
such an independent reality offers, that the principal gain of realism over other
accounts resides. There may be other gains, but these need to be defended
against inter-translatability – that is, to be shown to be distinctly realist advan-
tages, not also able to be claimed by anti-realist accounts.
It seems reasonable to propose that the work done by the positing of this type
of reality at least balances the problems it causes. That is, it is hard to see how
a position positing a Platonist mathematical reality is, in the end, any better off
than one which does not, without some direct utilisation and defence of the
reality in question. In fact, once we take into account the ontological problem
and the phenomenon of inter-translatability, then we can note that a realist’s
account of mathematical reality, if left as a largely undefended stipulation, not
only carries with it all of the problems of both realism and anti-realism, but it
does so without the principal gain traditionally associated with the Platonist
status of mathematical reality as genuinely independently existent.
For the sake of providing a simple shorthand concept to refer to the particular
status that mathematical realism might confer on mathematical reality,5 we can
look at a footnote in Benacerraf’s (1973) article on mathematical truth about his
causal theory for everyday objects (in this case, Hermione seeing a cat on
a mat):
I would like to avoid taking any stand on the cluster of issues in the philoso-
phy of mind or psychology concerning the nature of psychological states.
Any view in which Hermione can learn that the cat is on the mat by looking at
a real cat on a real mat will do for my purposes. If looking at a cat on a mat
puts Hermione into a state and you wish to call that state a physical, or
psychological, or even physiological state, I will not object so long as it is
understood that such a state, if it is in her state of knowledge, is causally
related in an appropriate way to the cat’s having been on the mat when she
looked. If there is no such state, then so much the worse for my view. (p. 412)
The direction of causality is important here. Benacerraf is at pains to note that
causality, while it may run from us to reality, also crucially runs from reality to
us. The existence of the cat causes our relevant knowledge or (to circumvent the
5 As well as some evidence that Benacerraf was concerned with both versions (ontological and
epistemological) of the access problem.
16
Philosophy of Mathematics
of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108592505
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 194.176.167.34, on 27 Jan 2022 at 20:35:14, subject to the Cambridge Core terms

issues surrounding the notion of causality) our relevant knowledge depends on
the existence of the cat. Whatever it is that our knowledge might cause (or that
depends on our knowledge) – say the physical or physiological state Hermione
is in (incorporating the perceptual image of the cat, the belief that the cat is truly,
independently there, etc.) – this has to be ‘related in an appropriate way’ to the
actual cat. If the cat independently, objectively exists, then our beliefs about it
are justiﬁed in a way in which they are not if it does not.
The analogous problem for Platonism is not in showing how we can reason-
ably believe that mathematical reality exists but in showing or arguing that if it
does exist, then our beliefs about it are justiﬁed in a particular way and that this
particular type of justiﬁcation is worth retaining and defending in our account.
Note that a traditional realist about the cat on the mat would hold that
ordinary physical objects have an existence independent of our own – that
they exist prior to and separate from us, and so are not dependent on us. But,
in order to defend the traditional realist justiﬁcation of our beliefs about these
sorts of objects, such a realist needs to show (at least) that what we ‘perceive’ as
physical reality is in fact, or in some sense, the same reality that existed prior to,
or independent of our perception of it, or again, that such a notion of justiﬁcation
is worth retaining and defending – that is, balances or outweighs the problem it
brings along with it.
As mentioned earlier, this problem is not small.
If the independent reality posited by the realist is ultimately inseparable or
indistinguishable from our perception (or knowledge or belief) of it, then in
turn, the realist account has little to distinguish it from an anti-realist one. This is
why the ontological problem of access remains and should remain a real one for
the realist. In short, mathematical realists need to underline the role of the
actual, independent cat on the mat: despite its signiﬁcant attendant problem,
perhaps the sort of realism in which it is the cat itself that justiﬁes (perhaps
among other things) is the sort – likely the only sort – that can overcome the
inter-translatability problem.
3.3 The Caesar Problem
Another part of Shapiro’s main argument from his 1997 book, and indeed the
main sort of argument generally given for the prioritising of some version of the
epistemological access problem over the ontological access problem, is that
the so-called ‘Caesar problem’ is not a real problem for mathematical realism.
In short, the Caesar problem is a more targeted version of Frege’s identity
problem. It asks precisely what the real or original objects of mathematics are
and how can these be identiﬁed, speciﬁcally, how numbers can be distinguished
17
Ontology and the Foundations of Mathematics
of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108592505
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 194.176.167.34, on 27 Jan 2022 at 20:35:14, subject to the Cambridge Core terms

from any other kinds of object, such as the object that is Julius Caesar. Since
there is no ‘in principle’ way of deciding between the various candidates, it is
tempting to conclude with Benacerraf (see Benacerraf (1965)) that the singular
terms of mathematical language do not denote objects at all, at least nothing
akin to ordinary or scientiﬁc objects. Shapiro (1997) argues that the acceptabil-
ity of this conclusion ‘depends on what it is to be an object . . . on what sort of
questions can be legitimately asked about objects and what sort of questions
have determinate answers waiting to be discovered’ (p. 5).
Shapiro’s argument says that there is no real fact determining the matter of
whether the places of a structure and other objects are identiﬁable, or
whether the places of two different structures are identiﬁable; so the only
questions of identity with a determinate answer are those asked within the
context of the single structure. That is, there is no determinate answer to the
question, ‘Is the 2 of the natural numbers identiﬁable with the 2 of the real
numbers?’, but there is a determinate answer to the question, ‘Is the 2 of the
natural numbers identiﬁable with the 4 of the natural numbers?’. So whether
or not the places of the natural number structure exist as objects in the
universe, or existed as objects before we identiﬁed them as such, is a non-
question.
This has the consequence that our identiﬁcation or ‘discovery’ of mathemat-
ical structures may or may not be a discovery or identiﬁcation of objects that
existed previous to whatever procedure enabled it. But this means that the
structures of Shapiro’s structuralism are either entirely new objects whose
existence depends on the various epistemic routes by which they are encoun-
tered, in which case their inter-translatability with anti-realist objects under-
mines their status as independent; or are some other sort of reality which is
unable to be identiﬁed with any unique realm of real, pre-existing mathematical
objects. In this case further argument is needed to defend the stipulation of such
a mathematical realm and its relevance to the epistemologically accessible
structures.
To recap: It seems that one of the best accounts we have of the independent
reality of an independent mathematical realm – Shapiro’s structuralism – can
address the epistemological access problem only, so perhaps we have to set the
ontological problem to one side.6 It remains unclear just what structures are and
how such things can be said to occupy a place in the realm of independent,
objective reality.
6 At least insofar as it seeks to go beyond criterion 4, in Hellman and Shapiro (2019, 54). But see
their p. 54 for an argument that pushes the ontological problem up a level – that is, from the
ontological problem of the existence of set-theoretic structures to ante rem structures.
18
Philosophy of Mathematics
of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108592505
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 194.176.167.34, on 27 Jan 2022 at 20:35:14, subject to the Cambridge Core terms

4 Independence
It seems that the strongest sort of independence that we can attribute to
mathematical structures – the ‘ante rem’ existence of structures – may not, in
the end, do enough explanatory or justiﬁcatory work to balance the ﬁrst
principles, asked from the ‘outside-in’ ontological problem it encounters.
That is, ‘ante rem’ structures cannot serve the realist desideratum outlined in
Section 3 without further defence – that is, without further defence for the
relevance and role of the independence claim itself and without acknowledging
the ontological access problem it encounters.
In particular, the notion of ‘ante rem’ existence does not settle traditional
realist problems, such as the various offshoots of Benacerraf’s problem. As we
saw earlier, these most notably include problems of reference and correctness:
for instance, the problem of showing that mathematical names and formalisms
correctly correspond to or ‘pick out’ their genuine counterparts in the independ-
ently existing mathematical realm, if these counterparts are, as stipulated,
indeed independent of their instances.
4.1 Traditional Ante Rem Independence
In his reworking of the structuralist slogan ‘that mathematical objects are places
in structures’, Shapiro points out that there is an intuitive difference between an
object and the place or space it occupies. An object is an ‘ofﬁce-holder’, and the
place in a structure that object might occupy is an ofﬁce. The intuition that these
are indeed two separate items boils down, for Shapiro, to a distinction in
linguistic practice, depending on where (or on what) your focus lies.
For Shapiro, the slogan ‘mathematical objects are places in structures’ is to
be interpreted from the ‘places-are-objects’ perspective. So when the struc-
turalist says that sets are objects, he means that each place in the set theoretic
structure is an object – at least grammatically and at most literally.
Arithmetic, then, is about the natural number structure, and its domain of
discourse consists of the places in this structure. The same goes for the other
non-algebraic ﬁelds, such as real and complex analysis, Euclidean geometry,
and perhaps set theory (p. 89).
This distinction is important to Shapiro’s account for a number of reasons,
one of which is the articulation of his particular realism, particularly to his claim
that structures are indeed ‘ante rem’. That is, Shapiro’s realism takes the
‘places-are-ofﬁces’ perspective literally. For Shapiro, ‘bona ﬁde singular
terms, like “Vice-President,” “short-stop,” and “2,” denote bona ﬁde objects’
(p. 83). Likewise: ‘structures exist whether or not they are exempliﬁed in
a nonstructural realm’ (p. 89).
19
Ontology and the Foundations of Mathematics
of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108592505
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 194.176.167.34, on 27 Jan 2022 at 20:35:14, subject to the Cambridge Core terms

Another reason that this particular distinction is important to Shapiro’s
account is that he sees it as enabling his program both to commit to numbers
as objects and to resolve (or, more accurately, to resign) Frege’s ‘Caesar
problem’ via ontological, speciﬁcally interstructural relativity.7
This second reason will be dealt with in some depth later, but is worth
touching upon now. Recall that, in a nutshell, the Caesar problem asks how
numbers can be objects (as Frege argued they were) when, to repeat an earlier
point, it seems that there is no way in principle of either distinguishing between
or identifying numbers and any other of their modes of presentation, nor indeed
of any other kind of object (recall the moon and telescope example presented in
Section 3).
Shapiro’s solution uses the distinction between the ‘places-are-ofﬁces’ and
the ‘places-are-objects’ perspectives by arguing that each perspective creates its
own context for these kinds of identity questions, and it is only within the
conﬁnes of one of these contexts at any one time that such questions can even
make sense.
For instance, from the ‘places-are-objects’ perspective, we may ask whether
or not the object ‘2’ is the same or different from the object ‘4’. And because this
question is asked within the conﬁnes of only one of the two possible perspec-
tives, we may expect to discover a deﬁnite answer. It is determinate, Shapiro
argues, that ‘2’ is identical to ‘2’ and not to ‘4’. But he adds:
[I]t makes no sense to pursue the identity between a place in the natural
number structure and some other object, expecting there to be a fact of the
matter. Identity between natural numbers is determinate; identity between
numbers and other sorts of objects is not, and neither is identity between
numbers and the positions of other structures (p. 79).
That is, these latter questions, rather than staying within the conﬁnes of only
one or the other of the two perspectives, commit the error of taking both
perspectives at once – of trying to compare their different foci within one
question. Asking whether ‘the shortstop is Ozzie Smith’ (p. 79) commits
a similar mixing of perspectives, or crossing of contexts. Shapiro argues that
in this case the person and the position share no criteria by which to establish or
reject their identity. Of course, Ozzie Smith can take the position of shortstop
and so, in this sense, ‘be’ that position; but according to Shapiro, this is not
a question of identity. And it is in just this same way – that Ozzie Smith can be
the shortstop, but can neither be nor not be identical to the shortstop – that Julius
7 Again, though, see Hellman and Shapiro (2019, 54) for a summary of a higher-level distinction
between set-theoretic structures themselves, based on existence criteria for the ante rem structures
they may instantiate.
20
Philosophy of Mathematics
of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108592505
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 194.176.167.34, on 27 Jan 2022 at 20:35:14, subject to the Cambridge Core terms

Caesar can be ‘2’, but is neither identical nor non-identical to ‘2’. Thus,
Shapiro’s solution to the Caesar problem is effectively to ban the question it
asks – at the level of ofﬁces and set-theoretic structures.
Arguably, though, the same problem arises at the higher level wherein we
may wish to ask which set-theoretic structures exemplify which ante rem
structures and how to identify or distinguish between the various cases of the
latter themselves.8 For example, questions, such as Cantor’s,9 about the ‘true’ or
‘real’ nature of inﬁnity arguably rely on a separation between perspectives at the
most fundamental level of mathematics: we have (at least) two notions of
inﬁnity – that which we understand as ‘counting’ (i.e. the natural numbers – I,
2, 3, . . . etc.), and that which we understand as somehow in-between each of our
numbers (the real numbers – 1.00001, 1.00002, etc.). How are we to decide
whether questions about the relationship between these (e.g. Cantor’s theorem)
mix perspectives or whether they do not?
Or, perhaps a better example, should we understand the notion of ‘set’ as
a simple fundamental akin to ‘any bunch of stuff’ (as does naïve set theory), or
should we constrain the notion of ‘set’ to that which we can somehow charac-
terise (as Fefermen’s predicative set theory,10 or Russell’s type theory11).
Perhaps questions of identity like these that (even potentially) mix perspec-
tives ‘do not have deﬁnitive answers, and they do not need them’ (p. 80).
This solution though, in order to be consistent, has to apply to questions of
identity between different structures as well. This is because the places of one
structure can be the placeholders of another, in the same way that Ozzie Smith
can be the shortstop.
The argument here (presented more fully below) is that this particular
application of a general ban on mixing perspectives threatens a realist solution
to the Caesar problem. To anticipate, there is something intuitively quite
different between asking whether Julius Caesar is identical to the real number
2 and asking whether the natural number 2 is identical to the real number 2 (also
again, at the higher level offered in Hellman and Shapiro (2019), it equally
seems that there is something intuitively different about identity questions
between ante rem structures themselves, and those within particular structures
exemplifying them – see p. 49). The latter sort of question is not so easily
dismissed as nonsensical or wholly indeterminate.
8 For more on this, see Andrew David Irvine and Harry Deutsch, ‘Russell’s Paradox’, The Stanford
Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Spring 2021 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), https://plato
.stanford.edu/archives/spr2021/entries/russell-paradox.
9 See https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/settheory-alternative.
10 See https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/set-theory-constructive/#PreConSetThe.
11 See https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/type-theory.
21
Ontology and the Foundations of Mathematics
of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108592505
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 194.176.167.34, on 27 Jan 2022 at 20:35:14, subject to the Cambridge Core terms

The important point for now though is that, from what we have looked at so
far, it can be argued that the nature or degree of independence that Shapiro wants
for structures is a signiﬁcant one. For Shapiro, taking the ‘places-are-ofﬁces’
perspective literally means that structures exist before and apart from any non-
structural exempliﬁcation in any realm whatsoever (p. 75).
But this could mean a couple of different things. It might mean that the
existence of structures is an existence that is independent of the theories –
mathematical or otherwise – that we have about them. It might also mean that
their existence is independent of both the act (since they exist before exempliﬁ-
cation) and objects (since they exist apart from any exempliﬁcation) of our
comprehension or understanding.
The beneﬁts of an ante rem structuralism, then, include ‘[the fact that this
kind of structuralism is] the most perspicuous and least artiﬁcial . . . It comes
closest to capturing how mathematical theories are conceived’ (p. 90). But we
could argue that, given both the literal interpretation of the ‘places- are-ofﬁces’
perspective, and the intuitive difference between the Caesar problem and that of
differentiating pre-existing mathematical objects (or, indeed, ante rem struc-
tures) from one another, this claim only holds provided that by ‘ante rem
structuralism’ Shapiro means a structuralism which includes both types of
independence outlined earlier in this section.
Even if this proviso is granted, though, and we conclude that the most
perspicuous structuralism posits structures with this degree of independence,
there still remains the question of how to accommodate it in a structuralist or
realist account.
4.2 Independence in Mathematics
The notion of ‘independence’, much like that of ‘objectivity’, is often presumed
understood for a given realm of discourse, but rarely explicated beyond a few
well-known slogans, such as that appealed to in Resnik’s formulation, and
(Øystein, 2018, section 3.2):
Independence says that mathematical objects, if there are any, are independ-
ent of intelligent agents and their language, thought and practices.
Taken as it stands, though, this characterisation invites an inter-translatability
problem all of its own – just one that occurs yet another level up from those
we’ve been exploring. Such slogans around the notion of independence do little
to distinguish a realist from an anti-realist account of mathematics. To see this,
we can refer to Wright’s characterisation of objectivity (in his (1992)), which he
explicitly seeks to render an acceptable, metaphysically neutral account of
22
Philosophy of Mathematics
of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108592505
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 194.176.167.34, on 27 Jan 2022 at 20:35:14, subject to the Cambridge Core terms

objectivity for any given realm – that is, Wright proposes a sound, thoughtful,
and insightful account of objectivity that both the realist and the anti-realist can,
he hopes, agree on. But I would argue that this only pushes the problem of
‘inter-translatability’ another level above that we’ve already encountered.
Similarly, a notion of independence, such as that appealed to earlier, insofar
as it can be encompassed by both an anti-realist and a realist account of
mathematical reality, faces the same problem. If we are to have a thorough, in-
depth, and instructive conversation about the status of mathematical reality, we
need some way to distinguish the two primary positions one can take here, such
that each does not simply and easily translate to the other. (Of course, the ﬂip
side of this desideratum is that such a conversation cannot be had unless there is
a clear, shared language in which it can be conducted – this is the tightrope on
which we balance.)
An example here is Wright’s ﬁrst criterion for objectivity, ‘epistemic con-
straint’ (Shapiro, 2000a, 357). A realist position embracing epistemic constraint
effectively lines up with the realist position which adopts ‘real’ to avoid
ideology, yet whose account is constrained by what is possible given by
classical logic and widely accepted mathematics. Epistemic constraint for
a discourse is deﬁned thus: ‘A discourse is epistemically constrained if it is
not possible for there to be unknowable truths in the discourse’ (Shapiro, 2000a,
357). Were a position to grant the existence of unknowable truths, this would
prima facie distinguish it from any anti-realist counterparts, in the same way
that a position stipulating that even known ‘truth’ goes beyond whatever it is
that is constrained by any particular method, means, ability, and so on by which
we come to know it is prima facie distinct from one simply allowing the proper
translation from truth to ‘possibly knowable truth’. But often, the stipulation of
such ‘transcendent’ truth itself leaves the realm of any ‘shared language’ in
which the existence of such a thing can be debated.
A key point of this Element is that nowhere is this conundrum more acute
than in the realm of discourse regarding mathematical truth, given the Field/
Putnam underdetermination touched on in Section 3. In the mathematical realm,
it seems we feel we have fewer ‘hooks’ tying our methods and means of
knowing than we do in the physical, or at least the middle-sized portion of the
physical in which we can collect empirical data to attest to the reasonableness of
such claims as that there really is a cat on the mat. We can, for instance, attest to
object permanence regarding the cat (provided he stays on the mat when our
backs are turned) and to shareable, empirically testable data establishing his
real, objective existence. But mathematics apparently lacks such hooks, and
without such hooks, the distinction between the object of knowledge and the
object itself seems more problematic.
23
Ontology and the Foundations of Mathematics
of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108592505
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 194.176.167.34, on 27 Jan 2022 at 20:35:14, subject to the Cambridge Core terms

4.3 Who Cares?
One response to the inter-translatability problem is, essentially: who cares? We can
be either realist or not without much changing at all (is the thought). Interestingly,
Shapiro and Gaifman take inter- translatability to be a reason to accept realism
(because at least then you preserve something of the sense that mathematics is
objective, and you seem to be capturing the way mathematicians actually do
maths). But Field (and others) have taken the same sort of argument to be
a reason to accept anti-realism/constructivism (because, if anything goes, nothing
is actually objective here, and pretending so just creates a burden we don’t need).
So this is interesting – we have a situation with mathematics that we don’t
have (at least not obviously) elsewhere: mathematical deﬁnitions, relations, and
properties seem to so wholly circumscribe, or even in some sense be what they
are about, that going on to offer some further description (say, these are actually
proofs, or these are actually structures, objects, possibilities, or whatever) can
just seem a little beside the point.
On the other hand, there’s another response, essentially: we should care, there
is much at stake. Often this feeling is put down to the sense that there is
a determinate answer to our mathematical questions: if anything is objective,
mathematics is. We must have a good account of what that objectivity actually
amounts to, because mathematics is just (objectively) true.
A mathematical realist, remember, is someone who thinks mathematical
structures, numbers, sets, or whatever your poison, exists. So, again, perhaps
what is at stake for a mathematical realist is existence, and not just any exist-
ence, but independent existence; that is, the sort of reality touted is the sort that
is (at least as much as anything is) regardless of whether we – that is any
human – is, was, or would be around to discover it. But this means that what’s at
stake for a realist then (well, ok, one conception which is interesting (to me) to
imagine) is not objectivity as such, but objectivity as a result of, or perhaps in
some way because of independent existence.
The trouble with, and the interest in this particular thought is that – many
philosophers throw up their hands at this point – this is what Hume dispara-
gingly called metaphysics. It’s beyond Kant’s transcendental categories: it’s
being theological and mystical and just somehow plain silly. Existence that
independent is (it seems) beyond any effective control – past any means we
might have of either conﬁrming or denying knowledge of it or any interaction
with it at all – so the anti- metaphysics claims tend to go.
And, yes, metaphysics is weird and, as touched on here, it’s hard enough to
sensibly talk about the idea that ordinary physical stuff might have this sort of
independent existence (let’s focus on middle-sized stuff such as the cat on the
24
Philosophy of Mathematics
of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108592505
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 194.176.167.34, on 27 Jan 2022 at 20:35:14, subject to the Cambridge Core terms

mat, to dodge quantum questions for the minute). But it gets extra interesting
when you try it out with mathematical stuff. Mathematical reality, remember, is
(in some sense) ‘wholly determined’ by whatever makes the axioms true – that’s
it. There is, so far as we know, no ‘more’ to this stuff than that. There are ways
we can talk about physical stuff to try to make sense of the idea of independent
existence there; appeals, say, to our perspective or our acquaintance with
whatever makes physical stuff whatever it is – the idea that somehow there’s
maybe more to the story than we know or can know, because, after all, we’re not
it and we see things a certain way, constrained by our own physical limitations,
and so on.
But, when it comes to mathematical stuff – so far as we know, there’s
nowhere (or barely anywhere) to go. We can’t say there’s somehow more
beyond our perspective (whatever that might be) of mathematical objects – or
our proofs and our axioms; in a very real sense there is no more to the number 4
than the sum of 1 and 3 (and the product of 2 and 2, etc.).
I think this sort of weirdness – the strange character of mathematical abstract
stuff as compared with other abstract stuff – is why a lot of modern-day
philosophers of mathematics turn the original thought about independent exist-
ence being what’s at stake upside down. Rather than having what’s at stake
being the way in which objectivity comes from independent reality, they retreat
back to objectivity itself and then bring independent existence back into the
story (if they do at all) by incorporating these weird metaphysical ideas into the
notion and criteria of ‘objectivity’ or ‘real’ and so on, and so they wind up with
something that effectively says ‘independent reality comes from objectivity – or
at least from an entitlement to speak, believe, and act as if the mathematical
realm were objective, real’, and so on.
So a good majority agree with Gaifman when he says: if we think ques-
tions about mathematics have a ‘factually meaningful’ answer (independ-
ently of whether or not we can ﬁnd it out), then we’re ‘realists’ about
mathematics (Gaifman, 2012). Since most mathematicians do work (in
something like) this way, they are (or are as good as) ‘realists’ in this
sense. And as we’ve seen, a lot of what we’ve called anti-realist positions
in mathematics want to retain mathematics as it stands, or to account for it as
it is practised (rather than to revise it), and, in this sense, they can be aligned
with realism too.
So Gaifman (and a lot of modern philosophers with him) have the idea that if
we have to talk of existence at all, it is best characterised as something like this:
if you think there’s a yes-or-no answer to a question about something (inde-
pendently of whether we can ﬁnd it out or not), you think that thing independ-
ently exists.
25
Ontology and the Foundations of Mathematics
of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108592505
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 194.176.167.34, on 27 Jan 2022 at 20:35:14, subject to the Cambridge Core terms

The thing that bothers/interests me here is: is this sort of idea all there really is
to thinking something exists, or (if we dodge the notion of existence for
a minute) is this all there is to the realist’s idea of an ‘independent’ way things
are or ‘what it is for something to be (independently) the case’? Surely this is not
what a realist intends (or what all versions of realism boil down to). What
happened to metaphysics? It seems it’s been swallowed up by a shareable or
neutral notion of objectivity.
But what if we still feel there’s more to what’s at stake in the original debate
than whether we believe there’s a yes-or-no answer to mathematical questions
independently of our ability to ﬁnd them? Well then, again, this is the tightrope
we walk – metaphysics sneaks back in.
Why might we want to invite metaphysics back to the table? Well, let’s look
again at what might be going on here. Gaifman says meaning for the realist has
to do with the notion of a determinate answer: he starts with that notion just
because he takes it to be more primitive and easily understood than weird things
like existence or objects – remember, for Gaifman ‘a factually meaningful
question is a question that has a determinate answer, which is independent of
our knowing it or our abilities to ﬁnd it’ (p. 481)
But, as we’ve seen, there’s nothing stopping a ﬁctionalist or constructivist
thinking there may be mathematical truths independent of our knowing them or
being able to ﬁnd them (perhaps we could in principle, or, if we were inﬁnite,
but their point can still stand in this case – maths can still be about non-existent,
non-independent things)
So there’s a collection of questions for which anti-realists and realists agree
there is an answer independent of our ability to ﬁnd it (supposing for a minute
that these are just questions asked within the main body of mathematics as
practised); but, if this is all there is to thinking something independently exists,
then all realists can be read as anti-realists or all anti-realists can be read as
realists. Again, there is nothing to distinguish a realist stance about these
questions from one where the answer is understood as or argued to be dependent
on our (possibly) knowing it and our abilities to ﬁnd it. I say (possible)
constructible proof, you say independent realm – it doesn’t really matter at
all, and methodologically it need make no difference. We are back to inter-
translatability again.
And, this may mean that ‘independence’, if it’s taken as something more
than this – that is, more than as what can be translated as ‘real’, ‘objective’,
and so on, according to a set of criteria, acceptable to realism and anti-realism
alike, there is a risk that this ‘extra’ or ‘over and above’ notion of independ-
ence might be seen as a sort of ‘by the way’ add-on; a bit ad hoc. Indeed, for
Gaifman, if something like Hilbert’s programme (whose goal, very brieﬂy
26
Philosophy of Mathematics
of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108592505
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 194.176.167.34, on 27 Jan 2022 at 20:35:14, subject to the Cambridge Core terms

stated, was to prove that the system in which we ask mathematical questions
is consistent and that every such question will have a determinate (yes-or-no)
answer) was actually accomplished – that is, if ‘the mathematician could . . .
apply “true” and “false” across the board, [then] conjectures arising in
mathematical practice are true if they can be proved, false if they can be
refuted, and it is either one or the other. The appeal to ﬁnitist reasoning is
needed in order to guarantee consistency and base mathematics on ﬁrm
foundations. But once this is done, the problem of mathematical realism
becomes moot’ (p. 497).
But if you do want to resist this situation, or want to bring metaphysics back
in somehow, or want to restipulate a separate or prior role for independence and
existence – if you think inter-translatable objectivity is not all there is to
thinking (mathematical) somethings exist, you’re going to ﬁnd it hard to express
this in any clear way that’s effectively different from what Gaifman says. This is
because, in a way, an appeal to objectivity as characterised by bivalence does no
more, and a lot less, than does an appeal to the Wrightian objectivity mentioned
in Section 4.2.
Appealing to bivalence shifts the emphasis. Gaifman can still talk of inde-
pendent existence, that is, just by adding that what it strictly meant (or what it
can be reduced to) is this notion of an objective answer to a question. And, yes,
on the whole, realists do agree that there being an independent yes–or-no
answer is what they meant, or it’s part of it somehow; but some may mean
more, and it seems, in this case, all they can do is lamely add ‘but I actually
meant something more than that too’. it seems that the only way you can say so
is to jump up and down a lot. This is because we’ve now got a weird kind of
deeper inter-translation going on – your ‘independent existence’ is translatable
(or reducible) to my ‘objective answer’, and vice versa. Saying ‘well, we
wanted the objectivity to depend on the independent existence, not the other
way around’ achieves very little, because so long as these concepts are tied to
objectivity at all, it doesn’t really matter which depends on what – we can all be
construed as saying the same thing, just with different emphasis.
4.4 What Is the Case?
There is another option, though, and this is for mathematical realists to try to
explicitly ‘write in’ to their account what exactly they meant by there being
‘something else’ involved.
An initially appealing option here might be to somehow ﬁgure out a way of
spelling out the way mathematical reality is more, perhaps by drawing analogies
with physical stuff, or perhaps in some other way.
27
Ontology and the Foundations of Mathematics
of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108592505
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 194.176.167.34, on 27 Jan 2022 at 20:35:14, subject to the Cambridge Core terms

Carrie Jenkins gives a thoughtful picture outlining one way in which whether
or not you accept bivalence across a given domain can be inﬂuenced by whether
or not you are realist about that realm – but acceptance or rejection of bivalence
is not by itself at issue. For Jenkins, what’s at issue is rather the idea that ‘it is no
part of what it is for p to be the case that our mental lives be a certain way’
(Jenkins 2005, 200).
Jenkins has had a good go at spelling things out this way. First, she casts the
whole debate so that it’s not necessarily about existence (per se) or objects
(per se) nor about any particular characterisation of an independent realm or
reality or what have you, but just about the question of what it is for (something)
to be the case.
So on Jenkin’s account, we have anti-realism (for a given area) characterised
as claiming that something’s being the case (or not being the case) in this area
depends in some way or other on humans (or ideal extensions of humans) –
speciﬁcally on humans’ mental states (according to Jenkins), but in principle, it
could be on any sort of thing we tie to us – to our own ‘being the case’.
So then, realism about an area (for Jenkins) is the idea that it is no part of
humanness (speciﬁcally our mental lives or states being a certain way) that
something is the case (or is not the case) in this area. You can still put this in
more commonly used parlance; for example, ‘what something essentially is or
what something essentially is not’.
I quite like this characterisation (Jenkins calls it ‘essential realism’) – it
shows how the difference between realism and anti-realism need not come
down to whether or not we posit existing (in some standard sense of that word)
objects, or an eternal, acausal, or abstract realm (which realists do often get
landed with). This seems right, especially when we remember that the realist
attitude is one of potential discovery of the way things are; so, in a way,
deciding beforehand that the stuff we might discover is such and such a way
(including eternal, abstract, meeting (our human) criteria for existence, being
an object, or any such thing) seems a bit contrary to a central motivation of
realism. Having just independence as what’s at issue, with the difference
between realism and anti- realism expressed in a Jenkinsy way, seems quite
nice to me.
But again, if that’s all we say, how will this make any practical difference
between realism and anti-realism? How, by saying mathematical stuff is ‘essen-
tially independent’, do we say anything non- translatable into the opposite
position? I think, ultimately, Jenkins’ characterisation won’t work – at least
for mathematics – unless it is supplemented somehow: that is, unless something
else is said, her position too can be directly translated into a constructivist, or
epistemically constrained-type account of objectivity/independence.
28
Philosophy of Mathematics
of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108592505
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 194.176.167.34, on 27 Jan 2022 at 20:35:14, subject to the Cambridge Core terms

And remember, there is this curious thing about mathematical stuff – it’s hard
to see how it could be any more than what makes our axioms (and so on) true.
Jenkins, and my realist, attempting to distinguish her account from anti-realism
in mathematics, will have a very hard time spelling out what mathematical
objects or structures essentially are without direct appeal to what we make of
them – that is, without direct appeal to how we axiomatise them, what we
believe is true of them, and so on. It is one thing to say that our mental state
when we do mathematics is no part of what mathematical objects are, but it is
quite another to then go on to say that independent mathematical reality is
what’s left if what we believe makes the axioms true is taken out of the equation.
4.5 Meaningfulness
Perhaps we can try to pin down the difference by looking at a bit more at what
might make mathematics meaningful to an anti-realist and what makes math-
ematics meaningful to a realist. Let’s check if there might be more we could say
about Gaifman’s ‘factually meaningful answer’.
In general, by ‘meaningful’ anti-realists mean constrained or trackable
(recall Wright’s ‘epistemic constraint’ condition).
Gaifman, on the other hand (as we’ve seen), ties mathematical ‘meaning-
fulness’ to ’factually meaningful’ – and cashes this notion out as being apt for
yes-or-no answers. This characterisation arguably does capture the way math-
ematics is done.
The catch here is the subsequent fork in the road: if this way of describing
mathematical meaningfulness gives no tie to construction, proof, methods, and
means of knowing, then it inherits the realist problems without the realist
advantage. If, on the other hand, appeal is made to our believing there’s
a factually meaningful yes-or-no answer, then this itself is a constraint that
can be inter-translated with an anti-realist position – that is, we may then be
taken as saying that the real or true is just that bit about which we think there is
such an answer to be found.
We can attempt to contrast this with our ‘differentiable’ realist, for whom
’meaningful’ may mean something like ‘accessing or discovering or corres-
ponding to independent reality’. As we’ve seen, in this formulation, objectivity
is somehow external: tied to something beyond our constructions, that is,
beyond our proof, justiﬁcations, and so on.
In a well-used example, Hilbert can represent the anti-realist here – he
deﬁnitely had a conception of ‘factually meaningful answer’ in which meaning
was tied to constructible proof. And, for Hilbert, something was ‘meaningful’
only in the sense it referred to a ﬁnite, and so in some clear way, graspable (and
29
Ontology and the Foundations of Mathematics
of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108592505
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 194.176.167.34, on 27 Jan 2022 at 20:35:14, subject to the Cambridge Core terms

so accessible) totality. Hilbert wanted to show how all of mathematics is as
irrefutable and clear and solvable as elementary number theory, so he came up
with a program in which our natural conception of ﬁniteness underpinned (or
ultimately justiﬁed) the rest of mathematics.
Compare this to Gödel’s conception of meaningful mathematics, taking
Gödel here as representing realists, since he deﬁnitely had a conception of
‘factually meaningful answer’ in which meaning relied on an external justiﬁca-
tion for our proof. But now note what Gödel says about Hilbert’s program:
[I]t . . . acknowledge[s] that the truth of the axioms from which mathematics
starts out cannot be justiﬁed or recognised in any way, and therefore the
drawing of the consequences from them has meaning only in a hypothetical
sense, whereby this drawing of consequences itself . . . is construed as a mere
game with symbols according to certain rules, likewise not [supported by]
insight. (Gödel 2001, 151)
The truth of the axioms, for Gödel, was attained by virtue of their referring to,
or correctly capturing the ways things independently are. This comparison
between the two underscores that, for the (Gödelian) realist, meaning comes
from independence, or from something external to the axioms, proofs, and so on
themselves.
Perhaps we could sum it up this way: anti-realist meaning comes from the
idea of a coherent, effective system – that is, an effective constraint.
Whereas (real) meaning for realism comes from (as Folina puts it (1994))
a difference between what the facts are and what we take them to be, so,
perhaps, the difference comes down to an in principle possible access to the
truth/facts versus an in-principle falliblism.
So, if we’re looking for a way to articulate realism such that it is non-
translatable (i.e. effectively distinguishable from anti realism), perhaps we
need to look seriously at the way in which, for realists, factually meaningful
answers and objectivity come from the way in which we could have gotten it
wrong – from the gap between what we construct and what independently is:
again, between what the facts are and what we take them to be.
4.6 Wright, Continued
As we’ve seen, someone who has already gone to a lot of trouble to spell this all out
in detail and to really pin down what anti-realism is saying about factually mean-
ingful answers and objectivity versus what realism is saying, is Crispin Wright.
In his (2000), Wright proposes (Q) Q->(p is true <-> Z(p)) as a good formal
encoding of (a good, or ‘moderate’) anti-realism, which he also calls ‘direct
realism’.
30
Philosophy of Mathematics
of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108592505
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 194.176.167.34, on 27 Jan 2022 at 20:35:14, subject to the Cambridge Core terms

‘Q’ here is a general epistemic idealisation such as ideal conditions holding
for maximally coherent set of beliefs, or ideal thinkers, and Z is a general
alethic operator such as ’ being judged to be true’ (that is, Z could be read as
‘known’, ‘accessible’, etc.). So (according to Wright) what antirealists (in
general) are trying to say is that ideal thinkers would believe (Z) a thing, if
they happily inhabited the land of ideal conditions Q, if and only if it that
thing was true.
Wright spells out Q this way:
were p to be appraised under (topic-speciﬁed) sufﬁciently good epistemic
conditions, p would be true if and only if p would be believed. (p. 347)
Note that this is what Gaifman is saying, really – for Gaifman, it’s (possibly
or allowably) just our actual epistemic capacities that prevent us from consider-
ing all mathematical questions in ever stronger systems. So Gaifman’s view
(which, remember, he calls ‘realism’) ﬁts with Wright’s encoding here (which,
remember, Wright calls ‘anti-realism’), which is exactly what this Element
focuses on, is and why the terms ‘realism’ and ‘anti-realism’ have come to
mean approximately nothing.
Wright says that so long as ‘sufﬁciently good’ is understood as conditions that
incorporate whatever features it might take to enable a thinker to track the relevant
facts, ‘then no realism, however extreme, need hesitate to accept (Q’s) provisional
biconditionals everywhere’ (p. 349. Also see footnote, p. 348). If there were no
obligation for a constructive speciﬁcation of what these facts might actually be,
a mathematical realist might agree with Wright here, if what Wright means is that
we could incorporate the whole of reality, not just us – that is, postulating what
global ideal conditions might look like if they obtained. But then inter-
translatability looms again. To differentiate realism from anti-realism here, the
realist would perhaps have to postulate a hypothetical tracking of truth, just so long
as it doesn’t tie this tracking in principle to human mental states or humanness.
Wright isolates two scenarios in particular which are ‘incompatible’ with
a constructible-type interpretation of Q: both are associated with what he calls
‘metaphysical realism’.
The ﬁrst scenario (incompatible with a constructive reading of Q) is the
possibility that (in at least one case) there is no ideal or sufﬁciently good theory
that would deliver knowledge; and the second is the possibility that, even if there
were ideal or sufﬁciently good theories (in all cases), some of these (or, again, at
least one) may actually have got it wrong, or (as Wright puts it) may be false.12
12 This idea is contentious – ‘false’ and ‘truth’ both can be utilised as if by the realist. So it is better,
perhaps, to say ‘may not be (independently) the case’.
31
Ontology and the Foundations of Mathematics
of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108592505
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 194.176.167.34, on 27 Jan 2022 at 20:35:14, subject to the Cambridge Core terms

So, Wright says, it is not the notion of recognition-transcendent truth as such
that anti-realists reject, but ‘the notion that recognition-transcendent truth can
arise for some reason other than the unavailability of sufﬁciently good condi-
tions’ (p. 355).
So then, maybe realism (or at least the kind that there’s any point in an anti-
realist taking the trouble to reject) says something like this: it’s possible that
there are sufﬁciently good conditions and that truth transcends the recognition
or obtaining of these. But again, this could possibly make no practical differ-
ence – unless the realist could somehow point out (or ensure that our formal
expressions brings it about) that the attaining of these sufﬁciently good condi-
tions and the independent truth of something (or its ‘being the case’) are
different things. And it seems to me that the only way to say that (without,
again, making no difference) is to grasp the nettle and allow the full conse-
quences of that scenario (as Wright has already outlined) – that, yes, on this
account, we could have it wrong: even if we’ve produced a proof whose
correctness is beyond reasonable doubt or that, say, in principle, it is possible
that in some cases no theory, however ideal, could give us knowledge.
This is all to say that perhaps realism in mathematics must be a negative
option; that perhaps the only means available to articulate the ‘something else’
is that which is not directly translatable into mathematical anti-realism.
So, perhaps the mathematical realist is stuck with saying ‘it’s not that’ (i.e.
with saying it’s not simply what makes the axioms true, it’s not whatever has an
objective yes-or-no answer, and so on) because, again, there’s that sense in
which there’s no more, no ‘extra bit’ to mathematical reality than what ﬁts our
mathematical theories. It seems that the mathematical realist is stuck with
saying something like ‘well yes, there’s what ﬁts our theories, and I can’t
point to anything richer or outline a sense in which our perspective on this
stuff is only part of a wider story (the way I might, apparently, be able to with
physical stuff). It seems that all I can say here is that independent mathematical
reality is also not (or not identical) with that.’
Putting the ‘something else’ in this negative way and responding thus to
Wright’s scenario itself runs close to being paradoxical – just so long as the
realist wants to say that we can also have (real) knowledge of the ways things
independently are (and surely realists do want to retain this possibility).
The paradox, or contradiction, might be something like this:
A realist, from the perspective of modern philosophy, is basically someone
who claims to think that which is where there is no thought. That is to say,
a realist is someone who keeps doing the opposite of what he says he’s doing:
he speaks of thinking a world in itself and independent of thought. But in
saying this, does he not precisely speak of a world to which thought is given,
32
Philosophy of Mathematics
of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108592505
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 194.176.167.34, on 27 Jan 2022 at 20:35:14, subject to the Cambridge Core terms

and thus of a world dependent on our relation-to-the-world? (Meillassoux,
2008)
Or this:
[T]he problem, for anyone inclined to suppose a ‘transcendent’ or ‘independ-
ent’ realm, is how cognition can reach that which is transcendent . . . [i.e.] the
correlation between cognition as mental process, its referent and what object-
ively is . . . the source of the deepest and most difﬁcult problems. Taken
collectively, they are the problem of the possibility of cognition. (Husserl,
1964, 10–15)
that is, there’s a sense in which we know and we don’t know, we access and
we don’t access, all at the same time.
5 Justiﬁcation
After outlining his ante rem stance, Shapiro proposes a possible anti-realist
response asking how we are justiﬁed in our beliefs about mathematical objects.
In response to this question, Shapiro offers the theory that we can, through
physical perception, ‘recognise’, ‘apprehend’, and ‘attain knowledge of’
abstract patterns – hence also of abstract structures. Those structures not
directly attainable through physical perception, he argues, ‘are in fact appre-
hended (but not perceived) by abstraction’. Speciﬁcally, this theory says,
‘pattern recognition . . . is a faculty . . . leading to an apprehension of freestand-
ing, ante rem structures’ (all quotations on p. 113).13
But imagine, again, a traditional physical realism regarding Benacerraf’s cat:
suppose that this realism is simply the ordinary belief that the cat is real. Such
a belief might easily incorporate the notion that ordinary physical objects have
an existence independent of our own – that is, they exist prior to and separate
from us and so are not dependent on us. But, in order to use that notion of
independent reality to independently justify our beliefs about these sorts of
objects, even such an ordinary realist needs to show (at least) that what we
‘perceive’ as physical reality is in fact, or in some sense, the same reality that
existed prior to or independent of our perception of it. Note again that in order to
show this, the ‘what-is-perceived’ and ‘what-existed-prior-to-that-perception’
must (initially at least) be distinguishable from each other. If they are not
distinguishable, then ‘the cat I see’ cannot, at some later stage, be shown to be
13 This theory gains traction given some recent research. See the following BBC articles: www
.bbc.com/future/article/20200907-the-remarkable-ways-animals-understand-numbers www
.bbc.com/future/article/20191121-why-you-might-be-counting-in-the-wrong-language Both of
these seem to indicate ways in which a realist about the middle-sized physical world can have
a good epistemology – biology adapts to its environment, it does not create it, nor does the
environment depend on the biology of those adapting; or maybe the two are intertwined.
33
Ontology and the Foundations of Mathematics
of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108592505
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 194.176.167.34, on 27 Jan 2022 at 20:35:14, subject to the Cambridge Core terms

identical to, or in any way the same as ‘the cat that exists prior to and
independently of my seeing it’ – this, again, is the thrust of Frege’s (aka
‘Hesperus is Phosphorous’) identity problem.
This active, later identiﬁcation is, in fact, a necessary part of the justiﬁcation
required if any independence claim is to be maintained or utilised. Simply
assuming
that
the
‘what-is-perceived’
and
‘what-existed-prior-to-that-
perception’ are the same thing from the beginning, with no initial distinction
between them, begs the same question: how our beliefs about this previously
existing independent reality are justiﬁed. But this reasoning can be applied to
Shapiro’s theory, wherein nothing distinguishes his ‘apprehended structure’
from his ‘independently existing structures’.
Shapiro gives this problem some attention in his (1997), speciﬁcally by
imagining and answering another possible objection to his theory – this time
of pattern recognition:
Somewhere along the line anti-realists might concede that pattern recognition
and the other psycholinguistic mechanisms lead to a belief in (perhaps ante
rem) structures, and they may concede that we have an ability to coherently
discuss these structures. But anti-realists will maintain that these mechanisms
do not yield knowledge unless the structures (or at least their places) exist.
Have we established this last, ontological claim? Can this be done without
begging the question?
. . . I present an account of the existence of structures according to which
an ability to coherently discuss a structure is evidence that it exists . . . This
account is perspicuous and accounts for much of the ‘data’ – mathematical
practice and common intuitions about mathematical and ordinary objects.
The argument for realism is an inference to the best explanation. The nature
of structures guarantees that certain experiences count as evidence for their
existence. (p. 118)
As mentioned earlier, the same argument is given in (2011, 147). This
argument is that certain mechanisms, most notably our ability to coherently
discuss them, provide evidence for ante rem structures. The problem for our
realist seeking to distinguish her position from any position inter- translatable or
interchangeable with anti-realism is that, so long as these structures are sup-
posed to be independent of such mechanisms, nothing about the mechanisms
themselves can establish that what they provide evidence for are indeed what
they appear to be: independent, previously existing structures. The mechanisms
lead perhaps to a belief in Shapiro’s ante rem structures but not necessarily to
those structures themselves. Evidence that an abstracted or psycholinguistically
apprehended structure exists is not evidence that the same structure existed prior
to, or independently of the mechanism that led us to believe in it. The evidence,
34
Philosophy of Mathematics
of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108592505
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 194.176.167.34, on 27 Jan 2022 at 20:35:14, subject to the Cambridge Core terms

then, only supports the existence of the apprehended structure, and without any
speciﬁc reason to believe that the structure is indeed ante rem, evidence for the
existence of what we apprehend – even if this evidence is the ability to
coherently discuss the object of our apprehension – is not evidence for its
existence independent, or prior to, our apprehension of it.
Again, this is just because an independence claim (if it is to provide
a distinguishing feature preventing proper inter-translation between realist and
anti-realist positions) necessarily incorporates the ontological access problem: the
realist conundrum that these two objects – the object of our apprehension and the
independent object existing prior to our apprehension – need to be distinguished
before they can be shown to be the same, similar, or strictly identical.
Suppose, though, that we give up trying to maintain any initial separation
between the two, and we do simply assume or try directly to show that the
apprehended structure is one and the same as the independent structure.
A question remains: in what sense is the yielded structure’s existence something
more than – that is, above and beyond – the existence of the end result of the
process of abstraction or psycholinguistic apprehension that yielded it, or those
structures for which coherence is evidence? That is, does the idea of independ-
ent or prior existence attach naturally to the structures arrived at via abstraction?
If so, how? What is it about the psycholinguistically yielded structures that
makes it reasonable to ascribe independence or priority to their existence?
As we’ve seen, if this same question were applied to physical reality, one
possible answer would be the apparent persistent existence of the objects when
we close our eyes, walk away from them, and so on. What sort of things can we
say about abstract mathematical structures such that our experience of them
gives evidence for their independence? There certainly are compelling features
of mathematical reality we can appeal to that support the idea that it is inde-
pendent and existed prior to our perception of it. The undeniable force of
mathematical truth suggests itself as one such feature. The point, though, is
just that we can ask for this sort of evidence.
All this is to say that it is reasonable to ask what sort of existence the appre-
hended structures can naturally or reasonably be said to have – given only what we
do know and experience of them. That is, we can still ask: does independent or
prior existence sit naturally with the structures arrived at via abstraction? Or is such
an ascription of independence, in this case, somehow ad hoc?
5.1 The Natural/Least Artiﬁcial Attitude
How, then, can we accommodate independent ante rem structures in a relatively
natural – that is, in a ‘non-ad hoc’ – way? One way of judging whether the
35
Ontology and the Foundations of Mathematics
of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108592505
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 194.176.167.34, on 27 Jan 2022 at 20:35:14, subject to the Cambridge Core terms

inclusion of this sort of independence is ad hoc or not would be to assess how
well the proposed independence sits with the account overall. This could be
done, ﬁrst of all, by assessing whether or not the account has ‘room’ (or enough
room) for this sort of independence and, if it does, by assessing whether this
room provides comfortable or forced accommodation.
Before thus assessing Shapiro’s account, note that another occasion upon
which a proposed independence might appear ad hoc is when its inclusion in an
account is simply stipulated. But perhaps we can grant that a signiﬁcant inde-
pendence, such as Shapiro’s ante rem structuralism involves, probably does
have to be simply stipulated at some stage or other, if it is to be included in an
account at all. As Shapiro notes, independence cannot, after all, be positively
‘shown’ (see, again, Hellman and Shapiro (2019) for a response to this which
shifts the question up to the existence of ante rem structures themselves).
Generally, we establish that something is independent of something else by
showing that it is not dependent on the something else, rather than by attempting
to positively illustrate some inherent independent nature it might have.
Independence is ‘arrived at’ (insofar as it is ‘arrived at’ at all) negatively, and
so also by stipulation rather than by proof. So the fact that something is simply
stipulated in an account does not automatically render its inclusion ad hoc. I take
it that we can suspect the idea of independence to be ad hoc when its setting (i.e.
the rest of the account) renders its inclusion somehow unnatural or, at worst, if
there is nothing in an account able to interpret or make some sense of such
a stipulation.
Now recall that, even if we agree with Shapiro’s claim that the ability to
discuss a structure coherently is itself evidence that that structure exists, the
issue of the nature of that structure’s existence still remains untouched. At best,
all we have is evidence that an abstracted or psycholinguistically apprehended
structure exists (independent or otherwise). But it remains unclear how this
evidence supports the independent existence of that same abstracted structure.
We can get some idea of how Shapiro regards this problem from his brief
discussion of the ambiguity, inherent in his account, in the reference of numerals
(and across mathematics in general). Shapiro (1997) points out that his struc-
turalism entails that:
‘4’, for example, denotes a place in the natural number structure, a ﬁnite
cardinal structure, a ﬁnite ordinal structure, a place in the real number
structure, a place in the integer structure, a place in the complex number
structure and a place in the set theoretic hierarchy. (p. 120)
Now recall that for Shapiro, structures exist before and apart from any of their
exempliﬁcations. But if we take this to mean that for Shapiro there is an
36
Philosophy of Mathematics
of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108592505
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 194.176.167.34, on 27 Jan 2022 at 20:35:14, subject to the Cambridge Core terms

independent structure that existed before our denoting term ‘4’ did, then it
seems that the ambiguity ought to be able to be resolved. That is, we ought to
be able to say whether or not the denoting term ‘4’ picks out that particular pre-
existing structure, or a place in that structure (similarly, for Hellman and
Shapiro (2019), that ante rem structures can be identiﬁed or distinguished
from one another, as well as from their set-theoretic exempliﬁcations).
5.2 The Caesar Problem Revisited
This same problem can be approached from a number of different angles, and
the Caesar problem is just one of these. In chapter 4 of (1997), Shapiro utilises
Robert Kraut’s work, ‘Indiscernibility and Ontology’, to provide another ‘epi-
stemic route’ to mathematical structures. Kraut considers an imaginary econo-
mist who speaks a version of impoverished English, a language that does not
have the resources to distinguish between two people with the same income
(p. 19). Where person P has the same income as person Q, anything that the
speaker of this impoverished language can say about P applies equally to
Q. That is, an interpreter of the economist’s language could apply the Leibniz
principle of the identity of indiscernibles that, for the economist, P = Q, since the
two items cannot be distinguished. From the economist’s point of view, they are
treated as a single object.
Shapiro gives the following scenario to illustrate:
if the interpreter sees a certain woman [who earns $35,000 per annum], he might
say (on behalf of the economist), ‘there is the $35,000’. If a man with the same
income walks by, the interpreter might remark, ‘There it is again.’ The economist
herself might make the identiﬁcation if she knows that the two are indiscernible
and does not envision a framework for distinguishing them. (p. 19)
Even at this stage, there is a natural ambiguity that threatens to undermine any
potential realist stance regarding the objects proposed. So long as the econo-
mist’s ‘knowledge’ that the two are indiscernible consists in her not being able
to envision a framework in which they might be distinguished (in this case, the
full background language, ordinary English), the object’s existence could, in an
important sense, be regarded either as given by the language itself or as prior to
the existence of this particular language. This early ambiguity could be under-
stood as highlighting the shortcomings of the Leibniz principle, speciﬁcally, the
possibility that the principle by itself is not enough to establish true identity; that
is, objects that are able to be ‘taken as’ one rather than two, are not necessarily
one rather than two in point of fact. An alternative understanding of the
ambiguity might simply be that an application of the principle that results in
identity relations between things on this basis is, in fact, a misapplication.
37
Ontology and the Foundations of Mathematics
of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108592505
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 194.176.167.34, on 27 Jan 2022 at 20:35:14, subject to the Cambridge Core terms

Shapiro makes two points, both of which can be used to support the idea that
an object’s existence is given by the (object) language itself. First, he notes that
‘nothing is lost by interpreting [the economist’s] language as about income
levels and not people [such that] . . . A singular term, like “the Jones woman”,
denotes an income level’ (p. 20). But if we were presented with this interpret-
ation alone, we’d have a free-standing language, without the history from which
it evolved, and in this case something more than history is lost.
Speciﬁcally, the missing history takes with it a potential item of evidence that
the object’s (or at least an object’s) existence predated the language being used
to refer to those objects. Indeed Shapiro agrees that the only way we can
understand examples like Kraut’s economist is by possessing the ‘background
language’ ourselves. This same point applies to the mathematician and to the
‘number- person’ that Shapiro models on Kraut’s example (the latter is someone
who speaks an impoverished version of English in which equinumerous collec-
tions of objects are indiscernible.
The second point Shapiro makes that appears to lend support to the idea that
the object’s existence arises from language, rather than the other way around, is
the following: one way of understanding the thrust of the sublanguage examples
is through Frege’s Grundlagen result (taken here from Coffa (1991)) that ‘a
wide range of statements previously regarded as extralogical and involving an
appeal to either empirical intuition (Mill) or to pure intuition (Kant) involved
only reference to concepts’ (p. 75). That is, ‘number statements’ make no sense
so long as we try to understand them as being about objects, but they do make
sense if we understand them as having a concept as their ‘target’. Or, as Shapiro
(1997) puts it:
Suppose that our number-person looks at two decks of cards and we interpret
him as saying ‘There is two’. Then we assume that, at some level, the number-
person knows that it is the decks and not the cards or the colours that are being
counted. Nothing in the hunk of mass determines that it is 2, 104, or any other
number for that matter. If the subject loses the use of sortals like ‘deck’, he
will not see the stuff as 2. To accomplish this feat, the subject must be aware
of the decks and must distinguish the two decks from each other. (pp. 20–1)
Frege’s point (according to Coffa (1991)) is that since it is only when the
concept is determined that the number attribute is ﬁxed, regarding the concept
itself as the topic of the number statement is natural. But Frege was sensitive to
the possibility that this idea introduced an ambiguity between understanding
and acquaintance. He not only addressed this possibility; he went to great pains
to avoid it by drawing a sharp distinction between sense and the real world,
pointing out that the things we understand, be they concepts, universals,
38
Philosophy of Mathematics
of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108592505
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 194.176.167.34, on 27 Jan 2022 at 20:35:14, subject to the Cambridge Core terms

properties, or essences, are something altogether different from the ‘real world’.
That is, ‘He denied that understanding is a gloriﬁed form of “seeing” aimed at
these entities . . . [His] point was that while understanding does involve “giving”
the object in question, it need not necessarily be “given” in the mode of
acquaintance’ (p. 81).
Contra Frege, and in defence of structuralism, Shapiro offers that what he
argues is a better way to understand the Kraut sublanguage examples; namely,
that what they show us is that income levels, numbers, and so on are ‘places in
structures’. (Recall Shapiro’s distinction, in linguistic practice, between an
object, an ofﬁce holder; and a place in a structure, an ofﬁce.)
Although Shapiro acknowledges that the division between the places-are-
ofﬁces perspective and the places-are-objects perspective is both relative and
not sharp, its existence is nonetheless a crucial part of his structuralist inter-
pretation of the sublanguage examples. This is because if the distinction is not
drawn at some point, Shapiro’s program becomes an eliminative program,
whereby the places-are-objects perspective is reduced to the places-are-
ofﬁces perspective – speciﬁcally by calling the former a generalisation over
the latter. It is purposely to avoid this scenario that Shapiro gives a direct
stipulation that at some point the places-are-objects perspective has to be
taken literally. The problem then becomes whether, given the rest of his
account, this perspective indeed can be taken literally and, if it can, whether
the stipulation is somehow ad hoc.
Note that a Fregean-type response suggests not only that the places-are-
objects perspective can indeed be taken literally but also that the stipulation
that it ought to be is something that needs defence or at least is problematic,
insofar as this type of answer represents a concerted effort to retain the realist
idea that the truth or falsity of mathematical statements in some way depends on
the presence or absence of the corresponding object in mathematical reality. It
turns out, though, that the cost of this effort is the retention of ‘the Caesar
problem’.
A Shapiro-type answer also argues that the places-are-objects perspective can
be taken literally, but makes a concerted effort to avoid the Caesar problem. But
it turns out that the cost of avoiding the problem is the loss of the proposed
realist’s desiderata – a non–ad hoc notion of independence.
5.3 Frege, Shapiro, and Caesar
Frege’s original Caesar problem came about via his belief that the real world
comes to us already divided up into separate elements: namely those elements
that constitute a given claim’s topic and determine its truth value.
39
Ontology and the Foundations of Mathematics
of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108592505
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 194.176.167.34, on 27 Jan 2022 at 20:35:14, subject to the Cambridge Core terms

Coffa (1991) illustrates the Fregean approach with the following example.
Whether the claim
The author of ‘Waverley’ is tall
is true or false depends entirely on whether a single object in the universe,
namely Scott, has a single property, namely a certain height. The grammatical
units
‘the author of “Waverley”’ and ‘x is tall’
are associated with the truth-relevant parts of the world, that is, with those
elements of the world that are the only ones relevant to the determination of
whether what (A) says is true. That is, the grammatical units of a claim are
associated with the elements that constitute its topic and determine its truth
value.
The real world, then, includes all such elements: ‘all that we talk about when
we don’t talk about talking’ (p. 80). These elements, according to Frege, are
themselves what is meant by a given claim. That is, they are a given claim’s
‘signiﬁcance’ or ‘meaning’ (p. 80). So, grammatical units, effectively or inef-
fectively, correctly or incorrectly, sort the world into those elements that matter
and those that don’t as far as the truth of a given claim is concerned.
The following argument, also Coffa’s, clariﬁes Frege’s belief in an original,
previously partitioned ontology (the real world), going on to show how this
belief leads directly to the Caesar problem. Coffa begins by noting that:
All that is required for the purposes of communication or responsible dis-
course in general is that what we say be intelligible, and this has little to do
with the possession of effective methods to identify either its referents or
truth-values. (p. 81)
But, as Coffa observes, sense in Frege’s account is nonetheless intimately
related to the truth value–relevant elements in the world. This, Coffa notes, is
strongly suggested by a seldom-noticed fact: Frege took it as self-evident that
the grammatical analysis appropriate to the study of sense coincides with the
grammatical analysis appropriate to the study of meaning. An understanding of
the sense of a sentence is not, for Frege, a holistic phenomenon but comes about
through an understanding of the sense of its parts:
Notice that there is, in principle, no reason the grammatical units that provide
the building blocks of propositional sense should be the same that provide the
truth-relevant features of the world, unless sense (and therefore understand-
ing) are essentially a matter of doing something with those worldly units.
(p. 81)
40
Philosophy of Mathematics
of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108592505
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 194.176.167.34, on 27 Jan 2022 at 20:35:14, subject to the Cambridge Core terms

For Frege, any language, including natural language, is capable of producing
true claims only when it contains a device establishing a correlation, however
ineffective, with objects of the original ontology – in this case, of the real world.
That is, procedures such as Kraut’s ‘sublanguage procedure’ from the Fregean
viewpoint would be capable of true claims only to the extent that they are
capable of establishing a link between the original elements of the real world
and the elements ‘produced’ by that language. Indeed, for Frege (according to
Coffa), it is only in this way that language can be seen as a means by which we
understand claims concerning the objects language produces.
So for Frege, whether or not our understanding is effective – which, for
Frege, amounts to whether what we understand is capable of being true or
false – depends upon the absence or presence of objects in the original ontology,
the real world. It seems reasonable to suppose that this dependence of effective
understanding on the existence of the relevant objects in the real world comes
about directly as a result of Frege’s commitment to the realist notion of
independence. After all, it is just when the idea of a single ﬁxed universe is
retained that the problem of identifying all the items to be found in the original
ontology presents itself. And so we arrive back at the Caesar problem, so named
because Frege’s account seems simultaneously to demand, and to lack, a means
by which to determine how and why each number is the same or different from
any object whatsoever.
Shapiro agrees that we could not understand claims about objects which are
themselves produced by a language without an original ontology. But, in
contrast to the Fregean approach, he argues that there is not something that
could be called the background ontology. For Shapiro, ‘the idea of a single,
ﬁxed universe, divided into objects a priori, is rejected’ (p. 28).
In mathematics, for Shapiro, there are no objects simpliciter (p. 15). That is,
there is no structure- independent answer to such questions as whether Julius
Caesar = 2’ or ‘2 = {{ ∅}}’. A mathematical object is a place in a ﬁxed
structure. So a number, for example, is a place in the natural number structure.
Thus, as mentioned in Section 5.2, identity between objects within a given
structure is determinate, but identity between numbers and other sorts of objects
is not (p. 14).
Thus, for Shapiro, only statements internal to a single structure have
a determinate truth value, so the truth value of this (internal) sort of statement
is to be discovered. By contrast, the truth value of statements like the latter is
a matter of invention or stipulation, which is why there is no answer waiting to
be discovered to the Caesar problem.
To delve further into the Kraut sublanguage procedure, viewing the level-
roles as played by groups of people or by individual people is taking the ‘places
41
Ontology and the Foundations of Mathematics
of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108592505
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 194.176.167.34, on 27 Jan 2022 at 20:35:14, subject to the Cambridge Core terms

are ofﬁces’ perspective. But, ‘when we focus on the impoverished sub-
languages and interpret them with the Leibniz principle, we take the places of
the structure – income levels and numbers – as objects in their own right. This is
the “places are objects” perspective’ (p. 21).
Now, the process by which we arrive at this ‘impoverished sublanguage’
involves, ﬁrst of all, taking a framework with objects already within the range of
its variables – that is, a framework that already has ontology. The next step is to
focus on an equivalence relation over the ontology of the base language
[which] ... divides its domain into mutually exclusive collections – called
‘equivalence classes’. ... The idea here is to see the equivalence classes as
exemplifying a structure and to treat the places of this structure as objects. (p. 21)
A sublanguage is then formulated for which the equivalence is a congruence
such that where two items are equivalent they are indiscernible. Shapiro sug-
gests that:
in such cases . . . in the sub-language, the equivalence relation is the identity
relation. The idea here is that the language and sub-language together char-
acterise a structure, the structure exempliﬁed by the equivalence classes and
the relations between them formable in the sub-language. It is thus possible to
invoke the places-are-objects orientation, in which the places in this structure
are rightly taken to be its objects. (p. 22)
The ﬁnal step in Shapiro’s argument is to introduce the idea that the frame-
work of pure mathematics, along with that of his own ‘structure theory’, might
allow
sub-languages in which either isomorphism or structure equivalence is
a congruence. In this way, structures themselves are to be seen as objects in
their own right and, according perfectly with the structuralist’s credo, math-
ematics is the science of structure.
From the Fregean perspective introduced earlier, the problem with this is
again that it boils down to the claim that it follows from the coherence of
a structure characterisation that there are things which satisfy it. Indeed, on
Shapiro’s account, coherence just means satisﬁability. And this means that
coherence cannot be characterised in a non-circular way. Shapiro points out
that mathematics itself involves an inherent circularity born of the common
mathematical practice of settling questions of coherence just by modelling one
structure in another – for example, complex numbers are coherent just because
they can be modelled in the real number structure. The ﬁnal port of call, then,
would be set theory – in which all other mathematical structures can be
modelled (p. 22).
42
Philosophy of Mathematics
of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108592505
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 194.176.167.34, on 27 Jan 2022 at 20:35:14, subject to the Cambridge Core terms

But then, set theory itself is satisﬁed because it is coherent and is coherent
because it is satisﬁed. We are now in a better position to examine how the notion
of independence sits with the rest of Shapiro’s account. Speciﬁcally, the circu-
larity from satisfaction to coherence for set theory does not sit well with a claim
that there is an independent realm of mathematical objects. That is to say, the
notion that set theory is satisﬁed because it is coherent clashes with the notion of
independence and, in particular, with the notion of the dependence of mathem-
atical formalisms, proof, truth, and coherence on mathematical reality. On the
other hand, the notion that coherence depends on satisfaction supports the
independence claim. But, as is highlighted in Hellman and Shapiro, it is hard
to see how anyone could argue that a structure is coherent because it is satisﬁed
without a determinate background ontology of mathematical objects – or
without the idea of a single, real mathematical universe that exists not because
of, but before, our notion of mathematical coherence. But (as suggested earlier)
simply shifting the problem up to another level, wherein the notion of a set-
theoretic structure itself is taken as an instantiation of ante rem structures, seems
to me to encounter the same problem, albeit in a more sophisticated, less direct
way.
5.4 Structures, Realist and Otherwise
The idea that mathematical systems and concepts themselves are founded or
depend on a pre- existing mathematical reality (and not the other way around) is
one of the central realist notions underpinning the notion of justiﬁcation dis-
cussed earlier. The appeal of such a notion gives a realist account some balance,
insofar as it goes some way towards offsetting the cost of the problems entailed
by the postulation of an independent reality. But it gets trickier. For the realist
seeking to retain this particular sort of justiﬁcation, there are other features that
a structure characterisation would need to possess before it could serve as any
sort of foundation or ‘ﬁnal court of appeal’ for mathematical theories and
questions of mathematical existence.
Speciﬁcally, it seems that if such a foundation were to serve to substantially
differentiate realism from anti-realism, that foundation would need to be in
some sense metaphysical, at least to the extent that existence questions are
resolvable only by reference to a reality independent of the systems it grounds.
That is, for the realist seeking to retain the traditional notion of justiﬁcation,
existence questions need to be resolved by reference to a supposed, or stipulated
abstract reality, as opposed to the coherent characterisation of a structure or
indeed to any sort of a reality whose existence can likewise be attributed to
ourselves or to our ability to deﬁne or construct it. Indeed, without reference to
43
Ontology and the Foundations of Mathematics
of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108592505
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 194.176.167.34, on 27 Jan 2022 at 20:35:14, subject to the Cambridge Core terms

a metaphysical independent reality, the line between construction and discov-
ery – or in this case, between a coherent structure and a satisﬁed structure – will
always be blurred.
The realist can grant that we can create coherent structures and say they are
satisﬁed, or she can say that we can discover satisﬁed structures and show that
they are coherent. But the term ‘discover’ and the idea that the structures are
‘ante rem’ both lose their speciﬁc realist force if, in the ﬁnal analysis, each of
these ideas is deﬁned in terms of the other.
To conclude: there is, in the end, no reason to stipulate an independent reality
unless it does some work. But the primary work such a notion can do is to
provide a speciﬁc sort of justiﬁcation for our knowledge of mathematical reality
and truths. Without this, it is hard to see how the reality posited differs from the
anti-realist realms to which it is equivalent, and the stipulation of an independ-
ent mathematical reality itself risks being somewhat ad hoc. With it, though, an
account at least encounters the ontological access problem, and, at most – that
is, just so long as it works to provide independent justiﬁcation – it necessitates
a commitment to that same problem’s insolubility.
44
Philosophy of Mathematics
of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108592505
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 194.176.167.34, on 27 Jan 2022 at 20:35:14, subject to the Cambridge Core terms

Bibliography
Balaguer, M. (1998), Platonism and Anti-Platonism in Mathematics, Oxford
University Press, Oxford.
Benacerraf, P. (1965), ‘What numbers could not be’, Philosophical Review, 74,
47–73.
Benacerraf, P. (1973), ‘Mathematical truth’, Journal of Philosophy, 70, 661–79.
Coffa, A. (1991), The Semantic Tradition from Kant to Carnap, Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge.
Field, H. (2001), Truth and the Absence of Fact, Clarendon Press, Oxford.
Folina, J. (1994), ‘Poincare’s conception of the objectivity of mathematics’,
Philosophia Mathematica, 2(3), 202–27.
Frege, G. (1970), ‘On sense and reference’, in Peter Geach (ed.) and Max Black
(trans.), Translations from the Philosophical Writings of Gottlob Frege, Basil
Blackwell, Oxford, pp. 56–78.
Frege, G. (1984), Collected Papers on Mathematics, Logic, and Philosophy, ed.
Brian McGuinness, trans. Max Black et al., Basil Blackwell, Oxford.
Gaifman, H. (2012), ‘On ontology and realism in mathematics’, The Review of
Symbolic Logic, 5(3), 480–512, doi: https://doi.org/10.1017/S17550
20311000372
Gödel, K. (2001), Kurt Gödel: Collected Works Volume IV: Publications 1929–
1936, ed. Solomon Feferman, John W. Dawson, Jr., Stephen C. Kleene,
Gregory H. Moore, Robert M. Solovay, and Jean van Heijenoort, Oxford
University Press, Oxford.
Hellman, G. and Shapiro, S. (2019), Mathematical Structuralism, Cambridge
Elements, The Philosophy of Mathematics, Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge.
Husserl, E. (1964), The Idea of Phenomenology, William P. Alston and
George Nakhnikian (trans.), Nijhoff, The Hague. doi: https://doi.org/
10.1080/00071773.2001.11007353
Jenkins, C. S. (2005), ‘Realism and independence’, American Philosophical
Quarterly, 42(3), 199–209.
Linnebo, Ø. (2018) ‘Platonism in the philosophy of mathematics’, The
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Spring 2018 Edition), ed. Edward
N. Zalta, https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2018/entries/platonism-
mathematics.
MacBride, F. (2008), ‘Can ante rem structuralism solve the access problem?’,
The Philosophical Quarterly, 58, 155–64.
of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108592505
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 194.176.167.34, on 27 Jan 2022 at 20:35:14, subject to the Cambridge Core terms

MEGS (2020), Mount Everest Geographical Society, www.nationalgeographic
.org/encyclopedia/mount-everest.
Meillassoux, Q. (2008), ‘Time without becoming’ (transcript of talk, Middlesex
University, London, 8 May).
Putnam, H. (1987), The Many Faces of Realism, Open Court, La Salle, IL.
Shapiro, S. (1997), Philosophy of Mathematics, Structure and Ontology, Oxford
University Press, New York.
Shapiro, S. (2000a), ‘The status of logic’, in New Essays on the a Priori,
Boghossian and Peacocke, Oxford University Press, New York, pp. 333–67.
Shapiro, S. (2000b), Thinking about Mathematics, The Philosophy of
Mathematics, Oxford University Press, New York.
Shapiro, S. (2011), ‘Epistemology of mathematics: what are the questions?
What counts as answers?’, The Philosophical Quarterly, 61(242), 130–50.
Wright, C. (1987), Realism, Meaning and Truth, Basil Blackwell, Oxford.
Wright, C. (1992), Truth and Objectivity, Harvard University Press, Cambridge,
MA.
Wright, C. (2000), ‘Truth as a sort of epistemic, Putnam’s peregrinations’, The
Journal of Philosophy, 97(6), 335–64.
Wright, C. (2004), ‘Warrant for nothing (and foundations for free)?’,
Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, supplementary volume, 78(1),
167–212.
46
Bibliography
of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108592505
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 194.176.167.34, on 27 Jan 2022 at 20:35:14, subject to the Cambridge Core terms

The Philosophy of Mathematics
Penelope Rush
University of Tasmania
From the time Penny Rush completed her thesis in the philosophy of mathematics (2005),
she has worked continuously on themes around the realism/anti-realism divide and the
nature of mathematics. Her edited collection The Metaphysics of Logic (Cambridge
University Press, 2014), and forthcoming essay ‘Metaphysical Optimism’ (Philosophy
Supplement), highlight a particular interest in the idea of reality itself and curiosity and
respect as important philosophical methodologies.
Stewart Shapiro
The Ohio State University
Stewart Shapiro is the O’Donnell Professor of Philosophy at The Ohio State University,
a Distinguished Visiting Professor at the University of Connecticut, and a Professorial Fellow
at the University of Oslo. His major works include Foundations without Foundationalism
(1991), Philosophy of Mathematics: Structure and Ontology (1997), Vagueness in Context
(2006), and Varieties of Logic (2014). He has taught courses in logic, philosophy of
mathematics, metaphysics, epistemology, philosophy of religion, Jewish philosophy, social
and political philosophy, and medical ethics.
About the Series
This Cambridge Elements series provides an extensive overview of the philosophy of
mathematics in its many and varied forms. Distinguished authors will provide an
up-to-date summary of the results of current research in their ﬁelds and give their own
take on what they believe are the most signiﬁcant debates inﬂuencing research, drawing
original conclusions.
of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108592505
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 194.176.167.34, on 27 Jan 2022 at 20:35:14, subject to the Cambridge Core terms

The Philosophy of Mathematics
Elements in the Series
Mathematical Structuralism
Geoﬀrey Hellman and Stewart Shapiro
A Concise History of Mathematics for Philosophers
John Stillwell
Mathematical Intuitionism
Carl J. Posy
Innovation and Certainty
Mark Wilson
Semantics and the Ontology of Number
Eric Snyder
Wittgenstein’s Philosophy of Mathematics
Juliet Floyd
Ontology and the Foundations of Mathematics: Talking Past Each Other
Penelope Rush
A full series listing is available at: www.cambridge.org/EPM
of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108592505
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 194.176.167.34, on 27 Jan 2022 at 20:35:14, subject to the Cambridge Core terms

