PHOTOREALIST 
PAINTING TECHNIQUES

2 PHOTOREALIST PAINTING 
TECHNIQUES
This is an example of a drawing of one of my photorealist paintings.
I’ll take you through the process of creating a photoreal painting, in this case one of Osaka City as well as using other works to 
explain the techniques of photorealist painting. 
Published by Mark Alan Russell 
This version - 20 September 2009
FOR THE LATEST INFORMATION ON MARK’S ART GO TO
http://www.photorealistpainting.com
or view his blog at
http://www.photorealistpainting.com/wpblog
This book is self published by Mark Alan Russell and is free and subject to no restrictions imposed by the author. I believe in 
free speech.  

3
CONTENTS
TOOLS YOU WILL NEED
4
SELECTING AN IMAGE
7
COMPUTER WORK
10
DRAWING
11
BASIC COLOR THEORY
16
PAINTING
18

4
TOOLS YOU WILL NEED
• MDF Board 
• A mechanical pencil with a 0.5mm lead and some replacement leads
• A few HB pencils
• A good pencil sharpener
• An eraser
• A bowl (to put those messy pencil sharpening’s in)
• A large steel ruler (preferably at least a metre long)
• Some high quality acrylic paint. (See later article on paint colors and mediums)
• A minimum of two ice cube trays (for your paint palettes)
• Taklon haired brushes - 000, 00, 0 sizes are essential and a few larger ones come in handy
• A paint rag
• Several sheets of wet and dry sandpaper - 800, 600, 400, 320 and 240 grit
• A jar of water for cleaning brushes
• Cotton buds
• A water sprayer for keeping the acrylic paint at the right viscosity 
• A desk capable of holding the board you will work on as well as the computer monitor
• A comfortable chair
• A computer with reasonable performance
• A scanner
• An image editing program like Photoshop or Gimp

5
MDF BOARD
MDF board is the perfect support for painting photorealist paintings. Why? Because it is smooth, strong, inexpensive, takes well 
to being drawn on with pencil and when you need to use an eraser it allows it to be corrected with minimal problems. It also is 
apparently long lasting and if prepared well stable; which when you have poured your heart and soul into a work, not to mention 
hundreds of hours, is very important. It comes in a great variety of sizes and is available from just about every good hardware 
store. When buying it be careful to check the boards because sometimes they can have damaged edges or surfaces that have 
been scratched, banged into or walked on. I generally use 3 mm thick board for small work (up to 60 cm), 6 mm for medium 
sized work (up to 90 cm) and 12 mm for anything larger.
PENCILS AND RELATED ITEMS
A good mechanical pencil (I use a Rotring brand) is absolutely 
essential because they make the drawing of fine objects so much 
easier due to their even and consistent line width. A normal HB 
pencil can yield, if sharpened to a very fine point, a hairs width line 
and when dull, a thick line. Having to maintain an even line width 
is impossible so I use a 0.5 mm mechanical pencil 95% of the time. 
The rest of the time I use good quality Staedler HB pencils and a 
high quality eraser and pencil sharpener. These are best obtained 
from an artist supplies shop or equivalent mail order company. I also 
find a common cereal bowl or dish comes in handy to put pencil 
sharpening’s in.
RULERS
You will have to draw a grid, so at least a one metre stainless steel 
ruler will be required, it will have to have at least one edge divided 
into a usable set of units. I live in a country that uses the metric 
system so I use a base system of either 10, 15, 20, or 25 
millimetre squares when constructing my grid. I use three 
sizes because some situations don’t require the use of a 
large, unwieldy ruler, they are 300 mm, 600 mm and 1000 
mm.
ACRYLIC PAINT
Buy the best paint you can afford, and if you are new to 
painting keep it very simple with color selection. I could 
mix every color with just 9 colors if they were the right 
colors! The difficult part is finding out where the paints 
hue lie on the color wheel in order to make the right choice. Paint manufacturers aren’t always the most helpful but I will use 
Chromacolour, for the paintings in this tutorial. I would recommend as a minimum 8 colors - they are; Chroma White, Chroma 
Black, Chroma Violet, Chroma Blue, Chroma Green, Chroma Yellow, Chroma Orange, Chroma Red,  I would also advise buying 
their brush cleaners.
I would highly recommend using the Chromacolour brand because it is far superior in its opacity and covering power which are 
important when painting in very thin layers and it also changes very little from wet to dry (normally acrylic paints will dry about 
5% darker). The paint dries to a smooth matt finish and performs very much like any other acrylic - just better!
In the past I have primarily used the Luiqitex brand and a little bit of others like Windsor & Newton. I can certainly recommend 
these two brand’s if you can’t get the Chromacolour acrylic paint.

6
ICE CUBE TRAYS
Ice cube trays make the best acrylic paint palettes, they are cheap and can be obtained in a wide variety of sizes.
BRUSHES
I buy taklon brushes, usually Roymac brand, and lots of them because they can get ‘splayed’ after use. No matter how well 
you clean them this will happen and they will be difficult to use for fine work, but hang on to them, they can be then used for 
mixing or sometimes you’ll need a brush to be used in a manner that deliberately gives a ‘textured’ mark. I would recommend 
you purchase a minimum of three each of 000, 00 and 0 round sizes in a good quality brand. Cheap brushes will cause endless 
frustration. It is also handy to have several flats up to about 30 mm wide. Also some sort of acrylic brush cleaner comes in 
handy to maintain them.
PAINT RAG
I use a variety of paint rags to clean 
brushes and occasionally I need to wipe 
up an accidental paint drop or smudge 
and the best type is a ‘cheesecloth’ type 
because it doesn’t tend to leave much 
‘lint’.
WET AND DRY SANDPAPER
Buy several sheets each of good quality 
wet and dry sandpaper in 240, 320, 
400, 600 and 800 grit. These are used 
for maintaining a very flat and smooth 
paint surface as you progress in building 
up layers of paint.
WATER JAR
An old jam jar will do perfectly well for the job, it needs to be clean and kept clean with a good wipe every time you change the 
water.
COTTON BUDS
I buy a box of 200 cotton buds from the supermarket and use them a lot, they are handy for blending and creating ‘effects’.
WATER SPRAYER
A general purpose water sprayer comes in handy for adding a mist of water to the ice cube tray paint palette.
DESK AND CHAIR
A good setup of chair and desk is essential because you will spend a lot of time working on painting photorealist work. The 
desk needs to be quite big, preferably with a few draws to put your paints and equipment away when not used. Mine is around 
1400 mm x 550 mm and when I work on large board I have to use something to prop up the overhanging board. I use a plain old 
kitchen chair at the moment, but if I could afford it I’d certainly look at getting something that would ease the back strain!
COMPUTER, SCANNER AND SOFTWARE
You will need a reasonable computer to view the image that you will create. It also needs a good monitor which is set up 
reasonably accurately in order to show colors as truthfully to the original as possible. I adjust mine by eye and with some 

7
experience but I notice many people have horrible settings on their computers so it is worth getting a second opinion and 
sometimes I also use the original print source next to the monitor to compare. Photoshop is great software and is what I use 
but their are many others available that will do the job - freeware like Gimp is more than capable. I use an old 600 dpi Canon 
scanner to bring in a magazine page into the digital realm. Many of these items are quite common and as long as you can do 
basic image manipulation, show a grid, use a set of layers and zoom in and out on your computer you’ll do just fine.
SELECTING AN IMAGE
I select images to paint with two main questions in mind. One - is it a visually complex and interesting image? Two - what 
does the image say? Most photoreal painters are only concerned with the visual aspects when considering their work, but I 
believe that it is most important to say something other than ‘here is something nice and complex to look at’. I would strongly 
encourage aspiring photorealist painters to look at Dutch art of the seventeenth century and its relationship with the community. 
It was capable of conveying almost every facet of the society from wealthiest down to the poorest. We should strive to do 
the same by bringing the good, bad and the ugly of our contemporary world to our work. One of the best ways to do this is to 
use other peoples work by appropriating images from books, magazines, newspapers, and the internet. I have painted my own 
photography and I encourage this in others but the sheer wealth of images is hard to ignore.
I believe that the first consideration should concern the technical merits of the image, specifically the sharpness and amount of 
detail, followed then by the composition and narrative. Many a time I have been asked to copy an image that just isn’t suited to 
photorealism - it’s been blurred by a shaky hand, or poorly composed by the center of interest being cropped awkwardly. I just 
say no and explain that it simply isn’t good enough.
The second consideration should be the images ‘message’ that the average person would read. I have produced work that takes 

8
This image is simply not suitable for a photorealistic painting 
due to the motion blur and all that refracted light of the 
water. The text would also present an incredibly difficult 
challenge to realistically ‘clone-stamp’ out.
this factor as my prime consideration. However this is a very 
personal subject and I can’t ‘teach’ the answers to this.
There are other considerations however; is the image 
within the artists ability?, and if the image is not your own 
photography then the legality of copying it. The first question 
is something the artist must consider seriously because it can be incredibly frustrating to find some way into producing the 
work that you are way out of your depth and you have wasted a lot of hours with the only solution to abandon the work. If you 
aren’t a professional artist and don’t intend to sell the work then the legal question shouldn’t stop you - go ahead and make art!
I consider copying the 
photographic image to be 
making work ‘after’ the 
original photographer and 
a huge complement. They 
almost always have been 
paid well for their work and if the work matches very closely the image 
they should be proud, if not I would question wether they were truly an 
artist or someone who does it purely for the money. I look to the Dutch 
art of the seventeenth century for a defence to this attitude - copying 
others work was the most important way for an apprentice to learn his 
trade. The rest of the history of art is full of copying others images, some 
extremely closely, some loosely.
When I was a young child my father had brought back this book simply 
titled ‘Osaka’ from his trip as a merchant seaman to this city. It was 
produced as a ‘trade publication’ for the 1970 Osaka World Fair. I spent 
This is a stunningly beautiful image and 
would make an  impressive work due to 
the sheer complexity of the composition. 
It would be difficult and time consuming 
to remove the text however.
Peter Robinson posing beside 
this gorgeous Ferrari would 
be an interesting painting, 
it also is as sharp as a tack 
and removing the words and 
little graphic in the upper left 
wouldn’t be to hard. It also has, 
I believe, a strong conceptual 
value because it talks about 
both wealth and beauty at the 
same time

9
many hours looking at this book as a child. The images fascinated me, showing vast vistas of Japanese life and culture. This 
image in particular has lead me to appreciate the complexity of this type of photo and then to become a photorealist artist. I 
have had to wait until I thought my skills were at the level needed to give this important work in my oeuvre  justice.
The image is so difficult that to do it accurately with less skill you must enlarge the scale of the work. I don’t particularly like the 
really large, overblown proportions of much of contemporary art - it seems to be like a form of shouting. Now I will tackle this 
work with a certainty of purpose and immense confidence that will hopefully stand the test of many centuries to come. I also 
hope that others will appreciate this book on the painting of the image and maybe some can follow in my footsteps.
	
One of the image’s I will use to demonstrate photorealist painting techniques is the image of Osaka shown. I will go 
through, step by step, and explain as best as I can the process so you can see just how something so complex can be copied. 

10
COMPUTER WORK
For the Osaka painting, I scanned the image into my computer at 600 dpi. Unfortunately the paper it was printed on had a fine 
texture like canvas, so I had to use the dust and scratches filter (filter ¦ noise ¦ dust and scratches) at 2 pixels radius and a 
little gaussian blur at about 2 pixels radius to remove this first. It’s quite common to have to use a similar process to remove the 
screen effect that modern day printing uses, so play around with these two handy tools first. Then when I am happy with the 
image and think it has that smooth 
photographic look I save the 
original .bmp file as a .psd. Then I 
duplicate the original background 
layer, and using this layer (I’ll give 
it a name like edge) apply the find 
edges filter (filter ¦ stylize ¦ find 
edges). Then still on the edge layer 
I then play with the brightness and 
contrast (image ¦ adjustments 
¦ brightness/contrast) a little to 
remove the very fine ‘textured 
detail’ that is unnecessary. I then 
will need to decide on a scale to 
produce the work, so I spend quite 
a bit of time looking at the most 
complex passages of the photo in 
the drawing version, zooming in 
and out with one question in mind - 
can I draw and paint this section at 
this scale?
If I make the work too big, which 
is easier, it will lose a great deal of 
visual appeal I believe. So my goal 
is to reproduce the work on a scale 
which is ‘just on’ that limit of tightly 
packed detail. I decided that the 
Osaka painting was not going to be able to be done on anything less than 120 x 128 cm. That means it fits nicely on a board (you 
have to allow some edge space for framing) which comes in 123 x 200 x 1.2 cm thick. With some of the smaller paintings like 
‘Carolyn Francis’ I have painted on a smaller scale than I would have preferred. This is because a smaller size is faster to finish 
but more difficult to do well, and I like to challenge myself. If I were asked to do it to the most realistic scale I would have done 
it at 60 x 78 cm, instead of 20 x 26 cm.
I then set the image size to suit this (image ¦ image size). I don’t want to resample the image so I de-check the box and change 
the size to suit in the document size box. I then set my grid preferences (edit ¦ preferences ¦ guides, grids, slices & count) to 
use a 1 cm grid. This is a ‘variable’ but after many years of experience I almost always use this scale of grid because it makes 
for a more accurate drawing. Now I have one more thing left to do - drawing a blue colored dot on the centre of every fifth 
grid square. This is to make ‘getting around’ a little easier and helps reduce timely drawing mistakes. It’s useful mostly in the 
drawing stage but it also gets used in the painting stage, although mostly this layer will be off.
The find edges filter will provide you with a line drawing. It might not look ‘right’ but 
copying this somewhat abstract looking view of the image is the key to my technique.
I can’t stress enough how important it is to get the preparatory stages right. So 
make sure you always have a backup of the original image file before you go making 
adjustments. You should end up with a psd file with three layers, the original image as 
the background layer, the edge layer and the dots layer.

11
DRAWING
DRAWING A GRID
Now I get the MDF board, measuring it up and marking the basic outside dimensions of the image. There is a planned offset all 
around of around 12 mm which add’s to the size and then I cut this with a circular saw. In all cases of my painting I only had to 
trim one side because I planned the size to fit the board. In all of the other cases I would make the image fit a store bought size.
The next step is to mark the grid up and if it is a smallish work (60 cm  x 90 cm or less) then it is relatively easy as a 1 metre 
rule will cover edge to edge. However large boards are more difficult because you need to establish a smaller set of grids within 
the larger grid. This process requires a lot of measuring and checking because drawing the grid out by as little as 1 mm means 
you will face problems in the drawing of the image later. So getting this stage right is very important, so do as I do and measure 
and check and check again and if you make a mistake, rub the line out carefully with an eraser and redo it. It will take several 

12
hours. Osaka took me eight hours. A smaller work like ‘Carolyn Francis’ or the ‘old Yarra Glen railway station’ should less than an 
hour including the time I would take in marking up the board to be cut and then trimming it from the larger sheet (I use 60 x 90 
x 0.3 cm for small paintings). 
I number every fifth square around my edges when marking out my grid and to aid in locating a particular square (there are 
15,360 in Osaka) I carry this methodology into the internal squares by placing a small blue pencil mark in the centre of every fifth 
square. If you look closely you can see these, 
THE DRAWING 
I usually start in the bottom left hand corner in a large work like 
Osaka, otherwise I will start with the most prominent or easy 
segment of the edge drawing layer. On a large work like Osaka I 
have to set the board up on my desk so that it sits flush with the 
front edge and the overhang on the rest of the board is supported 
with a couple of milk crates and an appropriate sized book. 
The next step involves looking for long lines that form the edges 
of the major structural components in the small area that you 
will work on. You then start to mark those lines in. The basic 
methodology of photorealism (well my way at least) involves 
breaking the image down into these smaller versions by using a 
grid. So when you draw you measure by eye where a line fits in 
relation to its singular square.
Take the example above, I say to myself when analyzing the image on the computer (which is zoomed in to make the detail 
easy to read); that line begins a little below the halfway point of that square, slightly to the right of the centre of the square 
and rises ever so slightly across two squares and a bit, then it angles up to the right a bit and leaves that square slightly to the 
left of the centre of the square. Then with that in mind I draw the line, checking it against the computer image. I proceed to 
lay in most of the important, straight lines like this first, in my area of work (which often is only 5 x 5 cm). I also look for marks 
that are somewhat like a known figure, things like a letter or a numeral are the most common that I can recognise. This makes 
it easier to get their ‘shape’ right. In the example above I have noticed a stretched letter five and a letter J that form part of 
other forms. Marks that are easiest to place are drawn first, then the rest is drawn in. You don’t have to finish one square before 
finishing another, sometimes it pays to ‘take a line for a walk.’ 
One of the most annoying things about this process is it’s easy to draw the small area of work in the wrong area. That’s what 
the dots are for but even then you must check often that you indeed are drawing in the right location. So I often double check 
and even triple check by 
counting the blue squares 
on the computer (say fourth 
square from the left, seventh 
square from the bottom) and 
then doing the corresponding 
to the board. There’s nothing 
worse than drawing for an hour 
or so and then when you take a 
break and look at the full view 
of your work and realise - ‘hey 

13
I have outlined above, and when this is done very accurately you will have an easier time  of the painting. However there are 
going to be times when the drawing is extremely abstract or detailed that it seems worthwhile to skip on the quality aspect. It 
can take me several hours to reproduce five squares wide by five squares high of such a chaotic tangle of lines and marks, but 
it makes painting the image so much easier. In my earlier work I would get disheartened at some of the more difficult drawing 
passages and when I came to painting found it was easier to do the drawing than try and paint it in. They were hard learnt 
lessons.
If I have to paint an image like the Carolyn Francis one where there are extremely abstract areas like the grass and trees I don’t 
put anything more than a few ‘markers’ in the drawing. These markers will be large outlines of highly contrasting areas. The 
chaotic abstract areas would have been impossible to reproduce and I have to paint a ‘likeness’ in. These areas that are not 
drawn in are almost universally things like gravel, leaves, grass etc. I will spend a bit of time to explain the painting process for 
these areas in the painting chapters.
You have to discriminate however, not every mark gets put down because the ‘find edges’ filter finds even the slightest changes 
in tonality within the image and shows a line. So switch between the two views and decide for yourself whether it needs to be 
drawn in, a lot of it chaotic ‘noise’. Which goes back to the question you will have to ask yourself when doing the first computer 
that doesn’t look quite right’. If this happens then rub it out and do it all again. I never said it was going to be easy. 
Much of what you see in the computer generated drawing is rather abstract and it is going to be quite difficult to draw. It pays 
to constantly look at the photographic version in order to understand just what it is you are drawing. However you should 
always attempt to copy as faithfully as possible the drawing image, and not draw what you think it should be.
The process of drawing a complex image such as Osaka is often best broken down into a simple square by square process as 

14
work, (brightness & contrast adjusting after the find edges) - do I move the slider a little this way or a little that way? You 
need some experience to make these decisions but I believe it’s best to leave a little noise in because you can always ignore it 
later. Even though I said that it’s best to draw ‘square by square’, it’s not always necessary and is easy to make ‘wrong location’ 
mistakes like this so I recommend drawing the long unbroken lines that may dominate a small or large portion of the image are 
that you are working on. Then you can return to fill in the small details, square by square. If you look at some of the photo’s 
you can see many long lines that cross many squares. They are almost always drawn first when I move to a new section of the 
work.
With the Carolyn drawing (which is only 20 x 27 cm.) you can see that details like the tree and it’s complex branches weren’t 
even given an outline. When it came to work on these areas a simple dark wash of color was used to position the basic shape. 
From there I could still see the square’s so I could still place the various features of the tree accurately. I still had to draw the 
important elements like Carolyn, the seat and the basic outlines of some of the graves. This particular work took 23 hours all up 
and only about two of them were needed for the drawing. This early stage of painting shows how in a photorealistic painting 
a simple few basic washes over a good drawing can make a painting begin to work very early in the process. Elements like 
the dress only required a few ‘internal lines to position the elements which are then finished with more detail by the painting 
process.
 
When I drew the Vanquish painting I knew that the abstract textured areas of the gravel was impossible to draw so it needed 
was just the  basic lines that denoted the cracks in the ground. As you can see this work uses a larger grid square and there are 
no blue dots in every fifth square. That’s because this was done many years ago and was not part of my work practice. It pays 
to keep an open mind about techniques and to always consider any extra steps, or different approaches, in order to improve 
ones abilities. With the sheer number of windows in the buildings I had to make written notes about these - something brief like 

15
‘32 x 54 for right building’ so I 
could count them and check that 
I’d got it right.
Every new work will present 
new problems so sometimes 
you have to be flexible with your 
process.
With another small work like the 
Old Yarra Glen railway station 
piece I decided to take a little 
more time with some of the 
abstract elements like the trees 
in the background. Some of the 
detail was ignored but the basic 
outlines were drawn in. The 
grass in the picture was treated 
in a similar manner because it’s 
only important to get the general 
location of these sort of things as the painting process itself is 
where you’ll refine and pick up the detail. That’s a general rule 
I have - if it’s highly detailed texture then just mark some basic, 
high contrast, elements in the position they’ll take up. 
 
A work like Osaka doesn’t really have much of this except at the top of the painting where the detail’s in the distance become a 
blur the further they are from the camera. There are a few elements that stand out so they’ll get drawn. The rest will be put in 
with the painting process.
 
The old railway station had a great deal of detail and it was necessary to choose where to apply it. The old locomotive was 
full of rust stains and patchy paint so many years of experience tells me that they too can forgo the drawing stage. However 
 A good photorealist painter knows that he is actually 
painting (and drawing) abstraction and then sets out to 
duplicate the close up abstract elements as accurately 
possible in the position of the picture that they occupy.

16
elements like the basic outlines, windows and all the long lines that make up the handrails were deemed to be important to be 
drawn as well as the myriad of ‘dots’ and small circles. I find that because these have an ability to make the basic underpainting 
stages easier they are important and get drawn in with some accuracy. What happens is when you go to lay in a wash of color 
you can just paint around them and they’ll still be there as you work on getting the color right and when that’s done a little dab 
of color is all that’s needed to bring them back up to the fore.
BASIC COLOR THEORY
First I need to explain that ‘color’ in the terms I will use throughout the book has three properties. If you are familiar with an 
image editing program like Photoshop then you will know that a color can be measured and can be described numerically. You 
can change the method of displaying this information in several ways. They are RGB, CYMK, Lab and HSB. We will use the same 
concept as the HSB system of describing color. Any other ideas of primary, secondary or tertiary are also unhelpful.
HSB stands for Hue, Saturation, Brightness. They are the three separate properties that make up every color. Hue is the proper 
term that most people use to describe the family of color. When we are talking about color we should say it’s a red hue or green 
hue, or even more accurately we should refine this to a red - orange hue in order communicate it’s ‘color’. Please do not call 
colors silly names like Irish moss green - that’s what paint manufacturers call their products and it’s not very helpful. Brightness 
(or value) is simply a scale of black to white values or lightness and darkness of a particular hue. Saturation (or chroma) is the 
scale of intensity or dullness of the hue, or its sometimes referred to as a colors key. These concepts are difficult to explain in 
words and the best way of learning this is to use an image editing program and use the color picker, set to HSV and do just that, 
pick a ‘color’ in the big square box and then proceed to adjust the three sliders and observe the effect it has on the final ‘color’.
When I paint I mix a range of expected colors but this often grows considerably, so I utilise many palettes and organise them in 
groups of hue. I will refer to twelve hues - they are red, red/orange, orange, orange/yellow, yellow, yellow/green, green, green/
blue, blue, blue/purple, purple, and purple/red. Most paintings will have three or four of these hues dominating the image and a 
few smaller areas will need the rest. The lesser needed hues can go in their own pallete but it is important to keep a separate 
green palette, green/yellow palette and green/blue palette for a painting like Osaka which is primarily made of these three hue 
family’s. 
I’ll analyze the image before making up my palettes up. I’ll usually have 
one row of lower key of the expected range of brightness for a hue and 
one of more intense saturation. It pays to have many ‘wells’ in the ice 
cube trays as you soon find that you’ll be modifying a color to suit a 
particular passage of paint then when you need that original color - it’s 
gone. That’s Ok - you’ll get plenty of practice in color matching when 
painting photorealism.
When I paint I use a small halogen desk lamp to illuminate my 
workspace, and when I go to mix or adjust a color I’ll often hold the 
palette up under the light and compare it to the small image file that I 
use to display a currently picked color (I find photoshop’s small square 
box in the color palette to be too small). I have the color picker always 
open and use the paint bucket to pour the sampled color into a small 
untitled file. The color palette tells me exactly what I need to know - just 
where the hue lies on the color wheel, its chroma and its brightness. 
- HSB - hue, saturation, brightness. It’s very important to match your 
color’s to what photoshop tells you, even when you think it’s wrong.

17
I picked a random, relatively high key blue to begin this demonstration 
of my approach to color. Notice that it is a blue that is ever so slightly 
biased towards blue/purple and it’s 240 degrees around the Photoshop 
Color Wheel. It also has a saturation value of 89%and a brightness of 
93%.
I have typed 9 into the Saturation box and this reduces the intensity 
of our 240 degreee blue making it a dull blue, a very greyed out light 
blue. Note the brightness still remains at 93%. 
Now I have altered the brightness to 20% which makes a very greyed 
out dark blue.
Adjusting the saturation to 89% makes a very dark blue. Note that each 
time I only adjust one of the three properties that makes up ‘color’.
Finally I enter the same values as the first example used but now the 
240 degrees is 127 degrees which gives us a green hue of the same 
saturation and brightness.

18
PAINTING
GETTING READY
You need to think and plan ahead with your plan of attack. Analyze the image - are their broad areas of relatively unchanging 
color, are there any strong geometric shapes in the image or are there very abstract areas full of ‘noise and chaos’, what, if 
any, colors dominate? These questions when answered will inform your plan of attack. You should paint large areas of relative 
unchanging color first, followed by strong geometric shapes, and then everything that’s left can be painted in. So with these in 
mind you should place your drawn up board on a desk (or any horizontal surface really) and the computer monitor nearby with 
all your brushes, paints, palettes etc. at hand. This can be a challenge with large works. I have managed to do with what I have 
and if you are dedicated you’ll find some arrangement. One word of advice - be very careful with paint, keep a towel underneath 
palettes if they are to sit on the board you are working on and be very careful not to knock them over! There’s nothing worse 
than spending countless hours only for a moment of clumsiness to ruin it all.
MIXING THE FIRST FEW PALETTES 
With everything in place begin to mix those first few palettes of paint. I’ll use one of my paintings - Vanquish as an example. 
First remember to organise your palettes according to hue. One each (sometimes I’ll even have two) for a particular hue. In the 
case of Vanquish the sky was a blue purple, so I used ultramarine at one end of the tray and added a little black (to take the 
chroma out a little) and then used a brush to place a small amount of this base hue in the following wells. The sky was almost 
uniform but got paler towards the horizon. I would then add white in  slightly differing quantities to give me a gradation of the 
same hue but different values. 
I would then ‘try them out’ on the board in a somewhat thin wash of paint, not to thin but thin enough so it still leaves the grid 
easily visible. The problem with acrylic paint colors is they tend to dry a little darker than when wet so this is a test of your 
color mixing accuracy, but it is okay if you don’t get it right first up, because there are many more layers going to be applied.

19
Lay broad flat areas down first and where they come up against detailed passages, take your time and use a smaller brush, 
being careful to paint up to but not to paint over the edge (don’t fret when you do just use a cotton bud to clean it up). Painting 
the first layer or two of the sky in the Vanquish painting would have taken many hours so don’t rush it. Once your happy with 
that first layer you can start to mix up the other palettes for the next most prominent or easy areas. I would have needed 
several for the buildings - red, red/orange, orange, orange/yellow, etc. - actually I would of needed to start mixing a lot of paint. 
I have a word of advice don’t be confident that a particular color is spot on in any of the three measurements - hue, chroma or 
value until your just about finished. Why? Because it’s very difficult for the eye to judge or compare with the original until all the   
surrounding colors are painted in. So the process is one of gradually ‘bringing up the paint’ over the drawing. My paintings are on 
average made up of four or more thin layers of paint.
Take the example on the right this is taken 
at the halfway stage after maybe ten hours 
of work, the basic colors are laid in but not 
that accurate yet, you can still see the grid, 
(better in real life than with the camera) and 
from here on in you just use the view on the 
computer monitor to inform - ‘what color, in 
what shape, and where’. Now that might seem 
a little weird but in this tutorial I can’t foresee 
the many different challenges and problems 
that viewers of this work will come up against 
but I would always want to keep that previous statement in mind. 
WHAT COLOR, IN WHAT SHAPE, AND WHERE
The best photorealistic paintings have a certain abstractness to their quality. Zoom right into a photo and you should see what 
I mean, there is a somewhat chaotic bunch of different colored shapes essentially that when you take a more distant view 
coalesce into the real, This is the true key to my photoreal painting. I try very hard to paint those exact same qualities that my 
computer shows me. If you can see the passage you are working on as being what it is then a good solution would be to rotate 
the image 180 degrees in photoshop and work upside down or maybe just turn the work 90 degrees. I had to paint most of my 
larger paintings using this technique because I simply couldn’t easily reach the far end of the board.
For chaotic areas like the gravelly asphalt in Vanquish I would have painted in the yellow parts, the red parts and the cracks etc. 
with a thin layer of paint and gradually layer by layer painted in an approximation of the type of chaos that I would see on the 
monitor. I would look back every few minutes or so at the monitor and see just the sorts of colors and ‘motifs’ that went into 
making the gravel look just like gravel. For areas like trees with leaves, if there is a basic drawing to follow - of say a prominent 
branch here and there, then you can quite satisfactorily replicate the original in the photo. Take your time and remember to 
follow the golden rule, - what color, in what shape, and where.
There are many techniques I use that are commonplace, hard edge, painting, wet in wet, blending, dabbing, dragging and 
wiping with my fingers, a rag or cotton bud. This tutorial isn’t about these things (there are plenty of other books covering this) 
but explains the things what I do, that aren’t common knowledge in the art world. And that’s where I had to create my own 
techniques along the way. I have endeavoured to cover as much as I can but for many of you that take up the challenge of 
photorealist painting you’ll encounter the same problems or new ones. I am quite happy to answer any questions you put to me 
but I would urge you to reread this and see if there are any hints already provided that you might of missed.

