
Avoiding Attack

Avoiding Attack
The Evolutionary Ecology of 
Crypsis, Aposematism, and 
Mimicry
Second edition
Graeme D. Ruxton
William L. Allen
Thomas N. Sherratt
Michael P. Speed
1

1
Great Clarendon Street, Oxford, OX2 6DP,
United Kingdom 
Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford.  
It furthers the University’s objective of excellence in research, scholarship,  
and education by publishing worldwide. Oxford is a registered trade mark of  
Oxford University Press in the UK and in certain other countries
© Graeme D. Ruxton, William L. Allen, Thomas N. Sherratt, & Michael P. Speed 2018
The moral rights of the authors have been asserted
First Edition published in 2004
Second Edition published in 2018
Impression: 1
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in
a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, without the
prior permission in writing of Oxford University Press, or as expressly permitted
by law, by licence or under terms agreed with the appropriate reprographics
rights organization. Enquiries concerning reproduction outside the scope of the
above should be sent to the Rights Department, Oxford University Press, at the
address above
You must not circulate this work in any other form 
and you must impose this same condition on any acquirer
Published in the United States of America by Oxford University Press
198 Madison Avenue, New York, NY 10016, United States of America
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
Data available
Library of Congress Control Number: 2018944296
ISBN 978–0–19–968867–8 (hbk.)
ISBN 978–0–19–968868–5 (pbk.)
DOI: 10.1093/oso/9780199688678.001.0001
Printed in Great Britain by 
Bell & Bain Ltd., Glasgow
Links to third party websites are provided by Oxford in good faith and
for information only. Oxford disclaims any responsibility for the materials
contained in any third party website referenced in this work.

Dedicated to
Katherine
Jioh
Frances, Finlay, Stuart, Kaelan, Nathan, Kyah, & Jakob
Yvonne

Acknowledgements
Many colleagues helped with reading text, sug-
gesting references, and providing figures. In no 
­particular order, we would like to acknowledge our 
thanks to Nicholas Scott-Samuel, Anna Hughes, 
Willem Bekkers, Jolyon Troscianko, Roger Hanlon, 
Sami Merilaita, Jennifer Kelley, Olivier Penacchio, 
Innes Cuthill, Sonke Johnsen, Malcolm Edmunds, 
Jayne Yack, Takeo Kuriyama, Ullasa Kodandaramaiah, 
Carlos Cordero, Bree Putman, Dinesh Rao, Pierre-
Paul Bitton, Lynne Isbell, Chris Hassall, John Skelhorn, 
Francis Gilbert, Thomas Reader, Krushnamegh Kunte, 
Karl Loeffler-Henry, Thomas Aubier, Mathieu Cho­
uteau, Kyle Summers, David Kikuchi, Mikhail Kozlov, 
Kevin Arbuckle, Butch Brodie, Johanna Mappes, 
Hannah Rowland, Bibi Rojas, Janne Valkonen, & 
Elena Zvereva. We apologize to those that should 
be on this list but slipped our mind. None of those 
named bear any responsibility for our errors and 
omissions.
The smartest thing the original three authors of 
Avoiding Attack did was bring in Will Allen as a co-
author—his drive, energy, and scholarship have been 
transformative—and every chapter of this book is bet-
ter for his contributions; some simply would not exist 
at all without him. The joint smartest thing we did 
was hire Rosalind Humphries as research assistant to 
coordinate the four authors. Her friendly, unflappable 
organization and very gentle chivvying were essential 
in completing this project and we all owe her a huge 
debt. Our final smart call was to stay with OUP—
Bethany Kershaw was exceptionally patient, always 
wise in her guidance, and everything we could 
hope for in an Editor; the production and copyediting 
side of the book (by Suryajeet Mullick and Julian 
Thomas particularly) was managed with collegiate 
efficiency and good grace. Julian in particular com-
bines a very keen eye for detail with exceptional 
intellectual engagement, professionalism, and wit. 
vii

ix
Contents
Introduction
1
Chapter summary
3
The sequence of a predator–prey encounter and investment across  
multiple defences
5
1	
Background matching
9
1.1	 Introduction, definition, mechanism, and chapter overview
9
1.2	 Empirical evidence of background matching
10
1.3	 The evolution of background matching
11
1.4	 Co-evolutionary considerations
14
1.5	 Ecological considerations
17
1.6	 Unresolved issues and future challenges
23
2	
Disruptive camouflage
24
2.1	 Introduction and overview
24
2.2	 Examples of disruptive camouflage
26
2.3	 The multiple mechanisms of camouflage by disruption
28
2.4	 Identifying and quantifying disruptive camouflage
33
2.5	 The relationship between disruption and other forms of protective coloration
35
2.6	 The ecology of disruption
36
2.7	 Unresolved issues and future challenges
39
3	
Countershading
41
3.1	 What is countershading?
41
3.2	 Examples and taxonomic distribution of countershading camouflage
43
3.3	 Countershading camouflage mechanisms
45
3.4	 Evolution
50
3.5	 Costs of countershading and counterillumination camouflage
51
3.6	 Developmental genetics of countershading
51
3.7	 The evolutionary ecology of countershading
52
3.8	 Countering countershading and counterillumination adaptations
54
3.9	 Unresolved issues and future challenges
55

x
Contents
4	
Transparency
57
4.1	 Definition and introduction
57
4.2	 The distribution of transparency across habitats
57
4.3	 How transparency influences ease of detection
58
4.4	 Evolutionary considerations
63
4.5	 Ecological influences
68
4.6	 Co-evolutionary considerations
70
4.7	 Unresolved issues and future challenges
70
5	
Secondary defences
72
5.1	 Introduction and overview of the chapter
72
5.2	 Evolution of secondary defence
72
5.3	 Consequences of variation in costs of secondary defence
76
5.4	 Ecology
78
5.5	 Co-evolutionary considerations
80
5.6	 Unresolved issues and future challenges
83
6	
Aposematism
84
6.1	 What is aposematism?
84
6.2	 Characteristics of aposematic organisms
84
6.3	 Evolution of aposematism
90
6.4	 Maintenance of aposematic signalling
95
6.5	 Ecology of aposematism
95
6.6	 Co-evolution of aposematic signals and receiver psychology
102
6.7	 Future work and conclusions
102
7	
The evolution and maintenance of Müllerian mimicry
103
7.1	 Introduction
103
7.2	 Examples
104
7.3	 Müller’s theory revisited
108
7.4	 Evidence for Müller’s hypothesis
110
7.5	 Questions and controversies
115
7.6	 Overview
127
8	
Advertising elusiveness
128
8.1	 Introduction and definition
128
8.2	 Empirical evidence of elusiveness signals
129
8.3	 Evolution
138
8.4	 Ecology
143
8.5	 Co-evolutionary considerations
145
8.6	 Unresolved issues and future challenges
146
9	
Batesian mimicry and masquerade
148
9.1	 Introduction and overview of the chapter
148
9.2	 Examples of protective deceptive mimicry
150

Contents
xi
9.3	 The origin of protective mimicry: selection or shared ancestry?
152
9.4	 The evolution of protective deceptive mimicry
153
9.5	 Ecological and phylogenetic considerations
169
9.6	 Associated phenomena in the evolution of Batesian mimicry and masquerade
171
9.7	 Overview
178
10	
Startling predators
179
10.1	 What do we mean by startle?
179
10.2	 Empirical evidence for the defence
180
10.3	 The evolution of startle defence
183
10.4	 Ecological aspects of startle defences
186
10.5	 Co-evolutionary considerations in startle defences
187
10.6	 Unresolved issues and future challenges
188
11	
Deflecting the point of attack
189
11.1	 Overview
189
11.2	 How deflecting traits work
189
11.3	 The taxonomic distribution of deflecting traits
190
11.4	 The evolution of deflective traits
198
11.5	 Ecology
202
11.6	 Co-evolutionary considerations
202
11.7	 Future challenges
203
12	
Dazzle camouflage
205
12.1	 Camouflage in motion?
205
12.2	 Examples of dazzle
206
12.3	 How does dazzle camouflage work?
210
12.4	 The evolution of dazzle
215
12.5	 The costs and benefits of dazzle
215
12.6	 The ecology of dazzle
215
12.7	 Future challenges in dazzle camouflage research
216
13	
Thanatosis
219
13.1	 Introduction and overview of the chapter
219
13.2	 Distribution
219
13.3	 Form: the mechanisms involved
221
13.4	 Evolutionary function: a cost/benefit approach
224
13.5	 Ecological considerations
225
13.6	 Co-evolutionary considerations
227
13.7	 Unresolved issues and future challenges
228
Synthesis
229
References
235
Index
277

(a)
(d)
(g)
(i)
(h)
(e)
(f)
(b)
(c)
Plate 1  Examples of countershading, counterillumination, and reverse countershading (see page 42 for details).

(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
Plate 2  Treatment groups for experiment on countershading (see page 48 for details).
Plate 3  An aphid employing defensive secretions against a ladybird larva (see page 73 for details).
yellow-and-black
5
4
3
2
relative survival
1
0
YA
YP
YT
YM
YL
BP
Plate 4  Relative survival of different types of artificial prey from an 
experiment to investigate aposematism (see page 88 for details).
Plate 5  A moth displaying conspicuous warning signals (see page 
89 for details).

1
(a)
(b)
0.8
0.6
0.4
20
25
30
Week
35
Survival
2,500
2,000
1,500
1,000
500
0
1718 1920 212223 24 25262728 293031 323334 35
Week
May
June
July
August
September
Count of nestlings ringed
Plate 6  Seasonal variation in emergence of avian fledglings from nests and survival of different types of artificial prey in an experiment to explore 
how naive individuals might affect selection for aposematism (see page 96 for details).

Plate 8  A Heliconius butterfly sitting on a Heliconia flower (see page 105 for more on these butterflies).
(a)
(b)
Plate 7  A beetle and a moth that may be Müllerian mimics (see page 104 for detail).

17
Eastern
Western
Tropical
Texan
Desert
Madrean
45
53
62
55
57
18
47
15
25
58
64
66
48
12
51
59
30
38
27
7
22
21
5
8
42
41
1
26
10
14
28
20
40
37
67
29
24
50
16
46
61
65
60
19
13
54
52
56
32
49
4
23
35
39
34
33
36
6
63
11
3
2
31
9
44
43
Plate 9  Velvet ant mimicry rings (see page 106 for detail).
Plate 10  Above are three millipedes of the Apheloria clade; below are three co-mimics (see page 107).

Plate 13  Below are hand-crafted clay models designed to resemble two conspicuous and one inconspicuous frogs shown above (see page 113 
for detail).
H. erato peterivana
H. erato emma
H. erato favorinus
Polymorphic
forms of
H. cydno alithea
H. eleuchla eleusinus
H. sapho candidus
(a)
(b)
(c)
Plate 11  Three field experiments to test Müllerian mimicry in butterflies (see page 111).
(a)
(b)
Plate 12  Right are the different morphs of artificial butterfly used in an experiment on Müllerian mimicry; left is an example of one as they were 
deployed in the field (see page 112).

species 1
species 2
(a) Müller’s “ﬁxed nk”
species 1
species 2
(b) Optimal Sampling Strategy
Plate 14  Predictions of the spatial distribution of different prey colour morphs from models employing different assumptions about predator 
behaviour (see page 121 for details).
Plate 15  A moth whose wing patterning is reminiscent of two flies feeding on a bird dropping (see page 151 for detail).
1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
Proportion of individuals
0.1
0.0
20
30
Latitude (degrees) of study sites
40
50
60
Proportion model (n = 356)
Proportion mimic morph (n = 348)
Plate 16  A transition zone between mimic and non-mimetic forms of a butterfly (see page 156 for detail).

(a) Original frame
(b) Motion map
Plate 19  Above is a frame from a video of several zebra moving in 
the same direction; below is the output of a computational model of 
motion detection applied to this image that implies a patchwork of 
motion signals in different directions (see page 210 for details). 
f. cyrus
f. polytes
f. theseus
f. romulus
Pach. aristolochiae
Pach. aristolochiae
black from
Pachliopta hector
Papilio polytes (Batesian mimic)
♂♀
♂♀
♂♀
♀
♀
♀
♀
♂
♀
Plate 18  Females of the non-mimic form of a butterfly look like the 
males (top line); whereas three mimetic forms (first column) look like 
distantly related species (second column – see page 168 for details). 
(a)
(b)
Plate 17  Left is a flesh-fly mimicking weevil; right is a potential flesh-fly model (see page 160 for details).

Avoiding Attack: The Evolutionary Ecology of Crypsis, Aposematism, and Mimicry. Second Edition. Graeme D. Ruxton,  
William L. Allen, Thomas N. Sherratt, & Michael P. Speed, Oxford University Press (2018). © Graeme D. Ruxton,  
William L. Allen, Thomas N. Sherratt, & Michael P. Speed 2018. DOI: 10.1093/oso/9780199688678.001.0001
Introduction
In 2004, the first edition of ‘Avoiding Attack: The 
Evolutionary Ecology of Crypsis, Warning Signals, and 
Mimicry’ by Ruxton et al. was published. The book 
aimed to provide a systematic and up-to-date review 
and synthesis of widespread anti-predator defences. 
In it, we focussed on sensorially mediated defences 
and the many factors that underpin these adapta-
tions, aiming to set out the state-of-understanding 
in the fascinating world of anti-predator adapta-
tions, and highlight which topics within the field 
seem most ripe for further investigation.
Since the publication of the first edition, many 
research opportunities have been realized, and our 
understanding of the diverse and captivating strat-
egies that have evolved in nature has developed 
significantly. In light of this, we here present a sec-
ond edition of Avoiding Attack. We have strived to 
update and develop our previous work, particularly 
in areas where scientific advance has been most 
radical in the past 13 years, including: mechanisms 
of crypsis, understanding among-species variation 
in anti-predator defences through evolutionary 
genomics and phylogenetics, and the causes and 
consequences of variation in secondary defences. 
Since the first book, emphasis in the field of anti-
predatory adaptations has also shifted from a very 
mechanistic perspective to an integrated under-
standing including broad evolutionary and eco-
logical consequences of adaptations; we hope that 
this new book broadens our previous focus to con-
sider these consequences more systematically. To 
do so, most chapters now follow a similar structure 
where appropriate, first discussing the natural his-
tory and key examples of a defence, before shifting 
to explain the mechanism via which it works to pro-
mote survival, followed by the evolutionary history 
and costs and benefits of the trait. We then review 
the ecological factors that the trait responds to, as 
well as co-evolutionary considerations. Each chapter 
then finishes with an open section where we outline 
what we see as key unresolved challenges and pro-
pose some more-or-less easily achievable potential 
avenues for resolving these. In addition to our sub-
ject focus, we have broadened our author-base too, 
bringing Will Allen on board to compensate for sen-
escence in the original three.
As with the previous edition, our own interest in 
predator–prey interactions remains as strong as 
ever, but we would also argue that general scientific 
interest in anti-predatory defences and signals has 
never been greater, as evidenced by recent high-
profile reviews and special editions of well-known 
journals (Cuthill et al., 2017; Caro et al., 2017). There 
are very few species for which perception by their 
predators or prey is not a major influence on fitness. 
Hence the phenomenon of predation and the many 
sensory adaptations surrounding it remain of great 
ecological and evolutionary significance.
Interactions between predators and their prey 
can often usefully be broken down into a sequence 
of stages, beginning with 1) encounter (spatial and 
temporal proximity), and leading through: 2) detec-
tion, 3) identification, 4) approach, 5) subjugation 
and, ultimately, 6) consumption (see Endler, 1991; 
Caro, 2005). In the literature, anti-predatory defences 
employed by prey individuals ahead of subjugation 
(stages 1–4) are typically referred to as ‘primary 
defences’, affecting the likelihood of the predator 
physically contacting the prey. While much of this 
book focusses on primary defences, we also consider 
‘secondary defences’—those adaptations which act 
once subjugation (or contact) has begun (stages 5 and 
6). We think this view of a predator–prey interaction 
as a sequence of stages (Figure 0.1) is a powerful 

2
AVOIDING ATTACK
conceptual tool for understanding co-evolution of 
investment by the parties involved, and so we 
devote the second section of this chapter to a fur-
ther exploration of this sequence.
There are no perfect defences. No animal has 
evolved a defence that gives 100 per cent protection 
against all possible predatory threats. This is not 
surprising. Predators will often evolve to counter-
act defensive developments in their prey, and 
defences can be expensive to maintain. A suit of 
armour might offer you protection from surprise 
attack from a medieval swordsman; but you can 
easily imagine how exhausting walking about in 
that armour might be, and how it might limit your 
ability to go about all sorts of daily activities (not to 
mention how it might limit opportunities for repro-
duction). Thus we would expect organisms to invest 
judiciously in anti-predator defences. In the context 
of the sequence of a predation event, we might 
expect that if prey invest strongly in being able to 
flee effectively from predators then they do not also 
invest in costly secondary defences too. Aside from 
simultaneous heavy investment in two defences 
being unattractive from a fitness perspective, it may 
be impossible from a design perspective. Our notional 
suit of armour likely makes fleeing from an onrush-
ing swordsman impossible. Similarly, design trade-
offs exist between trying to hide from predators using 
camouflage and signal to predators using conspicu-
ous coloration.
In terms of general trends across defences acting 
at different stages of the predation process, we can 
make some predictions. A predation event can end 
at different points in the process, so for a prey type 
that has several defences that act at different stages 
of the process, the earlier-acting defence will be 
employed more often. This does not necessarily 
mean that the earlier-acting defence will be more 
honed by evolution; it probably does mean, how-
ever, that if the two defences have costs that are 
imposed every time they are engaged, then high 
costs can be maintained for the late-acting defence 
rather than the early-acting one. The stakes get 
higher for the prey the deeper into the sequence a 
predation event gets as it becomes less likely that 
the prey will be bailed-out by a later-acting defence. 
Similarly, the deeper into a predation event we 
move the more time and effort the predator will 
have invested in that attack and the less easily it 
should be convinced to give up on this particular 
prey item. Thus, we can see obviously very expen-
sive defences—such as autotomy of body parts—
occurring as very late-acting defences.
Naturally occurring predation is unpredictable in 
space and time, in large part because we would 
expect predators to exploit any predictability in 
prey to increase predation rates (and for prey to exploit 
predator predictability to reduce predation). Further, 
naturally occurring predation can often be adversely 
affected by the presence of human observers. This 
creates real challenges studying predation in the 
field and, as a generality, these challenges increase 
as we advance through the sequence of a predation 
event. If we switch from the field to the laboratory 
Encounter
Detection
Identiﬁcation
Approach
Subjugation
Consumption
Pre-contact predation sequence
Post-contact predation sequence
Primary defences
Secondary defences
Anchoresis
(seek refuge)
Transparency
Disruptive
camouﬂage
Deﬂection
Death
feigning
Example
defence:
Figure 0.1  The classical predation sequence from search to subjugation (continuous lines) and examples of anti-predator behaviours that have 
evolved to inhibit specific stages of the sequence (dashed lines). These behaviours can arise pre-contact (as primary defences) or post-contact (as 
secondary defences) with the predator. Behavioural responses range from inhibiting search (by fighting back or seeking refuge, for instance) to 
inhibiting consumption (by death feigning, for instance).

INTRODUCTION
3
then ethical issues often arise, especially when 
studying anti-predator adaptations in vertebrates. 
Again, these challenges generally increase as we 
move deeper into the predation sequence. So this 
book is in large part a celebration of the fantastic 
ingenuity of generations of researchers in inventing 
an extraordinary diversity of imaginative solu-
tions to the challenges of our field. It greatly helps 
that the researchers you will find in our reference 
list are exceptionally diverse in their background: 
you will find individuals that would be comfortable 
describing themselves as one or more of the follow-
ing: naturalist, ethologist, animal behaviourist, ani-
mal ecologist, evolutionary biologist, vision scientist, 
psychologist, physicist, biochemist, or mathemat­
ical biologist.
Chapter summary
One widespread primary defence is crypsis, an 
umbrella term for the various strategies organisms 
use to prevent detection. These are covered in Section 
1 of the book: Chapter  1 discusses background 
matching, an adaptation that remains relatively under-
studied, perhaps because as ‘standard’ camouflage 
it is unfairly considered less interesting than other 
defences. Among other things, we aim to show how 
understanding background matching addresses 
important issues in evolutionary biology, such as 
the maintenance of polymorphisms. As achieving 
highly effective background matching in a complex 
environment is very hard to achieve, there is room 
for other types of crypsis. In Chapter 2 we explore 
disruptive camouflage, a topic that has perhaps 
seen the largest advances since the first edition, 
which contained a four-page review that concluded 
there was little empirical evidence for disruption. 
While background matching aims to minimize the 
signal sent to the receiver, disruptive camouflage 
aims also to increase the sensory noise sent to 
receivers by creating false edges and features that 
make detection or recognition of an animal’s out-
line and shape difficult. Detecting an object and rec-
ognizing what it is are conceptually distinct pro­cesses 
but they are functionally related, and while a preda-
tor can detect that something is present without 
­recognizing what it is, the reverse cannot occur. Dis­
ruptive camouflage exploits features of its viewer’s 
perceptual processes such as edge detection and 
figure-ground segregation to achieve camouflage.
Chapter 3 goes on to explore countershading, a 
term which describes the common colour pheno-
type where the surfaces of an animal that orient 
towards the sun are darker than surfaces that face 
away from the sun. The number of camouflage-
related mechanisms that might select for counter-
shading is considerable. We list six, including three 
that fall under the banner of self-shadow conceal-
ment, the hypothesis that animals gain protection 
from predation by hiding their self-cast shadows. 
Thus a major task of this chapter is in clearly explain-
ing and distinguishing these alternative mechanisms. 
Our interest in countershading is about light and 
vision. Countershading occurs because ambient 
light is generally highly directional in nature—there 
is no other sensory system that is likely to be 
­subverted by some equivalent of countershading 
because there is nothing analogous to the direc-
tional nature of ambient light in other modalities—
although there is strong directionality in extrinsic 
thermal radiation and the earth’s magnetic field, 
these are not used in predator–prey interactions.
Concluding Section  1, we discuss the cryptic 
nature of transparency and silvering in Chapter 4. 
Transparency adaptations are only common in pela-
gic habitats and it is important to note that they are 
not the same as invisibility—reflection and refrac-
tion still occur, potentially creating visible features. 
Interestingly, transparency and polarization vision 
might be linked phenomena, but recently there has 
been more scepticism of this idea. Silvering, by con-
trast to transparency, is only common in mesopel-
agic habitats. Silvering presents a similar solution to 
transparency, but allows organs to be opaque with-
out reducing crypsis; we cover some of the down-
sides of this adaptation.
In Section 2 of the book, we go on to consider 
adaptations through which prey can avoid attack 
after they have been detected. Prey species may 
evolve traits that render themselves unprofitable to 
predators and ways of advertising these defensive 
qualities. Chapter  5 first covers the nature of 
­secondary defences, such as armour, spines, and 
­toxins. These are the adaptations that underpin and 
co-evolve with the defensive advertising described 
in Chapters 6 and 7 on aposematism and mimicry. 

4
AVOIDING ATTACK
We thus need to understand secondary defences to 
understand defensive signalling fully. Further, the 
existence of secondary defences will affect selection 
on other defences in camouflage. Secondary def­ences 
can protect the bearer but also may offer ­protection 
to other individuals that the predator subsequently 
encounters. Plants are discussed more in this chap-
ter than any other. Camouflage is hard for plants 
because of the demands of photosynthesis and 
­limits on mobility. Their lack of mobility also robs 
them of fleeing as a defence, or seeking shelter in 
protective environments like burrows, factors that 
favour heavy investment in secondary defences. In 
Chapter 6, we look at aposematism, where a sec-
ondary defence combines with a warning signal 
that ­advertises possession of the defence to pred-
ators. Aposematic signals normally seem to have a 
visual component. Aposematism has evolved many 
times and there has been convergent evolution 
towards some signal phenotypes such as repeating 
bands of dark colour interspersed with yellow, 
orange, or red. In recent years fascinating new find-
ings have emerged and the chapter focusses on 
these discoveries, for example evidence that selec-
tion for aposematism changes spatio-temporally—
particularly in non-tropical regions aposematism is 
less effective at the time of year when many pred-
ators are young of that year that have not yet 
learned to avoid aposematic signals.
Chapter 7 turns to look at the occurrence, evolu-
tion, and maintenance of defence through Müllerian 
mimicry. Müller’s original theory made a lot of sim-
plifying assumptions about the way in which pred-
ators behave when faced with unfamiliar prey, but 
recent experiments and theory have helped identify 
how and why predators decide whether to sample 
these prey. In so doing, this work has helped reveal a 
much greater range of situations in which we might 
find Müllerian mimicry. Most examples we find of 
Müllerian mimicry are invertebrates, although it is 
also well known in vertebrates such as poison dart 
frogs and catfish. We discuss how mimicry rings and 
spatial mosaics are two particularly important and 
interesting features of the biogeography of coloration; 
hybrid zones between morphs are an excellent place 
to study selection and speciation processes. Previous 
work has been heavily focussed on avian predators, 
but they are not the only visual predators and we dis-
cuss exciting prospects for non-visual and multi-
modal mimicry that are beginning to emerge. Finally, 
Section 2 concludes with a discussion of elusiveness 
in Chapter 8, and how prey signal this to predators 
through pursuit deterrence and perceptual adver-
tisement. These strategies are distinguished from 
aposematism on the basis that prey are not signalling 
their difficulty of capture rather than the presence of 
a post-capture defence. Elusiveness signalling is an 
area where theory is strong and there are now many 
empirical examples of elusiveness signalling, espe-
cially from terrestrial vertebrates.
The final section of the book, Section 3, concerns 
anti-predatory defences that are focussed around 
misleading predators in one way or another. We 
first look at the evolution and maintenance of 
Batesian mimicry and masquerade in Chapter  9. 
Here we proceed with a healthy degree of caution, 
pausing before ascribing resemblance between two 
species as mimicry: it might be shared ancestry, or 
the result of sharing a similar environment (conver-
gent evolution). We also aim to avoid story-telling 
on the basis of perceived resemblance of the putative 
model and mimic to humans—who are unlikely to 
have similar visual and cognitive systems to agents 
of selection that lead to mimicry. Masquerade has 
attracted a great deal of interest in the past decade, 
and we now review a number of these recent stud-
ies, as well as their implications. By contrast, Batesian 
mimicry has long been understood theoretically, 
and its properties have been supported by lab and 
field studies. These studies not only demonstrate its 
occurrence, but also the fine-scale predictions of the 
theory (such as the nature of the underlying fre-
quency dependence). Nevertheless, since the first 
edition there has been some exciting progress on a 
range of topics including uncovering the genetics of 
some polymorphic Batesian mimics, laboratory 
experiments on the ways in which natural predators 
classify profitable and unprofitable prey which dif-
fer in several traits, and experimental and theoretical 
work on how and why imperfect mimicry is not 
improved upon by natural selection. Fascinatingly, 
evidence thus far suggests that different mimetic 
species use very different underlying genetic archi-
tectures. The role this has in explaining differences 
in mimicry systems is an interesting avenue of dis-
cussion and future research.

INTRODUCTION
5
In Chapter 10, we consider startle defences, pro-
viding a new definition and discussing such fascin-
ating adaptations like eye mimicry. We also present 
a discussion on whether distress calls in prey spe-
cies might be startle signals. Chapter 11 then looks 
into deflective signals which influence the position 
of the initial contact of a predator with the prey’s 
body in a way that benefits the prey. Here the inter-
esting questions are how this mechanism interacts 
with other defences and how predators allow them-
selves to be manipulated in this way. We next present 
a new chapter, Chapter 12 on dazzle camouflage, a 
putative anti-predator defence that was only briefly 
noted in the first edition, but that has now been sub-
ject to intensive experimental research such that we 
felt it deserved its own chapter. Readers may be 
familiar with dazzle from photographs of warships 
painted with high contrast geometric shapes. The 
idea is that bold patterns on moving prey may cause 
predators to misjudge the speed and trajectory of 
prey, hampering pursuit and capture. Experimental 
support for this is very mixed, and we are also not 
yet clear whether dazzle effects occur in natural sys-
tems. This chapter aims to review what we cur-
rently do and do not know about ‘camouflage in 
motion’. Finally, in another chapter new in this edi-
tion, Chapter 13 discusses the intriguing defence of 
death-feigning, or tonic immobility, in which prey 
adopt a relatively immobile state that can often be 
visually reminiscent of a dead individual. Like deflec-
tion, the interesting questions are how this mechanism 
interacts with other defences and how predators 
allow themselves to be manipulated in this way.
Before moving on to these issues, we want to fin-
ish this introduction by returning to the concept of 
predation as a sequence of events. We feel that the 
sequential aspect of a predator–prey interaction is 
fundamental to a holistic view of linkages between 
all the defences that we are about to consider indi-
vidually in the rest of the book.
The sequence of a predator–prey 
encounter and investment across 
multiple defences
As discussed in the previous section, this book will 
review the varied forms of anti-predator sensory 
defences; examining, for each, aspects of natural his-
tory, of mechanism, of ecology and evolution. Before 
we do this in earnest, however, we first pause (briefly) 
to consider that prey defences are often multiple; 
camouflaged prey may also be good at rapid move-
ments that lead to escape from nearby predators, 
chemically defended, warningly coloured, and mim­etic 
prey may also use camouflage or employ tough 
integuments to protect themselves from predation. 
Hence here we briefly pose two general questions 
that should in our view permeate our thinking 
about prey defences: how many defences should a 
prey deploy, and what kind(s) should it use?
Perhaps the simplest explanation for the use of 
multiple defences is that they act at the same time, 
and tend to maximize survival of a prey from an 
encounter with a predator. Camouflage and noctur-
nal activity may both contribute to reduced appar-
ency of prey to diurnal predators, hence combining 
them may decrease risk of detection, perhaps syner-
gistically. Prey that deploy chemical defences often 
use multiple toxins that act simultaneously. Examples 
of simultaneously acting defences are not then hard 
to find, but they may not be the whole story.
A more complex reason for multiple defences 
could be that prey defences have a predictable 
sequential organization, designed around the struc-
ture of attacks. As discussed earlier in the chapter, 
John Endler (1991) argued that an attack by a predator 
on its (animal) prey is typically composed of a 
sequence of six stages:
	1)	 encounter (spatial proximity)
	2)	 detection
	3)	 identification
	4)	 approach
	5)	 subjugation
	6)  consumption
At each stage in this sequence the prey organism 
can put up one or more  lines of defence with the aim 
of preventing, interrupting and stopping the attack. 
Interested readers are recommended to read Malcolm 
Edmunds’ (1974) and Tim Caro’s (2005) texts which 
both develop the idea that defences evolve to reflect 
the typical sequences of events during an encounter 
between predators and prey.
An animal prey may, for example, hide to prevent 
encounter (stage 1), and detection (2), use masquerade 

6
AVOIDING ATTACK
and cryptic coloration to prevent detection (2) and 
identification (3), perhaps form aggressive defensive 
groups to prevent approach (4). They may alterna-
tively have a startle display or use vigilance and 
rapid escape behaviours to prevent approach (4). 
They may violently retaliate, perhaps using stings, 
spines, or bites, and/or deploying irritating or toxic 
chemicals (secondary defences), to prevent subju-
gation (5) and consumption (6). At each stage in the 
sequence that Endler identified, one or more defences 
could be deployed by a prey animal, and they will 
often operate sequentially, as some defences are 
typically used only if earlier-acting defences have 
failed to stop the predation event. We can now ask 
whether there is one or more general framework(s) 
within which we can begin to evaluate how many 
and what kinds of defences prey need.
There are interesting parallels between the organ-
ization of biological and human military defences. 
Both concern protection of valuable yet vulnerable 
targets, seeking optimal deployment of costly defen-
sive ‘assets’. A relevant military tactic is ‘layered 
defence’ in which sets of defensive resources,  
such as border security, naval warships, and inter-­
continental ballistic missiles, are deployed in 
sequence; when a first line of defence fails against an 
incoming threat a second line of defence activates to 
­minimize further risk, and after that perhaps a third 
or fourth defence. In the military theory literature, 
layered defence has been described as follows 
(Wilkening, 2000). Suppose that there are m  defence 
levels and Li is the probability that a warhead passes 
through the ith layer of an army’s defence. The prob-
ability that the target is not  destroyed, Kw, is
	
K
L L
L
w
m
=
−
1
1
2...
	
(0.1)
The probability that the target survives an attack 
then increases with the number of defensive levels 
and the efficacy of each level. Suppose the defence 
at each layer is only moderately successful, Li = 0.5. 
In the case of only one defence layer, the probability 
that the target is not reached and destroyed is  
Kw =1−0.5 = 0.5; for two layers Kw=1−0.52 = 0.75; when 
there are four sequentially acting defensive layers, 
however, KW  is now much greater 1–0.54=1−0.0625 = 
0.9375. Hence, layering of several moderately effective 
defences leads to a high probability of survival from 
an attack. The maths here can, of course, be applied 
directly to sequentially acting organismal defences 
(including plants, microbes as well as animals). 
Defensive layers can operate at any of the stages of 
predation that Endler envisaged. There may, further-
more, be several defensive levels within a stage of pre-
dation. Thus a prey animal could use several defences 
in sequence to prevent subjugation—for example 
sharp spines, tough exterior, and secretion of irritating 
chemicals. We argue here that a sequential organiza-
tion of defences provides a useful general framework 
within which to think about the organization of pro-
tective phenotypes.
Thus we can now ask: when should a prey dis-
perse defensive investment across defensive levels 
or put all of its investment in a single level? 
Equation 0.1 illustrates the diminishing nature of 
incremental survival benefits as more and more 
defensive layers are added to a set of defences. The 
first layer in our example makes a much bigger 
contribution to survival (here 0.5) than the second 
(0.25), the third (0.125) and so on. If, as seems 
likely, there are costs associated with defences then 
we can see limits on the number of defences that it 
is optimal for a prey to invest in. Imagine, for 
example, that sequentially acting defences are 
­rel­atively cheap to construct and maintain, but at 
their best each provides little protection, i.e. the 
survival benefit saturates at a low value. Here, 
multiple levels of defence could be optimal to pro-
vide high levels of protection in a cost-effective 
manner. In contrast, a very effective (and indeed a 
very cost-effective defence) may be sufficient on its 
own, and effectively block the evolution of any 
later-acting defences (this has been called strategy-
blocking, e.g. Britton et al., 2007).
We suggest that this integrated approach to defences 
that act in sequence can be important in directing 
research questions. For example, much of the early 
part of this book focusses on mechanisms that gen-
erate camouflage and crypsis. We can now ask: how 
often is camouflage so effective that it blocks the 
need for later-acting (secondary) defences, such as 
repellent toxicity (and hence, how often are camou-
flaged prey edible)? Or, how often is camouflage 
cheap but relatively ineffective and hence followed 
by a sequence of further defences that act after 

INTRODUCTION
7
camouflage has failed, such as rapid escape and 
repellent toxicity?
An integrated-sequential view of defences can be 
informative too in helping to determine what kinds 
of defence should be invested in, not merely the num-
ber of defences. An organism that protects itself by 
reliably deterring enemies before they make con-
tact, for example by camouflage and crypsis or by 
defensive grouping or warning coloration, suffers 
no injuries to its tissues at an encounter. In contrast, 
an organism that relied only on chemical defence 
may survive encounters but would more likely pay 
costs that follow from having its tissues ruptured 
during the attack, or from loss of fluids and other 
resources. Hence, might we expect selection to favour 
investment in the ‘before contact’ primary defences, 
over those that operate as secondary defences, dur-
ing contact between prey and their predators? An 
additional point is that the ‘lifestyle’ of an organism 
is surely influential on the kinds of defences that are 
deployed. Sessile organisms, for example plants 
and some animals such as barnacles, cannot use 
movement as a defence, so hiding, evasion or rapid 
variation in group size is not possible. The intrinsic 
apparency of the organism in its situation may deter-
mine the overall investment and type of defences 
used (cf. plant apparency hypothesis, see Stamp, 
2003). For example, many forms of cactus and adult 
barnacles are both exposed and highly vulnerable 
to predation, and both defend themselves with 
robust physical defences, shells or spines respect-
ively that will prevent attack by a broad range of 
predators.
A final consideration with respect to sequential 
defences is that earlier-acting defences will, by def-
inition, be deployed more frequently than later-acting 
defences (equation 0.1, and Endler,  1991). For a 
given effectiveness of defence, therefore, earlier-
acting defences will reduce per capita mortality 
more than later-acting defences and therefore be 
under stronger natural selection. Can we then expect 
selection to work harder to make earlier-acting 
defences more efficient and effective than later-acting 
defences? Selection on predators for adaptations that 
overcome early-acting defences should also be 
stronger, making defences better in absolute terms, 
but relatively no more effective. Earlier-acting 
­defences may also tend to be less effective than 
later-acting defences.
The relative efficacy of multiple defences is per-
haps more easily studied in plants than many ani-
mals, because risks from enemies can be more easily 
assessed over a long period in sessile organisms. 
Thus in a meta-analysis Carmona et al.  (2011) found 
that variation in traits that act at the earlier stages of 
attacks (varied flowering times, growth and morph-
ology, and physical defences) predicted susceptibil-
ity to herbivory more strongly than variation in 
forms of chemical defence, which offer a late stage 
of defence. This makes sense in our framework of 
sequential defences (equation 0.1); since effective 
chemical defences are then the last line of attack, 
variation in these traits will be less influential on 
survival than variation in earlier-acting defences. 
This interpretation would be consistent with John 
Endler’s (1991) view that it is in the interests of vic-
tims to interrupt predation at early stages in order 
to save energetic and time costs, and to reduce risks 
of injury (and see Broom et al., 2010).
There are relatively few theoretical treatments of 
layered defence in the biology literature. Notably 
Frank (1993) considered the importance of ‘sequen-
tial defence’ models of hosts and their parasites. 
Here a parasite must successfully cross m  barriers 
to gain any benefit from infection. Frank compares 
this to models of simultaneous defence in which 
there is only one defence layer, but with more than 
one defence in operation. Broom et al. (2010), in 
contrast, separate defence investment into the two 
general layers of primary and secondary defences. 
They use analytical and numerical solutions to 
determine the different scenarios that favour alter-
native outcomes (no defence, both primary and sec-
ondary investment, primary or secondary investment 
only). One intriguing prediction is that in some cir-
cumstances there may be very little fitness difference 
between alternative strategies, so that diversifica-
tion in defensive organization within clades may be 
strongly influenced by processes of drift. Species 
that hide and use camouflage may be as persistent 
as those that use warning coloration and toxicity to 
defend themselves (and see Stamp & Wilkens, 1993). 
Recently, Bateman et al. (2014) looked at a two-prey, 
one-predator system where prey can differ in their 

8
AVOIDING ATTACK
investment in primary and/or secondary defences. 
They sought to identify the condition where one 
prey type could invade a system where the other 
initially dominated numerically, but found that this 
was critically dependent on the fine detail of how 
costs and benefits of different types of defensive 
investment were described.
So far we have considered the simple scenario in 
which prey defend themselves against a single type 
of enemy. Nature is unlikely ever to be that simple, 
however, and defence systems must protect prey 
against multiple enemies which may have different 
modes of attack, and require different kinds of 
defence (see the excellent review in Greeney et al., 
2012). Animal prey may have to defend, for example, 
against predators of different sizes and levels of 
mobility and against enemies such as ants or parasit-
oids which have different modes of attack to large 
predators. Rojas et al. (2017), for example, recently 
showed targeting of alternative defensive secretions 
by wood tiger moth (Arctia plantaginis) toward differ-
ent kinds of enemy (here ants and birds). There are 
field-based measures of animal prey survival based 
on alternative forms of protection (see for example 
Lichter-Marck et al., 2015; Carroll & Sherratt, 2013); 
how­ever, the plant literature provides quantitative 
insight of relevance. As part of their meta-analysis, 
Carmona et al. (2011), determined whether alterna-
tive defences offered protection to different kinds of 
herbivores. Their results show support for the idea 
that multiple types of defence evolved to protect 
against different types of herbivore. Chewing insects, 
for example, were deterred from damaging plants 
(expressed as per cent leaf area lost, biomass reduc-
tion etc.) by variation in gross morphology (size, 
number of branches etc.) and by variation in life his-
tory variables (flowering time, growth rates), whereas 
herbivores that pierce and suck plant fluids were not 
deterred by these traits (see Table 1 of Carmona et al.). 
Specialist herbivores were particularly deterred 
from damaging plants by physical defences and life 
history variation, whereas generalists were not 
­det­erred by these variables.
We suggest then that an important empirical ques-
tion is the extent to which different defences in nat-
ural systems evolved independently, each to protect 
against different types of enemy, or because they are 
deployed in sequence against enemies. What seems 
to lack systematic investigation is whether stages in 
the sequence of an attack (early or late) tend to be 
more generalized and function across sets of enemy 
types or more specific and function only against spe-
cific enemies. Endler (1991), and Broom et al. (2010) 
have argued that primary defences tend to be applied 
generally to sets of different predators, whereas sec-
ondary defences may be more specialized. Cryptic 
coloration may, for example, protect individual prey 
against visual detection by a range of predators, but 
secondary defences such as toxins could operate 
more specifically. We think that this is an interesting 
area for further research.
In summary, while this book is largely structured 
around individual types of defence: different forms 
of mimicry, disruptive camouflage etc., we do not 
wish to suggest that defences are best viewed in iso-
lation. Hence at the outset we emphasize that it is 
common for prey to deploy more than one form of 
defence (see Blanchard & Moreau, 2017 for a highly 
integrative approach to the biology of defences). 
Three reasons for multiple defences have been iden-
tified: simultaneous action to maximize survival at 
a stage of encounter, organization across sequen-
tially operating defences, and multiple types of 
enemy. There are no doubt others, and we encour-
age readers to keep in mind the potential for inte-
gration of defences as they read the rest of the text.

Avoiding Attack: The Evolutionary Ecology of Crypsis, Aposematism, and Mimicry. Second Edition. Graeme D. Ruxton,  
William L. Allen, Thomas N. Sherratt, & Michael P. Speed, Oxford University Press (2018). © Graeme D. Ruxton,  
William L. Allen, Thomas N. Sherratt, & Michael P. Speed 2018. DOI: 10.1093/oso/9780199688678.001.0001
CHAPTER 1
Background matching
1.1  Introduction, definition, mechanism, 
and chapter overview
In this chapter we describe the phenomenon known 
as ‘background matching’ in which an animal’s col-
oration resembles the background against which it 
is observed. The adaptive function of such matching 
in colour patterns is to reduce the likelihood that a 
prey will be detected by its predators, or a predator 
detected by its prey, though we focus on the former. 
Here we will review evidence that background-
matching coloration works in this manner. We sub-
sequently consider how natural selection causes the 
evolution of background matching, focussing on the 
nature of frequency dependent selection and poly-
morphism, including the role of so-called ‘search 
images’ in predators. Finally, we consider ecological 
considerations that apply generally in the study of 
background matching, notably how variation in 
colour patterns of backgrounds limits the effective-
ness of this defence mechanism. We argue however 
that visual background matching need not be perfect 
in order for detection to be hindered. One of several 
reasons for imperfect background matching is that 
organisms can be viewed against a range of different 
backgrounds and so adopt appearance traits that 
offer some degree of matching against several of 
these. We start, however, with a brief discussion of 
the terminology that relates the mechanism of back-
ground matching to the wider categories of crypsis 
and camouflage.
In the recent edited volume ‘Animal camouflage: 
mechanisms and function’ Stevens & Merilaita (2011) 
propose that the term crypsis is used for strategies 
that hinder detection by predators, whereas camou-
flage refers ‘to all forms of concealment including 
strategies to prevent detection . . . as well as those 
preventing recognition’, which include for example, 
disruptive coloration (Chapter 2) and masquerade 
(Chapter 9).
Visual crypsis thus incorporates multiple strat­
egies, including countershading, transparency and 
silvering (which we discuss fully in Chapters 3 
and 4 respectively) and must also include aspects of 
behaviour that contribute to reduced likelihood of 
detection.
Most obviously, though, the term crypsis invokes 
the phenomenon known as background matching, 
which describes situations where ‘the appearance 
generally matches the colour, lightness and pattern 
of one (specialized) or several (compromise) back-
ground types’ (Stevens & Merilaita, 2011). The 
authors also offer an elaboration of this definition 
which both clarifies aspects of the definition and 
describes the underlying mechanism, stating: 
‘Comparison of local features over the retina is used 
in subsequent visual processing to distinguish an 
object from the background (called figure-ground 
segregation). Thus if the appearance of an animal 
does not match its background closely enough, a 
viewer will potentially detect a marked deviation 
in the local features between the animal surface 
and its adjacent surroundings. This facilitates the 
detection of the animal as something that is not a 
part of the background. Background matching is 
therefore an adaptation that decreases the deviation 
in features between the appearance of the animal 
and its background to counteract the figure-ground 
segregation.’
These definitions seem clear and effective to us; 
however, we make the following points.
First, many authors use the terms crypsis and cam-
ouflage interchangeably. However, we agree with the 
terminological framework of Stevens & Merilaita 

10
AVOIDING ATTACK
(2011) and keep some distinction between the terms 
in this book.
We feel there is utility in the definitions adopted 
in Stevens & Merilaita (2009a) where crypsis refers 
to traits that hinder detection, whereas camouflage 
is a broader term that refers to traits that hinder 
detection and/or correct recognition of a prey indi-
vidual. By this argument camouflage would encom-
pass all the mechanisms considered to function in 
crypsis, disruptive coloration plus masquerade. We 
note however that this definition could also encom-
pass mimicry of conspicuous, warningly coloured 
prey, which is not usually considered a form of cam-
ouflage (Chapter 9). There may be merit in this use 
of the term camouflage since it is in a sense a form 
of concealment of identity. Other readers may, how-
ever, prefer to limit the use of the term camouflage 
to colour patterns that do not draw a predator’s 
attention to the organism per se.
A second point is that the concepts of crypsis and 
background matching can readily be extended to 
modalities other than vision (as considered in depth 
by Ruxton, 2009), and indeed could be applied 
multi-modally. Conceptually, if the environment in 
the absence of the organism stimulates the senses of 
an observer in characteristic ways, then background 
matching in another organism involves aspects of 
the organism stimulating the senses of the observer 
in ways that resemble the background and thus hin-
der detection of the focal organism.
A third point we make here is that although the 
above description of background matching is 
couched in terms of a cryptic animal, there is good 
evidence that crypsis can apply to plants as well as 
animals (see Niu et al., 2017 for evidence of crypsis 
related to local background matching in different 
morphs of a plant), just parts of organisms, groups 
of organisms, or indeed to objects made by animals 
(e.g. see Bailey et al., 2015 for evidence that some 
avian nests are adapted for improved background 
matching).
Finally we agree with Merilaita et al. (2017) that 
camouflage, including background matching, con-
sists of a suite of adaptations to the perceptual and 
cognitive systems of receivers that aims to reduce the 
signal-to-noise ratio of stimuli utilized by searchers 
to detect, localize, and identify targets. We also agree 
with them that a focus on mechanistic functions is 
likely to be more fruitful that a focus on describing 
appearance types, a perspective we aim to follow in 
all our chapters on camouflage.
In the next section (1.2) we consider the empirical 
evidence for background matching in natural sys-
tems and discuss the distribution of this adaptation. 
We then consider evolutionary and co-evolutionary 
aspects of background matching (1.3 & 1.4), before 
turning to how background matching is affected 
by the ecology of predator–prey interactions (1.5). 
Finally we consider unresolved questions and oppor-
tunities for further research (1.6).
1.2  Empirical evidence of background 
matching
Organisms that seem to humans to offer uncanny 
levels of background matching are staples of nat-
ural history TV programmes. However, to us, the 
most persuasive evidence for background-match-
ing adaptations comes from species that behav-
iourally select their microhabitat and orientation 
so as to enhance similarity to features of the back-
ground, and species that change aspects of their 
appearance in ways that enhance background 
matching. For example, many freshwater fish are 
able to adjust their pigmentation to match the 
background (Kelley et al., 2017; Kelley & Merilaita, 
2015). Similar observations have been made for 
cuttlefish (e.g. Buresch et al., 2011; Hanlon et al., 
2009). Other bottom-dwelling fish actively choose 
substrates on which they achieve good back-
ground matching (Tyrie et al., 2015). Lovell et al. 
(2013) demonstrated that birds that lay their eggs 
in simple scrapes can preferentially select sub-
strates that maximize background matching of 
their eggs. Moths landing on bark often orientate 
according to patterning of the background in a 
way that enhances background matching and hin-
ders detection (Kang et al., 2012).
There is also experimental evidence that organisms 
that appear to humans to be highly background 
matching are also challenging for non-human 
observers to find (e.g. Merilaita & Dimitrova, 2014). 
The classic example of selection by predators driven 
by the degree to which prey match the background 
remains the peppered moth Biston betularia, a poly-
chromatic species with light and dark morphs. As 

Background matching
11
coal burning increased throughout the industrial 
revolution dark melanic morphs increased in fre-
quency relative to the light morph, supposedly 
because they suffered lower predation at daytime 
resting sites on dark surfaces. Since 1970, with the 
introduction of pollution controls, there has been a 
rapid reversal with pale morphs becoming more fre-
quent, thought to have been caused by visual pred-
ators selecting against melanics at rest on today’s less 
sooty surfaces. After decades of uncertainty about the 
underlying mechanism(s) driving morph fluctu-
ations, Michael Majerus conducted a properly con-
trolled experiment to test the predator selection 
hypothesis, releasing 4864 moths of different morphs 
then recording resightings of them over a six-year 
period. This experiment, reported by Cook et al. 
(2012a) after the death of Majerus, confirmed that 
differential bird predation against melanic pep-
pered moths occurred at a rate sufficient in magni-
tude and direction to explain the recent rapid decline 
of melanism in post-industrial Britain. These data 
provide the most direct evidence yet implicating 
camouflage through background matching and bird 
predation as the explanation for the rise and fall of 
melanism in moths.
Not all organisms are camouflaged. Part of the 
explanation for this is the costs of adopting a cam-
ouflage strategy. First, since background matching is 
enhanced by adoption of certain microhabitats and 
behaviours (e.g. benefits through stillness, or adopt-
ing certain orientations relative to background elem-
ents) then there may be ‘loss of opportunity’ costs to 
background matching. For organisms that seek out 
microhabitats that enhance background matching 
there may be additional locomotion costs in search-
ing for and reaching these microhabitats. There are 
also physiological costs associated with production of 
the pigmentation required for background matching. 
These costs may be recurring for organisms that 
change appearance in order to track changing back-
grounds, or in organisms that shed and replace their 
outer covering.
From the argument above we can predict that 
background matching should be most prevalent in 
species whose natural range offers predictability 
and uniformity of background, but this is a difficult 
hypothesis to test. In large part the problem here is 
that characterizing backgrounds and measuring 
degree of background matching of different targets 
within them is difficult. Fully quantifying the 
appearance of even a very simple background (e.g. 
the sky or a snowfield) is challenging. We can 
describe the average colour and average brightness 
relatively easily, for example—but quantifying spa-
tial and temporal variation in appearance is much 
more challenging (Allen & Higham, 2013). A com-
plete quantification of the level of background 
matching of a single target for a single observer in a 
single snapshot would require measuring all of the 
different visual parameters on which objects can be 
separated from the background (e.g. colour, lumi-
nance, edges, and conjunctions of these such as 
shape and texture), for both the target and the back-
ground, as they would be perceived by the obser-
ver, and with reference to how parameter changes 
affect detection probability. This is hugely challen-
ging, and yet it still comes short as it ignores the 
differences between the sensory systems of the mul-
tiple observers organisms aim to hide from, and the 
temporal variation in the relationship between fore-
ground and background attributes (e.g. the sun 
passing behind a cloud, movement in the target or 
background, or target movement to a different 
background). The usual approach taken is to meas-
ure just one or two attributes known to be relevant 
(e.g. colour difference) and use this as a proxy for 
the overall level of background matching. This has 
the consequence of restricting the range of predic-
tions that can be tested, so it is exciting to see 
approaches being developed that make collection of 
richer measurements more straightforward (e.g. 
Troscianko et al., 2017), though there are still con-
siderable methodological challenges to overcome 
(Maia & White, 2018).
1.3  The evolution of background 
matching
1.3.1  Polymorphism of background-matching 
forms
We now consider how background matching can 
be reconciled with the frequent observation of poly-
morphic coloration in cryptic species. Ford (1940) 
defined genetic polymorphism as the occurrence 
in the same locality of two or more discontinuous 

12
AVOIDING ATTACK
forms of a species in such proportions that the rar-
est of them cannot be maintained only by recur-
rent mutation from the other forms. This section 
will consider a number of different mechanisms 
via which selection for background matching in a 
population might lead to polymorphism. The 
main mechanisms produce frequency-dependent 
per capita predation risk on prey morphs, and care-
ful exposition of this requires a detour into the 
complex maze of terminology used to describe 
frequency-dependent selection.
1.3.2  Definitions related to frequency-
dependent predation
There is a strong body of experimental evidence for 
frequency-dependent predation: increased per cap-
ita predation risk for the common morph increases 
relative to less common morphs (e.g. Allen, 1989a; 
Reid, 1987). Whilst there is general agreement that 
frequency-dependent predation often occurs, iden-
tification of the mechanism behind it in any particular 
case can be challenging because possible mechanisms 
may act together and because different mechanisms 
can produce very similar behaviours. Here we focus 
on the potential mechanisms related to detection 
of prey, though there are additional post-detection 
mechanisms that can also lead to frequency-
dependent effects (Endler, 1988; Greenwood, 1984; 
Sherratt & Harvey, 1993).
Let us consider a situation where a predator 
includes two prey morphs of the same species in its 
diet (labelled prey types 1 and 2). Over a certain 
time period, the predator eats E1 of type 1 and E2 of 
type 2. The densities of the two prey types in the 
environment are N1 and N2. We follow Murdoch 
(1969) and Cock (1978) (amongst others) in defining 
the predator’s preference between their two prey 
types (p12) by:
	
E
E
p
N
N
1
2
12
1
2
=
	
(1.1)
Of course p12 is a relatively uninformative measure 
of preference for one morph over another: in prac-
tice it is often difficult to separate a genuine ‘liking’ 
for one prey type over another from circumstantial 
details such as the true availability of alternatives. 
Nevertheless, if p12 is greater than one, then this 
indicates an overall ‘preference’ for prey type 1 over 
prey type 2; if it is less than one then the preference 
is reversed. In the boundary case, no preference is 
apparent. Most importantly, since p12 is equivalent 
to the ratio of the per capita mortality of prey type 1 
to the per capita mortality of prey type 2, it can be 
used as a simple measure of the relative fitness of 
these two prey types in the context of predation.
Say in a series of experiments, the ratio of prey 
availabilities (N1/N2) is varied, the ratio of consump-
tions (E1/E2) is noted, and p12 calculated. If p12 is 
unaffected by the ratio of prey availabilities, then we 
have a frequency-independent preference. Otherwise, 
if p12 increases as N1/N2 increases, then the predator 
displays a frequency-dependent preference, such 
that per capita predation rate on prey type 1 com-
pared to the per capita predation rate on prey type 
2 increases as prey type 1 becomes more common in 
the overall population. If p12 (as a measure of rela-
tive fitness) rises from below one to above one as 
(N1/N2) rises, then when prey type 1 is rare it will 
be selected for over prey type 2, and vice versa when 
it is common (see Figure 1.1). We call this form of 
frequency-dependence (pro-) apostatic selection 
(selection for the rare form). Conversely, when the 
preference for a prey type decreases from above 1 to 
below 1 as it becomes more common then such an 
outcome is referred to as anti-apostatic selection (see 
Figure 1.1). Following Greenwood (1984), we reserve 
the term potential pro-apostatic selection for a subset 
of cases analogous to pro-apostatic selection where 
p12 increases with increasing N1/N2 but one form is 
consistently at a selective advantage over the other 
(and potential anti-apostatic selection in a similar 
way). Naturally, you could invent more names for 
other outcomes (e.g. when p12 falls over a range of 
values of N1/N2 and then rises—as predicted in a 
theory paper of Sherratt & MacDougall (1995)) but 
this is perhaps going too far.
Of course, it is possible to consider cases in which 
the two prey types are separate species. Once again, 
preference for one prey type may cross the value 
of one as a prey type gets more common. Here the 
analogous form of positive frequency-dependent 
predation has been called ‘switching’ (Murdoch, 
1969).

Background matching
13
Be warned when reading the literature that not 
everyone adopts the definitions given above. The 
term ‘positive frequency-dependence’ can be particu-
larly confusing—it typically refers to cases where 
relative fitness of a prey type is positively related to 
relative frequency, but has sometimes been inappro-
priately interpreted in the converse: attack rates 
increasing on a prey type as it becomes more com-
mon (this is negative frequency-dependence). Most 
authors do not differentiate between ‘potentially 
­pro-apostatic selection’ and ‘pro-apostatic selec-
tion’, and refer to both as apostatic selection (e.g. 
Endler, 1988). Bond (1983) has called particular forms 
of apostatic selection ‘matching selection’ and anti-
apostatic selection ‘oddity selection’. Pro-apostatic 
selection has also been called ‘unifying selection’ by 
Pielowski (1959). ‘Reflexive selection’ (Moment, 1962; 
Owen & Whiteley, 1986) is also a synonym for pro-
apostatic selection (Allen, 1988a, b). Bewildered? 
The abundance of terminology reflects the general 
importance of frequency-dependent predation, and 
the fact that it has been observed in many different 
contexts. Hopefully, Table 1.1 will help (modified 
from Allen, 1989a).
1.3.3  Positive selection for polymorphism
In order to examine the role of frequency-dependence 
in the evolution of polymorphic crypsis, Bond & 
Kamil (2002) designed an ingenious experiment 
using birds that were trained to search a computer 
screen and peck at images of moths in return for a 
food reward. The population of moth images from 
which individual images were randomly selected 
to appear on the screen was allowed to evolve over 
time via a genetic algorithm, with offspring being 
slightly mutated versions of their parents. Selection 
for crypsis was introduced by allowing greater 
Anti–apostatic
b < 1
V > 1
Frequency
independent
preference for
prey type 1
Frequency
independent
preference for
prey type 2
V = 1
V < 1
b = 1
b > 1
Pro–apostatic
Proportion of prey type 1 in diet
Proportion of prey type 1 in environment
Figure 1.1   Graphs showing how the frequency-independent and frequency-dependent components of predator preference can combine to 
influence the relationship between the proportion of a prey type in the environment and its proportion in a predator’s diet. All nine graphs have 
limits 0.0–1.0. Here we have considered just two prey types (1 and 2) and used the Elton–Greenwood model (Greenwood & Elton,1979) to 
generate the graphs. The parameter b in the Elton–Greenwood model reflects the degree of frequency dependence in the preference (b < 1 
anti-apostatic, b > 1 apostatic), while the parameter V reflects the underlying frequency-independent selection (V > 1 preference for type 1,  
V < 1 preference for type 2).

14
AVOIDING ATTACK
representation of the least detected ‘prey’ in suc-
ceeding generations. Selection by the birds led to 
increased crypsis and greater phenotypic variance 
compared to control populations that were sub-
jected to no selection. Bond & Kamil interpret their 
results as a suggestion that polymorphism is 
caused by the birds displaying pro-apostatic selec-
tion. That is, a given morph is less likely to be 
detected by the birds if the birds have little recent 
experience of that morph because it is rare in the 
population. This interpretation was strongly sup-
ported as both phenotypic variance and crypsis 
increased to higher levels in the experiments with 
avian predators than in experiments with com-
puter-controlled selection that eliminated any fre-
quency-dependent effects.
However, an earlier experiment using a similar 
set-up demonstrated that polymorphism was not 
an inevitable outcome of this paradigm (Bond & 
Kamil, 1998). If all phenotypes are too easy for the 
birds to detect then there will be no selection, since 
all phenotypes are always found when they are 
presented to the birds. Conversely if a morph is 
introduced that is impossible for the birds to 
detect, then this will come to dominate the popula-
tion, reducing diversity. These experiments are a 
convincing demonstration of predator-induced 
selection for prey polymorphism of appearance 
(albeit in an artificial system). Further, this poly-
morphism seems to be driven by pro-apostatic 
selection.
One of the most popular explanations for pro-
apostatic selection is the formation of search images 
(Tinbergen, 1960). The term ‘search image’ has been 
used to describe an enormous host of activities 
related to foraging. This has led some (e.g. Dawkins, 
1971) to suggest that the term is too imprecise to be 
useful. Whilst we have some sympathy with this 
viewpoint, we use the term here, but clearly define 
what we mean by a search image in the following 
section.
1.4  Co-evolutionary considerations
Simply speaking there are a range of counter-adap-
tations predators can adopt to combat background 
matching by prey. Firstly, and least interestingly, they 
could switch to focus on prey that have poorer back-
Table 1.1  A glossary of terms relating to frequency-dependent predation. Adapted from Allen (1989a).
Term
Examples of use
Meaning
Frequency-dependent 
selection (fds)
Fisher (1930), Ayala & Campbell (1974)
Selection that results in a positive or negative relationship between relative 
fitness and relative frequency
Positive fds
Levin (1988)
Fds where relative fitness of prey is positively related to relative frequency
Negative fds
Partridge (1988), Antovics & Kareiva 
(1988), O’Donald & Majerus (1988)
Fds where relative fitness of prey is negatively related to relative frequency
Apostate
Clarke (1962)
Rare morph maintained by apostatic selection
Apostatic selection
Clarke (1962)
Negative fds by predators in the absence of Batesian mimicry
Apostatic polymorphism Clarke (1962)
Polymorphism maintained by apostatic selection
Pro-apostatic selection
Greenwood (1985)
= apostatic selection
Anti-apostatic selection
Greenwood (1985)
Positive fds by predators in the absence of Batesian mimicry
Potential apostatic 
selection
Greenwood (1984)
When the prey type taken is taken more often than expected by chance at all 
frequencies, and this selection increases with frequency
Switching
Murdoch (1969)
= apostatic selection (especially when prey are different species)
Matching selection
Bond (1983)
Apostatic selection (in matching backgrounds)
Oddity selection
Bond (1983)
= anti-apostatic selection
Reflexive selection
Moment (1962)
= apostatic selection (on massive polymorphisms)
Reflexive polymorphism
Owen & Whiteley (1989)
Massive polymorphism maintained by reflexive selection

Background matching
15
ground matching, or focus on foraging in places or 
under lighting conditions (e.g. specific times of day) 
when background matching is less effective. More 
interestingly, they could search the environment 
more carefully (likely at a cost of how quickly they 
can search the environment) and/or they could refine 
their search strategy to focus on the search for par-
ticular prey characteristics, forming a ‘search image’ 
for particular types of prey. We focus on these issues 
in this section.
1.4.1  Search image formation as a means of 
enhancing detection of cryptic prey
Following Dukas & Kamil (2001), we define a search 
image as 1.) a process of transitory attentional spe-
cialization that results in enhanced detection ability 
for particular cryptic prey types or characteristics 
(e.g. ‘a triangular shape on a wing-like feature’), 
and that 2.) follows from repeated visual detection 
of an item over a relatively short timescale. This is 
predicted to result in increased capture success for 
prey that match the search image, but decreased 
capture success for prey which do not match the 
search image. While this definition remains some-
what imprecise about an exact mechanism, a key 
criticism of Dawkins (1971), it does allow us to be 
explicit about the types of processes underlying our 
conception of a search image. Equally importantly, 
we are explicit about the types of processes that do 
not lead to search images under our definition. These 
include behavioural changes such as modification of 
search paths, and strategic decision-making about 
which detected prey items to accept or reject.
A search image is formed after repeated detec-
tions of a particular prey type (Pietrewicz & Kamil, 
1979), and requires further detections of that prey 
type in order to be maintained (Plaisted & Mackintosh, 
1995; and we refer readers to the reviews of Ishii & 
Shimada, 2010 and Skelhorn & Rowe, 2016). Though 
a feature of individual cognition, search image for-
mation may be influenced by observation of peers 
in social groups (White & Gowan, 2014). Search 
images should lead to relative protection for prey 
types when they are rare—promoting heterogen-
eity of prey types. This occurs because common 
prey types are more likely to be encountered so (pro-
viding prey types are equally cryptic in the absence 
of search images) are more likely to induce and 
maintain a search image for that prey type. This will 
lead to prey types being subject to disproportionately 
high predation when common.
It is important to remember that formation of 
search images need not necessarily lead to stable 
polymorphism. Formation of a search image for a 
common prey type may reduce the per capita likeli-
hood that a rare prey type is detected, but this reduc-
tion need not necessarily reduce this likelihood 
below that of the common morph, and so may simply 
slow rather than reverse a decline in the relative fre-
quency of the rare morph. However, search image for-
mation, and more generally pro-apostatic selection by 
predators on cryptic prey can provide an evolution-
ary pressure for the development and maintenance 
of polymorphism in prey species.
1.4.2  Control of search rate to enhance 
detection of cryptic prey
Frequency-dependent selection on cryptic prey can 
also arise from predators’ control of their rate of 
searching the environment. There is likely to be a 
trade-off between how rapidly an area is searched for 
prey and the efficiency of detection (fraction of prey 
in the scanned area that is detected: for empirical 
support for this conjecture see Gendron & Staddon 
(1983)). Further, cryptic prey may require a slower 
search rate to obtain a specified detection efficiency, 
compared to a less cryptic prey type. Gendron & 
Staddon (1983) argued that it would be optimal for 
predators to reduce their rate of search when cryptic 
prey types are common in the environment. However, 
when cryptic prey types are uncommon, compared 
to less cryptic types, the optimal strategy is to 
increase search rate. Although this will lead to a 
greater fraction of cryptic prey being missed, this 
will be more than compensated for by the larger 
number of less cryptic prey discovered. Hence, 
optimal control of search rate leads to a reduction in 
the per capita risk of detection to individuals of the 
more cryptic morph when this morph is rare. In this 
way, predator strategies involving control of the rate 
at which they search their environment can often 
explain empirical results that had originally been 
attributed to a search image effect (Allen, 1989b; 
Guilford & Dawkins, 1989a,b).

16
AVOIDING ATTACK
1.4.3  Comparing search image and search rate 
mechanisms
Optimal control of search rate leads to a reduction 
in the per capita risk of detection to individuals of 
the more cryptic morph when this morph is rare. 
However, per capita detection risk is always lower 
for the more cryptic morph than for the less cryptic 
morph (in the absence of search image effects). Thus 
(in the absence of any other differences between the 
morphs), frequency-dependent predation acts to 
increase the rate at which the relative frequency of 
the more cryptic morph increases. However, its fre-
quency would still increase in the absence of this 
effect. When the less cryptic morph is rare, it does 
not receive the same protection. In such circum-
stances the predator should slow up its search rate so 
as to improve its detection of the more cryptic prey. 
This will not decrease its ability to detect the less 
cryptic morph, indeed it may increase it. Thus, in 
contrast to search image formation, optimal search 
speed does not lead to protection for the less cryptic 
morph (which will always be discovered dispro-
portionately often), and so polymorphism may not 
be maintained. This difference allows distinction 
between the search rate control and search image 
mechanisms, even though both provide the ability 
to produce frequency-dependent selection. Under 
the search image mechanism, the rank order of per 
capita detection risk of different morphs can change; 
this is not true of the search rate mechanism. Hence, 
other things being equal, in a situation where search 
images do not occur, then the more cryptic of the 
two morphs will always have a fitness advantage 
and will steadily increase its frequency in the popu-
lation. Should a random perturbation to the fre-
quencies of morphs in the population or change in 
selection pressures mean that the more cryptic morph 
is at a low level, then control of search rate will 
act to strengthen the competitive advantage of this 
morph, and so may reduce the likelihood of sto-
chastic extinction. In this very specialized set of 
circumstances, optimal control of search rate act-
ing in isolation from other mechanisms (such as 
search image formation) may play a role in the 
maintenance of polymorphism.
An interesting comparison between the two mech-
anisms considered above involves comparing a 
monomorphic population to a polymorphic popu-
lation where all the morphs are equally cryptic. The 
search-image mechanism suggests that frequency-
dependent selection will occur in the polymorphic 
case, whereas the search rate hypothesis does not. 
The search rate model predicts entirely the same 
search rate in the two cases, and predicts that indi-
viduals of all prey morphs will be equally vulnerable 
to detection. Whereas the search image hypothesis 
suggests that polymorphism will reduce the preda-
tor’s performance, search images will either take 
longer to arise or will be less successfully main-
tained because the encounter rate of individual 
morphs decreases compared to the monomorphic 
case. Hence, in this special case where the morphs 
have equal crypsis, polymorphism is advantageous 
under the search image mechanism, but not the 
search rate one (Guilford & Dawkins, 1987; Knill & 
Allen, 1995). Knill & Allen (1995) found that human 
‘predators’ were less effective at detecting prey in the 
polymorphic case. Similarly, Glanville & Allen (1997) 
found that human subjects were slower to detect 
computer-generated prey displayed on a screen in 
trials where prey were polymorphic compared to 
monomorphic trials. The prey types were assumed 
to be equally cryptic, although this was not dem-
onstrated explicitly. However, these results tend 
to  support the suggestion that in these studies 
frequency-dependent selection occurred through 
search image formation rather than search rate 
control.
There is no reason why search image mechanisms 
and optimal control of search rate cannot occur sim-
ultaneously. Such a situation was explored theoret-
ically by Dukas & Ellner (1993). Their model does 
not explicitly use the phrase ‘search image’; how-
ever, such a phenomenon is implicit in the assump-
tions of the model. They assumed that prey detection 
requires information processing, and that the preda-
tor has a finite capacity for processing, which it must 
apportion to detecting different prey types. Increasing 
the processing ability devoted to a given prey type 
increases the chance that an encountered individual 
of that type will be detected. However, because of 
the finite processing ability available, increasing 
ability to detect one prey type can only be bought at 
the cost of reduced ability to detect other prey types. 
The other key assumption of the model is that the 

Background matching
17
more cryptic a prey type is, the more information 
processing capacity is required to achieve a specified 
detection level. These assumptions are motivated by 
consideration of neurobiological experiments mostly 
on humans (see references in Bernays & Wcislo, 1994; 
Dall & Cuthill, 1997; Dukas & Ellner, 1993; Dukas & 
Kamil, 2001). This model predicts that when prey 
are very cryptic, then the predator should devote 
all its processing capacity to detection of one type. 
However, as the conspicuousness of prey increases, 
so the diet of the predator should broaden, as it 
becomes advantageous for it to spread its informa-
tion processing capacity across a wider range of prey 
types. When the predator divides its ‘attention’ 
between several prey types, this division should not 
necessarily be even. If prey are cryptic, then the 
predator should give more attention to the least 
cryptic of the prey types; whereas if the prey are 
generally less cryptic then the predator should attend 
most to the least detectable type.
In summary, much heated debate has surrounded 
the concept of search images over the last 30 years. 
This debate has arisen because many other mechan-
isms (most notably control of search rate) can also 
produce very similar behaviour to search image for-
mation. This had led some to overstate evidence of 
search image formation, without logically exclud-
ing plausible alternative explanations. However, 
more recent studies do seem to have demonstrated 
the existence of this mechanism, and it does appear 
that search image formation (perhaps working in 
concert with other mechanisms, such as control of 
search rate) could potentially select and maintain 
polymorphism in cryptic populations. This has 
been demonstrated in the laboratory, but not yet in 
the field.
1.5  Ecological considerations
The key ecological issue for background matching 
is the overwhelming majority of organisms will be 
viewed against a range of different backgrounds. 
Even species that have very narrow microhabitat 
use (e.g. living on the bark of a particular tree spe-
cies) will be viewed by observers from a diversity of 
distances and angles, and under a range of different 
light conditions. There are two options here: we con-
sider organisms whose appearance is more-or-less 
fixed in ontogeny before turning to those organisms 
that have the ability to change appearance. Finally, 
we consider the effects of ecology on combining 
crypsis with other selection pressures.
1.5.1  Optimizing of background matching for  
a single appearance in visually variable 
backgrounds
A significant drawback to background matching as 
a strategy for crypsis is that almost all organisms will 
be viewed against a variety of backgrounds with 
varied appearances. Even if the habitat is physically 
homogeneous, then temporal change in light condi-
tions will change the nature of the background that 
the organism must attempt to match. Indeed, an 
organism can be viewed against two backgrounds 
simultaneously when viewed by two organisms 
with different visual sensory systems. This raises the 
question, should the organism specialize by maxi-
mizing its matching to one particular background, 
or should it seek a compromise that provides rea-
sonable crypsis against more than one background 
but which is not maximally effective against any 
one of them. This was addressed using a simple 
model by Merilaita et al. (1999). We outline a very 
slight generalization of their analysis below.
We assume two backgrounds (a and b). Let the 
probability of being viewed by a predator against 
background a be Va. The corresponding probability 
that the potential prey is not detected whilst in the 
predator’s view is Ca. The prey is always viewed 
against background a or b, so
	
V
V
a
b
+
= 1.	
(1.2)
Hence, the overall probability of being detected by 
a predator is
	
D
V
C
V
C
a
a
b
b
=
−
+
−
(
)
(
)
1
1
.	
(1.3)
The probability of escaping detection is
	
E
D
V
C
V
C
a
a
b
b
=
−
=
−
−
−
−
1
1
1
1
(
)
(
).	
(1.4)
In some cases, there is likely to be a trade-off between 
crypsis against the two backgrounds, and improved 
crypsis against one background can only be 
bought with reduced crypsis against the other. 
Mathematically, Cb is a declining function of Ca.

18
AVOIDING ATTACK
	
C
f C
b
a
=
(
) 	
	
df C
dC
a
a
(
) < 0.	
(1.5)
It is trivial to show that E has a turning point (i.e. 
either a maximum or a minimum) if there is a value 
of Ca that satisfies
	
df C
dC
V
V
a
a
a
b
(
) = −
.	
(1.6)
Further, this point is a maximum if, at that point,
	
d f C
dC
a
a
2
2
0
(
) < .	
(1.7)
Figure 1.2 describes this situation graphically. We 
assume that the prey individual is free to adopt any 
value of Ca from 0 (which maximizes crypsis against 
b but provides no crypsis against a), to a value A 
(which maximizes crypsis against a but provides no 
crypsis against b). If the shape of the trade-off curve 
is ‘convex’ like the solid line in the figure, and if 
there is a point where that line has gradient –Va/Vb, 
then the optimal strategy for minimizing predator 
detection is a compromise value that provides 
some crypsis in both environments. Increasing Va 
(or decreasing Vb) moves this compromise towards 
improving crypsis against background a, as we 
would expect. However, if no such point can be 
found, or the trade-off line is concave, like the broken 
line in the figure, then the optimal strategy is to 
specialize and maximize crypsis against one of the 
backgrounds. In the figure, the optimal strategy is to 
maximize crypsis against a providing
	
AV
BV
a
b
>
, 	
(1.8)
where B is the value of Cb corresponding to Ca = 0, 
i.e. the maximal probability of not being detected 
whilst in the predator’s view against background b. 
Otherwise crypsis against b should be maximized. 
That is, crypsis should be maximized in the environ-
ment where the product of the probability of being 
viewed by a predator and the probability of that view 
not leading to detection is maximized.
Hence, both background specialization and com-
promise can be predicted, a key determining factor 
being the shape of the trade-off between crypsis in 
one environment and another. We now look to give 
a more ecological description of this shape. Imagine 
a prey organism that specializes in crypsis against 
background b, and so adopts strategy Ca = 0. If it can 
increase its crypsis against a by losing a relatively 
smaller amount of its crypsis against b, then we 
have the type of convex shape of trade-off curve 
that can lead to evolution of an intermediate level of 
crypsis that provides some protection in both envir-
onments. However, if a little crypsis against a can 
only be bought with a relatively large decrease in 
crypsis against b, then we have a concave shape and 
background specialization is favoured. Merilaita 
et al. (1999) give simple examples of abstract back-
ground combinations that might lead to these two 
different types of situation; these are reproduced in 
Figure 1.3.
Of course, the situation can become much more 
complex than the simple example considered here. 
The costs associated with being detected need not 
be the same for detection against both backgrounds 
(since, for example, the predator may be more effect-
ive at capturing prey against one background). The 
trade-off curve can have both convex and concave 
segments, or can incorporate straight line segments 
and/or discontinuities, and many more backgrounds 
than two can be considered. In such circumstances, 
the adaptive landscape will be much more complex 
and there will be considerable potential for evolution-
arily stable polymorphisms. However, the essential 
1
Gradient =
0
0
B
A 1
Cb
Ca
– Va
Vb
Figure 1.2  The probability of not being detected when viewed 
against background b (Cb ) as a function of the equivalent probability 
against background a (Ca ). If the function is convex (like the solid 
line) and has a point where its gradient is −Va /Vb , then a compromise 
level of crypsis is optimal, otherwise the organism should maximize 
crypsis against one of the backgrounds.

Background matching
19
points of our analysis above will remain unchanged, 
specifically:
	1)  The optimal cryptic strategy for an organism may 
be one that does not maximize its crypsis against 
any one of the backgrounds against which it is 
viewed, but rather provides some measure of 
crypsis against a suite of the backgrounds that it 
is viewed against.
	2)  In some cases, specialization against one back-
ground will be favoured, in which case this will 
be the background against which the organism 
can maximize the rate of occurrence of viewings 
of it by a predator that do not lead to detection.
The case where specialization is predicted war-
rants further scrutiny. Let us return to our simple 
case of the two environments a and b. Let us imagine 
that AVa is only slightly bigger than BVb. The opti-
mal strategy is to maximize crypsis against back-
ground a. However, if there is a small change in one 
of the parameters, such that AVa becomes slightly 
smaller than BVb then this has dramatic consequences 
and now the optimal strategy is to maximize crypsis 
against b. This has important ramifications:
	•	 Two types of organisms could have very similar 
ecologies but adopt very different appearances 
because the difference in their ecologies means 
that they lie on different sides of the knife-edge 
described above and so adopt colorations that maxi­
mize their crypsis against different backgrounds.
	•	 If the environment inhabited by a population 
changes (perhaps only slightly), such that it moves 
to the other side of this knife-edge, then individ-
uals in that population that previously had the 
optimal choice of coloration can now find them-
selves with a coloration that is far from the opti-
mal. Evolution towards the new optimum may 
be particularly challenging as colorations only 
slightly different from the ‘old’ optimal may still 
be selectively worse than the current situation. 
An example of this is shown in Figure 1.4. Here 
we have a concave trade-off function shown in 
Figure 1.4a. This means that the turning point in 
D is a maximum, and so the optimal strategy is 
one of the extremes. Imagine, first, that we are in 
a situation represented by the solid line in Figure 
1.4b, Ca = A is the optimal strategy. However, 
imagine now that Va is changed such that we 
move to the broken line: now Ca = 0 is the best 
strategy. However a small mutation away from 
Ca = A produces an increase in detection rate D. 
Only a macromutation producing a Ca value less 
than β in the diagram would be selected over the 
strategy Ca = A.
	•	 Polymorphism within a population may be main-
tained by even slight fluctuations in the propor-
tions of different backgrounds that individuals 
experience, if those fluctuations continually move 
the system across the knife-edge.
In a follow up paper, Merilaita et al. (2001) reported 
the results of experiments with captive birds search-
ing for artificial prey. Birds were faced with one of 
two background types (differing in the size of pat-
terning). There were three types of prey: one which 
matched the small background pattern, one which 
(a)
(b)
Figure 1.3  Two hypothetical examples of heterogeneous habitats 
and animals relying on crypsis through background matching. In (a) 
the habitat consists of two different microhabitats, one with circular 
and the other with square elements. The two outermost of the four 
animals have adapted to the microhabitats with respective patterns 
only. The two animals in the middle, one with a circle and a square to 
the left and one with two hexagons to the right, represent 
compromised adaptations for crypsis in both microhabitats. 
Successfully compromised colorations give the trade-off between 
crypsis in these microhabitats a convex form. In (b) one microhabitat 
is black and the other is white. Again the outermost animals represent 
adaptations to one microhabitat only. However, this time the 
compromised colorations in the middle are apparently very poor, 
making the trade-off between crypsis in the two habitats concave.

20
AVOIDING ATTACK
matched the larger patterned background, and an 
intermediate-sized pattern. On the small-patterned 
background, small-patterned prey were most cryp-
tic (measured by mean time between prey discover-
ies), followed by the intermediate pattern, which in 
turn was more cryptic than the large pattern. On the 
large-patterned background, the small-patterned 
prey was least cryptic, but there was no difference 
between intermediate and large-patterned prey. 
This means that in a situation where both back-
grounds were encountered with equal frequency, 
the intermediately patterned prey would be the 
best protected of the three, and generally that cir-
cumstances exist where some intermediate type 
between the two extremes of background matching 
would be optimal. These results can be seen as sup-
portive of the theory presented in this section; how-
ever, further empirical study of this theory would 
be very welcome.
Houston et al. (2007) extended the modelling 
approach of Merilaita et al. (1999) by allowing pred-
ators control of which background they chose to 
search against. However, the key result of Merilaita 
remained—under some combinations of parameter 
values background specialism was selected in the 
prey, under other parameter value combinations 
compromise solutions flourished.
An interesting situation arises when backgrounds 
themselves can evolve in response to predator–prey 
interactions occurring against them, as is the case 
of flowers on which predators lurk to prey on the 
flower’s pollinators. This situation was modelled by 
Abbott (2010), with results predicting that flowers 
should match the appearance of predators when 
predator densities are high to prevent predators 
overexploiting the plant’s pollinators, and when 
pollinators are less discriminating as they are will-
ing to land on a flower even if it might contain a 
predator. Floral polymorphisms could evolve that 
both concealed and revealed ambushing predators.
The arguments in this section have many paral-
lels with the arguments of Edmunds (2000) on why 
some mimicry systems display poor mimicry such 
that humans can easily tell model and mimic apart. 
He suggests that under some circumstances evolu-
tion will drive a mimic species to specialize on one 
particular model species, whereas in other circum-
stances generalized mimicry of a number of differ-
ent models (necessitating imperfect mimicry of each 
one) will evolve (see Barnard (1984) for a similar 
idea). Further discussion of the evolutionary pres-
sures on the ‘perfection’ of mimicry can be found in 
Chapter 7.
Empirical demonstration of a natural organism 
having compromise appearance is challenging. We 
have already discussed why quantification of the 
degree of background matching to one particular 
background in challenging. In this case, we must 
add that exploration of compromise appearance 
requires identification of the backgrounds involved 
and the frequencies at which the organism is viewed 
by the observer against these different backgrounds. 
–Va
Vb
Gradient = 
1
(a)
(b)
B
A
0
0
D
1
Cb
Ca
0
0
Ca
A
1
β
Figure 1.4  (a) The trade-off between Ca and Cb is concave so 
specialization is predicted. (b) When Va is such that detectability (D ) is 
given by the solid line then Ca = A is the optimal choice, but if Va 
changes slightly so we move to the broken line, then Ca =0 is optimal.

Background matching
21
However, we have valuable empirical studies utiliz-
ing more artificial situations. Merilaita & Dimitrova 
(2014) trained wild-caught birds to search for artifi-
cial prey against two different backgrounds in an 
aviary and found that a compromise design offered 
as much protection as prey designed to provide a 
good match against one of the backgrounds (but 
sometimes found against the other background). 
Sherratt et al. (2007) explored a situation where 
humans were tasked with detecting prey presented 
on examples of two different backgrounds. They 
found that in general habitat specialists performed 
better than compromise prey, but the extent of this 
benefit varied considerably depending on the nature 
of the two backgrounds and the difference between 
them, and there were some situations where a com-
promise appearance could gain very similar protec-
tion to a specialist. In a very similar study, Toh & 
Todd (2017) found situations where compromise 
prey had lower net detectability than background 
specialists.
While most studies have considered very simple 
situations in which prey can be found on one of two 
backgrounds, Michalis et al. (2017) considered a 
more realistic situation where there is continuous 
variation in background appearance. They argue 
that, logically, in such a situation the optimal choice 
for prey to maximize protection through background 
matching should be to match the background that 
they are viewed against most frequently. They sup-
port this prediction with evidence using artificial 
prey pinned to trees and predated by wild-living 
birds, and with experiments using human search-
ing for targets on a computer screen. They note that 
Bond & Kamil (2006) demonstrated that when birds 
were trained to search for cryptic prey against 
backgrounds that showed fine-grained variation in 
background (i.e. such that the background changed 
on a spatial scale similar to that of individual targets), 
birds selected for a prey population composed of a 
shifting portfolio of different morphs through apos-
tatic selection. Initially this seems counter to the 
arguments of Michalis et al.; however, they suggest 
that the difference results from the importance of 
predator learning in Bond & Kamil’s experiments 
whereas theirs were designed to minimize learning 
by having prey at low densities and in different loca-
tions. In the absence of learning, therefore, match-
ing the most-common background is an effective 
strategy for prey, but once predators respond to this 
by forming a search image for that prey the condi-
tions exist for prey with alternative appearances 
to become advantaged via apostatic selection. The 
experiments of Bond and Kamil have another inter-
esting aspect; when the background was changed to 
a more coarse-grained structure where it was homo-
geneous on the spatial scale of targets, then pred-
ators switch from a strategy of extensively searching 
the whole environment to one where they focussed 
primarily on looking for prey on the parts of the 
environment with the currently most-profitable 
background. This behaviour reduced the effects of 
apostatic selection and led to a population that 
mainly just shifted in the relative frequency of 
morphs that offered a good match to one of the 
background types.
It is also worth remembering the issue that some 
backgrounds are fundamentally more challenging 
to detect targets against than others, regardless of 
background matching issues, as demonstrated ele-
gantly by Merilaita & Lind (2005) in experiments 
with wild-caught birds searching an aviary for arti-
ficial prey against control backgrounds. Further, 
prey can preferentially select such habitats over 
those that would confer a benefit through back-
ground matching (Kjernsmo & Merilaita, 2012).
1.5.2  Changing appearance to enhance 
background matching
Some organisms (e.g. cuttlefish) are known to change 
appearance in ways that seem to improve back-
ground matching on timescales of seconds. Other 
species can take minutes, hours, or days like some 
fish (Akkaynak et al., 2017; Smithers et al., 2017) 
and frogs (Kang et al., 2016). Others, such as crust-
aceans and insect larvae, change ontologically in a 
way influenced by environment but controlled by 
the timescale of their moults; still other species (such 
as many Arctic vertebrates) show seasonal variation 
(Stevens, 2016). With the exception of cuttlefish, this 
form of crypsis has been very understudied, as 
emphasized by a recent review by Duarte et al. 
(2017). From our perspective, there is much similar-
ity between issues raised by such within-individual 
change and within-population change discussed 

22
AVOIDING ATTACK
elsewhere in the chapter. However, additional ques-
tions worthy of more consideration relate to costs. 
First, exploring the costs of maintaining the ability 
to sense background (or some correlate—such as 
available food), and changes in appearance in 
response to this. Second, the costs of a time lag 
between a change in the background and a change 
in responsive appearance; or the costs of decreased 
reliability of correlates of background (such as the 
link between time of year and snow cover for verte-
brates that turn white in winter). Lastly, once these 
costs are better understood, we can ask how unpre-
dictable change in background has to be for such 
within-individual change in appearance to bring a 
net advantage. As the review of Duarte et al. empha-
sizes, we are only just beginning to scratch the sur-
face of these questions.
Eacock et al. (2017) describe how larvae of the 
peppered moth (Biston betularia) respond to match 
the appearance of the twigs that they rest on when 
not feeding. They observed that larvae that were sub-
ject to exposure to a diversity of twig backgrounds 
evolved a good match towards the appearance of 
one twig type rather than a compromise. The flexi-
bility in appearance is suggested by the authors as 
being linked to wind-based dispersal and ability to 
feed on a range of tree species, which means that the 
background an individual will experience cannot be 
predicted over ontological timescales. However, the 
lack of compromise might be linked, we suggest, to 
reasonably strong fidelity to a given tree and thus 
individuals uncommonly experiencing a range of 
backgrounds (twig colours) on shorter timescales.
1.5.3  Combining background matching with 
other functions
Since effective background matching depends on 
the visual abilities of the viewer, this can mean that 
an organism that does not appear cryptic to us is 
cryptic to its predators. One obvious example arises 
from inter-specific differences in colour vision. If an 
organism’s main predators are colour-blind, then 
matching intensity of light is important to crypsis 
but spectral matching is not. Similarly, detail in the 
background that falls below the acuity threshold of 
predators need not be matched. This can present an 
opportunity for signalling to conspecifics without 
impairing crypsis, if the cryptic species has higher 
acuity than its predators or if signalling to conspe-
cifics occurs under higher ambient light levels than 
predation events. For example, conspecific signal-
ling can involve small multicoloured spots that do 
not match the pattern of the background but which 
blend over the coarser spatial frequency of predator 
acuity to provide a good match to the background 
(for fuller discussion see Endler, 1991; Marshall, 2000). 
It has also been demonstrated that background 
matching can be combined with aposematic signal-
ling by using striped patterns that blend to a cryptic 
colour at a distance, but are effective warning pat-
terns when viewed close up (Barnett & Cuthill, 2014). 
Similarly, it has been suggested that certain avian 
alarm calls decay rapidly over distance, so nearby 
conspecifics can be warned about an overflying bird 
of prey without alerting the predator to the caller’s 
position (Klump et al., 1986; Klump & Shalter, 1984).
Some deep-water organisms may use red light for 
intraspecific signalling without giving their pos-
ition away to their predators (a ‘private communi-
cation channel’), since red light rapidly attenuates 
in water and (because of this) many deep-water 
organisms are not receptive to red light. Cummings 
et al. (2003) have suggested that UV may have simi-
lar advantages to aquatic organisms as a short-range 
intraspecific signal, because of high signal degrad-
ation over longer distances due to UV’s high pro-
pensity to scattering by water molecules. In such 
situations, we must explain why the predator has 
not evolved its visual system to detect intraspecific 
signals between prey individuals. This is relatively 
easy for generalist predators, since a diversity of 
intraspecific signals combined with physical trade-
offs in the visual system would prevent evolution of 
a system that could effectively detect the different 
signals of the predator’s suite of prey types. Prey 
individuals on the other hand have no need to 
detect the signals of other species that share the same 
predator, and so do not have the same constraint 
on their visual system. Hence, for these predators 
being a generalist presents sensory constraints that 
may prevent enhanced detection of ‘private chan-
nels of communication’. In contrast, explaining why 
a specialist predator has not developed the ability 
to detect the intraspecific signals of its prey is more 
challenging, but not impossible.

Background matching
23
One reason that specialist predators do not enhance 
their capacity to detect ‘private channels of commu-
nication’ is that prey generally have shorter gener­
ation times than their predators, producing different 
rates of evolutionary change. Furthermore, intraspe-
cific signalling may be essential for reproduction, 
where a prey individual that does not signal does 
not reproduce. In contrast, predator individuals 
that can detect intraspecific signals would do bet-
ter than those that could not, but those that cannot 
would still be able to contribute to the next generation 
(if the prey can also be detected by other means). 
Both this ‘life-dinner’ argument and the difference 
in generation times might allow the prey to evolve 
signals faster than their specialist predator can evolve 
to detect them. It is also worth remembering that 
specialist predators are uncommon, and generaliza-
tion over a number of prey types is the norm for 
predators (Brodie & Brodie, 1999a,b).
While the ways organisms have managed to com-
bine crypsis and conspicuousness are fascinating 
and illuminating, the more usual situation is for con-
flict. Many studies have shown that more exuberant 
intraspecific signalling leads to higher predation 
rates (e.g. Roberts et al., 2006). A neat example of the 
trade-offs organisms often make to balance camou-
flage and signalling was recently demonstrated by 
Kelley et al. (2016) who showed that male western 
rainbowfish (Melanotaenia australis) who darken 
their colour to improve their degree of background 
matching receive more aggressive interactions from 
rival males because skin darkness is also used to 
signal dominance. Subdominant males must there-
fore pay a cost in aggression from rivals to achieve 
better background matching. As subordinates were 
observed to change colour less than dominant males 
when placed on a dark background, this cost is 
apparently more severe than the cost of increased 
predation risk.
1.6  Unresolved issues and future 
challenges
An outstanding basic question is how the visual 
appearance of the background selects for different 
anti-predator strategies. Dimitrova & Merilaita 
(2009, 2011) show experimentally in a lab environ-
ment that background matching is more effective 
against more visually complex backgrounds, a result 
confirmed in field experiments (Xiao & Cuthill, 
2016). This implies that simple backgrounds should 
select for alternative strategies such as warning 
coloration. Whether this predicted relationship 
between background complexity and defence strat-
egy is seen in across-species patterns remains to be 
investigated.

Avoiding Attack: The Evolutionary Ecology of Crypsis, Aposematism, and Mimicry. Second Edition. Graeme D. Ruxton,  
William L. Allen, Thomas N. Sherratt, & Michael P. Speed, Oxford University Press (2018). © Graeme D. Ruxton,  
William L. Allen, Thomas N. Sherratt, & Michael P. Speed 2018. DOI: 10.1093/oso/9780199688678.001.0001
CHAPTER 2
Disruptive camouflage
2.1  Introduction and overview
Background matching coloration has several limita-
tions in protecting prey from detection and recog-
nition. For example the alignment of patterning 
between the organism and background may be off-
set, shadows may give away its form, and the out-
line of an animal may therefore remain quite visible. 
This creates opportunities for alternative strategies 
for improving crypsis, one of which is known as dis-
ruptive camouflage. Disruptive camouflage involves 
using coloration to hinder detection or recognition 
of an object’s outline, or other conspicuous features 
of its body. A classic example of disruption is color-
ation patterns that extend across the folded legs of a 
frog (Cott, 1940; Figure 2.1). By forming a continu-
ous pattern between the upper and lower legs and 
then across the foot, disruptive theory proposes that 
the frog is harder to find or recognize. This anti-
predatory benefit arises because the high-contrast 
patterns make the ‘true’ interior and exterior edges 
that visual predators use to find and recognize prey 
less apparent.
The most recent formal definition of disruptive 
camouflage is ‘a set of markings that creates the 
appearance of false edges and boundaries and hin-
ders the detection or recognition of an object’s, or 
part of an object’s true outline and shape’ (Stevens 
& Merilaita, 2009b, p.1). This definition highlights 
the dependence of disruption on the perceptual and 
cognitive processing of receivers. Whereas counter-
shading can be defined on the basis of phenotype 
alone, and background-matching camouflage by the 
relationship between the target and background, dis-
ruptive camouflage must  be explained with respect 
to how it works to prevent predator detection or 
recognition. Detection involves finding locations in 
a visual scene that contain features corresponding 
to the object class of interest (where is it?), and rec-
ognition involves determining if a set of visual fea-
tures corresponds to an object in a particular class 
(what is it?).
Like other anti-predator coloration strategies dis-
cussed in this book, the concept of disruptive cam-
ouflage originated in the work of Poulton (1890) 
and Thayer (1909), and went on to be substantially 
developed by Cott (1940). Writing about the cater-
pillar of the privet hawk moth Sphinx ligustri, 
Poulton noted that its ‘stripes increase protection by 
breaking up the large green surface of the caterpil-
lar into smaller areas.’ (Poulton, 1890, p.42). Thayer 
(1909) observed that objects with a very high level 
of background matching are often still easily detect-
able by their outline. For example, shapes cut from 
a patterned wallpaper can be picked up off a sheet 
identical to the one that they were cut from fairly eas-
ily because they have a conspicuous cut edge and 
pattern elements will likely misalign. There was early 
appreciation of the critical importance of animals’ 
outlines to detection and recognition, and there-
fore the advantage that might be gained by using 
coloration to interfere with the perceptual processes 
involved in finding object outlines (Cott, 1940). While 
the task of finding and picking out an object with a 
clear outline seems quite straightforward to us as act-
ors, in terms of visual computation it is enormously 
complex (Marr, 1982), and it is no great surprise that 
the colour and pattern of the object potentially makes 
the task more difficult in a number of distinct ways. 
A major topic in this chapter is therefore explaining 
the multiple mechanisms by which colour markings 
can create ‘false’ information and obfuscate ‘true’ 
information to improve camouflage.

Disruptive camouflage
25
The traditional approach (sensu  Cott) has been to 
organize disruptive mechanisms into ‘principles of 
disruptive camouflage’ (Cott, 1940). Each principle 
describes how an aspect of disruptive camouflage 
design might work to make detection or recognition 
of the object more difficult. Cott proposed his prin-
ciples with little by way of formal investigation and 
testing, and the predictions from each principle 
remained largely untested for several decades. 
Hence, as recently as 2005 ‘disruptive camouflage’ 
was accurately described as a ‘little studied principle 
of concealment’ (Merilaita & Lind, 2005, p.665), with 
no definitive experimental verification that disrup-
tion could work to improve camouflage. This changed 
rapidly, however, as a flurry of studies tested Cott’s 
ideas experimentally, providing support for the main 
hypothesis that disruptive principles can improve 
camouflage, independent of background matching 
(Cuthill et al., 2005; Merilaita & Lind, 2005; Schaefer & 
Stobbe,  2006). This line of research continues, and 
new studies that test and refine Cott’s proposals 
enter the literature annually. After consideration of 
these recent theoretical and empirical developments, 
Stevens & Merilaita (2009b) reduced the nine distinct 
principles of disruptive coloration that can be iden-
tified in Cott’s writing down to five: differential 
blending, maximum disruptive contrast, disruptive 
marginal patterning, surface disruption and coinci-
dent disruptive coloration (see summary of prin-
ciples in Table 2.1, illustrated in Figure 2.2).
There is much value in the ‘principles’ approach 
described in Table  2.1. Here, however, while con-
tinuing to use the terminology, we structure the 
discussion of disruptive camouflage mechanisms 
using an emerging contemporary approach which 
replaces the traditional focus on the design of dis-
ruptive patterns (Figure 2.2) with a focus on receiver 
visual processing (Cuthill & Troscianko, 2011; Fraser 
et al., 2007; Kelley & Kelley, 2013; Merilaita et al., 
2017; Osorio & Cuthill, 2013; Stevens & Merilaita, 
2009b; Troscianko et al., 2009; Webster, 2015). Several 
studies have begun to focus in detail on the perceptual 
processes that disruptive camouflage targets (Egan 
et al., 2016; Troscianko et al., 2013; Webster et al., 
2013), and this approach represents the likely direc-
tion for future work on disruptive mechanisms. 
Hence, we feel that a receiver-centred approach—
rather than a prey-phenotype-centred approach—is 
more suited to providing an explanation of disrup-
tive camouflage, because it is more appropriately 
integrated within the sensory ecology of predator–
prey interactions.
Investigators are also beginning to examine the 
taxonomic, ecological, and behavioural correlates of 
disruptive camouflage strategies, and work on the 
relationship between disruption and other forms of 
protective coloration, as well as develop advanced 
approaches to quantifying disruption in images of 
Figure 2.1  Coincident disruptive camouflage on the common frog 
Rana temporaria . From Cott (1940).

26
AVOIDING ATTACK
real animals. These topics are all discussed in detail 
later in this chapter.
2.2  Examples of disruptive camouflage
Identifying examples of disruptive camouflage is 
challenging because confirming disruption requires 
establishing the perceptual response of receivers, 
consequently disruption cannot be defined on the 
basis of appearance alone (see section 2.4). However, 
many likely examples of disruptive camouflage have 
been proposed, some with good circumstantial or 
experimental evidence.
Examples of disruptive camouflage suggested by 
Cott (1940) include woodcock, giraffe, jaguar, pipits, 
and plovers, all animals that feature high-contrast 
markings across parts of their bodies that do not 
seem to be used in signalling. Other likely examples 
include the contrasting black, white and grey panels 
slashing across giant anteaters’ (Myrmecophaga tri-
dactyla) bodies (Caro & Melville, 2012), and the dorsal 
stripe that bisects the two halves of many distantly 
related frog species such as the African bullfrog 
Pyxicephalus adspersus, the Western toad Anaxyrus 
boreas, and Mascarene grass frog Ptychadena mas-
careniensis . Moths are the model organism when it 
comes to testing disruptive mechanisms, with many 
of the experimental studies discussed in the next sec-
tion featuring triangular paper ‘moths’ as artificial 
prey of wild birds. This is not by coincidence, as many 
real moths are good cases of apparent disruption, 
with the garden carpet Xanthorhoe fluctuata  and oak 
beauty Biston strataria  moths featured as examples by 
Cott (1940).
An interesting example of putative disruptive cam-
ouflage is bioluminescence creating disruptive 
patterns on the undersides of plainfin midshipmen 
Porichthys notatus  (Harper & Case, 1999) and splen-
did ponyfish Leiognathus splendens  (McFall-Ngai & 
Morin, 1991), as well as many other bioluminescent 
fish. Here bioluminescence is produced such that bio-
luminescing elements match the intensity of down-
welling light while other ventral regions that do not 
bioluminesce contrast with the background when 
viewed from below, disrupting the true outline of 
the fish.
Disruptive camouflage has been most intensively 
investigated in colour-changing animals such as the 
bullethead parrotfish Chlorurus sordidus  (Crook, 
1997), chameleons (Stuart-Fox & Moussalli, 2009), 
and especially cuttlefish (Hanlon et al., 2009; Mathger 
et al., 2007). These animals are of particular interest 
because they allow experimental investigation of the 
ecological features that select for different camouflage 
strategies, such as habitats with different appear-
ances, or predators with different visual systems. 
This research is discussed in detail in section 2.7.
The presence of disruptive coloration in plants is 
relatively unstudied. There is good evidence that 
seed coloration has a role in crypsis, and some seeds 
>
1
2
>
3
>
4
5
Figure 2.2  Sub-principles of disruptive camouflage identified in Thayer (1909) and/or Cott (1940) and retained in Stevens & Merilaita’s (2009) 
reorganization. In panels 2–4 the ‘>’ indicates which half of the moth should have greater camouflage according to disruptive principles.  
(1) Differential blending applies as all tones of the moth’s wings match those present in the background. (2) Maximum disruptive contrast is 
achieved on the left wing as internal tones are highly contrasting, whilst still commonly found in the background. (3) Disruptive marginal patterns 
on the left wing break up the true edge, while the identical but internally shifted patterns on the right wing may make the edge more conspicuous. 
(4) Internal markings on the left wing break up the recognizable shape of the moth, whereas identically shaped markings on the right wing margin  
do not. (5) The coincident marking across the two wings and body creates false edges that hinder recognition. See Table 2.1 for further detail.

Disruptive camouflage
27
and seed pods have two-tone coloration which might 
provide disruption (Aviezer & Lev-Yadun, 2015; Lev-
Yadun & Ne’eman, 2013). Variegated leaves, which 
often feature markings distributed around the edges, 
might also be good candidates for disruptive cam-
ouflage against herbivores (Givnish, 1990; Lev-Yadun, 
2015). Similarly, the variegated patterns of some 
unripe fruits might camouflage against frugivores 
until seeds are mature (Lev-Yadun, 2013). However, 
to date all these hypotheses remain untested.
The possible presence of disruptive camouflage 
has been comprehensively reviewed in mammals 
(Caro,  2013) and insects (Théry & Gomez, 2010), 
with the suggestion that disruption is a taxonomic-
ally widespread anti-predator strategy. However, 
compared to background matching and counter-
shading camouflage, it does not seem to be as ubi-
quitous. Some taxonomic groups such as pinnipeds, 
for example, do not seem to contain any species with 
potentially disruptive coloration (Caro et al., 2012).
Table 2.1  Sub-principles of disruptive camouflage identified in Thayer (1909) and/or Cott (1940) and reasons for rejection or retention in Stevens 
& Merilaita’s (2009b) reorganization.
Principle
Description
Reason for retention or 
rejection
Recent investigations
References
Retained as a principle of disruption:
1 Differential 
blending
Disruption most effective  
when some or all tones  
match the background.
Conceals the real object 
boundary.
Highest survival when all  
object tones match the 
background.
Thayer (1909); Cott (1940)
2 Maximum 
disruptive 
contrast
Disruption most effective  
when pattern contrast  
is high.
Conceals the real object 
boundary.
Studies generally find survival 
highest when patterns have  
high contrast, but only within  
the range of background 
matching colours.
Cuthill et al.  (2005); Stevens & 
Cuthill (2006); Stevens et al. 
(2006); Kelman et al. (2007); 
Stobbe & Schaefer (2008)
3 Disruptive 
marginal 
patterns
Disruption improved when 
markings intersect the outline 
of the body.
Conceals the real object 
boundary.
Strong support for markings  
that intersect the outline 
increasing camouflage.
Cuthill et al. (2005); Schaefer & 
Stobbe (2006); Stevens & Cuthill 
(2006); Stevens et al. (2006); Fraser 
et al. (2007); Todd et al. (2015)
4 Surface 
disruption
Creating false internal  
edges and shapes that do  
not correspond to the true 
outline.
Creates false edges and 
boundaries within an 
object.
Some evidence that internal 
markings can increase  
survival.
Stevens et al. (2009); Seymoure & 
Aiello (2015)
5 Coincident 
disruptive 
coloration
Disruptive marking that  
span across otherwise 
conspicuous body parts.
Creates false edges and 
boundaries within an 
object.
Two-tone coloration crossing 
conspicuous features can  
improve survival.
Cuthill & Székely (2009)
Rejected as a principle of disruption:
6 Background 
picturing
Disruptive patterns should  
be background matching.
Synonymous with 
background matching.
Optimal camouflage does not 
necessarily maximize degree  
of background matching.
Fraser et al. (2007); Kang et al. 
(2015); Phillips et al. 2017; 
Wilkinson & Sherratt (2008);
7 Regularity 
avoidance
Disruption most effective  
when pattern elements are 
irregular.
Does not involve 
concealment of shape or 
outline.
Repeating and symmetrical 
patterns more likely to be 
interpreted as a single object.
Merilaita & Lind (2005)
8 Irregular 
marginal form
Morphological complexity 
conceals the shape of an 
animal.
Uses morphology rather 
than colour patterns.
No evidence for an interaction 
between shape and markings  
on survivorship.
Webster et al. (2015)
9 Distractive/
deflective 
markings
Markings that attract 
predators’ attention towards 
parts of the body in a way 
that facilitates escape.
A distinct anti-predator 
strategy from disruption 
(see Chapter 11).
Colour markings have been 
shown to attract predator 
attention and deflect attacks to 
facilitate escape.
Section 2.5.3 and Chapter 11.

28
AVOIDING ATTACK
2.3  The multiple mechanisms of 
camouflage by disruption
In an influential review ‘Camouflage and visual per-
ception’ Troscianko et al. (2009) introduced the per-
spective developed here and by others (Cuthill & 
Troscianko,  2011; Kelley & Kelley,  2013; Merilaita 
et al., 2017; Osorio & Cuthill, 2013; Webster, 2015) of 
disruptive camouflage as a group of strategies that 
work by exploiting features of the visual system 
to  make the encoding of an object’s characteristic 
outline and shape more difficult.
The major task of complex visual systems is to 
process the responses of millions of photoreceptor 
inputs in a way that results in a coherent perceptual 
representation of the environment that supports 
behaviour, and does so with energetic efficiency in 
terms of how computational resources (neurons) 
are deployed and utilized (Vincent et al.,  2005). 
Intensively studied complex visual systems, mainly 
mammalian, achieve this by 1.) constructing a hier-
archy of features, beginning at retinal cells where 
phototransduction converts light of a specific fre-
quency bandwidth from a specific point in the vis-
ual field to an electrical signal, through to 2.) early 
visual edge detection processing that summarizes 
this input by encoding the location, polarity, and 
orientation of small edges, then on to 3.) mid-level 
perceptual grouping processes that join edges spa-
tially and temporally (detecting motion) and seg-
ment edges that belong to a single object from the 
background (Goldstein & Brockmole, 2016). Finally, 
4.) high-level object recognition processes identify 
and classify objects in the scene and their properties, 
including whether they are potential prey. These 
broad stages in the hierarchy of visual processing, 
from primitive feature and edge detection, to fea-
ture grouping and segmentation, and then on to 
object identification and classification (Palmer, 1999), 
effectively summarize the information in previous 
stages using both top-down and bottom-up pro-
cesses, until it is in a form useful to subsequent 
processing and behaviour. The ‘short-cuts’ visual 
systems take to compress this information are what 
enable coloration to disrupt the encoding of object 
outline and shape (Merilaita et al., 2017), and each 
stage is likely to have specific mechanisms via which 
disruptive camouflage influences processing.
Here then, we review the small but growing body 
of work investigating the different perceptual mech-
anisms via which disruptive camouflage strategies 
have been proposed to exploit processing of object 
shape and identity at each stages of visual process-
ing, and make links with traditional principles of dis-
ruption. As almost all work to date has been done 
on visual disruption, we leave discussion of disrup-
tion in other sensory modalities to the concluding 
section of this chapter. Work on visual system organ-
ization across species points to commonalities (Gibson 
et al., 2007); though there are many important differ-
ences too (Qadri & Cook, 2015). Future work should 
aim to expand knowledge of interspecific differences 
in how perception of object outline, shape, and other 
characteristic features can be disrupted, but for now 
we assume that the disruptive mechanisms identi-
fied apply to a broad taxonomic range of receivers.
2.3.1  Disruption of edge detection processes
One reason for the primacy of edges in visual per-
ception is that they define spatial change in the 
environment, commonly where an object meets the 
background it is viewed against. Defining where 
edges occur in a scene is a necessary step towards 
defining object outlines; this is one of the most char-
acteristic aspects of objects. However not all edges 
in a scene are parts of object outlines. Markings and 
textures created by pigmentary and structural col-
ours are, along with shadows, intensity edges that 
are not coincident with physical object outlines. 
How visual systems tasked to locate and recognize 
objects by finding their outlines ‘ignore’ these types 
of edge is a classic problem in computational visual 
neuroscience (Marr & Hildreth,  1980) and a key 
cause of failure for artificial visual systems (Vondrick 
et al., 2013) and technologies that rely on these, such 
as driverless cars. The disruptive hypothesis pre-
dicts that an animal’s coloration can decrease the 
salience of true edges and generate and increase the 
salience of false edges, making separation of ‘false’ 
and ‘true’ outline edges at subsequent stages of pro-
cessing more difficult. Merilaita et al. (2017) frame 
this as a signal-to-noise manipulation, where dis-
ruptive camouflage increases the salience of false 
edge noise and decreases the salience of true edge 
signal.

Disruptive camouflage
29
In non-specific suppression, the responses of sim-
ple edge detectors are suppressed when strong edges 
are detected by other nearby simple cells (Brouwer 
& Heeger, 2011). Troscianko et al. (2009) therefore 
suggest that non-specific suppression should be 
important in disruptive camouflage, since strong 
coloration edges should make nearby true outline 
edges less visible. This idea is clearly relevant to 
Cott’s (1940) principle of maximum disruptive con-
trast (#2, Table 2.1), which states that disruptive pat-
terns should be more effective when they are high 
contrast (i.e. edges are strong).
The principle of maximum disruptive contrast has 
been tested empirically several times, most notably 
by Cuthill et al. (2005) in a study that introduced an 
influential experimental paradigm where triangu-
lar paper ‘moths’ printed with different colour pat-
terns were pinned to trees with mealworms attached. 
Targets were left exposed to wild avian predators 
and the survival rate of mealworms in each treat-
ment was recorded. This provides an effective meas-
ure of camouflage effectiveness that allows for both 
tight control of experimental stimuli (e.g. standard-
izing the degree of background matching across 
treatments in terms of avian vision), whilst measur-
ing the responses of real predators in a relatively 
natural foraging task. Cuthill et al. found that tar-
gets with high-contrast disruptive patterns survived 
better than those with low-contrast disruptive pat-
terns, supporting the prediction of maximum dis-
ruptive contrast and the idea that strong false edges 
can make nearby true edges less conspicuous. 
Following up on this result, Schaefer and Stobbe 
(2006) investigated whether maximizing contrast 
could be effective when it led to a decrease in back-
ground matching and found that there was room 
for inclusion of non-background matching colours 
when they increased contrast. Rapidly changing, 
cuttlefish dynamic-disruptive camouflage sometimes 
exceeds the level of contrast in backgrounds (Hanlon 
et al.,  2009). However several studies have since 
demonstrated that the effective degree of contrast is 
strongly limited by the level of contrast in the back-
ground, as targets using much lighter tones than are 
present in the background suffer increased preda-
tion (Fraser et al., 2007; Stevens et al., 2006; Stobbe 
& Schaefer,  2008), presumably because this also 
increases the contrast between the true outline and 
the background. The emerging picture is that higher 
contrast maximizes disruptive ‘noise’, but this is 
balanced by opposing selection for background 
matching.
Also following from the phenomenon of non-
specific suppression, edge detectors in early stages 
of vision (such as the mammalian primary visual 
cortex) tuned to respond to the true outline should 
be inhibited by the responses of other neurons 
responding to edges that run perpendicular to 
their receptive fields (cross-orientation suppression; 
Brouwer & Heeger,  2011; Priebe & Ferster,  2006). 
Camouflage markings that intersect an animal’s 
outline should therefore weaken the responses of 
the edge detectors that are tuned to edges of the ani-
mal’s true outline. This process relates to the disrup-
tive marginal patterning principle (#3, Table  2.1.), 
which states that disruptive camouflage is improved 
when markings intersect an object’s outline. This 
prediction was also tested by Cuthill et al. (2005); in 
an ‘edge’ treatment, markings randomly sampled 
from the oak bark background were placed on a tri-
angular target’s outline, in a second ‘inside 1’ treat-
ment the exact same markings were shifted inward 
so they no longer intersected the outline, and in a 
third ‘inside 2’ treatment randomly selected mark-
ings were placed so they did not intersect the out-
line (Figure 2.3). Survival was best when markings 
intersected the outline, supporting the marginal 
patterning hypothesis. While the treatments were 
designed to be equivalent in terms of background 
matching (all markings were a random sample from 
the background) it remained possible that the con-
spicuous straight edge created by the ‘inside 1’ 
manipulation enhanced the true outline, or the 
increased density of inside markings increased their 
conspicuousness. This issue was resolved by Fraser 
et al. (2007) who repeated Cuthill et al.’s experiment 
but added a third ‘inside’ treatment that had the 
same low pattern density as the edge treatment. 
While the low-density inside treatment did survive 
better than the high-density one, indicating that the 
inside treatments in Cuthill et al. did have worse 
background matching than the edge treatment, the 
edge treatment still survived best, indicating a spe-
cific effect of intersecting the edges. In an experiment 
on human predators searching for camouflaged prey 
on a computer monitor that replicated the disruptive 

30
AVOIDING ATTACK
marginal patterning effect, Fraser et al. demonstrated 
generalizability of disruption across species and 
contexts. The finding of increased survival for prey 
with markings that intersect edges has now been 
replicated several times under different experimen-
tal designs for human and avian predators (Cuthill 
et al., 2006b; Merilaita & Lind,  2005; Schaefer & 
Stobbe, 2006; Stevens et al., 2006, 2009; Webster et al., 
2013, 2015).
The hypothesis that these results are specifically a 
consequence of disruption of edge detection pro-
cessing in early stages of vision is supported by 
studies that present disruptively patterned stimuli 
to computational models of early vision. Stevens & 
Cuthill (2006, following Osorio & Srinivasan, 1991) 
demonstrated that various edge detection algo-
rithms based on properties of the vertebrate visual 
system detected false internal edges but not true out-
line edges in Cuthill et al.’s (2005) disruptive stimuli 
more often than in the background matching stim-
uli. The consequence of this was that a line detector 
based on the Hough transform located the sides of 
the triangular disruptive targets less often.
2.3.2  Disruption of perceptual organization: 
grouping and segmentation
Perceptual grouping of simple features (i.e. edges 
and collections of edges) involves determining 
which parts and regions of a visual scene belong 
together in a mid-level unit (Brooks, 2015; Peterson 
et al.,  2013). Segmentation involves determining 
which of these units belong to which objects and 
deciding that a feature is not part of the background 
(figure-ground organization). Gestalt laws of per-
ceptual organization, first developed by perceptual 
psychologists in the 1920s, codify how simple image 
features are processed, leading to grouping or sep-
aration and the perception of organized patterns and 
objects (Figure 2.4; Wagemans et al., 2012).
The Gestalt law of grouping by colour similarity 
clearly relates to Cott’s (1940) differential blending 
principle (#1, Table 2.1): If the colours of an animal 
contrast with each other, but match the background, 
then in addition to reducing the conspicuousness of 
the outline, the different colour patches are more 
likely to be grouped with different elements of the 
background than with each other.
Differential blending and disruptive marginal pat-
terning also combine to create artificial gaps in an 
object’s outline when true edges blend with differ-
ent parts of the background. This can be considered 
as targeting the Gestalt law of good continuation, 
which specifies how edges link to form a continu-
ous line. Detecting object outlines in natural scenes 
is made difficult by non-camouflage factors such as 
occlusions, shadows, and complex backgrounds. 
Disruptive camouflage mechanisms can be thought 
of as adding to this list of problems that result in 
incomplete object edges and the detection of many 
edges that do not correspond to object outlines. 
To resolve this problem and ‘fill-in’ missing edges, 
contour completion mechanisms have evolved that 
aim to connect the correct edges together. Animals 
use heuristics based on the assumption that missing 
edges are likely to span gaps with smooth lines and 
curves (mammals: Kanizsa et al., 1993; birds: Regolin 
& Vallortigara, 1995; fish: Sovrano & Bisazza, 2008). 
While it remains to be specifically investigated, it is 
likely that disruptive patterns specifically target 
the use of these heuristics by offering parsimonious 
solutions to image ambiguity that lead to incorrect 
interpretations of a scene.
The principle of surface disruption, which pro-
poses that camouflage can be improved with con-
trasting markings spanning body surfaces as well 
as intersecting edges (Cott, 1940; #5, Table 2.1), also 
likely targets mid-level perceptual grouping pro-
cesses. There is good evidence that surface disrup-
tion can be effective. In an artificial moth field 
Edge
Inside 1
Inside 2
Black
Brown
Figure 2.3  Stimuli used to test the principle of disruptive marginal patterning in Cuthill et al. (2005). In the edge treatment markings are placed 
on the outline. These targets have higher survival against wild avian predators than the inside treatments and plain black or brown treatments.

Disruptive camouflage
31
predation experiment, Stevens et al. (2009) found 
that treatments with high-contrast internal mark-
ings but low-contrast edge markings survived 
better than other combinations. As high- and low-
contrast markings were equally common in the 
background, and image analysis following the com-
putational edge detection approach used in Stevens 
& Cuthill (2006) showed that there were no differ-
ences in the number of edges identified between 
treatments, this indicates the survival advantage 
is not being granted by low-level edge detection 
mechanisms. Instead the authors suggest that high-
contrast internal markings worked because the most 
salient (internal) edges did not correspond to the 
true outline. Similarly, Seymoure and Aiello (2015), 
following up on Silberglied et al. (1980), found that 
naturalistic models of Anartia fatima  butterflies, 
which display an internal wing stripe, survived bet-
ter than models that had been manipulated to have a 
continuous or broken stripe at the wing edge. While 
this result may have been a consequence of a post-
detection preference for the novel manipulated prey, 
as birds generally show a neophobic response to 
novelty, a decrease in camouflage effectiveness is 
the more likely explanation.
A class of internal disruptive patterns given spe-
cial consideration by Cott (1940) are what he termed 
coincident disruptive patterns (# 5, Table 2.1). Here 
patterns overlap different elements of an internal 
feature such as the sclera and iris of an eye, or differ-
ent portions of a limb, and are proposed to interfere 
with determining the shape of the internal feature 
(Cuthill & Székely, 2009). This interference distin-
guishes coincident disruption from simple back-
ground matching of potentially conspicuous features 
using coloration (e.g. a black eye surrounded by black 
body). To test the coincident disruption hypothesis, 
Cuthill and Szekely performed an artificial moth 
field experiment and a replicate human computer 
search experiment, using prey with disruptive wings 
and a central ‘body’ feature with a non-background 
matching shape. When the body was two-tone and 
the surrounding wing coloration was coincident 
(i.e. both the two body tones matched the surround-
ing wing colour), survival was higher than when the 
body was monotone and matched the surrounding 
wing coloration, and when the body was two-tone 
but the wing only partially matched. The specific 
perceptual mechanisms behind this and the sur-
face disruption results have not been investigated. 
However it seems likely that surface and coincident 
disruption work by interfering with perceptual 
grouping processes, such that groupings are based 
on coloration rather than features such as the true 
outline, the eyes, or the three segments of a frog’s 
folded limbs.
Gestalt laws of perceptual grouping are often in 
competition with each other. For example differen-
tial blending may produce an incorrect assignation 
of a bicolour prey to two or more separate groups, 
where each tone of the prey is grouped with a dif-
ferent background tone due to the law of similarity. 
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 2.4  (a) shows how eight evenly spaced dots are grouped into a single unit. In (b) the proximity between dots is altered resulting in group-
ing into four groups of two (law of proximity). (c) shows grouping by the law of similarity, where “like parts band together”, in this case by tone/
colour (Wertheimer, 1923).

32
AVOIDING ATTACK
However, if the disruptive patterns are symmetric 
then grouping by symmetry will offer a compet-
ing explanation that groups the pattern elements 
together. Indeed, symmetric patterning has been 
shown to reduce the effectiveness of disruptive cam-
ouflage (Cuthill et al., 2006a, b). Grouping laws may 
also be disrupted synergistically, an idea investi-
gated by Espinosa and Cuthill (2014) who tested the 
hypothesis that colour patches on animals will be 
most camouflaging when they are high contrast 
and match different colours in the background (dif-
ferential blending), but especially when they match 
the colours in different background regions. Two-
tone stimuli were positioned in a scene such that 
they spanned a region consisting of either one or 
two background objects, whilst controlling for local 
contrast. Results supported the prediction that the 
disruptive benefit is greater when the colours in the 
immediate background are perceived as belonging 
to different objects. While this and other similar 
experiments can appear quite abstract, plausible 
real-world examples include reef fish that differen-
tially blend with two distinct coral types that are 
perceived by predators as being different objects 
(Marshall, 2000) and isopods that blend with brown 
algae and their epiphytes (Merilaita, 1998).
Disruption of shape and object processing in mid-
level vision may also be achieved through a variety 
of visual illusions. Specific examples that have been 
demonstrated in the context of disruptive camou-
flage include edge enhancement, where tones of 
colour patches increase in contrast where they meet, 
a commonly observed phenotype on diverse spe-
cies such as copperhead snakes Agkistrodon contor-
trix  and many hawk moths in Sphingidae. Egan et al. 
(2016) showed that this creates the impression of 
pictorial depth between different pattern elements 
for human observers, and that this improves cam-
ouflage beyond just simply matching the level of 
pictorial depth in backgrounds. The likely explan-
ation is that regions perceived as being in different 
depth planes are less likely to be grouped together 
(Rock & Brosgole, 1964).
Whether disruptive processes at the perceptual 
grouping stage are more or less effective than pro-
cesses at earlier or later stages remains an open ques-
tion. In one of the very few studies that attempts 
to identify which perceptual processes underlie 
examples of disruption, Webster et al. (2015) meas-
ured human predator responses to artificial moth 
prey presented on a computer screen. Prey varied in 
whether their markings intersected edges or not and 
the shape of their outline (straight vs. jagged vs. 
wavy). The authors predicted that if disruptive mech-
anisms were operating at the shape completion 
stages of processing, then the survival advantage of 
disruptive markings should be dependent on object 
shape, with simple straight outlines gaining more 
from disruptive markings than jagged or wavy ones. 
Instead they observed that disruptive markings were 
effective irrespective of object shape, indicating that 
the advantage of disruption, in this experiment at 
least, lay in disruption of local edge information 
rather than shape information.
2.3.3  Disruption of object detection and 
recognition
From a computational perspective, object detection 
and recognition are closely related processes 
(Sermanet et al., 2013; Tu et al., 2005). As stated pre-
viously, detection involves finding locations in a 
visual scene that contain features corresponding to 
the object class of interest, and recognition involves 
determining if a set of visual features corresponds 
to an object in a particular class. Both detection and 
recognition can be involved in searching for camou-
flaged objects, during which time bottom-up infor-
mation generated by the visual scene and processed 
by earlier stages interacts with top-down informa-
tion (Gilbert & Li, 2013) specifying what features 
to search for, with this interaction guiding where 
attention is focussed (Wagemans et al., 2012).
Visual search for camouflaged targets guided by 
top-down information may be made particularly 
difficult for predators if disruptive coloration helps 
to prevent so-called ‘search images’ forming and 
being utilized (Guilford & Dawkins, 1987; Ishii & 
Shimada, 2010; Tinbergen, 1960a, Ch. 1.). A visual 
search image might be for a very specific combin-
ation of colour and shape that is highly characteris-
tic of a favoured prey species, or it might be a more 
general representation that, for example, guides 
attention towards anything with a ‘furry’ texture. In 
the latter case, disruptive coloration that interferes 
with processing features that define a broad class of 

Disruptive camouflage
33
prey might be an effective strategy. For example, if 
most frogs among all those that a predator encoun-
ters over its life do not possess coincident leg stripes, 
then the image feature created by frogs’ folded legs 
is a useful diagnostic feature of class membership 
and likely to form part of the search image for frog 
prey. Disruptive patterns, in this example coinci-
dent leg stripes, may therefore work specifically by 
interfering with detection of the key features pred-
ators are using in their search images; using search 
images to become better at finding frogs without leg 
stripes has the consequence that predators become 
worse at finding frogs with leg stripes. There is 
potential here for frequency-dependent effects where 
invariant disruptive patterns themselves become a 
valuable search cue if they are sufficiently common. 
Most experimental investigations use stimuli that 
are partly random (e.g. Cuthill et al., 2005), but vari-
ability of disruptive patterns may be low in natural 
populations. Testing for frequency-dependent effects 
in disruptive patterning would be a valuable avenue 
for future research.
As taxonomists will attest, colour, size, and texture 
are rarely identifying features of a particular species; 
however, shape often is. Indeed, despite variation 
in shape due to viewpoint and translation, visual 
systems in general (not just those of taxonomists!) 
extensively utilize shape information to detect and 
recognize objects (Hummel,  2013), especially ani-
mals (at least in humans; Elder & Velisavljević, 2009; 
Lloyd-Jones & Luckhurst,  2002). Thus disruptive 
camouflage that manipulates how shape is per-
ceived should particularly affect target recognition, 
though to date there is little evidence of this mech-
anism (Webster et al., 2015). Interesting computer 
vision work demonstrates how images containing 
animals can be reliably classified on the basis of edge 
curvature alone (Perrinet & Bednar, 2015), suggest-
ing that disruption of low-level but characteristic 
aspects of stimuli, such as edge curvature, may be a 
good strategy to prevent classification of high-level 
object categories.
Disruptive camouflage may also target perceptual 
learning and the initial formation of search images, 
particularly those for finer classes of stimuli such as 
a particular target species. Testing this hypothesis, 
Troscianko et al. (2013) set up experiments using 
humans as model predators to test learning rates 
for background-matching, disruptive, and distrac-
tive camouflage types. In general across the experi-
ments, results showed that high-contrast disruptive 
treatments survived best initially, but that this 
advantage was eroded across trials. These results 
imply that the value of different camouflage types 
is dependent on interactions between detection, rec-
ognition, and learning processes, and that disrup-
tive markings, at least those used in the study, while 
hard to detect initially, are learnt quickly and so 
become easier to detect over time. This is likely 
because while disruption is promoted by high con-
trast, high-contrast stimuli are also learnt more easily. 
While this effect may be a consequence of encoun-
tering many stimuli in quick succession, if results 
translate to natural systems the implications are 
intriguing. Understanding why increased rates of 
predator learning do not wipe out camouflage advan-
tages of disruption is a necessary avenue for future 
research.
2.4  Identifying and quantifying 
disruptive camouflage
As previously mentioned, determining whether a 
particular animal or artificial stimulus has disrup-
tive effects on receiver perceptual processing is not 
a trivial task. A common approach is to base quanti-
fication of disruption on features of the camouflage 
pattern. For example, Stevens and Merilaita (2009b) 
argue that disruptive patterns should have a differ-
ent distribution of contrast to the background to sat-
isfy the principle of maximum disruptive contrast, 
and suggest that disruptive markings should be 
dependent on body shape and size while back-
ground matching markings should not (Merilaita & 
Lind, 2005). Other predictions include the idea that 
animals pursuing disruption should have a higher 
proportion of markings touching the outline of the 
body, over and above the distribution that would be 
predicted by matching the background (Merilaita, 
1998). Establishing whether these metrics are a valid 
proxy for the presence of disruptive coloration, let 
alone the degree of disruption, at minimum requires 
establishing a correlation between behavioural per-
formance on search tasks and stimulus properties—
something that the psychophysical studies reviewed 
in the previous section have begun to do. Moreover, 

34
AVOIDING ATTACK
in theory there should be a correlation between 
properties of the disruptive camouflage pattern, 
and the perceptual process(es) that it targets. For 
example, an untested hypothesis is that the position 
of markings for edge disruption should intersect 
long edges to break them up, whereas disruption of 
feature detection processes should involve edges 
intersecting areas that provide the most informa-
tion about object shape and identity, such as the cor-
ners of a triangular object (Figure 2.5; Webster, 2015).
Testing these hypotheses experimentally may 
establish associations between disruption and 
appearance that in the long term have the potential 
to identify specific disruptive mechanisms deployed 
by an animal on the basis of appearance alone. 
However, testing this and other similar predictions is 
difficult, as it is unclear what measurable behavioural 
difference will result from disruption of different 
perceptual mechanisms. As eye movements reflect 
internal cognitive processes (Findlay & Gilchrist, 
2003), one promising approach is to use eye track-
ing to investigate the stage of visual processing 
affected by a particular disruptive pattern. Webster 
et al. (2013) tracked the eye movements of humans 
searching for targets with and without edge-inter-
secting patterns, quantifying the period of time 
that subjects viewed the target area overall, how 
frequently targets were passed over, and how long 
they were fixated immediately prior to a detection 
response. All three measures were correlated posi-
tively with the number of edge-intersecting patches 
on targets, which the authors argued reflected object 
recognition processing rather than disruption of 
lower-level processes.
Non-disruptive
Edge detection disruption
Feature detection disruption
Figure 2.5  Disruptive mechanisms may be identifiable on the basis of appearance. From Webster (2015).

Disruptive camouflage
35
An alternative solution to quantifying disruption 
that gets around the problem of establishing a suit-
able assay involves presenting targets designed to dis-
rupt different processes to both animal observers and 
banks of computer vision algorithms that have been 
designed to either incorporate or exclude models of 
different visual processes. If the performance of an 
algorithm that incorporates particular perceptual 
processes correlates with observer performance on 
search for camouflaged targets better than an algo-
rithm that excludes it, then this might be suggestive 
that the process is targeted by the camouflaged pat-
tern. To date this approach has been applied to dem-
onstrate disruption of edge detection in humans 
when viewing artificial prey, using metrics such as 
‘GabRat’ which employs banks of Gabor filters 
(Troscianko et al., 2017). A Gabor filter determines 
the spatial frequency content in a particular direc-
tion at a particular image region. GabRat uses the 
responses of many filters tuned to different fre-
quency bandwidths and orientations to calculate the 
ratio of coherent to incoherent edges around an 
object’s outline. In principle, if correlations between 
different visual models, different observers, differ-
ent visual environments, and different target types 
are sufficiently clear, the mapping could be applied to 
identify and quantify disruptive mechanisms oper-
ating in real animals on the basis of appearance alone.
An interesting approach to quantifying examples 
of disruptive camouflage in nature is to observe how 
animals select particular resting locations in the 
environment that offer the best camouflage (Jaenike 
& Holt,  1991; Kjernsmo & Merilaita,  2012), and 
measure the degree to which they improve back-
ground matching or disruption. Kang et al. (2015) 
investigated two species of moth, Hypomecis robo-
raia  and Jankowskia fuscaria, that alter their resting 
positions on a very fine scale to improve camouflage 
(Kang et al., 2012). Captive moths were released and 
allowed to settle on tree trunks; they were then photo-
graphed in their initial landing position and then 
again after one hour, by which point some individ-
uals had made fine adjustments to their positions. 
Comparing differences in background matching and 
disruptive camouflage measures derived from image 
analysis of pre and post repositioning images showed 
that in both species, as well as improving their 
degree of background matching, the amount the 
edge was broken up also increased as a result of 
increased differential blending and phase match-
ing between the moth and bark texture. This sug-
gests that moth behaviour optimizes disruptive as 
well as background matching camouflage, with 
the implication that moth camouflage employs 
disruption. Similarly Webster et al. (2009) show 
that the alignment behaviour of two moth species 
can be explained by improved differential blend-
ing, as human predation on moths is highest when 
the moth is at an atypical orientation relative to 
the tree.
A similar strategy was taken in a study that dem-
onstrates Japanese quail Coturnix japonica  select 
egg-laying sites that improve the camouflage of the 
particular egg maculation phenotype they lay (Lovell 
et al., 2013). Interestingly, in this species there seems 
to be intraspecific variation in camouflage strategy 
adopted. Females that lay lightly maculated (spot-
ted or stained) eggs select sites that match their eggs’ 
background colour, suggesting a primarily back-
ground matching camouflage strategy. Females with 
heavily maculated eggs instead select sites that match 
their maculation colour, which image analysis sug-
gests improves outline disruption as well as back-
ground matching.
2.5  The relationship between disruption 
and other forms of protective coloration
2.5.1  Background matching (Chapter 1)
Several empirical results have demonstrated that an 
insufficient degree of background matching makes 
disruptive camouflage ineffective (Fraser et al., 2007; 
Kang et al., 2015), likely because key features such 
as outlines that disruption might be expected to act 
on are so conspicuous. Wilkinson and Sherratt (2008) 
conclude that the relationship between background 
matching and disruption is asymmetric; background 
matching can work without disruption, but disrup-
tion cannot work without sufficient background 
matching. This seems to hold true in most situations, 
though observations of cuttlefish displaying high-
contrast disruptive patterns when hunting prey in 
the open may suggest that using coloration to dis-
guise body shape can still be effective when back-
ground matching cannot be achieved (Hanlon et al., 

36
AVOIDING ATTACK
2009). In a signal-to-noise ratio framework (Merilaita 
et al., 2017) background matching reduces the infor-
mation in the signal, while disruptive camouflage 
both reduces the true edge signal and increases the 
noise by creating false edges.
2.5.2  Aposematism (Chapter 9)
A longstanding idea is that disruptive patterns can 
have a dual function in aposematism. The two strat-
egies seem incompatible, since disruption is thought 
to reduce conspicuousness while warning colours 
are generally most effective when they are highly 
conspicuous. However the visual effect of factors 
such as changing viewing distance, utilization of 
backgrounds with different appearances, or differen-
tial targeting of receivers with high- and low-acuity 
visual systems, creates the potential for multiple 
strategies for a single colour pattern that operate in 
different circumstances (Tullberg et al., 2005). This 
idea is supported empirically in a study of the wood 
tiger moth Parasemia plantaginis  (Honma et al., 2015), 
which has effective aposematic coloration when rest-
ing in foliage. When approached this species some-
times feigns death and drops to the ground, at which 
point it becomes hard to spot on a background of 
leaf litter. Manipulating the moth pattern into ‘edge’ 
and ‘inside’ treatments (Figure  2.3), Honma et al. 
found ‘edge’ moths survived better on some leaf lit-
ter backgrounds, with the inference that survival 
was improved by disruption of edge processing. 
Examining distance-dependent effects in aposem-
atic firebugs Pyrrhocoris apterus, Bohlin et al. (2012) 
found that making bugs disruptive by moving pat-
terns to the margins did not increase detection times 
except on certain backgrounds at a long distance, 
suggesting that long-range disruptive effects are 
possible in warningly coloured species. European 
vipers have been suggested as deploying both 
aposematism and disruption in their zig-zag dorsal 
pattern; however, experimental studies suggest 
that the function is purely in warning coloration 
(Valkonen et al., 2011). The emerging picture is that 
warning signals and camouflage can be balanced 
and that a dual function is possible (Barnett & 
Cuthill,  2014; Barnett et al.,  2017), but whether a 
dual strategy is frequently implemented in nature is 
as yet unclear.
2.5.3  Distractive, divertive, and deflective 
markings (Chapter 11)
Distractive markings are conspicuous patches of 
colour that draw a predator’s attention away from 
distinctive features of the prey to facilitate camou-
flage, and divertive or deflective markings manipu-
late where a predator directs its attack toward a 
region that facilitates escape or reduces mortality 
(Dimitrova et al., 2009; Kjernsmo et al., 2016; Kjernsmo 
& Merilaita, 2013; Merilaita et al., 2013, 2017; Stevens 
et al., 2012). Cott (1940) presented examples of dis-
traction under a disruptive camouflage heading; 
however, because these markings aim to increase 
visibility and attract attention, it is now generally 
treated as a separate strategy.
2.5.4  Dazzle (Chapter 12)
Dazzle coloration affects a receiver’s judgement of 
speed or trajectory while in motion. Since both dis-
ruptive and dazzle coloration are proposed to be 
most effective when patterns are high contrast, one 
possibility is that some patterns have a dual role, 
being disruptive when the animal is stationary, and 
then dazzling when the animal is moving (Stevens, 
2007; Stevens & Merilaita, 2009b). This suggestion is 
not fully supported by the available evidence: Stevens 
et al. (2011) found that striped patterns prevented 
capture of moving targets most effectively when 
low contrast, arguing that high contrast patterning 
facilitated object tracking. Furthermore striped tar-
gets were poor camouflage when motionless, and 
non-striped disruptive targets were not effective in 
motion, with the latter finding replicated in Hall 
et al. (2013). Multiple studies have found high con-
trast patterns to be effective at preventing capture 
of moving targets (e.g. Hall et al., 2016; Hogan et al., 
2016b; Scott-Samuel et al., 2011; Chapter 12), but these 
have not demonstrated a disruptive effect while sta-
tionary. Thus demonstration that coloration can 
be both disruptive when stationary and dazzling in 
motion remains elusive.
2.6  The ecology of disruption
Identifying under what ecological circumstances 
animals pursue disruptive camouflage strategies is 

Disruptive camouflage
37
challenging, primarily because identifying the type 
of camouflage used and the degree of protection it 
gives for a large number of individuals, popula-
tions or species is difficult (section 2.4). With this 
caveat, numerous studies have attempted to make 
progress on this subject by using appearance-based 
measures of the degree to which an animal utilizes 
disruption.
Observation of colour changing animals in 
response to different stimuli is one of the best ways 
of understanding the ecology of disruption (Duarte 
et al., 2017). Most work has been done on common 
cuttlefish Sepia officinalis. Cuttlefish can rapidly 
adapt their camouflage over very short timescales 
(0.5–2 seconds) and use visual cues to determine 
what colour pattern to display (Chiao et al., 2015). 
Cuttlefish switch between background matching 
(uniform or mottled coloration) and apparently dis-
ruptive camouflage featuring blocks of high-contrast 
colour, largely depending on substrate appearance. 
As well as providing insight into cuttlefish vision, 
manipulating the substrate and observing the colour 
response also allows investigation of what environ-
mental features select for apparent disruption.
Testing cuttlefish responses on substrates that vary 
in spatial scale, including checkerboards (Barbosa 
et al., 2007, 2008; Kelman et al., 2007; Mathger et al., 
2006; Zylinski et al., 2009a), semi-naturalistic (Chiao 
et al., Hanlon, 2009) and natural backgrounds con-
sisting of rocks of different sizes (Mathger et al., 2007), 
shows that apparently disruptive patterns are 
elicited when check sizes are between 40 and 120 
per cent of the largest disruptive skin patch that the 
cuttlefish can switch on or off (Figure  2.6). This 
demonstrates that disruption is dependent on the 
scale of the background, and supports the idea that 
disruption is mainly effective when pattern elements 
match the background to a sufficient degree. Similarly 
disruption only emerges when backgrounds are 
of sufficiently high contrast (Barbosa et al., 2008; 
Zylinski et al., 2009b), specifically the contrast of 
short-edge fragments (Chiao et al., 2013; Zylinski 
et al., 2012), suggesting that disruption is most effect-
ive when backgrounds are full of fragmented incom-
plete contours. More surprising is that disruptive 
patterns are more likely in cuttlefish when back-
grounds are darker (Chiao et al., 2007). Interestingly, 
this matches the result in Japanese quail where dis-
ruptive eggs tended to be laid on dark backgrounds 
while background-matching eggs were laid on light 
backgrounds (Lovell et al., 2013). The presence of 
visual depth in the background is also a key stimu-
lus element that elicits disruptive patterns (Kelman 
et al., 2008). While noting that many of these rela-
tionships are also what would be predicted by adap-
tation for improved background matching, it is a 
reasonable assumption that the patterns which have 
all the hallmarks of design principles such as differ-
ential blending, edge enhancement, and maximum 
disruptive contrast (Hanlon et al.,  2009) actually 
have disruptive effects when perceived by cuttlefish 
predators.
Accepting that cuttlefish do use disruptive cam-
ouflage, if the relationship between expression of 
disruption and environmental structure is not spe-
cies-specific, it is reasonable to extrapolate the rapid 
responses of cuttlefish to other species whose 
­colour adapts to the environment over evolutionary 
timescales. Comparative evidence in felids suggests 
that species with patterns that appear to use disrup-
tive principles, such as ocelot, clouded leopards, and 
jaguar, are those that occupy closed habitats (Allen 
et al., 2010) where dappled light creates the high-
contrast fragmented background that favours expres-
sion of disruptive patterns in cuttlefish, although 
this relationship is also predicted by selection for 
background matching. Similarly tentative conclu-
sions can be drawn in chameleons, where species with 
ventral line markings are associated with arboreal 
habitats where this marking might break up the 
silhouette of animals when they are viewed from 
below (Resetarits & Raxworthy, 2016).
The ecological correlates of some potentially dis-
ruptive markings, such as the stripes seen on the 
flanks of several artiodactyl species, associated with 
stotting and leaping behaviour, suggesting that 
these markings instead have a signal amplification 
role (Allen et al., 2012; Caro & Stankowich, 2009). 
Similarly, in cetaceans, high-contrast markings are 
no more common in well-lit environments where 
they might have a more disruptive effect (Caro et al., 
2011). Diagonal stripes on butterflyfish have evolved 
in tandem with increased dietary complexity, but 
not habitat diversity (Kelley et al.,  2013), and in 
cichlids vertical stripes occur in species using rocky 
environments (Van Alphen, 1999). As selection for 

38
AVOIDING ATTACK
disruption cannot straightforwardly explain these 
patterns, this suggests that at macroecological scales 
these markings, which seem to conform to disrup-
tive principles, have not been selected solely or 
chiefly for their disruptive effects. Alternatively, 
disruption may not predict strong ecological associ-
ations of these types. More work needs to be done 
to establish a set of testable predictions on the eco-
logical circumstances under which the presence 
of disruptive camouflage is expected, for example 
Wilkinson and Sherratt’s (2008) suggestion that dis-
ruption should emerge when animals use a greater 
variety of backgrounds, as disruption may still be 
able to provide protection when mismatching the 
Figure 2.6  Illustration of how spatial scale of the substrate affects body patterning in cuttlefish Sepia officinalis . From a mottled pattern the 
disruptive pattern emerges and strengthens (S2 to S6) as the spatial scale of the substrate increases, before declining as it changes to a uniform 
pattern (S7 to S9).

Disruptive camouflage
39
background to some degree. However there is little 
evidence supporting this prediction and the few 
other similar hypotheses, so until more experimental 
work has been conducted, comparative predictions 
like this are on shaky foundations. More generally 
there are few predictions regarding whether disrup-
tion should evolve in, for example, species pursu-
ing particular life history strategies, or occupying 
particular ecological niches.
Two recent studies on egg camouflage in several 
avian species have taken a rigorous image-processing-­
based approach to quantifying disruption in nat-
ural scenarios in the context of the local background 
(Stoddard et al.,  2016; Troscianko et al.,  2016). 
Neither study found support for various measures 
of disruption predicting survival. In nightjars, high-
contrast eggs only survived better when they were 
on a high-contrast background, suggesting back-
ground matching being the primary mechanism. In 
snowy plovers Charadrius nivosus  and least terns 
Sternula antillarum  no camouflage metric predicted 
clutch survival, including those specifically designed 
to identify disruptive principles.
2.7  Unresolved issues and future 
challenges
While our understanding of disruptive camouflage 
has progressed rapidly in the last 15 years, a focus 
on mechanistic questions has meant progress has 
been uneven, and many open questions remain 
(including mechanistic questions). A major issue 
highlighted as a barrier to progress throughout this 
chapter is lack of knowledge about whether and to 
what degree organisms have evolved a disruptive 
camouflage strategy. Common cuttlefish are the best 
understood species, yet even here disruption in terms 
of the severity of effects on predator visual processing 
has not been quantified.
In studies which measure the survival of artificial 
or manipulated disruptive prey, the issue of con-
trolling for equivalence in background matching is 
still not effectively resolved. Part of the problem is 
in quantifying the degree of background matching 
(Chapter 1), but many manipulations deployed are 
likely to affect both background matching as well as 
disruption. For example, ‘inside’ treatments (Cuthill 
et al., 2005; Figure  2.2), even if pattern density is 
controlled (Fraser et al., 2007), by focussing on the 
dark pattern element, the potential change in back-
ground matching of the light pattern element is 
neglected, when it is likely that the light border cre-
ated makes a shape that does not occur in the back-
ground, and is therefore less background matching.
Additionally, as many experimental studies use 
simple triangular ‘moths’ as stimuli, it is currently 
quite unclear how disruption of features involved 
in object recognition operate, or under what circum-
stances disruption of high-level processing is effect-
ive compared to disruption of edges. One interesting 
idea discussed in Webster (2015) is to use targets 
that have the same local and global properties as 
real animal outlines. Hopefully future work will 
pick this up to add to our understanding of high-
level disruption. Other avenues for future work in 
this area include investigation of whether disruption 
targets different levels of visual processing when prey 
are targeted by different predators. Low-level edge 
disruption may be a good general-purpose strategy 
against a wide variety of predators, whereas disrup-
tion of higher-level processing may be deployed 
when targeted by specialist predators and those 
which develop search images for particular prey 
types.
One problem for this idea, and another major area 
for improved understanding of disruptive camou-
flage, is whether disruptive patterns are learnt by 
predators more or less easily than patterns that do 
not produce disruptive effects in natural settings 
(Skelhorn & Rowe, 2016). The experiments of 
Troscianko et al. (2013), which found an eroding 
advantage for high-contrast disruptive markings over 
time, suggest that disruptive patterns are learnt more 
rapidly than pure background matching patterns. 
This result predicts that disruption should be most 
effective when predators detect and recognize prey 
infrequently, or encounter many different prey types, 
making search image formation more difficult, 
whereas if prey are common or targeted by special-
ized predators, less easily learnt patterns may be more 
advantageous. This hypothesis remains to be tested in 
comparative or experimental work. Predator learn-
ing should also constrain the form of disruptive cam-
ouflage, with pattern elements selected for being 
indistinct, irregular, and hard to learn. Another intri-
guing area for future work is whether there are 

40
AVOIDING ATTACK
examples of selection for visual adaptations that work 
to counter the effects of disruptive camouflage, for 
example perceptual ability to better discriminate true 
and false edges. Related to this is how disruption 
might work on predators with visual systems very 
different to those of highly visually oriented humans 
and birds, the groups on which most work has been 
done so far.
Further theoretical progress on defining what is 
and what is not disruption is also required. The pre-
vailing view of disruption as a family of adapta-
tions that exploit features of how object outline and 
shape are processed to improve camouflage incorp-
orates uses of defensive coloration not typically 
thought of as disruptive, for example a gradation 
of pigmentation towards the edges of an object to 
make the true outline blurry, and thus weaken the 
response of edge detectors (Troscianko et al., 2009).
A final subject for future work is investigation of 
non-visual disruptive camouflage (Ruxton,  2009). 
There are multiple examples of camouflaging effects 
in other modalities that could accurately be described 
as disruptive. For example the high-pitched ‘seet’ 
calls of many small passerine birds have been sug-
gested to provide camouflage not by being undetect-
able by predators, but because they target predators’ 
sound localization processing to make localizing 
the call difficult (Jones & Hill, 2001). There is, how-
ever, poor understanding of this issue and whether 
theoretical developments from studies of visual dis-
ruption can be usefully applied to other modalities. 
Given that different modalities share similar signal 
processing strategies (Stevens, 2013) it seems likely 
that examples of mechanical, magnetic, electrical, 
thermal, and chemical disruption will be established 
in the future.

CHAPTER 3
Countershading
3.1  What is countershading?
‘Animals are painted by nature, darkest on those parts 
which tend to be most lighted by the sky’s light, and vice 
versa.’
(Thayer, 1896, p.125)
Perhaps the most common coloration pattern 
observed across species is that exterior surfaces 
most exposed to light, typically dorsal surfaces, 
are more darkly coloured than those oriented 
away from light, typically ventral surfaces. This 
phenotype is commonly known as countershading 
and sometimes as dorsal pigmentary darkening 
(Kiltie, 1988).
There is a great deal of variation in appearance of 
countershading patterns, including subtle transi-
tions of cryptic browns, greens, and greys across the 
surface of the body, sharp transitions between black 
and white, and dorso-ventral gradients created by 
altering the size, density, or colour of spots or other 
pattern elements (Figure 3.1).
Countershading is most widely discussed as an 
anti-predator camouflage defence, and it is this 
function the chapter focusses on. However several 
other functions may also select for countershading, 
including thermoregulation, abrasion resistance, and 
protection from ultraviolet light. Countershading 
may also occur simply as a result of lack of selection 
for colour production on ventral surfaces. These alter-
native explanations are discussed where relevant in 
order to evaluate the general applicability of anti-
predator hypotheses.
The idea that countershading has a camouflage 
function was developed towards the end of the nine-
teenth century (Behrens, 2009). Two principal mech-
anisms were proposed: first that countershading 
works to offer improved background-matching 
camouflage when viewed from above against dark 
backgrounds such as the ocean depths, or below 
against generally light backgrounds such as the sky 
(Wallace, 1877). Likely examples include the color-
ation of many pelagic animals such as manta rays 
(Figure 3.1C). The second mechanism, generally 
termed self-shadow concealment (Kiltie, 1988), but 
also referred to as obliterative shading (Cott, 1940), 
was first put forward by Edward Poulton (1888) 
then more fully developed by Abbott Thayer (1896). 
Their idea was that countershading improves cam-
ouflage by reducing the visual effect of self-cast-
shadows. Since natural illumination almost always 
comes from above (the sun, moon, and stars), 
shadows typically fall on ventral surfaces. Counter­
shading coloration was proposed to ‘cancel out’ the 
appearance of these shadows that appeared to 
increase the animal’s conspicuousness.
Thayer vigorously promoted the self-shadow 
concealment theory using strategies such as pre-
senting audiences with animal models painted with 
and without countershading to persuasively dem-
onstrate the camouflaging ability of countershading 
(Behrens, 2009). The perhaps apocryphal story is 
that the neatness of the idea and intuitive appeal of 
the background matching and self-shadow conceal-
ment effects meant countershading rapidly became 
a widely accepted text-book example of adaptive 
coloration (Cott, 1940; M. Edmunds, 2009; Gould, 
2010; Sheppard, 1958), which had the consequence 
of deterring scientific research into countershad-
ing camouflage for several decades despite limited 
empirical support.
Few of the small number of early studies investi-
gating countershading have had a lasting influence 
(De Ruiter, 1956; Turner, 1961; Young & Roper, 1976), 
and recognition of methodological and conceptual 
shortcomings led the reviews of Kiltie (1988) and 
Avoiding Attack: The Evolutionary Ecology of Crypsis, Aposematism, and Mimicry. Second Edition. Graeme D. Ruxton,  
William L. Allen, Thomas N. Sherratt, & Michael P. Speed, Oxford University Press (2018). © Graeme D. Ruxton,  
William L. Allen, Thomas N. Sherratt, & Michael P. Speed 2018. DOI: 10.1093/oso/9780199688678.001.0001

42
AVOIDING ATTACK
Ruxton et al. (2004a, c) to emphasize that most key 
questions remained unanswered, to the extent that 
the last edition of this book noted that there was 
‘no conclusive evidence that countershading per se 
provides any enhancement of crypsis’ (Ruxton et al., 
2004a). Reassuringly, since then the basic question 
of whether countershading can reduce predation 
rates has been resolved experimentally. Edmunds 
and Dewhurst (1994) introduced a paradigm that 
exposes to avian predation artificial prey—pastry 
(a)
(d)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(e)
(f)
(b)
(c)
Figure 3.1  Examples of countershading, counterillumination, and reverse countershading. (a) Countershading created by the size, distribution, 
and colour of pattern and background pattern elements of an Argentine horned frog Ceratophrys ornata. (b) A herd of chital Axis axis. The 
individual in the foreground is made conspicuous by the light ventral surface showing as it rears. Individuals in the background remain inconspicu-
ous, likely partly due to self-shadow concealment. (c) Aquatic species such as this reef manta ray Manta alfredi likely countershade to match the 
background radiance, which is much higher looking up the water column than down. (d) This naked mole-rat Heterocephalus glaber is counter-
shaded though it will spend the vast majority of its life in complete darkness. (e) A juvenile pufferfish in Tetraodontidae that countershades by 
altering the size of light spots. (f) European hamsters Cricetus cricetus possess reverse countershading. (g) Hatchet fish have ventral photophores 
to produce counterillumination that matches the radiance of downwelling light. (h) ‘Living fossils’ such as nautiluses possess countershading. Left. 
Nautilus pompilius; centre. Allonautilus scrobiculatus; right. Nautilus macromphalus. (i) Countershading is widely employed in military camouflage. 
Here the barrel of a Sherman Firefly gun has been countershaded (see Plate 1).

Countershading
43
‘caterpillars’ constructed with either countershaded, 
reverse-countershaded, dark or light coloration. The 
results of Edmunds and Dewhurst’s experiment 
demonstrated a survival advantage for counter-
shaded prey, but with a small sample size. When 
the experiment was repeated by Speed et al. (2004) 
with an additional manipulation of background 
colour to isolate camouflage effects on detection from 
post-detection preferences for different prey types, 
results were mixed. Several experiments showed no 
effect of countershading while in another counter-
shading only reduced attack rates for some species 
of predator. This conflict and the suggestion that 
birds may have habituated to prey types and/or 
formed search images because of long presentation 
times in Speed et al.’s study, led to a third refine-
ment by Rowland et al. (2007b), this time finding a 
strong survival advantage of countershaded prey, 
both when prey were displayed on colour-matched 
boards and on lawns. The conclusive result, how-
ever, came from an ingenious set of experiments 
where the pastry caterpillars were pinned to either 
the upper or lower surfaces of branches (Rowland 
et al., 2008). Countershaded types survived best 
when placed on upper surfaces, but reverse-­
countershaded types survived best when placed 
‘upside-down’ on the underside of twigs so that they 
became countershaded with their dark ventrum 
uppermost. This body of evidence enabled the last 
comprehensive reviews of countershading (Rowland, 
2009; updated 2011) to be confident in the camou-
flage potential of countershading.
Demonstration that countershading coloration 
can have an anti-predator function has allowed 
researchers to begin addressing more advanced 
questions, and it is these that this chapter focusses 
on. Recent experimental work has begun to investi-
gate how countershading might work to reduce 
predation (Cuthill et al., 2016; Kelley et al., 2017). 
Comparative approaches are formally analysing 
the distribution and drivers of countershading 
phenotypes in taxa including ruminants, primates, 
and bats (Allen et al., 2012; Kamilar, 2009; Kamilar & 
Bradley, 2011; Santana et al., 2011), adding to numer-
ous single-species observations of countershading 
appearance interacting with behaviour and envir-
onmental variability (e.g. Kekäläinen et al., 2010). 
These investigations have been supported by 
computational approaches that model counter-
shaded objects in virtual lighting environments to 
provide insight into the form of optimal counter-
shading in different circumstances (Penacchio et al., 
2015a, b). Our understanding of the developmental 
genetics of countershading coloration is also rapidly 
developing (Ceinos et al., 2015; Manceau et al., 2011). 
After decades of research neglect, the last ten years 
have been an exciting time for understanding this 
basic feature of so many observed colour patterns.
This chapter reviews several key examples of 
countershading and counterillumination before dis-
cussing six distinct mechanisms via which counter-
shading might decrease predation. Following this 
are sections on the evolution and genetics of counter-
shading, with the chapter finishing with ecological 
considerations and suggestions for future research.
3.2  Examples and taxonomic distribution 
of countershading camouflage
The basic countershading phenotype of surfaces 
oriented away from illumination being lighter than 
surfaces oriented towards illumination is extremely 
common with examples frequent in almost all major 
lineages, including vertebrates, sponges, echino-
derms, bryozoans, molluscs, brachiopods, arachnids, 
crustaceans, insects, worms, coelenterates, fungi, and 
plants. The presence of countershading in bacteria 
and cyanobacteria is as yet unknown, though recent 
technical breakthroughs now make this question 
possible to address (Yokoo et al., 2015). While their 
small size affords limited scope for differential inter-
action with light across the cell body, pigments can 
be non-uniformly distributed and countershading 
is possible (Vermaas et al., 2008). Protists also have 
organized pigment distributions, though counter-
shaded patterning has not been specifically identi-
fied (Lobban et al., 2007).
In photosynthesizing organisms, including plants, 
countershading is common but likely to be primarily 
the result of distributing chlorophyll and carotenoid 
pigments for efficient photosynthesis and warming 
whilst minimizing photooxidative damage (Archetti 
et al., 2009). It has been suggested that leaf counter-
shading works to increase predation on insect 
herbivores, as by presenting two different back-
ground colours the effectiveness of herbivores’ 

44
AVOIDING ATTACK
background matching camouflage may be under-
mined (Lev-Yadun et al., 2004); however, this 
hypothesis remains untested. Stink bug Podisus 
maculiventris eggs laid on the upper surface of 
leaves are darker than those laid on the underside, 
with leaf reflectance being used by females to select 
egg colour (Abram et al., 2015), suggesting that leaf 
colour on upper and lower surfaces can select for 
insect coloration. However, in this case the explan-
ation seems to lie primarily in protection from 
ultraviolet radiation rather than predation (Torres-
Campos et al., 2016). A direct camouflage effect for 
countershaded leaves to hide them from herbivores 
may also be possible given emerging evidence for 
the advantage of leaf camouflage (Niu et al., 2014).
In animal lineages the presence of countershad-
ing is more likely to be a camouflage adaptation. 
Losing leaves to herbivory is a relatively minor con-
sequence in comparison to a predator that fails to 
capture its prey, or to prey that is consumed follow-
ing detection. In terrestrial environments many ani-
mals are countershaded. For example in mammals, 
106 out of 114 species of ruminants were observed 
to have some degree of countershading (Allen et al., 
2012), as were high proportions of primates (95/113) 
(Kamilar & Bradley, 2011), sciuromorphs (164/276) 
(Ancillotto & Mori, 2017) and lagomorphs (61/71) 
(Stoner et al., 2003). Such systematic surveys have 
not been conducted for other classes of terrestrial 
animal, but a cursory review indicates that propor-
tions are similar for other tetrapods while terrestrial 
invertebrates are less often countershaded, perhaps 
because ventral surfaces are generally not as exposed. 
The question of how often countershading in terres-
trial environments represents an anti-predator adap-
tation is considered further in section 3.3, but the 
likelihood is that many examples will have been 
selected either fully or partly for non-camouflage 
functions. For example, human tanning, which 
results in countershading, has evolved multiple 
times in populations from middle latitudes which 
experience high variance in annual levels of ultra-
violet radiation. Here the primary function is to 
prevent overproduction of vitamin D in summer 
while avoiding deficiency in winter (Jablonski & 
Chaplin, 2010). Likewise it has been suggested that 
penguin countershading has a thermoregulatory 
function, creating a temperature switch that warms 
the penguin when the dark back faces the sun and 
cools it when the pale belly is turned towards the sun 
(Chester, 2001), as well as providing background-
matching camouflage while in water (Bretagnolle, 
1993).
Countershading is observed in some unexpected 
situations. Naked mole-rats, for example, can be 
quite strongly countershaded despite spending the 
vast majority of their lives underground and so out 
of the influence of light coming from above. It is 
possible that melanic pigments protect mole-rats 
from abrasion as they pass each other in tunnels but 
Braude et al. (2001) did not find this explanation sat-
isfactory because dominant animals scrape against 
tunnels more than the subordinate individuals 
they pass over, but are more lightly countershaded. 
Instead the available evidence suggests that cam-
ouflage during the high-risk period of overland 
dispersal at night is sufficiently important for 
countershading camouflage to be selected for.
Reverse-countershading, where surfaces facing 
the light are more lightly pigmented than those 
facing away from the light is relatively common too. 
Striped skunks Mephitis mephitis and honey badgers 
Mellivora capensis are well-known examples. In these 
cases coloration is aposematic (Stankowich et al., 
2011) and light from above likely increases the con-
spicuousness of the signal. Adult male bobolink 
(Dolichonyx oryzivorus) birds likely employ reverse 
countershading to increase the conspicuousness 
of its mating signals (Mather & Robertson, 1992). 
Other examples of reverse countershading such as 
European hamster Cricetus cricetus (Figure 3.1F) 
and muskox Ovibos moschatus await explanation.
Countershading is perhaps even more common in 
aquatic environments, though no surveys of preva-
lence have been conducted. Interesting examples 
include parasitic marine isopods, which attach to fish 
with their heads facing forward, that countershade 
by darkening whichever side is uppermost depend-
ing on whether they attach to the left or right flank 
of their host fish (Körner, 1982). Countershading 
is also seen in catfish of the family Mochokidae 
(Hiroshi et al., 1989), a cichlid Tyrannochromis mac-
rostoma (Stauffer et al., 1999) and sea slugs in 
Glaucidae (Miller, 1974). These organisms are 
unusual in that dorsal surfaces are lighter than 
ventral surfaces; however, because they utilize 

Countershading
45
upside-down body positions as they feed at the air–
water interface, they conform to the standard coun-
tershading rule of surfaces towards the illuminant 
being more darkly pigmented. A neat demonstra-
tion of the orientation dependence of countershading 
is the reflexive colour change response of cephalo-
pods to body rotation so that countershading is 
maintained (Ferguson & Messenger, 1991).
The most vivid examples of differential dorso-
ventral coloration occur in bioluminescent species 
(Figure 3.1G). Bioluminescence is extremely com-
mon in mid-water species including protists, algae, 
crustaceans, fish, and squid, as well as some aerial 
insects (Haddock et al., 2010; Young & Roper, 1977). 
In addition to signalling functions, bioluminescence 
is employed to create counterillumination where 
light is produced only on ventral surfaces (Haddock 
et al., 2010). This is suggested to camouflage an organ-
ism’s silhouette against predators viewing from 
below better than would be possible using pigmen-
tary or structural coloration alone (Johnsen, 2002). 
Several lines of evidence support a camouflage 
function of counterillumination, including appro-
priate bioluminescent responses in squid to improve 
silhouette camouflage against ships’ downwelling 
lights (Young & Roper, 1976) and variation of the 
intensity of bioluminescence with depth to match the 
strength of downwelling light in sergestiid shrimp 
(Latz, 1995), squid (Jones & Nishiguchi, 2004; Young & 
Mencher, 1980) and fish (Denton et al., 1972). The 50 
or so species of bioluminescent shark emit a fixed 
luminescent output (Straube et al., 2015) and so 
instead move up and down the water column in 
diel migrations to follow circadian fluctuations in 
the intensity of downwelling light in a way that 
maintains isoluminance between the shark and its 
background when viewed from below (Claes et al., 
2010, 2014). Counterillumination is currently thought 
to be absent in rivers and lakes, perhaps as these 
environments are much less optically clear than 
oceans (Haddock et al., 2010). Counterillumination 
is also absent from flowering plants and terrestrial 
vertebrates, lineages not known to be biolumines-
cent. Many fungi are bioluminescent. Species with 
bioluminescent basilodomes such as bitter oyster 
mush­rooms Panellus stipticus produce biolumines-
cence only from their gills, creating counterillumina-
tion. However the function of fungal biolumin­escence 
is likely to be in attracting dispersers or the predators 
of fungivorous organisms rather than in camouflage 
(Desjardin et al., 2008).
Countershading is frequently employed in military 
camouflage, beginning with efforts between Abbot 
H. Thayer and George de Forest Brush to counter-
shade naval vessels in the 1898 Spanish–American 
War (Behrens, 2002, 2009). There have also been sev-
eral military trials of counterilluminating technol-
ogy on ships and aircraft, which were conducted in 
the Second World War, for example the US’s Project 
Yehudi placed lights on the leading edge of planes 
that automatically adjusted brightness to that of the 
sky (Duntley, 1946). Trials showed promising results 
on visibility reduction, but practicalities and shifts 
in military priorities meant the concept never entered 
operational usage.
3.3  Countershading camouflage 
mechanisms
The two main mechanisms through which counter-
shading might achieve camouflage, background 
matching, and self-shadow concealment, are really 
umbrella terms for what have been hypothesized to 
be several distinct (but not necessarily exclusive) 
camouflage mechanisms.
The most straightforward mechanism is back-
ground matching from above or below against 
backgrounds that are dark underneath and light 
overhead. This form of background matching needs 
no special explanation in addition to that provided 
in Chapter 1. Optical considerations suggest that 
background matching when viewed from below will 
be necessarily imperfect as a lightly coloured ven-
trum will rarely reflect as much light as there is radi-
ating around the animal, simply because there is 
much less upwelling light to be reflected back off 
the ventrum. This is apparent from viewing coun-
tershaded marine animals or birds that are never-
theless silhouetted when viewed from below, and 
explains the prevalence of counterillumination in 
mesopelagic environments. However a marginal sil-
houette contrast reduction may still be effective: in 
predatory gulls, individuals with undersides painted 
black catch fish at lower rates (Götmark, 1987). 
Environmental factors that increase the diffusiveness 
of light also increase the potential for improved 

46
AVOIDING ATTACK
background matching. Producing counterillumi-
nation by bioluminescence to create additional down-
ward radiating light, however, has the potential to 
solve this issue. Background matching downwell-
ing light when viewed from below, and dark back-
grounds when viewed from above, is almost certainly 
the camouflage mechanism through which counter-
illumination primarily works (Johnsen, 2014).
A rarely considered possible camouflage mech-
anism is that countershading may work to increase 
the level of background matching for animals viewed 
from the side in environments where the lower field 
has a lighter tone than the upper field such as a 
savannah’s mix of light dry grass mixed with dark 
shrubbery. This is suggested by the apparent ‘over-
countershading’ of some species in these habitats, 
where a dark–light dorso-ventral gradient remains 
even after illumination from above (Allen et al., 
2012). The chroma of light reflected off the substrate 
will also contribute to the perceived colour of light 
undersides viewed from the side, and this may 
improve the colour match of ventral surfaces against 
backgrounds of different colours (Norris & Lowe, 
1964). Another possibility suggested by examples of 
overcountershading, and other rapid changes in 
colour between dorsal to ventral surfaces, is that 
countershading may work via disruptive camou-
flage mechanisms (Allen et al., 2012; Harper & Case, 
1999; Penacchio et al., 2015b; see Chapter 2).
The self-shadow concealment hypothesis pro-
poses that countershading works by counteracting 
the effects of light from above which creates, on 
average, stronger shadows on ventral surfaces. The 
self-shadow concealment idea itself potentially 
involves multiple distinct camouflage mechanisms. 
The simplest is that it improves camouflage via back-
ground matching the three-dimensional (3D) form of 
animals when they are viewed from the side (Cott, 
1940). In the absence of countershading, patterns 
resulting from shading created by directional illu-
mination are likely to be dissimilar to the colours, 
tones, and pattern elements of the background. 
Self-cast shadows may also increase detectability by 
increasing contrast between the target outline and 
background. Countershading coloration potentially 
resolves these problems by presenting light tones on 
areas where shadows fall and dark tones on areas 
receiving more irradiance, resulting in the reflected 
radiance over the entire body potentially being a 
better match to the background, a mechanism termed 
here and elsewhere (Penacchio et al., 2015b) as 3D 
background matching.
A separate self-shadow concealment camouflage 
mechanism involves reduction of cues to 3D form 
itself. The 3D form of objects is a major source of 
information that enables separation of objects from 
the background and recognition as a particular 
object, such as potential prey. The form and identity 
of 3D objects can be acquired from several distinct 
cues. For example, binocular cues allow the depth 
of surfaces comprising an object to be estimated 
from the difference in relative position of the sur-
face on each retina or the angular difference of the 
eyes’ rotation when focussing on a surface. However, 
binocular cues only provide useful information over 
short distances and in species with forward-facing 
eyes (Blake & Wilson, 2011). A more generally import-
ant source of information on 3D shape comes from 
patterns of shading created by directional light 
interacting with object form to create self-cast 
shadows that are characteristic of object form (Figure 
3.2a) (Kleffner & Ramachandran, 1992; Lovell et al., 
2012; Rittenhouse, 1786), and it is this information 
that self-shadow concealment is proposed to obscure.
The utilization of information from self-cast 
shadows in 3D shape perception has been demon-
strated in most species that have been studied to 
date (rhesus macaques: Arcizet et al., 2009; pigeons: 
Cook et al., 2012b; starlings: Qadri et al., 2014; 
humans and chimpanzees: Tomonaga, 1998; cuttle-
fish: Zylinski et al., 2016). Humans, for example, 
perceive 2D discs shaded on top as concave and 
shaded on bottom as convex, a demonstration of 
the perceptual assumption that light comes from 
above (Ramachandran, 1988; Sun & Perona, 1998). 
Search for convexity defined by shading is a suc-
cessful computer vision strategy for detecting cam-
ouflaged objects without countershading (Tankus & 
Yeshurun, 2009), and it is likely predators also search 
for either simple or complex patterns of shading 
that are indicative of potential prey (Skelhorn & 
Rowe, 2016). Countershading may therefore work 
to reduce predation by minimizing or eliminating 
shading cues to 3D form. Here we follow Penacchio 
et al. (2015b) and resurrect the term ‘obliterative shad­
ing’ to refer specifically to this unique mechanism 

(a)
(d)
(b)
(c)
cloudy
12 noon
sunny
7 am
(sun el. 30°)
sunny
12 noon
(sun el. 60°)
optimal coloration
resulting radiance proﬁle
Figure 3.2  Modelling the visual effect of self-cast shadows on objects with and without countershading coloration in virtual lighting environments, 
where (a) illustrates self-cast shadows on a cylinder lit from above, (b) uniform reflectance when the cylinder’s tonal gradient is the inverse of 
self-cast shadows (obliterative shading) and (c) when the cylinder’s overall tone additionally achieves background matching as well as obliterative 
shading. (d) shows in the first column of images optimal coloration for 3D background matching and obliterative shading in different lighting 
conditions. The background colour is displayed in the lower left corner. Note how the strength of countershading required increases in sunny 
conditions and with increasing height of the sun. The second column of images illustrates the resulting radiance profile, highlighting that in sunny 
conditions a ‘perfect’ solution is impossible as pigmentation cannot counter the magnitude of irradiance gradients, since reflectance cannot be 
greater than 100% or less than 0%. Figures adapted with permission from Penacchio et al. (2015b).

48
AVOIDING ATTACK
of camouflage through reduction of shape-from-
shading cues to 3D form (obliterative shading of shape). 
An object with perfect obliterative shading will 
appear optically flat to an observer using shape-
from-shading cues to perceive the 3D form of objects 
(Figure 3.2). A conceptually distinct extension of the 
obliterative shading mechanism has been proposed 
by Penacchio et al. (2015b), who suggest that oblit-
erative shading may also work by reducing cues to 
object depth relative to the background, thus ham-
pering identification of prey as being in a different 
depth plane to the background (obliterative shading 
of depth).
Self-shadow concealment mechanisms may also 
work for objects when they are viewed from above 
or below as well as from the side. Rowland (2009) 
used modelling to demonstrate that illumination 
from above results in uniformly coloured cylindrical 
objects having non-uniform reflectance profiles when 
viewed from above as well as from the side, being 
darker at the object’s edges. Edge contrast is particu-
larly important for object detection (Troscianko et al., 
2009) so countershading may be selected to reduce 
this cue as well, resulting in improved camouflage 
via either 2D and 3D background matching, disrup-
tion, and/or obliterative shading.
Experimental investigation of which potential 
countershading mechanisms are actually effective 
at promoting survival, in what situations, and their 
relative contributions to camouflage, is a research 
task that is only just beginning: Cuthill et al. (2016) 
recently reported a field predation experiment that 
used paper tube ‘caterpillars’ printed with optimal 
self-shadow concealment patterns for either sunny 
or cloudy conditions, as derived from the computa-
tional modelling of Penacchio et al. (2015b; Figure 
3.3.). Results showed that countershaded targets opti-
mized for sunny and cloudy conditions survived 
best in sunny and cloudy conditions respectively, 
demonstrating that the survival benefit of counter-
shading in this instance is dependent specifically on 
the degree of self-shadow concealment given envir-
onmental light conditions. Penacchio et al. (in 
review) went on to replicate this result in labora-
tory conditions. Well over a century after the self-
shadow concealment mechanism was proposed, 
this experiment finally verifies its operation in 
camouflaging prey against predators. What remains 
to  be understood is whether increased survival 
through self-shadow concealment is achieved 
through 3D background matching or obliterative 
shading. The modelling work of Penacchio et al. 
(2015b) demonstrates that both these mechanisms 
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
Figure 3.3  The experimental treatments used in Cuthill et al. (2016). The top row shows a plan view of each treatment. The second row shows 
examples of each treatment photographed in cloudy weather and the third row in sunny weather. Treatments are: (a) optimized for cloudy 
weather; (b) optimized for sunny weather; (c) dark green; (d) sharp dark–light transition; (e) mean colour of cloudy weather treatment; (f) mean 
colour of sunny weather treatment; (g) light green (see Plate 2).

Countershading
49
are optimized by the same pattern and thus can-
not be disassociated on the basis of colour pheno-
type alone.
In aquatic environments specific countershading 
mechanisms have been experimentally investigated 
for the first time by Kelley et al. (2017) in studies of 
the western rainbowfish Melanotaenia australis, a 
species that can make its pigmentation lighter or 
darker depending on conditions over the course of 
a few days. The authors measured colour change 
following manipulation of overhead light intensity 
and substrate colour in one experiment, and hori-
zontal background colour in a second experiment. 
Background matching and self-shadow concealment 
hypotheses were teased apart by testing predictions 
generated by photographing a uniformly coloured 
model fish in the same conditions and observing 
what optimal countershading for each mechanism 
would be. On a light substrate the self-shadow con-
cealment hypothesis predicts weak countershad-
ing, since light reflected off the substrate decreases 
the ratio of upwelling light to downwelling light, 
whereas a dark substrate, which reflects little light 
back up the water column, predicts strong counter-
shading if self-shadow concealment is being opti-
mized. Similarly when horizontal backgrounds are 
dark, sidewelling radiance will be low, increasing 
the strength of self-cast shadows and so predicting 
stronger countershading. Results showed that fish 
did not conform to these predictions—there was no 
effect of substrate or horizontal background colour 
on dorso-ventral gradients. Instead dorsal surfaces 
became darker on dark substrates and lighter on light 
substrates, replicating Kelley & Merilaita (2015). 
Ventral surfaces became lighter when overhead 
light intensity increased and lighter on light sub-
strates, perhaps due to increased upwelling radi-
ance. Overall the pattern is entirely consistent with 
2D background matching mechanisms rather than 
self-shadow concealment mechanisms. Thus west-
ern rainbowfish, which inhabit rivers and lakes, 
seem to have evolved the ability to change counter-
shading coloration in order to match the background 
from multiple viewing angles rather than hide self-
cast shadows.
Together with the results of Cuthill et al. (2016), 
this provides experimental support for the hypoth-
esis that background matching is the typical  
countershading mechanism in aquatic and aerial 
envir­onments, whereas self-shadow concealment has 
a more important role in terrestrial environments 
(Johnsen, 2014; Kelley & Merilaita, 2015). Terrestrial 
animals inhabit a more 2D environment than pela-
gic animals and are thus assumed to be viewed 
from above or below less often and from the side 
more often than aquatic animals in general. Self-
shadow concealment on land is challenged by enor-
mous variability in the direction of light in terrestrial 
environments, such that for a static terrestrial ani-
mal diel variation in where self-cast shadows fall is 
enormous. This problem has led to some scepticism 
about whether countershading could be a camou-
flage adaptation in terrestrial environments, as it 
will only counter the appearance of shadows for a 
small fraction of each day (Kiltie, 1988). However 
the results of Cuthill et al. (2016) demonstrate that 
self-shadow concealment is resistant to some of this 
variability, as they found increased survival for 
countershaded prey left exposed to predation for 
long periods during which changing lighting condi-
tions would have made self-shadow concealment 
suboptimal most of the time. Light in aquatic envir­
onments is much more homogeneous because of 
the scattering effects of water (though factors such as 
turbidity, the position and brightness of the sun and 
moon, and depth are still important: Johnsen, 2012), 
so the position and intensity of self-cast shadows 
should be more consistent, making self-shadow con-
cealment mechanisms more effective. However ini-
tial observations and experiments are showing that 
improving background matching from above or 
below is the primary mechanism utilized by aquatic 
countershading and counterillumination (Claes et al., 
2010; Kelley & Merilaita, 2015; Kelley et al., 2017).
In summary six mechanisms have been proposed 
to explain the anti-predator function of countershad-
ing: 1.) background matching against backgrounds 
that differ consistently depending on viewing angle 
(light backgrounds viewed from below, dark from 
above, and light–dark from the side); 2.) background 
matching following selection only on dorsal surfaces; 
3.) disruptive camouflage that splits upper and lower 
sections; 4.) 3D background matching following 
self-shadow concealment; 5.) obliterative shape 
shading to reduce cues to 3D shape; and 6.) oblitera-
tive depth shading to reduce cues to overall object 

50
AVOIDING ATTACK
depth. With the exception of background matching 
following selection on only dorsal surfaces, but with 
the addition of non-camouflage mechanisms, these 
are non-mutually exclusive. This complexity partly 
accounts for the challenge of investigating the func-
tion and mechanism of countershading coloration.
3.4  Evolution
3.4.1  Evolutionary history of countershading
Given the prevalence of countershading on extant 
organisms and the fact that solar light has always 
come from above, it is possible that the counter-
shading phenotype has been around and common 
for a very long time. For sedentary organisms, dis-
tributing costly pigments with respect to the sun 
is in principle straightforward from an evolutionary 
point of view. For motile organisms in shallow 
waters, being able to take advantage of counter-
shading pigmentation requires orientation of body 
position with respect to the direction of light, which 
additionally necessitates an ability to sense the 
direction of light.
The use of countershading as a camouflage strat-
egy could, at the earliest, coincide with the emer-
gence of visually oriented predators in the Cambrian 
around 540 Mya (Parker, 2003). The Cambrian oceans 
contained numerous lineages that would plausibly 
have benefited from countershading camouflage 
mechanisms. Countershading that may function in 
camouflage is present on ‘living fossils’ with origins 
in the Cambrian such as nautiluses (Figure 3.1H), 
suggestive of an early origin for countershading cam-
ouflage, but by no means conclusive. To date the 
earliest examples of fossilized pigments with distri-
butions that indicate countershading phenotypes are 
fish from the Permian and Carboniferous (Gabbott 
et al., 2016; Gottfried, 1989) around 300 Mya, and, 
on land, a taxonomically diverse array of dinosaurs 
from the Early Cretaceous starting at 100.5 Mya 
(Brown et al., 2017; Smithwick et al., 2017; Vinther 
et al., 2016). Vinther et al. (2016) demonstrated the 
presence of countershading in Psittacosaurus sp. by 
reconstructing coloration from the distribution of 
fossilized melanins in a specimen with very well 
preserved skin. Further, by reconstructing the 3D 
shape of Psittacosaurus from skeletal morphology, 
the authors were able to infer the countershading 
phenotype, which featured a smooth and relatively 
shallow reflectance gradient, would have been more 
effective for self-shadow concealment in closed 
compared to open environments. With this conclu-
sion corroborated by the presence of petrified tree 
trunks in the surrounding deposits, this represents 
a novel approach to understanding the ecology of a 
long-extinct species. It is equally interesting to specu-
late on why other examples of long-ago extinct 
reptiles do not appear to possess countershading 
(Lindgren et al., 2014).
As countershading has several potential non-
camouflage functions, a plausible scenario for the 
evolution of countershading for camouflage is exap-
tation of countershading for ultraviolet protection, 
abrasion resistance or thermoregulation. Alter­
natively, predation may have been the primary 
driving force for the initial evolution of counter-
shading. Establishing the sequence of evolutionary 
trajectories of countershading has received little 
attention and awaits future work.
3.4.2  Evolutionary history of 
counterillumination
Bioluminescence is produced following oxidation of 
a substrate luciferin triggered by a catalysing enzyme, 
either a luciferase or photoprotein, resulting in 
photon emission. Bioluminescence can generated 
intrinsically in photophores, or extrinsically through 
bacterially mediated symbioses.
In non-symbiotic bioluminescence, organisms pos-
sess a gene to produce luciferase or a photoprotein. 
Some species also produce luciferin directly while 
for others it is acquired through diet. The earliest 
origin of intrinsic non-symbiotic bioluminescence 
can be tracked to a split between two ostracod lin-
eages 400 Mya (Haddock et al., 2010).
In organisms where bioluminescence is produced 
via symbiotic bacteria, the anatomy required to host 
the bacteria has evolved between 40 and 50 times 
among extant organisms (Haddock et al., 2010). In 
ray-finned fishes, which include several lineages 
containing examples of counterillumination, bio-
luminescence has evolved several times between 
the early Cretaceous (ca. 150 Mya) through to the 
Cenozoic (Davis et al., 2016).

Countershading
51
3.5  Costs of countershading and 
counterillumination camouflage
It is expected that achieving effective self-shadow 
concealment camouflage entails significant oppor-
tunity costs, such as restricting an animal to par-
ticular lighting environments or activity periods, 
maintaining a fixed orientation with respect to the 
sun, or otherwise constraining potentially benefi-
cial behaviours that might reduce the effectiveness 
of self-shadow concealment (Cuthill et al., 2016), par-
ticularly in terrestrial environments. Though costs 
have not been directly quantified, modelling work 
(Penacchio et al., 2015a, b) demonstrates the dele-
terious effect on conspicuousness that countershad-
ing has when an animal is viewed in suboptimal 
lighting conditions, potentially being more visible 
than uniform coloration. A recent experiment found 
that in simulated cloudy conditions, countershading 
optimized for sunny conditions survived no better 
or worse than uniform coloration, and in cloudy con-
ditions sunny-optimized countershading only does 
slightly better (Penacchio et al., in review). Thus 
animals which rely on effective countershading to 
maintain acceptable level of predation risk would 
be strongly constrained by weather conditions. For 
bilaterally symmetric animals living in open envir-
onments under direct sun, not orienting to the sun 
will always have a negative effect on conspicuous-
ness (Penacchio, Cuthill, et al., 2015a). These issues 
may be balanced if, as seems likely, countershading 
is a relatively cheap adaptation to produce and live 
with, such that even if it is of relatively limited 
effectiveness most of the time, it is still worthwhile 
to adopt. More work is required to investigate how 
selection optimizes trade-offs between camouflage 
effectiveness and other factors such as foraging, 
mating, and resting requirements, and the conse-
quences this has for the form of countershading 
phenotypes observed (Allen et al., 2012).
From a purely energetic perspective, the costs of 
producing counterillumination are much higher 
than the costs of producing countershading. Young 
and Roper (1977) calculated that producing coun-
terillumination accounts for 0.3–0.9 per cent of the 
squid Histioteuthis heteropsis’s resting metabolic rate 
at 400m in clear water. Because in the daytime 
downwelling light increases in radiance by a factor 
of 50 for every 100m decrease in depth, producing 
sufficient counterillumination in shallower waters 
becomes prohibitively costly, and indeed counteril-
lumination in the daytime has not been observed in 
shallow waters. Claes and Mallefet (2010) discuss 
how the unique hormonal control of lantern sharks’ 
(Etmopteridae) counterillumination evolved out of 
the mechanism to control physiological colour change 
in shallow-water sharks. While this innovation may 
have freed the family from being restricted to shal-
low-water niches and allowed a deep-water species 
radiation, the close association between different spe-
cies’ bioluminescent output and the depth at which 
they are caught also hints at the constraints this adap-
tation places on behaviour (Claes et al., 2014).
3.6  Developmental genetics of 
countershading
Most countershading phenotypes are, at least in 
principle, straightforward to produce from a devel-
opmental perspective. Mathematical models of pat-
tern formation have proposed several processes by 
which dorso-ventral gradients in pigmentation could 
be produced (Gierer & Meinhardt, 1972; Murray, 
2002), the simplest of which is diffusion of a mor-
phogen from source cells in dorsal regions that 
degrades as it spreads towards ventral regions 
(Howard et al., 2011). Countershaded gradients with 
more complex shapes can be created by reaction–
diffusion models, as can countershading patterns 
comprised of spots and stripes of varying widths 
and densities (Majumdar et al., 2014; Turing, 1952; 
Figure 3.1). Until recently the biological applicabil-
ity of mathematical models was not well understood; 
however, the developmental genetics of counter-
shading is beginning to be understood, with recent 
work concentrating on zebrafish Danio rerio (Ceinos 
et al., 2015) and deer mice Peromyscus (Manceau 
et al., 2011).
In mammals, pigment is produced by a single 
chromophore type, the melanocyte. Melanocytes 
originate from the neural crest during embryogenesis 
and pigment production within melanocytes is 
under the control of two loci, Extension and 
Agouti. The Extension locus encodes a receptor for 
α-melanocyte-stimulating hormone (α-MSH) at 
melanocortin 1 receptor (MC1R). Stimulation leads 

52
AVOIDING ATTACK
to eumelanin (black/brown pigment) synthesis. The 
Agouti gene ASIP instead codes for production of 
agouti signalling protein (asip1) in hair follicles which 
inhibits α-MSH induced eumelanin production and 
promotes pheomelanin (yellow/red pigment) syn-
thesis (Lu et al., 1994). Countershading is produced 
by regulation of Agouti expression (Millar et al., 
1995), with Agouti expressed at low levels in the 
ventrum (Vrieling et al., 1994). In Peromyscus mice, 
this delays melanocyte differentiation, creating bicol-
our banded hairs on the ventrum and a counter-
shading pattern (Manceau et al., 2011). Higher 
contrast countershading can be created via upward 
shifts of Agouti expression to create completely depig-
mented hairs, and the boundary between light and 
dark hair can be shifted dorsally or ventrally by 
changes in the location of Agouti expression, genetic 
changes which have been linked to camouflage 
adaptations in wild populations (Hoekstra, 2011; 
Manceau et al., 2011; Steiner et al., 2007).
In zebrafish countershading is instead formed by 
differential densities of two chromophore types; 
dark melanocytes are concentrated in dorsal areas 
and reflective iridophores in ventral areas (Bagnara 
& Matsumoto, 2007). Despite this different cellular 
mechanism the same ASIP gene as in mammals is 
responsible for creating countershading via MC1R 
antagonism (Ceinos et al., 2015). However instead 
of regulating eumelanin/pheomelanin production, 
asip1 expression in ventral regions controls the 
balance of melanocytes and iridophores along the 
dorso-ventral axis. Asip1 is also expressed at higher 
levels in ventral regions of goldfish Carassius aura-
tus (Cerdá-Reverter et al., 2005), turbot Scophthalmus 
maximus and sole Solea senegalensis (Guillot et al., 
2012). The developmental mechanism is also under-
stood to be similar in amphibians (Mills & Patterson, 
2009) and birds (Gluckman & Mundy, 2017). As 
well as Agouti and MC1R, variation in countershad-
ing pigmentation has also been observed to result 
from changes in expression of KITLG (Miller et al., 
2007; Steiner et al., 2007), a conserved protein cod-
ing gene involved in many cell migration functions 
across species, including chromophore migration 
and differentiation (Wehrle-Haller, 2003).
In summary, the genetic and molecular basis of 
countershading adaptations are beginning to be 
well understood for focal species and the emerging 
picture is that developmental mechanisms are highly 
conserved across taxonomic groups, despite funda-
mental differences in pigment production. Evidence 
from invertebrate lineages is now required, as is 
understanding of how developmental constraints 
might affect the range of countershading pheno-
types that can be expressed.
3.7  The evolutionary ecology of 
countershading
Building on illustrative examples such as the dark 
ventra observed on upside-down swimming catfish, 
comparative studies have begun to formally analyse 
how countershading and counterillumination correl-
ate with the ecology and behaviour of organisms. 
In doing so they provide insight into how and why 
countershading might be adaptive in different groups 
of organism.
Seabirds that feed at medium depths, such as many 
penguins and diving petrels, seem to be more likely 
to be countershaded than those that feed on the sur-
face or lower depths (Bretagnolle, 1993; Cairns, 1986), 
suggestive of background matching from above or 
below since these species will be viewed from these 
angles more by both predators and prey. In cetaceans 
both smoothly and sharply countershaded species 
are more likely to be small, and feed on squid and 
fish, than species lacking countershading (Caro et al., 
2011). Additionally, smoothly countershaded species 
are likely to be shallow diving and thus in environ-
ments with stronger directional light. These associ-
ations are consistent with a camouflage function 
of countershading, with small species being under 
greater predation risk, and squid and fish being visu-
ally oriented prey. Sharp countershading was also 
more common in species that form larger social 
groups, suggesting a communication role for high-
contrast patterning. In a similar study of pinnipeds, 
however, countershading coloration did not associate 
with any ecological traits analysed, including prey 
type, body size, and diving depth (Caro et al., 2012).
In terrestrial environments the ecological correl-
ates of dark dorsal and light ventral pigmentation 
also remained enigmatic in a study of lagomorphs 
(Stoner et al., 2003) and in 914 species of bat (Santana 
et al., 2011). However Santana et al.’s study found 
that species with light-coloured neck bands gener-

Countershading
53
ally roosted upside down in open environments, 
suggesting anterior regions display countershading 
camouflage. In rainforest birds countershading was 
observed to be ubiquitous by Gomez & Théry (2007), 
with no clear environmental drivers of variation in 
countershading phenotype. As in pelagic habitats 
the principle camouflage mechanism in forest birds 
was suggested to be background matching against 
the dark forest floor and vegetation when viewed 
from above, and the lighter canopy or canopy gaps 
when viewed from below.
Kamilar (2009) and Kamilar & Bradley (2011) 
investigated variation in the strength of counter-
shading across primate species, measuring dorsal 
and ventral coloration from photos of museum spe-
cimens then associating the degree of countershad-
ing with behavioural traits in a phylogenetic context. 
They found no support for the prediction that 
stronger countershading should be found on spe-
cies active during the day when the strongest self-
cast shadows are cast and UV levels are highest. 
However countershading was found to be weaker 
on larger primates, perhaps because they experi-
ence less predation and consequently selection for 
crypsis has been weaker relative to other functions 
(Kamilar, 2009; Kamilar & Bradley, 2011). The clearest 
predictor of countershading strength was the pos-
itional behaviour of species; primates that spend a 
significant portion of their time in a vertical pos-
ition have little difference between dorsal and ven-
tral coloration, whereas those that adopt horizontal 
positions generally have strong countershading 
(Kamilar & Bradley, 2011). The inference is that 
since self-cast shadows are generally only cast on 
ventral surfaces when in a horizontal position, and 
dorsal and ventral surfaces will be viewed from 
above or below more often when in a horizontal 
position, species that adopt horizontal positions 
will benefit more from countershading camouflage, 
whether through self-shadow concealment or back-
ground-matching mechanisms (Kiltie, 1989). In 
squirrels the presence of countershading has simi-
larly been found to associate with utilization of 
arboreal habitats, though species differences in 
positional behaviour were not directly studied 
(Ancillotto & Mori, 2017).
One of the difficulties in drawing conclusions on 
how ecological circumstance affects the evolution of 
anti-predator countershading is that other potential 
countershading functions such as thermoregulation 
and UV protection often predict the same associ-
ations, for example that countershading should be 
stronger in open lighting environments, or stronger 
when horizontal postures are typically adopted 
(Cuthill et al., 2016). Allen et al. (2012) attempted to 
separate the predictions made by different counter-
shading functions by taking more detailed measure-
ments of countershading phenotypes from mus­eum 
specimens of 114 species of ruminant, including 
the abruptness and position of change between 
dark and light tones, with alternative camouflage 
functions making unique predictions across mul-
tiple measures. The pattern of associations with 
ecological and behavioural traits observed were all 
consistent with the self-shadow concealment hypoth-
esis; species in open environments had stronger 
countershading and more abrupt transitions from 
dark to light tones, and stronger countershading was 
found on species with smaller body sizes (Kamilar & 
Bradley, 2011) and also on species living closer to 
the equator (Penacchio et al., 2015b). The pattern of 
associations did not fit the predictions made by alter-
native functional hypotheses including thermo-
regulation (which predicts stronger countershading 
at high latitudes) and ultraviolet protection (which 
does not predict an effect of lighting environment 
on the abruptness of change between dark dorsal 
and light ventral tones). 2D background matching 
countershading mechanisms were also supported 
as countershading strength and overall tone correl-
ated with lighting environment, but 2D background 
matching alone could not account for results since it 
does not predict the observed relationship between 
countershading strength and latitude. By analysing 
the strength of self-cast shadows on a uniform grey 
model deer photographed in open and closed envir-
onments, and at midday and in the evening, Allen 
et al. (2012) additionally showed that the degree 
of  countershading across species was generally a 
good match to what would be required for effective 
self-shadow concealment. The virtual modelling of 
Penacchio et al. (2015a, b) extends this approach 
and allows greater control over factors such as the 
effects of sun altitude, body orientation, and the dif-
fusiveness of light. Results agreed with the real-world 
observations of Allen et al., but cast some doubt over 

54
AVOIDING ATTACK
whether the form of countershading phenotypes can 
signify function, since predicted countershading for 
UV protection and, to a lesser extent, thermoregula-
tion, was very similar to predicted counter­shading 
for camouflage.
In a similar attempt to identify countershading 
function and mechanism by testing the different 
predictions each makes for the ecological correlates 
of countershading phenotypes observed in nature, 
Kelley and Merilaita (2015) examined how intraspe-
cific variation in western rainbowfish Melanotaenia 
australis countershading correlates with local light-
ing environments and predation pressure in the 
wild, and with substrate colour in the lab. Results 
showed no effect of downwelling or sidewelling 
irradiance levels, predation risk or substrate reflect-
ance on the degree of countershading, suggesting 
against a self-shadow concealment mechanism. 
Instead there were important effects of both down-
welling light and predation risk on dorsal and ven-
tral colour separately, with fish from high irradiance 
environments having paler colours. Ruling out a role 
for ultraviolet protection by the lightening of dorsal 
surfaces in high irradiance environments and the 
association with predation risk, the authors con-
cluded that only background matching camouflage 
from above or below was entirely consistent with 
patterns of variation. Overall this study lends fur-
ther support to the idea that the principle counter-
shading mechanism in aquatic environments is 
background matching. Analysing species with the 
ability to change colour over short timescales com-
plements interspecies analyses examining colour 
change over evolutionary timescales. It will be 
interesting to apply the approach to additional spe-
cies and environments. There is some suggestion 
that responses may not be consistent in different 
species, as in King George whiting Sillaginodes punc-
tatus kept in laboratory environments under differ-
ent light intensities the pattern of colour variation is 
opposite to that observed in wild western rainbow-
fish, with species in low light environments having 
lighter dorsal and ventral tones (Meakin & Qin, 
2012).
The focus of many studies reported in this section 
has been on elucidating countershading function and 
mechanism from patterns of ecological and behav-
ioural associations. More generally, it is clear from 
overall results that countershading phenotypes read-
ily adapt to the visual environment and the behav-
ioural ecology of individuals and species. However 
the selective forces on countershading appearance 
such as latitude or positional behaviour are found 
to explain only a small percentage of variation in 
countershading phenotypic diversity (Figure 3.1), 
leaving much about the evolutionary ecology of 
countershading to be discovered.
3.8  Countering countershading and 
counterillumination adaptations
For obliterative shading to be operational requires 
that an observer has ability to infer shape or depth 
from patterns of shading. This is expected to be a 
relatively basic visual ability, and indeed it has been 
observed in all species studied to date (section 3.3), 
though studies have so far focussed on highly 
visually oriented animals. Computer vision models 
designed to break other forms of camouflage by 
identifying patterns of convexity perform worse 
at  identifying countershaded targets (Tankus & 
Yeshurun, 2009). Conversely, obliterative shading 
alone, whilst it removes shape and depth cues, does 
not necessarily affect contrast with the background 
unless it is combined with background matching, 
and edges may remain conspicuous without being 
disruptive. The only way to determine if obfusca-
tion of depth cues is providing a camouflage advan-
tage is through behavioural test (Penacchio et al., 
2015b), but thus far this has happened for very few 
species. This is an efficient research activity as it also 
provides a route into understanding non-human 
object perception (Zylinski et al., 2016). If a consist-
ent picture emerges then the presence of counter-
shading camouflage can be used to infer the visual 
cognition of observers that cannot be tested directly, 
such as dinosaurs (Vinther et al., 2016).
Since the effectiveness of fixed countershading 
camouflage varies with factors such as time of day, 
weather, and microhabitat (Allen et al., 2012; Cuthill 
et al., 2016; Penacchio et al., 2015b), there is potential 
for interesting ecological and evolutionary predator–
prey dynamics; predators may adjust their hunting 
time or place to instances where their favoured 
prey’s countershading is least effective, and the 
prey may respond to this by adjusting behaviour or 

Countershading
55
countershading (Bond & Kamil, 2006). However this 
possibility has not yet been studied.
Counterillumination can be broken by predators 
with acuity high enough that individual photophores 
can be detected (Johnsen, 2014; Johnsen et al., 2004). 
Counterilluminatiing species can respond by decreas-
ing the size of photophores and increasing photo-
phore density. This may explain why species in 
shallower water have finer photophores, since high 
acuity vision is only possible at high levels of illu-
mination, and why many deep-sea fish have higher 
acuity for upward viewing than in other directions 
(Warrant & Locket, 2004). Deep-sea predators have 
a limitation on acuity placed by the requirement to 
spatially sum photoreceptor outputs to achieve sen-
sitivity in very low light conditions (Warrant & 
Locket, 2004). Predators may also adapt to detect 
spectral mismatches between prey and downwell-
ing light: counterilluminating species are generally 
monochromats, and thus are likely to be able to 
only sense the intensity of downwelling light, not 
its spectral distribution. Further, bioluminescence 
mechanisms constrain the spectrum of light that 
can be produced. The presence of yellow lenses in 
deep-sea predators may be an adaptation to enhance 
differences between the colour of downwelling light 
and that coming from counterillumination (Johnsen, 
2014; Muntz, 1976).
3.9  Unresolved issues and future 
challenges
The increased level of interest in investigating coun-
tershading coloration since the last edition of this 
book will hopefully continue as many pressing 
questions remain unanswered.
First, and perhaps foremost, whether each of the 
six potential countershading camouflage mechan-
isms discussed can make an independent contribu-
tion to improving camouflage needs experimental 
verification. Unlike most experimental tests of anti-
predator coloration which use 2D stimuli, tests of 
countershading coloration generally require 3D 
stimuli which presents an additional level of com-
plexity for designing controlled experiments. Virtual 
modelling is generating predictions and specifying 
stimuli that can be used to tease apart predictions 
made by different mechanisms (Penacchio et al., 
2015a, b), but this work has only just begun with 
Cuthill et al. (2016). This study provides the strong-
est evidence to date of the anti-predator effective-
ness of self-shadow concealment, but it remains 
to be investigated to what degree 3D background 
matching and obliterative shading mechanisms 
within the self-shadow concealment umbrella are 
operating to reduce predation. This will require 
behavioural tests of predators to determine what 
cues they are using to detect and identify prey, and 
the perceptual and cognitive processes employed 
(Merilaita et al., 2017), as on the basis of prey 
appearance alone these mechanisms cannot be dis-
tinguished (Penacchio et al., 2015b).
A further outstanding issue given recent experi-
mental and theoretical results is how close to opti-
mal countershading needs to be to provide effective 
protection (or avoid increasing conspicuousness). 
Due to variation in environmental conditions, 
whether there exists an optimal countershading 
phenotype for achieving camouflage through both 
3D background matching and obliterative shading 
remains an open question. The answer is likely to be 
specific to the perceptual systems of the potential 
receivers and the ecological and morphological 
traits of the camouflaged target. Different receivers 
may weigh cues from imperfect background match-
ing or imperfect removal of depth cues from shad-
ing differently, and within each mechanism different 
visual cues may or may not be used. For example, if 
predators primarily use object convexity as a cue to 
the presence of potential prey, then optimal coun-
tershading phenotype would differ to that expected 
if they primarily use optical flatness (Penacchio et al., 
2015b, c).
Related to this is a need to improve understanding 
of how organisms might alter behaviour to improve 
countershading camouflage, and what trade-offs 
are made to do so. The area most likely to be fruitful 
in this regard is examination of orientation behav-
iour. Penacchio et al. (2015a) demonstrate that coun-
tershading camouflage is improved when bilaterally 
symmetric animals orient directly towards or away 
from a light source. Cuthill et al. (2016) suggest that 
for animals in the open, except for the exceptional 
instance when the sun is directly overhead, the con-
sequences of not orienting to the sun are always 
deleterious for bilaterally symmetric animals, as 

56
AVOIDING ATTACK
only by orienting to the sun is the illumination on 
the animal symmetric. Indeed deviations of more 
than 15° in orientation to the light source result in a 
dramatic increase in human search performance for 
computer-generated countershaded prey (Penacchio 
et al., 2017). It has not yet been tested whether ani-
mals move to maintain equal illumination on both 
body halves, a behaviour that is likely to entail high 
costs. It is possible that animals orient to optimize 
countershading only on one half of their body at a 
time, such as the side most visible to predators. The 
orientation hypothesis also makes predictions that 
could be tested by comparative approaches: model-
ling shows that the advantage gained by orienting 
to the sun should be reduced for animals that are at 
risk of predation in more diffuse light, such as those 
that live in forests or under cloudy skies. Whether 
and how behaviour to maintain effective counter-
shading operates in context of foraging, thermo-
regulatory, and social behaviour is a largely 
unexplored area (Claes & Mallefet, 2010), for which 
a fuller understanding of how countershading inter-
acts with other types of coloration and the environ-
ment is required.
Another pressing need is better characterization 
of the backgrounds that countershaded animals are 
viewed against. There may be some backgrounds 
where non-uniform patterns of radiance from an 
animal created by countershading coloration and 
self-cast shadows are advantageous, for example 
when shadows create patterns which match the 
structure of a cluttered background full of shadows, 
or perhaps over-countershading improves back-
ground matching in environments where the back-
ground of the upper visual field is darker than the 
lower visual field. It is notable that little work has 
examined the appearance of countershaded animals 
in situ (Kiltie, 1989) Similarly, whether and how 
counterilluminating animals modulate counterillu-
mination to deal with different angular, spectral, 
and intensity distributions of light is little under-
stood, with only some suggestion that cephalopods 
use water temperature as a gauge to depth (Johnsen, 
2014; Young & Mencher, 1980). Johnsen regards 
non-invasive in-situ observations of counterillumi-
nation in the oceans as the most pressing require-
ment. Fortunately imaging technology is coming 
online that allows in-situ high-speed recording of 
deep-sea bioluminescense (Phillips et al., 2016).
The message and conclusion of this chapter has 
changed from the previous edition more than any 
other chapter in this book. This is a reflection of the 
growth in the size of the evidence base and how lit-
tle was well understood previously. It is also perhaps 
true that the subject of countershading and counter-
illumination for camouflage has greatest potential 
to develop in the future as it is still relatively under-
studied. This is not for want of interesting ques-
tions. Most light on earth always has and always 
will come from above; how life colours itself, adapts 
its vision, and modifies its behaviour in response to 
this basic feature is a wonderful puzzle to solve.

Avoiding Attack: The Evolutionary Ecology of Crypsis, Aposematism, and Mimicry. Second Edition. Graeme D. Ruxton,  
William L. Allen, Thomas N. Sherratt, & Michael P. Speed, Oxford University Press (2018). © Graeme D. Ruxton,  
William L. Allen, Thomas N. Sherratt, & Michael P. Speed 2018. DOI: 10.1093/oso/9780199688678.001.0001
CHAPTER 4
Transparency
4.1  Definition and introduction
We begin this chapter by considering the ecological 
distribution of transparent organisms and, in particu-
lar, how they are found predominantly in one par-
ticular habitat type (open waters). A major aim of 
sections 4.2 and 4.3 will be to explain this trend. A 
perfectly transparent organism (or part of an organ-
ism) will not absorb or scatter incident light. 
Superficially, transparent  might seem like a synonym 
for visually undetectable, but this is not quite true: we 
will discuss in section 4.3 how transparent organisms 
can still be visually detected by their predators or 
prey. Conversely, section 4.4 will demonstrate that 
there are circumstances where a little transparency 
can go a long way to reducing an organism’s visibil-
ity. Some body parts cannot be made transparent, but 
section 4.5 argues that opaque body parts need not 
always significantly increase the detectability of a 
generally transparent organism. Section 4.6 will con-
sider the distribution of transparency among natural 
organisms. The distributional observations we seek 
to explain are the greater prevalence of transparency 
among aquatic than terrestrial organisms, and the 
particular prevalence among midwater species. An 
alternative but related strategy to transparency, 
adopted by some midwater fish, and considered in 
section 4.4.2, is silvering of the body to provide 
crypsis by broadband reflection.
4.2  The distribution of transparency 
across habitats
Johnsen (2001) presented detailed evidence that the 
overwhelming majority of transparent organisms are 
in the pelagic zone (any water in a sea or lake that is 
neither close to the bottom nor near the shore). There 
are very few examples of substantially transparent 
species in terrestrial ecosystems, and even in aquatic 
environments they are uncommon at the surface of 
the water (the neustonic zone), on or near the under-
lying substrate (the benthic zone) or in very deep 
waters where the sun’s light does not penetrate suffi-
ciently to aid vision (the aphotic zone).
In section 4.3, we will argue that the different 
refractive indices of air and water suggest that 
transparency is a much more attractive option for 
an organism in water than in air, and that this is the 
major reason for the lack of transparent terrestrial 
organisms. The transparent wings of many flying 
insects are an interesting exception to this; for these 
there is little evidence that transparency has been 
selected to reduce visual detection by antagonists. It 
may be that transparency in this case can better be 
understood as a consequence of selection for very 
thin cross-sections and a lack of selection for invest-
ment in pigmentation.
In the very deep ocean (the aphotic zone), below 
1000m, solar illumination is insufficient to aid vision. 
In these waters, animals are mostly red or black in 
coloration (Marshall, 1971; McFall-Ngai, 1990; 
Johnsen, 2005). The dominant source of illumin-
ation at these depths is bioluminescent light pro-
duced by organisms. Under these circumstances 
transparency seems to have been less often adopted 
than pigmentation designed to minimize the light 
reflected back by the organism. The reason for this 
is likely to be related, in part, to the directional 
nature of much of the bioluminescent light pro-
duced by organisms (as discussed in section 4.6). It 
may also be related to a generally lower rate of 
encounters between predators and prey at these 
depths, making continuous metabolic investment 
in transparency and/or the structural compromises 

58
AVOIDING ATTACK
required by this whole-body style of crypsis less 
attractive than crypsis based on pigmentation.
One reason for the rarity of transparency in ben-
thic habitats might be that pigmentation is less 
costly when pigments are selected to match a rela-
tively unchanging background, whereas in more 
sunlit waters background colour is subject to more 
change. Another reason may be that refraction of 
light passing through a transparent benthic organ-
ism causes a shadow to be cast on the benthos that 
might greatly reduce the effectiveness of transpar-
ency. Further, transparent animals tend to be more 
physically delicate and, thus, might be prone to 
damage by abrasion against the substrate in benthic 
habitats. Additionally, it may be that the backdrop 
of the substrate provides an opportunity for other 
types of crypsis, using pigments that avoid the 
structural compromises and/or continual mainten-
ance requirements of transparency. Finally, it may 
be that the physical complexity of some substrates 
provides hiding places that offer an alternative to 
visual crypsis.
Transparency is also rare among those animals 
living on the surface film (the neuston). It may be 
that the complex light environment produced by 
the ever-changing surface of the water makes crypsis 
by pigmentation easier—although this hypothesis 
is currently untested (Hamner, 1995)—and such a 
strategy is physiologically cheaper and/or less con-
straining than crypsis by transparency. Additionally, 
or alternatively, for such animals the conflict between 
allowing UV radiation to pass through the body to 
achieve crypsis by transparency and minimizing 
cell damage by UV radiation may favour alterna-
tive methods of crypsis, based on pigmentation of 
the organism’s surface (we discuss UV radiation 
more fully in section 4.3.3).
Hence it is understandable why the distribution of 
transparency in aquatic systems is predominantly 
where sunlight is present (but not in the surface 
layer), especially since alternatives such as hiding in 
physical structures are generally not available in open 
water. In section 4.4 we discuss the wide taxonomic 
spread of transparency across different organism 
types, and the indication that it has evolved and been 
lost on many occasions. This suggests that the key to 
understanding the ecological distribution of trans-
parency is through the physical arguments discussed 
above and not through taxonomy. In the next section 
we will examine more closely exactly how transpar-
ency influences ease of visual detection and expand 
on some of the ideas introduced in this section.
4.3  How transparency influences ease of 
detection
4.3.1  Transparent objects still reflect and refract
A perfectly transparent object is one that does not 
absorb or diffusely scatter incident light. However, 
perfect transparency does not make an object per-
fectly invisible. Glass can be very close to perfectly 
transparent yet we can see glass window panes. To 
be invisible, an object must have no effect on any 
light that strikes it. Perfect transparency removes 
two physical mechanisms, absorption and diffuse 
scattering, which could affect any incident light. 
However, that still leaves several others. Whenever 
light passes from one medium into another, then 
that light is both reflected and refracted even if both 
media are transparent. It is this reflected and 
refracted light that allows us to see even the purest 
glass. Every material has a physical quantity called 
its ‘refractive index’. When light moves between 
media of different refractive indices, some of the 
light is refracted and some reflected. The magnitude 
of both of these effects increases with the difference 
between the refractive indices of the two media.
We will deal with reflection first. At normal inci-
dence (when the light beam is perpendicular to the 
interface between the media), the proportion of 
light that is reflected is given by the simple formula:
	
R
n
n
n
n
=
−
+






1
2
1
2
2
	
(4.1)
where n1  and n2  are the refractive indices of the two 
media that form the interface (Denny, 1993). These 
values vary with the wavelength of light, but repre-
sentative values for different materials are given in 
Table 4.1.
Biological tissues have refractive indices between 
1.34 and 1.55 (Johnsen, 2001). Using these values in 
eq. (4.1) suggests that the proportion of the light 
striking some biological tissue that is reflected is 
much greater when the animal is in air (2–5%) than 

Transparency
59
when it is in water (0.001–0.6%). These simple calcu-
lations go a long way towards explaining why trans-
parency is much more commonly observed among 
aquatic organisms than terrestrial ones. A transpar-
ent organism in air reflects a fraction of incident light 
many times greater than that of the same organism in 
water. Hence, a transparent organism has a greater 
optical effect on the light that ultimately reaches the 
eye of its predators or prey when in air than in water. 
As Johnsen (2001) remarks, although ice is transpar-
ent we can see even fine detail in an ice sculpture 
without difficulty. This conclusion holds regardless 
of the angle between the light ray and the interface 
between the organism and the surrounding medium; 
indeed the further from the perpendicular the light 
strikes, the greater the fraction that is reflected 
(Johnsen, 2012, p. 146).
Refraction is manifested by the bending of the 
path of a light ray as it passes between media with 
different refractive indices. The greater the difference 
between these indices (and the less orthogonal the 
angle of incidence), the greater the distortion of the 
path. Hence, for biological tissues with refractive 
indices between 1.34 and 1.55, refraction is greater 
in air than in water. The practical consequence of 
refraction is that the image seen through a transpar-
ent object is not the same as the image that would 
be seen if the object were not there. This can be veri-
fied by holding a piece of glass at arm’s length at a 
slight angle to the perpendicular. The view that you 
see through the glass does not perfectly match up 
with the view that you get from light that does not 
pass through the glass; the piece of the view that 
you get through the glass seems slightly shifted. 
This shift is due to refraction of light travelling 
through the glass. The magnitude of refraction 
would be less if we were viewing under water, 
because the refractive index of water is closer to 
that of glass. This is easily observed whilst washing 
up drinking glasses—unless you wash glasses by 
switching on a machine!
Not only is the extent of refraction physically less 
extreme for an organism in an aquatic environment 
than in a terrestrial one, the apparent effect of any 
refraction is likely to be less easy to detect in aquatic 
environments. As a generalization, aquatic environ-
ments are relatively featureless compared to terres-
trial ones (especially in midwater) and so the effect 
of image distortion will be harder to detect in such 
environments. This may help explain why transpar-
ency is particularly common among midwater 
aquatic species. For a transparent organism on a 
solid substrate in a non-uniform light field, refrac-
tion will cause a shadow to be cast on the substrate. 
This can be seen again if you place an empty drink-
ing glass on a table in strong sunlight. As discussed 
in section 4.2, this mechanism may make transpar-
ency less attractive for benthic organisms in rela-
tively shallow sunlight waters. However, as water 
depth increases so the downward shining light 
becomes more uniform regardless of the position of 
the sun (as discussed in section 4.4.2), and this may 
reduce this potential drawback to transparency.
In summary, transparent individuals can still be 
detected because, although they do not absorb or 
scatter visible light, they still reflect and refract it. In 
order to minimize these potentially crypsis-breaking 
mechanisms, the refractive indices of transparent tis-
sues must conform as closely as possible to that of the 
surrounding medium. This is much easier to achieve 
if the medium is water rather than air. Reflection and 
refraction are two physical mechanisms that can 
allow a perfectly transparent organism to be visually 
detected. The next sections consider several more.
4.3.2  How transparent organisms influence 
polarization of light
Light waves oscillate in a plane perpendicular to 
the direction of travel of a light beam. Where on this 
plane a specific light wave oscillates is described by 
the polarization of that light. This matters to us 
because, as any scattered light becomes polarized 
(Mobley, 1994), ambient light is expected to become 
partially polarized as it passes through water. In 
Table 4.1  Refractive indices for a selection of media. Modified from 
Denny (1993) and Johnsen (2001).
Medium
Refractive index
Air
1.00
Water
1.33
Cytoplasm
1.34
Densely packed protein
1.55
Glass
1.56

60
AVOIDING ATTACK
addition, the polarization of light can be changed 
when it passes through so-called birefringent mater-
ials, of which muscle and connective tissue fibres 
seem to be examples (Shashar et al., 1998). Several 
fish, crustaceans, and cephalopods have been shown 
to be sensitive to the polarization of light, and there 
is some evidence to suggest that this may be used to 
enhance detection of transparent prey. Novales 
Flamarique & Browman (2001) found that juvenile 
rainbow trout appeared better able to find transpar-
ent zooplankton prey in a laboratory aquarium 
under polarized light compared to unpolarized light. 
This suggests that light is changed in polarization as 
it passes through the zooplankton, in a way that the 
trout can detect and exploit. Shashar et al. (1998) 
obtained similar results for juvenile squid preying on 
live zooplankton in an aquarium. Shashar et al. 
(1998) also demonstrated that adult squid showed a 
marked preference for preying on transparent glass 
beads that were birefringent, compared to beads that 
looked identical—at least to humans—but that had 
no effect on polarization. Hence, change in polariza-
tion may be another physical process that can allow 
a transparent organism to be visually detected.
Johnsen et al. (2011) report on polarization images 
of transparent zooplankton taken under natural 
lighting conditions. They argue that the small frac-
tion of light scattered by transparent organisms 
may be important for detection from the side. Such 
detection could be achieved by contrast between 
the scattered light and the background in either 
intensity and/or polarization. Specifically, near the 
surface the intensity of downward-directed light 
will be orders of magnitude stronger than horizon-
tal radiance. Thus the small fraction of this down-
welling light that is scattered in the horizontal 
direction can provide a substantial intensity con-
trast with the darker background. Also, the hori-
zontal radiance will often have a characteristic 
polarization, whereas the scattered light will be 
unpolarized. Johnsen et al. (2011) argue that, when 
considered separately, it is likely that horizontally 
orientated viewers will be able to detect transparent 
organisms more readily through difference from the 
background in intensity rather than in polarization; 
both because the intrinsic difference from the back-
ground will be stronger, and because viewers are 
expected to be more sensitive to small differences in 
intensity of light than small differences in polariza-
tion. However, Johnsen et al. also argue that view-
ers may be able to effectively combine these two 
differences to aid detection of transparent prey 
using simple algorithms. For example, if the viewer 
views the scene through a polarizer orientated to 
minimize the background horizontal radiance, then 
this could well boost their ability to detect the inten-
sity difference between the target organism and the 
background. It would certainly be valuable to explore 
whether such structures can be found in the visual 
systems of any predatory marine organisms.
4.3.3  How transparent organisms interact with 
light outside our visual range
An organism can be transparent to visible light but 
still absorb and/or scatter significant amounts of 
ultraviolet (UV) radiation. The ability to detect UV 
radiation is common in fish (Losey et al., 1999) and 
other aquatic predators (Johnsen, 2001). Browman 
et al. (1994) found that two species of zooplanktivo-
rous fish appeared to find prey less easily in a 
laboratory aquarium when the UV part of the ambi-
ent light spectrum was removed. However, neither 
Rocco et al. (2002) nor Leech & Johnsen (2006) were 
able to replicate these results. Rocco et al. suggest 
two reasons for this difference between their study 
and that of Browman et al. First, Rocco et al. used 
natural sunlight, as opposed to Browman’s artificial 
illumination; second, Rocco et al. used direct counts 
of rate of prey consumption rather than indirect 
estimates of detection distances. Hence, at the present 
time, there is no unequivocal evidence that UV 
vision is important in predator–prey interactions 
involving visibly transparent prey, but it certainly 
seems physically possible.
UV radiation is capable of damaging living cells 
(Paul & Gwynn-Jones, 2003), and can cause increased 
mortality among aquatic larvae (Morgan & Christy, 
(1996). This suggests that there may be a trade-off 
for an organism between transparency to UV radi-
ation for crypsis reasons and having a UV-absorbing 
outer surface to protect internal organs from damage 
(Morgan & Christy, 1996; Johnsen & Widder, 2001). 
UV radiation is most intense at the surface of the 
water column and is rapidly absorbed by water and 
dissolved organic matter (Peterson et al., 2002), 

Transparency
61
which explains why UV damage has seldom been 
reported at depths greater than 25m (El-Sayed et al., 
1996). In contrast, it has been estimated that suffi-
cient UV light for vision can be found at depths of 
100–200m (Losey et al., 1999). Hence, it has been 
predicted that if a trade-off between radiative pro-
tection and crypsis influences the distribution of 
transparency to UV radiation among aquatic spe-
cies, then UV opacity should be more common 
among species inhabiting surface waters (Johnsen 
& Widder, 2001), or that the pigmentation of an indi-
vidual may decrease—and transparency increase—
as organisms migrate vertically into deeper waters 
(Morgan & Christy, 1996). Certainly, UV light seems 
an important driver of diel vertical migration 
(DVM) in zooplankton (Leach et al., 2015), and it 
has been found that marine zooplankton change 
their level of transparency with depth and time of 
the day (Vestheim & Kaartvedt, 2006); thus UV light 
likely impacts crypsis and predation trade-offs.
In order to test the hypothesized trade-off between 
crypsis and avoiding radiative damage, Johnsen & 
Widder (2001) measured the transparency of zoo-
plankton collected from epipelagic (0–20m) and 
mesopelagic (150–790m) depths. They report that 
the two groups did not differ in their transparency 
to visible light, but those from the surface layers 
were less transparent to UV, in line with their 
expectation from the trade-off argument of the last 
paragraph. However, these authors argue that the 
greater UV absorbency of surface-dwelling zoo-
plankton need not necessarily substantially increase 
their detectability to predators. This is based on two 
arguments. First, absorbency in the UV-A range 
(320–400nm) was generally low in their study com-
pared to that in the UV-B (280–320nm). This is 
important because only UV-A has been implicated 
in vision (Losey et al.,1999) and UV-B seems much 
more damaging to living tissues than UV-A (Johnsen 
& Widder, 2001). Second, Johnsen & Widder also 
report that many species with low UV transparency 
also had low transparency to visible light. UV radi-
ation attenuates more rapidly in water than blue 
visible light. Hence, if an individual has low trans-
parency to both blue visible light and UV radiation, 
then (all other things being equal) the visible light 
will permit its detection by organisms at a greater 
distance, compared to UV radiation. Consider a 
predator moving closer and closer to an as-yet-
undetected prey item. If the prey item has low 
transparency to both blue light and UV light, then it 
will be detected initially because of its effect on the 
visible light reaching the predator. After its effect on 
the visible light has caused the prey to be detected, 
the effect of UV light, when the two organisms have 
drawn even closer to each other might matter little. 
Conversely, if the prey is highly transparent to vis-
ible light, then a predator could move very close to 
it without detecting it on the basis of its effect on the 
visible spectrum. In this case, even small changes in 
UV transparency may substantially affect the ease 
with which the prey organism can be detected. 
These caveats suggest that the situation may be 
rather complex, and that in order to understand the 
selection pressures on UV transparency we need a 
quantitative understanding of the effects of depth 
and degree of transparency on both risk of UV dam-
age and risk of predation. We also need an under-
standing of the fitness consequences of UV damage. 
Such understanding is not currently available and 
should be the focus of future research.
4.3.4  Considering how Snell’s window affects 
detection of transparent organisms
Another method by which visual predators could 
detect perfectly transparent prey near the surface in 
an aquatic medium is through using Snell’s win-
dow. Figure 4.1a illustrates the light reaching a 
fish’s eye. Whether light is reflected or refracted at 
the interface between two media (such as the sur-
face of a body of water) depends on the angle of 
incidence of that light with the interface. A conse-
quence of this is that all light reaching the eye from 
angles from the perpendicular less than 49° is light 
from above the water’s surface. Indeed, the fish’s 
whole view of the world above the water’s surface 
is compressed into this so-called Snell’s window by 
the properties of refraction discussed earlier. All 
light entering the fish’s eye at angles greater than 
49° is light that was travelling upward through the 
water column but was reflected at the surface of the 
water. The intensity of light entering the water col-
umn from above is generally much greater than the 
light from below that has been reflected back from 
the surface. Hence, a fish sees the world above the 

62
AVOIDING ATTACK
surface as a bright image in Snell’s window sur-
rounded by a much dimmer (reflected) image of the 
depths below. This could be a problem for a zoo-
plankter situated just outside Snell’s window. Light 
that would pass through that space if the zooplank-
ter was not there can be refracted by the zooplank-
ter so that its course is changed and it reaches the 
fish’s eye (zooplankter i  in Figure 4.1b). If the zoo-
plankter were not there, that light would not reach 
the fish’s eye. This light will show up as a bright 
spot against the dark background of the image of 
the depths, and so the zooplankter will be very vis-
ible to the fish. This will be less of a problem for a 
zooplankter well away from Snell’s window (zoo-
plankter ii), which will not refract light sufficiently 
dramatically to enter the fish’s eye. Nor is there a 
substantial problem for a zooplankter in Snell’s 
window, as light refracted through it will be seen 
against the rest of the bright light in the window, 
and so will not provide a strong contrast.
This theory was supported by the observations of 
captive blueback herring by Janssen (1981). These 
fish are visually feeding planktivores, and charac-
teristically swim upwards towards their prey. This 
trajectory will cause the ring of visibility just outside 
Snell’s window to sweep inwards as the fish swims 
towards the surface, allowing the fish a chance to 
detect prey across a wide area of the surface waters. 
The median angle of attack by the fish in Janssen’s 
observations was 54°. This is only slightly greater 
than the 49° that defines Snell’s window and is con-
sistent with attacking individuals detected just out-
side Snell’s window. Such calculations can only be 
considered approximate since the position of the 
edge of the window will be affected by any surface 
waves (S. Johnsen, pers. comm.). Zooplankton can 
do little about their relative positioning with respect 
to predators; their best defence to this vulnerability 
is to minimize refraction by keeping their refractive 
index as close to that of water as possible. The issue 
of surface waves mentioned above may mean that 
this mechanism of prey detection is much more of 
an important factor in the calmer waters of lakes 
than in the open ocean.
The refractive index of any material is different 
for different wavelengths of light; this too may have 
ecological implications. Johnsen & Widder (1998) 
studied the effect of the wavelength of incident 
light on the transparency of 29 species of gelatinous 
zooplankton. In the overwhelming majority of cases, 
they found that transparency increased linearly with 
wavelength, albeit only very gradually. This means 
that the spectrum of light passing through such a 
zooplankton will be different from that of the back-
ground against which it is seen, potentially allow-
ing detection in the same way that a green-coloured 
glass bottle is easier for us to see than a clear one. 
However, light of different wavelengths attenuate 
differentially in water such that the spectrum of ambi-
ent light is much broader in the surface layers than at 
depth (where blue-green visible light predominates). 
Hence, Johnsen & Widder argue that this potential 
weakness to crypsis by transparency is more of a 
problem when hiding near the surface. Even in the 
surface waters, we currently lack a demonstration 
that the visual systems of appropriate aquatic organ-
isms can detect the relatively modest changes in light 
spectrum predicted by this mechanism.
In section 4.3 we suggested that transparent 
organisms could still be detected through the light 
that they reflect and refract. The last few sections 
have considered several other mechanisms that might  
allow an organism that is perfectly or partially 
water
air
(a)
49o
(b)
water
air
0
0
0
(ii)
(i)
(iii)
49o
Figure 4.1  Snell’s window.

Transparency
63
transparent to visible light to be detected by either 
its predators or its prey: change in light polariza-
tion, differential absorption of different wavelengths 
(especially combined with UV vision), and Snell’s 
window. We say ‘might’ because definitive experi-
mental work is still lacking. Rocco et al. (2002) cast 
doubt on previous evidence that UV radiation helps 
predators capture visually transparent prey. Further 
studies using systems as similar as possible to nat-
ural field conditions are required to resolve this 
issue. Similarly, further experiments on the possible 
role of polarization in increasing the detectability of 
visually transparent prey under natural light condi-
tions would be useful. Another related topic is the 
extent to which changes in hue caused by differen-
tial transparency of organisms to different wave-
lengths of visible light can be detected by potential 
predators. Janssen’s fascinating idea and experi-
ments on Snell’s window are certainly worthy of 
further work exploring the ecological relevance of 
his results. We have now argued that transparency 
is not the perfect form of crypsis and that transparent 
is certainly not a synonym for undetectable. However, 
section 4.5 argues that despite these caveats, even 
less than perfect transparency can sometimes be an 
effective form of crypsis. Before that, in the next sec-
tion, we consider transparency from an evolutionary 
perspective.
4.4  Evolutionary considerations
Johnsen (2001) provided a detailed overview of the 
phylogenetic distribution of transparency. Trans­
parency has evolved on many separate occasions. 
Most transparent organisms belong to the ten 
phylogenetically disparate pelagic groups: cubozo-
ans (box jellyfish), hydromedusae (predatory sub-
order of the Cnidaria), non-beriod ctenophores (comb 
jellies), hyperiid amphipods (a suborder of plank-
tonic amphipod crustaceans), tomopterid poly-
chaetes (planktonic suborder of polychaete worms), 
pterotracheid and carinariid heteropods (a branch 
of the marine gastropod molluscs), pseudotheco-
somatous pteropods (sea butterflies), cranchiid squid 
(glass squid), thaliaceans (class of tunicates), and 
chaetognaths (arrow worms). He also emphasizes 
that within classes, such as the arthropods and mol-
luscs, there are many major groups containing both 
transparent and non-transparent forms. Within ver-
tebrates, a relatively small number of fish are trans-
parent as adults but more are transparent as 
juveniles. Together, all this indicates that transpar-
ency has evolved on many occasions, and that ecol-
ogy is a better predictor of transparency than 
phylogeny. Given that transparency (unlike so 
many other forms of crypsis) is a property of the 
whole body not just the integument, then its fre-
quent evolution is especially noteworthy. Although 
achieving transparency may not be as challenging 
as it first appears, because the majority of organic 
molecules do not absorb visible light, the real chal-
lenge to transparency is not to avoid absorption, 
but to avoid scattering. Scattering is caused by dis-
continuities in refractive index. Thus, the challenge 
to making biological tissues transparent is mostly 
about making them homogeneous on the scale of 
wavelengths of visible light. As Johnsen (2001) 
points out, transparent tissues can have compo-
nents of many different refractive indices, so long as 
the average index is constant over distances equal 
to half the wavelength of the incident light.
As mentioned above, unlike other forms of crypsis, 
transparency involves the entire body, not just the 
exterior (McFall-Ngai, 1990). We have argued that 
transparent organisms will gain an advantage by 
having the optical properties of their body (such as 
refractive index) as similar to those of the surround-
ing medium as possible. Many aquatic organisms 
achieve this by being gelatinous, where thick layers 
of extracellular watery material separate very thin 
layers of cellular material. Transparency of muscle 
and other dense tissues is more easily achieved if one 
dimension is very thin (McFall-Ngai, 1990; Herring, 
2001). Clearly a gelatinous body plan inv­olving 
greatly increasing water content leads to a huge 
increase in size. This increased size will have costs 
and benefits other than improved crypsis. For 
example, one added benefit of a gelatinous body 
plan will be decreased body density, and so increased 
buoyancy. For suspension feeders, a gelatinous 
body plan can bring increased capture rates without 
the increase in metabolism that would normally result 
from growing bigger (Acuña, 2001). Costs are likely to 
include increased drag and vulnerability to mechan-
ical damage. These non-crypsis costs and benefits 
may have important implications for the evolution of 

64
AVOIDING ATTACK
crypsis by transparency through adoption of a gelatin-
ous body-plan. We should also consider what con-
straints there might be on the evolution of transparency, 
and turn to this in the next section.
4.4.1  Constraints of transparency: some parts of 
an organism cannot be made transparent
Food is usually opaque, with the result that the 
stomach cannot generally be transparent after the 
organism has fed. Feeding on transparent prey does 
not seem to be a solution to this, as transparent 
organisms rapidly turn opaque after death (Herring, 
2001). This change suggested to Herring, and to 
others (e.g. McFall-Ngai, 1990; Hamner, 1995), that 
transparency of cellular tissues can only be achieved 
with a continual investment in active maintenance. 
However, direct evidence of such a continuous 
metabolic cost to crypsis through transparency is 
currently lacking, and investigation of this would 
be very useful. It may be adaptive to have an opaque 
stomach if feeding on bioluminescent (or brightly 
coloured) prey, in order to reduce the visibility of 
stomach contents to potential predators or prey. 
Some prey continue to bioluminesce even when 
being digested (Johnsen, 2012, p. 159). Seapy & 
Young (1986) describe squid, heteropods, and 
hyperiid amphipods that are highly adapted to 
minimize the visibility costs of an opaque gut. They 
have a needle-shaped gut which always points ver-
tically no matter the orientation of the animal, min-
imizing the silhouette of the gut when viewed from 
above or below. Further, the sides of the gut have a 
mirrored coating to reduce visibility when viewed 
from the side (see section 4.4.2).
Eyes must contain light-absorbing pigments and 
so cannot be wholly transparent. This can be a sig-
nificant problem for deep-sea organisms that need 
large eyes to maximize photon capture at low light 
levels. However, adaptations can be found to min-
imize the conspicuousness of this. One tactic is to 
spread the light-absorbing surfaces over a wide 
area of the body, so that there is not a concentrated 
area of strong light absorption (Johnsen, 2012, p. 159). 
Other tactics include minimizing the volume of the 
opaque retina and using reflective structures (see 
section 4.4.2) around the eyes to reduce visibility 
of the opaque parts (Feller & Cronin, 2014). Recently 
it has been demonstrated that a midwater squid uses 
photophores on the ventral surfaces of its eyes to 
emit bioluminescence to counterilluminate shadows 
cast by the eyes (Holt & Sweeney, 2016).
There has been considerable empirical investiga-
tion into whether the size of opaque parts increases 
predation risk for otherwise transparent organisms. 
As these studies take different approaches, we will 
try to provide a synthesis of their results. Giguère & 
Northcote (1987) found that the predation rate of 
juvenile coho salmon on transparent phantom midges 
(Diptera: Chaoboridae) increased with increasing 
stomach fullness of these insect larvae. Considering 
the relative sizes and mobilities of predator and 
prey, this is more likely to result from increased 
prey visibility following a meal, rather than decreased 
mobility. Tsuda et al. (1998) obtained similar results 
for herring larvae and salmon fry feeding on cope-
pods. Similarly, Wright & O’Brien (1982) concluded 
that the detectability of mainly transparent midge 
larvae to predatory fish was based on the size of 
high-contrast structures within the larvae rather 
than the overall size of the prey individuals. 
Essentially identical conclusions were drawn by 
Hessen (1985) after experiments with roach feeding 
on zooplankton. Bohl (1982) offered predatory fish 
a combination of generally transparent daphnia 
with and without eggs in their dorsal pouch. Eggs 
are opaque and should act to increase the vulner-
ability of egg-bearing individuals. He found no 
preferences for egg-bearers under complete dark-
ness and under bright light conditions, but a strong 
preference for egg-bearers under low light condi-
tions. This seems to represent strong evidence that 
the egg-bearing individuals were more easily detected 
by predators than non-egg-bearers when visual 
detection was challenging, but not impossible. 
Brownell (1985) performed laboratory experiments 
to explore cannibalism in the (relatively transpar-
ent) larvae of cape anchovy. He concluded that the 
formation of pigmented eyes, at a certain develop-
ment stage, triggered a substantial increase in larval 
detectability, and so vulnerability to cannibalism.
Zaret (1972) reported laboratory experiments 
where predation on a cladoceran appeared to be 
related to the amounts of pigmentation in their 
black compound eyes. These experiments used a 
species with two morphs that differ considerably in 

Transparency
65
eye pigmentation; the morph with the higher pig-
mentation (i.e. the larger eye) was attacked more 
frequently than the morph with the smaller eye. 
Zaret took advantage of the fact that the stomach of 
these organisms lies near the eye to produce a 
‘super eye spot’ by allowing individuals of the 
‘small eye’ morph to pre-feed in water to which 
India ink had been added. This led to a reversal in 
relative predation rates in subsequent experiments, 
where the small-eyed morph with the ‘super eye 
spot’ created by black pigment in their stomach was 
preyed on more heavily than the larger-eyed morph 
without the India ink modification. Whilst alterna-
tive explanations based on behaviour or chemosen-
sory changes are possible, the most likely explanation 
for these results is that the size of the opaque parts 
of the prey influences detectability by predators. A 
follow-up set of laboratory trials (Zaret & Kerfoot, 
1975) demonstrated that variation in predation rate 
on a largely transparent cladoceran was better 
explained by variation in the size of its large com-
pound eye than variation in the size of the whole 
body. However, a similar study by O’Brien et al. 
(1979) did not support these conclusions, finding 
body size to be a better predictor than eye size. 
Similarly, studies have found no effect of ink pre-
feeding by daphnia on detectability by bluegills 
(Vinyard & O’Brien, 1975) or lake trout (Confer 
et al., 1978).
In conclusion, there is evidence that opaque parts 
to a generally transparent organism can have a sub-
stantial effect on predation risk, although this effect 
is not shown universally in empirical studies. 
However, we should not expect there always to be 
such an effect. If the mostly transparent organism 
can be readily detected by other means (and we 
have considered a number of methods by which a 
perfectly transparent organism can still be detected 
visually) then small opaque parts need not neces-
sarily increase predation risk. Another important 
component to building an understanding of the 
selective pressures for the evolution of camouflage 
through transparency is to consider alternative 
forms of camouflage. One obvious alternative is 
background matching through pigmentation and 
this has been fully discussed in Chapter 1. Another 
alternative, which like transparency is particularly 
effective in aquatic systems, is silvering of the body 
to provide camouflage by reflection: we now con-
sider this in more depth.
4.4.2  Silvering as an alternative form of crypsis
In terrestrial ecosystems, there is generally strong 
directionality in the ambient lighting, since the sun 
takes up only a small part of the visible sky, and this 
part of the sky produces much more light than other 
equivalent-sized parts. This directionality can be 
seen clearly from the existence of shadows. As light 
passes through water, scattering by water mol-
ecules and suspended particles has the effect of 
reducing this strong directionality. Denton et al. 
(1972) suggest that 300m depth of clear water is 
required before direct sunlight is scattered suffi-
ciently to become vertically symmetrical, reducing 
considerably (to perhaps around 50m) if the water 
is turbid or the sky cloudy. Thus, in the midwaters 
of the oceans and deep lakes, the light environment 
is potentially at least approximately symmetrical 
about the vertical axis. In these waters, there is also 
generally a complete absence of background fea-
tures. We can plainly see the mirrors hanging on 
our walls of our homes, because they produce a 
reflection that does not match the background of 
the wall. However, in mesopelagic environments an 
animal with a body plan like a vertical mirror can 
make itself invisible to detectors viewing from side-
on (see Figure 4.2). This is not an option for terres-
trial organisms or organisms near the substrate, 
where background features mean that reflection is 
no longer an effective disguise.
One strategy to reduce the vulnerability of dis-
guise by silvering to detection from above and 
below is to be laterally flattened, so as to restrict the 
vulnerable cross-sectional area. This is adopted by 
some silvered fish, such as hatchetfishes. This body 
form, though, restricts locomotive performance, 
and so muscular fish—such as herring, mackerel, 
and salmon—adopt a body form with an elliptical 
cross section, where the reflective scales act as tiny 
mirrors and each is aligned vertically rather than 
parallel to the curved body surface (see Figure 4.3). 
However, the problem of providing reduced detec-
tion from above and below still remains. Both 
Herring (2001) and Denton (1970) suggest that the 
tapered keels of many silvered fish act to reduce 

66
AVOIDING ATTACK
visibility from below, although the mechanism for 
this is not specified. Reflective scales could be angled 
so as to reflect light partially downward, and whilst 
this would reduce visibility from below, it would do 
so only at the expense of potentially increasing visi-
bility from the side.
One feature of midwater environments is that the 
downwelling light is orders of magnitude more 
intense than the upwelling light (Johnsen, 2012). 
Thus, dorsally placed mirrors reflecting downwell-
ing light would make an animal very visible against 
the dark background of the depths. Hence, mirrors 
are not the solution to reducing detection from dir-
ectly above. Instead, silvered animals tend to have a 
dark pigmented upper surface, so as to provide a 
match to the background (see Johnsen (2012) for a 
full analysis of this). The reverse problem applies 
when being viewed from below, where reflected 
upwelling light provides a large contrast to the 
strong downwelling light. One solution is for the 
animal to produce its own downward-directed light 
to match that of the ambient downwelling illumin-
ation (for an overview see Widder, 1999; Haddock 
et al., 2010). Some species have been demonstrated to 
alter the intensity and wavelength distribution of the 
light they produce appropriately as they change 
depth, so as to match the changing downwelling 
light (Case et al., 1977; Young & Roper, 1977; Latz & 
Case, 1982; Young & Arnold, 1982; Young, 1983). 
Organisms have also been demonstrated to prod-
uce light that matches the angular distribution of the 
ambient light (Denton et al., 1972; Latz & Case, 1982). 
Such counterillumination is only feasible at consid-
erable depths when the intensity of downwelling 
light is sufficiently reduced that self-generated light 
can significantly affect the contrast (for further 
discussion see McFall-Ngai, 1990).
When light is reflected, its polarization changes. 
This may provide a mechanism by which the crypsis 
provided by silvering can be reduced. As noted in sec-
tion 4.3.1, cephalopods are sensitive to the polariza-
tion of light, and Shashar et al. (2000) demonstrated in 
a laboratory experiment that cuttlefish targeted fish 
with normal polarization reflection over fish that, by 
M
D
D
R
R
Figure 4.2  Diagram to show how a dark object can be camouflaged 
in the radially symmetric radiance distribution of the ocean by making 
it reflective. Vertical mirror (M) cannot distinguish between reflected 
rays (R) and direct rays (D), so the mirror (or silvered) fish is invisible 
(from Herring, 2001).
Ventral
Body cavity
Dorsal
Figure 4.3  Reflectors aligned to the curve of the body surface 
would not be an effective camouflage for the flanks of a muscular fish 
of elliptical cross-section like a herring. Hence, the individual reflectors 
are aligned vertically, providing an effective vertical mirror surface 
(from Herring, 2001).

Transparency
67
means of filters, were made to not reflect the linearly 
polarized component of the light. However, the con-
sensus of current research is that long-range detec-
tion of silvery fishes is unlikely to benefit from 
evaluation of polarization (Cronin et al., 2016; 
Johnsen et al., 2016; Feller et al., 2017). It appears 
that under natural conditions polarization of light is 
generally not strong underwater, and natural recep-
tors are not strongly sensitive to small changes in 
polarization. It remains possible (but so far undem-
onstrated) that changes in polarization on reflection 
may aid in short-range processes of prey identifica-
tion and precise localization after long-range detec-
tion has occurred.
Silvering seems largely confined to adult stages 
of fish. It may be that for juvenile stages and smaller 
plankton transparency is a more effective form of 
crypsis, but that this ‘whole body’ disguise becomes 
impossible for large fish. Large, adult fish need to 
move quickly, and must have large amounts of (rela-
tively opaque) respiratory and connective tissues 
associated with their substantial muscle mass. The 
different depth distributions of larvae and adults 
may also have a role. Giske et al. (1990) suggest that 
juveniles tend to be distributed more in shallower 
waters than adult stages, and we have already dis-
cussed why silvering is more effective at greater 
depths where the light field is more homogeneous. 
Salmonid fish characteristically change from a dark 
and highly patterned body to a classical silvered 
appearance before migrating from stream and river 
to the ocean. This can be understood in terms of our 
argument above about the inefficiency of silvering 
in shallow water with visible background features, 
whereas their juvenile coloration would make sal-
monids highly visible when viewed from the side 
against the featureless ocean.
Silvering can also be a solution to enable crypsis of 
parts of an organism that cannot be made transpar-
ent in an otherwise transparent animal. Effectively, 
the eye or digestive organ can be thought of as a 
mini-organism that can be disguised by silvering in 
exactly the same way as described in this section for 
whole organisms.
Badcock (1970) and Denton et al. (1972) report that 
many silvery mesopelagic fish darken their silvery 
reflective surfaces at night. Recall that silvering is 
only an effective means of crypsis if the light field 
around the object is symmetrical. This will not be 
true at these depths at night, where the main light 
will not be downwelling star and moonlight, but 
rather the light generated by luminescent organisms. 
Under such circumstances, a dark, light-absorbing 
surface may be a more effective disguise than a sil-
very, reflective one. In fact, recent work (Johnsen 
et al., 2014) suggests that the light field to a depth of 
100m is quite strongly asymmetrical for much of 
the daylight hours too, and thus the effectiveness 
of crypsis by silvering may be less than previously 
supposed.
Johnsen & Sosik (2003) discuss the effectiveness 
of crypsis by use of mirrored sides or cryptic color-
ation in near-surface pelagic habitats, before water 
has passed through sufficient depth for the light 
field to be uniform. In general terms, both methods 
have limited effectiveness in this region, which per-
haps explains the particular prevalence of transpar-
ent organisms in the first few tens of metres and the 
vertical migration of other organisms so as to min-
imize exposure to the surface waters when they are 
well-lit. These authors took careful measurements 
of the light field at different depths in the open 
ocean, then used modelling of the visual capabil-
ities of the Atlantic cod Gadus morhua  as a model 
predator. For both cryptic coloration and mirrored 
sides, they found the optimal set of physiological 
traits for reducing detection under a given set of cir-
cumstances (e.g. time of day, depth in the water col-
umn, relative position of viewer), then explored how 
quickly crypsis generated by that particular opti-
mum deteriorated with changes in the ecological 
conditions. Focussing on the ecological robustness of 
these two strategies for crypsis makes sense, because 
these broad strategies do not appear to offer strong 
flexibility with respect to adaptation to changing 
light conditions (except for the control of pigmenta-
tion achieved by many cephalopods). In compari-
son, transparency is trivially able to accommodate 
changing lighting conditions, and use of self-gener-
ated light (bioluminescence) is well known to be 
sensitive to prevailing illumination (Case et al., 1977); 
Young & Roper, 1977; Latz & Case, 1982, Young & 
Arnold, 1982; Young, 1983). Johnsen & Sosik (2003) 
reached a number of interesting conclusions. First, in 

68
AVOIDING ATTACK
stark contrast to benthic organisms that are viewed 
against the solid substrate, pelagic organisms using 
either mirrored sides or cryptic coloration will often 
not be able to find a robust optimum that offers 
effective crypsis across the range of ecological con-
ditions experienced. Second, neither reflective nor 
pigmented strategies are clearly better than the 
other. In general, reflective strategies were more 
robust, but they could never be perfectly cryptic 
when viewed in the azimuth of the sun. Finally, both 
strategies showed strongest robustness when view-
ing from above was considered; this was because of 
the relatively unchanging nature of the background. 
So, perhaps these tactics might be particularly 
attractive to prey whose main predators are, for 
example, seabirds making feeding forays from the 
surface. These authors argue that viewing horizon-
tally may present more of a problem for organisms 
in these upper waters than viewing from below. 
Essentially, wave-induced shadowing, internal reflec-
tion of light at the surface, and the possible presence 
of broken cloud all make the background against 
which prey in the surface waters are viewed from 
below very complex, and background complexity 
generally increases the difficulty of target detection.
As we have seen over this section, the distribu-
tion of transparency amongst living organisms seems 
easier to understand in terms of ecology than in terms 
of phylogeny. For this reason, we have been obliged 
to weave ecology into much of the material covered 
so far in this chapter; however, there are some inter-
esting aspects to ecology that we have not yet men-
tioned, and we turn to these in the next section.
4.5  Ecological influences
An organism might well experience very different 
types of illumination, even on a daily timescale. 
This can be brought about either by the daily cycle 
of sunlight and/or (for many aquatic organisms) by 
vertical migration of the organism. Hamner (1995) 
contends that ‘at sea, predation drives most, if not 
all, vertical migratory behaviour.’ From the discus-
sion earlier in this chapter, we can see that at different 
depths (or, more generally, under different lighting 
conditions) different mechanisms of crypsis will be 
favoured. Hence, it is no surprise to find that indi-
viduals can adapt their external appearance on 
behavioural timescales so as to adopt the most 
effective mechanism for their current situation 
(Morgan & Christy, 1996). An alternative behav-
ioural mechanism employed by some species is to 
adjust their depth, so as to remain within a range of 
preferred irradiances (Frank & Widder, 2002).
Illumination is not the only ecological variable that 
influences transparency. Bhandiwad & Johnsen (2011) 
subjected the transparent grass shrimp Palaemontes 
pugio  to changes in ambient salinity and temperature 
and found that such changes could induce changes 
in transparency. This organism lives in shallow 
estuaries, and the authors suggest that the range of 
variation in the two parameters explored was within 
the range naturally experienced, due to variation in 
tidal cycles, evaporation, and runoff. However, the 
changes imposed were of a faster timescale than 
would naturally be experienced, and exploration of 
how the speed of imposed environmental changes 
affects changes in transparency would be very use-
ful. This might be a useful model species for explor-
ing the physiological mechanisms that allow tissues 
to be transparent but still functional within the organ-
ism. To be transparent, a material must have uni-
form refractive index on size scales greater than 
one-half a wavelength of the light applied. In this 
species muscle tissue can be transparent, but it 
appears that reduced transparency is caused by 
increased scattering. This results from a breakdown 
in the homogeneity of refractive index within the 
tissue, which itself is caused by the pooling of 
excess fluid in extracellular space between muscle 
fibres. Another underexplored issue is how vari-
ation in transparency translates to variation in ease 
of visual detection; we explore this issue next.
4.5.1  Imperfect transparency can be effective at 
low light levels
The visibility of an underwater object generally 
depends more upon its contrast than its size (Lythgoe, 
1979). Contrast is the difference in intensity of light 
reaching an organism’s eye that originates from the 
viewed object compared with the intensity of light 
reaching the eye from other sources. Contrast can 
be defined in various ways, but is generally expressed 
as a ratio. For our purposes we can think of it as 
the difference in light intensity coming from the 

Transparency
69
organism and the background divided by the aver-
age of these intensities.
A predator’s ability to detect prey (and vice 
versa) depends on the minimum contrast that it can 
detect: the contrast threshold. Specifically, prey 
whose contrast falls below the contrast threshold 
will not be visually detected. Contrast threshold 
decreases with increasing ambient light intensity. 
That is, an object can be seen at a greater distance as 
the ambient light intensity against which it is viewed 
increases. This means that aquatic prey will be more 
easily detected from below, against the bright (down-
welling) light from the sky, than from above, against 
the much reduced scattered or reflected light dir-
ected upwards. However, downwelling light inten-
sity decreases with depth, and so this should lead to 
an increase in contrast threshold (and thus a decrease 
in ease of detection) with depth.
Anthony (1981) estimated the contrast threshold 
for cod and suggested that this changed from 
around 0.02 at light intensities equivalent to those 
in the first 20m of clear water on a bright sunny day, 
up to 0.5 in light intensities more representative of 
depths of around 650m (Johnsen & Widder, 1998). 
Consideration of Figure 4.4, based on theoretical 
modelling of Johnsen & Widder (1998), suggests 
that this change should have a substantial eco-
logical effect. At the top of the water column, when 
the contrast threshold is 0.02, transparency has to be 
greater than 85 per cent (i.e. 85 per cent of light 
passes through without absorption or scattering) to 
halve the maximum sighting distance of an object 
compared to a fully opaque counterpart. In con-
trast, at depth, when the threshold has increased to 
0.5, transparency need be only greater than 30 per 
cent to more than halve the sighting distance. Indeed, 
at this contrast threshold, individuals with a trans-
parency of greater than 50 per cent remain visually 
undetected no matter how close the predator or prey 
may approach. Johnsen & Widder (1998) measured 
the transparencies of 29 species of zooplankton as 
being between 50 per cent and 90 per cent. The 
effect of background illumination on ease of detec-
tion is strongly non-linear (see Johnsen, 2012) for a 
full discussion of this), because the detection dis-
tance varies with the difference between the natural 
logarithm of the inherent contrast of the object 
against the background and the natural logarithm 
of the contrast threshold of the viewer. Effective 
camouflage involves minimizing this difference by 
lowering the inherent contrast (through transpar-
ency, silvering, pigmentation, or self-generated 
light) or by raising the contrast threshold by mov-
ing to darker waters. Thus, a 5-fold reduction in 
inherent contrast from 0.5 to 0.1 produces only a 
1.7-fold reduction in sighting distance if the viewer 
has a contrast threshold of 0.01; whereas a 5-fold 
reduction from 0.1 to 0.02 produces a 3.3-fold reduc-
tion in viewing distance by the same viewer; and a 
reduction from 0.05 to 0.01 would render the animal 
virtually undetectable.
Utne-Palm (1999) demonstrated that of preda-
cious gobies the maximum distance of prey detection 
was higher for opaque copepods than transparent 
ones. This is in line with our expectation that trans-
parent organisms are actually more challenging to 
detect than opaque ones. Experiments to measure 
the contrast threshold and how it is affected by 
properties of the eye, the target, the medium, and 
the light field are technically challenging. However, 
the arguments in this section urgently require a 
stronger empirical foundation. So far, we have 
focussed on adaptations of organisms to evade vis-
ual detection, but of course we would also expect 
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
Sighting range/sighting range
of opaque object
0
20
40
60
80
100
% transparency
0.5
0.2
0.1
0.02
Contrast
threshold
Figure 4.4  Sighting distance of a prey item versus its per cent 
transparency when viewed from below by predators with visual 
systems that have different minimum contrast thresholds for object 
detection. The sighting distance is divided by the sighting distance of 
an opaque object to control for water quality, prey shape, size, etc. The 
ratio gives an estimate of the advantage of transparency for crypsis in 
a given situation.

70
AVOIDING ATTACK
counter-adaptations by those seeking to detect them; 
we explore this issue a little in the next section.
4.6  Co-evolutionary considerations
Zylinski & Johnsen (2011) demonstrate dynamic 
change in the appearance of two cephalopods 
(Japetella heathi  and Onychoteuthis banksii) that is con-
sistent with changing cryptic strategies in response 
to the adaptations of predators at different depths 
in the ocean. In the upper waters of the ocean, many 
predators have ‘tubular’ eyes that are directed 
upward; these are effective in detecting the silhou-
ettes of prey against the lighter background of the 
sky. Transparency is an effective defence against 
detection by such predators, and the two focal spe-
cies of this study employ transparency of much of 
their body as their default.
However, in the deep ocean, sunlight is irrelevant 
and the main source of light is light generated bio-
chemically by organisms themselves. In the waters 
below 500m, 70 per cent of fish and 65 per cent of 
decapod crustaceans are bioluminescent (Herring, 
2001). Predators can use such bioluminescence as a 
‘searchlight’ to illuminate potential prey. Such illu-
mination is clearly strongly directional and transpar-
ency is of limited defence against this. As discussed 
previously, some light will be reflected back from a 
transparent organism, and the intensity of this 
reflected light will stand out from the dark back-
ground, allowing effective detection. Bioluminescent 
light is generally blue-green, and when individuals 
of the focal cephalopod species are illuminated with 
strongly directional light, they rapidly change 
appearance to being a blotchy dull brown-red. This 
can be interpreted as the best defence against bio-
luminescent searchlights; absorption of the light 
produced by the bioluminescent searchlight offers 
the prey the best chance of avoiding detection. 
However, this tactic makes the prey highly vulner-
able to detection from below when in sunlit waters. 
Conversely, in the uniform light field of many sunlit 
waters, the small fraction of light that is reflected by 
a transparent organism may not greatly compromise 
crypsis. Thus, the control that cephalopods have 
over their appearance appears to offer them the abil-
ity to flexibly select the cryptic strategies required to 
thwart the predatory adaptions seen in different 
layers of the ocean.
Johnsen & Sosik (2003) discuss how searching 
behaviour by predators can most effectively under-
mine crypsis by use of mirrored sides or cryptic col-
oration in near-surface pelagic habitats, before water 
has passed through sufficient depth for the light 
field to be uniform. They argue that in such situ-
ations the effectiveness of both cryptic approaches 
will be dependent on the azimuthal angle at which 
the predator views the cryptic organism, and so cir-
cular swimming patterns while searching may be 
best for prey discovery in situations where prey are 
sparse and high value. Foraging when the sun is not 
high in the sky (Johnsen et al. (2014) will further 
increase the sensitivity of detection distance to azi-
muthal angle, and so hunting at these times may be 
particularly beneficial for the predators of prey that 
adopt these forms of crypsis. Finally, the effect might 
be further enhanced the higher in the water column 
the prey is, so predatory activity at depth that drives 
prey upward may be particularly effective in break-
ing these tactics. The authors provide references 
demonstrating the commonness of these tactics, but 
(since these tactics also have other benefits) their 
specific linkage to breaking crypsis remains unclear.
4.7  Unresolved issues and future 
challenges
In summary, visual detection of an organism requires 
that the light reaching a detector’s eye has been modi-
fied by the organism. Perfect transparency means that 
light can pass through an organism without any 
modification through the processes of absorption and 
scattering. This does make transparent organisms 
challenging to detect. However, other physical pro-
cesses (such as reflection and refraction) can also 
alter light as it passes between an organism and the 
surrounding medium (air or water). Hence, trans-
parent organisms are challenging but not necessar-
ily impossible to visually detect. The environmental 
conditions where transparency is likely to be particu-
larly effective in reducing detectability occur in mid-
depths of open water regions of lakes and seas. These 
regions also provide the conditions where a highly 
reflective skin can make an organism very challenging 

Transparency
71
to detect. This chapter provides an overview of the 
current state of knowledge of crypsis by transpar-
ency or reflection. It seems that the fundamental 
physical processes are relatively well understood, 
but quantification of the importance of these pro-
cesses to natural predator–prey systems is currently 
lacking. This may well reflect the bias of terrestrial-
living scientists towards the processes they see in 
the world around them. However, this field does 
seem to have experienced renewed interest recently 
and we can expect further developments in the near 
future. We finish by highlighting two potential 
areas of investigation.
Johnsen (2012, pp. 146–9) points out that in some 
human-built optical devices the problem of reflec-
tion at the interface between two media is mitigated 
by a ‘bumpy’ surface structure to optical lenses; this 
means that as light approaches the lens, the bumps 
occupy a greater and greater fraction of the area, so 
that the ‘average’ refractive index (at the scale of 
wavelengths of light) increases smoothly rather than 
abruptly as light passes into the lens. This design 
feature reduces the level of reflection compared to 
abrupt transition at a smoother surface. He speculates 
that it would be worth exploring whether a similar 
approach is utilized by transparent marine organ-
isms to reduce the amount of light that they reflect. 
For example, Binetti et al. (2009) suggest that such 
nano-sized protuberances act as an anti-reflection 
device on the transparent parts of the wings of the 
glasswing butterfly Greta oto.
Johnsen (2012, p. 157) also points out that our 
understanding of how many animals achieve trans-
parency is very limited. In some cases (such as jelly-
fish and comb jellies) transparency is achieved by 
having gelatinous tissue with very high water con-
tent; in others part of the answer is simply being 
very thin. Light attenuation in tissue, whether due 
to absorption or scattering, is exponential; so we 
might expect selection for extreme body flattening. 
However, for many animals those two factors alone 
cannot explain transparency, and our understanding 
of how this is achieved is very limited. Such organ-
isms generally become opaque soon after death, sug-
gesting that transparency may require active (and 
presumably costly) metabolism.

Avoiding Attack: The Evolutionary Ecology of Crypsis, Aposematism, and Mimicry. Second Edition. Graeme D. Ruxton,  
William L. Allen, Thomas N. Sherratt, & Michael P. Speed, Oxford University Press (2018). © Graeme D. Ruxton,  
William L. Allen, Thomas N. Sherratt, & Michael P. Speed 2018. DOI: 10.1093/oso/9780199688678.001.0001
CHAPTER 5
Secondary defences
5.1  Introduction and overview of the 
chapter
Much of this book covers the use of visual appear-
ance to prevent attacks taking place. Defences that 
happen early in a potential predator–prey encoun-
ter affect the likelihood of the predator physically 
contacting the prey, and are generally called ‘pri-
mary defences’ (see the Introduction to this book). 
In this chapter we consider defences that are usu-
ally deployed during, or just before, contact 
between a prey and its predator: so-called ‘second-
ary’ defences. Secondary defences underpin defen-
sive advertising described in other chapters, 
including aposematism, Müllerian mimicry, and 
deceptive forms of mimicry. Hence, we now explore 
the form of, and the evolutionary and ecological 
effects of variation in, secondary defences.
A key point to make at the start of this chapter is 
that secondary defences are found right across the 
tree of life from the simplest to the most complex 
organisms. Secondary defences therefore come in 
very many forms, including: 1.) chemical defences, 
that act variously as olfactory deterrents, irritating 
repellent secretions, and internally stored toxins 
that are transferred to predators during and after 
ingestion; 2.) mechanical defences, including 
changes in body shape to exceed the gape of pred-
ators, and the possession of piercing spines and/or 
tough integuments; and 3.) behavioural defences, 
such as forms of aggressive retaliation and perhaps 
social-defensive grouping. In the corresponding 
chapter to this from our original text (Avoiding 
Attack, Ruxton et al. 2004a) the lion’s share of the 
material reviewed a large range of different defences 
and evaluated the evidence for costs associated 
with different defences. Here we change emphasis a 
little. We will review selected examples that pro-
vide useful illustrations of the ecological and evolu-
tionary characteristics associated with secondary 
defences. We will again discuss costs of secondary 
defences, but this time, place more emphasis on the 
consequences of such costs, especially as they relate 
to forms of social interaction. We show also that the 
acquisition of secondary defences may modify 
niche, life history, and habitat range of prey animals 
and review a well-known and significant study of 
predator–prey co-evolution of defensive toxins of 
prey and resistance to those toxins in predators. We 
do not limit our discussion to animals, but include a 
small selection of examples and ideas from the 
plant and microbe defence literature where we 
think a broader perspective is helpful. We begin the 
chapter by considering the evolutionary mechan-
isms that favour secondary defence evolution.
5.2  Evolution of secondary defence
5.2.1  Self and others: social evolution of 
defences
At first glance, the evolution of secondary defences 
by natural selection should be a simple matter in 
which the benefit of increased survival to individ-
ual prey outweighs the costs of acquiring, storing, 
and deploying the secondary defences. However 
the evolution of secondary defence is not necessar-
ily so simple. Internally stored toxins may harm 
predators, but do so too slowly to protect the indi-
vidual prey that bears them. For example, some 
toxins may only be liberated once the prey is killed 
and ingested, and hence provide no protection to 
the individual prey. Explaining how these apparently 
self-defeating defences can evolve brings us to one of 

Secondary defences
73
the interesting aspects of secondary defences—that 
there may be a social component in their evolution.
In his classic text on natural selection and evolu-
tion R.A. Fisher (1958) described an early version of 
kin selection theory to explain secondary defences 
that do not protect individuals (‘nauseous flavours as 
a means of defence’, Fisher 1958). Fisher realized that 
through social aggregation the effects of attack on 
an individual prey would later be conferred on 
neighbouring prey, which gain protection from the 
subsequent disablement of the predator. If the 
aggregation were a set of siblings, hatched from a 
clutch of eggs from a singly-mated female then the 
‘selective potency’ for each sibling would be ‘only 
half as great as if the individual were itself protected. 
Against this has to be set that it applies to the whole of a 
possibly numerous brood’ (Fisher, 1958). Hence the 
alleles that confer ‘nauseous flavours’ may not 
increase the likelihood of survival of the individual 
that is killed, but if the defence that they generate 
can protect a sufficient number of nearby siblings, 
the relevant alleles can be favoured by increases in 
indirect fitness.
We can easily conceive of different evolutionary 
routes to kin-selected influences on secondary 
defences (Ruxton & Sherratt, 2006). In one scenario, 
chemical defences that are inadequate to protect 
individuals (Fisher’s‘nauseous flavours’) may fail 
to evolve except in species that are socially aggre-
gated. Here kin selection is the driver of defence 
evolution. In another scenario, chemical defence 
evolves first to protect solitary individuals, and 
this in turn causes a transition to social living and 
aggregation, in which benefits of defence are con-
ferred both directly (protection of individuals) 
and indirectly (through enhanced survival of rela-
tives). The nature of an individual’s defence might 
then evolve so that it enhances the benefit to rela-
tives, perhaps at the expense of some level of self-­
protection.
The influential phylogenetic work by Tullberg & 
Hunter on defence and aggregation (Sillén-Tullberg, 
1988; Tullberg & Hunter, 1996), indicates that chem-
ical defence in the macrolepidopterans typically 
came first, followed by social aggregation and 
warning coloration that advertises these defences. 
It is striking that more than 20 years after Tullberg 
and Hunter’s key papers, there are almost no fol-
low-up tests on lepidopterans or other arthropod 
groups; this is still a fruitful research area awaiting 
exploitation (see review in Ruxton & Sherratt, 2006). 
For insect species there is good evidence of associ-
ations between aggregation and chemical defence 
in general (Tullberg & Hunter, 1996), and a lot of 
experimental evidence that aggregation in prey 
groups facilitates avoidance by predators (Ruxton 
& Sherratt, 2006), but we note there is not always 
support for the prediction that survival increases 
with group size in chemically defended species 
(Lindstedt et al., 2006). Furthermore the rules may 
apply differently to other animal groups. Stankowich 
et al. (2014), for example, reported that presence of 
chemical defence in carnivores, manifest as noxious 
anal secretions, is associated with solitary not social 
living.
Fisher’s theory for kin-selected defence is how-
ever supported in a fascinating example of clonal 
aphid defence. Aphid defences can operate through 
small tubes called cornicles, which point backward 
from the abdomen targeted at rear-approaching 
predators (example in Figure 5.1). When an aphid is 
attacked, the cornicles release defensive secretions 
that produce volatile alarm cues causing nearby 
individuals to cease feeding and perhaps to flee 
(Montgomery & Nault, 1977). Since individuals live 
in colonies of clones, this is reasonably interpreted 
as a costly kin-selected act. The secretion itself is 
waxy and rapidly hardens; so if it is smeared over 
an arthropod predator, the secretion will inhibit its 
movement, possibly clogging up mouthparts, thus 
Figure 5.1  An oleander aphid (Aphis nerii) deploying defensive 
secretions from its cornicles, in response to attack from a ladybird 
larvae (see Plate 3).

74
AVOIDING ATTACK
preventing further attacks. The colonial grain aphid 
(Sitobion avenae) uses these cornicle secretions against 
enemies such as the parasitoid wasp (Aphidius rho-
palosiphi) that lays its eggs inside the aphid. Wu 
et al. (2010) examined the fitness consequences of 
cornicle secretion for individuals and their clonal 
group-mates. In fact the secretion had no benefit for 
individuals, since aphids that used the defensive 
secretion were no more likely to survive the current 
attack, and were in fact less likely to survive a sec-
ond attack. Smearing of the wasp with ‘aphid wax’, 
however, benefitted other group members because 
the wasp was diverted from attack behaviour by 
grooming behaviours to clean the wax off. Hence 
there is a benefit to group members from one indi-
vidual defending itself, and no apparent direct 
benefit to the individual. A kin-selection explanation 
predicts greater investment in defence if the kin-
group size increases, and indeed, after statistically 
controlling for group size, Wu et al. found higher 
rates of smearing the secretion as the number of 
clone mates in the group increased.
5.2.2  Costs
It is often assumed that defences are costly in the 
sense that in the absence of a predatory threat the 
presence of a defence reduces the prey’s fitness. 
Potential causes of fitness costs are diverse. They 
may often follow directly from conflicts over 
resources within an organism, when production of 
a secondary defence requires re-allocation of energy 
and raw materials away from other key functions 
like growth or reproduction. There may also be self-
damage (or ‘design’ costs), in which a defence inter-
feres with other functions; for example, storage of 
defensive toxins may damage tissues, or defensive 
(trichome) hairs on plant leaves may reduce photo-
synthetic efficiency. Some defences may cause 
indirect ecological costs, if for example they were 
associated with decreased competitive ability or 
greater vulnerability to other kinds of enemy. 
Defences which are typically induced in relation to 
short-term threats may impose costs of plasticity, 
unlike so-called ‘constitutive defences’ that are con-
stantly present. Finally some defences may incur 
costs of reduced opportunity, for example alloca-
tion of resource to defence at an early stage may 
cause additional costs later, for example reducing 
growth rates (see Strauss et al., 2002).
In our earlier text we reviewed evidence for and 
against costs of secondary defences, often chemical 
defences. We would again refer the interested reader 
to M. Deane Bowers’ (1992) excellent evaluation of 
costs of defence in arthropods; this remains a sem-
inal review. Since 2004, we note greater depth to 
published reviews of costs of secondary defences, 
reflecting growth of empirical work. In a review of 
plant chemical defences, Cipollini et al. (2018) argue 
that the evidence they surveyed broadly favours 
the expectation that costs of defensive secondary 
metabolites can be consistently identified and quan-
tified; and where they are not found a cause may be 
limitations in experimental conditions, rather than 
genuine absence of costs. Genetic mechanisms of 
growth–defence trade-offs in plant systems are now 
being described (Karasov et al., 2017), focussing 
on  the genomic regulation of induced chemical 
defences. It seems likely that the coming years will 
provide very detailed information about costs of 
defensive secondary metabolites in plant systems.
For researchers interested in costs of animal sec-
ondary defences, Zvereva & Kozlov (2016) recently 
described a very informative meta-analysis, exam-
ining evidence for costs of chemical defences in 
insect herbivores. Readers wishing to review rele-
vant experiments are recommended to see the list of 
source material used there. Robust meta-analysis 
involves filtering out papers that do not match care-
fully designed inclusion criteria. Given the remark-
ably widespread and diverse distribution of 
chemical defence in herbivorous insects, it is strik-
ing that after a very thorough review of the relevant 
experimental literature, Zvereva & Kozlov were 
able to include only 33 papers (including 22 species; 
but because of multiple investigations in each 
paper, up to 87 measures could be used to evaluate 
effect sizes). Studies were included if they meas-
ured performance variation caused in response to 
defensive secretion, or that measured correlations 
with variation in intake of defensive chemicals that 
were sequestered from the animal’s diet. The stud-
ies retained covered lepidopterans (10 species), 
coleopterans (7 species), hymenopterans (3 species), 
and hemipterans (2 species). Zvereva & Kozlov 
found that sequestration of increasing amounts of 

Secondary defences
75
plant allelochemicals was actually associated with 
increased herbivore performance. This indicates 
perhaps that specialist herbivores are adapted to 
metabolizing plant allelochemicals and used them 
as a nutrient, or alternatively that other nutritional 
components of the host plants correlate with increas-
ing allelochemical concentration. Zvereva & Kozlov 
did find small costs of de novo  synthesis (but sample 
size is only 3 here). Significant costs of external secre-
tion of chemical defences (regurgitation, reflex bleed-
ing, etc.), were clearly identified (excluding those that 
synthesize salicylaldehyde, for which glucose is a 
byproduct of biosynthesis). This is a notable result, 
as deployment of chemical defences in arthropods, 
whether biosynthesized or taken second-hand from 
components of diet, often involves secretion of a 
noxious substance that is lost to the prey when 
deployed. Higginson et al. (2011) for example found 
that defensive regurgitation in caterpillars (of the 
large white butterfly, Pieris brassicae) was costly in 
multiple ways, including reduced survival (prob-
ably through reduced immune function) as well as 
reduced pupal weight and adult female fecundity.
Zvereva & Kozlov (2016) present a robust and 
informative meta-analysis, but with a necessarily 
limited data set. There is in our view still consider-
able need for empirical evaluation of costs of chem-
ical defences in insects. We would like to see this 
kind of analysis performed with a wider set of stud-
ies and species included before we can, for example, 
really understand whether allocation costs are usu-
ally negligible or nonexistent in sequestering ani-
mals, but more substantial in those that biosynthesize 
their defences. It would be very useful if researchers 
took note of and complied with the selection criteria 
used by Zvereva & Kozlov, because this analysis 
can of course develop as more studies are pub-
lished. The studies included looked for costs which 
might be seen when toxin levels within prey vary; 
they do not count in the costs any constitutive 
phenotypes that are possessed by all members of 
the species, for example organs for storage and 
deployment of defensive toxins etc.
If we take Zvereva & Kozlov’s results at face value 
we might conclude that 1.) de novo  synthesis of and 
defensive external secretion of repellent chemicals 
are likely to be costly, and 2.) sequestration of plant 
defensive allelochemicals is associated with a lack of 
net costs and often increased performance in key 
components of fitness. This could be because herbi-
vore dietary specialization is accompanied by strong 
selection to reduce costs, and perhaps bring meta-
bolic benefits of plant allelochemicals. Certainly 
papers reporting positive or negligible effects of 
sequestration of chemical defence can easily be 
found (e.g. Cogni et al., 2012). In at least one species 
of sawfly (Diprion pini) that recycles diet-derived 
resins for its own defence, there appears to be no 
cost to survival or growth from increases in the res-
inous nature of the food (Lindstedt et al., 2011). D. 
pini  larvae with a diet high in resin acid had a higher 
pupal mass and bigger defensive secretions than 
those with a lower resin component in their diets.
A good question, posed by Zvereva & Kozlov 
themselves, is the extent to which other kinds of 
cost are missed in experimental work. Hence it is 
common to look for correlations of defence with 
life-history parameters that indicate performance, 
such as body size, but not to look for ecological 
costs, such as decreased competitive ability. Gentry 
& Dyer (2002), presented a thorough investigation of 
vulnerability of caterpillars to enemies including 
parasitoids; they point out that the presence of 
chemical defences that protect against predators 
may be associated with increased attacks by parasit-
oid wasps. Zvereva & Kozlov’s meta-analysis sug-
gests that this kind of ecological cost may be general. 
Such indirect, ecological costs will not be seen in lab 
studies that focus on effects of chemical defence on 
the growth and maturation of insect prey.
We note also that some chemical defences are nei-
ther biosynthesized nor taken from the diet, but are 
instead supplied by microbial symbionts, and these 
are generally excluded from the kinds of study we 
refer to above. Symbiont-conferred chemical defences 
have been recorded in assorted organisms, includ-
ing grasses that gain chemical defence from endo-
phytic fungi that live between plant cells (Clay & 
Schardl, 2002), rove beetles that gain chemical 
defence from endosymbiont bacteria (Kellner, 2002), 
and numerous potential cases in aquatic inverte-
brates (Lopanik, 2014; and we recommend the 
review by Clay, 2014). The use of symbionts in this 
way may indicate reduced costs of secondary 
defences, since hosts do not need to invest in genetic 
or metabolic systems to create the toxins themselves. 

76
AVOIDING ATTACK
But this must be set against any other fitness-influ-
encing properties of these symbionts.
5.3  Consequences of variation in costs of 
secondary defence
Let’s first of all assume that classes of secondary 
defence, such as dietary sequestration by insect 
herbivores, involve no net allocation costs; how 
might we expect an absence of costs to affect ecol-
ogy and evolution of prey species? Cogni et al. 
(2012) consider this question as they discussed their 
findings of weak evidence for costs of pyrrolizidine 
alkaloid sequestration by a specialist arctiid moth, 
Utetheisa ornatrix.  Here the only measurable cost 
reported was on larval development time. Cogni et al. 
(2012) point out that a lack of sequestration costs 
could affect co-evolutionary dynamics between prey 
and their predators, perhaps biasing co-­evolution 
toward escalation, rather than fluctuating selection 
(see section 5.5). They also suggest that plant–­
herbivore relationships will be affected. If a specialist 
herbivore evolves cost-free resistance to the plant’s 
chemical defences, and if that herbivore is one of the 
most commonly met, then the value of the plant 
defence declines, perhaps leading to relaxed ­selection 
and lower production levels if the plant’s defences 
are costly (see Agrawal & Fishbein, 2008).
Now let’s switch assumptions and ask: if there are 
allocation costs of secondary defences, what might 
be the evolutionary and ecological consequences of 
such costs? We can perhaps expect ‘optimal deploy-
ment’ of secondary defences (see Cipollini et al., 
2018). This idea originated in the plant literature 
where it is known as ‘optimal defence theory’ (ODT), 
and predicts that deployment of costly defences are 
selectively targeted to the most valuable and vulner-
able components of the plant. A meta-analysis of 
empirical tests reported some support for ODT 
across plant species (McCall & Fordyce, 2010). For 
example, young leaves which are more synthetic-
ally active than older leaves contain greater chem-
ical herbivory deterrents. However, in this study 
there was no evidence that flowers are more strongly 
defended than leaves, yet it could be expected that 
reproductive organs are particularly worth defend-
ing from herbivory. Hence the case for optimal 
defence theory in plants appears partly supported. 
There is a related idea in the animal defence litera-
ture, that chemically defended individuals store 
their defensive toxins in appendages that are most 
likely to be contacted first by a predator’s mouth-
parts. Thus, monarch butterflies store their carde-
nolide toxins in their cuticles, not their internal 
body organs (Brower, 1988).
More generally, we can expect that investment in 
a costly defence is optimized, with varied costs 
traded off against the benefits of repellence. If the 
potency of a costly defence increased then (other 
things being equal) prey should use lower levels of 
that defence; or if marginal costs of production 
decreased then (again other things being equal) 
prey should use higher levels of the defence. In 
addition, we might expect that prey density is an 
important determinant of individual levels of 
investment. Aggre­gations of prey may, for example, 
dilute the risk that any individual will be ‘picked 
off’ by a predator. The average level of optimal indi-
vidual toxicity could then be negatively related to 
local density, although this may need to be set against 
the potential for preferential targeting of larger 
groups by predators. Finally, an optimization per-
spective leads us to expect economical inducibility 
of costly defences. Many defences will not be ‘always 
on’, but rather switched on by stimulation indicative 
of a predatory threat.
5.3.1  Defence costs might lead to cheating
A second consequence of defence costs could be to 
incentivize ‘defence cheating’. Some individuals 
may invest less in a costly defence than others. 
Assuming secondary defences protect individuals 
that deploy those defences (rather than just their 
kin, see section 5.2.1), such defence cheats would be 
more vulnerable if attacked, but would save on the 
costs of secondary defences, and so might have 
higher reproductive output. The extent to which 
defence cheats can invade and replace defended 
prey depends critically on the response of pred-
ators. If predators increase attack rates as cheats 
increase in frequency, then the mortality risk to 
cheats increases more quickly than it would for 
non-cheats because cheats are less likely to survive 

Secondary defences
77
an attack. There is good evidence that the frequency 
of attacks can rise with the frequency of cheats, so 
this critical assumption is well supported, at least 
for bird–insect systems (Gamberale-Stille & Guilford, 
2004; Skelhorn & Rowe, 2007a; Jones et al., 2013). 
If  predators respond in this way, then theoretical 
models predict that a cheat that invades a popula-
tion of defended prey will increase to a stable fre-
quency at which the fitness of cheats (no cost of 
defence, high mortality risk from an attack) and non-
cheats (cost of defence, but lower risk from attack) 
is equal. The equilibrium frequency of cheats is pre-
dicted to increase with the deterrent effect and the 
costs of the defence (Speed et al., 2006; Svennungsen 
& Holen, 2007; Sherratt et al., 2009).
The concept of defence cheats reveals the broadly 
social nature of secondary defence. An individual 
prey repelling a predator can confer a public benefit of 
protection, reducing risk to other potential victims if 
the prey kills, injures, disables or otherwise deters the 
enemy. This benefit may be conferred on close kin (as 
in Fisher’s theory of kin-selected defences, see section 
5.2.1) or it may be conferred on any individual prey in 
the same population, or even in other species. We can 
expect this ‘public good of protection’ to pertain 
whenever (1) predators are to some extent deterred 
from further attacks after an aversive experience with 
a prey individual, and (2) there are sufficient numbers 
of prey in the predators’ locality to benefit from its 
aversion. If secondary defences protect individuals 
during attack and incur some non-trivial cost then we 
can expect cheating can be beneficial.
Theoretical models predicting stable cheating 
only require quite general assumptions leading to a 
prediction that the phenomenon of ‘defence cheats’ 
could be taxonomically widespread. It is certainly 
easy to find examples in which some members of a 
population have no investment (or very reduced 
investment) in chemical defences (see review in 
Speed et al., 2012). The ‘classic’ animal example is 
the monarch butterfly (Danaus plexippus) in which 
the toxicity status of each individual adult depends 
on the presence or absence of cardenolide second-
ary metabolites sequestered from the host plant 
of  its larval stage (Brower et al., 1967b). Brower 
et  al. coined the term ‘automimicry’ to describe 
this dimorphism in edibility, since the nontoxic 
(automimic) individuals are assumed to gain pro-
tection from the presence of their toxic (automodel) 
conspecifics in a similar manner to that seen in 
Batesian mimicry, in which members of an edible 
mimic species copy the warning display of a dis-
tasteful model species. Dimorphism in the pres-
ence/absence of toxicity is not limited to the 
monarch butterfly; indeed the state of automimicry 
may be widespread across diverse taxa, life-history 
stages, and ecological niches. For example, auto-
mimicry has been noted in other arthropods (such 
as millipedes, Eisner et al., 1967; and beetles, Kellner 
& Dettner, 1996). Defensive responses are a likely 
source of automimicry in arthropods and other ani-
mals. Many insects can, for example, defend them-
selves by defensive secretion (by regurgitation, 
reflex bleeding etc.; Whitman et al., 1990; Eisner 
et al. 2005), and a non-trivial proportion of a prey 
population may be automimics in the sense that they 
do not produce any defensive secretion when threat-
ened (Higginson et al., 2011), either because they 
choose not to respond, or because they do not have 
defensive fluids available. The ‘classic’ plant example 
is the dimorphism in cyanogenesis in white clover 
(Trifolium repens; Olsen et al., 2014) but other plant 
species show automimetic variation in cyanogenesis 
(e.g. Goodger et al., 2002). Well-studied microbial 
examples of automimicry can be found in the litera-
ture too (Jousset et al., 2009). What is lacking in most 
of these examples is a systematic demonstration of all 
the assumptions necessary for a public good explan-
ation of cheating: that other individuals benefit, that 
predators increase feeding as non-defended prey 
increase in frequency, and that defence protects indi-
viduals and is costly. This omission is an important 
point because toxin level dimorphism could have 
other explanations, such as competition for dietary 
toxins (see review in Speed et al., 2012).
Understanding how and why defences evolve is 
not in principle particularly challenging; under-
standing the stunning diversity of such defences is. 
Further, we find this variation over ontogeny, 
between sexes, members of a population, as well as 
between species. There is variation in patterns of 
complexity of multiple defences too, and in how 
such defences interact with other life-history traits 
(such as aggregation). Thus there is a great deal of 

78
AVOIDING ATTACK
fundamental research still to do in this area; to make 
substantial progress we perhaps need especially to 
identify some tractable model systems, and develop 
a theoretical framework of defensive investment 
that will produce predictions that we can test in 
these model systems.
5.4  Ecology
5.4.1  Ecology-defence correlations
Given the vast array of alternative secondary 
defences seen in organisms, an important question 
is how the precise forms that defences take reflect the 
diverse nature of the threats that organisms encounter. 
Recent improvements in the resolution of phylogenies 
and advances in the sophistication of phylogenetic 
comparative methods are beginning to allow a sys-
tematic understanding of the relationships between 
secondary defence and ecology. An excellent example 
of this phylogenetic-ecological approach is the study 
of carnivore secondary defence by Stankowich et al. 
(2014), who compiled a rich data set describing mech-
anisms of defence (e.g. absent, foul scent, or directed 
noxious spray), behaviour (solitary or aggregated, 
daily activity period), geographic range, and habitat 
type for the carnivores. Predation risk was assessed, 
using similar data sets for diet and geographic range 
for mammalian and avian predators. Noxious repel-
lent sprays were strongly associated with predomin-
antly nocturnal activity, where the most likely 
predatory threat was from close-range mammalian 
predators that are susceptible to pungent olfactants. In 
contrast, species with predominantly diurnal activity 
patterns faced strong threats from avian predators, 
and here noxious chemical defence was more likely 
absent, but replaced by defensive social grouping. 
Stankowich et al. argue that birds are less susceptible 
to repellent olfactants, hence social grouping with 
vigilance and mobbing is used as an alternative, more 
effective defence for species active in the daytime. In 
carnivorous mammals, therefore, chemical defence is 
not associated with social living, whereas in arthro-
pods such as the macrolepidopterans it often is 
(Tullberg & Hunter, 1996), a fact supported by empir-
ically parameterized models of aggregation in chem-
ically defended arthropods (Sillén-Tullberg & Leimar, 
1988). An important message from these studies is 
that defence-ecology patterns cannot easily be gener-
alized from one group to another. There are disap-
pointingly few papers on the scale of the Stankowich 
et al. paper that examine the ecological correlates of 
chemical defence, though as we discuss in Chapter 6 
some work suggesting that warning coloration of 
chemical defence is associated with diurnal activity 
and modified social behaviours.
5.4.2  Ecological and evolutionary consequences 
of secondary defences
What effect does the acquisition of a secondary 
defence have for the ecology of a species? Does it 
change its niche or its life-history characteristics? 
Does it perhaps have consequences for long-term 
macroevolutionary effects such as speciation and 
extinction? The idea that chemical defence may be 
crucial in macroevolutionary processes originated in 
the plant literature. In discussing the co-evolution of 
plants and herbivore enemies, Ehrlich & Raven 
(1964) implicated chemical defence in adaptive radi-
ation in plant groups, particularly the angiosperms, 
considering it a ‘biochemical shield’ that facilitated 
species persistence and diversification. Ehrlich & 
Raven’s hypothesis is sometimes known as ‘escape 
and radiate’ and identifies chemical defence as a so 
called ‘key innovation’ promoting adaptive radiation. 
Ehrlich & Raven’s hypothesis is often described at 
second or third hand, so it is worth quoting the key 
sentences here: ‘a [chemically defended] plant, protected 
from the attacks of phytophagous animals, would in a 
sense have entered a new adaptive zone. Evolutionary 
radiation of the plants might follow, and eventually what 
began as a chance mutation or recombination might char-
acterize an entire family or group of related families.’ 
(Ehrlich & Raven, 1964, p. 602).
Though Ehrlich & Raven’s paper is key to mod-
ern co-evolutionary biology, the paper is somewhat 
vague as to the mechanisms by which effective 
defences cause adaptive radiation. A follow-up 
paper by Berenbaum however provided a more sys-
tematic approach (Berenbaum, 1983). Even here the 
exact mechanism by which diversity is promoted 
by the removal of predatory threat is not clear in a 
generalized form, rather Berenbaum suggests exap-
tation of chemicals that help plants cope with dry 
conditions into anti-herbivore defences. For a recent 

Secondary defences
79
viewpoint on ecological opportunity and adaptive 
radiation, we refer interested readers to the review 
of Stroud & Losos (2016).
In the animals there are relatively few large-scale 
evaluations of the escape and radiate prediction 
that chemical defence increases speciation rates. 
Arbuckle & Speed (2015) tested the prediction for 
Amphibia using statistics that measure not just net 
diversification (as in traditional phylogenetic sister 
group analyses), but also measure speciation and 
extinction rates. In keeping with an escape and 
radiate prediction, they found higher speciation 
rates in lineages with chemical defence than in 
those without. However, surprisingly, they also 
found raised rates of extinction in species with 
chemical defence. This suggests that on the one 
hand, chemical defence does open up ‘adaptive 
zones’ as Erhlich & Raven suggested for plants; but 
on the other, the new species that form have a rela-
tively fragile existence. The net effect is that chem-
ical defence actually tends to reduce diversification 
rates in lineages, because estimated increases in 
extinction rates were two to three orders higher than 
the increase in speciation rates. However, across 
tetrapods Harris & Arbuckle (2016) found an 
increase in net diversification rates associated with 
poisonous defence when amphibians were excluded, 
supporting a general prediction of the escape and 
radiate hypothesis and suggesting that amphibians 
are divergent in the macroevolutionary patterns of 
their toxic defences. Blanchard & Moreau (2017) 
evaluated the effects of alternative anti-predator 
defences on diversification in ants, using data for 82 
per cent of genera. Sister clade analyses indicated 
raised diversification associated with larger eyes 
(greater acuity and threat detection), defensive 
spines, and colony size, but a negative association 
with presence of a sting and diversification rates. In 
plant groups, the evolution of structures that sup-
port defence mutualisms has been shown to increase 
diversification rates (Weber & Agrawal, 2014).
If the acquisition of chemical and other defences 
does affect macroevolutionary patterns, it is import-
ant to determine why this might be. Two explan-
ations are that effective defences allow species to 
diversify their niche, ultimately causing reproduct-
ive isolation and speciation; or to change life-his-
tory patterns, making some species more or less 
resilient to environmental change. To examine 
whether chemical defence is associated with niche 
and life history changes, Arbuckle et al. (2013) 
examined the musteloid mammals (85 species in 
all) including the families Mustelidae (badgers, 
otters, weasels, etc.), Mephitidae (skunks), and 
Procyonidae (raccoons, coatis, olingos etc.). Most 
pertinent to the present discussion, chemical 
defence was associated with increases in the most 
direct measures of niche space: omnivory, diet 
diversity, and more diverse activity periods, taking 
in both night and day times rather than nocturnal or 
diurnal activity only. There was strong statistical 
support for a model in which chemical defence pre-
ceded the evolution of omnivory, and some support 
for the more general case that chemical defence pre-
ceded changes in other traits. Reduction of the 
threat from enemies may have allowed members of 
musteloid species to be relieved of the constraint of 
hiding (Merilaita & Tullberg, 2005). If competition 
can be relieved by adopting more varied activity 
periods, this might require feeding on a wider 
diversity of food items when there is temporal vari-
ation in food availability.
A related possibility is that chemical defence 
enables prey to make better use of new opportun-
ities if life-history traits are modified. Hence in the 
musteloid example presence of chemical defence 
was associated not just with behavioural changes 
but also with reduced female age at maturity, 
reduced sexual dimorphism, and reduced longev-
ity, suggesting adaptive change in life history as a 
consequence of (or requiring) a strong repellent 
defence. The reduction in longevity is perhaps sur-
prising, since if chemical defence lowers extrinsic 
mortality we may expect that longevity would 
increase. Consistent with this prediction, in a phylo-
genetically corrected study, Hossie et al. (2013) 
found that the possession of chemical defence in 
amphibia (in a sample of 106 species) was associ-
ated with increased longevity. One possible explan-
ation for the reverse finding in musteloids is that 
chemical defence does not necessarily reduce extrin-
sic mortality: though it increases the likelihood that 
a musteloid prey survives an encounter with a 
predator, the prey may alter its activities so that it is 
more behaviourally conspicuous, gaining more 
resources but exposing itself to more encounters 

80
AVOIDING ATTACK
with predators. Perhaps heightened encounter rate 
explains the earlier female maturation and associ-
ated reduced longevity.
Expansion of niche can help explain the diversifi-
cation effects of chemical defence and hence greater 
rates at which new species form. But why do chem-
ical defences make extinction more likely in amphib-
ians as Arbuckle & Speed (2015) reported? One 
explanation is that chemical defence encourages 
amphibian diversification into habitats which typic-
ally have low carrying capacities. Since populations 
of small size are less resilient to environmental chal-
lenges, chemical defence may facilitate short-term 
gains, but greater long-term likelihood of extinction. 
A possibility that we think is more likely is that life-
history changes, toward greater longevity and later 
maturation and smaller broods (a slow life-history 
strategy) again makes the chemically defended popu-
lation less resilient to adapting to rapid change. ‘Slow’ 
organisms, which have longer generation times and 
fewer (but better quality) individuals, present fewer 
mutations per unit time and hence have slower reac-
tions to novel environmental challenges.
A final point to make in this section, is that phylo-
genetic methods increasingly allow us to look at the 
macroevolutionary patterns of different kinds of 
defence in large animal groups. Thus, Harris & 
Arbuckle (2016) were able to show that in the tetra-
pods, biosynthesis of toxins is less dynamic in terms 
of gains and losses than sequestration of toxins 
from diet. Furthermore, in the amphibian clade the 
rate of gain of defensive poisons is higher than the 
rate of loss, whereas these patterns are reversed in 
mammals and reptiles.
5.5  Co-evolutionary considerations
Secondary defences in prey may cause evolutionary 
change in predators; a potent toxin may for example 
stimulate the evolution of a detoxification mechan-
ism in predators, which could in turn select for 
more potent toxins in prey. We consider interspe-
cific co-evolution to occur when there is a cycle of 
repeated evolutionary effects of one party against 
the other and vice versa, and a signature time-lag so 
that one species changes in response to, and there-
fore after, the other. We may expect co-evolutionary 
relationships to occur when predator and prey spe-
cies interact sufficiently and the selective effects 
from their interaction are strong. Here we discuss 
likely properties of co-evolutionary interaction, 
some key examples from the literature, and also the 
limitations of co-evolutionary explanations.
Antagonistic predator–prey co-evolution can 
have alternative outcomes. There may be: 1.) an ini-
tial period of arms race escalation in which (prey) 
toxicity and (predator) resistance to toxins increase 
in relative value across generations. An arms race 
may be followed by 2.) extinction of one party 
(for  example a prey becomes so toxic it kills off 
its predator) or by 3.) a stationary equilibrium, in 
which toxicity and resistance cease to evolve fur-
ther. Finally an initial arms race could be followed 
by 4.) fluctuating selection dynamics, in which 
small-scale arms races alternate with periods of 
de-escalation in trait values (see detailed discussion 
of so called ‘red queen’ co-evolution, in Brockhurst 
et al., 2014). Here there is continual change, but 
over a long evolutionary time period there is no 
change in average values of toxicity and resistance 
traits.
With no costs in toxin and resistance traits, we 
may expect stationary equilibria after a period of 
arms races, unless one side causes the extinction of 
the other. For arms races to convert into periods of 
de-escalation (and hence allow fluctuating selec-
tion) some kind of cost is required, so that reduced 
investment is favoured once a toxin or resistance 
trait reaches a high level but provides little survival 
benefit. As with costs of defence (section 5.2.2), 
resistance traits may sometimes confer costs.
5.5.1  Evidence for predator–prey co-evolution
Without a time machine, it is difficult to get evi-
dence of co-evolutionary arms races or fluctuating 
selection dynamics in natural populations. Hence 
many studies look instead for evidence of trait 
correlations across large spatial scales as a sign of 
co-evolution. If there is fluctuating selection operat-
ing over a metapopulation framework, different 
populations will be at different stages of the co-­
evolutionary cycle. Hence we should see consider-
able variation in prey toxicity across populations, 
but a good match of predator resistance and prey 
toxicity traits within localities.

Secondary defences
81
In the plant defence literature the classic example 
is the work of Berenbaum, Zangerl, and colleagues 
on the co-evolutionary relationships between wild 
parsnip (Pastinaca sativa) and its insect pest, the pars-
nip webworm (Depressaria pastinacella; Berenbaum 
et al., 1986; Berenbaum & Zangerl, 1992, 1998; 
Zangerl & Berenbaum, 2005). Wild parsnips defend 
themselves against herbivory with up to five kinds 
of furanocoumarin toxin. Levels of these toxins are 
geographically variable and there is often a good 
match in traits values between the plant and the 
webworm. Thus webworms often show heightened 
capacity to detoxify the locally abundant toxin, and 
reduced capacity to detoxify locally rare toxins. 
Berenbaum and colleagues suggest that this system 
shows evidence of antagonistic fluctuating co-evo-
lution operating at different stages across a large 
spatial mosaic.
The most thoroughly studied example of poten-
tial co-evolution involving animal prey secondary 
defences is between the rough-skinned newt (Taricha 
granulosa) and its garter snake predator (Thamnophis 
sirtalis), extensively examined in the work of ED 
Brodie III, ED Brodie Jr, CT Hanifin, and colleagues 
(Figure 5.2). The newt defends itself with a potent 
neurotoxin known as ‘TTX’ (tetrodotoxin). TTX blocks 
sodium channels preventing movement of muscles 
by interfering with action potentials. In response to 
TTX, the garter snakes have evolved resistance, but 
this appears to come at a cost to reduced muscle 
function, so that more resistant snakes move more 
slowly (Brodie & Brodie, 1999a).
Newt toxicity is variable across geographic 
ranges. In some island and mainland areas the newt 
has very low toxicity levels whereas in other areas 
toxicity ranges up to very high levels (Brodie & 
Brodie, 1999a). Toxicity levels higher than that 
which the snake can resist have been shown to 
increase survival of newts (Williams et al., 2010), 
showing that there can be individual selection 
favouring the trait. On its part, the garter snake 
seems pre-adapted from ancestral forms to dealing 
with TTX (Motychak et al., 1999), and often has a 
good match in its resistance to local newt toxicity 
over a wide range of toxin levels (Hanifin et al., 
2008). However, Hanifin et al. (2008) found numer-
ous places where toxin and resistance levels did not 
match each other. In all of these sites of phenotype 
Figure 5.2   A rough-skinned newt (Taricha granulosa) is attacked by a garter snake (Thamnophis sirtalis). 

82
AVOIDING ATTACK
mismatch, the snake was always resistant to the 
newt’s toxin. As Hanifin et al. point out, this find-
ing runs contrary to our standard expectations of 
predator–prey co-evolution, that in the ‘life–dinner 
arms race’ prey are usually ahead of their predators. 
Hanifin et al. suggest several explanations for this 
result, perhaps the most plausible of which is that 
simple genomic changes in the snake, such as single 
amino acid substitutions, can lead to high levels of 
resistance (Feldman et al., 2010), so it can adapt 
very quickly and escape the evolutionary burden 
from TTX in prey. This hypothesis may at first 
glance seem implausible, because TTX resistance in 
snakes requires modification of several proteins, 
expressed in different tissues. McGlothlin et al. 
(2016) have, however, resolved this issue using 
phylogenetic reconstruction. They found that 
extreme TTX resistance in snake species has been 
facilitated by pre-adaptive changes in paralogous 
genes. The evolutionary history of some snake gen-
omes therefore ensures that some of the necessary 
genomic changes are already in place, favouring the 
subsequent, rapid evolution of strong TTX resist-
ance by relatively few further genomic changes.
A complete explanation of these mismatches is 
difficult, however, because rather less is known 
about the production of the TTX toxin in the rough-
skinned newt. TTX is present as a defensive toxin in 
a wide diversity of species from bacteria and dino-
flagellates to amphibians and fish (Miyazawa & 
Noguchi, 2001) and its origins in many species are 
mysterious (Hanifin, 2010). It may frequently be 
conferred by bacterial symbionts, or perhaps be bio-
synthesized endogenously. In the rough-skinned 
newt there is some evidence favouring endogenous 
production (Lehman et al., 2004; Gall et al., 2012), 
making the newt’s genome the locus of toxin co-
evolution.
Co-evolution itself need not be a necessary out-
come of predator–prey interactions for at least two 
reasons. First, the rate of encounter between a 
predator and a prey species may be so low that the 
effect of co-evolutionary selection is negligible. 
Second, phenotypic plasticity in key traits may be 
adaptively modified without genetical change occur-
ring. Predators may, for example, rapidly learn to 
avoid certain prey; and they may transmit this 
information socially, for example from parents to 
offspring. In some cases predators can neutralize 
secondary defences behaviourally, as when logger-
head shrikes (Lanius ludovicianus) ‘exapt’ their 
­existing behaviour of impaling prey to hang dead 
lubber grasshoppers (Romalea guttata ) on spikes 
and leave them until the toxin components have 
degraded (Yosef & Whitman, 1992). On the other 
side, prey may be able, within their lifetimes, to ‘up-
regulate’ toxicity production mechanisms in the 
face of heightened threat. Hence greater defence 
and offence could occur in a correlated, time-lagged 
fashion, even if no genetic change in predator or 
prey populations occurs.
5.5.2  Co-evolution—an explanation for  
defence diversity?
Co-evolutionary considerations may be pertinent to 
the general questions of why populations are often 
polymorphic for kinds of toxin; and why individuals 
often present their enemies with several toxin types.
Rare forms of toxins can frequently be favoured, 
because predators have little or no recent (co)evolu-
tionary history with them, and hence no resistance. 
If rarity is always favoured then one consequence 
can be persistent diversification of toxicity within 
populations. This form of frequency dependence 
may help to explain why chemically defended 
populations often have several forms of toxic com-
pounds present (Speed et al., 2012). Favouring of 
rare toxins may be co-evolutionary if the predator 
is constantly evolving alternative resistance and 
detoxification mechanisms in response to the emer-
gence of new toxin variants. However, again, co-
evolution is not necessary. If predators modify their 
behaviours adaptively by being wary of ingesting 
prey with rare, novel tastes then toxin diversity will 
be selectively favoured (Skelhorn & Rowe, 2005).
A second point about toxin diversity is that many 
defended individuals have more than one toxin. 
This is widely reported in the chemical ecology lit-
erature (Speed et al., 2012). One explanation is that 
prey need to defend themselves against more than 
one kind of predator, and hence use alternative 
defences to do so. Alternatively, dietary variation 
may lead to variation in chemical defences which 
protect against different kinds of enemy (Zverev 
et al., 2017). Where there is only one major kind of 

Secondary defences
83
enemy, however, co-evolution may provide a prom-
ising explanation for diversity in chemical defence. 
Gilman et al. (2012), for example, modelled the 
effects of increasing numbers of defense traits on 
victim–exploiter co-evolution, noting the frequency 
with which victim species (here the prey) can create 
defences so effective that they cause the extinction 
of the (predator) exploiter. The model predicts 
that evolutionary escape from an enemy becomes 
more likely as the number of defences increases. 
Considered in terms of toxin types a key aspect to 
their model is that as numbers of different toxins 
within individuals increase, prey only need to ‘beat’ 
their predators on one defence trait to repel the 
predator. In contrast, to gain from an attack a preda-
tor must ‘beat’ all prey defences by having resist-
ance to all toxins. Increasing the number of toxin 
types therefore increases the chance that a prey has 
at least one toxin level higher than a predator’s cor-
responding resistance level, so on average prey 
become increasingly advantaged as the number of 
different toxins increase (Speed et al., 2015). This is a 
potentially important co-evolutionary insight, which 
may explain why prey organisms have multiple sec-
ondary defences.
5.6  Unresolved issues and future 
challenges
The links between chemical defences and other life 
history and ecological parameters (such as aggrega-
tion) and other defences (such as aposematism) 
were actively and effectively explored by compara-
tive analyses last century, but there have been fewer 
further investigations of broad cross-species trends 
since. However, in this chapter and more broadly 
throughout the book we highlight unresolved ques-
tions that may benefit from this approach. The costs 
of secondary defences is an area that has been 
actively pursued by cross-species meta-analyses—
but these meta-analyses have been limited by lack 
of available suitable source studies. Hence we 
would encourage further measurement of aspects 
of the potential costs of secondary defences: we 
would particularly encourage those planning such 
studies to explore how best to design their study to 
not only be interesting in its own right, but also to 
contribute to expanding our collective understand-
ing through meta-analyses. The evolution of sec-
ondary defences is complex because selection often 
does not operate through essentially isolated inter-
actions between a predator and prey individuals; 
there are often also kin-selected effects among prey 
that potentially share the same predator. However, 
the situation is even more complex yet, because it is 
quite common for secondary defensive compounds 
to be diet-derived and/or to be conferred by sym-
bionts. This means that the interacting network of 
individuals that impinges on selection for these 
defences can be complex indeed, and the role of 
symbionts in particular is deserving of much more 
attention. In terms of how much organisms should 
invest in costly secondary defences, we currently 
have more theory than we have empirical work 
purpose-designed to test the predictions of that 
theory—a rebalancing of this would be welcome.

Avoiding Attack: The Evolutionary Ecology of Crypsis, Aposematism, and Mimicry. Second Edition. Graeme D. Ruxton,  
William L. Allen, Thomas N. Sherratt, & Michael P. Speed, Oxford University Press (2018). © Graeme D. Ruxton,  
William L. Allen, Thomas N. Sherratt, & Michael P. Speed 2018. DOI: 10.1093/oso/9780199688678.001.0001
CHAPTER 6
Aposematism
6.1  What is aposematism?
Aposematism is the pairing of two kinds of defen-
sive phenotype: an often repellent secondary 
defence that typically renders prey unprofitable to 
predators if they attack them and some evolved warn-
ing signal that indicates the presence of that defence. 
Since secondary defences have been reviewed in the 
previous chapter we focus here on the functions and 
evolutionary consequences of aposematic signals.
We could perhaps neatly split these two compo-
nents of aposematism into two simple categories in 
which the signal is the primary defence, which is 
continuously available so that it is always present 
before attacks begin (following Edmunds, 1974), 
and the repellent trait that operates as the second-
ary defence. Life, however, is not so simple because 
aposematic signals often work to modify the behav-
iours of predators both before and during attacks. 
Warning coloration, for example, may increase 
wariness and hence improve the chances that a 
chemically defended prey is released unharmed 
after an attack (Halpin et al., 2008a). An aposematic 
signal may therefore first tend to reduce the prob-
ability that a predator commences attack (a primary 
defence) and then (as a component of secondary 
defence) reduce the probability that the prey is 
injured or killed during any subsequent attack. In 
this chapter we will therefore consider both the pri-
mary and the secondary effects of aposematic sig-
nals on prey protection.
Aposematic signals are well known to raise a num-
ber of interesting evolutionary issues, including their 
initial evolution and their integration with sexual 
and other signals (Rojas et al., 2015). Furthermore, 
they may have important ecological, co-evolutionary, 
and macroevolutionary consequences. Before we 
review each of these properties, however, we begin 
first by describing the common features of aposem-
atic signals and attempting to show the very wide 
use to which aposematic signalling is deployed 
across animals (and perhaps plants too). By way of 
doing this, we give some indication of the taxonomic 
distribution of the characteristic.
6.2  Characteristics of aposematic 
organisms
6.2.1  What characterizes an aposematic 
organism?
Let’s imagine that we have a newly discovered prey 
species and we want to determine whether it is cor-
rect to class it as ‘aposematic’. This leads us to the 
most fundamental question: What criteria would 
we need to define a prey phenotype as an aposem-
atic signal? The most straightforward answer 
would be to look for the pairing of conspicuous col-
oration and a secondary defence, such as a toxin. 
However, as we explain below, a more nuanced set 
of diagnostic criteria are needed. To begin, we sug-
gest three minimal criteria, and notice that con-
spicuousness is itself not one of them.
First, perhaps rather obviously, we need the 
phenotype in question to be reliably paired with a 
repellent secondary defence or more generally some 
trait which can make the prey unprofitable to pred-
ators, such as rapid escape or aggressive defence (as 
in the unusual case of the Norwegian lemming, 
Lemmus lemmus; Andersson, 2015). If the repellent 
defence is absent, and prey are typically profitable 
to attack, then the putative signal would be deceit-
ful. Rather than classifying it as ‘aposematic’, it 
would be better to consider it as a form of dishonest 

Aposematism
85
signal mimicry: either Batesian mimicry of another 
unprofitable species (Chapter 9) or so called ‘auto-
mimicry’ in which some members of a population of 
the same species lack repellent defences (Chapter 5). 
Interestingly, some aposematic species may have 
target-specific chemical defences, whereby separate 
defensive compounds are targeted to different preda-
tor types (Rojas et al., 2017).
The second criterion is that the phenotype must 
have evolved as a signal—i.e. been modified by nat-
ural selection so that it alters the behaviour of pred-
ators, in this case to increase prey survival. It may 
be helpful to attempt ancestral state reconstructions 
in phylogenetic trees to ensure that traits that we 
suppose to be aposematic signals did not precede 
the evolution of the quality being signalled, here the 
prey’s unprofitability such as a chemical defence. 
Phenotypes that cannot be demonstrated to have 
evolved in order to signal are better considered as 
cues, perhaps informative cues, but not signals 
per se.
Our third criterion is that the signal must primar-
ily act as a deterrent, causing predators to fail to 
initiate attack behaviours, where they otherwise 
would. Hence in our view aposematic signals must 
necessarily operate as primary defences (as in 
Edmunds, 1974), even if they sometimes also func-
tion as secondary defences, for example reducing 
the severity of an attack once it has begun (Halpin 
et al., 2008a). A signal that is only deployed to 
increase survival once attack has begun, in effect 
only operating as a secondary defence, such as a 
flash of colour or a warning sound, could be con-
sidered as a combination of startle (diematic) and 
aposematic display (Umbers & Mappes, 2015). We 
discuss this in Chapter 10.
We now discuss further diagnostic characteristics 
that may indicate aposematic signalling.
6.2.2  Aposematic signals are (usually)  
primarily visual
If we were looking for evidence of aposematism in 
our newly discovered species, we would likely 
focus on its visual appearance first, especially if the 
prey is diurnally active. Although aposematic sig-
nals can target any sensory modality in a predator, 
the fundamentally important one is usually vision. 
Indeed the term ‘warning coloration’ is sometimes 
used as synonymous with aposematic signalling.
A crucial point is that visual aposematic signals 
in animals are often constitutive, meaning that they 
are ‘always on’ (and hence function as a primary 
defence, in the sense of Edmunds, 1974). Visual 
aposematic signals are usually produced by long-
lasting pigments in animals, deposited in integu-
ments, scales, or feathers and cannot therefore be 
switched on and off to match the presence or 
absence of threats (Cott, 1940). Once an animal has 
invested in aposematic colour patterning, the 
phenotype will generally persist. Animals that can 
change colour rapidly, such as some transiently bio-
luminescent animals (De Cock & Matthysen, 2003), 
are of course exceptional to this generalization.
In contrast, smells and sounds are often induced 
responses to immediate threats. In his classic text 
Cott (1940, p. 229) made this point succinctly when 
he wrote that warning odours are ‘Often… only 
released as a last desperate resort, in the face of the 
aggressor’. Defensive olfactory responses are easy 
to identify: the famous odours of stinkbugs 
(Pentatomidae) being perhaps the best-known 
examples, but ladybirds release well-studied pyra-
zine odours when disturbed (Marples et al., 1994), 
as do Neotropical fireflies Photuris trivittata  and 
Bicellonycha amoena  (Vencl et al., 2016) amongst the 
many examples. Similarly, examples of auditory 
warning signals are usually only produced when 
the animal is disturbed, including the ‘clicks’ of 
silkmoth caterpillars (Brown et al., 2007) and the 
famous rattle of the rattlesnake (Rowe & Owings, 
1978). Each of these examples could operate as 
an aposematic signal of unprofitability and/or to 
induce a startle response and be aversive in its own 
right (see Chapter 10).
In support of the primacy of vision in aposemat-
ism, Rowe & Halpin (2013) reviewed and classified 
defences in many insect species; in so doing they 
assumed that colour patterning is present in apo-
sematism as a diagnostic tool, and then found that 
the distribution of sounds, smells, and tastes is 
more sporadic.
There are several factors that render the visual 
modality fundamental in aposematism. First, from 
the prey’s perspective the generation of aposem-
atic sounds may be energetically demanding and 

86
AVOIDING ATTACK
similarly generation of odours will use resources 
including energy. If sounds and smells were to func-
tion as primary aposematic signal defences they 
would need to be ‘always on’ and could generate a 
large cumulative resource cost over the lifetime of the 
individual. Once the energetic and resource costs of 
pigments have been paid, however, further invest-
ment of resources is not necessary (or is not necessary 
until a new life stage is met, such as metamorphosis 
in lepidopterans). Many prey species will have to 
deploy some kind of coloration anyway, for example 
being cryptic if they are not aposematic. Consequently 
there might be few additional resource costs to prey 
that change their coloration between crypsis and 
aposematism (though there may be trade-offs with 
thermal regulation; Hegna et al., 2013). In contrast, 
prey species do not usually make sounds and odours 
constitutively, hence as aposematic signals they might 
more clearly represent additional costs.
Second, whereas colour patterns can often be 
clearly directed at predators perhaps over long dis-
tances, olfactory and some auditory signals rapidly 
degrade or dissipate, especially in complex habi-
tats. This may especially be the case when the prey 
animal is small, and the costs, for example, of pro-
ducing odours received over a wide radius are 
likely high. Consequently odours, and perhaps also 
sounds and odours, may not be as good as colour 
patterns at turning predators away well before they 
get close enough to strike on the prey.
A third point favouring visual aposematic signals 
is that many aposematic species are diurnal (Merilaita 
& Tullberg, 2005), a fact that we examine in the sec-
tion on ecology (section 6.5). They are commonly at 
risk from visually hunting predators that use day-
time illumination to locate prey, and hence they are 
likely to communicate with them via visual cues. 
Well-known examples of primarily auditory warn-
ing signals are found usually in nocturnal environ-
ments, such as many tiger moths (Erebidae: Arctiinae) 
which signal to bats at night (Dowdy & Conner, 
2016), but use visual aposematic signals in the 
daytime (see comparative analyses in Ratcliffe & 
Nydam, 2008).
Though consideration of aposematic signals 
focusses frequently on colour patterning, behaviour 
itself may be an important component of the visual 
signals used. Some authors, for example, suggest 
that chemical defence in insects comes with a syn-
drome of traits including aposematic coloration and 
slow, sluggish behaviours (Edmunds, 1974; Hatle & 
Faragher, 1988; Sherratt et al., 2004a). In support, 
Srygley (2004) showed that some aposematic lepi-
dopterans fly more slowly and at greater cost than 
edible non-aposematic and mimetic species. Hence 
it is important to include modifications to behaviour 
when evaluating how visual cues are modified to 
function as aposematic signals (Rojas et al., 2014a).
Though we think it uncommon in animals, the 
possibility that olfaction is used as a sole, or pri-
mary, aposematic signal has been discussed repeat-
edly in the literature (see discussions of ‘olfactory 
aposematism’ by several authors, e.g. Eisner & Grant, 
1981; Camazine, 1985; Weldon, 2013). Olfactory cues 
as primary aposematic traits may be used by fungi 
and some plants as constitutive aposematic signals 
(Sherratt et al., 2005). An interesting point is that 
some olfactory volatiles may be inherently repellent 
in themselves, and thus be punishing to potential 
predators, as well as warning of other defences that 
can cause unprofitability (Rothschild, 1961). Finally 
here, it is worth mentioning that the volatile odours 
such as pyrazines (Marples et al., 1994; Rowe & 
Guilford,1996; Lindström et al., 2001b; Boevé et al., 
2009) and the bitter tastes of a prey’s chemical 
defences may affect a predator’s response to apo-
sematic colour patterns between capture and inges-
tion. Smells and tastes may make the predator even 
more wary of the brightly coloured prey it has picked 
up, and hence increase the likelihood that the prey 
is released before it is killed (Skelhorn et al., 2008; 
Rowland et al., 2013; Halpin & Rowe, 2017).
6.2.3  Visual aposematic signals are often 
conspicuous, sometimes predictably so
Visual aposematic signals are (very) often conspicu-
ous, in the sense that they tend to attract attention 
from receivers, including potential predators. Visual 
aposematic signals often incorporate colours that 
contrast against the prey’s background, and they 
often include two or more contrasting colours over 
the organism’s body (Poulton, 1890; Cott, 1940; 
Edmunds, 1974; Stevens & Ruxton, 2012; Aronsson 
& Gamberale-Stille, 2013). Aposematic signals may 
have evolved to be effective against a wide range of 

Aposematism
87
natural backgrounds, and this may in part explain 
the success of this strategy (Arenas & Stevens, 
2017). Given that aposematism has evolved inde-
pendently many times, repeated forms of similar 
pigmentation to achieve visual conspicuousness 
must be considered a convergently evolved quality 
in aposematism (Arenas et al., 2015). In many cases 
it is likely that different species have evolved bright 
coloration independently in order to stimulate the 
visual perception of similar predators in similar ways. 
Hence for a given habitat there may be a limited 
range of colour patterns which are likely to gener-
ate the kinds of conspicuousness that function well 
as aposematic signals. We often see red, yellow, 
white, and black pigmentation used, thereby mak-
ing the form of visual aposematic signals relatively 
predictable. A study of ladybird coloration ‘seen’ 
through the eyes of bird predators bears this out; 
long-wave red colours are visually conspicuous 
against green foliage that form prey backgrounds, 
and they are perceived in a more consistent manner 
across a range of lighting conditions caused by vari-
ation in weather and time of day (Arenas et al., 
2014). In a recent study by Preißler & Pröhl (2017), 
background coloration and dark spot size were both 
seen to influence predation rate on clay models of 
the strawberry poison frog (Oophaga pumilio); pred-
ators avoided the non-local aposematic colour 
morph models, and the larger a model’s spots the 
lower the attack rate. Though research has focussed 
on colour patterns, there is growing interest in iri-
descent and shiny reflections as aposematic signals 
(Fabricant et al., 2014; Pegram & Rutowski, 2016; 
Waldron et al. 2017).
It might be tempting to attribute convergence in 
aposematic patterns wholly to adaptive evolution 
to match similarities in the receiver characteristics 
of predators. There are at least two reasons, how-
ever, that this is probably too simplistic. A good case 
study here is the transverse banded patterning seen 
in many insects, in which typically black alternates 
with yellow, white, or orange coloration. Examples 
can be found in caterpillars (e.g. of cinnabar moths, 
Tyria jacobaeae,  and of monarchs, Danaus plexippus), 
and in the abdomens of some adult hymenoptera 
such as bees and wasps. One adaptive reason for 
this patterning may be to produce high-contrast 
boundaries within the animal’s form, thereby opti-
mally heightening its conspicuousness to predators, 
hence high-contrast banding patterns could be con-
sidered to be adaptively convergent.
However, we can easily propose alternative explan-
ations. One is that the animals’ banding patterns fol-
low anatomical segmentation patterns, and hence 
the form of the actual pattern is determined by 
underlying anatomy. A second point is that there 
can be thermal effects from altering colour pattern 
(Williams, 2007), hence aposematic prey animals 
could favour high-contrast (light and dark) compo-
nents within their colour patterns, because this 
balances conflicting demands from thermal and 
signalling functions (Hegna et al., 2013).
6.2.4  But aposematic conspicuousness does not 
always exclude crypsis
Scientists like to classify the phenomena that they 
encounter, and so we often talk and write about 
aposematism as if it is a trait that excludes cryptic 
coloration, and vice versa. However, a growing 
number of authors speculate, theorize, and occa-
sionally demonstrate that the appearances of many 
prey can include both components of camouflage 
and of warning displays. Rothschild (1975), for 
example, proposed that the yellow and black band-
ing on cinnabar caterpillars would blend at a dis-
tance, and provide protective cryptic coloration, but 
would be distinctive and conspicuous from close 
up (see also the discussion in Edmunds, 1974). 
Given that conspicuousness is potentially costly to 
prey because it attracts the attention of enemies, we 
might perhaps expect that selection would com-
monly favour prey forms that include both aposem-
atic and cryptic components in their coloration. 
Endler & Mappes (2004) proposed that since the 
acceptability of prey varies between predator spe-
cies, so the evolved level of conspicuousness may 
vary with variation in predator community too 
(and see Mappes et al., 2005). A putative example is 
the hibiscus harlequin bug (Tectocoris diophthalmus), 
which is both repellant and presumably aposematic 
to some bird species, but is actually edible to man-
tid predators (Fabricant & Smith, 2014). The height-
ened protection which arises from conspicuousness 
may also be seen as a benefit which can be directly 
traded-off against the loss of crypsis. It is easy to 

88
AVOIDING ATTACK
conceive that the level of aposematic conspicuous-
ness is then an optimizable trait in which only in a 
limited range of risk levels is the best strategy to be 
maximally conspicuous (Leimar et al., 1986; Ruxton 
et al., 2009). Varied predator mixes and simple trade-
off mechanisms may then provide some general and 
fundamental reasons for the combination of crypsis 
and conspicuousness in aposematic colour patterns.
What these two general hypotheses do not say, of 
course, is how crypsis and conspicuousness can be 
packaged into the same prey appearance, though 
Rothschild’s idea—blending crypsis at a distance, 
conspicuousness close up—is a compelling mech-
anism. Barnett, Cuthill, and Scott-Samuel have 
taken a psychophysical approach to testing the 
Rothschild mechanism, noting that the retina is 
sensitive to different scales of pattern variation at 
different detection distances. Narrow bands of con-
trasting colours, that they termed ‘high-frequency’ 
aposematic patterns, may be highly visible up close, 
but become increasingly undetectable as distance 
increases. In one experiment Barnett et al. (2017) 
created artificial pastry caterpillars showing a range 
of colour patterns including uniform coloration 
(green, cryptic; yellow or black, aposematic) and 
banded aposematic yellow–black patterns that var-
ied in the width of the banding from high to low 
frequency (see Figure  6.1). The pastry caterpillars 
were pinned to horizontal bramble stems, passerine 
birds were allowed to feed on them, and prey sur-
vival was recorded at census points up to 96 hours. 
Caterpillars with the high-frequency banding pattern 
had higher relative survival than the other prey 
types (Figure 6.1).
To investigate the mechanisms that may facilitate 
blending-at a-distance further, Barnett & Cuthill 
(2014) designed an artificial ‘dual purpose’ prey pat-
tern, combining high-frequency striping, consistent 
with warning coloration, with background-matching 
coloration consistent with cryptic coloration. When 
presented pinned to trees in a woodland, human 
observers detected the dual-purpose pattern at 
similar distances to patterns with purely cryptic 
coloration (which lacks striping, 5m), which was 
less than half the distance for aposematic (high-
frequency only) patterning (circa 11m). When pre-
sented to wild-foraging bird predators in the 
woodland, the ‘dual-purpose’ prey survived longer 
than those with just the warning coloration or the 
cryptic components present. Hence, for these dual-
purpose colour patterns, conspicuousness was not 
appreciably increased over that shown for the cryptic 
prey, but the presence of the aposematic component 
increased protection (see extensions to these experi-
ments in Barnett et al., 2016a,b).
If many aposematic patterns are in fact of this 
‘dual-purpose’ variety, and if the spatial frequency 
of patterning is important, as Barnett & Cuthill 
(2014) proposed, then we may see a common select-
ive force that would make aposematic patterning 
converge on relatively predictable forms. This may 
help explain the long-made observation that apo-
sematic patterns tend to have formal similarities in 
colour and pattern (e.g. Poulton, 1890; Cott, 1940).
In addition to the work of Barnett and colleagues, 
there is now a growing set of experiments that test, 
and generally do demonstrate, that prey patterns 
can combine crypsis and aposematic conspicuous-
ness. With wild-caught predators (great tits, Parus 
major) Honma et al. (2015), for example, show that 
(presumed) aposematic wing patterns of wood tiger 
moths (Arctia plantaginis; Figure 6.2) may have com-
ponents of disruptive coloration in them, making 
initial detection more difficult. Other researchers use 
computer games with humans acting as predators, 
seeking to find images of prey against natural back-
grounds. These provide some support for the idea 
yellow-and-black
5
4
3
2
relative survival
1
0
YA
YP
YT
YM
YL
BP
Figure 6.1  Relative survival of artificial prey with different colour 
patterns, from Barnett et al. (2017). From left to right: Three plain 
colorations, green, yellow, and black; and three striped patterns, high 
to low frequency of banding. Relative survival is significantly 
enhanced by the high-frequency banding pattern (see Plate 4).

Aposematism
89
that natural prey coloration may be cryptic from a 
distance, and more conspicuous from close up (e.g. 
Bohlin et al., 2008). Caro et al. (2013) also used human 
observers in the field to measure detection distances 
of mounts of (aposematic) striped skunks (Mephitis 
mephitis), (cryptic) bobcats (Lynx rufus), and poten-
tially intermediate patterns of spotted skunks 
(Spilogale  gracilis, which are chemically defended). 
They concluded that spotted skunks are of inter-
mediate conspicuousness: less conspicuous than 
striped skunks, but in some conditions more con-
spicuous than the bobtails. The human observers 
did not, however, show effects of viewing distance 
(between 40m and 140m) on detection rates, but 
objective colour measurements of animals and their 
habitats indicated that the striped and spotted 
skunks’ colour patterns do tend to contrast with 
their immediate backgrounds.
6.2.5  Distinctiveness and simplicity of visual 
traits may be primary requirements of 
aposematic colour patterns
An important diagnostic criterion of aposematic 
signalling may be distinctiveness. A.R. Wallace 
himself hit on this point when he originated the 
idea of aposematism. In his text ‘Darwinism’, for 
example, he wrote ’Owing to its remarkable power of 
offence the skunk is rarely attacked by other animals, and 
its black and white fur, and the bushy white tail carried 
erect when disturbed, form the danger signals by which it 
is easily distinguished in the twilight or moonlight 
from unprotected animals’ (Wallace, 1889, p. 233, our 
emphasis). Prey that are typically unprofitable may 
benefit by looking and behaving different to those 
that are edible and profitable. As we have seen in 
earlier chapters (Chapters 1–4), edible prey are very 
often cryptic—they have a camouflaged coloration, 
carry out ‘hiding’ behaviours, and when disturbed 
exhibit rapid escape. Aposematic prey may then 
achieve distinctiveness from edible prey by being 
visually conspicuous, by not hiding, and by exhibit-
ing relatively slow movements (Sherratt et al., 2004a). 
However, as Wüster et al., (2004) and others (e.g. 
Valkonen et al., 2011) showed in their experiments on 
snake coloration, distinctiveness may be achievable 
while maintaining crypsis and without imposing 
strong costs of conspicuousness. Hence, if we are 
seeking further evidence to determine whether a 
prey’s display is aposematic, then we may look for 
measurements that show that it is distinctive from 
the edible species in the habitat (see Merilaita & 
Ruxton, 2007). A theoretical and empirical investiga-
tion by Polnaszek et al. (2017) suggests that increased 
distinctiveness confers increased predator avoidance 
to aposematic prey, with the extent of this benefit 
depending on the prey’s relative frequency. Notably 
they identify conditions in which distinctiveness is 
not itself beneficial for aposematic individuals.
Cott (1940) added a supplementary point. In add-
ition to distinctiveness, aposematically coloured prey 
may benefit from simple patterning because this is 
likely to be reliably recognized, perhaps especially so 
in poor lighting conditions (Rojas et al., 2014b). Cott’s 
point may explain why naive bird predators are more 
wary of aposematic prey patterns with large, sym-
metrical components than with small, asymmetrical 
components (Forsman & Merilaita, 1999).
6.2.6  Aposematism is primarily a phenomenon 
in animals, but it may be present in other groups
We focus in this text on animal defences, but apo-
sematism may apply in other groups. Aposematism 
has thus been variously proposed in plants by 
Lev-Yadun (2001, 2009; and see Schaefer & Ruxton, 
2011; Kavanagh et al., 2016) where, for example, 
conspicuous coloration on the tips of defensive spines 
Figure 6.2  Photo of a wood tiger moth Arctia plantaginis, showing 
warning coloration on the exposed hind wings. The patterning is 
simple and distinctive. From Bibiana Rojas (see Plate 5).

90
AVOIDING ATTACK
might serve to draw the attention of predators and 
deter them from attacking. It has been suggested also 
that aposematism exists in some fungi (Sherratt et al., 
2005) and even in the defence of colonies of infec-
tious microbes which undergo olfactory and colour 
changes, including glowing, during infection (Jones 
et al., 2015, 2017). An important, but unexplored, 
question is whether aposematism is intrinsically 
more effective in animals than, for example, in plants. 
A key difference may well be that plants may often 
survive attacks by herbivores, because roots and 
other tissues are unharmed and tissue regeneration 
is possible, or because insect herbivores are smaller 
than the plants that they feed on. Furthermore, plants 
would lose photosynthetic surface if they replaced 
chlorophyll with conspicuous pigmentation that sig-
nalled aposematically. In contrast, animal prey will 
be killed by successful attacks by predators. Hence, 
deterrence of enemies may be more important for 
animals than it is for plants. Should conspicuousness 
be an expensive trait, either because of the proximate 
costs of pigmentation or the heightened costs of con-
spicuousness, then it may turn up more often in the 
animals, where deterrence is more valuable.
6.2.7  Aposematism is probably a rare 
phenomenon in animals
We started this section asking how one could evalu-
ate whether a newly discovered species is in fact 
aposematic. This brings us to a final characteristic of 
aposematism, which is that it is probably a com-
paratively rare defensive strategy. Mappes et al. 
(2014), for example, reported results of a systematic 
classification of final instar caterpillars in Finland, 
finding that about 85 per cent were apparently cam-
ouflaged, without signs of aposematic coloration. 
Only 5 per cent of all species surveyed showed col-
oration that could be classed as ‘strong aposemat-
ism’ (with the remaining 10 per cent showing signs 
of aposematic coloration overlaid on camouflage). 
Similarly, Arbuckle & Speed (2015) estimate that 88 
per cent from a sample of 2638 amphibian species 
are unambiguously cryptic, with 5 per cent show-
ing ‘strong aposematism’. It may be the case that 
colourful aposematic signalling is more common 
in some locations and habitats (such as tropical 
forests) than in others (such as temperate habitats, 
see Adams et al., 2014).
If aposematic coloration is generally rare, how-
ever, there can be several explanations, including 
that its initial evolution is unlikely, or it is evolu-
tionarily unstable and often replaced with crypsis, 
or that aposematic species may themselves be prone 
to extinction. We turn next to the initial evolution of 
aposematism, which it turns out might after all be 
rather improbable. Subsequently we examine the 
stability and maintenance of aposematic coloration.
6.3  Evolution of aposematism
6.3.1  Initial evolution of aposematic signals
Aposematism may be relatively rare, and one rea-
son is because its initial stages are inhibited by evo-
lutionary barriers. Even if an aposematic signal is 
highly advantageous when established and com-
mon, it may be maladaptive when new and rare. In 
particular, the initial evolution of aposematic sig-
nalling poses a problem of what we can call ‘num-
ber-dependent disadvantage’. Here, new, rare 
forms of aposematic signal are unfamiliar and 
therefore not associated with unprofitability by 
predators; organisms bearing this signal are there-
fore likely to be less well protected than more 
familiar ancestral forms (Mallet & Barton, 1989; 
Lindström et al., 2001a; Chouteau et al., 2016). New 
aposematic forms of unprofitable species are also 
likely to be more conspicuous than the (likely) more 
cryptic ancestral form from which they deviate. A 
new mutant must therefore overcome the joint prob-
lems of unfamiliarity to enemies and of heightened 
apparency. Consequently, and unlike the evolution 
of cryptic coloration, the initial evolution of aposem-
atic signalling has often been seen as challenging 
to explain (see Mallet & Singer, 1987). Considerable 
thought and empirical effort has therefore been put 
into explaining the initial evolution of aposematic 
signals, with a strong emphasis being placed on 
warning coloration.
We present here a brief survey of the now numer-
ous attempts to explain how aposematic signals can 
originate. Before we do this it is worth mentioning a 
few general points. First, it is important to clarify 

Aposematism
91
the evolutionary (and co-evolutionary) context 
being used for the initial evolution of aposematic 
signals. Are we, for example, seeking to explain the 
very first aposematic signals on the tree of life? In 
this case we can assume no prior contribution from 
co-evolution between predators and aposematic 
prey, and hence no special adaptive preparation by 
predators to bias responses away from attacks on 
aposematic prey forms. Alternatively, we may be 
explaining one of the many later evolutionary 
events that lead to the evolution of aposematism, in 
which case it may be sensible to assume the influ-
ence of (co)evolved receiver biases. Second, a num-
ber of evolutionary treatments here directly address 
the question why are aposematic signals so often visu-
ally conspicuous?  And so, they provide alternative 
explanations for the prevalence of conspicuousness 
in aposematic signalling; this makes them particu-
larly interesting in the context of this chapter. A 
third point is that many of the explorations of the 
initial evolution of aposematism assume that the 
secondary defence is an internally stored toxin. As 
we shall see, this may be one of the harder classes of 
aposematic signalling to explain.
1)  Absence of predators, relaxed selection,  
and drift
Perhaps the simplest explanation for the evolution 
of bright warning coloration is that for some period 
there was an absence of visually oriented predators, 
during which bright coloration in prey could evolve 
by random drift, or in relation to other selection 
pressures such as mate choice. Subsequently pred-
ators arrived in the habitat and had numerous 
experiences which enabled them to associate bright 
coloration with toxicity. Perhaps conspicuousness 
was initially just a cue, and it later evolved into a 
signal refined, for example, to be more easily learnt 
and retained. Something like this idea was (to our 
knowledge) made originally by Beddard (1892) in 
his considerations of lepidopteran coloration. He 
wrote, ‘In earlier times, when there were no birds—and 
after all, the chief enemies of caterpillars are birds—­
brilliant coloration, due to abundant and varied pigment, 
would be the rule...the advent of bird-life proved a disas-
trous event for these animals, and compelled them to 
undergo various modifications, except in the case of those 
forms which combine brilliant coloration with uneatable-
ness.’ Where most modern accounts of aposematism 
have crypsis as the ancestral starting point, Beddard, 
by comparison, assumes a world of bright color-
ation in which the advent of visually oriented pred-
ators causes the evolution of crypsis, away from 
conspicuous pigmentation, in edible species. In 
effect, conspicuous, edible prey will be ‘filtered off’ 
because they attract attention and cannot survive 
attacks (a point independently developed in detail 
by Sherratt, 2002a, and described in point 3 below). 
It might be possible to begin to test Beddard’s 
hypothesis, if sufficient fossil data on insect color-
ation could be obtained (e.g. McNamara et al., 2012).
A variant hypothesis could be proposed by assum-
ing that in some locations the chance loss, or reduc-
tion in the number, of visually hunting predators for 
a period causes relaxed selection which allows ran-
dom drift of alleles for colour patterns (Mallet & 
Singer, 1987). Some of these colour patterns lead 
to conspicuous coloration in prey that are also 
defended. If at the return of the relevant predator 
species bright coloration were sufficiently common 
in chemically defended species, then it may be rap-
idly associated with unpalatability and become an 
established warning cue.
What both of these hypotheses lack, however, is a 
compelling explanation for the maintenance of con-
spicuousness once it has evolved. Even if bright col-
oration becomes abundantly associated with chemical 
defence by chance there is nothing obvious to stop 
the prey coloration reverting to the (less costly) 
cryptic form over time, perhaps by gradual change. 
Hence, some other factors that favour conspicuous-
ness per se will be required. One factor discussed 
earlier is distinctiveness (see section 6.2.5), in which 
defended prey must maintain some difference in 
appearance to cryptic, edible prey, and ‘relaxed 
crypsis’, or greater conspicuousness is one example 
(see Merilaita & Ruxton, 2007). We now describe 
some others.
2)  Exploitation of receiver biases
A number of authors have considered that aposem-
atic signals may evolve using conspicuousness 
because by so doing they exploit biases in percep-
tual and cognitive properties of predators that 

92
AVOIDING ATTACK
enhance protection. Predators may, for example, be 
especially wary of novel (hence distinctive) and 
conspicuous traits, and tend to avoid prey that use 
them as warning signals. Such aversion to novelty 
(neophobia and dietary conservatism) may be suffi-
cient to protect individual prey and hence enable 
conspicuous morphs to increase in frequency (Halpin 
et al., 2008b). This view has been advocated by 
Marples, Kelly, Thomas, and colleagues, supported 
by experiments with wild-caught birds as predators 
and evolving artificial prey (e.g. Thomas et al., 2003; 
Marples et al., 2005; Marples & Mappes, 2011). Here, 
bright coloration in populations of artificial prey can 
‘evolve’ across generations, more often than would 
be expected by chance.
Novelty effects might, however, be short-lived—
once a prey form begins to evolve it lacks protection 
from its novelty. Mallet & Singer (1987), for example, 
argued that the influence of wariness of new prey 
coloration would be so brief that its influence would 
be trivial (‘The problem with novelty is that it soon 
wears off.’, p. 342). However, Lee et al. (2010) showed 
that in simulation models, novel prey could persist 
through a dynamic equilibrium, increasing from 
rarity with benefits from novelty, then decreasing 
when novelty wears off, but not necessarily to 
extinction. In this way novel prey may cycle in fre-
quency, maintaining a presence across many gener-
ations (and see also Puurtinen & Kaitala, 2006).
In addition to wariness of novel prey items, a 
number of authors have focussed on the fact that 
conspicuousness seems to be ‘salient’, in the sense 
that it speeds up learning about the aversiveness of 
prey and perhaps increases the duration of learnt 
avoidance by making memories resistant to forget-
ting. These assumptions have been included in a 
number of theoretical models usually of individual 
selection, often showing that there are conditions in 
which receiver biases on learning and memory can 
promote the evolution of new aposematic forms 
(e.g. Leimar et al., 1986; Servedio, 2000; Speed, 2001; 
Merilaita & Kaitala, 2002; Puurtinen & Kaitala, 
2006). Guilford (1994) argued that a key factor in the 
maintenance of aposematic signalling is that it pro-
vokes careful handling—he called this ‘go slow’ 
behaviour—because this causes predators to take 
longer during an attack, giving them an opportunity 
to determine whether a prey is in fact edible (and 
hence worth eating) or chemically defended (and 
hence to be rejected; a detailed theoretical treatment 
is found in Holen & Svennungsen, 2012). ‘Go slow’ 
responses of predators to aposematic prey may give 
the prey a strong individual advantage over chem-
ically defended, but cryptic, conspecifics.
Learning and memory biases may be present 
even in the absence of co-evolution between prey 
appearances and prey phenotypes. For example, 
learning tends to accelerate when events are unex-
pected or unusual, hence conspicuousness and nov-
elty per se may be inherently ‘salient’ qualities, in 
the sense that they tend to increase attention and 
hence learning. Furthermore there may be predict-
able physiological reasons that some colour pat-
terns are salient—for example, visual systems often 
use ‘opposed channels’ so that cones fire to record 
e.g. either red or green coloration but never a mix-
ture of both. Consequently, red coloration may be 
inherently conspicuous in insect prey that rest on 
green vegetation (Stevens, 2013; Stevens & Ruxton, 
2012), and hence inherently salient.
Overall, then, a case can be made that new apo-
sematic forms may increase in frequency because 
they exploit receiver characteristics, wariness of 
novelty, and increased learning and memorability 
by foragers. Conspicuousness as a typically apo-
sematic cue can then be explained by the pre-exist-
ing sensory and cognitive biases of predators.
3)  Co-evolution of aposematic signals and 
receiver biases
An alternative (or additional view) is that apo-
sematic signals co-evolve with receiver biases in a 
self-reinforcing manner. Let’s imagine the world as 
something like Beddard described it: colour pat-
terns of prey evolve in many ways initially without 
conspicuousness because bird predators have not 
evolved yet. This leads to a very variable relation-
ship between coloration, edibility, and toxicity 
across prey species. Subsequently, bird predators do 
evolve and they exert strong selective pressures. 
Prey that are highly conspicuous to the birds suffer 
high attack rates, and those that are edible will likely 
be killed and eaten. Those that are conspicuous and 
chemically defended, however, may sometimes sur-
vive, because their toxins cause them to be rejected 
by predators before the prey is killed and ingested. 

Aposematism
93
Hence, as selection proceeds across generations, the 
predators ‘filter off’ prey species that are edible and 
conspicuous, but are more likely to let those that are 
conspicuous and chemically defended survive. 
Over generations, conspicuousness and chemical 
defence become associated in prey populations. This 
scenario, albeit without Beddard’s (1892) specula-
tions about life before birds, has been examined in 
an analytical model by Sherratt (2002a). Sherratt 
showed that as conspicuousness becomes associ-
ated with defence in prey, so the optimal decisions 
of predators would increasingly bend toward avoid-
ance and cautious handling of brightly coloured 
prey. The system becomes then self-reinforcing by 
co-evolution. Conspicuous coloration in prey then 
signals that prey have likely survived attacks and are 
worth avoiding. As conspicuous edible prey are ‘fil-
tered off’, so predators attack conspicuous prey less 
often and with less severity, and the spread of apo-
sematic signalling can increase. Sherratt’s approach 
manages not only to explain the evolution of con-
spicuous signalling in defended prey, but rather 
importantly it also explains why conspicuousness is 
so prevalent in aposematism (only defended prey 
can afford it) and why predators show heightened 
wariness to aposematic species (they have co-
evolved to avoid them).
4)  Aggregation and family grouping are causal in 
the initial evolution of aposematism
Most theoretical and empirical treatments of the ini-
tial evolution of aposematism focus on individual 
selection, evaluating how well rare aposematic 
individuals can survive compared to more cryptic 
conspecifics. It is relatively possible, however, to 
argue that social grouping can help to explain the 
initial evolution of aposematic coloration. Imagine 
a family group of chemically defended caterpillars 
feeding on one host plant. Though all are full sib-
lings, suppose that half have inherited and manifest 
conspicuous coloration from a parent, the other half 
are cryptic. When a naive bird attacks and kills one 
of the group it has an unpleasant experience and 
will then tend to generalize the aversive experience 
to the individuals that have the same colour pattern 
as the victim. If the victim were cryptic, then all the 
cryptic siblings gain a benefit of a reduced probabil-
ity of attack, and equivalently if the victim were 
conspicuous. The allele for colour pattern in the vic-
tim is not directly reproduced, but it is replicated 
indirectly via the siblings whose survival is 
increased. Up to this point we can see kin-selected 
altruism for either colour pattern. However, if the 
conspicuous colour pattern is more salient (see 1 
above) and if the victim is conspicuous, then the 
predator will avoid the remaining conspicuous sib-
lings more strongly. Across family groups aposematic 
coloration could increase via kin-selection, raising the 
frequency of the aposematic morph in a locality (see 
Harvey et al., 1982; Leimar et al., 1986; Mallet & 
Singer, 1987). Note though that Guilford (1985) has 
argued strongly that kin selection should not be 
invoked in this context. Guilford argues that it is the 
aggregation of phenotypically similar animals, not 
relatedness per se, that favours the evolution of 
aposematism in aggregations (see discussion in 
Turner et al., 1984).
Empirical researchers have focussed on aggrega-
tion and aposematism because in experiments bird 
predators are often very wary and show low attack 
rates on aggregated prey. Notably, Tullberg and 
Gamberale-Stille show strong individual benefits of 
aggregation in heteropteran and artificial prey from 
predation by chicks (Gallus gallus) in a number of 
experiments (e.g. Sillén-Tullberg, 1990; Gamberale 
& Tullberg, 1998). They suggest that aggregations of 
conspicuous prey present more effective warning 
signals which, for example, heighten wariness 
and increase protection. Some empirically focussed 
researchers do support the idea that aggregation 
may be causal. Mappes and colleagues (Alatalo & 
Mappes, 1996; Riipi et al., 2001), for example, used 
a  ‘novel world’ of artificial prey phenotypes that 
sought to remove innate, (co)evolved biases. They 
showed strong benefits of aggregation in part 
because the conspicuousness costs of groups in­­
crease only slowly as the group becomes large, 
whereas the benefits of rapid predator avoidance 
are substantial.
5)  Gradual evolution of aposematic coloration
Most considerations of the initial evolution of apo-
sematism assume that the aposematic mutant is 
much more conspicuous than the cryptic conspecif-
ics against which it competes. However, some sug-
gest that aposematism can evolve by small, gradual 

94
AVOIDING ATTACK
increases in conspicuousness. Yachi & Higashi 
(1998), for example, invoked ‘peak-shift’ to model 
the gradual evolution of aposematic signals. In 
peak-shift, receivers learn to discriminate signals, 
and then respond more strongly to exaggerations of 
these signals perhaps to avoid misidentifying them. 
In the Yachi & Higashi model, heightened avoid-
ance of exaggerated warning signals can offset the 
costs of conspicuousness and lead to gradual 
increase in this trait. Experimental evidence for a 
gradual evolution of prey signals is, however, 
mixed. Gamberale & Tullberg (1996) found that 
chicks showed exaggerated avoidance of aposem-
atic heteropteran bugs where the size of the bug 
was increased. This demonstrates that peak-shift-
like effects can apply to bird–insect systems. 
Lindström et al. (1999) used wild-caught great tits 
as predators, and artificial, black-and-white sym-
bols as signals. In this experiment the birds did not 
learn to avoid distasteful artificial prey that were 
slightly more conspicuous than the edible prey 
available. Lindström et al. argue that there may be a 
stimulus region close to crypsis in which selection is 
relaxed. Within this, mutations may accumulate to 
the point that chemically defended prey cross a 
threshold in which conspicuous prey are numerous 
and favoured by selection, especially if peak-shift 
effects operate.
A different approach to the question of gradual 
exaggeration of aposematic cues is to use ancestral 
state reconstructions across phylogenetic trees and 
evaluate whether aposematic traits tend to increase 
in magnitude over phylogenetic time. A demonstra-
tion of bioluminescence in millipedes supports the 
idea that aposematic traits increase in this manner 
(Marek et al., 2011; Marek & Moore, 2015).
6)  Initial evolution is more easily explained with 
physical not chemical defences
It may be easier to explain the initial evolution of 
aposematic signals when they are associated with 
physical defences such as sharp, defensive spines of 
animals and plants (Lev-Yadun, 2001), than for the 
advertisement of internally stored toxins. We con-
sider defensive spines as an example. These are a 
taxonomically widespread, likely convergent mode 
of defence, found in insects (e.g. many lepidopteran 
larvae), fish (species of pufferfish), and mammals 
(such as the porcupine). Defensive spines are often 
externally situated on a prey and can therefore be 
seen by predators and recognized as a threat before 
damaging attacks take place. Physical defences 
such as spines can therefore be considered to have 
self-advertising properties, in a way that chemical 
defences cannot. Aposematic colour patterns that 
add visual conspicuousness to structures like a por-
cupine’s spines, then, arguably function to better 
draw a predator’s attention to the threat before con-
tact is made. If predators are familiar with the threat 
that the physical defences pose then new conspicu-
ous colour patterns can add protection without the 
need for additional and costly learning events by 
drawing attention to the threat. The frequency-
dependent ‘learning barrier’ to initial evolution of 
aposematic signals may not, therefore, pertain in 
these cases. Speed & Ruxton (2005a) showed in a 
simple evolutionary model that aposematic signal-
ling of this nature could easily evolve, in a wide 
range of conditions, from a cryptic ancestral popu-
lation. Some physical defences also incorporate 
chemical defences, such as when defensive spines 
puncture the skin of enemies and release poisons 
into them (e.g. Murphy et al., 2009). Speed & Ruxton 
suggest a scenario in which visual aposematic sig-
nals evolve initially to draw attention to physical 
defences, but can become associated with a chem-
ical defence of stinging spines subsequently.
7)  Ecological conditions lower the costs of initial 
aposematic coloration
There are a number of ways that local conditions 
can lower the survival costs imposed on novel 
aposematic signals. First, conspicuous coloration 
may be one of a set of alternative developmental 
outcomes, and only deployed when the benefits of 
crypsis are small, and hence the relative costs of 
aposematic coloration are low. In the desert locust 
Schistocerca gregaria  (Orthoptera: Acrididae), for 
example, there is a density-dependent switch from 
cryptic and edible to conspicuous and toxic pheno-
types as prey density exceeds a threshold (Sword 
et al., 2000).
A second way that ecological conditions can favour 
the initial evolution of aposematism is if the prey spe-
cies is already behaviourally conspicuous or grows to 
a size that ‘hiding’ as a defensive strategy is not effect-

Aposematism
95
ive. Animals, for example, that move around freely 
for foraging opportunities, or that engage in showy 
sexual displays, will add a smaller marginal 
increase in conspicuousness when they gain new 
conspicuous colour patterns than those that are, by 
their natural history, originally hidden and camou-
flaged (Guilford, 1988; Merilaita & Tullberg, 2005; 
Speed & Ruxton, 2005b; Speed et al., 2010). In the 
case of prey with colourful sexual displays, it may 
be that they are subsequently and easily ‘exapted’ 
as aposematic signals after a protective secondary 
defence evolves.
A general point that we can make here, then, is 
that many theoretical (and some empirical) treat-
ments of the initial evolution of aposematic signal-
ling take a pessimistic starting point, choosing highly 
cryptic ancestral species and therefore imposing 
high additional costs of encounter rate when apo-
sematic signals evolve. What seems more likely (to 
us at least) is that the initial evolution of aposematic 
forms is more likely to occur in prey species that are 
not very cryptic, by reason of high density, foraging, 
or mating demands.
6.4  Maintenance of aposematic 
signalling
Focussing on barriers to initial evolution, the last 
section provided reasons to expect aposematic sig-
nalling to be rare. However, it is perhaps also plaus-
ible that aposematism is rare because, even when 
established, it is typically not maintained over long 
evolutionary periods. Aposematic signalling may, 
for example, be unstable over evolutionary time 
and frequently replaced by crypsis within lineages. 
Alternatively, there could be macro-evolutionary 
explanations, such as relatively reduced diversifica-
tion or heightened extinction rates in lineages with 
aposematism, compared to lineages which contain 
crypsis (as we saw for chemical defence, Chapter 5).
To examine these possibilities, Arbuckle & Speed 
(2015) analysed the relationship between variation 
in coloration and patterns of diversification in the 
amphibians (using >2500 species). They found 
heightened speciation rates in lineages with apo-
sematic coloration compared to those with cryptic 
coloration, but no increase in extinction rates (see 
also Santos et al., 2014; Wang & Shaffer, 2008). The 
relative rarity of aposematic coloration in amphib-
ians was instead explained in this study by the 
intrinsic instability of the trait over long evolution-
ary timescales. Aposematic coloration was estimated 
to switch to cryptic coloration twice as often as 
crypsis gave way to aposematism. Aposematism in 
amphibians is, then, on the one hand associated 
with periods of species diversification, but on the 
other hand the trait itself is typically unstable over 
macroevolutionary timescales in this group.
One explanation for this instability is that selec-
tion by predators for or against conspicuousness 
may be very variable across habitats and across 
time, because the composition of predator commu-
nities is itself variable (Mappes et al., 2014; 
Nokelainen et al., 2014). In addition, the chemical 
defences on which aposematic signalling is often 
based may also be highly variable within and 
between populations (Speed et al., 2012). If aposem-
atic signalling is underpinned by variable, and some-
times weak, secondary defences, selection may 
favour reversion to crypsis (Speed & Franks, 2014). 
Aposematism may then be favoured in a relatively 
narrow range of ecological parameters which are 
prone to variability, rendering the trait unstable 
over long timescales. We return to this point in sec-
tion 6.5 below.
6.5  Ecology of aposematism
We restrict our discussion of ecology to three key 
ecological components: first, variability in selection 
regimes imposed by ecological variation in pred-
ators; second, the effect of aposematism on prey 
niche; and third, the explanations for signal variation, 
including whether aposematic signals are ‘honest’.
6.5.1  Ecology 1: Effects of predictable variation 
in predator communities
We will begin this section by considering how 
threats from predation vary in habitats subjected to 
seasonal changes. Every Spring starts with a set of 
predators educated from experience in previous 
seasons who know that conspicuously coloured 
prey are often chemically defended, and tend to 
avoid them. When young, naive predators emerge in 
the middle of the early Summer period however, then 

96
AVOIDING ATTACK
1
(a)
(b)
0.8
0.6
0.4
20
25
30
Week
35
Survival
2,500
2,000
1,500
1,000
500
0
1718 1920 212223 24 25262728 293031 323334 35
Week
May
June
July
August
September
Count of nestlings ringed
Figure 6.3   Summary of results from Mappes et al. (2014). (a) Mean observed survival of three artificial larval types (N =1171, ±s.e.m.) over a 
season (non-warning-coloured: blue squares, small signals: orange stars, large signals: red bold stars) and the predictions for two best models 
(models D and E). The seasonal relationship for non-warning-coloured prey (blue curve) is identical in both models but differs for warning-coloured 
prey. Model D predicts an identical increase for small and large signals (red solid line) and model E a higher survival for large signals (red dotted 
line) than for small signals (orange line). (b) The estimated nest-leaving dates of juvenile passerine birds in Finland (see Plate 6).

Aposematism
97
there can be many naive, inexperienced predators 
who may attack brightly coloured prey at high 
rates. Aposematic individuals may be especially 
vulnerable in this period. Toward the end of the sea-
son this vulnerability may be reversed as the new 
predators are increasingly experienced and tend to 
avoid aposematic signalling. The consequence is 
that aposematic conspicuousness may be exces-
sively costly in the middle of the season, but benefi-
cial either side.
This prediction was confirmed in a field experi-
ment in which Mappes et al. (2014) investigated the 
survival of three forms of the caterpillar of the wood 
tiger moth—cryptic (black), highly conspicuous (large 
signal: black with large portions of orange color-
ation) and intermediate conspicuousness (small sig-
nal: smaller areas of orange pigmentation). They 
recorded prey survival over the Spring to Autumn 
months and simultaneously the age-structure of the 
avian predator community. As Figure 6.3a shows, 
the cryptic forms (squares) were advantaged when 
the young fledglings started to forage (mid-season, 
week 22, Figure 6.3b), but in the other periods con-
spicuous coloration was superior.
An analysis of the phenology of macrolepidop-
teran caterpillars in Finland (in the same paper, 
Mappes et al. 2014) showed that conspicuous spe-
cies are least prevalent in this middle part of the 
year. Hence, temporal variation in predator abun-
dance appears to drive temporal patterns of vari-
ation in the abundance of aposematic forms in a 
habitat. This study gives us considerable insight 
into the vulnerability of aposematic coloration to 
variation in ecological conditions. Each season apo-
sematic signalling may become unprofitable in the 
‘fledging period’. If that period increased in dur-
ation for sufficient seasons, because for example of 
increased reproductive periods in predators, we 
could reasonably imagine that aposematic signal-
ling could be destabilized and replaced by crypsis. 
Note though, that not all the evidence supports this 
particular pattern; Langham (2005), for example, 
found that older jacamar birds (Galbula ruficauda) 
were more likely to sample novel, conspicuous prey 
than younger birds, who were more hesitant. It is 
worth mentioning here also that seasonality as a 
cause of rapidly changing selection on aposematic 
phenotypes is unlikely to apply in tropical ecosys-
tems, in which the seasonality is less pronounced 
and the breeding season of birds tends to be longer.
Aluthwattha et al. (2017) have proposed that spa-
tial variation in predation pressure may modulate 
selection for, and maintain variation in conspicu-
ousness of, aposematism. Their study of aposem-
atic Danainae (Nymphalidae) butterflies and their 
mimics found that highly conspicuous individuals 
experienced fewer attacks from avian predators 
when background predation pressure was low, but 
attack rates increased rapidly as background preda-
tion pressure increased. The least conspicuous indi-
viduals, conversely, experienced higher attack rates 
at low predation pressures, but reduced predation 
with high predation pressures, seemingly benefit-
ting from crypsis.
Selection can, of course, vary across space too, 
and a growing number of ambitious field experi-
ments demonstrate this. Nokelainen et al. (2014), 
for example, showed that yellow vs white polymor-
phisms for warning coloration on the wings of the 
adult wood tiger moth provide protection against 
alternative bird species (white appears most pro-
tective against accentors, Prunellidae; yellow against 
Paridae, tits, chickadees etc.). Hence, relative vari-
ation in the distribution of these two groups helps 
predict the variation in these colour patterns across 
large areas. Willink et al. (2014) report alternative 
selective forces across large areas in Costa Rica on 
artificial models of cryptic and conspicuous dendro-
batid frogs (Oophaga granulifera) by birds, lizards, and 
crabs. Lizard predation, for example, would select 
for cryptic coloration in prey, whereas bird attacks 
were more often deterred by conspicuousness. 
Variation in the relative frequency of different kinds 
of predator can therefore affect the net value of 
aposematic signalling. Similarly, variation in raptor 
populations may affect survival of aposematic and 
cryptic forms of snake coloration. Valkonen et al. 
(2012) showed that predation on model vipers by 
raptors was affected by the presence of buzzard 
species, which unlike the other raptors in the study 
would attack warningly coloured models. Hence, 
again, an established aposematic signal may become 
vulnerable and be replaced by cryptic coloration 
if there is a change in the suite of predators in a 
habitat so that sufficient numbers of them ignore 
the signal.

98
AVOIDING ATTACK
6.5.2  Ecology 2: Aposematic coloration and its 
relationship to niche and behaviour
Since chemical defence is often paired with apo-
sematic signalling, we may expect that there are 
similar effects on niche, often to widen it, and hence 
we refer the reader to Chapter 5, section 5.4.2.
However, coloration mediates many of an ani-
mal’s interactions with its environment, so it is not 
surprising that we may find additional, or different, 
effects of aposematic coloration on niche and life 
history than we would by chemical defence alone. 
For example, where Arbuckle et al. (2013) found 
that chemical defence has some effect of increasing 
diet range in the musteloid group (see Chapter 5, 
section 5.4.2), they found a stronger association 
between omnivory and aposematic coloration than 
with chemical defence alone. Aposematic coloration 
may, in a sense, amplify the protective effects of 
chemical (or other) defences, preventing many attacks 
rather than merely deterring predators once attack 
takes place. In this way, aposematic signalling may 
open a wider set of opportunities within a habitat 
(Speed et al., 2010). Furthermore, warning coloration 
may itself be strongly associated with niche change: 
Merilaita & Tullberg (2005) found a strong phylogen-
etic association between the presence of aposematic 
coloration and transition to diurnal from nocturnal in 
selected macrolepidopteran groups, mainly Arctiidae.
Warning coloration may then be a result, or a 
cause, of quite fundamental changes in the biology 
of the prey organism. Two important case studies 
are worth describing here, though of course others 
exist. First, in a phylogenetically corrected study of 
the Carnivora, Stankowich et al. (2011) demon-
strated that ‘salient’ (highly contrasting, presumed 
aposematic) colour patterns evolved in a manner 
positively correlated with more ‘sophisticated’ anal 
spraying methods of secondary defence, and with 
body length, movement into open habitats, and 
increased burrowing capacities. The data available 
at the time of their analysis did not allow Stankowich 
et al. to reveal the sequences of events in Carnivora 
coloration, so causality remains unresolved. Did, 
for example, aposematism precede or succeed ini-
tial movement to more open habitats? In a study of 
similar biological range, Santos & Cannatella (2011) 
found that the presence of aposematic coloration in 
dendrobatids was correlated with active metabolism 
and ‘aerobic range’ (a measure of physical activity), 
as well as with body size. They ask whether meta-
bolic change for greater activity resulted from, or 
caused, the evolution of aposematic coloration and 
chemical defence.
Warning coloration may also be associated with 
variation in behaviour. If aposematism frees ani-
mals from behavioural constraints, we may find 
them modifying and diversifying their behaviours 
in response to diversifying sexual selection or to 
take advantage of new opportunities (Guilford, 
1988; Merilaita & Tullberg, 2005). Comparative 
methods are useful here, showing for example the 
associations and perhaps the sequence by which 
new behaviours and aposematism come into being. 
Santos et al. (2014) notably showed association 
between the presence of alkaloid sequestration and 
conspicuous coloration with acoustic characteristics 
of male calls in dendrobatid frogs. Variation in a 
principal component that included the temporal 
pattern of sound production significantly explained 
the presence of alkaloids; specifically, short-pulsed 
sounds predicted an increased likelihood of seques-
tering alkaloids (by 1.4 times) and of using con-
spicuous coloration (by 1.2 times; similar effects 
associated with low pitch calls, but this is associated 
with larger body size). Species in which males use 
exposed calling sites, rather than being hidden, 
were also more likely to be chemically defended 
and conspicuously coloured. Santos et al. suggest 
that aposematism enables males to use exposed 
positions in which their calls are likely to travel fur-
ther. A key point is that estimations of ancestral 
states suggest that modification to vocal character-
istics followed as a consequence of, rather than pre-
ceded, aposematic coloration.
Other studies on dendrobatids explore the gen-
eral prediction that aposematism is associated with 
behaviours that enable greater exploitation of social 
or ecological opportunity, but would cause 
increases in visibility to enemies. Evidence from 
dendrobatid frogs is currently supportive, but 
mixed (see review in Rojas, 2017). Rudh et al. (2012, 
with Oophaga [Dendrobates] pumilio), Willink et al. 
(2013, O. granulifera) and Galeano & Harms (2016, 
O. pumilio) all reported positive correlations, espe-
cially of coloration and aggressive (male–male) 

Aposematism
99
behaviours, whereas Dugas et al. (2015, with O. 
pumilio) found no simple correlation. Crothers & 
Cummings (2015, O. pumilio  again) found that con-
spicuousness did correlate with individuals’ speed 
of initiating aggressive territorial defence, and fur-
thermore that individuals used brightness of a com-
petitor as a social cue, such that the difference in 
brightness tended to predict the outcome of an 
interaction. Hence, variation in conspicuous color-
ation in (O. pumilio) provides intraspecific social 
information, whether or not it is informative to 
predators.
In summary, there is a growing body of research 
which links the evolution of aposematic signalling 
with changes in the biology of prey species. 
Sometimes these changes are profound, moving 
activity periods from night to day, or reversing the 
dietary range of the species. Aposematic signals 
also seem very often to interact with sexual selec-
tion, opening the door to diversification of traits, if 
species have not found ways to use colour patterns 
so that they work independently on different audi-
ences (Cummings & Crothers, 2013).
6.5.3  Ecology 3: Variation and honesty in 
warning coloration
On the face of it, aposematism within a species is a 
mutualistic enterprise. Individuals that have sec-
ondary defences evolve a consensus phenotype to 
warn enemies about their unprofitability, an evolved 
and widely used warning signal (in Chapter 7, we 
see that this mutualism can be extended across 
species in Müllerian mimicry). In a simplified view, 
the more common the aposematic signal, the more 
effective it will be, since predators will have many 
opportunities to learn, and many reminders about 
the unpleasant consequences of attack. Hence, we 
should expect a rule of signal uniformity within 
aposematic signals (Mallet & Singer, 1987). Indeed 
there is evidence from field-based experiments 
(Mallet & Barton, 1989; Noonan & Comeault, 2009) 
and the preferences of wild-caught predators 
(Langham, 2005) that novel variation in warning 
coloration is disproportionately punished.
Though many aposematic colour patterns are 
similar within species, variation is nonetheless fre-
quently reported. We deal with such variation in this 
section. Note we consider here only that variation in 
pigmentation that will be sufficient to be noticeable to 
predators (Arenas & Stevens, 2017), leaving aside that 
which is too minor to affect predator decision-mak-
ing. We are also careful to discriminate such variation 
that occurs within populations, which might indicate 
varied levels of signal honesty or dishonesty within a 
prey population, from that which occurs between 
species or between populations which reflect broader 
selective regimes, as we explain later.
1)  Relaxed and disruptive selection and  
variable costs
First, there are some relatively straightforward 
explanations that involve relaxed selection. It may 
be, for example, that predators perceive variation in 
warning signals, but choose to categorize the vari-
ant phenotypes together into one class that they 
treat similarly, mainly by avoidance. Here the vari-
ation in phenotypes may be selectively almost neu-
tral. There is some suggestion of this in work 
examining predation on models of dendrobatid 
frogs (O. histrionica) by Amézquita et al. (2013), 
including that such generalization is more likely 
when prey are at high abundances (see Mallet & 
Joron, 1999). Reports that predators focus on 
selected, highly salient features such as overall 
­coloration, and pay less attention to less salient 
components of prey appearance (Aronsson & 
Gamberale-Stille, 2008; Rönkä et al., 2018), suggests 
that selection may be relaxed on some components 
of warning coloration, but not others, and account 
for variation in those traits.
Note that in studies of geographical variation in 
colour patterns, it may be possible to test whether 
drift alone can account for diversification in warn-
ing coloration. A notable study by Brown et al. 
(2010) showed that the wide range of colour vari-
ation in the strawberry poison dart frog (O. pumilio, 
which is distributed over the Bocas del Toro archi-
pelago in Panama) is not caused by neutral pro-
cesses alone. Rather, diversifying selection must be 
included to explain the range of colour variation 
(see related study on the wood tiger moth, by 
Galarza et al., 2014).
Varied forms of disruptive selection make for 
plausible explanations of signal variation. Rojas 
et al. (2014b), for example, propose that variation in 

100
AVOIDING ATTACK
lighting conditions within habitats can maintain 
simultaneous selective advantage on varied colour 
forms (and recently, that variation in colour forms 
correlate with variation in movement; Rojas et al., 
2014a). Temporal changes in selection and popula-
tion size may often be important (Galarza et al., 
2014). Alternatively, varied levels of sexual selec-
tion combined with variation in the effectiveness 
of anti-predator coloration may cause disruptive 
selection across habitats and lead to variation in 
conspicuousness of prey colour forms. Endler & 
Rojas (2009) examine the disruptive effects of vari-
ation in predator abundance and mate availability, 
showing how variation in both will lead to vari-
ation in coloration and behaviour. Taking the wood 
tiger moth as their case study, Gordon et al. (2015) 
propose that a combination of migration, positive 
frequency-dependent mating advantage, and vari-
ation in predator communities all combine to cause 
the persistence of variation in colour forms, which 
affect fitness through anti-predator defence and 
sexual selection. Kang et al. (2017) have recently 
suggested that differential predation is influential 
in the divergence in multiple traits of the aposem-
atic oriental fire-bellied toad (Bombina orientalis) 
between South Korean mainland populations and 
populations on Jeju Island. Jeju Island populations 
apparently experience higher predation pressure 
than mainland toads, and exhibit less bright and 
less chromatic aposematic ventral coloration, lower 
activity overall, and a tendency to rest underwater. 
Increasingly, researchers are taking this kind of 
broad geographical approach to warning colour 
variation, so we invite interested readers to follow 
the growing set of papers which evaluate this fur-
ther (some excellent examples are: Comeault & 
Noonan, 2011; Mochida, 2011; Rojas & Endler, 2013; 
Hegna et al., 2015).
Another relevant point to make here is that gen-
etic correlations, as arise from linkage or pleiotropy, 
between signalling and other traits may lead to 
quite complex determinants of colour variation. 
This point is well made by Lindstedt et al. (2016) 
who demonstrate a negative genetic correlation 
between larval and female adult coloration in the 
wood tiger moth (Arctia plantaginis), so that larvae 
with large warning signals turned into adults with 
smaller signals. Lindstedt et al. propose that this 
correlation can contribute to additive genetic vari-
ation in these traits, especially as both are subject to 
multiple and, likely, variable selection pressures. 
This leads us to a final point, that trade-offs between 
coloration and other biological functions such as 
mating (as demonstrated by Nokelainen et al., 2012) 
may be a proximate cause of variation in prey spe-
cies, and these may not always be apparent to 
empirical researchers. An interesting question is: 
how many important trade-offs are obscure to us, 
but important in causing variation in aposematic 
coloration?
2)  Honest signalling as an explanation of  
signal variation
One attractive hypothesis is that the observable 
variation in aposematic signalling is maintained by 
its role in the signalling system itself. More con-
spicuous phenotypes may, for example, predict 
higher levels of toxicity. If this were the case, apo-
sematism may be a ‘quantitatively’ honest signal-
ling system, in which variation is essential to its 
functioning.
A paper by Summers & Clough (2001) arguably 
initiated much of the interest in this idea, though 
it  was earlier discussed in theoretical terms by 
Guilford and Dawkins (1993). Using phylogenetic-
ally corrected regression, Summers & Clough 
showed that across dendrobatid species there is 
quantitative variation in both toxicity and con-
spicuousness in colour patterns and, furthermore, 
there is a positive correlation between these traits. 
Subsequently, a number of papers report such posi-
tive conspicuousness–toxicity correlations between 
species (for example: marine opisthobranchs, Cortesi 
& Cheney, 2010; ladybird beetles, Arenas et al., 2015: 
see reviews in Summers et al., 2015; Crothers et al., 
2016) or between geographical populations of dif-
ferent species (e.g. Maan & Cummings, 2011; for the 
frog species Oophaga pumilio). However, because the 
correlations being reported are across genetically or 
geographically independent entities, it is very hard 
to see these as evidence for evolved signalling hon-
esty, in which variation in conspicuousness between 
species has a signalling function to predators. It 
would take some feat of migration and cognition for 
predators to impose honesty across geographically 
separate populations, and some rather non-intuitive 

Aposematism
101
selection mechanisms by which the conspicuousness 
levels of several species is driven by mechanisms that 
enforce mutual signal honesty.
Furthermore, it may be that fitting regression or 
correlations through cross-species data sets leads to 
the appearance of continuous correlations, whereas 
in fact we have two groups of prey: a mostly cryptic 
group (those poorly protected by toxicity) and an 
aposematic group (high toxicity). If the values for 
these are placed on the same axes and a regression 
line plotted, we might gain a significant effect 
whereas the real state may be closer to categorical.
Accounts of cross-species variation in conspicu-
ousness can, though, tell us about the processes that 
cause exaggeration of conspicuous coloration 
within species of different levels of defence. It may 
be, for example, that in a group like the dendro-
batids the processes that cause aposematism tend to 
lead to higher equilibrium levels of conspicuous 
phenotype when chemical protection is greater. 
Sexual selection is a possible explanation, in which 
better protected species have freer range to exag-
gerate conspicuous coloration, so that the driver is 
now courtship advantage, rather than anti-predator 
deterrence. It would be instructive to find case stud-
ies where we can compare cross-species correlations 
in larval vs adult forms, for only in the latter would 
sexual selection drive brightness. We note also that 
at least one amphibian study found the reverse of 
the more common relationship—a negative toxin–
conspicuous correlation (Wang, 2011; readers inter-
ested in explanations for negative correlations are 
referred to the review by Summers et al., 2015 and 
the experimental work of Darst et al., 2006). This 
exception suggests that we need a larger set of 
evaluations to understand cross-species patterns in 
nature.
Although we do not see cross-species or cross-
population correlations as evidence of honest sig-
nalling per se, there are a few empirical studies 
that have demonstrated conspicuousness–toxicity 
relationships within species; positive associations, 
including in paper wasps (venom sac vs colour pat-
tern in Polistes dominula, Vidal-Cordero et al., 2012), 
frogs (O. pumilio, Crothers et al., 2016), and beetles 
(Blount et al., 2012; Arenas et al., 2015); but negative 
in the wood tiger moth (Reudler et al., 2015) so 
there is some (mixed) evidence for honest signalling 
within aposematic species. There are several theor-
etical attempts to explain honest signalling (posi-
tive correlations) within aposematic populations 
(see review in Summers et al., 2015). Some explan-
ations rely on the idea that coloration is a condition-
dependent trait (Blount et al., 2009; Holen & 
Svennungsen, 2012). Notably, Blount et al. (2009) 
proposed that toxin generation and storage invoked 
oxidative stress, which required anti-oxidant mol-
ecules to mitigate the damage. However, pigment 
molecules (e.g. carotenoids, melanins, and pteri-
dines, among others) may themselves have a pri-
mary use as anti-oxidants. Pigmentation may then 
mechanistically trade-off against coloration. Prey 
with good anti-oxidant resources can be both more 
toxic and have more pigmentation than those with 
poorer anti-oxidant resources. An experiment that 
manipulated the availability of food (aphids) to lar-
val ladybirds (seven-spot, Adalia septempunctata), 
showed the predicted positive toxin–pigment cor-
relations (between precoccinelline, a precursor 
toxin molecule, and elytra carotenoid concentra-
tions; Blount et al., 2009; Winters et al., 2014; and see 
Crothers et al., 2016).
A major issue in all of these studies is the meas-
urement of toxicity. Some studies measure the con-
centrations of the toxic chemicals directly (e.g. 
Blount et al., 2012). Other studies use lab assays 
with model species as bio-indicators of toxicity 
(effects on mice, e.g. Summers & Clough, 2001, or 
Daphnia  in Arenas et al., 2015). Results from experi-
ments based on lab models are not straightforward 
to evaluate, however, because the toxin in question 
could affect the model system differently to eco-
logically relevant predators (Weldon, 2017). The 
alkaloid of the two-spot ladybird is, for example, 
not harmful at least to one likely bird predator spe-
cies (blue tits, Cyanistes caeruleus, Marples et al., 
1989), and is only a mild deterrent to ant predators 
(Marples, 1993). However, it turns out that the com-
pounds in this species are actually quite toxic to 
Daphnia  used in lab assays (Arenas et al., 2015). 
This discrepancy calls for caution in interpretation. 
Bolton et al. (2017) have recently taken steps to ver-
ify that dendrobatid toxicity characteristics gath-
ered from lab mice can be reproduced in more 
ecologically appropriate arthropod species (and we 
recommend interested readers look at the very 

102
AVOIDING ATTACK
interesting discussion in Crothers et al., 2016). The 
gold standard is, we would argue, first to measure 
the variation of concentrations of relevant chemical 
compounds within the prey population, so that 
there is an objective basis for evaluating variation, 
and second to know how natural predators respond 
to this variation. When lab models (such as Daphnia) 
are used as a proxy, they need to be calibrated 
against real predators for us to really understand 
the nature of toxicity in natural populations.
6.6  Co-evolution of aposematic signals 
and receiver psychology
In the preceding chapter, we spent some time dis-
cussing the evidence for co-evolution between 
chemically defended prey and their predators. 
Traits of toxicity (prey) and resistance to toxicity 
(predators) may be linked in tight co-evolutionary 
relationships, with evolutionary change limited to 
few genomic sites. Researchers can then look for 
evidence of correlation in traits as they vary over 
wide spatial scales. Co-evolution in aposematic 
signals is less tractable, and has a more limited 
evidence base. We do know that there is often 
‘something special’ about the effects of aposematic 
coloration on the cognition of predators. Aposematic 
coloration may increase wariness, speed up learn-
ing, increase the likelihood that prey will be rejected 
before consumption, and perhaps reduce forgetting 
rates. These may be evolved, special responses to 
aposematic coloration, and aposematic coloration 
may evolve to match the perceptual-cognitive 
biases of their predators. The evidence for repeated 
co-evolution of these traits in relation to each other 
is to the best of our knowledge not present. There 
are signs of interest in the empirical literature, for 
example when researchers look at variation in 
predator diet choice from geographically distant 
sites (Exnerová et al., 2015).
6.7  Future work and conclusions
We focussed in this chapter on the prey side of apo-
sematism, but as a way to conclude, we briefly 
point out that aposematic signalling is an important 
experimental tool in the study of the predator side. 
As an experimental tool, aposematism has been 
important in the discovery and investigation of 
dietary conservatism, which has widespread impli-
cations for our understanding of diet choice in ani-
mals (Marples & Kelly, 1999). Aposematism has 
also proven useful in the study of cognition. 
Thorogood et al. (2018) for example use aposemat-
ism as a tool to show the importance of social learn-
ing in the evolution of animal signalling. In their 
2016 review ‘Learning about aposematic prey’, 
Skelhorn et al. draw attention to the fact that pred-
ators do not simply learn to avoid prey utilizing 
aposematic signals, but instead make adaptive deci-
sions regarding when to gather information about 
such prey and when to include them in their diets 
despite their defences. Skelhorn, Rowe, Halpin, and 
colleagues have used aposematism as a laboratory 
model with which they have demonstrated that 
predators are physiological strategists in their 
approach to diet, taking into account toxin burdens, 
concentration of toxins, and the size of prey in their 
decision-making (Smith et al., 2014; Barnett et al., 
2012). In their review, Skelhorn et al. (2016a) argue 
that current knowledge about what predators learn 
about aposematic prey is lacking. We fully support 
this ‘call to arms’ and would encourage future stud-
ies investigating how predators gather and use 
information about aposematic, defended prey.

Avoiding Attack: The Evolutionary Ecology of Crypsis, Aposematism, and Mimicry. Second Edition. Graeme D. Ruxton,  
William L. Allen, Thomas N. Sherratt, & Michael P. Speed, Oxford University Press (2018). © Graeme D. Ruxton,  
William L. Allen, Thomas N. Sherratt, & Michael P. Speed 2018. DOI: 10.1093/oso/9780199688678.001.0001
CHAPTER 7
The evolution and maintenance  
of Müllerian mimicry
7.1  Introduction
In his classic paper, Bates (1862) reflected on the 
similar appearances of a number of Neotropical 
butterfly species and proposed that the phenom-
enon could be explained by natural selection on 
palat-able species to resemble unpalatable (or other-
wise unprofitable) species (‘Batesian mimicry’, 
Chapter 9). Palatable species experience this selec-
tion simply because would-be predators will tend 
to refrain from attacking them when they resemble 
something harmful. However, in the same mono-
graph Bates also noted that some common and 
apparently distasteful butterfly species also resem-
bled one another. While Bates speculated that this 
resemblance could have arisen due to shared phys-
ical conditions, it was Johannes Friedrich (‘Fritz’) 
Müller who proposed the explanation that con-
tinues to be favoured today. Indeed, reflecting the 
honour bestowed on Bates, mimicry among unpal-
atable or otherwise unprofitable species has since 
become known as ‘Müllerian mimicry’. Müller’s 
idea was very simple: predators often have to learn 
to avoid unpalatable (or otherwise unprofitable) 
prey, and in  these instances there will be strong 
selection on unpalatable prey to adopt a similar 
appearance, because it serves to share the mortality 
cost of educating inexperienced predators. In effect, 
they will face selection to evolve the same set of 
warning signals.
To formalize Müller’s arguments, we begin by 
outlining the model he presented to illustrate his 
theory (Müller, 1878; translation in Müller, 1879). Of 
course, Müller invoked his quantitative arguments 
for illustration only and the real world is inevitably 
more complicated than that. In section 7.3 we revisit 
the model and reframe it, showing that the optimal 
sampling strategy when predators are faced with 
unfamiliar prey can explain both Müllerian mim-
icry and neophobia (a reluctance to attack novel 
prey). Next we survey some of the best-known 
examples of shared resemblances among unprofit-
able species that cannot be explained simply on the 
basis of shared ancestry. The central part of this 
chapter is devoted to considering the evidence that 
the shared resemblance has arisen for the reason 
that Müller hypothesized. Finally we consider some 
of the properties of Müllerian mimicry systems in 
more depth, including ecological and co-evolution-
ary phenomena, and raise some fundamental ques-
tions that have only been partly resolved.
7.1.1  Müller’s theory
As described in our opening remarks, Müller’s 
argument was based on ‘strength in numbers’: two 
or more unpalatable species may face selection to 
adopt a common appearance because it helps 
reduce the mortality cost involved in teaching naive 
predators to avoid them. Following Müller’s 
(1878, 1879) original argument, let a1 and a2 be the 
numbers of two approximately equally unpalatable 
(or otherwise defended) species in some definite 
district during one summer, and let n be the number 
of individuals of each distinct, unpalatable species 
that are killed by predators during a season before 
their distastefulness is generally known. If the spe-
cies are distinct in appearance, then each species 

104
AVOIDING ATTACK
would lose n individuals in the course of educating 
predators to avoid them. If, however, the two spe-
cies were exactly alike in appearance, then the first 
species would lose an average of only a1n/(a1+a2) 
individuals and the second would lose only a2n/
(a1+a2) individuals. Under these conditions, a 
mimetic mutant of species 1 that perfectly resem-
bled species 2 would tend to spread from extreme 
rarity (in that it will have a higher mean survivor-
ship) so long as a2>a1. So, all else being equal, the 
rarer unpalatable species would face selection to 
resemble the more common unpalatable species. 
We revisit this model from an opti-mization per-
spective in section 7.3, but first we consider some of 
the examples of resemblance among unprofitable 
prey that motivated Müller, and many others that 
have since come to light.
7.2  Examples
Here we present a range of instances of mimicry 
among unprofitable species. The list is not intended 
to be exhaustive (we have left out excellent cases 
of Müllerian mimicry in snakes, burnet moths, and 
cotton stainer bugs, to name a few). However, in 
each of the cases below we include evidence that:  
(i) the species involved are unprofitable to attack by 
would-­be predators, (ii) the species are similar in 
visual appearance to their would-be predators (or 
at least human observers), and (iii) the shared 
appearance is not simply the consequence of shared 
ancestry. We note two features of these examples at 
the outset.
First, although Müllerian mimicry is often pre-
sented as involving resemblance between just two 
species, it frequently involves larger collections of 
similar-looking species—‘mimicry rings’ (Mallet & 
Gilbert,  1995). Linsley et al. (1961) for example, 
describe a series of ‘lycid complexes’ that include 
collections of unpalatable lycid beetles, arctiid moths, 
parasitic hymenoptera, and flies, all of which are 
orange in coloration with black tips (Figure 7.1). 
Similarly, tarantula hawk wasps in the genera Pepsis 
and Hemipepsis have some of the most painful stings 
known to man and form Müllerian (and Batesian) 
mimicry complexes with many other species of 
stinging tarantula hawks, as well as numerous flies, 
beetles, and moths (Schmidt, 2004).
Second, one might expect that selection by pred-
ators on unprofitable prey species to adopt a com-
mon warning signal would promote near-universal 
uniformity in appearance. As we show, this is 
indeed often the case at a local scale, although in 
some unusual cases a single unprofitable species 
can be locally polymorphic with different forms 
participating in different mimicry rings (section 
7.5.5). However, despite strong localized selection 
for ­uniformity, species engaged in Müllerian mim-
(a)
(b)
Figure 7.1  (a) A lycid beetle and (b) an arctiid moth, found together in southern Ontario. These species are both unpalatable to birds and their 
colour pattern similarity suggests they are Müllerian mimics. Photo courtesy of Dr Henri Goulet (see Plate 7).

The evolution and maintenance of Müllerian mimicry 
105
icry often have surprisingly high geographical 
diversity in colour patterns, sometimes referred to 
as ‘spatial mosaics’. Although this polymorphism 
at the geographical scale is somewhat counter- 
intuitive given the nature of selection, it is now 
readily understood. Moreover, the matching of 
these colour patterns between the same pair (or 
more) of unprofitable species across geographical 
scales serves to reaffirm that mimicry has not arisen 
through shared ancestry. We consider the phenom-
enon of geographical polymorphisms in Müllerian 
mimics in section 7.5.4.
7.2.1  Neotropical butterflies
Following the original observations of Bates and 
Müller, Neotropical butterflies have provided some of 
the most celebrated and intensively studied examples 
of Müllerian mimicry. The best known examples 
derive from the genus Heliconius and nine smaller 
genera from the Neotropical tribe Heliconiini 
(Nymphalidae: Heliconiinae), along with butter-
flies from the tribe Ithomiini. Indeed, Neotropical 
butterflies are the poster child for Müllerian mimicry 
and we will return to them on multiple occasions 
throughout this chapter.
The genus Heliconius comprises 46 described 
­species, all of which have conspicuous (and often 
shared) wing patterns as adults (Figure 7.2). Hel­
iconius butterflies are widely considered unpalatable 
to vertebrate predators due to cyanogenic glycosides 
which are sequestered from their Passiflora host 
plants as larvae (Cardoso & Gilbert, 2007) or newly 
synthesized in larvae or adults (Engler-Chaouat & 
Gilbert,  2007). This unpalatability has been con-
firmed in a number of feeding trials. For example, 
Brower et al. (1963) presented wild-caught silver-
beaked tanagers (Ramphocelus carbo) with alternat-
ing sequences of lab-reared Heliconius butterflies 
and palatable satyrid butterflies. While the palatable 
butterflies were always attacked when offered, the 
majority of the heliconids were either rejected at the 
outset or consistently rejected after only 1–3 attacks 
by the birds. Intriguingly, the nature of the responses 
of birds (ranging from not touching to pecking, 
­killing, and consuming) differed dependent on the 
heliconid species offered, although there was also 
substantial variation among individual birds. More­
over, a very high proportion of tanagers avoided 
touching a heliconid mimic from another species 
after they had learned to avoid their original helico-
nid model, providing early evidence for a pro- 
tective effect of mimicry.
The Neotropical tribe Ithomiini (Nymphalidae: 
Danainae) comprises circa 380 species drawn from 
50 genera (Elias & Joron, 2015). Many ithomiine 
species have partly or entirely transparent wings 
(‘glasswings’) although their wing patterns are still 
considered conspicuous. Like Heliconius butterflies, 
many ithomiine species are involved in mimetic 
complexes and are often the most abundant species 
in these complexes (Elias & Joron, 2015). Adult male 
ithomiines are thought to acquire their chemical 
defences, pyrrolizidine alkaloids, from decaying 
flowers or stems of Apocynaceae, Boraginaceae, and 
Asteraceae (Trigo,  2011). Intriguingly, these pyr-
Figure 7.2  An unpalatable Heliconius numata butterfly, shown here 
sitting on a Heliconia flower. This Müllerian mimic is unusual because 
it exhibits local polymorphism in which several different forms of the 
same species co-exist in the same locality, with different forms 
participating in different mimicry rings (see section 7.5.5). Photo 
credit: Mathieu Joron (see Plate 8). 

106
AVOIDING ATTACK
rolizidines are then transferred to females during 
copulation as a nuptial gift (Elias & Joron, 2015; see 
Conner et al., 2000 for a similar example in an arc-
tiid moth). A number of experiments have confirmed 
the unpalatability of adult ithomiines to avian and 
arthropod predators. For example, Arias et al. (2016b) 
recently found that wild-caught great tits (Parus 
major) consumed proportionately less crushed-up 
ithomiine Mechanitis polymnia (wings removed) than 
similar palatable mealworms.
7.2.2  Wasps
Velvet ants are wingless wasps (Hymenoptera: 
Mutillidae) that are ectoparasitoids of the larvae of 
solitary bees and wasps. Not only are egg-laying 
females protected by a painful sting, chemical secre-
tions, and a hard cuticle but they also tend to be 
conspicuously coloured. Wilson et al. (2012) quanti-
tatively compared the appearances of 65 species in 
the velvet ant genus Dasymutilla  and placed them 
into six morphologically distinct and geographically 
delimited mimicry rings (Figure 7.3). Phylogenetic 
analysis suggested that these shared colour pat-
terns are primarily the result of independent evolu-
tion rather than a consequence of their phylogenetic 
history. In follow-up work, comparing the appear-
ances of 351 species from 21 velvet ant genera, only 
15 species did not fit into any mimicry ring (J. Wilson 
et al., 2015). Yet the complex may be even bigger than 
that. Rodriguez et al. (2014), for example, argued 
that another group of solitary parasitic wasps, 
­spider wasps (Psorthaspis spp), showed parallel 
geographical variation in colour pattern, making it 
Figure 7.3  Velvet ant mimicry rings in north and central America. A total of 65 Dasymutilla species (and three populations of D. bioculata) were 
classified by Wilson et al. (2012) into six mimicry rings on the basis of their shared colour, pattern and geographic location. The indices under each 
species are voucher numbers, also used to highlight their position on the phylogenetic tree. Reprinted from Wilson et al. (2012) with permissions 
(see Plate 9).

The evolution and maintenance of Müllerian mimicry 
107
Figure 7.4  Millipedes of the Apheloria clade (top row) and their co-mimics in the Brachoria clade (bottom row). Photo by Paul Marek. Reprinted 
from Merrill & Jiggins (2009) with permissions (see Plate 10).
one of the largest Müllerian complexes described 
to  date. Not surprisingly, the complex has also 
attracted putative Batesian mimics, including bee-
tles, antlions, and spiders. Intriguingly, male velvet 
ants lack the sting and are considered relatively 
harmless compared to females. However, while 
males are often conspicuously coloured, these puta-
tive Batesian mimics do not always resemble or even 
participate in the same mimicry ring as their conspe-
cific females.
7.2.3  Millipedes
Apheloriine millipedes are endemic to the temperate 
forests of North America, and very well protected 
from predators: each individual can secrete 18-fold 
the amount of hydrogen cyanide necessary to kill 
a pigeon-sized bird (Marek & Bond, 2009). The milli-
pedes also exhibit conspicuous colour patterns that 
vary in hue, including yellow, red, orange, and 
pink—traits that cannot be used for conspecific sig-
nalling since the millipedes are blind. Although it has 
long been postulated that Appalachian apheloriine 
millipedes are engaged in Müllerian mimicry, Marek & 
Bond (2009) formally analysed the colour patterns 
and spatial distribution of seven species of cyanide-
generating millipede endemic to the mountains of 
Virginia, Kentucky, and Tennessee. They showed 
that while individual species vary in colour and 
pattern over large spatial scales they share very simi-
lar appearances where they co-occur, an outcome 
that could not arise simply due to shared ancestry, 
making this a compelling example of Müllerian mim-
icry in a group not well known for it (Figure 7.4). 
7.2.4  Catfish
Named for their barbels that resemble cat’s whiskers, 
many catfish are defended by spines and bony plates. 
In a particularly comprehensive study, Alexandrou 
et al. (2011) described colour pattern similarity among 
over 400 catfish specimens from the subfamily Cory­
doradinae. These fish swim in multispecies shoals in 
streams, rivers, and floodplains throughout South 
America and have retractable venomous spines and 
bony plates that serve to defend them against a range 
of fish and avian predators. As might be expected 
from a diverse group, the catfish species exhibit a 
range of colour patterns, including potentially cryptic 
and disruptive patterns but also highly contrasting 
patterns (black and white, orange and black, and 
­colours that highlight their spines). After fitting a 
phylogeny to help understand the historical basis of 
this colour pattern variation, then placing this vari-
ation in a geographical context, Alexandrou et al. 
(2011) identified 52 species belonging to 24 different 
Müllerian mimicry rings, each composed of two or 

108
AVOIDING ATTACK
three relatively unrelated (hence reproductively iso-
lated) co-existing species. The convergent colour 
patterns among distantly related species is a clear 
indication of natural selection for colour pattern 
similarity, but their phylogenetic distinctiveness may 
well be more than fortuitous. Indeed, in this case 
the vast majority of co-mimics in the same ring dif-
fer from one another in snout length and ­stable 
nitrogen isotope content, indicating that they do not 
compete for benthic resources. This finding contrasts 
with what we know about the case of  Müllerian 
mimicry reported in the venomous catfishes in Lake 
Tanganyika in the same year (Wright, 2011), with co-
mimics being closely related and occupying similar 
feeding niches. We leave further discussion of this 
intriguing example to section 7.5.3.
7.2.5  Bumblebees
It is widely appreciated that female bumblebees 
(Bombus spp) sting and that certain palatable fly 
species such as hoverflies have evolved to mimic 
them (see Chapter 9).
Although there are only about 248 recognized 
species worldwide, bumblebees are highly poly-
morphic, which has led to taxonomic confusion and 
many different names (Williams, 1998). Plowright & 
Owen (1980) analysed the morphological appear-
ances of different species of bumblebee within 
England and North America and concluded that co-
occurring species were much more similar in colour 
patterns than their taxonomic affinities would pre-
dict. In a tour de force, Williams (2007) greatly 
extended this work by rigorously classifying the 
multiple (about three per species) visible colour 
patterns of 219 non-parasitic bumblebee species 
distributed worldwide, and again confirmed spa-
tially aggregated colour-pattern groups comprising 
a number of different bumblebee ­species.
In a more directed analysis, Hines & Williams 
(2012) documented the colour patterns and distri-
butions of polymorphic Bombus trifasciatus, B. haem­
orrhoidalis, and B. breviceps. Collectively these species 
exhibit approximately 14 distinct colour patterns, 
but once again they exhibit similar colour patterns 
in the same geographical location, despite their 
phylogenetic distances.
7.2.6  Poison frogs
Poison frogs (including species from the family 
Dendrobatidae) are well known for their toxicity as 
well as their highly conspicuous colour patterns. 
Their toxicity derives from a range of alkaloids, 
which are obtained from their arthropod diet of mites, 
ants, beetles, and millipedes (Saporito et al., 2009). As 
might be anticipated, several potential incidences of 
Müllerian mimicry among these frogs have been 
reported. In particular, the dendrobatid poison frog 
Ranitomeya (formerly Dendrobates) imitator has four 
distinct morphs in north-central Peru, each of which 
resembles a distinct co-occurring dendrobatid species 
from the genus Ranitomeya (Stuckert et al., 2014b; 
Symula et al., 2001). These distributions ­collectively 
form a spatial mosaic with narrow transition zones 
(Twomey et al., 2016). Intrigu­ingly, Ranitomeya imi­
tator is generally considered more toxic than the spe-
cies it resembles in that it has a greater number of 
distinct alkaloid types and more total alkaloids 
(Stuckert et al., 2014a), and it currently occurs at higher 
abundances  (Twomey et al.,  2013). However, it is 
noteworthy that all the mimetic morphs in this sys-
tem appear to  belong to  this single species. While 
genetic analysis of the variability and genetic differ-
entiability of populations raises important questions 
(Chouteau et al., 2011), phylogeographic arguments 
support the contention that Ranitomeya imitator  
has rapidly adverged to resemble different model 
­species as it expanded its range (Twomey et al., 2016). 
So its ‘imitator’ species name may be well deserved.
7.3  Müller’s theory revisited
Having been introduced to Muller’s theory and 
surveyed some candidate examples, it is now time 
to re-visit Müller’s theory with a more sophisti-
cated representation of predator decision making 
and evaluate its implications for the evolution of 
shared warning signals. In particular, the idea of 
a light suddenly going on in the predator’s brain 
after attacking exactly n distasteful prey is clearly a 
convenient abstraction. Moreover, even if this were 
the case, one might expect the number of prey 
attacked before compete rejection would be based 
on a number of factors, including the unprofitabil-
ity of the prey in question and their abundance. 

The evolution and maintenance of Müllerian mimicry 
109
Indeed, researchers are beginning to recognize that 
decision making by predators is not simply a matter 
of learning but is often strategic—balancing the 
benefits of correct decisions against the costs of 
incorrect ones (Skelhorn et al., 2016a).
It turns out that the optimal sampling strategy 
for unfamiliar prey can be deduced from first prin-
ciples, albeit with certain assumptions. As Sherratt 
(2011) noted, predators encountering an unfamiliar 
prey item are effectively faced with an exploration–
exploitation trade-off. Do they take the risk and 
attack the unfamiliar prey item (for future infor-
mational rewards, but also uncertain immediate 
benefit or cost), or do they exploit their available 
information (which may suggest it is unprofitable 
to attack) and ignore it altogether? In this case, the 
optimal decision for the predator can be identified 
by comparing the known future payoff to a predator 
if the prey item is rejected (i.e., a payoff of 0) with the 
estimated future payoff from attacking it, assuming 
the continued use of its optimal decision rules as it 
learns more about the properties of the prey type 
(Box 7.1).
If predators adopt this optimal sampling strategy 
(or use rules of thumb that approximate the optimal 
strategy) then the number of unprofitable prey that 
should be sampled before complete rejection should 
rise with the density of these unprofitable prey. This 
is because the value of obtaining information about 
common prey phenotypes is higher than that of 
obtaining information about rare prey phenotypes. 
Despite the fact that the number sampled before 
complete rejection (n) can increase with the density 
of unprofitable prey (a), the rate of increase of the 
former is less than the latter. Thus, the per capita 
attack rate on unprofitable prey is predicted to 
Box 7.1  The optimal sampling strategy for unfamiliar prey
Let N be the total number of an unfamiliar prey type with 
a given appearance that a predator can possibly sample 
in its lifetime. This unfamiliar prey type could potentially 
belong to one or more of up to k profitability classes. Let 
fi be the immediate cost or benefit of attacking an indi-
vidual prey item of profitability class i. The information 
currently available to a predator is the number of prey 
items of the unfamiliar prey type that have been attacked 
that belong to profitability class i (i.e. ri for i = 1 . . . k 
where 
1
k
ir
n
∑
=
). A predator should continue to attack an 
unfamiliar prey type if its estimated future payoff from 
attacking the prey type exceeds its expected future payoff 
from not attacking it. However, in making this calculation 
it needs to take into account the fact that its future esti-
mates of payoffs (and hence its optimal decisions) from 
attacking the unfamiliar prey type are liable to change as 
it learns more about them.
The future payoff from not attacking the unfamiliar prey 
type in the remaining (N – n) trials on the basis of its current 
information (r1, r2 . . . rk) can be labeled SD(r1, r2 . . . rk) with 
subscript D representing deferral. Since no beneficial or 
costly prey are attacked, then the future payoff from deferral, 
SD(r1, r2 . . . rk) = 0. By contrast, the future expected payoff 
from attacking (SA) an individual of the unfamiliar prey type 
under the same conditions is:
S
r r
r
S r
r
r
f
A
k
i
k
i
i
k
i
( ,
)
[ ( ,
,
,
,
)
]
1
2
1
1
1
…
=
…
+
…
+
=
∑
π
(7.1)
where πi is the expected probability that the prey item is 
of profitability class i. In effect, this estimate of future payoff 
represents the immediate expected payoff from attacking 
the prey item, weighted by its likelihood i.e. (
i
k
i
if
=
∑
1 π
) 
plus the future payoff for all its potential future encounters 
(assuming it makes optimal decisions) weighted by their 
likelihoods, i.e. 
i
k
i
i
k
S r
r
r
=
∑
…
+
…
1
1
1
π
( ,
,
,
,
) . Clearly the 
estimated probabilities of belonging to a given profitability 
class (πi) will depend on its current information (r1, r2 . . . rk), 
but these beliefs will be updated as more information is 
gained about the profitability of the unfamiliar prey type. 
A convenient way to represent updated beliefs is Bayesian 
learning—in which prior beliefs are converted to pos-
terior beliefs as new information is gained. If we employ  
a Dirichlet distribution (D[α1, α2 . . . αk]) to represent the 
priors (and consequently the posteriors) then at any stage 
π
α
α
i
i
i
i
k
i
i
r
r
=
+
+
=
∑
(
)
(
)
1
where αi is a concentration parameter  
of the initial Dirichlet prior, reflecting 
the initial relative confidence that the 
prey type is of profitability class i.
By working backwards from the maximum number of 
­trials N, we can deduce the optimal decision for a predator 
at each informational state (r1, r2 . . . rk) and hence its optimal 
sampling strategy. The above approach assumes that the 
number of unfamiliar prey N is known, but the model is 
readily generalized to identify the optimal sampling strategy 
when the density of unfamiliar prey also has to be estimated 
(see Sherratt, 2011; Aubier et al., 2017 for more details).

110
AVOIDING ATTACK
diminish (and indeed reach an asymptote) the more 
prey there are with this appearance, just as Müller 
had argued (Sherratt, 2011).
What is the optimal sampling strategy for a preda-
tor when the prospective mimics differ in unprofit-
ability? In general, predators should sample fewer 
individuals of an unprofitable prey type before com-
plete rejection the more costly they are to attack 
(Sherratt, 2011). Indeed, if an unfamiliar prey was suf-
ficiently rare and the costs of attacking prey should 
they prove to be unprofitable sufficiently high, pred-
ators should refrain from attacking them altogether. 
This is because both the future value of information 
and the immediate payoff from attack are estimated 
to be low. While differences in unprofitability and 
abundance among species can collectively combine 
to influence which of the species faces the strongest 
selection for mimicry, the basic tenets of Müller’s 
model in terms of selection for a shared warning sig-
nal remain (for a formal demonstration, see Aubier 
et al., 2017). We return to consider experimental data 
on the sampling strategies of predators in section 7.5.1. 
We also consider how Müller’s theory applies when 
­co-mimics to differ in unprofitability in section 7.5.6.
7.4  Evidence for Müller’s hypothesis
Here we discuss evidence for Müller’s hypothesis. 
We begin by considering field-based evidence for 
the general form of positive frequency-dependent 
selection anticipated by Müller. We then consider 
more focussed studies on predators themselves that 
have attempted to elucidate the cognitive basis of 
selection for warning signal uniformity.
7.4.1  Field assessments of the benefits  
of adopting a common warning signal
There has been a range of field experiments to 
assess the benefits of adopting a common warning 
signal. Heliconius butterflies have been the predom-
inant study species, but there have also been a num-
ber of recent studies on other groups, notably on 
poison frogs.
One of the earliest field experiments to test the 
advantages of Müllerian mimicry was described by 
Benson (1972)—see Figure 7.5a. Working in Costa 
Rica, Benson (1972) stained part of the forewings 
of  a group of Heliconius erato butterflies, creating 
a non-mimetic form (red band stained black) and a 
mock-treated control (similar area of black stained 
black, in order to control for the effects of painting). 
The sample sizes of individuals marked were rela-
tively low, but by re-sighting individuals at roosting 
sites it was possible to estimate two indices of 
selective (dis)advantage: mortality and beak marks. 
In the first year of study (1968), the non-mimetic 
forms had lower estimated longevity than their 
mock-treated controls, while in both years (1968 and 
1969) the wing damage was higher in non-mimetic 
forms than the mock-treated controls and unaltered 
H. erato combined. Although these results are entirely 
consistent with Müllerian mimicry, it should be 
borne in mind that beak-marked butterflies have 
(by definition) escaped and remain alive.
In a subsequent study, Mallet & Barton (1989) 
reciprocally transferred local races of H. erato (‘post-
man’ and ‘rayed’) across their narrow hybrid zone 
in northern Peru (see Figure 7.5b) so that they could 
evaluate the relative success of forms that were rare 
(individuals transferred across the hybrid zone) 
with forms that were common (controls caught, 
marked, and released on the same side of the hybrid 
zone). Overall, proportionately fewer experimental 
(i.e. novel rare morph) butterflies were recaptured 
than controls (i.e. established common morphs). 
Among recaptures, a higher proportion of the rare 
morph than the common control morphs of H. erato 
carried beak marks, suggesting that predation (most 
likely by jacamars) played some role in generating 
differences in establishment rates. Indeed, the dif-
ferences in survival rate between experimental and 
control releases were individually significant at two 
sites where jacamars were common, and not signifi-
cant at the two sites where jacamars were perceived 
rare or absent.
In an even more ambitious field study, Kapan 
(2001) made use of the unusual polymorphism 
exhibited by Heliconius cydno in western Ecuador 
(Figure 7.5c). Two colour morphs (yellow and white) 
of this species resemble two different species: H. 
eleuchia (yellow) and H. sapho (white) respectively. 
Where H. eleuchia and H. sapho occur in the same 
locality, the yellow and white colour morphs of H. 
cydno vary in frequency. Yellow and white H. cydno 
were caught at two source sites and released in 

The evolution and maintenance of Müllerian mimicry 
111
other sites that were dominated by a particular co-
mimic. Treatments involved the introduction of a 
morph that differed from the dominant co-mimic 
while in the controls the forms were similar. Overall 
a lower proportion of treatment (rare morph) indi-
viduals were re-sighted than control individuals, 
and these individuals had both lower initial estab-
lishment rates and higher subsequent disappearance 
rates. If predators quickly learn to avoid morphs, 
then one might expect that there would be little dif-
ference in survivorship of controls and treatments 
when they were released at high density. Indeed, 
release density also affected survival differences: 
while there was a significant difference in the esti-
mated life expectancy of treated and control butter-
flies that were released at low density, there was no 
such effect at high density. Of course, we still need 
to understand how polymorphism in H. cydno can 
persist when one might expect that distasteful 
butterflies should converge on a single shared 
warning coloration. Kapan (2001) suggested that 
the solution may lie in geographically variable 
selection, or  relaxed selection at higher density, 
but  we leave consideration of polymorphism in 
Müllerian mimicry systems to section 7.5.5.
Researchers have increasingly been using artificial 
models to compare rates of predation between vari-
ants of mimetic phenotypes. In a recent experiment, 
Chouteau et al. (2016) placed artificial wax models 
of butterflies with coloured paper wings in tran-
sects at six different locations in northern Peru 
(Figure 7.6a,b). These artificial models (over 100 of 
each colour form) were designed to match natural 
colour variants of H. numata that varied geograph-
ically (in some locations certain colour patterns 
were rare, in other locations the same colour pattern 
was common). Models of the common palatable 
brown butterfly Pierella hyceta were also distributed 
to assess the overall intensity of predation in each 
area. In several locations the models with exotic 
(rare) colour patterns showed signs of attack more 
frequently than the intermediate and common colour 
patterns for that area. Moreover, after fitting a gen-
eralized linear mixed model to their data (available 
in their Supplementary Information), it is evident that 
while relative frequency of the phenotype in the area 
was a highly significant predictor of attack rates on 
the various artificial models and attack rates varied 
between locations, the specific colour pattern pheno-
type had no detectable influence per se. Thus, it is 
clear that there is strong localized selection imposed 
by predators for colour pattern uniformity, even in 
this species that is known to exhibit local colour 
polymorphism.
Chouteau et al. (2016) note that even individuals 
with the appearance of the common morph are not 
H. erato peterivana
H. erato emma
H. erato favorinus
Polymorphic
forms of
H. cydno alithea
H. eleuchla eleusinus
H. sapho candidus
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 7.5  Field tests of Müllerian mimicry. (a) In Benson’s (1972) experiment the establishment success of altered and mock-treated H. erato 
butterflies were compared. (b) In Mallet & Barton’s (1989) study, different forms of H. erato were reciprocally transferred across their hybrid zone 
and their establishment success compared with controls moved within each area. (c) In Kapan’s (2001) experiment, white and yellow forms of 
H. cydno were separately transferred to sites dominated by white co-model (H.sapho) and the yellow co-model (H. eleuchia) and their 
establishment success compared. From Kapan (2001), re-drawn from Nature with permission (see Plate 11).

112
AVOIDING ATTACK
completely protected from predation (an observation 
seen in other experiments such as those with poison 
frogs), leading the authors to suggest (in contrast 
to  earlier mark-recapture studies indicating rapid 
learning) that predator knowledge is saturated only 
for the most common warning signals. However, 
there are many reasons why artificial prey with the 
common appearance might experience some preda-
tion. Of course, any influx of naive predators in 
the  area would also explain why morphs are not 
completely protected. Moreover, given their rest-
ing positions and lack of movement, some birds 
might suspect that the butterflies are not what 
they  appear to be. Perhaps most importantly, in 
adding 100 additional individuals of a given colour 
pattern then the perceived local density of this 
phenotype will be augmented, leading predators 
to sample a few more of them to confidently estab-
lish their (un)profitability (Sherratt,  2011). In this 
sense, there may be a Heisenberg uncertainty prin-
ciple ­operating—in conducting well-replicated field 
experiments to  assess the nature of frequency 
dependence in Müllerian mimicry systems, the 
underlying conditions are also altered.
Not all experiments establishing positive fre-
quency dependence have been conducted with 
Neotropical butterflies. The leaf beetle Oreina glori­
osa is a relatively sedentary metallic-coloured beetle 
that is chemically defended by cardenolides and 
found in isolated populations throughout the moun-
tains of Europe. Its potential predators include 
European robins (Erithacus rubecula) and Eurasian 
wrens (Troglodytes troglodytes). Other leaf beetle spe-
cies of the genus Oreina tend to share the same local 
colour patterns and chemical defences through 
sequestration/synthesis. Borer et al. (2010) was able 
to crudely classify the leaf beetle community in 20 
separate high-altitude locations as being dominated 
by the metallic green phenotype or metallic blue 
phenotype. After tethering 10 green and 10 blue O. 
gloriosa at these locations, the authors found that 
beetles that matched the locally predominant colour 
morph had a significantly higher survivorship (by a 
factor of 1.67) compared to those beetles that did not 
match, once again indicating the potential for local-
ized positive frequency dependence.
Analogous experiments have also been carried 
out with dendrobatid frogs. For example, Dendro­
bates tinctorius exhibits significant geographical 
variation in colour pattern in French Guyana. To 
understand the factors that might maintain this 
variation, Noonan & Comeault (2009) placed out 
hand-painted clay frogs that resembled the local 
phenotype (yellow dorsum, black legs), along with 
clay frogs that resembled those from a coastal popu-
lation (blue legs, black dorsum, yellow stripes) and 
a cryptic brown form. They found that brightly 
­coloured novel forms were more likely to suffer an 
attack from avian predators (deduced from charac-
teristic peck marks) than both the local aposematic 
form and cryptic forms. Nevertheless, this study 
was conducted in only one locality and (like 
Figure 7.6  A collection of artificial butterflies (coloured paper wings with wax bodies) with patterns resembling variants of H. numata, placed 
out in the field by Chouteau et al. (2016) to quantify the local susceptibility of each colour form to predation (b) an example of one such butterfly 
deployed in the field. Photos courtesy of Mathieu Chouteau (see Plate 12).

The evolution and maintenance of Müllerian mimicry 
113
Benson’s classical study) could potentially have 
arisen from frequency-­independent rather than fre-
quency-dependent selection, with models display-
ing the yellow ­dorsum simply attacked less. In 
a  more complete  reciprocal ‘transfer’ experiment, 
Chouteau & Angers (2011) noted that the dendro-
batid frog Ranitomeya imitator had a vivid green 
reticulated appearance in a high-elevation valley 
in  northern Peru, yet exhibited a distinct gold-
striped  pattern at a lowland site just 15km away. 
Motivated by these observations, they placed 900 
hand-painted clay frog models at each of the two 
sites. The clay models comprised 300 frogs with the 
locally dominant colour pattern, 300 of the locally 
novel pattern, and 300 resembling a non-aposematic 
(brown) frog (see Figure 7.7). Although attack rates 
were relatively low in each of the sites (10–14 per 
cent), in each locality the exotic morph experienced 
up to four times more attacks by avian predators 
(identifiable through their characteristic peck marks) 
than the local one, and two times more than the 
non-conspicuous phenotype. This form of positive 
frequency-dependent selection readily explains selec-
tion for common warning signals in the manner 
that Müller had anticipated.
There has been a range of field-based experiments 
investigating the nature of frequency dependence 
using artificial baits that do not resemble any par-
ticular organism. While unnatural, they do have the 
benefit that they are easier to replicate and manipu-
late. In an early experiment, Greenwood et al. (1981) 
presented wild birds with yellow and red pastry 
baits (in a 1:9 ratio and in a 9:1 ratio), both of which 
had been made unpalatable using quinine sulfate. 
While birds showed a frequency-independent pref-
erence for red baits they showed no tendency to 
consume disproportionately more of the rarer form 
of unpalatable prey. In a subsequent experiment, 
Greenwood et al. (1989) presented yellow and red 
pastry baits (made equally distasteful with quinine 
hemisulfate) at different ratios (1:9 and 9:1) to gar-
den birds, this time with separate control popula-
tions involving similar pastry baits without quinine. 
In this experiment disproportionately more of the 
rare forms of distasteful baits were indeed attacked 
by birds. Intriguingly, more of the more common 
distasteful form were taken in the process, a result 
we return to in section 7.5.1. No such frequency 
dependence was observed in the palatable control 
populations (which were consumed at far higher 
rates), suggesting that the frequency dependence 
arose due to aversion learning.
7.4.2  Direct observations of predators reacting 
to warningly coloured unpalatable prey
Much of the fieldwork on Müllerian mimicry has 
understandably focussed on the relative rates of 
Figure 7.7  Clay models of frogs (bottom row) hand-crafted by Chouteau & Angers (2011) to resemble two aposematic phenotypes (striped and 
reticulated) of Ranitomeya imitator and a non-conspicuous frog (top row). Images courtesy of Mathieu Chouteau (see Plate 13).

114
AVOIDING ATTACK
survival of different prey phenotypes at different 
relative frequencies, but we can also understand 
the  processes that generate positive frequency-
dependent selection by directly observing preda-
tor behaviour. For example, one of the most basic 
assumptions of Müller’s hypothesis is that there is a 
degree of learned avoidance of unpalatable prey—if 
avoidance were always innate then there would be 
no predators to educate and no burden to share 
(Müller,  1879). It has long been recognized that 
some predators have evolved innate avoidance for 
highly dangerous prey. For example, naive avian 
predators will tend to avoid coral snake patterns 
(Smith, 1975, 1977). Likewise, naive predators fre-
quently show heightened wariness when presented 
with novel and/or conspicuously patterned prey 
(e.g. Schuler & Roper,  1992). However, there are 
now numerous studies (albeit often with artificial 
prey) demonstrating that predators often need to 
learn to associate colour patterns with unprofitable 
experiences. These experiments typically show that 
predators gradually reduce their attack rates on con-
spicuously coloured unprofitable prey over a series 
of test sessions (Alatalo & Mappes, 1996; Ham et al., 
2006; Kazemi et al., 2014; Skelhorn et al., 2016a). 
For example, Dell’Aglio et al. (2016) placed out 
chromatically and achromatically coloured artifi-
cial heliconid butterflies with novel warning pat-
terns (found only in the Amazon Basin) along three 
trails in Panama in two separate 4-day trials, 5 days 
apart. These artificial prey were rendered unpalat-
able using quinine monohydrochloride dehydrate. 
While the attack rates on the achromatic butterflies 
was higher than the chromatic butterflies, the pro-
portion of both heliconid-like prey types attacked 
declined in successive trials. Likewise, Chouteau & 
Angers (2011) found that the frequency of new pre-
dation attempts on their clay frog models declined 
over time.
Field and semi-field experiments with relevant 
natural predators of heliconid butterflies have 
also provided evidence of learned avoidance. For 
example, jacamars specialize in preying on fast-
flying insects such as dragonflies and butter-
flies  and have long been implicated as selective 
agents for Batesian and Müllerian mimicry. When 
exposed to Neotropical butterflies for the first time, 
naive young jacamars tend to attack the unpalatable 
butterflies without inhibition yet subsequently 
reject them, showing learned aversion (Chai, 1996). 
By contrast, Langham (2004) presented 80 wild-
caught (hence somewhat experienced) caged adult 
rufous-tailed jacamars (Galbula ruficauda) with 
individuals of three morphs of Heliconius butter-
flies—the local morph of H. erato, and two other 
morphs of H. erato (red and black) that were simply 
artificial morphs created with permanent ink. 
Overall, the novel (red or black) Heliconius was 
attacked by 29 of 80 jacamars (36 per cent) in these 
first trials, while the local morph was completely 
avoided. Clearly for adults of this predator species, 
at least, its avoidance of butterflies exhibiting the 
familiar warning signals was complete. More 
importantly, it also shows that the jacamar uses 
subtle differences in colour patterns when making 
discriminative decisions and is capable of selecting 
out novel variants. In follow-up work, 46 of the 
same birds were re-caught from between 4 to 429 
days since original testing and tested again in the 
same manner. A total of 39 of the birds showed the 
same attack predilections in terms of complete 
avoidance or attacking one or the other novel 
morphs, suggesting that they had highly repeat-
able behavioural responses.
In an earlier study, Pinheiro (2003) released live 
mimetic Neotropical butterflies (all participants in 
Müllerian mimicry rings) and non-mimetic butter-
flies close to predatory tropical kingbirds (Tyrannus 
melancholicus) and cliff flycatchers (Hirundinea fer­
ruginea). To evaluate the role of the likely prior 
experience of these predators, he conducted his 
experiments in three different Amazonian habitats 
(rain forest, city, and low growth ‘canga’ vegeta-
tion), where only particular species of butterflies co-
occur. The highest proportion of sight-rejections by 
birds occurred at the forest site where cliff flycatch-
ers selectively attacked the cryptic and palatable 
species and avoided almost all the Müllerian mim-
ics on sight. By contrast, the cliff flycatchers in the 
canga did not discriminate among butterflies and 
attacked most mimetic and non-mimetic species. 
Tropical kingbirds in the city also attacked most 
non-mimetic species, but did tend to sight-reject 
some species of Müllerian mimic.
Following Chouteau & Angers’ (2011) field dem-
onstration of frequency-dependent selection for 

The evolution and maintenance of Müllerian mimicry 
115
common forms of the dendrobatid frog Ranitomeya 
imitator (see section 7.4.1), Stuckert et al. (2014b) 
conducted trials in which they presented young 
chickens (Gallus domesticus) with either the spotted 
morph of R. variabilis, the spotted morph of R. imita­
tor that resembles it, or the striped morph of R. imi­
tator that does not have this appearance. All chicks 
initially expressed a degree of interest in the frogs, 
and a number picked them up, but some chicks 
expressed innate neophobia and did not taste the 
frogs they were presented with. Comparing hesita-
tion times in the pre-learning and post-learning ­trials 
it was clear that chicks learned to avoid the brightly 
coloured frogs. However, both striped and spotted 
phenotypes were subsequently avoided at similar 
rates, independent of the training environment. So, 
while the work demonstrates that avian predators 
can learn to avoid this type of prey it does not directly 
explain the localized frequency dependence that 
had previously been observed in this ­system. Of 
course domestic chickens are not wild predators 
and they have been bred to put on weight. Moreover, 
as the authors note, this high degree of generalization 
may have arisen as a consequence of the experi-
mental design (which re-used chicks, presumably 
for ethical reasons, so that the predators had previ-
ously been exposed to frogs with both phenotypes). 
We return to stimulus generalization in section 7.5.3.
7.5  Questions and controversies
7.5.1  Do predators take a fixed n in aversion 
learning?
As noted in section 7.1.1, Müller speculated that 
predators would take approximately a fixed num-
ber of prey with a given appearance before com-
pletely avoiding them, when making his case for 
positive frequency-dependent selection on warning 
signals. However, this was simply for illustration. 
As reported above, Greenwood et al. (1989) found 
that while disproportionately more of a rarer form 
of distasteful baits were attacked by garden birds, 
more of the common form of baits were attacked, 
suggesting that the number sampled (n) before 
rejection increases with prey density. Lindström et al. 
(2001) likewise found that while the proportion 
of  unpalatable artificial prey attacked by captive 
great tits declined with increasing density available, 
the total number of unpalatable prey consumed 
increased with absolute density. Analogous phe-
nomena have since been found in a variety of sys-
tems. For example, Beatty et al. (2004) conducted 
experiments in which humans searched for artificial 
computer-generated prey, some of which were costly 
to attack. Once again, it was found that the per cap-
ita ‘mortality’ of the unprofitable forms declined as 
their frequency increased, but that the human pred-
ators attacked more of the common form of the 
unprofitable prey available. To explore this phe-
nomenon further, Rowland et al. (2010c) presented 
male chicks with mixtures of green, palatable 
(water-­coated) and red, unpalatable (quinine-coated) 
crumbs. The starting density of edible crumbs was 
fixed at 10 or 20, but the density of unpalatable 
crumbs was varied from 5, to 10, to 30 for each edible 
prey density (6 treatments overall). Chicks in all 
treatment groups readily learned to discriminate 
between quinine-coated red prey and water-coated 
green prey. Moreover, the mean per capita attack 
rates (total attacked/total presented) of unpalatable 
prey decreased as the number of unpalatable prey 
in the population increased. Once again, however, 
chicks attacked significantly more unpalatable red 
crumbs the more that were available.
Why would predators sample more unprofitable 
prey before the experiment ends? Greenwood et al. 
(1989) suggested that it may have resulted from 
predators leaving the study area before they were 
fully educated to avoid the rare form, but after they 
were educated about the common form (see also 
Chouteau et al.,  2016 above). Mallet (2001) simi-
larly suggested that a possible explanation for the 
Lindström et al. (2001) results was that learning was 
not complete. However, Beatty et al. (2004) exam-
ined the encounter and attack sequences of the 
human volunteers and noted that even rare unprof-
itable prey tended to be rejected by the end of the 
experiment, indicating that avoidance learning was 
complete. An alternative explanation for the phe-
nomenon may be that predators occasionally return 
to attacking the more common unprofitable type 
since the opportunity cost of not attacking them, 
should some prove to be palatable, is higher (Beatty 
et al.,  2004). Sherratt (2011) formalized this argu-
ment, showing that as the density of an unfamiliar 

116
AVOIDING ATTACK
prey type increases then information about their 
properties increases in value, so that predators 
should sample more of them.
7.5.2  Is one signal better than two?
If Müller’s theory was correct then the positive 
­frequency dependence generated by predators 
(‘strength in numbers’) should lead to one signal 
in  a given number of unprofitable prey incurring 
lower overall per capita mortality than if the same 
number of prey had two signals. So, while the 
per  capita mortality on a given unprofitable prey 
type should decline with increasing density, another 
comparison can be made—unprofitable prey that 
exhibit two distinct signals (some with one signal, 
the other with another) should experience higher 
overall mortality than prey with a single signal. 
Note at the outset, however, that learning to associ-
ate two separate signals with unprofitability may 
not be particularly challenging; by contrast, learn-
ing to associate many different signals with profit-
ability and unprofitability is likely to be much more 
demanding. Therefore one might expect the inten-
sity of selection for Müllerian mimicry to increase 
with community complexity (Beatty et al., 2004; see 
section 7.5.3).
The above ‘one signal is better than two’ predic-
tion has been tested on a number occasions, with 
mixed results. For example, in a ‘novel world’ 
experiment, Rowe et al. (2004) presented individual 
wild-caught great tits with palatable and unpal-
atable artificial prey (slices of almond, rendered 
unpalatable by soaking in chloroquinine phosphate) 
hidden under cards carrying particular symbols. 
Either 20 palatable and 20 unpalatable prey were 
presented, or just 40 unpalatable prey alone. The 
unpalatable prey were presented either with a sin-
gle signal, or in two forms (50 per cent of each type 
that were judged similar or more distinct in appear-
ance). The authors found that the extent of pattern 
similarity between co-mimics (identical, similar, or 
dissimilar) had no detectable influence on their 
overall survivorship. Thus, two patterns did not 
appear any more difficult to learn to avoid than just 
one (although in the last two trials there was a trend 
of indicating that increasing pattern similarity 
reduced mortality). Related experiments conducted 
as part of more complex designs, in which co-mimics 
vary in unpalatability, have likewise reported that 
the predation pressure on unpalatable prey with 
two signals is not always significantly higher than 
on the same number of unpalatable prey with 
just  one signal (Ihalainen et al.,  2007; Lindström 
et al., 2006).
Nevertheless, Rowland et al. (2010a) argued 
that the signals of each prey type used in the Rowe 
et al. (2004) experiment had shared features, so 
the study may be more appropriately considered a 
comparison of the success of perfect and imperfect 
mimics. Likewise, simultaneously varying both the 
level of unpalatability and signal design (of uncer-
tain conspicuousness and discriminability) can 
make inferences difficult. Motivated by the above 
challenges, Rowland et al. (2010a) conducted a 
‘novel world’ experiment involving wild-caught 
great tits foraging for cryptic palat-able and con-
spicuous unpalatable prey (almonds with or with-
out chloroquine phosphate) hidden under cards 
with one of two signals (a black-filled square and 
a symbol resembling a spoked wheel). These sym-
bols were confirmed at the outset to be approxi-
mately equally visible when palatable. The symbols 
also generated similar avoidance learning patterns 
when unpalatable, and they were shown to be dis-
criminable in that the birds did not completely gen-
eralize their learned avoidances to prey bearing the 
alternative symbol. Rowland et al. (2010a) then pre-
sented great tits with 50 cryptic palatable prey, and 
50 unpalatable models, with or without an add-
itional 50 unpalatable mimics that had either the 
same symbol as the model (generating 100 unpalat-
able prey with one signal) or a different symbol 
(generating 50 unpalatable prey with one symbol 
and another 50 with the alternate symbol). The 
overall per capita mortality of unpalatable prey 
declined as their density was increased from 50 to 
100, a result readily understood in terms of an over-
all dilution effect (trials were always ended after 
the birds killed 40 prey items in total). More import-
antly, however, the authors found that the model 
had significantly lower mortality when presented 
alongside prey sharing the same symbol, compared 
to when presented with alternative prey with a dif-
ferent symbol.

The evolution and maintenance of Müllerian mimicry 
117
7.5.3  How does Müllerian mimicry evolve?
How does Müllerian mimicry evolve from a puta-
tive starting point of two or more species with dis-
tinct appearances? Assuming the simplest case of 
just two species, does one species evolve to mimic 
the other (‘advergence’), or do both species evolve 
towards one another in appearance (‘convergence’)? 
As we will argue, to fully address this question we 
also need to consider the phenomenon of gener­
alization, since the extent of generalization will 
influence the degree to which intermediate pheno-
types are protected from predation and hence the 
nature of the adaptive landscape.
Müller (1878) argued that mimicry would fre-
quently involve convergence (English translation): 
‘the question of which one of two species is the original 
and which one is the copy is an irrelevant question; each 
had an advantage from becoming similar to the other; 
they could have converged to each other’. Dixey (1920) 
shared this view, labelling such reciprocal advan-
tages of mimicry as ‘diaposematism’. In effect, the 
early proponents of diaposematism argued that a 
mutant of a common species that resembled a rarer 
species may not lose all of its protection from resem-
bling the common species—on the contrary, it may 
gain as a ‘jack of all trades’ by looking like both. 
Intuitively, one might expect convergence of this 
nature would be more likely to arise when the spe-
cies are already reasonably similar in appearance, 
so that intermediates would survive at high rates. 
Moreover, if there are two stimuli that a predator is 
learning to avoid, then there may be a form of 
‘peak shift’, in which a predator’s maximum aver-
sive response arises not around any one of the 
stimuli, but at some intermediate point (Balogh & 
Leimar, 2005).
Ironically, however, at face value Müller’s simple 
model beginning with readily differentiable (i.e. no 
intermediate) phenotypes suggests that selection for 
mimicry is a one-way street, i.e. advergent (Marshall, 
1908). In particular, it has already been argued (sec-
tion 7.1.1) that if there are two unprofitable species 
(1 and 2) then species 1 should be selected as the 
mimic (and species 2 as the model, but not vice versa) 
if (n1/a1)> (n2/a2) where n1 and n2 refer to the number 
of each type consumed through avoidance learning. 
As more mimetic mutants arise and are favoured, 
the selective pressure for advergent mimicry only 
increases.
So far, the empirical evidence available has tended 
to support advergence (see Mallet, 1999 for a detailed 
discussion), although such inferences are not always 
clear-cut. For example, despite being more abun-
dant and having more toxins than its models (Stuckert 
et al., 2014a) the poison arrow frog Ranitomeya imi­
tator appears to have adverged to resemble differ-
ent  model species in different geographical areas 
(Symula et al., 2001; Yeager et al., 2012) most likely 
as it spread into new areas from rarity. Likewise, 
Marek & Bond (2009) have argued that Brachoria 
millipedes likely evolved the colour patterns of the 
more established and widespread species (but see 
Merrill & Jiggins,  2009). Similarly, ecological and 
genetic arguments (Mallet,  1999; Flanagan et al., 
2004) suggest that Müllerian mimicry among H. 
melpomene and H. erato may have arisen mostly 
via  advergence of H. melpomene towards H. erato. 
However, historical reconstruction based on genetic 
analyses by Hines et al. (2011) suggest that while H. 
melpomene adverged on the red-banded patterns 
of  H. erato, both species acquired the Amazonian 
rayed mimetic pattern around the same time, mak-
ing it harder to discern the leader and/or follower.
Despite continuing empirical and theoretical 
debates, the advergent–convergent dichotomy may 
well be too simplistic. For example, it is possible 
that even when two species experience selection to 
resemble one another, differences in the mutational 
space available and intensity of selection produces 
an outcome which is predominantly, but not exclu-
sively, advergent in nature (Balogh & Leimar, 2005). 
Likewise, Sheppard et al. (1985) noted that while 
Müllerian mimicry might involve an initial stage 
of advergence (which is particularly likely if one of 
the species was cryptic and the other conspicuous), 
mutual convergence in both species might subse-
quently be selected for as the species come to resem-
ble one another (Franks & Sherratt, 2007). Note also 
that while harder to prove, a shared appearance 
among closely related Müllerian mimics may arise 
simply through conservation of the ancestral state. 
This is precisely what Machado et al. (2004) found 
in their analysis of the yellow-black pattern in 
chemically defended soldier beetles (Cantharidae). 
More recently, Wright (2011) made a case for the 

118
AVOIDING ATTACK
conservative co-evolution of colour patterns among 
the  venomous Synodontis catfish species of Lake 
Tanganyika, noting that those species confined to 
Lake Tanganyika were more similar in appearance 
than related Synodontis species occurring outside 
of  the lake. In this way, predation maintains the 
similarity, while shared phylogeny readily explains 
its origins.
Since Müllerian mimicry can in theory evolve 
even by small mutational steps when the extent of 
generalization (the phenomenon of attributing com-
mon properties to distinguishable objects) across 
colour patterns is wide (Balogh & Leimar,  2005; 
Ruxton et al., 2008), then it is important to consider 
how broad generalization tends to be in natural sys-
tems, and when and why predators would tend to 
generalize broadly. One insight as to the breadth of 
generalization exhibited by natural predators comes 
from considering co-occurring mimicry rings, and 
comparing the success of intermediate phenotypes. 
Indeed, the very persistence of multiple co-existing 
mimicry rings (see section 7.5.5) serves to illustrate 
the fact that predators do not simply generalize across 
all conspicuous forms. In most Heliconius species, a 
single mimetic colour pattern is maintained within 
populations by positive frequency-dependent selec-
tion (see section 7.4.1). However, H. numata is unusual 
in having a high number of morphs present in each 
locality, with each morph a close Müllerian mimic 
of a coexisting ithomiine species (Joron et al., 1999). 
The presence of these multiple co-existing forms 
allowed researchers the opportunity to investigate 
the relative success of crosses that are intermediate 
in phenotype.
To understand why such intermediates are so rare, 
and the types of experiment that have been con-
ducted, we first need to understand more about the 
fascinating genetics of H. numata. Genetic variation 
in wing colour pattern morphs in the species is 
­controlled by about 20 genes clustered in a single 
genomic region (hence low recombination) referred 
to as the ‘supergene P’, with a range of ‘superalleles’ 
(Joron et al.,  2006). With so many morphs in the 
same locality, and plenty of opportunity for hybrid-
ization, one might wonder how the polymorphic 
mimicry of different species is ever maintained. It 
turns out that the majority of crosses between local 
phenotypes resembling different models continue to 
resemble one model or another because of the strong 
hierarchical dominance that has evolved among 
sympatric (but not parapatric) superalleles (Joron 
et al., 2006). Nevertheless, intermediate heterozygous 
phenotypes (the products of rare recombination or 
incomplete dominance) can occasionally be gener-
ated. In an ambitious experiment, Arias et al. (2016a) 
deployed over 5000 artificial butterflies (comprising 
paper wings with wax bodies) that displayed colour 
patterns exhibited by H. numata at eight sites in 
northern Peru. Included in the colour pattern vari-
ants were mimetic forms, intermediate phenotypes, 
exotic aposematic morphs of the species (absent 
from the local community but found elsewhere), 
and cryptic phenotypes resembling a palatable 
butterfly species. After 72 hours exposure in the 
field, it was found that both the non-mimetic exotic 
morphs and intermediates were attacked more than 
the local mimetic forms. These results suggest clear 
adaptive peaks associated with locally abundant 
mimetic morphs, surrounded by valleys in which 
intermediate phenotypes are purged. Not only do 
such results help explain why the unusual genetic 
dominance may have evolved in this species, but 
they also indicate that the agents of selection were 
relatively picky with relatively narrow general-
ization around the ithomiine models they were 
familiar with. Indeed, simply having aposematic 
coloration provided no clear benefit to the exotic 
morph since it was attacked more frequently than the 
cryptic morph.
The phenomenon of generalization has been 
widely researched by psychologists but it is of 
increasing interest to evolutionary biologists inter-
ested in signal evolution. Müller did not consider the 
appearance of profitable prey at all when making his 
arguments, and in effect he assumed that predators 
learn to recognize the characteristic features of 
each and every distinct unpalatable prey type inde-
pendently. Yet, as Fisher (1930) observed, ‘being recog­
nized as unpalatable is equivalent to avoiding confusion 
with palatable prey’, so categorization of prey types will 
almost inevitably involve seeking rules to distinguish 
profitable from unprofitable prey (MacDougall & 
Dawkins, 1998; Sherratt & Beatty, 2003). For example, 
if most prey with a yellow stripe are generally found 
to be unpalatable then a predator may think twice 
about attacking an unfamiliar prey item with a  

The evolution and maintenance of Müllerian mimicry 
119
yellow stripe, even if it is readily distinguishable 
from other such prey with yellow stripes. In this way, 
even unprofitable prey species that are readily distin-
guishable may mutually reduce one another’s attack 
rate, so long as they share a common appearance 
property (Chittka & Osorio, 2007).
While theoretical treatments (Balogh & Leimar, 
2005; Ruxton et al., 2008) have tended to consider 
generalization curves immutable, it is clear pred-
ators should be prepared to generalize widely when 
the relative cost of attacking an unprofitable prey 
item is high. Indeed, Kikuchi & Sherratt (2015) 
recently showed that it would sometimes pay pred-
ators to lump unfamiliar prey that had common 
traits together—even if they could be phenotypically 
distinguished—if learning more about them sep-
arately was potentially expensive. In effect, while 
learning to avoid moderately distasteful prey may 
involve relatively narrow generalization curves, it 
is likely that learning to avoid lethal prey would 
involve very broad generalization—so that any 
unfamiliar prey sharing some of the characteristics 
of prey known to be highly unprofitable would be 
given a wide berth.
Other factors may also affect the breadth of gen-
eralization. In particular, predators only have a 
finite capacity for processing information (Sherratt 
& Peet-Pare, 2017), so one might expect that simple 
(hence broadly applicable) discriminative rules are 
likely to be employed when the phenotypic diver-
sity of profitable and unprofitable prey phenotypes 
is high (MacDougall & Dawkins, 1998). In support, 
Beatty et al. (2004) conducted experiments on humans 
foraging for artificial computer-generated prey and 
concluded that imperfect mimetic forms are more 
likely to spread in complex communities compared 
with simple communities, because of the need for 
predators to adopt simple rules of thumb to deal with 
the high signal diversity. Likewise, in laboratory 
­trials, Ihalainen et al. (2012) found that only those 
great tits that had foraged for prey in communities 
of artificial prey with little signal diversity actively 
selected against inaccurate mimics. There is also 
gathering comparative evidence that community 
complexity can influence the nature of selection for 
Müllerian mimicry. For example, Wilson et al. (2013) 
found that the extent of mimetic similarity in vel-
vet ants varied between Müllerian mimicry rings, 
and suggested that this variation likely arose from 
there being wider generalization in more diverse 
communities.
In sum, Müller’s model predicts advergence, and 
empirical data tend to support this view. However, 
when the unprofitable species are relatively similar 
in appearance and/or the predators generalize 
widely (an outcome particularly likely when the 
prey are highly unprofitable and/or the prey com-
munity is particularly diverse), then it is possible that 
there is ultimately selection favouring convergence 
of both forms towards one another. The observation 
of mimicry rings is a reflection of the adaptive land-
scape generated by predators, and the fact that 
there are distinct peaks clearly shows the converse: 
there are also deep valleys where intermediates are 
selected against.
7.5.4  Why are mimetic species variable in form 
between areas?
We have already described examples of Müllerian 
mimics, such as Heliconius erato and H. melpomene, 
which, while locally monomorphic, vary consider-
ably every 100km or so ‘as if by touch of an enchanter’s 
wand’ (reported commentary of Bates in Müller 
(1879), page xxix). Analogous spatial variation has 
been reported in a number of other Müllerian mim-
ics, such as the burnet moth Zygaena ephialtes, which 
exists in four different colour forms in different 
areas throughout Europe, with each form a member 
of a different Müllerian mimicry complex (Turner, 
1971), cotton stainer bugs (genus Dysdercus) which 
show widespread coincident intraspecific variation 
in colour pattern (Zrzavy & Nedved,  1999)) and 
Eulaema bees which likewise co-vary in colour pat-
tern over South America (Dressler, 1979)– see also 
our description of Müllerian mimicry in bumble-
bees, velvet ants, and frogs (section 7.2). Although 
spatial mosaics are seen as something of a paradox 
in Müllerian mimicry systems (e.g. Langham, 2004), 
so long as there are mechanisms to generate the 
geographical diversity, their subsequent maintenance 
is a direct consequence of the frequency depend-
ence favouring common forms, imposed at limited 
spatial scales (Joron & Iwasa, 2005).
A range of theories, not mutually exclusive, have 
been put forward to explain the underlying source 

120
AVOIDING ATTACK
of the geographical diversification, particularly in 
Neotropical butterflies. For instance, one possibility 
is that local populations simply diversified from 
one another when in isolation due to Pleistocene ice 
ages. However, a variety of historical and geograph-
ical arguments have since been raised that render 
this theory unlikely (see Jiggins, 2017 for a review). 
Instead, some researchers place more emphasis on 
Wright’s ‘shifting balance’ theory (Wright, 1932) to 
explain the geographical diversification of Müllerian 
mimics (Mallet & Singer, 1987). This argument main-
tains that stochastic processes generated by genetic 
drift can help explain how novel variants might cross 
adaptive valleys and ultimately be selected upon. 
Naturally, this mechanism would be expected to be 
more powerful in small populations and in areas 
temporarily devoid of predators, such as species 
spreading into new areas. For example, Sherratt 
(2006) explored stochastic simulations which showed 
that a spatial mosaic can form under local positive 
frequency-dependence generated by Müller’s ‘fixed 
n’ rule, but only so long as there were chance effects, 
such as the temporary absence of predators from 
certain areas, that could help generate the initial 
spatial diversity. In support, Chouteau & Angers 
(2012) extracted genetic samples and conducted 
predation experiments either side of a transition 
zone in the poison frog Ranitomeya imitator in north-
ern Peru. Although transition zones may be special 
for a number of reasons, the authors concluded that 
the frog population in this zone had both high 
phenotypic diversity and relatively relaxed preda-
tion (even clay models of palatable frogs were less 
frequently attacked than elsewhere). In this way the 
hybrid zones, or simply areas with relaxed predation, 
may be important engines of phenotypic diversity, 
but precisely how these new forms might succeed 
elsewhere (or spread within the zone) is unclear.
In a memorably titled ‘Shift happens . . .’ opinion 
piece, Mallet (2010) makes a strong case for how 
shifting balance can help explain warning signal 
diversity in Heliconius  butterflies. Likewise, Jiggins 
(2017) contrasts the shifting balance and refugia 
explanations, favoring the former. Nevertheless, both 
authors suggest that selection may play some role 
in explaining the generation of phenotypic diversity 
necessary for mosaics. This selection could be 
­frequency-independent and arise through local 
­adaptation to particular abiotic (e.g. light environ-
ment) or biotic (e.g. social mating preferences, dif-
ferent predator species) environments not related to 
mimicry. However, another means through which 
novel forms may at least be initially protected is 
neophobia. Indeed, Aubier & Sherratt (2015) showed 
that the optimal sampling strategy for unfamiliar 
prey could generate spatial mosaics of co-varying 
colour patterns far more readily than Müller’s 
fixed n rule, simply as a consequence of the cau-
tiousness expressed by predators when novel forms 
were rare and the fact that attacking unprofitable 
prey is relatively costly (Figure 7.8). This adaptive 
neophobia allows particularly rare forms the chance 
to persist for long enough to increase in density, but 
once they are sufficiently common to be attacked 
then they will only thrive if they have shared 
­warning signals. In this way, neophobia can help 
generate diversity by allowing rare morphs an 
opportunity to persist, but it does not obliterate the 
positive frequency dependence maintaining mono-
morphism at higher densities. Ironically then, the 
very same (optimal) sampling behaviour that leads 
to Müllerian mimicry can also help explain the gen-
eration and maintenance of spatial polymorphisms.
Intriguingly, while the zones at which different 
phenotypic forms meet often coincide with a barrier 
to dispersal such as a major river, one can gain an 
insight as to the nature of selection from the width of 
the zone in which morphs from neighbouring areas 
intermix. As one might expect, the more movement, 
the wider the zone—but the more intense selection 
against hybrids, the narrower the zone. Indeed, the 
width of the zone is approximately proportional 
to the rate of dispersal (measured in terms of gene 
flow σ) divided by the strength of selection (meas-
ured in terms of √s) (Jiggins, 2017; Mallet & Barton, 
1989). Simulations of Aubier & Sherratt (2015) 
­confirm that low rates of dispersal are more likely 
to  generate highly patchy mosaics, which helps 
explains why transitions in Heliconius arise in the 
order of 100km, whereas the transitions in poison 
frogs arise in the order of 10km (Mallet,  2014). 
Several mathematical and simulation models suggest 
that the hybrid zones between different phenotypic 
forms can form even without physical barriers, in 
which case they can move in a manner influenced 
by the curvature of the boundary (Kawaguchi & 

The evolution and maintenance of Müllerian mimicry 
121
Sasaki,  2006; Sasaki et al.,  2002; Sherratt,  2006). 
Indeed, a well-known juncture between two forms of 
the ‘postman’ pattern of H. erato in Panama has been 
documented to move about 47 km in 17 years 
(Blum,  2002). Another intensively studied hybrid 
zone is found near Tarapoto in northern Peru where 
two forms of H. erato (and two corresponding forms 
of H. melpomene) meet. In this case, however, both the 
width and position of the hybrid zone has remained 
remarkably stable in the past quarter century (Mallet 
et al., 1990; Rosser et al., 2014). Here high levels of pre-
cipitation at the edge of the easternmost Andes may 
generate a population density trough for butterflies, 
effectively creating a barrier that traps the hybrid 
zones at the foot of the mountains. Overall, it is clear 
that local positive frequency dependence serves to 
promote local homogeneity, but it can also preserve 
regional heterogeneity once local differences have 
arisen by some other means. Hybrid zones where two 
forms meet are have understandably attracted consid-
erable interest since they highlight an intriguing dis-
continuity.
Warning colour patterns may also be used as mate 
recognition cues, so mate choice (by males and/or 
females) may serve to reinforce or undermine the 
localized frequency dependence imposed by pred-
ators. In particular, several studies have shown that 
male Heliconius butterflies exhibit preferences for 
mates that have similar wing colour patterns as 
themselves (Jiggins et al., 2001, 2004; Kronforst et al., 
2007; Merrill et al., 2011a; Finkbeiner et al., 2014). 
It turns out that male mating preferences and their 
colour patterns tend to be inherited together in 
Heliconius butterflies (Chamberlain et al.,  2009), 
while linkage mapping studies have confirmed that 
traits associated with mate preference loci map very 
closely to loci underlying colour pattern variation 
(Merrill et al., 2011b). So, colour and preference for 
colour are closely associated in these species. Since 
the local patterns within Heliconius that are pre-
ferred in mating trials are also the ones that experi-
ence less predation (e.g. Finkbeiner et al.,  2014), 
then the mating preferences observed in Heliconius 
butterflies may well have evolved as a consequence 
of the fact that inter-morph hybrid offspring with 
unusual colour patterns suffer high predation. In 
this way, selection for mimicry may generate mat-
ing preferences that further promote phenotypic 
uniformity.
A fascinating counter-example has recently been 
reported in the locally polymorphic H. numata. 
Here females of all morphs exhibit a strong aversion 
toward males displaying their own phenotype, that 
is they exhibit disassortative mating preferences 
(Chouteau et al.,  2017). The ultimate reasons for 
these diversity-generating mate preferences are 
species 1
species 2     
(a) Müller’s “ﬁxed nk”
species 1
species 2     
(b) Optimal Sampling Strategy
Figure 7.8  Examples of prey community composition in the spatial model (a 20 x 20 regular lattice, with two unprofitable species) after 500,000 
generations when (a) Müller’s “fixed n” model and (b) the optimal predator sampling strategy is implemented. The same nine distinct morphs of 
each unprofitable species were assumed possible. The local population morph composition is shown for both species, with the colour of any given 
cell indicating the dominant morph phenotype of that species in that area. Initially, all individuals were represented by the red morph. When local 
predators sample a fixed n in each local population then this monomorphic mimicry is maintained across the lattice, because rare mutant morphs 
are always attacked. However, when predators employ the optimal sampling strategy then they will often avoid attacking rare morphs, only 
attacking them when they reach a density at which they becomes worthwhile to sample. Under these conditions a diverse spatial mosaic readily 
arises, with the forms of each species matching one another in any given area but with the dominant morph varying between areas. See Aubier & 
Sherratt (2015) for model details (see Plate 14).

122
AVOIDING ATTACK
unclear, but one possibility is that it helps promote 
genetic heterozygosity. Whatever its selective bene-
fits, just as assortative mating can promote uniform-
ity, disassortative mating preferences may in part 
help explain the maintenance of the unusual local 
polymorphism in this species (section 7.5.5).
In a more preliminary study, Twomey et al. (2014) 
quantified mate choice in the poison frog Ranitomeya 
imitator (see section 7.2.6). Both sexes of R. imitator 
frogs are able to express mate preference, with males 
generally initiating courtship and females choosing 
to follow up or take no interest. Working at a ­contact 
zone between the striped and a Varadero (blotched) 
form of R. imitator, Twomey et al. assayed mutual 
mate choice by presenting a single male of a given 
form with a striped and a blotched female and 
quantifying the proportion of total courtship time 
that was for the striped morph. Striped R. imitator 
from near the contact zone preferred to court fellow 
striped morphs over blotched morphs. However, 
blotched morphs, as well as striped morphs from 
well outside the contact zone, do not exhibit a 
clear  preference for either morph. This asymmet-
ric  courtship preference parallels other studies of 
incipient speciation which have found greater selec-
tion against hybridization in the contact zones and 
greater selection to avoid hybridization in some 
morphs (notably, rare ones) than others (e.g. Hoskin 
et al., 2005).
7.5.5  How can multiple Müllerian mimicry  
rings co-exist?
While spatial polymorphisms can be understood, it 
is much harder to understand how members of the 
same taxonomic group can co-exist in several differ-
ent rings all in the same general location. For ex-
ample, ithomiine butterflies from a single site have 
been classified as members of 18 distinct co-existing 
mimicry rings (Beccaloni, 1997). Likewise, different 
bumblebee species may belong to a different mim-
icry rings in the same location (see section 7.2.5). 
Even males and females of the same species may 
belong to distinct mimicry rings, as seen in certain 
sexually dimorphic ithomiine species (Willmott & 
Mallet, 2004). Although examples of polymorphic 
mimicry in Müllerian mimics are relatively few and 
far between, it has been reported in a few species 
namely H. numata, H. ismenius, H. doris, and some 
populations of H. cydno (Jiggins, 2017; Kapan, 2001). 
H. numata provides one of the most celebrated 
examples of polymorphic mimicry at its most 
extreme, in that it co-occurs in a number of distinct 
forms with each form a member of a different 
­mimicry ring, dominated by a tiger-patterned ithom-
iine species. Outside Neotropical butterflies, we see 
additional examples of polymorphisms in Müllerian 
mimics. For example, the bumblebee Bombus rufocinc­
tus is dimorphic with forms that resemble two dis-
tinct earlier emerging Bombus species (Plowright & 
Owen, 1980). All of these examples are something 
of a puzzle, given that we have previously presented 
multiple lines of evidence showing that unprof-­
itable species are under strong selection to evolve 
the same warning signals, thereby reducing the 
costs of predator education.
There are several general explanations for this 
paradoxical diversity, which are not mutually exclu-
sive. One explanation is based on habitat segrega-
tion. Many sites may actually comprise a range of 
different microhabitats ranging from open forest to 
closed canopies, and the different mimicry rings 
may be separable in space and/or time. So while 
mimics in ostensibly different rings may be occa-
sionally seen together, members of the mimicry 
rings and their predators spend most of their time 
sufficiently separated to be considered distinct 
communities. Gompert et al. (2011) presented a 
model showing that mimetic diversity could indeed 
be maintained in this way, analogous to the manner 
in which spatial polymorphisms are maintained 
over a much larger scale. Many ithomiine butter-
flies show a considerable degree of vertical stratifi-
cation. For instance, species with tiger patterns tend 
to fly relatively high above ground, whereas species 
with transparent wings fly in the understory and 
low above ground (Elias & Joron, 2015). Differences 
in the heights of their host plants are likely causes of 
this stratification (e.g. Beccaloni, 1997; Papageorgis, 
1975). Indeed, Willmott & Mallet (2004) found that 
ithomiines in the same mimicry ring utilize the 
same larval host-plant species significantly more 
often than expected in two out of five communities 
surveyed. Likewise, Hill (2010) reported that there 
was habitat segregation among ithomiine mim-
icry  complexes which were driven largely by the 

The evolution and maintenance of Müllerian mimicry 
123
abundant species in each complex, although there 
was a degree of overlap among the complexes. 
Given that predators such as birds also partition 
forest microhabitats (Walther, 2002), it is clear that 
this spatial separation could contribute to the stable 
co-existence of multiple mimicry rings in this group. 
Although one might anticipate that the microhabi-
tat preferences which separate the different colour-
pattern rings of ithomiine butterflies could be 
explained by their shared ancestry, it turns out that 
their preferences are more similar than one would 
predict based on their shared ancestry (Elias et al., 
2008). Thus, either colour-pattern mimicry has been 
selected in species that share the same niche, or the 
selection for colour-pattern mimicry has also led 
to  the convergence of the ecological preferences 
of co-mimics. The evidence for microhabitat parti-
tioning is less clear-cut for taxonomic groups such 
as Heliconius (Mallet & Gilbert, 1995). However, it is 
possible that Heliconius at least partially exploit the 
segregation seen in ithomiines, and there is some 
evidence that co-mimics tend to share similar noc-
turnal roosting heights (Mallet & Gilbert,  1995; 
Mallet & Joron, 1999).
The sympatric intraspecific polymorphism in H. 
numata is perhaps the hardest to explain of all, with 
up to 11 of its 38 known mimetic colour pattern 
forms occurring in a single population (Joron et al., 
1999). It has been suggested (Charlesworth & 
Charlesworth, 2011) that H. numata could act as a 
parasitic (‘quasi-Batesian’) mimic on its ithomiine 
models, with the decline in warning signal effective-
ness with increasing mimetic load generating selec-
tion for polymorphism. We leave a discussion of the 
nature of Müllerian mimicry when species differ in 
their unprofitability to section 7.5.6. However, given 
that H. numata is particularly unpalatable (Arias et al., 
2016b) and often relatively common (Charlesworth 
& Charlesworth, 2011) this explanation now appears 
unlikely. Instead, Joron & Iwasa (2005) developed a 
model to show that microhabitat segregation of 
ithomiine models could generate stable poly-­
morphism in H. numata so long as the spatial segre-
gation was strong and/or the mimic was not too 
distasteful (as noted above, this remains question-
able for H. numata). Naturally, if ring formation was 
all due to microhabitat segregation one has to won-
der why so few Müllerian mimics are genuinely 
polymorphic in a given location. It could be that the 
spatial segregation of its particular ithomiine models 
encourages it, but H. numata has also evolved 
some remarkable genetic architecture which appears 
to limit the formation of non-mimetic intermediate 
morphs that would have relatively low survivorship 
(Arias et al., 2016a; Le Poul et al., 2014). As noted 
earlier, the dissassortive mating preferences of 
female H. numata (Chouteau et al., 2017) may also 
play a role in maintaining the local diversity.
Once established, how are rings maintained? We 
have already discussed the phenomenon of gener-
alization when discussing how Müllerian mimicry 
might evolve (section 7.5.3), noting that when 
predators only have narrow generalization, then 
intermediates may be always at a disadvantage. In 
a seminal paper, Turner (1984) drew an analogy of 
an astronomical attractor—the more species that 
join any given ring, the more powerful is its ‘gravi-
tational attraction’. Following up on these argu-
ments, Franks & Noble (2004) presented an 
individual-based model showing that Müllerian 
mimicry rings can readily evolve and be main-
tained for precisely the reasons that Turner (1984) 
had in mind, with predators generalizing their 
learned aversion over a limited region of phenotypic 
space, thereby selecting out individuals that differ 
from the most common warning signals. Never­
theless, it is unclear precisely how permanent these 
configurations are and how they get started (Franks 
& Noble,  2004 simply assumed random starting 
conditions and observed what happened). Extending 
the gravitational analogy, it is possible that any 
given ring could ultimately act as an all-consuming 
black hole. However, in contrast to single species of 
Müllerian mimics, when different rings are all 
well populated with co-mimics, then the per capita 
mortality experienced in the course of educating 
predators is likely to be very low so there will be 
little or no advantage in switching rings, at least in 
terms of predation, and the long-term stability of 
the rings will be maintained.
7.5.6  What is the nature of selection when the 
species differ in unprofitability?
It has long been appreciated that prey vary in their 
palatability to would-be predators.

124
AVOIDING ATTACK
Dixey (1920, p. 564), for example, asserted that 
‘distastefulness is relative; that it exists, like other means 
of defense, in degrees that may vary indefinitely from spe­
cies to species.’ Nicholson (1927, p. 34) likewise noted 
that ‘every intergrade appears to exist between the most 
distasteful species and those which are palatable to all 
predators.’ Given this inevitable variation, there has 
been a great deal of debate as to the nature of the 
relationship between Müllerian co-mimics when 
one species appears much better defended than the 
other. In particular, does the less unpalatable spe-
cies undermine the effectiveness of the more unpal-
atable species, thereby parasitizing it in a manner 
analogous to Batesian mimicry (Chapter 9), or are 
the signals mutually reinforcing in the manner 
envisaged by Müller? This question is important, 
not least because if moderately defended prey acted 
as parasites eroding the deterrent of the common 
warning signal then it could help explain the puz-
zling cases of polymorphism observed in unpalat-
able species (see section 7.5.5).
A wide range of models of predator behaviour 
have been developed to determine the nature of 
mimicry between prey with unequal defences. Some 
of these models have been based exclusively on 
learning, others have been based on identifying 
optimal state-dependent decisions (e.g. hunger) in 
well-informed predators, and a few have combined 
learning and state dependence. Here we briefly 
review some of their key findings.
In the most systematic evaluation of the conse-
quences of aversion learning to date, Speed & 
Turner (1999) quantified the probability of the less 
unpalatable prey species parasitizing the effective-
ness of the signal of a more unpalatable species 
in 29 different learning models. Parasitism in these 
cases was judged to occur if (i) the probability of 
attacking the model–mimic phenotype on encoun-
ter was higher than a distinct model control (held at 
equal density) or (ii) the attack rates of the model–
mimic phenotype increased as the probability of 
encountering a mimic (at the expense of encounter-
ing no prey at all) increased. This second criterion 
implicitly assumes there is no other form of density 
dependence (for example, the predators do not 
exhibit a saturating functional response in which an 
increase in food availability reduces the per capita 
mortality), which we return to below. A surprising 
27 of these 29 models were found to be capable 
of  generating a form of parasitism in which the 
moderately unpalatable prey eroded the protection 
afforded to the more unpalatable prey type. Given 
the fact that the mimics in question are unpalatable 
and yet harm their more unpalatable models, they 
have been dubbed ‘quasi-Batesian’ mimics (Speed, 
1993; Speed & Turner, 1999).
A study by Balogh et al. (2008) explored a similar 
set of learning models to those investigated above 
and likewise reported the potential for quasi-­Batesian 
mimicry involving a long-term non-zero attack prob-
ability for unpalatable models. Intriguingly, they 
argued that if variation in prey unpalatability 
enhances learning through a surprise effect (i.e. the 
outcome was different from predicted in the recent 
past) then the model can benefit even more from 
being mimicked by a less unpalatable mimic because 
the signal is that much more effective. The authors 
dubbed this phenomenon ‘super-Müllerian’, and 
argued that the mutualism could arise even if the 
mimic was palatable (‘quasi-Müllerian’).
In the Speed & Turner (1999) model of condi-
tioned aversion, unpalatable prey had a characteristic 
asymptotic probability of attack on encounter, with 
prey of neutral palatability considered to have an 
asymptotic attack rate of 0.5. Likewise, Balogh et al. 
(2008) assumed that prey could be charac-terized 
by  a particular asymptotic attack rate. Moreover, 
in  all of the models the (un)palatability of the 
prey types were considered fixed, which effectively 
assumes fixed predator hunger levels (Speed & 
Turner, 1999). Clearly a 50 per cent probability of 
attack on encounter is an arbitrary threshold, and 
one might wonder why a predator that found a 
given prey type unpalatable would not learn to per-
manently reject it. While many researchers continue 
to use the terms ‘unpalatable’, ‘distasteful’, ‘inedible’, 
or ‘defended’ when discussing Müller’s hypothesis, 
his theory is better at explaining mimicry when 
predators sample and ultimately reject prey. For 
this to happen, the prey species must not simply be 
unpleasant, but generally sufficiently unprofitable 
to attack to dissuade further sampling.
Since associative learning is a means to an end 
(maximizing payoff) then to understand predator 
behaviour from an adaptive perspective, it helps to 
take a cost–benefit approach. Such an approach is 

The evolution and maintenance of Müllerian mimicry 
125
particularly appropriate once one considers the fact 
that predators tend to be more prepared to attack 
unpalatable prey items in times of nutritive need. 
For example, European starlings (Sturnus vulgaris) 
increased their attack rates on quinine-injected 
mealworms when their body masses and fat stores 
were experimentally reduced, while choice trials 
clearly indicated the response was not due to any 
hunger-based reduction in the discriminatory abil-
ities of the birds (Barnett et al., 2007). In these cases, 
a given prey type such as a quinine-injected meal-
worm may continue to be unpalatable, yet hunger 
makes it profitable for predators to attack these prey. 
Likewise, Skelhorn & Rowe (2007b) revealed that the 
dose of quinine sulfate administered to European 
starlings affected the number of chem-ically defended 
prey that they were subsequently prepared to con-
sume, with birds receiving high toxin doses less 
inclined to eat chemically defended prey.
To address the state-dependent nature of (un)
profitability, a number of dynamic programming 
models have been developed and explored (e.g. 
Kokko et al.,  2003; Sherratt,  2003; Sherratt et al., 
2004b). Each of these models have assumed that the 
properties of the prey types are already known to 
the predator and the predator simply seeks to make 
decisions that balances its toxin and energy levels to 
ensure maximum long-term survivorship (thus the 
predator dies with too low an energy level, or with 
too high a toxin dose). For example, Sherratt et al. 
(2004b) found that when distinct palatable prey are 
rare then those prey types which contain relatively 
low doses of toxins become profitable to consume 
by (hungry) predators with low energy levels. 
Faced with hungry predators, then the weakly toxic 
prey could gain selective advantage by mimicking 
prey with a higher dose of toxins. Whether the more 
toxic model gains from this mimicry depends on 
how its success is measured. First and foremost, the 
model controls were always attacked at lower rates 
on encounter than the model–mimic phenotype. This 
indicates that when predators are well-informed 
about the nature of prey types then a highly toxic 
model would experience greater protection from 
predators if it had a unique and recognizable appear-
ance compared to a case in which it were confused 
with weakly unpalatable prey (which are occasion-
ally eaten by hungry predators). Nevertheless, 
increasing the mimic density sometimes increased 
and sometimes decreased the attack rates of pred-
ators on the model–mimic phenotype. The relation-
ship tended to be negative if the increase in mimic 
density increased the total prey density in the 
­system (i.e. the additional mimics represent a new 
supply of potential food) but positive (increasingly 
parasitic) if the increase in mimics came at the 
expense of well-recognized mimic controls.
In fact, the possibility that weakly defended prey 
could act as Batesian mimics of better-defended 
models in periods of nutritive need has long been 
discussed. de Ruiter (1959, p. 353) felt that it was 
common, arguing that the Müllerian mechanism ‘is 
very unlikely to be realized except when predators live in 
the presence of such a superabundance of food that they 
never have to resort to relatively distasteful prey.’ 
Wallace (1882) made a similar argument when he 
proposed many ‘difficult cases of mimicry’ could be 
understood in terms of Batesian mimicry, so long as 
some predators find the unpalatable species profit-
able to attack. Are weakly toxic prey subject to pre-
dation by hungry predators therefore quasi-Batesian 
mimics? We prefer to treat such prey simply as tem-
porary Batesian mimics since they are after all prof-
itable to eat by hungry predators. Thus, despite 
their distastefulness, if a prey species is profitable to 
consume then they are Batesian mimics for the 
period of time they remain profitable to consume—
however temporary that relationship may be. 
Indeed, the possibility that relationships between 
co-mimics can sometimes switch from mutualistic 
(Müllerian) to parasitic (Batesian) should not come 
as too much of a surprise to ecologists. For example, 
plant–mycorrhizal relationships frequently switch 
from parasitism to mutualism dependent on the 
underlying nutritive conditions (Johnson et al., 
1997). Likewise, the mutualism between cleaner 
fish and their clients in coral reef fish can degrade 
into parasitism if ectoparasites are rare (Cheney & 
Côté, 2005).
The above state-dependent models assumed com-
plete knowledge and did not assume any form of 
learning at all, which is so central to Müller’s hypoth-
esis. Ironically, the distinct model never gains from 
the mimicry per se because, in contrast to Müller’s 
arguments based on associative learning, the preda-
tor was assumed to have complete information 

126
AVOIDING ATTACK
about the nature of the various phenotypes at the 
outset. In a recent paper, Aubier et al. (2017) sought 
to bridge this gap by developing a state-dependent 
optimization model in which predators have to learn 
the attributes of prey types and yet make optimal 
decisions based on this incomplete information as to 
whether to attack the prey they have encountered. 
Here the introduction of a moderately unprofitable 
mimic (derived from a discriminable non-mimic 
population) of a more unprofitable model caused 
an increase in overall consumption of the model–
mimic phenotype because there were simply more 
such prey with this appearance (so information 
about them is more valuable), and because the 
mean cost of attacking unpalatable prey is lower, 
warranting more sampling. However, this increase 
in consumption was more than offset by the increase 
in overall density of prey sharing the model appear-
ance, generating a decline in the per capita attack 
rates and classical Müllerian mutualism.
It is important to note that parasitism readily arose 
in the above model when the payoff from attacking 
moderately defended mimics varied among individ-
ual predators, so that they are profitable to attack by 
some predators but not others. Under these cases 
then the moderately defended mimics could be 
parasitic on their models, just as classical Batesian 
mimics are. Note, however, that this is not a new phe-
nomenon, but the very same mechanism that has 
always been invoked to explain Batesian mimicry. 
Indeed, the fact that the very same optimal sampling 
model invoked to explain Müllerian mimicry also 
readily predicts Batesian mimicry strongly suggests 
that the two phenomena are intimately related. An 
earlier attempt by Honma et al. (2008) to combine a 
model of learning with the classical optimal diet 
model came to a similar conclusion. Thus, they found 
that a parasitic relationship could emerge only under 
very restricted conditions in which the availability of 
alternative prey was so low that the predator must 
either starve or eat unpalatable prey. Under these 
conditions, such unpalatable prey are (by definition) 
profitable and therefore the relationship is classical 
Batesian mimicry.
Of course, one could argue the above state-
dependent mechanisms, while broadly correct in 
theory, never operate in practice because: (a) all nat-
ural distasteful prey are so highly noxious that, once 
learning is complete, they are never attacked by pred-
ators and/or that (b) alternative palatable prey are 
always so abundant that predators are never hungry 
enough to need to eat these prey. Cyanide-producing 
millipedes and poison frogs may well be simply too 
unprofitable to attack to ever warrant re-sampling by 
reasonably informed predators. It has been rumoured 
among field biologists that Heliconius butterflies ‘taste 
like dog shit’ but it is reasonable to assume that some 
predators under some conditions would find them 
profitable to eat, particularly in times of food scarcity.
Moreover, given the fact that specialist insectivores 
are capable of handling prey in such a way as to 
reduce their ingestion of toxins (Brower & Calvert, 
1985) then we suspect that it is likely that natural 
predators will occasionally have recourse to attacking 
chem-ically defended prey for the food they can pro-
vide. Naturally, if attacks were too common then the 
warning signal would provide no benefit at all—
indeed it would be detrimental to the prey, since they 
would be highly visible to predators.
So far, experimental evidence for quasi-Batesian 
mimicry (which we prefer to consider classical 
Batesian mimicry when the defended mimics are 
profitable to attack due to hunger or an ineffective 
defence) has been mixed. Speed et al. (2000) con-
ducted a field experiment with pastry baits contain-
ing a range of doses of quinine and found that 
increasing the density of moderately unpalatable 
mimics at the expense of distinct (non)mimetic 
­controls increased the mortality of the more toxic 
model. Rowland et al. (2007a) conducted a ‘novel 
world’ experiment with wild-caught great tits, and 
found that when moderately unpalatable mimics 
were added to a system with highly unprofitable 
models, then great tits attacked more prey in the 
model–mimic mixture than one would expect if all 
the prey were highly unprofitable. However, despite 
this increase in overall consumption, the presence of 
moderately unprofitable mimics actually decreased 
the mortality on the models through a simple dilution 
effect, suggesting that the net effect of moderately 
unprofitable mimics was mutualistic in the way 
Müller had anticipated rather than parasitic. More 
recently, Rowland et al. (2010b) conducted an analo-
gous experiment, this time keeping the total density 
of prey constant by reducing the density of distinct 
(non)mimetic controls as the number of moderately 

The evolution and maintenance of Müllerian mimicry 
127
unprofitable mimics increased. In contrast to their 
earlier work, they found that the per capita mortality 
of the moderately unpalatable mimics and more 
unpalatable models went up as the proportion of 
mimics increased, suggesting evidence for quasi-
Batesian mimicry. Rowland et al. (2010b) suggested 
that the differences in results of their two studies 
arose as a consequence of whether the total density of 
prey was fixed. However, you might expect predators 
to treat prey with distinct appearances entirely inde-
pendently from models and mimics, and in both 
experiments the combined densities of models and 
mimics were increased in comparable ways. An alter-
nate possibility is that some of the moderately unpal-
atable prey were profitable to consume by the birds, 
especially those with low toxin doses (indeed, the 
authors also showed evidence that toxin content 
influenced foraging decisions). So, once again, we 
see that moderately toxic prey can occasionally be 
profitable to consume, making them genuine Batesian 
mimics.
7.6  Overview
The subject of Müllerian mimicry has seen signifi-
cant advances over the past couple of decades. Not 
only are more examples of Müllerian mimicry being 
uncovered in a range of new taxonomic groups 
from millipedes to catfish, but with the advent of 
genomics we now know a great deal about the gen-
etics underlying colour-pattern evolution in the 
group best known for it, namely Heliconius butter-
flies. We now have a far more nuanced understand-
ing of the strategy that predators should employ 
when learning to avoid unfamiliar unprofitable 
prey and there have been a number of field studies 
establishing positive frequency-dependent selec-
tion by predators in the manner that Müller had 
envisaged. For instance, deployment of artificial 
models—including clay frogs and wax butterflies—­
has revealed the phenotypes most vulnerable to 
predation under field conditions. Following some 
targeted experimentation, we now know that prey 
with low doses of toxins may, under some circum-
stances, act as parasitic Batesian mimics of better 
defended models. However, the reasons for this 
may be simply that such prey are profitable to 
attack rather than through some demonstrably 
sub-optimal psychological feedback mechanism.
Future work should focus on just how easily 
Müllerian mimics switch to being Batesian and vice 
versa. We also need to know a lot more about mim-
icry ring formation—are these rings simply human 
constructs or do they reveal the limits of predator 
generalization? Are they fixed or can rings effectively 
merge? What factors influence the fidelity of 
Müllerian mimicry? We have learned a lot over the 
past decade, but there is still much more to do.

Avoiding Attack: The Evolutionary Ecology of Crypsis, Aposematism, and Mimicry. Second Edition. Graeme D. Ruxton,  
William L. Allen, Thomas N. Sherratt, & Michael P. Speed, Oxford University Press (2018). © Graeme D. Ruxton,  
William L. Allen, Thomas N. Sherratt, & Michael P. Speed 2018. DOI: 10.1093/oso/9780199688678.001.0001
CHAPTER 8 
Advertising elusiveness
8.1  Introduction and definition
In Chapter 6 we discussed aposematic signals that act 
to inform the predator that while it might easily be 
able to capture the prey, consuming the captured 
prey might be unattractive to the predator because 
it is chemically or otherwise defended. The signals 
considered in this chapter aim to inform the preda-
tor that an attempt to catch the prey is likely to be 
unsuccessful. That is, they warn that prey will be 
difficult to capture, rather than somehow being 
unappealing to attempt to consume post-capture. 
Necessarily, these signals will be restricted (unlike 
aposematic signals) to mobile prey that can mount 
an active response to impending attack, generally 
involving fleeing. Also unlike aposematic signals, 
they will normally not be displayed continuously, 
but triggered by the perception by the prey that 
they are under imminent risk of predatory attack. 
We differentiate between two different types of 
such elusiveness signals: pursuit deterrent and percep-
tion advertisement. These two types of signal are 
used against coursing and ambushing predators 
respectively. In pursuit deterrence, the prey signals 
to a coursing predator that it is a particularly fleet 
individual, that the predator will struggle to close 
on, and/or a particularly strong individual, that 
will be difficult to subdue if the predator does suc-
ceed in closing on it. Certainly, predators select prey 
individuals on traits such as size, sex, age, and indi-
vidual behaviour—such as activity during high risk 
periods (Heurich et al.,  2016)—with smaller and 
poorer quality individuals, for example, being tar-
geted in particular (Tucker et al., 2016); and so, an 
individual signalling fitness and escape ability may 
dissuade a predator from targeting it. Perception 
advertisement is directed at a stalking or ambushing 
predator that relies on being able to gain close prox-
imity to the prey prior to detection; the prey signals 
that it has detected the predator prior to it coming 
sufficiently close to mount a successful attack. In 
both these cases, the signal can only be effective if 
mounting attacks is expensive to predators in some 
way such that they have an interest in biasing their 
attacks towards situations where they are more 
likely to be successful. In such a situation, the signal 
could be selected providing it offers sufficiently 
reliable information to predators to make their 
attack strategy more cost-effective.
Aposematic signals are effective because pred-
ators generalize from aversive experiences; that is, 
the prey signal that they have a similarity (in terms 
of unpalatability) to previous prey encountered by 
the predator. There is also an element of generaliza-
tion required for elusiveness signals to be effective 
but, by signalling, the prey also seek to differentiate 
themselves from other potential prey. At least some 
individuals of the prey species (or group of similar-
looking species) concerned must be of interest to 
the predator, or else the type of signalling discussed 
here would not be required. Hence, with perception 
advertisement the particular prey individual is sig-
nalling that, on this particular occasion, it presents 
an unattractive option for the predator to try and 
capture because it has already detected the presence 
of the predator. Similarly, for pursuit deterrent sig-
nals the prey may be signalling that it is currently 
particularly fleet by comparison to alternative prey 
the predator might target. Such fleetness can change 
between encounters through factors such as exhaus-
tion or injury. For this reason, the types of signals 
described in this chapter tend to be displayed only 
in response to the prey detecting a specific potential 
predatory threat. Such prey are signalling something 

Advertising elusiveness
129
about active defence through flight that must be ini-
tiated after the predator has been detected, which 
again makes it natural for such signals to be trig-
gered by a predator’s detection by the prey. In com-
parison, because aposematic coloration generally 
describes signals that can be used after capture, 
these signals are generally (but not always) con-
tinuously displayed. The general expectation that 
­signals of elusiveness will not be continuously dis-
played should not be seen an absolute requirement. 
We can imagine that individuals of a particularly 
fleet species might modify their appearance to dif-
ferentiate themselves from otherwise similar-look-
ing prey species that are easier to capture. Such a 
continuously displayed signal of elusiveness has 
been suggested in butterflies (Pinheiro et al., 2016), 
but currently no strong evidence exists.
The borderline between the types of signalling 
described here and aposematism is difficult to draw 
definitively. The hornet Vespa velutina is a predator 
of bees, including the Asian hive bee Apis cerana. 
When a hornet approaches a colony of these bees, 
guard bees simultaneously vibrate their abdomens, 
producing a characteristic visual display and buzz-
ing noise. This signal is not produced by the close 
approach of harmless insects to the colony, and the 
signal seems to act to cause the hornet to abort its 
approach toward the colony. However, since a mass 
of bees can kill a hornet by suffocating and/or over-
heating it in a ball of bees, we see this as more akin 
to an aposematic display, unlike the perception 
advertisement signals discussed in this chapter. 
Essentially, where the signal indicates defences that 
might simply produce an aversive experience but 
might in some cases (like this) be lethal, we consider 
the signal to be aposematic. However, in describing 
the hornet–bee interaction, Tan et al. (2012) link it 
with the type of signals discussed in this chapter, 
because it is triggered by close approach of the 
predator. However, as discussed in Chapter 6, this 
can be true of aposematic signals too.
Hence, the types of signals considered in this 
chapter are signals given by prey during the close 
approach of a predator, that act to inform the preda-
tor that the prey would be difficult to catch and sub-
due. Other displays may be given by undefended 
prey that act to simply startle the predator, and 
these are fully discussed in Chapter  10. Since the 
key informational aspect of the signals discussed in 
this chapter is how easy it will be for the predator 
to  capture the signaller, we have introduced the 
umbrella term elusiveness signalling. In the next sec-
tion we will document current empirical evidence 
for the existence of such signalling.
8.2  Empirical evidence of elusiveness 
signals
The empirical study of elusiveness signalling is 
challenging since, by definition, such studies require 
observation of encounters between potential pred-
ators and mobile prey. Further, it must be demon-
strated that the predator (rather than conspecifics) is 
the target perceiver of the signal, and that the signal 
does not function exclusively through aposemat-
ism, startle, or deflection—mechanisms discussed 
in Chapters 6, 10, and 11respectively. Nevertheless, 
there are now a number of case studies where valu-
able evidence has been collected, and we summar-
ize some of what we consider the most interesting 
ones in the following sections. However, because of 
the challenges discussed in section  8.1 above, we 
have to expect that these cases potentially represent 
only a fraction of the prevalence of elusiveness 
­signalling in the natural world.
8.2.1  Stotting by gazelle
The behaviour most commonly cited as a signal to 
predators of individual prey’s escape ability is stot-
ting (jumping with all four legs held stiff, straight, 
and simultaneously off the ground). This has been 
observed in several mammalian species but has 
been investigated most fully in the Thomson’s gaz-
elle (Gazella thomsonii). Caro (1986a,b) identified 
eleven non-exclusive potential functions of stotting. 
Two of these involved signalling to the predator: 
either that it has been detected or that the prey indi-
vidual is particularly fleet. Caro suggested that 
cheetah need to approach within 20m of gazelle 
in  order to have a chance of a successful attack. 
Stotting during a chase occurred when the gazelle 
was generally further than 60m from the cheetah, 
and occurred mostly towards the end of unsuccess-
ful chases. These observations are compatible with 
stotting being a signal of prey athleticism to the 

130
AVOIDING ATTACK
predator. The outcomes of 31 cheetah hunts are 
summarized in Table 8.1. These data may suggest 
that stotting is related to both failed chases and the 
cheetah giving up a hunt without giving chase 
(although sample sizes are too small to be certain). 
Again, this interpretation is consistent with stotting 
being a signal of fleetness. Caro initially favoured 
the ‘predator detection’ hypothesis over the ‘high 
quality’ hypothesis (although both could operate). 
He realized that if stotting only functions to indi-
cate to the cheetah that the gazelle has detected it, 
then explaining its occurrence during chases is chal-
len-ging. He suggested that ‘the act of fleeing itself 
may be insufficiently unambiguous to inform the 
predator that it has been detected’. This might be 
because gazelle sometimes make quick dashes to 
gain respite from biting insects (Tim Caro, personal 
communication). Crucially, Caro notes that the ‘high 
quality’ hypothesis ‘is challenged primarily because 
so few fleeing members of a group (less than 20%) 
stott, and stotters do not get captured after pursuit 
any less than non-stotters (see Table 8.2). The frac-
tion of individuals stotting does not seem critical to 
us as this might be what is expected when only 
high-quality individuals in a group can afford to 
send a costly signal that (for example) reduces run-
ning speed. Further, the results shown in Table 8.2 
do not have the sample sizes to persuade us that it 
is safe to assume that stotting during a chase has no 
influence on the eventual outcome of that chase. 
However, it is true that they provide no evidence in 
support of such an association.
FitzGibbon & Fanshawe (1988) demonstrated 
that the individual Thomson’s gazelles that African 
wild dogs (Lycaon pictus) selected to chase from a 
group stotted at lower rates than those that dogs 
did not select to chase. However, cause and effect 
are unclear—it could be that gazelles react to being 
chased by stotting less, rather than dogs selecting 
those that stott less. Fitzgibbon & Fanshawe argued 
against this alternative explanation as follows:
‘In the eight cases when gazelles were observed both 
before they were selected and while being chased, four 
increased their stotting rate when selected and four 
decreased it. This implies that the gazelles are as likely to 
decrease their stotting on being hunted as they are to 
increase it, and that the dogs are selecting on the basis of 
stotting rate. In addition, wild dogs were seen to change 
the focus of a hunt from one gazelle to another on five 
occasions, and on four of these the gazelle preferred was 
stotting at a lower rate.’
Hasson (1991) pointed out that Fitzgibbon & 
Fanshawe’s data also shows that the one occasion 
where the dogs switched to a faster stotting individ-
ual is also the case where the two gazelles’ stotting 
rates were most similar. Fitzgibbon & Fanshawe 
also report that those gazelle that were selected but 
which outran the wild dogs were more likely to 
stott and stotted for a longer duration than those 
that were successfully captured. Although this is 
suggestive of stotting being a signal of ability to 
escape, there is an alternative explanation: animals 
that escape may not be more able to stott but simply 
have more oppor-tunity to do so, as they are not as 
closely pursued. Together, these studies of stotting 
behaviour come closer to convincing evidence of 
signalling of ability to evade attack, rather than 
awareness of the predator’s presence. However that 
stotting is a signal (of any kind) to predators has 
not been demonstrated to the exclusion of all other 
Table 8.1  Outcomes of 31 cheetah hunts—redrawn from Caro (1986b).
Outcome
Chase successful
Chase failed
Hunt abandoned
Gazelle stotted
0
2
7
No stotting
5
7
24
Table 8.2  Outcomes of 10 cheetah hunts on neonate gazelles—redrawn from Caro (1986b).
Outcome
Chase successful
Chase failed
Hunt abandoned
Gazelle stotted
1
0
0
No stotting
7
2
0

Advertising elusiveness
131
candidate explanations, although it certainly remains 
highly plausible.
8.2.2  Upright stance by hares
Holley (1993) reported on observations of naturally 
occurring interactions between brown hares (Lepus 
europaeus) and foxes (Vulpes vulpes) on English 
farmland. He observed 32 occasions in which feed-
ing adult hares were approached by a fox. On 31 of 
these occasions, as the fox closed to within 20–50m 
of the hare, the hare stood bipedally, ears erect, dir-
ectly facing the fox, turning its body so as to remain 
facing the fox as it moved, continuing until the fox 
moved away. This behaviour was not seen consist-
ently in other contexts during 5000 hours of obser-
vation of hares. Hence, Holley suggested that this 
behaviour was a signal to the fox that it had been 
detected. In support of this interpretation, Holley 
pointed out that none of the 31 ‘signalling’ hares 
was attacked. He further argued that such signal-
ling is plausible because adult hares are sufficiently 
fleet that foxes are only successful in catching fit 
hares when catching them unawares, allowing 
­capture before the hare is able to accelerate to its 
maximum speed. On five occasions, a fox appeared 
near hares as a result of using cover to approach 
undetected. In these five cases, the hare did not 
show this ‘signalling’ behaviour, but either moved 
away from the fox or adopted a crouched stance 
that Holley suggested allows fast acceleration if 
flight is required. This was interpreted as the hares 
not signalling in circumstances where signalling of 
detection may not deter the fox, because it has 
already managed to get near to the hare. Holley also 
reported that in 28 encounters between hares and 
domestic dogs, this ‘signalling’ behaviour was not 
shown. He interpreted this by suggesting that 
domestic dogs are coursers, willing to pursue hares 
over long distances in order to exhaust them, are 
thus not reliant on surprise like foxes, and so are 
less likely than foxes to be concerned about being 
detected by a hare. Hence, such signalling would 
not be expected to deter dogs from attacking.
Holley considered alternative explanations for 
this bipedal behaviour. He argued that the bipedal 
behaviour is unlikely to serve solely to improve the 
hare’s view of the fox, because it is not used against 
dogs. Further, he suggested that in low vegetation 
the fox is visible to the hare at much greater dis-
tances than the distance at which this behaviour is 
induced (never more than 50m). He also argued that 
bipedal behaviour is unlikely to serve solely as a sig-
nal to conspecifics because it was not given to dogs, 
because the hare turns its body so as to constantly 
face the fox, and because on 13 of the 31 occasions 
when it was used the signaller was solitary.
We consider this study as strongly persuasive that 
the hare’s behaviour serves at least in part as a sig-
nal to the fox that it has been detected. The turning 
of the body to face the moving fox is strongly sug-
gestive of signalling to the fox. A follow-up study, 
using video analyses, that allowed quantification 
of this aspect of behaviour would be useful. Such 
a  study could also search for evidence that hares 
detect foxes before they have closed to 50m; per-
haps detection can be identified by head turning 
or increased vigilance. However, given that the ori-
ginal study involved only 32 encounters between 
foxes and hares in 5000 hours of observations, such 
a follow-up study would be very challenging.
8.2.3  Vervet monkey alarm calls to leopards
Isbell & Bidner (2016) report on a powerful use of 
technology to study the responses of leopards 
(Panthera pardus) to the alarm calls of vervet monkeys 
(Chlorocebus pygerythrus). The researchers deployed 
acoustic recorders, camera traps, and GPS collars on 
both species. They found that leopards often quickly 
changed direction and moved away from the mon-
keys, or broke off approaches to monkeys after the 
monkeys gave alarm calls (see Figure  8.1). Since 
leopards typically hunt by ambush, there appears 
to be no benefit to them in lingering once they have 
been detected. Vervet monkey alarm calls in response 
to leopards are well known for their function as 
a  warning call to conspecifics. Their predator-­
deterrent function was recognized only because 
the  devices allowed the researchers to min-imize 
their presence (leopards tend to be wary of humans) 
and remotely monitor the behaviour of both pred-
ators and prey. This study very much deserves fol-
low-up investigation. Firstly, it would be valuable 
to study leopard responses to recordings in order to 
demonstrate that abandoned attacks are not just 

132
AVOIDING ATTACK
related to alarm calling but actually triggered by 
leopards detecting such calls. Secondly, other func-
tions of the calls deserve exploration, given that 
monkeys used these calls mostly at dawn and dusk, 
but leopards approached vervets most closely in 
middle of the night (Isbell & Bidner, 2016).
8.2.4  Other potential signals by mammals
Another very commonly cited putative elusiveness 
signal is tail-flagging in white-tailed deer (Odocoileus 
virginianus). Caro et al. (1995) provided a useful 
synthesis of the available data. They concluded that 
tail-flagging may indicate individual ability to 
escape, on the grounds that flagging animals ran 
faster than those that did not. However, as no stud-
ies have investigated the responses of natural pred-
ators to this behaviour, and Caro et al. suggested 
that alternative explanations based on crypsis exist, 
this remains only conjecture.
Observation of the behaviour of predators in 
response to putative signals can be challenging but, 
when successful, can be insightful. Clark (2005) 
implanted radio trackers in a number of timber 
rattlesnakes (Crotalus horridus) and was thus able to 
set video cameras on snakes when they were bask-
ing or sitting in ambush beside runways used by 
small mammals. This allowed him to observe har-
assment displays by chipmunks (Tamias striatus), 
eastern grey squirrels (Sciurus carolinensis) and by a 
wood thrush (Hylocichla mustelina). Foraging snakes 
were over 4 times more likely to abandon sites after 
harassment than foraging snakes that were not sub-
jected to displays; whereas displays had no effect 
on movement rates of basking snakes. Foraging 
snakes also moved further when moving soon after 
harassment than when moving for other reasons, 
and again this difference was not seen in basking 
snakes. In a follow-up study, Barbour & Clark 
(2012) found that Californian ground squirrels 
(Spermophilus beecheyi) frequently gave tail-flagging 
displays to northern Pacific rattlesnakes (Crotalus 
oreganus oreganus). They found that the probability 
of ambush-foraging rattlesnakes striking at a tail-
flagging squirrel decreased with spatial separation 
between the two, but remained high for all distances 
in non-flagging squirrels. Flagging was associated 
with squirrel vigilance, as measured by readiness to 
dodge a snake strike. Tail-flagging, again, was seen 
to increase the rattlesnake’s likelihood of leaving 
the ambush site. Interestingly, a study by Putman 
et al. (2015) found that adults were both more likely 
to  detect snakes than pups and perform more 
­tail-­flagging toward snakes. Snake detection and 
800
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
–120
–90
Min Before/After Alarm Call
Leopard Proximity to Vervet
Monkey (m)
–60
–30
0
30
60
0
Figure 8.1  Modified by Lynne Isbell from results presented in Isbell & Bidner (2016). Proximity of collared leopards to collared vervets on the 
three nights when a leopard approached the vervets’ sleeping site, and on the one evening when vervets approached the leopard, before and after 
vervets gave alarm calls. Open symbols: proximity before alarm calls began; closed symbols: proximity after alarm calls began. Solid lines: nights 
leopard moved away >200 m from vervets after alarm calls; dashed line: night vervets moved >200 m away from leopard before giving alarm 
calls. Distance between consecutive symbols indicates speed of travel.

Advertising elusiveness
133
appropriate anti-predator signalling, therefore, seems 
to improve with age (see Figure 8.2). Together these 
studies are very highly suggestive of elusiveness 
signalling towards these snakes.
Striking the ground with one or both feet to prod-
uce an audible thump is a near-universal response to 
predators in macropodid marsupials. This has often 
been suggested as an elusiveness signal. However, 
as reviewed by Rose et al. (2006), exploration of the 
behaviour’s function remains very limited. A great 
many putative elusiveness signals to predators have 
been suggested within the artiodactyls (including 
different calls, tail movement, foot stamping, and 
changes of gait); in general, the function of these is 
difficult to evaluate in the absence of studies involv-
ing responses of predators. Caro et al. (2004) pre-
sented comparative analyses that sought to link the 
presence or absence of these different potential sig-
nals to morphological, ecological, and behavioural 
variables across 200 species of artiodactyls. This 
study did not yield any strong trends that could be 
interpreted as suggestive of signalling to predators 
specifically. Indeed the main function of this work 
may be to highlight the limits of the approach to the 
study of this animal group at present, where behav-
iour patterns are poorly documented, the formation 
of clear hypotheses is difficult, independent vari-
ables are correlated, and species may show a given 
behaviour in some ecological conditions but not 
others. Logistically challenging as it undoubtedly is, 
consideration of this study suggests that in evaluat-
ing the impact of such putative signals to pred-
ators,  we really do need to observe interactions 
with predators.
8.2.5  Singing and distress calling by birds
Cresswell (1994) reported on extensive and carefully 
recorded naturally occurring predation events by a 
raptorial bird (the merlin, Falco columbarius) attack-
ing a songbird (the skylark, Alauda arvensis). The 
merlin clearly selected a skylark for pursuit before 
any song by the skylark was heard. If singing by the 
skylark was heard (by Cresswell), then it started very 
soon after the pursuit began. For pursuits where the 
merlin gave up without capture, merlins chased non- 
or weakly singing skylarks for longer periods com-
pared to skylarks that sang strongly. These chases 
often exceeded five minutes in duration over several 
kilometres, so that the costs of not signalling or 
responding to the signal were high for the skylark 
and merlin respectively. Merlins were more likely to 
catch a non-singing skylark than a singing one. The 
study also showed that skylarks that did not sing on 
attack (and therefore probably could not sing) were 
more likely to attempt to hide from the merlin rather 
than outrun it. The author himself admitted that one 
drawback to this study is that he does not demon-
strate that singing whilst being pursued is costly, 
although other studies have shown that singing in 
skylarks in the absence of pursuit is energetically 
demanding. However, in all other respects this study 
comes very close to a convincing demonstration of 
pursuit deterrence signalling.
Laiolo et al. (2004) caught a number of lesser 
short-­toed larks (Calandrella rufescens) and recorded 
the calls they made on flying away after being 
released from a bag. The authors found variation in 
aspects of the call structure to be related (separately) 
to variation in body condition and immunocompe-
tence. They argue that these latter two factors are 
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
60
50
40
30
20
10
Adults
Pups
Tail-ﬂagging Bouts
Proportion of Squirrels
0
Figure 8.2  Adapted by Bree Putman from results presented in 
Putman et al. (2015). Age differences in the proportion of squirrels 
that detected a hunting rattlesnake when coming within 1 m of one, 
and the number of tail-flagging bouts that were directed at a snake 
when one was detected.

134
AVOIDING ATTACK
likely to be associated with ease of capture, and thus 
the calls may afford predators an ability to detect 
and preferentially select those that would be most 
profitable to chase.
8.2.6  Visual signalling of contrastingly coloured 
birds’ tails
One of the earliest suggestions of quantitative evi-
dence for elusiveness signalling comes from observa-
tion of tail-flicking behaviour by eastern swamphens 
(Porphyrio melanotus: a large bird of the rail family) 
when approached by a human (Woodland et al., 
1980). Flicking rates were highest in the birds near-
est the approaching human; birds’ tails were 
orientated towards the human and flicking rate 
increased with decreasing separation between 
human and bird. Woodland et al. interpreted these 
observations as evidence that tail-flicking was a sig-
nal directed towards predators. Craig (1982) chal-
lenged this interpretation, suggesting that tail-­ 
flicking was more likely to be a submissive signal 
directed at dominant conspecifics. He suggested that 
the reason that birds nearest the approaching preda-
tor signal most was that these birds were likely to be 
low-quality birds at the periphery of groups. These 
peripheral subdominants have increased need to 
signal submission to dominants when the human 
‘predator’ drives birds closer together. The closer 
the human gets, the more signalling is required as 
the birds are driven closer together when they bolt 
for nearby water. Craig also suggested that the 
apparent orientation of the tail towards the human 
was simply a necessary consequence of the bird 
walking away or preparing to do so.
Craig’s alternative interpretation certainly com-
plicates the situation, but further work on this 
­system may be worthwhile since there are other 
observations in Woodland et al. (1980) that the alter-
native explanation does not easily accommodate. For 
example, when birds on reed beds were approached 
by boat, ‘birds would remain virtually on one spot, 
standing erect, looking back by rotating their body 
so that the rump flash was directed towards the 
intruder’. Again the flicking rate increased as the 
intruder approached.’ This observation seems eas-
ier to reconcile with tail-flicking being a signal dir-
ected to potential predators rather than one directed 
to conspecifics. Further, Randler (2007) reported 
observations of tail-flicking in the Eurasian moorhen 
(Gallinula choropus) that seem difficult to reconcile 
with signalling to conspecifics. He found a positive 
relationship between flicking and both vigilance and 
nearest neighbour distance. He found a negative rela-
tionship between flicking and flock size. In playback 
experiments, moorhens increased both vigilance and 
tail-flick rate in response to calls of potential pred-
ators but decreased in response to calls of conspecif-
ics. Further, flicking rates were no different between 
adults and (socially submissive) juveniles.
One puzzle about tail-flicking is what keeps the 
signal honest, since no obvious time or energy cost 
is apparent; birds may well be able to feed and sig-
nal at the same time. Alvarez (1993) suggested that 
the cost is an added risk of predation from secondary 
predators, as envisaged by the theory of Bergstrom 
& Lachmann (2001) discussed later in this chapter. 
This hypothesis could be tested with flicking and 
non-flicking mechanical model birds. Alternatively, 
honesty might be caused by anatomical constraint; 
it may be that balance considerations preclude feed-
ing and flicking, but this has not been explored. 
Alvarez et al. (2006) observed moorhens and found 
a positive correlation across individuals between 
flicking rate and various measures of condition. If it 
is the case that feeding and tail-flicking are mutu-
ally incompatible, then tail-flicking rate might be an 
honest measure of condition, since birds in better 
condition might be more able to forgo feeding oppor-
tunities in order to signal. However, as we stated 
above, such incompatibility has yet to be demon-
strated. Alternatively, if conspicuousness to predators 
increases with flicking rate, then only individuals in 
good condition could risk signalling in this way. In 
a quite different species (a ground feeding insect-
ivore, the white wagtail Motacilla alba), Randler 
(2006) found that wagging was positively related to 
vigilance and negatively correlated with pecking 
for food; however, the constraint or cost that might 
drive these correlations remains to be identified.
Both sexes of the turquoise-browed motmot 
(Eumomota superciliosa) have an exaggerated pendu-
lum-like tail display. These displays were experi-
mentally triggered by a potential predator (a human 
emerging from a blind) near to nesting colonies, in 
experiments reported by Murphy (2006). The signal 

Advertising elusiveness
135
was given by both sexes, and was given by unpaired 
individuals, paired individuals out of visual contact 
with their mate, and by individuals out of visual 
contact with any conspecific. The displays were 
generally (see section  8.4) not observed in the 
absence of this simulated predator, were triggered 
immediately on the appearances of the human, and 
stopped coincident with the removal of this stimu-
lus. From this, Murphy suggests that the signal is 
likely to be directed at predators to inform them 
that they have been detected. Bitton & Doucet 
(2013) explored a tail-raising signal in a woodland 
bird, the elegant trogon (Trogon elegans). They found 
that the signal was more likely to be induced by a 
model of a potential predator than a suitable control 
model, and that the presence of conspecifics along 
with the model did not influence propensity to sig-
nal (see Figure 8.3). Effects of this signal on predators 
await exploration, and an alternative explanation 
where the predator induces the display as a non-
functional fear-response that the predator does not 
respond to cannot currently be ruled out.
Intriguingly, it might be that some birds’ prey 
themselves use pursuit deterrence signalling. Pin­
heiro et al. (2016) suggest that signalling difficulty 
of capture to predators may be widespread in 
butterflies, and that this ability may not be limited 
to palatable butterflies. Further, they point out that 
the possibility that the evolution of pursuit deter-
rence signalling mimicry preceded that of unpal-
atability should be further investigated within the 
context of classical Müllerian and Batesian mim-
icry. This is an interesting idea worthy of further 
investigation.
8.2.7  Willow tit alarm calls and attack 
preferences by pygmy owl
In a simple but insightful experiment by Kareksela 
et al. (2013), a pygmy owl (Glaucidium passerinum) 
was exposed to several dummy willow tits (Poecile 
montanus) in an aviary. A small loudspeaker emit-
ting characteristic willow tit alarm calls was associ-
ated with one of the dummies, and the owl 
invariably attacked one of the ‘non-calling’ dum-
mies. A very valuable follow-up would be to explore 
if this selection by predators is specific to alarm 
calling.
25
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
Predator
Present
Absent
Conspeciﬁc
Control
Model type
(a)
(b)
20
15
10
Number of trials
5
0
Tail raises
No tail raises
Figure 8.3  Created by Pierre-Paul Bitton from data 
presented in Bitton & Doucet (2013) on the factors 
affecting a tail-raising signal in the elegant trogon.

136
AVOIDING ATTACK
8.2.8  Visual displays by lizards
Leal & Rodríguez-Robles (1997) reported that a 
­lizard (Anolis cristatellus) performed conspicuous 
‘pushup’ displays, in which the body is moved 
up  and down in a vertical plane by flexion and 
extension of the legs, in response to a snake preda-
tor. Snakes have been demonstrated to stop an 
approach to a lizard in response to this signal (Leal 
& Rodríguez-Robles,  1995). This earlier study also 
demonstrated that lizards that signal are attacked 
significantly less often than those that do not. These 
lines of evidence are certainly suggestive that the 
‘pushup’ display acts, at least in part, as a signal to 
predatory snakes. Leal (1999) provided evidence that 
the intensity of the ‘pushup’ signal given in response 
to predators by this lizard species is correlated with 
individual physiological condition, as measured by 
endurance capacity; whereas the intensity of this 
signal given in intraspecific non-predatory contexts 
was not similarly correlated. Leal further argued that 
since struggles between a captured lizard and the 
snake can last several tens of minutes, and can result 
in the escape of the lizard, endurance capacity will 
correlate strongly with how easily an individual can 
be subdued. This suggests that the pushup signal 
may be an honest and reliable signal of escape ability. 
Although these studies do not definitively demon-
strate that the pushup signal is costly, the authors 
argue persuasively that such signals are costly both 
energetically and in terms of increased conspicu-
ousness attracting secondary predators.
Font et al. (2012) describe the anti-predator foot 
shake displays performed by wall lizards (Podarcis 
muralis) in the presence of their potential predators 
(e.g. snakes). Through simulated predatory attacks, 
it was found that these foot shake displays were 
consistent with expectations from pursuit deterrent 
theory: they were oriented toward the predator, 
they were performed more often when the predator 
was some distance from the lizard, and they gave 
way to flight behaviour when the predator closed in 
on the lizard.
Most putative elusiveness signalling in lizards 
consist of tail movements. Dial (1986) is often cited as 
empirical evidence supportive of prey signalling to 
potential predators. However, this paper’s evidence 
amounts to demonstrating that of two lizard species 
(Cophosaurus texanus and Holbrookia propinqua), the 
one living at lower population densities (C. texanus) 
produced a tail display more readily in response to 
predatory threats. We do not consider this conclusive 
proof that such signals are not aimed at conspecifics. 
Hasson et al. (1989) also suggested that tail-wagging 
in a lizard species (Callisaurus draconoides) was a pur-
suit deterrent signal. Their evidence is as follows. 
Wagging occurred more in individuals near to a ref-
uge. Wagging increased with ground temperature, 
which was postulated to correlate with escape abil-
ity. Wagging was less common in a situation where 
the experimenters hypothesized that the lizard 
should consider itself to be in extreme danger. 
Lizards wagged more when moving than when sta-
tionary, which the experimenters suggest is because 
their risk of being detected by a predator is higher 
when moving. This seems contrary to the increased 
wagging near refuges and at higher temperatures, 
both of which were considered indicative of reduced 
predation risk. Despite this, Hasson et al.’s study cer-
tainly constitutes a stronger argument than that of 
Dial for tail-wagging in lizards being a predator-
directed signal. Cooper (2000) raised further con-
cerns about the interpretation of both the studies 
mentioned above, but he does consider predator 
deterrence to be a likely function of at least some tail-
wagging behaviours in lizards. Very similar evidence 
to that presented by Hasson et al. is presented for 
another species (Leiocephalus carinatus) in a study by 
Cooper (2001), which was careful to consider and 
eliminate plausible alternative functions of the 
behaviour. Since then, Cooper and others have 
honed this approach and provided a jigsaw of very 
suggestive evidence for some tail-waving and arm-
waving displays in a variety of lizards to have some 
function in communicating evasiveness to predators 
(Font et al.,  2012; Cooper & Perez-Mellado,  2004; 
Cooper, 2007,  2010a,b,  2011; York & Baird,  2016; 
Kircher & Johnson,  2017), Hence, we agree with 
Cooper that elusiveness signalling is currently the 
most plausible explanation for some tail-wagging 
in lizards, but further work on eliminating other 
potential explanations is still required.
Telemeco et al. (2011), for example, investigated 
the tail-waving behaviour of hatchling Australian 
three-lined skinks (Bassiana duperreyi) and concluded 
that it appeared to function to deflect predatory 

Advertising elusiveness
137
attacks towards the expendable tail, rather than pri-
marily functioning as a pursuit deterrent signal. 
They suggest that pursuit deterrence may be a less 
common and derived function of anti-predator tail 
displays in lizards, and that deflection is likely to 
have been the ancestral function. It may be that 
we  really need to explore some way of observ-
ing predator behaviour in response to mechanical 
model lizards.
8.2.9  Predator inspection by fish
It is well known that a range of prey species actually 
respond to detecting a predator in their vicinity by 
approaching that predator. The important aspect to 
this predator inspection behaviour seems to be about 
gathering information about predatory threats. For 
example, predators may not always be motivated to 
attack (e.g. if they are currently sated), and prey can 
benefit from identifying such instances. However, 
the act of inspection has been demonstrated in staged 
laboratory encounters between freshwater fish to 
negatively influence the predator’s likelihood of 
attacking the inspector (Godin & Davis, 1995a,b; 
Brown et al., 1999). That is, predator inspection can 
function in part as an elusiveness signal. These stud-
ies have not been substantially built on in the last 
two decades, perhaps because there are methodo-
logical challenges associated with designing experi-
ments that allow the effect of such signalling to 
predators to be isolated from other mechanisms 
(Milinski & Boltshauser, 1995) and the ethical chal-
lenges associated with staged predation on verte-
brate prey. However, this system should be worth 
revising to explore if new technologies can allow 
useful measurements to be taken of naturally occur-
ring interactions.
8.2.10  Summary of empirical evidence
Due to the challenges of successfully observing 
predator–prey encounters involving fleeing prey, 
none of the studies above can be considered to dem-
onstrate elusiveness signalling beyond any doubt, 
but in most of these cases (and particularly in the 
skylarks, vervet monkeys, and hares) the strength 
of empirical evidence is very suggestive of such sig-
nalling. It does seem that such signalling occurs, 
perhaps infrequently but widely spread, among the 
vertebrates. Perhaps the lack of evidence for its 
existence in invertebrates is related to the much 
greater use of post-capture defences among inverte-
brates. However, the absence of evidence may sim-
ply reflect disproportionate emphasis on vertebrate 
taxa in behavioural research, and later in this 
­chapter we will mention a possible invertebrate 
­system that may involve elusiveness signalling. 
Likewise, the paucity of aquatic taxa from this chap-
ter most likely simply reflects the added practical 
challenges for humans to observe predator–prey 
encounters underwater.
That elusiveness signalling might have evolved 
several times may not be surprising. It is probably 
common for predators to encounter prey that vary 
in their ease of capture. Whenever attacks are 
­sufficiently expensive for predators that pred-
ators  should decline difficult opportunities and 
concentrate on attacks that are more likely to be 
successful, then prey should be motivated to 
inform predators that they are especially difficult 
to capture and predators would be motivated to 
respond to such signals. This issue of cost driving 
selectivity might hint at another reason why elu-
siveness signalling seems to occur especially in 
vertebrates. In all of the vertebrate systems con-
sidered above, prey are relatively similar in size to 
their predators, making the prey expensive to catch 
and subdue but offering a substantial reward when 
such investment is successful. For many systems 
involving vertebrate predators and invertebrate 
prey, the predators are much bigger than the prey, 
prey offer a relatively small meal size, and pred-
ators consequently invest little in capture. In such 
circumstances, elusiveness signalling will be less 
likely to be selected for.
We would only expect elusiveness signalling to 
evolve in situations where the signal is generally 
honest. The case of the hare looking directly at the 
approaching fox suggests that in some cases the 
honesty of the signal may be assured because it is 
unfakeable. However, this does not seem to hold 
true for all the signals we have considered in this 
section, so in the next section we will lay out current 
theoretical understanding of how reliable elusive-
ness signalling can be maintained in the face of 
prey’s temptation to cheat.

138
AVOIDING ATTACK
8.3  Evolution
Let us turn from considering current prevalence of 
elusiveness signalling to evolutionary consider-
ations, starting with theory on how such signalling 
might evolve and be maintained.
8.3.1  Theoretical stability of signalling that  
an approaching predator has been detected 
(perception advertisement)
Signals that inform predators that they have been 
detected have been suggested for several prey 
­species (see section 8.2). The basic idea is that a 
predator has a reduced chance of successfully 
­capturing an individual if that prey individual 
becomes aware of the approaching predator before 
the final attack is launched. Hence, the predator 
may benefit from being informed that it has been 
detected, since it may now be optimal for the preda-
tor to cancel its attack. This cancellation could be 
beneficial to the predator if the attack involves an 
investment in time or energy, or if there is some 
other potential cost to the predator, such as risk 
of  injury or opportunity costs associated with 
revealing its presence to all potential prey in the 
vicinity. If this signal does cause the predator to 
cancel its attack, then the signaller also benefits in 
saving the costs (e.g. time, energy, risk of injury) of 
evading the attack and/or the risk (however small) 
of being captured in that attack. Since both parties 
appear to benefit, the evolution of such a signal 
seems uncontroversial. However, we might ask 
what stops prey individuals from cheating, and 
­signalling that they have detected the predator 
when they have not. If signalling was energetically 
and otherwise inexpensive, this would seem an 
advantageous tactic, reducing the predation risk of 
cheats compared to non-cheats. As cheats pros-
pered, though, so the signal would grow to have lit-
tle value to the predator, which should be selected 
to ignore it. Hence, the signal could break down 
because of cheating by prey. Bergstrom & Lachmann 
(2001) developed a formal model, ‘the watchful 
babbler game’, to explore the conditions required 
for the signal to be maintained in the face of such a 
danger from cheating. We now describe this model 
in detail.
A game between predator and prey is played in a 
series of rounds. For each round, the predator is 
either in the vicinity of a single prey individual and 
hence able to attack (hereafter ‘present’) or not. The 
predator is present with fixed probability α. However, 
in a given round, the prey does not know with cer-
tainty whether the predator is present or not. Rather, 
it detects sensory stimuli (e.g. sounds, movements, 
etc.) that are caused both by the predator (if it is pre-
sent) and by other components of its environment. 
These stimuli are characterized by a random variable 
x ∈ [0,1]. If x takes a high value (range B in Figure 8.4), 
then the prey is certain that the predator is present; if 
x takes a low value (range A), then it is certain that 
the predator is not present. There is, however, an 
intermediate range of values of the stimulus where 
the prey is uncertain. Specifically, x for a given round 
is drawn from different probability distributions 
according to whether the predator is present or not 
(f(x) and g(x) respectively). There is some overlap 
between the two distributions, so there is a range of x 
values for which the value of x does not unambigu-
ously inform the prey whether the predator is pre-
sent or not (the ‘zone of uncertainty’ in Figure 8.4).
The model assumes that signalling costs the prey. 
Specifically, if a prey individual signals in a given 
round then its probability of surviving that round is 
multiplied by a factor (1−c) for some 0 ≤ c ≤ 1. This 
cost has to be interpreted with care. The cost is paid 
regardless of any effect that the signal may have on 
the predator to which it is directed (hereafter the pri-
mary predator). Hence, this mortality cost is not 
g(x)
(Predator certainly
not present)
(Predator certainly
present)
zone of
uncertainty
A
B
x
o
Probability
f(x)
Figure 8.4   The situation modelled by Bergstrom & Lachmann 
(2001).

Advertising elusiveness
139
associated with the primary predator. Bergstrom & 
Lachmann suggest that signalling attracts a different 
type of predator (hereafter a secondary predator), 
attacks by which are responsible for the mortality 
cost of signalling. This interpretation justifies a situ-
ation where the cost is incurred whether or not the 
primary predator is present. If the primary predator 
had to be present for a cost to be imposed, then sig-
nalling would break down; prey could signal indis-
criminately without heed to whether they thought a 
predator was present or not, without incurring pro-
hibitive costs (since signalling would be cost-free 
when the predator was not present), and so the 
predator would be selected to stop heeding the sig-
nal. It is possible to imagine other costs of signalling 
also being expressed as a mortality cost of signal-
ling regardless of the predator’s response, for 
example this could be increased starvation risk if 
signalling and foraging are mutually exclusive.
All attacks by the primary predator require the 
predator to make an investment (d). However, 
attacks differ in their probability of success (t). 
Bergstrom & Lachmann argue that, for signalling to 
be stable in their model, the probability of success 
must be negatively correlated with the sensory 
stimulus x. This is a key result of the model, and for-
malizes the idea that the prey can gain information 
about whether a predator is likely to be present from 
the stimuli it detects (x) and reduce its risk from an 
attack (t) by being forewarned of the danger. Both x 
and t are generated from a bivariant distribution 
f (x,t) for each round when the predator is present.
The rules just described translate into the payoff 
matrix shown in Table 8.3. The predator is unaware 
of the values of x (the strength of stimulus received 
by the prey, and hence the prey’s knowledge of the 
predator’s presence) and t (the probability that an 
attack will succeed). The only information that the 
predator can use to decide whether to attack or not 
is whether the prey signals or not. The prey is aware 
of x but not t. Hence, the prey’s decision to signal or 
not will be based on x and knowledge of the fre-
quency with which predators occur (defined by frac-
tion of rounds in which the predator is present (α)). 
A successful attack brings the predator a reward of 
one, not attacking brings no reward (but saves the 
investment of d).
The prey gains nothing from signalling if the 
predator is not present, but pays a price in raised 
mortality because of the signal attracting secondary 
predators (described by the value of c). Part of the 
prey’s strategy should therefore be not to signal when 
it knows that the predator is not present; this occurs 
for the range A of x values in Figure 8.4. If it is worth 
the prey signalling for one value of x, then it is 
worth it signalling for all higher values of x (where 
it is more likely that the predator is present). Hence, 
the prey’s strategy can be defined by a critical value 
xc. If x in the current round is below xc then the prey 
does not signal, otherwise it signals. We can see that 
costs of signalling (c) must be greater than zero for 
the signalling equilibrium to be stable. If there is no 
cost to signalling, then the prey could always signal, 
in which case the predator should ignore the signal 
as it contains no useful information about the prey’s 
estimate of the likelihood of the predator being 
present. However, c should not be so high that prey 
never benefit from signalling.
The predator’s strategy depends on the values of 
two related components: its probability of attacking 
when the prey signals and its probability of attacking 
when there is no signal. Since the predator has no 
Table 8.3  The pay-off matrix for the model of Bergstrom & Lachmann (2001).
Payoffs per round
 
Predator present
Predator not present
 
Prey signals
Prey does not signal
Prey signals
Prey does not signal
 
Attack
No attack
Attack
No attack
 
 
Prey
(1−c)(1−t)
1−c
1−t
1
1−c
1
Predator
1−d
0
1−d
0
0
0

140
AVOIDING ATTACK
way to distinguish one non-signaller from another, 
or one signaller from another, then it should operate 
an all-or-nothing policy with respect to attacks on 
signallers and non-signallers (i.e. either attack all or 
no individuals of each type). If all values of probabil-
ity of an attack in a specific round being successful (t) 
are greater than the investment made in each attack 
(d), then the predator should always attack regard-
less of any signalling. Similarly, if all t are less than d, 
then it should never attack. We are interested in cases 
where it should attack one group but not the other. 
Recall that a key requirement for stable signalling in 
the model is that t is negatively correlated with x. 
Now, high values of x induce the prey signal. Hence, 
the average value of t from rounds where the prey 
signal (call this average t+) is less than the average 
value from rounds where no signal is given (t−). The 
predator should attack when it is most beneficial to 
it, so if it attacks one group but not the other, then it 
should attack non-signallers.
Bergstrom & Lachmann demonstrate that there is 
a set of necessary conditions that are sufficient to 
produce a stable system in which 1) prey only sig-
nal when they are reasonably sure that they have 
detected a predator, and 2) the predator responds to 
that signal by not attacking. These conditions are 
that:
	1)	There is a cost to signalling.
	2)	This cost to signalling is not so high that signal-
ling is never profitable.
	3)	Prey have some means (even if imperfect) of 
gauging the likelihood of a predator being 
present, and hence their risk of attack. That is, 
those prey that are most ‘concerned’ about pre-
dation are actually those that are most at risk.
	4)	Prey that strongly suspect the presence of the 
predator are more difficult to capture than those 
which have lower levels of suspicion.
	5)	The costs to the predator of attacking are not pro-
hibitively high.
Two aspects of this model that may make it chal-
lenging to apply to real systems are: the description 
of time as a sequence of rounds; and the definition 
that t (the probability that an attack is successful) 
and d (the cost to the predator of attacking) are con-
sidered to be in equivalent units. These restrictions 
to the model’s applicability were removed by Getty 
(2002). As can be seen in Table 8.1, in the original 
model, if the predator is present but does not attack 
then it receives a payoff of zero. This can be con-
sidered as the opportunity cost of pursuit. If we 
move from a series of rounds of a game to a con-
tinuous time setting, then Getty demonstrates that 
the fundamental conclusions of the original paper 
are retained except that this opportunity cost now 
changes. The predator should pass up opportun-
ities to attack signallers and resume searching for 
non-signallers whenever the opportunity cost of 
pursuing signallers exceeds the expected benefit 
from attacking a signaller. Getty’s modifications 
therefore make the model more useful, in the sense 
that the opportunity cost of attacking a signaller is 
now costed as the expected value of the alternative 
activity (finding and attacking a non-signaller). 
The result is that parameters such as the expected 
time to find a non-signaller become important, 
with  the further effect that population density of 
prey and search ability of the predator become 
explicit parameters of the model. Getty’s work also 
provides a re-interpretation of the model in terms 
of  commonly considered foraging concepts, like 
diet choice, and concepts from signal-detection the-
ory, such as the receiver operating characteristic 
(ROC) curve.
This body of theory was further developed by 
Broom & Ruxton (2012). They showed that the essen-
tial arguments of the theory still hold when it is gen-
eralized, such that the signal is not simply binary but 
can vary in its intensity (with higher intensity signals 
being costlier to produce) and with the addition of a 
high-cost signal (such as staring directly at the preda-
tor) that can only be utilized when the prey is very 
confident about the existence of a nearby predator. 
These complexities still allow for stable signalling, 
but the prey do not use the range of signalling inten-
sities to signal different degrees of confidence in the 
proximity of the predator. Rather, prey simply adopt 
a binary response of not signalling or always signal-
ling at the same fixed intensity. This binary response 
occurs because the predator has only two responses 
open to it on detecting a signal (attack or not). They 
make the testable prediction, however, that the inten-
sity of the signal will increase for prey that require 
greater confidence in the existence of the predator 
before signalling. Thus, they make the prediction 

Advertising elusiveness
141
that within an individual the intensity of the sig-
nal will not correlate with confidence in the proxim-
ity of a predator; however, across populations 
those populations whose signals are lower cost will 
be associated with higher rates of giving such sig-
nals mistakenly when no predator is present. The 
availability of the high-cost/high-certainty signal 
does prohibit the stability of signalling based on a 
lower-cost signal, but there are also circumstances 
where only the high-cost signal is used. Again, 
because of arguments based on the essentially binary 
options available to the predator, it is expected that 
where prey use a high-cost/high-certainty signal 
(such as directed staring) they will not also use a 
lower cost signal (e.g. tail-flagging) when their con-
fidence in a predator’s presence is reduced. Finally, 
they emphasize that any stable signalling equilibria 
co-exist with an equilibrium state where prey do 
not signal and predators do not respond to signals. 
We can assume that this non-signalling state is 
ancestral. However, Broom & Ruxton (2012) discuss 
how when the signalling solution is also stable, 
there are natural routes for natural selection to lead 
to the signalling state.
8.3.2  Theoretical stability of signalling that the 
prey individual is intrinsically difficult to catch 
(pursuit deterrent signals)
One benefit of signalling may arise simply by 
informing the predator that it has been detected. An 
alternative (yet not necessarily mutually exclusive) 
role of signalling may be to indicate to the would-be 
predator that the signaller is difficult to catch. A key 
theoretical work on honest signalling by prey is 
that of Vega-Redondo & Hasson (1993), and looks at 
the maintenance of signals of ‘quality’ rather than 
‘alertness’. Rather than communicating that it has 
detected a predator, the prey signals that it is a 
particularly high-quality individual that would be 
difficult to capture in an attack, and so the predator 
would be better served by passing up the chance of 
attacking it. Their model is structured as follows.
In each round of the game the predator confronts a 
group of N prey individuals drawn randomly from 
the entire population. The prey population is made 
up of two prey types, differentiated by their qualities 
q1 and q2. We assume that q1 is greater than q2, and that 
this denotes that q1 individuals are intrinsically more 
difficult for predators to catch than q2 individuals. 
Prey can signal to the predators; this signal (s) must 
be selected from the continuous range [0,smax]. In the 
example used by Vega-Redondo & Hasson, s repre-
sents the distance between predator and prey at 
which the prey flees. The constant smax is then the 
maximum distance at which approaching predators 
can be detected by the prey. Small values of s are 
intrinsically more risky for the prey than higher val-
ues of s, and so are more likely to indicate a high-
quality individual. It is on the basis of these signals 
that the predator chooses which prey to attack. The 
predator attacks only one individual from each 
group. We assume that if two individuals signal alike 
then (even if they are of intrinsically different quality) 
they are both equally likely to be the individual 
attacked. The payoffs from a round of the model are 
zero to any prey item in the group of N that is caught 
by the predator and one to all those that are not 
caught (either because they were not the one selected 
for attack or were selected but the attack failed). The 
predator gets a reward of one if it attacks successfully 
and zero if it is unsuccessful. The final part of the 
model is the function h(sj,qi), which is the probability 
that a targeted individual of quality qi that signals sj 
and is targeted by the predator, escapes the attack.
Vega-Redondo & Hasson’s key finding is that 
there is an evolutionarily stable signalling equilib-
rium where the two prey types issue different sig-
nals, and the predator responds differentially to 
those signals. The q1 individuals issue signals s1, 
and the q2 individuals issue signals s2 where s1 ≠ s2. 
Indeed, in the case where s reflects the distance to 
which predators are allowed to approach: s1 < s2 
(i.e. high-quality individuals allow the predator to 
approach more closely). At this signalling equilib-
rium, if the group contains individuals of both sig-
nal types, then only those of the s2 type have a 
non-zero probability of being the one targeted. 
This probability is the same for all such individuals, 
and is the inverse of the number of s2 signallers. 
Only if the group is entirely composed of s1 signal-
lers will one of them be targeted, each q2 individ-
ual having a 1/N probability of being the one 
targeted.
The equilibrium exists and is evolutionarily stable 
providing h(s,q) satisfies the following conditions:

142
AVOIDING ATTACK
	1)	 An attack on a higher-quality individual is less 
likely to be successful than an attack on a poorer-
quality individual if both signal identically (i.e. if 
both allow the predator to approach equally close). 
That is, the signal (s) is related to a quality of prey 
that affects their vulnerability to predators (q).
	2)	If s increases, then the relative decrease in the 
probability of an attack being successful is greater 
for the higher-quality individual than the lower-
quality one. Thus, the cost of a more intensive 
signal (a smaller s) is greater for a low-quality 
individual than for a high-quality individual.
	3)	If s becomes small enough, then the predator’s 
attack is always successful.
	4)	h(s,q) converges to zero as s increases, and does 
so faster than its derivative.
These conditions would have to be modified (but 
in a very intuitive way) if the signal is one where 
increasing signal value is associated with increasing 
quality, e.g. stotting height or stotting frequency.
What keeps the signal honest is the risk that all 
individuals in a group will be vulnerable to attack, 
including a low-quality individual that pretends 
(by its signal) to be a high-quality individual. If, by 
chance, such an individual ends up in a group of 
high quality individuals then it has a 1/N chance of 
being the one selected for attack. If this occurs, then 
this individual pays the price of its deception 
through a high probability of predator success, 
because it has allowed the predator to approach so 
closely. This means that both a large group size N 
and a relatively low frequency of high-quality indi-
viduals strengthens the incentive for low-quality 
individuals to cheat. However, providing the four 
conditions above are met, the signalling equilib-
rium will remain stable, although the signals will be 
driven to higher s values by such circumstances. If 
both signals are greater than smax, then the signalling 
equilibrium will break down and both types will do 
their best to flee as soon as they detect the predator. 
Hence, there is a requirement that smax is sufficiently 
big to incorporate the two signals. Ecologically, 
we  can see that if smax is very small, then signal-
ling breaks down because the optimal strategy for 
all prey types is to flee as soon as the predator is 
detected. However, there may also be a restriction 
that smax cannot be too big; if the prey are too good at 
spotting the predator, then the analysis becomes 
more problematic and is not explored in the original 
paper.
Notice that, at equilibrium, the low-quality indi-
viduals do not necessarily flee as soon as they detect 
the predator. A mutant that did this would always 
be the one targeted by the predator in preference to 
the other low-quality individuals that allow the 
predator to close a little more before bolting.
There is much that can be done to develop this 
model. It seems likely that predators can only dis-
criminate signals if they are sufficiently far apart, 
and this minimum separation distance is likely to 
change with signal intensities. Prey individuals 
need not associate at random. It may be possible for 
cheating to take root more effectively if cheats band 
together or preferentially associate with low-quality 
individuals, to avoid or reduce the risk of being the 
targeted individual. There may be costs to both 
predator and prey individuals involved in an unsuc-
cessful attack. Prey populations are likely to be com-
posed of more than two quality types, and predators 
may meet prey singly rather than in groups. All of 
these elaborations are worth exploring, but even the 
original model warrants further investigation. The 
original paper demonstrates that a signalling equi-
librium can exist; it does not explore the nature of 
that equilibrium or how it is affected by plausible 
parameter values and specific functional forms.
8.3.3  Summary of theoretical work
There is a quantitative theoretical basis for consid-
ering that both signals that predators have been 
detected and signals that individual prey are hard 
to catch or subdue are at least theoretically pos-
sible. Notice, for all the modelling discussed in the 
preceding sections, that we would only expect sig-
nals to be honest ‘on average’. Johnstone & Grafen 
(1993) argue that we should always expect some 
low level of cheating. Hence, evidence that cheat-
ing sometimes occurs is not evidence that the signal 
carries no useful information to the predator ‘on 
average’. Indeed, the fact that palatable (Batesian) 
mimics can persist strongly suggests that they do 
not completely undermine the effectiveness of the 
signal generated by the unpalatable model (see 
Chapter 9).

Advertising elusiveness
143
8.3.4  Empirical explorations of evolutionary 
trajectories
Stang & McRae (2009) present an insightful com-
parative analysis of the evolution of white under-
tail plumage associated with tail-flicking behaviours 
in response to predators in a group of ground-
dwelling birds (the rails), considered in section 8.2.6. 
They found that white under-tail plumage gener-
ally evolves after adaptation to open wetland habi-
tat but before evolution of gregariousness. This 
relative timing is important, since the most plaus-
ible alternative explanation for selection of flicking 
behaviour and associated coloration is that it is an 
interspecific signal. However, the evolution of this 
coloration prior to adopting a gregarious lifestyle 
argues against this. This paper thus adds to the 
strong body of recent evidence that tail-flicking in 
rails is directed towards predators. Further, the 
study found no support for the white tails being 
sexually selected, since they were not associated 
with sexual dimorphism, with the use of the tail in 
courtship displays, or with their mating system.
Key to the evolutionary stability of the types of 
signalling described in this chapter is that those 
­signals are sufficiently costly for the signaller to 
produce. However, such signals may serve mul-
tiple functions, and these may reduce the potential 
costs  of such signals for the mechanism under 
consideration here. For example, a signal may act 
both to inform the predator about the prey individ-
ual, but it may also act to inform kin or other con-
specifics about the presence of the predator. There 
may be a kin-selected benefit to alerting relatives; 
alerting other conspecifics to the predator’s presence 
may benefit the focal individual if the simultaneous 
fleeing of several individuals offers protection to 
the individuals concerned, through predator confu-
sion. As a further complication for the study of such 
signals, identification of the means by which costs 
are expressed (never mind quantifying them) may 
be challenging. Consider the examples below.
Stankowich (2008) provides a thoughtful critique 
on the extensive literature on the possibility that tail-
flagging by fleeing deer and bright rump patches 
may be a signal to predators. They make the inter-
esting prediction that only relatively short tails can 
be lifted during flight to reveal a bright rump patch 
and act as a signal, and animals with a short tail can-
not act to disperse biting insects the way those with 
a longer tail can. Having a tail short enough to be 
useful in signalling may come at a cost of increased 
irritation from flies. Stankowich & Coss (2008) 
report on the characteristic walking gait adopted by 
Columbian black-tailed deer (Odocoileus hemionus 
columbianus) in response to an approaching preda-
tor. A biomechanical analysis of gait leads them to 
speculate that it has traits that would not be possible 
for a lame or arthritic animal, and so the walk may 
be an honest signal of fleeing ability. The take-home 
message from this is that researchers must be alert to 
the number of different ways in which costs of sig-
nalling to predators may be expressed.
8.4  Ecology
If (as we expect) elusiveness signals are expensive, 
then we would expect their use to be dependent on 
ecology, since ecology will influence the magnitude 
of costs and benefits to both parties. Indeed, in some 
situations prey may be signalling not simply intrin-
sic traits about the prey individual (such as how 
quickly it can run), but ecological aspects of a par-
ticular predator–prey interaction (e.g. how close the 
prey individual is to protective cover). The prey’s 
motivation to signal is that it may deter the predator 
from attacking, saving the prey the costs of any 
attack. These costs will be influenced by the ecology 
of the situation. Setting aside, for now, the effects of 
ecology on the likelihoods of the prey detecting the 
predator and of the predator responding to any sig-
nal, the costs of an attack for the prey will be influ-
enced by aspects of the ecology. For example, the 
probability that attack will lead to capture of the 
prey might be dependent on: the nature of the ter-
rain, the distance of the prey from protective cover, 
and/or environmental temperature for ectotherms. 
Even if the attack is unsuccessful, the prey may pay 
a cost in energy spent and/or foraging time lost. 
These costs will be dependent on the energetic state 
of the predator and on the availability of its food. 
The cost might be expressed as increased apparency 
of the prey to other predators, which will depend on 
the local predator community. Aspects of ecology 
also have the potential to affect the distance at which 
the predator is first detected by the prey (and so the 

144
AVOIDING ATTACK
maximum distance between prey and predator at 
which the signal can be given). Obvious aspects 
of the prevailing ecology in this regard include the 
physical complexity of the terrain and light levels. 
Further, considering the costs to predators of failed 
attacks, aspects of ecology will also influence the 
willingness of the predator to heed such a signal. 
Risk of injury during an attack might be influenced 
by terrain and microhabitat, and the risk of a preda-
tor attracting its own predators will be dependent 
on the local community of such predators. The size 
of a cost to the predator in revealing itself to other 
prey that have yet to detect it will be dependent on 
the local prey community, as will the ability of the 
predator to pay energy costs of failed attacks. The 
value of a successful attack will be dependent on 
the local prey community (which will influence the 
availability and value of other possibilities for prey 
capture) and the local competitor community (which 
may steal captured prey before it is fully consumed). 
Thus, we should expect that for those prey that have 
elusiveness signals, those signals are not used indis-
criminately, but their use (and perhaps their nature) 
will be influenced by variation in the ecology of dif-
ferent predator–prey interactions.
Because many aspects of the interaction between 
prey and predator will be influenced by ecology, 
making clear predictions about the effects of a given 
ecological parameter on signalling can be difficult. 
For example, consider the effects of prey density. If 
the prey density is higher, then this may reduce the 
risk of attacks being successful, because prey can 
mount collective defences (say, through confusion 
effects). However, a higher local density of prey 
may require the predator to approach a given prey 
more closely before it is clear to the prey individual 
that it has been singled out for attack, and predator–­
prey distance is likely to influence attack success 
rate, and so the value of signalling. The effect of 
attack success rate on prey’s propensity to signal is 
likely often complex. We agree with Cooper (2011) 
that signalling may be most attractive at intermedi-
ate success rates: at low success rates the cost of sig-
nalling is not worth paying; and at very high success 
rates prey should not delay their fleeing by signal-
ling first, but should flee immediately on detection 
of the predator. A high local prey density might 
increase the costs of failed attacks, since all those 
prey in the vicinity will be alerted to the presence of 
the predator. Further, a higher local prey density 
may also make the predator more willing to forgo 
one particular attack, because there are likely to be 
further (sometimes better) opportunities to make a 
kill soon. The situation is too complex and non-lin-
ear for verbal reasoning to furnish us with clear, 
general predictions about how this ecological factor 
(prey density) should influence signalling. Rather, 
predictions will be dependent on the final detail of 
the interaction, and qualitative modelling will be 
required to yield predictions for specific situations. 
However, the value of such theory will be dependent 
on finding a suitable empirical system, in which key 
quantities and functional relationships can be esti-
mated empirically and used to parameterize the 
theoretical model.
Several recent publications on signalling by lizards 
are beginning to gather valuable empirical informa-
tion on how signalling can be used flexibly in different 
ecological circumstances (Cooper, 2010a, 2011). The 
zebra-tailed lizard Callisaurus draconoides sometimes 
waves its tail in response to approaching predatory 
threats. Cooper observed that individuals that sig-
nalled prior to fleeing allowed him to approach closer 
before fleeing than non-signalling individuals. He 
interprets the signal as one of elusiveness, and argues 
that signalling will increase the probability that real 
predators will break off attacks, and thus lowers the 
risk associated with a given approach. He assumed 
that this reduced risk translates into lizards redu-
cing their flight initiation distance. He also observed 
that signalling was most frequent when prey were at 
intermediate distances from a refuge from predation, 
which he interprets as fitting his conjecture that sig-
nalling is most appropriate at intermediate levels of 
the risk of an attack being successful. He also observes 
signalling to be more common at higher substrate 
temperatures, which is consistent with higher ambi-
ent temperatures leading to higher athleticism in an 
ectothermic lizard. Lastly, he observed that signalling 
was more likely when on soil than when the lizard 
was on rock; this he interpreted as indicative that rock 
provides few refuges and is difficult to run quickly 
on—and so is a high-risk microhabitat, where 
immediate fleeing is a better option than signalling.
Murphy (2006) argued that his study species (tur-
quoise-browed motmots, Eumomota superciliosa) 

Advertising elusiveness
145
might have a number of life-history characteris-
tics  that make signalling of detection to potential 
ambush predators (perception advertisement) par-
ticularly beneficial. It is a large, slow-flying bird 
that might be particularly vulnerable to surprise 
attacks. Also, its nesting burrows are near the 
ground, exposing it to many mammalian ambush 
predators. Further, Murphy suggests that a motmot 
commonly repeatedly hunts (terrestrial insects and 
small vertebrate prey) from the same perch, making 
its positioning predictable to its predators. More 
generally, it may be possible to make cross-species 
predictions about which types of ecologies are suit-
able for signalling, but we suspect (because of the 
multiplicity of different mechanisms involved, as 
discussed in the section  8.3) within-species com-
parisons may be more effective except in cases 
where the species being compared have very nar-
row ecological niches. However, comparing signal-
ling behaviour between different species can reveal 
similarities and differences in the evolution of form 
and function of anti-predator signalling, and how 
different ecologies may influence their evolution 
(Clark et al., 2016).
8.5  Co-evolutionary considerations
The signals discussed in this chapter require prey to 
benefit, on average, for giving the signals and pred-
ators to benefit, on average, from responding to 
them. Thus, the evolutionary considerations of 
­section  8.3 have extensively considered the co-­
evolutionary requirements for such signalling to be 
maintained. However, this does not preclude the 
possibility that in some circumstances prey can 
benefit from using a signal dishonestly. As discussed 
in section  8.4, Murphy (2006) suggested that tur-
quoise-browed motmots use a tail signal to inform 
potential ambush predators that they have been 
detected. In a follow-up paper, Murphy (2007) 
presents data that suggests that the same signal can 
be given in another context, even when a predator is 
not present: when an adult returns to its nesting 
tunnel to feed chicks. They argue that this signal 
is  unlikely to be directed to conspecifics in this 
instance, and suggest that it may be used in this con-
text as a dishonest perception-advertisement signal-
ling: in effect, pretending that a potential ambushing 
predator has been detected when it has not. However, 
responses of any pred-ators to this signal have yet to 
be reported, and in the absence of this, it is difficult 
to say anything definitive about whether predators 
are truly being fooled in this way. It seems relatively 
challenging to explain how predators have suffi-
cient familiarity with this prey species to respond to 
the signal when it is used honestly, but can still be 
fooled when it is used dishonestly; especially since a 
visual cue to differentiate between the two cases will 
be available: when the adult returns to the nest to 
feed the chick it will be carrying food in its beak. In 
contrast, Barbour & Clark (2012) observed that over 
90 per cent of the tail-flagging displays seen in their 
California ground squirrels were given when no 
rattlesnake predator was nearby. However, they 
do not interpret this as widespread dishonesty, but 
rather as evidence that the signal honestly indicates 
a state of heightened vigilance in a situation where a 
predator might be present. Further, Putman & Clark 
(2014) argue that tail-flagging displays in the absence 
of predators can honestly signal vigilance, or the 
readiness to avoid an attack, even if predators are 
undetected, as, in their study, squirrels signalled often 
when interacting with a snake, but also in areas of 
recent snake encounters where they would then 
respond faster to simulated strikes (see Figure 8.5). 
They suggest that anti-predator displays may be 
widespread across species, due to the benefits of 
advertising alertness even when uncertain of the 
location of predators.
The Californian ground squirrel presents a fas-
cinating example of signals being tuned to the sen-
sory systems of the predators concerned. In the 
study of Rundus et al. (2007) the squirrels were 
faced with rattlesnakes and gopher snakes; only the 
first predator type is sensitive to infrared. The squir-
rel tail-flags in response to detection of both types 
of snake, but only with the rattlesnake does it add 
an IR component, by piloerection and enhanced 
blood flow to the surface in the tail. Experiments 
with a robotic squirrel demonstrated that this IR 
component enhanced the predator deterring effect 
of tail-flagging towards rattlesnakes.
Co-evolution leading to the maintenance of 
­elusiveness signalling will be facilitated when the 
predator is relatively specialized on a given type 
of  prey and when the signal is distinctive and 

146
AVOIDING ATTACK
unambiguous. However, displays used by parental 
birds to distract predators away from their offspring 
can be seen as dishonest signalling of evasiveness. 
This is likely possible only because the predators 
concerned are generalists and because the behaviour 
of the prey is not a ritualized and distinctive signal, 
but rather a suite of behaviours that the predator 
does not interpret as a signal but as the normal 
behaviour of an unevasive prey type. We consider 
such behaviour in the next section.
8.6  Unresolved issues and future 
challenges
As we saw in section 8.2, almost all the empirical 
systems where signals of evasiveness have been 
explored involve large vertebrate prey and pred-
ators. Laboratory experimentation of such systems 
is near impossible. However, there have been a 
number of reports that different types of fly display 
to salticid spiders that provide a predatory threat 
to them, and that the spiders can break off attacks 
in  response to such displays: e.g. Figure  8.6 and 
Aguilar-Argüello et al. (2016) and references therein.
The flies appear to offer no defence against 
spiders that make aposematism a likely explan-
ation. Although it has been repeatedly suggested 
that the signalling may be perception advertising, it 
would be useful to evaluate startle effects as an 
alternative explanation. One would expect that if 
the signal acts to startle the spider, then habituation 
to the signal should be more likely than if it is 
­perception advertisement. If startling mechanisms 
can  be excluded, then this system may hold real 
possibilities for experimental manipulations, con-
trol of interaction circumstances, and substantial 
replication; all of which are difficult or impossible 
to achieve in current systems. The idea that some 
butterflies signal evasiveness to avian predators 
might also offer potential for developing a labora-
tory system (Pinheiro et al., 2016).
Recording data on naturally occurring interactions 
involving vertebrate predators and prey is very 
challenging. One expects the occurrence of such 
interactions to be difficult to predict, both in space 
and in time, since any predictability by predators can 
be exploited by prey to reduce encounter rates. 
Coursing vertebrate predators can often chase their 
prey over several kilometres, and ambushing pred-
ators are easily disturbed by human observers. It may 
be that technological advances may solve some of the 
current challenges associated with such data. We saw 
earlier in this chapter (section  8.2.4) an example 
where researchers benefited from the ability to radi-
otrack ambush-hunting snakes. The sophistication of 
data-recording equipment that can be carried on ani-
mals is increasing rapidly and, for example, drone 
technology may allow effective remote monitoring of 
interactions with reduced risk of disturbance. It is 
likely that, to make substantial further progress in our 
understanding of elusiveness signalling, we may 
need to move to larger-scale, more expensive studies 
No Snake
No Snake
Snake Present
Snake
Present
Recent Snake
60
50
40
30
20
10
Reaction time (ms)
0
Recent
Snake
59%
41%
39%
61%
90%
10%
Yes Tail Flag
No Tail Flag
Figure 8.5  Adapted by Bree Putman from results presented in Putman & Clark (2014): shows the proportion of squirrels that exhibited 
tail-flagging at a bait station when no snake was present, when a snake was present, and when they had recently encountered a snake that 
was no longer present, and it shows the reaction times to simulated snake strikes under these three treatments.

Advertising elusiveness
147
than have historically been the case (the recent study 
of Isbell & Bidner, 2016 is an example of what can be 
achieved). This change will not just be driven by the 
availability of useful technologies, but also by a need 
to develop a more detailed understanding of some 
model systems. Elusiveness signalling will only be 
selected if it brings net benefits to both parties. In 
order to truly understand such signalling, we need to 
quantify the costs and benefits to the prey of signal-
ling and those to the predator of responding to the 
signal. As we have discussed earlier in this chapter, 
costs in particular will often be multivariate, and we 
acknowledge that their measurement will not be easy. 
However, we feel that there are examples elsewhere 
in behavioural ecology where detailed measurements 
of suitable model systems have yielded wide-reach-
ing improvements in understanding of general prin-
ciples. Such a case might be the study of foraging by 
the shorebird the Eurasian oystercatcher (Haematopus 
ostralegus), which has been a very successful model 
system for enhancing our understanding of the 
economics of foraging (Goss-Custard, 1996).
Enhancing our understanding of elusiveness sig-
nalling cannot be achieved by empirical measure-
ment alone: we must use such measurements of 
specific systems to parameterize and test underlying 
general theory. We now have a relatively solid the-
oretical framework for understanding both pursuit 
deterrent and perception advertisement signals. 
However, as Broom & Ruxton (2012) discuss, a 
number of other functions may influence selection 
on signals triggered by detection of predators (such 
as signalling to conspecifics). Further, as discussed 
in various sections above, such signals may also be 
influenced by sexual selection. Hence, there is a 
need to build on existing theory and explore the 
influence of multiple selective pressures on the 
existence and forms of signals between prey and 
predators. Further, as discussed in section 8.5, we 
must expand the aims we have for theory in this 
area. Until now, investigation of theory has been 
focussed on identifying the conditions required for 
the maintenance of signalling. We have argued that 
we should expect that prey will use such signalling 
flexibly, in some encounters with predators but not 
in others. It is also possible that the nature of the 
signal (rather than whether it is given at all) will 
vary between encounters to encode encounter-spe-
cific information. We need to expand our theory to 
offer predictions about how prey signalling will 
change in different ecological scenarios. These pre-
dictions should allow the integration of theory with 
empirical observation and, in doing so, strengthen 
our understanding of a relatively uncommon but 
evolutionarily fascinating tactic for avoiding attack.
16
14
12
10
Number
Fly Display
8
6
4
Display
No Display
2
Attack
No Attack
Response
Fly Display
Display
No Display
16
14
12
10
Number
8
6
4
2
0
Fly Killed
Fly Survived
Event
(a)
(b)
Figure 8.6  Developed by Dinesh Rao from data presented in 
Aguilar-Argüello et al. (2016), these data suggest that flies that 
display are less likely to be attacked by spiders and more likely to 
survive an encounter with a spider.

Avoiding Attack: The Evolutionary Ecology of Crypsis, Aposematism, and Mimicry. Second Edition. Graeme D. Ruxton,  
William L. Allen, Thomas N. Sherratt, & Michael P. Speed, Oxford University Press (2018). © Graeme D. Ruxton,  
William L. Allen, Thomas N. Sherratt, & Michael P. Speed 2018. DOI: 10.1093/oso/9780199688678.001.0001
CHAPTER 9
Batesian mimicry and masquerade
9.1  Introduction and overview  
of the chapter
In this chapter we consider deceptive mimicry as a 
means of gaining protection from predation. We 
start the chapter by briefly reviewing the alternative 
forms of mimicry, showing that they can be challen-
ging to classify. Subsequently we present examples 
of deceptive protective mimicry, and examine mul-
tiple lines of evidence that these resemblances serve 
to protect prey in the manner ascribed.
The possibility that individuals of one species 
may gain selective advantage by mimicking mem-
bers of another species was raised by Henry Walter 
Bates just three years after the publication of On the 
Origin of Species (Darwin, 1859).1 In his classic paper 
on species resemblances among Amazonian butter-
flies, Bates (1862) described several different types 
of mimicry, but the form that he is now most closely 
associated with (‘Batesian mimicry’) occurs when 
members of a palatable species (the ‘mimic’) gain a 
degree of protection from predators by resembling 
an unpalatable or otherwise defended species 
(the ‘model’). Charles Darwin was clearly much 
impressed by Bates’ article, writing in a letter to 
Bates on November 20 1862: ‘You have most clearly 
stated and solved a most wonderful problem. Your 
paper is too good to be largely appreciated by the 
1  Examples of mimicry had been recognized long before 
Bates (1862), although they were not understood to have 
arisen as a consequence of natural selection. For example, 
Kirby & Spence (1817) noted the striking similarity of adults 
of Volucella hoverflies to bees, considering it (p. 223) ‘a beau-
tiful instance of the wisdom of Providence’ allowing them to 
enter ‘nests and deposit their eggs undiscovered’. The natural 
theology of mimicry before Bates is reviewed by Blaisdel 
(1982).
mob of naturalists without souls; but rely on it that 
it will have lasting value’ (Darwin, 1887). Indeed, 
it has.
As Bates had anticipated, mimicry is thought to 
evolve for several different reasons, including gain-
ing protection from predators (‘protective’ mimicry), 
and gaining access to prey, hosts, or other resources 
(‘aggressive’ mimicry). Examples of aggressive 
mimicry include deception to gain access to hosts, 
nuptial gifts, pollinators, parental care, and even 
burial as a seed (Midgley et al., 2015). However, in 
keeping with our chosen topic (‘avoiding attack’) 
we will restrict much of our discussion of mimicry 
in this book to protective mimicry, i.e. a consid-
eration of selection on potential prey species to 
resemble other species or objects, thereby gaining 
protection from would-be predators. Examples of 
protective mimicry include: (i) the resemblance of 
the species to an object of no inherent interest to a 
potential predator such as leaves, thorns, sticks, 
stones, or bird droppings (‘masquerade’; Skelhorn, 
2015); (ii) the resemblance of species to other unpal-
atable or otherwise defended species that employ 
warning signals to indicate their unprofitability 
(‘Batesian mimicry’; Bates, 1862); and (iii) the evo-
lution of a shared warning signal among defended 
prey types (‘Müllerian mimicry’; Müller, 1879). 
Here we consider protective masquerade and 
Batesian mimicry, which we collectively refer to as 
‘protective deceptive mimicry’ since we discuss 
‘Müllerian’ mimicry (which we might consider as 
‘protective informative mimicry’) at length in 
Chapter 7.
We must first make it clear that there are numer-
ous ways of classifying protective deceptive mimicry 
and it is not always obvious to which class of defence 

BATESIAN MIMICRY AND MASQUERADE
149
a given example belongs. In particular, as the value 
of masquerade rests on not being recognized as a 
prey item (or as a potential predator) yet also involves 
resembling items or objects in the local environment 
such as bird droppings and pebbles, then masquer-
ade can be thought of either as a form of camouflage 
or as a form of mimicry. However most recent def-
initions stress the latter (see Skelhorn et al., 2010a; 
Skelhorn, 2015).
A graphic illustration of the difference between 
masquerade and background matching was pro-
posed by Allen & Cooper (1985), who drew inspir­
ation from a much-loved fictional bear. In the 
first chapter of Milne (1926) we are introduced to 
Winnie-the-Pooh who was attempting to reach 
honey that was high in the trees and guarded by 
bees. Pooh first thought of floating up on a blue bal-
loon that would be cryptic against the blue sky, 
hence hard to detect. However, he then figured that 
the bees would identify him hanging below. As a 
solution, Pooh rolled himself in mud so that he 
would resemble a small black cloud, which would 
be easy for the bees to detect but hard to recognize. 
It is the difference between general background 
matching and adaptive resemblance to a specific 
object in the background that is now used to distin-
guish crypsis2 from masquerade. Potential examples 
of ‘aggressive masquerade’ initiated by Pooh are 
occasionally reported, such as that seen in the 
Amazon fish Monocirrhus polyacanthus which resem-
bles a dead leaf, most likely to launch surprise 
attacks on fish and invertebrate prey (Catarino & 
Zuanon, 2010).
While masquerade is now seen as a form of mim-
icry, it generally involves resemblance of traits that 
have not evolved to convey information (i.e. cues) 
rather than warning signals (Jamie, 2017), so it is 
separable from both Batesian and Müllerian mim-
icry. Just as crypsis and masquerade are hard to 
­disentangle, however, it is clear that appearances 
alone are insufficient to infer the specific reason why 
2  Likewise, disruptive coloration and crypsis have often 
been distinguished as two separate camouflage strategies, the 
former based on hindering detection or recognition of an 
object’s outline or characteristic shape, and the latter based on 
minimizing visual difference between object and background 
(see Chapters 1 and 2).
a given form of mimicry has evolved. For example, 
in 1892 Bateson and Poulton engaged in a caustic 
debate in the journal Nature on whether Volucella 
hoverflies are aggressive or Batesian mimics of 
bumblebees (Poulton, 1890; Bateson, 1892). Naturally, 
in principle the two tactics are not mutually exclu-
sive, and the same species may benefit both from 
avoiding predators and gaining access to hosts 
(Nelson & Jackson, 2009). For example, the fang-
blenny mimic Plagiotremus laudandus gains from 
its resemblance to the toxic poison fangblenny 
Meiacanthus atrodorsalis through its ability to para-
sitize local coral reef inhabitants (aggressive mim-
icry) but also from its reduced predation risk 
(protective mimicry) (Cheney, 2010). Even more 
remarkably, the dusky dottyback (Pseudochromis 
fuscus) can alter its body coloration to mimic differ-
ently coloured reef fishes and in so doing gains 
access to prey as well as protection from predators 
(Cortesi et al., 2015). Some species are thought to 
employ two different forms of mimicry at different 
stages in their life cycle. For example, although 
cuckoos are widely known as brood parasites that 
often engage in aggressive mimicry of eggs and 
chicks to avoid being expelled from the nest, they 
have also long been suspected as Batesian mimics 
of raptors, especially Accipiter hawks (Wallace, 1889; 
Gluckman & Mundy, 2013; Trnka et al., 2015).
To further complicate matters, Batesian and 
Müllerian mimicry are generally treated as distinct 
forms of mimicry, but it is important to note at the 
outset that it is sometimes difficult to distinguish 
between these two forms of mimicry. For instance, the 
viceroy butterfly (Limenitis archippus) has tradition-
ally been regarded as a palatable Batesian mimic 
of the unpalatable monarch (Danaus plexippus) yet 
Ritland & Brower (1991) presented red-winged black-
birds with abdomens of these two species and found 
that the viceroy and monarch were approximately 
equally unpalatable, a finding more consistent with 
Müllerian than Batesian mimicry. In other instances 
it may be quite fruitless to make the distinction. For 
example, some predator species may find a given 
species profitable to attack, while other predator 
species find it unprofitable. Even the motivation of 
the same individual predator to attack a given type 
of prey may vary according to its state of hunger or 

150
AVOIDING ATTACK
toxin burden (see section 7.5.6.1), so the profitability 
of a given mimic species to a given predator may be 
highly variable.
Bearing in mind that no simple categorization of 
mimicry will neatly classify all examples, we begin 
by briefly reviewing some well-known examples of 
protective deceptive mimicry. In some cases, while 
the mimic is assumed to be palatable, and the model 
is assumed to be unpalatable or otherwise unprofit-
able, this is not always known for sure. Moreover, the 
major predators of mimics are not always known, 
and it is generally implicitly assumed that the appar-
ent visual (or other sensory) resemblance of the 
mimic and model(s) are also perceived by the major 
predators in question. Despite these reservations, 
many of these examples have all the hallmarks of 
selection to deceive predators, including the adop-
tion of behavioural traits to help further the illusion. 
We then compare and contrast the various theories 
that have been proposed to understand the phenom-
enon. Next, we examine the evidence for the phe-
nomenon and its predicted properties, and finally we 
address several important questions and controver-
sies relating to the evolution and ecology of mimicry, 
many of which remain only partly resolved.
9.2  Examples of protective  
deceptive mimicry
9.2.1  Masquerade
Many organisms appear to mimic inedible objects 
such as leaves, thorns, sticks, and bird-droppings; 
that is, objects of no inherent interest to the poten-
tial predator. Remarkable examples include the sea 
dragon (Phyllopteryx eques), a seahorse found off 
the coast of Australia that has numerous out-
growths that together create the impression of sea-
weed. Likewise, the northern potoo bird (Nyctibius 
jamaicensis) from Central America rests motionless 
on trees in the day, and closely resembles a broken 
branch (Edmunds, 1974). The potter wasp Minixi 
suffusum disguises its nest—effectively its extended 
phenotype (Dawkins, 1982)—in the form of a bird 
dropping (Auko et al., 2015). Naturalists have long 
been impressed with the way in which certain leaf 
mimics not only have a leaf shape, but also exhibit 
patterns resembling the leaf’s veins and even their 
blemishes. One characteristic that appears to help 
predators identify objects of interest is their bilateral 
symmetry (Cuthill et al., 2006a,b). Intriguingly 
therefore, many moths that resemble leaves also 
hold their wings in an asymmetric posture (Preston-
Mafham & Preston-Mafham, 1993). Moreover, many 
species adopt characteristic postures or behaviour 
that enhance their resemblance to inedible objects, 
including twig-mimicking caterpillars that hold 
themselves at angles similar to those of the twigs of 
their host plant and those that select microhabitats 
where they are most likely to fool would-be pred­
ators (Skelhorn & Ruxton, 2013). Plants themselves 
appear to have evolved masquerade to avoid being 
attacked by herbivores. For example, plants from 
the genus Lithops look remarkably like stones (see 
Lev-Yadun, 2014a for an excellent review).
One particularly striking case of masquerade, 
which remains to be more formally confirmed, 
involves a drepanid moth from Malaysia, Macrocilix 
maia, with a wing patterning at rest that appears to 
mimic an entire scene: a pair of flies feeding on bird 
droppings (Piel & Monteiro, 2011)—see Figure 9.1. 
A rose by any other name smells just as sweet, but 
what makes this an example of masquerade as 
opposed to Batesian mimicry? In this case the flies 
have not evolved a signal to indicate their unprofit-
ability, so the moth is copying a cue rather than a 
warning signal (Jamie, 2017).
9.2.2  Batesian mimicry
Perhaps the classic examples of Batesian mimicry 
occur in adult butterflies and hoverflies, and we 
will deal in more depth with several specific cases 
of these in later sections. Batesian mimicry appears 
to be a very widespread taxonomic phenomenon 
and there is no shortage of examples in other groups 
outside the Lepidoptera. Recent recorded examples 
include the potential Batesian mimicry of a preda-
cious ground beetle (Craspedophorus sublaevis) by a 
cockroach (an undescribed Blattinae), although the 
possibility that both species are unpalatable (hence 
Müllerian mimics) cannot entirely be ruled out 
(Schmied et al., 2013). The Tomentose burying bee-
tle Nicrophorus tomentosus (Silphidae) engages in a 

BATESIAN MIMICRY AND MASQUERADE
151
twist and flip manoeuvre that exposes the yellow 
underside during flight, thereby enhancing its 
resemblance to the flight behaviour and appearance 
of a bumblebee (Heinrich, 2012). The phenomenon 
of behavioural mimicry is reviewed in section 9.6.3.
Although widely associated with insects, mim-
icry also occurs in vertebrates. Nestlings of the 
Amazonian bird Laniocera hypopyrra have modified 
feathers comprising elongated orange barbs with 
white tips when newly hatched, resembling local 
aposematic caterpillars (notably a caterpillar from 
the Megalopygidae). These nestlings even move 
their head slowly in caterpillar-like fashion, further 
supporting the contention that they are Batesian 
mimics (Londoño et al., 2015)—see Figure  9.2. 
Numerous nonvenomous colubrid snakes of the 
Neotropics and Nearctic (e.g. kingsnakes and milk 
snakes) have evolved the characteristic tri-colour 
ringed patterns of venomous elapid coral snakes, 
which has led many to suggest that these snakes are 
Batesian mimics (see sections 9.3 and 9.4 for more 
extensive discussion). Several convincing examples 
of Batesian mimicry are also known in fish (see 
Randall, 2005 for review). For instance, the plesiopid 
fish Calloplesiops altivelis exhibits a colour pattern 
which make the caudal portion of the fish resemble 
the head of a toxic moray eel, Gymnothorax meleagris 
(McCosker, 1977). When approached by a predator 
the fish flees to a crevice and leaves its tail exposed, 
thereby resembling the moray eel in several ways, 
including an eyespot. Conversely, the harmless 
ringed snake eel Myrichthys colubrinus appears to 
have evolved a resemblance to the venomous sea 
snake Laticauda colubrina and other dark-ringed sea 
snakes (McCosker & Rosenblatt, 1993).
Finally, note that while Batesian mimics some-
times fit the classical dyadic model–mimic scenario, 
they frequently form part of more complex mimetic 
communities, often involving mimicry rings (Mallet 
& Gilbert, 1995; Gilbert, 2005). For example, edible 
longicorn beetles in Arizona appear to participate 
as Batesian mimics, not of any specific species but of 
a more general Müllerian complex consisting of 
lycid beetles and arctiid moths (Linsley et al., 1961). 
Similarly, Neotropical butterfly communities often 
consist of mimicry rings that support both Müllerian 
and Batesian co-mimics (DeVries et al., 1999). Pekár 
et al. (2017) described a particularly impressive 
multi-order mimicry complex that includes at least 
140 different putative mimics drawn from four 
arthropod orders including ants, wasps, bugs, tree 
hoppers, and spiders.
Figure 9.1  The drepanid moth Macrocilix maia with wing patterns that appear to resemble a pair of flies feeding on a bird dropping. Photo 
courtesy of William H. Piel and Antónia Monteiro (see Plate 15).

152
AVOIDING ATTACK
9.3  The origin of protective mimicry: 
selection or shared ancestry?
Though it is tempting to assume that all instances of 
shared appearance can be interpreted as mimicry 
evolved via natural selection, we must remain open 
minded, and be prepared to accept the possibility 
that some instances of apparent mimicry have arisen 
simply as a consequence of common ancestry. To 
quote Fisher (1930), page 156, ‘Obviously the more 
closely allied are the organisms which show resemblance, 
the more frequently are homologous parts utilized in its 
elaboration, and the more care is needed to demonstrate 
that a superficial resemblance has been imposed upon or 
has prevented an initial divergence in appearance’.
Clearly, examples of species evolving to resemble 
taxonomically distinct species such as birds resem-
bling caterpillars, caterpillars resembling snakes, 
and spiders resembling ants are highly unlikely to 
have arisen due to shared ancestry. In cases where a 
species masquerades as an inanimate object such as 
stone or bird dropping, then naturally there is no 
shared ancestry to consider. Additional compara-
tive evidence also supports the contention that 
mimicry has arisen as a specific adaptation (pre-
sumably to avoid attack), rather than as a general 
response to a shared environment. As Cott (1940) 
emphasized, mimetic species often differ mark-
edly from closely related non-mimetic species. For 
instance, those Hymenoptera that resemble the 
orange and black of unpalatable lycid beetles have 
coloured wings, rather than the typical colourless 
wings of the majority of Hymenoptera. Of course, it is 
possible that a common environment generates simi-
lar selection pressures on appearance. Yet it is worth 
noting that while models and mimics often share the 
same geographical and ecological environment, only 
specific palatable species resemble the model. As 
Nicholson (1927) remarked, ‘Actually, we find that in 
many cases closely related mimics resemble a series of 
unrelated models which differ from one another greatly 
in appearance and which have only one factor in com-
mon, that they are all found in the same environment’.
Finally, it is important to note that mimetic resem-
blances are often only ‘skin deep’. Thus, as Cott 
(1940) noted, similar appearances in putative mim-
ics and models are often produced by widely differ-
ent mechanisms. For instance, the transparent wings 
in mimetic Neotropical Lepidoptera (consisting of 
both Müllerian and Batesian mimics) have been 
achieved by an array of different structural and optical 
mechanisms in different species (Cott, 1940). Similarly, 
the red spots near the base of the wing in the great 
Mormon butterfly Papilio memnon  mimic the body 
spots of their models (Joron, 2003). Nevertheless, it 
will come of no surprise to find that even distantly 
related mimics can arrive at a phenotype similar to 
their model using similar mechanisms. For example, 
the scarlet kingsnake Lampropeltis elapsoides produces 
its red, yellow, and black rings through the same 
Figure 9.2  A putative example of Batesian mimicry. Nestlings of the Amazonian bird Laniocera hypopyrra (left) look and behave like a toxic 
caterpillar (Megalopygidae) found in the same area (right). Photo credits: left, Santiago David Rivera; right, Wendy Valencia.

BATESIAN MIMICRY AND MASQUERADE
153
pigments and incorporates these pigments in the 
tissues in the same way as its model, the eastern coral 
snake Micrurus fulvius (Kikuchi & Pfennig, 2012). 
Manceau et al. (2010) provide an excellent overview 
of phenotypic convergence in relation to crypsis, 
emphasizing that different genes can be responsible 
for convergent phenotypes even among closely 
related populations of the same species, while the 
same mutation can create similar phenotypes in dis-
tantly related species. It is clear from the above that 
the similarity of individuals to other species rather 
than their background is likewise achieved in a 
range of different ways.
9.4  The evolution of protective 
deceptive mimicry
There is considerable evidence that mimicry protects 
prey from predators. Here we briefly review some 
basic evidence, before moving on to review whether 
the model–mimic relationship has the sort of proper-
ties one would expect. In many instances the studies 
we describe were multifaceted, but we discuss only 
aspects of studies that are pertinent to the point we 
are making, rather than giving a comprehensive 
overview of the entire paper. The vast majority of 
work to date has been on Batesian mimicry rather 
than masquerade, but where possible we have high-
lighted relevant examples based on masquerade.
9.4.1  Evidence that masquerading  
prey dupe predators
Until recently scientific research on masquerade has 
been somewhat limited, perhaps in part because 
this adaptation appears relatively straightforward 
to understand. de Ruiter (1952) found that captive 
jays (Garrulus glandarius) could not discriminate 
twig-like caterpillars from the twigs on which the 
caterpillars normally fed, but could distinguish 
these caterpillars from the twigs of other trees, con-
firming that masquerade can dupe would-be pred-
ators but also suggesting that it can involve close 
model–mimic relationships. As we discuss in more 
detail in section 9.4.8, the American peppered 
moth  caterpillar Biston betularia cognataria shows 
polyphenetic (i.e. environmentally induced) mas-
querade, with caterpillars found on birch trees look-
ing like birch twigs and those on willow trees looking 
like willow twigs (Skelhorn & Ruxton, 2011).
There is an important methodological challenge 
to studying masquerade, related to how it is 
defined. Say we observe a potential herbivore over-
looking a plant that mimics a stone. Is this back-
ground matching (i.e. failure to detect the plant as an 
entity) or masquerade (i.e. detecting it as an entity 
but misclassifying it as a stone)? As Getty (1987) 
noted ‘we do not have good operational definitions 
that allow us to recognize and count encounters and 
rejections unambiguously’. A study by Skelhorn et al. 
(2010b) met this challenge head-on. Caterpillars of 
the brimstone moth (Opisthograptis luteolata) and the 
early thorn moth (Selenia dentaria) resemble twigs, 
but do predators see them and fail to recognize 
them? To test this idea, Skelhorn et al. manipu-
lated the prior experiences of naïve domestic chicks 
(Gallus gallus domesticus) by presenting groups of 
domestic chicks with a hawthorn branch, a haw-
thorn branch bound in cotton thread to change its 
visual appearance, or no branch at all (an empty 
arena). Each of these three groups of chicks were 
then further subdivided into birds that were pre-
sented with either a brimstone caterpillar, an early 
thorn caterpillar, or a single hawthorn twig, all in 
clear view. Birds with prior experience of twigs took 
longer to attack the caterpillars of both species and 
handled them more cautiously, indicating that the 
caterpillars were seen but not as readily recognized.
9.4.2  Evidence that Batesian mimics  
dupe predators
Laboratory studies
Perhaps the most direct evidence that predators can 
be duped into avoiding palatable Batesian mimics 
after experience with similar-looking but more nox-
ious prey comes from laboratory studies. Classic 
research of this kind includes the work of Mostler 
(1935)3. Mostler showed that, in addition to their 
propensity to sting, the abdomens of wasps and 
honeybees (but not bumblebees) were unpalatable 
to a wide variety of species of bird. When young 
birds were offered wasp-like flies (hoverflies) or 
3  We are grateful to Francis Gilbert, University of Nottingham, 
UK for providing an English translation of this work.

154
AVOIDING ATTACK
other Diptera for the first time they were readily 
eaten. However, mimetic hoverflies tended to be 
attacked less often when birds had been given 
experience with their noxious hymenopteran models 
(to which they bore either a particularly close resem-
blance, or only an approximate similarity). Better 
known work includes the studies of J. V. Brower 
(Brower, 1958a, b, c; Platt et al., 1971) who found 
that captive blue jays learned to avoid attacking 
the pipevine swallowtail (Battus philenor), monarch 
(Danaus plexippus) and queen (Danaus gilippus beren-
ice) butterflies after they had tasted them, and sub-
sequently tended to reject species (which were either 
moderately unpalatable or palatable) that resem-
bled them. In a more recent study, Kuchta et  al. 
(2008) presented scrub jays (Aphelocoma californica) 
with the warningly coloured and toxic Pacific newt 
(genus Taricha) followed by morphs of the poly-
morphic salamander Ensatina eschscholtzii. The birds 
were much more hesitant to handle the presumed 
Batesian mimic morph with yellow eyes than the 
cryptic morph.
While birds have been widely used as predators 
in these types of study, it is clear that predators 
other than birds can similarly learn to avoid dis-
tasteful prey and thereby be deceived into rejecting 
palatable prey. For example, Brower et al. (1960) 
showed that toads (Buffo terrestris) learn to avoid 
attacking bumblebees and that these toads subse-
quently had a greater tendency to reject edible  
asilid fly mimics. In an experiment that any fly-
fisherman would enjoy, Boyden (1976) cast palatable 
Anartia fatima and unpalatable Heliconius spp. butter-
flies to free-ranging Ameiva ameiva lizards as well as 
their re-constructed butterfly mimics (wings glued 
on bodies of different species). The degree of protec-
tion afforded to mimics was greater in those lizards 
known to have had prior experience with the unpal-
atable model.
Far fewer laboratory studies have been con-
ducted with invertebrate predators (such as dragon-
flies, spiders, bugs, and wasps), despite the fact 
that many species are abundant and visual hunters. 
Bates (1862, page 510) himself observed that ‘I never 
saw the flocks of slow-flying Heliconiidae in the woods 
persecuted by birds or Dragon-flies, to which they would 
have been easy prey; nor, when at rest on leaves, did they 
appear to be molested by Lizards or the predacious Flies 
of the family Asilidae, which were very often seen poun-
cing on Butterflies of other families’, indicating that he 
had observed that invertebrate predators refrain 
from attacking certain types of prey, and had appre-
ciated its potential significance. It has been shown, 
for example, that praying mantids learn to avoid 
food associated with electric shocks (Gelperin, 1968) 
and distastefulness (e.g. Bowdish & Bultman, 1993). 
In an early experiment, Berenbaum & Miliczky 
(1984) found that the Chinese mantid Tenodera aridi-
folia sinensis rapidly learned to avoid unpalatable 
milkweed bugs (Oncopeltus fasciatus) that had been 
reared on milkweed seeds. Furthermore, of six man-
tids that had learned to reject milkweed-fed bugs, 
none of these individuals attacked palatable sun-
flower-fed bugs (automimics, see Chapter 5) when 
they were offered. Recent experiments by Morris & 
Reader (2016) suggest that prior exposure of the 
predatory crab spider Synema globosum to the paper 
wasp Polistes dominula resulted in a decline in attack 
rates on mimetic hoverflies that was most marked 
in species that most closely resembled the wasp 
model (to human eyes).
Many species of spider appear to have evolved a 
visual (and sometimes behavioural) resemblance to 
ants (‘myrmecomorphy’). Huang et al. (2011) pre-
sented three large jumping spider species with a 
range of smaller spiders as potential prey and found 
that the rates of attack on ant-mimicking jumping 
spiders were significantly lower than those of non-
ant-mimicking jumping spiders, indicating that the 
resemblance of spiders to ants could provide pro-
tection against salticid predation. Nevertheless, the 
deception may not have been perfect since the 
spider predators tended to treat ants themselves 
rather differently.
Field studies
Laboratory experiments provide direct evidence 
that predators can be duped into avoiding other-
wise palatable mimics, but an even more appro-
priate way to test whether mimicry enhances the 
survival of edible prey is to see if artificial mimics 
benefit from their resemblance to real models in 
the field. In an ingenious series of experiments, 
L.P. Brower and colleagues (Brower et al., 1964, 1967a; 
Cook et al., 1969) released palatable day-flying male 
moths Callosamia promethea (a species native to eastern 

BATESIAN MIMICRY AND MASQUERADE
155
North America) that had been painted in different 
ways, into areas of Trinidad. A major advantage 
of using this species was that the moths could be 
recaptured using traps baited with pheromone-
releasing females. Experimental moths painted to 
mimic the unpalatable Heliconius erato, and the unpal-
atable Parides neophilus, were not re-caught at signifi-
cantly higher rates than control-painted (similar 
amounts of paint but no change in colour or pattern) 
alternatives (Brower et al., 1964). Follow-up experi-
ments with different unpalatable models also gener-
ated mixed results, leaving Cook et al. (1969, p. 344) 
to conclude that ‘under wild conditions no clear selective 
differential can be demonstrated with the promethean 
moth mimicry system’. Of course, failure to reject the 
null hypothesis does not prove the null hypothesis, 
and to obtain sufficient data the densities of moths 
may have been unrealistically high. Indeed, it is 
possible that birds became familiar with feeding on 
the moths (of all colours) where they were released, 
in a fashion similar to the ‘feeding stations’ that 
may have incidentally been formed in Kettlewell’s 
classic experiments on melanism in Biston betularia 
(Grant & Clarke, 2000).
Half a decade later, Waldbauer & Sternburg 
(1975) proposed an alternative explanation for the 
results of Brower and his colleagues, noting that the 
black non-mimetic controls of C. promethea may 
have gained protection through their resemblance 
to unpalatable Battus spp. which occur in Trinidad. 
Thus the survivorship of artificial mimics may have 
been compared against co-mimics, rather than 
non-mimics (Waldbauer, 1988). Impressed with the 
elegance of earlier work and motivated by this re-
interpretation, Sternburg et al. (1977) and Jeffords  
et al. (1979) used painted promethea males to evalu-
ate the advantage of mimicry in the pipevine swal-
lowtail complex in Illinois. This time, some of the 
promethea moths were painted with yellow bars to 
resemble the non-mimetic forms of the palatable tiger 
swallowtail butterfly—others (in some experiments) 
were painted orange to resemble the unpalatable 
monarch, while other male moths of this species 
were again control-painted (considering them nat-
ural mimics of the pipevine swallowtail). In these 
experiments, the yellow-painted moths were signifi-
cantly less likely to be recaptured than orange and 
black-painted moths (and surviving yellow-painted 
moths also showed more evidence of wing injury), 
providing perhaps ‘the first field demonstration of the 
efficacy of Batesian mimicry’ (Jeffords et al., 1979). By 
contrast, in similar work conducted in Michigan 
(Waldbauer & Sternburg, 1987) male C. promethea 
moths painted to resemble the palatable tiger swal-
lowtail, the monarch, and the pipevine swallowtail 
all had similar recapture rates to one another. One 
explanation may be that the pipevine swallowtail 
does not occur locally, while the local monarchs 
feed on plant species that are most likely not suffi-
cient to provide an emetic dose of cardenolides. Taken 
together, these studies suggest that the selective 
advantage of Batesian mimicry may be dependent 
on the availability of suitable noxious models. We 
now consider this property in more detail.
9.4.3  Evidence that the success of the mimic 
generally requires the presence of the model
One might expect that Batesian mimicry can only 
evolve and be maintained in the presence of a nox-
ious model. Bates (1862) drew much from the fact 
that models and mimics co-occurred. Likewise, 
Wallace (1867) p. 8 argued: ‘The first law is, that in an 
overwhelming majority of cases of mimicry, the animals 
(or the groups) which resemble each other inhabit the 
same country, the same district, and in most cases are to 
be found together on the very same spot’.
This view has been supported by several experi-
ments that have demonstrated a greater advantage 
to mimics when they are sympatric with models. 
For example in a field study, Pfennig et al. (2001) 
put out hundreds of plasticine models of snakes in 
triplicates. These triads included a replica of the 
putative mimetic snake in the area, a distinct striped 
version with the same proportions of colours, and a 
plain brown version. The replica mimics were either 
based on colour patterns of the scarlet kingsnake 
(Lampropeltis elapsoides) or the Sonoran mountain 
kingsnake (Lampropeltis pyromelana) that resemble 
the venomous eastern (Micrurus fulvius) and west-
ern (Sonoran) coral snake (Micruroides euryxanthus) 
respectively. For both model–mimic pairs, the pro-
portions of total attacks by carnivores on the plasti-
cine mimics were significantly higher in locations 
where the model was absent compared to where it 
was present (see also Pfennig et al., 2007). In an 

156
AVOIDING ATTACK
even more comprehensive analysis, Davis Rabosky 
et al. (2016) combined geographic, phylogenetic, eco-
logical, and coloration data to elucidate the spatio-
temporal association between New World coral 
snakes and their Batesian mimics. They found that 
the shifts to mimetic coloration in nonvenomous 
snakes were highly correlated with the colour pat-
terns of coral snakes in both space and time, although 
they noted that mimicry appears to have been gained 
and lost in this group, suggesting that it was not 
necessarily a stable ‘end-point’.
Perhaps most enlightening evidence of the import­
ance of the presence of the model is the forms (some-
times sub-species) a putative mimic species tends to 
adopt in areas where the model is not present. For 
example, the harmless snake Lampropeltis doliata 
appears to mimic the coral snake Erythrolamprus aes-
culapii in the southern United States, but further 
north where no venomous models are present the 
snake takes a more blotchy appearance, more con-
sistent with disruptive coloration (Hecht & Marien, 
1956; Edmunds, 1974). In butterflies, the mimetic 
black female form of the eastern tiger swallowtail 
Papilio glaucus tends to occur where the pipevine 
swallowtail Battus philenor is abundant (Platt & 
Brower, 1968; Edmunds, 1974). However, in south-
ern Canada where Battus philenor is rare, the black 
female form of Papilio glaucus is rarely encountered 
and the genetically distinct yellow non-mimetic 
female form predominates (Layberry et al., 1998). 
Likewise, another of the pipevine swallowtail’s 
mimics, the red-spotted purple (Limenitis arthemis 
astyanax) is common in the United States, but it 
is  the non-mimetic (and possibly disruptively 
­patterned) subspecies of white-banded admiral 
(L. a. arthemis) that predominates in Canada (Platt & 
Brower, 1968; Layberry et al., 1998). Analysing 29 
years of observational data from the 4th of July 
butterfly counts, Ries & Mullen (2008) confirmed 
that there is indeed a sharp phenotypic transition 
zone between mimetic (red-spotted purple) and 
non-mimetic (white-banded admiral) subspecies 
distributions, which corresponds to the limit of the 
model’s range, although it is notable that mimicry 
appears to be selected for even when the swallow-
tail model is rare (Figure  9.3). Has mimicry been 
gained in the red-spotted purple, or lost in the 
white-banded admiral? Although an initial analysis 
suggested that mimicry was lost (Prudic & Oliver, 
2008), a more detailed phylogenetic analysis of the 
different morphs conducted by Savage & Mullen 
(2009) suggests a single origin of mimicry and reten-
tion of the ancestral non-mimetic form in the north.
In a recent analysis of the frequency of different 
forms of the polymorphic hoverfly Volucella bomby-
lans, Edmunds & Reader (2014) found that the fre-
quency of the common black and yellow hoverfly 
(plumata) morph was positively related to the rela-
tive frequency of black and yellow bumblebees 
across 52 sites in central England and northern 
Wales. Likewise, they found that the frequency of 
the rare red-tailed (bombylans) Volucella morph was 
significantly positively related to the frequency of 
red-tailed bumblebees, although this relationship 
disappeared when spatial autocorrelation (morph 
frequencies at nearby locations are not strictly inde-
pendent data points) was accounted for. Collectively 
their results indicate geographical variation in 
selection by predators as a consequence of variation 
in the frequencies of different bumblebee models.
1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
Proportion of individuals
0.1
0.0
20
30
Latitude (degrees) of study sites
40
50
60
Proportion model (n = 356)
Proportion mimic morph (n = 348)
Figure 9.3  Changes in the proportions of individuals of the  
mimetic morph (red-spotted purples), in relation to the total number 
of mimetic and non-mimetic (white admirals) individuals of the 
Limenitis arthemis species complex, with latitude (red triangles). Also 
shown are changes in proportion of the model (pipevines) relative to 
the total numbers of the model and its mimic recorded at that latitude 
(blue circles). Where the model is present at lower latitudes, the 
mimetic morph comprises 100% of the L. arthemis population.  
Where the model is absent at higher latitudes, the non-mimetic  
morph of L. arthemis dominates. Data drawn from the 4th of July 
butterfly counts. Figure from Ries & Mullen (2008), with permissions 
(see Plate 16).

BATESIAN MIMICRY AND MASQUERADE
157
While the co-occurrence of models and mimics in 
the same location generally appears important for 
the maintenance of mimicry, the co-occurrence of 
models and mimics at the same time may be far less 
important. Indeed, it may sometimes be advanta-
geous for a mimic to delay its appearance until after 
the appearance of the model. Moreover, by appear-
ing first, the model is ‘uncontaminated’ by palatable 
mimics. The buff ermine moth (Spilosoma lutea) is 
considered a mimic of the distasteful white ermine 
moth (S. lubricipeda), although it may be a Müllerian 
rather than Batesian mimic because it is unpalatable 
to some predators (Rothschild, 1963). As might be 
expected in this situation, the white ermine moth 
reaches peak abundance before the buff ermine 
moth (Rothschild, 1963). Similarly, Brodie (1981) 
noted that the palatable salamander Desmognathus 
ochrophaeus is active later in the season than its 
unpalatable salamander model Plethodon cinereus. 
Strangely, many good hoverfly mimics of stinging 
Hymenoptera in North America reach a peak in 
spring before their models are most abundant 
(Waldbauer & Sheldon, 1971; Waldbauer et al., 1977; 
Waldbauer & Laberge, 1985). One explanation for 
this puzzling phenomenon (see Waldbauer, 1988) is 
that while adult birds may avoid mimics based on 
their previous seasons’ experience with models, 
early emergence avoids the time when fledgling 
birds (which have not yet learned to avoid models) 
begin to capture their own insect prey. This is an 
intriguing explanation, although the timings of 
emergence of hoverflies in relation to their models 
are different in other parts of the world. Working in 
the north-west of England, Howarth & Edmunds 
(2000) could find little evidence that hoverfly mimics 
were rare compared to models when fledgling birds 
are abundant, and generally found that hoverfly 
mimics were synchronous in their flight season with 
their hymenopteran models. Indeed, after account-
ing for site, season, microclimatic responses, and 
overall abundance, Howarth et al. (2004) concluded 
that the residual numbers of mimics were signifi-
cantly correlated positively with their models nine 
times out of 17, with 16 of 17 estimated relation-
ships positive.
Finally, while mimetic protection has long been 
assumed to disappear when the model is perman­
ently absent, it must be borne in mind that mimetic 
advantage in the absence of the model may in theory 
be possible—for example when predators migrate 
from areas that contain the model (e.g. Poulton, 
1909, page 217; Carpenter & Ford, 1933, page 43; 
Waldbauer, 1988). Anecdotal observations suggest 
that some vertebrate predators may remember 
unpleasant experiences for periods over a year 
(Mostler, 1935; Rothschild, 1964). While there is 
clearly potential for the evolution of Batesian mim-
icry in the absence of the model, we do not know of 
any study that has formally demonstrated mimetic 
advantage to a given prey species on the basis of 
learnt (or innate) aversion to models in another geo-
graphical area. The maintenance of eyespots in cat-
erpillars in areas such as Canada where venomous 
tree snakes are absent is one possibility (Hossie & 
Sherratt, 2014) although the eyespots may have 
evolved to resemble a general predator (Janzen 
et al., 2010) and/or may have additional adaptive 
benefits (Stevens & Ruxton, 2014).
Other puzzling examples of mimics persisting in 
the absence of a model have occasionally been 
observed, but they are exceptions rather than the 
rule. For instance, Clarke & Sheppard (1975) reported 
that females of the nymphalid butterfly Hypolimnas 
bolina, which gave ‘no convincing evidence’ of unpal-
atability to birds (although it may contain cardioac-
tive substances obtained from certain food plants) 
occurred entirely in their mimetic form in Madagascar 
even though its putative model (Euploea butterflies) 
was absent (a ‘rule-breaking’ mimic, Clarke et al., 
1989). Rather than being maintained by the pres-
ence of migrating birds, or regular immigration of 
the butterfly from India, the authors argued that the 
resemblance was likely to persist either because of a 
lack of non-mimetic variants (especially likely if the 
species had recently immigrated to the area), or due 
to some selection unassociated with mimicry (it is 
also possible that the model once existed but is now 
extinct in Madagascar; Clarke et al., 1989).
9.4.4  The relative (and absolute) abundance  
of the model and mimic affect the rate of 
predation on these species
While the presence or absence of an aversive model 
is important, one might wonder whether decep-
tion shows a more continuous form of frequency-

158
AVOIDING ATTACK
dependent advantage, such that it is more beneficial 
to the mimics/masqueraders when they are rare 
compared to their models. For example, one might 
expect that as the frequency of prey that masquer-
aded as twigs increased with respect to twigs, then 
it would pay potential predators to pay more atten-
tion to twig-like objects. This is precisely what 
Staddon & Gendron (1983) predicted in an early 
application of signal detection theory. Decades later, 
Skelhorn et al. (2011) presented domestic chicks with 
different mixtures of twigs and twig-mimicking cat-
erpillars (the early thorn moth, Selenia dentaria) and 
showed that the benefit of masquerade (measured 
in terms of latency to attack) increased as the ratio 
of twigs to masquerading caterpillars increased. 
This effect appeared to arise through two separate 
mechanisms. Increasing the ratio of twigs to caterpil-
lars reduced the predators’ motivation to search for 
prey as predicted, but increasing the density of twigs 
also produced a more complex environment, mak-
ing it harder for the chicks to find the caterpillars.
Of course, many masquerading prey items have 
evolved to resemble extremely common objects in 
their environment, such as bird-droppings, twigs, 
and leaves, so masqueraders may always be rare in 
the field compared to the objects they model, what-
ever their population size. Moreover, if the model is 
a small part of an organism (such as thorns or twigs) 
then masquerading species that resemble them are 
unlikely to have an effect on selection for model 
appearance (but see Abbott, 2010 for some potential 
counter-examples in which plants are selected to 
reveal herbivores to their predators). Indeed, it is the 
lack of deleterious effects on the model that is some-
times used to distinguish masquerade from Batesian 
mimics (Endler, 1981; Skelhorn et al., 2010a).
A fascinating recent study investigated the mater-
nal nest-brooding cichlid Neolamprologus furcifer 
which inhabits shaded areas of large rocks in Lake 
Tanganyika (Satoh et al., 2017). Unlike the brooding 
mothers, the young have clear white stripes on the 
dark brown body which appears to enhance their 
resemblance to a local white-striped and inedible 
snail Reymondia horei. Indeed, the guarded young 
had black/white coloration only in populations 
where the model snails were present. In manipula-
tive experiments, when the putative model snail was 
removed from the female territories, the mothers 
had to ‘up their game’ and work at higher rates to 
repel would-be predators from attacking their young. 
Moreover, the mimic/model ratio appears such 
an important factor in deterring predators that the 
mothers actively sought to remove non-model snails 
from their territories!
It has been widely predicted that the attack rates 
of predators on encounter with Batesian mimics 
and their models should depend not just on the 
presence of the model, but on the relative abun-
dances of mimics and models. Bates (1862, page 
514) himself noted: ‘It may be remarked that a mimetic 
species need not always be a rare one, although this is 
very generally the case’. Note, however, this does not 
mean that mimics should never outnumber their 
models. Indeed, when the model is particularly 
unprofitable then it may pay predators to continue 
to avoid similar-looking prey even when there is a 
high ‘mimetic load’. The mimics of venomous coral 
snakes, for instance, often vastly outnumber their 
models (Harper & Pfennig, 2007; Davis Rabosky 
et al., 2016).
Several studies have examined the nature of the 
quantitative relationship between predator attack 
rates and the relative proportion of models and 
mimics. In a classic study, Brower (1960) showed 
that the rate of attack of caged European starlings 
(Sturnus vulgaris) on palatable (‘mimetic’) and 
unpalatable mealworms (the model, dipped in 
quinine dihydrochloride) tended to increase as the 
percentage of models offered in a sequential mix-
ture decreased. As might be expected, this rela-
tionship was non-linear. Thus, even when models 
comprised only 40 per cent of the models/mimics, 
then mimics often received similar protection com-
pared to trials where there were a greater percent-
age of models. This is consistent with a non-linear 
‘zone of protection’ (see for example Turner, 1984; 
Sherratt, 2002a,b).
In more recent fieldwork, Jones et al. (2013) pre-
sented wild garden birds with dishes containing 16 
mealworm larvae that comprised a mixture of pal-
atable mimics and unpalatable models (rendered 
bitter-tasting using Bitrex), and varied the propor-
tion of the mimics from 0 to 1 by increments of 0.25. 
The authors found strong frequency-dependent selec-
tion with the proportion of mealworms attacked after 
4 hours of foraging again increasing non-linearly 

BATESIAN MIMICRY AND MASQUERADE
159
with the frequency of mimics. Several experiments 
have shown similar frequency-dependent effects 
when the mimics were not perfect replicas. For 
instance, Pilecki & O’Donald (1971) showed that 
neither poor mimics (artificial palatable pastry 
mealworms, paler in colour than models) nor their 
models experienced high attack rates by sparrows 
when the poor mimics were relatively rare (their 
Experiment III). By contrast, significantly more 
mimics than models were taken when mimics and 
models were presented in a 1:1 ratio (Experiment 
IV). In this case the predators became more discrim-
inatory when mimics were more abundant, although 
even here the poor mimics suffered less predation 
than expected compared to the palatable controls. 
Likewise, Lindström et al. (1997) sequentially pre-
sented captive great tits (Parus major) with a combin­
ation of model and mimic mealworm larvae (6 in 
total). Models were dipped in (and injected with) 
chloroquine and 3 small light blue ‘nonpareils’ 
(small round balls of brightly coloured sugar used 
in food decorations) were placed close to their heads. 
Imperfect mimics were simply mealworm larvae with 
the nonpareils in the middle of their bodies. As might 
be expected, they found that imperfect Batesian mim-
ics were attacked least frequently by the birds on a 
per capita basis when the models were more common.
In sum, a number of experiments have demon-
strated that the relative abundances of models and 
mimics influence the mean rates of predation on 
these types—as the ratio of models to mimics 
increases then the attack rates on both models and 
mimics on encounter tends to decrease, typically in 
a non-linear fashion.
9.4.5  The distastefulness of the model affects 
the rate of predation on the model and mimic
Common sense suggests that, other things being 
equal, the protection an edible mimic gains from 
mimicry will vary with the intensity of the model’s 
defences. This might arise for two complementary 
reasons. First, predators may more readily learn to 
avoid models that are particularly unprofitable, and 
mimics might incidentally benefit from this acceler-
ated learning.
For example, Skelhorn & Rowe (2006) presented 
coloured crumbs that had been soaked in different 
concentrations of quinine sulfate and found that 
chicks more rapidly learned to avoid those crumbs 
containing higher concentrations of aversive chem-
icals, and were less prepared to reverse their aver-
sions when all crumbs presented were palatable. 
Second, predators may choose to avoid prey types 
that look remotely like highly unprofitable prey for 
fear of misclassification, even after learning is com-
plete (see Sherratt, 2002b).
The above common-sense prediction has been 
supported on a number of occasions. For instance, 
Alcock (1970) first trained captive white-throated 
sparrows (Zonotrichia albicollis) to overturn seed 
shells (painted with dots) under which was hidden 
half a mealworm or no mealworm at all. The birds 
were then presented with a binary choice of a model 
and mimic. The mealworm models were either 
weakly unpalatable (salted) or highly unpalatable 
(smeared with tartar emetic) and hidden under 
shells decorated with specific markings. The meal-
worm mimics were consistently palatable and were 
either good or poor mimics of the models (manipu-
lated by changing the dots on the shells). When the 
mimic was poor and the model weakly aversive, 
then the mimic was attacked at a relatively high rate 
(and significantly more frequently than the model). 
However, when the model was emetic then neither 
the model nor the mimic were frequently attacked, 
even when the degree of mimicry was poor. The 
Lindström et al. (1997) study described in the previ-
ous section also found that the concentration of 
chloroquine in the mealworm model affected the rate 
of attack of great tit predators on the model, but in 
this case the attack rates on imperfect mimics did not 
change significantly—possibly because birds could 
distinguish them.
9.4.6  The model can be simply difficult to catch 
rather than noxious on capture
Can a prey species that is easy for its predators to 
catch gain protection by mimicking a species that is 
sufficiently difficult to catch that predators decline 
the opportunity to pursue them? We will call this 
‘evasive Batesian mimicry’; although it has also 
been called locomotor mimicry (e.g. Brower, 1995), 
this term has also been used to mean mimicry of the 
movement behaviour of unpalatable prey (Srygley, 

160
AVOIDING ATTACK
1999). Naturally, it is also possible that collections of 
species, all of which are difficult to catch, evolve 
similar appearances to warn predators more effect­
ively of their unprofitability. This form of mimicry 
could be considered evasive Müllerian mimicry (see 
Chapter 7).
van Someren & Jackson (1959) were amongst the 
first to suggest that a species could gain selective 
advantage simply by resembling another species 
that was difficult to catch. Rettenmeyer (1970) simi-
larly included an effective escape mechanism in his 
list of features worth mimicking. Evasive mimicry 
has been widely suspected among coleoptera. In 
one of the first specific examples, Lindroth (1971) 
remarked on the visual similarity between flea-
beetles (Alticinae, Chrysomelidae) and sympatric 
ground beetles (Lebia, Carabidae). He proposed that 
neither beetle species was unpalatable to their pred-
ators and hypothesized that the ground beetles had 
evolved to mimic the flea-beetles because they can 
jump as an effective form of escape from predators. 
Holm & Kirsten (1979) argued that the remarkable 
similarity of a complex of fast-moving scarab beetles 
in the Namib desert, all with orange-brown elytra, 
was best explained by a combination of Batesian and 
Müllerian evasive mimicry. Likewise, Hespenheide 
(1973) described a diverse collection of Neotropical 
beetle species, not normally considered distasteful, 
that appear to have evolved to resemble flies. Vanin 
& Guerra (2012) detail one such example of a weevil, 
Timorus sarcophagoides that appears to have evolved 
to resemble flesh flies from the family Sarcophagidae. 
The weevil even appears to behave like their model 
with stereotypical leg-scrubbing behaviour widely 
associated with flesh flies. Why evolve this resem-
blance? Both sets of authors suggest it is a case of 
evasive mimicry because many flies are hard to catch, 
and while it remains to be tested, the extent of mim-
icry is compelling (Figure 9.4).
More recently, Pinheiro & Freitas (2014) reviewed 
some purported cases of evasive mimicry in Neo­
tropical butterflies and suggested several potential 
mimicry rings based on escape behaviours including 
a ‘bright blue bands’ ring and a ‘creamy bands’ ring. 
The blue-banded one-spotted prepona (Archae­
oprepona demophon), for example, flies at high speed 
and moves erratically, and has been observed to 
escape 73 of 83 (88 per cent) attacks by rufous-tailed 
jacamars (Chai, 1990) and 8 of 18 attacks (44 per cent) 
by tropical kingbirds (Pinheiro, 1996). Many other 
blue-banded species also appear to have the same 
ability to evade predators, and the common warning 
patterns may therefore represent a case of Müllerian 
evasive mimicry. Naturally, we should be aware that 
associations in appearance and flight characteristics 
can arise simply through shared phylogeny rather 
(a)
(b)
Figure 9.4  (a) The flesh-fly mimicking weevil Timorus sarcophagoides (Coleoptera. Curculionidae) from Southeastern Brazil. Not only does 
the weevil morphologically resemble flesh flies, but it also behaves like them when moving and engages in stereotypical leg-scrubbing behaviour. 
(b) A potential flesh fly (Sarcophagidae) generic model. The adaptive significance of the mimicry is unclear, but flesh flies are hard to catch and it 
seems likely that the weevil has evolved this resemblance because it provides a degree of protection from predators (thus Batesian evasive mimicry, 
although it could be Müllerian evasive mimicry if the weevils are also hard to capture). Photographs courtesy of Tadeu Guerra (see Plate 17).

BATESIAN MIMICRY AND MASQUERADE
161
than selection, especially for closely related species 
(Brower, 1995). However, Pinheiro & Freitas (2014) 
argue that the candidate species have strongly 
diverged in the underwing coloration pattern, but 
not on the upperwing, suggesting active selection for 
monomorphism in appearance.
Experimental evidence that mimicry of a more 
evasive species can protect a slower-moving mimic 
from predation was provided by Gibson who found 
that Australian star finches (Neochmia ruficauda; 
Gibson, 1974) and robins (Erithacus rubecula; Gibson, 
1980) continued to avoid attacking prey types (seeds 
and mealworms) of particular colours that had pre-
viously been difficult to catch (by means of a hinged 
platform). Interestingly, the more conspicuous eva-
sive model appeared to provide higher and longer 
levels of protection to the mimic. In a similar experi-
mental design, Hancox & Allen (1991) presented 
red and yellow pastry baits on a specially con-
structed bird table, which allowed one colour of 
bait to drop out of reach when attacked. In two sets 
of 20-day sessions (yellow evasive, red non-evasive, 
followed by yellow non-evasive, red evasive) it was 
clear that birds rapidly learned to avoid attacking 
those pastry baits with the ‘evasive’ colour. The 
implications of the above results for mimicry were 
contested by Brower (1995), who stressed that the 
conditioned aversion to escaping prey is temporary, 
whereas aversion to chemically defended prey is 
much longer-term. However, it should be noted that, 
in contrast to prey with a chemical defence, predators 
gain no nutritional benefit from chasing after an 
evasive model. Moreover, predators do not need to 
attack mobile prey to be reminded of their escape abil-
ity since direct observation of their manoeuvrability 
(and/or a short, failed chase) will suffice.
One might intuitively expect that evasive Batesian 
mimicry would be a rare phenomenon if the cost of 
ascertaining whether a prey individual is easily 
caught (for example, by attempting to catch it) were 
low: in these instances, both models and mimics 
would be pursued and mimicry would not evolve. 
Indeed, Ruxton et al. (2004b) developed a simple 
optimal foraging model which showed that while 
evasive Batesian mimicry was plausible, it was much 
more likely to evolve when it is costly (in time or 
energy) for the predator species to pursue evasive 
prey, when mimics are encountered less frequently 
than evasive models, and where there are abundant 
alternative prey. Conversely, Ruxton et al. (2004b) 
argued that evasive Müllerian mimicry would be 
most likely to arise when evasive prey species differ 
in abundance, predators are slow to learn to avoid 
evasive prey, and evading capture is costly to the 
prey. So, while evasive mimicry remains a real pos-
sibility in theory, and there are plenty of plausible 
examples, it is clear that more empirical work is 
needed to ascertain whether putative examples of 
the phenomenon are indeed a result of selection to 
signal difficulty of capture.
9.4.7  The success of mimicry is dependent on 
the availability of alternative prey
Carpenter & Ford (1933, page 28) noted that, since 
the motivation of predators to distinguish model 
from mimic depends on how hungry they are then 
‘the success of Mimicry depends on the abundance of 
other palatable food’. These conclusions were later 
supported in a wide range of quantitative models 
(Holling, 1965; Emlen, 1968; Dill, 1975; Luedeman 
et al., 1981; Getty, 1985; Kokko et al., 2003; Sherratt, 
2003; Sherratt et al., 2004a) all of which showed that 
predators maximizing their rate of energy gain per 
unit time (or simply acting to avoid starvation) 
would be expected to more readily attack models 
and mimics when alternative palatable prey were in 
short supply. Indeed, Holling (1965, page 36) pro-
posed that ‘…the marked effects produced by removal of 
alternate prey or changes in their palatability are great 
enough that alternate prey should be included as an 
essential feature of mimicry theory’.
Several authors have attributed low predation 
pressure on mimics at least in part to the presence of 
alternative prey. For example, Nonacs (1985) reported 
that the attack rates of predators (long-eared chip-
munks, Neotamias quadrimaculatus) on mimics and 
models (palatable and unpalatable dough balls) 
decreased when alternative palatable prey were 
offered in abundance. Lindström et al. (2004) like-
wise presented trained wild-caught great tits with 
palatable and unpalatable (soaked in chloroquinine 
solution) almonds covered by paper with different 
patterns. The unpalatable models were green while 
the palatable prey were either blue (considered 
imperfect mimics) or distinct alternative prey with 

162
AVOIDING ATTACK
crosses, resembling the background—the green and 
blue colour treatments were reversed in other experi-
ments. The birds were allowed to attack 50 prey items 
in a given trial. As one might anticipate, the unpalat-
able models were consistently under-represented in 
the diet compared to what one would expect if the 
birds exhibited no selectivity. When alternative prey 
were scarce (50 models, 50 mimics, 50 alternatives) 
then the imperfect palatable mimics were actually 
over-predated compared to what one would expect 
by chance, presumably due to their imperfect resem-
blance to unpalatable models and their higher 
conspicuousness compared to alternative prey. By 
contrast, when the density of alternative prey was 
raised (50 models, 50 mimics, 100 alternatives) then 
the distribution of attacks on mimics decreased. It 
would be of interest to evaluate the success of mim-
icry when alternative prey replaced mimics or models 
thereby maintaining a constant initial density of prey. 
Nevertheless, the results confirm that the density of 
alternative prey available affects the level of protec-
tion afforded to mimics.
Many defended prey contain toxins but they also 
contain nutrients, and such prey may be profitable 
to attack when alternative prey are in short supply. 
Indeed, Speed (1993) noted that ‘in periods of actual 
(or anticipated) hunger, and of scarcity of alternative 
prey, eating a species that contains some toxin and sur-
viving is a better strategy than eating none at all and 
starving’. Over the past decade, considerable work 
has been conducted to elucidate the effect of a pred-
ator’s nutritional state on its propensity to attack 
chemically defended prey (and presumably mim-
ics that look like them). Barnett et al. (2007), for 
instance, showed that European starlings increase 
their attack rates on distinctly coloured chemically 
defended (quinine sulfate injected) mealworm lar-
vae (Tenebrio molitor) when their body masses and 
fat stores were experimentally reduced (and subse-
quently restored in cycles). Nevertheless, the birds 
were still able to discriminate between differently 
coloured chemically defended and undefended 
(water injected) larvae when presented in simultan-
eous choice tests, indicating that this increase in 
consumption was not due to a reduced ability to 
discriminate. In an extension of this work, Barnett 
et al. (2012) presented three types of mealworm to 
captive starlings—undefended mealworms, mildly 
defended mealworms injected with 1 per cent quinine 
solution, and moderately defended mealworms 
injected with 3 per cent quinine solution, all distin-
guishable by colour. After a period of training the 
birds ate more undefended than defended prey and 
more mildly than moderately defended prey. 
However, following a period of food restriction, the 
birds increased the number of defended prey that 
they consumed, although as one might expect, their 
relative preferences for the different prey types were 
maintained.
In another experiment aimed at elucidating pre-
cisely why the availability of alternative prey might 
reduce the attack rates on chemically defended 
prey, Halpin et al. (2013) found that wild-caught 
starlings ate fewer unpalatable mealworms when 
the alternative palatable mealworms were large 
compared with when they were small. Intriguingly, 
however, the size of the unpalatable prey had no 
effect on the numbers eaten, implying that deci-
sions to attack chemically defended prey are not 
based on energy considerations alone. Likewise, 
Halpin et al. (2014) found that starlings increase 
consumption of quinine-injected prey mealworms 
when the nutritional content of the prey was artifi-
cially increased. In another experiment, Chatelain 
et al. (2013) found that starlings increased their con-
sumption of unpalatable mealworms when the 
ambient temperature was reduced to 6°C (14°C 
below their thermoneutral zone), indicating that 
thermal stress can induce similar effects as dietary 
restriction. Energy is not the only state variable that 
influences predatory decisions and, in a complemen-
tary experiment, Skelhorn & Rowe (2007b) revealed 
that the dose of quinine sulfate administered to 
European starlings affected the number of chemically 
defended prey that they were subsequently prepared 
to consume, with birds receiving high toxin doses 
less inclined to eat chemically defended prey.
9.4.8  Frequency-dependent selection on 
Batesian and masquerader mimics can lead  
to mimetic polymorphism
In general, if Batesian and masquerading mimics 
increase in frequency then predators will learn of their 
presence and tend to increase their attacks, since 
their chances of attacking a model concomitantly 

BATESIAN MIMICRY AND MASQUERADE
163
decrease. Since rarity compared to the model maxi-
mizes the survival of a Batesian mimic, then one 
might expect selection to promote polymorphisms 
in which some conspecifics resemble one noxious 
model and other conspecifics resemble another nox-
ious model. Alternatively, if Batesian mimicry carries 
some form of cost (such as enhanced conspicuous-
ness) then a polymorphism between mimetic and 
cryptic forms is possible (Holen & Johnstone, 2004). 
For example, the highly polymorphic ground snake 
(Sonora semiannulata), a Batesian mimic of coral snakes, 
has both cryptic and conspicuous morphs (Cox & 
Davis Rabosky, 2013). Likewise, the tri­morphic 
salamander Plethodon cinereus is considered to have 
forms that mimic the salamander Notophthalmus 
viridescens, but it also has a non-mimetic morph 
(Kraemer & Adams, 2014). Theo­retical consider­ations 
suggest that the equilibrium frequency of different 
mimetic forms, if influenced solely by predation, 
should be such that each morph gains as much 
protection as other forms.
Mimetic polymorphism occurs in a number of 
Batesian mimicry complexes, but it is by no means a 
diagnostic characteristic (Joron & Mallet, 1998). Of 
62 species of Holarctic hoverfly species considered 
to resemble bumblebees, Gilbert (2005) estimated 
that 25 were polymorphic, with variation some-
times confined to one sex. The palatable salaman-
der Desmognathus ochrophaeus is considered to have 
colour morphs that resemble several species of 
unpalatable salamander (Brodie & Howard, 1973; 
Brodie, 1980, 1981). Other potential examples of 
polymorphic Batesian mimics include the non-
aggressive social wasp Mischocyttarus mastigophorus 
that exhibits dark and pale colour morphs, thought 
to resemble the aggressive swarm-founding wasps 
Agelaia xanthopus and A. yepocapa (O’Donnell, 1999). 
In these and other cases it should be borne in mind 
that morphs often co-occur locally but often the 
models only partially overlap in distribution. Hence, 
polymorphism is likely to be maintained by a com-
plex interplay of local balancing selection and the 
mixing of morphs from different areas.
Polymorphisms (genetic and environmentally 
determined) have also been reported in masquerad-
ing species. For example, the appearance of the 
American peppered moth caterpillar Biston betularia 
cognataria is known to be influenced by the colour of 
light in the feeding environment (Noor et al., 2008). 
Likewise, Nemoria arizonaria caterpillars resemble 
oak twigs when fed on oak leaves, and oak catkins 
when fed on oak catkins (Greene, 1989). Skelhorn & 
Ruxton (2011) showed that this environmentally 
induced variation (‘polyphenism’) may be adap-
tive, in that chicks misclassified birch-fed larvae as 
birch twigs and willow-fed larvae as willow twigs 
based on their similar visual appearance.
Perhaps the best-known example of mimetic 
polymorphism occurs in swallowtail butterflies 
(Figure 9.5). Many of these species have a single 
male-like non-mimetic female form and one or 
more mimetic female forms that mimic unpalatable 
models with different appearances (e.g. Papilio pol-
ytes and P. glaucus). In other mimetic species (e.g. 
Hypolimnas misippus, and several mainland popula-
tions of Papilio dardanus), all female forms resemble 
different unpalatable models (Kunte, 2009a, b). 
Intriguingly, the males in female-limited mimetic 
species are generally believed to represent the 
ancestral wing colour pattern of the species, the 
mimetic female forms having diverged from their 
ancestral, male-like wing patterns (Kunte, 2008). 
Why mimicry should be restricted to one sex is a 
separate question (see section 9.4.9) from why one 
or both sexes are polymorphic, but the answers are 
related. For instance, in south and central America, 
the kite swallowtail butterflies of the genus Eurytides 
consist of 15 recognized species, 14 of which appear 
to be Batesian mimics, largely of papilionid Parides 
species (West, 1994). Of these Batesian mimics, six 
species are poly- or dimorphic without sex limitation 
and the remainder have sex-limited polymorphism 
(West, 1994).
Formal experimental evidence for the prediction 
that Batesian mimicry is capable of generating and 
maintaining polymorphisms in systems with two 
or more models is understandably rare. However, 
as noted in section 9.4.4, there is considerable evi-
dence that attack rates on mimics increase as the ratio 
of mimics to models increases. Intuitively polymorph­
ism would be more likely to be selected for when 
there is a rapid increase in the attack rate of a model/
mimic mixture as the mimetic load increases—such 
cases will arise when the model is only mildly aver-
sive. O’Donald & Pilecki (1970) presented palatable 
and unpalatable (dipped in 1 per cent or 3 per cent 

164
AVOIDING ATTACK
quinine hydrochloride) pastry ‘mealworms’ to house 
sparrows (Passer domesticus). There were two forms of 
distasteful model (blue and green) and three forms of 
palatable prey (blue mimic, green mimic, and non-
mimetic yellow). They found from comparing sep­
arate experiments that if the models were only slightly 
distasteful then the rare mimic was at an advantage 
over the common one, confirming the plausibility of 
active selection for mimetic polymorphism. However, 
when the models were highly distasteful then a rare 
mimic had no advantage over a more common one. 
There has been some question of the appropriate 
interpretation of this experiment (Edmunds & 
Edmunds, 1974; O’Donald & Pilecki, 1974) due pri-
marily to the differences in the consumption rate of 
the two unpalatable models (blue and green) used, 
and statistical questions relating to the appropriate 
population from which the observations were drawn. 
O’Donald & Pilecki (1970) does not therefore provide 
the unequivocal evidence of frequency-dependent 
predation risk in mimics that it purports to and 
­further work is required.
Naturally, when there are two or more separate 
potential models then they can be exploited in ways 
other than via polymorphisms. Perhaps the most 
impressive example of a species varying the model 
it resembles (although it is clearly not a genetic poly-
morphism) is the Indo-Malayan octopus Thaumoctopus 
mimicus, in which an individual may impersonate a 
range of venomous animals that co-occur in its habi-
tat (Norman et al., 2001). There is some evidence that 
this mimicry can be employed facultatively, with 
the octopus adopting a form best suited to the per-
ceived threat at any given time, although this pro-
posal needs further testing (Hanlon et al., 2008). An 
alternative solution is to evolve an intermediate 
phenotype, most especially if predators generalize 
widely over both models (Sherratt, 2002b). Indeed, 
stimulus generalization by predators (which is 
expected to be wide in the case of highly toxic prey) 
may be one reason why Batesian polymorphisms 
are not more frequent. Darst & Cummings (2006) 
describe two Ecuadorian poison frogs, Epipedobates 
bilinguis and E. parvulus, which act as models for their 
phylogenetically distant relative, Allobates zaparo. 
Intriguingly, A. zaparo is geographically dimorphic, 
matching each model’s warning signals where only 
a single model occurs. However, in areas where 
the two models co-occur, then the mimic has evolved 
to resemble only one model. Somewhat unexpect-
edly, the model in these cases was the less toxic and 
less abundant E. bilinguis. Note that a vague similar-
ity to an extremely noxious species is usually suffi-
cient to guarantee significant protection, whereas a 
much closer resemblance to a mildly noxious model 
species is necessary to afford a similar level of benefit. 
Amauris echeria
Amauris niavius
Aletis helcita
f. meriones
f. cenea
Papilio dardanus (Batesian mimic)
f. hippocoonides
f. trophonius
♂
♂♀
♂♀
♂♀
♀
♀
♀
♀
Figure 9.5  Polymorphic Batesian mimicry in the African mocker swallowtail, Papilio dardanus. Dubbed “the most interesting butterfly in the 
world” (Poulton, 1924), this species (bottom row) exhibits female-limited polymorphism, with the different female forms resembling different 
unpalatable models (top row). The subspecies of P. dardanus from the Madagascar region (illustrated in first column) has male-like non-mimetic 
females. Image courtesy of Krushnamegh Kunte.

BATESIAN MIMICRY AND MASQUERADE
165
Therefore if the generalization curves for these models 
overlap, then a mimic might maximize its overall 
protection by adopting an intermediate phenotype 
that more closely resembled the less defended model 
(Sherratt, 2002b).
9.4.9  Sex-limited polymorphic mimicry
Some of the most fascinating and complex examples 
of polymorphic mimicry include cases where the 
model is sexually dimorphic and the two sexes of 
mimic resemble each of the sexes of the model. 
Typically the male and female mimic their respective 
sexes. However, sometimes the male resembles 
the female and vice versa (Carpenter & Ford, 1933, 
p. 91). In other cases both males and females are 
mimetic, but they resemble different model species. 
For example, the Central American Erostratus swal-
lowtail (Papilio erostratus) females are thought to 
mimic pink-spotted cattleheart (Parides photinus), 
while the males are considered mimics of the gold 
rim swallowtail (Battus polydamas). Conversely, there 
are examples of multiple mimetic forms of the same 
species, but these mimetic forms are shared between 
the sexes. Examples of such polymorphic mimics are 
most common (albeit relatively unusual) in Müllerian 
mimics, but they have also been documented in 
Batesian mimics, for example Papilio clytia (Kunte, 
2009a), which has two mimetic forms per sex.
Intriguingly, in other species mimicry is limited 
to one sex. In butterfly species where sex-limited 
Batesian mimicry occurs, it is invariably the female 
that exhibits mimicry with both mimetic and male-
like (non-mimetic) female forms (Turner, 1978). 
Male-limited Batesian mimicry has however been 
reported in other taxonomic groups including the 
buprestid beetle Chrysobothris humilis whose males 
resemble members of the chrysomelid subfamily 
Clytrinae (Hespenheide, 1975). Hespenheide (1975) 
explained this unusual case of male-limited mim-
icry as a consequence of sexual differences in behav-
iour: males often sit on legume twigs waiting for 
ovipositing females, and thereby occur more fre-
quently where the model occurs and are more  
frequently exposed to predators. Another potential 
example is the promethea moth Callosamia pro-
methea, where the males may gain a selective advan-
tage by resembling the pipevine swallowtail butterfly 
(Battus philenor) yet the females appear non-mimetic. 
Male moths are almost certainly exposed more to 
visual predators, primarily through their need to fly 
towards pheromone-releasing females during the 
day—by contrast, females lay their eggs at night—
(Waldbauer, 1996, page 127). Many hoverfly mimics of 
bumblebees in the Holarctic also exhibit sex-limited 
Batesian mimicry: 17 cases of male-limited and 11 
cases of female-limited mimicry have now been 
recognized (Gilbert, 2005). While the reason for sex 
limitation in these species is unclear, it is notable 
that the majority of polymorphic species are bee 
mimics. Bees are widely considered less aversive 
models than wasps, so it is possible that they face 
selection to diversify because they are attacked 
more frequently as the mimetic load increases.
If Batesian mimicry is advantageous, why don’t 
both sexes always adopt it? So far two main theories 
have been put forward to explain the occurrence of 
sex-limited mimicry—one based on differences in 
the ecology of the two sexes, and the other based on 
sexual selection. In his classic paper, on Malayan 
swallowtails, Wallace (1865) explained the wide-
spread occurrence of female mimetic forms: ‘with their 
slower flight, when laden with eggs, and their exposure 
to attack while in the act of depositing on leaves, render 
it especially advantageous for them to have some add­
itional protection’. Later Belt (1874, pp. 384–385), added 
the suggestion (not necessarily mutually exclusive) 
that sexual selection may help explain non-mimetic 
forms in males: mimicry does not arise in this sex 
because it would render them at a disadvantage 
during courtship. Turner (1978) took up the chal-
lenge of modelling this latter phenomenon, noting 
that sexual selection may resist colour changes 
more strongly in males than females. Using a popu-
lation genetic framework, he showed how female-
limited mimicry could readily arise when modifiers 
that suppress the expression of mimicry in males 
get selected for. The predicted outcomes include 
female-limited mimicry, or better mimicry in females 
than males, and males retaining some of their colours 
that play a role in mate choice.
Experimental evidence that males and females of 
the same species may experience different selective 
pressures with respect to predation is widespread. 
Bowers et al. (1985) capitalized on an unusual find-
ing in 1980 of large numbers of detached wings 

166
AVOIDING ATTACK
(matched for 309 individuals) of the checkerspot 
butterfly Euphydryas chalcedona in California, almost 
certainly the remains from being attacked and eaten 
by birds (coldness may have contributed to making 
the species more vulnerable that year). By compar-
ing the coloration and sexual composition of this 
sample with a representative sample that had not 
been killed, Bowers et al. (1985) argued that birds 
had attacked significantly more females than males, 
and fewer of those males with high amounts of 
red on their forewing. The authors proposed that 
females may have been actively selected by pred­
ators (they are larger and probably represent a more 
nutritious meal) while redder males may have 
­benefited from warning coloration. More direct 
evidence that sexual differences in potential rates of 
predation can select for mimicry in just one sex 
was presented by Ohsaki (1995) who examined 
the frequency of beak marks on the wings of palat-
able Papilionidae and Pieridae and unpalatable 
Danaidae in Malaysia. The analysis of beak marks 
is  fraught with problems, not least because it 
also  indicates successful escape from a predator4. 
However, females of each palatable family had a 
greater rate of wing damage than males. The num-
bers of recorded observations of Papilio polytes were 
relatively low, but non-mimetic females of this spe-
cies had a higher per capita incidence of beak marks 
than mimetic females or males. Ohsaki (1995) points 
out that these observations indicate that ‘females 
benefit greatly when they become mimetic, whereas males 
will benefit much less even if they become mimetic’, but 
this rather leaves open the question why all females 
are not mimetic (Ohsaki, 1995 suggests this may 
possibly be a consequence of local disequilibrium, 
or some other cost to mimicry).
Looking at the bigger picture, Kunte (2008) ana-
lysed a partial phylogeny of Papilio (swallowtail) 
butterflies, a group well known for sexual dimorph­
ism, based predominantly on multiple instances 
of female-limited mimicry (as noted earlier in this 
section). He argued that where sexual dimorphism 
4  The analysis of statistician Abraham Wald in World War II 
comes to mind, who successfully argued that the military should 
(somewhat paradoxically) reinforce areas of the fuselage where 
returning bombers were unscathed, as opposed to where they 
showed damage—because the bombers were clearly capable 
of surviving damage in areas where it was observed.
was observed, it was often females that were 
selected to be different (mimetic), with males tend-
ing to conserve their ancestral colour pattern. Kunte 
(2008) interpreted the observation of active selec-
tion on female appearance as evidence for Wallace’s 
theory, but we still need to ask why males do not 
engage in mimicry and it remains possible that 
­sexual selection on male colour pattern serves to 
conserve the ancestral form.
Evidence that sexual selection (either through 
female mate choice or male–male interactions) can 
maintain non-mimetic males, comes from several 
quarters. Krebs & West (1988) blackened the wings 
of male Papilio glaucus butterflies to look like the 
mimetic female form and examined their mating 
success compared to yellow-painted controls. No 
significant difference was found in the proportion 
of presentations to both mimetic and non-mimetic 
females, which resulted in mating. However, female 
solicitation of males that themselves had failed to 
court occurred at a significantly higher rate for yel-
low-painted than black-painted males.
In general, there is relatively little evidence that 
papilionid females employ colour in male mate 
choice outside the ultraviolet, with most of the 
close-range mate choices being based on olfactory 
rather than visual signals (see Kunte, 2009b and ref-
erences therein). There is slightly more evidence for 
non-mimetic male forms having some advantage in 
male–male competition. For instance, Lederhouse 
& Scriber (1996) investigated the benefits of male 
coloration in the eastern black swallowtail butterfly 
Papilio polyxenes asterius. The dorsal sides of males 
are less convincing mimics of the pipevine swal-
lowtail Battus philenor (to human eyes at least) than 
the dorsal side of females, and the species is there-
fore generally considered as one exhibiting female-
limited mimicry. Males of the species seek out and 
defend hilltop territories (‘hilltopping’) where the 
vast majority of courtship takes place. Lederhouse 
& Scriber (1996) found that males that had been 
altered using marker pens to have more female-like 
(and therefore mimetic) coloration were less likely 
on release to be able to establish (and maintain) a 
local hilltop territory (at least close to the release 
site) than mock-treated controls. One reason for this 
may be that altered males were involved in signifi-
cantly longer male–male encounters, through being 

BATESIAN MIMICRY AND MASQUERADE
167
misidentified as females. By contrast, the experimen-
tal creation of female-like males did not appear to 
affect female choice per se: while altered males did 
not as readily obtain territories, the mean durations 
of courtship flights that progressed to copulations 
were not significantly different in the territories of 
males that were treated and mock-treated.
In summary, it is perhaps fair to say that while 
there are several good candidate explanations for 
why Batesian mimicry might sometimes be limited 
to one sex, we still do not know which explanation 
is the most general and important one (if indeed 
there is such an explanation). As Kunte (2009b) 
noted, more experiments are needed. One might 
also ask if sexual selection acts to conserve male 
appearance and thereby prevent mimicry, why does 
it not tend to do so in Müllerian mimics? One explan­
ation may lie in the differing nature of the frequency 
dependence (Turner, 1978; Joron & Mallet, 1998). By 
its nature, Batesian mimicry may involve selection 
against common morphs. In contrast to Batesian 
mimicry, the mutualistic nature of Müllerian mimicry 
ensures that the more individuals that adopt a com-
mon form of advertising, the higher the fitness of all.
9.4.10  The genetics of polymorphic  
Batesian mimicry
Butterflies have become the central model for under-
standing the genetics of Batesian mimicry, not only 
because they provide some of the most celebrated 
examples of protective resemblance, but also because 
many species can be crossed under laboratory condi-
tions. As we have seen, many Batesian mimics are 
polymorphic—with the polymorphism often limited 
to one sex—so one of the primary motivational ques-
tions is how several discrete colour patterns can be 
generated.
In an early study in Sri Lanka, Fryer (1914) con-
ducted breeding experiments on the swallowtail 
Papilio polytes whose females are polymorphic (one 
form resembles the male and other forms resemble 
different unpalatable models). Somewhat surpris-
ingly, no intermediate forms resulted from the 
crosses, and it was also deduced that males (all of 
which are non-mimetic) could transmit genes relat-
ing to mimicry to their female offspring. Perhaps 
understandably, observations such as this fuelled 
Punnett’s (1915) belief that mimetic resemblance 
was more likely to have arisen by a sudden ‘sport 
or mutation’, rather than a gradual accumulation of 
mutations providing closer resemblances. Gabritch­
evsky (1924) crossed three forms of the polymorphic 
hoverfly Volucella bombylans, namely bombylans, 
haemorrhoidalis, and plumata, and found that the 
frequencies of resultant offspring matched simple 
Mendelian ratios (see also Keeler, 1925). We now 
know that the underlying genetics of polymorphic 
mimicry are far more complex than at first believed. 
Most of our early knowledge of the genetics under-
lying Batesian (and Müllerian) mimicry in Lepi­
doptera comes from the dedicated and detailed 
studies of E.B. Ford, C.A. Clarke, P.M. Sheppard, 
J.R.G. Turner, and H.F. Nijhout, among others. 
However, with the advent of modern genomics, 
there have been a number of breakthroughs in 
elucidating the genetic mechanisms involved (see 
Deshmukh et al., 2017 for a recent review).
In the previous section we discussed the case of 
polymorphic mimicry in the African mocker swal-
lowtail butterfly Papilio dardanus, in which females 
have evolved colour patterns that mimic several 
different species of unpalatable danaid butterfly. 
Detailed heritability studies of Ford (1936) and 
Clarke & Sheppard (1959, 1960) revealed that within 
a single population, inheritance of wing pattern 
generally behaved as if it were controlled at a single 
locus with alleles of large phenotypic effect and a 
characteristic Mendelian dominance hierarchy. 
However, when the researchers crossed individuals 
from different subspecies and from populations 
with differing morph compositions, these crosses 
produced different forms with a dominance hierarchy 
that was less clear cut, indicating that the nature of 
the expression of this Mendelian factor depends on 
other co-evolved genetic ‘modifiers’ specific to that 
population (Nijhout, 1991). As Turner (2000) notes, 
mimicry is not simply a consequence of variation at 
one locus, but the result of fine tuning of the genome 
by further modifiers. Intriguingly, many of these 
modifiers have no obvious phenotypic effect in the 
absence of mimicry. For instance, modifier genes in 
a population of Papilio dardanus in Ethiopia shorten 
the tails of mimetic forms (so that they resemble 
their tailless models) but do not shorten the tails of 
non-mimetic forms (Turner, 2000).

168
AVOIDING ATTACK
The fact that the main pattern ‘gene’ has such a 
complex and diverse set of simultaneous effects on 
the phenotype (colour and pattern) has led to the 
suggestion that the gene is a complex locus (a 
‘supergene’) consisting of several closely linked 
genes each with a specific effect on the pattern 
(Clarke & Sheppard, 1960). Given the tight linkage 
of genes with developmentally different character-
istics, the ‘supergene’ hypothesis can explain why 
only the advantageous mimetic forms are seen, 
with few recombinants that combine properties in 
disadvantageous ways. Supergenes have long been 
discussed in the context of mimicry (Nijhout, 1991), 
but until recently formal experimental evidence of 
supergenes in Papilio species has remained relatively 
tentative. In the last decade, however, our under-
standing of the genetics underlying mimicry has 
improved dramatically. For example, as discussed in 
our chapter on Müllerian mimicry (Chapter  7), 
supergenes in Heliconius numata have been identi-
fied, with their integrity maintained by chromosomal 
inversions that lock multiple adjacent genes into sin-
gle, non-recombining clusters (Joron et al., 2011).
The common Mormon (Papilio polytes) is a swal-
lowtail butterfly distributed across Asia that exhib-
its female-limited polymorphic mimicry. The males 
have a single non-mimetic wing pattern, while 
females arise in a variety of discrete forms, exhibit-
ing the non-mimetic male-like wing pattern but also 
wing patterns that resemble different toxic species 
of swallowtail in the genus Pachliopta (Figure 9.6). In 
a breakthrough paper, Kunte et al. (2014) found that 
variation in phenotypes was associated with genetic 
variation around the doublesex locus, a member of 
the Dmrt family of genes which control aspects of 
sexual differentiation and development. In retro-
spect, this was a good candidate to screen: the hunt 
was on for such a gene (Nishikawa et al., 2013; see 
Mallet, 2015), especially since these genes have long 
been known to play a role in generating discrete 
polymorphisms based on multiple traits, namely 
males and females. Rather than a tightly linked 
cluster of genes collectively controlling wing pat-
tern, doublesex appears to have been co-opted as a 
master regulator to control distinct networks that 
pattern various aspects of the wing, and hence the 
entire phenotype from a single locus. Precisely how 
one gene controls so many distinct networks remains 
unclear. Kunte et al. (2014) found that the doublesex 
transcripts spliced differently in different sexes, but 
they find no evidence for differential splicing 
between mimetic forms in females. Instead, non-
coding, regulatory DNA that controls when and 
where doublesex is expressed may play a role in mimic 
f. cyrus
f. polytes
f. theseus
f. romulus
Pach. aristolochiae
Pach. aristolochiae
black from
Pachliopta hector
Papilio polytes (Batesian mimic)
♂♀
♂♀
♂♀
♀
♀
♀
♀
♂
f
l
f
l
♀
Figure 9.6  Polymorphic, sex-limited mimicry in Papilio polytes 
(left column). The non-mimetic (form cyrus) females of P. polytes 
look like males, whereas mimetic female morphs (forms polytes, 
theseus, and romulus) mimic distantly related, toxic Pachliopta 
swallowtails (right column). In some populations (including those 
studied by Kunte et al., 2014), the non-mimetic cyrus form lack 
hindwing tails, yet the presence/absence of tails segregated perfectly 
with female wing pattern in their crosses. Image courtesy of 
Krushnamegh Kunte (see Plate 18).

BATESIAN MIMICRY AND MASQUERADE
169
differentiation. Do other Papilio species with sex-
limited polymorphism employ the same genetic sys-
tems? Intriguingly, female mimetic polymorphism in 
Papilio dardanus has been associated with variation 
in the genomic region containing the genes engrailed  
and invected (Clark et al., 2008) which are not linked 
to doublesex, so natural selection may have found 
rather different solutions to the same underlying 
problem in different (yet closely related) species.
Overall, it is clear that polymorphic Batesian mimic 
species may require a special form of genetic architec-
ture if its members are to simultaneously reach 
optima on different adaptive peaks. Researchers do 
not currently know enough about the genetics of 
mimicry in monomorphic mimetic species to discuss 
the various ways in which mimicry is achieved, but 
intuitively in monomorphic species with a single 
adaptive peak it may not require supergenes or 
master regulators. We are still at an early stage of 
combining our knowledge of molecular and devel-
opmental biology and how it relates to mimicry. This 
may add a whole new layer of complexity. For 
instance, while the characteristics of the different eye-
spots are developmentally coupled in non-mimetic 
Bicyclus anynana, Beldale et al. (2002) found that 
artificial selection for increased size of one individual 
eyespot tended to proceed in a manner largely inde-
pendent from selection imposed on another eyespot. 
The authors argued that this flexibility was probably 
related to the compartmentalization of the wing, 
possibly mediated compartment-specific genetic 
components that regulate the expression of the eye-
spot-forming genes. Clearly, there is more to learn and 
very little work has been done to understand the 
genetics of mimicry in non-lepidopteran groups such 
as snakes and hoverflies. Nevertheless, the time is 
coming where we can close the circle and understand 
the evolution of mimicry not just from a phenotypic 
perspective, but also from a genotypic one.
9.5  Ecological and phylogenetic 
considerations
If mimicry is so beneficial, then why don’t all spe-
cies adopt it? Carpenter & Ford’s (1933, p. 28), 
response to this familiar ‘ridiculous question’ was 
a  reductio ad absurdum: the success of mimicry 
depends upon abundance of alternative palatable 
food. In effect, if all species became mimics, then 
there would be no advantage to mimicry. This, 
however, is not a real evolutionary argument—it 
does not in itself explain why only a subset of spe-
cies become mimetic, and which species these are.
Phylogenetically controlled analyses are begin-
ning to shed light on the selection pressures leading 
to mimicry, and why only some species become 
mimetic. For example, Higginson et al. (2012) com-
pared the life history and coloration of British spe-
cies of Geometridae and Drepanidae (Lepidoptera) 
and found that the tendency of species to employ 
masquerade was associated with the utilization of 
a greater diversity of host plants. The reason(s) for 
this association are not entirely clear, but crypsis 
(a common alternative strategy) may involve much 
more host-specific adaptation than masquerade. 
Indeed, it is possible that looking like a twig (or bird 
dropping—although only five species in the sample 
did this) confers protection to masqueraders over a 
broader array of different host plants.
In one of the most thorough comparative analyses 
of the evolution of masquerade to date, Suzuki et al. 
(2014) attempted to elucidate the how leaf mimicry 
patterns varied among species of the nymphalid 
genus Kallima and 45 related species. Comparative 
morphological analyses of the species wing patterns 
suggest that they share the same basic ‘ground plan’, 
which allowed the authors to reconstruct the likely 
evolutionary pathways as new species are formed. 
Their character state-change analysis showed that 
the leaf pattern has evolved over time from a non-
mimetic ancestor through accumulation of changes 
in multiple pattern elements to enhance mimetic 
resemblance.
In a broader scale analysis, Merilaita & Tullberg 
(2005) compared the coloration of seven phylogenet-
ically matched pairs of diurnal and nocturnal adult 
Lepidoptera species and found that Batesian mim-
icry and aposematism were much more likely to 
evolve in the day fliers than in the nocturnal spe-
cies. A likely explanation for this simple pattern is 
that crypsis is harder to achieve in active, day-flying 
species, but readily realized in night-active species 
that rest during the day. Given the preponderance 
of night-flying moths and the enhanced detectabil-
ity of diurnally active species, why was daytime 
activity ever selected for and maintained? Clearly a 

170
AVOIDING ATTACK
range of physiological and ecological factors may 
play a role, including relative freedom from compe-
tition. Indeed, in some species there may be high 
opportunity costs of crypsis; by hiding from pred­
ators, prey may lose opportunities to forage, to 
thermoregulate, and to find mates. Hence, Batesian 
mimicry may evolve in species that have much to 
gain from conspicuousness, but for whom the costs 
of secondary defences are too high. Intriguingly, 
Yack & Fullard (2000) note that ultrasound hearing 
is absent in butterflies but prevalent in moths, lead-
ing them to suggest that diurnal activity may have 
arisen through selection to avoid bat predation. So 
certain Lepidoptera may have jumped from the fry-
ing pan into the fire as they exploited the daytime, 
switching their predators from bats to birds.
Of course, breaking free of crypsis can be realized 
either by aposematism or by Batesian mimicry. 
Some Batesian mimic species we see today may 
have originally been aposematic, but because of the 
costliness of secondary defences, became cheats. 
Alternatively, for some species the costs of acquir-
ing secondary defences in the first place may sim-
ply be too high so that Batesian mimicry is the next 
best method of removing the opportunity costs that 
follow from crypsis (Turner, 1984). In some intriguing 
comparative work, Prudic et al. (2007) noted that 
most swallowtail (Papilio) caterpillar species mas-
querade as bird droppings in their early instars. 
However, as they enter their fourth or fifth instar 
they adopt alternative phenotypes including an 
eye-spotted form that putatively resembles a snake 
(Janzen et al., 2010) and a conspicuous form (prob-
ably aposematic, since it is likely that many Papilio 
caterpillar species are unpalatable). Intriguingly, 
the tendency to become aposematic was not related 
to the species’ extent of diet specialization, but 
their signal environment—those that develop on 
narrow-leaved plants were more likely to evolve 
aposematism since exposure of caterpillars on 
such plants would tend to render caterpillars 
­conspicuous.
In another comparative study, Hossie et al. (2015) 
examined the distribution of eyespots across final 
instar hawkmoth caterpillars (Macroglossinae). 
Although the evolutionary significance of eyespots is 
still being debated, it is likely that the eyespots 
improve the resemblance of the caterpillars to verte-
brate predators and hence have an intimidatory 
effect. After controlling for phylogeny, they found 
that eyespots were significantly more likely to occur 
in larger caterpillars. Why would this be so? 
Complementary laboratory work by the authors 
confirmed that naïve chicks showed a greater latency 
to attack large (pastry) caterpillars with eyespots, 
than those without eyespots. By contrast, chicks 
more rapidly attacked small caterpillars with eye-
spots than those without. Eyespots on small prey 
may not be especially intimidating, and yet serve to 
enhance the prey’s conspicuousness. However, 
since they may pose a legitimate threat, large prey 
items are generally more intimidating to small birds, 
and the addition of eyespots further enhances the 
effect. This cross-species pattern is entirely consistent 
with the observation that eyespots tend to be sub-
stantially reduced or absent altogether during early 
instars of hawkmoths, only becoming prominent in 
late instars when the caterpillars are much larger.
Taken together, for morphological protective 
mimicry to be selected for, we require the prey spe-
cies to benefit from exposure to visually hunting 
predators, no means to protect themselves directly 
and a suitable noxious model to resemble. Many 
hoverfly species, for instance, may be mimetic 
because they are regularly exposed on flowering 
heads and because these sites are also visited by 
wasps and bees. It almost goes without saying that 
some species (such as nocturnal-flying and day-
resting moths—see above) would not benefit from 
adopting the visual appearance of an unpalatable 
species, since they would not be clearly seen by 
predators. There may also be anatomical restric-
tions (size and shape) that may drastically restrict the 
range of traits that would confer any initial mimetic 
advantage at all, and at least have some influence on 
choice of model. Phylogenetic approaches are increas-
ingly used in the study of mimicry, and we are 
already seeing how detailed spatial and phylo­
genetic analyses have helped reveal that mimicry 
is not necessarily a stable endpoint (Davis Rabosky 
et al., 2016). Future work may help elucidate the 
nature and frequency of co-evolutionary chases of 
model and mimic.
It has recently been argued that selection for 
mimicry may be more intense in some geographical 
regions than others. Echoing the earlier work of 

BATESIAN MIMICRY AND MASQUERADE
171
Nicholson (1927), Herberstein et al. (2014) noted a 
high reported prevalence of aggressive mimicry in 
cuckoos, crab spiders, and orchids in Australian 
biota. The authors discussed several explanations 
for the apparent over-representation of mimicry in 
these taxonomic groups, ruling out the possibility 
that the taxa are simply more diverse in Australia 
than elsewhere. Instead, they suggest it is likely the 
indirect result of arid climate and isolation (through 
a series of tentative but plausible mechanisms). If 
the authors are correct, then Australia may have 
provided a ‘perfect storm’ for the evolution of 
deception, at least in terms of aggressive mimicry.
9.6  Associated phenomena in the 
evolution of Batesian mimicry and 
masquerade
9.6.1  Tastes and toxins: the role of prey 
rejection
It is well known that aposematic insects, including 
butterflies, are frequently released unharmed after 
being seized by birds (Boyden, 1976; Fink & Brower, 
1981; Järvi et al., 1981; Wiklund & Järvi, 1982; 
Pinheiro & de Campos, 2013). Many defended prey 
species, including butterflies and wasps, have 
tough and flexible bodies (Fisher, 1930; Rothschild, 
1971; Chai, 1986) so the release response of birds may 
in part be on the basis of tactile rather than gusta-
tory stimuli (Kassarov, 1999). Whatever the mech-
anism, predators are able to distinguish defended 
and undefended prey post attack, while defended 
prey can survive this encounter.
There is also considerable laboratory evidence 
that birds can sample and selectively reject unpalat-
able prey. Gamberale-Stille & Guilford (2004), for 
example, found that domestic chicks tended to sam-
ple and reject a high proportion of crumbs rendered 
unpalatable through quinine, and yet consume 
most palatable crumbs. Skelhorn & Rowe (2006b) 
conducted an analogous experiment using dried 
crumbs, this time with two concentrations of quin-
ine, and found that the chicks could discriminate 
between crumbs with different concentrations of 
quinine, rejecting a higher proportion of crumbs 
with higher concentrations of quinine following 
attack. In these experiments, the rejection rates of 
palatable automimics decreased with increasing 
automimic frequency, a phenomenon that might 
arise at least in part because the underlying chances 
of misclassifying palatable prey as unpalatable prey 
are lower the higher the frequency of mimics.
Clearly this sample-rejection behaviour has 
important implications for the evolution of Batesian 
­mimicry. One might think that if predators could 
discriminate between unpalatable models and 
­palatable mimics after attacking them, then they 
could avoid the costs of consuming the models and 
Batesian mimicry would no longer provide any 
protection. It is rather like a trader maintaining 
honesty of a given currency simply by biting into 
any coins they receive and rejecting forgeries. Of 
course even if a degree of taste-rejection were pos-
sible, then there will still be a cost to sampling any 
prey item that is ultimately rejected, both in terms 
of time and risk of injury or ingestion of noxious 
substances (cf the conditions favouring Batesian 
evasive mimicry, section 9.4.6). Therefore, cautious 
sampling or ‘go-slow’ behaviour (Guilford, 1994) 
would be more likely to arise when predators not 
only have the ability to successfully taste-reject 
harmful prey, but also the motivation to take the 
risk and handle such prey. Indeed, Holen (2013) 
presented a model based on the classical optimal 
diet model which predicts precisely this—predators 
should avoid the mimicry complex altogether if the 
mimicry complex is unprofitable and alternative 
prey are profitable and/or common. Conversely, 
when the mimicry complex is profitable to attack by 
a taste-rejecting predator, then the predator should 
attack these prey, but reject prey (largely the 
­models) according to their perceived distasteful-
ness. Naturally, when predators decide to attack a 
model–mimic complex, then we would expect the 
taste-rejection strategy to be frequency-dependent, 
in that (following signal detection theory) the accept-
ance/rejection thresholds should change with mimic/
model ratio.
Although prey palatability, taste, and profitabil-
ity are often treated synonymously, researchers are 
increasingly starting to highlight the differences 
between these phenomena, so we should be more 
careful how we label them (Ruxton & Kennedy, 2006). 
Palatability and taste are largely characteristics of 
the prey item itself (although both can depend to an 

172
AVOIDING ATTACK
extent on the dietary history of the predator), while 
the profitability of a prey item is as much a charac-
teristic of the predator’s state (its hunger or toxin 
levels, for instance) and environment (the abundance 
and profitability of alternative prey) as it is the nutri-
ents and defences the prey item exhibits.
Indeed, sometimes even that a prey item tastes 
bad (but does not contain toxins) is sufficient to 
make a prey unprofitable to attack, especially when 
there are alternative palatable prey available. For 
example, Skelhorn & Rowe (2009) found that coat-
ing mealworms with Bitrex could protect them from 
predators, but most particularly when they are 
presented alongside alternative, distinct palatable 
mealworms which predators prefer.
Intuitively, one might expect that predators 
would evolve to sense the unprofitability of a prey 
item through some sensory modality such as its 
taste. Like warning signals, such cues would be 
mutually beneficial to both predator and prey. 
However, again like warning signals, there is scope 
for exploitation, especially since taste receptors can-
not be specific to every type of toxin. Skelhorn & 
Rowe (2010) manipulated palatability of meal-
worms (through coating them with non-toxic 
Bitrex) and their toxicity (by injecting quinine sul-
fate through the mouthparts), and presented them 
to European starlings along with entirely palatable 
mealworms. The palatable mealworms were visu-
ally discriminable, but the defended mealworms 
were not. When taste was a reliable predictor of tox-
icity (mildly toxic prey had fewer drops of Bitrex 
than moderately toxic prey), then the birds used the 
taste of Bitrex to preferentially ingest more of the 
mildly toxic prey while taste-rejecting moderately 
toxic prey—maintaining a relatively high nutrient 
intake while managing their toxin burden. By con-
trast, when toxicity and taste were independent, the 
birds did not taste-reject prey and instead ate approxi­
mately equal numbers of mildly and moderately dis-
tasteful prey. This result is important because it shows 
that birds do not use toxicity directly to discriminate 
between visually identical mimics and models, but 
learn about toxicity through associating it with taste. 
Conversely, here the bad taste of Bitrex itself was not 
sufficient to motivate predators to taste-reject—it had 
to be associated with quinine toxins before taste-rejec-
tion ensued.
It seems likely that predators would adopt a ‘go-
slow’ approach if there were outward signs that the 
prey could be costly to attack. For example, Sillén-
Tullberg (1985) found that great tits tended to taste-
reject both red and grey forms of an unpalatable 
bug (Lygaeus equestris) after attacking them, but that 
the red form was more likely to survive this sam-
pling. It was suggested that the difference in sur-
vival was due to birds handling the red morph 
more cautiously at the outset, perhaps forewarned 
by the conspicuous signals. Halpin & Rowe (2017) 
recently conducted similar experiments, presenting 
domestic chicks with conspicuous or cryptic (green 
or purple, that either contrasted with their back-
ground or not) live waxmoth larvae (Galleria mel-
lonella) with certain of these caterpillars rendered 
unpalatable by the application of Bitrex.
While the total number of presentations was rela-
tively low, there was no strong evidence for differ-
ential rejection rates of conspicuous and cryptic 
prey and (in contrast to Sillén-Tullberg, 1985) no dif-
ferences in the survivorship of these prey types fol-
lowing rejection.
While Batesian mimicry has been discussed for 
over a century, the phenomena of taste and toxicity 
have only begun to be separated. Indeed, what we 
may be calling ‘taste-rejection’ may more aptly be 
referred to ‘toxin rejection on the basis of taste’. The 
model of Holen (2013) confirms that the two phe-
nomena may inter-relate in some subtle ways. For 
example, if a given toxin enhances the ability of a 
predator to distinguish the model from its palatable 
mimics, then the profitability of the model–mimic 
complex may actually increase as the toxin concen-
tration of the models increase, so that mimics and 
models may be better protected if the model was 
moderately rather than highly toxic.
More work needs to be done to elucidate the roles 
of taste and toxicity in predator decision making, 
especially if their relationship is capable of exhibit-
ing such non-intuitive properties. There are a num-
ber of fundamental questions. How often is the 
toxicity of a prey type determined directly from 
its taste? Are there any taste mimics in the natural 
world that share the taste but not toxicity with 
their models? Some fruiting plants produce hyper-
sweet peptides rather than more expensive sugars, 
­possibly to fool frugivores into consuming them 

BATESIAN MIMICRY AND MASQUERADE
173
(Ruxton & Kennedy, 2006), but we clearly need 
more examples. When predators choose to sample 
prey rather than attack it outright, does this cau-
tious (‘go-slow’) strategy involve any trade-offs to 
the predator, such as a higher probability of prey 
escape? If so, what are the implications of this trade-
off for the survival of mimics and models? What 
prey species have evolved post-attack defences, 
such as a thickened cuticle, and have any mimics 
also evolved these defences? More generally, if 
rejection of models/mimics before attack can allow 
the mimics to gain a foothold, while taste-rejection 
following attack can prevent Batesian mimics and 
automimics from dominating, then is taste-rejection 
the key reason why Batesian mimicry so rarely 
undermines the protection afforded to the model at 
high frequencies of mimics? Clearly there are more 
questions than answers in this emerging field.
9.6.2  Imperfect mimicry and the limits of 
natural selection
One widely held belief is that there should always 
be strong selection pressure on mimics to resemble 
their models as closely as possible. Indeed, there are 
some spectacular cases of close mimicry in a range 
of sensory modalities. For example, the parasitoid 
wasp Gelis agilis (Ichneumonidae) closely resembles 
the sympatric black garden ant (Lasius niger) in 
body size, morphology, and movement and even 
emits an ant alarm pheromone when threatened 
(Malcicka et al., 2015). Yet mimicry only rarely 
involves the convergence of such a full range of 
traits and there are many cases in nature in which 
potential Batesian mimics (and masqueraders) do 
not appear to resemble their models particularly 
closely. For example, many species of hoverfly are 
generally regarded as Batesian mimics of wasps 
and bees, yet to the human eye at least, they do not 
resemble their models particularly well (e.g. Dittrich 
et al., 1993; Edmunds, 2000; Penney et al., 2012; 
Wilson et al., 2013). Likewise, as we have seen 
(section 9.2.2), many harmless Neotropical snakes 
resemble highly venomous coral snakes. Although 
some of these Batesian mimics are considered high 
fidelity (Greene & McDiarmid, 2005) many of these 
snake species have only a coarse resemblance 
(Savage & Slowinski, 1992).
The widespread occurrence of apparently imper-
fect Batesian mimics has so far been explained in a 
variety of different ways (Edmunds, 2000). Kikuchi 
& Pfennig (2013) list and classify eleven separate 
(but not mutually exclusive) explanations (see 
Table 9.1). These hypotheses include the possibility 
that imperfect mimicry arises simply as an artifact 
of human perception (Cuthill & Bennett, 1993) or as 
a consequence of constraints that prevent selection 
for more perfect mimicry (Holen & Johnstone, 2004). 
Imperfect mimicry could also arise as a consequence 
of some trade-off, such as the selection to simul­
taneously resemble a number of different models 
(Edmunds, 2000), selection for mimicry and thermo­
regulation (Taylor et al., 2016), or selection to deal 
with multiple predators with different sensory ecol-
ogies (Pekár et al., 2011) with imperfect mimics gain-
ing the greatest overall protection. In other cases 
imperfect mimicry may provide just as much pro-
tection as perfect mimicry, so there is simply no fur-
ther selection to improve the degree of mimetic 
fidelity (Bates, 1862; Duncan & Sheppard, 1965). 
A recent paper stressed that predators do not have 
complete information about the physical properties 
of all the prey types they encounter and argued that 
optimal sampling behaviour can lead to situations 
under which there is little selection to improve 
mimetic fidelity (Sherratt & Peet-Pare, 2017). For 
example, predators might quickly learn to adopt 
the rule ‘avoid prey with black and yellow stripes’ 
but evaluating the profitability of more complex 
conditional rules (of which there will be many) such 
as ‘avoid black and yellow stripes but only when 
the prey has long antennae’ may be perceived as too 
costly to warrant the extensive sampling required 
(Sherratt & Peet-Pare, 2017).
The hypothesis that there is no selection on imper-
fect mimics to improve their fidelity beyond a cer-
tain point has had a long history. Indeed, Bates 
(1862) himself invoked this ‘relaxed selection’ argu-
ment to explain variation in the degree of mimetic 
fidelity: ‘In many cases of mimetic resemblance, the mim-
icry is not so exact as in the Leptalides…It would show 
that the persecutor is not keen or rigid in its selection; a 
moderate degree of resemblance suffices to deceive it, and 
therefore the process halts at that point.’ In support, the 
relationship between the attack rates on mimics and 
their extent of mimetic fidelity often tends to appear 

174
AVOIDING ATTACK
sigmoidal—so while mimicry pays, there is little 
difference in the success of perfect and imperfect 
mimics (Dittrich et al., 1993; Caley & Schluter, 2003). 
One reason for this sigmoidal relationship is that 
mimics and models vary continuously in appear-
ance and the way they are perceived can also intro-
duce additional uncertainty. For example, receivers 
may view mimics and models at unusual angles, at 
a distance (Skelhorn & Ruxton, 2014) or with insuf-
ficient or deceptive illumination (Kemp et al., 2015). 
Speed–accuracy trade-offs may also actively pro-
mote only a cursory inspection of objects that are 
encountered (Chittka & Osorio, 2007). Since dis-
crimination is not always clear-cut, then predators 
cannot rely on identifying a single phenotype but 
must employ thresholds. Perhaps most importantly, 
it is not what a predator believes that is important 
to selection (for example, it may be reasonably con-
vinced that the prey it has encountered is a mimic) 
but how it responds to that prey in terms of its deci-
sion to attack—despite its beliefs, it may decide to 
leave partial mimics alone because the consequences 
of attacking a prey should it turn out to be a model 
are too costly.
Intuitively, one would expect relaxed selection to 
be particularly likely when the model is extremely 
numerous or highly unprofitable (and conversely 
when the mimic is relatively rare and low in profit-
ability)—(Schmidt, 1958; Duncan & Sheppard, 1965; 
Sherratt, 2002b). Likewise, imperfect mimicry might 
be expected to be maintained when alternative prey 
are so abundant that it is not worth taking the risk 
and attacking anything vaguely model-like (Dill, 
1975; Sherratt, 2003). Although the above relation-
ships arise for a number of reasons, the fidelity of 
scarlet kingsnakes to their coral snake models tends 
to increase as the coral snake becomes rarer (Harper 
& Pfennig, 2007). Likewise, the mimetic fidelity of 
hoverfly species tends to increase with body size 
(Penney et al., 2012; but see Taylor et al., 2016), a 
result readily understood if one assumes that larger 
mimics are more profitable to predators and/or 
more visible, and so intrinsically more likely to be 
attacked. Using a model of avian colour perception, 
Table 9.1  The eleven specific hypotheses for the evolution of imperfect mimicry tabulated by Kikuchi & Pfennig (2013) along with a simple 
classification of the nature of selection. See their Tables 1 and 2 for further details.
Specific Hypothesis Brief description
Nature of selection
Eye-of-the beholder
Imperfect mimicry is an
anthropocentric projection
Adaptive peak at perfect mimicry to relevant 
perceiver
Developmental and 
genetic constraints
Perfect mimicry cannot be achieved (or is only achieved at a cost)
No opportunity to improve imperfect mimicry 
(or adaptive peak at imperfect mimicry)
Chase-away
Models evolve away from their mimics leaving a ‘phenotypic gap’
Non-equilibrium dynamics
Relaxed selection
The same level of protection afforded whether the mimic is perfect 
or imperfect
Selection neutral beyond certain point  
(a plateau)
Mimetic breakdown
Mimicry is no longer beneficial due to paucity of models or absence 
of predators
No selection, or selection away from mimicry
Perceptual exploitation
The imperfect mimic has more of an effect on receiver than a 
perfect mimic
Adaptive peak at imperfect mimicry
Satyric mimicry
A chimera with mixed signals confuses the receiver even more than a 
perfect mimic, at least when rare
Adaptive peak at imperfect mimicry
Multiple models
Mimics evolve a ‘jack of all trades’ appearance somewhere between 
several models to maximize their protection
Adaptive peak at imperfect mimicry
Multiple predators
Imperfect mimics face selection to
dupe generalist predators while avoiding specialist predators 
Adaptive peak at imperfect mimicry
Kin selection
While individual selection favours perfect mimicry, imperfect mimicry 
can be selected if it better protects others with the same trait
Adaptive peak at imperfect mimicry
Character displacement
Competition displaces phenotypic optimum away from perfect mimicry Adaptive peak at imperfect mimicry

BATESIAN MIMICRY AND MASQUERADE
175
Su et al. (2015) quantified the extent of mimetic 
resemblance among butterfly models and mimics 
within seven mimicry rings (comprising Papilionidae, 
Pieridae, and Nymphalidae) in the Western Ghats, 
India. They found that females of sexually mono-
morphic mimetic species were better Batesian mimics 
than males of the same species, a result that may arise 
because females are more exposed to predators, and/
or because males are under stronger sexual selection 
(see section 9.4.9).
What specific traits should be mimicked to confer 
a high degree of protection (and conversely, which 
ones might be less important)? Imperfect mimicry 
might be selected and maintained if predators learn 
to associate prey defences with certain salient dis-
criminative features and effectively overlook others 
that are equally informative but functionally redun-
dant. The phenomenon of reacting (for example, a 
dog sitting down) more strongly to one salient con-
ditioned stimulus (such as its owner waving a treat) 
than another, less salient, stimulus (such as its owner 
saying ‘sit’), when both have been presented together, 
is known as ‘overshadowing’ (Mackintosh, 1976; 
Shettleworth, 2010). Building on earlier studies on 
the degree of mimetic protection gained by new par-
tial mimics (Schmidt, 1958, 1960; Ford, 1971; Terhune, 
1977) there has recently been a surge of interest in 
understanding how objects are categorized and 
what traits are attended to when predators make 
their discriminative decisions (Bain et al., 2007; 
Aronsson & Gamberale-Stille, 2008; Balogh et al., 
2010; Aronsson & Gamberale-Stille, 2012). Bain et al. 
(2007), for example, analysed the same training 
and  test images of non-mimetic flies, wasps, and 
hoverflies that had been presented to pigeons in 
Dittrich et al.’s (1993) experiment using a feed-
forward neural network classifier. They were able 
to closely replicate the pigeon response data only if 
they assumed that pigeons placed weight on some 
discriminative features (such as antennae length) 
but effectively overlook others (such as wing trans-
parency). Likewise, Kikuchi & Pfennig (2010) were 
able to explain why non-venomous scarlet kingsnake 
mimics with concentric yellow/black/red/black 
rings can persist despite the fact that their models 
have concentric yellow/red/yellow/black rings in a 
different order. Their field experiments involving 
clay models revealed that predators are averse to 
ringed mimics with the right proportions of red and 
black, but the order of the coloured rings was effect­
ively immaterial. For the same reason that humans 
employ mnemonics (‘Red and black, friend of Jack, 
red and yellow, kills a fellow’), conditional rules 
(avoid red but only if next to yellow) are harder to 
remember than simpler unconditional rules. Indeed, 
after presenting human subjects with computer-gen-
erated mimics and models that varied continuously 
in their colour (proportion of yellow and blue pixels) 
and/or size, Kikuchi et al. (2015) found that subjects 
could successfully use either trait when it was the 
sole distinguishing characteristic, adopting a thresh-
old as classical signal detection theory would pre-
dict. However, when mimics and models differed in 
both size and colour (such that, for instance, subjects 
were expected to avoid attacking prey with a high 
proportion of yellow, but only when large), then 
subjects did not follow the predictions of multidi-
mensional SDT and instead placed more emphasis 
on one or the other characteristic (typically colour 
over size). Once again, simpler avoidance rules are 
easier to learn and adopt than more complex ones, 
even by humans.
One of the most ambitious studies to date on this 
topic was conducted by Kazemi et al. (2014) who 
trained wild-caught blue tits, Cyanistes caeruleus, to 
discriminate between rewarding prey (symbol-bear-
ing laminated cards over wells containing pieces of 
mealworm) and non-rewarding prey (symbol-bear-
ing cards over empty wells). The symbols over 
rewarding and non-rewarding wells differed from 
one another in their colour, pattern, and shape, and 
the blue tits learned to feed almost exclusively on 
the rewarding wells over four separate trials. 
Naturally, this high level of discrimination could 
have been achieved by using any given combination 
of colour, pattern, and/or shape in the symbols. To 
evaluate what traits were being used in the discrim-
ination process, the authors then presented the same 
birds with an identical collection of rewarding prey, 
along with non-rewarding (Müllerian) mimetic prey 
that only had one trait (colour, pattern, or shape) in 
common with the earlier models that the birds had 
learned to avoid (the former models were also used 
as a control). The results of this test showed that 
rather than learning to avoid only those prey with 
all three attributes, the birds generalized their 

176
AVOIDING ATTACK
avoidance to non-rewarding prey that had colour in 
common with the former models, to such an extent 
that they were not attacked any more frequently 
than the perfect controls. Collectively, this work 
suggests that high-salience discriminatory traits 
(in this case colour) can overshadow other inform­
ative traits, allowing incipient mimics a significant 
survival advantage even if they share only one trait 
with the model. Sherratt et al. (2015) extended their 
design to include two-trait mimics and no-trait novel 
prey, this time using humans as predators, with simi-
lar results. However, the fact that novel prey were 
frequently avoided in these experiments indicates 
that predators do not simply learn to associate bad 
outcomes with certain traits, but that they also learn 
to associate good outcomes with certain traits.
There are now such a plethora of explanations for 
imperfect mimicry, one might wonder why perfect 
mimicry arises at all. Naturally, when simple, safe 
discriminative rules are indefinitely favoured, then 
imperfect mimicry can be maintained. However, 
what is the outcome if predators are exposed repeat-
edly to the mimics? Skelhorn et al. (2016b) performed 
just this sort of experiment when they presented 
naïve domestic chicks with pastry caterpillars over 
8 days. The caterpillars were either with or without 
eyes, and with or without a swollen head, with the 
presence of both traits conferring the closest resem-
blance to a snake model. The chicks rapidly attacked 
the caterpillars that had neither mimetic trait, but 
initially exhibited similar levels of wariness towards 
mimics with just one or both deceptive traits. Over 
repeated exposures however, chicks discovered that 
the single-trait mimics were profitable more quickly 
than they discovered the double-trait mimics were 
profitable. So, predators’ initial reactions to novel or 
deceptive prey will not necessarily be the same as 
their long-term reactions. Indeed, in systems where 
the incentive or opportunity to gain more informa-
tion is high then one can anticipate strong selection 
for perfect mimicry.
The study of mimicry has allowed considerable 
insight into not just the power of adaptation, but 
also its limits. Like many well-known puzzles in 
evolutionary biology, ranging from cooperation to 
sexual reproduction, imperfect mimicry is rapidly 
becoming a problem with many potential solutions. 
The various hypotheses that have been proposed to 
explain imperfect mimicry are not mutually exclu-
sive and while we are not in a position to evaluate 
their relative importance, imperfect mimicry is far 
from paradoxical—indeed, it is the perfect mimics 
we now need to explain!
9.6.3  What selective factors influence 
behavioural mimicry?
So far we have dealt almost exclusively with mor-
phological mimicry, yet some masquerading spe-
cies and some Batesian mimics also behave like 
their models. Although one might anticipate that 
resembling a leaf, thorn, or stone would not involve 
any behavioural adaptations, this is not always the 
case. For example, twig-mimicking caterpillars of the 
early thorn moth Selenia dentaria are able to select 
microhabitats with size-matched twigs (Skelhorn & 
Ruxton, 2013). Likewise, females of the phytopha-
gous stick insect (Extatosoma tiaratum) typically hang 
inverted among the foliage with curled abdomen and 
have been frequently observed rocking from side to 
side as if swaying in the wind. In a recent experiment, 
Bian et al. (2016) investigated this behaviour, find-
ing that wind would initiate (but not indefinitely 
maintain) a swaying response in the phasmid, and 
that its movement had quantitatively similar prop-
erties to that of wind-blown plants. Since a motion-
less object on a moving plant is likely to attract 
attention while a moving object on a motionless plant 
will do the same, it seems highly likely that the behav-
iour has evolved to enhance its disguise. Finally, the 
orb-web spider Cyclosa ginnaga not only has a silver 
body but also adds a white discoid-shaped silk dec-
oration to its web to enhance its resemblance and 
this combination was found to reduce its probabil-
ity of wasp predation by increasing its resemblance 
to bird droppings (Liu et al., 2014).
Many Batesian mimics also engage in behav-
ioural mimicry. For example, we have already 
described chicks that use behaviour to enhance 
their resemblance to an aposematic caterpillar 
(Londoño et al., 2015). The Indian rat snake Ptyas 
mucosus may be an acoustic Batesian mimic of the 
king cobra Ophiophagus hannah (Young et al., 1999). 
The ant-like jumping spider Myrmarachne melanotarsa 
not only resembles ants from the genus Crematogaster, 
but it also forms aggregations that appear to enhance 

BATESIAN MIMICRY AND MASQUERADE
177
the overall protective effect of the mimicry (Nelson & 
Jackson, 2009). Similarly, certain spiders that mimic 
ants also hold their front legs before them to resem-
ble their antennae (McIver & Stonedahl, 1993). 
Srygley & Chai (1990) report that members of the 
butterfly subfamily Dismorphiinae, which mimic 
highly unpalatable Ithomiinae butterflies, have 
slow regular flights like their models. In a recent 
paper, Kitamura & Imafuku (2015) quantified the 
movement behaviour of mimetic and non-mimetic 
females of the polymorphic swallowtail butterfly 
Papilio polytes. They found that the flight paths of 
mimetic and non-mimetic females were different 
from each other, but the locomotory behaviour of 
the mimetic females was not significantly different 
from that of the model (Pachliopta aristolochiae) they 
morphologically resemble. Behavioural mimicry is 
not limited to adults either—certain eye-spotted cat-
erpillars adopt a defensive posture when approached 
that increases their resemblance to snakes (Hossie & 
Sherratt, 2014).
In each of the above cases it seems clear that 
behaviour has augmented the effectiveness of their 
disguises. Behaviour—from the way an organism 
moves, to how it behaves under threat—may often 
serve to discriminate profitable and unprofitable prey. 
So if a given behaviour is sufficiently characteristic 
of unprofitable prey then there may be selection on 
mimics to adopt these diagnostic behavioural traits. 
Indeed, sometimes behaviour may be one of the most 
important traits that need to be mimicked. Pekár et al. 
(2011) suggested that because spiders that mimic ants 
are also selected to run quickly like ants, then there 
may be little or no selective advantage to them more 
closely resembling the ants from a morphological per-
spective. Other behaviours, such as leg waving to 
provide the illusion of antennae, may serve to obfus-
cate key morphological differences between mimics 
and models that would otherwise be used for dis-
crimination.
Despite its potential advantages, it is clear that not 
all species of a given group engage in behavioural 
mimicry, so one might wonder why some species 
have evolved behavioural mimicry and others have 
not. For example, Penney et al. (2014) surveyed the 
incidence of behavioural mimicry (mock stinging, 
wing wagging, leg waving) in 57 field-caught spe-
cies of hoverfly, and found that these highly associ-
ated traits occurred in just two genera (Spilomyia 
and Temnostoma)—see Figure 9.7. Intriguingly, the 
behavioural mimics were all good morphological 
mimics of wasps (to human eyes at least), but not 
all good mimics were behavioural mimics. This 
led the authors to conclude that while the behav-
ioural mimicry may have evolved to augment good 
morphologi­cal mimicry, it does not advantage all 
good mimics. When behavioural mimicry arises then 
it may often reflect overall stronger selection for 
Figure 9.7  A hover fly (Spilomyia longicornis) and its wasp model (Vespula sp.). Note how the hover fly, left, is waving its darkened forelegs 
in front of its head to resemble the longer antennae of its hymenopteran model. Photographs courtesy of Dr Henri Goulet.

178
AVOIDING ATTACK
mimetic fidelity on all levels, rather than compensa-
tion for poor morphological similarity.
9.7  Overview
Batesian mimicry is now a well-studied phenomenon. 
While field demonstrations that Batesian mimicry 
provides a degree of protection from predators 
remain rare, there is ample evidence that predators 
given prior experience with noxious models subse-
quently tend to avoid the palatable mimics. It has also 
been repeatedly argued, and shown, that the efficacy 
of Batesian mimicry is dependent on the abundances 
of the models and mimics, the noxiousness of the 
model, and the abundance of alternative prey.
Since the last edition, more fascinating examples 
of Batesian mimicry have come to light and there has 
been much more work to test the basic properties of 
masquerade. Significant progress has been made in 
understanding the genetics of mimicry notably in 
polymorphic Batesian mimics. There has also been 
increasing use of phylogenetic techniques to under-
stand the evolution of Batesian mimicry and how 
certain traits are gained and lost. There have also been 
significant advances in understanding the cognition 
of predators and how they arrive at the decisions 
that they do. These insights have helped to explain 
why imperfect mimics can persist, but also why 
mimics face selection to resemble their models in 
multiple traits.
As always, there is work to do. We still do not 
understand the genetics of mimicry in most sys-
tems, and the application of phylogenetic methods 
to mimicry is still in its infancy. The role of taste-
rejection behaviour in the evolution of warning sig-
nals and mimicry is still somewhat uncertain, as is 
the prevalence of evasive mimicry. Indeed, while 
the possibility of mimicry based on evasiveness has 
long been discussed, and is plausible in theory, there 
are no field studies demonstrating its effectiveness 
in deterring predators. Most work has focussed 
on avian predators, but invertebrate predators are 
extremely common and voracious consumers and 
deserve further attention. We are still only begin-
ning to learn what discriminative features pred­
ators pay attention to when deciding whether to 
attack a prey or not. For example, we still need to 
fully understand the conditions under which multi-
trait mimicry is favoured compared to just a single 
trait. Since sophisticated discriminative rules (such 
as those involving interactions of traits—avoid yel-
low, but only when it has long antennae) require 
more information to evaluate: are there limits on 
what rules predators would ever benefit from learn-
ing? While most attention has focussed on selection 
for traits directly involved in deceiving predators, do 
other correlated traits such as nutritional value of 
the mimic, whether it can survive handling, and 
even its rate of senescence evolve as a consequence 
of this selection? Placing Batesian mimicry in a 
more general evolutionary or co-evolutionary life-
history framework could well be enlightening. 
Finally, work on Batesian mimicry is often based on 
pairs of species, but since many Batesian mimics are 
parts of rings then we should be taking a whole 
community approach (see Pekár et al., 2017 for an 
excellent example), viewing mimicry in its appro-
priate context.

Avoiding Attack: The Evolutionary Ecology of Crypsis, Aposematism, and Mimicry. Second Edition. Graeme D. Ruxton,  
William L. Allen, Thomas N. Sherratt, & Michael P. Speed, Oxford University Press (2018). © Graeme D. Ruxton,  
William L. Allen, Thomas N. Sherratt, & Michael P. Speed 2018. DOI: 10.1093/oso/9780199688678.001.0001
CHAPTER 10
Startling predators
10.1  What do we mean by startle?
Startling signals are secondary defences that occur 
after the focal prey individual has been singled out 
for attack. They are also often called ‘deimatic  
signals’—coined by Maldonado (1970)—from the 
Greek for ‘I frighten’; and less commonly ‘bluff 
displays’. Startling signals involve stimulation of 
the predator’s senses that cause it to delay or break 
off an attack. The assumption is that even a delay in 
attack can confer a survival advantage to the prey. 
This might occur because delay gives the prey an 
added opportunity to flee, or added opportunity 
for some other event to occur (perhaps the arrival of 
a predator of the predator) that causes the predator 
to break off the attack permanently. The mechanism 
by which sensory stimulation might cause the preda-
tor to break off or delay the attack is not specified, 
and indeed is a current area of controversy. It might 
be: overloading of sensory systems; simple confu-
sion; a caution associated with novel stimuli; or it 
might be the prey stimulating the predator in a way 
that triggers the predator’s own anti-predatory 
responses. There is no reason why the underlying 
mechanism of startle responses should be the same 
in all cases.
In general, startling stimuli involve a change in 
behaviour on the part of the prey. However, demon-
strating that a given behaviour is triggered by immi-
nent or actual attack by a predator and is associated 
with reduced likelihood of attack, delayed attack, or 
less effective attack is not, of itself, sufficient to con-
clude that the behaviour has a startling effect. First, it 
must be demonstrated that the behaviour influences 
the predator’s behaviour primarily through sensory 
and/or cognitive manipulation. This differentiates 
it from behaviours whose primary effect is physical—
such as fleeing or struggling. Secondly, argument 
that a given prey behaviour has a startling effect 
should involve consideration of why other mech­
anisms (such as aposematism and deflection) can be 
discounted. Behaviours that influence the predator’s 
behaviour can include the revealing of apos­ematic 
or deflective signals that are not constantly dis-
played. Some prey may be selected not to display 
such signals permanently if they are effective only 
against a subset of predators or in a subset of eco-
logical situations, and their permanent display 
would involve a cost (e.g. increased conspicuous-
ness to predators against which the display is inef-
fective in deterring or deflecting attacks). Thus, 
startling signals must be separate from other mech-
anisms that may also influence predators’ behav-
iour so as to curtail, delay, or diminish an attack. In 
theory, a startling effect could be produced by the 
action of the predator rather than the prey. For 
example, a bird rooting through leaf litter might be 
startled when it suddenly reveals a brightly coloured 
insect. However, we know of no example where a 
startle signal is not associated with a behavioural 
change by the prey, itself triggered by close approach 
by the predator.
Separating startle signals given by unpalatable 
prey types from aposematism is conceptually chal-
lenging, and not completely resolved in the litera-
ture. For Skelhorn et al. (2016c), startle displays 
should be defined by their ability to evoke fear 
responses, as they are suggested to result from a 
predator misclassifying prey as a potential threat 
to its immediate safety. Here, Skelhorn et al. also 

180
AVOIDING ATTACK
differentiate startle displays from aposematism, as 
they argue that aposematic displays do not provoke 
predators to fear for their immediate safety, but have 
evolved in response to the way in which predators 
learn and decide about what prey to consume. 
However, Umbers & Mappes (2016) argue that apo-
sematic and deimatic displays are not necessar-
ily  mutually exclusive strategies, and additionally 
emphasize the difficulty of measuring the physio-
logical states of fear responses in predators, especially 
in field studies. Umbers et al. (2017) then further dis-
tinguished aposematism from startling signals, in 
emphasizing that—unlike aposematism—startle sig-
nals do not require a predator to have any learned 
or innate aversion.
Another complication is to differentiate between 
startling signals and Batesian mimicry. Batesian 
mimicry relies on the predator generalizing between 
the sensory stimulation produced by the focal 
unprotected prey (the mimic) and the stimulation 
produced by a defended prey type (the model). In 
startle such a model cannot be identified and the 
protection afforded to undefended prey does not 
stem from them being misidentified as a defended 
prey type. If (as some have claimed) ‘eyespot’ pat-
terning of the wings of some butterflies causes a 
potential predator of the butterfly to mistakenly 
interpret these eyespots as the eyes of one of their 
own predators, we would consider this a case of a 
startle signal, because here the mimicry is not of 
something that would be unattractive as food but 
of something that possesses a direct and immedi-
ate lethal threat.
Having considered in general terms what we 
consider to be a startling signal, we will now con-
sider the empirical evidence for the existence of 
such signals.
10.2  Empirical evidence for the defence
10.2.1  Sound production in insects
Bura et al. (2011) demonstrated that caterpillars of the 
North American walnut sphinx (Amorpha juglandis) 
can be induced to produce a whistling sound by 
simulated avian attack, using physical contact with 
blunt forceps. This was accompanied by thrashing 
movements but not any obvious chemical defence, 
such as regurgitation. Contact with an avian predator 
(the yellow warbler Dendroica petechia) in laboratory 
trials also caused this behaviour in the caterpillars, 
and the whistling sound itself then caused the birds 
to hesitate, jump back, or dive away. Bura et al 
interpret the whistle as a startle signal. This seems 
plausible, although further experiments where the 
noise was experimentally broadcast when birds 
approached an otherwise undefended food item, 
or where caterpillars were experimentally muted, 
would be interesting. Bura et al. also note that cater-
pillars showed no escape response after birds broke 
off attacks, but such escape behaviours may not be 
necessary to select for startle signals (as discussed in 
section 10.1).
Recently, Dookie et al. (2017) also investigated the 
whistles of walnut sphinx caterpillars, in a study 
where variations of these sounds were presented 
to  wild-caught predator red-winged blackbirds 
(Agelaius phoeniceus), following activation of a sensor 
while they fed on mealworms (Tenebrio molitor). 
They found that birds exposed to whistles exhibited 
significantly more startle behaviours—such as flying 
away, flinching, and hopping—and took longer to 
return to the area than during control conditions 
where no sounds were played. Interestingly, during 
the hour-long sessions birds habituated to the 
whistles, but after two days the startling effects 
were restored (Figure 10.1). Dookie et al. suggest 
that the re-sensitization underscores the importance 
of novelty for effective startle displays, and that 
the  infrequency of encounters with these cryptic  
caterpillars—that occur solitarily on their host 
plants—would likely result in a restoration of the 
startle response after a few days in the wild as well 
as in captive situations.
Many insects produce a clicking or buzzing 
sound, through stridulation, immediately prior to 
or after contact by a predator. In some circum-
stances where the insects have a clear defensive 
capability this is most likely to be an aposematic 
signal. Even when the individual prey types do not 
have obvious defence, the sound may function as 
acoustic mimicry of the aposematic signals of 
defended prey. However, it is certainly clear that this 
noise can be associated with less effective handling 
of the prey by predators, and startle may be one of 
the mechanisms leading to this. The most convincing 

STARTLING PREDATORS
181
case of startle in this context was reported by Lewis 
& Cane (1990). They used a beetle, Thanasimus dubius, 
as predator and another beetle, Ips calligraphus, as 
prey in staged laboratory encounters. These species 
were chosen for a number of reasons: 1.) they natur-
ally have predatory encounters; 2.) the prey has 
been extensively investigated biochemically and 
seems to have no chemical, or other, defences; 3.) 
only female prey are capable of producing sound, 
but otherwise there are no obvious differences in 
morphology or behaviour between males and 
females that are likely to impact on predators; and 4.) 
the predator is an oligophagous predator of Ips and 
Dendroctonus bark beetles and, thus, is not expected 
to encounter aposematically stridulating prey. 
Lewis and Crane found that females always 
reacted to handling by the predator by stridulat-
ing and, thus, predators were more likely to drop 
females than males whilst handling them. The 
authors argue that such drops in natural circum-
stances are likely to lead to the loss of the prey 
by  the predator. In the lab, dropped prey were 
recovered by the predators and all prey were readily 
consumed.
When approached by predators, several species 
of butterfly, including peacocks (Aglais io), respond 
by a display of opening and closing their wings 
revealing a bright, spotted pattern and generate a 
3
Startle Score
Approach
Experimental
2
1
1
2
3
4
5
6
Bird 2
Bird 4
Bird 5
Bird 8
Bird 9
Bird 18
Bird 21
Bird 30
Mean
0
3
Startle Score
Approach
Control
2
1
1
2
3
4
5
6
Bird 2
Bird 4
Bird 5
Bird 8
Bird 9
Bird 11
Bird 18
Bird 21
Bird 30
Mean
0
Figure 10.1  Red-winged blackbirds (Agelaius phoeniceus) exhibit startle responses (by flying away, flinching, and hopping) when exposed to 
playbacks of defensive whistles recorded from the walnut sphinx caterpillar (Amorpha juglandis). Sounds were presented to birds that activated a 
sensor while feeding on mealworms (Tenebrio molitor). Birds exposed to whistles (top panel) exhibited significantly higher startle scores and took 
longer to return to the feeding dish than during control conditions (bottom panel) where no sounds were played. Birds habituated to sounds 
during a one-hour session, but after two days the startling effects were restored. Figure provided by Jayne Yack.

182
AVOIDING ATTACK
high-pitched noise. Mohl & Miller (1976) demon-
strated that peacock butterflies produced intense 
ultrasonic clicks that startled three captive vesper-
tilionid bats. Bats’ responses to displaying peacocks 
included jumps, audible screams, retreats, head jerks, 
and pinna movements. The bats responded in this 
way even when out of visual contact with the butter-
flies. Olofsson et al. (2012a) showed that the sound of 
displaying peacocks also startled wild-caught mice of 
the species Apodemus flavicollis and A. sylvaticus in 
staged encounters. Mice were more likely to flee from 
sound-producing butterflies than those that had had 
their sound production disabled. These butterflies are 
perfectly edible to the mice, which are likely to be sig-
nificant predators in the wild (Wiklund et al., 2008;, 
Olofsson et al., 2012a). One limitation of this experi-
ment, however, is that the authors did not play back 
control sounds, so we cannot tell if mice are deterred 
by a sudden noise generally or by the specific type 
generated by the butterflies.
10.2.2  Clicking sounds of aquatic organisms
Vester et al. (2004) reported that the close approach 
of harp seals (Pagophilus groenlandicus), hooded 
seals (Cystophora cristata), or human divers to cap-
tive cod (Gadus morhua) caused the cod to generate 
conspicuous clicking sounds. They report anec-
dotally that harp seals, but not hooded seals, often 
aborted approaches towards cod coincident with 
the onset of clicking, and had a lower success rate in 
capturing cod than salmon (Salmo salar) that were 
never heard to emit clicks. These possible startle 
signals seem worthy of further exploration.
Bouwma & Herrnkind (2009) demonstrated that 
Caribbean spiny lobsters (Panulirus argus) produce 
sound by stridulation during tailflip escape man-
oeuvres, in response to being grasped by potential 
predators. In laboratory interactions, they found 
that stridulating lobsters were more able to escape 
from the grasp of Caribbean reef octopuses (Octopus 
briareus) than experimentally muted individuals. 
Further, sound production in the lobster seemed to 
only be elicited by restraint, and experimentally 
muted lobsters exhibited the same escape behav-
iours as the unmanipulated controls. Startle might 
be expected to be effective in this case, since once 
free of an octopus’s grasp, the lobster should be able 
to easily outdistance it in the open ocean. However, 
the authors argue against such a startle effect. 
Sound production generally occurred just before 
the octopus made initial contact, but the authors 
found no change in octopus behaviour coincident 
with the onset of sound production, or at any stage 
prior to contact being made. Rather, they suggest 
that sound may be a non-functional by-product, 
and the key advantage of stridulating is that it sets 
up vibrations in the lobster’s carapace that make it 
more difficult for the octopus to maintain a good 
grip. This is plausible, but not definitively demon-
strated, and it is possible that startle may provide 
an additional benefit. This warrants further explor-
ation, especially when considering that Bouwma & 
Herrnkind cite references for 35 fish species and 39 
spiny lobsters that produce sound in the context of 
heightened predation risk.
10.2.3  Posture, appearance, and inking in 
cuttlefish and squid
Staudinger et al. (2011) reported staged encounters 
between longfin squid, Loligo pealeii, and either a 
cruising predator (bluefish Pomatomus saltatrix) or 
an ambush predator (summer flounder Paralichthys 
dentatus). The discharge of ink was a common 
response to both predators, causing the bluefish to 
abandon attacks and the flounder to misdirect 
attacks towards the ink plume. The second of these 
might be a case of distraction (see Chapter 11), but 
the first may be an example of startle, at least in 
part. However, cephalopod ink is known to contain 
chemicals that disrupt some predator sensory sys-
tems and can be unpalatable, or otherwise aversive. 
Nonetheless, since some fish were not deterred by 
ink, we agree with Straudinger et al. that the ink is 
more likely to function as a signal rather than as a 
defence in itself. Another possibility might be that the 
ink acts as a cloaking device that disguises the direc-
tion of flight of the squid. This seems unlikely in this 
case, as inking was often paired not with fast escape 
behaviour, but with posture change which did not 
seem well designed to reduce ease of visual localiza-
tion of the squid. Hence, this paper provides very 
suggestive evidence of startle signalling in this squid.
Straudinger et al. also report that some postural 
displays were effective in causing bluefish to 
break off an attack. The authors speculate that 
such postures may increase the apparent size of the 

STARTLING PREDATORS
183
prey and, thus, be effective in dissuading gape-lim-
ited predators. This is an interesting aspect to startle 
signals, and staged encounters with model squid in 
a variety of sizes and different postures (and against 
predators of different gape) would be illuminating.
10.2.4  Adult lepidopteran wing patterns
The most active current field of investigation of 
possible startle effects in predators relates to some 
of the patterning on the wings of adult Lepidoptera. 
Many species sit with their wings closed such that 
the undersides only are visible, and these under-
sides are often assumed to be relatively cryptic. 
However, on close approach of a predator, the insect 
will flick its wings open (sometimes repeatedly) to 
expose conspicuous patterning. This pattern can take 
a diversity of forms, but often includes approximately 
round elements called eyespots because of their vis-
ual similarity to vertebrate eyes. There is now a con-
siderable body of evidence that these conspicuous 
patterns induce a startle response in potential pred-
ators (Vallin et al., 2005, 2007; Olofsson et al., 2012b).
10.2.5  Posture and stridulation in mantids
Robinson (1969), Edmunds (1972), and Edmunds 
(1974) all discuss observations that mantids 
(Mantidae spp.) and stick insects (Phasmatodea spp.) 
can commonly respond to approaching predatory 
threat by adopting an erect posture, often with 
wings spread and with noise production by stridu-
lation. In some cases, these insects have potent toxic 
defences, but not in all cases, and it is likely that 
some of these behaviours are best interpreted as 
startle rather than aposematism. Edmunds (1974) 
summarizes the results of a number of essentially 
observational studies that suggest that some, but 
not all, predators are intimidated by mantid dis-
plays. Grandcolas & Desutter-Grandcolas (1998) 
provided the most detailed account. They reported 
on field observations of interactions between a gen-
eralist bird—the yellow-vented bulbul (Pycnonotus 
barbatus)—and a mantid of the species Polyspilota 
aeruginosa. The mantid adopted a posture with all 
four wings opened and slightly moving and forelegs 
outstretched. Colourful stripes on the wings and 
ocelli on the forelegs are prominently displayed dur-
ing this. The bird approached and retreated several 
times before eventually flying away. Further work 
on this system would be worthwhile, especially 
since it might offer a valuable model system of 
multi-component and even multimodal startle sig-
nalling, as different body parts (legs and wings) are 
generally evolved and appear to have coloration 
that might be selected, at least in part, for a startle 
function, and because stridulation is often induced 
alongside the visual display.
10.2.6  Summary of empirical evidence
The examples given here are very unlikely to be an 
exhaustive list of startle signals. For example, it has 
repeatedly been suggested that marine organisms 
can use bioluminescence triggered by the close 
approach of predators as a startle defence (Haddock 
et al., 2010). However, we often simply lack system-
atic study of encounters with potential predators.
It is difficult to identify commonality among the 
eclectic group of taxa that appear to show startle 
defences, or to identify common traits in the form of 
these defences. This variation perhaps should not be 
surprising, given that startle defences are essentially a 
bluff, and variation in the form of such defences 
experienced by a given predator might help to avoid 
selection pressure for predators to ignore such dis-
plays. Edmunds (1972) reported on apparently start-
ling responses of 25 species of praying mantid from 
Ghana. He noted that the patterning and colours 
used in display were highly variable between species, 
which he suggested might be a counter-selection 
against predator habituation to a particular signal, 
although no evidence for this was presented, and 
other (potentially complementary) explanations—
such as species-identification signals—are possible.
10.3  The evolution of startle defence
10.3.1  The mechanism underlying startle
To many researchers, the explanation of startle is 
self-evident and follows from well-established con-
cepts of signal detection theory, speed-accuracy 
trade-offs, and the life–dinner principle. When 
encountering a stimulus that might be generated by 
prey, sometimes that stimulus can be ambiguous, in 
that it can possibly be generated by prey and pos-
sibly by a predator of our focal predator. This is the 

184
AVOIDING ATTACK
signal-detection problem, where two types of error 
are possible—mistakenly approaching a predator 
or mistakenly giving up on a prey item. Predators 
are likely to have evolved cognitive processes that 
trade off these two types of error. However, the cost 
of mistakenly approaching a predator (or simply 
not fleeing in time) may be very high compared to 
the cost of missing out on a meal (this is the life–
dinner principle) and so we might expect predators 
to have evolved cognitive processes that leads to 
many false alarms where the predator flees from 
sudden conspicuous signals. Startle defences in 
prey are exploiting these processes to the benefit of 
defenceless prey. We find this line of reasoning to be 
very plausible; however, where we disagree with 
some authors is in the extent to which the startle 
signal causes misidentification. This issue has been 
clearly discussed in terms of eyespots but holds 
more generally.
To many, eyespots work because they cause the 
predator to misidentify these markings as the eyes 
of a potential predator (e.g. Janzen et al., 2010). To 
such authors, the eyespots have been adapted to 
appear particularly eye-like to potential predators of 
the eyespot-bearing organism; the more eye-like the 
signal, the more likely the predator is to misidentify 
these markings as eyes of potential predators and 
flee. An alternative explanation is presented particu-
larly clearly by Stevens (2005). This suggests that 
effective startle signals need not resemble particular 
features of predators sufficiently closely to trigger 
misidentification, but must simply be conspicuous 
and salient enough to trigger a neophobic reaction, 
confusion, or sensory overload. Essentially, the 
question is whether a blue tit flees from a display-
ing peacock butterfly because the display of the 
peacock in some way shares appearance features 
with a predator, or just because it was unexpected 
and ‘surprising’. Both mechanisms are plausible, 
and a signal could be both unexpected and reminis-
cent of a predator. Hence, the selective importance 
of the two mechanisms for a particular case needs 
to be resolved empirically on a case-by-case basis, 
and it would be unwise to assume one mechanism is 
operating without careful consideration of the other. 
There has been an explosion in empirical research 
on eye mimicry associated with startle signals: 
Stevens & Ruxton (2014) offer a valuable review. 
Since this review was published there have been a 
number of further interesting studies, e.g. De Bona  
et al. (2015), Mukherjee & Kodandaramaiah (2015).
Currently, the most suggestive evidence that startle 
displays cause predators to misidentify the stimulus 
as a predator comes from exposure of adult domestic 
fowl (Gallus gallus domesticus) to the eyespot display 
of the peacock butterfly (Olofsson et al., 2013). In this 
study, some peacocks had their eyespots obliterated 
with black marker pen, while the controls had a simi-
lar amount of black added to the wings but in posi-
tions that leave the eyespots intact. Birds were much 
more likely to emit a particular type of call in response 
to wing flicking by eyespot-intact peacocks than  
eyespot-covered ones. Further, the authors argue that 
this particular type of call is otherwise very closely 
associated with detection of a ground-based predator. 
This seems a very promising test system. However, 
experimental confirmation that such calls cannot be 
produced by the sudden appearance of appropriate 
control stimuli that look nothing like a potential 
predator (but are no less conspicuous and novel) 
would be useful, in order to increase our confidence 
that this call is truly functionally referential and indi-
cates that the caller believes that it has detected a 
ground-based predator. If this is so, then domestic 
fowl might be a model system for exploring what fea-
tures of wing patterning are required to produce this 
type of call. This will allow investigation of how well 
human perception of similarity to the appearance of 
eyes matches with at least one non-human animal. 
However, we acknowledge that design of a range of 
appropriate control stimuli of the type described 
above is a non-trivial challenge.
10.3.2  Satyric mimicry
A separate, but related, putative mechanism under-
lying startle effects is that of satyric mimicry—intro-
duced by Howse & Allen (1994) and most recently 
articulated in Howse (2013). This is based on the 
reasonable assumption that misidentification of 
some stimuli as prey may be costly to a predator, 
perhaps because this causes it to expose itself to its 
own predators or to attack a well-defended species. 
This theory rests on the further assumption that 
accurate identification of prey by predators takes 
time, and that there is a speed–accuracy trade-off, 

STARTLING PREDATORS
185
such that predators are less likely to make mistakes 
if they take longer in the identification phase prior 
to deciding whether to attack or not. This too is rela-
tively uncontroversial. The next step in Howse’s 
reasoning is that ‘images of any part of a prey  
animal’s immediate environment may be found on 
its body and it is hypothesized that the ambiguity 
that is presented can interfere with the process of 
visual perception in potential predators, resulting 
in withdrawal or increased latency to attack.’ So, if 
part of the body of the prey has the appearance of 
something else—which could be something innocu-
ous and need not be a predator—this causes confu-
sion in the predator that makes the signal-detection 
challenge for the predator greater, and so more 
time-consuming and/or error prone. This hypoth-
esis is plausible, and cannot be rejected on logical 
grounds. The key issue is one of empirical evidence, 
and here we do not fully agree with Howse.
Firstly, he claims that ‘[i]t has now been found 
that eyespots and other designs on the wings of 
many insect species are often coupled with other 
wing patterns and designs. These composite images 
often closely resemble heads and bodies of verte-
brates (including birds and reptiles) and of various 
invertebrates.’ Although Howse offers a great many 
examples of such putative cases, we often find these 
less convincing than he does, and it must be borne 
in mind that the cognitive and sensory systems of 
ecologically relevant predators can be quite differ-
ent from our own. As an example, he claims that the 
white spots on a black background that make up 
part of the wing pattern of the monarch butterfly 
Danaus plexippus represents potential satyric mim-
icry of the slimy salamander Plethodon americanus, 
whose sticky skin secretions would be aversive to 
many potential predators of monarchs. In order to 
build a more convincing case for this, or any other 
example of satyric mimicry, we need experiments. 
Firstly, this theory would predict that birds with 
recent experience of the salamander will be less 
willing to attack the butterfly than control birds 
exposed to a similarly defended amphibian with 
different visual appearance. Secondly, if we modify 
the appearance of the spotting pattern of the butter-
flies, then this should have more of an effect on the 
behaviour of birds with previous experience of the 
slimy salamander than the control birds. Without 
such experimental exploration, many will see the cur-
rent putative examples of satyric mimicry as no more 
than imaginative over-interpretation similar to the 
way humans can often imagine that they see patterns 
in random data (a phenomemon called apophenia).
10.3.3  Evolutionary history, genetic control, and 
environmental plasticity of startle signals
Butterflies are becoming a model system for under-
standing the factors controlling expression of visual 
signals. As discussed in Chapter 11, the wingspots of 
the intensively studied species Bicyclus anynana can 
be experimentally influenced by variation in rear-
ing temperature, to produce either the wet-season 
form with prominent eyespots or the dry-season 
form with much-reduced eyespots. Although the 
selective benefit of these spots has yet to be identi-
fied, this study demonstrates that the type of mark-
ings relevant to startle signals might be very easily 
evolved.
It has been shown that the evolution of eyespot 
patterning in butterflies of the tribe Junoniini 
(Nymphalidae) has not been subject to consistent 
strong directional selection either with respect to 
eyespot number or size (Kodandaramaiah, 2009). 
This is not surprising given that, firstly, eyespots 
can function in a number of different ways in butter-
flies including species recognition, mate choice, and 
deflection, as well as startle; secondly, that there are 
possible costs to eyespots in terms of reduced crypsis 
(Stevens et al., 2008a); and, thirdly, that the costs and 
anti-predatory benefits of eyespots are likely to 
change differentially with changes in predator com-
munity structure. Add in the mimicry that is com-
monplace in butterflies, and they become a very 
problematic group in which to search for evidence 
of consistent evolutionary pressure for startle sig-
nals. This difficulty would be greatly alleviated if we 
could identify the particular appearance features 
that are likely to be associated with a startling effect.
10.3.4  Selective pressures
The frillneck lizard (Chlamydosaurus kingii) erects a 
large frill on its neck when faced with a predatory 
threat. However, in this species, the frill is most com-
monly erected in interactions between conspecifics 

186
AVOIDING ATTACK
(Shine, 1990), and it may be that the evolution of 
some startle signals can be understood as co-option 
of signals originally selected through social or sexual 
signalling. Another possible evolutionary pathway 
to a startle signal is that the signal functions apose-
matically against some predatory types faced by the 
focal prey species, and as a startle defence against 
other predators; its evolution can, thus, be under-
stood via the pathways discussed in Chapter 6.
Even when the startle signal seems unrelated to 
other functions, its evolution can be understood 
relatively simply. It is easy to imagine how a preda-
tor might show a startle response to stimuli gener-
ated by the prey inadvertently during the process of 
fleeing from an attack or resisting attack. Such a 
situation would offer an immediate survival benefit 
to the prey. Incremental changes in behaviour and/or 
anatomy might be selected if they increased the fre-
quency and/or salience of such stimuli and did not 
incur a prohibitive cost (see section 10.5). Over time, 
the original act of fleeing may not be required to 
produce the stimulus, which shifts from being inad-
vertent to being under voluntary control. Differential 
exposure to predation appears to have impacted the 
development of acoustic defence, for example, in 
Poecilimon ornatus tettigoniids, where the higher pro-
portion of male startling stridulation, relative to 
females, is consistent with a male-biased predation 
risk (Kowalski et al., 2014).
A startle display that is triggered too easily by 
proximity of a predator might incur costs in attracting 
the attention of that predator (or other predators 
nearby) when it had not previously detected the prey. 
However, this cost must be traded off against avoid-
ing a situation where the predator has already dam-
aged the prey before the startle display is triggered.
There may also be conflict between secondary 
defences; for example, conflict between some 
aspects of startle signal production and simultan-
eous ability to flee. For some taxa it may be better 
(in terms of survival) simply to flee on first detect-
ing a predator, rather than engage in a startle defence 
that may be effective on some occasions but on other 
occasions allows the predator to approach sufficiently 
closely that risk of capture is much higher if the 
startle signal is not effective.
Lastly, it may be that there are costs associated 
with investment in startle defences that are paid 
regardless of whether attacks take place or not. These 
might be the physiological cost of construction of sig-
nal structures, or compromises made in morphology 
to accommodate signalling structures. However, in 
general, these costs may often be relatively small, 
since in most cases startle signals involve relatively 
minor physical modification to existing structures: 
clearly the prime function of lepidoptera wings are 
for flight and not for startle displays.
10.4  Ecological aspects of  
startle defences
Links between the startle defences and the ecologies 
of the species involved have not been subject to any 
significant research, but it is possible to make a num-
ber of predictions that should be open to empirical 
testing. Since being startled is detrimental to the 
predator in an encounter with prey, we would expect 
that predators should habituate to startle signals. 
Thus, it seems reasonable to predict that startle 
defences will most often be seen, and therefore most 
often be successful, when utilized by prey that the 
predator does not encounter frequently. Thus, we 
would expect startle displays to be less commonly 
used and to be less effective when the prey are locally 
common, relative to alternative prey types of the 
predator concerned. Thus, startle defences may be 
uncommon in outbreaking species and those for 
which aggregation is an important aspect of life his-
tory. Similarly, we might expect that susceptibility to 
startle defences is a cost of dietary generalism for a 
predator, with startle signals being most effective 
when presented to predators with a broad diet. Again 
to counteract predator habituation, we might predict 
that prey with relatively high local densities would be 
selected to show within-population variation in the 
nature of any startle signals used, and where two spe-
cies share a predator, there would be selection for 
between-species variation in startle signalling.
The susceptibility of a predator to startle defences 
is likely to rest on the relative costs of missed oppor-
tunities to feed versus increased risk of predation 
(see section 10.5). We would predict that when prey 
are particularly valuable to predators (either 
because of a high level of hunger in the predator, 
high nutritional value of the prey, and/or low avail-
ability of alternative prey), then startle defences will 

STARTLING PREDATORS
187
be less effective. Conversely, where predators are 
vulnerable to predators of their own, then startle 
defences should be more effective. Often these two 
aspects will covary with the relative size of predator 
and prey, and so making general predictions about 
body-size trends in the effectiveness and/or preva-
lence of startle displays is difficult. For example, a 
mantid’s startle display might be expected to be less 
effective against a chimpanzee (Pan troglodytes) that 
has few potential predators relative to a small lizard. 
However, conversely, a single mantid is likely to be 
a much more valuable food resource for the lizard.
We can also predict that startle defences should 
be more common in situations where other second-
ary defences are less available to the prey con-
cerned. For example, one common trait of the 
species of prey that have been shown to use startle 
defences is that none of them make use of retreat 
into a burrow or similar physical refuge from pre-
dation. We might expect that startle will be more 
common in physically complex environments, where 
prey are unable to detect predators a long distance 
away and flee; conversely, startle defences will be 
ineffective if the predator is able to completely sur-
prise the prey, such that the predator can subdue the 
prey before the prey has had opportunity to detect 
the predator and mount a startle defence. This may 
be open to experimental investigation. For example, 
at high ambient temperatures butterflies may be able 
to escape terrestrial predators—like lizards—by 
taking flight, whereas at colder temperatures startle 
defences may be more attractive. Similarly, we pre-
dict that where the undergrowth is physically com-
plex (and thus potentially concealing) a mantid in 
vegetation might escape from an avian predator 
simply by dropping from the plant, whereas startle 
might be more attractive where ground cover is 
less, or when the same mantid encounters the bird 
on open ground and dropping is not a behavioural 
option.
10.5  Co-evolutionary considerations  
in startle defences
If a predator is startled by a prey type such that its 
success in capturing that prey type is reduced, then 
one would expect this situation to produce a selec-
tion pressure to reduce this cost in the predator. This 
selection pressure might take the form of changes 
to the cognitive processes associated with prey rec-
ognition, to reduce the effectiveness of this startle 
signal and/or learned habituation to the signal. 
However, such selection pressure may not be strong 
if the predator is a dietary generalist and the prey is 
infrequently encountered. Essentially, this is a sig-
nal detection problem for the predator, and selec-
tion pressure to reduce one type of error (being 
startled by harmless prey) will depend on: the rela-
tive frequency with which this type of error can 
occur compared to errors where dangerous animals 
are misidentified as innocuous; the relative costs of 
these two types of errors; and how any change in 
focal predator cognition influences the relative fre-
quencies of the two types of error. The life–dinner 
principle can be used to argue that where the indi-
vidual value of the prey items lost to inappropriate 
startle responses is low compared to any increase in 
predation risk associated with changes in responses 
to ambiguous stimuli, then prey lost to startle effects 
may be a price worth paying. As a corollary of this, 
we predict that startle defences will be less effective 
in high-value prey items. Thus, we might expect 
startle defences in caterpillars to be more effective 
against avian predators (where a single prey item 
might only meet a tiny fraction of the predator’s 
daily energetic requirements) than, for example, 
digger wasps (where a single caterpillar might be 
sufficient to provision an entire brood of the wasp’s 
offspring). By similar reasoning, we might expect 
predators to be less susceptible to startle defences 
when particularly hungry and more susceptible at 
times of heightened expectation of predation. We 
know of no tests of these hypotheses.
We would expect predators to evolve mechanisms 
that allow them to habituate to startle signals from 
harmless prey. That is, we would expect predators to 
react to startle signals not by completely fleeing the 
scene, but by retreating to a safer distance from 
which they may be able to assess the potential threat. 
Fleeing may deprive a predator of the ability to learn 
about the other organism (except in as much as the 
other organism did not successfully pursue it). Thus, 
the behaviour of a predator towards a startle signal 
should not be fixed but, rather, should be responsive 
to that individual’s experiences subsequent to previ-
ous exposures to similar signals.

188
AVOIDING ATTACK
Habituation by birds to initially startling displays 
has been demonstrated under laboratory conditions 
(Ingalls,  1993; Vaughan, 1983; Schlenoff, 1985). 
However, the relevance of this to natural conditions, 
where birds are likely to encounter a range of differ-
ent stimuli between interactions with a particular 
startle display, and where those startle displays are 
encountered in a range of different environmental 
settings (e.g. different relative orientations of preda-
tor and prey), remains to be explored.
Experiments of Merilaita et al. (2011) into the 
importance of eyespot patterns in startle signals are 
insightful in a number of respects. Firstly, since they 
demonstrated that eyespot patterns induced latency 
to attack in naive hand-reared pied flycatchers 
(Ficedula hypoleuca), they demonstrate clearly that 
startle behaviours in predators can have an innate 
component. However, by using an experimental 
design that involved serial exposures to prey, they 
found that eyespots not only caused latency to 
attack the focal prey, but also caused increased 
latency to attack the next prey item offered, even 
when the next prey had no eyespots. This shows 
that there can be a carry-over effect as well as innate 
aspects of startle responses. In Merilaita et al.’s 
experiment, the treatment without eyespots still 
had many aspects of visual similarity to the prey 
with eyespots. It would be interesting to explore 
how predators generalize from the aversive experi-
ence of startle responses. That is, we currently have 
little idea of the aspects of a startling experience 
that predators remember in the context of subse-
quent experiences.
10.6  Unresolved issues and  
future challenges
Essentially, there is much current debate in the lit-
erature as to whether startle effects should best be 
seen only as a response to unexpected strong sen-
sory stimulation, or whether they can in some 
instances additionally represent misidentification 
of the prey as a predator. It should be possible to 
manipulate the experience of captive birds so as to 
explore the relative strengths of these alternatives. 
There are established protocols for manipulating 
the perceived predation risk of small passerines. If 
startle effects are primarily about misidentification 
of prey as a predatory threat, we might expect that 
startle defences should be more effective against 
avian predators whose perception of predation risk 
has been experimentally raised. Similarly, it should 
be interesting to either manipulate birds’ propen-
sity to neophobia (by manipulating their experience 
of novel stimuli) and/or to screen individuals in 
terms of individual variation in neophobia. If startle 
is essentially a special case of neophobia, then we 
would predict that it would be less effective against 
those with an innate or experimentally induced 
lower propensity to neophobic reaction.
Exploration of eye mimicry (see Stevens & Ruxton, 
2014 for a review) and satyric mimicry rests on how 
relevant non-human detectors assemble aspects of 
an image to achieve localization and identification 
of a particular object. Howse (2013) argues that 
Gestalt  perception is absent or greatly reduced 
relative to humans in non-mammalian vertebrates, 
which focus more on individual aspects of detail 
than on integration of the pattern as a whole. This 
issue is fundamental to Howse’s theory of satyric 
mimicry as an explanation for why mimicry can be 
effective even if very imperfect to human observers. 
Investigation of this issue would be valuable, more 
generally, to understanding of how non-humans 
separate specific objects from the background and, 
thus, illuminate the effectiveness of countershading 
and crypsis through disruption.
It is clearly difficult to resolve in non-humans the 
extent to which a startle reaction is based on mis-
identification of innocuous prey as a predatory 
threat. Unlike humans, we cannot ask evolutionar-
ily relevant predators ‘what they thought they saw’. 
However, developments in functional magnetic res-
onance imaging (fMRI) and other brain activity 
mapping techniques may hold potential for illu-
minating this issue in the not-too-distant future. It 
would be particularly interesting to compare pat-
terns of brain activity when relevant animals are 
exposed to sensory stimulation caused by real pred-
ators and when caused by startling prey and suitable 
controls.

Avoiding Attack: The Evolutionary Ecology of Crypsis, Aposematism, and Mimicry. Second Edition. Graeme D. Ruxton,  
William L. Allen, Thomas N. Sherratt, & Michael P. Speed, Oxford University Press (2018). © Graeme D. Ruxton,  
William L. Allen, Thomas N. Sherratt, & Michael P. Speed 2018. DOI: 10.1093/oso/9780199688678.001.0001
CHAPTER 11
Deflecting the point of attack
11.1  Overview
Deflection involves the prey influencing the pos-
ition of the initial contact of the predator with the 
prey’s body, in a way that benefits the prey. As we 
discussed in the introduction, the anti-predatory 
mechanisms covered in this book vary greatly in 
current understanding of their taxonomic distribu-
tion, and deflection is an extreme example of this. It 
has been postulated to occur in a sparse and eclectic 
group of organisms, and the evidence for its exist-
ence is quite variable among members of this group. 
We spend the bulk of this chapter exploring this evi-
dence. We argue that the evidence currently avail-
able allows some speculation on the evolutionary 
ecology of this anti-predatory strategy, and we 
­dev­elop hypotheses that aim to broaden the scope 
of research into deflective traits.
11.2  How deflecting traits work
Deflection involves traits that influence the initial 
point of contact of the predator on the prey’s body 
in a way that benefits the prey. These traits might be 
behavioural, involve morphological structures, or 
involve pigmentation and other appearance traits, 
or combinations thereof. The benefit to the prey is 
normally considered to be an increased likelihood 
of escaping the attack, and so the benefit to the prey 
comes at a cost to the predator. Thus, deflection 
may involve biasing attacks to areas of the body 
that can be broken off without catastrophic damage 
to the prey, or which are particularly difficult for the 
predator to grasp. However, for chemically defended 
prey, both predator and prey may benefit if the 
predator’s point of contact can be biased to posi-
tions on the prey’s body that allow for accurate 
assessment of these defences by predators, without 
incurring significant damage to the prey. Additionally, 
spiders may offer a tantalizing example of the 
­ext­ended phenotype in deflection, where decorations 
on the spider’s web, that are thus entirely physic-
ally separate from the body of the spider, serve to 
draw predatory attacks away from the spider. Since 
this involves deflecting the predator away from the 
body of the prey entirely, this does not fit our defin-
ition of deflection. We choose to call the putative 
mechanism in this case distraction rather than deflec­
tion, but cover it in this chapter because of the strong 
conceptual similarity.
As with startle, it is important to differentiate 
between perceptual exploitation and mimicry in 
deflection. That is, there are two conceptually dif-
ferent mechanisms by which the predator’s point of 
attack might be influenced by prey appearance. In 
perceptual exploitation, the point of attack may be 
drawn to particular areas of the body simply because 
they are the most conspicuous or salient, stimulat-
ing the senses of the predator. However, in mimicry, 
the cognitive systems of the predator are fooled and 
an attack is drawn to, for example, a false head 
structure, because the predator intended to attack 
the prey’s head and has misidentified another part 
of the body as the head. Sensory exploitation is a 
more parsimonious explanation of observed deflec-
tion than specific mimicry (in terms of making 
fewer assumptions about cognitive complexity in 
the decision-making processes of the predator). 
Hence, we should be careful not to assume the latter 
is occurring without due consideration of the former. 

190
AVOIDING ATTACK 
It also seems likely to us that in cases where deflec-
tion by mimicry is occurring, deflection through sen-
sory exploitation was a likely precursor to this 
situation. These two mechanisms are not dichotom-
ous, but are best seen as descriptions of ends of a 
continuum of a cognitive underpinning of behav-
iour; see Schaefer & Ruxton (2009) for a fuller dis-
cussion of these concepts.
Some conspicuous animal markings are described 
as having a ‘distractive’ effect that hinders visual 
detection. The suggestion is that such markings 
draw the attention of the viewer in a way that takes 
attention away from the outline of the animal (or 
other salient aspects of morphology) in a way that 
hinders visual detection of the animal (Dimitrova 
et al., 2009, Stevens et al., 2012) In this chapter we 
focus on markings that manipulate the point of first 
physical contact on the body; markings that influ-
ence detection are covered fully in Chapters 1–4, 
with Chapter 2 on disruptive camouflage being par-
ticularly relevant to distraction of attention from 
salient features.
Notice that this chapter deals entirely with situ-
ations where it is assumed that the predator’s vis-
ual sense is the key sensory system involved in 
determining the point of attack. We can think of no 
physical reason why deflection must be confined to 
this modality, and suspect cases of deflection in 
other modalities await discovery. There have been 
suggestions that the morphology and flight dynam-
ics of moths may function to deflect the point of 
attack of acoustically mediated bat predators towards 
harder-to-grasp body parts (Barber et al., 2015), but 
whether the errors in targeting by moths might be 
better seen as an acoustic version of the dazzle 
mechanism discussed in Chapter 12 remains an 
open question (Lee & Moss, 2016).
11.3  The taxonomic distribution  
of deflecting traits
In contrast to crypsis, aposematism, and mimicry, 
we do not have an extensive body of empirical evi-
dence in support of the existence of deflecting traits 
in natural organisms, so in this section we need to 
consider the evidence that is available. We start 
with eyespots in butterflies and moths, as the poten-
tial deflecting effect of these has been most inten-
sively studied. However, it is worth first pondering 
why deflection is much less commonly observed 
than the other anti-predatory traits mentioned above. 
We suspect that this apparent paucity of examples 
is a genuine reflection of its rarity in nature, rather 
than simply neglect or oversight by scientists. Def­
lection will only be successful in mobile prey that 
have the ability to escape their predator, even after 
contact between the two has been initiated, and that 
feature at least some body parts that are highly resist-
ant to, or tolerant of, damage inflicted by contact 
with a predator. We suspect that taxa that meet both 
these requirements will be relatively uncommon.
11.3.1  Adult lepidopteran eyespots
Spot-shaped markings on the wings of adult Lepid­op­
tera can have functions that are nothing to do with 
predation—for example, they can influence mate-
choice. As discussed in Chapter 10, larger spots 
may have a startling effect on would-be predators; 
here we explore whether (as is often postulated) 
smaller spots can have a deflecting function.
Perhaps not surprisingly, it is certainly possible 
for markings on the body of prey to influence the 
point of attack. For example, Vallin et al. (2011) 
exposed blue tits (Cyanistes caeruleus) to artificial tri-
angular prey objects that were uniformly coloured 
except that some were made conspicuously asym-
metric by placing a contrastingly coloured mark on 
one half. Birds were more likely to peck the side of 
the prey with the marking when the marking was 
small, but there was no statistically significant effect 
when spots were larger. These results suggest that 
some forms of patterning have the potential to 
influence the point of attack.
In order to explore the effect of lighting condi-
tions on deflection, Olofsson et al. (2010) presented 
dead specimens of the woodland brown butterfly 
(Lopinga achine) to blue tits. These butterflies show 
numerous white spots near the peripheral edge of 
their wings which reflect strongly in UV wave-
lengths. The authors found that the point of attack 
on the body of the butterflies was strongly affected 
by ambient light conditions. If the light contained a 
UV component, then at high light intensities attacks 
were directed to the butterfly’s head, whereas at 
low light intensities the attacks were directed more 

Deflecting the point of attack
191
often towards the peripheral edge of the wing. In 
another treatment with low light intensity but the 
UV component removed, attacks were again dir-
ected towards the head area. It seems difficult to 
explain these results other than by concluding that 
the interaction of the natural appearance of this 
­butterfly species with ambient light has the poten-
tial to influence the point of attack of these avian 
predators. In the absence of experimental manipu-
lations of the butterflies’ appearance or compara-
tive studies with other species, we cannot identify 
the specific appearance attributes that influenced 
predators under the experimental conditions. But, it 
does seem as if those attacks not focussed on the 
head often seemed directed towards the peripheral 
spot markings. Following on from this study, 
Olofsson et al. (2013) investigated whether the 
background against which butterflies are concealed 
may deceive birds so that they err in similar ways to 
the low UV-containing light intensity condition. 
They presented speckled wood butterflies, decor-
ated with or without eyespots, on oak and birch 
bark backgrounds to blue tits. Their observations 
suggest that, firstly, eyespots, independent of back-
ground, were effective in deflecting attacks; sec-
ondly, the time elapsed between a bird landing and 
the attack depended on the background and 
whether the butterfly had an eyespot or not; and, 
thirdly, faster-to-attack birds were more prone to 
errors than slower birds. Backgrounds, therefore, 
play some role in the anti-predatory effectiveness of 
marginal eyespots, and predators can experience 
speed–accuracy trade-offs.
While larger size and conspicuousness may make 
individual eyespots serve an intimidating, startling 
effect; smaller, sometimes serial, eyespots located 
closer to the periphery of wings can be argued to 
serve a deflective role (Kodandaramaiah et al., 2013). 
A considerable number of older studies have exploited 
variation in the number and/or size of spots on the 
periphery of the wings between different popula-
tions, morphs, or sexes within one species, or vari-
ation between different species (summarized by 
Stevens, 2005). These studies are based on the prem-
ise that, if a greater fraction of the type with more 
prominent spots have wing-damage associated with 
failed predation, then this can be seen as evidence 
of a survival advantage of spots through a deflec-
tive effect. As an example, the beak mark data col-
lected in Pinheiro et al.’s (2014) capture-recapture 
study of Junonia evarete butterflies in Brazil, indi-
cated to the authors that birds do focus on the eye-
spots when making attacks on butterflies The 
inter­pretation of these sorts of studies hinges on (i) 
the ability to differentiate damage associated with 
failed predation from other types of damage, and 
(ii) confidence that there is no reason to expect the 
type with the spots to be exposed to higher levels of 
predatory attack. There has been little empirical 
effort invested in demonstrating the first assump-
tion. However, the second assumption is particu-
larly problematic, given that different species and 
different sexes of one species have different behav-
iours (e.g. activity levels and microhabitat prefer-
ences), and comparison between different morphs 
of the same species generally requires comparison 
between locations or across different time periods 
in the same location (both of which are likely to lead 
to variation in predator community composition).
Similarly, interpretation of older studies (again 
well summarized in Stevens, 2005) that attempt to 
interpret position of wing damage relative to the 
position on the wing of eyespots also require con-
sideration of the validity of a number of assump-
tions. These assumptions assert (i) that damage 
resulting from predatory attack can be unambigu-
ously identified, and (ii) that unsuccessful attacks 
on different parts of the wing are equally likely to 
cause breakage. Further, if these assumptions hold, 
it might be possible to infer whether spots on the 
wing influence the placement of unsuccessful attacks. 
However, this would not allow inference to be made 
about the fraction of attacks that are successful (and 
so the selective forces—if any—associated with the 
deflective nature of the spots). Hence, this does not 
seem a particularly fruitful line of evidence. However, 
related work by Hill & Vaca (2004) is illuminating. 
They demonstrated in the laboratory that the strength 
needed to tear the outer region of the hindwing of 
Pierella astyoche (which has putatively deflective 
spot patterns on its wings) was less than that required 
to make equivalent damage to wings of species of 
the same family that lack this wing patterning. This 
observation is consistent with the deflection theory, 
as less prey investment in outer hindwing strength 
is perhaps to be expected if these areas are adapted 

192
AVOIDING ATTACK 
to be the targets of attacks. Prey butterflies would 
benefit from their outer hindwings tearing easily at 
‘intended’ areas when attacked there, as the preda-
tor will perhaps more readily pull back from the 
assault after breaking a region and allow the prey to 
escape quicker. Given the relatively simple nature 
of the experiment, it would be straightforward to 
evaluate whether this effect can be found consist-
ently across a range of species.
Paul Brakefield and colleagues have intensively 
studied selection pressures on the appearance of the 
African satyrine butterfly Bicyclus anynana. The spe-
cies has two morphs, termed dry season and wet sea­
son, which differ in appearance, mainly in that the 
wet season form has prominent spots on the wing 
margin that are absent in the dry season form. These 
researchers have discovered that individuals of simi-
lar genotype (e.g. full-sibs) can be made to develop 
into one form or the other depending on larval-­
rearing temperature. Thus, the two forms have been 
used to explore the possible deflective effect of mar-
ginal spots in a series of carefully controlled labora-
tory experiments (Lyytinen et al., 2003, 2004; Vlieger 
& Brakefield, 2007) that have, so far, failed to prod-
uce strong support for this mechanism against 
vertebrate predators. They do, however, suggest a 
cost to developing into a wet season rather than a 
dry season form in terms of reduced crypsis (see 
section 11.4), and so a balancing selective benefit 
likely exists, but is currently unknown. However, 
recent evidence suggests that the spots may have a 
deflective effect against invertebrate mantid pred-
ators (Prudic et al., 2015).
Many Lycaenid butterflies seem to show a com-
plex of traits that, together, are strongly suggestive 
of the false-head mechanism: a pattern at the anal 
angle of the hindwings combining eye-like mark-
ings, filamentous antenna-like extensions to the edge 
of the wing, movement of the false-antennae whilst 
keeping the real antennae still, other extensions giv-
ing the appearance of legs, a resting attitude with 
the real head pointed downward (in contrast to the 
normal resting position of related species), and a 
tendency to walk backwards (again contrary to the 
norm)—see Stevens (2005) and references therein. 
However, not all species show all of these features, 
and systematic exploration of how often they appear 
together in one species would be welcome. It is dif-
ficult to propose plausible alternative explanations 
to deflection through misleading predators as to the 
position of the false head—especially for the false 
antennae. However, there has not been particularly 
vigorous empirical investigation of the effect of 
these traits on predators. The most thorough explor-
ation has been that of Wourms & Wasserman (1985) 
on the response of captive avian predators (blue 
jays Cyanocitta cristata) to modified forms of the cab-
bage white butterfly (Pieris rapae). When birds were 
presented with dead butterflies marked in a num-
ber of different ways (see Figure 11.1), only the add-
ition of a ‘false eye’ affected the target of initial strikes, 
with strikes being directed towards this marking. In 
another experiment reported in the same paper 
with live butterflies, those with the false eye mark-
ings were more often mishandled by the jays and 
escaped relative to unpainted controls. These results 
could be strengthened if repeated with one or more 
further controls for the paint applied, either apply-
ing the paint near to the real head, or applying paint 
that matches the natural wing colour in the false-
head position. At the moment we cannot rule out 
that painted butterflies were less palatable to birds 
and/or that the application of paint influenced prey 
behaviour that reduced their risk of predation, regard-
less of any change in predator behaviour.
Sourakov (2013) presented a single individual 
jumping spider of the species Phidippus pulcherri­
mus with a succession of butterfly individuals. Two 
of those individuals were of the species Calycopis 
cecrops that sports a false head; the other 13 belonged 
to 11 different species that do not appear to have 
such false heads. The two C. cecrops were the only 
individuals that the spider failed to capture, despite 
making 14 attempted attacks in one case. Attacks on 
other species were always directed towards the 
head region, whereas those on C. cecrops were dir-
ected towards the false-head region. These results 
deserve development with more predatory indi-
viduals and a wider range of false-head bearing 
butterflies.
There are two hypotheses regarding how false 
heads may offer anti-predatory defence. One is that 
butterflies can break free and escape after being 
grabbed in the false head region (Robbins, 1981). 
The other is due to Cordero (2001) and suggests that 
prey sensory organs are concentrated on the head, 

Deflecting the point of attack
193
and so predators attempt surprise attacks by 
­appr­oach­ing from the rear. In such circumstances, 
the false head can fool the predator into approach-
ing from an angle that makes detection and flight 
easier for the butterfly; here, our definition of deflec-
tion would not be met, as it may be that no contact 
is made between predator and prey. Sourakov sug-
gests that his observations of staged attacks by his 
spider give support for the first rather than the sec-
ond of these mechanisms. He also suggests that 
wild-caught individuals of species with false heads 
can often be found with damage in the false-head 
region that is indicative of failed attack, and that the 
wing is particularly fragile in this region to facilitate 
breaking off in the grip of a predator, and the butter-
flies’ escape. Quantification of these issues would 
be very helpful.
Many butterfly species with false-head wing struc-
tures also perform a typical hind wings movement 
(HWM) back-and-forth along the sagittal plane with 
their tails while perching, a movement that appar-
ently mimics antennal movement. Interestingly,  
this movement has sometimes been seen to change 
depending on how close a predator is. One hypoth-
esis proposes that, when butterflies are observed at 
close range, the HWM distorts the shape of the false 
head so that its deceiving effect is reduced; and 
butterflies that stop moving their wings when a 
predator is close by will be selected. A second hypoth-
esis suggests that increasing the frequency of HWM 
improves its deflective effect at close range. A study 
by López-Palafox et al. (2015) presented 33 individ-
uals from 18 species of Lycaenidae to a stuffed bird 
to test these hypotheses, and found that half of the 
butterflies started to move their hind wings or 
increased the rate of HWM when the stuffed bird 
was at close range; however, a substantial propor-
tion of butterflies (30 per cent) stopped moving 
their hind wings or decreased the rate of HWM. 
Future studies could investigate the effects of HWM 
on predator deflection in more naturalistic settings. 
However, the results produced here also demon-
strated that there are alternative ways butterflies 
can produce ‘vivid’ movement of the hind wing 
tails (the ‘false antennae’) in the absence of HWM, 
and so perhaps more fine-scale behavioural studies 
concerning prey responses to approaching pred-
ators may reveal more subtle effects. Additionally, 
as López-Palafox et al. note, it would be interesting 
to perform similar experiments using other visually 
oriented predators that are also thought to have 
been selective pressures in the evolution of false 
heads.
11.3.2  Lizard’s tails
Several species of lizard have the ability to shed 
their tail when in the grasp of a predator (an ability 
called ‘autotomy’). Such tails are often coloured in a 
(b)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(c)
(a)
Control
front
middle
hind
Figure 11.1  Seven types of butterfly markings presented to blue 
jays by Wourms & Wasserman (1985). (a) Control showing front, 
middle, and hind regions used to identify strike points. (b) Lines 
converging in the anal angle of the hindwing. (c) Eyespot 0.5 cm in 
diameter. (d) Tails consisting of 1.0 cm wing segments painted and 
dried in place. (e) Convergent lines and tails. (f) Tails and anal spot.  
(g) Convergent lines, tails, and anal spot.

194
AVOIDING ATTACK 
way that contrasts strongly with both the rest of the 
lizard’s body and with typical substrates. In experi-
ments with predatory snakes, Cooper et al. (1985) 
and Cooper & Vitt (1991) demonstrated clearly that 
the appearance of tails can have a deflective effect; 
increasing the chance of the predator grasping the 
lizard by the tail, and increasing the probability of 
the lizard’s escape from the predator’s grasp fol-
lowing autotomy. The effect of such distinctively 
coloured tails is often enhanced by dramatic tail-
waving behaviours that draw further attention to 
them. This is an unusually unambiguous case of 
deflection, and has been extensively studied; hence 
we will return to it later in the chapter.
11.3.3  Eyespots on fish
Many tropical fish feature a dark spot at the poster-
ior end of their bodies; these ‘eyespots’ or ‘ocelli’ 
have sometimes been suggested as having a deflec-
tive function. Direct evidence for this is, however, 
limited. McPhail (1977) outlines some potentially 
interesting experiments, without providing detailed 
methods or quantitative results. In these experi-
ments, he experimentally added dark spots to some 
members of a species that does not feature them 
(Hyphessobrycon panamensis), and compared the fate 
of manipulated fish with those of unmanipulated 
controls in laboratory predation experiments. He 
reported that fish with artificial caudal spots escaped 
predators more often than the same species without 
spots, but the difference was not significant. However, 
in fish captured, the place on the body where the 
fish were seized was shifted towards the posterior 
by the presence of a spot.
Dale & Pappantoniou (1986) explored the deflec-
tive function of eyespots using the cutlips minnow 
(Exoglossum maxillingua) as a predator. This species 
exhibits eye-picking behaviour, where it removes 
and consumes the eyes of attacked fish. As with the 
previously discussed paper, experimental details 
were not provided, but they compared 20 trials 
with single goldfish (Carassius auratus) as prey with 
20 trials using single goldfish with an artificial eye-
spot (created by injecting India ink under the scales 
in the tail region). For fish with eyespots, 49 per cent 
of strikes were directed to the head; compared to 
68 per cent of strikes to fish given a sham injection 
that did not alter their appearance. Further, the mean 
time taken to remove both of the prey fish’s eyes was 
1.2 minutes for unmanipulated fish and 2.3 minutes 
for fish with eyespots. In a further series of similar 
experiments, unmanipulated goldfish were com-
pared with two species that naturally feature eye-
spots (rosy barb Barbus conchonius and flag cichlid 
Cichlasoma festivum). The results were, again, suggest-
ive of an anti-predatory role for eyespots. Finally, 
the authors report that a ‘series of experiments with 
wooden models having various combinations of 
eye, eye camouflage, and eyespot mark­ings, have 
further corroborated these results’, although no 
details were given. We can see very strong ethical 
reasons for making maximal use of inanimate 
models in any future laboratory work related to this 
phenomenon.
Empirical work in the wild is very scarce. Wine­
miller (1990) observed that ‘Astronotus ocellatus and 
several other large cichlid fishes of South America 
exhibit bright ocelli, or eyespots, near the base of 
the caudal fin. Astronotus ocellatus sympatric with 
fin-nipping piranhas shows less extensive fin dam-
age than sympatric cichlids of similar size that lack 
distinct caudal ocelli.’ Winemiller suggested that 
this two-species comparison supports the hypoth-
esis that eyespots reduce piranha attacks by con-
founding visual recognition of the prey’s caudal 
region. Since the two species involved differ quite 
considerably in behaviour and ecology, we find the 
strength of evidence in support of this argument to 
be low.
The most extensive study of this issue is reported 
by Gagliano (2008). She used a mark-recapture experi-
ment on juvenile coral reef fish Pomacentrus amboin­
ensis, which features a prominent black eyespot on 
the posterior dorsal fin. Although she argues that 
these fish experience strong predation from visually 
hunting fish, no differential survivorship on the 
basis of natural variation in size of the eyespot was 
detected (despite three-fold variation in her sample 
in the ratio of eyespot area to area of the real eye). 
Further, none of the recaptured juveniles showed 
bitemarks on the posterior of their body.
Some insights can also be gained from recent 
studies of attacks by predatory fish on fish-like arti-
ficial prey (Kjernsmo & Merilaita, 2013; Kjernsmo 
et al., 2016). Eyespots on such artificial prey could be 

Deflecting the point of attack
195
designed such that they drew attacks towards them. 
It can be common for fish (and other taxa) to have a 
stripe running through their eye as well as some-
times sporting an eyespot. These experiments showed 
that adding a stripe through an artificial eyespot on 
these artificial prey reduced the tendency of pred-
ators to attack the eyespot. The inference of this in 
real prey fish is that the combination of an eyespot 
and a stripe marking through the real eye may maxi-
mize the effectiveness of deflection of the point of 
attack towards the eyespot.
11.3.4  Tadpole tails
Tadpoles often have patterning on their tail that has 
long been suggested to have a deflective function. 
Touchon & Warkentin (2008) reared tadpoles of the 
Neotropical treefrog Dendropsophus ebraccatus sub-
ject to cues from either fish predators, or from dragon-
fly nymph predators, or under control conditions. 
Tadpoles reared with dragonfly cues developed lar-
ger and redder tails than controls; those reared with 
fish cues had shallower achromatic tails. This is 
argued to be adaptive because fish are long-range 
cruising predators, against which crypsis is the best 
defence; whereas dragonfly larvae are ambush pred-
ators, for which deflection may be a more effective 
defence because (unlike fish) the dragonfly has little 
ability to pursue the tadpole through open water 
after a failed attack.
Van Buskirk et al. (2004) presented model tad-
poles to dragonfly larvae. The models either had a 
dark body and a pale tail, a dark spot in the middle 
of the tail, or a dark spot near the tip of the tail. For 
this first model type, almost all attacks were dir-
ected to the body, whereas for the second model 
about half of all attacks were directed to the mid-
tail, whereas for the final model type around 2/3 of 
attacks were to the body, but the other 1/3 were 
near the tip of the tail (with very few strikes to other 
parts of the tail). Previous work (Van Buskirk et al., 
2003) with dragonfly larvae preying on Rana tempo­
raria tadpoles demonstrated that tadpoles were 
around three times as likely to survive attacks to the 
tail as attacks directed to the body. Taken together, 
this recent body of work has considerably strength-
ened the evidence for deflection by traits in tad-
pole tails.
11.3.5  Weasels’ tails
Powell (1982) hypothesized that the black tip to the 
tail of a stoat (Mustela erminea, sometimes called an 
ermine) acted to draw attacks from potential avian 
predators towards the tail, which is a smaller target 
than the stoat’s body and more easily missed by the 
predator. He further hypothesized that weasels 
(Mustela nivalis, sometimes called ‘least weasels’), 
being smaller than stoats and having shorter tails, 
do not have a black tip to their tail because this 
would be too close to the body to provide any advan-
tage. These hypotheses were tested using three cap-
tive hawks trained to attack targets that moved 
rapidly across the floor of their enclosure. Six types 
of targets were used, three of similar size and tail 
length to a stoat and three similar to a weasel. One 
of each set of three was all white; one was white with 
a black tip to the tail and one white with a black 
band on the body. Each hawk was presented with 
each of the six models on twelve occasions, in ran-
dom order. On every occasion the hawk attacked the 
moving target, but sometimes missed (see Table 11.1). 
Of the larger, more stoat-like, long-tailed targets, 
each hawk was much more likely to miss the model 
with the tail spot than the ones with no spot or a 
band on the back. Conversely, for the smaller, more 
weasel-like, short-tailed models, they were each 
much more likely to miss the spotless model than 
either of the other two. These clear-cut results 
very much warrant further investigation, especially 
with regard to other mammals with contrastingly 
coloured tips to their tails. We would welcome 
a  cross-species comparison among mammals to 
explore whether there were any morphological or 
ecological variables that could be related to 
contrastingly-­coloured tail tips. Powell’s hypoth-
esis predicts that contrasting tips would be more 
prevalent in species with longer tails and in those 
facing greatest predation pressure.
11.3.6  Caterpillars
Many caterpillars have markings that have gener-
ally been considered to have a startling effect on 
predators (see Chapter 10). However, Hossie & 
Sherratt (2012) provide some evidence, from ­models 
exposed to free-living birds, that some spot markings 

196
AVOIDING ATTACK 
may influence the point of birds’ attacks on a cater-
pillar’s body. Given the body-plan of caterpillars, 
any such deflection is unlikely on its own to increase 
the likelihood of the caterpillar’s escape. However 
it may be that the position of the caterpillar within 
the mouth of a bird may influence the ability of 
birds to detect chemical defences deployed by the 
caterpillar and, thus, increase the chance of taste 
rejection. Alternatively, or additionally, it may be 
that some areas of the body are more resistant to 
damage incurred prior to taste rejection, or that 
damage in some areas of the body can be more eas-
ily tolerated than in others. Empirical evaluation of 
the survival and growth of chemically defended 
invertebrates following handling and rejection by 
predators is needed, not just in the context of poten-
tial deflection but also to improve our understand-
ing of the evolution of chemical defences and 
associated signalling (see Chapter 6).
11.3.7  Web decorations in orb spiders 
functioning in distraction
Many orb-web spiders add so-called decorations 
(called stabilimenta) to their webs, made variously 
from silk, prey remains, egg sacs, and plant mater-
ial. There has been much debate on the function of 
these structures, and it seems highly likely that they 
serve a variety of functions in different species (see 
general reviews by Herberstein et al. (2000) and 
Théry & Casas (2009)). However, Tseng & Tso (2009) 
provide evidence suggestive that in the Taiwanese 
species Cyclosa mulmeinsis their function may be to 
act as decoys that distract the attacks of predatory 
wasps from the spider itself. The webs built by 
these spiders are vertically orientated and spiders 
characteristically rest in the middle. Over time, a 
series of decorations are added in a line above and 
below the normal resting place of the spider. These 
decorations are made from prey remains, egg sacs, 
and silk. At any one time there is natural variation 
in the numbers of decorations, because spiders are 
sometimes forced to relocate due to damage by 
wind, falling leaves, or large animals, and then the 
number of decorations increases slowly over the 
lifetime of a web at a particular location. These 
authors compared webs that contained one or no 
decorations with those having more than one. Wasp 
attacks were twice as frequent on webs in the latter 
category. However, of 12 attacks observed on webs 
with one or no decorations, nine (75 per cent) were 
directed towards the spider with the others being 
directed at the decoration; whereas, of 22 attacks 
observed on more-decorated webs only seven 
(~32 per cent) were directed towards the spiders. It 
is unsurprising that decorations increased observed 
Table 11.1  Results of Powell (1982).
Number of times a hawk missed a fake weasel of the designated size-spot morph
Hawk
Note: each kind of fake weasel morph was presented 12 times to each hawk
Size-spot morph
Long-tail no spot
Long-tail tail spot
Short-tail no spot
Short-tail tail spot
Short-tail black spot
Long-tail black spot
1
1
2
9
1
3
11
0
0
7
0
1
4
2
1
0
9
2
9
0
3
2
3
25
4
2
24
Total

Deflecting the point of attack
197
attack rates, since both decorations and spiders 
appear to be conspicuously coloured in comparison 
to the background. However, distraction also seems 
plausible, since web decorations appear similar in 
appearance (as measured by reflectance spectra) to 
spiders. Further, decorations on a particular web 
were similar in size to the associated individual 
­spider, despite five-fold variation in linear meas-
ures of spider size being observed. Other studies 
have offered evidence from other species of appar-
ent strong similarity of appearance between spiders 
and decorations, as seen through the visual systems 
of relevant predators (Gan et al., 2010). In this sys-
tem it would be interesting to explore the conse-
quence of attacks initially directed to decorations 
for spider survival. In particular, it would be of 
value to have confirmation that attacks misdirected 
at decorations enhance survival, by allowing spiders 
to flee to hiding places in the vegetation around the 
web before being attacked themselves. Further, it 
would be valuable to have a closer exploration of 
whether such reduced success rates provide a net 
mortality benefit, given the enhanced predation 
rates that seem associated with higher numbers of 
decorations. It is also important to exercise care in 
interpreting results that take advantage of natural 
variation in decoration number with respect to the 
potential for confounding factors. It might be instruct-
ive to undertake experiments in this species which 
manipulate the appearance of the decorations, to 
reduce their visual similarity to the spiders, and 
explore the effects that this has on attack targeting 
by wasps.
11.3.8  Distractive behaviour by breeding 
adult vertebrates
It is well known that many species of ground-nesting 
birds exhibit conspicuous displays in response to 
approaching predators. These displays are gener-
ally interpreted as functioning to distract the preda-
tor, reducing the chance of the bird’s offspring being 
discovered and predated. This area has been thor-
oughly reviewed by Gochfeld (1984), who com-
mented that it was difficult to think of another field 
of enquiry where the ratio of anecdotal accounts to 
scientific study is as great as in distraction behav-
iour. This remains true today, although the lack of 
manipulative studies seems to us less problematic 
for this topic than for others discussed in this book. 
It is difficult to interpret the wealth of information 
collected by Gochfeld and others using any other 
explanation than the conventional one of distract-
ing the predator away from the animal’s offspring. 
Gochfeld demonstrates that individuals use such 
behaviour flexibly, not adopting it when a nearby 
predator is moving on a course that will cause them 
to pass harmlessly by. Similarly, the behaviour is 
suppressed if the predator has approached so closely 
that the bird could not creep away from the nest 
undetected before initiating the display. Gochfeld 
lists several instances where the predators substan-
tially modify their trajectory in order to move towards 
such a displaying bird. Displays are often appar-
ently designed to make the bird look like an easier 
target than usual: e.g. by apparently feigning injury 
or mimicking a small rodent, in either case poten-
tially suggesting that the adult bird is an easy target 
that cannot simply fly away if attacked. All these 
points are strongly supportive of the classical dis-
traction interpretation.
Behaviour that distracts predators away from off-
spring has also been reported in fish. Sticklebacks 
can show parental care, with males constructing a 
nest that they defend against conspecifics, which 
can show egg cannibalism. There is a body of evi-
dence (e.g. Foster, 1988; Ridgway & McPhail, 1987; 
Whoriskey & Fitzgerald, 1985; Whoriskey, 1991) 
suggesting that males use deception rather than 
aggression when approached by a group of conspe-
cifics. This deception involves moving away from 
the nest and simulating feeding in the substrate, 
such apparent feeding behaviour attracting the 
nearby group away from the proximity of the nest. 
Whoriskey (1991) demonstrates that males with 
empty nests as well as those defending eggs use this 
behaviour. He thinks it unlikely that nesting mater-
ials were being defended; hence this aspect of behav-
iour requires further consideration; especially since 
Ridgway & McPhail (1987) found that males with 
empty nests did not show distraction behaviour. 
Long (1993) reported cases of distraction behaviour 
in the American red squirrel (Tamiasciurus hudsoni­
cus), and we would not be surprised to find reports 

198
AVOIDING ATTACK 
of it in other mammals whose offspring go through 
a relatively immobile stage in nests accessible to 
predators.
11.3.9  Summary of current knowledge of the 
distribution of deflective traits
The clearest evidence we currently have regarding 
deflection comes from coloration and behaviour of 
the tails of lizards that can show autotomy when 
grasped by a predator. Evidence for a deflective 
function to tail coloration in tadpoles has strength-
ened considerably in the last decade. The possibility 
that the contrasting coloration of the tip of some 
mammals’ tails can be deflecting still rests on one 
intriguing 30-year old study. Despite being the focus 
of much historical interest in deflection, evidence 
for its importance in butterflies and in fish has not 
strengthened greatly in recent years, and it may be 
time to shift research focus to more promising groups.
Autotomy occurs across quite a wide spectrum of 
animals: reptiles, salamanders, both terrestrial and 
sea slugs, octopuses, crabs, brittle stars, lobsters, 
and spiders (see Fleming et al., 2007 for distribution 
among invertebrates). In animals that have this 
ability, there would seem to be a strong benefit to 
deflecting attacks towards the relevant body part; 
hence we would not be surprised to find that there 
are further examples of deflective traits associated 
with autotomy other than lizards’ tails.
11.4  The evolution of deflective traits
11.4.1  Evolutionary history
In the experiments with blue tits attacking artificial 
prey discussed by Vallin et al. (2011), the existence 
or size of the spot on the prey did not affect the will-
ingness of the birds to attack. Birds took longer to 
attack prey when the background closely matched 
the colour of the prey than when a contrasting back-
ground was used, but this effect was unaffected by 
the presence or size of the spot. These results imply 
that the blue tits did not use the spot to aid them in 
prey detection and identification, even in circum-
stances where the matching background made prey 
location challenging. This may suggest that if deflec-
tion of attack selected for the introduction of non-
background matching spots, this need not necessarily 
impose a cost on prey that are also selected to be 
cryptic to their predators. However, Lyytinen et al. 
(2004) found that the spotted wet-season form of 
Bicyclus anynana (which features wing spots sug-
gested by some to have a deflective function) was 
less cryptic against brown leaf litter than the spot-
less dry-season morph, suggesting a potential cost 
to some spot patterns in terms of higher discovery 
rates by predators.
Autotomy of a lizard’s tail may buy escape from 
the clutches of a predator, but this escape comes at a 
cost. The tail acts as a fat store in many lizards, and 
the loss of this fat store may make an individual 
more at risk from starvation. Forfeiture of the tail 
can also affect future foraging, as autotomized sala-
manders have been found to have a significantly 
greater latency to strike at prey and to make fewer 
predatory strikes than intact salamanders (Gilde­
meister et al., 2017). Further, after autotomy, the liz-
ard must invest in regrowing the tail, and until 
regrowth is complete this anti-predator technique is 
unavailable to the individual concerned. Exploratory 
movements, escape distance, and temperature pref-
erence can also be affected. Interestingly, while feed-
ing rates do not increase, salamanders compensated 
for tail loss by preferring warmer microenviron-
ments that might accelerate tail regeneration or 
healing (Bliss & Cecala, 2017). During some lizards’ 
tail regeneration, digestive performance is also affected, 
as protein income needs to be maximized (Sagonas 
et al., 2017). There is also likely to be a cost in 
increased conspicuousness to predators associated 
with bright tail coloration (see Husak et al., 2006 for 
empirical support). Thus, not all lizards show autot-
omy and associated coloration and tail-waving behav-
iours that likely cause predators to deflect their 
point of attack towards the tail. It is quite common 
in those species that show brightly coloured detach-
able tails that this coloration is lost over ontogeny. 
This is likely to be associated with a greater ability 
to outrun or outfight predators in older, larger indi-
viduals. This shifts the trade-off in the costs and 
benefits of alternative strategies away from autot-
omy. Telemeco et al. (2011) studied hatchling 
­Austr­alian three-lined skinks, Bassiana duperreyi, 
and found that individuals with less ability to run 
fast when exposed to a predatory threat were more 

Deflecting the point of attack
199
likely to use tail-waving behaviours. Starostová et al. 
(2017) looked at juvenile males of the Madagascar 
ground gecko (Paroedura picta) with and without 
regenerating tails, and found that tail regeneration 
had a negligible influence on metabolic rate; this 
suggests to the authors that fast-growing juveniles 
with unrestricted food can largely compensate for 
costs of tail loss and regeneration in their somatic 
growth without significant metabolic costs. Another 
reason why juveniles might have greater need of 
deflection would be if they are more active foragers, 
but adults switch to a more sit-and-wait foraging 
style, for which cryptic coloration may be more 
effective. Cryptic coloration is often compromised 
by movement. As conspicuous coloration is lost 
over ontogeny, so too are associated waving behav-
iours (Hawlena, 2009), again suggesting that color-
ation and behaviour work synergistically in deflective 
defence, but that the costs of such defences begin to 
outweigh the benefits as individuals develop. Cooper 
& Perez-Mellado (2004) compared three popula-
tions of lacertid lizard of the genus Podarcis that 
they suggest differed in predation risk. They argued 
that physiological and behavioural traits associated 
with improving the effectiveness of autotomy as an 
anti-predatory defence were more pronounced as 
predation threat increased. This work deserves fur-
ther exploration with a wider comparative data set. 
It suggests that there are substantial costs associ-
ated with having the ability to use autotomy, which 
are paid even when the ability is not used. Such 
costs mean that it is unattractive for individuals 
that are unlikely to face predation threats to invest 
in having this ability. However, researchers perform-
ing such studies face the considerable challenge of 
quantifying the pressure from relevant predators in 
different situations. Cooper et al. argued that islands 
offer ideal study systems, since (they suggest) smaller 
islands have lower predator densities than larger 
islands. However, Itescu et al. (2017) suggest that 
intraspecific competition may be more important 
than predation in imposing selection on autotomy 
on islands. An added complication is that predator 
diversity may also be lower on smaller islands, and 
it is conceivable at least that those types of pred-
ators more likely to be exploited by deflective traits 
may not be a constant fraction of predator popula-
tions of different sizes.
One potential drawback to brightly coloured defl­
ective signals is increased detection by predators. 
Cooper & Vitt (1991) explored this with a simple 
model. Imagine that an individual with a cryptically 
coloured tail is detected by a predator with probability 
Pd. After detection, the predator attacks and the prob-
ability of the prey escaping this attack is Pe. If these 
two probabilities are independent, then the prey indi-
vidual’s probability of being captured by a predator is:
	
P
P
d
e
(
)
1−
.
(11.1)
We assume that having a conspicuously coloured 
tail increases the probability of detection by α (sub-
ject to the condition that α + Pd < 1), but also 
increases the probability of escaping by an amount 
β (again assuming β + Pe < 1). Conspicuous tail col-
oration will be favoured if the inconspicuous type is 
more likely to be captured by the predator: i.e. if:
	
P
P
P
P
d
e
d
e
(
)
(
)(
)
1
1
−
>
+
−
−
α
β .	
(11.2)
This rearranges to the condition:
	
β
α
α
>
−
(
)
1
P
P
e
d +
	
(11.3)
Hence, conspicuousness will be favoured if β (the 
advantage that is gained from conspicuousness) is 
large or α (the increased probability of detection 
due to conspicuousness) is small compared to β and 
Pd (the probability of being detected in the absence 
of the conspicuous signal). Also unsurprisingly, a 
large probability of detection in the absence of con-
spicuous coloration favours selection of the con-
spicuous signal, as an anti-predatory deflective tactic 
should offer some benefit to the prey that is almost 
certain to be detected anyway. More interestingly, 
a high probability of escape following detection in 
the absence of conspicuous coloration (high Pe) also 
favours the evolution of the conspicuous deflective 
coloration. This suggests that tail autotomy (increas-
ing Pe)—and perhaps associated behaviours that 
draw attention to the tail—probably developed before 
the conspicuous coloration of these body parts in 
some species. This prediction could be explored in a 
comparative survey across the reptiles. More gener-
ally, this model demonstrates that if deflective mark-
ings cause an increase in the rate at which their 
bearer is attacked, this need not necessarily mean 
that such markings will not be selected for. They 

200
AVOIDING ATTACK 
can still be selected for providing their enhance-
ment of probability of escape from an attack is suffi-
cient to compensate for this potential cost.
The use of comparisons across populations, spe-
cies, or ontogeny in the presence or prominence of 
putative deflective markings is greatly hampered 
by the potential for these markings to sometimes 
fulfil other (perhaps simultaneous) functions. Let us 
take fish as an illustrative example. Considering 
first predation, Meadows (1993) suggested an entirely 
novel anti-predatory function for eyespots. His inves-
tigation of these spots on the foureye butterflyfish 
(Chaetodon capistratus) found that they were gener-
ally oval in shape, being longer perpendicular to 
the main (head to tail) axis of the fish’s body. 
Meadows suggests that predators are more success-
ful when attacking perpendicular to their prey’s 
longitudinal axis. Thus, at this angle, a predator 
might expect to see a round eye. An oval ‘eye’ may 
suggest to the predator that its angle to the prey is 
other than perpendicular. As a result, the predator 
may misdirect its strike or may delay its attack 
while it tries to manoeuvre into the ‘correct’ pos-
ition. This idea is currently without an empirical 
foundation, but is worthy of further investigation. 
Misleading viewers as to the prey’s direction was 
one of the key objectives of many camouflage pat-
terns painted on warships during the twentieth cen-
tury (Williams, 2001), discussed in depth in the next 
chapter on dazzle camouflage. Alternatively, Karplus 
& Algom (1981) suggested that fish use distance 
between the eyes to evaluate whether another fish 
is a predator, and suggest that false eyes may func-
tion to make relatively benign fish appear to be 
more fearsome to potential competitors or pred-
ators. Again, this idea remains untested. Experiments 
described by Paxton et al. (1994) suggest that caudal 
eyespots on predatory fish influence the inspection 
behaviour of potential prey. Additionally, or alter-
natively, to these varied putative predation-related 
effects, eyespots may have functions unrelated to 
predation such as species recognition (Uiblein & 
Nielsen, 2005) or mediating within-species social 
interactions (Gagliano, 2008).
The situation is perhaps more tractable for tad-
poles than for fish. Using models, it should be pos-
sible to identify the specific traits that seem effective 
against ambushing dragonfly larvae through deflec-
tion, and then it should be possible to test how 
closely these traits correspond to morphological 
changes caused by exposure to cues associated with 
this predator in the laboratory in different species. It 
should also be possible to predict, and then test, the 
relative effectiveness of different morphs, or differ-
ent species, of tadpole in terms of these trait values.
11.4.2  Evidence for costs to deflective traits
In the study discussed in section 11.3.3, Gagliano 
(2008) reported a particularly interesting experi-
ment on juvenile coral reef fish of the species Pomac­
entrus amboinensis that feature a prominent dorsal 
eyespot. She kept some fish in laboratory condi-
tions for a month and compared them with fish 
allowed to develop in their natural environment. 
The laboratory-reared fish had smaller eyespots. 
She argued that the explanation for this was unlikely 
to lie in any dietary deficiency or food shortage in 
her laboratory condition. Rather, she speculated 
that there was some cost to eyespot production, but 
also a benefit (either in reduced predation or reduced 
aggression from conspecific adult males), and that 
the juveniles have developmental plasticity that 
allows them to invest less in eyespot production in 
the absence of both types of potential antagonist in 
the laboratory. As discussed previously, she found 
no evidence for an anti-predatory function of eye-
spots, but exploration of the eyespot development 
in different laboratory populations experiencing dif-
ferent manipulated predatory cues might be very 
instructive in fish, as it has been in tadpoles.
Tadpole tails also present an attractive group for 
exploring the costs of deflection. The study of Touchon 
& Warkentin (2008) suggests that tadpoles exposed 
to cues from dragonfly larvae predators develop a 
larger, more colourful tail, but that these changes 
came at a cost of reduced body size. It would be 
useful to quantify costs and benefits more fully. It 
would also be interesting to explore whether this 
induced defence affects the timing and/or size at 
metamorphosis, and how effective the induced change 
was in affecting survival rate in as close to a natural 
environment as possible. Although there is currently 
good evidence that tadpoles can survive some attacks 
by dragonfly larvae especially when grabbed by the 
tail (Van Buskirk et al., 2003), and larvae can readily 

Deflecting the point of attack
201
be found with tail damage (Blair & Wassersug, 2000), 
the longer-term fortunes of surviving tadpoles remain 
ripe for exploration.
Importantly, in terms of costs for lizards losing 
their tails, a recent 7-year, capture-mark-recapture 
study by Lin et al. (2017) found that, following 
autotomy in Takydromus viridipunctatus, the survival 
rate of tailless individuals over the next month was 
significantly reduced; however, the risk of mortality 
returned to baseline after the tails were fully grown. 
So, despite initial costs, this goes some way to explain-
ing the maintenance of this trait as an evolutionarily 
beneficial adaption to predator–prey interactions 
on a longer-term timescale.
11.4.3  Linkage with other  
anti-predatory defences
If deflection works to free prey from the grasp of 
predators, this will only be of fitness value if such 
momentary release can be converted into longer-
term escape from the predator. This might be achieved 
in a number of ways. In the cases of autotomic liz-
ard tails, the predator retains the nutritionally valu-
able tail and so its motivation to pursue the rest of 
the lizard may be reduced, especially if such pursuit 
(with uncertain outcome) requires the predator to 
relinquish the tail. In other circumstances, the prey 
may be able to flee to a refuge. This may be what 
happens in orb spiders that characteristically sit in 
the middle of their web to allow rapid closing on 
caught prey. Wasp attacks misdirected at web dec-
orations may allow the spider to flee into a crevice 
in the surrounding vegetation that hinders discov-
ery and/or access by the wasp. Otherwise, escape 
may require simply the ability to move out of the 
reach of relatively immobile predators, as may be 
the case for tadpoles attacked by dragonfly larvae 
that are essentially benthic. This line of argument 
may explain why extensive research on deflection 
of birds by butterfly markings and of one fish spe-
cies by another have failed to provide clear evi-
dence of effective deflection. It may be that in these 
cases, it would be difficult for prey to turn moment-
ary escape from the predator’s grasp into long-term 
escape, although an exception to this might be in 
freshwater and coral-reef fish that have access to 
nearby physical refuges. In complex vegetation, 
butterflies may be able to escape simply by drop-
ping to the ground, if complex vegetative structure 
makes it inefficient for the bird to attempt to search 
for it.
Regarding possible deflection in caterpillars, our 
argument was that in this case the release from the 
predator’s grip may be voluntary on the predator’s 
part, and that the predator would have no motiv-
ation to repeat the attack. This argument is built on 
the assumption that deflection works to enhance 
the likelihood of taste rejection in chemically defended 
species, and as such provides a synergistic enhance-
ment to such defence. However, this remains our 
speculative hypothesis.
It is clear that, in general, the momentary free-
dom that deflection can provide must be converted 
to longer-term escape through the use of other anti-
predatory tactics, but at present this is entirely 
unexplored in the literature.
11.4.4  Phylogenetic studies
Kelley et al. (2013) took a comparative approach to 
the evolution of spots and stripes across 95 species 
of the butterflyfish (family Chaetodontidae). They 
suggested that if eyespots were evolutionarily labile, 
this might imply that they are primarily a sexually 
selected trait, whereas if they experience strong and 
consistent pressure as an anti-predatory adaptation, 
then they should be much more conserved. In fact, 
they found that such spots had evolved relatively 
recently and independently on at least 12 occasions. 
Further, they predicted that correlations between 
spot traits such as size, colour, and position might 
be suggestive of a defensive mechanism, but no 
such correlations were apparent. They further sug-
gest that spots intended to misdirect predator attacks 
might be expected to be preferentially located in the 
posterior part of the body, but there was no evi-
dence for this in their comparative data set.
Phylogenetic studies in Lepidoptera are similarly 
unsupportive of a defensive function. Specifically 
across the junoniine butterflies, eyespots have evolved 
multiple times, and the total number of eyespots on 
the wings had both increased and decreased over 
evolutionary time (Kodandaramaiah, 2009). Further 
investigation across 13 butterfly species suggested 
that species with similar-looking patterning do not 

202
AVOIDING ATTACK 
necessarily use the same genetic pathways to express 
these spots (Shirai et al., 2012).
11.5  Ecology
One important aspect of the ecology of a species that 
will affect selection pressure for (and use of) deflec-
tion is the mixture of predatory threats faced. Not all 
predators will be vulnerable to potential deflection. 
In the extreme case, deflection would be ineffective 
against predators, such as baleen whales, that engulf 
the whole prey. One of the most promising models for 
the study of deflection seems, currently, to be tadpole 
tails. It appears, from our earlier discussion (section 
11.3.4), that coloration in the tail can be effective 
against dragonfly larvae predators but not fish pred-
ators. We would welcome systematic comparison of 
variation in tail morphology between populations 
of tadpoles exposed to different relative threats 
from these two groups. Except for the case of chem-
ically defended prey, we would expect that—as a 
generality—deflection will be much more appeal-
ing to prey that have some advantage in mobility 
relative to their predators, that allows momentary 
escape to be capitalized on. Against more mobile 
predators, we would expect that other anti-­predatory 
traits might be relatively more effective.
Since deflection relies on the predator’s visual 
representation of the prey, it will be affected by 
ambient light levels. This has already been demon-
strated by Olofsson et al. (2011) for deflection induced 
by butterfly wing patterning. It seems very plaus-
ible to us that some traits may only be effective in 
deflection under certain light conditions. Anecdotally, 
it appears to us that the contrasting tip to the tail of, 
for example, the red fox (Vulpes vulpes) is much 
more salient when the animal is viewed under low-
light conditions. Expansion of the work of Olofsson 
et al. to explore how variation in natural lighting 
conditions affects deflection would be valuable.
It has recently been found that the shades of blue 
colour in the tails of juvenile Plestiodon latiscutatus 
lizards vary across island populations with differ-
ent predator assemblages. Kuriyama et al. (2016) 
found that tail coloration varied with the colour 
vision of specific predators: vivid blue reflectance 
occurred in communities with either weasel or snake 
predators, both groups of which can detect blue 
wavelengths; UV reflectance was much higher in 
populations with only snake predators—snakes can 
detect UV, but weasels cannot; and cryptic brown 
tails occurred independently on islands where birds 
were the primary predators, likely because birds have 
keen visual acuity and so a camouflaged phenotype 
may be more advantageous. This adaptation of dif-
ferent levels of tail conspicuousness indicates a deflec-
tive function of the tails against specific predators.
11.6  Co-evolutionary considerations
The empirical evidence above is suggestive that 
some prey may be able to reduce their risk of being 
captured in a predatory attack by inducing the preda-
tor to attack specific parts of their body. It seems 
logical to ask why predators ‘allow’ such deflection 
to occur, if it costs them prey items. Firstly, it is 
important to be certain that deflection is, in fact, 
costly to the predator. We speculated, in the example 
of chemically defended prey, whether in such cases 
deflection may enhance ease of taste rejection and 
thus be to the benefit of both prey and predator. 
However, in most cases we do expect that the 
deflection is costly to the predator, and thus should 
be selected against. However, predators of reptiles 
that shed their tails upon attack may not be under 
strong selection pressure to stop ‘falling for this 
trick’, since they do end up with a substantial meal 
from the tail, particularly as tails are often used as 
fat stores. More generally, it seems possible that for 
deflection involving autotomy, there may be selec-
tion on the prey to make the consolation prize of the 
automized body part sufficiently valuable to pre-
vent predators being selected to stop responding to 
deflective traits. In the case of some reptile tails, 
autotomy can occur at a variety of different posi-
tions along the length of the tail. The ‘consolation-
prize’ hypothesis would predict that sometimes 
breakage would occur nearer to the body than the 
predator’s point of contact with the tail in order to 
offer a higher reward for allowing prey escape. 
This, however, remains entirely our own specula-
tion and has not been empirically explored.
The issues discussed above notwithstanding, we 
expect that in most situations deflection is costly to 
the predator and should be subject to counter-selec-
tion to ignore the deflective traits. That deflection still 
exists suggests that the predator concerned has not 
experienced strong and consistent selection pressure 

Deflecting the point of attack
203
to change its behaviour when its senses detect 
deflective traits. Following this line of argument, 
we hypothesize that deflection occurs because of 
lack of familiarity with the prey type. Hence, we 
would predict that deflective markings will be rela-
tively unsuccessful when used by prey species that 
the predator attacks frequently, compared to prey 
items that it attacks infrequently. Specialist pred-
ators should not be fooled by deflective markings, 
whereas generalist predators have to accept such 
costs as a by-product of having evolved to be able to 
handle diverse prey types. Associated with this, we 
might expect that given sufficient practice, pred-
ators may be able to learn to ignore deflective traits, 
and thus we might expect that deflective traits are 
less common in species that have life-history traits 
(e.g. aggregation of individuals, outbreaking popu-
lation dynamics) that would allow predators repeated 
experience of being deflected within a concentrated 
time interval. This line of argument is based on the 
assumption that we expect to see predators habitu-
ating, such that their probability of being fooled by 
deflective marking declines with increased expos-
ure. Whilst this has been demonstrated repeatedly 
for startle signals (see Chapter 10), it has not been 
explored for deflective signals.
Restricting the ability of predators to counteract 
deflective traits (either evolutionarily or behaviour-
ally) may have impact on aspects of the design of 
the deflective traits and on the wider life history of 
the prey. Specifically, a generalist predator may find 
deflective marking difficult to combat in one spe-
cies encountered infrequently if similar visual cues 
are useful when attacking a different species, indi-
viduals of which are encountered more frequently. 
This argument may provide a theoretical frame-
work for consideration as to why some styles of sig-
nal will be more effective at deflecting than others. 
It also raises the testable hypothesis that prey that 
use deflective signals will generally not be the main 
prey of predatory species that they successfully 
deflect, and that the success of deflection will be 
affected by predator exposure to other prey types. 
Specifically, we predict that deflective traits work 
because they provoke an out-of-context response 
that is effective in other circumstances. That is, we 
consider deflection to involve some sensory and/or 
cognitive traits in the predator that are retained des-
pite the costs to the predator associated with deflec-
tion. They may be retained because they exploit some 
constraint of the sensory system, or because there is 
counter-selection because changes that reduce the 
risk of deflection in this context have a greater cost 
to the predator than the benefit of reduced deflec-
tion. These costs might manifest as reduced ability 
to capture other prey, or detect another valuable 
resources, or detect its own predators. Again, we 
know of no empirical investigation of the funda-
mental idea that deflection only occurs because a 
similar response to similar cues benefits the preda-
tor in another context. Admittedly, identifying all 
the potentially relevant contexts for any given preda-
tor would be difficult, but this idea is so fundamen-
tal to the concept of deflection that we feel deeper 
exploration is warranted. Much of the argument above 
is analogous to the frequency dependence inherent 
in Batesian mimicry, and consideration of the exten-
sive empirical literature on that subject (see Chapter 9) 
may provide a useful guide when designing studies 
on deflection.
For distraction of predators away from offspring 
by avian parents, we should again ask why pred-
ators allow themselves to be fooled in this way if, 
indeed, it is a matter of fooling; the adult, if it can be 
caught, may make a better meal than eggs or chicks—
Gochfeld (1984) cites several cases where the preda-
tor was able to successfully capture a bird exhibiting 
a distraction display. Of course, not all birds behav-
ing as if they have a broken wing are faking it, and 
a predator that ignored such signals would forgo 
easy meals. However, there will be instances where 
a fox has a number of such breeding birds in its ter-
ritory and encounters distraction displays much 
more commonly than genuinely injured birds. We 
might expect such a fox to become habituated to 
such displays and ignore them, or even use them to 
alert it to the close proximity of a nest. In support of 
this, Sonerud (1988) reports observations where 
foxes were not drawn to displaying grouse, but did 
change their behaviour in a way that was inter-
preted as enhanced searching for a nest.
11.7  Future challenges
We have suggested a number of potentially advan-
tageous lines of further study in deflection traits 
throughout the chapter. We will not repeat these 
here, but instead highlight some other areas that we 

204
AVOIDING ATTACK 
have not had opportunity to raise earlier where we 
feel substantial progress can be made.
The experiment of Vallin et al. (2011), discussed 
previously (section 11.3.1), suggests that it might be 
possible to introduce markings that function in 
deflection to cryptic prey, without the prey suffer-
ing a loss in crypsis. However, this experiment 
involved artificial prey presented to captive pred-
ators in a cafeteria-style format; it would be inter-
esting to explore whether this effect can be replicated 
in a more realistic setting. However, we currently 
lack a clear, simple, and effective methodology for 
detecting deflection occurring with wild-living pred-
ators. A useful step forward would be to take the 
prey types used by Vallin et al. and modify them for 
presentation as artificial moths on the trunks of 
trees (as discussed at length in Chapter 10; see 
Stevens et al. (2008a) for an example of the use of 
this methodology), to explore whether cryptic prey 
with spots of the type predicted to have a deflective 
effect were removed at the same rate as those with-
out (as Vallin et al.’s experiment would predict). 
Now that Olofsson et al. (2010) have identified dif-
ferent lighting conditions under which spots on a 
butterfly’s wing can have a deflective function, it 
would also be useful to repeat these experiments, 
but with light more carefully calibrated to match 
naturally occurring light spectra in order to identify 
the ecological conditions where deflection appears 
most potent.
If it can be demonstrated that evidence of failed 
predatory attack can be reliably obtained from inspec-
tion of captured butterflies, then a capture-mark-
recapture experiment may be of value where the 
size and or number of contrasting spots on the per-
iphery of wings of a species are manipulated. Such 
manipulation would resolve concerns about con-
founding effects of varying exposure to predation, 
provided it could be convincingly argued that the 
nature of the change in appearance caused by dif-
ferent types of markings might influence the point 
of attacks but would not influence the rates at which 
attacks occur. This might be plausible given that 
such naturally occurring eyespots take up a rela-
tively small fraction of the wing area in comparison 
to putatively startling spot markings discussed in 
Chapter 10.
As discussed earlier, use of among-population, 
among-species, or across-phylogeny comparisons to 
explore factors associated with deflective marking are 
currently stymied by the complex of possible func-
tions that putatively deflective eyespots might have. 
Hence, identification (probably in laboratory experi-
ments) of specific features of such markings that are 
effective in deflection of predators would be very 
beneficial in allowing comparative work to focus par-
ticularly on these features. Although the strongest 
evidence for deflection comes from autotomic lizards’ 
tails, there are non-trivial ethical and practical chal-
lenges in exploring anti-predatory traits manipula-
tively in such large vertebrates. For this reason, we 
should fully exploit artificial model prey when study-
ing the traits that may cause deflection of predators. It 
has also been suggested that ‘redirection’ may work 
in combination with deflective autotomy in lizards, 
such that longitudinal-striped patterns on anterior 
body parts may redirect attacks towards less vulner-
able posterior parts during motion, for example, the 
autotomous tail (Murali & Kodandaramaiah, 2016); 
this perhaps warrants further study. Recent evidence 
that the web decorations of at least one orb spider 
appear to have a distractive function is worth further 
exploration, because the deflective structure being 
separate from the body of the animal may make 
experimental manipulations much more practical 
than other systems.

Avoiding Attack: The Evolutionary Ecology of Crypsis, Aposematism, and Mimicry. Second Edition. Graeme D. Ruxton,  
William L. Allen, Thomas N. Sherratt, & Michael P. Speed, Oxford University Press (2018). © Graeme D. Ruxton,  
William L. Allen, Thomas N. Sherratt, & Michael P. Speed 2018. DOI: 10.1093/oso/9780199688678.001.0001
CHAPTER 12
Dazzle camouflage
12.1  Camouflage in motion?
Camouflage using background matching, disrup-
tive, and countershading principles can be highly 
effective strategies for motionless animals, but 
experiments have shown that movement ‘breaks’ 
camouflage (Hall et al., 2013; Ioannou & Krause, 
2009). Reflecting on our own experience of crossing 
roads, playing sports, or observing wildlife, it is 
clear that moving objects attract attention and ‘pop 
out’ from the background. Computationally, the 
task of segregating a moving object from a textured 
background is easy because its edges are readily 
defined. From a prey’s point of view, the salience 
of movement is helpful for detecting approaching 
predators, but the prey’s own movement can cost it 
in apparency to predators (Skelly, 1994).
The simplest solution to mitigating this risk is 
to remain motionless as much as possible, or to 
move only when it is dark, and indeed these are 
common tactics. However, movement is vital 
for most animals, necessary to perform essential 
functions such as finding food and mates. So how 
do animals reduce predation risk while moving if 
standard camouflage strategies are ineffective? 
Anti-predator adaptations proposed to be less 
dependent on remaining motionless include liv-
ing in groups, chemical defence, fighting ability, 
or fleeing ability (Chapter 5), and signals that 
advertise these (Chapters 6 and 8), as well as per-
haps startle and deflection defences (Chapters 10 
and 11). These give an animal increased freedom 
to roam, collect resources, and find mates com-
pared to strategies that work by preventing detection 
(Speed et al., 2010). However, they do not exploit 
movement itself to gain protection, nor are  they 
necessarily dependent on movement to function.
This chapter discusses a putative anti-predator 
adaptation that works to reduce predation by 
­camouflaging movement itself. Dazzle camouflage 
comprises coloration that interferes with predator 
perception of prey speed and trajectory. Accurately 
estimating speed and trajectory is essential for any 
predator that needs to know where its prey is likely 
to be in the near future so that it can position itself 
to intercept. The dazzle hypothesis is that prey 
­coloration can interfere with these judgements. The 
idea is appealing because physical models of ­pursuit 
hunting show that relatively small errors in esti-
mates of future position can dramatically adversely 
affect capture success (R. Wilson et al., 2015). In 
instances where the predator has limited ability 
to  alter its attack path, the prey may well not be 
there when they arrive. Even if the attack path can 
be updated as better estimates of prey position are 
obtained, the longer curving pursuit path that 
results, and potential decrease in speed as a conse-
quence of having to turn, makes the physical task of 
catching the prey harder for the predator.
The idea that coloration may be able to affect 
judgements of speed and trajectory to facilitate 
predator evasion was first suggested by Thayer 
(1909) in tandem with what is now known as dis-
ruptive camouflage under the banner of ‘ruptive’ 
coloration. These two camouflage strategies share 
important similarities; both aim to generate errors 
in specific aspects of predator perceptual processing, 
and maximizing pattern contrast is thought to be 

206
AVOIDING ATTACK
important for both (section 12.3.2). However the 
function of both strategies is quite different; pre-
venting detection and recognition of prey outline 
and shape for disruptive coloration vs preventing 
estimation of prey speed and trajectory for dazzle 
coloration, so they are now treated as separate 
­strategies. Some definitions of dazzle camouflage 
include errors of target size or shape created by 
moving patterns under the category of dazzle 
(Scott-Samuel et al., 2011). We feel that despite the 
role of prey movement, these effects would be 
­better classified as disruptive unless they lead to 
misperception of speed or trajectory (which may 
commonly be the case, see Figure 12.1). The likely 
form of dazzle and disruption, as well as the eco-
logical circumstances in which dazzle evolves com-
pared to disruption are also thought to be quite 
different (sections 12.3 and 12.6).
While research questions, experimental paradigms, 
and response measures vary, experimental investiga-
tion of the dazzle camouflage hypothesis has thus 
far almost exclusively utilized human ‘predators’ 
tasked with capturing artificial prey on computer 
screens. Only two studies have investigated dazzle 
effects in non-humans (Hämäläinen et al., 2015; 
Santer, 2013). Overall, the basic idea that animal col-
oration can impact perceived speed and trajectory is 
quite controversial. Several studies find support 
(Hughes et al., 2014; Scott-Samuel et al., 2011; Stevens 
et al., 2011; Stevens et al., 2008b), while others find no 
difference between dazzle and non-dazzle targets 
(exp 1. Hughes et al., 2015; von Helversen et al., 
2013), or even a disadvantage for moving targets 
designed to dazzle relative to uniformly coloured 
controls (exp. 2, Hughes et al., 2015). Other experi-
ments find decreased capture success for patterns 
designed to dazzle compared to other similar pat-
terns designed without dazzle principles, but also 
find that uniformly coloured background-matching 
controls survive in motion just as well as dazzle tar-
gets (Hughes et al., 2014; Stevens et al., 2008b). Thus 
currently the experimental evidence for the effect-
iveness of dazzle is suggestive but still requires fur-
ther work. In section 12.3 of this chapter we aim to 
identify where firm and less firm conclusions can be 
made on the role of pattern contrast, pattern orienta-
tion, and internal object motion, before moving on 
to consider the evolution (12.4) and ecology (12.6) of 
dazzle camouflage. First though we discuss illustra-
tive examples of putative disruptive effects in bio-
logical and military design.
12.2  Examples of dazzle
The only objects we know that have been selected 
to create dazzle-type effects are warships operat-
ing in World Wars I and II that were painted with 
high-contrast geometric patterns as a defence 
against enemy torpedoes. One of the difficulties 
faced by dazzle theory is identifying and confirm-
ing examples of dazzle-type effects operating in 
nature. The groups displaying the most likely 
examples of dazzle are zebra, snakes and lizards, 
and cephalopods. These examples are discussed in 
turn along with the evidence for and against their 
dazzle function.
12.2.1  Dazzle ships
In World War I German submarines posed a major 
threat to Allied shipping, especially in the later 
stages of the war following the German campaign 
of unrestricted submarine warfare. Strategies were 
sought to minimize shipping losses, leading to the 
involvement of artist Norman Wilkinson in design-
ing ship camouflage and the formation of the British 
Dazzle Section in 1917 (Behrens, 1999). Since effect-
ively camouflaging large objects that operate in 
open but very varied lighting conditions is near 
impossible using conventional background match-
ing, disruptive, and countershading strategies, 
ships were painted with high-contrast dazzle pat-
terns that aimed to mislead the enemy about a 
ship’s speed, heading, and range. At the time sub-
marines sought to fire torpedoes that travelled at 
around 15m/s from between 300 and 1000 m dis-
tance from the target, aiming at a point ahead of the 
ship’s course on an interception path. To navigate to 
a good position and then fire torpedoes in the right 
direction, submariners needed to estimate how far 
away the ship was currently, how fast it was travel-
ling, and on what bearing. To make these calcula-
tions, range finding equipment at the time relied on 
matching images of the target acquired from two 
different horizontal locations. Any effect of coloration 
on submariners’ ability to do this might have led to 

DAZZLE CAMOUFLAGE
207
adoption of suboptimal firing positions and target-
ing errors that resulted in torpedo misses.
Thousands of ships were painted with dazzle 
patterns by the UK and US. As well as high-contrast 
markings designed to distort perception of speed 
and trajectory, designs included other deceiving 
features such as false bow-waves, attempts to make 
the stern appear like the bow, and efforts to make 
backward-leaning funnels appear forward-leaning 
(Figure 12.1).
It is a topic of contemporary debate whether these 
efforts were effective in reducing shipping losses 
(Forbes, 2011). Most pre-implementation tests of 
model ships found some supporting evidence, for 
example an average trajectory error of between 20° 
and 30° for twelve ship models (Blodgett, 1919), but 
experimental protocols were rudimentary and diffi-
cult to draw firm conclusions from. There is plenti-
ful anecdotal supporting evidence, including that 
of the King of the United Kingdom, George V, that 
Figure 12.1  Images of WW1 dazzle ships: USS Wilhelmina (1918) and USS Nebraska (1918). The repeating pattern along the side of USS 
Wilhelmina reduces in size in order to exploit size constancy mechanisms. If the observer makes the incorrect perceptual assumption that the 
patterns are all the same actual size, then the larger patterns will appear closer than the smaller ones, affecting perceived trajectory.

208
AVOIDING ATTACK
observers found the patterns distorting. However 
some German officers reported being unfazed as 
they generally used ship’s masts rather than hulls 
for targeting. Post-war analysis of the effects of daz-
zle camouflage on shipping showed some suggest-
ive effects of dazzle, such as dazzle ships being 
missed by torpedoes more, hit towards fore or aft 
rather than amidships, and overall sunk at a 
reduced rate (Behrens, 1999). However, these trends 
may have been confounded by the larger average 
size of dazzle ships compared to non-dazzle ships, 
or to changes in military tactics throughout the 
deployment period (Behrens, 2012; Forbes, 2011). 
Furthermore, ships were often painted with dazzle 
patterns when being overhauled and fitted with 
other modifications and improvements, making 
separating out the effect of the dazzle camouflage 
even more challenging. Recent work has aimed to 
assess whether 3D computer models of dazzle ships 
are any harder to recognize than uniformly coloured 
ships using machine learning techniques, a quanti-
tative approach that has promise for the future if it is 
able to include models of motion processing (Bekers 
et al., 2016). Dazzle camouflage continued to be 
applied to ships in World War II but its use faded out 
as developments in radar technology and targeting 
systems made the visual effects of dazzle redundant 
(Williams, 2001). In modern asymmetric wars where 
adversaries may use low-tech targeting or bomb-
triggering devices, military dazzle may find a new 
use (Scott-Samuel et al., 2011).
12.2.2  Zebras
The idea that zebra stripes work to ‘confuse’ pred-
ators while the zebra is in motion is a relatively 
early theory (Kruuk, 1972) for a phenotype that 
attracts many theories (Caro, 2016). This is a plaus-
ible possibility; zebras have the high-contrast pat-
terning generally thought to promote dazzle effects 
(section 12.3.2), and as herd animals they might 
benefit from an interaction between dazzle effects 
and confusion effects created when targeting indi-
viduals in groups (section 12.6). They also have 
visually oriented lions and hyena as their main 
predators, and as large animals that live in the 
open, much like ships they might find camoufla-
ging via other mechanisms difficult. The motion 
dazzle hypothesis has been studied in zebras by 
modelling the motion signals created by moving 
zebra stripes (How & Zanker, 2014). This analysis, 
discussed in more detail in section 12.3.1, shows that 
zebra stripes create strong motion signals in direc-
tions other than the true direction of movement, sup-
porting the hypothesis that zebra stripes make 
movement processing difficult. While most recent 
work focusses on exploring whether zebra stripes 
function as protection against biting insects rather 
than mammalian carnivores (Caro, 2016), this idea is 
not necessarily mutually exclusive with the dazzle 
hypothesis; rather than (or in addition to) lions and 
hyenas, stripes may target the motion processing of 
much smaller but perhaps no less fitness-reducing 
horse (tabanid) and tsetse (glossinid) flies instead.
12.2.3  Squamate reptiles
Many species of snake feature high-contrast striped 
patterns that have been suggested to confuse preda-
tor perception of speed and trajectory (Brodie, 1992; 
Jackson et al., 1976). In support of this hypothesis, 
a  comparative analysis of 171 species of snake 
by Allen et al. (2013) found high-contrast patterns 
were more common in fast-moving species, that 
stripes running longitudinally were associated with 
small species that had rapid escape behaviours, and 
that stripes running transverse to the body were 
associated with erratic movements. These behav-
iours link colour and movement in the way pre-
dicted by dazzle camouflage theory (Hogan et al., 
2016a). The very simple body shape of snakes and 
their undulating movements create potential for 
movement camouflage effects that may not be 
effective in animals with more complex body forms. 
Tracking forward motion of snakes may be difficult 
because of the lack of suitable reference points on a 
snake’s cylindrical body. Longitudinal stripes do not 
add reference points that track forward motion, but 
may create local motion signals in directions different 
to the global heading of the snake as a result of undu-
lating movements. This may be particularly effective 
if the snake is viewed through a partially occluding 
foreground, effectively creating a version of the bar-
ber pole illusion (section 12.3.1; Wallach, 1935).
As in snakes, lizard longitudinal stripes have a nega-
tive relationship with body size at the interspecific 

DAZZLE CAMOUFLAGE
209
level, potentially because dazzle effects might only be 
large enough to displace attacks to less vulnerable 
tails when lizards are small, an idea further sug-
gested by an association between stripes and caudal 
autotomy across species (Murali & Kodandar­amaiah, 
2017). In this respect the outcome of dazzle is similar 
to deflection, though it is achieved via a different 
mechanism. Matching results in snakes, in lizards 
longitudinal stripes are more common on mobile for-
agers that operate in the open (Halperin et al., 2017). 
A similar pattern has been observed at the intraspe-
cific level in the Be’er Sheva fringe-fingered lizard 
Acanthodactylus 
beershebensis 
(Hawlena, 
2006). 
Overall there are clear associations between pat-
terning and the movement ecology of squamate 
reptiles, with the similarities between lizards and 
snakes suggesting that the effectiveness of longitu-
dinal stripes in motion is not necessarily dependent 
on snakes’ simple body plan.
12.2.4  Cephalopods
The rapid colour-changing ability of many cephalo-
pod species allows for different patterns to be dis-
played whilst still and in motion. This ability to, in 
principle, overcome any disadvantage dazzle cam-
ouflage might have whilst motionless, makes ceph-
alopods a good candidate for displaying dazzle 
camouflage.
However current evidence suggests that this is 
not what cephalopods do. Zylinski and colleagues 
(Zylinski et al. 2009a, b) found that common cuttle-
fish Sepia officinalis used relatively low-contrast pat-
terns while in motion compared to the high-contrast 
disruptive patterns they are capable of displaying. 
This is contra to the prediction that dazzle works 
best when pattern contrast is high, though this is a 
contentious issue (section 12.3.2). A further compli-
cating factor is that this investigation was done in 
the absence of predator cues. Additionally colour 
change during movement may work to improve the 
camouflage of the animal once it resettles rather 
than during movement, as the predator has to find 
an object with a different appearance to the one it 
saw whilst it was moving.
Cephalopods are one of the few groups capable 
of displaying the internally moving ‘dynamic daz-
zle’ patterns (see section 12.3.4) investigated by 
Hall et al. (2016) and Hughes et al. (2017), where 
waves of moving pattern on an integument can 
strongly influence the perceived motion of the over-
all object. The function of these ‘passing clouds’ in 
cephalopods is currently unclear; they are used in 
the vicinity of conspecifics, predators, and prey, 
especially following capture attempts. Thus they 
may or may not simultaneously work as either a 
conspecific signal, motion camouflage, an elusive-
ness signal to predators, or a signal to startle prey 
(Laan et al., 2014; Mather & Mather, 2004).
12.2.5  Other groups
Dazzle may well operate in other aquatic systems. 
In cichlids horizontal stripes are associated with 
shoaling behaviour (Seehausen & Van Alphen, 1999) 
and while other groups have not been systematic-
ally investigated, there are several other examples 
that conform to this relationship (e.g. bluestripe snap-
per, Lutjanus kasmira). Whether these are examples of 
adaptive convergence on the zebra stripe phenotype 
in group-living animals, and whether they have daz-
zling effects on underwater predators, is as yet 
unknown.
In plants a creative but untested hypothesis pro-
poses leaf patterns blowing in the wind produce 
dazzle effects, making it hard for large herbivores to 
target individual leaves and insects to land on them 
(Lev-Yadun, 2014b).
The relationship between elongated patterning 
and movement speed observed in squamate reptiles 
has also been observed at the intraspecific level in a 
frog Dendrobates tinctorius (Rojas et al., 2014a); it will 
be interesting to find out how general this rule is.
Little investigated is the potential for dazzle 
effects in insect coloration (Théry & Gomez, 2010). 
Flying insects might be ideal beneficiaries of dazzle 
camouflage as at relevant attack distances they move 
through predators’ visual fields rapidly, behaviour 
thought to be necessary for dazzle effects to occur to 
a meaningful degree (Scott-Samuel et al., 2011). 
However, while research has shown in locusts that 
responses of neurons tuned to moving stimuli are 
affected by dazzle-type patterns (Santer, 2013), daz-
zle camouflage in insect prey has not yet been inves-
tigated. An interesting suggestion made by Hall 
et al. (2016) is that insect multilayer iridescence, which 

210
AVOIDING ATTACK
produces a striped pattern that would be perceived 
as moving when the predator and prey are in motion, 
perhaps creates a dynamic dazzle effect akin to ceph-
alopod moving clouds (section 12.3.4).
12.3  How does dazzle camouflage work?
12.3.1  How can coloration affect perception  
of speed and trajectory?
Very simplistically, object movement is perceived 
following the perceptual interpretation of edges 
moving across the visual field, after accounting for 
the observer’s body, head, and eye movements. 
Dazzle effects will occur if edges formed by colour 
patterns on an object can create incorrect interpret-
ations of object movement. This section discusses 
how examples of motion illusions and our under-
standing of motion-processing systems illuminate 
how this can take place.
The direction a line moving across a visual recep-
tive field is going in is inherently ambiguous; many 
combinations of speed and trajectory can create the 
same responses in neural cells tuned to moving 
stimuli (Adelson & Movshon, 1982). To resolve this 
ambiguity the mammalian visual system utilizes 
additional information, especially the changing pos-
ition of terminal points on lines (end-stops), relative 
movement of non-moving foreground and back-
ground objects, and the orientation of patterning on 
the moving object. The importance of these factors 
was demonstrated in a series of experiments that 
introduced the aperture problem, most famously 
illustrated by the barber pole illusion, where diag-
onal stripes moving horizontally through a verti-
cally elongated aperture are generally perceived as 
moving vertically (Wallach, 1935; Wuerger et al., 
1996). Wallach’s investigations, supplemented by 
more recent results, show how the orientation of 
high-contrast striped patterns passing through an 
aperture can influence the perceived speed and tra-
jectory of object movement, i.e. create dazzle effects 
(Fisher & Zanker, 2001; Sun et al., 2015).
Another form of motion illusion resulting from 
object pattern is known as the wagon wheel effect, 
named after the Western movies it is sometimes 
noticed in. Here a slowly rotating stimulus is per-
ceived as moving in the correct direction, but as 
speed increases the direction of rotation is perceived 
to reverse. This results in the position of one spoke 
of the wagon wheel correlating with the position of 
a different spoke across movie frames (though it can 
also occur in continuously presented stimuli; Purves 
et al., 1996), creating interpretations of wheel motion 
consistent with rotation in the opposite direction. 
The effect is created by antagonistically oriented 
motion detectors generating rival perceptual inter-
pretations of motion direction as a result of object 
pattern (Kline et al., 2004; VanRullen et al., 2005).
The barber-pole and wagon wheel effects show 
that linear and rotational shifts in patterned stimuli 
can create incorrect perceptions of motion, and give 
insight into how this happens as a result of a failure 
of motion detection mechanisms to correctly inter-
pret the changing position of contours as the retinal 
image changes. How & Zanker (2014) demonstrate 
that both illusions can be replicated by a simple 
computational model of biological motion detection 
(a) Original frame
(b) Motion map
Figure 12.2  Motion vector distribution of a herd of zebras viewed 
by the 2DMD computational model of motion detection (How & 
Zanker, 2014). The colour indicates the trajectory of the motion signal 
and the saturation the strength of the motion signal. A herd of zebra 
moving in the same direction creates a patchwork of motion signals  
in different directions (see Plate 19).

DAZZLE CAMOUFLAGE
211
systems (Borst et al., 2010). They go on to show that 
similarly misleading motion signals are created 
when viewing images of zebra stripes that shift pos-
ition on the retina following either zebra movement 
or saccadic eye movements. Movement of the rump 
generates motion signals 50–60° offset clockwise 
from the true direction of movement, similar to the 
size of displacement generated by the barber-pole 
illusion. Results further show that different regions 
of the body of zebras such as the flank and rump 
would be perceived as moving in different direc-
tions, creating further confusion about overall 
movement (Figure 12.2). In contrast the same move-
ments of plainly patterned horses were observed to 
create no misleading or incoherent motion signals.
In summary, there is reasonable evidence that col-
oration can affect the accurate estimation of speed 
and direction by exploiting features of how motion 
is processed locally and globally. In the next two 
sections we discuss specific features of coloration 
thought to be particularly important in influen-
cing these judgements: pattern contrast, texture, and 
orientation.
12.3.2  The form of dazzle camouflage:  
pattern contrast
Dazzle is often defined as a high-contrast pattern 
that interferes with perceived speed and/or trajec-
tory in order to reduce predation. Thus the definition 
includes both phenotype and function (Hogan et al., 
2016b). Both theoretical frameworks which pro-
mote definitions based on function (Caro & Allen, 
2017; Merilaita et al., 2017), and empirical evidence 
demonstrating either reduced capture success for 
low-contrast moving patterns (Stevens et al., 2011), 
or no difference between high- and low-contrast 
patterns (Hall et al., 2016; Hogan et al., 2016b), sug-
gest the ‘highcontrast’ element of the definition 
may be unnecessary. Of studies testing effects of 
contrast in dazzle camouflage, only Scott-Samuel 
et al. (2011) find high contrast to be important.
There is some possibility that conflicting results 
are due to features of experimental design. While all 
studies used psychophysical techniques that tasked 
human predators with observing simplified virtual 
prey on a monitor, they differed in their response 
measures: Scott-Samuel et al. (2011) asked subjects 
which of two targets was moving faster without 
requiring physical ‘capture’, whereas Hogan et al., 
(2016b) recorded tracking errors made by subjects as 
they followed targets around a screen, and Stevens 
et al. (2011) recorded target capture success. Thus it 
may be that perception of speed is affected by pat-
tern contrast, but that the effect is obscured when 
using measures that require production of a gross 
motor response to capture the target.
Alternatively it may be that dazzle is only effect-
ive at moderate levels of contrast with no advantage 
of increasing contrast further. Only Scott-Samuel 
et al. (2011) tested very low-contrast (6.25 per cent) 
patterns against black-and-white (100 per cent 
­contrast) patterns, whereas Hogan et al. tested at 
50 per cent and 100 per cent and Stevens et al. tested 
‘intermediate grey’ and 100 per cent contrast pat-
terns. Clearly more work is needed on resolving 
this issue as uncertainty presents a risk for stimulus 
design in experiments investigating other aspects 
of dazzle camouflage, which for now seem to have 
settled on using high-contrast patterns as dazzle 
stimuli (e.g. Hogan et al., 2017; Hughes et al., 2017; 
Murali & Kodandaramaiah, 2017).
The evidence against an advantage of high pat-
tern contrast in creating dazzle effects is surprising. 
Most theoretical models of motion detection depend 
on the contrast of the input (Adelson & Bergen, 
1985; Simoncelli & Heeger, 1998; Van Santen & 
Sperling, 1985), thus, all else being equal, maximiz-
ing contrast should maximize the strength of mis-
leading motion signals created by patterning 
(although see Georgeson & Scott-Samuel, 1999). It is 
fairly well established in human psychophysical 
experiments outside a dazzle context that low-con-
trast patterns are perceived as moving slower than 
high-contrast patterns at low speeds (< 4°/s), but 
faster at higher speeds (Stone & Thompson, 1992; 
Thompson, 1982). However, in dazzle camouflage 
experiments these results have not been replicated. 
Scott-Samuel et al. (2011) measured the perceived 
speed of a range of geometric patterns and found 
that the only targets that differed in perceived speed 
compared to uniform controls were fast-moving 
(20°/s) high-contrast zig-zags and checkerboards. 
However, these patterns were perceived as moving 
slower than low-contrast and uniform patterns, 
opposite to the results of Thompson (1982). Overall 
current evidence suggests that the relationship 
between pattern contrast and perceived speed is not 

212
AVOIDING ATTACK
a simple positive correlation consistent across tasks. 
The issue needs further investigation as resolution 
has important implications for the predicted form of 
dazzle camouflage, both in terms of whether contrast 
is important at all, and whether dazzle camouflage 
has been selected to cause over- or under-estimation 
of speed.
12.3.3  The form of dazzle camouflage: pattern 
texture and orientation
The examples of motion illusions and the species 
suggested as utilizing dazzle camouflage indicate 
that repeating patterns, especially striped patterns, 
should be the prime candidate for inducing dazzle 
effects. Studies have focussed on investigating the 
effects of stripes running parallel, orthogonal, or 
diagonal to the direction of movement.
The theoretical background for this focus is based 
on our understanding of the architecture of receptive 
fields and motion-processing mechanisms. Neurons 
sensitive to directional movement are also often only 
sensitive to certain stimuli, usually edges orthog-
onal to the direction of movement (Henry et al., 
1974; Maunsell & Van Essen, 1983). Thus for a given 
stimulus movement, stimuli textured with parallel, 
orthogonal, or diagonal stripes should create different 
motion signals.
Several experiments have aimed to establish 
what sort of pattern makes the most effective dazzle 
camouflage. Overall no consistent result emerges, 
so here we briefly review the current state of know-
ledge. Von Helversen et al. (2013, exp 1) and Hughes 
et al. (2015, exp. 1) find targets with stripes parallel 
to the direction of motion are captured more easily 
than orthogonal or diagonal stripes or uniformly 
coloured controls. However, other dazzle experi-
ments find no difference between parallel or orthog-
onal stripes (Hughes et al., 2015, exp. 2; Scott-Samuel 
et al., 2011; Stevens et al., 2008b; von Helversen 
et al., 2013, exp. 2), while others find parallel stripes 
hardest to track (Hogan et al., 2016a, b, 2017). This 
mirrors mixed findings from human observers in 
non-camouflage contexts, with some results indi-
cating that errors in speed are greatest when pat-
terns are orthogonal to the direction of movement 
and others finding the opposite result (Castet et al., 
1993; Georges et al., 2002; Scott-Brown & Heeley, 
2001). Indeed, it may be that stripes of any sort are 
not particularly effective dazzle camouflage. As pre-
viously mentioned, Scott-Samuel et al. (2011) found 
that only check and zig-zag treatments affected 
speed perception (Figure 12.3).
The study reporting the clearest effect of stripe 
orientation is Hughes et al. (2017), which focusses on 
whether dazzle patterns produce trajectory errors 
rather than speed errors. In these experiments diag-
onally striped stimuli move across a screen in a 
straight line on different trajectories before being 
occluded. The observer’s task is to indicate at which 
point along a vertical line the target will intersect, 
with the response measure being the error from the 
true intersection point. Thus this task reflects the 
judgement a pursuit predator has to make about its 
prey’s future position. Results show that when the 
target is moving at moderate to high angular speeds 
(> 10°/s) there is a remarkably strong average effect 
of about 5° in heading for obliquely striped patterns 
compared to vertically striped patterns, with errors 
in the direction that the leading diagonal is pointing 
towards (Figure 12.4). How & Zanker’s model also 
finds that diagonal stripes are most the most likely 
pattern orientation to create a consistent error in 
perceived direction of movement; however, the 
error is in the opposite direction, perhaps as a result 
of measuring local rather than global motion per-
ception. A further reason to predict an advantage 
for diagonal stripes is the higher proportion of edge 
detectors tuned to vertical and horizontal orienta-
tions compared to oblique orientations (Appelle, 
1972). Compared to the weak or mixed results in 
studies focussing on speed errors, or a combination 
of speed and trajectory errors, the results of Hughes 
et al. suggest that the main effect of pattern orienta-
tion is on estimation of trajectory. Confirming this 
finding with a broader variety of oriented stimuli 
and in non-human animals should be a priority. 
How & Zanker’s model suggests that it is likely, 
and that a further consequence of orientation-
dependent trajectory errors is that stripes at a range 
of orientations over the whole object should create 
confusing multidirectional motion signals.
Recent discussion suggests that processing dazzle 
patterns at different orientations may be achieved by 
fundamentally different motion detection mechan-
isms, with stimuli patterned with orthogonal stripes 

DAZZLE CAMOUFLAGE
213
processed by classical inference on the ‘intersection 
of constraints’ of two or more motion detectors tuned 
to different orientations, but the motion of stimuli 
with stripes parallel to the direction of movement 
being processed using motion streak processing 
(Hughes et al., 2015, 2017). Motion streak processing, 
an example of which can be seen by waving a spark-
ler around, is achieved by temporal integration of 
samples of a moving object and has been demon-
strated for a range of species (Geisler et al., 2001). 
While orthogonally striped stimuli increasing in 
speed will lead to light and dark stripes being inte-
grated (blurred), which only has the effect of redu-
cing pattern contrast rather than producing smeared 
motion streak signals, parallel striped stimuli should 
create ‘speedlines’ that indicate direction and vel-
ocity of motion (Burr & Ross, 2002). Hughes et al. 
(2017) concluded that utilization of motion streak 
cues may underlie the target trajectory errors they 
observed, as the direction of errors reversed at low 
target velocities when motion streak signals are not 
produced. Interestingly, this means that at low vel-
ocities the trajectory errors found by Hughes et al. 
match those predicted by How & Zanker, suggest-
ing that different dazzle effects may operate at dif-
ferent velocities.
12.3.4  Dynamic dazzle
Although few animals have the capability of cre-
ating moving patterns on their integuments, and 
­current evidence suggests that those that can (e.g. 
(a)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(b)
Figure 12.3  Experimental stimuli used in Scott-Samuel et al. (2011). The perceived speed of stimuli (a)–(e) were compared to that of (f), a 1D 
Gaussian: (a) horizontal, (b) vertical, (c) zigzag, (d) check, (e) plain. Stimuli (c) and (d) were perceived as moving slower than (f) at high speeds. All 
stimuli were seen to move at the same speed at low speeds.

214
AVOIDING ATTACK
cephalopods) do not do so to dazzle, the question of 
whether internally moving patterns can create dis-
tortions of perceived speed and trajectory has been 
the topic of recent research interest, though the 
focus is more on potential military rather than bio-
logical systems.
In a series of experiments that follow the same 
basic paradigm as Scott-Samuel et al. (2011), but 
using stimuli with internally moving striped pat-
terns, Hall et al. (2016) show that these ‘dynamic 
dazzle’ patterns can create much larger distortions 
of perceived speed than stimuli with internally 
static patterns, up to about 18 per cent error com-
pared to the 7 per cent maximum error observed in 
Scott-Samuel et al. The basic finding is that internal 
stripes moving in the same direction as the target 
increase perceived speed, while stripes moving in 
the opposite direction decrease perceived speed. 
The size of error depends on the relative speeds of 
target and stripe motion, with the largest effects 
found when they match.
The study by Hughes et al. (2017) introduced in 
the previous section also examines targets with 
internal pattern movement. This complements Hall 
Left to Right
0.50
0.25
0.00
Target orientation
Difference between real and subjective crossing point (deg)
Right to Left
Internal movement
None
Upwards
Downwards
Figure 12.4  Results of Hughes et al. (2017) Observers were tasked with estimating the point at which the target would cross a line. Results 
show how perceived trajectory is affected significantly by stripe orientation, but minimally by internal movement of stripes. Error bars are ± 1 
bootstrapped standard errors.

DAZZLE CAMOUFLAGE
215
et al. by measuring the impact of dynamic dazzle on 
perception of target trajectory rather than speed. The 
effect of moving stripes was to create trajectory errors 
in the same direction as the motion of internal stripes 
(e.g. perceiving a SW trajectory of a W moving target 
when internal stripes were moving to the SW); 
however, the magnitude of the effect was quite 
small (0.1°), especially compared to the effect of 
stripe orientation discussed in the previous section 
(0.5°). The authors speculated that the effect results 
from failures in how local and global motion signals 
are integrated (Tse & Hsieh, 2006).
12.4  The evolution of dazzle
If we make the (almost certainly incorrect) assump-
tion that all the examples identified in section 12.2 
are of dazzle camouflage, and that there are not 
many more examples of dazzle to discover, then we 
can draw two tentative conclusions. First that dazzle 
camouflage is a relatively rare anti-predator adapta-
tion, and second that it has evolved multiple times 
independently, but when it does so it generally 
remains quite restricted. Of course these conclu-
sions may lead from the fact that identifying dazzle 
camouflage and how it is perceived by relevant 
observers in nature is difficult, and attempts to do 
so are in their infancy. Establishing dazzle effects 
created by iridescence in insects would, for example, 
alter this perspective. Similarly, the pool of poten-
tially dazzling species would broaden if it became 
possible to make a firm conclusion that high con-
trast is unnecessary to produce dazzle effects. It 
would also be instructive to attempt to identify the 
evolutionary pathways that have led to potential 
instances of dazzle, as has been done for zebra 
(Caro et al., 2014).
It is straightforward to imagine scenarios for the 
initial evolution of dazzle. For example, disruptive 
patterns could be selected for increased regularity 
as a result of predation against moving individuals. 
Another unexplored possibility is that conspicuous 
patterns used by mimics of aposematic species 
could be co-opted for dazzle following a change in 
the model’s presence or phenotype. For now though 
we can only assume that the benefits of dazzle out-
weigh the costs for relatively few species, and there-
fore that the conditions that select for dazzle are 
quite narrow. We explore what these might be in the 
next two sections.
12.5  The costs and benefits of dazzle
The major potential upside of dazzle camouflage is 
that it can offer protection against predation while 
moving without having to invest in defences or suf-
fer predation from uneducated predators, as with 
aposematic strategies, or restricting movement to 
night time when vision is less important (Merilaita 
& Tullberg, 2005).
While there is conflicting evidence over the role 
of high-contrast and regular patterning in creating 
dazzle effects, assuming that dazzle does select for 
these phenotypes then it is likely to be balanced by 
the cost of decreasing camouflage performance while 
the animal is not moving (Stevens et al., 2011). In 
terms of background matching, natural back-
grounds do not often feature regular patterns, nor 
do they generally contain very high contrast, thus 
these traits are likely to reduce crypsis. Like dazzle, 
disruptive camouflage is also thought to select for 
high contrast (but not pattern regularity); however, 
maximum contrast is constrained by the range of 
tones present in the background (Fraser et al., 2007) 
and this is possibly also the case for dazzle. Another 
solution to this problem is minimization of the time 
spent motionless. For many species movement is 
expensive and rest essential, but for others, such as 
pelagic fish, costs of movement may be relatively 
low, and there are many other advantages to keeping 
moving too. A final solution is utilization of hiding 
places where visual camouflage is not relevant, such 
as caves and burrows. In these circumstances dazzle 
may be effective when the animal is active and irrele-
vant when it is hiding. Exploration of these issues 
really requires resolution of the role of pattern con-
trast in dazzle as a prerequisite (Hogan et al., 2016b).
12.6  The ecology of dazzle
In section 12.2 we described several examples of 
potential dazzle camouflage and in doing so high-
lighted a number of ecological factors that are com-
monly implicated in species that might pursue a 
dazzle strategy. The main ones include living in 
groups and rapid movement. We have already dis-

216
AVOIDING ATTACK
cussed how dazzle effects have generally been 
found to increase with increasing target speed (e.g. 
Scott-Samuel et al., 2011), so it makes sense that they 
will only be effective on animals that can move 
across the visual field of predators sufficiently rap-
idly, an association that has been demonstrated in 
squamates (Allen et al., 2013; Halperin et al., 2017), 
but not yet established as a more general pattern in 
other taxa.
Zebra and shoaling fish are two groups of poten-
tially dazzling prey that live in dense groups. Is this 
a coincidence? While the issue has not yet been 
extensively investigated in a comparative context, 
the motion modelling of How & Zanker (2014) sug-
gests that the effect of complex motion signals cre-
ated by moving zebra stripes should be enhanced 
when zebra are seen against a background of other 
moving zebra, as they might be from the viewpoint 
of a hunting lion. This might make it difficult to 
pick out a single zebra as the selected prey, both 
because of uncertainty about the direction of each 
zebra’s individual motion, but also because differ-
ent parts of separate but adjacent bodies may mis-
takenly be grouped together if they are perceived as 
moving in the same direction via the Gestalt principle 
of common fate. Several experiments have begun to 
follow up on this issue, aiming to find out if dazzle 
effects interact with confusion effects experienced 
by predators attempting to target individuals in 
groups, a well-established phenomenon where cap-
ture success decreases with increasing group size 
(Krause & Ruxton, 2002) or density (Ioannou et al., 
2009).
Hogan et al. (2016a, b, 2017) have shown that in 
the errors observers make while tracking targets, 
dazzle patterning (which in these experiments are 
striped patterns) interacts with the group size of 
moving distractors with the same appearance, with 
larger groups leading to more marked tracking 
errors for dazzle patterns. This suggests a specific 
benefit of dazzle when moving in groups. However 
the result was not replicated by Hughes et al. (2015) 
who found instead that striped prey in groups of 6 
or more were caught more often than uniform prey. 
One difference in experimental setup that may 
underlie differences between results is that in the 
Hogan et al. studies targets move unpredictably, 
whereas in Hughes et al. targets move linearly 
which might make following a single target among 
distractors more straightforward.
Extending the basic finding of dazzle facilitating 
survival of individuals living in groups, Hogan et al. 
(2017) looked at the situation where individuals in 
a  group vary in speed—something that occurs in 
natural groups and potentially undermines the pro-
tection afforded by the confusion effect because it 
allows individuals to be identified and separated on 
the basis of their unique speed (the oddity effect). 
Dazzle, because it interferes with speed and trajec-
tory perception, might in turn counter the oddity 
effect. However, their experiments found no evi-
dence for this; the oddity effect made tracking indi-
viduals significantly easier, and the size of effect 
was equal for striped and non-striped patterns.
Examining this issue from a comparative per-
spective, Seehausen & Van Alphen (1999) find 
stripes parallel to the direction of general motion in 
cichlid fish are correlated with feeding on fish and 
shoaling behaviour, suggesting a phenotype that 
works well in groups of moving animals; however, 
a similar association between stripes and sociability 
in butterflyfish was not supported (Kelley et al., 2013), 
so it is unclear how general this this pattern is.
12.7  Future challenges in dazzle 
camouflage research
A message that should have come through clearly 
in this chapter is that the dazzle camouflage hypoth-
esis is still some way from being well established as 
a mechanism by which animals can achieve camou-
flage while in motion. While some experiments 
present clear effects of target patterning on percep-
tions of speed or trajectory, other similarly designed 
and powered experiments do not. What’s more, 
these experiments take place in carefully controlled 
lab situations, generally using human predators 
and highly artificial stimuli. We have little idea 
whether dazzle effects occur in any natural situ-
ations, or even if they plausibly could. This is a 
moderately concerning situation which may be 
resolved by further systematic experiments exam-
ining outcomes over a wide range of conditions: 
however, we suggest that a current priority should 

DAZZLE CAMOUFLAGE
217
be experimental investigation of potential natural 
dazzle systems in non-human animals.
There is a disconnect between the large errors 
that the modelling of How & Zanker (2014) predicts, 
and the relatively small errors observed in behav-
ioural studies. One explanation for this is that human 
observers use higher-level object-tracking mechan-
isms to overcome the illusions predicted by the 
lower-level modelling of How & Zanker. Future 
work may be able to investigate this, and examine 
whether there are ways coloration can disrupt object-
tracking processes.
The issue of prey speed requires urgent attention. 
It may be that to produce meaningful dazzle effects 
in natural predator–prey interactions, many prey 
simply cannot move across their predator’s visual 
fields fast enough. Using their observed effect sizes 
to calculate the ‘real-world’ impact of dazzle cam-
ouflage, Scott-Samuel et al. (2011) estimated that a 
rocket-propelled grenade fired from 70 m away at a 
vehicle painted with dazzle patterns and moving at 
90 km/h would make a targeting error of about 90 cm 
compared to firing at a uniformly painted vehicle, 
indicating some military application. It would be 
highly beneficial to extend this analysis and formally 
model different dazzle effects in natural predator–
prey interactions, incorporating prey pattern pheno-
type, movement speed, typical attack distances, 
predator contrast sensitivity and acuity, and the 
magnitude of predator error that would give prey a 
chance to escape. The results should give experi-
mental investigations in the lab and field indication 
of whether dazzle effects observed are likely to 
translate to predator–prey interactions in the wild, 
and whether observational studies of predator 
attacks are likely to involve dazzle effects.
If high-quality examples of dazzle in prey species 
could be established, then examining the coevolution 
of predator counter-adaptations may yield poten-
tially fascinating insights. Possibilities include strat-
egies to target and capture dazzle prey while they are 
motionless, or changes to motion detection mechan-
isms. Future work should also look to investigate the 
relationship between dazzle camouflage and other 
anti-predator strategies. For example, it may be 
possible that aposematic patterns featuring repeti-
tive patterns might also function as motion dazzle.
We still see a benefit of using the controlled set-
ting of humans targeting artificial prey in virtual 
computer spaces to explore some outstanding ques-
tions. If an experimental situation demonstrates a 
benefit to a given pattern in producing a dazzle 
effect, then we think it would be useful to explore 
the robustness of this effect following perturbations 
to the experimental setting. This would let us 
explore whether dazzle patterns can be designed so 
that they work effectively over a range of prey 
speeds, prey motion types, prey sizes, prey shapes, 
background types, and orientations of the prey to 
the predator. Such knowledge might identify likely 
candidate situations for finding naturally occurring 
dazzle markings, and also help identify likely forms 
for these markings. One outstanding issue in par-
ticular is the role of colour in dazzle camouflage; 
some dazzle ships and potentially dazzling animals 
are coloured, but thus far experimental studies have 
mainly used achromatic stimuli (Hall et al., 2016 is 
the exception).
Previous computer-based explorations have 
involved the artificial prey being in motion but the 
predator being effectively stationary relative to 
the background against which the prey are seen. 
Relaxing this restriction would not only be biologic-
ally realistic for mobile predators but might allow 
exploration of whether predators can ameliorate 
the effects of dazzle patterns in their prey by control 
of their own speed and search path trajectory.
A final thought is on the potential for dazzle cam-
ouflage in taxa where it has not yet been investi-
gated. Flocking birds should be ideal beneficiaries of 
camouflage in motion, being fast, highly mobile, 
living in an open environment, and pursued by 
visually oriented predators. Examples of patterns 
commonly implicated in dazzle, such as high-contrast 
repeating stripes, are not common but do exist in a 
few species such as the red-bellied woodpecker 
Melanerpes carolinus. Alternatively, given the lack of 
clarity on what make a dazzle phenotype, it may be 
that we are looking for the wrong thing. Similarly, it 
will also be worth exploring links between visual 
dazzle and camouflage of movement in other sensory 
modalities. Acoustic camouflage of movement in 
moths is likely a common adaptation: for example, the 
shape of the luna moth’s tails has been demonstrated 

218
AVOIDING ATTACK
to reflect incoming bat echolocation calls in a complex 
way that depends on where in the cycle the moth’s 
wingbeat is (Lee & Moss, 2016). Averaging the centre 
of the echo over a period of flight, a likely heuristic 
used by bats to calculate where the moth is, pro-
duces an estimated point behind the abdomen of 
the moth, in other words, a  dazzle effect. This is 
likely to lead to targeting errors; indeed brown bats 
capture 47 per cent more luna moths when they 
have had their tails ablated (Barber et al., 2015).

Avoiding Attack: The Evolutionary Ecology of Crypsis, Aposematism, and Mimicry. Second Edition. Graeme D. Ruxton,  
William L. Allen, Thomas N. Sherratt, & Michael P. Speed, Oxford University Press (2018). © Graeme D. Ruxton,  
William L. Allen, Thomas N. Sherratt, & Michael P. Speed 2018. DOI: 10.1093/oso/9780199688678.001.0001
CHAPTER 13
Thanatosis
When physically restrained, many animals adopt 
a  relatively immobile state that can last after the 
physical constraint has been released. Sometimes 
in  ­vertebrates such a behaviour involves tongue 
protrusion, and setting the eyes wide open, very 
reminiscent of a dead individual. This phenomenon 
has therefore been variously called death feigning, 
animal hypnosis, tonic immobility, playing dead, and 
playing possum (after the exemplary practitioners, 
­opossums—see Gabrielsen & Smith, 1985). But the 
most common term used in the recent scientific 
­literature to describe this behaviour is thanatosis.
This phenomenon is widespread taxonomically, 
and has been well known for a long time: indeed 
Darwin discussed it in a posthumously published 
essay (see Romanes, 1883). However, for reasons we 
discuss later, it has not been the subject of intensive 
study, and so there was insufficient material to jus-
tify more than a few paragraphs in our previous 
edition. Happily, this has changed, and there has 
been more purpose-designed study of this phenom-
enon in the last 15 years than in all the previous 
time since Darwin. As such, we feel thanatosis justi-
fies a full chapter in this edition, although, unsur-
prisingly, we also highlight substantial areas of 
uncertainty in the current state of knowledge.
13.1  Introduction and overview  
of the chapter
It is quite difficult to obtain a clear and unambiguous 
definition of thanatosis. Thanatosis is an unlearned 
reflex action, not a proxy for ‘fearfulness’ (Rogers & 
Simpson, 2014). In general, we see it as distinct 
from immobility used to reduce the risk of detec-
tion or tracking by a predator, since it acts later in 
the sequence of a predation event (generally after 
the prey has been detected by the predator, and 
most often after the predator has actually made 
physical contact with the prey). However, physical 
contact does not seem an absolute requirement for 
the triggering of thanatosis; sometimes simple 
detection of a predator in circumstances that sug-
gest strong and imminent threat of attack, and lack 
of avenue for escape, can be sufficient (see Vogel, 
1950, for reports of this in various birds). The onset 
of thanatosis is rapid and animals can remain in an 
immobilized state from seconds to hours (Rogers & 
Simpson, 2014). Although some instances of thana-
tosis are strongly suggestive of mimicry of death, 
some are less so and (as we will explore in sec-
tion 13.3) there is potential for thanatosis to offer 
protection from predators through other mechan-
isms than feigning death. However, except for 
some very specialist situations considered in sec-
tion 13.3.2, the function of thanatosis does appear 
to be employed as a means of protection from pred-
ators. Thanatosis is widely interpreted as a last-
resort defence against predation after active 
physical resistance has proved unsuccessful and 
fleeing is impossible. The lack of movement is sug-
gested to inhibit further attack by the predator, and 
reduce the perceived need of the predator to con-
tinue to attack or constrain the prey.
13.2  Distribution
Thanatosis is very widely but sparsely reported: in 
the vertebrates it has been reported in mammals, 
birds, reptiles (e.g. Lygosoma skinks, Patel et al., 
2016, and Erythrolamprus miliaris water snakes, 
Muscat et al., 2016), amphibians (e.g. Incilius toads, 

220
AVOIDING ATTACK
Sanchez Paniagua & Abarca, 2016) and fish (recently, 
e.g. the Brazilian seahorse Hippocampus reidi, Freret-
Meurer et al., 2017); in the invertebrates it has 
been suggested to occur in at least crabs, lobsters, 
stick insects, spiders, butterflies, stoneflies, water-
scorpions, cicadas, crickets, mites, beetles, damselfly 
larvae, ants, bees, and wasps (see Cassill et al., 2008 
for a partial list and references). The precise distri-
bution is difficult to be certain of, even within a well-
studied vertebrate group. For example, it seems 
relatively prevalent amongst snakes but even the 
number of families involved remains unclear 
(Gregory et al., 2007). One problem here is that 
(unlike most of the other tactics discussed for 
avoiding attack in this volume) there are normally 
no specialist morphological adaptations, so the 
behaviour needs to be observed as it occurs. The 
behaviour is very much a last line of defence after 
the predator has made physical contact with the 
prey. As such, its observation is logistically challen-
ging in the field (with natural predation being gen-
erally unpredictable in time and space, and often 
deterred by human presence) and ethically challen-
ging for staged encounters involving vertebrate 
prey. Finally, the use of this tactic often seems vari-
able within even a local population, and very patch-
ily distributed at higher levels of organization (so 
failure to observe it in most species of a given fam-
ily would not inspire confidence in its likely absence 
from the remaining species).
The widespread but sparsely reported (and likely 
under-reported) prevalence of thanatosis makes it 
very difficult to speculate on underlying patterns to its 
taxonomic distribution. It is tempting to suggest that it 
might be more prevalent in snakes, for example, 
because snakes in general are not especially fleet of 
movement (reducing the efficacy of fleeing as an 
alternate strategy), and having an elongate body per-
haps facilitates contact by a predator. However, such 
speculations are at this stage no more than ‘just so’ 
stories. Because thanatosis requires no anatomical 
specializations there seems likely often to be little 
cost to carrying the potential to use this last-ditch 
defence. As will be discussed in section  13.6, we 
expect the likelihood of prey displaying this trait to 
be more closely linked to traits of the predator than 
the prey—specifically, we would expect it to be 
more commonly implemented against generalist 
predators with a broad diet, and predators that 
encounter prey simultaneously or in quick succes-
sion (or which are otherwise constrained in how 
much time they can devote to ensuring that con-
tacted prey are dead or permanently immobilized).
The widespread but sparse nature of its taxo-
nomic distribution suggests that it has evolved a 
large number of times. This seems more plausible to 
us than explanations based on one evolution and 
multiple losses of the trait. Also, thanatosis seems 
relatively simple to evolve, in that it is defined in 
the main by a lack of behaviour and does not 
involve specialist anatomical adaptations. Given 
multiple independent evolutions, one might expect 
considerable variation in the form and usage of 
thanatosis. There does seem strong evidence for 
such variation and this (together with the issues of 
almost certain under-reporting discussed above) 
makes generalizations challenging. However, there 
is evidence (discussed in later sections) that thana-
tosis is partly under genetic control, and is often 
consistent within an individual but variable within 
and between populations in the form and frequency 
of the behaviour.
Individual consistency can often be linked to 
other traits. As an example of this, Krams et al. 
(2014) found high repeatability in aspects of thana-
tosis in a laboratory-reared population of the meal-
worm Tenebrio molitor. They found that individuals 
with a higher metabolic rate had both a longer 
latency to enter thanatosis and a tendency to remain 
in that state for a shorter time. This complex of 
traits was repeatable within an individual, not only 
over time but also across environmental contexts. 
Similarly, Edelaar et al. (2012) exposed individuals of 
two avian species (yellow-crowned bishop Euplectes 
afer and tree sparrow Passer montanus) to mounts of 
predatory birds placed near their home cage and to 
repeated induction of thanatosis by human handling. 
Duration of thanatosis was found to be consistent 
within an individual, and low durations were correl-
ated with higher activity rates in the presence of 
the mount. The authors interpret these two traits as 
being indicative of general ‘boldness’.
Suzuki et al. (2013) found lower thanatosis 
responses to physical restraint in Bengalese finches 

THANATOSIS
221
(Lonchura striata var. domestica) compared to the 
white-backed munia (L. striata), from which they 
were domesticated some 250 years ago. Bengalese 
finches also had lower corticosterone levels. The 
authors interpret these results as being suggestive 
that artificial selection during domestication has led 
to reduced fear responses. Evidence that thanatosis is 
linked to fear response also comes from the study of 
Fijian ground frogs (Platymantis vitiana) by Narayan 
et al. (2013). Frogs were exposed to a range of 
experimental manipulations. Those manipulations 
that experimenters expected to simulate the highest 
levels of predatory threat induced both higher levels 
of circulating corticosterone and stronger thanatosis 
responses in response to standardized handling.
There is evidence of variation in thanatosis over 
ontogeny. As a generality, those life-history classes 
less able to use fleeing or active resistance as defences 
are more likely to use thanatosis. Thus, there is a ten-
dency in some taxa at least for it to be associated with 
early life-history stages. Cassill et al. (2008) report that 
day-old workers of the fire ant Solenopsis invicta 
responded to encounters with workers from another 
nest by exhibiting thanatosis, whereas week-old 
workers responded with aggression. This was inter-
preted in terms of the still-soft exoskeleton of the day-
old workers rendering their ability to inflict damage 
on alien workers very low, but their vulnerability to 
damage being high. Thanatosis appears effective in 
this case, as day-old workers were four times more 
likely to survive such an encounter than week-old 
individuals encountering similar aliens. Interestingly, 
the authors speculate that death feigning is effective 
because aggression between workers from two differ-
ent colonies often involves multiple individuals, and 
there may be selection to attack as many as possible, 
but this may come at the expense of failing to ensure 
that immobile individuals are actually dead.
A recent study by Matsumura et al. (2017) using 
red flour beetles, Tribolium castaneum and T. confu­
sum, demonstrated that a behavioural correlation 
between thanatosis duration and walking distance 
can decouple across life stages. They found a nega-
tive correlation of traits in adults of both the spe-
cies, but not in larvae of either species. The authors 
suggest that the negative correlation between tonic 
immobility and walking is decoupled across life 
stages, contrasting with the phenotypic correlations 
between behavioural traits that have been found to 
be maintained from larvae to adults in insects that do 
not have a pupal stage. Metamorphosis is, therefore, 
suggested to have the potential to change trade-offs 
between behavioural traits, including the duration 
of thanatosis.
Linkages with other life-history traits have also 
been observed. For example, Gregory & Gregory 
(2006) reported that gravid garter snakes (Thamnophis 
elegans) were much more likely to show thanatosis 
than similar-sized non-gravid females. The authors 
put this down to impaired locomotive ability and 
flexibility of gravid individuals making fleeing or 
resisting less effective as alternative tactics. Other 
traits that have been shown in some species to influ-
ence thanatosis include sex, size, conditions during 
rearing, and sexual history; these effects can generally 
be interpreted in terms of shifting costs and benefits 
of the tactic and so will be discussed more fully in 
section 13.4. However, in keeping with an emerging 
theme in thanatosis, these life-history correlates can 
be explained in individual species or populations, but 
are not seen universally across species.
13.3  Form: the mechanisms involved
There are a number of mechanisms by which thana-
tosis might confer protection from predators; these 
are enumerated by Miyatake et al. (2009), and are 
potentially complementary.
Firstly, it might actually be death feigning, where 
the predator has an aversion to long-dead prey 
(which might be adaptive because of risk from toxins 
produced by microbial spoilage). Here thanatosis 
causes the predator to mistakenly reject a live indi-
vidual because it is misidentified as a long-dead 
individual.
Secondly, it might be that thanatosis reduces the 
predator’s ability to localize the prey individual, 
relative to a moving individual. This may be at least 
part of the explanation in cases where prey first of 
all drop from a plant to the ground (or otherwise 
physically distance themselves from a potential 
predator) and then adopt thanatosis.
Thirdly, thanatosis might serve as a physical 
defence against predators that swallow prey whole. 

222
AVOIDING ATTACK
For example, this might work by thanatosis involv-
ing assuming a posture that makes swallowing more 
difficult or impossible. Alternatively, it could be com-
bined with production of post-ingestion aversive 
secretions that trigger regurgitation, if the posture 
minimizes injury during the processes of ingestion 
and regurgitation. There is evidence in support of the 
first of these in Honma et al. (2006). Evidence for the 
second of these comes from reports in Toledo et al. 
(2010) of frogs swallowed whole by snakes and sur-
viving after subsequent regurgitation.
The study of Honma et al. is particularly interest-
ing; it involved staged interactions between the 
pygmy grasshopper Criotettix japonicus and poten-
tial predators. When faced with a gape-limited frog 
predator the grasshopper adopted a pose that 
effectively increased its functional body size and 
exposed spines. These adaptations make the grass-
hopper impossible to swallow for smaller frogs that 
could manage to swallow it in the prey’s normal 
posture. For slightly larger frogs, ultimate swallow-
ing was only possible after time-consuming manipu-
lation to position the prey correctly in the mouth, 
hence making eating this prey less attractive from a 
foraging rate efficiency perspective. In this regard, 
it is significant that a field-based aspect of Honma 
et al.’s study found that larger frogs that could con-
sume the grasshoppers undergoing thanatosis in the 
lab did not consume them in a field situation where 
such prey were available in abundance. In another 
interesting aspect, the grasshoppers never showed 
this behaviour in response to bird, spider, or mantid 
predators that do not need to consume their prey 
whole. In an earlier study, Moore & Williams (1990) 
observed stonefly nymphs Pteronarcys dorsata curl 
up into a ball in a way that projected spines and pre-
vented ingestion by fish predators. Curling into a 
ball removes vulnerable body parts from exposure to 
the predator. Examples of prey postures where pred-
ators are presented only with an armoured shell are 
widely known, from insects such as pill-bugs all the 
way to large vertebrates like the armadillos.
Returning to possible underlying mechanisms of 
thanatosis, it may be that some predators have a 
relatively hard-wired sequence of actions that they 
need to perform during prey capture. In this case, 
thanatosis might subvert this by denying the preda-
tor successful completion of a subjugation action. 
This, in turn, might prevent them from initiating 
later actions of the predation sequence; and, indeed, 
cause them to break off and abandon the interaction 
with that particular prey item.
It could be that thanatosis is an aposematic signal 
that the prey is chemically or otherwise well defended, 
and thus unattractive as prey. However, the one study 
to test this possibility found no evidence that this was 
the case (Miyatake et al., 2009).
If moving prey are more salient to a predator’s 
senses, then it may be that thanatosis is a means of 
deflecting a predator’s attention to alternative prey 
in a situation where prey are exposed simultan-
eously to the predator. Strong evidence for this was 
presented by Miyatake et al. (2009), who also 
pointed out that this mechanism was not the only 
one acting in their study system, since thanatosis 
also offered protection when prey were offered sin-
gly to the predator (see fuller discussion of this 
study in section 13.3.1). More generally, thanatosis 
might be effective in any circumstances where there 
is a cost to predators in time invested in making 
sure that a captured individual is definitely dead 
(or at least immobilized). The most obvious circum-
stance for this to occur is when a predator has 
potential to capture several prey items but only a 
short period of time when those prey are available; 
for example, when a predator discovers a group of 
prey that take some time to flee to cover.
In terms of what goes on in the prey animal itself, 
a number of physiological mechanisms can be 
involved in controlling thanatosis. In vertebrates, 
reduced breathing rates, bradycardia, salivation, 
defecation, and urination are common during than-
atosis, and are consistent with mediation by the 
parasympathetic nervous system (Rogers & Simpson, 
2014). In insects, ventilatory movements of the abdo-
men strongly decrease during thanatosis, but see 
Rogers & Simpson (2014) for some species-specific 
mechanisms.
13.3.1  What is the evidence that thanatosis 
offers protection from predators?
Krams et al. (2013a) found the resting metabolic rate 
(RMS) was consistent within individuals of a labora-
tory population of yellow mealworm beetles Tenebrio 
molitor. High metabolic rate was correlated with 

THANATOSIS
223
both longer latency to show thanatosis in response 
to experimental jarring with the substrate (caused 
by experimenters striking the experimental arena) 
and reduced duration of thanatosis. After RMR and 
thanatosis were measured, beetles were moved to 
another arena into which an insectivorous bird was 
introduced. High-RMS individuals were preferen-
tially consumed by the bird. The authors interpret 
these results in terms of high RMS being part of a 
‘bold’ personality type that will experience increased 
predation risk (because they exploit thanatosis less 
strongly) but obtained benefits in terms of higher 
activity and thus increasing mating opportunity. 
These authors subsequently observed essentially 
similar results with a nocturnal predator, the brown 
rat (Rattus norvegicus; Krams et al., 2013b). For both 
predators, the beetles could likely use vibrations 
through the substrate to warn of danger of preda-
tion. Further evidence of thanatosis offering insects 
protection from predators is discussed in later  
sections. Specifically, Miyatake et al. (2009) and 
Nakayama & Miyatake (2010b) bred lines of the red 
flour beetle Tribolium castaneum for either longer 
duration and higher frequency thanatosis (the L 
strain) or shorter and less frequent (the S strain), and 
demonstrated that L strain individuals suffered less 
from predation in an experimental arena with an 
Adanson’s house jumping spider Hasarius adansoni.
13.3.2  Does thanatosis ever function in 
contexts other than against predators?
Hansen et al. (2008) demonstrated that males of the 
spider Pisaura mirabilis that entered a state of thana-
tosis during mating were more successful in gain-
ing copulations and gained longer copulations than 
those males that did not. Sexual cannibalism is rare 
in this species, and when it does happen it occurs 
before the part of the mating sequence when thana-
tosis is manifest—so it is unlikely that this risk is the 
main driver of thanatosis. Males begin mating by 
offering the female a nuptial gift. While the female 
consumes this gift, the male initiates sperm transfer. 
The female can, however, interrupt copulation, 
after which she can either return to eating or depart 
with the gift (ending the copulation). Some males 
responded to such interruption by entering a state 
of thanatosis, which was associated with higher 
probability of the female returning to feeding, after 
which the male left thanatosis and returned to 
copulating. This can happen several times during a 
copulation session. The authors speculate that there 
must also be a cost to thanatosis to explain variation 
in its expression between males. They speculate that 
this cost might be heightened vulnerability to attack 
by females, energetic cost of maintaining the pose, or 
risk of injury if they are dragged across the substrate 
in this pose by a fleeing female; however, as yet there 
has been no investigation of these alternatives. 
Previous studies had briefly reported that male man-
tids of the species Mantis religiosa freeze after mating 
to avoid post-copulatory cannibalism by the female 
(Lawrence 1992), and robber fly females of the spe-
cies Efferia varipes behave similarly to avoid harass-
ment by males (Dennis & Lavigne 1976).
Another instance of thanatosis in mating behav-
iours is described by Shreeve et al. (2000) in their 
observations of European Lepidoptera. They found 
that death feigning was used in the final part of a 
mate-rejection behavioural sequence by non-receptive 
female butterflies of the Satyrinae of the Palaearctic. 
The females closed their wings and released them-
selves from the underlying substrate, following 
extreme male persistence. Shreeve et al. suggest that 
this behaviour might possibly be restricted to the 
tribes Elymiini and Maniolini, and that it could be 
related to female mating frequency, male mate-locat-
ing mechanisms, and the physical structure of habi-
tats where attempted mating occurs.
There is also highly suggestive evidence that at 
least two species of cichlid adopt a pose that appears 
subjectively to mimic a corpse falling through the 
water column and then lying inert on the substrate. 
The cichlid then appears to attract other fish that are 
interpreted as motivated to scavenge from the 
‘corpse’; such fish are then attacked by the cichlid that 
‘comes to life’ when a would-be scavenger swims 
close to their mouth (McKaye, 1981; Tobler, 2005). In 
both studies, this hunting tactic was only shown by 
adults, which McKaye speculates may be because 
juvenile fish of these species would be sufficiently 
small to be vulnerable to predation if they lay immo-
bile. A similar tactic involving apparently feigning 
illness or dying to draw potential prey closer has 
been reported in a shallow-water predatory grouper 
fish Mycteroperca acutirostris (Gibran, 2004).

224
AVOIDING ATTACK
Van Veen et al. (1999) discuss the use of thanato-
sis by gynes in the stingless bee Melipona beecheii. 
They discuss how surplus queens are continually 
produced but are subject to aggression from the 
workers and usually killed. It was noted that thana-
tosis appeared effective in stopping instances of 
worker aggression, although it was also noted that 
no gynes which showed this behaviour went on to 
successfully be accepted by the colony.
13.4  Evolutionary function: a cost/
benefit approach
The last section outlined potential benefits to thana-
tosis, but there are also likely to be costs. The same 
is likely to be true for alternative last-ditch  
anti-predator behaviours, such as struggling to break 
free and fleeing, or aggressively attacking the would-
be predator. Hence, we might expect the preva-
lence and strength of thanatosis to reflect conditions 
where the cost-benefit trade-off favours thanatosis 
over alternative behavioural tactics. As an example of 
this, Gyssels & Stoks (2005) found that thanatosis in 
larvae of the damselfly Ischnura elegans was more 
likely to be utilized in staged laboratory encounters 
with predators if an alternate anti-predator defence 
was negated by removal of lamellae, which are given 
up through autotomy when grasped by a predator. In 
general, variation and plasticity in thanatosis could 
be driven by evolution since (as we have shown pre-
viously) aspects of this behaviour are heritable. We 
will leave responsiveness to environmental factors to 
the next section, and here focus more on identifying 
the potential trade-offs that affect variation in the 
expression of thanatosis.
Nakayama & Miyatake (2010b) bred lines of the 
red flour beetle Tribolium castaneum for either longer 
duration and higher frequency thanatosis (the L 
strain) or shorter and less frequent (the S strain). 
They then demonstrated that males of the L strain 
suffered less from predation in an experimental 
arena with a spider, but had reduced mating suc-
cess in a predator-free environment. This latter 
effect was interpreted by the authors as individuals 
of the L strain being overall less active and thus 
encountering females less frequently.
Nakayama & Miyatake (2010a) similarly bred L 
and S lines of the adzuki bean beetle Callosobruchus 
chinensis and found that the L strain had reduced 
activity, which translated into reduced mating suc-
cess in males but not females. This is likely because 
male mating success is more dependent on fre-
quency of encounters and thus on activity levels. 
They suggest that activity levels might explain the 
fact that in Nakayama & Miyatake (2009) these 
authors reported that L individuals had higher lon-
gevity, larger egg size, and faster development. They 
suggest that reduced activity may conserve energy, 
increasing longevity, and allowing diversion of 
energy to larger eggs that take less time to develop.
Kuriwada et al. (2010) reported that mass rearing 
over 71 generations in the sweet potato weevil Cylas 
formicarius caused no change in the duration of 
thanatosis. This is surprising, since there was no 
predation pressure during these 71 generations. 
The authors speculate that one reason for lack of 
selection pressure on thanatosis might be because 
with a high abundance of both food and mates, any 
cost of reduced activity through thanatosis is trivial. 
We would also add that thanatosis may have been 
triggered very infrequently in any individuals dur-
ing these 71 generations, and there may be little 
expressed cost in retaining the capacity to perform 
thanatosis in situations where the behaviour is sel-
dom triggered.
Ohno & Miyatake (2007) argued that for the 
adzuki bean beetle flying away and death feigning 
are two alternative tactics that are used in response 
to predators. They artificially bred lines for long or 
short duration of thanatosis, and found that those 
bred for long-duration death feigning had weaker 
flying ability than those in the other line. Flying abil-
ity was measured in terms of how strongly an experi-
mentally dropped beetle influenced its downward 
trajectory (i.e., how far it landed from directly below 
its release point). Lines bred for higher (lower) flight 
ability showed correlated lower (higher) duration of 
thanatosis. The exact mechanism underlying this 
genetic correlation was not determined. The authors 
speculated that there may be competition for 
resources between investment in flight muscles and 
in reproduction, and highly reproductive individuals 
may thus have poor flying ability and separately (for 
reasons that are unclear to us) increased ability to sus-
tain thanatosis. Alternatively, they speculate that 
individuals that show a low propensity for thanatosis 

THANATOSIS
225
are more active and, thus, more likely to find a means 
of escape from the rearing facility. Finally (and most 
plausibly to us) they suggest that thanatosis might be 
indirectly selected, despite a direct cost, because it is 
genetically correlated with other traits that confer 
higher fitness. In this regard, they cite Nakayama & 
Miyatake (2009) who found that longevity, emer-
gence rate, and egg size were all positively correlated 
with extent of thanatosis in the adzuki bean beetle.
Kiyotake et al. (2014) inferred potential costs to 
thanatosis of the red flour beetle, T. castaneum. These 
authors had previously demonstrated (Miyatake  
et al., 2009) that the frequency of predation by a jump-
ing spider, Hasarius adansoni, was significantly lower 
among beetles from lines that had been selected to 
show higher frequencies and longer durations of 
tonic immobility (L-type) than those with lower fre-
quencies and shorter durations of tonic immobility 
(S-type). However, they also found that the wild 
population showed a majority of S-type individuals. 
In the 2014 study, they demonstrated that L-type bee-
tles were significantly more sensitive to environmen-
tal stressors such as mechanical vibration and high or 
low temperatures.
In the sweet potato weevil, Kuriwada et al. (2011) 
found that mated females showed longer duration 
thanatosis than virgin individuals, something the 
authors interpreted in terms of a shifting trade-off 
between avoiding predation and being active to 
search for mates. They also found that older females 
decreased investment in thanatosis, which they 
again interpreted as reduced relative costs to preda-
tion in older individuals. Males, however, showed 
no change with age. The authors argued that there 
should be a strong effect of increasing age (and thus 
mortality risk from factors other than predation) in 
females that must not only mate, but also collect 
food for investment in eggs and find oviposition 
sites, versus males, who need only find mates. 
A previous study (Kuriwada et al., 2009) had found 
an effect of copulation in both males and females. 
The authors suggest that the difference between 
studies was that the earlier study tested thanatosis 5 
hours after the treatment (copulation or control) 
was imposed, increasing to 30 hours in the second 
study. The authors speculate that the long interval 
during which no females could be encountered may 
have caused perception of mating opportunity to 
decline in males of both treatments, making a treat-
ment effect difficult to pick up. Miyatake (2001b) had 
previously found that duration of thanatosis in the 
sweet potato weevil decreased with increased dur-
ation of starvation, and that this effect was stronger 
in males. This last result can be explained by males 
being more susceptible to mortality through starva-
tion than females. Miyatake (2001a) also observed a 
sex difference in thanatosis in the sweet potato wee-
vil. Both sexes showed a reduction in thanatosis at 
night, which Miyatake suggests might be because 
most of their predators are visual and so predation 
risk is generally lower at night. The effect was par-
ticularly strong in males, and the author interpreted 
this as a consequence of copulations occurring at 
night and males having more to gain from remaining 
active to obtain multiple matings than females.
Hozumi & Miyatake (2005) found that smaller 
aduki bean beetles showed shorter duration thana-
tosis, something the authors interpreted in terms of 
the shorter natural lifespan of smaller individuals. 
Nakayama & Miyatake (2009) bred adzuki bean bee-
tles for either long or short duration of thanatosis. 
Fecundity was the same in the two lines, but those 
with longer-duration thanatosis produced bigger 
eggs, that developed more quickly, were more likely 
to hatch, and produced longer-lived offspring. This 
was interpreted as thanatosis requiring less energetic 
investment than fleeing, the energy saved being 
diverted into reproduction. However, they note that 
their stocks experienced an abundance of food and 
potential mates. In other ecological circumstances, 
the energetic savings of thanatosis may have to be 
traded off against the lost time that could be devoted 
to finding food and mating. We explore ecological 
influences of thanatosis more fully in the next section.
13.5  Ecological considerations
Having interpreted plasticity and variation in than-
atosis in the framework of a cost–benefit trade-off, 
we here explore how that trade-off might be influ-
enced by aspects of the environment. For example, 
Miyatake et al. (2008) found that thanatosis occurred 
more strongly in two species of seed beetle (Calloso­
bruchus maculatus and C. chinensis) when individuals 
were kept at lower temperatures. The authors inter-
preted this as a consequence of higher temperatures 

226
AVOIDING ATTACK
allowing beetles to use fleeing as an alternative anti-
predator behaviour more readily. Similarly, Saxena 
(1957) found that woodlice (Armadillidium vulgare) 
showed stronger thanatosis at lower temperatures 
(presumably when the alternative anti-predatory tac-
tic of fleeing was less available) and when lighting 
was reduced (and so vulnerability to visual predators 
when stationary was reduced).
There is evidence that thanatosis is used flexibly 
according to how ecological circumstances influ-
ence its costs and benefits relative to alternative 
anti-predator behaviours (most obviously fleeing to 
a refuge). Arduino & Gould (1984) performed experi-
ments where domestic chicks (Gallus gallus domesti­
cus) were exposed to some stimulus for 15 seconds, 
then experienced 15 seconds of being manually 
restrained whilst still being exposed to the stimu-
lus. This induced thanatosis, the chick was released, 
and the duration of thanatosis measured. They 
found in numerous paired comparisons that thana-
tosis lasted longer in situations where it was 
thought that the chick would consider the chance of 
escape to be lower (e.g. when the stimulus was a 
hawk model facing the chick), compared to cases 
when this chance might be considered to be higher 
(when the hawk model was facing away from the 
chick). Ewell et al. (1981) demonstrated in a labora-
tory that rabbits (Oryctolagus cuniculus) decreased 
the duration of thanatosis as proximity to a human 
decreased or as proximity to their home cage 
increased. Gallup et al. (1971) found that chickens 
immobilized by manual restraints in the presence of 
a hawk model exhibited longer durations of thana-
tosis than chickens immobilized without the pres-
ence of the model. Hennig et al. (1976) found that 
thanatosis was of shorter duration in anole lizards 
that had been immobilized near bushes than those 
immobilized in the absence of nearby protective 
cover. O’Brien & Dunlap (1975) reported that crabs 
immobilized on a sandy substrate (in which they 
could seek cover by burying themselves) exhibited 
shorter durations of thanatosis than individuals 
similarly immobilized on a hard surface. Santos 
et al. (2010) reported that thanatosis experimentally 
induced in lizards by manual handling lasted 
longer if the human remained in close vicinity. 
Social environment can also affect expression of 
thanatosis. Odén et al. (2005) reported that female 
laying hens showed shorter duration thanatosis in 
response to standardized human handling if they 
had been kept in groups with males. The authors 
interpreted this as males acting as guards and 
lowering fear levels in the females.
Sometimes the environment is not always the 
best predictor of thanatosis behaviour, though. 
Farkas (2016) tested the hypothesis that Timema cris­
tinae stick insect individuals that were poorly cam-
ouflaged against their backgrounds were more 
likely to feign death. This would indicate that indi-
viduals respond to attacks in a plastic fashion, 
wherein thanatosis is dependent on the colour pat-
tern matching the host-plant species. Instead, 
Farkas found that smaller individuals were more 
likely to feign death than larger individuals, regard-
less of camouflage.
It may be that experience of previous environ-
mental conditions can influence thanatosis, as well 
as the currently experienced condition. Tojo (1991) 
found that common cutworm Spodoptera litura 
raised in crowded conditions in their 4th and 5th 
instar showed reduced periods of thanatosis in 
their 6th instar compared to those raised in isola-
tion. This might be seen as an adaptive response to 
a trade-off between avoiding predation and com-
peting for food resources. He also reported vari-
ation between natural populations in duration of 
thanatosis and demonstrated, in crossed experi-
ments, that this had a genetic component. In a study 
investigating the effects of human contact and intra-
specific social learning on thanatosis in guinea pigs, 
Cavia porcellus, de Lima Rocha et al. (2017) found 
that, firstly, handling and habituation did not pre-
vent tonic immobility responses in subjects. 
However, habituation increased the latency of 
thanatosis, while handling or habituation decreased 
the duration of the tonic immobility behaviour. 
Additionally, the cohabitation of unhabituated and 
habituated animals was found to reduce tonic 
immobility duration. The authors concluded that 
experience of human interactions can reduce 
experimenter fear in guinea pigs and that unhabit-
uated guinea pigs may learn not to fear experi-
menters by cohabitating with habituated guinea 
pigs. Experience and social environment can 
clearly be important in determining the occurrence 
of thanatosis.

THANATOSIS
227
The complexity of how thanatosis, as an anti-
predatory behaviour, interacts with other parts of 
an individual’s responses to the environment is 
shown by the study of Kuriwada et al. (2009) on the 
effect of copulations in the sweet potato weevil. In 
both sexes, encounters with individuals of the oppos-
ite sex where copulation was experimentally prohib-
ited did not affect duration of any subsequent 
thanatosis. However, an encounter leading to suc-
cessful insemination led to reduced thanatosis length 
in females but not males. Regardless of whether 
copulation lead to insemination, females reduced 
thanatosis after a single copulation, and males after 
multiple copulations. The authors interpret the 
behaviour of males as follows. Sex recognition abil-
ity is poor in this species and so copulation rather 
than simple encounter may be needed to suggest to 
males that there is high current availability of 
females. In such a situation activity to find females 
should be prioritized over avoiding predation. For 
females, copulations may signal high male activity 
and thus high risk of sexual harassment. Having 
allowed successful sperm transfer once, a female’s 
interest in the attentions of further males decreases 
and, thus, such females will be willing to accept 
higher predation risk in order to remain active to 
avoid unwanted male attentions.
The local predatory community is also part of the 
environment. Gyssels & Stoks (2005) found that 
thanatosis in larvae of the damselfly Ischnura elegans 
was more frequently induced experimentally in 
those from a pond in which fish predators are present 
compared to those from a pond where this important 
predatory group is absent. As well as demonstrating 
a genetic correlation in the laboratory between flight 
ability and duration of thanatosis discussed previ-
ously, Ohno & Miyatake (2007) also found such a 
negative correlation across 21 wild populations of 
the adzuki bean beetle C. chinensis. They speculate 
that one reason for this may be that the two alter-
nate tactics have differential effectiveness against 
different predators and the predator communities 
differ between populations. Additionally, or alter-
natively, they speculate that one tactic (perhaps fly-
ing away) may be both more effective and more 
costly, and populations that face lower predation 
pressure are selected to make more use of the 
cheaper but less effective tactic (thanatosis). We 
explore the predator’s side of thanatosis more fully 
in the next section.
13.6  Co-evolutionary considerations
There is increasing evidence that thanatosis does 
have a functional basis in reducing the probability 
of an attack by a predator ending in the prey’s 
death. We now turn to considering why thanatosis 
causes the predator to reduce its attacking. Our sug-
gestion is that the thanatosis might be effective 
against predators that commonly face a situation 
where they can subdue more than one prey item in 
quick succession. The predator faces a trade-off, 
since the more time it spends making certain that 
the first prey item is dead (or sufficiently injured 
that it cannot escape), the more likely it is that other 
nearby prey items will make good their escape. In 
this circumstance, thanatosis works by inducing the 
predator to switch prematurely from one prey item 
to the next, and the trade-off may make it maladap-
tive for the predator to invest time in making abso-
lutely sure that the first item is dead. In order to 
explore this, we suggest that it would be useful for a 
systematic study of anecdotal accounts of the obser-
vation of thanatosis to explore the percentage of 
occasions when the predator had the chance to attack 
another prey item soon after releasing the individual 
exhibiting thanatosis. Our prediction would be that 
this percentage will be high. Additionally, or alterna-
tively, it would be worth exploring whether individ-
uals of species exhibiting thanatosis occur commonly 
in groups. Thanatosis can still be effective for single 
prey individuals, if the predator concerned has 
evolved to release prey quickly because it often 
encounters prey in groups, against which quick 
release can aid in making multiple kills.
It may be that thanatosis is ineffective against 
predators that specialize on a given prey type and 
have thus been able to co-evolve effective responses 
to thanatosis. Gregory et al. (2007) demonstrated 
thanatosis in the grass snake Natrix natrix and 
hypothesized that this would only be an effective 
tactic against generalist predators that rarely 
encounter it. He thus suggested that grass snakes 
should less readily show thanatosis in those parts of 
its range shared by the snake specialist short-toed 
eagle Circaetus gallicus.

228
AVOIDING ATTACK
Evidence that thanatosis can be more effective 
when predators face multiple prey comes from the 
study of the red flour beetle T. castaneum attacked 
by Adanson’s house jumping spider H. adansoni in 
laboratory experiments. Miyatake et al. (2009) used 
two strains bred for long and short duration of 
thanatosis. When a long-strain individual was pre-
sented to a spider 38 per cent were killed, dropping 
to 9 per cent when presented at the same time as a 
short-strain individual. When presented in a pair 
alongside an individual of another species that does 
not show thanatosis, 28 per cent of long-strain and 
62 per cent of short-strain individuals were killed. 
When presented in pairs of a long-strain and short-
strain individual, the short-strain individual was 
killed every time. When presented in a group of five 
from each strain, predation rates were 79 per cent 
and 21 per cent for short- and long-strain individ-
uals respectively. These authors also reported that 
levels of potential chemical aversants were not 
strongly different between the two strains, so the 
differences in predation rates were likely to do with 
thanatosis and not to a correlated chemical defence.
13.7  Unresolved issues and  
future challenges
As already discussed, a substantial challenge 
remains to identify and then understand the taxo-
nomic prevalence of this behaviour. We suspect that 
thanatosis may often be observed by fieldworkers 
in studies of other aspects of animal biology, and 
these incidents go unreported. We would see value 
in raising awareness of thanatosis amongst biolo-
gists generally and providing some easy means for 
observations to be logged and collated. We suggest 
that a valuable way forward in this would be for 
collaboration between those scientists who have an 
interest in thanatosis to reach a consensus on such 
an endeavour. This consensus might involve agree-
ment on: 1.) a simple definition that would allow 
non-specialist biologists to identify incidents of 
thanatosis; 2.) the aspects of a thanatosis manifest-
ation that should ideally be recorded; 3.) design and 
maintenance of a single website where such data 
could be input; and 4.) vigorous and sustained 
effort to publicize the initiative widely among ani-
mal biologists. Such a consensus might usefully 
agree on how the data from which an effort could 
best be analysed. Based on the arguments presented 
in the last section, we would argue that it would be 
of great value to record information on the pred-
ators that induce the thanatosis as well as the prey 
that displays it. This would allow testing of predic-
tions made in this chapter about which predators 
are more likely than others to induce thanatosis. 
However, both prey and predator traits should 
influence the prevalence of thanatosis, and we 
would expect (for example) that the behaviour is 
more common in aggregated prey that have some 
capacity to flee upon discovery by a predator which 
can only capture those prey one at a time.
The last 15 years have seen a huge leap in our 
understanding of thanatosis (at least in insects) 
driven by some very effective laboratory studies. 
However, captive animals experience a very unnat-
ural (lack of) predation regime, have often experi-
enced this artificial world their whole life, and 
indeed may often be bred from stock that have been 
removed from natural predation pressures for gen-
erations. In most studies thanatosis is induced by 
humans rather than a natural predator. There is a 
strong need for us to find systems in which we can 
study thanatosis in the wild. Ever-improving tech-
nology involving tracking animals and on-board 
cameras should be a powerful weapon in such an 
endeavour. Head-mounted cameras that allow 
predators of the size of a domestic cat to hunt for 
prey unimpeded are now very cheaply and widely 
available.
Laboratory studies have also highlighted behav-
ioural, physiological, and life-history correlates of 
thanatosis, and we would benefit now from finding 
a suitable model system in which to explore whether 
similar relationships can be found under naturally 
occurring conditions.
There is still an important place for laboratory 
study, and here—for example—we would encour-
age an increased focus on how thanatosis influences 
predators’ subsequent behaviours. It might be, 
again, that there is a place for advanced technology 
here. An attraction of remote-controlled robotic 
simulated prey is that the form and extent of thana-
tosis can be manipulated whilst controlling all 
potentially confounding variables, in a way that is 
very difficult in experiments with living prey.

Avoiding Attack: The Evolutionary Ecology of Crypsis, Aposematism, and Mimicry. Second Edition. Graeme D. Ruxton,  
William L. Allen, Thomas N. Sherratt, & Michael P. Speed, Oxford University Press (2018). © Graeme D. Ruxton,  
William L. Allen, Thomas N. Sherratt, & Michael P. Speed 2018. DOI: 10.1093/oso/9780199688678.001.0001
Synthesis
In writing this new edition, we have thoroughly 
enjoyed exploring the most recent findings in the 
fascinating world of anti-predatory interactions and 
the diverse and sometimes astonishing related adap-
tations. The first section to this book was devoted to 
studies of crypsis, beginning with a consideration 
of background matching. Simply matching the back-
ground against which you are seen might seem at 
first pass to be the be all and end all of avoiding 
detection. The running theme throughout this chap-
ter, however, is that costs and constraints mean that 
perfect background matching is often not obtained, 
and this explains why organisms often utilize other 
mechanisms of reducing their ease of detection.
Turning to disruptive camouflage, it is clear from 
our discussion of empirical research that it is funda-
mentally tricky to demonstrate that disruption is 
occurring; this does not mean that disruption is 
unlikely to be widespread, just that the tell-tale hall-
marks of it are not as obvious as, for example, trans-
parency. We emphasize how the effectiveness of 
disruption depends on subverting the perceptual 
processing of predators; however, thus far predator 
counter-adaptations to disruption have not been 
identified. It may be that given all the other design 
requirements of efficient visual processing, it is fun-
damentally difficult for a predator to evolve to stop 
being fooled by disruption. As observers experience 
such a diversity of different visual inputs, they need 
to have very generalized processes for detecting and 
recognizing objects; it is that very need for general-
ity that disruption can exploit. We find the emer-
ging picture of a trade-off, whereby some markings 
might make initial detection more tricky through dis-
ruption, but then might also be more easily learnt, 
making subsequent detection easier, absolutely fas-
cinating. This might select for mass polymorphism 
of disruptive markings, or it might be that the range 
of scenarios that natural disruptively camouflaged 
animals occur in reduces the importance of this 
learning.
Considering next the class of countershading 
defences, we are likely on the cusp of really improv-
ing our empirical understanding. Fish that counter-
shade adaptively over relatively short timescales in 
response to the local light environment are a really 
fruitful experimental resource and have already 
been used effectively to test between alternative 
mechanisms that might select for countershading. 
Our ability to generate computer images with dif-
ferent types of countershading that can be used to 
test ease of detection by humans is also growing 
ever more sophisticated—it would seem not too dif-
ficult to extend this to other types of predators 
interacting with computer screens or even with arti-
ficial 3D objects (3D printers might be a great tool 
for scientists in this regard). It seems unlikely to us 
that fixed countershading often offers high-quality 
camouflage, because in order to really work per-
fectly the organism must be suitably oriented to the 
direction of the light and the light levels must be 
just so; this is a very big ask for almost all organisms 
except under rather specialist circumstances. How­
ever, countershading does offer a relatively cheap 
defence adaptation that goes some way to prevent-
ing, or reducing the likelihood of, detection. Addi­
tionally, or alternatively, countershading might 
aug­ment camouflage generated mainly by back-
ground matching and disruption—the relation-
ships between countershading and other forms of 
camouflage are currently unexplored.
With regards to transparency and silvering, we 
believe there is still more to learn about the physi-
ology of transparency. More investigations could 

230
AVOIDING ATTACK
explore what the exceptions to the pelagic transpar-
ency rule are, and why are they adaptive. There is 
still more to discover, also, about whether polariza-
tion change is ever important for detecting trans-
parent organisms. Quantifying and exploring just 
how much cryptic benefit is gained by silvering 
would also be of great value.
The second section of this book looked at adapta-
tions through which prey can avoid attack follow-
ing detection. It is key to recognize that the defences 
employed by one individual not only affect the out-
come of a given interaction between that individual 
and a predator but may also affect the subsequent 
behaviour of the predator—and thus the selection 
pressure it imposes on the defences of subsequently 
encountered prey. We focus on this a lot in the sec-
ondary defences chapters and in the mimicry chap-
ters—but it is also true more widely. Prey that make 
themselves harder for predators to detect may induce 
the predators to shift their attention more to other 
prey. We don’t dwell much on predator switching 
and predator–prey dynamics, but there is much to 
explore about population and ecosystem-level effects 
of anti-predator defences. We have to limit the book 
in some way or go mad, so we don’t talk about 
behavioural defences that don’t have a primarily 
sensory aspect; defences like fleeing, avoiding pred-
ators in time and space (e.g. by being nocturnal), 
and using protective microenvironments like bur-
rows. A truly integrated consideration of predator–
prey interactions would give more consideration to 
these.
In our chapter on aposematism, we discuss how 
there is now a suite of logically plausible scenarios 
that could explain the initial evolution of aposemat-
ism. Many of these scenarios also have empirical 
support for some of their key assumptions. What 
we don’t have is a good idea of the relative import-
ance of these scenarios either for particular cases or 
more generally across the multiple times that apo-
sematism has evolved. Further, it seems easy to  
construct scenarios where a change in the local 
environment can cause aposematism to be outcom-
peted by crypsis—so it may be that aposematic traits 
are usually extinction-prone—but this deserves fur-
ther investigation. In contrast to chemical defence, 
we see lots of comparative phylogenetic studies for 
ecological correlates of visual aposematic signals. 
This is simply a function of how easy to it to score 
an individual as having a visual aposematic signal 
(or not), versus scoring it as chemically defended 
or not.
Müllerian mimicry is a fascinating anti-predator 
defence to unpick, because the advantages of hav-
ing a shared warning signal rest so much on the 
cognition of predators. While the genetics of this 
defence are beginning to be understood, especially 
in Heliconius, and it has been the subject of some very 
large-scale field studies, there remain significant 
outstanding questions and potential controversies. 
In the future, there should be a greater consider-
ation of whether or not Müllerian mimicry benefits 
predators. Essentially, we tend to assume that pred-
ators are trying to categorize potential prey into 
those worth eating or not—just two categories. In 
such a situation, if all the unpalatable prey share a 
common signal than this would aid the predator’s 
decision-making—it only has to learn one signal. 
However, it is probably the case that predators are 
more sophisticated than this and that they actually 
want to evaluate just how bad different prey types 
are; some might be essentially unattractive in the 
present situation but would become attractive if 
alternative prey became scarce. If this is the case, 
Müllerian mimicry will no longer help the predator 
if it cannot easily tell two prey species that differed 
substantially in their unattractiveness apart, with 
one prey type a Batesian mimic in time of need. 
Whichever of these situations is truly the case, sci-
entists should be more interested in what predators 
actually learn about prey, acknowledging that it 
might be more sophisticated than if a prey item is 
simply tasty or not. We have some theory on this, 
but we need more experiments.
When we think about the evolution of mimicry 
(especially Müllerian mimicry) we need to remem-
ber that there might be selection on level of invest-
ment in defences as well as selection on appearance. 
Too much of the theory of evolution of Müllerian 
mimicry treats the aversiveness of the species 
involved as fixed. As a corollary of this, we need to 
measure the costs of the mimetic signal compared 
to the costs of other potential signals and the costs 
of producing the defence that is being signalled. 
Additionally, we currently treat the predators as 
very simple agents in our models—they either have 

Synthesis
231
perfect knowledge or they are sampling in order to 
learn about the prey options available to them. But 
for long-lived predators their information about a 
prey type will be subject to forgetting as well as 
learning, and we should maybe look at memory 
jogging, at how long memories are retained, and 
how accurately they are retained to get a fuller pic-
ture. The fact that Müllerian mimicry is assumed to 
involve learning by predators (rather than innate 
genetically encoded knowledge) suggests that the 
prey community available to a predator is dynamic—
to what extent do predators keep tabs on a prey 
type after they have had some aversive experiences 
with it? Future work is also needed to understand 
the transitions between different anti-predator strat-
egies, both generally and between Batesian and 
Müllerian mimicry specifically.
Considering elusiveness signalling, there is a 
sound theoretical base and a number of highly sug-
gestive case studies. However, there is currently lit-
tle empirical work detailing the costs and benefits 
to each party of signalling and responding to the 
signal. For the future, both the development of a 
laboratory system and large-scale observations of 
predator–prey interactions in the wild are necessary 
for really drilling down into the selective pressures 
that sometimes lead to prey signalling their elusive-
ness to predators.
The final section of the book focusses around 
deceptive anti-predatory defences and we first looked 
at the roles of Batesian mimicry and masquerade 
in predator–prey interactions. Our understanding 
of Batesian mimicry is currently dominated by 
visual mimicry, although there are known examples 
of mimicry in other modalities and even multi-
modal mimicry; we likely have lots of examples still 
to uncover. We also need to consider whether we 
can predict which modalities will be important for 
mimicry in different contexts, whether there are 
particular advantages to multimodal mimicry, and 
whether we would expect mimicry to be similarly 
accurate in all modalities. It should not be a surprise 
that some field studies fail to produce results con-
sistent with mimicry theory; it is unlikely that the 
selection pressure for mimicry would be consist-
ently strong over short temporal and spatial scales, 
where there will be fluctuations in both the prey 
and predator communities. Indeed, it would not be 
surprising if you ran the same experiment at the 
same field site in two consecutive years and got quite 
different results, because of stochastic variation in 
the communities under study. There is, therefore, a 
need to make our field studies more sophisticated. 
At the moment, we don’t seem to be embracing new 
technologies, maybe because most mimicry systems 
involve pretty small insects that are hard to track 
over long periods, but we could definitely have bio-
logging equipment on avian predators, and maybe 
some of the fish mimicry systems might lend them-
selves to on-board tracking of prey. In the same vein 
of using different predatory systems, we could learn 
more from exploring possible examples of Batesian 
mimicry and masquerade employed against inverte-
brate predators. Further work on the genetics of mas-
querade and invasions of mimics and models 
generally would also be of value, as would progress 
on separating taste and toxicity.
There is much current debate in the literature as 
to whether startle effects are best seen only as a 
response to unexpected strong sensory stimulation, 
or whether they can in some instances additionally 
represent misidentification of the prey as a preda-
tor. It should be possible to manipulate the experi-
ence of captive birds (for example) to explore the 
relative strengths of these alternatives. Developments 
in functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) 
and other brain activity mapping techniques may 
hold potential for illuminating this issue in the not-
too-distant future. An important point surrounding 
startle signals, we feel, is that whereas some strat-
egies are clearly pursued by certain kinds of spe-
cies, this does not seem to be the case for startle 
signals, although systematic comparative work has 
not been done.
Deflection of the predator’s point of attack on the 
body of a prey individual would appear to occur in 
a number of situations in ways that offer benefits to 
the prey. This deflection can also be linked to appear-
ance traits of the prey. The key underexplored issue 
in this topic is what costs if any having these deflec-
tive traits have on other defences—most obviously 
crypsis, but also mimicry and aposematism. We 
hope that someone will also find ways to exploit 
new technologies to help us explore the operation 
of deflection in natural environments, since this 
remains a very lab-based area of study.

232
AVOIDING ATTACK
The defence discussed in this book with perhaps 
the shakiest empirical foundation currently is daz-
zle camouflage. The idea that animal patterns might 
distort the perception of speed and trajectory has 
only recently been tested in a dozen studies, and 
these report highly inconsistent findings. While over-
all these strongly suggest that pattern can ‘camou-
flage in motion’ via dazzle effects, we do not yet 
really understand how they do so, under what cir-
cumstances dazzle effects occur, and whether any 
animals actually employ dazzle camouflage as a 
defence. This situation compares with the growth of 
our understanding of disruptive camouflage fol-
lowing Cuthill et al. (2005) and Merilaita & Lind 
(2005). These studies reported consistent disruptive 
effects of, for example, patterns that intersect target 
outlines, and allowed progress to be made on under-
standing perceptual processes underlying disruption. 
Hopefully our understanding of dazzle camou­
flage will likewise develop now that its plausibility 
has been confirmed.
Death-feigning research has boomed in the last 
decade, causing us to devote an entire chapter to 
the topic. We expect the next decade to allow this 
study to move out of the lab into observation of 
how this mechanism operates in the natural world. 
We also highlighted that there would be real benefit 
to finding some way to more effectively collate 
observations of the phenomenon—since its taxo-
nomic spread is very hard to evaluate in the absence 
of obvious anatomical correlates.
Identifying instances of many defensive strategies 
is very difficult. This is an issue we kept returning to 
in the chapters on disruptive camouflage, dazzle 
camouflage, aposematism, elusiveness, startle, and 
deflection. Even for defences that can readily identi-
fied, such as countershading and transparency, estab-
lishing the mechanism through which a particular 
case provides protection can be challenging.
It emerges as a consistent conclusion across chap-
ters that the quality of predator counter-adaptations 
to prey defences is perhaps weaker than might be 
naively expected. If increased foraging efficiency 
results, then why are predators not able to detect 
and recognize prey in spite of coloration that attempts 
to disguise status as suitable prey by subverting the 
sensory systems that evolve in part to detect prey? 
This emerged most strongly in the chapters on dis-
ruption, countershading, and Batesian mimicry, 
and we feel is one of the key outstanding issues in 
our understanding of sensory aspects of predator–
prey relations.
Humans are primarily visual, and this book is pri-
marily focussed on visual adaptations in part because 
researchers in this field are human (mostly ☺). We 
have strived to always remember other modalities 
throughout each chapter but there is a whole world 
of non-visual interaction between predators and 
prey yet to be fully uncovered. Sometimes our under-
standing based on vision can illuminate exploration 
of other modalities: for example, it seems highly 
likely that many alarm calls that are designed to 
incorporate the disruptive principles explored visu-
ally in Chapter 2.
If we had to distil down where we see most activ-
ity in the general field of predator–prey sensory 
interactions in the next decade then some of the key 
themes that stand out for future research on all of 
these intriguing defences are:
	•	 a need to embrace emerging technologies (espe-
cially to move out from the lab to the field);
	•	 a broadening of the perspective of predator learn-
ing and decision-making (to not only understand 
how predators react, but about the internal pro-
cesses that lead to that behavioural reaction); and
	•	 a general inclusion of many ecological factors in 
predictive models, so as to better reflect the com-
plexity of natural ecosystems and predator–prey 
interactions (moving from describing patterns of 
defensive strategies to predicting).
As in our previous edition, we are keen to discour-
age compartmentalization of thinking on the 
issues discussed in this book. Indeed, many prey 
may have evolved a portfolio of defences—for 
example, relying on crypsis but then employing 
startle or death-feigning when their cover is 
blown. Despite our chapter structuring, this field 
will make the greatest progression through devel-
oping an integrated framework that takes into 
consideration all the complexities of natural sys-
tems without viewing individual behaviours and 
interactions in isolation. Only when we consider 
the costs, benefits, evolution, maintenance, and 

Synthesis
233
distribution of anti-predatory strategies can we 
begin to understand the true role of the sensory 
mechanisms involved and make predictions about 
how they may influence behaviours, fitness, and 
future evolution of the species involved. We have 
seen in recent years how a broadening of outlook 
can develop understanding, radically in some cases, 
of the ways in which prey avoid attack by predators, 
and we hope that future studies will continue in this 
vein to discover yet more.

References
Abbott, K. R. (2010) ‘Background evolution in camouflage 
systems: A predator–prey/pollinator-flower game’, Journal 
of Theoretical Biology, 262(4), pp. 662–78.
Abram, P. K., Guerra-Grenier, E., Després-Einspenner, M.-L., 
Ito, S., Wakamatsu, K., Boivin, G., and Brodeur, J. (2015) 
‘An insect with selective control of egg coloration’, Current 
Biology, 25, pp. 2007–11.
Acuña, J. L. (2001) ‘Pelagic tunicates: why gelatinous?’, 
The American Naturalist, 158(1), pp. 100–7.
Adams, J. M., Kang, C., and June-Wells, M. (2014) ‘Are trop-
ical butterflies more colorful?’, Ecological Research, 29(4), 
pp. 685–91.
Adelson, E. H., and Bergen, J. R. (1985) ‘Spatiotemporal 
energy models for the perception of motion’, JOSA A, 
2(2), pp. 284–99.
Adelson, E. H., and Movshon, J. A. (1982) ‘Phenomenal 
coherence of moving visual patterns’, Nature, 300(5892), 
pp. 523–5.
Agrawal, A. A., and Fishbein, M. (2008) ‘Phylogenetic escal-
ation and decline of plant defense strategies’, Proceedings 
of the National Academy of Sciences, 105(29), pp. 10057–60.
Aguilar-Argüello, S., Díaz-Fleischer, F., and Rao, D. (2016) 
‘Motion-triggered defensive display in a tephritid fly’, 
Journal of Ethology, 34(1), pp. 31–7.
Akkaynak, D., Siemann, L. A., Barbosa, A., and Mäthger, 
L.  M. (2017) ‘Changeable camouflage: how well can 
flounder resemble the colour and spatial scale of sub-
strates in their natural habitats?’, Royal Society Open 
Science, 4(3), 160824.
Alatalo, R. V., and Mappes, J. (1996) ‘Tracking the evolu-
tion of warning signals’, Nature, 382(6593), pp. 708–10.
Alcock, J. (1970) ‘Punishment levels and response of white-
throated sparrows (Zonotrichia albicollis) to three kinds of 
artificial models and mimics’, Animal Behaviour, 18(V), 
pp. 733–9.
Alexandrou, M. A., Oliveira, C., Maillard, M., McGill, 
R. A. R., Newton, J., Creer, S., and Taylor, M. I. (2011) 
‘Competition and phylogeny determine community struc-
ture in Müllerian co-mimics’, Nature, 469(7328), pp. 84–8.
Allen, J. A. (1988a) ‘Frequency-dependent selection by pred-
ators’, Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B, 319(1196), pp. 485–503.
Allen, J. A. (1988b) ‘Reflexive selection is apostatic selec-
tion’, Oikos, 51(2), pp. 251–3.
Allen, J. A. (1989a) ‘Colour polymorphism, predation and 
frequency-dependent selection’, Genetics (Life Science 
Advances), 8, pp. 27–43.
Allen, J. A. (1989b) ‘Searching for search image’, Trends in 
Ecology & Evolution, 4, 361. 
Allen, J. A., and Cooper, J. M. (1985) ‘Crypsis and mas-
querade’, Journal of Biological Education, 19, pp. 268–70.
Allen, W. L., Baddeley, R., Cuthill, I. C., and Scott-Samuel, 
N. E. (2012) ‘A quantitative test of the predicted rela-
tionship between countershading and lighting environ-
ment.’, The American Naturalist, 180, pp. 762–76.
Allen, W. L., Baddeley, R., Scott-Samuel, N. E., and Cuthill, 
I. C. (2013) ‘The evolution and function of pattern diver-
sity in snakes’, Behavioral Ecology, 24, pp. 1237–50.
Allen, W. L., Cuthill, I. C., Scott-Samuel, N. E., and Baddeley, 
R. (2010) ‘Why the leopard got its spots: relating pattern 
development to ecology in felids’, Proceedings of the 
Royal Society of London B: Biological Sciences. doi: 10.1098/
rspb.2010.1734
Allen, W. L., and Higham, J. P. (2013) ‘Analyzing visual sig-
nals as visual scenes’, American Journal of Primatology, 
75(7), pp. 664–82.
Aluthwattha, S. T., Harrison, R. D., Ranawana, K. B., Xu, C., 
Lai, R., and Chen, J. (2017) ‘Does spatial variation in pre-
dation pressure modulate selection for aposematism?’, 
Ecology and Evolution, 7(18), pp. 7560–72.
Alvarez, F. (1993) ‘Alertness signalling in two rail species’, 
Animal Behaviour, 46(6), pp. 1229–31.
Alvarez, F., Sánchez, C., and Angulo, S. (2006) ‘Relationships 
between tail-flicking, morphology, and body condition in 
Moorhens’, Journal of Field Ornithology, 77(1), pp. 1–6.
Amézquita, A., Castro, L., Arias, M., González, M., and 
Esquivel, C. (2013) ‘Field but not lab paradigms support 
generalisation by predators of aposematic polymorphic 
prey: the Oophaga histrionica complex’, Evolutionary 
Ecology, 27(4), pp. 769–82.
Ancillotto, L., and Mori, E. (2017) ‘Adaptive significance of 
coat colouration and patterns of Sciuromorpha (Rodentia)’, 
Ethology Ecology & Evolution, 29, pp. 241–54.
235

236
REFERENCES
Andersson, M. (2015) ‘Aposematism and crypsis in a rodent: 
antipredator defence of the Norwegian lemming’, 
Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology, 69(4), pp. 571–81.
Anthony, P. (1981) ‘Visual contrast thresholds in the cod 
Gadus morhua L’, Journal of Fish Biology, 19(1), pp. 87–103.
Antonovics, J., and Kareiva, P. (1988) ‘Frequency-
dependent selection and competition: empirical 
approaches’, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of 
London Series B: Biological Sciences, 319(1196), pp. 601–13.
Appelle, S. (1972) ‘Perception and discrimination as a func-
tion of stimulus orientation: the “oblique effect” in man 
and animals’, Psychol Bull, 78(4), pp. 266–78.
Arbuckle, K., Brockhurst, M., and Speed, M. P. (2013) ‘Does 
chemical defence increase niche space? A phylogenetic 
comparative analysis of the Musteloidea’, Evolutionary 
Ecology, 27(5), pp. 863–81.
Arbuckle, K., and Speed, M. P. (2015) ‘Antipredator defenses 
predict diversification rates’, Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences, 112(44), pp. 13597–602.
Archetti, M., Döring, T. F., Hagen, S. B., Hughes, N. M., 
Leather, S. R., Lee, D. W., Lev-Yadun, S., Manetas, Y., 
Ougham, H. J., Schaberg, P. G., and Thomas, H. (2009) 
‘Unravelling the evolution of autumn colours: an inter-
disciplinary approach’, Trends in Ecology & Evolution, 24, 
pp. 166–73.
Arcizet, F., Jouffrais, C., and Girard, P. (2009) ‘Coding of 
shape from shading in area V4 of the macaque monkey’, 
BMC Neuroscience, 10, pp. 140.
Arduino, P. J., and Gould, J. L. (1984) ‘Is tonic immobility 
adaptive?’, Animal Behaviour, 32(3), pp. 921–3.
Arenas, L. M., and Stevens, M. (2017) ‘Diversity in warn-
ing coloration is easily recognized by avian predators’, 
Journal of Evolutionary Biology, 30(7), pp. 1288–1302.
Arenas, L. M., Troscianko, J., and Stevens, M. (2014) ‘Color 
contrast and stability as key elements for effective warn-
ing signals’, Frontiers in Ecology and Evolution, 2(25). 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fevo.2014.00025
Arenas, L. M., Walter, D., and Stevens, M. (2015) ‘Signal 
honesty and predation risk among a closely related 
group of aposematic species’, Scientific Reports, 5, 11021. 
doi:10.1038/srep11021
Arias, M., le Poul, Y., Chouteau, M., Boisseau, R., Rosser, 
N., Thery, M., and Llaurens, V. (2016a) ‘Crossing fitness 
valleys: empirical estimation of a fitness landscape asso-
ciated with polymorphic mimicry’, Proceedings of the 
Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 283(1829).
Arias, M., Mappes, J., Thery, M., and Llaurens, V. (2016b) 
‘Inter-species variation in unpalatability does not explain 
polymorphism in a mimetic species’, Evolutionary Ecology, 
30(3), pp. 419–33.
Aronsson, M., and Gamberale-Stille, G. (2008) ‘Domestic 
chicks primarily attend to colour, not pattern, when 
learning an aposematic coloration’, Animal Behaviour, 
75(2), pp. 417–23.
Aronsson, M., and Gamberale-Stille, G. (2012) ‘Colour and 
pattern similarity in mimicry: evidence for a hierarch-
ical discriminative learning of different components’, 
Animal Behaviour, 84(4), pp. 881–7.
Aronsson, M., and Gamberale-Stille, G. (2013) ‘Evidence 
of signaling benefits to contrasting internal color bound-
aries in warning coloration’, Behavioral Ecology, 24(2), 
pp. 349–54.
Aubier, T. G., Joron, M., and Sherratt, T. N. (2017) ‘Mimicry 
among unequally defended prey should be mutualistic 
when predators sample optimally’, The American 
Naturalist, 189, pp. 267–82.
Aubier, T. G., and Sherratt, T. N. (2015) ‘Diversity in Müllerian 
mimicry: the optimal predator sampling strategy explains 
both local and regional polymorphism in prey’, Evolution, 
69(11), pp. 2831–45.
Auko, T. H., Trad, B. M., and Silvestre, R. (2015) ‘Bird 
dropping masquerading of the nest by the potter wasp 
Minixi suffusum (Fox, 1899) (Hymenoptera: Vespidae: 
Eumeninae)’, Tropical Zoology, 28(2), pp. 56–65.
Aviezer, I., and Lev-Yadun, S. (2015) ‘Pod and seed defen-
sive coloration (camouflage and mimicry) in the genus 
Pisum’, Israel Journal of Plant Sciences, 62(1–2), pp. 39–51.
Ayala, F.J., and Campbell, C.A., (1974) ‘Frequency-dependent 
selection’, Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics, 5(1), 
pp. 115–38.
Badcock, J. (1970) ‘The vertical distribution of mesopelagic 
fishes collected on the SOND cruise’, Journal of the 
Marine Biological Association of the United Kingdom, 50(4), 
pp. 1001–44.
Bagnara, J. T., and Matsumoto, J. (2007) ‘Comparative anat-
omy and physiology of pigment cells in nonmammalian 
tissues’, in Nordlund, J. J., Boissy, R. E., Hearing, V. J., 
King, R. A., Oetting, W. S., and Ortonne, J.-P. (eds), The 
Pigmentary System: Physiology and Pathophysiology, 2nd 
edn, Hoboken, NJ: Wiley-Blackwell, pp. 11–59. 
Bailey, I. E., Muth, F., Morgan, K., Meddle, S. L. and Healy, 
S. D. (2015) ‘Birds build camouflaged nests’, The Auk, 
132(1), pp. 11–15.
Bain, R., Rashed, A., Cowper, V., Gilbert, F. S., and Sherratt, 
T. N. (2007) ‘The key mimetic features of hoverflies 
through avian eyes’, Proceedings of the Royal Society B: 
Biological Sciences, 274, pp. 1949–54.
Balogh, A. C. V., Gamberale-Stille, G., and Leimar, O. (2008) 
‘Learning and the mimicry spectrum: from quasi-Bates 
to super-Müller’, Animal Behaviour, 76, pp. 1591–9.
Balogh, A. C. V., Gamberale-Stille, G., Tullberg, B. S., and 
Leimar, O. (2010) ‘Feature theory and the two-step 
hypothesis of Müllerian mimicry evolution’, Evolution, 
64(3), pp. 810–22.

REFERENCES
237
Balogh, A. C. V., and Leimar, O. (2005) ‘Müllerian mimicry: 
an examination of Fisher’s theory of gradual evolutionary 
change’, Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological 
Sciences, 272(1578), pp. 2269–75.
Barber, J. R., Leavell, B. C., Keener, A. L., Breinholt, J. W., 
Chadwell, B. A., McClure, C. J., Hill, G. M., and Kawahara, 
A. Y. (2015) ‘Moth tails divert bat attack: evolution of 
acoustic deflection’, Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences, 112(9), pp. 2812–16.
Barbosa, A., Mathger, L. M., Buresch, K. C., Kelly, J., Chubb, 
C., Chiao, C. C., and Hanlon, R. T. (2008) ‘Cuttlefish cam-
ouflage: the effects of substrate contrast and size in evok-
ing uniform, mottle or disruptive body patterns’, Vision 
Res, 48(10), pp. 1242–53.
Barbosa, A., Mathger, L. M., Chubb, C., Florio, C., Chiao, 
C. C., and Hanlon, R. T. (2007) ‘Disruptive coloration in 
cuttlefish: a visual perception mechanism that regulates 
ontogenetic adjustment of skin patterning’, J Exp Biol, 
210(Pt 7), pp. 1139–47.
Barbour, M. A., and Clark, R. W. (2012) ‘Ground squirrel 
tail-flag displays alter both predatory strike and ambush 
site selection behaviours of rattlesnakes’, Proceedings of 
the Royal Society of London B: Biological Sciences, 279(1743), 
pp. 3827–33. doi: 10.1098/rspb.2012.1112
Barnard, C. (1984) ‘When cheats may prosper’, Producers 
and Scroungers: Strategies of Exploitation and Parasitism. 
London: Chapman & Hall, pp. 6–33.
Barnett, C. A., Bateson, M., and Rowe, C. (2007) ‘State-
dependent decision making: educated predators stra-
tegically trade off the costs and benefits of consuming 
aposematic prey’, Behavioral Ecology, 18(4), pp. 645–51.
Barnett, C. A., Skelhorn, J., Bateson, M. and Rowe, C. (2012) 
‘Educated predators make strategic decisions to eat 
defended prey according to their toxin content’, Behavioral 
Ecology, 23(2), pp. 418–24.
Barnett, J. B., and Cuthill, I. C. (2014) ‘Distance-dependent 
defensive coloration’, Current Biology, 24(24).
Barnett, J. B., Cuthill, I. C., and Scott-Samuel, N. E. (2017) 
‘Distance-dependent pattern blending can camouflage 
salient aposematic signals’, Proceedings of the Royal Society 
B-Biological Sciences, 284(1858).
Barnett, J. B., Redfern, A. S., Bhattacharyya-Dickson, R., 
Clifton, O., Courty, T., Ho, T., Hopes, A., McPhee, T., 
Merrison, K., and Owen, R. (2016a) ‘Stripes for warning 
and stripes for hiding: spatial frequency and detection 
distance’, Behavioral Ecology, 28(2), pp. 373–81.
Barnett, J. B., Scott-Samuel, N. E., and Cuthill, I. C. (2016b) 
‘Aposematism: balancing salience and camouflage’, 
Biology Letters, 12(8). doi: 10.1098/rsbl.2016.0335
Bateman, A. W., Vos, M. and Anholt, B. R. (2014) ‘When to 
defend: antipredator defenses and the predation sequence’, 
The American Naturalist, 183(6), pp. 847–55.
Bates, H. W. (1862) ‘Contributions to an insect fauna of the 
Amazon valley. Lepidoptera: Heliconidae.’, Transactions of 
the Linnean Society of London, 23, pp. 495–566.
Bateson, W. (1892) ‘The alleged “aggressive mimicry” of 
Volucellæ’, Nature, 46, pp. 585–6.
Beatty, C. D., Beirinckx, K., and Sherratt, T. N. (2004) ‘The 
evolution of Müllerian mimicry in multispecies commu-
nities’, Nature, 431(7004), pp. 63–7.
Beccaloni, G. W. (1997) ‘Vertical stratification of ithomiine 
butterfly (Nymphalidae: Ithomiinae) mimicry complexes: 
the relationship between adult flight height and larval 
host-plant height’, Biological Journal of the Linnean Society, 
62(3), pp. 313–41.
Beddard, F. E. (1892) Animal coloration: an account of the 
principal facts and theories relating to the colours and mark-
ings of animals. London: S. Sonnenschein & Company.
Behrens, R. R. (1999) ‘The role of artists in ship camouflage 
during World War I’, Leonardo, 32(1), pp. 53–9.
Behrens, R. R. (2002) False colors: art, design and modern cam-
ouflage. Bobolink Books.
Behrens, R. R. (2009) ‘Revisiting Abbott Thayer: non-scien-
tific reflections about camouflage in art, war and zoology.’, 
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological 
Sciences, 364, pp. 497–501.
Behrens, R. R. (2012) Ship Shape: A Dazzle Camouflage 
Sourcebook; an Anthology of Writings about Ship Camouflage 
During World War One. Bobolink Books.
Bekers, W., De Meyer, R., and Strobbe, T. (2016) ‘Shape rec-
ognition for ships: World War I naval camouflage under 
the magnifying glass’, WIT Transactions on The Built 
Environment, 158, pp. 157–68.
Beldale, P., Koops, K., and Brakefield, P. M. (2002) ‘Modularity, 
individuality, and evo-devo in butterfly wings’, Pro­
ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United 
States of America, 99, pp. 14262–7.
Belt, T. (1874) The Naturalist in Nicaragua. New York: E.P. 
Dutton.
Benson, W. W. (1972) ‘Natural selection for Müllerian 
mimicry in Heliconius erato in Costa Rica’, Science, 
176(4037), pp. 936–9.
Berenbaum, M. (1983) ‘Coumarins and caterpillars: a case 
for coevolution’, Evolution, 37(1), pp. 163–79.
Berenbaum, M. R., and Miliczky, E. (1984) ‘Mantids and 
milkweed bugs: efficacy of aposematic coloration against 
invertebrate predators.’, American Midland Naturalist, 111, 
pp. 64–8.
Berenbaum, M. R., and Zangerl, A. R. (1992) ‘Genetics of 
physiological and behavioral resistance to host furano-
coumarins in the parsnip webworm‘, Evolution, 46(5), 
pp. 1373–84.
Berenbaum, M. R., and Zangerl, A. R. (1998) ‘Chemical 
phenotype matching between a plant and its insect 

238
REFERENCES
herbivore’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 
of the United States of America, 95(23), pp. 13743–8.
Berenbaum, M. R., Zangerl, A. R., and Nitao, J. K. (1986) 
‘Constraints on chemical coevolution – wild parsnips 
and the parsnip webworm’, Evolution, 40(6), pp. 1215–28.
Bergstrom, C. T., and Lachmann, M. (2001) ‘Alarm calls as 
costly signals of antipredator vigilance: the watchful 
babbler game’, Animal Behaviour, 61(3), pp. 535–43.
Bernays, E. A., and Wcislo, W. T. (1994) ‘Sensory capabil-
ities, information processing, and resource specializa-
tion’, The Quarterly Review of Biology, 69(2), pp. 187–204.
Bhandiwad, A., and Johnsen, S. (2011) ‘The effects of salin-
ity and temperature on the transparency of the grass 
shrimp Palaemonetes pugio’, Journal of Experimental Biology, 
214(5), pp. 709–16.
Bian, X., Elgar, M. A., and Peters, R. A. (2016) ‘The swaying 
behavior of Extatosoma tiaratum: motion camouflage in a 
stick insect?’, Behavioral Ecology, 27, pp. 83–92.
Binetti, V. R., Schiffman, J. D., Leaffer, O. D., Spanier, J. E., 
and Schauer, C. L. (2009) ‘The natural transparency and 
piezoelectric response of the Greta oto butterfly wing’, 
Integrative Biology, 1(4), pp. 324–9.
Bitton, P.-P., and Doucet, S. M. (2013) ‘A multifunctional vis-
ual display in elegant trogons targets conspecifics and 
heterospecifics’, Behavioral Ecology, 25(1), pp. 27–34.
Blair, J., and Wassersug, R. J. (2000) ‘Variation in the pattern 
of predator-induced damage to tadpole tails’, Copeia, 
2000(2), pp. 390–401.
Blaisdel, M. (1982) ‘Natural theology and nature’s dis-
guises’, Journal of the History of Biology, 15, pp. 163–89.
Blake, R., and Wilson, H. (2011) ‘Binocular vision’, Vision 
Research, 51, pp. 754–70.
Blanchard, B. D., and Moreau, C. S. (2017) ‘Defensive traits 
exhibit an evolutionary trade-off and drive diversifica-
tion in ants’, Evolution, 71(2), pp. 315–28.
Bliss, M. M., and Cecala, K. K. (2017) ‘Terrestrial salamanders 
alter antipredator behavior thresholds following tail 
autotomy’, Herpetologica, 73(2), pp. 94–9.
Blodgett, L. S. (1919) Ship camouflage. Cambridge, MA: 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology Press.
Blount, J. D., Rowland, H. M., Drijfhout, F. P., Endler, J. A., 
Inger, R., Sloggett, J. J., Hurst, G. D., Hodgson, D. J., and 
Speed, M. P. (2012) ‘How the ladybird got its spots: effects 
of resource limitation on the honesty of aposematic sig-
nals’, Functional Ecology, 26(2), pp. 334–42.
Blount, J. D., Speed, M. P., Ruxton, G. D., and Stephens, 
P. A. (2009) ‘Warning displays may function as honest 
signals of toxicity’, Proceedings of the Royal Society of 
London B: Biological Sciences, 276(1658), pp. 871–7.
Blum, M. J. (2002) ‘Rapid movement of a Heliconius hybrid 
zone: for phase III of Wright’s shifting balance theory?’, 
Evolution, 56, pp. 1992–8.
Boevé, J. L., Sonet, G., Nagy, Z. T., Symoens, F., Altenhofer, 
E., Haberlein, C., and Schulz, S. (2009) ‘Defense by vol-
atiles in leaf-mining insect larvae’, Journal of Chemical 
Ecology, 35(5), pp. 507–17.
Bohl, E. (1982) ‘Food supply and prey selection in plank-
tivorous Cyprinidae’, Oecologia, 53(1), pp. 134–8.
Bohlin, T., Gamberale-Stille, G., Merilaita, S., Exnerova, A., 
Stys, P., and Tullberg, B. S. (2012) ‘The detectability of 
the colour pattern in the aposematic firebug, Pyrrhocoris 
apterus: an image-based experiment with human ‘pred-
ators’’, Biological Journal of the Linnean Society, 105(4), 
pp. 806–16.
Bohlin, T., Tullberg, B. S., and Merilaita, S. (2008) ‘The effect 
of signal appearance and distance on detection risk in an 
aposematic butterfly larva (Parnassius apollo)’, Animal 
Behaviour, 76, pp. 577–84.
Bolton, S. K., Dickerson, K., and Saporito, R. A. (2017) 
‘Variable alkaloid defenses in the dendrobatid poison frog 
Oophaga pumilio are perceived as differences in palat-
ability to arthropods’, Journal of Chemical Ecology, 43(3), 
pp. 273–89.
Bond, A. B. (1983) ‘Visual search and selection of natural 
stimuli in the pigeon: the attention threshold hypoth-
esis’, Journal of Experimental Psychology: Animal Behavior 
Processes, 9(3), pp. 292–306.
Bond, A. B., and Kamil, A. C. (1998) ‘Apostatic selection by 
blue jays produces balanced polymorphism in virtual 
prey’, Nature, 395(6702), pp. 594–6.
Bond, A. B., and Kamil, A. C. (2002) ‘Visual predators select 
for crypticity and polymorphism in virtual prey’, Nature, 
415(6872), pp. 609–13.
Bond, A. B., and Kamil, A. C. (2006) ‘Spatial heterogeneity, 
predator cognition, and the evolution of color poly-
morphism in virtual prey’, Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences, 103, pp. 3214–19.
Borer, M., van Noort, T., Rahier, M., and Naisbit, R. E. (2010) 
‘Positive frequency-dependent selection on warning 
color in alpine leaf beetles’, Evolution, 64(12), pp. 3629–33.
Borst, A., Haag, J., and Reiff, D. F. (2010) ‘Fly motion vision’, 
Annual Review of Neuroscience, 33, pp. 49–70.
Bouwma, P. E., and Herrnkind, W. F. (2009) ‘Sound pro-
duction in Caribbean spiny lobster Panulirus argus and 
its role in escape during predatory attack by Octopus 
briareus’, New Zealand Journal of Marine and Freshwater 
Research, 43(1), pp. 3–13.
Bowdish, T. I., and Bultman, T. L. (1993) ‘Visual cues used by 
mantids in learning aversion to aposematically colored 
prey’, American Midland Naturalist, 129(2), pp. 215–22.
Bowers, M. D. (1992) ‘The evolution of unpalatability and 
the cost of chemical defense in insects’, in Evans, D. L., 
and Schmidt, J. O. (eds), Insect Chemical Ecology, London: 
Chapman & Hall, pp. 216–44. 

REFERENCES
239
Bowers, M. D., Brown, I. L., and Wheye, D. (1985) ‘Bird 
predation as a selective agent in a butterfly population’, 
Evolution, 39(1), pp. 93–103.
Boyden, T. C. (1976) ‘Butterfly palatability and mimicry - 
experiments with Ameiva lizards’, Evolution, 30(1), pp. 
73–81.
Braude, S., Ciszek, D., Berg, N. E., and Shefferly, N. (2001) 
‘The ontogeny and distribution of countershading in col-
onies of the naked mole-rat (Heterocephalus glaber)’, 
Journal of Zoology, 253, pp. 351–7.
Bretagnolle, V. (1993) ‘Adaptive significance of seabird 
coloration: The case of Procellariiformes’, The American 
Naturalist, 142, pp. 141–73.
Britton, N., Planqué, R. and Franks, N. (2007) ‘Evolution of 
defence portfolios in exploiter–victim systems’, Bulletin 
of Mathematical Biology, 69(3), pp. 957–88.
Brockhurst, M. A., Chapman, T., King, K. C., Mank, J. E., 
Paterson, S., and Hurst, G. D. (2014) ‘Running with the 
Red Queen: the role of biotic conflicts in evolution’, 
Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B: Biological 
Sciences, 281(1797), 20141382.
Brodie, E. (1992) ‘Correlational selection for color pattern 
and antipredator behavior in the garter snake Thamnophis 
ordinoides’, Evolution, 46, pp. 1284–98.
Brodie, E. D. (1980) ‘Differential avoidance of mimetic 
salamanders by free-ranging birds’, Science, 208(4440), 
pp. 181–2.
Brodie, E. D. (1981) ‘Phenological relationships of model 
and mimic salamanders’, Evolution, 35(5), pp. 988–94.
Brodie, E. D., and Howard, R. R. (1973) ‘Experimental study 
of Batesian mimicry in the salamanders Plethodon jor-
dani and Desmognathus ochrophaeus’, American Midland 
Naturalist, 90, pp. 38–46.
Brodie III, E. D., and Brodie Jr, E. D. (1999a) ‘Costs of 
exploiting poisonous prey: evolutionary trade-offs in a 
predator-prey arms race’, Evolution, 53, pp. 626–31.
Brodie III, E. D., and Brodie Jr, E. D. (1999b) ‘Predator-prey 
arms races: asymmetrical selection on predators and prey 
may be reduced when prey are dangerous’, Bioscience, 
49(7), pp. 557–68.
Brooks, J. L. (2015) ‘Traditional and new principles of per-
ceptual grouping’, Oxford handbook of perceptual organiza-
tion, pp. 57–87. Edited by Johan Wagemans. OUP.
Broom, M., Higginson, A. D. and Ruxton, G. D. (2010) ‘Optimal 
investment across different aspects of anti-predator 
defences’, Journal of Theoretical Biology, 263(4), pp. 579–86.
Broom, M., and Ruxton, G. D. (2012) ‘Perceptual adver-
tisement by the prey of stalking or ambushing pred-
ators’, Journal of Theoretical Biology, 315, pp. 9–16.
Brouwer, G. J., and Heeger, D. J. (2011) ‘Cross-orientation 
suppression in human visual cortex’, Journal of Neuro­
physiology, 106(5), pp. 2108–19.
Brower, A. V. (1995) ‘Locomotor mimicry in butterflies? A 
critical review of the evidence.’, Philosophical Transactions 
of the Royal Society of London Series B: Biological Sciences, 
347, pp. 413–25.
Brower, J. V. (1958a) ‘Experimental studies of mimicry in 
some North American butterflies .1. The monarch, Danaus 
plexippus, and Viceroy, Limenitis archippusarchippus’, 
Evolution, 12(1), pp. 32–47.
Brower, J. V. (1958b) ‘Experimental studies of mimicry in 
some North American butterflies .2. Battus philenor and 
Papilio troilus, P. polyxenes and P. glaucus’, Evolution, 
12(2), pp. 123–36.
Brower, J. V. (1958c) ‘Experimental studies of mimicry in 
some North American butterflies .3. Danaus gilippus 
berenice and Limenitis archippus floridensis’, Evolution, 
12(3), pp. 273–85.
Brower, J. V. (1960) ‘Experimental studies of mimicry .IV. The 
reactions of starlings to different proportions of models 
and mimics’, American Naturalist, 94(877), pp. 271–82.
Brower, L. P. (1988) ‘Avian predation on the monarch butter-
fly and its implications for mimicry theory’, The American 
Naturalist, 131, pp. S4–S6.
Brower, L. P., Brower, J. V., and Westcott, P. W. (1960) 
‘Experimental studies of mimicry .5. The reactions of toads 
(Bufo terrestris) to bumblebees (Bombus americanorum) and 
their robberfly mimics (Mallophora bomboides), with a 
discussion of aggressive mimicry’, American Naturalist, 
94(878), pp. 343–55.
Brower, L. P., Brower, J. V., and Collins, C. T. (1963) ‘Experi­
mental studies of mimicry. 7. Relative palatability and 
Müllerian mimicry among neotropical butterflies of the 
subfamily Heliconiinae’, Zoologica, New York, 48, pp. 65–84.
Brower, L. P., and Calvert, W. H. (1985) ‘Foraging dynam-
ics of bird predators on overwintering monarch butter-
flies in Mexico’, Evolution, 39, pp. 852–68.
Brower, L. P., Cook, L. M., and Croze, H. J. (1967a) ‘Predator 
responses to artificial Batesian mimics released in a neo-
tropical environment’, Evolution, 21(1), pp. 11–23.
Brower, L. P., Hower, A. S., Croze, H. J., Brower, J. V., and 
Stiles, F. G. (1964) ‘Mimicry - differential advantage 
of  color patterns in the natural environment’, Science, 
144(361), pp. 183–5.
Brower, L. P., Brower, J. V., and Corvino, J. M. (1967b) 
‘Plant poisons in a terrestrial food chain’, Proceedings of 
the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America, 57(4), pp. 893–8.
Browman, H., Novales-Flamarique, H., and Hawryshyn, 
C. (1994) ‘Ultraviolet photoreception contributes to prey 
search behaviour in two species of zooplanktivorous 
fishes’, Journal of Experimental Biology, 186(1), pp. 187–98.
Brown, C. M., Henderson, D. M., Vinther, J., Fletcher, I., 
Sistiaga, A., Herrera, J., and Summons, R. E. (2017) ‘An 

240
REFERENCES
exceptionally preserved three-dimensional armored 
dinosaur reveals insights into coloration and Cret­
aceous predator-prey dynamics’, Current Biology, 27(16), 
pp. 2514–21. e3.
Brown, G. E., Godin, J.-G. J., and Pedersen, J. (1999) ‘Fin-
flicking behaviour: a visual antipredator alarm signal 
in  a characin fish, Hemigrammus erythrozonus’, Animal 
Behaviour, 58(3), pp. 469–75.
Brown, J. L., Maan, M. E., Cummings, M. E., and Summers, 
K. (2010) ‘Evidence for selection on coloration in a 
Panamanian poison frog: a coalescent-based approach’, 
Journal of Biogeography, 37(5), pp. 891–901.
Brown, S. G., Boettner, G. H., and Yack, J. E. (2007) ‘Clicking 
caterpillars: acoustic aposematism in Antheraea polyphemus 
and other Bombycoidea’, Journal of Experimental Biology, 
210(6), pp. 993–1005.
Brownell, C. L. (1985) ‘Laboratory analysis of cannibalism by 
larvae of the Cape anchovy Engraulis capensis’, Transactions 
of the American Fisheries Society, 114(4), pp. 512–18.
Bura, V. L., Rohwer, V. G., Martin, P. R., and Yack, J. E. 
(2011) ‘Whistling in caterpillars (Amorpha juglandis, 
Bombycoidea): sound-producing mechanism and func-
tion’, Journal of Experimental Biology, 214(1), pp. 30–7.
Buresch, K. C., Mäthger, L. M., Allen, J. J., Bennice, C., 
Smith, N., Schram, J., Chiao, C.-C., Chubb, C. and 
Hanlon, R. T. (2011) ‘The use of background matching 
vs. masquerade for camouflage in cuttlefish Sepia offici-
nalis’, Vision Research, 51(23–24), pp. 2362–8.
Burr, D. C., and Ross, J. (2002) ‘Direct evidence that 
“speedlines” influence motion mechanisms’, Journal of 
Neuroscience, 22(19), pp. 8661–4.
Cairns, D. K. (1986) ‘Plumage colour in pursuit-diving sea-
birds: Why do penguins wear tuxedos?’, Bird Behavior, 6, 
pp. 58–65.
Caley, M. J., and Schluter, D. (2003) ‘Predators favour 
mimicry in a tropical reef fish’, Proceedings of the Royal 
Society of London Series B: Biological Sciences, 270(1516), 
pp. 667–72.
Camazine, S. (1985) ‘Olfactory aposematism: Association 
of food toxicity with naturally-occurring odor’, Journal 
of Chemical Ecology, 11(9), pp. 1289–95.
Cardoso, M. Z., and Gilbert, L. E. (2007) ‘A male gift to its 
partner? Cyanogenic glycosides in the spermatophore 
of longwing butterflies (Heliconius)’, Naturwissenschaften, 
94, pp. 39–42.
Carmona, D., Lajeunesse, M. J. and Johnson, M. T. (2011) 
‘Plant traits that predict resistance to herbivores’, 
Functional Ecology, 25(2), pp. 358–67.
Caro, T. (1986a) ‘The functions of stotting: a review of the 
hypotheses’, Animal Behaviour, 34(3), pp. 649–62.
Caro, T. (1986b) ‘The functions of stotting in Thomson’s 
gazelles: some tests of the predictions’, Animal Behaviour, 
34(3), pp. 663–84.
Caro, T. (2005) Antipredator defenses in birds and mammals. 
University of Chicago Press.
Caro, T. (2013) ‘The colours of extant mammals’, Seminars 
in Cell & Developmental Biology, 24(6–7), pp. 542–52.
Caro, T. (2016) Zebra stripes. Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press.
Caro, T., and Allen, W. L. (2017) ‘Interspecific visual sig-
nalling in animals and plants: a functional classifica-
tion’, Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B, 372(1724), pp. 20160344.
Caro, T., Graham, C., Stoner, C., and Vargas, J. (2004) 
‘Adaptive significance of antipredator behaviour in 
artiodactyls’, Animal Behaviour, 67(2), pp. 205–28.
Caro, T., Lombardo, L., Goldizen, A., and Kelly, M. (1995) 
‘Tail-flagging and other antipredator signals in white-
tailed deer: new data and synthesis’, Behavioral Ecology, 
6(4), pp. 442–50.
Caro, T., Stankowich, T., Kiffner, C., and Hunter, J. (2013) 
‘Are spotted skunks conspicuous or cryptic?’, Ethology, 
Ecology & Evolution, 25(2), pp. 144–60.
Caro, T., Stoddard, M. C., and Stuart-Fox, D. (eds) (2017). 
Animal coloration: production, perception, function 
and application. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal 
Society B: Biological Sciences, 372 (1724), theme issue.
Caro, T. M., Beeman, K., Stankowich, T., and Whitehead, 
H. (2011) ‘The functional significance of colouration in 
cetaceans’, Evolutionary Ecology, 25, pp. 1231–45.
Caro, T. M., Izzo, A., Reiner Jr, R. C., Walker, H., and 
Stankowich, T. (2014) ‘The function of zebra stripes’, 
Nature Communications, 5. doi:10.1038/ncomms4535
Caro, T. M., and Melville, C. (2012) ‘Investigating colour-
ation in large and rare mammals: the case of the giant 
anteater’, Ethology, Ecology and Evolution, 24, pp. 104–15.
Caro, T. M., and Stankowich, T. (2009) ‘The function of 
contrasting pelage markings in artiodactyls’, Behavioral 
Ecology, 21, pp. 78–84.
Caro, T. M., Stankowich, T., Mesnick, S. L., Costa, D. P., 
and Beeman, K. (2012) ‘Pelage coloration in pinnipeds: 
functional considerations’, Behavioral Ecology, 23, pp. 
765–74.
Carpenter, G. D. H., and Ford, E. B. (1933) Mimicry. London: 
Methuen & Co.
Carroll, J. and Sherratt, T. (2013) ‘A direct comparison of 
the effectiveness of two anti-predator strategies under 
field conditions’, Journal of Zoology, 291(4), pp. 279–85.
Case, J., Warner, J., Barnes, A., and Lowenstine, M. (1977) 
‘Bioluminescence of lantern fish (Myctophidae) in 
response to changes in light intensity’, Nature, 265(5590), 
pp. 179–81.
Cassill, D. L., Vo, K., and Becker, B. (2008) ‘Young fire ant 
workers feign death and survive aggressive neighbors’, 
Naturwissenschaften, 95(7), pp. 617–24.
Castet, E., Lorenceau, J., Shiffrar, M., and Bonnet, C. (1993) 
‘Perceived speed of moving lines depends on orientation, 

REFERENCES
241
length, speed and luminance’, Vision Research, 33(14), 
pp. 1921–36. 
Catarino, M. F., and Zuanon, J. (2010) ‘Feeding ecology 
of  the leaf fish Monocirrhus polyacanthus (Perciformes: 
Polycentridae) in a terra firme stream in the Brazilian 
Amazon’, Neotropical Ichthyology, 8, pp. 183–6.
Ceinos, R. M., Guillot, R., Kelsh, R. N., Cerdá-Reverter, 
J. M., and Rotllant, J. (2015) ‘Pigment patterns in adult 
fish result from superimposition of two largely inde-
pendent pigmentation mechanisms’, Pigment Cell & 
Melanoma Research, 28, pp. 196–209.
Cerdá-Reverter, J. M., Haitina, T., Schiöth, H. B., and Peter, 
R. E. (2005) ‘Gene structure of the goldfish agouti-­
signaling protein: a putative role in the dorsal-ventral pig-
ment pattern of fish’, Endocrinology, 146, pp. 1597–1610.
Chai, P. (1986) ‘Field observations and feeding experi-
ments on the responses of rufous-tailed jacamars 
(Galbula ruficauda) to free-flying butterflies in a tropical 
rain-forest’, Biological Journal of the Linnean Society, 29(3), 
pp. 161–89.
Chai, P. (1990) ‘Relationships between visual characteris-
tics of rainforest butterflies and responses of a special-
ized insectivorous bird’, in Wicksten, M. (ed.) Adaptive 
coloration in invertebrates. Proceedings of Symposium spon-
sored by American Society of Zoologists. Galveston: Texas 
A&M University, pp. 31–60.
Chai, P. (1996) ‘Butterfly visual characteristics and 
ontogeny of responses to butterflies by a specialized 
tropical bird’, Biological Journal of the Linnean Society, 
59(1), pp. 37–67.
Chamberlain, N. L., Hill, R. I., Kapan, D. D., Gilbert, L. E., 
and Kronforst, M. R. (2009) ‘Polymorphic butterfly reveals 
the missing link in ecological speciation’, Science, 
326(5954), pp. 847–50.
Charlesworth, D., and Charlesworth, B. (2011) ‘Mimicry: 
The hunting of the supergene’, Current Biology, 21(20), 
pp. R846–8.
Chatelain, M., Halpin, C. G., and Rowe, C. (2013) ‘Ambient 
temperature influences birds’ decisions to eat toxic prey’, 
Animal Behaviour, 86(4), pp. 733–40.
Cheney, K. L. (2010) ‘Multiple selective pressures apply to 
a coral reef fish mimic: a case of Batesian–aggressive mim-
icry’, Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 
277(1689), pp. 1849–55.
Cheney, K. L., and Côté, I. M. (2005) ‘Mutualism or para-
sitism? The variable outcome of cleaning symbioses’, 
Biology Letters, 1, pp. 162–5.
Chester, J. (2001) The nature of penguins. Vancouver: Greystone 
Books.
Chiao, C.-C., Chubb, C., Buresch, K. C., Siemann, L., and 
Hanlon, R. T. (2009) ‘The scaling effects of substrate texture 
on camouflage patterning in cuttlefish.’, Vision Research, 
49, pp. 1647–56.
Chiao, C.-C., Chubb, C., and Hanlon, R. T. (2015) ‘A review 
of visual perception mechanisms that regulate rapid 
adaptive camouflage in cuttlefish’, Journal of Comparative 
Physiology A, 201(9), pp. 933–45.
Chiao, C. C., Chubb, C., and Hanlon, R. T. (2007) 
‘Interactive effects of size, contrast, intensity and config-
uration of background objects in evoking disruptive 
camouflage in cuttlefish’, Vision Res, 47(16), pp. 2223–35.
Chiao, C. C., Ulmer, K. M., Siemann, L. A., Buresch, K. C., 
Chubb, C., and Hanlon, R. T. (2013) ‘How visual edge 
features influence cuttlefish camouflage patterning’, 
Vision Res, 83, pp. 40–7.
Chittka, L., and Osorio, D. (2007) ‘Cognitive dimensions of 
predator responses to imperfect mimicry?’, PloS Biology, 
5(12), pp. 2754–8.
Chouteau, M., and Angers, B. (2011) ‘The role of predators 
in maintaining the geographic organization of aposem-
atic signals’, American Naturalist, 178(6), pp. 810–17.
Chouteau, M., and Angers, B. (2012) ‘Wright’s shifting bal-
ance theory and the diversification of aposematic sig-
nals’, PloS One, 7(3). https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.
pone.0034028
Chouteau, M., Arias, M., and Joron, M. (2016) ‘Warning 
signals are under positive frequency-dependent selec-
tion in nature’, Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences, 113(8), pp. 2164–9.
Chouteau, M., Llaurens, V., Piron-Prunier, F., and Joron, 
M. (2017) ‘Polymorphism at a mimicry supergene main-
tained by opposing frequency-dependent selection 
pressures’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 
114(31), 8325.
Chouteau, M., Summers, K., Morales, V., and Angers, B. 
(2011) ‘Advergence in Müllerian mimicry: the case of 
the poison dart frogs of Northern Peru revisited’, Biology 
Letters, 7(5), pp. 796–800.
Cipollini, D., Walters, D. and Voelckel, C. (2018) ‘Costs of 
resistance in plants: From theory to evidence’, Annual 
Plant Reviews: John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Annual Plant 
Reviews book series, Volume 47: Insect-Plant Interactions. 
Section III. Ecology and Evolution of Insect-Plant 
Interactions. https://doi.org/10.1002/9781119312994.
apr0512
Claes, J. M., Aksnes, D. L., and Mallefet, J. (2010) ‘Phantom 
hunter of the fjords: Camouflage by counterillumina-
tion in a shark (Etmopterus spinax)’, Journal of Experimental 
Marine Biology and Ecology, 388, pp. 28–32.
Claes, J. M., and Mallefet, J. (2010) ‘The lantern shark’s 
light switch: turning shallow water crypsis into midwa-
ter camouflage’, Biology Letters, 6, pp. 685–7.
Claes, J. M., Nilsson, D.-E., Straube, N., Collin, S. P., and 
Mallefet, J. (2014) ‘Iso-luminance counterillumination 
drove bioluminescent shark radiation’, Scientific Reports, 
4, 4328. doi:10.1038/srep04328

242
REFERENCES
Clark, R., Brown, S. M., Collins, S. C., Jiggins, C. D., 
Heckel, D. G., and Vogler, A. P. (2008) ‘Colour pattern 
specification in the Mocker swallowtail Papilio dardanus: 
the transcription factor invected is a candidate for the 
mimicry locus H’, Proceedings of the Royal Society B: 
Biological Sciences, 275(1639), pp. 1181–8.
Clark, R. W. (2005) ‘Pursuit-deterrent communication 
between prey animals and timber rattlesnakes (Crotalus 
horridus): the response of snakes to harassment displays’, 
Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology, 59(2), pp. 258–61.
Clark, R. W., Dorr, S. W., Whitford, M. D., Freymiller, G. A., 
and Hein, S. R. (2016) ‘Comparison of anti-snake dis-
plays in the sympatric desert rodents Xerospermophilus 
tereticaudus (round-tailed ground squirrels) and 
Dipodomys deserti (desert kangaroo rats)’, Journal of 
Mammalogy, 97(6), pp. 1709–17.
Clarke, B. (1962) ‘Natural selection in mixed populations 
of two polymorphic snails’, Heredity, 17(3), p. 319.
Clarke, C., and Sheppard, P. M. (1975) ‘Genetics of mimetic 
butterfly Hypolimnas bolina (L)’, Philosophical Transactions 
of the Royal Society of London Series B: Biological Sciences, 
272(917), pp. 229–65.
Clarke, C. A., Clarke, F. M. M., Gordon, I. J., and Marsh, 
N. A. (1989) ‘Rule-breaking mimics - palatability of the 
butterflies Hypolimnas bolina and Hypolimnas misippus, a 
sister species pair’, Biological Journal of the Linnean Society, 
37(4), pp. 359–65.
Clarke, C. A., and Sheppard, P. M. (1959) ‘The genetics of 
some mimetic forms of Papilio dardanus, Brown, and 
Papilio glaucus, Linn.’, Journal of Genetics, 56, pp. 237–59.
Clarke, C. A., and Sheppard, P. M. (1960) ‘Supergenes and 
mimicry’, Heredity, 14, pp. 175–85.
Clay, K. (2014) ‘Defensive symbiosis: a microbial perspec-
tive’, Functional Ecology, 28(2), pp. 293–8.
Clay, K., and Schardl, C. (2002) ‘Evolutionary origins and 
ecological consequences of endophyte symbiosis with 
grasses’, The American Naturalist, 160(S4), pp. S99–S127.
Cock, M. (1978) ‘The assessment of preference’, The Journal 
of Animal Ecology, 47, pp. 805–16.
Cogni, R., Trigo, J. R., and Futuyma, D. J. (2012) ‘A free 
lunch? No cost for acquiring defensive plant pyrrolizidine 
alkaloids in a specialist arctiid moth (Utetheisa ornatrix)’, 
Molecular Ecology, 21(24), pp. 6152–62.
Comeault, A., and Noonan, B. (2011) ‘Spatial variation in 
the fitness of divergent aposematic phenotypes of the 
poison frog, Dendrobates tinctorius’, Journal of Evolutionary 
Biology, 24(6), pp. 1374–9.
Confer, J. L., Howick, G. L., Corzette, M. H., Kramer, S. L., 
Fitzgibbon, S., and Landesberg, R. (1978) ‘Visual preda-
tion by planktivores’, Oikos, 31(1), pp. 27–37.
Conner, W. E., Boada, R., Schroeder, F. C., Gonzalez, A., 
Meinwald, J., and Eisner, T. (2000) ‘Chemical defense: 
bestowal of a nuptial alkaloidal garment by a male 
moth on its mate’, Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America, 97, pp. 14406–11.
Cook, L., Grant, B., Saccheri, I., and Mallet, J. (2012a) 
‘Selective bird predation on the peppered moth: the last 
experiment of Michael Majerus’, Biology Letters, 8(4), 
pp. 609–12.
Cook, L. M., Brower, L. P., and Alcock, J. (1969) ‘An attempt 
to verify mimetic advantage in a neotropical environ-
ment’, Evolution, 23(2), pp. 339–45.
Cook, R. G., Qadri, M. A. J., Kieres, A., and Commons-
Miller, N. (2012b) ‘Shape from shading in pigeons’, 
Cognition, 124, pp. 284–303.
Cooper, W. (2000) ‘Pursuit deterrence in lizards’, Saudi J. 
Biosoc. Sci, 7, pp. 15–28.
Cooper, W. E. (2001) ‘Multiple roles of tail display by the 
curly-tailed lizard Leiocephalus carinatus: Pursuit deter-
rent and deflective roles of a social signal’, Ethology, 
107(12), pp. 1137–49.
Cooper, W. E. (2007) ‘Escape and its relationship to pur-
suit-deterrent signalling in the Cuban curly-tailed lizard 
Leiocephalus carinatus’, Herpetologica, 63(2), pp. 144–50.
Cooper, W. E. (2010a) ‘Pursuit deterrence varies with preda-
tion risks affecting escape behaviour in the lizard 
Callisaurus draconoides’, Animal Behaviour, 80(2), pp.  
249–56.
Cooper, W. E. (2010b) ‘Timing during predator–prey encoun-
ters, duration and directedness of a putative pursuit-
deterrent signal by the zebra-tailed lizard, Callisaurus 
draconoides’, Behaviour, 147(13), pp. 1675–91.
Cooper, W. E. (2011) ‘Pursuit deterrence, predation risk, and 
escape in the lizard Callisaurus draconoides’, Behavioral 
Ecology and Sociobiology, 65(9), pp. 1833–41.
Cooper, W. E., Caffrey, C., and Vitt, L. J. (1985) ‘Aggregation 
in the banded gecko, Coleonyx variegatus’, Herpetologica, 
41(3), pp. 342–50.
Cooper, W. E., and Perez-Mellado, V. (2004) ‘Tradeoffs 
between escape behavior and foraging opportunity by 
the Balearic lizard (Podarcis lilfordi)’, Herpetologica, 60(3), 
pp. 321–4.
Cooper, W. E., and Vitt, L. J. (1991) ‘Influence of detectabil-
ity and ability to escape on natural-selection of con-
spicuous autotomous defenses’, Canadian Journal of 
Zoology-Revue Canadienne De Zoologie, 69(3), pp. 757–64.
Cordero, C. (2001) ‘A different look at the false head of 
butterflies’, Ecological Entomology, 26(1), pp. 106–8.
Cortesi, F., and Cheney, K. (2010) ‘Conspicuousness is cor-
related with toxicity in marine opisthobranchs’, Journal 
of Evolutionary Biology, 23(7), pp. 1509–18.
Cortesi, F., Feeney, W. E., Ferrari, M. C. O., Waldie, P. A., 
Phillips, G. A. C., McClure, E. C., Sköld, H. N., Salzburger, 
W., Marshall, N. J., and Cheney, K. L. (2015) ‘Phenotypic 
plasticity confers multiple fitness benefits to a mimic’, 
Current Biology, 25(7), pp. 949–54.

REFERENCES
243
Cott, H. B. (1940) Adaptive coloration in animals. London: 
Methuen.
Cox, C. L., and Davis Rabosky, A. R. (2013) ‘Spatial and 
temporal drivers of phenotypic diversity in polymorphic 
snakes’, American Naturalist, 182(2), pp. E40–E57.
Craig, J. L. (1982) ‘On the evidence for a “pursuit deter-
rent” function of alarm signals of swamphens’, The 
American Naturalist, 119(5), pp. 753–5.
Cresswell, W. (1994) ‘Song as a pursuit-deterrent signal, 
and its occurrence relative to other anti-predation 
behaviours of skylark (Alauda arvensis) on attack by 
merlins (Falco columbarius)’, Behavioral Ecology and 
Sociobiology, 34(3), pp. 217–23.
Cronin, T. W., Gagnon, Y. L., Johnsen, S., Marshall, N. J., 
and Roberts, N. W. (2016) ‘Comment on “Open-ocean 
fish reveal an omnidirectional solution to camouflage in 
polarized environments” ‘, Science, 353(6299), p. 552.
Crook, A. C. (1997) ‘Colour patterns in a coral reef fish Is 
background complexity important?’, Journal of Experimental 
Marine Biology and Ecology, 217(2), pp. 237–52.
Crothers, L., Saporito, R. A., Yeager, J., Lynch, K., Friesen, 
C., Richards-Zawacki, C. L., McGraw, K., and Cummings, 
M. (2016) ‘Warning signal properties covary with tox-
icity but not testosterone or aggregate carotenoids in a 
poison frog’, Evolutionary Ecology, 30(4), pp. 601–21.
Crothers, L. R., and Cummings, M. E. (2015) ‘A multifunc-
tional warning signal behaves as an agonistic status sig-
nal in a poison frog’, Behavioral Ecology, 26(2), pp. 560–8.
Cummings, M. E., and Crothers, L. R. (2013) ‘Interacting 
selection diversifies warning signals in a polytypic frog: 
an examination with the strawberry poison frog’, 
Evolutionary Ecology, 27(4), pp. 693–710.
Cummings, M. E., Rosenthal, G. G., and Ryan, M. J. (2003) 
‘A private ultraviolet channel in visual communication’, 
Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B: Biological 
Sciences, 270(1518), pp. 897–904.
Cuthill, I. C., Allen, W. L., Arbuckle, K., Caspers, B., Chaplin, 
G., Hauber, M. E., Hill, G. E., Jablonski, N. G., Jiggins, 
C.  D. and Kelber, A. (2017) ‘The biology of color’, 
Science, 357(6350), eaan0221.
Cuthill, I. C., and Bennett, A. T. D. (1993) ‘Mimicry and the 
eye of the beholder’, Proceedings of the Royal Society of 
London Series B: Biological Sciences, 253, pp. 203–4.
Cuthill, I. C., Hiby, E., and Lloyd, E. (2006a) ‘The predation 
costs of symmetrical cryptic coloration.’, Proceedings of 
the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 273, pp. 1267–71.
Cuthill, I. C., Sanghera, N. S., Penacchio, O., Lovell, P. G., 
Ruxton, G. D., and Harris, J. M. (2016) ‘Optimizing 
countershading camouflage’, Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 113(46), 
pp. 13093–7.
Cuthill, I. C., Stevens, M., Sheppard, J., Maddocks, T., Párraga, 
C. A., and Troscianko, T. S. (2005) ‘Disruptive coloration 
and background pattern matching’, Nature, 434(7029), 
pp. 72–4.
Cuthill, I. C., Stevens, M., Windsor, A. M. M., and Walker, 
H. J. (2006b) ‘The effects of pattern symmetry on detection 
of disruptive and background-matching coloration’, 
Behavioral Ecology, 17, pp. 828–32.
Cuthill, I. C., and Székely, A. (2009) ‘Coincident disruptive 
coloration’, Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci, 364(1516), 
pp. 489–96.
Cuthill, I. C., and Troscianko, T. S. (2011) ‘Animal camou-
flage: biology meets psychology, computer science and 
art’, in Brebbia, C.A., Greated, C., and Collins, M.W. 
(eds), Colour in art, design and nature, Southampton: WIT 
Press, pp. 5–24. 
Dale, G., and Pappantoniou, A. (1986) ‘Eye-picking behav-
ior of the cutlips minnow, Exoglossum maxillingua - 
Applications to studies of eyespot mimicry’, Annals of 
the New York Academy of Sciences, 463, pp. 177–8.
Dall, S. R., and Cuthill, I. C. (1997) ‘The information costs 
of generalism’, Oikos, 80, pp. 197–202.
Darst, C. R., and Cummings, M. E. (2006) ‘Predator learning 
favours mimicry of a less-toxic model in poison frogs’, 
Nature, 440(7081), pp. 208–11.
Darst, C. R., Cummings, M. E., and Cannatella, D. C. 
(2006) ‘A mechanism for diversity in warning signals: 
conspicuousness versus toxicity in poison frogs’, 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 103(15), 
pp. 5852–7.
Darwin, C. (1859) On the Origin of Species by Means of 
Natural Selection, or the Preservation of Favoured Races in 
the Struggle for Life. 1st edn. London: John Murray.
Darwin, C. (1887) The life and letters of Charles Darwin: 
including an autobiographical chapter, edited by his son 
Francis Darwin. London: Murray.
Davis, M. P., Sparks, J. S. and Smith, W. L. (2016) ‘Repeated 
and widespread evolution of bioluminescence in mar­
ine fishes’, PLoS One, 11, e0155154.
Davis Rabosky, A. R., Cox, C. L., Rabosky, D. L., Title, P. O., 
Holmes, I. A., Feldman, A., and McGuire, J. A. (2016) 
‘Coral snakes predict the evolution of mimicry across 
New World snakes’, Nature Communications, 7, 11484.
Dawkins, M. (1971) ‘Perceptual changes in chicks: another 
look at the ‘search image’concept’, Animal Behaviour, 19(3), 
pp. 566–74.
Dawkins, R. (1982) The extended phenotype. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
De Bona, S., Valkonen, J. K., López-Sepulcre, A., and Mappes, 
J. (2015) ‘Predator mimicry, not conspicuousness, explains 
the efficacy of butterfly eyespots’. Proceedings of the Royal 
Society of London B: Biological Sciences, 282(1806). doi: 
10.1098/rspb.2015.0202
De Cock, R., and Matthysen, E. (2003) ‘Glow-worm larvae 
bioluminescence (Coleoptera: Lampyridae) operates as 

244
REFERENCES
an aposematic signal upon toads (Bufo bufo)’, Behavioral 
Ecology, 14(1), pp. 103–8.
de Lima Rocha, A. D., Menescal-de-Oliveira, L., and da 
Silva, L. F. S. (2017) ‘Effects of human contact and intra-
specific social learning on tonic immobility in guinea 
pigs, Cavia porcellus’, Applied Animal Behaviour Science, 
191, pp. 1–4.
de Ruiter, L. (1952) ‘Some experiments on the camouflage 
of stick caterpillars’, Behaviour, 4(3), pp. 222–32.
de Ruiter, L. (1956) ‘Countershading in caterpillars’, Archives 
Neerlandaises de Zoologie, 11, pp. 285–341.
de Ruiter, L. (1959) ‘Some remarks on problems of the 
ecology and evolution of mimicry’, Archives Neerlandaises 
de Zoologie, 13, pp. 351–68.
Dell’Aglio, D. D., Stevens, M., and Jiggins, C. D. (2016) 
‘Avoidance of an aposematically coloured butterfly by 
wild birds in a tropical forest’, Ecological Entomology, 
41(5), pp. 627–32.
Dennis, D. S., and Lavigne, R. J. (1976) ‘Ethology of Efferia 
varipes with comments on species coexistence (Diptera: 
Asilidae)’, Journal of the Kansas Entomological Society, 49(1), 
pp. 48–62.
Denny, M. W. (1993) Air and water: the biology and physics of 
life’s media. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Denton, E. (1970) ‘On the organization of reflecting sur-
faces in some marine animals’, Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. 
B, 258, pp. 285–313.
Denton, E., Gilpin-Brown, J., and Wright, P. (1972) ‘The 
angular distribution of the light produced by some 
mesopelagic fish in relation to their camouflage’, 
Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B: Biological 
Sciences, 182(1067), pp. 145–58.
Deshmukh, R., Baral, S., Gandhimathi, A., Kuwalekar, M., 
and Kunte, K. (2017) ‘Mimicry in butterflies: co-option 
and a bag of magnificent developmental genetic tricks’, 
WIREs Developmental Biology, 7, e291.
Desjardin, D. E., Oliveira, A. G., and Stevani, C. V. (2008) 
‘Fungi bioluminescence revisited’, Photochemical & 
Photobiological Sciences, 7, pp. 170–82.
DeVries, P. J., Lande, R., and Murray, D. (1999) ‘Associations 
of co-mimetic ithomiine butterflies on small spatial and 
temporal scales in a neotropical rainforest’, Biological 
Journal of the Linnean Society, 67(1), pp. 73–85.
Dial, B. E. (1986) ‘Tail display in two species of iguanid 
lizards: a test of the“ predator signal” hypothesis’, The 
American Naturalist, 127(1), pp. 103–11.
Dill, L. M. (1975) ‘Calculated risk-taking by predators as a 
factor in Batesian mimicry’, Canadian Journal of Zoology-
Revue Canadienne De Zoologie, 53(11), pp. 1614–21.
Dimitrova, M., and Merilaita, S. (2009) ‘Prey concealment: 
visual background complexity and prey contrast distri-
bution’, Behavioral Ecology, 21(1), pp. 176–81.
Dimitrova, M., and Merilaita, S. (2011) ‘Prey pattern regu-
larity and background complexity affect detectability of 
background-matching prey’, Behavioral Ecology, 23(2), 
pp. 384–90.
Dimitrova, M., Stobbe, N., Schaefer, H. M. and Merilaita, 
S. (2009) ‘Concealed by conspicuousness: distractive prey 
markings and backgrounds’, Proceedings of the Royal Society 
of London B: Biological Sciences, doi: 10.1098/rspb. 2009.0052.
Dittrich, W., Gilbert, F., Green, P., McGregor, P., and 
Grewcock, D. (1993) ‘Imperfect mimicry: a pigeon’s per-
spective’, Proceedings of the Royal Society of London Series 
B: Biological Sciences, 251(1332), pp. 195–200.
Dixey, F. A. (1920) ‘The geographical factor in mimicry’, 
Ecological Entomology, 68(1–2), pp. 208–11.
Dookie, A. L., Young, C. A., Lamothe, G., Schoenle, L. A., 
and Yack, J. E. (2017) ‘Why do caterpillars whistle at 
birds? Insect defence sounds startle avian predators’, 
Behavioural Processes, 138, pp. 58–66.
Dowdy, N. J., and Conner, W. E. (2016) ‘Acoustic apo-
sematism and evasive action in select chemically 
defended Arctiine (Lepidoptera: Erebidae) species: 
Nonchalant or not?’, PloS One, 11(4). https://doi.org/ 
10.1371/journal.pone.0152981
Dressler, R. L. (1979) ‘Eulaema bombiformis, E. meriana, and 
Müllerian mimicry in related species (Hymenoptera, 
Apidae)’, Biotropica, 11(2), pp. 144–51.
Duarte, R. C., Flores, A. A., and Stevens, M. (2017) 
‘Camouflage through colour change: mechanisms, 
adaptive value and ecological significance’, Phil. Trans. 
R. Soc. B, 372(1724), 20160342.
Dugas, M. B., Halbrook, S. R., Killius, A. M., Sol, J. F., and 
Richards-Zawacki, C. L. (2015) ‘Colour and escape 
behaviour in polymorphic populations of an aposem-
atic poison frog’, Ethology, 121(8), pp. 813–22.
Dukas, R., and Ellner, S. (1993) ‘Information processing 
and prey detection’, Ecology, 74(5), pp. 1337–46.
Dukas, R., and Kamil, A. C. (2001) ‘Limited attention: the 
constraint underlying search image’, Behavioral Ecology, 
12(2), pp. 192–9.
Duncan, C. J., and Sheppard, P. M. (1965) ‘Sensory dis-
crimination and its role in the evolution of Batesian 
mimicry’, Behaviour, 24, pp. 269–82.
Duntley, S. Q. (1946) ‘Visibility studies and some applica-
tions in the field of camouflage’, Summary Tech. Rept. 
Div. 16, NDRC, 2, p. 65.
Eacock, A., Rowland, H. M., Edmonds, N., and Saccheri, 
I. J. (2017) ‘Colour change of twig-mimicking peppered 
moth larvae is a continuous reaction norm that increases 
camouflage against avian predators’, PeerJ, 5, e3999.
Edelaar, P., Serrano, D., Carrete, M., Blas, J., Potti, J., and Tella, 
J. L. (2012) ‘Tonic immobility is a measure of boldness 
toward predators: an application of Bayesian structural 
equation modeling’, Behavioral Ecology, 23(3), pp. 619–26.
Edmunds, J., and Edmunds, M. (1974) ‘Polymorphic mim-
icry and natural selection: a reappraisal’, Evolution, 28(3), 
pp. 402–7.

REFERENCES
245
Edmunds, M. (1972) ‘Defensive behaviour in Ghanaian 
praying mantids’, Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society, 
51(1), pp. 1–32.
Edmunds, M. (2000) ‘Why are there good and poor 
­mimics?’, Biological Journal of the Linnean Society, 70(3), 
pp. 459–66.
Edmunds, M. (2009) ‘Do nematocysts sequestered by aeolid 
nudibranchs deter predators? - a background to the 
debate’, Journal of Molluscan Studies, 75, pp. 203–5.
Edmunds, M., and Dewhurst, R. A. (1994) ‘The survival 
value of countershading with wild birds as predators’, 
Biological Journal of the Linnean Society, 51, pp. 447–52.
Edmunds, M., and Reader, T. (2014) ‘Evidence for Batesian 
mimicry in a polymorphic hoverfly’, Evolution, 68(3), 
pp. 827–39.
Edmunds, M. E. (1974) Defence in animals: a survey of anti-
predator defences. Harlow: Longman.
Egan, J., Sharman, R. J., Scott-Brown, K. C., and Lovell, 
P.  G. (2016) ‘Edge enhancement improves disruptive 
camouflage by emphasising false edges and creating 
pictorial relief’, Sci Rep, 6, 38274.
Ehrlich, P. R., and Raven, P. H. (1964) ‘Butterflies and plants: 
a study in coevolution’, Evolution, 18(4), pp. 586–608.
Eisner, H., Alsop, D., and Eisner, T. (1967) ‘Defense mech-
anisms of arthropods. XX. Quantitative assessment of 
hydrogen cyanide production in two species of milli-
pedes’, Psyche, 74(2), pp. 107–17.
Eisner, T., Eisner, M., and Siegler, M. (2005) Secret weapons: 
defenses of insects, spiders, scorpions, and other many-legged 
creatures. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Eisner, T., and Grant, R. P. (1981) ‘Toxicity, odor aversion, 
and olfactory aposematism’, Science, 213(4506), p. 476.
El-Sayed, S. Z., Van Dijken, G. L., and Gonzalez-Rodas, G. 
(1996) ‘Effects of ultraviolet radiation on marine ecosys-
tems’, International Journal of Environmental Studies, 51(3), 
pp. 199–216.
Elder, J. H., and Velisavljevic´, L. (2009) ‘Cue dynamics under-
lying rapid detection of animals in natural scenes’, Journal 
of Vision, 9(7), p. 7.
Elias, M., Gompert, Z., Jiggins, C., and Willmott, K. (2008) 
‘Mutualistic interactions drive ecological niche conver-
gence in a diverse butterfly community’, PloS Biology, 
6(12), pp. 2642–9.
Elias, M., and Joron, M. (2015) ‘Mimicry in Heliconius and 
Ithomiini butterflies: The profound consequences of an 
adaptation’, in Maurel, M.C. & Grandcolas, P. (eds) 
Origins: Studies in Biological and Cultural Evolution, 
BIO Web of Conferences 4. https://doi.org/10.1051/bioconf/ 
20150400008
Emlen, J. M. (1968) ‘Batesian mimicry: a preliminary the­
oretical investigation of quantitative aspects’, American 
Naturalist, 102(925), pp. 235–41.
Endler, B. (1991) ‘Interactions between predators and prey’, 
in Krebs, J. R., and Davies, N. B. (eds), Behavioural 
Ecology: An Evolutionary Approach, Oxford: Blackwell 
Scientific Publications, pp. 169–202.
Endler, J. (1988) ‘Frequency-dependent predation, crypsis 
and aposematic coloration’, Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B, 
319(1196), pp. 505–23.
Endler, J. A. (1981) ‘An overview of the relationships 
between mimicry and crypsis’, Biological Journal of the 
Linnean Society, 16(1), pp. 25–31.
Endler, J. A., and Mappes, J. (2004) ‘Predator mixes and 
the conspicuousness of aposematic signals’, American 
Naturalist, 163(4), pp. 532–47.
Endler, J. A., and Rojas, B. (2009) ‘The spatial pattern of 
natural selection when selection depends on experi-
ence’, The American Naturalist, 173(3), pp. E62–E78.
Engler-Chaouat, H. S., and Gilbert, L. E. (2007) ‘De novo 
synthesis vs. sequestration: negatively correlated meta-
bolic traits and the evolution of host plant specialization 
in cyanogenic butterflies’, Journal of Chemical Ecology, 33, 
pp. 25–42.
Espinosa, I., and Cuthill, I. C. (2014) ‘Disruptive colour-
ation and perceptual grouping’, PLoS One, 9(1), 
e87153.
Ewell, A. H., Cullen, J. M., and Woodruff, M. L. (1981) 
‘Tonic immobility as a predator-defense in the rabbit 
(Oryctolagus cuniculus)’, Behavioral and Neural Biology, 
31(4), pp. 483–9.
Exnerová, A., Ježová, D., Štys, P., Doktorovová, L., Rojas, 
B., and Mappes, J. (2015) ‘Different reactions to aposem-
atic prey in two geographically distant populations of 
great tits’, Behavioral Ecology, 26(5), pp. 1361–70.
Fabricant, S. A., Exnerova, A., Jezova, D., and Stys, P. 
(2014) ‘Scared by shiny? The value of iridescence in apo-
sematic signalling of the hibiscus harlequin bug’, Animal 
Behaviour, 90, pp. 315–25.
Fabricant, S. A., and Smith, C. L. (2014) ‘Is the hibiscus har-
lequin bug aposematic? The importance of testing mul-
tiple predators’, Ecology and Evolution, 4(2), pp. 113–20.
Farkas, T. E. (2016) ‘Body size, not maladaptive gene flow, 
explains death-feigning behaviour in Timema cristinae’, 
Evolutionary Ecology, 30(4), pp. 623–34.
Feldman, C. R., Brodie, E. D., Jr., Brodie III, E. D., and 
Pfrender, M. E. (2010) ‘Genetic architecture of a feeding 
adaptation: garter snake (Thamnophis) resistance to tetro-
dotoxin bearing prey’, Proceedings of the Royal Society B: 
Biological Sciences, 277(1698), pp. 3317–25.
Feller, K. D., and Cronin, T. W. (2014) ‘Hiding opaque eyes 
in transparent organisms: a potential role for larval eye-
shine in stomatopod crustaceans’, Journal of Experimental 
Biology, 217(18), pp. 3263–73.
Feller, K. D., Jordan, T. M., Wilby, D., and Roberts, N. W. 
(2017) ‘Selection of the intrinsic polarization properties 
of animal optical materials creates enhanced struc-
tural reflectivity and camouflage’, Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B, 
372(1724), 20160336.

246
REFERENCES
Ferguson, G. P., and Messenger, J. B. (1991) ‘A counter-
shading reflex in cephalopods’, Proceedings of the Royal 
Society B: Biological Sciences, 243, pp. 63–7.
Findlay, J. M., and Gilchrist, I. D. (2003) Active vision: The 
psychology of looking and seeing. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press.
Fink, L. S., and Brower, L. P. (1981) ‘Birds can overcome the 
cardenolide defence of monarch butterflies in Mexico’, 
Nature, 291, pp. 67–70.
Finkbeiner, S. D., Briscoe, A. D., and Reed, R. D. (2014) 
‘Warning signals are seductive: Relative contributions 
of color and pattern to predator avoidance and mate 
attraction in Heliconius butterflies’, Evolution, 68(12), 
pp. 3410–20.
Fisher, N., and Zanker, J. M. (2001) ‘The directional tun-
ing  of the barber-pole illusion’, Perception, 30(11), 
pp. 1321–36.
Fisher, R. A. (1930) The Genetical Theory of Natural Selection. 
Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Fisher, R. A. (1958) The genetic theory of natural selection. 
New York: Dover Books. 
FitzGibbon, C. D., and Fanshawe, J. H. (1988) ‘Stotting in 
Thomson’s gazelles: an honest signal of condition’, 
Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology, 23(2), pp. 69–74.
Flanagan, N. S., Tobler, A., Davison, A., Pybus, O. G., 
Kapan, D. D., Planas, S., Linares, M., Heckel, D., and 
McMillan, W. O. (2004) ‘Historical demography of 
Müllerian mimicry in the neotropical Heliconius butter-
flies’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the 
United States of America, 101(26), pp. 9704–9.
Fleming, P. A., Muller, D., and Bateman, P. W. (2007) ‘Leave 
it all behind: a taxonomic perspective of autotomy in 
invertebrates’, Biological Reviews, 82(3), pp. 481–510.
Font, E., Carazo, P., Pérez i de Lanuza, G., and Kramer, M. 
(2012) ‘Predator-elicited foot shakes in wall lizards 
(Podarcis muralis): evidence for a pursuit-deterrent func-
tion’, Journal of Comparative Psychology, 126(1), pp. 87–96.
Forbes, P. (2011) Dazzled and deceived: mimicry and camou-
flage. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Ford, E. (1940) ‘Polymorphism and taxonomy’, in Huxley, 
J. (ed.), The New Systematics, London: Oxford University 
Press, pp. 493–513.
Ford, E. B. (1936) ‘The genetics of Papilio dardanus Brown 
(Lep.)’, Transactions of the Royal Entomological Society of 
London, 85, pp. 435–66.
Ford, H. (1971) ‘The degree of mimetic protection gained 
by new partial mimics’, Heredity, 27, pp. 227–36.
Forsman, A., and Merilaita, S. (1999) ‘Fearful symmetry: 
pattern size and asymmetry affects aposematic signal 
efficacy’, Evolutionary Ecology, 13(2), pp. 131–40.
Foster, S. A. (1988) ‘Diversionary displays of paternal stickle-
back: Defenses against cannibalistic groups’, Behavioral 
Ecology and Sociobiology, 22(5), pp. 335–40.
Frank, S. A. (1993) ‘Evolution of host–parasite diversity’, 
Evolution, 47(6), pp. 1721–32.
Frank, T., and Widder, E. (2002) ‘Effects of a decrease in 
downwelling irradiance on the daytime vertical distribu-
tion patterns of zooplankton and micronekton’, Marine 
Biology, 140(6), pp. 1181–93.
Franks, D. W., and Noble, J. (2004) ‘Batesian mimics influ-
ence mimicry ring evolution’, Proceedings of the Royal 
Society B: Biological Sciences, 271(1535), pp. 191–6.
Franks, D. W., and Sherratt, T. N. (2007) ‘The evolution of 
multicomponent mimicry’, Journal of Theoretical Biology, 
244(4), pp. 631–9.
Fraser, S., Callahan, A., Klassen, D., and Sherratt, T. N. (2007) 
‘Empirical tests of the role of disruptive coloration in redu-
cing detectability’, Proc Biol Sci, 274(1615), pp. 1325–31.
Freret-Meurer, N. V., Fernandez, T. C., Lopes, D. A., Vaccani, 
A. C., and Okada, N. B. (2017) ‘Thanatosis in the Brazilian 
seahorse Hippocampus reidi Ginsburg, 1933 (Teleostei: 
Syngnathidae)’, Acta Ethologica, 20(1), pp. 81–4.
Fryer, J. C. F. (1914) ‘An investigation by pedigree breed-
ing into the polymorphism of Papilio polytes, Linn’, 
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. 
Series B, Containing Papers of a Biological Character, 204, 
pp. 227–54.
Gabbott, S. E., Donoghue, P. C. J., Sansom, R. S., Vinther, J., 
Dolocan, A., and Purnell, M. A. (2016) ‘Pigmented anat-
omy in Carboniferous cyclostomes and the evolution of 
the vertebrate eye’, Proceedings of the Royal Society B: 
Biological Sciences, 283, 20161151.
Gabrielsen, G., and Smith, E. (1985) ‘Physiological responses 
associated with feigned death in the American opossum’, 
Acta Physiologica, 123(4), pp. 393–8.
Gabritchevsky, E. (1924) Farbenpolymorphismus und 
Vererbung mimetischer Varietäten der Fliege Volucella 
bombylans und anderer “hummelähnlicher” Zweiflügler. 
Z Indukt Abstamm u Vererb, 32, pp. 321–53.
Gagliano, M. (2008) ‘On the spot: the absence of predators 
reveals eyespot plasticity in a marine fish’, Behavioral 
Ecology, 19(4), pp. 733–9.
Galarza, J. A., Nokelainen, O., Ashrafi, R., Hegna, R. H., and 
Mappes, J. (2014) ‘Temporal relationship between genetic 
and warning signal variation in the aposematic wood 
tiger moth (Parasemia plantaginis)’, Molecular Ecology, 
23(20), pp. 4939–57.
Galeano, S. P., and Harms, K. E. (2016) ‘Coloration in the 
polymorphic frog Oophaga pumilio associates with level of 
aggressiveness in intraspecific and interspecific behav-
ioral interactions’, Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology, 
70(1), pp. 83–97.
Gall, B. G., Stokes, A. N., French, S. S., Brodie, E. D., and 
Brodie, E. D. (2012) ‘Female newts (Taricha granulosa) 
produce tetrodotoxin laden eggs after long term captiv-
ity’, Toxicon, 60(6), pp. 1057–62.

REFERENCES
247
Gallup, G. G., Nash, R. F., and Ellison, A. L. (1971) ‘Tonic 
immobility as a reaction to predation: Artificial eyes as a 
fear stimulus for chickens’, Psychonomic Science, 23(1), 
pp. 79–80.
Gamberale-Stille, G., and Guilford, T. (2004) ‘Automimicry 
destabilizes aposematism: predator sample-and-reject 
behaviour may provide a solution’, Proceedings of the 
Royal Society of London B: Biological Sciences, 271(1557), 
pp. 2621–5.
Gamberale, G., and Tullberg, B. S. (1996) ‘Evidence for a 
peak-shift in predator generalization among aposem-
atic prey’, Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B: 
Biological Sciences, 263(1375), pp. 1329–34.
Gamberale, G., and Tullberg, B. S. (1998) ‘Aposematism 
and gregariousness: the combined effect of group size 
and coloration on signal repellence’, Proceedings of the 
Royal Society of London B: Biological Sciences, 265(1399), 
pp. 889–94.
Gan, W., Liu, F., Zhang, Z., and Li, D. (2010) ‘Predator per-
ception of detritus and eggsac decorations spun by orb-
web spiders Cyclosa octotuberculata: Do they function 
to  camouflage the spiders?’, Current Zoology, 56(3), 
pp. 379–87.
Geisler, W. S., Albrecht, D. G., Crane, A. M., and Stern, L. 
(2001) ‘Motion direction signals in the primary visual 
cortex of cat and monkey’, Visual Neuroscience, 18(4), 
pp. 501–16.
Gelperin, A. (1968) ‘Feeding behaviour of praying mantis 
- a learned modification’, Nature, 219(5152), pp. 399–400.
Gendron, R. P., and Staddon, J. E. (1983) ‘Searching for 
cryptic prey: the effect of search rate’, The American 
Naturalist, 121(2), pp. 172–86.
Gentry, G. L., and Dyer, L. A. (2002) ‘On the conditional 
nature of neotropical caterpillar defenses against their 
natural enemies’, Ecology, 83(11), pp. 3108–19.
Georges, S., Seriès, P., Frégnac, Y., and Lorenceau, J. 
(2002) ‘Orientation dependent modulation of apparent 
speed: psychophysical evidence’, Vision Research, 42(25), 
pp. 2757–72.
Georgeson, M. A., and Scott-Samuel, N. E. (1999) ‘Motion 
contrast: a new metric for direction discrimination’, 
Vision Research, 39(26), pp. 4393–402.
Getty, T. (1985) ‘Discriminability and the sigmoid func-
tional response: how optimal foragers could stabilize 
model–mimic complexes’, American Naturalist, 125(2), 
pp. 239–56.
Getty, T. (1987) ‘Crypsis, mimicry, and switching: the basic 
similarity of superficially different analyses’, The American 
Naturalist, 130(5), pp. 793–7.
Getty, T. (2002) ‘The discriminating babbler meets the opti-
mal diet hawk’, Animal Behaviour, 63, pp. 397–402. 
Gibran, F. Z. (2004) ‘Dying or illness feigning: an unre-
ported feeding tactic of the comb grouper Mycteroperca 
acutirostris (Serranidae) from the Southwest Atlantic’, 
Copeia, 2004(2), pp. 403–5.
Gibson, B. M., Lazareva, O. F., Gosselin, F., Schyns, P. G., 
and Wasserman, E. A. (2007) ‘Nonaccidental properties 
underlie shape recognition in Mammalian and non-
mammalian vision.’, Current Biology, 17, pp. 336–40.
Gibson, D. O. (1974) ‘Batesian mimicry without distaste-
fulness?’, Nature, 250, pp. 77–9.
Gibson, D. O. (1980) ‘The role of escape in mimicry and poly-
morphism. I. The response of captive birds to artificial 
prey’, Biological Journal of the Linnean Society, 14, pp. 201–14.
Gierer, A., and Meinhardt, H. (1972) ‘A theory of biological 
pattern formation’, Biological Cybernetics, 12, pp. 30–9.
Giguère, L., and Northcote, T. (1987) ‘Ingested prey increase 
risks of visual predation in transparent Chaoborus larvae’, 
Oecologia, 73(1), pp. 48–52.
Gilbert, C. D., and Li, W. (2013) ‘Top-down influences on 
visual processing’, Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 14(5).
Gilbert, F. (2005) ‘The evolution of imperfect mimicry.’, in 
Fellowes, M., Holloway, G., & Rolff, J. (eds) Insect 
Evolutionary Ecology. Wallingford: CABI, pp. 231–88.
Gildemeister, E. A., Payette, W. I., and Sullivan, A. M. (2017) 
‘Effects of size, caudal autotomy, and predator kairo-
mones on the foraging behavior of Allegheny Mountain 
dusky salamanders (Desmognathus ochrophaeus)’, Acta 
Ethologica, 20(2), pp. 157–64.
Gilman, R. T., Nuismer, S. L., and Jhwueng, D.-C. (2012) 
‘Coevolution in multidimensional trait space favours 
escape from parasites and pathogens’, Nature, 483(7389), 
pp. 328–30.
Giske, J., Aksnes, D. L., Baliño, B. M., Kaartvedt, S., Lie, U., 
Nordeide, J. T., Salvanes, A. G. V., Wakili, S. M., and 
Aadnesen, A. (1990) ‘Vertical distribution and trophic 
interactions of zooplankton and fish in Masfjorden, 
Norway’, Sarsia, 75(1), pp. 65–81.
Givnish, T. J. (1990) ‘Leaf mottling: Relation to growth 
form and leaf phenology and possible role as camou-
flage’, Functional Ecology, 4(4), pp. 463–74.
Glanville, P. W., and Allen, J. A. (1997) ‘Protective poly-
morphism in populations of computer-simulated moth-
like prey’, Oikos, 80, pp. 565–71.
Gluckman, T.-L., and Mundy, N. I. (2013) ‘Cuckoos in rap-
tors’ clothing: barred plumage illuminates a fundamen-
tal principle of Batesian mimicry’, Animal Behaviour, 
86(6), pp. 1165–81.
Gluckman, T.-L., and Mundy, N. I. (2017) ‘The differential 
expression of MC1R regulators in dorsal and ventral 
quail plumages during embryogenesis: Implications for 
plumage pattern formation’, PLoS One, 12, e0174714.
Gochfeld, M. (1984) ‘Antipredator behaviour: aggressive 
and distraction displays of shorebirds’, in Burger, J. & 
Olla, B. (eds.) Shorebirds: breeding behaviour and popula-
tions. New York: Plenum Press, pp. 289–377.

248
REFERENCES
Godin, J.-G. J., and Davis, S. A. (1995a) ‘Who dares, bene-
fits: predator approach behaviour in the guppy (Poecilia 
reticulata) deters predator pursuit’. Proceedings of the 
Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 259(1355), pp.193–200.
Godin, J.-G. J., and Davis, S. A. (1995b) ‘Boldness and 
predator deterrence: a reply to Milinski & Boltshauser’. 
Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 
262(1363), pp. 107–12.
Goldstein, E. B. and Brockmole, J. (2016) Sensation and per-
ception. 10th edn. Boston: Cengage Learning.
Gomez, D., and Théry, M. (2007) ‘Simultaneous crypsis 
and conspicuousness in color patterns: Comparative 
analysis of a neotropical rainforest bird community’, 
The American Naturalist, 169, pp. S42–S61.
Gompert, Z., Willmott, K., and Elias, M. (2011) ‘Heterogeneity 
in predator micro-habitat use and the maintenance of 
Müllerian mimetic diversity’, Journal of Theoretical Biology, 
281(1), pp. 39–46.
Goodger, J., Capon, R. J., and Woodrow, I. E. (2002) 
‘Cyanogenic polymorphism in Eucalyptus polyanthemos 
Schauer subsp. vestita L. Johnson and K. Hill (Myrtaceae)’, 
Biochemical Systematics and Ecology, 30(7), pp. 617–30.
Gordon, S. P., Kokko, H., Rojas, B., Nokelainen, O., and 
Mappes, J. (2015) ‘Colour polymorphism torn apart by 
opposing positive frequency-dependent selection, yet 
maintained in space’, Journal of Animal Ecology, 84(6), 
pp. 1555–64.
Goss-Custard, J. (1996) The Oystercatcher: from individuals 
to populations. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Götmark, F. (1987) ‘White underparts in gulls function as 
hunting camouflage’, Animal Behaviour, 35, pp. 1786–92.
Gottfried, M. D. (1989) ‘Earliest fossil evidence for protective 
pigmentation in an actinopterygian fish’, Historical 
Biology, 3, pp. 79–83.
Gould, S. J. (2010) Bully for Brontosaurus: reflections in natural 
history. New York: W. W. Norton & Co.
Grandcolas, P., and Desutter-Grandcolas, L. (1998) ‘Suc­
cessful use of a deimatic display by the praying man-
tid  Polyspilota aeruginosa against the yellow-vented 
bulbul’. Annales de la Société Entomologique de France, 34, 
pp. 335–6.
Grant, B. S., and Clarke, C. A. (2000) ‘Industrial melanism’, 
Nature Encyclopedia of Life Sciences. London: Nature 
Publishing Group.
Greene, E. (1989) ‘A diet-induced developmental poly-
morphism in a caterpillar’, Science, 243(4891), pp. 643–6.
Greene, H. W., and McDiarmid, R. W. (2005) ‘Wallace and 
Savage: heroes, theories and venomous snake mimicry’, 
in Donnelly, M.A., Crother, B.I., Guyer, C., Wake, M.H. 
& White, M.E. (eds) Ecology and Evolution in the Tropics: 
A Herpetological Perspective. Chicago (Illinois): University 
of Chicago Press., pp. 190–208.
Greeney, H., Dyer, L. and Smilanich, A. (2012) ‘Feeding by 
lepidopteran larvae is dangerous: A review of caterpillars’ 
chemical, physiological, morphological, and behavioral 
defenses against natural enemies’, Invertebrate Survival 
Journal, 9(1).
Greenwood, J. J. (1984) ‘The functional basis of frequency-
dependent food selection’, Biological Journal of the Linnean 
Society, 23(2–3), pp. 177–99.
Greenwood, J. J. (1985) ‘Frequency-dependent selection 
by seed-predators’, Oikos, 44(1), pp.195–210.
Greenwood, J. J., and Elton, R. A. (1979) ‘Analysing experi-
ments on frequency-dependent selection by predators’, 
The Journal of Animal Ecology, 48(3), pp. 721–37.
Greenwood, J. J. D., Cotton, P. A., and Wilson, D. M. (1989) 
‘Frequency-dependent delection on aposematic prey: 
some experiments’, Biological Journal of the Linnean 
Society, 36(1–2), pp. 213–26.
Greenwood, J. J. D., Wood, E. M., and Batchelor, S. (1981) 
‘Apostatic selection of distasteful prey’, Heredity, 47(Aug), 
pp. 27–34.
Gregory, P. T., and Gregory, L. A. (2006) ‘Immobility and 
supination in garter snakes (Thamnophis elegans) follow-
ing handling by human predators’, Journal of Comparative 
Psychology, 120(3), pp. 262–8.
Gregory, P. T., Isaac, L. A., and Griffiths, R. A. (2007) ‘Death 
feigning by grass snakes (Natrix natrix) in response to 
handling by human “predators.” ’, Journal of Comparative 
Psychology, 121(2), pp. 123–9.
Guilford, T. (1985) ‘Is kin selection involved in the evolu-
tion of warning coloration?’, Oikos, 45, pp. 31–6.
Guilford, T. (1988) ‘The evolution of conspicuous color-
ation’, The American Naturalist, 131, pp. S7-S21.
Guilford, T. (1994) ‘“Go-slow” signalling and the problem 
of automimicry’, Journal of Theoretical Biology, 170(3), pp. 
311–16.
Guilford, T., and Dawkins, M. S. (1987) ‘Search images 
not  proven: a reappraisal of recent evidence’, Animal 
Behaviour, 35(6), pp. 1838–45.
Guilford, T. and Dawkins, M. S. (1989a) ‘Search image ver-
sus search rate: A reply to Lawrence’, Animal Behaviour, 
37(1), pp. 160–2.
Guilford, T., and Dawkins, M. S. (1989b) ‘Search image 
versus search rate: Two different ways to enhance prey 
capture’, Animal Behaviour, 37(1), pp. 163–5.
Guilford, T., and Dawkins, M. S. (1993) ‘Are warning 
colors handicaps?’, Evolution, 47(2), pp. 400–16.
Guillot, R., Ceinos, R. M., Cal, R., Rotllant, J., and Cerdá-
Reverter, J. M. (2012) ‘Transient ectopic overexpression 
of agouti-signalling protein 1 (Asip1) induces pigment 
anomalies in flatfish’, PLoS One, 7, e48526.
Gyssels, F. G., and Stoks, R. (2005) ‘Threat-sensitive responses 
to predator attacks in a damselfly’, Ethology, 111(4), pp. 
411–23.
Haddock, S. H. D., Moline, M. A., and Case, J. F. (2010) 
‘Bioluminescence in the sea’, Annual Review of Marine 
Science, 2, pp. 443–93.

REFERENCES
249
Hall, J. R., Cuthill, I. C., Baddeley, R., Attwood, A. S., 
Munafò, M. R., and Scott-Samuel, N. E. (2016) ‘Dynamic 
dazzle distorts speed perception’, PloS One, 11(5), 
e0155162.
Hall, J. R., Cuthill, I. C., Baddeley, R., Shohet, A. J., and 
Scott-Samuel, N. E. (2013) ‘Camouflage, detection and 
identification of moving targets’, Proc Biol Sci, 280(1758), 
20130064.
Halperin, T., Carmel, L., and Hawlena, D. (2017) ‘Movement 
correlates of lizards’ dorsal pigmentation patterns’, 
Functional Ecology, 31(2), pp. 370–6.
Halpin, C. G., and Rowe, C. (2017) ‘The effect of distaste-
fulness and conspicuous coloration on the post- 
attack rejection behaviour of predators and survival 
of prey’, Biological Journal of the Linnean Society, 120(1), 
pp. 236–44.
Halpin, C. G., Skelhorn, J., and Rowe, C. (2008a) ‘Being 
conspicuous and defended: selective benefits for the 
individual’, Behavioral Ecology, 19(5), pp. 1012–17.
Halpin, C. G., Skelhorn, J., and Rowe, C. (2008b) ‘Naïve 
predators and selection for rare conspicuous defended 
prey: the initial evolution of aposematism revisited’, 
Animal Behaviour, 75(3), pp. 771–81.
Halpin, C. G., Skelhorn, J., and Rowe, C. (2013) 
‘Predators’ decisions to eat defended prey depend on 
the size of undefended prey’, Animal Behaviour, 85(6), 
pp. 1315–21.
Halpin, C. G., Skelhorn, J., and Rowe, C. (2014) ‘Increased 
predation of nutrient-enriched aposematic prey’, Pro­
ceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 281(1781). 
doi: 10.1098/rspb.2013.3255
Ham, A. D., Ihalainen, E., Lindström, L., and Mappes, J. 
(2006) ‘Does colour matter? The importance of colour in 
avoidance learning, memorability and generalisation’, 
Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology, 60(4), pp. 482–91.
Hämäläinen, L., Valkonen, J., Mappes, J., and Rojas, B. 
(2015) ‘Visual illusions in predator–prey interactions: 
birds find moving patterned prey harder to catch’, 
Animal Cognition, 18(5), pp. 1059–68.
Hamner, W. M. (1995) ‘Predation, cover, and convergent 
evolution in epipelagic oceans’, Marine & Freshwater 
Behaviour & Phy, 26(2–4), pp. 71–89.
Hancox, A. P., and Allen, J. A. (1991) ‘A simulation of 
­evasive mimicry in the wild’, Journal of Zoology, 223, 
pp. 9–13.
Hanifin, C. T. (2010) ‘The chemical and evolutionary ecol-
ogy of tetrodotoxin (TTX) toxicity in terrestrial verte-
brates’, Marine Drugs, 8(3), pp. 577–93.
Hanifin, C. T., Brodie Jr, E. D., and Brodie III, E. D. (2008) 
‘Phenotypic mismatches reveal escape from arms-race 
coevolution’, PLoS Biology, 6(3), e60.
Hanlon, R., Chiao, C.-C., Mäthger, L., Barbosa, A., Buresch, 
K., and Chubb, C. (2009) ‘Cephalopod dynamic camou-
flage: bridging the continuum between background 
matching and disruptive coloration’, Philosophical Trans­
actions of the Royal Society of London B: Biological Sciences, 
364(1516), pp. 429–37.
Hanlon, R. T., Conroy, L. A., and Forsythe, J. W. (2008) 
‘Mimicry and foraging behaviour of two tropical sand-
flat octopus species off North Sulawesi, Indonesia’, 
Biological Journal of the Linnean Society, 93(1), pp. 23–38.
Hansen, L. S., Gonzales, S. F., Toft, S., and Bilde, T. (2008) 
‘Thanatosis as an adaptive male mating strategy in the 
nuptial gift-giving spider Pisaura mirabilis’, Behavioral 
Ecology, 19(3), pp. 546–51.
Harper, G. R., and Pfennig, D. W. (2007) ‘Mimicry on the 
edge: why do mimics vary in resemblance to their 
model in different parts of their geographical range?’, 
Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 
274(1621), pp. 1955–61.
Harper, R. D., and Case, J. F. (1999) ‘Disruptive counteril-
lumination and its anti-predatory value in the plainfish 
[sic] midshipman Porichthys notatus’, Marine Biology, 
134, pp. 529–40.
Harris, R. J., and Arbuckle, K. (2016) ‘Tempo and mode of 
the evolution of venom and poison in tetrapods’, Toxins, 
8(7), p. E193.
Harvey, P. H., Bull, J., Pemberton, M., and Paxton, R. J. 
(1982) ‘The evolution of aposematic coloration in dis-
tasteful prey: a family model’, The American Naturalist, 
119(5), pp. 710–19.
Hasson, O. (1991) ‘Pursuit-deterrent signals: communica-
tion between prey and predator’, Trends in Ecology & 
Evolution, 6(10), pp. 325–9.
Hasson, O., Hibbard, R., and Ceballos, G. (1989) ‘The pur-
suit deterrent function of tail-wagging in the zebra-
tailed lizard (Callisaurus draconoides)’, Canadian Journal of 
Zoology, 67(5), pp. 1203–9.
Hatle, J. D., and Faragher, S. G. (1998) ‘Slow movement 
increases the survivorship of a chemically defended 
grasshopper in predatory encounters’, Oecologia, 115(1–2), 
pp. 260–7.
Hawlena, D. (2006) ‘Blue tail and striped body: why do 
lizards change their infant costume when growing up?’, 
Behavioral Ecology, 17, pp. 889–96.
Hawlena, D. (2009) ‘Colorful tails fade when lizards adopt 
less risky behaviors’, Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology, 
64(2), pp. 205–13.
Hecht, M. K., and Marien, D. (1956) ‘The coral snake mimic 
problem: a re-interpretation’, Journal of Morphology, 98, 
pp. 335–56.
Hegna, R. H., Galarza, J. A., and Mappes, J. (2015) ‘Global 
phylogeography and geographical variation in warning 
coloration of the wood tiger moth (Parasemia plantagi-
nis)’, Journal of Biogeography, 42(8), pp. 1469–81.
Hegna, R. H., Nokelainen, O., Hegna, J. R., and Mappes, J. 
(2013) ‘To quiver or to shiver: increased melanization 
benefits thermoregulation, but reduces warning signal 

250
REFERENCES
efficacy in the wood tiger moth’, Proceedings of the Royal 
Society of London B: Biological Sciences, 280(1755), pp. 
2012–812.
Heinrich, B. (2012) ‘A heretofore unreported instant color 
change in a beetle, Nicrophorus tomentosus Weber 
(Coleoptera: Silphidae)’, Northeastern Naturalist, 19(2), 
pp. 345–52.
Hennig, C. W., Dunlap, W. P., and Gallup, G. G. (1976) 
‘The effect of distance between predator and prey and 
the opportunity to escape on tonic immobility in Anolis 
carolinensis’, The Psychological Record, 26(3), pp. 312–20.
Henry, G. H., Bishop, P. O., and Dreher, B. (1974) ‘Orientation, 
axis and direction as stimulus parameters for striate cells’, 
Vision Research, 14(9), pp. 767–77.
Herberstein, M. E., Baldwin, H. J., and Gaskett, A. C. 
(2014) ‘Deception down under: is Australia a hot spot 
for deception?’, Behavioral Ecology, 25(1), pp. 12–16.
Herberstein, M. E., Craig, C. L., Coddington, J. A., and 
Elgar, M. A. (2000) ‘The functional significance of silk 
decorations of orb-web spiders: a critical review of the 
empirical evidence’, Biological Reviews, 75(4), pp. 649–69.
Herring, P. (2001) The biology of the deep ocean. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press.
Hespenheide, H. A. (1973) ‘A novel mimicry complex: bee-
tles and flies’, Journal of Entomology Series A: General 
Entomology, 48(1), pp. 49–55.
Hespenheide, H. A. (1975) ‘Reversed sex-limited mimicry 
in a beetle’, Evolution, 29, pp. 780–3.
Hessen, D. O. (1985) ‘Selective zooplankton predation by 
pre-adult roach (Rutilus rutilus): the size-selective hypoth-
esis versus the visibility-selective hypothesis’, Hydrobiologia, 
124(1), pp. 73–9.
Heurich, M., Zeis, K., Küchenhoff, H., Müller, J., Belotti, E., 
Bufka, L., and Woelfing, B. (2016) ‘Selective predation of 
a stalking predator on ungulate prey’, PloS One, 11(8), 
e0158449.
Higginson, A. D., De Wert, L., Rowland, H. M., Speed, M. P., 
and Ruxton, G. D. (2012) ‘Masquerade is associated 
with polyphagy and larval overwintering in Lepidoptera’, 
Biological Journal of the Linnean Society, 106(1), pp. 90–103.
Higginson, A. D., Delf, J., Ruxton, G. D., and Speed, M. P. 
(2011) ‘Growth and reproductive costs of larval defence 
in the aposematic lepidopteran Pieris brassicae’, Journal 
of Animal Ecology, 80(2), pp. 384–92.
Hill, R. I. (2010) ‘Habitat segregation among mimetic ithom-
iine butterflies (Nymphalidae)’, Evolutionary Ecology, 
24(2), pp. 273–85.
Hill, R. I., and Vaca, J. F. (2004) ‘Differential wing 
strength in Pierella butterflies (Nymphalidae, Satyrinae) 
supports the deflection hypothesis’, Biotropica, 36(3), 
pp. 362–70.
Hines, H. M., Counterman, B. A., Papa, R., de Moura, P. A., 
Cardoso, M. Z., Linares, M., Mallet, J., Reed, R. D., Jiggins, 
C. D., Kronforst, M. R., and McMillan, W. O. (2011) 
‘Wing patterning gene redefines the mimetic history 
of  Heliconius butterflies’, Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 108(49), 
pp. 19666–71.
Hines, H. M., and Williams, P. H. (2012) ‘Mimetic colour 
pattern evolution in the highly polymorphic Bombus tri-
fasciatus (Hymenoptera: Apidae) species complex and 
its comimics’, Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society, 
166(4), pp. 805–26.
Hiroshi, N., Haruhisa, N., Ryozo, F., and Noriko, O. (1989) 
‘Correlation between body color and behavior in the 
upside-down catfish, Synodontis nigriventris’, Com­
parative Biochemistry and Physiology Part A: Physiology, 
92, pp. 323–6.
Hoekstra, H. E. (2011) ‘From Darwin to DNA: the genetic 
basis of color adaptations’, in Losos, J. B. (ed.), In the 
Light of Evolution: Essays from the Laboratory and Field. 
Greenwood Village, CO: Roberts and Co. Publishers, 
pp. 277–95. Hogan, B. G., Cuthill, I. C., and Scott-
Samuel, N. E. (2016a) ‘Dazzle camouflage, target track-
ing, and the confusion effect’, Behavioral Ecology, 27(5), 
pp. 1547–51.
Hogan, B. G., Cuthill, I. C., and Scott-Samuel, N. E. (2017) 
‘Dazzle camouflage and the confusion effect: the influ-
ence of varying speed on target tracking’, Animal 
Behaviour, 123, pp. 349–53.
Hogan, B. G., Scott-Samuel, N. E. and Cuthill, I. C. (2016b) 
‘Contrast, contours and the confusion effect in dazzle 
camouflage’, Royal Society Open Science, 3(7), 160180.
Holen, Ø. H. (2013) ‘Disentangling taste and toxicity in 
aposematic prey’, Proceedings of the Royal Society Series B: 
Biological Sciences, 280(1753), pp. 1–8.
Holen, Ø. H., and Johnstone, R. A. (2004) ‘The evolution of 
mimicry under constraints’, American Naturalist, 164(5), 
pp. 598–613.
Holen, Ø. H., and Svennungsen, T. O. (2012) ‘Aposematism 
and the handicap principle’, The American Naturalist, 
180(5), pp. 629–41.
Holley, A. J. (1993) ‘Do brown hares signal to foxes?’, 
Ethology, 94(1), pp. 21–30.
Holling, C. S. (1965) ‘The functional response of predators 
to prey density, and its role in mimicry and population 
regulation’, Memoirs of the Entomological Society of Canada, 
45, pp. 1–60.
Holm, E., and Kirsten, J. F. (1979) ‘Pre-adaptation and 
speed mimicry among Namib Desert scarabaeids with 
orange elytra’, Journal of Arid Environments, 2, pp.  
263–71.
Holt, A. L., and Sweeney, A. M. (2016) ‘Open water cam-
ouflage via ‘leaky’ light guides in the midwater squid 
Galiteuthis’, Journal of The Royal Society Interface, 13(119), 
20160230.

REFERENCES
251
Honma, A., Mappes, J., and Valkonen, J. K. (2015) ‘Warning 
coloration can be disruptive: aposematic marginal wing 
patterning in the wood tiger moth’, Ecology and Evolution, 
5(21), pp. 4863–74.
Honma, A., Oku, S., and Nishida, T. (2006) ‘Adaptive sig-
nificance of death feigning posture as a specialized 
inducible defence against gape-limited predators’, 
Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B: Biological 
Sciences, 273(1594), pp. 1631–6.
Honma, A., Takakura, K., and Nishida, T. (2008) ‘Optimal-
foraging predator favors commensalistic Batesian mim-
icry’, PloS One, 3(10). https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.
pone.0003411
Hoskin, C. J., Higgie, M., McDonald, K. R., and Moritz, C. 
(2005) ‘Reinforcement drives rapid allopatric speciation’, 
Nature, 437, pp. 1353–6.
Hossie, T., Hassall, C., Knee, W., and Sherratt, T. (2013) 
‘Species with a chemical defence, but not chemical 
offence, live longer’, Journal of Evolutionary Biology, 
26(7), pp. 1598–1602.
Hossie, T. J., and Sherratt, T. N. (2012) ‘Eyespots interact 
with body colour to protect caterpillar-like prey from 
avian predators’, Animal Behaviour, 84(1), pp. 167–73.
Hossie, T. J. and Sherratt, T. N. (2014) ‘Does defensive pos-
ture increase mimetic fidelity of caterpillars with eye-
spots to their putative snake models?’, Current Zoology, 
60(1), pp. 76–89.
Hossie, T. J., Skelhorn, J., Breinholt, J. W., Kawahara, A. Y., 
and Sherratt, T. N. (2015) ‘Body size affects the evolution of 
eyespots in caterpillars’, Proceedings of the National Academy 
of Sciences of the United States of America, 112(21), pp. 6664–9.
Houston, A. I., Stevens, M., and Cuthill, I. C. (2007) ‘Animal 
camouflage: compromise or specialize in a 2 patch-type 
environment?’, Behavioral Ecology, 18(4), pp. 769–75.
How, M. J., and Zanker, J. M. (2014) ‘Motion camouflage 
induced by zebra stripes’, Zoology, 117(3), pp. 163–70.
Howard, J., Grill, S. W., and Bois, J. S. (2011) ‘Turing’s next 
steps: the mechanochemical basis of morphogenesis.’, 
Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology, 12, pp. 392–8.
Howarth, B., and Edmunds, M. (2000) ‘The phenology of 
Syrphidae (Diptera): are they Batesian mimics of 
Hymenoptera’, Biological Journal of the Linnean Society, 
71(3), pp. 437–57.
Howarth, B., Edmunds, M., and Gilbert, F. (2004) ‘Does the 
abundance of hoverfly (Syrphidae) mimics depend on 
the numbers of their hymenopteran models?’, Evolution, 
58(2), pp. 367–75.
Howse, P., and Allen, J. A. (1994) ‘Satyric mimicry: the evolu-
tion of apparent imperfection’, Proceedings of the Royal 
Society of London B: Biological Sciences, 257(1349), pp. 111–14.
Howse, P. E. (2013) ‘Lepidopteran wing patterns and the 
evolution of satyric mimicry’, Biological Journal of the 
Linnean Society, 109(1), pp. 203–14.
Hozumi, N., and Miyatake, T. (2005) ‘Body-size dependent 
difference 
in 
death-feigning 
behavior 
of 
adult 
Callosobruchus chinensis’, Journal of Insect Behavior, 18(4), 
pp. 557–66.
Huang, J.-N., Cheng, R.-C., Li, D., and Tso, I. M. (2011) 
‘Salticid predation as one potential driving force of ant 
mimicry in jumping spiders’, Proceedings of the Royal 
Society B: Biological Sciences, 278(1710), pp. 1356–64.
Hughes, A. E., Jones, C., Joshi, K., and Tolhurst, D. J. (2017) 
‘Diverted by dazzle: perceived movement direction is 
biased by target pattern orientation’. Proceedings of the 
Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 284(1850). doi: 10.1098/
rspb.2017.0015
Hughes, A. E., Magor-Elliott, R. S., and Stevens, M. (2015) 
‘The role of stripe orientation in target capture success’, 
Frontiers in Zoology, 12(1), p. 17.
Hughes, A. E., Troscianko, J., and Stevens, M. (2014) 
‘Motion dazzle and the effects of target patterning on 
capture success’, BMC Evolutionary Biology, 14(1),  
p. 201.
Hummel, J. E. (2013) ‘Object recognition’, in Reisberg, D. 
(ed.), Oxford Handbook of Cognitive Psychology, New York: 
Oxford University Press, pp. 32–46.
Husak, J. F., Macedonia, J. M., Fox, S. F., and Sauceda, R. C. 
(2006) ‘Predation cost of conspicuous male coloration in 
collared lizards (Crotaphytus collaris): An experimental 
test using clay-covered model lizards’, Ethology, 112(6), 
pp. 572–80.
Ihalainen, E., Lindström, L., and Mappes, J. (2007) 
‘Investigating Müllerian mimicry: predator learning and 
variation in prey defences’, Journal of Evolutionary 
Biology, 20(2), pp. 780–91.
Ihalainen, E., Rowland, H. M., Speed, M. P., Ruxton, G. D., 
and Mappes, J. (2012) ‘Prey community structure 
affects how predators select for Mullerian mimicry’, 
Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 
279(1736), pp. 2099–105.
Ingalls, V. (1993) ‘Startle and habituation responses of blue 
jays (Cyanocitta cristata) in a laboratory simulation of 
anti-predator defenses of Catocala moths (Lepidoptera: 
Noctuidae)’, Behaviour, 126(1), pp. 77–95.
Ioannou, C., and Krause, J. (2009) ‘Interactions between 
background matching and motion during visual detec-
tion can explain why cryptic animals keep still’, Biology 
Letters, 5, pp. 191–3.
Ioannou, C. C., Morrell, L. J., Ruxton, G. D., and Krause, J. 
(2009) ‘The effect of prey density on predators: con-
spicuousness and attack success are sensitive to spatial 
scale’, The American Naturalist, 173(4), pp. 499–506.
Isbell, L. A., and Bidner, L. R. (2016) ‘Vervet monkey 
(Chlorocebus pygerythrus) alarm calls to leopards (Panthera 
pardus) function as a predator deterrent’, Behaviour, 153(5), 
pp. 591–606.

252
REFERENCES
Ishii, Y., and Shimada, M. (2010) ‘The effect of learning and 
search images on predator–prey interactions’, Population 
Ecology, 52(1), pp. 27.
Itescu, Y., Schwarz, R., Meiri, S., and Pafilis, P. (2017) 
‘Intraspecific competition, not predation, drives lizard tail 
loss on islands’, Journal of Animal Ecology, 86(1), pp. 66–74.
Jablonski, N. G., and Chaplin, G. (2010) ‘Human skin pig-
mentation as an adaptation to UV radiation’, Proceedings 
of the National Academy of Sciences, 107, pp. 8962–8.
Jackson, J. F., Ingram, W., and Campbell, H. W. (1976) ‘The 
dorsal pigmentation pattern of snakes as an antipreda-
tor strategy: a multivariate approach’, The American 
Naturalist, 110, pp. 1029–53.
Jaenike, J., and Holt, R. D. (1991) ‘Genetic variation for 
habitat preference: evidence and explanations’, The 
American Naturalist, 137, pp. S67–S90.
Jamie, G. A. (2017) ‘Signals, cues and the nature of mim-
icry’, Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 
284(1849). doi: 10.1098/rspb.2016.2080
Janssen, J. (1981) ‘Searching for zooplankton just outside 
Snell’s window’, Limnology and Oceanography, 26(6), 
pp. 1168–71.
Janzen, D. H., Hallwachs, W., and Burns, J. M. (2010) ‘A 
tropical horde of counterfeit predator eyes’, Proceedings 
of the National Academy of Sciences, 107(26), pp. 11659–65.
Järvi, T., Sillentullberg, B., and Wiklund, C. (1981) ‘The 
cost of being aposematic: an experimental study of pre-
dation on larvae of Papilio machaon by the great tit, Parus 
major’, Oikos, 36(3), pp. 267–72.
Jeffords, M. R., Sternburg, J. G., and Waldbauer, G. P. 
(1979) ‘Batesian mimicry - field demonstration of the 
survival value of pipevine swallowtail and monarch 
color patterns’, Evolution, 33(1), pp. 275–86.
Jiggins, C. D. (2017) The Ecology and Evolution of Heliconius 
Butterflies. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Jiggins, C. D., Estrada, C., and Rodrigues, A. (2004) ‘Mimicry 
and the evolution of premating isolation in Heliconius mel-
pomene Linnaeus’, Journal of Evolutionary Biology, 17(3), 
pp. 680–91.
Jiggins, C. D., Naisbit, R. E., Coe, R. L., and Mallet, J. (2001) 
‘Reproductive isolation caused by colour pattern mim-
icry’, Nature, 411(6835), pp. 302–5.
Johnsen, S. (2001) ‘Hidden in plain sight: the ecology and 
physiology of organismal transparency’, The Biological 
Bulletin, 201(3), pp. 301–18.
Johnsen, S. (2002) ‘Cryptic and conspicuous coloration in 
the pelagic environment.’, Proceedings of the Royal Society 
B: Biological Sciences, 269, pp. 243–56.
Johnsen, S. (2005) ‘The red and the black: bioluminescence 
and the color of animals in the deep sea’, Integrative and 
Comparative Biology, 45(2), pp. 234–46.
Johnsen, S. (2012) The optics of life: a biologist’s guide to light 
in nature. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Johnsen, S. (2014) ‘Hide and seek in the open sea: pelagic 
camouflage and visual countermeasures’, Annual Review 
of Marine Science, 6, pp. 369–92.
Johnsen, S., Gagnon, Y. L., Marshall, N. J., Cronin, T. W., 
Gruev, V., and Powell, S. (2016) ‘Polarization vision sel-
dom increases the sighting distance of silvery fish’, 
Current Biology, 26(16), pp. R752–4.
Johnsen, S., Gassmann, E., Reynolds, R. A., Stramski, D., 
and Mobley, C. (2014) ‘The asymmetry of the under-
water horizontal light field and its implications for mir-
ror-based camouflage in silvery pelagic fish’, Limnology 
and Oceanography, 59(6), pp. 1839–52.
Johnsen, S., Marshall, N. J., and Widder, E. A. (2011) 
‘Polarization sensitivity as a contrast enhancer in pela-
gic predators: lessons from in situ polarization imaging 
of transparent zooplankton’, Philosophical Transactions of 
the Royal Society of London B: Biological Sciences, 366(1565), 
pp. 655–70.
Johnsen, S., and Sosik, H. M. (2003) ‘Cryptic coloration and 
mirrored sides as camouflage strategies in near-surface 
pelagic habitats: Implications for foraging and predator 
avoidance’, Limnology and Oceanography, 48(3), pp. 1277–88.
Johnsen, S., and Widder, E. A. (1998) ‘Transparency and 
visibility of gelatinous zooplankton from the northwest-
ern Atlantic and Gulf of Mexico’, The Biological Bulletin, 
195(3), pp. 337–48.
Johnsen, S., and Widder, E. A. (2001) ‘Ultraviolet absorp-
tion in transparent zooplankton and its implications for 
depth distribution and visual predation’, Marine Biology, 
138(4), pp. 717–30.
Johnsen, S., Widder, E. A., and Mobley, C. D. (2004) 
‘Propagation and perception of bioluminescence: fac-
tors affecting counterillumination as a cryptic strategy’, 
The Biological Bulletin, 207, pp. 1–16.
Johnson, N. C., Graham, J. H., and Smith, F. A. (1997) 
‘Functioning of mycorrhizal associations along the 
mutualism–parasitism continuum’, New Phytologist, 135, 
pp. 575–85.
Johnstone, R. A., and Grafen, A. (1993) ‘Dishonesty and the 
handicap principle’, Animal Behaviour, 46(4), pp. 759–64.
Jones, B. W., and Nishiguchi, M. K. (2004) ‘Counterillumination 
in the hawaiian bobtail squid, Euprymna scolopes Berry 
(Mollusca: Cephalopoda)’, Marine Biology, 144, pp. 1151–5.
Jones, K. J., and Hill, W. L. (2001) ‘Auditory perception of 
hawks and owls for passerine alarm calls’, Ethology, 
107(8), pp. 717–26.
Jones, R., Fenton, A., Speed, M., and Mappes, J. (2017) 
‘Investment in multiple defences protects a nematode-
bacterium symbiosis from predation’, Animal Behaviour, 
129, pp. 1–8.
Jones, R. S., Davis, S. C., and Speed, M. P. (2013) ‘Defence 
cheats can degrade protection of chemically defended 
prey’, Ethology, 119(1), pp. 52–7.

REFERENCES
253
Jones, R. S., Fenton, A., and Speed, M. P. (2015) ‘ “Parasite-
induced 
aposematism” 
protects 
entomopathogenic 
nematode parasites against invertebrate enemies’, 
Behavioral Ecology, 27(2), pp. 645–51.
Joron, M. (2003) ‘Mimicry’, in Cardé, R.T., & Resh, V.H. 
(eds) Encyclopedia of Insects. New York: Academic Press, 
pp. 417–26.
Joron, M., Frezal, L., Jones, R. T., Chamberlain, N. L., Lee, 
S. F., Haag, C. R., Whibley, A., Becuwe, M., Baxter, S. W., 
Ferguson, L., Wilkinson, P. A., Salazar, C., Davidson, C., 
Clark, R., Quail, M. A., Beasley, H., Glithero, R., Lloyd, 
C., Sims, S., Jones, M. C., Rogers, J., Jiggins, C. D., and 
Ffrench-Constant, R. H. (2011) ‘Chromosomal rearrange-
ments maintain a polymorphic supergene controlling 
butterfly mimicry’, Nature, 477(7363), pp. 203–6.
Joron, M., and Iwasa, Y. (2005) ‘The evolution of a Müllerian 
mimic in a spatially distributed community’, Journal of 
Theoretical Biology, 237(1), pp. 87–103.
Joron, M., and Mallet, J. L. B. (1998) ‘Diversity in mimicry: 
paradox or paradigm?’, Trends in Ecology & Evolution, 
13(11), pp. 461–6.
Joron, M., Papa, R., Beltran, M., Chamberlain, N., Mavarez, 
J., Baxter, S., Abanto, M., Bermingham, E., Humphray, 
S. J., Rogers, J., Beasley, H., Barlow, K., Ffrench-Constant, 
R. H., Mallet, J., McMillan, W. O., and Jiggins, C. D. 
(2006) ‘A conserved supergene locus controls colour 
pattern diversity in Heliconius butterflies’, PloS Biology, 
4(10), pp. 1831–40.
Joron, M., Wynne, I. R., Lamas, G., and Mallet, J. (1999) 
‘Variable selection and the coexistence of multiple mimetic 
forms of the butterfly Heliconius numata’, Evolutionary 
Ecology, 13(7–8), pp. 721–54.
Jousset, A., Rochat, L., Péchy-Tarr, M., Keel, C., Scheu, S., 
and Bonkowski, M. (2009) ‘Predators promote defence of 
rhizosphere bacterial populations by selective feeding on 
non-toxic cheaters’, The ISME journal, 3(6), pp. 666–74.
Kamilar, J. M. (2009) ‘Interspecific variation in primate 
countershading: Effects of activity pattern, body mass, 
and phylogeny’, International Journal of Primatology, 30, 
pp. 877–91.
Kamilar, J. M., and Bradley, B. J. (2011) ‘Countershading is 
related to positional behavior in primates’, Journal of 
Zoology, 283, pp. 227–33.
Kang, C., Kim, Y. E., and Jang, Y. (2016) ‘Colour and pattern 
change against visually heterogeneous backgrounds in 
the tree frog Hyla japonica’, Scientific Reports, 6, 22601.
Kang, C., Sherratt, T. N., Kim, Y. E., Shin, Y., Moon, J., 
Song, U., Kang, J. Y., Kim, K., and Jang, Y. (2017) 
‘Differential predation drives the geographical diver-
gence in multiple traits in aposematic frogs’, Behavioral 
Ecology, 28, pp. 1122–30.
Kang, C., Stevens, M., Moon, J.-y., Lee, S.-I., and Jablonski, 
P. G. (2015) ‘Camouflage through behavior in moths: the 
role of background matching and disruptive coloration’, 
Behavioral Ecology, 26(1), pp. 45–54.
Kang, C. K., Moon, J. Y., Lee, S. I., and Jablonski, P. (2012) 
‘Camouflage through an active choice of a resting spot 
and body orientation in moths’, Journal of Evolutionary 
Biology, 25(9), pp. 1695–1702.
Kanizsa, G., Renzi, P., Conte, S., Compostela, C., and 
Guerani, L. (1993) ‘Amodal completion in mouse 
vision’, Perception, 22(6), pp. 713–21.
Kapan, D. D. (2001) ‘Three-butterfly system provides a field 
test of Müllerian mimicry’, Nature, 409(6818), pp. 338–40.
Karasov, T. L., Chae, E., Herman, J. J., and Bergelson, J. 
(2017) ‘Mechanisms to mitigate the trade-off between 
growth and defense’, The Plant Cell, 29(4), pp. 666–80.
Kareksela, S., Härmä, O., Lindstedt, C., Siitari, H., and 
Suhonen, J. (2013) ‘Effect of willow tit Poecile montanus 
alarm calls on attack rates by pygmy owls Glaucidium 
passerinum’, Ibis, 155(2), pp. 407–12.
Karplus, I., and Algom, D. (1981) ‘Visual cues for preda-
tor  face recognition by reef fishes’, Zeitschrift Fur 
Tierpsychologie-Journal of Comparative Ethology, 55(4), 
pp. 343–64.
Kassarov, L. (1999) ‘Are birds able to taste and reject  
butterflies based on ‘beak mark tasting’? A different 
point of view’, Behaviour, 136(8), pp. 965–81.
Kavanagh, P. H., Shaw, R. C., and Burns, K. C. (2016) 
‘Potential aposematism in an insular tree species: are 
signals dishonest early in ontogeny?’, Biological Journal 
of the Linnean Society, 118(4), pp. 951–8.
Kawaguchi, I., and Sasaki, A. (2006) ‘The wave speed of 
intergradation zone in two-species lattice Müllerian 
mimicry model’, Journal of Theoretical Biology, 243(4), 
pp. 594–603.
Kazemi, B., Gamberale-Stille, G., Tullberg, B. S., and 
Leimar, O. (2014) ‘Stimulus salience as an explanation 
for imperfect mimicry’, Current Biology, 24(9), pp. 965–9.
Keeler, C. E. (1925) ‘Recent work by Gabritchevsky on the 
inheritance of color varieties in Volucella bombylans’, 
Psyche, 33, pp. 22–7.
Kekäläinen, J., Huuskonen, H., Kiviniemi, V., and Taskinen, 
J. (2010) ‘Visual conditions and habitat shape the color-
ation of the Eurasian perch (Perca fluviatilis L.): a trade-
off between camouflage and communication?’, Biological 
Journal of the Linnean Society, 99, pp. 47–59.
Kelley, J. L., Fitzpatrick, J. L., and Merilaita, S. (2013) ‘Spots 
and stripes: ecology and colour pattern evolution in but-
terflyfishes’, Proceedings of the Royal Society B-Biological 
Sciences, 280(1757).
Kelley, J. L., and Merilaita, S. (2015) ‘Testing the role of 
background matching and self-shadow concealment in 
explaining countershading coloration in wild-caught 
rainbowfish’, Biological Journal of the Linnean Society, 114, 
pp. 915–28.

254
REFERENCES
Kelley, J. L., Rodgers, G. M., and Morrell, L. J. (2016) ‘Conflict 
between background matching and social signalling in a 
colour-changing freshwater fish’, Royal Society Open 
Science, 3(6), 160040.
Kelley, J. L., Taylor, I., Hart, N. S., and Partridge, J. C. 
(2017) ‘Aquatic prey use countershading camouflage to 
match the visual background’, Behavioral Ecology, 28(5), 
1314–1322.
Kelley, L. A., and Kelley, J. L. (2013) ‘Animal visual illusion 
and confusion: the importance of a perceptual perspec-
tive’, Behavioral Ecology, 25(3), pp. 450–63.
Kellner, R. L. (2002) ‘Molecular identification of an endo-
symbiotic bacterium associated with pederin biosynthesis 
in Paederus sabaeus (Coleoptera: Staphylinidae)’, Insect 
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, 32(4), pp. 389–95.
Kelman, E. J., Baddeley, R. J., Shohet, A. J., and Osorio, D. 
(2007) ‘Perception of visual texture and the expression 
of disruptive camouflage by the cuttlefish, Sepia offici-
nalis’, Proc Biol Sci, 274(1616), pp. 1369–75.
Kelman, E. J., Osorio, D., and Baddeley, R. J. (2008) ‘A 
review of cuttlefish camouflage and object recognition 
and evidence for depth perception’, J Exp Biol, 211(Pt 11), 
pp. 1757–63.
Kemp, D. J., Herberstein, M. E., Fleishman, L. J., Endler, J. A., 
Bennett, A. T. D., Dyer, A. G., Hart, N. S., Marshall, J., and 
Whiting, M. J. (2015) ‘An integrative framework for the 
appraisal of coloration in nature’, American Naturalist, 
185(6), pp. 705–24.
Kikuchi, D. W., Malick, G., Webster, R. J., Whissell, E., and 
Sherratt, T. N. (2015) ‘An empirical test of 2-dimensional 
signal detection theory applied to Batesian mimicry’, 
Behavioral Ecology, 26(4), pp. 1226–35.
Kikuchi, D. W., and Pfennig, D. W. (2010) ‘Predator cogni-
tion permits imperfect coral snake mimicry’, American 
Naturalist, 176(6), pp. 830–4.
Kikuchi, D. W., and Pfennig, D. W. (2012) ‘A Batesian mimic 
and its model share color production mechanisms’, 
Current Zoology, 58(4), pp. 658–67.
Kikuchi, D. W., and Pfennig, D. W. (2013) ‘Imperfect mim-
icry and the limits of natural selection’, Quarterly Review 
of Biology, 88(4), pp. 297–315.
Kikuchi, D. W., and Sherratt, T. N. (2015) ‘Costs of learning 
and the evolution of mimetic signals’, American Naturalist, 
186(3), pp. 321–32.
Kiltie, R. A. (1988) ‘Countershading: Universally decep-
tive or deceptively universal?’, Trends in Ecology and 
Evolution, 3, pp. 21–3.
Kiltie, R. A. (1989) ‘Testing Thayer’s countershading hypoth-
esis: An image processing approach.’, Animal Behaviour, 
38, pp. 542–4.
Kirby, W., and Spence, W. (1817) An Introduction to 
Entomology, Volume 2. 2nd edn. London: Longman, Hurst, 
Rees, Orme & Brown.
Kircher, B. K., and Johnson, M. A. (2017) ‘Why do curly tail 
lizards (genus Leiocephalus) curl their tails? An assess-
ment of displays toward conspecifics and predators’, 
Ethology, 123(5), pp. 342–7.
Kitamura, T., and Imafuku, M. (2015) ‘Behavioural mim-
icry in flight path of Batesian intraspecific polymorphic 
butterfly Papilio polytes’, Proceedings of the Royal Society 
B: Biological Sciences, 282. doi: 10.1098/rspb.2015.0483
Kiyotake, H., Matsumoto, H., Nakayama, S., Sakai, M., 
Miyatake, T., Ryuda, M., and Hayakawa, Y. (2014) ‘Gain of 
long tonic immobility behavioral trait causes the red 
flour beetle to reduce anti-stress capacity’, Journal of Insect 
Physiology, 60, pp. 92–7.
Kjernsmo, K., Grönholm, M. and Merilaita, S. (2016) 
‘Adaptive constellations of protective marks: eyespots, 
eye stripes and diversion of attacks by fish’, Animal 
Behaviour, 111, pp. 189–95.
Kjernsmo, K., and Merilaita, S. (2012) ‘Background choice 
as an anti-predator strategy: the roles of background 
matching and visual complexity in the habitat choice of 
the least killifish’, Proceedings of the Royal Society of 
London B: Biological Sciences, 279(1745), pp. 4192–8.
Kjernsmo, K., and Merilaita, S. (2013) ‘Eyespots divert 
attacks by fish’, Proceedings of the Royal Society of London 
B: Biological Sciences, 280(1766), 20131458.
Kleffner, D. A., and Ramachandran, V. S. (1992) ‘On the 
perception of shape from shading’, Attention, Perception 
and Psychophysics, 52, pp. 18–36.
Kline, K., Holcombe, A. O., and Eagleman, D. M. (2004) 
‘Illusory motion reversal is caused by rivalry, not by 
perceptual snapshots of the visual field’, Vision Research, 
44(23), pp. 2653–8.
Klump, G., Kretzschmar, E., and Curio, E. (1986) ‘The hear-
ing of an avian predator and its avian prey’, Behavioral 
Ecology and Sociobiology, 18(5), pp. 317–23.
Klump, G., and Shalter, M. (1984) ‘Acoustic behaviour of 
birds and mammals in the predator context; I. Factors 
affecting the structure of alarm signals. II. The func-
tional significance and evolution of alarm signals’, 
Ethology, 66(3), pp. 189–226.
Knill, R., and Allen, J. A. (1995) ‘Does polymorphism pro-
tect? An experiment with human ‘predators’’, Ethology, 
99(1–2), pp. 127–38.
Kodandaramaiah, U. (2009) ‘Eyespot evolution: phylogen-
etic insights from Junonia and related butterfly genera 
(Nymphalidae: Junoniini)’, Evolution & Development, 
11(5), pp. 489–97.
Kodandaramaiah, U., Lindenfors, P., and Tullberg, B. S. 
(2013) ‘Deflective and intimidating eyespots: a com-
parative study of eyespot size and position in Junonia 
butterflies’, Ecology and Evolution, 3(13), pp. 4518–24.
Kokko, H., Mappes, J., and Lindström, L. (2003) 
‘Alternative prey can change model–mimic dynamics 

REFERENCES
255
between parasitism and mutualism’, Ecology Letters, 
6(12), pp. 1068–76.
Körner, H. K. (1982) ‘Countershading by physiological 
colour change in the fish louse Anilocra physodes L. 
(Crustacea: Isopoda)’, Oecologia, 55, pp. 248–50.
Kowalski, K. N., Lakes-Harlan, R., Lehmann, G. U., and 
Strauß, J. (2014) ‘Acoustic defence in an insect: character-
istics of defensive stridulation and differences between 
the sexes in the tettigoniid Poecilimon ornatus (Schmidt 
1850)’, Zoology, 117(5), pp. 329–36.
Kraemer, A. C., and Adams, D. C. (2014) ‘Predator percep-
tion of Batesian mimicry and conspicuousness in a sala-
mander’, Evolution, 68(4), pp. 1197–206.
Krams, I., Kivleniece, I., Kuusik, A., Krama, T., Freeberg, 
T. M., Mänd, R., Sivacova, L., Rantala, M. J., and Mänd, 
M. (2014) ‘High repeatability of anti-predator responses 
and resting metabolic rate in a beetle’, Journal of Insect 
Behavior, 27(1), pp. 57–66.
Krams, I., Kivleniece, I., Kuusik, A., Krama, T., Freeberg, 
T. M., Mänd, R., Vrublevska, J., Rantala, M. J., and Mänd, 
M. (2013a) ‘Predation selects for low resting metabolic 
rate and consistent individual differences in anti-preda-
tor behavior in a beetle’, Acta Ethologica, 16(3), pp. 163–72.
Krams, I., Kivleniece, I., Kuusik, A., Krama, T., Mänd, R., 
Rantala, M. J., Znotiņa, S., Freeberg, T. M., and Mänd, M. 
(2013b) ‘Predation promotes survival of beetles with 
lower resting metabolic rates’, Entomologia Experimentalis 
et Applicata, 148(1), pp. 94–103.
Krause, J., and Ruxton, G. D. (2002) Living in groups. New 
York: Oxford University Press.
Krebs, R. A., and West, D. A. (1988) ‘Female mate prefer-
ence and the evolution of female-limited Batesian mim-
icry’, Evolution, 42(5), pp. 1101–4.
Kronforst, M. R., Young, L. G., and Gilbert, L. E. (2007) 
‘Reinforcement of mate preference among hybridizing 
Heliconius  butterflies’, Journal of Evolutionary Biology, 
20(1), pp. 278–85.
Kruuk, H. (1972) The spotted hyena: a study of predation and 
social behavior. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Kuchta, S. R., Krakauer, A. H., and Sinervo, B. (2008) ‘Why 
does the yellow-eyed ensatina have yellow eyes? Batesian 
mimicry of pacific newts (genus Taricha) by the salaman-
der Ensatina eschscholtzii xanthoptica’, Evolution, 62(4), 
pp. 984–90.
Kunte, K. (2008) ‘Mimetic butterflies support Wallace’s 
model of sexual dimorphism’, Proceedings of the Royal 
Society B: Biological Sciences, 275(1643), pp. 1617–24.
Kunte, K. (2009a) ‘The diversity and evolution of Batesian 
mimicry in Papilio swallowtail butterflies’, Evolution, 
63(10), pp. 2707–16.
Kunte, K. (2009b) ‘Female-limited mimetic polymorphism: 
a review of theories and a critique of sexual selection as 
balancing selection’, Animal Behaviour, 78(5), pp. 1029–36.
Kunte, K., Zhang, W., Tenger-Trolander, A., Palmer, D. H., 
Martin, A., Reed, R. D., Mullen, S. P., and Kronforst, M. R. 
(2014) ‘doublesex is a mimicry supergene’, Nature, 
507(7491), pp. 229–32.
Kuriwada, T., Kumano, N., Shiromoto, K., and Haraguchi, 
D. (2009) ‘Copulation reduces the duration of death-
feigning behaviour in the sweetpotato weevil, Cylas for-
micarius’, Animal Behaviour, 78(5), pp. 1145–51.
Kuriwada, T., Kumano, N., Shiromoto, K., and Haraguchi, D. 
(2010) ‘The effect of mass-rearing on death-feigning behav-
iour in the sweet potato weevil (Coleoptera: Brentidae)’, 
Journal of Applied Entomology, 134(8), pp. 652–8.
Kuriwada, T., Kumano, N., Shiromoto, K., and Haraguchi, 
D. (2011) ‘Age-dependent investment in death-feigning 
behaviour in the sweetpotato weevil Cylas formicarius’, 
Physiological Entomology, 36(2), pp. 149–54.
Kuriyama, T., Morimoto, G., Miyaji, K., and Hasegawa, M. 
(2016) ‘Cellular basis of anti-predator adaptation in a liz-
ard with autotomizable blue tail against specific predators 
with different colour vision’, Journal of Zoology, 300(2), 
pp. 89–98.
Laan, A., Gutnick, T., Kuba, M. J., and Laurent, G. (2014) 
‘Behavioral analysis of cuttlefish traveling waves and its 
implications for neural control’, Current Biology, 24(15), 
pp. 1737–42.
Laiolo, P., Tella, J. L., Carrete, M., Serrano, D., and López, 
G. (2004) ‘Distress calls may honestly signal bird quality 
to predators’, Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B: 
Biological Sciences, 271(Suppl 6), pp. S513–S515.
Langham, G. M. (2004) ‘Specialized avian predators repeat-
edly attack novel color morphs of Heliconius butterflies’, 
Evolution, 58(12), pp. 2783–7.
Langham, G. M. (2005) ‘Rufous-tailed jacamars and apo-
sematic butterflies: do older birds attack novel prey?’, 
Behavioral Ecology, 17(2), pp. 285–90.
Latz, M., and Case, J. (1982) ‘Light organ and eyestalk com-
pensation to body tilt in the luminescent midwater 
shrimp, Sergestes similis’, Journal of Experimental Biology, 
98(1), pp. 83–104.
Latz, M. I. (1995) ‘Physiological mechanisms in the control 
of bioluminescent countershading in a midwater shrimp’, 
Marine & Freshwater Behaviour & Phy, 26, pp. 207–18.
Lawrence, S. (1992) ‘Sexual cannibalism in the praying man-
tid, Mantis religiosa: a field study’, Animal Behaviour, 43(4), 
pp. 569–83.
Layberry, R. A., Hall, P. W., and Lafontaine, J. D. (1998) The 
Butterflies of Canada. Toronto: University of Toronto.
Le Poul, Y., Whibley, A., Chouteau, M., Prunier, F., Llaurens, 
V., and Joron, M. (2014) ‘Evolution of dominance mech-
anisms at a butterfly mimicry supergene’, Nature 
Communications, 5, 5644. doi:10.1038/ncomms6644
Leach, T. H., Williamson, C. E., Theodore, N., Fischer, J. M., 
and Olson, M. H. (2015) ‘The role of ultraviolet radiation 

256
REFERENCES
in the diel vertical migration of zooplankton: an experi-
mental test of the transparency-regulator hypothesis’, 
Journal of Plankton Research, 37(5), pp. 886–96.
Leal, M. (1999) ‘Honest signalling during prey–predator 
interactions in the lizard Anolis cristatellus’, Animal 
Behaviour, 58(3), pp. 521–6.
Leal, M., and Rodríguez-Robles, J. A. (1995) ‘Antipredator 
responses of Anolis cristatellus (Sauria: Polychrotidae)’, 
Copeia, 1995(1), pp. 155–61.
Leal, M., and Rodríguez-Robles, J. A. (1997) ‘Signalling dis-
plays during predator–prey interactions in a Puerto 
Rican anole, Anolis cristatellus’, Animal Behaviour, 54(5), 
pp. 1147–54.
Lederhouse, R. C., and Scriber, J. M. (1996) ‘Intrasexual 
selection constrains the evolution of the dorsal color 
pattern of male black swallowtail butterflies, Papilio pol-
yxenes’, Evolution, 50(2), pp. 717–22.
Lee, T. J., Marples, N. M., and Speed, M. P. (2010) ‘Can 
dietary conservatism explain the primary evolution of 
aposematism?’, Animal Behaviour, 79(1), pp. 63–74.
Lee, W.-J., and Moss, C. F. (2016) ‘Can the elongated hind-
wing tails of fluttering moths serve as false sonar targets 
to divert bat attacks?’, The Journal of the Acoustical Society 
of America, 139(5), pp. 2579–88.
Leech, D. M., and Johnsen, S. (2006) ‘Ultraviolet vision and 
foraging in juvenile bluegill (Lepomis macrochirus)’, Canadian 
Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences, 63(10), pp. 2183–90.
Lehman, E. M., Jr, E. D., and Brodie Brodie III, E. D. (2004) 
‘No evidence for an endosymbiotic bacterial origin of 
tetrodotoxin in the newt, Taricha granulosa’, Toxicon, 
44(3), pp. 243–9.
Leimar, O., Enquist, M., and Sillén-Tullberg, B. (1986) 
‘Evolutionary stability of aposematic coloration and 
prey unprofitability: A theoretical analysis’, American 
Naturalist, 128(4), pp. 469–90.
Levin, B.R. (1988) ‘Frequency-dependent selection in bacterial 
populations’, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of 
London Series B: Biological Sciences, 319(1196), pp. 459–72.
Lev-Yadun, S. (2001) ‘Aposematic (warning) coloration 
associated with thorns in higher plants’, Journal of 
Theoretical Biology, 210(3), pp. 385–8.
Lev-Yadun, S. (2009) ‘Aposematic (warning) coloration 
in  plants’, Plant-Environment Interactions. New York: 
Springer, pp. 167–202. Plant-Environment Interactions 
From Sensory Plant Biology to Active Plant Behavior 
Editors: Baluska, Frantisek (Ed.)
Lev-Yadun, S. (2013) ‘Theoretical and functional complex-
ity of white variegation of unripe fleshy fruits’, Plant 
Signaling & Behavior, 8(10), e25851.
Lev-Yadun, S. (2014a) ‘Defensive masquerade by plants’, 
Biological Journal of the Linnean Society, 113(4), pp. 1162–6.
Lev-Yadun, S. (2014b) ‘Potential defence from herbivory 
by ‘dazzle effects’ and ‘trickery coloration’of leaf 
variegation’, Biological Journal of the Linnean Society, 
111(3), pp. 692–7.
Lev-Yadun, S. (2015) ‘The proposed anti-herbivory roles of 
white leaf variegation’, Progress in Botany: Springer, pp. 
241–69.
Lev-Yadun, S., Dafni, A., Flaishman, M. A., Inbar, M., Izhaki, 
I., Katzir, G., and Ne’eman, G. (2004) ‘Plant coloration 
undermines herbivorous insect camouflage’, BioEssays, 
261126e113, pp. 1126–30.
Lev-Yadun, S., and Ne’eman, G. (2013) ‘Bimodal colour 
pattern of individual Pinus halepensis Mill. seeds: a new 
type of crypsis’, Biological Journal of the Linnean Society, 
109(2), pp. 271–8.
Lewis, E. E., and Cane, J. H. (1990) ‘Stridulation as a pri-
mary anti-predator defence of a beetle’, Animal Behaviour, 
40(5), pp. 1003–4.
Lichter-Marck, I. H., Wylde, M., Aaron, E., Oliver, J. C. and 
Singer, M. S. (2015) ‘The struggle for safety: effective-
ness of caterpillar defenses against bird predation’, 
Oikos, 124(4), pp. 525–33.
Lin, J.-W., Chen, Y.-R., Wang, Y.-H., Hung, K.-C., and Lin, 
S.-M. (2017) ‘Tail regeneration after autotomy revives 
survival: a case from a long-term monitored lizard 
population under avian predation’. Proceedings of the 
Royal Society of London Series B: Biological Sciences, 
284(1847), 20162538. doi: 10.1098/rspb.2016.2538
Lindgren, J., Sjövall, P., Carney, R. M., Uvdal, P., Gren, J. A., 
Dyke, G., Schultz, B. P., Shawkey, M. D., Barnes, K. R., 
and Polcyn, M. J. (2014) ‘Skin pigmentation provides evi-
dence of convergent melanism in extinct marine reptiles’,­ 
Nature, 506, pp. 484–8.
Lindroth, C. H. (1971) ‘Disappearance as a protective fac-
tor’, Entomol. Scand., 2, pp. 41–8.
Lindstedt, C., Huttunen, H., Kakko, M., and Mappes, J. 
(2011) ‘Disentangling the evolution of weak warning 
signals: high detection risk and low production costs of 
chemical defences in gregarious pine sawfly larvae’, 
Evolutionary Ecology, 25(5), pp. 1029–46.
Lindstedt, C., Lindstedt, Mappes, J., Päivinen, J., and 
Varama, M. (2006) ‘Effects of group size and pine 
defence chemicals on Diprionid sawfly survival against 
ant predation’, Oecologia, 150(3), pp. 519–26.
Lindstedt, C., Schroderus, E., Lindström, L., Mappes, T., 
and Mappes, J. (2016) ‘Evolutionary constraints of warn-
ing signals: A genetic trade-off between the efficacy of 
larval and adult warning coloration can maintain vari-
ation in signal expression’, Evolution, 70(11), pp. 2562–72.
Lindström, L., Alatalo, R. V., Lyytinen, A., and Mappes, J. 
(2004) ‘The effect of alternative prey on the dynamics of 
imperfect Batesian and Mullerian mimicries’, Evolution, 
58(6), pp. 1294–302.
Lindström, L., Alatalo, R. V., Lyytinen, A. and Mappes, J. 
(2001a) ‘Strong antiapostatic selection against novel rare 

REFERENCES
257
aposematic prey’, Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences, 98(16), pp. 9181–4.
Lindström, L., Alatalo, R. V., and Mappes, J. (1997) ‘Imperfect 
Batesian mimicry - The effects of the frequency and the 
distastefulness of the model’, Proceedings of the Royal 
Society of London Series B: Biological Sciences, 264(1379), 
pp. 149–53.
Lindström, L., Alatalo, R. V., Mappes, J., Riipi, M., and 
Vertainen, L. (1999) ‘Can aposematic signals evolve by 
gradual change?’, Nature, 397(6716), pp. 249–51.
Lindström, L., Lyytinen, A., Mappes, J., and Ojala, K. (2006) 
‘Relative importance of taste and visual appearance for 
predator education in Müllerian mimicry’, Animal 
Behaviour, 72, pp. 323–33.
Lindström, L., Rowe, C., and Guilford, T. (2001b) ‘Pyrazine 
odour makes visually conspicuous prey aversive’, 
Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 
268(1463), pp. 159–62.
Linsley, E. G., Eisner, T., and Klots, A. B. (1961) ‘Mimetic 
assemblages of sibling species of lycid beetles’, Evolution, 
15, pp. 15–29.
Liu, M.H., Blamires, S.J., Liao, C.P., and Tso, I.M. (2014) 
‘Evidence of bird dropping masquerading by a spider to 
avoid predators’, Scientific Reports, 4, 5058.
Lloyd-Jones, T. J., and Luckhurst, L. (2002) ‘Outline shape 
is a mediator of object recognition that is particularly 
important for living things’, Memory & Cognition, 30(4), 
pp. 489–98.
Lobban, C. S., Hallam, S. J., Mukherjee, P., and Petrich, J. W. 
(2007) ‘Photophysics and multifunctionality of Hypericin-
like pigments in heterotrich ciliates: A phylogenetic per-
spective’, Photochemistry and Photobiology, 83, pp. 1074–94.
Londoño, G. A., García, D. A., and Sánchez Martínez, M. 
A. (2015) ‘Morphological and behavioral evidence of 
Batesian mimicry in nestlings of a lowland Amazonian 
bird’, The American Naturalist, 185(1), pp. 135–41.
Long, C. (1993) ‘Bivocal distraction nest-site display in the 
red squirrel, Tamiasciurus hudsonicus, with comments on 
outlier nesting and nesting behavior’, Canadian Field-
Naturalist, 107(1), pp. 104–6.
Lopanik, N. B. (2014) ‘Chemical defensive symbioses in the 
marine environment’, Functional Ecology, 28(2), pp. 328–40.
López-Palafox, T. G., Luis-MartÍnez, A., and Cordero, C. 
(2015) ‘The movement of “false antennae” in butterflies 
with “false head” wing patterns’, Current Zoology, 61(4), 
pp. 758–64.
Losey, G. S., Cronin, T. W., Goldsmith, T., Hyde, D., 
Marshall, N., and McFarland, W. (1999) ‘The UV visual 
world of fishes: a review’, Journal of Fish Biology, 54(5), 
pp. 921–43.
Lovell, P. G., Bloj, M., and Harris, J. M. (2012) ‘Optimal 
integration of shading and binocular disparity for depth 
perception’, Journal of Vision, 12, p. 1.
Lovell, P. G., Ruxton, G. D., Langridge, K. V., and 
Spencer, K. A. (2013) ‘Egg-laying substrate selection 
for optimal camouflage by quail’, Current Biology, 
23(3), pp. 260–4.
Lu, D., Willard, D., Patel, I. R., Kadwell, S., Overton, L., 
Kost, T., Luther, M., Chen, W., Woychik, R. P., Wilkison, 
W. O., and Cone, R. D. (1994) ‘Agouti protein is an antag-
onist of the melanocyte-stimulating-hormone receptor’, 
Nature, 371, pp. 799–802.
Luedeman, J. K., McMorris, F. R., and Warner, D. D. (1981) 
‘Predators encountering a model–mimic system with 
alternative prey’, American Naturalist, 117(6), pp. 1040–8.
Lythgoe, J. N. (1979) Ecology of vision. Oxford: Clarendon 
Press.
Lyytinen, A., Brakefield, P. M., Lindström, L., and Mappes, 
J. (2004) ‘Does prediction maintain eyespot plasticity in 
Bicyclus anynana?’, Proceedings of the Royal Society 
B:Biological Sciences, 271(1536), pp. 279–83.
Lyytinen, A., Brakefield, P. M., and Mappes, J. (2003) 
‘Significance of butterfly eyespots as an anti-predator 
device in ground-based and aerial attacks’, Oikos, 100(2), 
pp. 373–9.
Maan, M. E., and Cummings, M. E. (2011) ‘Poison frog col-
ors are honest signals of toxicity, particularly for bird 
predators’, The American Naturalist, 179(1), pp. E1–E14.
MacDougall, A., and Dawkins, M. S. (1998) ‘Predator dis-
crimination error and the benefits of Müllerian mim-
icry’, Animal Behaviour, 55, pp. 1281–8.
Machado, V., Araujo, A. M., Serrano, J., and Galian, J. (2004) 
‘Phylogenetic relationships and the evolution of mimicry 
in  the Chauliognathus yellow-black species complex 
(Coleoptera: Cantharidae) inferred from mitochondrial 
COI sequences’, Genetics and Molecular Biology, 27(1), 
pp. 55–60.
Mackintosh, N. J. (1976) ‘Overshadowing and stimulus 
intensity’, Animal Learning & Behavior, 4(2), pp. 186–92.
Maia, R. and White, T. (2018) ‘Comparing colours using 
visual models’, Behavioral Ecology, ary017. https://doi.
org/10.1093/beheco/ary017
Majumdar, R., Sixt, M., and Parent, C. A. (2014) ‘New 
paradigms in the establishment and maintenance of 
gradients during directed cell migration’, Current 
Opinion in Cell Biology, 30, pp. 33–40.
Malcicka, M., Bezemer, T. M., Visser, B., Bloemberg, M., 
Snart, C. J. P., Hardy, I. C. W., and Harvey, J. A. (2015) 
‘Multi-trait mimicry of ants by a parasitoid wasp’, 
Scientific Reports, 5, 8043. doi:10.1038/srep08043
Maldonado, H. (1970) ‘The deimatic reaction in the pray-
ing mantis Stagmatoptera biocellata’, Zeitschrift für ver-
gleichende Physiologie, 68(1), pp. 60–71.
Mallet, J. (1999) ‘Causes and consequences of a lack of 
coevolution in Müllerian mimicry’, Evolutionary Ecology, 
13(7–8), pp. 777–806.

258
REFERENCES
Mallet, J. (2001) ‘Mimicry: An interface between psychology 
and evolution’, Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America, 98(16), pp. 8928–30.
Mallet, J. (2010) ‘Shift happens! Shifting balance and the 
evolution of diversity in warning colour and mimicry’, 
Ecological Entomology, 35, pp. 90–104.
Mallet, J. (2014) ‘Speciation: frog mimics prefer their own’, 
Current Biology, 24, pp. R1094–R1096.
Mallet, J. (2015) ‘New genomes clarify mimicry evolution’, 
Nature Genetics, 47(4), pp. 306–7.
Mallet, J., Barton, N., Lamas, G., Santisteban, J., Muedas, 
M., and Eeley, H. (1990) ‘Estimates of selection and gene 
flow from measures of cline width and linkage disequi-
librium in Heliconius hybrid zones’, Genetics, 124(4), 
pp. 921–36.
Mallet, J., and Barton, N. H. (1989) ‘Strong natural selec-
tion in a warning-color hybrid zone’, Evolution, 43(2), 
pp. 421–31.
Mallet, J., and Gilbert, L. E. (1995) ‘Why are there so many 
mimicry rings: correlations between habitat, behavior 
and mimicry in Heliconius butterflies’, Biological Journal 
of the Linnean Society, 55(2), pp. 159–80.
Mallet, J., and Joron, M. (1999) ‘Evolution of diversity in 
warning color and mimicry: polymorphisms, shifting 
balance, and speciation’, Annual Review of Ecology and 
Systematics, 30(1), pp. 201–33.
Mallet, J., and Singer, M. C. (1987) ‘Individual selection, kin 
selection, and the shifting balance in the evolution of 
warning colours: the evidence from butterflies’, Biological 
Journal of the Linnean Society, 32(4), pp. 337–50.
Manceau, M., Domingues, V. S., Linnen, C. R., Rosenblum, 
E. B., and Hoekstra, H. E. (2010) ‘Convergence in pigmen-
tation at multiple levels: mutations, genes and function’, 
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological 
Sciences, 365(1552), p. 2439.
Manceau, M., Domingues, V. S., Mallarino, R., and Hoekstra, 
H. E. (2011) ‘The developmental role of agouti in color 
pattern evolution’, Science, 331, p. 1062.
Mappes, J., Kokko, H., Ojala, K., and Lindström, L. (2014) 
‘Seasonal changes in predator community switch the 
direction of selection for prey defences’, Nature 
Communications, 5. doi:10.1038/ncomms6016
Mappes, J., Marples, N., and Endler, J. A. (2005) ‘The com-
plex business of survival by aposematism’, Trends in 
Ecology & Evolution, 20(11), pp. 598–603.
Marek, P., Papaj, D., Yeager, J., Molina, S., and Moore, W. 
(2011) ‘Bioluminescent aposematism in millipedes’, 
Current Biology, 21(18), pp. R680–R681.
Marek, P. E., and Bond, J. E. (2009) ‘A Müllerian mimicry 
ring in Appalachian millipedes’, Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America, 106(24), pp. 9755–60.
Marek, P. E., and Moore, W. (2015) ‘Discovery of a glow-
ing millipede in California and the gradual evolution of 
bioluminescence in Diplopoda’, Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences, 112(20), pp. 6419–24.
Marples, N., and Kelly, D. (1999) ‘Neophobia and dietary con-
servatism: two distinct processes?’, Evolutionary Ecology, 
13(7), pp. 641–53.
Marples, N. M. (1993) ‘Is the alkaloid in 2-spot ladybirds 
(Adalia bipunctata) a defence against ant predation?’, 
Chemoecology, 4(1), pp. 29–32.
Marples, N. M., Brakefield, P. M., and Cowie, R. J. (1989) 
‘Differences between the 7-spot and 2-spot ladybird 
beetles (Coccinellidae) in their toxic effects on a bird 
predator’, Ecological Entomology, 14(1), pp. 79–84.
Marples, N. M., Kelly, D. J., and Thomas, R. J. (2005) 
‘Perspective: the evolution of warning coloration is not 
paradoxical’, Evolution, 59(5), pp. 933–40.
Marples, N. M., and Mappes, J. (2011) ‘Can the dietary 
conservatism of predators compensate for positive fre-
quency dependent selection against rare, conspicuous 
prey?’, Evolutionary Ecology, 25(4), pp. 737–49.
Marples, N. M., Vanveelen, W., and Brakefield, P. M. (1994) 
‘The relative importance of color, taste and smell in the 
protection of an aposematic insect Coccinella septempunc-
tata’, Animal Behaviour, 48(4), pp. 967–74.
Marr, D. (1982) Vision: a computational investigation into the 
human representation and processing of visual information. 
San Francisco: W.H. Freeman.
Marr, D., and Hildreth, E. (1980) ‘Theory of edge detec-
tion’, Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 
207, pp. 187–217.
Marshall, G. A. K. (1908) ‘On diaposematism, with refer-
ence to some limitations of the Müllerian hypothesis of 
mimicry’, Transactions of the Entomological Society, 1908, 
pp. 93–142.
Marshall, N. B. (1971) Explorations in the life of fishes. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Marshall, N. J. (2000) ‘Communication and camouflage 
with the same ‘bright’colours in reef fishes’, Philosophical 
Transactions of the Royal Society of London B: Biological 
Sciences, 355(1401), pp. 1243–8.
Mather, J. A., and Mather, D. L. (2004) ‘Apparent move-
ment in a visual display: the ‘passing cloud’of Octopus 
cyanea (Mollusca: Cephalopoda)’, Journal of Zoology, 
263(1), pp. 89–94.
Mather, M. H., and Robertson, R. J. (1992) ‘Honest adver-
tisement in flight displays of bobolinks (Dolichonyx ory-
zivorus)’, The Auk, 109(4), pp. 869–73.
Mathger, L. M., Barbosa, A., Miner, S., and Hanlon, R. T. 
(2006) ‘Color blindness and contrast perception in cuttle-
fish (Sepia officinalis) determined by a visual sensori-
motor assay’, Vision Res, 46(11), pp. 1746–53.
Mathger, L. M., Chiao, C. C., Barbosa, A., Buresch, K. C., 
Kaye, S., and Hanlon, R. T. (2007) ‘Disruptive coloration 
elicited on controlled natural substrates in cuttlefish, 
Sepia officinalis’, J Exp Biol, 210(Pt 15), pp. 2657–66.

REFERENCES
259
Matsumura, K., Fuchikawa, T., and Miyatake, T. (2017) 
‘Decoupling of behavioral trait correlation across life 
stages in two holometabolous insects’, Behavior Genetics, 
47(4), pp. 1–9.
Maunsell, J. H., and Van Essen, D. C. (1983) ‘Functional 
properties of neurons in middle temporal visual area of 
the macaque monkey. I. Selectivity for stimulus direc-
tion, speed, and orientation’, Journal of Neurophysiology, 
49(5), pp. 1127–47.
McCall, A. C., and Fordyce, J. A. (2010) ‘Can optimal 
defence theory be used to predict the distribution of plant 
chemical defences?’, Journal of Ecology, 98(5), pp. 985–92.
McCosker, J. E. (1977) ‘Fright posture of plesiopid fish 
Calloplesiops altivelis: example of Batesian mimicry’, Science, 
197(4301), pp. 400–1.
McCosker, J. E., and Rosenblatt, R. H. (1993) ‘A revision of 
the snake eel genus Myrichthys (Anguilliformes: 
Ophichthidae) with the description of a new eastern 
Pacific species.’, Proceedings of the California Academy of 
Sciences, 48, pp. 153–69.
McFall-Ngai, M., and Morin, J. G. (1991) ‘Camouflage 
by  disruptive illumination in leiognathids, a family 
of  shallow-water, bioluminescent fishes’, Journal of 
Experimental Biology, 156(1), pp. 119–37.
McFall-Ngai, M. J. (1990) ‘Crypsis in the pelagic environ-
ment’, American Zoologist, 30(1), pp. 175–88.
McGlothlin, J. W., Kobiela, M. E., Feldman, C. R., Castoe, 
T. A., Geffeney, S. L., Hanifin, C. T., Toledo, G., Vonk, F. J., 
Richardson, M. K., and Brodie, E. D. (2016) ‘Historical 
contingency in a multigene family facilitates adaptive 
evolution of toxin resistance’, Current Biology, 26(12), 
pp. 1616–21.
McIver, J. D., and Stonedahl, G. (1993) ‘Myrmecomorphy: 
morphological and behavioral mimicry of ants’, Annual 
Review of Entomology, 38, pp. 351–79.
McKaye, K. R. (1981) ‘Field observation on death feigning: a 
unique hunting behavior by the predatory cichlid, 
Haplochromis livingstoni, of Lake Malawi’, Environmental 
Biology of Fishes, 6(3), pp. 361–5.
McNamara, M. E., Briggs, D. E., Orr, P. J., Noh, H., and 
Cao, H. (2012) ‘The original colours of fossil beetles’. 
Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B: Biological 
Sciences,279, 1114–21. doi:10.1098/rspb.2011.1677
McPhail, J. D. (1977) ‘Possible function of caudal spot in 
characid fishes’, Canadian Journal of Zoology-Revue 
Canadienne De Zoologie, 55(7), pp. 1063–6.
Meadows, D. W. (1993) ‘Morphological variation in eye-
spots of the foureye butterflyfish (Chaetodon capistra-
tus) - Implications for eyespot function’, Copeia, 
1993(1), pp. 235–40.
Meakin, C., and Qin, J. (2012) ‘Growth, behaviour and colour 
changes of juvenile King George whiting (Sillaginodes 
punctata) mediated by light intensities’, New Zealand 
Journal of Marine and Freshwater Research, 46, pp. 111–23.
Merilaita, S. (1998) ‘Crypsis through disruptive coloration 
in an isopod’, Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B: 
Biological Sciences, 265(1401), pp. 1059–64.
Merilaita, S., and Dimitrova, M. (2014) ‘Accuracy of back-
ground matching and prey detection: predation by blue 
tits indicates intense selection for highly matching prey 
colour pattern’, Functional Ecology, 28(5), pp. 1208–15.
Merilaita, S., and Kaitala, V. (2002) ‘Community structure 
and the evolution of aposematic coloration’, Ecology 
Letters, 5(4), pp. 495–501.
Merilaita, S., and Lind, J. (2005) ‘Background-matching 
and disruptive coloration, and the evolution of cryptic 
coloration’, Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B: 
Biological Sciences, 272(1563), pp. 665–70.
Merilaita, S., Lyytinen, A., and Mappes, J. (2001) ‘Selection 
for cryptic coloration in a visually heterogeneous habi-
tat’, Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B: Biological 
Sciences, 268(1479), pp. 1925–9.
Merilaita, S., and Ruxton, G. D. (2007) ‘Aposematic signals 
and the relationship between conspicuousness and 
distinctiveness’,­ Journal of Theoretical Biology, 245(2), 
pp. 268–77.
Merilaita, S., Schaefer, H. M., and Dimitrova, M. (2013) 
‘What is camouflage through distractive markings?’, 
Behavioral Ecology, 24(5), pp. e1271–2.
Merilaita, S., Scott-Samuel, N. E., and Cuthill, I. C. (2017) 
‘How camouflage works’, Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol 
Sci, 372(1724). doi: 10.1098/rstb.2016.0341
Merilaita, S., and Tullberg, B. S. (2005) ‘Constrained cam-
ouflage facilitates the evolution of conspicuous warning 
coloration’, Evolution, 59(1), pp. 38–45.
Merilaita, S., Tuomi, J., and Jormalainen, V. (1999) ‘Optimization 
of cryptic coloration in heterogeneous habitats’, Biological 
Journal of the Linnean Society, 67(2), pp. 151–61.
Merilaita, S., Vallin, A., Kodandaramaiah, U., Dimitrova, M., 
Ruuskanen, S., and Laaksonen, T. (2011) ‘Number of eye-
spots and their intimidating effect on naïve predators in the 
peacock butterfly’, Behavioral Ecology, 22(6), pp. 1326–31.
Merrill, R. M., Gompert, Z., Dembeck, L. M., Kronforst, 
M. R., McMillan, W. O., and Jiggins, C. D. (2011a) ‘Mate 
preference across the speciation continuum in a clade of 
mimetic butterflies’, Evolution, 65(5), pp. 1489–500.
Merrill, R. M., and Jiggins, C. D. (2009) ‘Müllerian mim-
icry: sharing the load reduces the legwork’, Current 
Biology, 19(16), pp. R687–R689.
Merrill, R. M., Van Schooten, B., Scott, J. A., and Jiggins, C. 
D. (2011b) ‘Pervasive genetic associations between traits 
causing reproductive isolation in Heliconius butterflies’, 
Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 
278(1705), pp. 511–18.
Michalis, C., Scott-Samuel, N. E., Gibson, D. P., and Cuthill, 
I. C. (2017) ‘Optimal background matching camouflage’, 
Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 
284(1858), 20170709. doi: 10.1098/rspb.2017.0709

260
REFERENCES
Midgley, J. J., White, J. D. M., Johnson, S. D., and Bronner, 
G. N. (2015) ‘Faecal mimicry by seeds ensures dispersal 
by dung beetles’, Nature Plants, 1, 15141. doi:10.1038/
nplants.2015.141
Milinski, M., and Boltshauser, P. (1995) ‘Boldness and preda-
tor deterrence: a critique of Godin & Davis’. Proceedings of 
the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 262(1363), pp. 103–5.
Millar, S. E., Miller, M. W., Stevens, M. E., and Barsh, G. S. 
(1995) ‘Expression and transgenic studies of the mouse 
agouti gene provide insight into the mechanisms by 
which mammalian coat color patterns are generated’, 
Development, 121, pp. 3223–32.
Miller, C. T., Beleza, S., Pollen, A. A., Schluter, D., Kittles, 
R.  A., Shriver, M. D., and Kingsley, D. M. (2007) ‘cis-
Regulatory­ changes in Kit ligand expression and parallel 
evolution of pigmentation in sticklebacks and humans.’, 
Cell, 131, pp. 1179–89.
Miller, M. C. (1974) ‘Aeolid nudibranchs (Gastropoda-
Opisthobranchia) of family Glaucidae from New-
Zealand waters’, Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society, 
54(1), pp. 31–61.
Mills, M. G., and Patterson, L. B. (2009) ‘Not just black and 
white: Pigment pattern development and evolution in 
vertebrates’, Seminars in Cell & Developmental Biology, 20, 
pp. 72–81.
Milne, A. A. (1926) Winnie the Pooh: the Complete Collection of 
Stories and Poems. 1994 edn. London: Methuen Children’s 
Books Limited.
Miyatake, T. (2001a) ‘Diurnal periodicity of death-feigning 
in Cylas formicarius (Coleoptera: Brentidae)’, Journal of 
Insect Behavior, 14(4), pp. 421–32.
Miyatake, T. (2001b) ‘Effects of starvation on death-feign-
ing in adults of Cylas formicarius (Coleoptera: 
Brentidae)’, Annals of the Entomological Society of 
America, 94(4), pp. 612–16.
Miyatake, T., Nakayama, S., Nishi, Y., and Nakajima, S. 
(2009) ‘Tonically immobilized selfish prey can survive 
by sacrificing others’, Proceedings of the Royal Society of 
London B: Biological Sciences, 276(1668), pp. 2763–7. doi: 
10.1098/rspb.2009.0558
Miyatake, T., Okada, K., and Harano, T. (2008) ‘Negative 
relationship between ambient temperature and death-
feigning intensity in adult Callosobruchus maculatus and 
Callosobruchus chinensis’, Physiological Entomology, 33(1), 
pp. 83–8.
Miyazawa, K., and Noguchi, T. (2001) ‘Distribution and 
origin of tetrodotoxin’, Toxin Reviews, 20(1), pp. 11–33.
Mobley, C. D. (1994) Light and water: radiative transfer in 
natural waters. Cambridge, MA: Academic Press.
Mochida, K. (2011) ‘Combination of local selection pres-
sures drives diversity in aposematic signals’, Evolutionary 
Ecology, 25(5), pp. 1017.
Mohl, B., and Miller, L., A (1976) ‘Ultrasonic clicks pro-
duced by the peacock butterfly: a possible bat-repellent 
mechanism’, Journal of Experimental Biology, 64(3), 
pp. 639–44.
Moment, G. B. (1962) ‘Reflexive selection: a possible 
answer to an old puzzle’, Science, 136(3512), pp. 262–3.
Montgomery, M. E., and Nault, L. R. (1977) ‘Comparative 
response of aphids to the alarm pheromone, (E)-ß-
farnesene’, Entomologia Experimentalis et Applicata, 22(3), 
pp. 236–42.
Moore, K. A., and Williams, D. D. (1990) ‘Novel strategies in 
the complex defense repertoire of a stonefly (Pteronarcys 
dorsata) nymph’, Oikos, 57, pp. 49–56.
Morgan, S. G., and Christy, J. H. (1996) ‘Survival of marine 
larvae under the countervailing selective pressures of 
photodamage and predation’, Limnology and Oceanography, 
41(3), pp. 498–504.
Morris, R. L., and Reader, T. (2016) ‘Do crab spiders per-
ceive Batesian mimicry in hoverflies?’, Behavioral Ecology, 
27(3), pp. 920–31.
Mostler, G. (1935) ‘Beobachtungen zur frage der wespen-
mimikry.’, Z. Morphol. Oekol. Tierre, 29, pp. 381–454.
Motychak, J. E., Brodie Jr, E. D., and Brodie III, E. D. (1999) 
‘Evolutionary response of predators to dangerous prey: 
preadaptation and the evolution of tetrodotoxin resist-
ance in garter snakes’, Evolution, 53(5), pp. 1528–35.
Mukherjee, R., and Kodandaramaiah, U. (2015) ‘What 
makes eyespots intimidating – the importance of paired-
ness’, BMC Evolutionary Biology, 15(1), p. 34.
Müller, F. (1878) ‘Ueber die vortheile der mimicry bei 
schmetterlingen’, Zoologischer Anzeiger, 1, pp. 54–5.
Müller, F. (1879) ‘Ituna and Thyridia: a remarkable case of 
mimicry in butterflies’, Transactions of the Entomological 
Society, 1879, pp. xx–xxix.
Muntz, W. R. A. (1976) ‘On yellow lenses in mesopelagic 
animals’, Journal of the Marine Biological Association of the 
United Kingdom, 56, pp. 963–76.
Murali, G., and Kodandaramaiah, U. (2016) ‘Deceived by 
stripes: conspicuous patterning on vital anterior body 
parts can redirect predatory strikes to expendable pos-
terior organs’, Open Science, 3(6), 160057.
Murali, G., and Kodandaramaiah, U. (2017) ‘Body size and 
evolution of motion dazzle coloration in lizards’, 
Behavioral Ecology. doi: 10.1093/beheco/arx128
Murdoch, W. W. (1969) ‘Switching in general predators: 
experiments on predator specificity and stability of prey 
populations’, Ecological monographs, 39(4), pp. 335–54.
Murphy, S. M., Leahy, S. M., Williams, L. S., and Lill, J. T. 
(2009) ‘Stinging spines protect slug caterpillars (Lima­
codidae) from multiple generalist predators’, Behavioral 
Ecology, 21(1), pp. 153–60.
Murphy, T. G. (2006) ‘Predator-elicited visual signal: 
why the turquoise-browed motmot wag-displays its 
racketed tail’, Behavioral Ecology, 17(4), pp. 547–53.
Murphy, T. G. (2007) ‘Dishonest ‘preemptive’ pursuit-
deterrent signal? Why the turquoise-browed motmot 

REFERENCES
261
wags its tail before feeding nestlings’, Animal Behaviour, 
73(6), pp. 965–70.
Murray, J. D. (2002) Mathematical Biology II: Spatial Models 
and Biomedical Applications. New York: Spring-Verlag.
Muscat, E., Rotenberg, E. L., and Machado, I. F. (2016) ‘Death-
feigning behaviour in an Erythrolamprus miliaris (Linnaeus, 
1758)(Colubridae) water snake in Ubatuba, São Paulo, 
southeastern Brazil’, Herpetology Notes, 9, pp. 95–7.
Nakayama, S., and Miyatake, T. (2009) ‘Positive genetic cor-
relations between life-history traits and death-feigning­ 
behavior in adzuki bean beetle (Callosobruchus chinensis)’, 
Evolutionary Ecology, 23(5), pp. 711.
Nakayama, S., and Miyatake, T. (2010a) ‘A behavioral syn-
drome in the adzuki bean beetle: genetic correlation 
among death feigning, activity, and mating behavior’, 
Ethology, 116(2), pp. 108–12.
Nakayama, S., and Miyatake, T. (2010b) ‘Genetic trade-off 
between abilities to avoid attack and to mate: a cost of 
tonic immobility’, Biology Letters, 6(1), pp. 18–20.
Narayan, E. J., Cockrem, J. F., and Hero, J.-M. (2013) ‘Sight of 
a predator induces a corticosterone stress response and 
generates fear in an amphibian’, PloS One, 8(8), e73564.
Nelson, X. J., and Jackson, R. R. (2009) ‘Aggressive use 
of  Batesian mimicry by an ant-like jumping spider’, 
Biology Letters, 5(6), pp. 755–7.
Nicholson, A. J. (1927) ‘Presidential Address. A new theory 
of mimicry in insects.’, Australian Zoologist, 5, pp. 10–24.
Nijhout, H. F. (1991) The Development and Evolution of 
Butterfly Wing Patterns. Washington: Smithsonian 
Institute Press.
Nishikawa, H., Iga, M., Yamaguchi, J., Saito, K., Kataoka, H., 
Suzuki, Y., Sugano, S., and Fujiwara, H. (2013) ‘Molecular 
basis of wing coloration in a Batesian mimic butterfly, 
Papilio polytes’, Scientific Reports, 3, 3184. doi:10.1038/
srep03184
Niu, Y., Chen, G., Peng, D.-L., Song, B., Yang, Y., Li, Z.-M., 
and Sun, H. (2014) ‘Grey leaves in an alpine plant: a 
cryptic colouration to avoid attack?’, New Phytologist, 
203, pp. 953–63.
Niu, Y., Chen, Z., Stevens, M. and Sun, H. (2017). ‘Divergence 
in cryptic leaf colour provides local camouflage in an 
alpine plant’. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London 
Series B: Biological Sciences, 284(1864), 20171654. doi: 
10.1098/rspb.2017.1654
Nokelainen, O., Hegna, R. H., Reudler, J. H., Lindstedt, C., 
and Mappes, J. (2012) ‘Trade-off between warning sig-
nal efficacy and mating success in the wood tiger moth’. 
Proceedings of the Royal Society of London Series B: Bio­
logical Sciences, 279(1727), 257–65. doi: 10.1098/
rspb.2011.0880
Nokelainen, O., Valkonen, J., Lindstedt, C., and Mappes, J. 
(2014) ‘Changes in predator community structure shifts 
the efficacy of two warning signals in Arctiid moths’, 
Journal of Animal Ecology, 83(3), pp. 598–605.
Nonacs, P. (1985) ‘Foraging in a dynamic mimicry com-
plex’, American Naturalist, 126(2), pp. 165–80.
Noonan, B. P., and Comeault, A. A. (2009) ‘The role of 
predator selection on polymorphic aposematic poison 
frogs’, Biology Letters, 5(1), pp. 51–4.
Noor, M.A., Parnell, R.S., and Grant, B.S. (2008) ‘A revers-
ible color polyphenism in American peppered moth 
(Biston betularia cognataria) caterpillars’, PloS One, 3(9), 
e3142.
Norman, M. D., Finn, J., and Tregenza, T. (2001) ‘Dynamic 
mimicry in an Indo-Malayan octopus’, Proceedings of the 
Royal Society of London Series B: Biological Sciences, 
268(1478), pp. 1755–8.
Norris, K. S., and Lowe, C. H. (1964) ‘An analysis of back-
ground color-matching in amphibians and reptiles’, 
Ecology, 45, pp. 565.
Novales Flamarique, I. N., and Browman, H. I. (2001) 
‘Foraging and prey-search behaviour of small juvenile 
rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss) under polarized 
light’, Journal of Experimental Biology, 204(14), pp. 2415–22.
O’Brien, T. J., and Dunlap, W. P. (1975) ‘Tonic immobility 
in the blue crab (Callinectes sapidus, Rathbun): Its rela-
tion to threat of predation’, Journal of Comparative and 
Physiological Psychology, 89(1), pp. 86.
O’Brien, W. J., Kettle, D., and Riessen, H. (1979) ‘Helmets 
and invisible armor: structures reducing predation from 
tactile and visual planktivores’, Ecology, 60(2), pp. 287–94.
O’Donald, P., and Majerus, M. E. N. (1988) ‘Frequency-
dependent sexual selection’,  Philosophical Transactions of 
the Royal Society of London Series B: Biological Sciences, 
319(1196), pp. 571–86.
O’Donald, P. and Pilecki, C. (1970) ‘Polymorphic mimicry 
and natural selection’, Evolution, 24(2), pp. 395–401.
O’Donald, P., and Pilecki, C. (1974) ‘Polymorphic mimicry 
and natural selection - Reply’, Evolution, 28(3), pp. 484–5.
O’Donnell, S. (1999) ‘Dual mimicry in the dimorphic 
eusocial wasp Mischocyttarus mastigophorus Richards 
(Hymenoptera: Vespidae)’, Biological Journal of the 
Linnean Society, 66(4), pp. 501–14.
Odén, K., Gunnarsson, S., Berg, C., and Algers, B. (2005) 
‘Effects of sex composition on fear measured as tonic 
immobility and vigilance behaviour in large flocks of 
laying hens’, Applied Animal Behaviour Science, 95(1), 
pp. 89–102.
Ohno, T., and Miyatake, T. (2007) ‘Drop or fly? Negative 
genetic correlation between death-feigning intensity 
and flying ability as alternative anti-predator strat-
egies’, Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B: 
Biological Sciences, 274(1609), pp. 555–60.
Ohsaki, N. (1995) ‘Preferential predation of female butter-
flies and the evolution of Batesian mimicry’, Nature, 
378(6553), pp. 173–5.
Olofsson, M., Jakobsson, S., and Wiklund, C. (2012a) 
‘Auditory defence in the peacock butterfly (Inachis io) 

262
REFERENCES
against mice (Apodemus flavicollis and A. sylvaticus)’, 
Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology, 66(2), pp. 209–15.
Olofsson, M., Jakobsson, S., and Wiklund, C. (2013) ‘Bird 
attacks on a butterfly with marginal eyespots and the 
role of prey concealment against the background’, 
Biological Journal of the Linnean Society, 109(2), pp. 290–7.
Olofsson, M., Løvlie, H., Tibblin, J., Jakobsson, S., and 
Wiklund, C. (2012b) ‘Eyespot display in the peacock 
butterfly triggers antipredator behaviors in naïve adult 
fowl’, Behavioral Ecology, 24(1), pp. 305–10.
Olofsson, M., Vallin, A., Jakobsson, S., and Wiklund, C. 
(2010) ‘Marginal eyespots on butterfly wings deflect 
bird attacks under low light intensities with UV wave-
lengths’, PloS One, 5(5), e10798. doi: 10.1371/journal.
pone.0010798
Olofsson, M., Vallin, A., Jakobsson, S., and Wiklund, C. 
(2011) ‘Winter predation on two species of hibernating 
butterflies: monitoring rodent attacks with infrared 
cameras’, Animal Behaviour, 81(3), pp. 529–34.
Olsen, K. M., Kooyers, N. J., and Small, L. L. (2014) 
‘Adaptive gains through repeated gene loss: parallel 
evolution of cyanogenesis polymorphisms in the genus 
Trifolium (Fabaceae)’, Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B, 369(1648), 
20130347.
Osorio, D., and Cuthill, I. C. (2013) ‘Camouflage and percep-
tual organization in the animal kingdom’, in Wagemans, J. 
(ed.), The Oxford Handbook of Perceptual Organization, 
Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 843–62.
Osorio, D., and Srinivasan, M. V. (1991) ‘Camouflage by 
edge enhancement in animal coloration patterns and its 
implications for visual mechanisms.’, Proceedings of the 
Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 244, pp. 81–5.
Owen, D. F., and Whiteley, D. (1986) ‘Reflexive selection: 
Moment’s hypothesis resurrected’, Oikos, 47, pp. 117–20.
Owen, D.F., and Whiteley, D. (1989) ‘Evidence that reflex-
ive polymorphisms are maintained by visual selection 
by predators’, Oikos, 55(1), pp. 130–3.
Palmer, S. E. (1999). Vision science: Photons to phenomen-
ology. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Papageorgis, C. (1975) ‘Mimicry in neotropical butterflies’, 
American Scientist, 63, pp. 522–32.
Parker, A. (2003) In the blink of an eye: how vision sparked the 
big bang of evolution. New York: Basic Books.
Partridge, L. (1988) ‘The rare-male effect: what is its evolu-
tionary significance?’, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal 
Society of London Series B: Biological Sciences,  319(1196), 
pp. 525–39.
Patel, H., Naik, V., and Tank, S. K. (2016) ‘Death-feigning 
behavior in two species of Lygosoma (Squamata: Scincidae) 
from India’, Phyllomedusa: Journal of Herpetology, 15(2), 
pp. 191–4.
Paul, N. D., and Gwynn-Jones, D. (2003) ‘Ecological roles 
of solar UV radiation: towards an integrated approach’, 
Trends in Ecology & Evolution, 18(1), pp. 48–55.
Paxton, C. G. M., Magurran, A. E., and Zschokke, S. (1994) 
‘Caudal eyespots on fish predators influence the inspec-
tion behaviour of Trinidadian guppies, Poecilia reticu-
lata’, Journal of Fish Biology, 44(1), pp. 175–7.
Pegram, K. V., and Rutowski, R. L. (2016) ‘Effects of direc-
tionality, signal intensity, and short-wavelength compo-
nents on iridescent warning signal efficacy’, Behavioral 
Ecology and Sociobiology, 70(8), pp. 1331–43.
Pekár, S., Jarab, M., Fromhage, L., and Herberstein, M. E. 
(2011) ‘Is the evolution of inaccurate mimicry a result of 
selection by a suite of predators? A case study using 
myrmecomorphic spiders’, American Naturalist, 178(1), 
pp. 124–34.
Pekár, S., Petráková, L., Bulbert, M. W., Whiting, M. J., and 
Herberstein, M. E. (2017) ‘The golden mimicry complex 
uses a wide spectrum of defence to deter a community 
of predators’, eLife, 6, e22089.
Penacchio, O., Cuthill, I. C., Lovell, P. G., Ruxton, G. D., 
and Harris, J. M. (2015a) ‘Orientation to the sun by ani-
mals and its interaction with crypsis’, Functional Ecology, 
29(9), pp. 1165–77.
Penacchio, O., Harris, J. M., and Lovell, P. G. (2017) 
‘Establishing the behavioural limits for countershaded 
camouflage’, Scientific Reports, 7(1), 13672.
Penacchio, O., Lovell, P. G., Cuthill, I. C., Ruxton, G. D., 
and Harris, J. M. (2015b) ‘Three-dimensional camou-
flage: Exploiting photons to conceal form’, American 
Naturalist, 186(4), pp. 553–63.
Penacchio, O., Lovell, P. G., and Harris, J. M. (in review) 
‘Subtlety of countershading camouflage in different 
weather: countershading must be close to optimal to 
reduce visibility’.
Penacchio, O., Lovell, P. G., Sanghera, S., Cuthill, I., 
Ruxton, G., and Harris, J. (2015c) ‘Countershading cam-
ouflage and the efficiency of visual search’, Perception, 
44(10), p. 1240.
Penney, H. D., Hassall, C., Skevington, J. H., Abbott, K. R. 
and Sherratt, T. N. (2012) ‘A comparative analysis of 
the evolution of imperfect mimicry’, Nature, 483(7390), 
pp. 461–4.
Penney, H. D., Hassall, C., Skevington, J. H., Lamborn, B., 
and Sherratt, T. N. (2014) ‘The relationship between mor-
phological and behavioral mimicry in hover flies (Diptera: 
Syrphidae)’, American Naturalist, 183(2), pp. 281–9.
Perrinet, L. U., and Bednar, J. A. (2015) ‘Edge co-occurrences 
can account for rapid categorization of natural versus 
animal images’, Scientific Reports, 5, 11400.
Peterson, G. S., Johnson, L. B., Axler, R. P., and Diamond, 
S. A. (2002) ‘Assessment of the risk of solar ultraviolet 
radiation to amphibians. II. In situ characterization of 
exposure in amphibian habitats’, Environmental Science 
& Technology, 36(13), pp. 2859–65.
Peterson, M. A., Kimchi, R., and Reisberg, I. D. (2013) 
‘Perceptual organization in vision’, The Oxford handbook 

REFERENCES
263
of cognitive psychology, pp. 9–31. Edited by Daniel 
Reisberg. OUP.
Pfennig, D. W., Harcombe, W. R., and Pfennig, K. S. (2001) 
‘Frequency-dependent Batesian mimicry: Predators 
avoid look-alikes of venomous snakes only when the 
real thing is around’, Nature, 410(6826), p. 323.
Pfennig, D. W., Harper, G. R., Brumo, A. F., Harcombe, W. R., 
and Pfennig, K. S. (2007) ‘Population differences in preda-
tion on Batesian mimics in allopatry with their model: 
selection against mimics is strongest when they are com-
mon’, Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology, 61(4), pp. 505–11.
Phillips, B. T., Gruber, D. F., Vasan, G., Roman, C. N., 
Pieribone, V. A., and Sparks, J. S. (2016) ‘Observations of 
in situ deep-sea marine bioluminescence with a high-
speed, high-resolution sCMOS camera’, Deep Sea Research 
Part I: Oceanographic Research Papers, 111, pp. 102–9.
Phillips, G. A., How, M. J., Lange, J. E., Marshall, N. J., and 
Cheney, K. L. (2017) ‘Disruptive colouration in reef fish: 
does matching the background reduce predation risk?’, 
Journal of Experimental Biology, 220(11), pp.1962–74.
Piel, W. H., and Monteiro, A. (2011) ‘Flies in the ointment 
make for convincing poop. ’, Yale Environmental News, 
16, p. 13.
Pielowski, Z. (1959) ‘Studies on the relationship: preda-
tor (goshawk)-prey (pigeon)’, Bull Acad Pol Sci Biol, 7, 
pp. 401–3.
Pietrewicz, A. T., and Kamil, A. C. (1979) ‘Search image 
formation in the blue jay (Cyanocitta cristata)’, Science, 
204(4399), pp. 1332–3.
Pilecki, C., and Odonald, P. (1971) ‘Effects of predation on 
artificial mimetic polymorphisms with perfect and 
imperfect mimics at varying frequencies’, Evolution, 
25(2), pp. 365–70.
Pinheiro, C., Antezana, M., and Machado, L. (2014) ‘Evidence 
for the deflective function of eyespots in wild Junonia evar-
ete Cramer (Lepidoptera, Nymphalidae)’, Neotropical 
Entomology, 43(1), pp. 39–47.
Pinheiro, C., Freitas, A., Campos, V., DeVries, P., and Penz, 
C. (2016) ‘Both palatable and unpalatable butterflies use 
bright colors to signal difficulty of capture to predators’, 
Neotropical Entomology, 45(2), pp. 107–13.
Pinheiro, C. E. G. (1996) ‘Palatability and escaping ability 
in neotropical butterflies: Tests with wild kingbirds 
(Tyrannus melancholicus, Tyrannidae)’, Biological Journal 
of the Linnean Society, 59(4), pp. 351–65.
Pinheiro, C. E. G. (2003) ‘Does Müllerian mimicry work 
in  nature? Experiments with butterflies and birds 
(Tyrannidae)’, Biotropica, 35(3), pp. 356–64.
Pinheiro, C. E. G., and de Campos, V. C. (2013) ‘Do rufous-
tailed jacamars (Galbula ruficauda) play with aposematic 
butterflies?’, Ornitologia Neotropical, 24(3), pp. 365–7.
Pinheiro, C. E. G., and Freitas, A. V. L. (2014) ‘Some pos-
sible cases of escape mimicry in neotropical butterflies’, 
Neotropical Entomology, 43(5), pp. 393–8.
Plaisted, K., and Mackintosh, N. (1995) ‘Visual search for 
cryptic stimuli in pigeons: implications for the search 
image and search rate hypotheses’, Animal Behaviour, 
50(5), pp. 1219–32.
Platt, A. P., and Brower, L. P. (1968) ‘Mimetic versus dis-
ruptive coloration in intergrading populations of 
Limenitis arthemis and astyanax butterflies’, Evolution, 
22(4), pp. 699–718.
Platt, A. P., Coppinger, R. P., and Brower, L. P. (1971) 
‘Demonstration of selective advantage of mimetic 
Limenitis butterflies presented to caged avian pred-
ators’, Evolution, 25(4), pp. 692–701.
Plowright, R. C., and Owen, R. E. (1980) ‘The evolutionary 
significance of bumble bee color patterns: a mimetic 
interpretation’, Evolution, 34(4), pp. 622–37.
Polnaszek, T. J., Rubi, T. L., and Stephens, D. W. (2017) 
‘When it’s good to signal badness: using objective meas-
ures of discriminability to test the value of being dis-
tinctive’, Animal Behaviour, 129, pp. 113–25.
Poulton, E. B. (1888) ‘Notes in 1887 upon lepidopterous 
larvae, etc., including a complete account of the life-
history of the larvae of Sphinx convolvuli and Aglia tau’, 
Trans. Entomol. Soc. Lond, 1888, pp. 515–606.
Poulton, E. B. (1890) The colours of animals: their meaning 
and use, especially considered in the case of insects. London: 
Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner & Co. London.
Poulton, E. B. (1909) ‘The value of colour in the struggle 
for life.’, in Seward, A.C. (ed.) Darwin and modern science; 
essays in commemoration of the centenary of the birth of 
Charles Darwin and of the fiftieth anniversary of the publica-
tion of the Origin of Species: Cambridge University Press, 
pp. 207–27.
Poulton, E. B. (1924) ‘Papilio dardanus. The most interesting 
butterfly in the world’, Journal of the East African and 
Ugandan Natural History Society, 20, pp. 4–22.
Powell, R. A. (1982) ‘Evolution of black-tipped tails in 
weasels - Predator confusion’, American Naturalist, 
119(1), pp. 126–31.
Preißler, K., and Pröhl, H. (2017) ‘The effects of background 
coloration and dark spots on the risk of predation in poi-
son frog models’, Evolutionary Ecology, 31(5), pp. 683–94.
Preston-Mafham, R., and Preston-Mafham, K. (1993) The 
encyclopedia 
of 
land 
invertebrate 
behaviour. 
Hong 
Kong: The MIT Press.
Priebe, N. J., and Ferster, D. (2006) ‘Mechanisms under-
lying cross-orientation suppression in cat visual cortex’, 
Nature Neuroscience, 9(4), pp. 552.
Prudic, K. L., and Oliver, J. C. (2008) ‘Once a Batesian 
mimic, not always a Batesian mimic: mimic reverts back 
to ancestral phenotype when the model is absent’, 
Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 
275(1639), pp. 1125–32.
Prudic, K. L., Oliver, J. C., and Sperling, F. A. H. (2007) 
‘The signal environment is more important than diet or 

264
REFERENCES
chemical specialization in the evolution of warning col-
oration’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of 
the United States of America, 104(49), pp. 19381–6.
Prudic, K. L., Stoehr, A. M., Wasik, B. R. and Monteiro, A. 
(2015) ‘Eyespots deflect predator attack increasing fit-
ness and promoting the evolution of phenotypic plasti-
city’. Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences,, 
282(1798). doi: 10.1098/rspb.2014.1531
Punnett, R. C. (1915) Mimicry in Butterflies. London: 
Cambridge University Press.
Purves, D., Paydarfar, J. A., and Andrews, T. J. (1996) ‘The 
wagon wheel illusion in movies and reality’, Proceedings 
of the National Academy of Sciences, 93(8), pp. 3693–7.
Putman, B. J., and Clark, R. W. (2014) ‘The fear of unseen 
predators: ground squirrel tail flagging in the absence 
of snakes signals vigilance’, Behavioral Ecology, 26(1), 
pp. 185–93.
Putman, B. J., Coss, R. G., and Clark, R. W. (2015) ‘The 
ontogeny of antipredator behavior: age differences in 
California ground squirrels (Otospermophilus beecheyi) at 
multiple stages of rattlesnake encounters’, Behavioral 
Ecology and Sociobiology, 69(9), pp. 1447–57.
Puurtinen, M., and Kaitala, V. (2006) ‘Conditions for the 
spread of conspicuous warning signals: a numerical 
model with novel insights’, Evolution, 60(11), pp.  
2246–56.
Qadri, M. A. J., and Cook, R. G. (2015) ‘Experimental diver-
gences in the visual cognition of birds and mammals’, 
Comparative Cognition & Behavior Reviews, 10, pp. 73–105.
Qadri, M. A. J., Romero, L. M., and Cook, R. G. (2014) 
‘Shape from shading in starlings (Sturnus vulgaris)’, 
Journal of Comparative Psychology (Washington, DC: 1983), 
128, pp. 343–56.
Ramachandran, V. S. (1988) ‘Perception of shape from 
shading’. Nature, 331, pp. 163–166.
Ranade, S. P., and Prakash, V. (2016) ‘Nesting of lesser 
whistling-duck Dendrocygna javanica (Horsfield, 1821)
(Aves: Anseriformes: Anatidae) and broken-wing dis-
traction display at Kamrup District, Assam, India’, 
Journal of Threatened Taxa, 8(5), pp. 8824–6.
Randall, J. E. (2005) ‘A review of mimicry in marine fishes’, 
Zoological Studies, 44, pp. 299–328.
Randler, C. (2006) ‘Is tail wagging in white wagtails, 
Motacilla alba, an honest signal of vigilance?’, Animal 
Behaviour, 71(5), pp. 1089–93.
Randler, C. (2007) ‘Observational and experimental evi-
dence for the function of tail flicking in Eurasian moor-
hen Gallinula chloropus’, Ethology, 113(7), pp. 629–39.
Ratcliffe, J. M., and Nydam, M. L. (2008) ‘Multimodal 
warning signals for a multiple predator world’, Nature, 
455(7209), pp. 96.
Regolin, L., and Vallortigara, G. (1995) ‘Perception of 
partly occluded objects by young chicks’, Attention, 
Perception, & Psychophysics, 57(7), pp. 971–6.
Reid, D. G. (1987) ‘Natural selection for apostasy and 
crypsis acting on the shell colour polymorphism of a 
mangrove snail, Littoraria filosa (Sowerby)(Gastropoda: 
Littorinidae)’, Biological Journal of the Linnean Society, 
30(1), pp. 1–24.
Resetarits, E. J., and Raxworthy, C. J. (2016) ‘Hidden in 
plain sight: How ventral line markings in chameleons 
may enhance camouflage’, Am Nat, 187(2), pp. 262–73.
Rettenmeyer, C. W. (1970) ‘Insect mimicry’, Annual Review 
of Entomology, 15, pp. 43–74.
Reudler, J., Lindstedt, C., Pakkanen, H., Lehtinen, I., and 
Mappes, J. (2015) ‘Costs and benefits of plant allelo-
chemicals in herbivore diet in a multi enemy world’, 
Oecologia, 179(4), pp. 1147–58.
Ridgway, M. S., and McPhail, J. D. (1987) ‘Rival male 
effects on courtship behavior in the Enos Lake species 
pair of sticklebacks (Gasterosteus)’, Canadian Journal of 
Zoology-Revue Canadienne De Zoologie, 65(8), pp. 1951–5.
Ries, L., and Mullen, S. P. (2008) ‘A rare model limits the 
distribution of its more common mimic: a twist on fre-
quency-dependent Batesian mimicry’, Evolution, 62(7), 
pp. 1798–1803.
Riipi, M., Alatalo, R. V., Lindström, L., and Mappes, J. (2001) 
‘Multiple benefits of gregariousness cover detectability 
costs in aposematic aggregations’, Nature, 413(6855), pp. 
512–14.
Ritland, D. B., and Brower, L. P. (1991) ‘The viceroy  
butterfly is not a Batesian mimic’, Nature, 350(6318), pp. 
497–8.
Rittenhouse, D. (1786) ‘Explanation of an optical decep-
tion’, Transactions of the American Philosophical Society, 2, 
pp. 37–42.
Robbins, R. K. (1981) ‘The “false head” hypothesis: preda-
tion and wing pattern variation of lycaenid butterflies’, 
The American Naturalist, 118(5), pp. 770–5.
Roberts, J. A., Taylor, P. W., and Uetz, G. W. (2006) 
‘Consequences of complex signaling: predator detection 
of multimodal cues’, Behavioral Ecology, 18(1), pp.  
236–40.
Robinson, M. H. (1969) ‘The defensive behaviour of some 
orthopteroid insects from Panama’, Ecological Entomology, 
121(7), pp. 281–303.
Rocco, V., Barriga, J. P., Zagarese, H., and Lozada, M. (2002) 
‘How much does ultraviolet radiation contribute to the 
feeding performance of rainbow trout, Oncorhynchus 
mykiss, 
juveniles 
under 
natural 
illumination?’, 
Environmental Biology of Fishes, 63(2), pp. 223–8.
Rock, I., and Brosgole, L. (1964) ‘Grouping based on phe-
nomenal proximity’, Journal of Experimental Psychology, 
67(6), pp. 531.
Rodriguez, J., Pitts, J. P., von Dohlen, C. D., and Wilson, J. S. 
(2014) ‘Müllerian mimicry as a result of co-divergence 
between velvet ants and spider wasps’, PloS One, 9, 
e112942.

REFERENCES
265
Rogers, S. M., and Simpson, S. J. (2014) ‘Thanatosis’, Current 
Biology, 24(21), pp. R1031–R1033.
Rojas, B. (2017) ‘Behavioural, ecological, and evolutionary 
aspects of diversity in frog colour patterns’, Biological 
Reviews, 92(2), pp. 1059–80.
Rojas, B., Burdfield-Steel, E., Pakkanen, H., Suisto, K., 
Maczka, M., Schulz, S., and Mappes, J. (2017) ‘How to 
fight multiple enemies: target-specific chemical defences 
in an aposematic moth’, Proceedings of the Royal Society B: 
Biological Sciences, 284(1863). doi: 10.1098/rspb.2017.1424
Rojas, B., Devillechabrolle, J., and Endler, J. A. (2014a) 
‘Paradox lost: variable colour-pattern geometry is associ-
ated with differences in movement in aposematic frogs’, 
Biology Letters, 10(6), 20140193.
Rojas, B., and Endler, J. A. (2013) ‘Sexual dimorphism and 
intra-populational colour pattern variation in the apo-
sematic frog Dendrobates tinctorius’, Evolutionary Ecology, 
27(4), pp. 739–53.
Rojas, B., Rautiala, P., and Mappes, J. (2014b) ‘Differential 
detectability of polymorphic warning signals under vary-
ing light environments’, Behavioural Processes, 109, pp. 
164–72.
Rojas, B., Valkonen, J., and Nokelainen, O. (2015) 
‘Aposematism’, Current Biology, 25(9), pp. R350–R351.
Romanes, G. J. (1883) Mental evolution in animals. New 
York: D. Appleton.
Rönkä, K., De Pasqual, C., Mappes, J., Gordon, S., and 
Rojas, B. (2018) ‘Colour alone matters: no predator gen-
eralization among morphs of an aposematic moth’, 
Animal Behaviour, 135, pp. 153–63.
Rose, T. A., Munn, A. J., Ramp, D., and Banks, P. B. (2006) 
‘Foot-thumping as an alarm signal in macropodoid 
marsupials: prevalence and hypotheses of function’, 
Mammal Review, 36(4), pp. 281–98.
Rosser, N., Dasmahapatra, K. K., and Mallet, J. (2014) 
‘Stable Heliconius butterfly hybrid zones are correlated 
with a local rainfall peak at the edge of the Amazon 
basin’, Evolution, 68(12), pp. 3470–84.
Rothschild, M. (1961) ‘Defensive odours and Müllerian 
mimicry among insects’, Ecological Entomology, 113(5), 
pp. 101–23.
Rothschild, M. (1963) ‘Is the buff ermine (Spilosoma lutea 
(Huf.)) a mimic of the white ermine (Spilosoma lubrici-
peda (L.))?’, Proceedings of the Royal Entomological Society 
of London, Series A, 38, pp. 159–64.
Rothschild, M. (1964) ‘An extension of Dr Lincoln Brower’s 
theory on bird predation and food specificity, together 
with some observations on bird memory in relation to 
aposematic colour patterns.’, Entomologist, 97, pp. 73–8.
Rothschild, M. (1971) ‘Speculations about mimicry with 
Henry Ford’, in Creed, E.R. (ed.) Ecological Genetics and 
Evolution, Oxford: Blackwell, pp. 202–23.
Rothschild, M. (1975) ‘Remarks on carotenoids in the evo-
lution of signals’, Coevolution of animals and plants, pp. 
20–47. In: Gilbert LE, Raven PH (eds) Coevolution of 
animals and plants, University of Texas Press, Austin, 
pp 20–47.
Rowe, C., and Guilford, T. (1996) ‘Hidden colour aversions 
in domestic chicks triggered by pyrazine odours of 
insect warning displays’, Nature, 383(6600), pp. 520–2.
Rowe, C., and Halpin, C. (2013) ‘Why are warning dis-
plays multimodal?’, Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology, 
67(9), pp. 1425–39.
Rowe, C., Lindström, L., and Lyytinen, A. (2004) ‘The 
importance of pattern similarity between Müllerian 
mimics in predator avoidance learning’, Proceedings of 
the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 271(1537), 
pp. 407–13.
Rowe, M. P., and Owings, D. H. (1978) ‘The meaning of the 
sound of rattling by rattlesnakes to California ground 
squirrels’, Behaviour, 66(3), pp. 252–67.
Rowland, H. M. (2009) ‘From Abbott Thayer to the present 
day: what have we learned about the function of coun-
tershading?’, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society 
B: Biological Sciences, 364, pp. 519–27.
Rowland, H. M. (2011) ‘The history, theory and evidence 
for a cryptic function of countershading’, in Stevens, M. 
and Merilaita, S. (eds), Animal Camouflage: Mechanisms 
and Function, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
pp. 53–72. 
Rowland, H. M., Cuthill, I. C., Harvey, I. F., Speed, M. P., 
and Ruxton, G. D. (2008) ‘Can’t tell the caterpillars from 
the trees: countershading enhances survival in a wood-
land.’, Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 
275, pp. 2539–45.
Rowland, H. M., Hoogesteger, T., Ruxton, G. D., Speed, M. 
P., and Mappes, J. (2010a) ‘A tale of 2 signals: signal 
mimicry between aposematic species enhances preda-
tor avoidance learning’, Behavioral Ecology, 21(4), pp. 
851–60.
Rowland, H. M., Ihalainen, E., Lindström, L., Mappes, J. 
and Speed, M. P. (2007a) ‘Co-mimics have a mutualistic 
relationship despite unequal defences’, Nature, 448(7149), 
pp. 64–7.
Rowland, H. M., Mappes, J., Ruxton, G. D., and Speed, M. P. 
(2010b) ‘Mimicry between unequally defended prey 
can be parasitic: evidence for quasi-Batesian mimicry’, 
Ecology Letters, 13(12), pp. 1494–502.
Rowland, H. M., Ruxton, G. D., and Skelhorn, J. (2013) ‘Bitter 
taste enhances predatory biases against aggregations of 
prey with warning coloration’, Behavioral Ecology, 24(4), 
pp. 942–8.
Rowland, H. M., Speed, M. P., Ruxton, G. D., Edmunds, M., 
Stevens, M., and Harvey, I. F. (2007b) ‘Countershading 
enhances cryptic protection: an experiment with wild 
birds and artificial prey’, Animal Behaviour, 74, pp. 1249–58.
Rowland, H. M., Wiley, E., Ruxton, G. D., Mappes, J., and 
Speed, M. P. (2010c) ‘When more is less: the fitness 

266
REFERENCES
consequences­ of predators attacking more unpalatable 
prey when more are presented’, Biology Letters, 6(6), 
pp. 732–5.
Rudh, A., Breed, M. F., and Qvarnström, A. (2012) ‘Does 
aggression and explorative behaviour decrease with 
lost warning coloration?’, Biological Journal of the Linnean 
Society, 108(1), pp. 116–26.
Rundus, A. S., Owings, D. H., Joshi, S. S., Chinn, E., and 
Giannini, N. (2007) ‘Ground squirrels use an infrared 
signal to deter rattlesnake predation’, Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences, 104(36), pp. 14372–6.
Ruxton, G. D. (2009) ‘Non-visual crypsis: a review of the 
empirical evidence for camouflage to senses other than 
vision’, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of 
London B: Biological Sciences, 364(1516), pp. 549–57.
Ruxton, G. D., Franks, D. W., Balogh, A. C. V., and Leimar, 
O. (2008) ‘Evolutionary implications of the form of 
predator generalization for aposematic signals and 
mimicry in prey’, Evolution, 62(11), pp. 2913–21.
Ruxton, G. D., and Kennedy, M. W. (2006) ‘Peppers and 
poisons: the evolutionary ecology of bad taste’, Journal 
of Animal Ecology, 75(5), pp. 1224–6.
Ruxton, G. D., and Sherratt, T. N. (2006) ‘Aggregation, 
defence and warning signals: the evolutionary relation-
ship’, Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B: Biological 
Sciences, 273(1600), pp. 2417–24.
Ruxton, G. D., Sherratt, T. N., and Speed, M. P. (2004a) 
Avoiding attack: the evolutionary ecology of crypsis, warning 
signals, and mimicry. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Ruxton, G. D., Speed, M., and Sherratt, T. N. (2004b) 
‘Evasive mimicry: when (if ever) could mimicry based 
on difficulty of capture evolve?’, Proceedings of the Royal 
Society B: Biological Sciences, 271(1553), pp. 2135–42.
Ruxton, G. D., Speed, M. P., and Broom, M. (2009) 
‘Identifying the ecological conditions that select for inter-
mediate levels of aposematic signalling’, Evolutionary 
Ecology, 23(4), pp. 491–501.
Ruxton, G. D., Speed, M. P. and Kelly, D. J. (2004c) ‘What, 
if anything, is the adaptive function of countershad-
ing?’, Animal Behaviour, 68, pp. 445–51.
Sagonas, K., Karambotsi, N., Bletsa, A., Reppa, A., Pafilis, 
P., and Valakos, E. D. (2017) ‘Tail regeneration affects the 
digestive performance of a Mediterranean lizard’, The 
Science of Nature, 104(3–4), p. 22.
Sanchez Paniagua, K., and Abarca, J. G. (2016) ‘Thanatosis 
in four poorly known toads of the genus Incilius 
(Amphibia: Anura) from the highlands of Costa Rica’, 
Mesoamerican Herpetology, 3(1), pp. 135–40.
Santana, S. E., Dial, T. O., Eiting, T. P., and Alfaro, M. E. 
(2011) ‘Roosting ecology and the evolution of pelage 
markings in bats’, PLoS One, 6, e25845.
Santer, R. D. (2013) ‘Motion dazzle: a locust’s eye view’, 
Biology Letters, 9(6), pp. 20130811.
Santos, J. C., Baquero, M., Barrio-Amorós, C., Coloma, 
L. A., Erdtmann, L. K., Lima, A. P., and Cannatella, D. C. 
(2014) ‘Aposematism increases acoustic diversification 
and speciation in poison frogs’, Proceedings of the Royal 
Society of London B: Biological Sciences, 281(1796). doi: 
10.1098/rspb.2014.1761
Santos, J. C., and Cannatella, D. C. (2011) ‘Phenotypic inte-
gration emerges from aposematism and scale in poison 
frogs’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 
108(15), pp. 6175–80.
Santos, M. B. d., Oliveira, M. C. L. M. d., Verrastro, L., and 
Tozetti, A. M. (2010) ‘Playing dead to stay alive: death-
feigning in Liolaemus occipitalis (Squamata: Liolaemidae)’, 
Biota Neotropica, 10(4), pp. 361–4.
Saporito, R. A., Spande, T. F., Garraffo, H. M., and 
Donnelly, M. A. (2009) ‘Arthropod alkaloids in poison 
frogs: a review of the “dietary hypothesis” ’, Heterocycles, 
79, pp. 277–97.
Sasaki, A., Kawaguchi, I., and Yoshimori, A. (2002) ‘Spatial 
mosaic and interfacial dynamics in a Müllerian mimicry 
system’, Theoretical Population Biology, 61(1), pp. 49–71.
Satoh, S., Takahashi, T., Tada, S., Tanaka, H., and Kohda, 
M. (2017) ‘Parental females of a nest-brooding cichlid 
improve and benefit from the protective value of 
young masquerading as snails’, Animal Behaviour, 124, 
pp. 75–82.
Savage, J. M., and Slowinski, J. B. (1992) ‘The colouration 
of the venomous coral snakes (family Elapidae) and 
their mimics (families Aniliidae and Colubridae)’, 
Biological Journal of the Linnean Society, 45, pp. 235–54.
Savage, W. K., and Mullen, S. P. (2009) ‘A single origin of 
Batesian mimicry among hybridizing populations of 
admiral butterflies (Limenitis arthemis) rejects an evolu-
tionary reversion to the ancestral phenotype’, Proceedings 
of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 276(1667), pp. 
2557–65.
Saxena, S. (1957) ‘An experimental study of thanatosis in 
Armadillidium vulgare (Latreille)’, Journal of the Zoological 
Society of India, 9, pp. 192–9.
Schaefer, H. M., and Ruxton, G. D. (2009) ‘Deception in 
plants: mimicry or perceptual exploitation?’, Trends in 
Ecology & Evolution, 24(12), pp. 676–85.
Schaefer, H. M., and Ruxton, G. D. (2011).  Plant–animal 
communication. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Schaefer, H. M., and Stobbe, N. (2006) ‘Disruptive color­
ation provides camouflage independent of background 
matching’, Proc Biol Sci, 273(1600), pp. 2427–32.
Schlenoff, D. H. (1985) ‘The startle responses of blue jays 
to Catocala (Lepidoptera: Noctuidae) prey models’, 
Animal Behaviour, 33(4), pp. 1057–67.
Schmidt, J. O. (2004) ‘Venom and the good life in tarantula 
hawks (Hymenoptera: Pompilidae): how to eat, not be 
eaten, and live long’, J Kan Ent Soc, 77, pp. 402–13.

REFERENCES
267
Schmidt, R. S. (1958) ‘Behavioural evidence on the evolution 
of Batesian mimicry’, Animal Behaviour, 6, pp. 129–38.
Schmidt, R. S. (1960) ‘Predator behaviour and the perfec-
tion of incipient mimetic resemblances’, Behaviour, 16, 
pp. 149–58.
Schmied, H., Lambertz, M., and Geissler, P. (2013) ‘New case 
of true mimicry in cockroaches (Blattodea)’, Entomological 
Science, 16(1), pp. 119–21.
Schuler, W., and Roper, T. J. (1992) ‘Responses to warning 
coloration in avian predators’, Advances in the Study of 
Behavior, 21, pp. 111–46.
Scott-Brown, K. C., and Heeley, D. W. (2001) ‘The effect of 
the spatial arrangement of target lines on perceived 
speed’, Vision Research, 41(13), pp. 1669–82. 
Scott-Samuel, N. E., Baddeley, R., Palmer, C. E., and 
Cuthill, I. C. (2011) ‘Dazzle camouflage affects speed 
perception’, PloS One, 6, e20233.
Seapy, R., and Young, R. (1986) ‘Concealment in epipelagic 
pterotracheid heteropods (Gastropoda) and cranchiid 
squids (Cephalopoda)’, Journal of Zoology, 210(1), pp. 
137–47.
Seehausen, M., and Van Alphen, J. J. M. (1999) ‘Evolution 
of colour patterns in East African cichlid fish’, J Evol Biol, 
12(3), 514–34.
Sermanet, P., Eigen, D., Zhang, X., Mathieu, M., Fergus, R., 
and LeCun, Y. (2013) ‘Overfeat: Integrated recognition, 
localization and detection using convolutional net-
works’, arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6229.
Servedio, M. R. (2000) ‘The effects of predator learning, 
forgetting, and recognition errors on the evolution of 
warning coloration’, Evolution, 54(3), pp. 751–63.
Seymoure, B. M., and Aiello, A. (2015) ‘Keeping the band 
together: evidence for false boundary disruptive color-
ation in a butterfly’, J Evol Biol, 28(9), pp. 1618–24.
Shashar, N., Hagan, R., Boal, J. G., and Hanlon, R. T. (2000) 
‘Cuttlefish use polarization sensitivity in predation on 
silvery fish’, Vision Research, 40(1), pp. 71–5.
Shashar, N., Hanlon, R. T., and Petz, A. de M. (1998) 
‘Polarization vision helps detect transparent prey’, 
Nature, 393(6682), pp. 222–3.
Sheppard, P. M. (1958) Natural selection and heredity. New 
York: Harper Torchbooks.
Sheppard, P. M., Turner, J. R. G., Brown, K. S., Benson, W. W., 
and Singer, M. C. (1985) ‘Genetics and the evolution of 
Muellerian mimicry in Heliconius butterflies’, Philo­
sophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London Series B: 
Biological Sciences, 308(1137), pp. 433–610. doi: 10.1098/
rstb.1985.0066
Sherratt, T. N. (2002a) ‘The coevolution of warning sig-
nals’, Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B: Biological 
Sciences, 269(1492), pp. 741–6.
Sherratt, T. N. (2002b) ‘The evolution of imperfect mim-
icry’, Behavioral Ecology, 13(6), pp. 821–6.
Sherratt, T. N. (2003) ‘State-dependent risk-taking in sys-
tems with defended prey’, Oikos, 103, pp. 93–100.
Sherratt, T. N. (2006) ‘Spatial mosaic formation through 
frequency-dependent selection in Müllerian mimicry 
complexes’, Journal of Theoretical Biology, 240(2), pp. 
165–74.
Sherratt, T. N. (2011) ‘The optimal sampling strategy for 
unfamiliar prey’, Evolution, 65(7), pp. 2014–25.
Sherratt, T. N., and Beatty, C. D. (2003) ‘The evolution of 
warning signals as reliable indicators of prey defense’, 
American Naturalist, 162(4), pp. 377–89.
Sherratt, T. N., and Harvey, I. F. (1993) ‘Frequency-
dependent food selection by arthropods: a review’, 
Biological Journal of the Linnean Society, 48(2), pp. 167–86.
Sherratt, T. N. and Macdougall, A. D. (1995) ‘Some popu-
lation consequences of variation in preference among 
individual predators’, Biological Journal of the Linnean 
Society, 55(2), pp. 93–107.
Sherratt, T. N., and Peet-Pare, C. A. (2017) ‘The perfection 
of mimicry: an information approach’, Philosophical 
Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 
372(1724). doi: 10.1098/rstb.2016.0340
Sherratt, T. N., Pollitt, D., and Wilkinson, D. M. (2007) ‘The 
evolution of crypsis in replicating populations of web-
based prey’, Oikos, 116(3), pp. 449–60.
Sherratt, T. N., Rashed, A., and Beatty, C. D. (2004a) ‘The evo-
lution of locomotory behavior in profitable and unprofit-
able simulated prey’, Oecologia, 138(1), pp. 143–50.
Sherratt, T. N., Roberts, G., and Kassen, R. (2009) 
‘Evolutionary stable investment in products that confer 
both an individual benefit and a public good’, Front. 
Biosci, 14, pp. 340–7.
Sherratt, T. N., Speed, M. P., and Ruxton, G. D. (2004b) 
‘Natural selection on unpalatable species imposed by 
state-dependent foraging behaviour’, Journal of Theoretical 
Biology, 228(2), pp. 217–26.
Sherratt, T. N., Whissell, E., Webster, R., and Kikuchi, 
D.  W. (2015) ‘Hierarchical overshadowing of stimuli 
and its role in mimicry evolution’, Animal Behaviour, 108, 
pp. 73–9.
Sherratt, T. N., Wilkinson, D. M., and Bain, R. S. (2005) 
‘Explaining Dioscorides’ “double difference”: why are some 
mushrooms poisonous, and do they signal their unprofit-
ability?’, The American Naturalist, 166(6), pp. 767–75.
Shettleworth, S. J. (2010) Cognition, Evolution and Behaviour. 
2nd edn. New York: Oxford University Press.
Shine, R. (1990) ‘Function and evolution of the frill of the 
frillneck 
lizard, 
Chlamydosaurus 
kingii 
(Sauria: 
Agamidae)’, Biological Journal of the Linnean Society, 
40(1), pp. 11–20.
Shirai, L. T., Saenko, S. V., Keller, R. A., Jeronimo, M. A., 
Brakefield, P. M., Descimon, H., Wahlberg, N., and 
Beldade, P. (2012) ‘Evolutionary history of the recruitment 

268
REFERENCES
of conserved developmental genes in association to the 
formation and diversification of a novel trait’, BMC 
Evolutionary Biology, 12, p. 21.
Shreeve, T. G., Dennis, R. L., and Wakeham-Dawson, A. 
(2000) ‘Phylogenetic, habitat, and behavioural aspects 
of possum behaviour in European lepidoptera’, Journal 
of Research on the Lepidoptera, 39, pp. 80–5.
Silberglied, R. E., Aiello, A., and Windsor, D. M. (1980) 
‘Disruptive coloration in butterflies: lack of support in 
Anartia fatima’, Science, 209(4456), pp. 617–19.
Sillén-Tullberg, B. (1985) ‘Higher survival of an aposem-
atic than of a cryptic form of a distasteful bug’, Oecologia, 
67(3), pp. 411–15.
Sillén-Tullberg, B. (1988) ‘Evolution of gregariousness in 
aposematic butterfly larvae: a phylogenetic analysis’, 
Evolution, 42, pp. 293–305.
Sillén-Tullberg, B. (1990) ‘Do predators avoid groups 
of  aposematic prey? An experimental test’, Animal 
Behaviour, 40(5), pp. 856–60.
Sillén-Tullberg, B., and Leimar, O. (1988) ‘The evolution of 
gregariousness in distasteful insects as a defense against 
predators’, The American Naturalist, 132(5), pp. 723–34.
Simoncelli, E. P., and Heeger, D. J. (1998) ‘A model of neur-
onal responses in visual area MT’, Vision Research, 38(5), 
pp. 743–61.
Skelhorn, J. (2015) ‘Masquerade’, Current Biology, 25(15), 
pp. R643–R644.
Skelhorn, J., Griksaitis, D., and Rowe, C. (2008) ‘Colour 
biases are more than a question of taste’, Animal Behaviour, 
75, pp. 827–35.
Skelhorn, J., Halpin, C. G., and Rowe, C. (2016a) ‘Learning 
about aposematic prey’, Behavioral Ecology, 27(4), pp. 
955–64.
Skelhorn, J., Holmes, G. G., Hossie, T. J., and Sherratt, T. N. 
(2016b) ‘Multicomponent deceptive signals reduce the 
speed at which predators learn that prey are profitable’, 
Behavioral Ecology, 27(1), pp. 141–7.
Skelhorn, J., Holmes, G. G., and Rowe, C. (2016c) ‘Deimatic 
or aposematic?’, Animal Behaviour, 113, pp. e1–e3.
Skelhorn, J., and Rowe, C. (2005) ‘Frequency-dependent 
taste-rejection by avian predation may select for defence 
chemical polymorphisms in aposematic prey’, Biology 
Letters, 1(4), pp. 500–3.
Skelhorn, J., and Rowe, C. (2006) ‘Prey palatability influ-
ences predator learning and memory’, Animal Behaviour, 
71, pp. 1111–18.
Skelhorn, J., and Rowe, C. (2007a) ‘Automimic frequency 
influences the foraging decisions of avian predators on 
aposematic prey’, Animal Behaviour, 74(5), pp. 1563–72.
Skelhorn, J., and Rowe, C. (2007b) ‘Predators’ toxin bur-
dens influence their strategic decisions to eat toxic prey’, 
Current Biology, 17(17), pp. 1479–83.
Skelhorn, J., and Rowe, C. (2009) ‘Distastefulness as an 
antipredator defence strategy’, Animal Behaviour, 78(3), 
pp. 761–6.
Skelhorn, J., and Rowe, C. (2010) ‘Birds learn to use dis-
tastefulness as a signal of toxicity’, Proceedings of the 
Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 277(1688), pp. 1729–34.
Skelhorn, J. and Rowe, C. (2016) ‘Cognition and the evolu-
tion of camouflage’. Proc. R. Soc. B: The Royal Society, 
20152890. Proc Biol Sci. 2016 Feb 24;283(1825):20152890. 
doi: 10.1098/rspb.2015.2890
Skelhorn, J., Rowland, H. M., Delf, J., Speed, M. P., and 
Ruxton, G. D. (2011) ‘Density-dependent predation influ-
ences the evolution and behavior of masquerading prey’, 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United 
States of America, 108(16), pp. 6532–6.
Skelhorn, J., Rowland, H. M., and Ruxton, G. D. (2010a) 
‘The evolution and ecology of masquerade’, Biological 
Journal of the Linnean Society, 99(1), pp. 1–8.
Skelhorn, J., Rowland, H. M., Speed, M. P., and Ruxton, G. D. 
(2010b) ‘Masquerade: camouflage without crypsis’, 
Science, 327(5961), p. 51.
Skelhorn, J., and Ruxton, G. D. (2011) ‘Mimicking multiple 
models: polyphenetic masqueraders gain additional 
benefits from crypsis’, Behavioral Ecology, 22(1), pp. 60–5.
Skelhorn, J., and Ruxton, G. D. (2013) ‘Size-dependent 
microhabitat selection by masquerading prey’, Behavioral 
Ecology, 24(1), pp. 89–97.
Skelhorn, J., and Ruxton, G. D. (2014) ‘Viewing distance 
affects how the presence of inedible models influence 
the benefit of masquerade’, Evolutionary Ecology, 28(3), 
pp. 441–55.
Skelly, D. K. (1994) ‘Activity level and the susceptibility 
of anuran larvae to predation’, Animal Behaviour, 47(2), 
pp. 465–8.
Smith, K. E., Halpin, C. G., and Rowe, C. (2014) ‘Body size 
matters for aposematic prey during predator aversion 
learning’, Behavioural Processes, 109, pp. 173–9.
Smith, S. M. (1975) ‘Innate recognition of coral snake pattern 
by a possible avian predator’, Science, 187, pp. 759–60.
Smith, S. M. (1977) ‘Coral-snake pattern recognition and 
stimulus generalisation by naive great kiskadees (Aves: 
Tyrannidae)’, Nature, 265, pp. 535–6.
Smithers, S. P., Wilson, A., and Stevens, M. (2017) ‘Rock 
pool gobies change their body pattern in response to 
background features’, Biological Journal of the Linnean 
Society, 121(1), pp. 109–21.
Smithwick, F. M., Nicholls, R., Cuthill, I. C., and Vinther, J. 
(2017) ‘Countershading and stripes in the theropod dino-
saur Sinosauropteryx reveal heterogeneous habitats in the 
early Cretaceous Jehol Biota’, Current Biology. 2017 Nov 
6;27(21):3337-3343.e2. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2017.09.032. Epub 
2017 Oct 26.

REFERENCES
269
Sonerud, G. A. (1988) ‘To distract display or not: Grouse 
hens and foxes’, Oikos, 51(2), pp. 233–7.
Sourakov, A. (2013) ‘Two heads are better than one: false 
head allows Calycopis cecrops (Lycaenidae) to escape pre-
dation by a Jumping Spider, Phidippus pulcherrimus 
(Salticidae)’, Journal of Natural History, 47(15–16), pp. 
1047–54.
Sovrano, V. A., and Bisazza, A. (2008) ‘Recognition of 
partly occluded objects by fish’, Animal Cognition, 11(1), 
pp. 161–6.
Speed, M. P. (1993) ‘Muellerian mimicry and the psych-
ology of predation’, Animal Behaviour, 45(3), pp. 571–80.
Speed, M. P. (2001) ‘Can receiver psychology explain the 
evolution of aposematism?’, Animal Behaviour, 61(1), pp. 
205–16.
Speed, M. P., Alderson, N. J., Hardman, C., and Ruxton, 
G. D. (2000) ‘Testing Mullerian mimicry: an experiment 
with wild birds’, Proceedings of the Royal Society of London 
Series B: Biological Sciences, 267(1444), pp. 725–31.
Speed, M. P., Brockhurst, M. A., and Ruxton, G. D. (2010) 
‘The dual benefits of aposematism: predator avoidance 
and enhanced resource collection’, Evolution, 64(6), 
pp. 1622–33.
Speed, M. P., Fenton, A., Jones, M. G., Ruxton, G. D., and 
Brockhurst, M. A. (2015) ‘Coevolution can explain defen-
sive secondary metabolite diversity in plants’, New 
Phytologist, 208(4), pp. 1251–63.
Speed, M. P., and Franks, D. W. (2014) ‘Antagonistic evolu-
tion in an aposematic predator–prey signaling system’, 
Evolution, 68(10), pp. 2996–3007.
Speed, M. P., Kelly, D. J., Davidson, A., and Ruxton, G. D. 
(2004) ‘Countershading enhances crypsis with some 
bird species but not others’, Behavioral Ecology, 16, pp. 
327–34.
Speed, M. P., and Ruxton, G. D. (2005a) ‘Warning displays 
in spiny animals: one (more) evolutionary route to apo-
sematism’, Evolution, 59(12), pp. 2499–508.
Speed, M. P., and Ruxton, G. D. (2005b) ‘Aposematism: 
what should our starting point be?’, Proceedings of the 
Royal Society of London B: Biological Sciences, 272(1561), 
pp. 431–8.
Speed, M. P., Ruxton, G. D., and Broom, M. (2006) 
‘Automimicry and the evolution of discrete prey 
defences’, Biological Journal of the Linnean Society, 87(3), 
pp. 393–402.
Speed, M. P., Ruxton, G. D., Mappes, J., and Sherratt, T. N. 
(2012) ‘Why are defensive toxins so variable? An evolu-
tionary perspective’, Biological Reviews, 87(4), pp. 874–84.
Speed, M. P., and Turner, J. R. G. (1999) ‘Learning and 
memory in mimicry: II. Do we understand the mimicry 
spectrum?’, Biological Journal of the Linnean Society, 67(3), 
pp. 281–312.
Srygley, R. B. (1999) ‘Incorporating motion into investiga-
tions of mimicry’, Evolutionary Ecology, 13(7), pp. 691–708.
Srygley, R. B. (2004) ‘The aerodynamic costs of warning 
signals in palatable mimetic butterflies and their dis-
tasteful models’, Proceedings of the Royal Society B: 
Biological Sciences, 271(1539), pp. 589–94.
Srygley, R. B., and Chai, P. (1990) ‘Predation and the 
­elevation of thoracic temperature in brightly colored 
neotropical butterflies’, American Naturalist, 135(6), pp. 
766–87.
Staddon, J. E. R., and Gendron, R. P. (1983) ‘Optimal detec-
tion of cryptic prey may lead to predator switching’, The 
American Naturalist, 122(6), pp. 843–8.
Stamp, N. (2003) ‘Out of the quagmire of plant defense 
hypotheses’, The Quarterly Review of Biology, 78(1), pp. 
23–55.
Stamp, N. E., and Wilkens, R. T. (1993) ‘On the cryptic side 
of life: being unapparent to enemies and the conse-
quences for foraging and growth of caterpillars’, in 
Stamp, N. E., and Casey, T. M. (eds), Caterpillars: 
Ecological and Evolutionary Contraints on Foraging, New 
York: Routledge, Chapman and Hall, pp. 283–330.
Stang, A. T., and McRae, S. B. (2009) ‘Why some rails have 
white tails: the evolution of white undertail plumage 
and anti-predator signaling’, Evolutionary Ecology, 23(6), 
pp. 943–61.
Stankowich, T. (2008) ‘Tail-flicking, tail-flagging, and tail 
position in ungulates with special reference to black-
tailed deer’, Ethology, 114(9), pp. 875–85.
Stankowich, T., Caro, T., and Cox, M. (2011) ‘Bold color-
ation and the evolution of aposematism in terrestrial 
carnivores’, Evolution, 65(11), pp. 3090–9.
Stankowich, T., and Coss, R. G. (2008) Alarm walking in 
Columbian black-tailed deer: its characterization and 
possible antipredatory signaling functions, Journal of 
Mammalogy, 89(3), pp. 636–45. https://doi.org/10.1644/ 
07-MAMM-A-203R.1
Stankowich, T., Haverkamp, P. J., and Caro, T. (2014) 
‘Ecological drivers of antipredator defenses in carni-
vores’, Evolution, 68(5), pp. 1415–25.
Starostová, Z., Gvoždík, L., and Kratochvíl, L. (2017) ‘An 
energetic perspective on tissue regeneration: The costs of 
tail autotomy in growing geckos’, Comparative Biochemistry 
and Physiology Part A: Molecular & Integrative Physiology, 
206, pp. 82–6.
Staudinger, M. D., Hanlon, R. T., and Juanes, F. (2011) 
‘Primary and secondary defences of squid to cruising 
and ambush fish predators: variable tactics and their 
survival value’, Animal Behaviour, 81(3), pp. 585–94.
Stauffer, J. R., Half, E. A., and Seltzer, R. (1999) ‘Hunting 
strategies of a Lake Malawi cichlid with reverse coun-
tershading’, Copeia, 1999, p. 1108.

270
REFERENCES
Steiner, C. C., Weber, J. N., and Hoekstra, H. E. (2007) 
‘Adaptive variation in beach mice produced by two inter-
acting pigmentation genes’, PLoS Biology, 5, e219.
Sternburg, J. G., Waldbauer, G. P., and Jeffords, M. R. 
(1977) ‘Batesian mimicry - selective advantage of color 
pattern’, Science, 195(4279), pp. 681–3.
Stevens, M. (2005) ‘The role of eyespots as anti-predator 
mechanisms, 
principally 
demonstrated 
in 
the 
Lepidoptera’, Biological Reviews, 80(4), pp. 573–88.
Stevens, M. (2007) ‘Predator perception and the interrela-
tion between different forms of protective coloration.’, 
Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 274, 
pp. 1457–64.
Stevens, M. (2013) Sensory Ecology, Behaviour and Evolution. 
Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.
Stevens, M. (2016) ‘Color change, phenotypic plasticity, and 
camouflage’, Frontiers in Ecology and Evolution, 4, p. 51.
Stevens, M., and Cuthill, I. C. (2006) ‘Disruptive color-
ation, crypsis and edge detection in early visual pro-
cessing.’, Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological 
Sciences, 273, pp. 2141–7.
Stevens, M., Cuthill, I. C., Windsor, A. M., and Walker, H. J. 
(2006) ‘Disruptive contrast in animal camouflage’, Proc 
Biol Sci, 273(1600), pp. 2433–8.
Stevens, M., Hardman, C. J., and Stubbins, C. L. (2008a) 
‘Conspicuousness, not eye mimicry, makes “eyespots” 
effective antipredator signals’, Behavioral Ecology, 19(3), 
pp. 525–31.
Stevens, M., Marshall, K. L., Troscianko, J., Finlay, S., 
Burnand, D., and Chadwick, S. L. (2012) ‘Revealed by 
conspicuousness: distractive markings reduce camou-
flage’, Behavioral Ecology, 24(1), pp. 213–22.
Stevens, M., and Merilaita, S. (2009a) ‘Animal camouflage: 
current issues and new perspectives’, Philosophical 
Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 
364(1516), pp. 423–7.
Stevens, M., and Merilaita, S. (2009b) ‘Defining disruptive 
coloration and distinguishing its functions’, Philosophical 
Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 364, 
pp. 481–8.
Stevens, M., and Merilaita, S. (2011) Animal camouflage: 
mechanisms and function. Cambridge: Cambridge Uni­
versity Press.
Stevens, M., and Ruxton, G. D. (2012) ‘Linking the evolu-
tion and form of warning coloration in nature’, 
Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 
279(1728), pp. 417–26.
Stevens, M., and Ruxton, G. D. (2014) ‘Do animal eyespots 
really mimic eyes?’, Current Zoology, 60(1), pp. 26–36.
Stevens, M., Searle, W. T., Seymour, J. E., Marshall, K. L., 
and Ruxton, G. D. (2011) ‘Motion dazzle and camouflage 
as distinct anti-predator defenses’, BMC Biol, 9, p. 81.
Stevens, M., Winney, I. S., Cantor, A., and Graham, J. 
(2009) ‘Outline and surface disruption in animal camou-
flage’, Proc Biol Sci, 276(1657), pp. 781–6.
Stevens, M., Yule, D. H., and Ruxton, G. D. (2008b) ‘Dazzle 
coloration and prey movement’, Proceedings of the Royal 
Society of London B: Biological Sciences, 275(1651), pp. 
2639–43.
Stobbe, N., and Schaefer, H. M. (2008) ‘Enhancement of 
chromatic contrast increases predation risk for striped 
butterflies’, Proc Biol Sci, 275(1642), pp. 1535–41.
Stoddard, M. C., Kupan, K., Eyster, H. N., Rojas-Abreu, 
W., Cruz-Lopez, M., Serrano-Meneses, M. A., and 
Kupper, C. (2016) ‘Camouflage and clutch survival in 
plovers and terns’, Sci Rep, 6, 32059.
Stone, L. S., and Thompson, P. (1992) ‘Human speed 
­perception is contrast dependent’, Vision Research, 32, 
pp. 1535–49.
Stoner, C. J., Bininda-Emonds, O. R. P., and Caro, T. M. 
(2003) ‘The adaptive significance of coloration in lago-
morphs’, Biological Journal of the Linnean Society, 79, 
pp. 309–28.
Straube, N., Li, C., Claes, J. M., Corrigan, S., and Naylor, 
G.  J. P. (2015) ‘Molecular phylogeny of Squaliformes 
and first occurrence of bioluminescence in sharks’, BMC 
Evolutionary Biology, 15, p. 162.
Strauss, S. Y., Rudgers, J. A., Lau, J. A., and Irwin, R. E. 
(2002) ‘Direct and ecological costs of resistance to her-
bivory’, Trends in Ecology & Evolution, 17(6), pp. 278–85.
Stroud, J. T., and Losos, J. B. (2016) ‘Ecological opportunity 
and adaptive radiation’, Annual Review of Ecology, 
Evolution, and Systematics, 47, pp. 507–32.
Stuart-Fox, D., and Moussalli, A. (2009) ‘Camouflage, 
communication and thermoregulation: lessons from 
colour changing organisms’, Philosophical Transactions of 
the Royal Society of London B: Biological Sciences, 364(1516), 
pp. 463–70.
Stuckert, A. M. M., Saporito, R. A., Venegas, P. J., and 
Summers, K. (2014a) ‘Alkaloid defenses of co-mimics in a 
putative Müllerian mimetic radiation’, BMC Evolutionary 
Biology, 14, 76. https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2148-14-76
Stuckert, A. M. M., Venegas, P. J., and Summers, K. (2014b) 
‘Experimental evidence for predator learning and 
Müllerian mimicry in Peruvian poison frogs (Ranitomeya, 
Dendrobatidae)’, Evolutionary Ecology, 28(3), pp. 413–26.
Su, S., Lim, M., and Kunte, K. (2015) ‘Prey from the eyes of 
predators: colour discriminability of aposematic and 
mimetic butterflies from an avian visual perspective’, 
Evolution, 69, pp. 2985–94.
Summers, K., and Clough, M. E. (2001) ‘The evolution of 
coloration and toxicity in the poison frog family 
(Dendrobatidae)’, Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences, 98(11), pp. 6227–32.

REFERENCES
271
Summers, K., Speed, M., Blount, J., and Stuckert, A. (2015) 
‘Are aposematic signals honest? A review’, Journal of 
Evolutionary Biology, 28(9), pp. 1583–99.
Sun, J., and Perona, P. (1998) ‘Where is the sun?’, Nature 
Neuroscience, 1, pp. 183–4.
Sun, P., Chubb, C., and Sperling, G. (2015) ‘Two mechan-
isms that determine the Barber-Pole Illusion’, Vision 
Research, 111, pp. 43–54.
Suzuki, K., Ikebuchi, M., and Okanoya, K. (2013) ‘The 
impact of domestication on fearfulness: a comparison of 
tonic immobility reactions in wild and domesticated 
finches’, Behavioural Processes, 100, pp. 58–63.
Suzuki, T. K., Tomita, S., and Sezutsu, H. (2014) ‘Gradual 
and contingent evolutionary emergence of leaf mimicry 
in butterfly wing patterns’, BMC Evolutionary Biology, 
14(1), p. 229.
Svennungsen, T. O., and Holen, Ø. H. (2007) ‘The evolu-
tionary stability of automimicry’, Proceedings of the Royal 
Society of London B: Biological Sciences, 274(1621), pp. 
2055–62.
Sword, G. A., Simpson, S. J., El Hadi, O. T. M., and Wilps, 
H. (2000) ‘Density-dependent aposematism in the des-
ert locust’, Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B: 
Biological Sciences, 267(1438), pp. 63–8.
Symula, R., Schulte, R., and Summers, K. (2001) ‘Molecular 
phylogenetic evidence for a mimetic radiation in 
Peruvian poison frogs supports a Müllerian mimicry 
hypothesis’, Proceedings of the Royal Society of London 
Series B: Biological Sciences, 268(1484), pp. 2415–21.
Tan, K., Wang, Z., Li, H., Yang, S., Hu, Z., Kastberger, G., and 
Oldroyd, B. P. (2012) ‘An ‘I see you’ prey–predator signal 
between the Asian honeybee, Apis cerana, and the hornet, 
Vespa velutina’, Animal Behaviour, 83(4), pp. 879–82.
Tankus, A., and Yeshurun, Y. (2009) ‘Computer vision, 
camouflage breaking and countershading’, Philosophical 
Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 364, 
pp. 529–36.
Taylor, C. H., Reader, T., and Gilbert, F. (2016) ‘Why many 
Batesian mimics are inaccurate: evidence from hoverfly 
colour patterns’, Proceedings of the Royal Society B: 
Biological Sciences, 283(1842). doi: 10.1098/rspb.2016.1585
Telemeco, R. S., Baird, T. A., and Shine, R. (2011) ‘Tail wav-
ing in a lizard (Bassiana duperreyi) functions to deflect 
attacks rather than as a pursuit-deterrent signal’, Animal 
Behaviour, 82(2), pp. 369–75.
Terhune, E. C. (1977) ‘Components of a visual stimulus 
used by scrubjays to discriminate a Batesian model’, The 
American Naturalist, 111, pp. 435–51.
Thayer, A. H. (1896) ‘The law which underlies protective 
coloration’, The Auk, 13, pp. 124–9.
Thayer, C. H. (1909) Concealing-coloration in the animal king-
dom. New York: Macmillan.
Théry, M., and Casas, J. (2009) ‘The multiple disguises of 
spiders: web colour and decorations, body colour and 
movement’, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society 
B: Biological Sciences, 364(1516), pp. 471–80.
Théry, M., and Gomez, D. (2010) ‘Insect colours and visual 
appearance in the eyes of their predators’, in Simpson, 
S., and Casas, J. (eds), Advances in Insect Physiology 38, 
Insect Integument and Colour, pp. 267–353. https://doi.
org/10.1016/S0065-2806(10)38001-5 Thomas, R., Marples, 
N., Cuthill, I., Takahashi, M., and Gibson, E. (2003) 
‘Dietary conservatism may facilitate the initial evolu-
tion of aposematism’, Oikos, 101(3), pp. 458–66.
Thompson, P. (1982) ‘Perceived rate of movement depends 
on contrast’, Vision Research, 22, pp. 377–80.
Thorogood, R., Kokko, H., and Mappes, J. (2018) ‘Social 
transmission of avoidance among predators facilitates 
the spread of novel prey’, Nature Ecology & Evolution, 2, 
pp. 254–61.
Tinbergen, L. (1960) The dynamics of insect and bird popula-
tions in pine woods. Brill Archive.
Tobler, M. (2005) ‘Feigning death in the Central American 
cichlid Parachromis friedrichsthalii’, Journal of Fish Biology, 
66(3), pp. 877–81.
Todd, P.A., Phua, H., and Toh, K.B. (2015) ‘Interactions 
between background matching and disruptive colour-
ation: Experiments using human predators and virtual 
crabs’, Current Zoology, 61(4), pp. 718–28.
Toh, K. B., and Todd, P. (2017) ‘Camouflage that is spot on! 
Optimization of spot size in prey-background match-
ing’, Evolutionary Ecology, 31(4), pp. 447–61.
Tojo, S. (1991) ‘Variation in phase polymorphism in the com-
mon cutworm, Spodoptera litura (Lepidoptera: Noctuidae)’, 
Applied Entomology and Zoology, 26(4), pp. 571–8.
Toledo, L. F., Sazima, I., and Haddad, C. F. (2010) ‘Is it all 
death feigning? Case in anurans’, Journal of Natural 
History, 44(31–32), pp. 1979–88.
Tomonaga, M. (1998) ‘Perception of shape from shading in 
chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes) and humans (Homo sapi-
ens)’, Animal Cognition, 1, pp. 25–35.
Torres-Campos, I., Abram, P. K., Guerra-Grenier, E., 
Boivin, G., and Brodeur, J. (2016) ‘A scenario for the evo-
lution of selective egg coloration: the roles of enemy-
free space, camouflage, thermoregulation and pigment 
limitation’, Royal Society Open Science, 3, 150711.
Touchon, J. C., and Warkentin, K. M. (2008) ‘Fish and dragon-
fly nymph predators induce opposite shifts in color and 
morphology of tadpoles’, Oikos, 117(4), pp. 634–40.
Trigo, J. R. (2011) ‘Effects of pyrrolizidine alkaloids through 
different trophic levels’, Phytochemistry Reviews, 10, pp. 
83–98.
Trnka, A., Trnka, M., and Grim, T. (2015) ‘Do rufous com-
mon cuckoo females indeed mimic a predator? An 

272
REFERENCES
experimental test’, Biological Journal of the Linnean 
Society, 116(1), pp. 134–43.
Troscianko, J., Lown, A. E., Hughes, A. E., and Stevens, M. 
(2013) ‘Defeating crypsis: detection and learning of 
camouflage strategies’, PLoS One, 8(9), e73733.
Troscianko, J., Skelhorn, J., and Stevens, M. (2017) 
‘Quantifying camouflage: how to predict detectability 
from appearance’, BMC Evol Biol, 17(1), p. 7.
Troscianko, J., Wilson-Aggarwal, J., Stevens, M., and 
Spottiswoode, C. N. (2016) ‘Camouflage predicts sur-
vival in ground-nesting birds’, Scientific Reports, 6, 
19966. doi:10.1038/srep19966
Troscianko, T. S., Benton, C. P., Lovell, P. G., Tolhurst, D. J., 
and Pizlo, Z. (2009) ‘Camouflage and visual percep-
tion.’, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: 
Biological Sciences, 364, pp. 449–61.
Tse, P. U., and Hsieh, P. J. (2006) ‘The infinite regress illu-
sion reveals faulty integration of local and global motion 
signals’, Vision Research, 46(22), pp. 3881–5.
Tseng, L., and Tso, I. M. (2009) ‘A risky defence by a spider 
using conspicuous decoys resembling itself in appear-
ance’, Animal Behaviour, 78(2), pp. 425–31.
Tsuda, A., Hiroaki, S., and Hirose, T. (1998) ‘Effect of gut 
content on the vulnerability of copepods to visual pre-
dation’, Limnology and Oceanography, 43(8), pp. 1944–7.
Tu, Z., Chen, X., Yuille, A. L., and Zhu, S.-C. (2005) ‘Image 
parsing: Unifying segmentation, detection, and recog-
nition’, International Journal of Computer Vision, 63(2),  
pp. 113–40.
Tucker, S., Hipfner, J. M., and Trudel, M. (2016) ‘Size- and 
condition-dependent predation: a seabird dispropor-
tionately targets substandard individual juvenile sal-
mon’, Ecology, 97(2), pp. 461–71.
Tullberg, B. S., and Hunter, A. F. (1996) ‘Evolution of larval 
gregariousness in relation to repellent defences and 
warning coloration in tree-feeding Macrolepidoptera: a 
phylogenetic analysis based on independent contrasts’, 
Biological Journal of the Linnean Society, 57(3), pp. 253–76.
Tullberg, B. S., Merilaita, S., and Wiklund, C. (2005) 
‘Aposematism and crypsis combined as a result of dis-
tance dependence: functional versatility of the colour 
pattern in the swallowtail butterfly larva’, Proceedings 
of the Royal Society of London B: Biological Sciences, 272, 
pp. 1315–21.
Turing, A. M. (1952) ‘The chemical basis of morphogen­
esis’, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: 
Biological Sciences, 237, pp. 37–72.
Turner, E. R. A. (1961) ‘Survival values of different methods 
of camouflage as shown in a model population’, 
Proceedings of the Zoological Society of London, 136, pp. 
273–84.
Turner, J. R., Kearney, E. P., and Exton, L. S. (1984) ‘Mimicry 
and the Monte Carlo predator: the palatability spectrum, 
and the origins of mimicry’, Biological Journal of the 
Linnean Society, 23(2–3), pp. 247–68.
Turner, J. R. G. (1971) ‘Studies of Müllerian mimicry and its 
evolution in burnet moths and heliconid butterflies’, in 
Creed, E.R. (ed.) Ecological Genetics and Evolution. Oxford: 
Blackwell.
Turner, J. R. G. (1978) ‘Why male butterflies are non-
mimetic: natural selection, sexual selection, group selec-
tion, modification and sieving’, Biological Journal of the 
Linnean Society, 10(4), pp. 385–432.
Turner, J. R. G. (1984) ‘Mimicry: the palatability spectrum 
and its consequences’, in Vane-Wright, R.I. & Ackery, P. 
(eds.) The Biology of Butterflies. Princeton: Princeton 
University Press.
Turner, J. R. G. (2000) ‘Mimicry.’, Encyclopedia of Life Sciences. 
London: Nature Publishing Group.
Twomey, E., Vestergaard, J. S., and Summers, K. (2014) 
‘Reproductive isolation related to mimetic divergence in 
the poison frog Ranitomeya imitator’,  Nature Communi­
cations, 5, 4749.
Twomey, E., Vestergaard, J. S., Venegas, P. J., and Summers, 
K. (2016) ‘Mimetic divergence and the speciation con-
tinuum in the mimic poison frog Ranitomeya imitator’, 
American Naturalist, 187(2), pp. 205–24.
Twomey, E., Yeager, J., Brown, J. L., Morales, V., Cummings, 
M., and Summers, K. (2013) ‘Phenotypic and genetic 
divergence among poison frog populations in a mimetic 
radiation’, PloS One, 8(2). https://doi.org/10.1371/jour-
nal.pone.0055443
Tyrie, E. K., Hanlon, R. T., Siemann, L. A., and Uyarra, M. C. 
(2015) ‘Coral reef flounders, Bothus lunatus, choose sub-
strates on which they can achieve camouflage with their 
limited body pattern repertoire’, Biological Journal of the 
Linnean Society, 114(3), pp. 629–38.
Uiblein, F., and Nielsen, J. G. (2005) ‘Ocellus variation and 
possible functions in the genus Neobythites (Teleostei: 
Ophidiidae)’, Ichthyological Research, 52(4), pp. 364–72.
Umbers, K. D., De Bona, S., White, T. E., Lehtonen, J., 
Mappes, J., and Endler, J. A. (2017) ‘Deimatism: a neg-
lected component of antipredator defence’, Biology Letters, 
13(4), 20160936.
Umbers, K. D., and Mappes, J. (2016) ‘Towards a tractable 
working hypothesis for deimatic displays’, Animal 
Behaviour, 113, pp. e5-e7.
Umbers, K. D. L., and Mappes, J. (2015) ‘Postattack dei-
matic display in the mountain katydid, Acripeza reticu-
lata’, Animal Behaviour, 100, pp. 68–73.
Utne-Palm, A. (1999) ‘The effect of prey mobility, prey 
contrast, turbidity and spectral composition on the reac-
tion distance of Gobiusculus flavescens to its planktonic 
prey’, Journal of Fish Biology, 54(6), pp. 1244–58.
Valkonen, J., Niskanen, M., Björklund, M., and Mappes, J. 
(2011) ‘Disruption or aposematism? Significance of dorsal 

REFERENCES
273
zigzag pattern of European vipers’, Evolutionary Ecology, 
25(5), pp. 1047–63.
Valkonen, J. K., Nokelainen, O., Niskanen, M., Kilpimaa, 
J., Björklund, M., and Mappes, J. (2012) ‘Variation in 
predator species abundance can cause variable selection 
pressure on warning signaling prey’, Ecology and 
Evolution, 2(8), pp. 1971–6.
Vallin, A., Dimitrova, M., Kodandaramaiah, U., and 
Merilaita, S. (2011) ‘Deflective effect and the effect of 
prey detectability on anti-predator function of eye-
spots’, Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology, 65(8), pp. 
1629–36.
Vallin, A., Jakobsson, S., Lind, J., and Wiklund, C. (2005) 
‘Prey survival by predator intimidation: an experimental 
study of peacock butterfly defence against blue tits’, 
Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B: Biological 
Sciences, 272(1569), pp. 1203–7.
Vallin, A., Jakobsson, S., and Wiklund, C. (2007) ‘ “An eye 
for an eye?” — on the generality of the intimidating 
quality of eyespots in a butterfly and a hawkmoth’, 
Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology, 61(9), pp. 1419–24.
Van Alphen, J. J. M. (1999) ‘Evolution of colour patterns in 
East African cichlid fish’, Journal of Evolutionary Biology, 
12(3), pp. 514–34.
Van Buskirk, J., And Anderwald, P., Lupold, S., Reinhardt, 
L., and Schuler, H. (2003) ‘The lure effect, tadpole tail 
shape, and the target of dragonfly strikes’, Journal of 
Herpetology, 37(2), pp. 420–4.
Van Buskirk, J., Aschwanden, J., Buckelmuller, I., Reolon, 
S., and Ruttiman, S. (2004) ‘Bold tail coloration protects 
tadpoles from dragonfly strikes’, Copeia, (3), pp. 599–602.
Van Santen, J. P., and Sperling, G. (1985) ‘Elaborated reich-
ardt detectors’, JOSA A, 2(2), pp. 300–21.
van Someren, V. G. L., and Jackson, T. H. E. (1959) ‘Some 
comments on the adaptive resemblance amongst African 
Lepidoptera (Rhopalocera)’, Journal of the Lepidopterist’s 
Society, 13, pp. 121–50.
Van Veen, J., Sommeijer, M. J., and Monge, I. A. (1999) 
‘Behavioural development and abdomen inflation of 
gynes and newly mated queens of Melipona beecheii 
(Apidae, Meliponinae)’, Insectes Sociaux, 46(4), pp. 
361–5.
Vanin, S. A., and Guerra, T. J. (2012) ‘A remarkable new 
species of flesh-fly mimicking weevil (Coleoptera: 
Curculionidae: Conoderinae) from Southeastern Brazil’, 
Zootaxa, 3413, pp. 55–6.
VanRullen, R., Reddy, L., and Koch, C. (2005) ‘Attention-
driven discrete sampling of motion perception’, 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the 
United States of America, 102(14), pp. 5291–6.
Vaughan, F. A. (1983) ‘Startle responses of blue jays to vis-
ual stimuli presented during feeding’, Animal Behaviour, 
31(2), pp. 385–96.
Vega-Redondo, F., and Hasson, O. (1993) ‘A game-theo-
retic model of predator–prey signaling’, Journal of 
Theoretical Biology, 162(3), pp. 309–19.
Vencl, F. V., Ottens, K., Dixon, M. M., Candler, S., Bernal, 
X.  E., Estrada, C., and Page, R. A. (2016) ‘Pyrazine 
­emission by a tropical firefly: An example of chemical 
aposematism?’, Biotropica, 48(5), pp. 645–55.
Vermaas, W. F. J., Timlin, J. A., Jones, H. D. T., Sinclair, 
M. B., Nieman, L. T., Hamad, S. W., Melgaard, D. K., and 
Haaland, D. M. (2008) ‘In vivo hyperspectral confocal 
fluorescence imaging to determine pigment localization 
and distribution in cyanobacterial cells’, Proceedings of 
the National Academy of Sciences, 105, pp. 4050–5.
Vester, H. I., Folkow, L. P., and Blix, A. (2004) ‘Click sounds 
produced by cod (Gadus morhua)’, The Journal of the 
Acoustical Society of America, 115(2), pp. 914–19.
Vestheim, H., and Kaartvedt, S. (2006) ‘Plasticity in color-
ation as an antipredator strategy among zooplankton’, 
Limnology and Oceanography, 51(4), pp. 1931–4.
Vidal-Cordero, J. M., Moreno-Rueda, G., López-Orta, A., 
Marfil-Daza, C., Ros-Santaella, J. L., and Ortiz-Sánchez, 
F. J. (2012) ‘Brighter-colored paper wasps (Polistes domi-
nula) have larger poison glands’, Frontiers in Zoology, 
9(1), p. 20.
Vincent, B. T., Baddeley, R. J., Troscianko, T., and Gilchrist, 
I. D. (2005) ‘Is the early visual system optimised to be 
energy efficient?’, Network: Computation in Neural Systems, 
16(2–3), pp. 175–90.
Vinther, J., Nicholls, R., Lautenschlager, S., Pittman, M., 
Kaye, T. G., Rayfield, E., Mayr, G., and Cuthill, I. C. 
(2016) ‘3D camouflage in an ornithischian dinosaur’, 
Current Biology, 26, pp. 2456–62.
Vinyard, G. L., and O’Brien, W. J. (1975) ‘Dorsal light 
response as an index of prey preference in bluegill 
(Lepomis macrochirus)’, Journal of the Fisheries Board of 
Canada, 32(10), pp. 1860–3.
Vlieger, L., and Brakefield, P. M. (2007) ‘The deflection 
hypothesis: eyespots on the margins of butterfly wings 
do not influence predation by lizards’, Biological Journal 
of the Linnean Society, 92(4), pp. 661–7.
Vogel, H. H. (1950) ‘Observations on social behavior in 
turkey vultures’, The Auk, 67(2), pp. 210–16.
von Helversen, B., Schooler, L. J., and Czienskowski, U. 
(2013) ‘Are stripes beneficial? Dazzle camouflage influ-
ences perceived speed and hit rates’, PLoS One, 8(4), 
e61173.
Vondrick, C., Khosla, A., Malisiewicz, T. and Torralba, A. 
(2013) ‘HOGgles: Visualizing object detection features’. 
Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on 
Computer Vision, 1–8. IEEE.
Vrieling, H., Duhl, D. M., Millar, S. E., Miller, K. A., and 
Barsh, G. S. (1994) ‘Differences in dorsal and ventral 
pigmentation result from regional expression of the 

274
REFERENCES
mouse agouti gene’, Proceedings of the National Academy 
of Sciences, 91, pp. 5667–71.
Wagemans, J., Elder, J. H., Kubovy, M., Palmer, S. E., 
Peterson, M. A., Singh, M., and von der Heydt, R. (2012) 
‘A century of Gestalt psychology in visual perception: I. 
Perceptual grouping and figure–ground organization’, 
Psychological Bulletin, 138(6), pp. 1172–217.
Waldbauer, G. P. (1988) ‘Aposematism and Batesian mim-
icry - measuring mimetic advantage in natural habitats’, 
Evolutionary Biology, 22, pp. 227–59.
Waldbauer, G. P. (1996) Insects Through the Seasons. 
Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press.
Waldbauer, G. P., and Laberge, W. E. (1985) ‘Phenological 
relationships of wasps, bumblebees, their mimics and 
insectivorous birds in Northern Michigan’, Ecological 
Entomology, 10(1), pp. 99–110.
Waldbauer, G. P., and Sheldon, J. K. (1971) ‘Phenological 
relationships of some aculeate Hymenoptera, their dip-
teran mimics, and insectivorous birds’, Evolution, 25(2), 
pp. 371–82.
Waldbauer, G. P., and Sternburg, J. G. (1975) ‘Saturniid 
moths as mimics - alternative interpretation of attempts 
to demonstrate mimetic advantage in nature’, Evolution, 
29(4), pp. 650–8.
Waldbauer, G. P., and Sternburg, J. G. (1987) ‘Experimental 
field demonstration that two aposematic butterfly color 
patterns do not confer protection against birds in 
Northern Michigan’, American Midland Naturalist, 118(1), 
pp. 145–52.
Waldbauer, G. P., Sternburg, J. G., and Maier, C. T. (1977) 
‘Phenological relationships of wasps, bumblebees, their 
mimics, and insectivorous birds in an Illinois sand area’, 
Ecology, 58(3), pp. 583–91.
Waldron, S. J., Endler, J. A., Valkonen, J. K., Honma, A., 
Dobler, S., and Mappes, J. (2017) ‘Experimental evi-
dence suggests that specular reflectance and glossy 
appearance help amplify warning signals’, Scientific 
Reports, 7(1), p. 257.
Wallace, A. R. (1865) ‘On the phenomena of variation and 
geographical 
distribution 
as 
illustrated 
by 
the 
Papilionidae of the Malayan region’, Transactions of the 
Linnean Society of London, 25, pp. 1–71.
Wallace, A. R. (1867) [Untitled] Proceedings of the Entomological 
Society of London, March 4th, pp. IXXX–IXXXi.
Wallace, A. R. (1877) ‘The colors of animals and plants’, 
The American Naturalist, 11, pp. 641–62.
Wallace, A. R. (1882) ‘Dr Fritz Müller on some difficult 
cases of mimicry’, Nature, 26, pp. 86–7.
Wallace, A. R. (1889) Darwinism: An exposition of the theory 
of natural selection with some of its applications. London: 
MacMillan & Co.
Wallach, H. (1935) ‘Uëber visuell wahrgenommene 
Bewegungsrichtung’, Psychologishe Forschung, 20, pp. 
325–80.
Walther, B. A. (2002) ‘Vertical stratification and use of 
vegetation and light habitats by neotropical forest 
birds’, Journal of Ornithology, 143, pp. 64–81.
Wang, I. J. (2011) ‘Inversely related aposematic traits: 
reduced conspicuousness evolves with increased tox-
icity in a polymorphic poison-dart frog’, Evolution, 
65(6), pp. 1637–49.
Wang, I. J., and Shaffer, H. B. (2008) ‘Rapid color evolu-
tion in an aposematic species: a phylogenetic analysis 
of color variation in the strikingly polymorphic 
strawberry poison-dart frog’, Evolution, 62(11), pp. 
2742–59.
Warrant, E. J., and Locket, N. A. (2004) ‘Vision in the deep 
sea’, Biological Reviews, 79, pp. 671–712.
Weber, M. G., and Agrawal, A. A. (2014) ‘Defense mutual-
isms enhance plant diversification’, Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences, 111(46), pp. 16442–7.
Webster, R. J. (2015) ‘Does disruptive camouflage conceal 
edges and features?’, Current Zoology, 61(4), pp. 708–17.
Webster, R. J., Callahan, A., Godin, J.-G. J., and Sherratt, T. N. 
(2009) ‘Behaviourally mediated crypsis in two noctur-
nal moths with contrasting appearance’, Philosophical 
Transactions of the Royal Society of London B: Biological 
Sciences, 364(1516), pp. 503–10.
Webster, R. J., Godin, J.-G. J., and Sherratt, T. N. (2015) ‘The 
role of body shape and edge characteristics on the con-
cealment afforded by potentially disruptive marking’, 
Animal Behaviour, 104, pp. 197–202.
Webster, R. J., Hassall, C., Herdman, C. M., Godin, J. G., and 
Sherratt, T. N. (2013) ‘Disruptive camouflage impairs 
object recognition’, Biol Lett, 9(6), 20130501.
Wehrle-Haller, B. (2003) ‘The role of Kit-ligand in melano-
cyte development and epidermal homeostasis’, Pigment 
Cell & Melanoma Research, 16, pp. 287–96.
Weldon, P. J. (2013) ‘Chemical aposematism’, Chemoecology, 
23(4), pp. 201–2.
Weldon, P. J. (2017) ‘Poison frogs, defensive alkaloids, and 
sleepless mice: critique of a toxicity bioassay’, Chemoe­
cology, 27(4), pp. 123–6.
Wertheimer, M. (1923) ‘A brief introduction to gestalt, iden-
tifying key theories and principles’, Psychol Forsch, 4, 
pp. 301–50.
West, D. A. (1994) ‘Unimodal Batesian polymorphism in 
the Neotropical swallowtail butterfly Eurytides lysithous 
(Hbn)’, Biological Journal of the Linnean Society, 52(3), 
pp. 197–224.
White, S. L. and Gowan, C. (2014) ‘Social learning 
enhances search image acquisition in foraging brook 
trout’, Environmental biology of fishes, 97(5), pp. 523–8.
Whitman, D. W., Blum, M. S., and Alsop, D. W. (1990) 
‘Allomones: chemicals for defense’, Insect Defenses: 
adaptive mechanisms and strategies of prey and predators, 
pp. 289–351. David L. Evans and Justin O. Schmidt 
[eds.] State University of New York, Albany, 1990.

REFERENCES
275
Whoriskey, F. G. (1991) ‘Stickleback distraction displays: 
Sexual or foraging deception against egg cannibalism’, 
Animal Behaviour, 41, pp. 989–95.
Whoriskey, F. G., and Fitzgerald, G. J. (1985) ‘Sex, cannibal-
ism and sticklebacks’, Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology, 
18(1), pp. 15–18.
Widder, E. A. (1999) ‘Bioluminescence’, in Editors: Archer, 
S., Djamgoz, M.B., Loew, E., Partridge, J.C., Vallerga, S. 
(Eds.) Adaptive mechanisms in the ecology of vision: 
Dordrecht: Springer, pp. 555–81.
Wiklund, C., and Järvi, T. (1982) ‘Survival of distasteful 
insects after being attacked by naive birds: a reappraisal 
of the theory of aposematic coloration evolving through 
individual selection’, Evolution, 36(5), pp. 998–1002.
Wiklund, C., Vallin, A., Friberg, M., and Jakobsson, S. 
(2008) ‘Rodent predation on hibernating peacock and 
small tortoiseshell butterflies’, Behavioral Ecology and 
Sociobiology, 62(3), pp. 379–89.
Wilkening, D. A. (2000) ‘A simple model for calculating 
ballistic missile defense effectiveness’, Science & Global 
Security, 8(2), pp. 183–215.
Wilkinson, D. M., and Sherratt, T., N. (2008) ‘The art of 
concealment’, Biologist, 55, p. 10.
Williams, B. L., Hanifin, C. T., Brodie Jr, E. D., and Brodie 
III, E. D. (2010) ‘Tetrodotoxin affects survival probability 
of rough-skinned newts (Taricha granulosa) faced with 
TTX-resistant garter snake predators (Thamnophis sirta-
lis)’, Chemoecology, 20(4), pp. 285–90.
Williams, D. (2001) Naval Camouflage 1914–1945: a complete 
visual reference. London: Chatham Publishing.
Williams, P. (2007) ‘The distribution of bumblebee colour 
patterns worldwide: possible significance for thermo-
regulation, crypsis, and warning mimicry’, Biological 
Journal of the Linnean Society, 92(1), pp. 97–118.
Williams, P. H. (1998) ‘An annotated checklist of bumble 
bees with an analysis of patterns of description 
(Hymenoptera: Apidae, Bombini)’, Bulletin of the Natural 
History Museum, London (Entomology), 67, pp. 79–152.
Willink, B., Brenes-Mora, E., Bolaños, F., and Pröhl, H. 
(2013) ‘Not everything is black and white: color and 
behavioral variation reveal a continuum between cryp-
tic and aposematic strategies in a polymorphic poison 
frog’, Evolution, 67(10), pp. 2783–94.
Willmott, K. R., and Mallet, J. (2004) ‘Correlations between 
adult mimicry and larval host plants in ithomiine but-
terflies’, Proc. R. Soc. Lond. B. (Suppl.) Biology Letters, 271, 
pp. S266–S269.
Wilson, J. S., Jahner, J. P., Forister, M. L., Sheehan, E. S., 
Williams, K. A. and Pitts, J. P. (2015) ‘North American 
velvet ants form one of the world’s largest known 
Müllerian mimicry complexes’, Current Biology, 25(16), 
pp. R704–R706.
Wilson, J. S., Jahner, J. P., Williams, K. A., and Forister, 
M. L. (2013) ‘Ecological and evolutionary processes drive 
the origin and maintenance of imperfect mimicry’, PloS 
One, 8(4). https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0061610
Wilson, J. S., Williams, K. A., Forister, M. L., von Dohlen, 
C. D., and Pitts, J. P. (2012) ‘Repeated evolution in over-
lapping mimicry rings among North American velvet 
ants’, Nature Communications, 3, 1272. doi:10.1038/
ncomms2275
Wilson, R. P., Griffiths, I. W., Mills, M. G., Carbone, C., 
Wilson, J. W., and Scantlebury, D. M. (2015) ‘Mass 
enhances speed but diminishes turn capacity in terres-
trial pursuit predators’, Elife, 4, e06487.
Winemiller, K. O. (1990) ‘Caudal eyespots as deterrents 
against fin predation in the neotropical cichlid Astronotus 
ocellatus’, Copeia, (3), pp. 665–73.
Winters, A. E., Stevens, M., Mitchell, C., Blomberg, S. P., 
and Blount, J. D. (2014) ‘Maternal effects and warning 
signal honesty in eggs and offspring of an aposematic 
ladybird beetle’, Functional Ecology, 28(5), pp. 1187–96.
Woodland, D., Jaafar, Z., and Knight, M.-L. (1980) ‘The 
“pursuit deterrent” function of alarm signals’, The 
American Naturalist, 115(5), pp. 748–53.
Wourms, M. K., and Wasserman, F. E. (1985) ‘Butterfly 
wing markings are more advantageous during hand-
ling than during the initial strike of an avian predator’, 
Evolution, 39(4), pp. 845–51.
Wright, D. I., and O’Brien, W. J. (1982) ‘Differential location 
of Chaoborus larvae and Daphnia by fish: the importance 
of motion and visible size’, American Midland Naturalist, 
108(1), pp. 68–73.
Wright, J. J. (2011) ‘Conservative coevolution of Müllerian 
mimicry in a group of rift lake catfish’, Evolution, 65(2), 
pp. 395–407.
Wright, S. (1932) ‘The roles of mutation, inbreeding, cross-
breeding, and selection in evolution’, Proceedings of the 
Sixth Annual Congress of Genetics, 1, pp. 356–66. 
Reprinted in Sewall Wright, Evolution: Selected Papers, 
William B. Provine (ed.). Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, pp. 161–177.
Wu, G.-M., Boivin, G., Brodeur, J., Giraldeau, L.-A., and 
Outreman, Y. (2010) ‘Altruistic defence behaviours in 
aphids’, BMC Evolutionary Biology, 10(1), p. 19.
Wuerger, S., Shapley, R., and Rubin, N. (1996) ‘ “On the 
visually perceived direction of motion” by Hans Wallach: 
60 years later’, Perception, 25(11), pp. 1317–67.
Wüster, W., Allum, C. S., Bjargardóttir, I. B., Bailey, K. L., 
Dawson, K. J., Guenioui, J., Lewis, J., McGurk, J., Moore, 
A. G., and Niskanen, M. (2004) ‘Do aposematism and 
Batesian mimicry require bright colours? A test, using 
European viper markings’, Proceedings of the Royal 
Society of London B: Biological Sciences, 271(1556), pp. 
2495–9.
Xiao, F., and Cuthill, I. C. (2016) ‘Background complexity 
and the detectability of camouflaged targets by birds 
and humans’. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B: 

276
REFERENCES
Biological Sciences, 283(1838), 20161527. doi: 10.1098/
rspb.2016.1527
Yachi, S., and Higashi, M. (1998) ‘The evolution of warn-
ing signals’, Nature, 394(6696), pp. 882–4.
Yack, J. E., and Fullard, J. H. (2000) ‘Ultrasonic hearing in 
nocturnal butterflies’, Nature, 403, pp. 265–6.
Yeager, J., Brown, J. L., Morales, V., Cummings, M., and 
Summers, K. (2012) ‘Testing for selection on color and 
pattern in a mimetic radiation’, Current Zoology, 58(4), 
pp. 668–76.
Yokoo, R., Hood, R. D., and Savage, D. F. (2015) ‘Live-cell 
imaging of cyanobacteria’, Photosynthesis Research, 126, 
pp. 33–46.
York, J. R., and Baird, T. A. (2016) ‘Juvenile collared lizards 
adjust tail display frequency in response to variable 
predatory threat’, Ethology, 122(1), pp. 37–44.
Yosef, R., and Whitman, D. W. (1992) ‘Predator exaptations 
and defensive adaptations in evolutionary balance: no 
defence is perfect’, Evolutionary Ecology, 6(6), pp. 527–36.
Young, B. A., Solomon, J., and Abishahin, G. (1999) ‘How 
many ways can a snake growl? The morphology of 
sound production in Ptyas mucosus and its potential mim-
icry of Ophiophagus’, Herpetological Journal, 9(3), pp. 89–94.
Young, R., and Arnold, J. (1982) ‘The functional morphology 
of a ventral photophore from the mesopelagic squid, 
Abralia trigonura’, Malacologia, 23(1), pp. 135–63.
Young, R. E. (1983) ‘Oceanic bioluminescence: an over-
view of general functions’, Bulletin of Marine Science, 
33(4), pp. 829–45.
Young, R. E., and Mencher, F. M. (1980) ‘Bioluminescence 
in mesopelagic squid: diel color change during counter-
illumination’, Science, 208, pp. 1286–8.
Young, R. E., and Roper, C. F. (1976) ‘Bioluminescent coun-
tershading in midwater animals: evidence from living 
squid’, Science, 191, pp. 1046–8.
Young, R. E., and Roper, F. E. (1977) ‘Intensity regulation 
of bioluminescence during countershading in living 
midwater animals’, Fishery Bulletin, 75, pp. 239–52.
Zangerl, A. R., and Berenbaum, M. R. (2005) ‘Increase in 
toxicity of an invasive weed after reassociation with its 
coevolved herbivore’, Proceedings of the National Academy 
of Sciences of the United States of America, 102(43), pp. 
15529–32.
Zaret, T. M. (1972) ‘Predators, invisible prey, and the nature 
of polymorphism in the Cladocera (Class Crustacea)’, 
Limnology and Oceanography, 17(2), pp. 171–84.
Zaret, T. M., and Kerfoot, W. C. (1975) ‘Fish predation on 
Bosmina longirostris: Body-size selection versus visibility 
selection’, Ecology, 56(1), pp. 232–7.
Zrzavy, J., and Nedved, O. (1999) ‘Evolution of mimicry in 
the New World Dysdercus (Hemiptera: Pyrrhocoridae)’, 
Journal of Evolutionary Biology, 12(5), pp. 956–69.
Zverev, V., Kozlov, M. V., and Zvereva, E. L. (2017) 
‘Variation in defensive chemistry within a polyphagous 
Baikal population of Chrysomela lapponica (Coleoptera: 
Chrysomelidae): potential benefits in a multi-enemy 
world’, Population Ecology, 59(4), pp. 329–41.
Zvereva, E. L., and Kozlov, M. V. (2016) ‘The costs and 
effectiveness of chemical defenses in herbivorous 
insects: a meta-analysis’, Ecological Monographs, 86(1), 
pp. 107–24.
Zylinski, S., Darmaillacq, A.-S., and Shashar, N. (2012) 
‘Visual interpolation for contour completion by the 
European cuttlefish (Sepia officinalis) and its use in 
dynamic camouflage’, Proceedings of the Royal Society of 
London B: Biological Sciences, 279(1737), pp. 2386–90.
Zylinski, S., and Johnsen, S. (2011) ‘Mesopelagic cephalo-
pods switch between transparency and pigmentation to 
optimize camouflage in the deep’, Current Biology, 21(22), 
pp. 1937–41.
Zylinski, S., Osorio, D., and Johnsen, S. (2016) ‘Cuttlefish 
see shape from shading, fine-tuning coloration in 
response to pictorial depth cues and directional illumina-
tion’, Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 
283, 20160062.
Zylinski, S., Osorio, D., and Shohet, A. J. (2009a) ‘Cuttlefish 
camouflage: context-dependent body pattern use dur-
ing motion’, Proc Biol Sci, 276(1675), pp. 3963–9.
Zylinski, S., Osorio, D., and Shohet, A. J. (2009b) 
‘Perception of edges and visual texture in the camou-
flage of the common cuttlefish, Sepia officinalis’, Philos 
Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci, 364(1516), pp. 439–48.

277
Index
Advergence  117
Advertising elusiveness  128
Aggregation  73, 76, 78, 93 and 
see gregariousness
Alarm calls  131, 135
Animal hypnosis  219 and  
see thanatosis
Anti-apostatic selection  12, 14
Anti-oxidants  101
Aposematism  84–102
Apostatic polymorphism  14
Apostatic selection, see Pro-apostatic 
selection
Automimicry  77
Autotomy  198, 201–2
Background matching  9–24, 31, 35, 
37, 45, 49, 83, 229
Batesian mimicry  107, 125, 142, 
148–78, 180
Biases  93
Bioluminescence  45, 57, 70
Bluff displays  179 and see startle
Camouflage  95 and see crypsis
Changing appearance 21 and see 
Facultative background 
matching
Cheating  76, 77
Chemical defences  105 and 
see defences
Cognitive biases  102
Compromise camouflage  21
Conspicuous  86, 89, 94–5, 97, 101, 
116, 163, 170, 190
Constructive relief  24–39
Contrast  211
maximum disruptive  29
Control of search rate  15, 16
Convergence  117
Counter-illumination  51, 54, 66
Countershading  41–56, 229
Crypsis  9, 19, 87, 89, 169, 170, 185, 
192 and see camouflage
Dazzle  36, 205, 232
Death feigning  219, 232 and 
see thanatosis
Defences  72–83
Deflection  36, 189–203, 231
Deimatic signals, see startle
Detection recognition  32, 149
Dietary conservatism, see wariness
Differential blending  27
Discriminability  116
Disruption  24–40
Disruptive camouflage  24, 49, 229
Disruptive coloration  24–39
Disruptive selection  99
Disruptive marginal patterns  27
Distastefulness  124
Distraction  189, 203
Distractive markings  36
Distress calling  133
Diversion  36 and see deflection
Drift  91
Edge detection  28–9, 35, 40
Elusiveness  128–46, 209, 231
Emetic prey, see defences
Evasiveness  136
Eyespots  170, 183–5, 190–1, 194, 
200–1, 204
Facultative background matching   
11–14, 23
False-head  192
Female-limited mimicry  166
Fear screams, see distress calling
Flicker fusion  205, 216–18
Frequency dependent selection  14, 
15, 82, 113–14, 157–8, 162, 171
Frightening signals,  
see startle defence
Generalisation  119, 164, 175
Genetic drift  115–27
Gestalt laws of perceptual 
­organization  30, 32
“Go slow” behaviour  171–3
Gregariousness  84–95
Grouping, see gregariousness
Habituation  188
Heliconius  105, 110, 118, 121, 123, 126
Heterogenous habitats  19
Honesty  99, 171
honest signalling  100–1, 134, 
142, 145
Hunger, see state dependence
Hybrid zones  121
Imperfect mimicry  159, 173
Kin-selection  73, 93, 143, 174 and 
see gregariousness; see also  
imperfect mimicry
Learning  92, 102, 113, 115–16, 124, 
159, 162
habituation  187
“Life-dinner” principle  23, 82
Masquerade  148–78
Matching selection  13, 14
Maximum disruptive contrast  27, 29
Microhabitat selection  10
Mimicry
aggressive  148, 171
Batesian  107, 125, 142, 148, 163, 180
behavioural  176
female-limited  166
imperfect  159, 173
Müllerian  103, 148–9, 151–2, 
165, 175
polymorphic  105, 108, 111, 123, 
156, 162–4, 174

Mimicry (cont.)
quasi-Batesian  125–7
rings  104, 106–7, 118, 122
satyric  174, 184, 188
sex-limited (polymorphic)  165
Mirrored sides  63–70
Motion camouflage  209
Movement  17–23, 205–16
Müllerian mimicry  103–27, 148–9, 
151–2, 165, 175, 230–1
Multi-modality  84–102 and see 
non-visual modalities
Multiple defences  5 and see defences
Mutualism  103–27
Neophobia  92, 115, 188 and  
see wariness
Non-visual modalities  10, 40, 232 
and see multi-modality
Obliterative shading  47–9 and 
see countershading
Oddity selection  13, 14
Opportunity costs  11
Orientation  10, 51, 53, 212
Overshadowing  175
Peak-shift, see generalisation
Perception advertisement  138 and 
see advertising elusiveness 128
Perceptual exploitation  174
Perceptual processing  205
Playing dead, see thanatosis
Playing possum, see thanatosis
Pleiotropy  100
Polarised light  59, 66
Pollinators  20
Polyphenism  163
Polymorphism  11, 14, 20, 105,  
108, 111, 123, 156, 162–4, 174 
and see polymorphic mimicry
Positive frequency dependence   
112, 120
Predator inspection  137
Predator psychology  102
Prey rejection  171 and see sampling
Primary defences  1–5, 72, 84 and 
see defences
Private communication channel  22–3
Pro-apostatic selection  12, 14
Pursuit deterrence  141
Quasi-Müllerian mimicry  124
Receiver biases  91–2
Receiver operating characteristic 
(ROC)  140
Receiver psychology  102
Recognition  32, 149
Reflection  58–9, 70
Reflexive selection  13–14
Refraction  58–9
Reverse-countershading  43–4
Sampling  121, 171
Satyric mimicry  174, 184, 188
Search image  14–16, 32
Search rate, see  
background matching
Secondary defences  1–5 and 
see defences
Self-generated light, see counter-
illumination
Self-shadow concealment  41, 46, 49, 
51, 53, 54 and see countershading
Sensory exploitation  190
Sequence of a predator-prey 
encounter  1, 5
Sequestration, see defences
Sex limited polymorphism  163, 165
Sexual dimorphism  122–7, 148–78
Sexual selection  99, 165, 167
Sexual signalling  186
Signal detection theory  158,  
171, 175
Signals of quality or condition,  
see pursuit deterrence
Silvering  65, 67
Snell’s window  61
Spatial mosaics  105
Special resemblance to inedible 
objects, see masquerade
Speciation rates  79
Speed-accuracy trade-off  184 and 
see search rate
Spines, see defences
Stabilimenta  196 and see web 
decorations
State dependence  125
Startle  85, 179–88, 209, 231
Super-Müllerian mimicry  124
Stotting  129
Stripes  26–8, 84–90, 102–7,  
205–15
Supergenes  168–9 
Surface disruption  27
Switching  12, 14
Symmetry  28–32
Tail flagging  132, 143, 145
Taste  171
Taste rejection  109 and see prey 
rejection
Thanatosis  219–28
Thermoregulatory  44
Tonic immobility  219–28
Toxins, see defences
Transparency  57–70
Ultra-violet radiation  54, 60–1, 63, 
166, 190–1, 202
Unifying selection  13
Unlearned avoidance, see wariness
Unpalatable  142
Unprofitability  108, 110, 119
Viewing distance  89
Wariness  114, 176
Warning coloration  84 and  
see aposematism
Warning signals  164
Web decorations  196
Zebra stripes  208
278
Index

