SAFE DIY  
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
Whenever you are carrying out DIY, your working practices 
don't only affect you - they could also affect the safety of 
anyone else nearby. 
  
 
 
If a job is worth doing at all, it's worth doing safely. 
  
Safety should always be a top priority for anyone who is 
involved in DIY. Many of the hundreds of accidents that 
happen each day in the home or garden could be easily 
avoided with a little thought. However experienced you are, 
it always pays to take time to plan your work, and to think 
about any safety issues before you start.  
  
Ultimately, the success of any DIY project can be affected by
the attitude you have to safety. Let safety be the first thing 
you think of before starting a job, and the last thing you 
think of when finishing it - so that it becomes an integral 
part of everything you do. This leaflet contains a wealth of 
suggestions that will help you to think about safety, and to 
practise it. 
 
2  - Be prepared  
Preparation and planning are key elements of good safety 
practice. They not only help to keep you safe - they can also 
save both time and money.  
 
 
 
Before starting a job, be realistic about how long it will take. 
Have regular breaks to avoid tiredness or loss of 
concentration. If it takes longer than you expected, don't 
start cutting corners or speeding up - take your time and 
make sure the job is done properly.  
 
 
 
Avoid loose clothing, tie back long hair (or tuck it under a 
hat), and remove any loose jewellery, including earrings, 
necklaces, bracelets and watches.  
 
 
 
Before you start any plumbing work, check the location and 
condition of items such as stopcocks and gate valves. Ensure
that they can be quickly opened or shut in the event of an 
emergency.  
 
 
 

It may seem obvious, but 
always read through any 
instruction leaflets 
beforehand - especially if y
are using an unfamiliar piece 
of equipment. Don't assume
you know how it works - 
check it out first. Make sure
you have a First Aid kit (with
contents that are not past 
their 'sell by' date) and keep
it somewhere handy (1).  
ou 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Switch off at the mains when working with electricity. Tape 
over any broken or unusable switches, and make sure that 
any broken items are replaced as soon as possible.  
 
 
 
Make up a simple electricity repair kit for basic emergencies. 
This should contain a torch (with working batteries), rubber 
gloves, insulated pliers and screwdrivers, insulating tape, 
spare bulbs, fuses and fuse wire. 
 
 
 
Don't be too proud to ask for help. If in doubt at any time, 
don't take risks - contact a professional.  
 
 
 
3  - The tools of the trade 
Always use the right tools for the project - don't be tempted 
to improvise! Don't use tools which have loose heads or 
handles. If you need to buy new tools, check the labels and 
opt for ones which are made to a British or European 
standard or which have an approved quality and safety 
mark.  
 
 
 
Always read the instructions before use. Maintain all tools in 
a good, clean condition - especially electrical appliances.  
 
 
 
Keep the cover guards on sharp tools when they are not 
being used. Use a toolbox with a tidy, so that everything is 
instantly at hand.  
 
 
 

Don't forget to wear the 
correct protective clothing at 
all times - including strong 
shoes, gloves, eye and ear 
protection, safety helmet a
dust masks etc (2).  
nd 
 
4  - The ladder of success  
Many DIY accidents are caused by the careless use of 
ladders or scaffolding. Always inform someone of what you 
are doing.  
 
 
 
Use sensible shoes when working on ladders - not sandals or 
bare feet.  
 
 
 
The bottom of the ladder (which should preferably have non-
slip feet) should rest on a hard, level surface. Similarly, the 
top should rest against a solid surface. Don't prop it against 
glass, window sills or gutters - where necessary use a pre-
fitted stand-off.  
 
 
 
Many accidents are caused by slipping ladders, so secure 
both the bottom and top parts to something firm and strong 
with ropes or straps.  
 
 
 
When you need to move the ladder, ask someone to help 
wherever possible. Always move or extend a ladder rather 
than risk overreaching. 
 
 
 
Make sure your ladder is at a safe angle - the distance of the
feet from the wall or vertical surface should be a quarter of 
the ladder's height. A 6m (20ft) ladder should therefore be 
1.5m (5ft) away from the wall at the bottom (3).  
 
 
 

If you need to work on 
scaffolding, always ensure 
that it is erected on firm, 
level ground. Scaffolding with 
a 1.3m (4ft) square base 
should be tied to a buildin
once the height exceeds 
3.25m (11ft). Provide kic
boards around the platform. 
 
Always w
working on scaffolding. 
Gloves are also 
recommended, al
may find them restrictive.  
 
g 
k 
ear a helmet when 
though you 
 
 - Power to the people  
should be handled with 
 
ater and electricity don't mix. Even if you're carrying out 
 
e 
 
xtension cables often need to be uncoiled before use, or 
t 
 
 you can't avoid working with electrical appliances in damp 
ply 
 
Take care not to use too 
th 
t 
an
 
 
5 
lectricity is a potential killer, and 
E
care - if in doubt, call in an expert.  
 
 
W
seemingly harmless tasks such as washing down walls, turn
off the electricity first. Never use any electrical plugs, 
sockets or equipment which have been wet, unless you ar
sure that they have thoroughly dried out.  
 
 
E
they could overheat - check the instructions. Make sure tha
it is safe to use the extension cable with an appliance before 
you start.  
 
 
If
conditions, you should use a Residual Current Device or 
power breaker. This automatically cuts off the power sup
in the case of an accident (such as a cut cable) or a 
malfunction.  
 
 
many plugs or adaptors wi
an electrical socket - it could 
overload (4). Where feasible, 
check that the connections 
inside each plug are tight, 
and that the cord grip is tigh
around the cable (rather th
 
just the wires inside the
cable).  
 
 
 

 
All plugs should contain the correct fuse. If a fuse blows, 
g 
ess 
 
nd the correct fuse rating by checking the manufacturer's 
eware of damaged, kinked or frayed cables and flexes.  
 - It's a gas!  
e appliances now run on liquefied 
 
t new cylinders in the open air. Never smoke or work near 
 
G appliances should only be used in well-ventilated areas. 
 
 
To check for leaks, apply 
s will 
they 
 
 
are LPG cylinders should be stored in a secure and well 
entilated area outside the house, but not below ground 
switch off the power and unplug the appliance before tryin
to find the fault. If in doubt, ask an expert. The same 
principles apply to a mains fuse - use the correct thickn
of fuse wire and switch off at the mains before checking a 
blown fuse.  
 
 
Fi
recommendations, or from the recommended ratings that 
are often published on fuse packets or in good DIY books. 
Copy them onto a list, and keep it with your fuses.  
 
 
 
B
 
 
 
6 
A wide variety of hom
petroleum gas (LPG) cylinders. Although these are generally 
very safe, certain precautions should be taken. 
 
 
Fi
a naked flame when changing a cylinder. Remember that 
even electrical tools can give off sparks.  
 
 
LP
The gas is heavy and highly flammable, and will not easily 
disperse in the event of a leak. LPG has a distinctive smell -
if you smell it, turn off the gas and ask an expert to check 
the appliance. 
 
 
soapy water over all 
connections - any leak
be shown by bubbles. Hoses 
should also be checked 
regularly and replaced if 
are cracked (5).  
 
p
S
v

level.  
 
 
 
ALL gas repairs must be carried out by a qualifie
gistered CORGI (Council Of Registered Gas Installers) 
 
gly hazardous place in which to 
 such as mowers and hedge 
hen using a mower or hedge trimmer, feed th
le over 
our shoulder, and always keep the appliance in front of the 
ever attempt to clean or adjust electrical tools whilst they 
re still plugged in. Switch off first, unplug, and clean by 
hen working in the garden, particularly with electrical 
quipment, always wear strong shoes or boots - never go 
any injuries are caused by falls due to slippery or uneven 
aths, or broken concrete and crazy paving. Repair any 
s.  
ear the correct protective clothing - including eye 
rotection - particularly if using a chainsaw or spraying 
 you are planning to use a chainsaw, make su
 you know 
ow to use it properly. Never climb a tree whilst holding one 
sk an expert or your Local Authority if you need advice on 
andling potentially harmful materials such as asbestos or 
d and 
re
engineer. To confirm whether a business is currently 
registered, ask your installer to show you a registration 
certificate. 
 
 
 
7 - Out and about 
 
A garden can be a surprisin
ork. Electrical equipment
w
trimmers merit particular care. Always use a Residual 
Current Device or power breaker.  
 
 
 
W
e cab
y
cable.  
 
 
 
N
a
wiping with a cloth - do not wash the appliance!  
 
 
 
W
e
barefoot.  
 
 
 
M
p
damaged areas as soon as possible. Use rubber or plastic 
caps on bamboo canes, as the tops can cause eye injurie
 
 
 
W
p
chemicals. 
 
 
 
If
re
h
- and always work with a companion in case of accidents.  
 
 
 
A
h
lead. 
 
 
 

Ensure that barbecues are 
located well away from 
fences, low trees or shrubs 
and sheds. Never use p
or petrol for lighting a bonfire
araffin
 
- there are many suitable 
firelighters or starter fluids 
available (6). Keep children
at a safe distance, don't wea
loose, flapping clothing and
tie long hair back.  
 
r 
 
 
 
 
Never spray a lighted barbecue with a flammable liquid, 
even a recommended starter fluid.  
 
 
 
8  - Accidents can happen...  
Even the most safety-conscious worker can sometimes have 
an accident. Here are some basic first aid tips.  
 
 
 
If someone is injured, remove any continuing danger: for 
instance, turn off the electricity if appropriate. Then don't 
panic, but assess the seriousness of the situation as calmly 
as possible. Don't move the patient unless necessary. If in 
any doubt, call a doctor.  
 
 
 
Small cuts and grazes should be cleaned up with soap and 
water - not antiseptic.  
 
 
 
Don't give an injured person any food or drink (in case any 
anaesthetics need to be administered at a later stage). 
However, if you urgently need to dilute the effects of poisons
or chemicals, give a drink of water, unless the patient's 
mouth is burnt.  
 
 
 
Call the emergency services (999) in cases of 
unconsciousness; drowsiness or sickness; poisoning; severe 
bleeding or bleeding from the ear; bad burns; or intense 
pain.  
 
 
 
Don't try to induce sickness - and never give the patient 
salty water.  
 
 
 

Severe bleeding should be 
reduced by pressing a pad o
the cut. A clean, folded 
handkerchief is ideal. If the 
cut still contains a large 
foreign body (such as a 
splintered stick or glass), 
press near the wound. 
Continue until the bleeding 
stops. If a limb is bleeding, 
raise it up, unless it's broken 
(7). For deep, wide or dirty 
cuts, or wounds containing a 
foreign body, call a doctor.  
n 
 
 
 
Burns and scalds need hospital treatment unless they are 
very minor. Small burns should be held under running cold 
water for at least ten minutes. Because skin can swell, 
remove any belts or jewellery, but don't attempt to move 
any clothing that is stuck to the burn. To minimise the risk 
of infection, burns can be covered with a clean cloth (such 
as a large handkerchief or pillowcase) or clingfilm. Never use
butter or oil on a burn - leave it untreated.  
 
 
 
Consider taking a simple first aid course so that you are 
better prepared for any accidents.  
 
 
 
 

