


A Joint Publication

Copyright © 2009 by Corwin Press
All rights reserved. When forms and sample documents are included, their use is authorized
only by educators, local school sites, and/or noncommercial or nonprofit entities that have
purchased the book. Except for that usage, no part of this book may be reproduced or
utilized in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying,
recording, or by any information storage and retrieval system, without permission in
writing from the publisher.
For information:
Corwin Press
SAGE India Pvt. Ltd.
A SAGE Company
B 1/I 1 Mohan Cooperative Industrial Area
2455 Teller Road
Mathura Road, New Delhi 110 044
Thousand Oaks, California 91320 India
www.corwinpress.com
SAGE Ltd.
SAGE Asia-Pacific Pte. Ltd.
1 Oliver’s Yard
33 Pekin Street #02–01
55 City Road
Far East Square
London EC1Y 1SP
Singapore 048763
United Kingdom
Printed in the United States of America.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Brunner, Judy M.
Safe & secure schools : 27 strategies for prevention and intervention/Judy M. Brunner,
Dennis K. Lewis.
p. cm.
“A joint publication with the American Association of School Administrators (AASA).”
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-1-4129-6298-8 (cloth)
ISBN 978-1-4129-6299-5 (pbk.)
1. Schools—Safety measures—Handbooks, manuals, etc. 2. Schools—Security
measures—Handbooks, manuals, etc. I. Lewis, Dennis K. II. Title.
LB2864.5.B78 2009
363.11′9371—dc22
2008017909
This book is printed on acid-free paper.
08
09
10 11 12
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2 1
Acquisitions Editor:
Hudson Perigo
Editorial Assistant:
Lesley K. Blake
Production Editor:
Libby Larson
Copy Editor:
Alison Hope
Typesetter:
C&M Digitals (P) Ltd.
Proofreader:
Dorothy Hoffman
Indexer:
Sylvia Coates
Cover Designer:
Lisa Miller
Graphic Designer:
Karine Hovsepian

Contents
Foreword
vii
Dr. Gerald Tirozzi
Acknowledgments
ix
About the Authors
xi
Introduction
1
1. Planning
Strategy 1
Starting the School Year: A Checklist for
Safety and Security
6
Strategy 2
The Principal’s Homework: What Does
Your Teacher Handbook Say About Safety and Security?
9
Strategy 3
Strategic Supervision: The Foundation
for School Safety
13
Strategy 4
A Safety Game Plan for Cocurricular Events
17
Strategy 5
On the Road Again: Discipline Investigations
Away From School
20
Strategy 6
Visitor Check-in and Screening Procedures:
It’s More Than Just Signing the Visitor Log
23
Strategy 7
Ensuring the Safe Evacuation of Students
With Physical Disabilities During an Emergency
26
Strategy 8
Invest in a Safety Committee: Creating Strategies
You Can Bank On
30
Strategy 9
Speaking of School Safety: Creating a Conversation
Within the School Community
33
Strategy 10
Closing Out the School Year
37
2. Response Strategies
Strategy 11
Planning for School Emergencies: Part 1
42
Strategy 12
Planning for School Emergencies: Part 2
46

Strategy 13
Assessing Student Threats of Violence:
A School’s Response to a Growing Problem
50
Strategy 14
De-escalating a Situation With an Angry Parent:
You’ll Never Have to Answer for What You Don’t Say
54
Strategy 15
Fights at School: Breaking Up Is Hard to Do
58
Strategy 16
Head ’Em Up! Move ’Em Out!: Relocating
Students During an Emergency Event
62
Strategy 17
Student Searches: A Practical Application
65
Strategy 18
Managing Electronic Devices: Sending the
Right “Signals” to Parents and Students
69
Strategy 19
Full-Court Press: A Media Management Plan
72
3. Professional Development
Strategy 20
Is Your School Up to Speed on Safety?
76
Strategy 21
What Teachers Must Know About Safety
79
Strategy 22
Training Support Staff to Respond Appropriately
82
Strategy 23
Intimidation, Harassment, and Bullying:
Fear Factors in the Twenty-First-Century School
85
Strategy 24
Holiday Blues: Responding to Seasonally
Despondent Students
89
Strategy 25
Tabletop Exercises: The Ultimate Tool for
School Safety Training
92
Strategy 26
There’s No “Substitute” for Good Safety
95
4. Top Ten
Strategy 27
School Safety’s Top Ten: The Top Ten Things
to Remember When Creating a Safe School Environment
100
Resources
105
Bibliography
113
Index
115

vii
Foreword
N
othing makes headlines more quickly than a school shooting. Such
an event violates an iconic safe haven and prompts parents in every
community to wonder, “Could it happen here?” Suddenly popular media
outlets are activated, archived Columbine footage is flashed across TV
screens, and school safety consultants are answering insistent questions:
“Are schools safe? Are we investing enough in security personnel and
equipment? Or—gasp—do we need a national policy?”
“These kinds of situations are just like terrorist situations,” National
Association of Secondary School Principals (NASSP) Specialist for School
Safety Bill Bond said on the occasion of one school shooting. ‘‘When
people have so much hate in them that they don’t mind dying, you don’t
have any deterrents left. People want to have metal detectors and security
guards and all of this, but the real thing that makes a difference is work-
ing with the kids and adjusting to the kids” (personal communication,
October 12, 2005).
Bond’s comments strike a stark contrast between how school safety is
considered by the general public and by school leaders. For school leaders,
safety isn’t just about preventing a tragic event: It’s about maintaining a
personalized environment in which every student is known and feels val-
ued. It’s about providing opportunities for every student to be successful.
It’s about modeling and fostering a pervasive attitude—on the part of
every adult and student in the school—that threatening and belittling
behaviors have no place in any school.
Not surprisingly, the conditions that mitigate school violence are the
same conditions that promote high academic achievement. Breaking Ranks
II and Breaking Ranks in the Middle (NASSP 2004, 2006), NASSP’s hand-
books on reform in high schools and middle schools, respectively, call for
a school culture centered around personalization because, to quote educa-
tional reformer Ted Sizer (1999), “We cannot teach students well if we do
not know them well” (p. 6). And knowing every student well encourages
educators to work through their frustrations so that, even if those frustra-
tions have not been resolved, at least they have been aired constructively.

Safe & Secure Schools
viii
From 2004 to 2007, members of the NASSP were regularly reminded
of these themes in the “Safety Tips for Principals” column in Principal
Leadership magazine. To their credit, column authors Dennis Lewis and
Judy Brunner address the spectrum of safety issues—from the day-to-day
behaviors that foster a positive climate, to warning signs of violence, to the
specifics of crisis preparedness and response.
I commend Dennis and Judy on their work to ensure safe environ-
ments in schools and further commend them for taking their guidance to
a broader audience. While the principal can provide leadership, it is only
with a cooperative effort on the part of all with a stake in school success
that educators can create truly personalized environments and can antici-
pate a day when news of a school shooting no longer hits the headlines.
Dr. Gerald Tirozzi, Executive Director
National Association of Secondary School Principals

ix
Acknowledgments
S
ince the conception in 1999 of Edu-Safe LLC, a school safety consult-
ing firm, several individuals and organizations have made significant
contributions to the growth of our business, as well as to our own profes-
sional development. We are very grateful to them for allowing us the
opportunity to submit articles for publication, present papers at confer-
ences, and provide staff development to education professionals across the
United States.
Three individuals that have been especially helpful are Jan Umphrey,
editor of NASSP’s Principal Leadership; Jim King, executive director of
Missouri Association of Secondary School Principals; and Elizabeth
Brenkus, former acquisitions editor for Corwin Press. Jan was the first to
give us a national forum for our ideas and suggestions related to school
safety and security through the column “Safety Tips for Principals.” Jim
was always willing to provide ideas and suggestions for statewide profes-
sional opportunities, and Lizzie was never too busy to provide guidance
and encouragement at times when we needed it most. We are very grate-
ful for her professional demeanor, smiling face, and positive attitude.
We are also grateful to the following professional organizations:
National Association of Secondary School Principals
National Association of School Safety and Law Enforcement Officers
American Association of School Administrators
Missouri Association of Secondary School Principals
Springfield Missouri Public Schools
Last, but not least, we wish to thank our families and friends for being
patient when our professional obligations and responsibilities took time,
effort, and perseverance.


About the Authors
Judy M. Brunner and Dennis K. Lewis are authors and consultants on a
variety of topics related to school safety and security. They are cofounders
of Edu-Safe LLC (www.edu-safe.org), a school safety and advisory orga-
nization providing professional development and resources to school per-
sonnel across the United States.
Ms. Brunner is a former high school, middle school, and
elementary school principal, and is currently an adjunct
instructor at Missouri State University. She is a nationally
recognized authority and speaker on the topics of school
safety and security, and prevention of bullying behaviors.
She provides technical and training assistance for a
number of state and national organizations.
Mr. Lewis is the past president and chairman of the
Board of the National Association of School Safety and
Law Enforcement Officers, and is a nationally recognized
authority and speaker on the topics of school safety, site
risk assessments, and bullying prevention. He is the for-
mer director of school police for the Springfield, Missouri
Public Schools and provides technical and training assis-
tance for a number of state and national organizations.
Judy Brunner and Dennis Lewis can be reached at edusafe@edu-
safe.org.
xi


1
Introduction
S
chools of the twenty-first century are expected to provide a level of
security unprecedented in the history of education. With a backdrop
of increasingly prevalent violent behavior in society that has spilled over
into schools, there is often a clash between the need to secure campuses
and the desire to maintain an open and welcoming environment. As
schools have responded with a myriad of strategies designed to strengthen
security in and around campuses, some individuals call for more drastic
measures, claiming not enough is being done, while others say schools
have already gone too far.
While academic achievement should always be the primary focus of
all who work in the school, great school leaders recognize that for this to
be accomplished, a number of support columns must be in place. School
safety is one of the columns supporting this mission; its removal or dam-
age can have negative and even devastating consequences on academic
achievement.
Although acts of school violence resulting in loss of life are still rare,
students, staff, and parents are well aware of the headlines. These head-
lines can erode the confidence of parents hundreds of miles away from a
specific event. In the aftermath of any school tragedy, school personnel
self-evaluate and consider whether or not they have done enough to pre-
vent such an occurrence on their own campus.
Safe school planning must merge two important concepts if it is to
truly make a difference. First, a physical environment must be created that
is reasonably safe. Second, the environment must be perceived as safe by
the entire school community. Both concepts are challenging but equally
important. Planning should not only address concrete items such as locks,
doors, windows, parking lots, and lighting, but should also include strate-
gies on how to promote these to the school community, while giving
everyone ownership in the process.

2
Safe & Secure Schools
THE GOAL OF THIS BOOK
The strategies in this book were originally written as columns for the
NASSP’s Principal Leadership. They have been edited to appeal to a wider
audience, as well as to reflect the most up-to-date best practices. It is our
intent to provide you, the reader, with the knowledge and tools to create
and enhance a safe learning environment for students, staff, and the
patrons who periodically visit your campus. We have attempted to do so by
• providing tips and strategies that have minimal or no associated cost;
• using strategies that blend with the educational atmosphere of most
schools and are acceptable to most school communities;
• structuring the suggestions so implementation can be accomplished
without major time commitments, while keeping the focus on aca-
demic achievement; and
• recommending methods of enhancing school safety we believe can
make a difference in preventing or minimizing the opportunity for a
tragedy to occur, facilitating a better response should such an event
happen, and allowing a school to recover and return to normalcy in
the aftermath of such an event.
Safe & Secure Schools: 27 Strategies for Prevention and Intervention pro-
vides a foundation for safe school planning. While not intended to address
every security issue or problem faced by schools in the twenty-first cen-
tury, the strategies provided in this book, when incorporated with system-
atic planning, ongoing discussion, and a review process, can make a
positive difference.
WHO THIS BOOK IS FOR
While the primary audience for this book is the school administrator, there
are a number of other individuals that can benefit from the content. In fact,
following the concept promoted by the authors that it is critical to make
everyone in a school building “participatory to the process,” all staff
members should read it. There are some groups and individuals that
should be targeted specifically: Safety coordinators or individuals who, by
job classification, have a specific responsibility for developing, planning,
and implementing safe school strategies will find the book a valuable
resource. Staff contemplating a future career move into administration will
find the contents thought provoking. And, for schools that use safety com-
mittees, ad hoc groups, or other teams of individuals (such as counselors,
school social workers, and lead teachers) to help guide safe school plan-
ning, the strategies and concepts contained in the following chapters will
provide a starting point for discussion toward mapping out a course of

action. Regardless of the audience, there is something for everyone with a
vested interest in enhancing school safety.
WHAT THIS BOOK IS NOT
Without belaboring the point, this book is not a cure or magic pill that will
somehow fix or prevent the negative events that occasionally happen at
school. Utilizing some or all of the strategies contained within is much like
taking a daily aspirin to help prevent a heart attack. Bad events may still
occur, but great leaders using the right medicine and following the pre-
scription label help to minimize the opportunity.
HOW THIS BOOK IS ORGANIZED
The book is divided into four sections—planning, response strategies,
professional development, and our recommended top ten strategies.
While each chapter is related to these broad topics, some sections could
easily be placed into more than one category. It was our intent to offer
practical and cost-effective suggestions that principals could read “on the
run.” It is our hope this goal has been accomplished.
The final section of the book is titled, “Top Ten School Safety
Strategies.” Of all the ideas suggested within this text, we consider these
to be the most important.
3
Introduction


1
Planning

STRATEGY 1
Starting the School Year
A Checklist for Safety and Security
C
reating a checklist before the school year begins helps ensure school
safety procedures are in place and implemented throughout the
school year.
As schools across the country prepare for the start of school each
September, school officials know safety and security issues related to pub-
lic and private education continue to change and evolve. Local and inter-
national events have put school personnel in the position of needing to
continually emphasize and reassure students, staff, and their communities
that school still provides an environment of normalcy and routine in the
lives of all. In fact, school may be the only predictable environment for
some students. School superintendents, principals, and teachers must go
the extra mile to ensure that every reasonable and prudent precaution is
taken to make certain the school is always a safe place for students.
FOLLOWING A SAFETY CHECKLIST
One of the ways administrators can accomplish this important mission is
to create a checklist of safety tasks before the school year begins. Just as a
pilot checks a preflight list before rolling down the runway, it is important
for school leaders to make changes before “taking off” into the new school
year. Once “in flight,” it may be more difficult to make a correction.
Suggested checklist tasks include the following:
• Review the school’s crisis management plan. This should include a
start-up meeting with the emergency response team before the school year
begins. Do not forget to include staff who are listed as alternates in the
plan. Alternates should be just as familiar with the plan and specific
responsibilities as are their designated counterparts.
• Use tabletop exercises for staff development. Because it is important
for the entire emergency response team to engage in problem solving for
specific security and safety-related scenarios as part of the practice and
planning process, the emergency response team should take part in table-
top exercises at the start of the school year.
6
Safe & Secure Schools

• Meet with representatives of local law enforcement agencies to dis-
cuss school safety issues. These meetings provide a good opportunity to
exchange information on safety issues that may directly or indirectly affect
the school community. Be sure to provide law enforcement representatives
with a list of all anticipated major school activities for the coming school
year. Send them updates during the year, as necessary. Many law enforce-
ment agencies will give this information to area patrol officers so that
added attention can be given to those school events.
• Communicate with community agencies that have a vested interest
in the school’s safety. These groups include juvenile authorities, health
department agencies, and the local fire department. The purpose of this
dialogue is to review any interagency agreements, new rules, or laws that
pertain to the school. This is also a good opportunity to update contact
information and to meet new staff members in those agencies. These con-
tacts can be invaluable throughout the school year.
• Review existing laws and inform the administrative team and staff
members of any new laws, court decisions, district policies, or practices
that affect school safety and discipline. It is important to dedicate a portion
of the first faculty meeting for reviewing this information. Do not forget to
keep documentation about these meetings. In the aftermath of a critical
incident, this information could be vital to everyone involved.
• Review the school’s access-control measures, including the check-in
procedures for visitors. Make certain appropriate signage is in place. If
changes need to be made in procedures, it is generally less problematic for
the public if they are made during the summer and implemented before
the start of a new school year.
• Review all safety-related work orders. It is important for the princi-
pal or his designee to review all safety-related work orders prior to the first
day of school. If critical repairs have not been completed, the principal
should make appropriate contacts related to completion date and any
interim measures necessary to ensure safety.
• Audit all first aid supplies and crisis management kits within the
school to verify they are properly stocked and in their designated loca-
tions. Perishable items, such as batteries for flashlights and radios, should
be replaced or recharged. Verify that the location of each kit is identified in
the school’s floor plan.
• Ensure that the school’s floor plan includes any recent building
modifications, including the plans previously supplied to emergency ser-
vice providers. This will assist those agencies if they need to respond to the
school during a critical incident.
• Verify that each classroom has all emergency information in place or
posted, to include fire evacuation routes, sheltering locations, and emergency
7
Planning

flip charts. This information should also be provided to each substitute
teacher during the school year. To facilitate this process, a classroom check-
list (see Resources) can be created so that each staff member can audit the
classroom environment for the necessary items. Having faculty members
participate in this process will add to their sense of ownership of the
school’s safety program.
• New staff members should receive in-service training on the various
safety components and strategies of the school, and returning staff members
should be reminded of these strategies. Do not overlook basic training,
such as how to use a fire extinguisher, first aid procedures, and the class-
room emergency-response flip chart.
• Review and analyze last year’s discipline statistics and campus
crime incidents. Review the statistics for possible trends involving specific
infractions and the locations where they occurred. Review student and
staff accident reports to determine if there is any causation commonality.
• Remind teachers to discuss appropriate safety procedures and secu-
rity measures with their students. This discussion should occur during the
first week of school as a part of the teacher’s classroom orientation.
Teachers should thoroughly review with all students their responsibilities
related to reporting incidents of school violence. This can include hotline
numbers and other anonymous reporting methods available to them.
• The principal should discuss and explain security and safety mea-
sures in use at the school during school orientations for students, parents,
or guardians. This information should also be included in the student
handbook, teacher handbook, and school website as part of the school’s
safety portfolio. This strategy can provide reassurance to all that school
safety is a priority.
Although the summer months provide time for school administrators
to reflect and review the past year’s accomplishments, reflection alone is
not enough. School leaders should strategically plan safety procedures as
part of their overall decision-making process. A safety checklist provides
an excellent method to ensure a quality-controlled beginning to each
school year.
8
Safe & Secure Schools

STRATEGY 2
The Principal’s Homework
What Does Your Teacher Handbook Say
About Safety and Security?
E
nsure that your teacher handbook addresses safety and security con-
cerns. Schools now almost always provide a written handbook for
teachers and certificated staff members. Administrators should make cer-
tain the handbook is reviewed and updated at least once each year. The
most important aspect of the handbook, however, is that all teachers have
a copy of the most up-to-date edition, that they have signed for receipt of
it, and that they are held accountable for the information within. Copies
also should be distributed to substitute teachers, student teachers, and
teacher aides.
Because the teacher handbook is one of the primary methods of com-
municating administrative expectations, it provides the perfect opportu-
nity to outline important safety and security information. The following
checklist is not inclusive, but it does include what we consider minimal
information related to safety and security. Use it to review your current
teacher handbook.
• Administrative duties and responsibilities. The duties and responsi-
bilities related to discipline and other assignments for each site adminis-
trator should be explained. If there is more than one site administrator,
staff members need to understand which administrator oversees which
specific tasks.
• Campus security expectations. If applicable, the handbook should
explain how staff can enter and exit the building or campus after regular
business hours. Information about working on the campus on weekends
or holidays should be provided. The handbook is a good place to include
information about access control for school classrooms, buildings, and
campus during the school day.
• Key control. Schools should have a method of controlling and
accounting for all keys that are issued to staff; all keys should be invento-
ried at least once a year. The handbook should include instructions for
issuing keys, and what to do if building or classroom keys are lost or stolen
during the school year.
9
Planning

• Procedures for reporting student attendance. This section should
contain detailed procedures for reporting attendance. Definitions of and
the appropriate faculty response for truancy and tardiness should be
explained.
• Identification badges. The teacher handbook should explain the
rules and regulations for displaying visual identification. If students are
required to display or carry a picture badge, procedures for monitoring
this practice should be in the handbook. If staff members must wear a
picture badge or other identification, this requirement should also be
included in the handbook.
• Disciplinary referrals and office procedures. Written guidelines for
referring students to the office should be in the teacher handbook. Teachers
should be encouraged to avoid using terms such as “defiant” and “disre-
spectful” in written referrals. For consistency and fairness, the teacher
should refrain from prejudging the incident. Instead, the administrator
should be the one to categorize the offense on the basis of the specific
behavior described. Guidelines for contacting parents in a timely manner
should also be given in the handbook.
• Visitor check-in procedures. Procedures for campus visitors should
be detailed. Teachers should be directed to help maintain a closed campus
by identifying and monitoring individuals who have not followed the
appropriate protocol. Instructions for staff members on how to approach
visitors when they observe them on campus should be in the handbook.
• Teacher check-in procedures; procedures for reporting teacher
absence. Staff member check-in and check-out procedures should be in the
handbook, along with a brief explanation of why these procedures are
important. These should include time lines for how teachers should report
a personal absence.
• Supervisory expectations. Included in the handbook should be
detailed guidelines for teachers on supervising classrooms, hallways, the
cafeteria, and restrooms. Instructions should include guidelines for
teachers on supervision during assemblies and other activities. This
section should also cover student passes, and whether and under what
circumstances students are allowed to be in the hallways or common areas
during class time.
• Guest speakers. If teachers are allowed to schedule classroom guest
speakers, include in the teacher handbook guidelines for gaining adminis-
trative approval, along with check-in procedures for the guests.
• Student permission to leave campus. Write down the conditions
under which students may leave the building or campus during the school
day. High school handbooks should also contain procedures for going to
the parking lot during the day.
10
Safe & Secure Schools

• School nurse. How and under what conditions students are permit-
ted to go to the school nurse should be outlined in the teacher handbook.
If the nurse has specific office hours, they should be included in the hand-
book. This section should also contain regulations for dispensing student
medication. All staff members should have a thorough understanding of
acceptable and unacceptable possession and use of prescription and non-
prescription drugs by students while on campus or at a school event.
• Lunch procedures. The handbook should address the lunch sched-
ule, lunchroom procedures, and guidelines for supervising students
during lunch.
• Assembly procedures. The handbook should provide procedures for
attendance, entrance and exit, and behavior during assemblies. It should
also state whether and under what circumstances staff is expected to
attend assemblies, and their supervisory responsibilities.
• Field trips and cocurricular activities. Procedures for taking students
off campus for a school activity—whether it is for an overnight or for a
shorter trip during the school day—should be in the handbook. The hand-
book should also state that the following information is needed before the
departure of any field trip:
a. The name, address, and phone numbers of each student
b. A printed itinerary of the trip
c. Written permission from parents
d. The trip time line
e. Emergency medical forms
f. The names of the chaperones, and copies of their security or
background checks, as applicable
g. Sponsor and chaperone expectations
h. Transportation details
i. Administrative approval
• Cash on campus. Teachers should be directed to never leave money
in the classroom overnight. The handbook should outline how to deposit
money collected for school activities, whether the deposit is made to a
building financial secretary or a banking institution. Information about
student fundraising can be included in this section.
• Instructions for substitute teachers. Teachers should be instructed to
provide to the school office a folder containing instructions for substitute
teachers. Each folder should include class seating charts, attendance pro-
cedures, disciplinary procedures, campus-level emergency plans, evacua-
tion and sheltering procedures, safety and security information, and forms
for disciplinary referrals.
11
Planning

• Parent and student handbook. Because teachers are often in a posi-
tion of enforcing and explaining school rules to students during the school
year, copies of parent and student handbooks should be issued to teachers
along with the teacher handbook. Teachers should review the student
handbook with their classes at the beginning of each year.
• Equipment inventory. The handbook should address the care, stor-
age, and inventory of equipment. In particular, teachers should be directed
to secure electronic devices when they are not in use. This section should
also outline the storage of equipment during the summer months.
• Staff parking. If the school provides designated parking for staff
members, the guidelines for parking should be in writing. This section
should include information about parking permits, restricted areas, and
other parking-related concerns.
After reviewing your handbook and comparing it to the checklist, how
did you do? Did you “ace the test,” or do you need to do some more hand-
book homework?
Everyone in school has homework from time to time, and school
leaders are no exception. Those who procrastinate and fail to complete all
the assignments could receive more than just a bad grade: they could find
themselves in a potentially embarrassing position or, worse yet, in a situa-
tion that compromises student or staff safety. It is important that person-
nel review and revise the teacher handbook annually. This document will
provide a written record of the expectations for staff and faculty.
12
Safe & Secure Schools

STRATEGY 3
Strategic Supervision
The Foundation for School Safety
W
ell-planned supervision of students is the key to keeping them safe
and preventing inappropriate behavior. Supervision is one of the
basic building blocks of a safe and orderly school environment. Because
supervision is such an essential component of a school safety program, it
often becomes the focal point when something unfortunate happens, such
as when a student is injured. Whether an injury occurs as a result of an
accident or as the outcome of a confrontation with other students, the
question of whether supervision was adequate may be asked.
The value of supervision is immeasurable in terms of monitoring and
controlling student and adult behavior. Therefore, it is essential for school
administrators to use every tool at their disposal to ensure the staff is prop-
erly educated and trained in how to supervise the students, and that the
campus environment supports those efforts. Effective supervision begins
with the guidance provided to staff members.
• Review the teacher handbook. The expectations for all staff who
supervise students, including personnel in support roles, should be
included in the teacher handbook.
• Staff should be present, alert, and in the hallways during class
changes. Grading papers and visiting with coworkers minimizes staff’s
ability to supervise. Greeting students as they enter the school or class-
room can positively impact staff’s relationship building with them.
• Staff should position themselves in the middle of hallway traffic pat-
terns. This will force groups of students to disband as they pass the central
position, and will increase the supervisor’s ability to see what is going on.
• Staff should engage students in conversation. When students appear
upset or angry, talking to them may help staff ascertain what is wrong and
to intervene, if appropriate.
• Staff should monitor restrooms near the area they supervise.
Restrooms are high on the list of locations where inappropriate behavior
occurs. High faculty visibility will discourage problem behavior.
• Staff should watch exterior doors that may be located near class-
rooms for unauthorized people entering or students exiting without
13
Planning

permission. All staff members must be part of the access control plan for
the school.
• Staff should watch for visitors or students who are not displaying—
or who do not have—the necessary pass or badge. The value of visitor
check-in procedures is greatly diminished if staff members do not speak
with people who fail to follow the procedure.
• Staff should use hallway passes and classroom sign-out ledgers to
help ensure that students are in the right place at the right time. A teacher’s
responsibility for student safety extends to the activities associated with
giving them permission to leave class.
Handbooks should be specific and clear about supervision.
Now, take a minute to locate and review the teacher handbook for your
school. Does it specifically address supervision? What guidance is pro-
vided for staff, and are expectations clear? If the handbook makes only a
general statement that staff is expected to be in the hallways during class
changes, then it probably does not provide enough direction, and school
personnel will be left to interpret the administrative expectations and
guidelines. Remember, adult presence alone does not mean that students
are adequately supervised. Finally, check to see if the handbook references
members of the support staff. As school employees, these important indi-
viduals have the responsibility for supervising students, if only indirectly
and within the parameters of their assignments. If this responsibility has
not been conveyed to the support staff, that oversight should be
addressed.
PROVIDE APPROPRIATE STAFF DEVELOPMENT
In addition to issuing staff members a handbook that provides definition
and guidance for student supervision, related staff development must be
provided during the initial faculty meeting at the start of each school year.
• Within a few days of receiving the handbook, staff should be
required to sign, indicating they have read and understood it, and that
they have had an opportunity to ask questions.
• An administrator should retain agendas that provide documenta-
tion of items discussed in faculty meetings.
• Provisions should be made to ensure that substitute teachers and
staff members hired after the beginning of the school year understand
their supervisory responsibilities. Substitute teacher folders should
include instructions for those teachers to follow the same supervisory
guidelines as the regular teacher.
14
Safe & Secure Schools

MODEL AND DISCUSS APPROPRIATE
SUPERVISORY BEHAVIORS
The value of supervision cannot be overemphasized, and staff should be
reminded of those expectations periodically throughout the school year.
This can be accomplished through email messages, staff newsletters,
posters in faculty lounges, and follow-up discussions at faculty meetings.
Administrators should remember that ensuring understanding is not about
telling someone something once. Rather, it is about teaching teachers how
to accomplish the art of supervision while maintaining an atmosphere that
is positive and conducive to learning.
Administrators should model proper supervisory techniques by
refraining from personal adult conversations while they are on supervi-
sion duty. When faculty members see administrators who are not paying
attention to students while on duty, they get the message that this is an
acceptable practice.
Now, take a minute to think about the following questions:
• How does your school promote supervision and remind staff that it
is an essential safe school strategy?
• Does your administrative team model appropriate supervisory
techniques?
• What strategies do you currently have in place to inform substitute
teachers and newly hired staff about the administrative expectations for
supervision?
• Do you maintain yearly documentation related to staff development
on the topic of supervision?
SUPERVISION MUST BE
STRATEGIC TO BE EFFECTIVE
It’s really not about working harder—it’s about working smarter. Ask a
fisherman what determines where the best place is to fish, and you are
likely to hear about data analysis. It will probably include time of day,
weather conditions, geography, first-hand experience, and fishing reports.
A fisherman would not just randomly cast a line any more than a staff
member should randomly decide where to supervise. While developing
the supervisory plan, school personnel should review information such as
disciplinary referrals, altercations, and faculty and student perceptions.
The strategic part of supervision is having a written plan and commu-
nicating it to those who are expected to carry out their duties. For most
schools, one plan will not fit all. For some regularly occurring events and
15
Planning

activities—such as arrival, dismissal, bus loading, lunch, and assemblies—
a separate written plan should be devised, and then disseminated to those
involved in supervisory roles. These written plans should include the
following information:
• Beginning and ending times for supervisory duties
• Communication procedures, such as a requirement to carry a two-
way radio or cell phone
• Unique or specific rules for the event being supervised
• Procedures and requirements for substitutions when supervising
staff is absent
• Instructions for evacuations or in-place sheltering
• Expectations and duties for staff members
• Notations of special problems or areas requiring extra attention
TAKE STRATEGIC SUPERVISION
INTO ACCOUNT WHEN PLANNING FOR
NEW CONSTRUCTION OR REMODELING
New construction and building renovations provide opportunities for
school personnel to increase the effectiveness of strategic supervision. To
the extent that it is practical, avoid constructing hallways that are narrow
or that contain protrusions, alcoves, or other features that may obstruct the
supervising staff’s view. Restrooms and other locations that are conducive
to inappropriate student behavior should be located and designed with
supervision in mind. The same applies to student centers and areas where
large numbers of students congregate before and after school.
Soft drink machines and other large objects should be recessed into
walls. Locating reception, secretarial, and other offices near where students
assemble provides additional indirect supervision. The use of camera
systems should be considered but should not replace staff presence.
Landscaping and the placement of sidewalks and parking lots around the
school affect pedestrian traffic patterns and change how students can be
supervised. As personnel review construction plans, they should consider
the plan’s impact on supervision.
Maintaining a safe school environment requires implementing a
number of proven strategies. Strategic supervision—which includes all
staff members actively monitoring students and visitors to prevent safety
lapses—should be at the top of every school administrator’s list.
16
Safe & Secure Schools

STRATEGY 4
A Safety Game Plan for Cocurricular Events
S
taff members who oversee, direct, or coach cocurricular activities
spend countless hours working and practicing with students—not
only to ensure a top-quality performance, but also to ensure that the activ-
ities project a positive and polished image of the school. Whether it is a
drama teacher preparing for a theatrical production, a coach developing
a game plan for an upcoming competition, or a music teacher practicing
with students for a PTA performance, everyone must understand that
planning for the unexpected is a necessary part of the safety process.
When something goes awry at a cocurricular activity, there are a
number of circumstances that can negatively affect safety in an already
unusual situation. Consequently, school employees should give due dili-
gence to planning for security at cocurricular activities throughout the
school year by considering the following recommendations:
• A clear and structured chain of command for supervision should
be in place. Indecision can be detrimental to successfully resolving or
responding to an emergency situation. It is essential for all staff members
who are working at a cocurricular activity to know who is assigned spe-
cific duties and where each person can be located in case of an emergency.
• Staff members acting in a supervisory role at cocurricular events
should have adequate training, and should understand the expectations
for making decisions. The administrator may not always be present at
every after-school activity. In fact, it is not uncommon for teachers or other
staff to be in charge at low-profile or lightly attended evening events.
Nevertheless, the public expects the administrative designee to be as qual-
ified and knowledgeable on safety-related issues as the principal or other
administrators. Therefore, developing a handbook or checklist for those in
charge of an event can be a real asset, especially for staff members who
only occasionally find themselves in an administrative role. It is particu-
larly important for those staff members to understand that they have the
authority to make decisions.
• A meeting of staff members who are assigned to supervise or work
the activity should be held before each cocurricular activity. This does not
need to be a long or formal meeting, but it should review the specific
duties and responsibilities of staff members and explain where supervi-
sory staff members will be located during the event. In addition, the dis-
cussion topics should include how to contact or locate those in charge,
17
Planning

how to handle any potential or anticipated problems, and how to verify
that safety and security devices or supplies are readily available and work-
ing properly. In an emergency, staff members will be under stress and will
be more likely to remember important information if it has been recently
discussed.
• Evacuation routes and in-place sheltering locations should be iden-
tified, verified, and posted in clear view at all entrances and exits. When
considering the location of sheltering areas, the anticipated size of the
crowd should be considered. The maximum allowable occupancy should
be posted at the entry to gymnasiums, auditoriums, or other locations
where significant numbers of people attend school functions. When large
crowds are expected, someone should be designated to monitor atten-
dance to ensure that the maximum occupancy is not exceeded.
• In-place sheltering and evacuation maps should be developed that
are specific to the locations that are commonly used for cocurricular
events. Normal school-day sheltering and evacuation routes and maps
usually reflect a student body that is spread throughout the building or
campus, but that will not be the case at cocurricular activities.
Consequently, plans specific to those locations should be developed. Be
sure to include cafetoriums and food courts when developing evacuation
and sheltering plans.
• It is advisable to announce certain safety information in advance of
large events or when the noise level may be a serious factor in communi-
cating with the crowd. For certain events, many schools already make
announcements concerning tobacco usage, crowd conduct expectations,
and so on. It is recommended that these announcements also contain infor-
mation related to emergency exits and evacuation procedures. In addition,
rules and conduct expectations should be posted at entryways to the events
to remind everyone of what the school expects, condones, and prohibits.
• Supervisory staff members, ushers, or others who are designated to
assist or oversee an event should wear easily recognizable attire. As part of
the general announcements made at the beginning of an event, the crowd
should be given instructions as to how to locate school staff members
should the need arise. Staff who dress in apparel that display school colors
or clothing with a mascot’s image may tend to blend in with patrons and
fans and may not be readily identified. It is therefore recommended that
supervisory staff members wear badges that identify them as someone
in authority. Wearing identical blazers, vests, or hats can also make staff
members easy to identify, especially at events with large crowds.
• Staff members should be equipped with essential equipment and
supplies, such as flashlights and cell phones. A small, powerful flashlight
can be a valuable tool in the event of a power outage or if staff needs to go
outside during evening hours to address a problem. In addition, staff
18
Safe & Secure Schools

should have a pocket-size notepad and pen; it is also a good practice for at
least the supervisory staff to have cellular telephones. If two-way radios
are used at the school, they should be carried by as many of the staff as is
practical. Schools that are in areas where severe weather can be a threat
should keep a weather-alert radio in a place where staff members will hear
it if it is activated—perhaps in a concessions stand or ticket booth. For out-
side events, lightning detectors are also recommended.
• First aid supplies and emergency response kits should be located in
the area where an event is being held. Although many athletic events will
have a trainer or other similarly qualified person present, other cocurricu-
lar activities will not. Staff members should be aware of who among them
has first aid training and where first aid supplies can be located. An emer-
gency response kit should always be placed in areas where large numbers
of students or the public congregate. In addition to the standard supplies
that these kits normally contain, a battery-powered megaphone is recom-
mended. This will be an invaluable tool if it is necessary to communicate
to large numbers of people under adverse conditions.
• Local law enforcement agencies should be kept informed when large
crowds are anticipated at cocurricular activities and events. Most law
enforcement agencies are more than willing to disseminate a schedule of
the school’s events to the officer who covers that beat. Police departments
like to be proactive and will want to know when large numbers are
expected to attend a cocurricular activity. In addition to your scheduled
staffing for security, having a police officer make a pass through the event
or the school parking lots adds to the overall security plan for the event.
• Finally, scenario-based training should be provided to members of
the crisis management team and others who may be called on to work
cocurricular activities. School personnel should already be using tabletop
exercises to train their school population about safety issues. Tabletop
exercises are recommended by the U.S. Department of Education and are
an excellent training method for a school’s staff development program
related to emergency response procedures. Consequently, it is recom-
mended that personnel occasionally select a tabletop exercise where some-
thing is going awry at a cocurricular event. Forcing individuals to respond
to the unusual circumstances of these events will allow for a better
response when staff members and students are confronted with an actual
emergency.
No school administrator can be at all activities, so training others to
occasionally fill that role is critical. In the words of Ronald Reagan,
“Surround yourself with the best people you can find, delegate authority,
and don’t interfere as long as the overall policy that you’ve decided on is
being carried out.”
19
Planning

STRATEGY 5
On the Road Again
Discipline Investigations Away From School
H
ow prepared are you to manage the discipline, safety, and legal
issues that occur on out-of-town, school-sponsored trips? To manage
disciplinary incidents that occur in a school, personnel must know how to
conduct an investigation, and must be familiar with the educational and
statutory laws governing the procedural guidelines that must be followed.
However, disciplinary issues will sometimes arise when students and staff
are on school-sponsored activities that take them out of town, out of state,
and—on rare occasions—out of the country. To avoid problems, adminis-
trators should address potential discipline issues, in advance, when the
trip is being planned.
Besides disciplinary matters, accidents and injuries may also occur on
out-of-town trips. Parents expect the school to have considered all contin-
gencies and will insist staff members respond appropriately and decisively
if an incident occurs. The following are some tips that should be followed
prior to out-of-town trips:
• Checklists. Perhaps the best tool to assist staff with the safety plan-
ning process is to provide a written checklist of tasks to be completed prior
to departure. The checklist should be considered a living document that
can be modified by staff on their return, and used to prepare for future out-
of-town events. A completed checklist should be part of the pretrip docu-
mentation record. When applicable, certain tasks on the list should include
a time line for completion (see Resources).
• Trip handbooks. Expectations of behavior and the potential school
and legal consequences should be discussed with students prior to trip
departure. This information should be clearly communicated in a student
handbook or a similar document designed for each specific trip. It should
be reviewed with parents in a pretrip group meeting. After reviewing the
document, parents and students should sign the document to acknowl-
edge they have read and understood it.
• Laws of foreign countries. When the trip involves travel to a foreign
country, parents and students should be reminded that the legal system in
other countries may be very different from the U.S. legal system, and
penalties may be much harsher—especially those related to the possession
or use of controlled substances.
20
Safe & Secure Schools

• Inspection of student belongings. Travel permission documents
should give administrators the right to inspect a student’s personal
belongings prior to departure and at any time during the trip. When
inspections are done randomly, they may negate the need for the thresh-
old of reasonable suspicion usually required for a student search, though
you should always consult legal counsel before including such language.
We also suggest using the term “inspect” rather than “search.” The word
“search” may have additional legal implications, depending on local judi-
cial interpretations. To ensure that the scope and nature of the inspections
are appropriate, a set of written guidelines should be used, and more than
one staff member should be present during the inspection. Only autho-
rized staff members should be involved if there is a need to conduct an
inspection of student belongings.
• Volunteer chaperones. When an administrative designee, in lieu of
an administrator, is placed in charge of an out-of-town trip, the designee
should have a thorough understanding of the disciplinary procedures and
investigative requirements. When an administrator is left to handle an
incident that occurred several days earlier across state lines, it may be dif-
ficult to reconstruct the circumstances if the incident was not handled
properly at the time. Incorrect or inappropriate actions by chaperones
who are not school employees may significantly hinder an administrator’s
ability to reconstruct an incident.
• Student handbooks and statement forms. Staff members on out-of-
town trips should always take a copy of the student handbook and other
documents that contain the discipline code; they should also take witness-
statement forms. In most situations, it is not advisable to wait until after
students return from a trip to take written and oral statements. The best
statements are taken when an incident is fresh in everyone’s mind and
when there has not been an opportunity for those involved to compare
stories, discuss the event, or collaborate.
• Cameras to document evidence. Chaperones for out-of-town trips
should have a camera at their disposal for those circumstances when evi-
dence will not be available at a later time, or where property damage has
occurred. Pictures may be important evidence to document an event or a
specific item. Cameras should be provided by the district to avoid any
issues over the possession rights of the pictures.
• Local and state jurisdictions. Many states have statutes that require
schools to notify law enforcement officials when certain types of offenses
occur. Some state laws require schools to report certain types of incidents
to the agency that has jurisdiction for that type of infraction. If in doubt,
contact the police where the incident occurred and make the appropriate
inquiries related to state and municipal regulations. Obtain a copy of the
written police report if one is prepared. If the police counsel no action, ask
the officer to put that counsel in writing.
21
Planning

• Dealing with contraband. Law enforcement officials should be con-
tacted when contraband, such as controlled substances or weapons, is
seized. Maintaining possession of these items until the return to the home
school is risky and may be illegal. However, pictures of the contraband
should be taken as part of the record of events.
• Debriefing. In the aftermath of a serious incident occurring on an
out-of-town trip, it is important for staff members and those directly
involved with the incident to debrief as a group. This will provide two
valuable sources of information: First, depending on the level of media
involvement and the seriousness of the event, debriefing will provide the
administrator with the best overall picture of the who, what, where, when,
how, and why of the incident. Second, debriefing provides an opportunity
to adjust the planning process for the next out-of-town trip.
Taking students to school-sponsored activities and letting them partic-
ipate in out-of-town cocurricular trips is a valuable and viable part of any
comprehensive school experience. If school personnel have already made
proper preparations during the planning process, discipline violations,
accidents, and injuries that occur on out-of-town trips can be managed
successfully. Remember: prior to an out-of-town event, it is important to
clearly communicate all of a school’s behavioral and procedural expecta-
tions with parents, students, accompanying staff members, and chaper-
ones. Should a regrettable incident occur, administrators will be better
prepared to act quickly, decisively, and appropriately.
22
Safe & Secure Schools

STRATEGY 6
Visitor Check-in and Screening Procedures
It’s More Than Just Signing the Visitor Log
S
ystematic and consistent check-in and screening procedures for school
visitors help ensure the safety of the school environment. Although a
visitor check-in system is a standard operating procedure for most school
buildings, establishing systematic, practical, and successful visitor check-
in and screening procedures entails much more than making visitors sign
a visitor’s log and giving them an identification badge. To implement a
successful visitor check-in process, staff members must first have a clear
understanding of the need for check-in procedures. The real purpose of
visitor check-in and screening procedures is not only to observe and iden-
tify individuals who have followed the procedures, but also to make it
easier to identify those individuals who have not followed them.
POSTING CHECK-IN PROCEDURES
All entry points to the school should have the rules and procedures for vis-
itor check-in clearly posted. It is recommended these be written in both
English and Spanish. Posting the rules serves two purposes: First, it pro-
vides an opportunity to notify visitors that they will be required to follow
established procedures when they visit the school. Second, it provides the
basis for inquiry when staff members must confront individuals who have
disregarded the posted instructions.
Individuals who arrive at the school without the intention to engage in
prohibited behavior will generally follow visitor check-in procedures.
However, those arriving to do otherwise will, in most situations, disregard
the posted instructions.
PROCEDURE
School secretaries often feel embarrassed when they are checking in
a visitor who is well known within the school community, but all staff
members should understand that an important aspect of successful access
control is maintaining consistency in administering procedures. Listed
below are some specific strategies that should be considered when
23
Planning

setting up or reviewing your school’s current visitor screening and check-
in procedure.
• Signage. Instructions that clearly portray visitor check-in require-
ments and direct visitors to the proper check-in location should be posted
at all entry points. If a local ordinance or other legal requirement is the
basis for enforcement, the signage should so indicate.
• Screening requirements. Additional signage should appear at the
check-in location to advise visitors that school staff members reserve the
right to ask for picture identification. Visitor check-in and screening
requirements should also appear in student handbooks and in school
newsletters that are sent home. The goal is to provide as much advanced
notice of the check-in and screening procedures as possible. This will usu-
ally result in greater compliance within the school community.
• Friendly conversation. As part of the standard check-in procedure,
the staff member on duty should engage each visitor in a friendly conver-
sation to determine if there are any abnormalities in the visitor’s demeanor
or mental state. This provides an opportunity to ascertain if the individual
is unhappy or agitated with staff members or students, or if the individual
is under the influence of a controlled substance.
• Visitor log. The visitor log should indicate who the visitor is, the
reason for the visit, the person the visitor will be seeing, and the times the
visitor checks in and out. The staff member who processes the visitor’s
check-in should initial the visitor log; having staff members take owner-
ship of this process will ensure greater attention to detail.
• Legibility. Unless the staff member who is overseeing the check-in
procedure recognizes the visitor, the visitor’s signature should be checked
for legibility. If the signature is unreadable, the staff member should ask
the visitor to pronounce the name.
• Picture identification. The decision to ask for picture identification
should be based on the comfort level the staff member has regarding
whether the visitor is, in fact, who he or she claims to be. Staff members
should always err on the side of caution and request identification if there
is any doubt.
• Visitor badges. Visitor badges should be color coded, numbered, and
designed so individuals who fail to return their badges on leaving the
campus cannot readily use the same badge on another day. Moreover,
reusable badges should be inventoried periodically to ensure that they are
all accounted for and ready for use. Commercially produced visitor
badges that are designed for one-time use are also available. It makes little
sense to design a secure check-in procedure if the visitor can leave with a
badge that can be reused another day.
24
Safe & Secure Schools

• Staff notification. When a visitor arrives, it is a good idea to alert the
person who is receiving the visitor. This can provide the staff member
at the time of check-in with additional information if the visitor is some-
one who may be expected to create a problem. For added security, staff
members may want to escort visitors through the school to the meeting or
classroom.
TRAINING AND PREPARATION
The final part of a sound visitor check-in procedure is to ensure all staff
members understand the process and their role in the overall success of
the program. The person assigned to process visitors is only one part of the
procedure. The rest of the staff should act as eyes and ears within
the building or on the campus, and be aware of any persons who ignore
the check-in process, are intent on creating a disruption, or might pose a
threat to the school population.
Staff members who check visitors in should receive a written copy of
the school’s building or campus procedures, as well as instructions about
how to respond when a visitor is noncompliant or exhibits unusual behav-
ior. All staff should receive training in how to approach and tactfully
engage in dialogue with individuals who do not have visitor identification
badges. These instructions should include information about how to prop-
erly respond to a visitor’s defiant or abusive behavior. A friendly demeanor
can sometimes defuse even the angriest person. When that does not work,
staff should remain calm, speak softly, keep a reasonable distance, and
stand at a right angle when speaking with the individual. However, if the
visitor is visibly agitated and distressed, the staff member should get to the
nearest communication device and notify the office of the visitor’s pres-
ence and location on the campus.
Visiting a school campus can and should be a positive experience for
everyone in the school community, and most of the time it is just that.
Publicizing, practicing, and providing written procedures for staff to
follow when visitors arrive should be a routine part of each school year.
Visitor check-in requirements can then be accurately promoted as one of
the components that a school uses to ensure a safe environment.
25
Planning

STRATEGY 7
Ensuring the Safe Evacuation of Students With
Physical Disabilities During an Emergency
F
or in-place sheltering and evacuation plans to work during an emer-
gency, schools need to prepare—and practice—individualized evacu-
ation and shelter plans for students with disabilities.
Throughout the school year, students and staff participate in fire drills
and severe weather drills that are usually simple and routine. But what
happens when a school cannot accommodate students with physical
disabilities through the normal sheltering and evacuation procedures? Just
as schools are committed to meeting the educational requirements
of students with physical disabilities, schools should be committed to
develop a plan to evacuate and shelter in place these students during an
emergency event.
Because of the unique risks and circumstances associated with moving
students who have limited mobility or complete immobility, administra-
tors should take the following factors into consideration when making
evacuation plans:
• Physical conditions that may create additional risks for students
with disabilities if they have to be moved rapidly
• Special equipment or medication that must accompany students
with disabilities
• The use of stairways, as opposed to elevators, during an evacuation
• Evacuation routes that require students to traverse terrain that could
be affected by bad weather
• Evacuations that may require students and staff to travel a consid-
erable distance to be clear of the danger
• The assignment of staff members to assist students with special
needs during evacuation and in-place sheltering
• The supervision of students whose teachers have been temporarily
reassigned to assist students with physical disabilities
• The special circumstances associated with cocurricular activities and
events—such as crowd movement—and the availability of shelter-
ing locations and evacuation routes from auditoriums, gymnasiums,
and stadiums
• Special considerations for students with physical disabilities who
may also have emotional and cognitive impairments
26
Safe & Secure Schools

• Schedule and class modifications made throughout the school year
that will affect the location of students with physical disabilities
during the school day
• Classrooms that, by their specific design, cannot be relocated to a
ground level
DEVELOPING AN INDIVIDUALIZED
EVACUATION AND SHELTERING PLAN
Every student with a disability who could be adversely affected during an
evacuation or in-place sheltering event should have an individualized
evacuation and sheltering plan (IESP). The IESP should be an addendum
to the school’s emergency response plan and should include the following:
• The class schedules of students with disabilities
• Information about any specific medical conditions of students with
disabilities, including notations about medications and critical
peripheral equipment such as the need for an oxygen tank or
wheelchair
• Any special instructions on medically approved techniques for the
physical movement of a student with a disability, such as restrictions
for lifting, and so on
• A sheltering location in close proximity to each of the classrooms
used by students with disabilities
• A designated exterior exit for evacuation and an alternate exit
specific to each class that a student with a disability attends
• Staff members and alternates who are assigned to assist in the evac-
uation or in-place sheltering of students with disabilities
Written operating instructions for medical equipment should accom-
pany the student.
The school nurse, students, parents, and an administrator should all
provide input into the IESP process and sign the document when it has
been completed to indicate they have reviewed and agreed. In some cases,
it may also be well advised to consult the physicians of students with dis-
abilities. Members of the emergency response team should have a copy of
the IESP as an addendum to their individual emergency response plans. In
addition, any classroom teacher who has daily or periodic responsibility
for a student with a disability should have a copy of the student’s IESP.
The plan should also be given to persons involved in the actual transport
of students with disabilities. A copy of the IESP should also be included in
the folder provided to substitute teachers.
27
Planning

PRACTICING THE IESP
Writing the IESP is only the first step in the process. The IESP is of little
value until it has been practiced and modified as appropriate. When
school personnel practice evacuation and in-place sheltering plans for
students with disabilities, the following considerations should be taken
into account:
• School personnel involved in assisting students with disabilities
should clearly understand each student’s medical condition. When possi-
ble, parents should be encouraged to observe a practice drill. By doing so,
they will be able to provide input and will have a greater comfort level
with the process.
• When possible, use the same staff members each time a student with
a disability is moved. When possible, assign alternate staff members to fill
this role in the event the primary staff member is absent. Transporting
these students might not be an easy task. Consequently, both designees
and alternates should be trained in how to correctly transport a physically
disabled student so neither staff nor student safety is compromised.
• It may be ill advised to physically carry a student with a disability
during a practice evacuation drill. However, the student should be present
during the drill so the student will understand the proper procedure.
When necessary, a mannequin or dummy can be used during a practice
drill; the local fire department is a good resource for obtaining such an
item. Staff members who are assigned to move students should be
reminded that these individuals may have limited movement in some
limbs and may be unable to protect themselves during a fall.
• Evacuation plans should account for times when students with dis-
abilities are not in a classroom, such as during lunch or class changes. In
addition, students with disabilities should be told what actions they
should take if something happens during times when they are not with a
staff member.
• Remember that a student with a disability may not be able to assume
protective positions during certain in-place sheltering events, such as dur-
ing earthquakes or severe weather. Therefore, it is important for adminis-
trators to work with local emergency management officials and district
risk management staff members to identify where and how these students
should be protected.
• Use monthly drill reports to note when practice sessions involving
students with disabilities occurred. This information is an important part
of any school’s routine record keeping.
28
Safe & Secure Schools

• Remember to debrief relevant participants after all practice and
actual evacuations. Although debriefing should be an integral part of
crisis planning, it is often overlooked because of time constraints.
ASSISTING STUDENTS
WITH SHORT-TERM PHYSICAL NEEDS
Throughout the school year, there will be students with temporary med-
ical conditions, such as a broken leg, who will have restricted mobility.
Consequently, a short-term IESP will need to be considered. An appointed
staff member should have the responsibility for monitoring and updating
all evacuation plans for these students. The school nurse might be a good
person for this task.
Although practice drills are an invaluable tool in preparing to evacu-
ate a student with a disability, administrators should remember there are
certain factors—panic, stress, and so on—that will be present in an actual
event that cannot be simulated in a practice drill. Although perfection
is seldom achieved in the world of school safety, thorough planning and
regular practice will certainly be a means toward that end.
Authors’ note: As is true in life, many valuable lessons are learned
through experience. As readers you might be interested to know the infor-
mation shared within this article is a direct result of a fire drill involving a
physically disabled student that went awry. While it was true there was a
plan, it was not detailed enough and did not account for the absence of one
of the designated transporters. Thus, the idea of an IESP had its inception.
It was a valuable lesson learned for all involved.
29
Planning

STRATEGY 8
Invest in a Safety Committee
Creating Strategies You Can Bank On
A
safety committee requires time, energy, and sometimes money, but
the rewards can be significant. Call it a focus group, a team, a com-
mission, or a board, but a committee by any other name is still a commit-
tee. And isn’t it just what everyone needs? Ah yes, another committee to
monitor, chair, and facilitate. Right? Absolutely not! But before the idea
of adding to an already overstressed workload makes you stop reading,
please consider the fact that taking the time to institute a productive school
safety committee will ultimately be time well spent in terms of shared
expertise, professional and personal liability, and overall schoolwide
safety. Does that sound like it has some possibilities? Of course it does.
Often underutilized, a school safety committee is one of the best tools
an administrator can have. If formed carefully, this group can help create,
maintain, and assess school safety and climate in a strategic, intentional,
and timely manner throughout the school year.
It is virtually impossible for any one person to be solely responsible
for the safety and security needs of elementary, middle, and high school
students and staff in the twenty-first century. Schools that have a positive
and safe educational environment usually have it because all staff con-
tributes to ensuring it. In fact, if a school’s overall safety plans do not
encourage—or require—the participation of staff from all departments, the
plans will be compromised.
A safety committee will encourage staff member participation through
a multidisciplinary mix of members. This combination is necessary if the
committee is to be effective. Bringing together individuals who have
expertise in specific areas and a vested interest in a safe and secure work
environment will pay big dividends over time.
WHO ARE THE PLAYERS?
When forming a committee designed to facilitate safety and security, school
personnel will want to ensure the right players are included. The following
are some of the areas, departments, and groups that should be represented:
• Administration
• Counseling
30
Safe & Secure Schools

• Health
• Secretarial
• Security
• Food service
• Custodial and maintenance
• Teaching staff
• Athletic staff
• Student body
Depending on the composition, special considerations, or unique
needs of the school, there may be other staff who also need to be a part of
the school safety committee. Representatives from each of the listed areas
will bring specific expertise and unique perspectives to the table. The mix
of individuals from these various departments will broaden the knowl-
edge base of all committee members, making them more effective and
versatile in the event of an emergency.
WHAT IS THE PURPOSE?
Safety committees must operate with clear direction and purpose. “Safety”
is too broad a term to simply designate it as the purpose. It is important for
the committee to have well-defined functions and specific tasks. Creating
a document that outlines these administrative expectations will help pro-
vide structure and guidance to the committee members.
WHAT ARE SOME SUGGESTED
DUTIES AND ACTIVITIES?
A frustration of many administrators is ensuring basic safety and secu-
rity functions and strategies are consistently in place throughout the
school. The larger the school, the more difficult this becomes. Safety com-
mittees can develop guidelines and ensure compliance by developing
checklists that are completed by each staff member in the school. For
example, the committee might consult with the school nurse to create a
checklist of first aid supplies that should be readily available in each
classroom. In turn, each teacher would verify once each semester that the
supplies are available in the assigned area and note such on a copy of the
checklist. This process creates the kind of participatory leadership imper-
ative to any school safety plan. The same process can be used to verify
that evacuation and sheltering plans are posted, door locks are in work-
ing order, important telephone numbers are posted, and so forth (see
Resources).
31
Planning

WHAT SHOULD BE DONE FIRST?
Certainly a good place to start is a review of accident statistics and data. The
committee can and should review each accident, and should examine statis-
tical and anecdotal information to identify possible causation. Then the
committee will be able to recommend actions to reduce the likelihood of
a recurrence. The committee should also follow up, and periodically review
that the recommended actions have been implemented.
A well-chosen and energized safety committee may prevent a signifi-
cant number of accidents. Developing schoolwide themes, projects, and
initiatives will enhance the overall safety of the school, and will create and
maintain a high level of awareness among staff and students. Tackling
such issues as thefts at school by providing information to students and
staff on how to avoid becoming a victim will help address that problem.
There are a limitless number of activities and projects that can be used to
enhance the safety of the school climate and environment.
WHAT IS THE COST?
The actual monetary expenditure of a safety committee is minimal, but
some funds for supplies and materials may be necessary. It is not realistic
to expect a safety committee not to recommend some strategies that have
an associated cost or develop safety awareness promotional programs
without some expenditure.
The question is, “What will the cost ultimately be if such a committee
is not formed and fully functioning?” The fear of generating costly and
untimely work orders should not be a reason to delay forming a safety
committee. In matters such as school safety, timing is everything.
WHAT WILL BE THE RESULTS?
The value of a safety committee should be measured not only in the dol-
lars and cents saved, but also in the benefit it provides in the area of acad-
emics. When a school increases its safety record, it will likely increase the
feeling of safety, which will have positive effects on student and staff atten-
dance, and on academic achievement. If a school experiences a tragedy
or accident of significant consequence, staff and student emotions are
affected long after the event. Safety can and does affect everyone, and
safety is a fundamental need for all. When a school begins to experience a
reduction in accidents, injuries, school crime, and disciplinary problems,
personnel will spend less time with these issues and more time doing what
is more rewarding and important—spending quality time with students.
32
Safe & Secure Schools

STRATEGY 9
Speaking of School Safety
Creating a Conversation Within the School Community
C
onversations about school safety should take place throughout the
year to assure parents and community members that the school is
prepared for emergencies.
Communicating with parents and others in the school community on the
topic of school safety can be a balancing act. Say too little and parents may
believe not enough is being done to address safety and security concerns. Say
too much and some will assume personnel are overreacting or that the school
has serious safety issues that need to be addressed by extreme measures.
Either way, it takes reflection and insight on the part of school personnel to
decide what to explain regarding safety and security measures and when it is
appropriate to share information. It can be a win-win or a lose-lose situation,
depending on the circumstances prompting the release of information, the
interpretation of the information by the listener, and the ability of the school
official to communicate clearly, strategically, succinctly, and confidently.
QUESTIONS FOR CONSIDERATION
Before considering how to share information about school safety, ask your-
self the following questions:
• What type of information is appropriate to share?
• How detailed should the information be?
• In what format is this type of information best communicated?
• When is the best time for this type of information to be dissemi-
nated? Should it be a routine part of the beginning of a new school year,
disseminated only in the aftermath of a tragic event, or a combination of
both? We recommend being proactive, as opposed to being reactive, when
it comes to making this decision.
• What board policies, if any, need to be considered?
Educators know the feeling of safety is essential to students and staff
to maximize academic achievement and to recruit and retain employees.
33
Planning

Promoting school safety should be part of the school’s routine, and dis-
cussing safety and security with parents and others in the community
should be as important as promoting academics, cocurricular activities,
special programs, and other services. Although there may be a few specific
details of safety and security that are privileged information, such as bomb
threat procedures and threat assessment screening, most strategies are
already visible; their value will not be compromised if they are broadcast.
SEVEN POINTS TO SHARE
Seven topic areas we believe should be discussed as part of the routine dia-
logue are outlined in the following paragraphs. For emphasis and clarity,
we provide suggested language.
• The school has a comprehensive emergency response plan. The plan
is reviewed periodically and updated when necessary. Emergency proce-
dures are practiced with the faculty, staff, and students. The school works
closely with local emergency service providers to ensure everyone is pre-
pared for an emergency. The school conducts drills for fire, severe weather
events, and armed intruders.
• The school has a check-in procedure for visitors during the school
day. Although we encourage parents to visit our campus, please keep in
mind check-in procedures apply to all visitors as part of our access control
measures. Visitors should use the appropriate entrance and be prepared to
state the nature of their visit, sign a guest register, and show picture iden-
tification if asked to do so. Our procedures are structured to help ensure
the safety of all students and staff. We ask that you set the correct example
for others by following them.
• Parents should contact school personnel as quickly as possible if
they become aware of a situation that could endanger students or staff
members. As a parent, you are a valuable partner in helping us ensure a
safe school environment. When you have any safety and security infor-
mation the school should know, please contact a building administrator,
school counselor, or teacher immediately. We will treat all information in
an appropriately confidential manner.
• As a district, we have adopted a variety of safety and security poli-
cies, including a student code of conduct we enforce fairly and consis-
tently. All students are provided a copy of the student code of conduct in
the student handbook, which is also available online at the school’s web-
site. Parents are asked to read and review the handbook with their
children. In addition, parents are welcome to contact school officials with
their questions and concerns about content, implementation, or enforce-
ment of school policies.
34
Safe & Secure Schools

• We have procedures in place for disseminating information to
parents and the greater community during an emergency. In the case of an
emergency in the community, listen to local radio and television stations.
This information will also be posted on the district’s website and sent elec-
tronically via text message to cell phones and email addresses, as provided
by the parents. As quickly as possible, we will provide information on
how, where, and when parents can pick up their children. In some emer-
gencies, it may not be advisable for you to come to the school. Please
remember the safety of your children is foremost in our minds, and you
may be required to show identification as an added security measure
before your child is released to you. If the school is considered by law
enforcement to be a crime scene, students will not be released until the
police instruct school officials to do so.
• We use the expertise of a school safety team throughout the school
year. Although injuries and disciplinary infractions occur periodically, all
necessary precautions are taken to ensure the school environment remains
hazard free. Our school safety team includes administrators, the school
nurse, a counselor, a custodian, a member of the food service staff, and
selected teachers. The team routinely reviews accident reports and
discipline violations to determine whether adjustments must be made to
supervision policies, the student code of conduct, or the school building.
Please contact the school if you believe you have information about a
safety hazard.
• Our school uses a number of strategies to help ensure a safe climate.
The following is a sample of what we do to help ensure a safe learning
environment for students and staff members:
 A nurse and a school counselor are available during the school day.
 Specific procedures for supervision are in place.
 Visitors are required to follow check-in procedures.
 Students and staff members are required to wear identification
badges.
 A school resource officer is assigned to the campus.
 Coaches and certain selected staff members have first aid and
CPR training.
 Surveillance cameras are placed strategically throughout the campus.
 Volunteers greet students in the morning as they arrive.
 Peer mediation and conflict resolution teams are available to
students.
 An antiviolence curriculum is incorporated in lessons throughout
the year.
 The discipline code is enforced consistently.
 Custodial staff members routinely check doors and grounds
throughout the school day.
35
Planning

CONCLUSION
Remember, parents, students, and the entire school community should be
involved in maintaining a safe learning environment. Teachers do not
mention an important concept only once and expect every student to inter-
nalize and understand it. To truly teach is to repeatedly explain and rein-
force what others need to know. Although the conversation about safety
may begin at a meeting with parents in September, the topic should be part
of the overall message from the school throughout the year.
For most people, it is enough to know the school staff is making every
effort to address safety and security concerns, but the community will not
be aware of that if it is not communicated clearly and often. Host parent
meetings, use the school’s website, or provide information through the
school newsletter—or do all three. Just keep parents informed.
36
Safe & Secure Schools

STRATEGY 10
Closing Out the School Year
E
very school leader approaches the month of May and the subsequent
end-of-year tasks with mixed feelings of stress and relief.
Although preparations for ensuring a safe ending to the school year
are crucial, for many schools the month of May will also be a time for tran-
sition from the regular school year into a summer school program or other
activities. End-of-year tasks are important, but it is important not to over-
look what must be readied for these summer activities as well as begin-
ning the preparation for the next school year.
A number of items should be on a “To Do” list related to school and
student safety as the regular school year concludes, including the following:
1. Identify students who planned to graduate but who will not do so
because of academic issues or discipline violations that occur at the end of
the school year. Staff should be kept informed of these students; not being
allowed to participate in graduation ceremonies can be a triggering event
for violent or escalating aggressive behavior. Principals, counselors, and
parents should maintain dialogue with the student and monitor the
student’s mental state. In addition, an effort should be made to ascertain if
the student plans to attend the graduation ceremony. When practical, it is
recommended pictures of these students be provided at graduation cere-
monies to security and other supervisory staff who may not recognize
them by sight.
2. Encourage teachers and other staff to remain vigilant for students
who exhibit signs of threatening behavior. This directive should come in
the form of a written reminder and should be reinforced at end-of-year fac-
ulty meetings. Supervision does not end until the last student leaves the
campus on the last day of school.
3. Remember that access control is basic and critical to maintaining
safety within a school. End-of-year activities will create additional visitors
to the campus as well as greater student movement to and from the school.
Consequently, access control can be even more frustrating for administra-
tors; vigilance by all must be maintained. Inconvenience to staff or a
patron is not a reason to ignore established visitor check-in procedures. If
you are expecting an influx of patrons for an end-of-year assembly, make
several staff members available at school entrances to issue visitor identi-
fication badges.
37
Planning

4. Plan carefully for field trips, school picnics, and senior excursions.
During the end of the year, many types of student activities are scheduled.
Make certain there are sufficient chaperones when students are taken out
of their familiar environments. Students should understand the para-
meters for exploration, and should be allowed to participate only after
parents have given written permission for them to do so. If the length of
the school day is shortened, make certain this information is provided in a
variety of formats to parents prior to the early dismissal days.
5. Provide adequate security and supervision at such end-of-year
functions as proms and graduation ceremonies. It is important to clearly
set and communicate expectations to both students and staff. It is also
advisable to provide the local law enforcement agency with a listing of the
end-of-year activities where large crowds are expected. In many jurisdic-
tions, local law enforcement officers may be instructed to put these events
on special patrol.
6. Explore the possibility of using private security for the evening
and overnight hours during the last few weeks of school. Many schools
experience an increase in vandalism at the end of the school year. In lieu of
hiring outside services or to supplement such, consider adjusting custodial
work shifts to create an overnight presence on the campus. At a minimum,
ask local law enforcement to patrol the campus more frequently as the
school year comes to a close.
7. Account for all building and room keys at the end of the school
year and collect them from the staff and faculty who will not be returning
in the fall. Also collect district identification badges, parking permits, and
other items issued to employees. If the school utilizes an intrusion alarm
system, make sure that access privileges have been removed for nonre-
turning staff and faculty.
8. Move mobile electronic equipment from rooms not in use during
the summer months to an area of high security during that time period.
Valuable items should not be left near windows or exterior doors for
extended times when school is not in session. For schools that have intru-
sion alarm systems, equipment should be placed where alarm coverage is
available and practical. An inventory of major equipment should be com-
pleted at the beginning and end of the summer months. As part of the
“check-out procedure,” individual classroom teachers should complete
the end-of-year inventory specific to the classroom.
9. Start planning for the next school year in terms of safety and
security. Although the school year is coming to an end, it is not too early
to begin thinking about safety and security for the next school year.
As part of one of the last faculty meetings it is a good idea to spend a
38
Safe & Secure Schools

designated amount of time debriefing the staff and compiling a list of the
things related to staff and student safety to be done differently during
the next school year. Some of the items discussed may require work
orders or specific modifications which will need to be completed over
the summer months. With the window of opportunity consisting of only
a few months, it will be important to plan how these tasks will be accom-
plished. The summer will also provide the opportunity to address those
items from the debriefing list that are procedural in nature, which may
require changes in handbooks, directives, or postings and placards.
10. Review the exterior lighting and other environmental issues such
as foliage around the school. As foliage increases in size with each pass-
ing year, it can begin to create shadowing and negate the value of the
intended lighting schemes. At the end of the school year and throughout
the summer months, lighting takes on an added significance. Check that
all lighting is functioning and is illuminating the intended areas.
11. Review the close of school year issues with staff related to safety
and security. Because this task takes time, making a checklist for individu-
als to follow will help ensure that important items are not forgotten. In
addition, assigning specific tasks to department heads, custodial staff, sec-
retarial staff, and teaching staff will serve three purposes. First, it will help
with the already full schedule of end-of-year “must do’s.” Second, it will
create ownership because the entire staff is taking part in specific tasks.
Third, it will continually reinforce the need to put safety and security at the
forefront as the school year concludes.
12. Visitor check-in procedures and other security strategies related
to movement of individuals in and out of the building should be contin-
ued. While summer school or other activities generally bring with them
fewer disciplinary issues, the overall issue of building security is not
lessened. Administrators should also make certain summer school
students are provided with pertinent information such as student hand-
books and codes of conduct, and that they are afforded the opportunity
to practice emergency drills.
13. A concerted effort should be made to familiarize summer school
staff and students to the specific procedures and practices within the
summer school sites. Often, staff and students are assigned to schools
that are not their regular assignments. In an emergency, staff and
students will respond to the way they have practiced and planned.
Therefore, acclimating staff and students to the new environment will
be crucial. This procedure should include practicing evacuation and
in-place sheltering drills.
39
Planning

PROACTIVE MEASURES
Planning for safety and security is critical in minimizing the chances that
an unpleasant or tragic event will occur at the close to the school year or
during the summer months. While every day of a school year has the
potential to generate a number of safety and security issues, the end of a
school year creates unique circumstances that must be considered as part
of the cycle of planning and preparation for student and staff safety.
40
Safe & Secure Schools

2
Response Strategies

42
Safe & Secure Schools
STRATEGY 11
Planning for School Emergencies: Part 1
R
egardless of what many people believe, educators know schools are
not dormant during the summer months. In addition to scheduling
special learning activities, working on building renovations, and planning
for the next school year, summer is an ideal time to reflect on and update
the school’s emergency response plan. A school has safety obligations all
year, but these obligations are elevated when students arrive on the first
day of the school year. Staff should review the school’s emergency prepa-
rations before that first day of school. The first part of a two-part plan,
Strategy 11 provides tips and information to help principals and staff
members review and update the school’s emergency response plan.
A MULTILEVEL PLAN
There are various levels of emergency planning that take place in any
community. Each level is interwoven with the next level, culminating with
plans developed at the national level. For school personnel, emergency
planning starts with the classroom and progresses upward through the
school and district plans. Segments developed for the local community
should fit into the overall plan.
Classroom Plans
Every teacher should be asked to view the classroom as a separate
school environment and to have a plan in place for ensuring the safety of
the students under direct supervision. A relatively simple written outline
of this plan should be easy to access. A flip chart is one of the most easily
used formats for an emergency response plan.
Placed in a location where it can be quickly found, the flip chart should
contain brief steps the teacher can follow to protect students from harm in
emergency situations. Although sample flip charts can be commercially
purchased, they should contain the events and response strategies that are
part of the school’s actual emergency response plan. The plans should
include general sheltering and evacuation plans for the classroom as well
as responses to fires, weather-related events, chemical or hazardous mate-
rial leaks or spills, armed intruders, and other events that may require
immediate action by the teacher.

School Plan
A school’s emergency response plan should be a framework of such
key functions as communications, evacuations, sheltering, and first aid.
Although emergencies do not follow a script, all staff must know the basic
components of the plan and be able to adapt each component to the cir-
cumstances accompanying a specific event. In a true emergency, staff
members may not have time to find the plan and locate the page that tells
them what they are supposed to do.
As a multifaceted document dealing with a variety of potential emer-
gencies, the plan and its specific components should occasionally be
reviewed by local emergency service providers. The outside review should
be conducted by law enforcement officials, fire and emergency response
teams, and disaster management officials.
The National Incident Management System (NIMS) is familiar to local
emergency service providers, but it may be unfamiliar to school adminis-
trators. NIMS was created in 2004 by the U.S. Department of Homeland
Security as the national standard for emergency and disaster planning. It
is a structured system for command, control, and decision making when
responding to various localized, regional, and national disasters. NIMS is
in the implementation stage nationally and should be incorporated into
school and district disaster and emergency plans. Local emergency service
providers can help schools write a plan that incorporates NIMS.
District Plan
Every school district should have an emergency response plan that
addresses how the district will support an individual school during and
after an emergency, and how it will support multiple schools if the emer-
gency is widespread. Each school administrator should be familiar with
the district’s plan and with the resources available if the school is directly
or indirectly affected by a tragedy. Building-level administrators at schools
that are not directly affected by an emergency event may become part
of the district response team. The district may ask administrators whose
schools are not affected by an emergency event to help the affected
schools. For this reason, building-level school administrators should be
thoroughly familiar with the district plan.
Community Plan
School administrators also should be familiar with how their school
fits into the community disaster plan. In many communities, school build-
ings are designated as relocation or evacuation sites. There may be a need
to house hundreds or thousands of individuals who are displaced because
of a natural or manmade disaster, and this need may occur at a moment’s
43
Response Strategies

notice. Also, schools in many parts of the country are designated as inocu-
lation sites in the event of biological terrorism or an epidemic. Such events
would significantly disrupt the school’s routine or cause widespread school
cancellations.
DEVELOPING YOUR PLAN
Although it is important to be familiar with all levels of planning dis-
cussed above, the building-level administrator is mainly held accountable
for developing and overseeing an individual school’s plan. Therefore, it is
essential that principals ensure the school’s emergency response plan is
designed and written to be a usable reference and operational document
under even the most difficult and extreme circumstances.
Plans are never written when the crisis response team is under stress;
consequently, plans seldom reflect a worst-case-scenario thought process.
Under stress, an individual’s sensory perceptions undergo radical changes.
The individual’s ability to hear, see, feel, and smell are all altered.
Respiration and heart rates increase, and multiple chemical changes occur
in the body as a direct result of the level of stress the individual is experi-
encing. When assembling a safety plan, it is important to recognize that
the individuals using the plan will most likely be under some level of
stress.
Here are some tips to help develop a user-friendly and functional plan
that can be helpful even under adverse conditions:
• Emergency plan documents should contain bulleted or short, direct
statements wherever practical. When under stress, a person’s ability to
read and comprehend material written in lengthy sentences or paragraphs
is significantly impaired. Sections that contain segmented material, such as
those commonly found in assignments and duties and responsibilities,
should be written using vertical columns that separate information by cat-
egories and use only brief wording (see Resources). Where feasible, use
oversized fonts so written material is easier to see and read.
• Color-coding or flagging should be used for important information
on maps and diagrams. Locating key information will be easier if it is
easily distinguished from other items displayed.
• Plans should have a table of contents or index to help people quickly
locate the information they need. In an emergency, seconds can be valuable.
• Individual components of the plan should be labeled as “critical” or
“reference” documents and located in the appropriate section. In addition,
each component of the plan should show the date it was last reviewed and
last modified, as well as how many pages should be present for each par-
ticular document. This will make routine auditing of the plan easier.
44
Safe & Secure Schools

• A three-ring binder works best for holding copies of the plan.
Because notebooks around work areas are usually plentiful and sometimes
hard to distinguish from one another, it is advisable to select a bright color
that will stand out, and to label the binder’s spine so it can be located
quickly in an emergency.
• Emergency plans provided to the emergency response team should
have plastic protectors for individual pages. This will help ensure their
legibility in situations where water, debris, or other conditions would
damage unprotected paper.
Clearly written and easily accessible guidelines will be essential in the
event of an emergency or disaster. With a plan, you will be able to respond
to any situation more quickly and effectively. Set aside some time to create
or update such plans for your classrooms, school, and district. The next
strategy, which is the second part of this two-part plan, examines specific
documents that should be included in a school’s plan for emergencies.
45
Response Strategies

46
Safe & Secure Schools
STRATEGY 12
Planning for School Emergencies: Part 2
I
n Strategy 11 (Part 1 of this two-part plan), we discussed the various
types of emergency plans with which administrators should be familiar,
and how each is interconnected in the event of a local or regional incident.
We also provided tips for enhancing the school emergency plan to make it
as user friendly as possible. However, because it is impossible to compre-
hensively cover all facets of an emergency plan, it is imperative school per-
sonnel stay well educated on this topic, review plans on a routine basis,
and always plan in terms of worst-case scenarios.
COMMUNICATIONS COMPONENT
In many emergencies, administrators must decide whether the unfolding
event warrants in-place sheltering or evacuation. There are a number of
variables that affect not only whether to initiate one of these two actions,
but also just how to accomplish the task. In many situations, the decision to
shelter in place or evacuate must be made in a matter of seconds. It is for
these and other reasons that communication plans for notifying students,
staff, and faculty members should not use coded or veiled words. The fol-
lowing tips are valuable when writing this section of the plan.
Use Simple, Direct Language
Communication plans for in-place sheltering and evacuation should use
simple yet direct language to communicate what students, staff, and faculty
members, and others in the school should do. The NIMS planning model,
which was discussed in Strategy 11, strongly encourages everyone to use
straightforward language for issuing instructions, rather than using “coded”
language (such as “Code Red,” “Code Green,” or a coded announcement
such as, “The copier equipment repairman is in the building”). An inher-
ent problem with using coded language is that, on a given day, individu-
als may be present who might not understand the code words being used.
Straightforward language provides the best chance for people to under-
stand what is expected of them and how they should act.

Use the Intercom Effectively
Students, staff, and faculty members are in a constant state of move-
ment, and there will be a number of opportunities for any of these groups
to be in places where normal communication is difficult. Band and choir
rooms, industrial technology rooms, and gymnasiums and locker rooms
are a few places where, depending on the activity in progress, intercom
announcements may go unheard. It is important for communication plans
to account for potential trouble areas through the use of alternative contact
procedures. Depending on the situation, runners might be a viable option;
for some in-place sheltering events, however, this may not be practical or
safe. Consequently, other means will have to be built into the plan, such as
the use of staff members in adjoining classrooms to assist in notification,
or visual alerts for the classroom teacher, such as a flashing light near the
intercom speaker.
Communication Is a Two-Way Process
Although verification that actions have been completed by teachers
and other staff members may be vital in some circumstances, staff should
wait to be contacted during an in-place sheltering event unless there is a
compelling reason for them to initiate communication. Classrooms with
only overhead public address speakers for communication may create a
privacy issue for the teacher and administrator, and loud background
noise could make communication difficult. We recommend that plans
include alternative contact methods to allow for those circumstances.
During evacuations, especially evacuations of large campuses, staff
may need to communicate with those in charge to report a problem, or to
report that all students are or are not accounted for. Although two-way
radios may be useful, hand or flag signals can also be used for rapid com-
munication. Establishing a uniform set of procedures as part of the com-
munication plan will facilitate the exchange of information. Administrators
may find that a bullhorn or similar device is essential in communicating
to large groups outdoors, or as an alternative communication device for
indoors, depending on the circumstances. The ability to communicate is
vital to maintaining order during an emergency.
EQUIPMENT AND SUPPLIES COMPONENT
Successfully navigating an emergency event is not only about having well-
trained individuals in key positions, but also about having the necessary
equipment, tools, and supplies available; knowing where they are located;
and being familiar with their use.
47
Response Strategies

Not all members of an emergency management team will be well-
versed in the location or use of equipment that may be essential during an
emergency. Consequently, the following tips will help provide guidance in
writing this section of the plan:
• Identify critical equipment and control devices on maps. The facility
diagram in the emergency plan should clearly mark the items such as shutoff
valves for water, electricity, and gas; the telephone system demarkation;
and the buildingwide HVAC (heating, ventilation, and air conditioning)
controls. In addition, emergency personnel, such as fire and emergency
response teams, will benefit from a list that documents a description or
photograph of each of these items, its exact location, and any special tools
needed to operate it. Maps should also identify caches of first aid supplies;
emergency response kits; other essentials, such as fire extinguishers or
bullhorns; and important paper documents, such as material safety data
sheets.
• Mark the rooms. Because staff members often must react without the
benefit of referencing the emergency plan, rooms that contain emergency
supplies (such as crisis kits and first aid supplies) or important equipment
should be clearly marked. The location within the room should be marked
as well. For schools that do not have a telephone in every classroom,
phone locations should be identified by placards or other insignias.
• Locate the equipment. Most staff will have few reasons to use emer-
gency equipment and supplies during the course of a normal school year,
so members of the emergency management team should tour the facility
at least twice a year to locate the items detailed on facility diagrams. If
practical, emergency response team members should also have an oppor-
tunity to handle and use (or simulate use of) specific pieces of equipment.
• Post instructions. Operating instructions should appear in the plan
as well as at the site of the equipment or supplies. Although custodial staff
may be well trained in shutting off utilities to the school, other emergency
management team members may have little or no experience with these
tasks. As discussed in Strategy 11, the language in the instructions should
be straightforward.
Make Sure That It All Works and Is Present
Someone on the emergency response team, referred to as the “logistics
and supply officer” or “plan monitor,” should be responsible for verifying
all emergency equipment is in working order and all supplies are present
in a yearly audit. Although some of these tasks can be delegated, such as
having the school nurse provide the first aid supplies, it is ultimately the
48
Safe & Secure Schools

responsibility of the logistics and supply officer to report that this emer-
gency preparedness task has been completed.
CONCLUSION
Emergency preparedness is all about planning in advance, operating from
worst-case scenarios, and delegating assignments so all involved have a
sense of duty and responsibility. Fortunately, most school personnel will
never really have to test their complete plans, but they will have a feeling
of accomplishment and well-being that comes from being prepared. That
feeling is just one of the many intangible aspects of an individual’s job that
makes it personally and professionally rewarding.
49
Response Strategies

50
Safe & Secure Schools
STRATEGY 13
Assessing Student Threats of Violence
A School’s Response to a Growing Problem
W
ith what seems like increasing frequency, school personnel are
confronted with student-generated threats of violence toward
people or property.
Unfortunately, some of the words that raise a red flag have now become
part of the everyday language of many students, making it difficult to dis-
criminate between the benign and the dangerous. The good news is many
of the threats of violence that come to the attention of authorities do not
indicate a real intent on the part of the student to carry out the act. The bad
news, however, is that the threat is sometimes very real.
Fortunately, several organizations have studied the issue of student
threats of violence and have released findings that will be helpful to those
of us on the front line that must respond when an utterance, written doc-
ument, or rumored threat surfaces. The Final Report and Findings of the Safe
Schools Initiative and Threat Assessment in Schools were prepared by the U.S.
Secret Service and the U.S. Department of Education (2002a, 2002b). These
two resources include a number of specific response strategies for educa-
tors to use while investigating, evaluating, and managing threats of vio-
lence. Another noteworthy resource, The School Shooter, was published by
the Federal Bureau of Investigation (1999). This document includes rec-
ommendations for a classification system for threats and an assessment
model for use by those charged with evaluating a student threat of vio-
lence. Finally, Early Warning, Timely Response, published by the U.S.
Department of Education (1998), offers general and specific strategies for
intervening in and responding to threats of violence and to emergency and
crisis events that can affect school safety.
USE THE RESEARCH AND A PROCESS
In the twenty-first-century classroom, teachers would be practicing anti-
quated methods of instruction if they did not use the most up-to-date infor-
mation on brain-compatible learning, differentiated instruction, and the
multitude of other research-based techniques for increasing student
achievement. Likewise, school administrators should use the most up-to-
date research related to analyzing and processing student threats of vio-
lence. This is one subject where school leaders need to be right every time.

The process is multilevel. The first level should include the following
steps:
• An initial determination if the threat of violence is serious. Anyone
who has worked in a school knows students periodically threaten to fight or
engage in injurious behavior. Threats that by the nature of the language or
wording reference the taking of life, serious debilitating injuries, or extreme
property damage should be separated from threats of a lesser degree.
• If the threat of violence reaches the level of seriousness that one must
ask, “Does the individual have the means and capability of carrying out
the threat?” There is a difference between the threat to make a bomb and
bring it to school when it is verbalized by a sixteen-year-old and when the
same threat is made by a five-year-old.
• Is there any indication the student has taken steps toward follow-
ing through with the threat? Using the previous illustration, a step taken
toward making a bomb might be obtaining instructions, purchasing mate-
rial to make a device, or even making an inquiry as to where those items
could be obtained.
• Finally, is there any indication the threat is imminent? If so, what
steps should be taken immediately to protect all students and staff?
The second level of the process is reserved for those threats that
are deemed to be serious, have some level of credibility, and situations
where school personnel believe further analysis is warranted. For these
threats the best practice is to use a threat assessment team to dissect
the threat itself and to analyze the student reportedly making the
threat for a better understanding of each using the aforementioned
research. Typically, a threat assessment team is composed of individu-
als having specialized training, expertise, or access to needed resources
that will aid in the analysis. Members may include one or more of the
following:
Administrative representative
Counselor
School nurse
Social worker
School resource officer or security personnel
Staff members having in-depth knowledge of the student making the
threat
51
Response Strategies

The charge of the threat assessment team is twofold.
1. Based on the analysis, what is the probability the student will carry
out the threat? Is there any indication the student has taken overt steps and
is engaged in planning? Although no planning has occurred, is the student
adamant the threat will be carried out? Is there any history that indicates
the student might be capable of violent behavior?
2. Based on the conclusions from the analysis of the threat and the
individual making it, what course of action should be undertaken by the
school? While the final decision at the school level will ultimately fall on
the administrator, the team can and should participate in that discussion.
Actions can be many, and may include the involvement of or referral to
outside agencies; these actions can take place at any point in the process.
For example, if the team obtains information that indicates the threat is
much more imminent than originally thought, school leaders should be
prepared to react quickly and decisively. If the team comes to believe the
threat is not realistic, however, the student may only need to be dealt with
from a discipline perspective.
Take a few minutes and conduct your own quick analysis of the
scenario below, and consider how your staff might respond.
52
Safe & Secure Schools
THE SCENARIO
It is Monday morning and the first bell has just sounded. The football coach tells you
he overheard the players talking this morning during workouts about a fight that
occurred Saturday night when some kids jumped “one of the weird kids who hangs
out in the commons.” The coach says the players heard a rumor the student who was
jumped was going to bring a gun to school to settle things. The coach said that the
students identified the student making the threat. The players told the coach the
student “is a coward and wouldn’t really do it.”
You know the suspected student dresses in all black and is usually in
the student commons area with other students of similar appearance.
Although the student has not been a discipline problem in the past, there
are ongoing academic failures evident.
Questions
• What action do you believe your staff would take if a similar con-
versation was heard?
• Would your staff simply find it unbelievable or think it was just one
of many rumors heard in a typical school year?

• Might your staff do nothing because they would assume you
already had similar information?
• Are there already pieces of information in the scenario that give you
some guidance as to how to proceed?
• What might be your initial actions?
• At what point during your initial investigation would the threat
assessment team be assembled?
Responding to student threats of violence is never easy, and no one
wants to make the wrong decision in determining whether or not the
threat is “real.” It might be easier to always assume the worst and take
actions based on that premise, but that is not fair to students and may cre-
ate dissension within the school community. School personnel should
develop a systematic response based on board policy, related educational
research, and the need to provide a safe school environment for everyone.
53
Response Strategies

54
Safe & Secure Schools
STRATEGY 14
De-escalating a Situation With an Angry Parent
You’ll Never Have to Answer for What You Don’t Say
U
nderstanding how to defuse the situation with an angry parent may
prevent an argument from becoming violent.
Imagine you are at a Friday evening basketball game with your
school’s biggest rival. At the end of the game, your school has lost by one
point. As the players leave the court, you observe the father of one of your
school’s players corner the coach and berate him, using profanity. The
player’s mother is attempting to convince the father to leave, but to no
avail. The situation is quickly escalating, and the coach is looking for
someone to intervene.
You know that
• this particular parent has been cautioned before about his behavior
at school sporting events,
• there are other parents still in the gym, and
• the school principal is outside on the parking lot managing traffic flow.
Has this happened at your school? Unfortunately, it probably has.
Whether in the gymnasium or the school office, principals and teachers are
sometimes forced to deal with verbally aggressive adults.
Before reading further, take a few minutes to identify the key pieces of
information that might determine how you could start to de-escalate the
situation and consider the actions you would initiate.
WHAT TO DO
Although most conversations with parents are civil and productive, there
will be times when communication about an unfortunate incident will
result in the parent becoming verbally aggressive. Sometimes it occurs
during a phone conversation, and sometimes it happens face to face.
Either way, there are a few tips you will want to remember.
• Stay calm and listen. All parents have the right to be heard, and
angry parents are no exception. Remember you will not be able to solve
the real problem until all parties can communicate openly, honestly, and

without malice. Think of the angry parent as a client, rather than as an
adversary. This can put an emotional distance between the two of you that
will enable you to treat the situation rationally and professionally.
• Do not take anything personally. Although an angry parent may say
things of a personal nature, as an educator you must keep your remarks
on a professional level. Some parents deserve the same type of “learner
leeway” you give students. Remind yourself that angry people are experi-
encing many of the physiological signs of stress, including increased heart
rate, difficulty listening, and tunnel vision. These physical changes make
it exceedingly difficult to communicate with them, so choose your words
accordingly.
• Use a low tone of voice. Appearing agitated or yelling back will
serve little purpose other than to fuel the fire you are trying to put out.
There are times when it is even advisable to speak so softly the parent
must strain to understand what you are saying, which may serve as a
distraction from the anger.
• Try to move to a more private setting. Separating an escalating, ver-
bally aggressive person from an audience may remove part of the reason
for the behavior. In most situations, however, it is not advisable to put
yourself in a one-on-one setting with an angry person. If possible, have
another school employee with you for the discussion.
• If possible, take notes with the individual’s permission to do so.
Whether the conversation is taking place on the telephone or in person,
say, “I want to make sure I understand all of your concerns. Do you mind
if I take some notes?” This sends two powerful messages: First, it indicates
you want to remember exactly what is being said so you can resolve the
issue—taking notes provides an accurate form of documentation. Second,
it puts the parent on notice that his remarks are being recorded for further
reference. This alone may cause some parents to eliminate foul language
or threats from their part of the conversation.
• Do not interrupt. Interjecting “Yes, but . . .” to correct inaccurate
statements may escalate, rather than de-escalate, the conversation. Even if
the parent’s statements are not based on the facts as you know them, it is
usually counterproductive to try to insert your own perspective or to cor-
rect any inaccuracies at that time. Wait until the parent is finished and then
diplomatically provide information from the school’s perspective.
• Do not use such phrases as, “Calm down,” “I understand,” or “I
know what you’re going through.” Parents may interpret these phrases as
condescending or arrogant, even when they are not intended as such. In
many instances, you will not be able to empathize or understand what the
parent is experiencing, and to imply that you do may be considered
patronizing.
55
Response Strategies

• Ask for parental help in solving the problem. Jot down possible solu-
tions from both the school’s and the parent’s perspective. After being
heard, parents are often willing participants in a rational and productive
problem-solving conversation.
• Assure the parents you are willing to listen carefully and to consider
all possibilities. Although you may not be giving them the answers they
want to hear, you can tell them that someone on staff will revisit the cir-
cumstances surrounding the problem to make certain the information is
accurate. If the problem needs to be investigated further, provide a time
frame to speak with them again. Giving daily or periodic updates on the
investigation can help reassure parents and remind them of the school’s
genuine desire to be fair and consistent.
• Maintain eye contact without staring. Keep your hands at your
sides and never touch or point at an agitated individual. If you are seated
behind a desk, do not make any quick movements; this may further inflame
the problem. If you are standing, maintain ample personal space between
the aggressor and yourself. Moving into another person’s body space when
he is upset will not serve any positive purpose. If possible, stand at a
ninety-degree angle from the approaching person. This may be less likely
to be viewed as confrontational and might help defuse the situation. Keep
in mind that different cultures perceive personal space in different ways; be
sensitive to and take clues from the parent’s body language.
• Take a few deep breaths and think before you speak. Even if the
pause in the conversation is a bit uncomfortable, use caution and reflection
before proceeding so the parent does not become angrier and more upset
by your tone or choice of words. Remember, sometimes the best commu-
nicating you will do is with your ears.
THE SCENARIO REVISITED
In the scenario, initial actions should include diplomatically removing the
parent or the coach from the scene of the confrontation. Because the
parent’s initial anger is directed toward the coach, redirecting his focus
toward you may enable you to alter the environment in which the conver-
sation will continue. It may be advantageous to say, “I want to hear your
concerns, but let’s get out of this crowd so we can talk,” or to set an appoint-
ment for the parent to come in at a later time. This removes both the coach
and the audience from the situation and allows for a cooling-off period.
Because the parent in our scenario has been warned before about his
behavior, this confrontation may indicate he is not complying with estab-
lished behavior. Summoning another staff member or security staff should
provide added safety for all. From the facts in the scenario, you know the
situation is escalating quickly and may require the removal of the parent.
56
Safe & Secure Schools

In that case, it is always best to have additional school or law enforcement
personnel present.
Although every situation will be different and individuals will not
always react the way you hope, understanding best practices of how to
interact with verbally aggressive people will give you a better chance of
successfully returning to normalcy.
57
Response Strategies

58
Safe & Secure Schools
STRATEGY 15
Fights at School
Breaking Up Is Hard to Do
P
repare yourself and your staff members to deter fights in your school
and handle them effectively when they occur.
When an administrator is alerted that there is a fight in the school, the
news usually causes apprehension. The heart rate accelerates and adrena-
line rushes through the body—and for good reason. Fighting is one
student behavior that carries with it a significant probability someone will
get hurt and the educational climate of the school will be negatively
affected. On top of everything else, school staff will likely have to spend a
great deal of time after the event sorting out the facts surrounding the
altercation.
A DIFFICULT SITUATION
School personnel have both a legal and an ethical obligation to ensure the
safety of all students. As a result, staff can find themselves in situations—
such as witnessing a fight between two or more students—that, if not han-
dled correctly, may result in victimization and injury. This is a particularly
difficult situation at the secondary level because students often have the
bodies and physical strength of adults, with the coping skills of adolescents.
One problem is most schools offer little if any staff training for verbal or
physical de-escalation. Although colleges and universities provide instruc-
tion in classroom management, there is seldom any coursework related to
managing aggressive individuals or violent incidents with multiple partic-
ipants. Even when training is provided, it is often inadequate. Physical
intervention methods are taught to school staff at walk-through speed, with
compliant partners, and under little or no stress. There is little similarity
between this training and what staff will encounter during an actual fight.
Another problem occurs because the dynamics of a fight create cir-
cumstances that work against those who try to intervene. The combatants
in a fight will exhibit the physical and mental characteristics of stress,
which are brought on by large amounts of adrenaline released in the body,
and experience a reduction in sensory perceptions, such as the following:
They will have little, if any, peripheral vision. The ability to process sounds
around them will be significantly limited, which explains why they may

not see or hear staff who try to intervene. Finally, combatants may
continue to fight even when they are feeling pain.
Because of a lack of knowledge or a fear of “going on the record,” some
districts are hesitant to provide written guidance that instructs staff in how
or when to intervene when a student fight erupts. The result is, staff does
not know what is expected of them.
TAKE STEPS TO PREVENT FIGHTS
The student code of conduct should clearly communicate to students that
fighting is prohibited on campus, and that there will be a disciplinary con-
sequence for both the combatant and bystanders who encourage or insti-
gate an altercation. Penalties for interfering with the ability of a staff
member to get to or break up a fight should also be written into the
student code of conduct and strictly enforced.
Sometimes the threat of a suspension for fighting has the least deter-
rent value in keeping students from engaging in this behavior. It will be
what they have to do or are not able to participate in on returning to school
after the suspension that may have the greatest effect on reducing their
willingness to engage in a fight. For example, consequences could include
participation in a support group for anger management, exclusion from
activity programs, or community service. Some high schools train com-
batants to serve as peer mediators or require that they serve on a “jury” for
another student accused of misbehavior on campus.
The teacher handbook should include directives for an appropriate
response to a fight. Districtwide practices and procedures should be cov-
ered thoroughly, and this information should be included as part of the
first faculty meeting of the year.
Supervision should always be planned strategically. This is especially
true when considering preventive measures for deterring fights. Knowing
when and where altercations are likely to occur on the basis of past occur-
rences should dictate where staff members are placed for supervisory
duties. Adult presence is a strong deterrent to a number of disciplinary
problems, and fighting is no exception.
HOW TO RESPOND EFFECTIVELY
The following advice should be kept in mind when preparing to intervene
in a fight:
• Anticipate that assistance will be necessary and get other adults to
the scene whenever possible. Remember, there will be a minimum of
two combatants, and bystanders may also pose a problem. A single staff
member will usually be ineffective and could even become a victim.
59
Response Strategies

• On arriving at the scene of a fight, remain in control of your own
emotions and assess the situation and surroundings. Remaining calm will
help reduce the negative effects of stress mentioned earlier. If time allows,
communicate with the other adults in the vicinity to determine who will
disperse bystanders, who will interact with combatants, and so on.
• Remove the audience. Getting student leaders within the crowd to
disperse is important because other bystanders will tend to follow.
Removing the audience can eliminate a prime motivation for the fighters.
• Remain at least an arm’s length away from those involved in the
fight. (Although see the point below that begins, “Only as a last resort.”)
Instead, stand where there is a reasonable chance of making eye contact
with one of the combatants.
• Identify the combatant with whom you have the most rapport and
then give direct verbal instructions. Remember, everyone involved will
experience selective hearing and vision. Clear, short, and concise sentences
are more likely to be heard and understood. Use a firm, commanding voice
to say something such as, “Daniel Jones, stop fighting now!” If a weapon
is involved in the fight, law enforcement should be notified immediately.
School personnel—with the exception of school police—seldom have the
training necessary for disarming an armed student.
• If necessary, create a diversion to break the concentration and gain
the attention of the students fighting. A loud, unexpected noise such as
slamming a book to a wall or floor may interrupt and break concentration.
Throwing water on the combatants has also been known to work. Once
you have the attention of the participants, follow up quickly with succinct
verbal commands.
• Only as a last resort should you attempt to physically intervene in a
fight if you are the only adult present. You should do so only if you are able
to help without becoming a victim, and only to prevent serious injury from
occurring. If forced to do so, push and shove rather than grab, and then
back off quickly. The shock of being pushed and shoved, along with the
resulting loss of balance, may bring some reality back to one or both com-
batants. Remember that many staff assaults and injuries that occur during
a fight are the result of getting between those engaged in the altercation.
• Once the combatants have been separated, immediately order or escort
each student to an area where they cannot see or communicate with each
other. In the immediate aftermath of a fight, it is common for both individu-
als to want to continue to “mouth off,” and fights can resume as a result.
• In the aftermath of a fight, it is always a good idea to debrief the staff
members who responded to the incident. This is an opportunity to discuss
what worked and what did not. This information can then be shared at the
next faculty meeting so staff can all learn from what a few experienced.
60
Safe & Secure Schools

A proactive stance against fighting is always better than a reactive one,
and the single most effective deterrent is visible adult presence throughout
the school building. However, even under the best of circumstances most
schools will still have a few altercations throughout the school year. When
this happens, staff with training in how best to respond will have a better
chance of intervening in a manner that successfully minimizes staff and
student injury.
61
Response Strategies

62
Safe & Secure Schools
STRATEGY 16
Head ’Em Up! Move ’Em Out!
Relocating Students During an Emergency Event
E
nsure that your school is prepared to relocate students during an
emergency. Moving hundreds or thousands of students off campus
with little or no warning is a daunting task, and it will be made even more
difficult if advance preparation has not been thorough. While there may be
an occasion when an evacuation is conducted with some advance warn-
ing, the greater chance will be that students and staff will need to vacate
the school building in a short amount of time. Whether as a result of a gas
leak, chemical spill, or sudden damage to the school building, the odds are
that during the lifetime of an educator this type of event will occur at least
once. When it does, planning will be critical.
Successful relocation—including the selection of the relocation site,
having adequate supplies on arrival, and having well-thought-out student
release procedures—affects the safety of students and staff members, and
depends on the attention to detail during planning. Consequently, school
leaders should consider the following:
• Choose more than one relocation site. When practical, identify at
least three relocation sites. Two should be within walking distance of the
school and in opposite directions from each other. This is important
because the nature of the evacuation may determine the walking routes
that are available or the event may render one of the relocation sites
unsafe. The third site should be farther away from the school, to be utilized
should the reason for the relocation affect a larger geographical area than
that immediately surrounding the school.
• In the latter situation transportation issues become much more
important. Therefore, planning should include school district transporta-
tion staff. It may be necessary to mobilize buses or other types of mass
transit. In some situations, the school buses themselves may become tem-
porary sheltering locations.
• Specify duties and responsibilities of the emergency response team.
The school’s emergency response plan should detail the relocation proce-
dure, and specify duties and responsibilities of staff. Most plans, if
properly worded, will already have a page of general duties and responsi-
bilities that relate to a variety of emergency situations. Relocating

students off campus, however, is one of several specific types of emer-
gency responses that should have its own detailed listing of staff duties
and responsibilities.
Staff members should also discuss and plan how relocation would
occur during the lunch period, before school, or at a cocurricular activity.
These types of situations present another set of difficulties to add to an
already complicated procedure (see Resources).
• Practice, practice, practice. As problematic as it may seem, practic-
ing an actual relocation of students is the best way to verify the plan’s
components. How to practice may vary according to each school’s cir-
cumstances, but there will be some problems during an actual event that
cannot be anticipated in advance, and practicing will minimize the
number of problems and provide some level of reassurance to the school
community that the plan will work. In addition to conducting an actual
relocation of students, emergency response teams should participate in
tabletop exercises that simulate some of the procedural aspects.
Regardless of how the relocation is practiced, incorporating emergency
responders into the process is important so that, in an actual event,
each will have some familiarity with how others respond as part of the
overall plan.
• Debrief the staff. It is important to debrief after any actual or simu-
lated emergency event; this is especially true after a relocation drill. If out-
side emergency response agencies participated in the exercise, they should
be included in the debriefing. As part of the debriefing activity, designate
someone in the group as the record keeper. It is important to document
comments related to concerns, problems, and ideas for improvement dur-
ing this process. Although it is tempting to skip the debriefing component,
especially after an actual emergency or crisis event, we do not advise
doing so. Debriefing is just as important as planning.
• Place an emergency kit at each relocation site. Each relocation site
should have emergency relocation supplies available for staff members
and students. These supplies should include name tags or badges, clip-
boards and writing tablets, pens and permanent markers, flashlights and
spare batteries, basic first aid supplies, and student release forms. The
emergency relocation supplies kits should be checked prior to the start of
each school year by the plan monitor or logistics officer to ensure each is
adequately stocked. Items using batteries and other dated material should
be refreshed as necessary.
• Include instructions for parent pick up, staff supervisory duties,
restrooms, and so forth. The plan should include where students will be
assigned, and detail supervisory and other staff duties at the relocation
site. Other considerations include where parents will be staged and how
students will be released to them; restroom facilities; and primary and
alternative communication systems. Local law enforcement officials
63
Response Strategies

should know the relocation sites in advance, and discussions should occur
as to the logistical issues that may affect both organizations.
• Be prepared to direct traffic in the absence of law enforcement
personnel, and cross-train staff members. Where appropriate, staff
members should have reflective vest and traffic-control aids in order to
assist students across heavily traveled thoroughfares. Although the reloca-
tion plan may call for law enforcement to provide this function, depend-
ing on the urgency to relocate, staff members may find themselves acting
temporarily in this role for at least the first few minutes of an event. Staff
should be familiar with the plan to the extent that individuals can quickly
assume others’ roles. Seldom will everyone be where they are needed at
the start of a relocation event.
• Inform parents of evacuation and relocation procedures. Publish the
general relocation procedures in advance and make sure parents have
access to vital parts of the plan. Although some people contend that pub-
lishing your procedures in advance creates added danger, the greater risk
is the confusion and panic caused by not doing so. Providing your proce-
dures and expectations for parents can be accomplished through parent
newsletters, handbooks, websites, and so on. Not every parent will
remember all expectations, but for those that do remember, communicat-
ing with them will contribute to a smoother process.
• Designate selected staff as parent liaisons. Utilizing parent liaisons
to help calm and manage parents is a sound and advisable strategy. These
individuals should be chosen on the basis of their de-escalation skills,
longevity within the district, and ability to relate to and positively work
with the parent community.
• Ensure that the relocation site is available at all times during the
school day. Many schools use neighborhood churches; in some cases, the
church may not be staffed at all times. Work in advance with the staff and
management at the relocation site to define the parameters for use so each
has a satisfactory comfort level with the procedures.
Even with the best of plans for relocating students, unforeseen prob-
lems will occur. With thoughtful planning and practice, however, another
layer of safety will have been added to the school day.
64
Safe & Secure Schools

65
Response Strategies
STRATEGY 17
Student Searches
A Practical Application
P
eriodically, every school administrator will have to respond to
parents’ concerns or complaints about the treatment of their children.
Although there are a number of topics that may cause parents to make
inquiries—special education services, discipline, teachers’ behavior, and
cocurricular activities—the search of a student’s person or belongings at
school or at a school activity can be a hot button, potentially generating
parental scrutiny.
Some complaints by parents will originate from not understanding the
differences between a school’s threshold for conducting a search and the
conditions necessary for law enforcement officials to conduct searches. In
other situations parents will simply believe a school search is not legally
correct based on their perception of a student’s right to privacy. The result
in a few cases will be a judicial review of the facts and circumstances.
School employees should recognize that searching a student for con-
traband might create potential safety issues for staff as well as for the
student. When in possession of something illegal or prohibited, adoles-
cents may react irrationally or in a manner that puts those involved in the
search at risk of injury. So how can school personnel ensure a search is
conducted safely and legally? Fortunately, the following simple steps will
help reinforce what to do in preparation for, during, and after student
searches. These steps are not necessarily legal requirements, but they
should be considered as a matter of practical application.
KNOW THE DISTRICT’S POLICY
FOR CONDUCTING A STUDENT SEARCH
Knowledge of school district policy, in addition to applicable case law, is
the first step in conducting a student search that will survive a review by
the courts and other concerned individuals. During the course of a school
year, many schools use administrative substitutes, such as lead teachers or
school counselors, to perform duties in the principal’s absence. However,
principals should not assume these individuals are knowledgeable about
conducting a search. Administrators should make sure that all individuals

who could potentially be involved in searches review and understand
related district policy.
Just as the courts may have conflicting views and opinions on the topic
of school searches based on the specific set of circumstances, staff might
read a policy and interpret it differently. Therefore, it is important ample
discussion and professional development occur with all staff members
who might be called on to participate in a student search.
Administrators should also review the following questions with those
who are authorized to conduct searches:
• Have policy interpretation issues been discussed with these
individuals?
• Have these individuals received training on how to conduct a phys-
ical search of a student and the student’s belongings?
• Do these individuals understand the differences between probable
cause and reasonable suspicion, and the elements needed to reach the
threshold for a legal search within a school setting?
• Have staff members received training in how to appropriately and
accurately document the search in a manner that will satisfy school board
policy?
DO NOT RUSH THE PROCESS
Although the life of school personnel can be hectic, time should not be the
driving factor in decisions about whether to conduct a student search or
how the search will be administered. In most search situations, taking a
few minutes for thoughtful reflection may be the difference between con-
ducting a search correctly and conducting a search that may ultimately fall
under scrutiny or review.
BASE THE DECISION TO SEARCH ON FACTS
In many cases that end up in judicial review or generate a parental inquiry
there are questions about whether there were sufficient facts or evidence
to support the search. Most school district policies on student searches
include the phrase “reasonable suspicion,” but few districts offer specific
guidance about what that term means. Ask any ten administrators to
explain the term, and chances are you will receive ten different responses.
As part of the aforementioned training, staff should receive information on
what the courts state constitutes reasonable suspicion for school person-
nel. However, as the circumstances unfold in a particular event, it will be
important to compare what is known with what is required to meet the
66
Safe & Secure Schools

threshold. Prior to the search someone must ask, “Do we have reasonable
suspicion and will it meet the test?”
USE PROPER PROCEDURES
AND BEST PRACTICES
Some school district search policies lack information on the practical appli-
cation of conducting a search. The following procedural and best practices
can make a student search safer and more productive:
1. From the time a decision to search a particular student is made, the
student should not be left alone. A request to use a restroom by a student
during an investigation may be a ruse to shed contraband. When one of
the authors was a school principal, she once found marijuana in a vase on
a bookshelf in an office at the school. It was later determined that a student
suspected of drug possession had been left alone in that office prior to a
search, and that the student used this opportunity to hide the contraband
and avoid disciplinary consequences.
2. During the search, the student should not be allowed to place hands
in clothing pockets, book bags, or other personal items. In addition to the
possibility that this may present an opportunity to destroy or further con-
ceal contraband, a student may panic and attempt to harm those in the
room or themselves with something they have concealed. If contraband is
located or suspected during a search, the student should not be the one to
remove it.
3. When searching for a weapon or drugs, it is well advised to have
additional staff members present in case the student panics or becomes
aggressive. In situations where weapons or illegal drugs are the objects of
the search, law enforcement or security personnel should be present. In
any case, always adhere to the adage of safety in numbers.
4. Just prior to the search, the student should be asked, “Do you have
anything on you or at school today that you should not have?” If the
student has other prohibited items that could pose a safety issue, the
administrator will have advance warning and can respond accordingly.
Although the initial object of the search may be tobacco, a student might
admit to having illegal drugs, a weapon, or other prohibited items if asked
this question.
5. Document the search. All student searches should be documented,
even when nothing is found. Many parental complaints occur when
a search produces nothing illegal or prohibited by the code of student
conduct. Parents will sometimes view the lack of finding anything
during the search as a reason to believe the search was unwarranted. A
67
Response Strategies

search that may appear to be routine at the time it was conducted might
become an issue weeks or months later, so thorough documentation is
recommended.
Documentation should consist of the following (see Resources):
• The facts used to support the search, including what constituted
reasonable suspicion
• The conditions surrounding the search, such as where it was con-
ducted, who witnessed the search, the name of the individual con-
ducting the search, and what specifically was searched (e.g., back
packs, purses, lockers, or cars)
• What, if anything, was found during the search?
• Any written or oral statements by the student
• If evidence was found, who took possession of it and where it is now
located
The decision to conduct a student search should not be taken lightly or
without careful thought. For a principal to do so invites a possible com-
plaint from a parent, or possibly even future judicial review. Remember
that the process of safely and legally searching a student begins long
before the actual search. It must start with a solid foundation of profes-
sional development and staff training.
68
Safe & Secure Schools

69
Response Strategies
STRATEGY 18
Managing Electronic Devices
Sending the Right “Signals” to Parents and Students
W
hen administrators create policies regarding student use of elec-
tronic devices, several issues should be considered.
Although technological advances over the past decade have been phe-
nomenal and have had a dramatic and revolutionary effect on educational
environments, not all changes have been positive. Most school adminis-
trators have struggled to manage the issue of students who possess or use
electronic devices on campus. These devices include cell phones (with and
without digital camera capabilities, and with and without text-messaging
capabilities), personal digital assistants, or portable music devices.
Until recently, many school districts generally prohibited the posses-
sion of electronic devices by students, but, as many school principals know
from experience, enforcing the policy was easier said than done. Conse-
quently, some districts now take the position of only prohibiting the use of
these electronic devices while the student is at school, rather than trying to
regulate the mere possession of the item.
Because there are differing opinions on the proper policies and
enforcement practices districts should adopt regarding the use of elec-
tronic devices, administrators should consider the following issues:
• Issue: Parents believe they and their children need access to each
other by telephone during the school day. Fact: While it is true some parents
may need to contact their children during the school day due to emergency
circumstances, school personnel are usually more than willing to take the
parent’s message, get the student out of class, and provide the student the
opportunity to speak with a parent by telephone. If the need for parental
contact is not an emergency, parents could still call the student’s cell phone
and leave a message that can be retrieved after school hours.
• Issue: Electronic devices disrupt the school environment. Fact: This
can be the case if strict adherence to policies is not reinforced consistently
by all school personnel. However, it is possible to restrict and enforce poli-
cies on the use of these devices during the school day. Guidelines and rules
can be established regarding when or where students may use these
devices. Disruptions to the educational process are then more likely to be
related to the lack of enforcement rather to a relaxed policy.

• Issue: Cell phones can disrupt or overwhelm cellular service during
a school emergency. Fact: Except in extreme events affecting a large geo-
graphical area, cell phones used during a school emergency would proba-
bly have a minimal effect on overall cellular service. Because most
students would be under staff supervision during an emergency event,
staff members can and should restrict cell phone usage by students. In
some situations, a student with a cell phone might be an asset if other com-
munication options are limited or nonexistent.
• Issue: Allowing electronic devices at school increases theft in schools
because the items are attractive to other students. Fact: Although some
increase of theft may occur, there are no studies or data to suggest a sig-
nificant increase in this type of school crime. Cell phones and portable
music players have become relatively inexpensive and do not have nearly
the monetary value that they once had.
• Issue: Using personal digital assistants, laptop computers, or cell
phones to send text messages during class time will result in an increase of
student plagiarism and cheating. Fact: Student plagiarism and cheating are
nothing new. The best deterrent has been and always will be teacher super-
vision during class time and a strictly enforced student code of conduct. In
addition, teachers can eliminate these devices during test-taking situations
by insisting students clear their desks of all items other than writing
devices and paper, and then alertly patrolling the classroom during the test.
REASONABLE AND PRUDENT
Although many districts may continue to prohibit the possession of certain
electronic devices at school, many of the reasons that were once used to form
policies now have little basis for support. When contemplating changing or
enacting a practice or policy that regulates electronic devices in school,
school personnel should take the following points into consideration:
• Using or displaying cell phones should be prohibited during the
school day. Exceptions may be warranted when the use of the device by
the student is to report an occurrence affecting the safety and security of
students or staff or under other approved special circumstances.
• The advent of cell phones with camera capabilities has caused con-
cerns about pictures taken in school locker rooms, restrooms, or other loca-
tions where there is an expectation of privacy. In those areas, cellular
telephones should be prohibited and students should be instructed to
leave the device in lockers, book bags, or purses. This policy should be
stated clearly on signs posted outside restrooms and locker rooms.
Unregulated use of any camera by adolescents in a school setting is an
invitation for problems to develop.
70
Safe & Secure Schools

• Violations of rules governing the use and possession of electronic
devices should result in the future loss of such privileges, in addition to
any disciplinary consequence that may be imposed.
• Rules and conditions for the use and possession of electronic devices
should appear in the student handbook.
Many school administrators have taken the position that even though
the current policy prohibiting electronic devices is “still on the books,”
enforcing the rule only takes place when students openly use a device.
This type of selective enforcement may lead to complaints alleging dis-
criminatory practices. Therefore, schools may wish to craft a policy that
more clearly addresses the real issue with electronic devices, including the
inappropriate use of electronic devices during the school day.
71
Response Strategies

72
Safe & Secure Schools
STRATEGY 19
Full-Court Press
A Media Management Plan
F
or most superintendents and principals, interacting with the media is
probably on their list of the top ten most dreaded tasks. Not only do
school administrators worry about what they will be asked, but they also
worry after the fact about what was said and whether it will be reported
in the context intended. When the topic of the interview is a tragic incident
or a high-profile event gone awry, the level of stress and accountability
becomes even greater.
So what should school personnel know about working with the media,
and how can they practice and prepare for the inevitable? To answer these
questions, let’s take a look at an event that could occur in any school and
see how one might prepare and respond.
THE SCENARIO
It is the end of a quiet day. Suddenly, the calm is broken by the sound of a fight that has
started in a hallway by the boys’ locker room. Nearing the scene, you hear someone yell
that the school nurse is needed. When you arrive, you find the music teacher, a first-year
teacher, on the floor, unconscious and bleeding from numerous cuts to the face and
head. Two other teachers appear to be standing guard over a student sitting on the floor
a short distance away, and several staff members are gathered around the injured
teacher.
A staff member informs you there was a fight between two individuals—one current
student and a nonstudent, a recent dropout. You observe the student, who is being
guarded by school personnel, and are told that the nonstudent fled minutes earlier. It is
further explained that as the first-year teacher tried to separate the two male combat-
ants, he was pushed and fell into the nearby window, shattering the glass and cutting
his head.
Just as the nurse arrives, the sounds of emergency vehicle sirens signal the arrival
of local police and medical personnel.
Later that same afternoon, as required notifications are being made, you are informed
the injured teacher is at the hospital and may have permanent damage to one eye, as well
as other injuries that are less serious. The nonstudent involved in the fight has been
arrested by the police, and the student is being detained at the local juvenile facility.

In most communities, this type of situation will draw some media
attention, and the district’s response to the related questions can have a
significant impact, either positive or negative, on the community’s per-
ceptions of the school.
Before reading further, take a few minutes to reflect on how you might
interact with the media concerning the incident.
POINTS TO CONSIDER
Now, after you have formed some strategies on how you might
proceed, consider the following guidelines:
• Never hope the situation will merely go away. This is a wish that will
probably not come true. If you do not take the lead in getting the truth and
facts out to the public, others will disseminate their “truth,” so you may be
forced to deal with misconceptions and unnecessary negative fallout.
• If managed appropriately, the media can be a tremendous asset to
help inform the public of the school’s multifaceted response to difficult sit-
uations, and can be a conduit for disseminating accurate and positive
information. However, if the school spokesperson is unprepared, the result
may not be as positive. Try to stay focused on the message that needs to be
conveyed and plan accordingly.
• Pay attention to feelings. Although facts are important, schools are
about people. After a tragic event, the public will want to know that school
personnel care about the human factor. When speaking publicly after a
tragedy, avoid robotic answers. Be sure to convey condolences and empathy,
without accepting or assigning responsibility for the events. This is usually
a good way to begin and end a press release or interview with the media.
• Remember the value of a written news release or statement. Interacting
with the media is stressful, even when it is a positive news story. When it is
bad news, emotions and other factors may cause information to not sound as
intended. Using a written statement or news release that precedes or supple-
ments a press conference or interview can be beneficial. Although many dis-
tricts will use central office staff to prepare news releases, there are times
when other personnel should be actively involved. Words in a written state-
ment should be chosen carefully. This is a time to be succinct and diplomatic.
• Keep the language simple. Avoid overly technical terms or organi-
zational jargon. The language that school employees use with each other is
one thing, but how we speak to the general public requires something dif-
ferent. When the public cannot understand what school staff says, they
may leave with a negative perception of the event.
• Don’t overexplain. There is value in keeping the answers and com-
ments short and to the point. Readers and listeners tend to draw conclu-
sions from the first part of what they see or hear. Long answers usually
73
Response Strategies

dilute what you are trying to convey. Staff should resist the urge to elabo-
rate when it is not necessary to do so.
• Prepare for questions and issues. Ateam approach to difficult situations
is essential in preparing to interact with the media. Bringing together all the
key players that have information and knowledge of the incident can be
invaluable in anticipating what the media and the public will view as the most
critical issues. Failure to use a team approach will be evident in media reports.
ANTICIPATING QUESTIONS
So, if anticipating questions and issues is an important step in preparing to
respond to the media, what types of questions might be anticipated from
the scenario at the beginning of the article? Questions for consideration
include the following, among many others:
• Why was the nonstudent in the building? Had the nonstudent been
observed prior to the altercation?
• What was the disciplinary history of the assailant when attending
school? Was the assailant violent and prone to these behaviors? Why
is the nonstudent no longer attending school?
• What is the extent of the teacher’s injuries?
• Who was present in the area when the assault occurred?
• How many adults are assigned to supervision during school dismissal?
• In light of the incident, do you believe the current level of supervi-
sion is adequate?
• Does school staff receive training to break up fights? What does the
training involve?
• What types of security measures are employed at the school to keep
these types of incidents from happening?
• Will security be enhanced as a result of the incident?
REVIEW AND COMPARE
Review your initial thoughts on how you would act in response to the
media and the public. Did you find that the suggested strategies alter how
you might respond? Using event scenarios to practice media management
with a team will allow you to be more effective if a real-life event unfolds.
Difficult situations that cause media scrutiny arise every day. They are
inevitable. However, unfortunate incidents do not inevitably result in neg-
ative press. Even the most negative of situations can be used to provide the
message to the public that, although bad things do happen occasionally,
the school’s responses are appropriate and considered.
74
Safe & Secure Schools

3
Professional
Development

76
Safe & Secure Schools
STRATEGY 20
Is Your School Up to Speed on Safety?
P
rincipals need to review and discuss school safety policies and proce-
dures with all staff throughout the school year.
At the beginning of each school year, administrators across the country
provide orientations, professional development opportunities, and assis-
tance to new employees about the way “we do things around here.” These
procedures include recording student attendance, computerized record
keeping, school improvement plans, master schedules, lunchroom routines,
emergency information, and disciplinary referral procedures. Although all
of these procedures are important, administrators should reserve ample
time on their orientation agendas to discuss specific matters related to the
safety of students and staff. It is equally important to involve the support
staff because they will also have roles and responsibilities during an emer-
gency or critical incident.
The following are some of the safety topics that should be reviewed
and discussed with all staff:
• Supervision. Administrators know the importance of adequate super-
vision. They should stress that all staff members must work together to
effectively monitor students and their activities. Staff should be reminded
that the supervision of students is especially critical between classes, dur-
ing lunch, and before and after school. It is also a good idea to discuss
supervisory expectations for the chaperoning of dances, field trips, or
other off-campus school or cocurricular activities. Because support staff
members are an important part of every school’s supervision plan, they
should be included in the discussions. Taking the time to discuss the prin-
cipal’s expectations before a problem arises will often eliminate the need
for later staff disciplinary actions.
• Emergency response plans. All new employees should receive a
copy of the school’s emergency response plan. Depending on the specific
position of a support staff, a complete copy of the plan may not be neces-
sary, but each staff member should still receive general information. For
instance, a part-time custodian or food service employee might not need a
complete copy of the plan. Rather, that staff member would need informa-
tion from the plan related to specific job responsibilities. Furthermore, if
the school uses a flip chart in addition to a more comprehensive plan, the
components of the flip chart should also be reviewed. Remember, this

process will be a new experience for first-year teachers, so additional time
should be reserved for them to absorb the information.
• Relocation sites and evacuation procedures. Most emergency response
plans include provisions for at least one relocation site in the event the
school becomes uninhabitable during the school day. New employees need
to be knowledgeable about these sites; they should review the procedures
that would be used if relocation becomes necessary. Evacuation procedures
should be explained—including evacuation procedures for times when
students are at lunch or at assemblies. Unfortunately, school emergencies
may occur early in the school year so it is important to make this informa-
tion an important part of the orientation prior to the beginning of school.
Waiting until later to provide this information is ill advised.
• In-place sheltering. All staff members should understand the proce-
dures that are to be followed in the event the school has a need to shelter
students in place. During an actual emergency, these procedures can be
nerve-rattling—even for seasoned educators. Principals should emphasize
staff may have to take the initiative under certain conditions when there is
little or no communication from the administrative office.
• Access control. Although most schools currently limit access within
the school during the day, all members of the staff should be informed of
their responsibilities related to this important practice. All staff can help in
this endeavor by informing school visitors and guests they are to enter
using specific entry points and check in with the office immediately on
arrival. In addition, all new employees need to receive instructions about
how to safely and effectively approach individuals who have come on
campus who have not followed building procedures (e.g., they are not
wearing proper visitor badges). This should include instructions on the
appropriate response if a visitor seems to be under the influence of a chem-
ical substance or is visibly agitated.
• Substitute teacher instructions. Certificated staff members need to
understand the administration’s expectations for planning for substitute
teachers. These instructions should include seating charts, attendance pro-
cedures, adequate emergency lesson plans, a list of students that might
require more supervision or special attention, a list of students who the sub-
stitute can normally depend on for assistance, emergency flip charts, and
procedures in the event of fire drills or actual emergencies (see Resources).
• Teacher handbook. The teacher handbook will contain a considerable
amount of safety information. Although the expectation is that teachers will
read the handbook, principals should not assume this. Therefore, the first
faculty meeting should provide the opportunity to thoroughly discuss the
safety information sections of the teacher handbook, which should outline
the expectations for staff behavior. This will help both new and veteran
77
Professional Development

teachers. The most important aspect of the handbook is that all teachers
have a copy of the most up-to-date edition, sign for receipt of it, and are
held accountable for the information in it.
• Legal expectations. The principal should provide a review of exist-
ing school safety and discipline policies, and inform all teachers about any
new laws, court decisions, district policies, or practices that affect school
safety. This discussion should include procedural information related to
the reporting of possible child abuse of a student. In all fifty states, school
personnel are mandated reporters; the principal should inform them and
remind them of their legal responsibilities. Part of this discussion should
be what it means for staff to act within their scope of employment.
• Communication devices. Because school districts generally purchase
equipment and services on the basis of the lowest bid, it is sometimes not
unusual for the intercom and telephone equipment to vary within a given
district and even within a given campus. Consequently, principals should
provide written information to staff about how to access intercom systems,
telephones, or any other two-way communication devices available to them.
• Disciplinary statistics. At the beginning of each school year, staff
should receive the prior year’s disciplinary statistics, including the loca-
tions most prone to inappropriate behavior. This statistical information
should be reviewed and then appropriately analyzed and used in making
decisions.
• Disciplinary referral procedure. Most schools have procedural guide-
lines about referring a student to the administrator’s office for matters
related to school discipline. Administration should provide new teachers
with the written procedures and any standardized forms used in the refer-
ral process. This discussion should also include dialogue about the nature
of infractions that should be sent to the office for administrative interven-
tion, as well as the types of infractions and how they should be managed
within the classroom. The principal should provide parameters for what
needs the attention of a school administrator as opposed to what types of
disciplinary infractions should be managed by the classroom teacher.
ADDITIONAL CONSIDERATIONS
In addition to the aforementioned considerations, individual schools or dis-
tricts may have other safety information procedures considered critical to
new employee orientation. As all good teachers and principals know, teach-
ing is not as simple as just telling. Consequently, it will be necessary for new
employees to reassemble at midyear to review and discuss the same safety
topics and procedures. And, just as important as for the orientation itself,
principals should retain a copy of the agenda for documentation.
78
Safe & Secure Schools

79
Professional Development
STRATEGY 21
What Teachers Must Know About Safety
B
ecause decisions made by faculty and staff members reflect on the
school community, safety training must be a priority for everyone.
THE SCENARIO
After a scheduled early morning fire drill, the school was finally settling into a normal
school-day routine. Thirty minutes later, much to the dismay of everyone, the piercing
noise of the fire alarm sounded again through the school. As teachers and students
filed out of the school for the second time, administrators suspected the alarm had
malfunctioned. After students and staff had remained outside for fifteen minutes, it
was confirmed that a sensor had not completely reset from the first drill. It was a com-
bination of good news and bad news: no fire had been found, but valuable class time
had been lost.
The following morning the principal read a disturbing email from a parent whose
child reported that during the second fire alarm on the previous day the student’s class
had not evacuated the building because the teacher was helping students review for a
test that was to be administered later in the week and she did not want to be disrupted
by yet another evacuation drill. The parent questioned the wisdom of such a decision
and wanted to know the school practice in such situations.
The principal found it hard to believe that this incident could be
true—that there was not some misunderstanding—but the veteran
teacher reported to the office and verified that the email was accurate.
The teacher explained she was certain it would be a false alarm
because it was in such close proximity to the announced fire drill that
had already taken place. In addition, the teacher indicated students
were held only for a few minutes, until such time as they reached a
natural breaking point in the lesson. The principal was astounded and
upset.
Do you find this unbelievable? Do you think it could not happen at
your school? In fact, a similar situation did occur in 2004 at a high school
in Missouri, and it illustrates the need for teachers to know and under-
stand safety policy and procedure, and how their actions or inactions can
undermine a parent’s confidence in school personnel.

GUIDED DECISION MAKING
Most principals have said, “If only ‘so and so’ had responded differently,
this would have been much easier to handle,” or “What was the staff
member thinking when that decision was made?” These questions are
not just a tendency to play Monday morning quarterback about previ-
ous events and decisions. To varying degrees, the reputation of a school
depends on the ability of employees to make good, sound decisions and to
respond appropriately during a critical incident or event. As leaders, prin-
cipals are responsible for ensuring that staff members are properly trained
and provided with the tools they need to do the job. It is important, there-
fore, that the training be all-encompassing and that it take into account the
need for a reasonable response to a variety of situations that have the
potential for negative outcomes. So what should be included in this type
of staff development?
• Teachers must understand their personal and professional liability.
Ask any group of educators about the contents of the No Child Left Behind
Act and you will hear a resounding response that it is about academic
achievement. What is often overlooked in the law is valuable information
contained in Section 2366 outlining the liability protection that teachers
have, provided they are “operating within their scope of employment.”
This protection is often taken for granted, but, according to the law,
teachers who operate outside their scope of employment or who show a
“flagrant indifference” for the welfare of their students may lose that per-
sonal liability protection. Those teachers also place added burden on the
administrators who must handle the aftermath of an event gone awry. At
least once a year, preferably at the beginning of the school year, a discus-
sion of professional liability should take place in every school.
• Teachers must receive written administrative expectations. Although
it is a teacher’s responsibility to know the particular practices, procedures,
and policies related to his or her job assignment in a school and district, it
is the duty of the administrator to communicate this information, docu-
ment that it has been communicated, and provide the resources where fur-
ther information can be obtained. It is impossible to cover everything a
teacher needs to know related to school safety at the first faculty meeting
of the year, so it is essential to provide resources and printed material in
addition to annual discussion and training.
• Teachers must be trained in appropriate responses to classroom and
school emergencies. Although they are relatively rare, real classroom or
school emergencies that have the potential for catastrophic results do
occur. Usually such events happen with little time for teachers to process
information using normal analytical thinking skills. Consequently, staff
members instinctively will revert to the way they have been trained and to
80
Safe & Secure Schools

the planning that has taken place. Without such planning or training, inde-
cision, inaction, or delay may result. Emergency drills, such as fire, adverse
weather, and in-place sheltering, are examples of training and planning.
As recommended by the U.S. Department of Education, administrators
should use tabletop exercises to train all faculty and staff members. These
exercises can occur during a faculty meeting or other staff development
time and are an excellent training tool.
• Teachers must be participants in school safety. Some teachers believe
school administrators are primarily responsible for the overall safety of
students and staff. Although administrators are ultimately held account-
able for all that happens at school, faculty and staff must also be willing
participants in prevention and intervention. One of the best ways to initi-
ate this type of accountability among staff members is to delegate individ-
ual classroom safety audits to the teachers who use a particular room on a
regular basis. For each classroom, a checklist of safety features, strategies,
equipment, and documents should be provided to teachers at the begin-
ning of the school year (see Resources). The individuals who are assigned
to teach in or use a particular room are responsible for verifying that all the
listed items are present and, as appropriate, that they know how to use
or operate the article on the list. Holding others accountable will pay big
dividends because staff members will be better trained and prepared to
respond to school emergencies and crises.
All faculty and staff should receive training that enables them to inter-
vene and manage escalating behavior when an individual threatens vio-
lence or aggression. Basic skills can and should be taught to all faculty and
staff members by those who have expertise in intervening when an individ-
ual becomes aggressive. In many instances, faculty and staff will have only
one chance to choose the right strategy to defuse an escalating situation.
School safety comes down to creating and maintaining an appropriate
plan of action and providing the staff development component to support it.
81
Professional Development

82
Safe & Secure Schools
STRATEGY 22
Training Support Staff to Respond Appropriately
S
chool safety relies on training for everyone, not just for the certificated
staff.
For many school administrators, providing meaningful staff develop-
ment to members of the support staff can be challenging. But a safe school
environment—and a school administrator’s professional reputation—are
affected not only by the faculty’s actions during a crisis, but also by the
response of those in support roles. Regardless of the scenario, the buck will
stop at the principal’s desk. When any staff member is unprepared or mis-
informed, the results can have tragic consequences, and negatively affect
how the principal is perceived by peers and the school community.
Take a moment to reflect on the daily interaction between students and
support staff at your school. Bus drivers, food service employees, custodi-
ans, and secretaries all have frequent contact with students: The school bus
driver is the first and last adult many students see each day. Students who
participate in breakfast programs interact with food service employees at
the beginning of the day, and even more students have contact with these
employees during lunch. Throughout the day, students walk by custodi-
ans in the hallways, classrooms, or commons areas. Students who visit or
pass through the school office area interact with secretarial staff.
THE SCENARIO
For many years, Billy has been teased and humiliated by other students. He is small,
wears glasses, and dresses precociously. One morning, as he waits at the bus stop, he
hears the usual comments: “Hey, four eyes,” and “You look like a fag in those clothes.”
Three boys grab his book bag and throw it around, playing keep-away. As the bus
arrives at the bus stop, one of the boys dumps the contents of the bag. The bus driver
notices the boys taunting Billy as he gathers his belonging and finds a seat on the bus.
When Billy arrives at school, he is visibly upset. As he passes a custodian, he kicks
a trash cart, sending it rolling away. The custodian tries to get Billy’s attention to ask him
to retrieve the cart, but Billy unleashes a string of profanities and kicks a nearby locker,
then heads down the hallway.
After Billy gets his breakfast tray, a food service worker notices Billy is eating alone
again. He is red in the face, and appears agitated. Other classmates sitting nearby are
paying little attention to him.

Was this crisis preventable? We believe it was, and that members of the
support staff who witnessed Billy before the crisis erupted were key play-
ers in the tragic sequence of events. Had any one of them responded at any
point, this story might have had a more positive ending.
PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT
A number of strategies are appropriate for training support staff members.
• Emergency management plans. The success of a comprehensive
emergency response plan hinges on the understanding of all staff members.
Some support staff will have specific duties and responsibilities that should
be outlined. During an emergency, assignments may be made on the basis
of who is available or closest to the scene. Support staff may have to super-
vise students, answer phones, or locate and operate equipment they do not
normally use. Therefore, they should have a complete copy of the emer-
gency management plan, as well as such documents as the telephone tree
and guidelines for utility shutoffs, building security, and supervision.
• Staff development. To the degree scheduling will allow, support staff
members should be included in schoolwide staff development for school
safety. Training in such topics as first aid, evacuation, in-place sheltering,
and supervision will help prepare these staff for crises. In the scenario
described, it would have been helpful for support staff to have been
trained in de-escalating aggressive behavior and subsequent reporting
procedures.
• Incident debriefing. Debriefing should occur after any crisis, and
support staff should be included. Even if they were not directly involved
in the incident, they can learn from what did and did not work, and they
can make suggestions for improvements.
• Support staff handbook. Including building-level expectations
for support staff in the staff handbook is an excellent way to provide
all groups with identical information about appropriate responses and
83
Professional Development
Just before the tardy bell rings, a secretary bumps into Billy in a crowded hallway.
She says, “Sorry,” and Billy replies, “No, you’re not. No one is ever sorry. I’m sick of this
place.” The secretary is surprised by his demeanor. She does not know quite how to
respond, so she does nothing and continues on her way.
Shortly after school begins, the principal is summoned urgently to an art classroom
to help with a student who is violently out of control. On her arrival, she sees the teacher
and students standing in the hallway. She looks inside the room to see Billy sitting in a
corner with a carving knife, threatening to cut his own arm.

procedures for potential events and issues. As an alternative, you may
want to create a support staff handbook that includes many of the same
things as the faculty handbook. As with other staff, within a few days of
receiving the handbook support staff should be required to sign, indicat-
ing they have read and understood it, and that they have had an opportu-
nity to ask questions.
• Extensions of the classroom. Buses and other areas that fall under the
direct control of support staff members are simply an extension of the class-
room and should be treated as such. All applicable rules should be posted
in the cafeteria, on buses, and in hallways and should be communicated
verbally to all students and staff members. Principals should encourage
lines of communication between the certificated staff and those serving in
a support role so concerns about student behavior can be shared.
• Supervisory techniques and expectations. Support staff should be
given directions and guidelines for supervising students in their respective
areas: custodians in the hallways and the student commons, food service
employees in the cafeteria, secretaries in the office and the hallways, and
bus drivers on school buses.
• Campus communication. Always include support staff in internal
communications related to safety and security. Support staff should know
they are a part of the safety process. They can be members of any building
committee that supports a safe learning environment for students and staff
members.
• Job-related expertise. Work with districtwide department heads
who manage support service functions in an effort to include site per-
sonnel in strategies that strengthen facility safety. In some cases, support
staff will be the experts on safety issues and can present the information
to certificated staff. It may not always be about teaching support staff
members—sometimes support staff will be the ones with knowledge
they can provide to others.
COOPERATION
Just like athletics, school security is a matter of teamwork, and everyone’s
safety is enhanced when all have been trained and had a chance to prac-
tice the play on the field. In the previous scenario, some players were miss-
ing from the game plan and, as a result, the school’s defense suffered.
Support staff members are essential to creating a positive school climate.
Make it a practice to include them whenever school safety is discussed.
84
Safe & Secure Schools

STRATEGY 23
Intimidation, Harassment, and Bullying
Fear Factors in the Twenty-First-Century School
B
ullying is a common threat to students’ physical and emotional safety,
but it can be reduced.
85
Professional Development
THE SCENARIO
You are walking through the student commons area when you see Jeffrey attempting to
move through the crowd. Several other students are repeatedly stepping in front of him,
blocking his path. Jack “accidentally” bumps into Jeffrey and knocks his book bag to the
ground. As Jeffrey tries to collect his belongings, others in the immediate area begin to
laugh, snicker, and call him a fag.
You know Jeffrey is small for his age. Jack is physically larger than Jeffrey, and is
known for his athletic ability.
Although you probably do not see this type of incident occurring every
day, chances are good that something similar happens from time to time
on your campus. When it does, what is an appropriate response?
STOP AND THINK
Before reading further, take a few minutes and ask yourself some ques-
tions: What would you do if you saw this occur? Which students need
your immediate attention: the victim, the bully, or the bystanders? Do you
think teachers or support staff should respond in different ways? What
about the school nurse or principal’s secretary?
At first glance, this situation may seem easy to resolve, but don’t be
fooled. Harassment and intimidation, which may include bullying, can be
difficult to address. Some students are reluctant to report such incidents.
When questioned, many male victims will deny the existence of a problem
because they believe admitting to victimization is somehow a threat to
their masculinity.

Although some elementary schools across the country have chosen to
adopt formalized bullying prevention programs, many secondary schools
have been reluctant to do so. The reasons for this are varied, but one fac-
tor is that many secondary teachers believe it will be one more require-
ment in an already hectic schedule of teaching, meetings, and professional
development. Either way, the issue will remain a problem until the school
community makes a concerted effort to eliminate it.
TEN STRATEGIES
Discussing bullying in the student code of conduct is a good first step, but
it is not enough on its own. These ten strategies can help school leaders at
any grade level address bullying behaviors.
1. Provide a definition of bullying. Some staff will have preconceived
ideas of what bullying entails, but the problem is broader than they may
think. There are three components to bullying. First, there is the intent to
harm another, either physically or emotionally. This separates bullying
from accidental remarks or actions. Second, there are intimidating behav-
iors repeated over time, as opposed to a single incident of negative actions.
Third, there is an imbalance of power between the victim and the perpe-
trator. One individual or group of individuals is perceived (by self and
others) to be superior to another because of financial, social, physical,
athletic, or another type of power.
2. Share the district’s policies and consequences for bullying with the
staff. Although some principals believe staff is already conversant on this
topic, it is a good idea to provide the various documents that explain
duties, responsibilities, and administrative expectations related to preven-
tion and intervention. If your state has legislation on this topic, it would be
wise to share this information with staff.
3. Using staff and student input, develop a map of hot spots where
bullying is most likely to occur. This map should be revised throughout
the school year on the basis of discipline statistics and information from
students, staff members, and parents. The principal should ensure that hot
spots are constantly supervised: before school, after school, during lunch,
between classes, and during cocurricular activities.
4. Advise staff to watch for evidence of cyberbullying. This form of
harassment is defined as using the Internet or mobile electronic devices to
send or display hurtful or intimidating content. Principals should remind
staff that students are sometimes reluctant to report these incidents for fear
that the electronic tools may be taken away by parents.
5. Provide a list of some of the signs that may indicate victimization
to teaching and support staff members. Staff members need to know the
86
Safe & Secure Schools

warning signs of victimization in order to provide an appropriate
response.
• Unexplained bruises or cuts
• Torn clothing
• Nonspecific pain, headaches, abdominal pains
• Academic decline
• Loss of possessions or money
• Outbursts of temper
• Symptoms of anxiety
• Loss of appetite
• Suicidal thoughts
• Poor school attendance
• Social withdrawal
• Dropping out of school
• Combativeness
• Depression
6. Provide support groups for students new to the school setting.
Students who have a transient school history are likely to be victimized.
Although participation should be optional, support should be offered and
involvement encouraged.
7. Remind staff that bullying may manifest itself in the form of “gay
bashing.” Not only does this behavior create a hostile environment, but it
can also have serious legal repercussions. Words such as gay, queer, fag, and
faggot should not be tolerated. Staff members are in a perfect position to
help students understand the inappropriateness of this type of language.
8. Advise victims to respond appropriately. Such actions as avoiding
the bully, staying around friends or adults, refraining from an emotional
reaction, and reporting incidents are always good advice for students who
are susceptible to victimization.
9. Encourage bystanders to befriend the victim. If a bystander is not
comfortable with direct intervention, the least he or she should do is walk
away and refrain from being a silent participant. If the bystander remains
at the scene of the incident, he or she may be considered one of the perpe-
trators by the victim.
10. Post a code of conduct in all classrooms. After posting the code, a
class discussion should be held to reinforce the school’s expectations
related to harassment and intimidation. A sample classroom code of
conduct might be the following:
• We will not harass, tease, or embarrass others.
• We will try to help anyone who is being harassed, teased, or
embarrassed.
• When we know someone is being bullied, we will tell a respon-
sible adult.
87
Professional Development

THE SCENARIO REVISITED
Let’s go back to the scenario and the questions.
The person who needs attention immediately is Jeffrey. His books were
scattered and he has been embarrassed and humiliated. Staff should go to
his assistance and help pick up the books. If the timing seems appropriate,
ask him to accompany you to a private setting. If not, have the school
counselor speak with him later in the day. Tell him you saw what hap-
pened and seek further information. He may or may not want to give the
details, but school personnel should listen carefully to what he does and
does not say.
The next individuals needing attention are the students who were
harassing Jeffrey. Without creating a scene, make a mental note of who
they are and direct them to the office or ask the principal to send a hall
pass for them as quickly as possible. Speaking to these students individu-
ally is more likely to help them understand the negative effects of their
behavior. If they remain in a group, they may continue to feel empowered,
even if they are seated in an administrative office.
Next, make a mental note of the bystanders and provide pertinent
information to a school counselor or administrator. If a teacher has the
victim or the perpetrators as students in class, there might be a time for
further discussion and personal conversation.
To change the culture of a school, the behavior of the adults must
change first. The most effective antibullying initiatives are ongoing
throughout the school year and are part of the discipline policies.
Significantly reducing harassment and intimidation will require every-
one’s participation.
88
Safe & Secure Schools

89
Professional Development
STRATEGY 24
Holiday Blues
Responding to Seasonally Despondent Students
F
or most schools, the holiday season is a time of bustling activity with
school dances, food drives, holiday assemblies, and the conclusion of
the first semester. And, while this should be a source of “good times” for
both students and staff, it can be one of the most difficult times of the year
in terms of school safety and security for those that work in an educational
environment.
It is no secret the holiday season may not be a time when everyone
is surrounded by loving family and friends. It is a difficult time for some
people, who feel isolated, lonely, or despondent. It is during this time of
year that people are inundated with images from the media of what the
holiday season “should” be. It can be difficult for young people to sort out
fact from fiction in terms of how ideal families are portrayed.
THE MONTH OF DECEMBER
For many schools, the month of December may show a significant increase in
the number of student disciplinary referrals sent to the office for administra-
tive action. These referrals may be for relatively minor classroom disruptions,
but it is more likely that the increase will manifest itself with referrals for dis-
respect, insubordination, or defiance. Additionally, student fights or assaults
may increase; left unchecked, these behavioral changes will cause a major
disruption in the school’s educational climate. Children show symptoms
of depression in a variety of ways. Their depression may manifest itself by
display of antisocial behaviors, spiking disciplinary referrals to the office.
While we are not suggesting that these referrals be handled without
using the student code of conduct, we are suggesting that staff would be
well advised to monitor the types of referrals written—especially during
the months of November and December—to determine if there are under-
lying causes that might be best addressed by something other than removal
from the classroom or suspension from school.
TYPES OF DEPRESSION
It is no secret many young people suffer from depression; causes include
emotional and biological factors. Some may have experienced a significant

loss or have serious behavioral problems. All may be at a higher risk for
depression.
As with many diseases, the severity of depression will vary from
person to person. When anyone is suffering from a major depressive dis-
order, the ability to function as a productive member of society may be
limited. Conversely, when one suffers from a less severe depressive state,
the ability to function day to day will be manageable. The result may be an
individual who simply does not feel well much of the time. There are
others who suffer from a third type of depression known as bipolar disor-
der. These individuals display severe mood swings. For some, the mood
changes will be gradual; for others, mood changes will be rapid and dra-
matic, with little warning to those around them.
SYMPTOMS OF DEPRESSION
One of the challenges educators face in school is that many students may
display mood changes—particularly at the middle school level—that have
little if anything to do with a depressive disorder. These mood changes are
simply products of the physiological and psychological maturation that
young adults experience.
Children who are experiencing a depressive episode may exhibit the
following warning signs:
• Persistent sadness
• Withdrawal from family or friends
• Increased irritability
• Changes in eating or sleeping habits
• Frequent physical complaints
• Decreased energy level
• Indecision, lack of concentration, or forgetfulness
• Feelings of worthlessness or excessive guilt
• Recurring thoughts of death or suicide
While not every student who exhibits one or two of these behaviors is
depressed, students who exhibit several over an extended period of time
might need help.
Student depression can be linked to the holiday season and may con-
tribute significantly to the onset of suicidal thoughts or attempts. It is
important to remember that a student who is considering self-destruction
may have little regard for the personal safety of others.
HOW TO HELP
The following suggestions may help to lessen the impact of the negative
side effects of the holiday season:
90
Safe & Secure Schools

• Educate staff on the warning signs of student depression. Talk about
this important issue at faculty meetings, and provide research-based arti-
cles for staff to read and discuss.
• Be vigilant when dealing with disruptive students, knowing that the
behavioral issues may be a result of a more serious condition. While a dis-
ciplinary consequence may be in order, do not forget to keep the student’s
counselor informed so appropriate interventions related to mental health
can be provided.
• When possible, be proactive in terms of individual and group coun-
seling. Instruct your counselors to facilitate student support groups related
to anger management, grief counseling, substance abuse, and so on. These
groups should be ongoing during the school year, but they will be partic-
ularly beneficial during the holiday season.
• Remind students to secure all belongings while in the school build-
ing and to refrain from bringing unnecessary valuables such as large sums
of money, personal electronic devices, and so on to school. This should
help to eliminate some of the temptation for possible theft on the part of
students with limited financial resources.
DON’T FORGET THE STAFF
Members of the school staff may also suffer from depression during the
holiday season. Although the warning signs of depression may manifest
themselves differently in adults, these individuals also feel despair and
sadness, and may find it difficult to be productive. Some may have diffi-
culty dealing with students who are antisocial or disruptive. As a result,
patience may be in short supply.
BE KIND TO ADMINISTRATORS, TOO
Finally, administrators are given and readily accept the responsibilities
and challenges of managing schools in the twenty-first century, and they
may find it difficult to remember to take care of their own physical and
mental health, particularly during the holidays when demands on their
time are so great. Students and staff always expect the principal to be func-
tioning on all cylinders, but doing so requires a conscious and strategic
effort. In embracing commitments to the school community, principals
must ensure they take care of themselves, too.
91
Professional Development

92
Safe & Secure Schools
STRATEGY 25
Tabletop Exercises
The Ultimate Tool for School Safety Training
F
or many administrators, the task of providing meaningful and timely
in-service training for classroom and school safety is difficult.
Staff development time is a scarce commodity in today’s education envi-
ronment. As a result, most in-service activities for faculty members center
on academic issues, and rightfully so. Training for support staff members
is concentrated on job responsibilities and duties—again, this is the way it
should be. But during an emergency or crisis event, a lack of preparation
may result in greater tragedy and a tarnished reputation for both the princi-
pal and the overall school community, so care should be taken and time
allocated for training all staff members for the role of first responder.
Tabletop exercises are a valuable tool for preparing all school staff to
respond appropriately to a variety of emergency events. This method of
training can be integrated with the multitude of other staff development
programs. Best of all, the exercises take very little time.
SO WHAT IS A TABLETOP EXERCISE?
A tabletop exercise is a written scenario containing a set of circumstances
and facts that create the need for the participant to problem solve and
make decisions that will bring the event to a conclusion with as few nega-
tive consequences as possible.
While under the stress of responding to an emergency, staff will make
decisions on the basis of prior training and practice, real-life experiences,
or simply the will to survive. In a true emergency, little—if any—problem
solving will take place. In a school environment, it is difficult to simulate
the stress that staff will face in a real emergency, but by practicing and
training with problem-solving tabletop exercises, school personnel can
establish a knowledge base that may provide them with necessary auto-
matic responses when analytical thinking skills are compromised.
To understand how an exercise is written and facilitated, we provide a
sample tabletop exercise, one used to train teachers to respond to a possi-
ble weapon in a classroom.
Although some exercises may appear quite simple at first, staff will
quickly realize the complexities as they begin the problem-solving process.

It will be the job of the facilitator to guide the participants through the
three levels of problem solving discussed later in this article (i.e., consid-
erations, options, and actions) and prevent staff members from jumping
ahead to “actions” until a thorough discussion of considerations and options
has been completed.
DEVELOPING TABLETOP EXERCISES
Written exercises should be constructed in such a manner as to be realistic,
create issues, allow options, and facilitate training.
• Be realistic. Staff members must believe that the events could occur
in their respective areas of responsibility.
• Create issues. The exercise must include facts or events that force
staff members to make decisions. In the sample exercise, Carol reports to
the teacher what she has seen, which creates an issue of what to do once
the conversation with Carol is complete.
• Allow options. Although policies and procedures may govern some
portions of the participant’s final actions, overall the decisions must be
generated by what is most likely to work given the complete set of cir-
cumstances and the personality of the staff member. Exercises should have
a limited number of facts so as to encourage free thinking.
• Facilitate training. The manner in which the facilitator guides par-
ticipants through the tabletop activity determines the level of learning and
experience that staff members will receive. Facilitators should thoroughly
explain the necessity for training on the given topic, the dynamics created
by an emergency event, the physiological effects on responders, and the
overall instructional objectives of the exercise.
• Because staff members should understand the process to be used as
they work through the activity, a thorough explanation—including
examples of the three components of considerations, options, and actions—
should be provided.
93
Professional Development
THE SCENARIO
You are the classroom teacher, and it is midmorning in your second hour class. The class
is working on an assignment, and you are grading papers. Carol, a student who sits near
the back of the classroom, comes to your desk and quietly tells you Gary, who sits across
the aisle from her, may have a gun in his book bag. Carol tells you that when Gary
opened his bag a short time ago, she thought she saw something that looked like a gun
stuck down inside a side pouch.
Additional facts: Gary has been in trouble with the juvenile authorities and recently ran
away from home. Carol is usually a reliable student.

• Considerations. This component encompasses the facts and circum-
stances from which the options are developed. For a consideration to be
valid, the participant should be able to articulate why it would affect the
forthcoming options. For the sample exercise, one valid consideration
would be whether the event is unfolding at the beginning, middle, or end
of the class period. If Carol is reporting her observations at the end of the
class, the options available to the teacher are far more limited than if the
teacher is receiving the information shortly after class has started. What
other considerations would be essential for a participant to consider when
developing options for the sample exercise?
• Options. Staff members should be encouraged to think in uncon-
ventional terms “outside the box,” and to offer all viable options during
the discussion. For the principal, who is often either the facilitator or an
observer, this will provide insight into how individual staff members
might respond in an actual emergency. The facilitator should never be crit-
ical of any option provided, but rather should ask participants to identify
both the positive and negative outcomes that might result from a particu-
lar option. Any discussion with an individual staff member who appears
to be advocating an unacceptable option should be held privately.
• Actions. Whether the exercise is worked with the entire staff, in
small groups, or individually, participants should be asked to evaluate
options and determine what courses of action should be initiated. The
facilitator should reinforce that, in some situations, the first actions taken
may be irreversible, so staff members should thoroughly evaluate their
decisions. Some responses, though reasonable and logical, may still result
in tragic consequences. For instance, in the sample exercise, if the teacher
sends Carol to the office to summon help and Gary concludes Carol’s exit
is related to his weapon, he may react violently.
MAKING THE MOST OF IT
Tabletop exercises can be conducted with mixed audiences that include
law enforcement, school administrators, faculty members, and support
staff members. Each group can discuss and solve the exercise from its own
perspective. While the sample exercise was written to train classroom
teachers, a similar set of circumstances can be developed to generate a
broader view of the event and to train a wider variety of staff members.
A tabletop exercise can have unlimited value because any change in
fact or circumstance creates a new event with new or additional consider-
ations, options, and actions. Staff and faculty will enjoy this type of train-
ing, learn about themselves and their abilities to respond during an
emergency, and be better trained when an escalating situation requires
action. For principals, school resource officers, and others charged with
training staff related to school security, tabletop exercises are a win-win
opportunity for staff development.
94
Safe & Secure Schools

95
Professional Development
STRATEGY 26
There’s No “Substitute” for Good Safety
I
n every occupation, there are times when employees are unavailable
because of sickness, family emergency, or vacation. When this occurs
and an alternate, or substitute, is needed, the public assumes, and rightly
so, that the substitute employee will be equally qualified.
This assumption takes on added meaning when a substitute’s responsi-
bilities involve emergency services or include ensuring care and safety of
others. For example, at thirty thousand feet, a passenger hopes a substitute
pilot has all the qualifications and expertise that the regular pilot has to
handle an in-flight emergency. A patient assumes a substitute physician is
qualified to diagnose and treat an ailment. Therefore, it stands to reason the
general public would believe and expect that when a regular classroom
instructor is absent from school and a substitute teacher is in charge, the
substitute is equally qualified not only to teach, but also to respond quickly
and appropriately to ensure the safety of students during an emergency.
Day in and day out, substitute teachers report for duty in schools
across the country. More times than not, they are ill-prepared for the types
of safety and security problems that they may face. Substitutes come from
a variety of backgrounds, and, depending on the state, many are in the
classroom without the most basic of education classes, let alone certifica-
tion in a specific curriculum area. In some school districts, substitute
teachers receive no training on safety issues at the district level. It can be a
recipe for disaster, or it can be a problem that you as an administrator can
manage with thought and planning.
SUBSTITUTE FOLDERS
It is important to organize paperwork so substitute teachers can find it
quickly if necessary. Teachers should create folders that contain pertin -
ent information for substitutes who are assigned to their classrooms.
Following a standard format for the folders will make finding information
progressively easier for returning substitute teachers each time they work
in the school. Principals should ensure that teachers have prepared their
substitute folders properly by giving them a checklist of folder require-
ments. This checklist should be attached to the inside cover of the substi-
tute folder and be completed when the folder is given to the school
secretary. The following components should be part of the substitute fold-
ers (see Resources):

96
Safe & Secure Schools
• School emergency response plan. Substitute teachers should receive
a copy of the school’s emergency response plan or be made aware of where
one can be found, and provided an opportunity to read it. In either case,
substitute teachers should know the most important components of the
plan. If emergency response flip charts are used in the school, the substi-
tute should receive the flip chart as part of the substitute teacher folder.
The chart will provide the substitute with explicit instructions of what to
do under specific types of emergency situations. In addition, substitute
teachers should receive individualized evacuation and sheltering plans for
any students with special needs.
• Severe weather, fire evacuation, in-place sheltering, and earthquake
instructions. The folder should also include information related to build-
ing procedures for severe weather, fire evacuation, and in-place sheltering,
and what to do in the event of an earthquake. If procedures are posted in
the classroom, the folder should note where procedures are located.
• List of student health concerns. Each school year, the school nurse
should provide a list of students with specific health-related problems to
all certified staff members. Because a variety of emergency situations can
arise on any given school day, a copy of this list should be included in the
substitute folder. This list should include the names of students who have
such conditions as epilepsy, diabetes, and life-threatening allergies, and
what the teacher should do in those emergencies. This folder should also
include guidelines for sending students to the school nurse for day-to-day
health events.
• Student disciplinary referrals. Substitute teachers should receive
information about the proper procedures for referring students to the
office for disciplinary purposes as well as the applicable building level
forms. They should also be reminded that parents may have the opportu-
nity to read the referral forms; substitutes should be encouraged to
describe the student behavior only, and to refrain from using language that
could be considered emotional or unprofessional.
• Seating charts. No one should ever expect a substitute teacher to try to
manage—let alone teach—students without having a seating chart. Students
simply cannot be allowed to sit at a location of their choice without teacher
guidance and input, and the substitute is in no position to provide this type
of information. Teachers should be required to have a classroom seating
chart in the folders. When possible, the seating chart should contain pictures
of students, as well as names. This can be accomplished relatively easily if
the school uses picture identification badges for students.
• Emergency lesson plans. Teaching from bell to bell will keep students
on task and minimize the time that they can engage in inappropriate behav-
ior. Occasionally, teachers are faced with unexpected situations in which

they do not have time to prepare complete and detailed lesson plans for
the day they will be absent. Therefore, all teachers should be required to
leave emergency lesson plans that anyone—regardless of certification—
could teach.
ADDITIONAL SUPPORTS
Handbooks
Substitute teachers should be given—and required to read—a copy of
the student handbook and the teacher handbook before or when reporting
to their first assignment for the school year. There is no other document
that contains as much information as the student handbook in terms of
rules and regulations related to behavioral expectations.
The teacher handbook can provide a wealth of information about
specific procedures, such as attendance procedures, school arrival infor-
mation, classroom management expectations, and assembly guidelines.
When a substitute teacher has had a chance to work within a building over
a period of time, these procedures become second nature. For those who
are relatively new to a particular school, however, this type of information
can be necessary for success.
Critical Equipment
Locations in a classroom that contain emergency response supplies or
equipment should be clearly identified. Although this safe school strategy
should be standard in every school and classroom, it takes on added
importance when substitute teachers are called on to respond in an emer-
gency. Cabinets or drawers that contain first aid supplies should be
marked. The location of the emergency gas shutoff in a science lab should
also be clearly identified. Fire blankets, fire extinguishers, material safety
data sheets (MSDS), and the like should all be easily located. A written list
should be included in the substitute’s folder for classrooms with this type
of emergency equipment and supplies.
Buddy Up
Every substitute teacher should have a “buddy” teacher to turn to
should something go awry and immediate assistance be needed. All regu-
lar classroom teachers who teach in classrooms adjacent to a class taught
by a substitute should be instructed, as practical, to check on the substitute
at least once a day to see whether any assistance is needed. In addition,
regular teachers should make personal contact and introduce themselves
as a matter of courtesy and as part of planning for safety and security.
97
Professional Development

CONCLUSION
As with most policies, practices, or procedures related to safety and secu-
rity, the key to ensuring that substitute teachers can protect the well-being
of their students is planning. No one expects regular teachers to be present
in their classrooms every single day during the school year. But adminis-
trators, students, and parents can—and should—expect that teachers will
prepare for their eventual absence. Substitute folders, handbooks, clearly
marked critical equipment, and personal contact can give substitute
teachers the support they need to do their jobs and maintain a high level
of safety and security for their students.
98
Safe & Secure Schools

4
Top Ten

100
Safe & Secure Schools
STRATEGY 27
School Safety’s Top Ten
The Top Ten Things to Remember
When Creating a Safe School Environment
S
chool personnel understand that safety seldom comes down to any
one particular component or plan, but rather that it is a combination
of strategies and ideas that make a school safe and secure for everyone. As
school employees and authors on the topic of school safety, the authors
understand all too well that most school administrators do a great deal of
reading “on the run.” In keeping with this philosophy, we have created a
“top ten” list of strategies that we consider essential to assessing the total-
ity of the school environment as related to safety and security. Whether
you read it on the run or take your time to read it carefully, we believe you
will find a few new ideas to consider. You might also find information that
will reinforce the necessity of doing some of the things you routinely do
each school year.
10. PROVIDE STUDENTS WITH
AN ANONYMOUS TIP LINE
Many states have a toll-free anonymous tip line that students, and in some
cases adults, can use when they have information related to a situation
that might be of danger to themselves or others. If your state has such a
toll-free number, be sure to publicize it by posting the number in every
classroom, and strategically throughout the entire building. The toll-free
number should also be included in the student handbook. If students
in your district wear or carry picture identification badges, the phone
number can be printed on the badge. If your state or district does not pro-
vide a toll-free number for such use, we recommend developing other
in-house methods for anonymous reporting, such as school answering
machines with a designated phone line. But again, remember this will be
of little value if students are not taught and reminded throughout the
school year this resource is available to them.

9. DO NOT ASSUME THE DISTRICT’S
MAINTENANCE DEPARTMENT OR OTHER
OUTSIDE STAFF MEMBERS WILL MONITOR THE
SCHOOL FOR SAFETY DEFICIENCIES
As the recognized leaders of the school, the principal and assistant princi-
pals have the responsibility to develop strategies that identify and remedy
general safety issues. One of the best strategies available is the use of a
safety team. This team should include the school nurse, a school counselor,
support staff members, school resource officers, security personnel, and
other certificated staff members. The safety team should periodically
review school data, including accident reports, and conduct general
inspections of the facility. Because no one person is an expert in all areas of
school safety, the use of a team brings together a number of individuals
with expertise in varied, specific areas.
8. DO NOT ASSUME PARENTS BELIEVE THE
SCHOOL HAS DONE EVERYTHING POSSIBLE
TO CREATE A SAFE CAMPUS
Most parents want to believe that school is safe. The media can have a sig-
nificant influence on their attitudes, however, and the general public is
routinely exposed to negative stories related to schools and school safety.
Although parents may not ask you to explain the safety strategies you
employ, do not doubt for a moment that they will want to know what you
are doing. For these reasons it is important for staff to take the time to use
the tools at their disposal to inform parents about the safety strategies the
school employs. School websites, student orientations, handbooks, and
newsletters are some of the avenues administrators can use to help keep
parents informed about the school’s safety strategies.
7. PERIODICALLY REVIEW THE SCHOOL’S
EMERGENCY RESPONSE PLAN WITH ALL STAFF
MEMBERS THROUGHOUT THE SCHOOL YEAR AND
TRAIN WITH TABLETOP EXERCISES
It is not sufficient to discuss the emergency response plan at the beginning
of the school year and then automatically expect faculty and staff to
101
Top Ten

respond correctly during a critical incident. In an actual emergency, faculty
and staff members will experience a high degree of stress, and their ability
to rationally problem solve may be significantly impaired. Therefore, we
recommend that school personnel periodically be given the opportunity
to practice and train for emergency situations through the use of tabletop
exercises. These exercises can cover such topics as emergency events that
might occur at cocurricular activities, or they might simulate such events
as a weapon in the school or a student or staff member death that occurs
during the school day.
6. DO NOT ASSUME STUDENTS WILL
AUTOMATICALLY COME FORWARD WITH
CRITICAL SCHOOL SAFETY INFORMATION
BECAUSE IT IS THE RIGHT THING TO DO
Students have to be educated throughout the school year on the topic
of safety, and teachers should be required to teach the student handbook
with a particular emphasis on the sections pertaining to student reporting.
We also recommend the use of tabletop exercises written specifically for
students. These exercises can easily be included in health and physical
education classes, or in homeroom and student advisory activities.
The tabletop exercises should include discussions of real-life scenarios
where students evaluate pieces of information involving safety and then
determine the proper course of action. The result will be students who are
better prepared to think critically and rationally during a school or per-
sonal emergency.
5. HAVE A VARIETY OF INDIVIDUALS
REVIEW THE EMERGENCY RESPONSE
PLAN EACH SCHOOL YEAR
Although superintendents and principals have a great deal of expertise
related to school safety, no one individual can anticipate and understand
every facet of a school environment. It is therefore imperative for other
school personnel—such as school nurses, custodians, secretaries, teachers,
counselors, school resource officers, and other administrative personnel—
to read the emergency response plan carefully and be allowed to suggest
additions and deletions as deemed appropriate.
Principals should never let their egos get in the way of emergency
planning and management. Each crisis and emergency drill should have
time allotted for debriefing. For routine drills, such as severe weather or
fire evacuations, this debriefing can be as simple as sending an email to
102
Safe & Secure Schools

staff members asking for their personal evaluations of how things went
and if they have any suggestions for improvement. For other drills, such
as in-place sheltering or relocation drills, the emergency response team
should assemble after the event but on the day of the drill, and discuss the
event as a group. These meetings should be documented and any recom-
mendations shared with the entire staff.
4. DO NOT ASSUME LOCAL EMERGENCY
SERVICE PROVIDERS WILL BE ABLE
TO PROVIDE IMMEDIATE ASSISTANCE
DURING A SCHOOL CRISIS OR EMERGENCY
In a crisis, depending on the location of the school, many staff members
may find it necessary to “go it alone” for several minutes or longer until
help from outside agencies arrives. In addition, the principal may have to
manage the event without assistance from outside sources for quite some
time. We suggest planning for a worst-case scenario that assumes staff
members will have to handle some of the tasks that would normally be
provided by responding agencies.
Staff members should be prepared to direct traffic if it becomes neces-
sary to move students away from the school during an evacuation.
Brightly colored vests should be located in designated crisis-supply kits
and teachers should be trained as to their appropriate use. Sufficient first
aid supplies for large numbers of injuries should also be available for staff
and students. Staff members should be cross-trained to perform essential
tasks. Students should also know where to access first aid supplies in the
event a classroom teacher is injured during an emergency.
3. DO NOT ASSUME AN ADMINISTRATOR
WILL BE PRESENT OR IN CHARGE
DURING AN EMERGENCY
Principals are absent periodically throughout the school year because of
meetings, conferences, and a variety of other duties that take them off cam-
pus for all or part of a school day. Make certain others on staff are prepared
to take control when necessary. The ability of others to respond and lead
appropriately will be a direct reflection on the planning and preparation a
principal has made for a school emergency.
When conducting emergency drills or facilitating tabletop exercises,
periodically place alternates in positions of command. Designated alter-
nates within the plan will need the same amount of training as the
designee, so make their training a priority.
103
Top Ten

2. STRESS THE IMPORTANCE OF
DOCUMENTATION AND ENSURE THAT
ALL STAFF MEMBERS DOCUMENT ISSUES
AND ACTIONS RELATED TO SCHOOL SAFETY
A school employee’s personal and professional accountability has never
been higher than it is in the beginning of the twenty-first century. It is
imperative that written records be kept for all staff training, drills, and
event debriefings. This documentation can be in the form of faculty meet-
ing agendas, in-service handouts, memos, emails, and written minutes
of meetings related to safety and security. Like most safety issues, it is not
a problem until it is a problem—and then it is a major problem.
Consequently, keeping a written record of what has been provided to staff
in terms of suggestions or mandates is very important.
1. AND THE NUMBER ONE SUGGESTION:
DO NOT UNDERESTIMATE THE
VALUE OF STRATEGIC SUPERVISION
Although technological tools and advances have a place in today’s school
environment, adult supervision is still the foundation of any safe school
plan, and strategic supervision will have a positive impact on school
safety. Considering the limited human resources available during the
school day, knowing where and when adults should supervise is of
extreme importance. Supervisory assignments should be based on the
number of personnel available, a review of previous disciplinary statistics,
anecdotal information from staff and students, and the type of activity to
be monitored. It is not enough to make a general supervisory assignment
to staff members; administrators should use strategic supervision to con-
sider and recognize where problems are most likely to occur and assign
staff members accordingly.
104
Safe & Secure Schools

Resources

106
Safe & Secure Schools
General Classroom Safety Checklist
_____ Classroom has room number or usage displayed and easily read.
_____ Classroom door lock works.
_____ Classroom door can be locked without stepping into hallway.
_____ Classroom door glass has cover present or available.
_____ Classroom windows have blinds or other type of covering.
_____ Classroom window locks function.
_____ Room lights are in working order with good illumination.
_____ Telephone or intercom access is at or near teacher’s desk.
_____ Phone directory is current and easily accessed.
_____ Emergency telephone numbers are readily accessible to all.
_____ Telephone usage instructions are posted.
_____ Violence hotline or similar type telephone number are posted.
_____ First aid kit or supplies are stocked and location identified.
_____ Severe weather and sheltering maps are posted (with primary
and secondary locations).
_____ Evacuation and sheltering locations have been discussed with
students.
_____ Flip chart is posted and reviewed with students.
_____ Laminated cards with room numbers for emergencies are easily
located and accessible.
_____ Classroom rules are posted and discussed with students.
_____ The nearest fire extinguisher is located and more than one
person is knowledgeable in its use.
_____ Free-standing bookcases and cabinets more than five feet tall are
secured to the wall.
_____ Television is strapped or secured to a wall mount or portable stand.
_____The room is free of trip hazards.
Copyright © 2009 by Corwin Press. All rights reserved. Reprinted from Safe & Secure Schools:
27 Strategies for Prevention and Intervention, by Judy M. Brunner and Dennis K. Lewis.
Thousand Oaks, CA. Corwin Press, www.corwinpress.com. Reproduction authorized only
for the local school site or nonprofit organization that has purchased this book.

107
Resources
Emergency Management Team Duties and Responsibilities
Relocation Event
(Title in bold indicates recommended terminology by the U.S. Department of Education
and the United States Department of Homeland Security.)
Positions
Person Assigned
Duties/Responsibilities
Team
Leader: School
Commander
_________
Communications:
Liaison to
Emergency
Providers
_________
Medical: Medical
Staff
_________
Media: Public
Information
Officer
Security: Safety
Officers
Principal
Alternate 1
Alternate 2
_________
Designee
Alternate 1
Alternate 2
_________
Designee
Alternate 1
Alternate 2
_________
Designee
Alternate 1
Alternate 2
Designee
Alternate 1
 Evaluate incoming information
 Determine emergency services needs
 Activate emergency plan and team
 Order relocation
 Request additional district services
 School spokesperson
 Precontact relocation sites
 Coordinate supervision of students
_________
 Make critical calls (911)
 Take student schedules and/or class
list to site
 Use emergency warning systems
 Oversee use of intercom system
 Notify band, choir, P.E., etc.
 Manage phones at relocation site
 Assist with student release
 Maintain event log
_________
 Triage multiple victims
 Administer immediate first aid
 Determine need for additional care
 Direct immediate movement of
injured from school site
 Identity tag on victims transported
_________
 Work with district P.I.O. as needed
 Prepare for media contacts off site
 Assimilate information for CMT
leader
 Assist student supervision
 Notify appropriate district officials
as directed
 Secure bldg. if time allows
 Coordinate final bldg. searches
(Continued)

108
Safe & Secure Schools
Positions
Person Assigned
Duties/Responsibilities
_________
Staff Liaison:
Operations
_________
Parent Liaison:
Operations
_________
Plan Monitor:
Logistics
_________
Counselors:
Student
Caregivers
_________
Family
Reunification
(Double-gated
system)
Alternate 2
_________
Designee
Alternate 1
Alternate 2
__________
Designee
Alternate 1
Alternate 2
___________
Designee
Alternate 1
Alternate 2
___________
Designee
Alternate 1
Alternate 2
___________
Designee
Designee
Alternate 1
Alternate 2
Use parent
liaisons,
communication
and plan
monitors to assist
 Coordinate traffic control
 Interface with emergency service
agencies
_________
 Assist with staff inquiries and needs
 Adjust student supervision
assignments
 Keep team leader informed
 Assist with communication
functions
__________
 Handle parent inquiries and contacts
 Assist with student transition
during relocation
 Assist with communication function
 Assist with student release from relo-
cation site
___________
 Directly assist team leader
 Ensure adequate communication
devices available
 Coordinate media function with team
leader
___________
 Assess students’ emotional needs
 Gather data on injured or missing
students
 Assess staff members’ emotional needs
 Assist with parent inquiries
 Assist with student release
 Assist with student transition
during relocation
___________
 Set up double-gated student release
 Two staff per table to provide checkout
form
 Two staff per table to greet parents and
explain procedure
 Two staff per table to serve as
runners to get students
(Continued)
Copyright © 2009 by Corwin Press. All rights reserved. Reprinted from Safe & Secure Schools: 27
Strategies for Prevention and Intervention, by Judy M. Brunner and Dennis K. Lewis. Thousand Oaks,
CA. Corwin Press, www.corwinpress.com. Reproduction authorized only for the local school site or
nonprofit organization that has purchased this book.

Out-of-District Travel Safety Checklist
Event: ___________________________________________________________
Staff Member in Charge: ___________________________________________
Dates of Travel ____________________ # of Students ___________________
 Permission slips completed
 Emergency contact list and numbers
 Itinerary provided to students, parents, and school
 Pertinent maps
 Student medical and prescription information
 Expectation of conduct provided to students
 Chaperone instructions distributed
 Supervision plans
 Student statement forms
 Student and teacher handbook
 First aid supplies
 Accident or injury forms and procedures
 Camera
 Student belongings inspected
Copyright © 2009 by Corwin Press. All rights reserved. Reprinted from Safe & Secure Schools:
27 Strategies for Prevention and Intervention, by Judy M. Brunner and Dennis K. Lewis.
Thousand Oaks, CA. Corwin Press, www.corwinpress.com. Reproduction authorized only
for the local school site or nonprofit organization that has purchased this book.
109
Resources

Student Search Form
This form can be used to document basic information related to the search
of a student and/or personal items.
1. Name, gender, and age of student
____________________________
____________
_________
_________
Name
Gender
Grade
Age
2. School, date, time, and location of search
__________________
_______
__________
______________________
School
Date
Time
Location of search
3. Names, titles or positions, and contact numbers for officials authoriz-
ing, conducting, and witnessing the search
__________________________________________ ______________________
Official authorizing search
Title/position
Contact #
__________________________________________ ______________________
Official conducting search
Title/position
Contact #
__________________________________________ ______________________
Official conducting search
Title/position
Contact #
__________________________________________ ______________________
Official witnessing search
Title/position
Contact #
110
Safe & Secure Schools

4. Statement of facts
Provide information supporting reasonable suspicion or other justification
for search.
_________________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________________
5. Details of search
Provide information on how the search was conducted, what (if anything)
was found, admissions or statements made by the student, special or
unusual circumstances, and other pertinent facts.
_________________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________________
Copyright © 2009 by Corwin Press. All rights reserved. Reprinted from Safe & Secure Schools:
27 Strategies for Prevention and Intervention, by Judy M. Brunner and Dennis K. Lewis.
Thousand Oaks, CA. Corwin Press, www.corwinpress.com. Reproduction authorized only
for the local school site or nonprofit organization that has purchased this book.
111
Resources

Substitute Teacher: Critical Information Checklist
Room # _____ Teacher Name___________________
 Emergency response flip chart
 Evacuation and sheltering instructions
 First aid supplies
 Emergency backpack with supplies
 Map of school with legend
 Fire extinguisher
 Intercom and phone usage instructions
 Seating chart
 Student conflict issues
 Health and medical alerts
 Discipline referral forms
 Teacher handbook
 Student handbook
 Lesson plan
 Buddy teacher
 Alternate buddy teacher
 Special instructions
Copyright © 2009 by Corwin Press. All rights reserved. Reprinted from Safe & Secure Schools:
27 Strategies for Prevention and Intervention, by Judy M. Brunner and Dennis K. Lewis.
Thousand Oaks, CA. Corwin Press, www.corwinpress.com. Reproduction authorized only
for the local school site or nonprofit organization that has purchased this book.
112
Safe & Secure Schools

113
Bibliography
American Psychiatric Association. (2000). Quick Reference to the Diagnostic Criteria
from DSM-IV-TR. Washington, DC: Author.
Barton, E. (2006). A Bullying Prevention: Tips and Strategies for School Leaders and
Classroom Teachers. Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin Press.
Beane, A. L. (1999). Bully-Free Classroom. Minneapolis, MN: Free Spirit Publishing.
Beaudoin, M.-N., & Taylor, M. (2004). Breaking the Culture of Bullying and Disrespect
Grades K–8. Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin Press.
Brunner, J. M., & Lewis, D. K. (2001). Problem-Solving Exercises: Elementary Edition.
Springfield, MO: Edu-Safe Publishing.
Brunner, J. M., & Lewis, D. K. (2001). Problem-Solving Exercises: School Resource
Officer Edition. Springfield, MO: Edu-Safe Publishing.
Brunner, J. M., & Lewis, D. K. (2001). Problem-Solving Exercises: Secondary Edition.
Springfield, MO: Edu-Safe Publishing.
Brunner, J. M., & Lewis, D. K. (2001). Problem-Solving Exercises: Student Edition.
Springfield, MO: Edu-Safe Publishing.
Brunner, J. M., & Lewis, D. K. (2002). Problem-Solving Exercises: Support Staff
Edition. Springfield, MO: Edu-Safe Publishing.
Brunner, J. M., & Lewis, D. K. (2004). Providing Teachers the Tools for Safe Classrooms.
Springfield, MO: Edu-Safe Publishing.
Brunner, J. M., & Lewis, D. K. (2005). School House Bullies: Preventive Practices for
Professional Educators. Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin Press.
Brunner, J. M., & Lewis, D. K. (2006). Student Searches: A Practical Application for
School Administrators. Springfield, MO: Edu-Safe Publishing.
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI). (1999). The School Shooter: A Threat Assessment
Perspective. Washington, DC: Author.
Federal Emergency Management Administration (FEMA). (2004). National Incident
Management System (NIMS), An Introduction Self Study Guide. Washington, DC:
Author.
Harris, S., & Petrie, G. E. (2003). Bullying the Bullies, the Victims, the Bystanders.
Lanham, MD: Scarecrow Press, Inc.
Jaksec, C. (2007). Toward Successful School Crisis Intervention Nine Key Issues.
Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin Press.
Lee, C. (2004). Preventing Bullying in Schools. Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin Press.
McGrath, M. J. (2006). School Bullying: Tools for Avoiding Harm and Liability.
Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin Press.

114
Safe & Secure Schools
Moore, M., & Minton, S. J. (2004). Dealing With Bullying in Schools: A Training
Manual for Teachers, Parents and Other Professionals. Thousand Oaks, CA:
Corwin Press.
National Association of Secondary School Principals (NASSP). (2004). Breaking
Ranks II: Strategies for Leading High School Reform. Reston, VA: Author.
National Association of Secondary School Principals (NASSP). (2006). Breaking
Ranks in the Middle: Strategies for Leading Middle Level Reform. Reston, VA:
Author.
Office of Safe and Drug Free Schools and U.S. Department of Education. (2003).
Practical Information on Crisis Planning: A Guide for Schools and Communities.
Washington, DC: Author.
Rigby, K. (2001). Stop the Bullying: A Handbook for Teachers. Markham, Ontario:
Pembroke Publishers.
Roberts, W. B. Jr. (2006). Bullying From Both Sides: Strategic Interventions for Working
with Bullies and Victims. Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin Press.
Sizer, T. R. (1999, September). No two are quite alike. Educational Leadership, 57,
1, 6–11.
Smith, S. T. (2003). Surviving Aggressive People: Practical Violence Prevention Skills for
the Workplace and the Street. Boulder, CO: First Sentient Publications.
Sullivan, K., Cleary, M., & Sullivan, G. (2004). Bullying in Secondary Schools: What
It Looks Like and How to Manage It. Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin Press.
U.S. Department of Education (DOE). (1998). Early Warning, Timely Response:
A Guide to Safe Schools. Washington, DC: Author.
U.S. Department of Health & Human Services (DHHS). (2003). Bullying Is Not a
Fact of Life. Washington, DC: Author.
U.S. Secret Service (Secret Service) and U.S. Department of Education (DOE).
(2002a). The Final Report and Findings of the Safe School Initiative: Implications for
the Prevention of School Attacks in the United States. Washington, DC: Secret
Service and DOE.
U.S. Secret Service (Secret Service) and U.S. Department of Education (DOE).
(2002b). Threat Assessment in Schools: A Guide to Managing Threatening
Situations and to Creating Safe School Climates. Washington, DC: Secret Service
and DOE.
Van Dyke, J. M., & Sakurai, M. M. (2006). Checklists for Searches and Seizures in
Public Schools. Eagan, MN: Thomson/West Publisher.

115
Index
Access control measures, 7, 77
See also Check-in procedures
Accidents
out-of-town trips procedures
in case of, 21–22
sharing information to prevent, 35
Administrators
do not assume emergency on-site
presence by, 103
IESP familiarity by, 27
seasonally depressed, 91
teacher handbook on duties/
responsibilities of, 9
“To Do” list closing out the
school year, 37–40
See also Principals
Angry parents
how to response to, 54–56
reviewing appropriate responses to,
56–57
understanding how to defuse, 54
Anonymous tip line, 100
Assembly procedures, 11
“Buddy” teachers, 97
Building remodeling issues, 16
Bullying
cyberbullying form of, 86
scenario on inadequate staff response to,
82–83
scenario on staff observation of
harassment and, 85, 88
staff response to harassment and, 85–87
Camera photographic evidence, 21
Campus
access control of, 7, 77
cash security procedures on, 11
ensuring safe climate on, 35–36
reviewing crime incidents on, 8
staff development on communications
within, 84
student permission to leave, 10
teacher handbook on expectations
of security of, 9
See also Check-in procedures; Physical
environment safety; Schools
Cell phones
school policies on student, 69–71
supervisory staff provided with, 18, 19
Chaperones
out-of-town volunteer, 21
provided with cameras, 21
See also Supervision
Check-in procedures
for guest speakers, 10
posting/sharing information on, 23, 34
for staff, 10
for teachers, 10
training staff on, 25
for visitors, 10, 23–25, 34, 37, 39
See also Access control measures;
Campus
Checklists. See School safety checklists
Classrooms
emergency lesson plans for, 96–97
guest speakers procedures for, 10
school emergency plan
flipcharts for, 42
seating charts for, 96
supervision of all extensions of the, 84
verifying emergency information
access in, 7–8
See also Schools
Cocurricular events
safety game plan for, 17–19
teacher handbook on, 11
Coded emergency language, 46

Communication
with angry parent, 54–57
staff development regarding
campus, 84
tips on emergency, 46–47
See also Emergency communication;
Language
Community agencies
regular safety communication with, 7
school emergency plan coordinated
with, 43–44
Community disaster plan, 43–44
Contraband
out-of-town trips and, 22
searching students for, 67
tabletop exercise on student
with gun, 93
Crisis management kits, 7
See also Emergency response kits
Crisis management plan, 6
See also Emergency response plans
Cyberbullying, 86
Debriefing
out-of-town trip incidents and, 22
relocation drills, 63
staff development training on, 83
Depression
evidence of seasonal, 89
staff strategies for helping students
with, 90–91
symptoms of, 90
types of, 89–90
Discipline referrals
cameras to document evidence on, 21
December and increasing
number of, 89
out-of-town trips and, 20–22
reviewing procedure for, 78
reviewing school statistics on, 8, 78
substitute teacher provided
with procedures for, 96
teacher handbook on procedures for, 10
Documentation
importance of emergency-
related, 104
information folders prepared
for substitute teachers, 95–97
photographic evidence
as part of, 21
on student searches, 68
Drugs
out-of-town trips and, 22
searching students for, 67
Early Warning, Timely Response (1998), 50
Electronic devices
issues regarding student use of, 69–70
reasonable and prudent
policies on, 70–71
Emergency communication
effective use of intercom for, 47
media management component
of, 72–74
simple and direct language for clear, 46
as two-way process, 47
See also Communication; School safety
information
Emergency lesson plans, 96–97
Emergency response kits
cocurricular events access to, 19
at each relocation site, 63
See also Crisis management kits
Emergency response plans
communications component of, 46–47
creating multilevel, 42–44
development of your, 44–45
on disseminating information to
parents, 35
documents on, 44–45
equipment and supplies
component of, 47–49
media management component of,
72–74
periodically reviewed with staff,
76–77, 101–102
on relocating students, 62–64
reviewed by variety of individuals,
102–103
sharing information on, 34
staff development and understanding
of, 83
See also Crisis management plan; School
safety information; School safety
planning; Schools
End-of-year
equipment inventory and
security during, 38
key control during, 38
next year safety planning
during, 38–39
supervision during the, 37
visitor check-in procedures
during, 37, 39
Equipment
emergency plan on, 47–49
intercoms, 47, 78
inventory of safety, 12
periodic review of use/operation of, 78
116
Safe and Secure Schools

providing substitute teachers
with critical, 97
staff provided with cocurricular
event safety, 18–19
See also Supplies
Evacuation procedures
cocurricular event routes for, 18
periodically reviewed
with staff, 77
students with disabilities and
safe, 26–29
See also In-place sheltering;
Relocation sites
Exterior lighting, 39
False alarm scenario, 79
See also Practice drills
Federal Bureau of Investigation, 50
Field trips
discipline procedures for out-of-
town, 20–22
ensuring safety for end-of-the
year, 38
teacher handbook procedures on, 11
Fights at school
difficulties and challenges
of, 58–59
how to respond effectively
to, 59–61
scenario on media
management of, 72
taking steps to prevent, 59
See also Student threats
The Final Report and Findings of the Safe
Schools Initiative (2002), 50
First aid supplies
auditing, 7
cocurricular events access to, 19
substitute teacher access to, 97
Flashlights, 18
Flipcharts (emergency plan), 42
Foliage (building), 39
Foreign country laws, 20
Guest speakers procedures, 10
Guide decision making, 79–81
Handbooks
parent, 12
staff, 83–84
student, 12, 21, 34, 97
teacher, 9–12, 14, 77–78, 97
See also School policies; School safety
information
Harassment
cyberbullying form of, 86
scenario on inadequate staff response
to, 82–83
scenario on staff observation of, 85, 88
staff response to student, 85–87
Health-related student problems, 96
Identification badges, 10
IESP (individualized evacuation and
sheltering plan)
development of, 27
practicing the, 28
In-place sheltering
IESP plan for students with disabilities,
27–28
maps for, 18
periodical reviewing with staff, 77
See also Evacuation procedures;
Relocation sites
Intercoms
effective use of, 47
reviewing operation of, 78
Intimidation
cyberbullying form of, 86
scenario on inadequate staff
response to, 82–83
staff observation of student, 85, 88
staff response to student bullying
and, 85–87
Key control
end-of-year, 38
teacher handbook on, 9
Language
avoiding use of coded emergency, 46
emergency communication using clear, 46
student use of inappropriate, 87
See also Communication
Laws
out-of-town trips and foreign
country, 20
out-of-town trips and local
jurisdictions, 21
periodic staff review of
existing and new, 78
reviewing existing
safety-related, 7
Liability issues (Section 2366), 80
Local law enforcement agencies
cocurricular activities
information provided to, 19
dealing with contraband, 22
117
Index

do not assume immediate
help from, 103
end-of-the year patrol by, 38
regular safety meetings with, 7
relocation site communication
with, 63–64
Lunch procedures, 11
Media management plans
anticipating questions for, 74
points to consider for, 73–74
reviewing and adjusting, 74
scenario of, 72
Megaphones, (battery-powered), 19
MSDS (material safety data sheets), 97
National Incident Management System
(NIMS), 43, 46
New construction planning, 16
No Child Left Behind Act Section 2366, 80
Notepads/pen, 18
Nurses. See School nurses
Out-of-town trips
debriefing after incident on, 22
disciplinary/safety procedures
during, 20–22
student experience benefits of, 22
Parent handbooks, 12
Parent liaisons, 64
Parents
de-escalating situation with
angry, 54–57
disseminating information to, 35
don’t make assumptions about their
safety perceptions, 101
IESP familiarity by, 27
relocation site procedures role of, 63, 64
as safe school partner, 34
security and safety discussions with, 8
student cell phones and, 69
student handbooks reviewed by, 34
Parking
during cocurricular events, 19
staff, 12
Photographic evidence, 21
Physical environment safety
perceived safety of, 1
reviewing exterior lighting
and foliage, 39
as safe school planning concept, 1
sharing information to promote, 35–36
strategic supervision issue
when planning, 16
See also Campus
Picture identification (visitor check-in), 24
Practice drills
evacuating students with
disabilities, 28, 29
for relocating students
during emergencies, 63
See also False alarm scenario
Principal Leadership (NASSP), 2
Principals
security and safety discussions by, 8
teacher handbook annually
reviewed by, 9–12
See also Administrators
Private security, 38
Reagan, R., 19
Relocation sites
emergency plan on, 62
issues to consider for, 62–64
periodically reviewed with staff, 77
See also Evacuation procedures;
In-place sheltering
Safety. See School safety
Scenarios
assessing student threats of violence, 52
de-escalating a situation with
an angry parent, 54–57
media management of
fight at school, 72
staff observation of student
harassment, 85
staff response to Billy’s
emotional state, 82–83
tabletop exercise on student
with gun, 93
teacher ignoring false fire alarm, 79
School community
emergency plan for, 43–44
perceived safety of environment by, 1
sharing safety information with, 33–36
School districts
emergency plan of, 43
policies on student cell
phones, 69–71
school fight policies of, 59
student search policies of, 65–66
School floor plans
cocurricular event evacuation
routes, 18
118
Safe and Secure Schools

marking utilities shutoff valves,
telephones, HVAC controls, 48
updating, 7
School nurses
IESP familiarity by, 27
student health concerns list
prepared by, 96
student visits to, 11
School orientations, 8
School policies
check-in procedures, 10, 23–25,
34, 37, 39
reviewing discipline referral, 78
See also Handbooks
School safety
additional considerations on, 78
parent-school partnership in, 34
questions to ask about, 33–34
seven points to share about, 34–35
substitute teachers and, 95–98
as teamwork and cooperation, 84
topics to review with staff on, 76–78
what teachers must know
about, 79–81
School safety checklists
made out for next year’s staff, 39
during out-of-town trips, 20–22
prepared for substitute
teachers, 95–97
suggested tasks to include in, 6–8
“To Do” list closing out the
school year, 37–40
See also School safety top ten
School safety committee
benefits of creating, 30
costs and expected value of, 32
members and composition of, 30–31
purpose of, 31
recommended actions of, 31–32
suggested duties and activities of, 31
School safety information
folders prepared for substitute teachers
on, 95–97
media management component
of, 72–74
procedures for disseminating, 35
questions to ask about, 33–34
verifying classroom access to
emergency, 7–8
when and who with to share, 34–36
See also Emergency communication;
Emergency response plans;
Handbooks
School safety planning
as critical to minimizing possible
problems, 40
end-of-year for the next school
year, 38–39
two important concepts of, 1
See also Emergency response plans
School safety top ten
1: do not underestimate value of
strategic supervision, 104
2; stress importance of
documentation, 104
3: do not assume administrator
emergency on-site presence, 103
4: do not assume help from local
emergency services, 103
5: have emergency response plan
reviewed by variety of
individuals, 102–103
6: do not assume student willingness to
provide safety information, 102
7: periodic review of emergency
response plan, 76–77, 101–102
8: do not assume parents perceptions
about campus safety, 101
9: do not rely on outside monitoring of
school safety deficiencies, 101
10: provide students with anonymous
tip line, 100
See also School safety checklists
School safety-related work orders, 7
The School Shooter (1999), 50
Schools
access control of, 7, 77
fights at, 58–61
reviewing access-control measures of, 7
reviewing discipline statistics/campus
crime incidents of, 8
safety committee of, 30–32
See also Campus; Classrooms;
Emergency response plans
Seasonally despondent students, 89–91
Seating charts, 96
Section 2366 (No Child Left
Behavior Act), 80
Staff
alerted to potential problem
students, 37
check-in procedures for, 10
fights at school de-escalation by, 58–61
identification badges for, 10
job-related expertise of, 84
key control and, 9
119
Index

making out next year checklists for, 39
meeting prior to cocurricular
event for, 17–18
notification of visitors made to, 24–25
parent liaisons selected from, 64
periodic review of emergency response
plan with, 76–77, 101–102
response to seasonally despondent
students, 89–91
safety topics to review with, 76–78
seasonally depressed, 91
strategies for responding to
bullying by, 86–87
student searches by, 65–68
See also Teachers
Staff development
for appropriate responses
to crisis, 82–84
on check-in procedures, 25
on cocurricular events safety, 17
in-service safety training as part of, 8
providing supervision training
as part of, 14
on responding to fights at
school, 58–61
using tabletop exercises for, 6,
19, 81, 92–94
Staff handbook, 83–84
Staff parking, 12
Student code of conduct, 34
Student handbooks
parents asked to review, 34
provided to students, 12
provided to substitute teachers, 97
taken during out-of-town trips, 21
Student searches
district policies for conducting, 65–66
documentation kept on, 68
making the decision to conduct, 66
using proper procedures/best practices
for, 67
Student threats
end-of-year watching for signs of, 37
using research to assess, 50–53
scenario on assessing violent potential
of, 52
student willingness to provide
information on, 102
tabletop exercise scenario on student
with gun, 93
training support staff to respond
appropriately to, 82–84
See also Fights at school
Students
anonymous tip line provided to, 100
attendance reports on, 10
disciplinary referrals and procedures
for, 10
fights between, 58–61
health-related problems of, 96
identifying potential problem, 37
intimidation, harassment, and bullying
of, 82–83, 85–88
permission to leave campus by, 10
policies on cell phones of, 69–71
relocating during emergency
event, 62–64
responding to seasonally despondent,
89–91
school nurse visits by, 11
security and safety discussions with, 8
Students with disabilities
evacuation plan considerations
for, 26–27
IESP (individualized evacuation and
sheltering plan) for, 27–28
with short-term physical needs, 29
Substitute teachers
handbooks, critical equipment, and
“buddy” teachers for, 97
information folders prepared for, 95–97
instructions given to, 11, 77
Suicide thoughts, 90
Supervision
cocurricular events chain
of command for, 17
do not underestimate value
of strategic, 104
end-of-the year activities, 38
of extensions of the classroom, 84
guidance to staff members on, 13–14
modeling and discussing appropriate
behaviors for, 15
new construction/building renovations
planning on, 16
periodically reviewed with staff, 76
providing appropriate staff
development on, 14
recognizable attire indicating
personnel, 18
strategic planning for effective, 15–16
teacher handbook expectations
regarding, 10, 14
watching for signs of threatening
behavior, 37
See also Chaperones
120
Safe and Secure Schools

Supplies
emergency plan on, 47–49
first aid, 7, 19, 97
See also Equipment
Tabletop exercises
description of, 92–93
developing, 93–94
for emergency response training, 19
getting the most value out of, 94
scenario used for, 93
for staff development, 6, 81
Teacher handbooks
issues used to review, 9–12
periodically reviewing the, 77–78
provided to substitute teachers, 97
safety and security information
included in, 9
on supervision guidelines, 10, 14
Teachers
alerted to potential problem
students, 37
“buddy,” 97
check-in procedures for, 10
false alarm scenario and, 79
fights at school de-escalation
by, 58–61
parent and student handbooks
issued to, 12
periodic review of emergency response
plan with, 76–77, 101–102
reporting absences by, 10
response to seasonally despondent
students, 89–91
safety knowledge and guided decision
making by, 79–81
seasonally depressed, 91
Section 2366 on liability of, 80
student searches by, 65–68
substitute, 11, 77, 95–98
supervisory expectations of, 10
See also Staff
Threat Assessment in Schools (2002), 50
Threatening behavior. See Student threats
Trip handbooks, 20
Two-way radios, 19
U.S. Department of Education, 19, 50, 81
U.S. Department of Homeland Security, 43
U.S. Secret Service, 50
Visitor badges, 24
Visitor check-in procedures
end-of-year, 37, 39
individual steps as part of, 23–25
sharing information on, 34
teacher handbook on, 10
Visitor log, 24
Volunteer chaperones, 21
Weapons
out-of-town trips and, 22
searching students for, 67
tabletop exercise on student with, 93
121
Index


The American Association of School Administrators, founded in 1865, is the
professional organization for more than 13,000 educational leaders across the
United States. AASA’s mission is to support and develop effective school system
leaders who are dedicated to the highest quality public education for all children.
For more information, visit www.aasa.org.
The Corwin Press logo—a raven striding across an open book—represents the union of
courage and learning. Corwin Press is committed to improving education for all learners
by publishing books and other professional development resources for those serving
the field of PreK–12 education. By providing practical, hands-on materials, Corwin
Press continues to carry out the promise of its motto: “Helping Educators Do
Their Work Better.”


