www.allitebooks.com

Salesforce.com Customization 
Handbook
Customize Salesforce to automate your business 
requirements
Rakesh Gupta
Sagar Pareek
BIRMINGHAM - MUMBAI
www.allitebooks.com

Salesforce.com Customization Handbook
Copyright © 2014 Packt Publishing
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval 
system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, without the prior written 
permission of the publisher, except in the case of brief quotations embedded in 
critical articles or reviews.
Every effort has been made in the preparation of this book to ensure the accuracy 
of the information presented. However, the information contained in this book is 
sold without warranty, either express or implied. Neither the authors, nor Packt 
Publishing, and its dealers and distributors will be held liable for any damages 
caused or alleged to be caused directly or indirectly by this book.
Packt Publishing has endeavored to provide trademark information about all of the 
companies and products mentioned in this book by the appropriate use of capitals. 
However, Packt Publishing cannot guarantee the accuracy of this information.
First published: September 2014
Production reference: 1050914
Published by Packt Publishing Ltd.
Livery Place
35 Livery Street
Birmingham B3 2PB, UK.
ISBN 978-1-84968-598-6
www.packtpub.com
Cover image by Artie Ng (artherng@yahoo.com.au)
www.allitebooks.com

Credits
Authors
Rakesh Gupta
Sagar Pareek
Reviewers
Steven Jeffes
Praveen Makam
Francisco Esteban Fálder Rodríguez
Sakthivel Thandavarayan
Jitendra Zaa
Acquisition Editor
Owen Roberts
Content Development Editor
Priya Singh
Technical Editor
Shashank Desai
Copy Editors
Roshni Banerjee
Mradula Hegde
Gladson Monteiro
Deepa Nambiar
Alfida Paiva
Adithi Shetty
Project Coordinator
Mary Alex
Proofreaders
Simran Bhogal
Maria Gould
Ameesha Green
Indexers
Hemangini Bari
Tejal Soni
Graphics
Valentina D'silva
Disha Haria
Abhinash Sahu
Production Coordinator
Shantanu Zagade
Cover Work
Shantanu Zagade
www.allitebooks.com

About the Authors
Rakesh Gupta is a Salesforce MVP, evangelist, trainer, blogger, and an independent 
Salesforce consultant. He is from Katihar, Bihar, and lives in Mumbai. He has been 
working on the Force.com platform since 2011. Currently, he is working as a Salesforce 
consultant and is a regular contributor to the Salesforce Success Community. He is the 
co-author of Developing Applications with Salesforce Chatter, Packt Publishing, and he is 
also a technical reviewer of Learning Force.com Application Development, Packt Publishing. 
He is very passionate about Force.com and shares information through various 
channels, including his blog at http://rakeshistom.wordpress.com.
He has trained almost 150 professionals around the globe and handled corporate 
trainings. He has 5x certifications in Salesforce. He works on all the aspects of 
Salesforce and is an expert in data migration, integration, configuration, and 
customization. He is the leader of the Navi Mumbai and Nashik developer user 
groups in India. He is also the initiator of the Mumbai Salesforce user group. 
He organizes Meetups at regular intervals for the groups he is part of.
He can be reached at rakeshistom@gmail.com, or you can follow him on Twitter 
@rakeshistom.
I would like to thank my parents, Kedar Nath Gupta and Madhuri 
Gupta, and my sister, Sarika Gupta, for supporting me in every step 
of my life. I would like to thank Packt Publishing for giving me this 
opportunity to share my knowledge via this book. I would also like 
to thank Adam Seligman, Vice President, Developer and Partner 
Marketing at Salesforce.com, for encouraging me. A special thanks 
to all my well-wishers and friends.
Lastly, I would like to thank my good friend and co-author of this 
book, Sagar Pareek, who came up with good ideas. I thank him for 
spending many nights and weekends working on this book with me.
www.allitebooks.com

Sagar Pareek is a Salesforce enthusiast, blogger, author, and Salesforce certified 
Force.com developer. He is from Bikaner, Rajasthan, and currently lives in Noida. He 
has been working on the Force.com platform since 2012, from his college days. Since 
2013, he is working for Astrea IT Services Pvt. Ltd., Noida as a Salesforce developer. 
Prior to that, he worked as a PHP and Java intern at Acme Embedded Technologies 
Pvt. Ltd., Bikaner. He was featured by Salesforce in a webinar (Boost Your Career: Get 
Cloud-Trained and Certified). He won a prize in the Salesforce New Year Resolution 
2013 challenge. He actively participates in the Salesforce discussion platforms 
such as user groups and organizing workshops. He leads the India Salesforce 
student developer user group and is the co-leader of the Navi Mumbai Salesforce 
developer user group. You can follow him on his blog at http://forceexperiment.
wordpress.com. He holds a Bachelor of Technology degree in Computer Science 
and Engineering from Rajasthan Technical University and is an alumnus of Manda 
Institute of Technology, Bikaner. He spends his spare time with his family and 
friends and exploring Force.com. He is the co-author of Developing Applications 
with Salesforce Chatter, Packt Publishing.
You can connect with him on Twitter @Sagarjaipareek.
I would like to thank my parents Sushil Pareek and Chanchal 
Pareek, my siblings Nikita Pareek and Dr. Sugita Pareek, my gurus 
Manish Shandilya and Pankaj Kumar Pandey, my mentors Kavindra 
Patel, Director, Developer Programs and Events at Salesforce.com, 
and Paresh Gupta, co-founder, Sharp Edge Learning. Special thanks 
to all the reviewers who spent their precious time reviewing our 
content. Thanks to the cartoonist Anil Bhargava for his excellent 
work on the images used in this book.
Last but not least, I would like to thank my best friend and 
co-author Rakesh Gupta for his constant support and trust that 
enabled me to reach this level and write this book.
www.allitebooks.com

About the Reviewers
Steven Jeffes has had a successful career generating over $450MM in sales and 
orchestrating the turnaround ($100MM+) of several Fortune 200 companies. He 
has nearly 100 career awards and accolades and is an architect of one of the most 
successful innovation programs is US history at GE. He is considered a thought 
leader/expert in an array of corporate disciplines such as Customer Relationship 
Management (CRM) and Customer Service Strategy; social media and Social 
Relationship Management (SRM); marketing and sales and world-class process 
design; brand and product management, public relations, and communications; 
engineering, IT, technology development and deployment, and innovation 
programs; and organizational design/optimization and change management.
Steven has worked for world's leading companies such as Accenture, IBM Global 
Services, General Electric, and Lockheed-Martin and has provided CXO-level advisory 
consulting services to companies such as Macy's, American Express, Intuit, Verizon, 
Vanguard, Pfizer, Johnson & Johnson, Citibank, JC Penney, Dell, Sony, and many 
others. His entire bio can be found at http://www.stevenjeffes.com/.
Steven is the author of the bestselling book Appearance Is Everything, 
SterlingHouse Publisher, which can be found on Amazon (http://www.amazon.com/
Steve-Jeffes/e/B001K8FMLS). He is also the author of the syndicated blog on 
CRM, marketing, innovation, social media, and change management followed 
by 168,000 people worldwide (http://stevenjeffes.wordpress.com/).  
Steven can be reached on e-mail at StevenJeffes@yahoo.com.
Praveen Makam is based out of Bangalore, India, and has been working in the 
Salesforce CRM domain since 2011. He is currently working with CSC Consulting 
India and was working with Accenture Consulting until 2013. He can be reached on 
Twitter @praveenmakam.
www.allitebooks.com

Francisco Esteban Fálder Rodríguez is currently working as a technical account 
manager for the biggest partner of Salesforce.com in Europe. His background as a 
Telecommunication Engineer makes him a versatile asset to get involved in any kind 
of Salesforce project. He previously worked in Salesforce.com technical support.
I would like to thank Gonzalo Pérez Díaz for providing me with the 
opportunity to get involved in this project.
Sakthivel Thandavarayan is based in Tamil Nadu, India. He has more than 
4 years of IT experience and has been building solutions with Salesforce CRM 
since 2009 for companies of all sizes and across a variety of industries. He is 
very passionate about the Salesforce.com platform and currently works as 
senior Salesforce consultant for a reputed US-based company.
He is a Salesforce.com Certified Administrator (ADM 201) along with his regular 
contribution to the Salesforce customer community/developer forum. He 
moderates the Salesforce Google+ community at https://plus.google.com/
communities/112913878984525867679.
Before contributing to this book as a reviewer, he worked as a technical reviewer 
for the book Salesforce CRM: The Definitive Admin Handbook Second Edition, 
Packt Publishing. You can mail him at sakthi.tsl@gmail.com.
I would like to thank the authors, project coordinators, and 
Packt Publishing for giving me this fantastic opportunity. Special 
thanks to my beautiful wife and gorgeous daughter, who motivate 
me to achieve great things and help, support, and guide me through 
each and every step.
www.allitebooks.com

Jitendra Zaa is a Force.com developer and owner of the well-known Salesforce.com 
blog http://blog.shivasoft.in/. He has extensively worked on many areas 
of Force.com, such as integration, data loading, AppExchange, and application 
development. He is a Java and Salesforce.com certified advanced developer, 
administrator, and consultant.
Jitendra has more than 7 years of experience in software development using 
Salesforce, Java, Node.js, AngularJS, PHP, ORMB, J2ME, and ASP.NET technologies. 
He graduated from RTM Nagpur University and is currently working with 
Cognizant Technology Solutions in the USA.
Apart from this book, Jitendra was also the reviewer on Visualforce Development 
Cookbook, and wrote a blog on Developing Applications with Salesforce Chatter, 
both by Packt Publishing. His Twitter handle is @ilovenagpur.
I wish to thank my parents, family, friends, and especially my wife 
for helping me maintain time for writing blogs and encouraging me. 
Also, I would like to thank the Packt Publishing team and the author 
of this book for giving me this unique opportunity.
www.allitebooks.com

www.PacktPub.com
Support files, eBooks, discount offers, and more
For support files and downloads related to your book, please visit www.PacktPub.com.
Did you know that Packt offers eBook versions of every book published, with PDF and ePub 
files available? You can upgrade to the eBook version at www.PacktPub.com and as a print 
book customer, you are entitled to a discount on the eBook copy. Get in touch with us at 
service@packtpub.com for more details.
At www.PacktPub.com, you can also read a collection of free technical articles, sign up for a 
range of free newsletters and receive exclusive discounts and offers on Packt books and eBooks.
TM
http://PacktLib.PacktPub.com
Do you need instant solutions to your IT questions? PacktLib is Packt's online digital book 
library. Here, you can search, access, and read Packt's entire library of books.
Why subscribe?
•	
Fully searchable across every book published by Packt
•	
Copy and paste, print, and bookmark content
•	
On demand and accessible via a web browser
Free access for Packt account holders
If you have an account with Packt at www.PacktPub.com, you can use this to access PacktLib 
today and view 9 entirely free books. Simply use your login credentials for immediate access.
Instant updates on new Packt books
Get notified! Find out when new books are published by following @PacktEnterprise on 
Twitter or the Packt Enterprise Facebook page.
www.allitebooks.com


Table of Contents
Preface	
1
Chapter 1: Getting Started with Salesforce	
5
Overview of the Salesforce CRM	
6
Client-server architecture	
6
Pros and cons of the client-server architecture	
7
Introducing Salesforce CRM	
9
The architecture of Salesforce.com	
9
Various products of Salesforce	
10
Sales Cloud	
11
Various editions of Sales Cloud	
12
Service Cloud	
14
Various editions of Service Cloud	
15
Salesforce Chatter	
16
Data.com	
18
Various editions of Data.com	
19
Work.com	
20
Various editions of Work.com	
21
Desk.com	
22
Various editions of Desk.com	
23
ExactTarget Marketing Cloud	
23
Various editions of ExactTarget Marketing Cloud	
24
Salesforce1	
25
Various editions of Salesforce1	
25
Salesforce.com – the most innovative company	
26
Key problems with ancient sales processes	
27
Key points for standardized sales performance processes	
28
Using Salesforce to streamline your business	
28
Improving collaboration in your organization	
29
Creating a Salesforce developer account	
30
Logging in to Salesforce.com	
31

Table of Contents
[ ii ]
First impression of the Salesforce developer account	
32
Benefits of using the Salesforce developer account	
33
Limitations of Salesforce Developer Edition	
34
Summary	
34
Chapter 2: User Management and Organization Administration	
35
Setting up company information	
36
Updating the company's information	
36
Locale setting	
38
Salesforce.com newsletter and login notification settings	
39
Corporate currency	
39
Additional features	
40
Viewing the licenses	
40
User license type	
41
Multiple currencies	
43
Enabling a single currency	
44
Enabling multiple currencies	
44
Adding a new currency	
45
Changing the corporate currency	
46
Effects of enabling multi-currency	
46
Fiscal year and its customization	
47
Standard fiscal year	
47
Custom fiscal year	
48
Defining a new custom fiscal year	
48
Business hours setup and its effect	
49
Setting up the business hours and its effects	
50
Holiday settings	
51
Setting up the holiday settings	
51
Associating holidays with business hours	
52
Language settings and its importance	
55
Personal settings	
55
Organization's default language settings	
56
Fully supported languages	
56
End user languages	
56
Platform-only languages	
57
The significance of roles and profiles	
59
Significance of the role hierarchy	
59
Creating the role hierarchy for your organization	
60
Profiles	
62
Types of profiles in Salesforce	
63
Different types of standard profiles	
63
Creating a custom profile	
65
Settings available under profile	
66

Table of Contents
[ iii ]
Permission sets	
67
Settings available under permission sets	
68
Creating permission sets	
68
Deleting permission sets	
70
Cloning permission sets	
70
Setting up the users	
71
Adding multiple users	
73
Locking and unlocking users	
74
Unlocking a user	
75
Freezing a user's account	
75
Benefits of the login history	
76
Groups and their uses	
77
Creating a public group	
77
Creating a personal group	
78
Queues and their significance	
79
Creating a queue	
79
Personal setup	
81
Editing personal information	
81
Changing the password	
81
Resetting the security token	
82
Language and time zone setup	
83
Grant account login access	
83
Checking connections	
84
Approver settings	
85
Summary	
86
Chapter 3: Making Your Salesforce Data Secure – Security 
Settings in Salesforce	
87
Concepts of OWD	
88
Setting up OWD	
88
Basic OWD settings for objects	
90
Sharing Rule	
90
Types of Sharing Rules	
92
Field-Level Security and its effect on data visibility	
94
From an object-field	
94
From a profile	
96
Field accessibility	
96
Setting up password policies	
98
Two-factor authentication in Salesforce	
99
Removing Time-Based Token/Two-Factor Authentication	
102
Session setting and its effect on users	
102
Network access – securing your organization's data	
105

Table of Contents
[ iv ]
Removing activated IP activations	
106
Setting up login access policies	
107
Single sign-on settings	
108
Authentication providers	
109
View Setup Audit Trail	
112
Audit Trail key concepts	
113
Expire all passwords	
114
Concepts of delegated administration	
115
Setting up a delegated administration	
115
Remote site settings	
119
HTML documents and attachments settings	
121
Testing document and attachment settings	
122
Portal Health Check	
122
Portal Health Check Reports	
123
Administrative and User Permissions	
123
Object Access and Field-Level Security	
124
Sharing Organization-Wide Defaults	
125
Sharing Rules	
125
Summary	
126
Chapter 4: Domain Management, E-mail Administration, 
and Google Apps Settings	
127
My Domain	
127
Setting up My Domain	
128
Deploying My Domain	
129
My Domain Settings	
130
Customizing your Salesforce login page	
131
Various e-mail administration methods	
133
Deliverability	
134
Access to Send Email	
134
Bounce Administration	
135
Email Security Compliance	
136
Mass Email	
136
Organization-Wide Email Addresses	
137
Compliance BCC Email	
139
Test Deliverability	
140
Email to Salesforce	
141
Setting up the Email to Salesforce URL	
142
Deleting attachments sent as links	
144
Email Footers	
145
Google Apps settings	
147
Creating a Google Apps Account	
148
Configuring Google Apps domain settings	
148

Table of Contents
[ v ]
Activating Google Apps Services	
149
Adding Google Docs to Salesforce	
149
Summary	
150
Chapter 5: CRM Functions and Streamlining 
Business Requirements	
151
Type of relationships in Salesforce	
152
A master-detail relationship	
152
Lookup relationships	
152
The difference between master-detail and lookup relationships	
153
Many-to-many relationship	
153
Self-relationship	
154
Hierarchal relationship	
154
Sales Cloud overview	
154
Campaign management 	
156
Setting up the campaign access	
157
Campaigns – standard fields	
157
Campaign members – standard fields	
160
Creating a new campaign	
162
Adding values in member status	
163
Adding campaign members	
164
Lead management	
166
Leads – standard fields	
166
Lead business process	
169
Lead settings	
170
Creating new leads	
170
Auto-response rules	
174
Assignment rules	
176
Accepting records from the lead queue	
179
Lead conversion	
180
Lead scoring	
180
Lead conversion – mapping lead fields	
180
Account management	
183
Accounts – standard fields	
184
Creating a new account	
186
Contact management	
186
Opportunity management	
187
Opportunity – standard fields	
187
Creating a new opportunity	
189
Big deal alert	
190
Order management	
191
Enabling orders	
191
Orders – standard fields	
192
Creating a new order	
194
Activating an order	
195

Table of Contents
[ vi ]
Service Cloud overview	
195
Case management	
196
Creating a case manually	
196
Email-to-Case	
196
Web-to-Case	
199
Streamlining a business process	
201
Creating a custom object	
201
Tab creation	
205
App creation	
207
Renaming standard tabs and labels	
210
The significance of various field types in Salesforce	
211
Adding fields to objects	
212
Adding relationships to objects	
214
Event	
215
Event Registration	
216
Sponsor	
216
Booth Registration	
217
Page layout	
218
Setting up record types	
220
Tracking the history	
222
Summary	
224
Chapter 6: Automating a Business Process	
225
Improving the data quality – the validation rule	
225
The Formula field	
230
The Roll-up Summary field	
232
Letterhead	
235
Uploading a file into the document folder	
236
Creating a letterhead	
237
An e-mail template	
240
Types of e-mail templates	
240
Creating an e-mail template	
240
Attaching a file with an e-mail template	
244
E-mail template's folder management	
244
Creating an e-mail template folder	
245
Deleting an e-mail template folder	
246
Using workflow to automate your work	
246
Creating a workflow rule	
247
Field update	
249
Assigning a task	
251
Creating an e-mail alert	
252
Outbound messages	
254
Relating all the actions with the workflow	
255
Limitations of the workflow	
259

Table of Contents
[ vii ]
Monitoring a time-based workflow	
260
Managing a time-based workflow	
261
Deleting a time-based workflow	
262
Streamlining your approval process – approval processes	
262
The wizard to create the approval process	
262
Creating a new approval process	
263
Final approval actions	
268
Final rejection actions	
268
Recall actions	
269
Initial submission actions	
269
Approval steps	
270
Approval step 1	
271
Approval step 2	
273
Adding an action to step 1	
274
Adding an action to step 2	
276
Viewing the process diagram	
277
Activating the approval process	
278
Limitations of the approval process	
278
Various ways to approve a request – approval settings	
279
Stay-in-Touch	
282
Stay-in-Touch settings	
283
A request update	
284
Summary	
287
Chapter 7: Concepts of Data Management	
289
Salesforce Record IDs	
290
Data management operations	
290
Tools for data management	
291
Import Wizard	
291
Creating a CSV file	
292
Import records into Salesforce through Import Wizard	
292
Data Import Wizard	
296
Importing records into Salesforce through Data Import Wizard	
296
Monitoring bulk data load jobs	
298
Data loader	
299
Installing data loader	
300
Configuring data loader	
300
Exporting data using data loader	
301
Differences between data loader and Import Wizard	
304
Truncating custom objects	
304
Enabling truncate for custom objects	
305
Performing truncate for custom objects	
305

Table of Contents
[ viii ]
Sandbox	
307
Types of Sandboxes	
307
Defining the Sandbox templates	
308
Creating a Sandbox	
309
Refreshing the Sandbox	
310
Deleting all the data	
311
Data Export Service	
312
Get the storage usage details	
313
Data storage	
314
File storage	
314
Mass transfer approval requests	
316
Mass transfer record	
317
Mass deleting records	
319
Mass reassign accounts and opportunity teams	
321
Tags	
323
Summary	
325
Chapter 8: Reports and Dashboards in Salesforce	
327
Understanding report types	
328
Custom report types	
328
Creating a custom report type	
328
Different types of reports	
331
A tabular report	
331
A summary report	
333
A matrix report	
334
A joined report	
334
A few noteworthy points about reports	
335
Dashboard components and their types	
335
Creating a dashboard	
336
Deleting a dashboard	
338
A few noteworthy points about dashboards	
339
Exporting a report	
339
Exporting reports in the background	
341
Exporting reports in a printable view	
341
Sharing reports and dashboards	
343
Folder sharing	
343
Enabling enhanced sharing for reports and dashboards	
344
Creating new reports and dashboard folders	
344
Sharing reports and a dashboard folder	
345
Scheduling a report	
346
Scheduling a dashboard	
348
A few noteworthy points on the report and dashboard schedule	
349

Table of Contents
[ ix ]
Hiding unused report types	
350
Exporting reports without footers	
351
Floating headers in summary and matrix reports	
352
Enabling floating report headers	
352
Using the floating header in reports	
352
Analytical snapshot	
353
A few noteworthy points about analytical snapshots	
358
Summary	
358
Chapter 9: Chatter Configuration	
359
Basic overview of Salesforce Chatter	
360
Enabling Salesforce Chatter	
360
Enabling Chatter invites	
361
Topics for objects	
361
Creating topics	
362
Branding e-mail notifications	
364
Chatter groups	
366
Creating Chatter groups	
366
Joining a group	
367
Archiving a Chatter group	
367
The Chatter announcement feature	
368
Posting e-mail to Chatter groups	
370
Chatter e-mail settings	
371
Enabling feed tracking	
372
Posting a dashboard snapshot to Chatter	
373
Various features of Chatter	
375
Status update	
376
Posting a comment	
376
Adding a link	
377
Chatter poll	
378
The Chatter publisher action	
378
Enabling a publisher action	
378
Creating object-specific actions	
379
Creating global actions	
380
Adding a global action to the page layout	
380
Follow/unfollow users and records	
381
Follow/unfollow users	
381
Follow/unfollow records	
382
Managing files	
382
Uploading a file	
383
Deleting a file	
383
Following a file	
383
Summary	
383
www.allitebooks.com

Table of Contents
[ x ]
Chapter 10: Mobile Administration	
385
Overview of SalesforceA	
385
Features of the SalesforceA mobile application	
385
Installing the SalesforceA mobile application	
386
Logging in to the SalesforceA mobile application	
386
Overview of Salesforce#	
388
Installing the Salesforce# mobile application	
388
Overview of Salesforce1	
388
Features of the Salesforce1 mobile application	
388
Installing the Salesforce1 mobile application	
389
Configuring the Salesforce1mobile application	
389
Mobile Browser App Settings	
390
Logging in to the Salesforce1 mobile application	
390
Branding the Salesforce1 application	
392
Summary	
393
Chapter 11: Setting Up Deployment Processes	
395
Understanding Change Sets and their types	
395
Outbound Change Sets	
396
Inbound Change Sets	
399
The Force.com IDE	
401
Installing the Force.com IDE	
401
Overview of packages	
404
Summary	
404
Chapter 12: AppExchange – Extending Salesforce Functionality	
405
AppExchange – an overview	
405
Installing applications from AppExchange	
406
A few noteworthy applications	
414
Uninstalling applications from Salesforce	
415
Summary	
416
Index	
417

Preface
This book is for Salesforce developers, administrators, customers, and partners to 
get started with the Salesforce platform configuration. It will act as both a reference 
for an administrators and a configuration guide for newbie customers who want to 
configure Salesforce for their organization.
This book covers all the possible configurations of Salesforce for enterprises, such 
as workflow, approval process, Chatter, data management, and AppExchange 
overview. We have taken a hands-on approach with real-time scenarios so that 
readers can get a complete overview on the topics.
Salesforce CRM is a service by Salesforce.com, which is commercial, but all the 
material in this book is developed using the Developer Edition.
What this book covers
Chapter 1, Getting Started with Salesforce, provides basic knowledge of CRM, proceeds 
towards Salesforce using examples, and then states the benefits of implementing 
Salesforce for your organization. It also covers the basic architecture of Salesforce.
Chapter 2, User Management and Organization Administration, starts with various ways 
to set up a user in Salesforce and then explains the organization administration.
Chapter 3, Making Your Salesforce Data Secure – Security Settings in Salesforce, covers the 
basics of Salesforce platform security and then goes through various security aspects 
of Salesforce.
Chapter 4, Domain Management, E-mail Administration, and Google Apps Settings, 
provides a clear-cut knowledge of domain management, e-mail management, 
and Google Apps setup.

Preface
[ 2 ]
Chapter 5, CRM Functions and Streamlining Business Requirements, gives the reader an 
overview on Sales Cloud and Service Cloud.
Chapter 6, Automating a Business Process, serves as a highlight of the book in which the 
reader will gain knowledge on how to automate a business process in Salesforce.
Chapter 7, Concepts of Data Management, describes various ways to manage data 
in Salesforce.
Chapter 8, Reports and Dashboards in Salesforce, explains the concept of reports 
and dashboards in Salesforce. Salesforce reports and dashboards help to analyze 
information captured in CRM, further assisting to make informed business decisions.
Chapter 9, Chatter Configuration, explains how to configure Chatter for your 
organization and introduces you to some of the basic settings of Salesforce Chatter.
Chapter 10, Mobile Administration, explains how to perform mobile administration. 
This chapter also discusses SalesforceA installation and its uses.
Chapter 11, Setting Up Deployment Processes, covers various ways to deploy changes in 
a live system.
Chapter 12, AppExchange – Extending Salesforce Functionality, teaches you how to 
extend a Salesforce.com functionality using third-party applications.
What you need for this book
To understand all the projects covered in this book, you will need the following:
•	
A Salesforce developer account
•	
A browser
•	
An Internet connection
Who this book is for
The book is written for anyone, from a newbie to an experienced professional in 
the Salesforce arena, who wants to learn or explore various aspects of Salesforce 
customization. After reading this book, you will be able to set up the entire 
configuration on your own.

Preface
[ 3 ]
Conventions
In this book, you will find a number of styles of text that distinguish between 
different kinds of information. Here are some examples of these styles, and an 
explanation of their meaning.
Code words in text, database table names, folder names, filenames, file extensions, 
pathnames, dummy URLs, user input, and Twitter handles are shown as follows: 
"In the search bar at the top, enter the keyword vcard."
New terms and important words are shown in bold. Words that you see on 
the screen, in menus or dialog boxes for example, appear in the text like this: 
"When you click on AppExchange, a new window will open in the browser."
Warnings or important notes appear in a box like this.
Tips and tricks appear like this.
Reader feedback
Feedback from our readers is always welcome. Let us know what you think about 
this book—what you liked or may have disliked. Reader feedback is important for 
us to develop titles that you really get the most out of.
To send us general feedback, simply send an e-mail to feedback@packtpub.com, 
and mention the book title via the subject of your message.
If there is a topic that you have expertise in and you are interested in either writing 
or contributing to a book, see our author guide on www.packtpub.com/authors.
Customer support
Now that you are the proud owner of a Packt book, we have a number of things to 
help you to get the most from your purchase.

Preface
[ 4 ]
Errata
Although we have taken every care to ensure the accuracy of our content, mistakes 
do happen. If you find a mistake in one of our books—maybe a mistake in the text 
or the code—we would be grateful if you would report this to us. By doing so, you 
can save other readers from frustration and help us improve subsequent versions of 
this book.
If you find any errata, please report them by visiting http://www.packtpub.com/ 
submit-errata, selecting your book, clicking on the errata submission form link, and 
entering the details of your errata. Once your errata are verified, your submission 
will be accepted and the errata will be uploaded on our website, or added to any list 
of existing errata, under the Errata section of that title. Any existing errata can be 
viewed by selecting your title from http://www.packtpub.com/support.
Piracy
Piracy of copyright material on the Internet is an ongoing problem across all media. 
At Packt, we take the protection of our copyright and licenses very seriously. If you 
come across any illegal copies of our works, in any form, on the Internet, please 
provide us with the location address or website name immediately so that we can 
pursue a remedy.
Please contact us at copyright@packtpub.com with a link to the suspected 
pirated material.
We appreciate your help in protecting our authors, and our ability to bring you 
valuable content.
Questions
You can contact us at questions@packtpub.com if you are having a problem with 
any aspect of the book, and we will do our best to address it.

Getting Started 
with Salesforce
The chapter starts with an overview of the Salesforce CRM and its architecture 
and takes the discussion forward to the various products of Salesforce.com. We 
will discuss ways to streamline sales processes and improve collaboration in an 
organization. By the end of this chapter, you will have learned how to create a 
Salesforce developer account. The following topics will be covered in this chapter:
•	
Overview of the Salesforce CRM
•	
Architecture of Salesforce
•	
Various products of Salesforce
•	
Streamlining the sales process
•	
Improving collaboration in your organization
•	
What makes Salesforce the most innovative company
•	
Creating a Salesforce developer account

Getting Started with Salesforce
[ 6 ]
Overview of the Salesforce CRM
In ancient ages, people used papyrus and wood to maintain their customer 
information, and eventually, this changed to slate. In the seventeenth and 
eighteenth centuries, kings used to take help from clerks (also known as Munim); 
these clerks were responsible for maintaining all the customer information on behalf 
of the king. From time to time, the clerks used to show this account information to 
the king. The problem with this system was that it was not secured; the clerk could 
easily manipulate the data for his benefit, and this may have caused losses to the 
king's business.
"Necessity is the mother of invention" – Plato
As the time passed, computers were invented, so people used them to save the 
customer information. In the late nineteenth century, the client-server model came 
into the picture, which introduced a centralized way of keeping record of the 
customer information.
Client-server architecture
In a client-server architecture, the end user acts as a client to the service provider; 
the service provider has its own centralized system known as the server. Once the 
user connects to the server, they get full rights to access their data. A few examples 
of CRM software based on the client-server model are Siebel, Oracle RightNow, 
and SugarCRM. The following is a client-server architecture diagram that describes 
this concept:

Chapter 1
[ 7 ]
Database
Server
Client
Client
Client
Client
Client
Server
Pros and cons of the client-server architecture
The following table describes the pros and cons of the client-server architecture:
Pros
Cons
The data is centralized once the user 
connects to the server, which means that 
he or she gets access to the relative data.
The user does not have access to the data on 
their system when he or she is not connected 
to the server.
Any number of users can connect to 
the server.
Due to the high volume of requests, the server 
may stop responding or can go down.
Data is stored in company premises or 
company data center.
If a technical fault occurs at the data center, 
then the customers will not be able to access 
the system.
This architecture needs technical staff to 
maintain and upgrade the server.
This architecture requires a dedicated 
high-speed server and a client's system 
with high-end graphics and the 
required software.
There were certain problems with the maintenance and upgrading of the 
client-server model. So, in the twenty-first century, cloud computing came 
into the picture.

Getting Started with Salesforce
[ 8 ]
Cloud computing is the new concept in the computing era, in which customers don't 
have to worry about server maintenance, upgradation, and scalability. We can say 
that this is a subscription-based model where we can buy the number of licenses as 
required and start using the application. A few big names in cloud computing are 
Amazon, Google, IBM, Microsoft, and Salesforce.com.
As per the preceding diagram, we see that we can connect with a large number of 
devices (mobiles, tablets, and workstations) via the same server. Customers only 
need a browser and an Internet connection to use their applications.
Advantages of cloud computing
The following are the advantages of cloud computing:
•	
No large startup fee
•	
It's a subscription-based model
•	
No buying, maintaining, and configuring hardware and software
•	
We can scale up with the growth of our business
•	
It's more secure and reliable than the client-server model
•	
We can access it from anywhere, anytime, and via any device; we just need 
an Internet connection

Chapter 1
[ 9 ]
Introducing Salesforce CRM
Salesforce.com was initially founded as a CRM company in the dot com era in 1999 
by former Oracle executives, Marc Benioff, Parker Harris, Dave Moellenhoff, and 
Frank Dominguez, as a company specializing in Software as a Service (SaaS). In 
June 2004, the company went public on the New York Stock Exchange under the 
stock symbol CRM. Salesforce.com is the leader in the SaaS-based on-demand cloud 
computing model. Salesforce.com's journey started in 2002 when they launched their 
first SaaS-based product.
The following screenshot shows the home page of their first product:
The architecture of Salesforce.com
The architecture of Salesforce.com is multitenant. In a multitenant architecture, a 
single system serves to the whole consumer base of the provider. This means that 
the system resources are shared among all the users. Salesforce.com provides a 
single copy of an app to all the organizations, which runs on Salesforce servers; 
the organizations are permitted to customize the app according to their business 
requirements. The resources are similar for all the Salesforce customers. Multiple 
organizations encounter the same interface to interact with the Salesforce cloud.
www.allitebooks.com

Getting Started with Salesforce
[ 10 ]
Salesforce also applies some limits to the usage termed as governor limits to make 
sure that a user/organization does not hit the threshold that might affect the system 
performance, thus making the system work slow or go down for other users or 
organizations. The clients of Salesforce.com are termed as an organization. Multiple 
organizations are called tenants, and these tenants further have multiple users based 
upon the organization's user base or employees.
Various products of Salesforce
Salesforce has various products available and they are as follows:
•	
Sales Cloud
•	
Service Cloud
•	
Salesforce Chatter
•	
Data.com
•	
Work.com
•	
Desk.com
•	
ExactTarget Marketing Cloud
•	
Salesforce1

Chapter 1
[ 11 ]
Sales Cloud
Sales Cloud is a product designed to automate your sales process. By implementing 
this, an organization can boost their sales process. It includes campaign, lead, 
account, contact, opportunity (deal), product, quotes, report, dashboard, and 
many other features as well, which we will discuss in next chapter. Salesforce 
offers various Sales Cloud editions, and as per the business needs, an organization 
can buy any of these different editions:

Getting Started with Salesforce
[ 12 ]
The price may change over time; whenever your organization is planning 
to implement Salesforce Sales Cloud, ask your account executive to 
contact Salesforce.com or visit http://www.salesforce.com/in/
sales-cloud/overview/ for the updated price.
Various editions of Sales Cloud
The following are the various editions of Sales Cloud:
•	
Contact Manager Edition: This edition is for small businesses. It primarily 
provides the contact management features. By implementing this edition, 
an organization can track accounts, contacts, activities, calendars, notes and 
attachments, and reports. Mobile access is also available for users. Users can 
also access Chatter. For each Contact Manager Edition license, organizations 
have to pay 5 USD per month.
•	
Group Edition: This edition is for small workgroups or businesses 
with a limited number of users only. Currently, Group Edition can have 
a maximum of 10 users per organization. Group Edition contains all 
the features of Contact Manager Edition, plus some extra features. By 
implementing Group Edition, organizations can manage their sales life 
cycle, starting from expression of interest (lead management) to closing 
the deal and providing customer service. Group Edition offers accounts, 
contacts, opportunities, leads, and reports. For each Group Edition license, 
organizations have to pay 25 USD per month.
•	
Professional Edition: This edition is for small and medium enterprise 
(SME). It is designed for business needs where a fully featured CRM 
functionality is required. It provides the CRM functionality of marketing, 
sales, and service automation. Professional Edition is a perfect fit for 
small- to mid-sized businesses. It includes all the features of Group 
Edition, plus the organization can manage campaigns, mass e-mail, 
and a customizable dashboard. For each Professional Edition license, 
organizations have to pay 65 USD per month.

Chapter 1
[ 13 ]
In any of the preceding three editions, the API is not enabled. 
The API is required to use external applications such as 
dataloader. To enable profiles, workflow, and the approval 
process, the organization has to pay an extra amount.
•	
Enterprise Edition: This edition is for businesses with large and complex 
business requirements. It includes all the features available in Professional 
Edition, plus it provides advanced customization capabilities to automate 
business processes and web service API access for integration with other 
systems. Enterprise Edition also includes workflow, the approval process, 
profile, page layout, and custom app development. In addition, organizations 
also get the Salesforce Identity feature with this edition. For each Enterprise 
Edition license, organizations have to pay 125 USD per month.
•	
Performance Edition: This edition includes all the Salesforce.com features 
for an entire enterprise. It provides a new level of platform flexibility to 
manage and share all of their information on demand. The key features of 
Salesforce.com Unlimited Edition (in addition to Enterprise Edition features) 
are premier support, full mobile access, and increased storage limits. It also 
includes Work.com, Service Cloud, knowledge base, live agent chat, multiple 
Sandboxes, and unlimited custom app development.
When purchasing Salesforce.com licenses, organizations 
have to negotiate with Salesforce to get the maximum 
number of Sandboxes. If your organization wants to have 
more space, then the organization will have to pay an 
extra amount. To know more about these license types, 
visit www2.sfdcstatic.com/in/assets/pdf/
datasheets/DS_SalesCloud_EdCompare.pdf.

Getting Started with Salesforce
[ 14 ]
Service Cloud
Service Cloud helps your organization to streamline its customer service process. 
Users can access it anytime, anywhere, and from any device. It helps your 
organization to close the deal faster. Service agents can connect with customers 
through the agent console, which means that the agents can interact with customers 
through multiple channels. Service Cloud includes case management, Computer 
Telephony Integration (CTI), Service Cloud Console, knowledge base, Salesforce 
Communities, Salesforce Private AppExchange, Premier+ success plan, reports, and 
dashboards with many other analytical features. We will discuss more about Service 
Cloud in Chapter 5, CRM Functions and Streamlining Business Requirements.

Chapter 1
[ 15 ]
The price might change over time. Whenever your organization is 
planning to implement Salesforce Service Cloud, ask your account 
executive to contact Salesforce.com or visit http://www.salesforce.
com/in/service-cloud/overview/ for the updated price.
Various editions of Service Cloud
The following are the various editions of Service Cloud:
•	
Professional Edition: This edition is for small and medium enterprises. 
It provides CRM functionality for customer support via various channels. 
It is a perfect fit for small- to mid-sized businesses. It includes features such 
as case management, CTI integration, mobile access, solution management, 
content library, reports, and analytics with sales features such as opportunity 
management and forecasting. For each Professional Edition license, 
organizations have to pay 65 USD per month.
In any of the three editions, API is not enabled. To enable 
profiles, workflow, and the approval process, the organization 
has to pay an extra amount.
•	
Enterprise Edition: This edition is for businesses that have large and complex 
business requirements. It includes all the features available in Professional 
Edition, plus it provides advance customization capabilities to automate 
business processes and web service API access for integration with other 
systems. It also includes the service console, service contract and entitlement 
management as well as the workflow and approval process, web chat, offline 
access, and knowledge base. Organizations get the Salesforce Identity feature 
with this edition. For each Enterprise Edition license, organizations have to pay 
125 USD per month.
For the web chat, knowledge base, and Salesforce communities 
as services, organizations have to pay an extra amount.

Getting Started with Salesforce
[ 16 ]
•	
Performance Edition: This edition includes all the Salesforce.com features 
for an entire enterprise. It provides all the features of Enterprise Edition 
and a new level of platform flexibility to manage and share all of their 
information on demand. The key features of Salesforce.com's Performance 
Edition (in addition to the Enterprise Edition features) are premier support, 
full mobile access, unlimited custom apps, and increased storage limits. It 
also includes Work.com, Service Cloud, knowledge base, live agent chat, 
multiple Sandboxes, and unlimited custom app development.
When purchasing a license organization, you have to negotiate 
with Salesforce to get the maximum number of Sandboxes. If 
you want to more space, then the organization will have to pay 
extra. To know more about these license types, visit the Salesforce 
website http://www2.sfdcstatic.com/in/assets/pdf/
datasheets/DS_ServiceCloud_EdCompare.pdf.
Salesforce Chatter
Chatter is a social platform that integrates with Salesforce's infrastructure to improve 
the collaboration in the organization. In other words, Chatter is a way to collaborate 
with team members at the workplace or with customers. It is basically a combination 
of Twitter and Facebook. It helps organizations to implement transparency in 
communication and improve customer satisfaction. It gives users access to real-time 
information about what is going on in the company. It is necessary to empower 
the entire organization with tools to communicate quickly and effectively with the 
right information at the right time and this is what Chatter does. By implementing 
Chatter, organizations can boost their Return of Investment (ROI). We will discuss 
more about Salesforce Chatter in Chapter 9, Chatter Configuration.

Chapter 1
[ 17 ]
The price might change over time, so whenever your organization is 
planning to implement Salesforce Chatter, ask your account executive 
to contact Salesforce.com or visit https://www.salesforce.com/
in/chatter/overview/Various editions of Salesforce 
Chatter for the updated price.

Getting Started with Salesforce
[ 18 ]
The following are the various editions of Chatter:
•	
Chatter: This is a free license for organizations to improve collaboration. 
It includes basics collaboration features such as Chatter Messenger, 
status update, activity feeds, group, file sharing Chatter desktop, 
and mobile applications.
•	
Chatter Plus: For this license, the organization has to pay 15 USD per user 
per month. Users with this license type can access account (read only), 
contact (read only), 10 custom objects, one custom app, solutions and ideas, 
tasks and activities, advanced sharing, Salesforce Private AppExchange, 
Salesforce identity, and many other features.
For Professional Edition customers, new Chatter users will 
not have access to accounts, contacts, and custom objects 
unless they have the profiles and page layouts add-on product 
previously enabled. To know more about this license type, visit 
the Salesforce website https://secure2.sfdcstatic.
com/in/assets/pdf/datasheets/DS_Chatter.pdf.
Data.com
Data.com is an online business directory of companies and business professionals. It 
is maintained and accessed by a worldwide community of over a million subscribers 
along with Salesforce.com. It allows subscribers to exchange and share their business 
information. Data.com helps organizations to clean their data, or in other words, it 
provides you with the correct data whenever you need it. Organizations can perform 
a real-time cleanup of their accounts, contacts, and leads. Data.com helps you to 
find the right leads for your organization. Data.com allows you to access a business 
directory where you can find contacts and company-related information. Data.com 
is one of the largest business directories that contain business contact information 
and company information of private as well as public-listed companies. No other 
business directory provides contacts with both phone and e-mail information. You 
can find leads or customers for your organization by using Data.com. Two important 
facts about Data.com are as follows:
•	
4+ million in-depth company profiles from D&B
•	
30+ million highly accurate leads from Jigsaw

Chapter 1
[ 19 ]
Various editions of Data.com
The following are the various editions of Data.com:
•	
Data.com Clean: This is an essential part of the Salesforce's Data.com 
package. It offers a number of ways to update your Salesforce account, 
contact, and lead records with Data.com. It compares them with the records 
from Data.com and links these records that match the criteria, thus providing 
clean status information on the Salesforce record. For each Data.com Clean 
license, organizations have to pay 25 USD per month. For each Data.com 
premium clean license, organizations have to pay 35 USD per month, 
as shown in the following screenshot:
The price may change over time. Whenever your organization is planning 
to implement Data.com, ask your account executive to contact Data.
com support or visit http://www.data.com/editions-pricing/
index.jsp for the updated price.
www.allitebooks.com

Getting Started with Salesforce
[ 20 ]
•	
Data.com Prospector: To make use of most of the features of Data.com, your 
organization needs to have a Data.com Prospector license. Data.com offers 
two versions of Data.com Prospector. It will help organizations add data 
from Data.com: Data.com Corporate Prospector and Data.com Premium 
Prospector. For each Data.com Corporate Prospector license, organizations 
have to pay 125 USD per month. For each Data.com Premium Prospector 
license, organizations have to pay 165 USD per month.
Work.com
Work.com is a Salesforce product that aligns sales and marketing people, motivates 
your team, and provides performance-driven real-time coaching. Here, you can do 
few things, such as:
•	
Alignment between different teams
•	
Set personal goals with business goals
•	
Recognize sales and marketing people publically so that they will 
get motivated
The following screenshot is an example of a use of Work.com. Here, Rakesh is 
complementing Sagar as he has closed the deal faster than expected:

Chapter 1
[ 21 ]
Various editions of Work.com
The following screenshot shows us the features and pricing of Work.com:
The price may change over time. Whenever your organization is planning 
to implement Work.com, ask your account executive to contact Work.com 
or visit http://work.com/pricing for the updated price.
The following are the various editions of Work.com:
•	
Motivate: This license of Work.com lets you recognize and reward your 
employees and team members in real time. Here, you can offer rewards such 
as Amazon.com gift cards. You can use gamification and boost your business 
outcomes. Each Motivate license costs 10 USD per month per user.
•	
Align: This license lets you use all the features of Motivate license plus have 
privileges to align your team member's goals with the organization's goals 
as well as for coaching and monitoring purposes. Each Align license costs 15 
USD per month per user.

Getting Started with Salesforce
[ 22 ]
•	
Perform: This license lets you use both of the preceding licenses plus has the 
advantage of using the performance analysis features of Work.com. For this 
license, organizations have to pay 20 USD per month per user.
Desk.com
Organizations can use Desk.com to simplify and make life easier for customer 
support agents. Data.com is a Salesforce product where you get support from 
all the social channels on a single platform. Service agents can access Desk.com 
from their desktop and mobile. The following screenshot shows Desk.com's 
features and pricing:

Chapter 1
[ 23 ]
The price may change over time. Whenever your organization is 
planning to implement Desk.com, ask your account executive to 
contact Desk.com support or visit http://www.desk.com/pricing 
for the updated price.
Various editions of Desk.com
The following are the various editions of Desk.com:
•	
Starter Plan: In this plan, you will get three support agents' access, 
including this application, one multichannel support, last 30 days reporting, 
and a knowledge base access. It also includes Salesforce integration and 
community support. Organizations have to pay 36 USD per year.
•	
Plus Plan: In this plan, you get all unlimited features of Desk.com, plus 
e-mail and phone support with full customization and branded Domain SSL 
hosting. For this, organizations have to pay 29 USD per agent per month but 
it will be charged annually.
ExactTarget Marketing Cloud
Salesforce renamed its marketing cloud product to ExactTarget Marketing Cloud 
after the acquisition of Exact Target in 2013 for 2.5 billion USD. This product is used 
for marketing purposes; it is a marketing automation tool. Using this product, you 
can create a campaign with a combination of e-mail, mobile, social media, and the 
Web. Here, you can listen to your customers with Radian6, publish with Buddy 
media, and advertise with Social.com.

Getting Started with Salesforce
[ 24 ]
Various editions of ExactTarget Marketing Cloud
The following screenshot gives us information about ExactTarget Marketing Cloud 
features and pricing:
The price may change over time. Whenever your organization is planning 
to implement a marketing cloud, ask your account executive to contact 
marketing cloud support.

Chapter 1
[ 25 ]
Salesforce1
Salesforce1 was announced at Dreamforce' 13 in order to take Salesforce to the next 
level, that is, the mobile platform. It is a platform to develop mobile applications, 
or in other words, you can have one platform for all your customer needs. Using 
Salesforce1, an organization can connect every employee, partner, product, and 
device with their customer using the power of social media, mobile, and the cloud. 
Salesforce1 is built on API-first to enable developers to build the next generation of 
connected apps. With 10x more APIs and services, developers can now build the next 
generation of social and mobile apps for employees, products, and customers faster 
than ever before. Salesforce1 solves the problem of lack of mobile specialists and 
lagging innovation with a revolutionary approach to app development for the social 
and mobile-first world.
Various editions of Salesforce1
The following screenshot shows the One Enterprise App and the Multi-App Bundles 
of Salesforce1:

Getting Started with Salesforce
[ 26 ]
The price may change over time. Whenever your organization is planning 
to implement Salesforce1 ask your account executive to contact Salesforce.
com support or visit http://www.salesforce.com/in/platform/
overview/ for the updated price.
The various editions of Salesforce1 are as follows:
•	
One Enterprise App: This license lets you connect to One Enterprise App. 
You can access the workflow, approval process, point and click development, 
Chatter, and Salesforce's private AppExchange. For this license, an 
organization has to pay 25 USD per user per license.
•	
Multi-App Bundles: This license contains all the features that developers 
require to build any number of connected apps. For the cost, the organization 
needs to contact Salesforce for a quote.
To find out more about Salesforce1 license types, visit 
http://www.salesforce.com/platform/overview/.
Salesforce.com – the most innovative 
company
To understand Salesforce.com's innovation in the CRM industry, we have to go 
more than a decade back, when other vendors used to provide CRM software as a 
client-server architecture model. The disadvantage of this model was that customers 
had to maintain their server (or servers), needed higher resources to maintain their 
software, and maintain traffic, and so on. In 1999, Marc Benioff came up with an idea 
of cloud-based CRM software (SaaS); the advantage of this model is that Salesforce.
com is responsible for maintaining the server and the resources including the 
upgrade of all software. The best part of Salesforce CRM is the subscription-based 
model, which comes included with basic CRM applications such as Sales Module, 
Service Module, and Chatter, which can all be further customized by the users. 
Salesforce.com was nominated as the most innovative company of the year by 
Forbes for three years in a row (2011 to 2013).
Salesforce.com pushed collaboration in organizations to the next level by using 
Chatter; so, in 2011, Forbes nominated Salesforce.com as the most innovative 
company of the year. Many companies around the globe changed their way of 
collaboration by using Chatter. They can access Chatter anytime and anywhere 
by using the Chatter mobile application.

Chapter 1
[ 27 ]
In 2012, Salesforce.com came with a different strategy to take the lead from other 
CRM vendors. They acquired Radian6 (the social media monitoring tools) and 
Buddy Media (by using this you can publish shareable content) by investing $1 
billion. These two acquisitions helped Salesforce.com form a new product known 
as Marketing Cloud. It helps brands to know what is trending about them across all 
major social networks. This was the reason for Forbes to nominate Salesforce.com as 
the most innovative company of that year.
In 2013, Forbes once again nominated Salesforce.com as the most innovative 
company of the year for the third time in a row. Showing its interest towards 
acquisition and promoting new ideas, Salesforce.com spent more than $2.5 billion 
this year to acquire ExactTarget (a digital marketing software vendor) and Pardot 
(a B2B marketing automation company). This year, Salesforce.com announced their 
new Salesforce1 platform.
Streamlining the sales process, a chain of customer-focused steps, enables sales 
professionals to fundamentally increase their win rates, build customer retention, 
and increase revenue production. Each step consists of some key activities and has 
a predictable, measurable outcome.
Key problems with ancient sales processes
The following are some of the key problems that arise due to ancient sales processes:
•	
There is an uncertainty about information. If the sales processes are not 
aligned, then you are not able to pass on the correct information to the sales 
team at the right time. It may cause a loss of business or it may lead you to 
make the wrong sales decisions.
•	
There is no system to maintain sales. Many organizations still maintain their 
sales processes on paper or Excel. This means that they are not able to track 
won or lost causes in the system. Sales representatives are unable to assign 
leads to the correct team if they are not in an automated system.
•	
There is a lack in forecasting. Many organizations do not have a sales 
forecasting process, which means organizations do not have forecasting 
accuracy and predictability.
•	
There is no feedback loop. Feedback from customers is really important 
to improve business processes, but in older times, people had one-to-one 
meetings to gather feedback from customers and never had all the gathered 
feedback in one single place.

Getting Started with Salesforce
[ 28 ]
•	
Sometimes sales representatives have to wait for a long time to get 
approval from higher authorities if organizations are not using a 
centralized sales process.
•	
For internal collaboration, organizations are still using e-mail services.
Key points for standardized sales 
performance processes
The following are the key points:
•	
Automate your sales process by using the CRM software
•	
Use forecasting features to optimize your sales process
•	
Pass a customer's information to the sales team at the right time so that they 
can know more about them at critical times
•	
Use social media to learn more about your customers
•	
Improve internal collaboration by using a cloud-based system
•	
After the closing of every deal, the system will send a survey link to 
customers to gather their feedback about your sales process and sales team
Using Salesforce to streamline your business
Salesforce provides many features to streamline your business processes. Here are a 
few examples:
•	
Here, you can create different sales processes according to your business 
requirement (it means different sales process for different verticals 
and companies)
•	
Automatically assign leads to proper teams and queues based on your 
business model
•	
Implement the approval process to get an approval from higher authority
•	
Use Chatter to boost collaboration between the teams and team members
•	
You can send an e-mail alert and assign tasks based on business process in 
Salesforce; everything is automated
•	
Use reports and dashboards to share the correct business status with 
higher officials
We will discuss more about the workflow and approval process in Chapter 6, 
Automating a Business Process.

Chapter 1
[ 29 ]
Improving collaboration in your 
organization
In the past, collaboration in an organization used to happen through letters, 
spreadsheets, or record keeping. People used to express their views, updates, and 
reviews through notice boards centrally located in the organization or via e-mail. 
Notice boards were used to express the latest happenings in an organization. As the 
time passed, organizations started using telephones, faxes, and telegraph to send 
the updates from one department to another department/person. The collaboration 
was a wide and vast process and used to take some days and months to exchange 
the latest information. The process had many steps and the failure of any step led to 
problems within the organization.
In the sales process, if any information was missing, it may lead to a wrong decision 
being taken. Imagine if the sales representatives of an organization are not updated 
with the latest product or a price change; this might lead to loss of profit/customers. 
The process was not quick and easy as one department may or may not be having 
proper information about one or the other. This could lead to serious problems. 
Likewise, suppose the marketing department is not able to explain the potential 
interest to a customer, which means that the organization is unable to get new 
customers, or is unable to get the right ideas for a new campaign.
In CRM, collaboration is the main essence in order to succeed. If any of the steps 
fall behind, the organization suffers. Salesforce introduced Chatter for productive 
collaboration in the organization and even enabled users to invite their customers to 
the platform to share new ideas, exchange information, and so on.
Salesforce Chatter has unique features that help organizations to become more 
productive. They are as follows:
•	
Share files
•	
Status update
•	
Invite your customers to Chatter
•	
Comment on status updates
•	
Chat
•	
Polls
•	
Create groups
•	
Chatter publisher actions
•	
Follow and unfollow people
www.allitebooks.com

Getting Started with Salesforce
[ 30 ]
We will discuss more about the preceding features in Chapter 6, Automating a 
Business Process.
Creating a Salesforce developer account
To get started with the given topics in this book and to practice them on your own, 
it is recommended that you have access to a Salesforce developer account. Using 
Salesforce production instance is not essential for practicing. You can use Salesforce 
Sandbox or a developer account to practice on the examples covered in this book.
If you currently do not have your own developer account, you can create a new 
Salesforce developer account. The Salesforce developer account is completely free 
and can be used to practice newly earned concepts, but you cannot use this for 
commercial purposes.
To create a Salesforce developer account, follow these steps:
1.	 Visit http://developer.force.com/.
2.	 Click on the Free Developer Edition link.
3.	 It will open Sign Up Page for your free developer account, and it will display 
the following screen:

Chapter 1
[ 31 ]
4.	 Fill in the form and accept Master Subscription Agreement.
5.	 Click on the Sign me up > button.
The Salesforce login ID, Username, should be unique and in the 
form of an e-mail address.
Once you register for the developer account, Salesforce.com will send you the login 
details on the e-mail ID that you provided during registration. By following the 
instructions in the e-mail, you are ready to get started with Salesforce. The e-mail 
will look as shown in the following screenshot:
Once you click on the link, it will ask you to choose your password and set the 
security question and answer. You can use the security question if you forget the 
password. If you forget your password, navigate to http://login.salesforce.
com and click on Forgot your Password link and enter your username. Salesforce will 
send a new password to your e-mail address. If your Salesforce account is locked and 
you are the only Salesforce administrator, then Salesforce will automatically unlock 
your account after 15 minutes.
Logging in to Salesforce.com
The following are the steps to log in to Salesforce.com:
1.	 If you are logging in to Salesforce production or developer instance, 
use http://login.salesforce.com.
2.	 If you are logging in to the Salesforce Sandbox instance, then use 
http://test.salesforce.com.
3.	 Once the login screen is loaded, provide your username and password.
4.	 Salesforce may ask you to enter a verification code depending upon the 
organization's security and settings.

Getting Started with Salesforce
[ 32 ]
5.	 After verification, you will be allowed to access Salesforce, and next time, 
Salesforce will not ask for the verification code.
You need to enter a verification code every time you access 
Salesforce from a different computer or device. We will 
discuss more about this in Chapter 3, Make Your Salesforce 
Data Secure – Security Settings in Salesforce.
First impression of the Salesforce 
developer account
Once you successfully complete the verification process, Salesforce will redirect 
you to the home page. The page you see the first time after logging in is known as 
the landing page, and if you move your mouse pointer to your browser's tab, you 
will be able to identify which Salesforce edition you are currently using. You can 
change the landing page, but we will discuss this in the later chapters. To play with 
your settings, you can click on the Setup link that is available in the top-right corner 
adjacent to your name on the page, as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 1
[ 33 ]
Benefits of using the Salesforce 
developer account
There are certain benefits of using the Salesforce developer account:
•	
Salesforce provides it free of cost to developers as a playground for their work
•	
A developer account can never expire
•	
You can experiment with certain development activities
•	
You can share your application with peers by creating packages
•	
The developer account comes with a number of preinstalled applications 
such as sales, call center, marketing, and ideas
•	
Updates are automatically installed in your developer account; 
these updates include:
°°
Salesforce customer portal
°°
Two Salesforce CRM licenses
°°
Two Salesforce mobile licenses
°°
Three Salesforce platform licenses
°°
Five Salesforce partner licenses
°°
10 Salesforce customer portal manager licenses
The following screenshot shows the license details of the developer organization:

Getting Started with Salesforce
[ 34 ]
Limitations of Salesforce Developer 
Edition
The following are the limitations of Salesforce Developer Edition:
•	
For data storage, you get 5 MB and for file storage (attachments), 20 MB. 
To check your developer account, follow the Name | Setup |Administration 
Setup | Data Management | Storage Usage path.
•	
It offers 5000 API calls every 24 hours.
•	
You can install any number of applications in your developer account.
•	
A 500 MB bandwidth and 10-minute service request time limits (per rolling 
24 hours) for Force.com site applications.
•	
You have only two Salesforce full licenses.
•	
You cannot use this developer account for commercial purposes. I would 
refer to the article at https://login.salesforce.com/help/pdfs/en/
salesforce_app_limits_cheatsheet.pdf to check the limits of 
each edition.
Summary
In this chapter, we went through an overview of Salesforce as well as its architecture. 
We discussed Salesforce's various products and its available editions on the market. 
We also discussed how Salesforce improves the ROI experience. We learned 
different ways to streamline your Sales process and improve collaboration in 
your organization. At the end, we discussed how to create a developer account 
and learned its benefits and limitations. In the next chapter, we will go through 
various organization setup concepts such as setting up a company profile and 
user management concepts such as setting role and profiles for your organization.

User Management and 
Organization Administration
This chapter starts with an overview of your company's profile settings, followed 
by role hierarchy and profiles in Salesforce. We will also discuss permission sets, 
various ways to set up users for an organization, and key concepts related to it. 
We will learn about public groups and the queue and its significance. Later, we 
will go through the Freeze user concepts, how to unlock user accounts, and finally 
brief you about the personal setup. All these concepts are very important as they 
are a one-time setup and will dictate how your Salesforce organization will work 
in accordance with your organization structure.
The following topics will be covered in this chapter:
•	
Setting up company information
•	
Multiple currencies, and the fiscal year and customizing it
•	
Setting up business hours and their effects
•	
Holiday settings and language settings and their importance
•	
The significance of roles and profiles
•	
Permission sets
•	
Setting up users
•	
Locking and unlocking users
•	
Freezing a user's account
•	
The benefits of a login history
•	
Groups and their uses
•	
Queues and their significance
•	
Personal setup

User Management and Organization Administration
[ 36 ]
Setting up company information
In the previous chapter, we went through ways to set up a developer account, 
the login concept, and what happens once you log in to Salesforce.com. Now, 
we will move forward to the next step. This feature is important as it is used to 
provide all the basic information about your company, such as the local address 
and phone numbers.
Let's start with an example. Appiuss Inc. just brought Salesforce Enterprise Edition 
(EE). Now the managers Sara Bareilles and Robby Williams are keen to know how 
to update the company information, its contact details, the default time zone, 
and set the corporate currency.
Once the company has purchased the Salesforce organization, the company has to set 
up its profile. Under the heading Company Profile in the Setup tab, there are various 
setups available as shown in the following screenshot:
Updating the company's information
At any time, the system administrator can update the company's information in 
Salesforce. The company information page contains the company's address, the 
company's contact details, corporate currency, organization default time zone, and 
language and locale setting. You can also use the page to find details about licenses 
such as the licenses available, used, and remaining.
Let's start updating the company's information. Now the user can think why the 
organization has to update the company information and contact details.
This company information and contact detail page contains the organization's 
address, the contact person's name, and his or her contact details. Whenever the 
organization updates this information, it is automatically updated in the Salesforce.
com database, so the Salesforce.com support people are able to contact you whenever 
you raise a case.

Chapter 2
[ 37 ]
To update the company information for the organization, follow these instructions:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Administer | Company Profile | Company Information.
2.	 Click on Edit and you will see the following screenshot:
3.	 Now you will be able to update the organization's name, the primary contact, 
the contact details, and the company information.
4.	 Click on Save to update the company information.
The following table provides a description of the fields available on the company 
information page:
Field
Description
Organization Name
Here you can enter the name of your 
organization. Up to 80 characters are allowed 
in this field.
Primary Contact
This is the person who is the main contact or 
administrator of the organization. Up to 80 
characters are allowed in this field.
Division
The group or division that uses the service, 
for example, Appiuss Sales. Up to 40 
characters are allowed in this field.
Fax and Phone 
Here you can enter the fax and phone 
number. Up to 40 characters are allowed in 
this field.
Address (Street, City, State/Province, 
Zip/Postal Code, Country)
In these fields, you can define the 
organization address.

User Management and Organization Administration
[ 38 ]
Locale setting
Under the Locale Setting tab, the user can update the Default Locale, Default 
Language, Default Time Zone, and Currency Locale fields for the organization. 
To update this information, follow these steps:
1.	 Click on the Setup option.
2.	 Navigate to Administer | Company Profile | Company Information.
3.	 Click on Edit.
4.	 Go to the Local Settings tab and you will see the following screenshot:
5.	 Change the details as per your organization's policy.
6.	 Click on Save to update the company information.
Let's start with an example. Sara Bareilles says to the system administrator 
(Sagar Pareek and Rakesh Gupta), "What is the benefit of these changes? 
Where will the changes be reflected?".
These changes are the default for the organization, and whenever you create a 
user, these values arrive as the default. However,  you can change the values for 
these fields. The locale settings determine the following display formats:
•	
Date and time
•	
Users' names
•	
Addresses
•	
Commas and periods in numbers

Chapter 2
[ 39 ]
Selecting locale names (with the country in parentheses) will set the 
default currency. Only the languages available here will be enabled 
for your organization. Selecting the default time zone in which the 
organization is located will set default time zone. Currency locale 
affects the format of the currency amount and is available for single 
currency organizations only.
Salesforce.com newsletter and login 
notification settings
Here, the administrator is able to choose whether he or she wants to receive 
user-targeted promotional e-mails from Salesforce.com:
The following points describe the login information options available in Salesforce:
•	
Hide Notices About System Downtime: Once you tick this checkbox, users 
will not get any advance notice of planned system downtime when they are 
logged in to Salesforce
•	
Hide Notices About System Maintenance: Once you tick this checkbox, 
users will not get any advance notice of planned system maintenance 
when they are logged in to Salesforce
Corporate currency
You are able to define corporate currency for your organization. Corporate currency 
is the revenue that is reported by the organization's corporate headquarters. These 
features are enabled for organizations that use multiple currencies; otherwise, it 
shows the organization's local currency. If your organization Australia, it will be 
AUD, for example. This is an important feature as it determines the currency in 
which your organization transacts.
www.allitebooks.com

User Management and Organization Administration
[ 40 ]
Additional features
In addition to providing the ability to update company-related information, 
the company information page also provides information on the data and file 
space used, API requests in the last 24 hours, and so on, as shown in the 
following screenshot:
In the organization detail section, there is also the Salesforce.com 
organization ID. This ID is unique for each Salesforce.com organization 
and uniquely identifies the instance. The Salesforce.com organization ID 
might be required while communicating with the Salesforce.com support 
team, especially when activating limited and feature activations.
Viewing the licenses
The company information page also displays all the user licenses, feature licenses, 
and permission set licenses that you have purchased for your organization. On the 
company information detail page, the user can find detailed information about these 
licenses as follows:
•	
User license type: This license type allows a user to use different 
functionalities within Salesforce and determines which profiles and 
permission sets are available to the user. You may have more than one 
type of user license in your organization.
•	
Permission set license type: You can assign permission sets to give a user 
access to certain features. However, sometimes permission sets require 
users to have a permission set license before they can be allotted the 
permissions in question.
•	
Feature license type: This license type allows a user to use an additional 
Salesforce feature such as marketing or connecting offline.
Depending on the features that are enabled for your organization, you 
might be able to assign more than one type of feature license to users.

Chapter 2
[ 41 ]
This related list gives more information for each type of license:
•	
Status: This indicates the status of the license. It should be active or inactive.
•	
Total licenses: This indicates the number of licenses that your company is 
paying for and that are available to you.
•	
Used licenses: This is the number of licenses that you have assigned to users.
•	
Remaining licenses: This is the number of unused licenses.
In addition to the license types, the following portal login information is listed for 
organizations that have customer portals or partner portals enabled:
•	
Monthly Logins Allotted: This shows the maximum number of customers or 
partners portal logins allowed per month.
•	
Monthly Logins Used: This indicates the number of successful logins for 
all the users associated with a customer or partner portal user license for 
the month.
User license type
The following license types are currently available for purchase:
License name
Description
Salesforce
This gives full access to standard CRM and AppExchange apps. 
Users can access both standard and custom apps. Each license 
has its own additional storage for Enterprise, Unlimited, and 
Performance Editions.
Salesforce Platform
This gives access to custom apps but not to the standard CRM 
functionality. With this license, users can access the accounts, 
contacts, reports, and dashboards, and AppExchange apps. This 
license type is cheaper than the Salesforce license.
Force.com One App
This license is for users who want to access only one custom 
application; by using this license, users don't have access to the 
standard Salesforce CRM features. This license type is cheaper 
than the Salesforce license. Each Force.com One App license 
provides an additional 20 MB of data storage and 100 MB of file 
storage, regardless of the Salesforce Edition.

User Management and Organization Administration
[ 42 ]
License name
Description
Force.com App 
Subscription
By using this license type, organizations can grant users access 
to a Force.com Light App or Force.com Enterprise App, neither 
of which include the CRM functionality.
A Force.com Light App has up to 10 custom objects and 10 
custom tabs, it has a read-only access to accounts and contacts, 
and supports object-level and field-level security. A Force.com 
Light App can't use the Bulk API or Streaming API.
A Force.com Enterprise App has up to 10 custom objects and 10 
custom tabs. In addition to the permissions of a Force.com Light 
App, a Force.com Enterprise App supports record-level sharing, 
can use the Bulk API and Streaming API, and has read/write 
access to accounts and contacts.
Each Force.com App Subscription license provides an additional 
20 MB of data storage and 100 MB of file storage, regardless of 
the Salesforce edition.
Knowledge Only User
An organization can use this type of license to provide access 
to the Salesforce Knowledge app. This license provides access 
to the tabs: articles, article management, Chatter, Chatter files, 
home, profiles, reports, custom objects, and custom tabs.
Identity
Organizations can use this type of license to grant users access 
to identity features such as the App Launcher. This is included 
with all paid user licenses in Enterprise, Performance, and 
Unlimited Editions. Ten free Identity user licenses are included 
with each new Developer Edition.
Chatter Free
This license works for Performance, Enterprise, and Personal 
Edition users who don't have Salesforce license but want to 
access Salesforce Chatter. By using this license, users can 
access all the Chatter features but they can't access standard 
Salesforce objects.
This license is cheaper than a Salesforce license so organizations 
use this license to save money.
Chatter External
This license type allows us to invite our customer into Chatter. 
This license has very limited Chatter access. Users can only see 
the groups they are invited to and can interact with members of 
that group.
This license is cheaper than a Salesforce license so organizations 
use this license to save money.
Chatter Only
This license works with Performance, Enterprise, and Personal 
Edition users who don't have the Salesforce license and want to 
use Salesforce objects in addition to Salesforce Chatter.

Chapter 2
[ 43 ]
License name
Description
Work.com Only User
This license works with Performance, Enterprise, and Personal 
Edition users who don't have a Salesforce license and need 
access to Work.com.
Company Community
This is an internal user license designed for users to access Force.
com Light application custom objects, custom tabs, Chatter 
(people, groups, feeds, and files), and Community that includes 
a Site.com site.
Company Community users have read-only access to Salesforce 
Knowledge articles and limited access to cases in order to create 
and read their own cases. They can also:
•	 Access up to 10 custom objects and 10 custom tabs
•	 Use content, ideas, and answers
•	 Use activities, tasks, calendars, and events
•	 Have read-only access to accounts and contacts
To view all the company information, a user must have the View Setup and 
Configuration permission and to make any changes in it, the Customize 
Application permission is required.
You can check the latest licenses available at https://help.
salesforce.com/HTViewHelpDoc?id=users_understanding_
license_types.htm&language=en_US as the above mentioned 
license types are subject to change.
Multiple currencies
Let's start with an example. Sara Bareilles is the Salesforce administrator at Appiuss 
Inc. Her company has sales representatives across the globe and deals coming 
in equally from the American, Asia-Pacific, and Europe/Middle-East regions. 
Currently, only the USD currency is enabled for her organization, so the sales reps 
are finding it difficult to enter the right amount in their local currency.
Multi-currency is a Salesforce limited and advance feature. After enabling it, the sales 
reps enter the amount in the Opportunity field in their local currency. Organizations 
can use multiple currencies in opportunities, forecasts, reports, quotes, and other 
currency fields. The administrator can set the corporate currency that reflects the 
currency of the corporate headquarters. The administrator also maintains a list of 
active currencies and their conversion rates relative to the corporate currency.

User Management and Organization Administration
[ 44 ]
So, Sara Bareilles decides to enable multiple currencies. She contacts Salesforce.com 
Support and has it enabled a few days later in her Sandbox.
Enabling a single currency
In a single currency organization, you can set the organization-wide currency locale 
for your company but your Salesforce users cannot set individual currency locales.
Enabling multiple currencies
To enable multiple currencies in your organization, follow these instructions:
1.	 Click on the Help and Training link in the top-right corner of the page. 
This opens a new page in the window.
2.	 Click on Contact Support followed by the open a case icon.
3.	 Fill in the form as shown in the following screenshot and in the Product 
Topics field, select Limits & Feature Activations:

Chapter 2
[ 45 ]
4.	 In the Business Impact area, give a proper reason for every question.
5.	 Click on Next and submit the case.
6.	 You will get an e-mail in which the administrator of the organization will 
have to provide the following details:
°°
Organization ID
°°
Default currency
°°
Confirmation that you understand that multiple currencies can't be 
disabled once enabled
°°
Confirmation that you are a system administrator authorized on 
behalf of your organization to request multi-currency enablement 
and that you consent to the lockout of this organization for a certain 
period of time, depending on your organization's data usage volume
7.	 Once you answer the e-mail, the multiple currencies feature will be enabled 
by Salesforce.com.
Adding a new currency
At any time, the system administrator can add a new currency to the organization. 
To do so, follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Administer | Company Profile | Manage Currencies.
2.	 Click on Add New to add a new currency. It will redirect you to a new 
window where you can add new currency to your organization.
3.	 To do this, you have to select Currency Type, Conversion Rate (find it from 
any exchange website), and Decimal Places:

User Management and Organization Administration
[ 46 ]
Changing the corporate currency
At any time, the system administrator can change the corporate currency of the 
organization. To do this, follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Administer | Company Profile | Manage Currencies.
2.	 Click on Change Corporate.
3.	 It will redirect you to a new window where you can select a new corporate 
currency for your organization.
A new corporate currency dropdown shows only those 
currencies that are currently active for the organization.
Effects of enabling multi-currency
The following are the effects of enabling multi-currency:
•	
Multi-currency cannot be disabled once enabled.
•	
All records have a default currency stamped that you mentioned at the time 
of enabling it.
•	
Objects such as opportunities, opportunity products, opportunity product 
schedules, and campaign opportunities include fields that are multi-currency 
compatible, which allows a specific currency for the record. The main use of 
such fields is to specify the primary amount.
•	
After multi-currency is enabled, all currency fields show the ISO code before 
the field value, for example, $50 is USD 50.
•	
Once the currency is added to the supportive currency list, it can't be 
removed from the administrator's currencies list, even when it is deactivated.
•	
Users can set their own personal default currency, which is known 
as the secondary currency. In reports (while running a report for the user), 
the primary default currency is shown as the organization's default 
corporate currency and the user's personal currency is shown as the 
secondary currency.

Chapter 2
[ 47 ]
Fiscal year and its customization
A fiscal year or financial year is a period of time used to calculate annual (yearly) 
financial statements in businesses and other organizations. The system administrator 
can set the fiscal year for your organization. The fiscal year settings are used to report 
on the fiscal year timeline.
Salesforce supports two types of fiscal years:
•	
Standard fiscal year
•	
Custom fiscal year
Standard fiscal year
Salesforce provides the Gregorian calendar as the standard fiscal year calendar by 
default. But this is not the same for every organization as some organizations use 
different calendars and need to change the fiscal year start month, for example, for 
the fiscal year starting in April, the standard fiscal year is used. Standard fiscal years 
can start on the first day of any month. Additionally, it can be defined whether the 
fiscal year is based on the start or end of the selected month.
To set up a standard fiscal year for your organization, follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Administer | Company Profile | Fiscal Year.
2.	 Select the option of Standard Fiscal Year.
3.	 Select the start month for the fiscal year.
4.	 Choose whether the fiscal year is defined based on the end or start of the 
month as shown in the following screenshot:

User Management and Organization Administration
[ 48 ]
5.	 Optionally, you can select Apply to all Forecasts and Quotas if you want to 
apply the new fiscal year settings to your existing forecasts and quotas. This 
option may or may not be available depending on your forecast settings.
6.	 Click on Save.
Custom fiscal year
The custom fiscal year option is used when the standard fiscal year does not meet the 
organization's requirements. To use the custom fiscal year, the system administrator 
has to enable it. Complex fiscal year structures can be achieved using the custom 
fiscal year option. Enabling custom fiscal years does not automatically define them. 
You must define all of your company's custom fiscal years so that they fit your 
company's calendar.
To set up a custom fiscal year for your organization, follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Administer | Company Profile | Fiscal Year.
2.	 Select the option of Custom Fiscal Year.
3.	 Select the checkbox next to the statement Yes, I understand the implications 
the custom fiscal year feature has on my organization and I want to 
enable it.
4.	 Click on Enable Custom Fiscal Years.
5.	 Click on OK.
Enabling custom fiscal years is not reversible. After enabling 
custom fiscal years, you cannot revert to standard fiscal years.
Defining a new custom fiscal year
To define a new custom fiscal year for your organization, follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Administer | Company Profile | Fiscal Year.
2.	 Click on New. It will open a Custom Fiscal Year Template window to set up 
a new custom fiscal year:

Chapter 2
[ 49 ]
3.	 In the template window, you can choose a template type based on your 
needs. Click on Continue and you are done.
4.	 The next step is to set the fiscal year start date. For this, enter the fiscal year 
name and choose the start day of the week. Here, you can reset the fiscal year 
structure as well.
5.	 Click on Save.
Before enabling the custom fiscal years, make sure that you 
have exported any data related to the fiscal periods.
Business hours setup and its effect
Business hours are the hours of the day in which business is generally conducted. 
These are especially applicable for the customer support team to track the operating 
hours of the customer support. For your Salesforce organization, you can configure 
multiple business hours. Business hour settings apply to case-related information 
about escalation rules and case milestones in the entitlement processes.
www.allitebooks.com

User Management and Organization Administration
[ 50 ]
Once the business hours are set, they can be used to set the time at which a support 
team will be available to work on the case. Business hours can also be specified when 
making the escalation rules. Setting the business hours on the escalation rules, results 
in the case getting automatically updated and escalated when the escalation rules are 
within the time and location of the rule.
Let's assume that your organization's working hours are from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. 
and a case is raised at 4:00 p.m. The escalation time for this case is 2 hours if the case 
is not resolved. So if the business hours are not set up for your organization, then 
the case will be escalated at 6:00 p.m. By default, business hours are set to 24 hours, 
seven days a week in the default time zone specified in your organization's profile.
Setting up the business hours and its effects
To set up the business hours for your organization, follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Administer | Company Profile | Business Hours.
2.	 Click on the New Business Hour button.

Chapter 2
[ 51 ]
3.	 Enter data in the Business Hours Name field and select the Active checkbox 
to activate it. Optionally, select Use these business hours as the default to 
set the business hours as the default business hours on all new cases.
4.	 Select Time Zone and define the working hours from Sunday to Saturday 
(by default, the 24 hours checkbox is selected next to each day, so deselect it 
and enter the business hours). You can leave the Business Hours field blank.
Salesforce automatically calculates daylight saving time for the time 
zones available for the business hours. It helps you to calculate the 
correct case age.
Holiday settings
Let's start with an example. Sara Bareilles is working as a support agent in a 
company. She is resolving an ample amount of cases per day, and the response time 
for every case is 3 hours. Now, she is worried because April 18 is a holiday for Good 
Friday and if cases come in on that day, they will be escalated to the manager.
Holiday settings define that your organization is not working on that day. If some 
cases are raised on that day and waiting for a service agent response, Salesforce will 
not count that day as a working day and the case will not be escalated.
Setting up the holiday settings
To set up the holiday settings for your organization, follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Administer | Company Profile | Holidays.
2.	 Click on the New button.

User Management and Organization Administration
[ 52 ]
3.	 Enter data in the Holiday Name, Description, Date, and Time fields. You 
can set recurring holidays as well. To do that, select the Recurring Holiday 
checkbox and fill in the  Frequency, Start Date, and End Date fields:
4.	 Click on Save.
Associating holidays with business hours
You can associate holidays with business hours so that Salesforce can suspend any 
escalation rules associated with it. There are two ways to associate business hours 
and holidays.
Method 1 – associate business hours with holidays
To associate business hours with holidays, follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Administer | Company Profile | Holidays.
2.	 Click on the holiday from the Holidays list.

Chapter 2
[ 53 ]
3.	 It will open the Holidays detail page.
4.	 Click on Add/Remove from the Business Hours list.
5.	 In addition, add any Business Hours as per your needs.
It will associate one holiday with multiple business hours.

User Management and Organization Administration
[ 54 ]
Method 2 – associate holidays with business hours
Another way to associate holidays with business hours is from the business hours 
instead. To associate holidays with business hours, follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Administer | Company Profile | Business hours.
2.	 Click on the Business Hours option from the available list:
3.	 It will open Business Hours detail page.
4.	 From the Holidays list, click on the Add/Remove button.
5.	 It will redirect you to the next screen where you can associate the current 
business hours with multiple holidays:
This will associate multiple holidays with one business hour.

Chapter 2
[ 55 ]
Language settings and its importance
As Salesforce is being used across the globe and we all use different languages 
to communicate, Salesforce supports multiple languages. The Salesforce web user 
interface, Salesforce for Outlook, Connect for Outlook, Connect Offline, and Connect 
for Office are all available in various languages.
The Salesforce web user interface supports two language settings.
Personal settings
Let's start with an example. Robby Williams is a new hire from Russia. The default 
organization language is set to English, which means all the text and online help are 
displayed to all the new users in English. Robby Williams would like to change his 
complete user interface to Russian.
Users can change the default language to their local language to display the 
Salesforce text, images, buttons, and online help.
To change to your personal language, follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Name | My Setting | Personal | Language & Time zone.
2.	 Then, select the language from the Language drop-down list:
You can find more information about the language Salesforce supports as the 
standard language in the information box.
If you are not able to find your preferred language, then contact your 
system administrator to enable it. In the preceding example, the system 
administrator enabled the English, Deutsch, Español, François, and 
Italiano languages for the organization so that users can get these options 
under the Language drop-down list.

User Management and Organization Administration
[ 56 ]
Organization's default language settings
A system administrator can enable multiple languages for your Salesforce 
organization. This means users have the option to select their preferred 
language from the available list.
Salesforce offers three levels of language support, as follows:
•	
Fully supported languages
•	
End user languages
•	
Platform-only languages
Fully supported languages
Fully supported languages, such as Thai, Russian, English, or Danish, are the ones 
where the user functionality and help pages in the application are completely 
translated into these languages.
The fully-supported languages list includes Chinese (simplified), Chinese 
(traditional), Danish, Dutch, English, Finnish, French, German, Italian, 
Japanese, Korean, Portuguese (Brazil), Russian, Spanish, Swedish, and 
Thai. Even though the Salesforce interface is completely translated to 
Thai, the help page remains in English.
End user languages
End user languages are useful when you are working in a multilingual organization 
where you speak a language that is different than your headquarters. End user 
languages are used by users who would like to access the app in that language, 
but do not want to access the Setup menu.
Let's start with an example. A company has its headquarters in a French-speaking 
country, but that company has non-admin employees in other countries that 
would prefer to use the app in a language supported as an EUL. As they do not 
want to access the Setup menu and help pages, the EUL settings provide sufficient 
translations out of the box to suit their needs.
The end user languages list includes Arabic, Bulgarian, Czech, English 
(U.K.), Greek, Spanish (Mexico), Hebrew, Hungarian, Indonesian, 
Norwegian, Polish, Romanian, Turkish, Ukrainian, and Vietnamese.

Chapter 2
[ 57 ]
Enabling an end user language
To enable an end user language for your organization, follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Administer | Company Profile | Language Settings.
2.	 From the Language Preferences section, select the Enable End User 
Languages checkbox to enable it:
3.	 Then, it will add all the end user languages to the available language 
multi-select picklist.
4.	 Click on Save.
Platform-only languages
Platform-only languages are used to localize the custom functionality (apps) built on 
the Salesforce Platform. The platform-only languages allow organizations to provide 
their own translations via the translation workbench for languages that Salesforce 
doesn't provide any translations for.

User Management and Organization Administration
[ 58 ]
The platform-only languages list includes Albanian, Armenian, Basque, 
Bosnian, Croatian, English (Australia), English (Canada), English (India), 
English (Malaysia), English (Philippines), Estonian, French (Canada), 
Georgian, Hindi, Icelandic, Irish, Latvian, Lithuanian, Luxembourgish, 
Macedonian, Malay, Maltese, Moldovan, Montenegrin, Portuguese 
(European), Romansh, Serbian (Cyrillic), Serbian (Latin), Slovak, 
Slovenian, Tagalog, Urdu, and Welsh.
Enabling the platform-only languages
To enable the platform-only languages for your organization, follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Administer | Company Profile | Language Settings.
2.	 From Language Preferences, select Enable Platform Only Languages:
3.	 This will add all the end user languages to the available language multi-
select picklist.
4.	 Click on Save.

Chapter 2
[ 59 ]
Once you enable the platform-only language, Salesforce will enable the end user 
language automatically.
What happens when the system administrator changes the 
organization's default language from English to Russian if the 
user's personal language preference is already set as Russian?
The user will still see Salesforce in Russian. If a personal 
preference is not set, then Salesforce will automatically change 
everything from English to Russian.
The significance of roles and profiles
In this section, we will discuss roles, profiles, and their significance in Salesforce.
Significance of the role hierarchy
By using roles in Salesforce, you can control the data/records access and 
organization reports. In simpler terms, you can use it to control record-level access in 
Salesforce. It describes how roles connect to each other. It may or may not be similar 
to your organization hierarchy. A role can have one, more than one, or even no users 
assigned to it. It is a good practice to ensure that every user is assigned a role when 
first added to the system.
The users who are higher in the role hierarchy will be able to see the records 
of people below them. Users who share the same role or are at the same level 
(VP Sales and VP Marketing) cannot access each other's records:

User Management and Organization Administration
[ 60 ]
In the preceding image, the CEO can see all the organization records as they are at 
the top of the role hierarchy. At the same time, VP Sales and VP Marketing can't see 
each other's records even though both are at the same level, but VP Sales can access 
Sales Reps records and VP Marketing can access Marketing Agents records. Sales 
Reps and Marketing Agents can see only their records as these roles are lower in the 
role hierarchy. Users at any given role level can view, edit, and report all the data 
owned by or shared with users below them in the role hierarchy.
In the preceding example, it is assumed that Organization-Wide 
Default (OWD) is private for objects. We will discuss more about 
OWD in Chapter 3, Make your Salesforce Data Secure – Security 
Settings in Salesforce.
Creating the role hierarchy for your organization
To create the role hierarchy for your organization, follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Administer | Manage Users | Roles.
2.	 Click on Set up Roles to go to the Creating the Role Hierarchy page:
3.	 Click on Add Role to create a new role:

Chapter 2
[ 61 ]
4.	 It will redirect us to a new page, where we have to enter details in a few 
fields to create the new role:
°°
Label: This will be displayed in the user interface
°°
Role Name: This unique name will be used by the API and 
packages managed
°°
This role reports to: This is the role above a specific role in the 
hierarchy (like in case of VP Sales – the value in this field would 
be CEO)
°°
Role Name as displayed on reports: This is the role name that 
appears on reports
°°
Opportunity Access: This field describes whether users can access 
other user's opportunities, which are associated with accounts that 
the users own
This field is not visible if your organization's sharing model for opportunities 
is public read/write:
5.	 Click on Save.

User Management and Organization Administration
[ 62 ]
Repeat the preceding process and create the organization role hierarchy. You can 
create the same role hierarchy we used to describe the role hierarchy under the 
Role Hierarchy topic. Finally, it will look like the following screenshot:
Whenever you want to delete any role, make sure that you start the 
deletion from its child roles. If users do not have any role assigned to 
their user record, they can only view their own records.
Profiles
Profiles are a way to customize the Salesforce overall experience of a user. Profiles 
are used to decide the data security in a Salesforce organization by granting object-
level permissions and Field-Level Security that decide whether the fields need to be 
shown to a specific set of users. Profiles have certain rules or settings that we can set 
in order to grant or restrict a set of user permissions. Roles decide data/record-level 
access in Salesforce (that is, the records that you can access), and profiles decide what 
users can see in those records (that is, fields, related lists, and apps).
Let's start with an example. In the roles section, we created a new role for the 
organization. Sagar Pareek is the system administrator and he wants to maintain 
data visibility based upon the said role, but in Salesforce, roles can only maintain 
data/record-level access, so he has to go with the profile feature.

Chapter 2
[ 63 ]
Types of profiles in Salesforce
There are two types of profiles in Salesforce. These are:
•	
Standard: These are profiles that come with your Salesforce organization. 
You cannot delete them.
•	
Custom: These are profiles that we make by cloning the existing Salesforce 
standard profiles.
We can delete a Salesforce custom profile only if users are not 
assigned to that particular profile.
Different types of standard profiles
The following table shows a list of the standard profiles available in Salesforce:
Profile
Description
System administrator
System administrators have full access to 
Salesforce. They are allowed to configure and 
customize the application. 
Standard Platform User
These users are allowed to use custom apps 
developed by an organization or installed from 
AppExchange and the main functionality of 
the platform.
Standard Platform One App User
Users with this profile can access one custom 
app developed in your organization or the one 
installed from AppExchange. The custom app is 
limited to five tabs. In addition, they can use the 
core platform functionalities, such as accounts, 
contacts, reports, dashboards, and custom tabs.
Standard User
Users with this profile are allowed to create and 
edit most major types of records, run reports, and 
view the organization's setup. They can view, but 
not manage, campaigns. They can also create, but 
not review, solutions. They can edit their personal 
quota and override forecasts.
Partner User
Users are only allowed to log in from a 
partner portal.

User Management and Organization Administration
[ 64 ]
Profile
Description
Customer Portal User
Users can only log in via a Customer Portal. They 
can view and edit data that they directly own or 
data owned by or shared with users below them in 
the Customer Portal role hierarchy. They can view 
and edit cases where they are listed in the Contact 
Name field.
Customer Portal Manager
Users can log in only from a Customer Portal. 
They can view and edit data that they directly 
own or data owned by or shared with users below 
them in the Customer Portal role hierarchy. They 
can view and edit cases where they are listed in 
the Contact Name field.
Marketing User
Users can manage campaigns, import leads, 
create letterheads, create HTML e-mail templates, 
manage public documents, and update the 
campaign history via the import wizards. They 
can also act as a Standard User.
Contract Manager
Users are allowed to create, edit, activate, and 
approve contracts. This profile can also delete 
contracts as long as they are not activated. 
Users can also edit their personal quota and 
override forecasts.
Chatter Only User
Users are only allowed to log in to Chatter. They 
are allowed access to all standard Chatter features: 
people, profiles, groups, and files. Additionally, 
they can view Salesforce accounts and contacts, 
use Salesforce CRM Content, Ideas, and Answers, 
and modify up to ten custom objects.
Chatter Free User
Users are only allowed to log in to Chatter. They 
can access all standard Chatter features: people, 
profiles, groups, and files.
This is only available with the Chatter Free 
user license.
Chatter External User
Users are only allowed to log in to Chatter and 
access groups they've been invited to and interact 
with members of those groups. This is only 
available with the Chatter External user license.
Chatter Moderator User
Users are only allowed to log in to Chatter and 
are able to moderate posts such as edit and delete. 
They can access all standard Chatter features: 
people, profiles, groups, and files.

Chapter 2
[ 65 ]
Profile
Description
Site.com Only User
Users can only log in to the Site.com app.
High Volume Customer Portal and 
Authenticated Website (both user 
licenses are high-volume portal users)
Users can only log in from a customer portal.
Solution Manager
Users with this profile are allowed to review 
and publish solutions. They can also act as a 
Standard User.
Read Only
Users with this profile can view all the records, 
but cannot edit them.
Creating a custom profile
To create a custom profile, follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Administer | Manage Users | Profiles.
2.	 Click on New.

User Management and Organization Administration
[ 66 ]
3.	 Select a standard profile from the list. You can't create custom profiles from 
scratch, so you have to clone one from a standard profile and enter the name 
in the Profile Name field as you want. A user license will autopopulate in 
front of the User License field.
4.	 Click on Save.
To distinguish between standard and custom profiles, make sure that the Custom 
checkbox in front of each profile is selected.
Settings available under profile
Profile provides the following settings to the users:
•	
Console Settings: This option allows you to define the console settings for 
the profile
•	
Page Layout: This option allows you to assign page layouts for standard and 
custom objects

Chapter 2
[ 67 ]
•	
Field-Level Security: This option helps you to define the fields within objects 
that users can view and edit
•	
Custom App Settings: This option allows you to define the custom apps 
that can be accessed by users
•	
Connected App Access: This option gives you access related to the 
connected apps
•	
Tab Settings: This option allows you to define the tabs that users can view
•	
Record Type Settings: This option lets you manage record-type settings for 
standard and custom objects
•	
Administrative and General User Permissions: This option provides 
permissions that allow users to manage the system and apps within it
•	
Standard and Custom Object Permissions: This option allows you to 
manage object permissions that allow users to create, read, edit, and 
delete records
•	
Desktop Integration Clients: This option defines the desktop client that 
users can access
•	
Login Hours: These are the hours in which specific profile users can log in 
to Salesforce
•	
Login IP Ranges: This is the IP range from which the user permits access 
to Salesforce
•	
Enabled Apex Class and Visualforce Pages Access: This defines the Apex 
classes and Visualforce pages that users can access
Permission sets
In Salesforce, users have only one profile, but sometimes you're required to assign 
more than one profile to users based upon business requirements. A permission set 
is a group of settings and permissions that gives users access to various apps and 
functions. The settings and permissions in permission sets are similar to those in 
profiles, but it extends users' functional access without changing their profiles.
Let's start with an example. Sara Bareilles (Profile - TL) is working as a team lead 
in Appiuss and her manager Rakesh Gupta (Profile - PM) is going on leave for a 
week, so Sara is responsible for Rakesh Gupta's work. As both of them have different 
profiles, Sara Bareilles does not have the access that Rakesh Gupta has; in this case, 
you can use permission sets.

User Management and Organization Administration
[ 68 ]
Settings available under permission sets
Through permission sets, you can manage access for the following settings:
•	
Assigned apps: This allows you to specify the apps that are visible to users
•	
Object settings: These include the following:
°°
Tab settings
°°
Record type settings
°°
Object permissions
°°
Field permissions
•	
App permissions: This helps you to define access for permissions to perform 
app-specific actions
•	
Apex class and Visualforce page access: This defines the Apex classes and 
Visualforce pages that users can access
•	
System permissions: This allows you to define permissions to perform 
actions that apply across apps such as Modify All Data
•	
Service providers: This is only available if you've enabled Salesforce as an 
identity provider
Creating permission sets
To create permission sets, follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Administer | Manage Users | Permission Sets.
2.	 Click on New.

Chapter 2
[ 69 ]
3.	 A new page will open. To create permission sets, enter data in the Label, 
API Name, and Description fields, and select User License from the 
drop-down list.
4.	 Click on Save.

User Management and Organization Administration
[ 70 ]
Deleting permission sets
To delete permission sets, follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Administer | Manage Users | Permission Sets.
2.	 Identify the permission sets that you want to delete and click on the Del link.
3.	 You will be asked for confirmation. Click on OK if you want to delete it and 
Salesforce will delete the permission set.
Once you delete a permission set, you can't restore it.
Cloning permission sets
To clone permission sets, follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Administer | Manage Users | Permission Sets.
2.	 Identify the permission sets that you want to clone.
3.	 Click on the Clone link.
4.	 You will be redirected to a new page where you have to enter data in the 
Label, API Name, and Description fields.

Chapter 2
[ 71 ]
5.	 Click on Save.
Setting up the users
To get more out of Salesforce, we have to allow our business users to access 
Salesforce. For this, a system administrator has to set up his or her user account. 
Before setting up a user account, the system administrator needs to gather basic 
information about users and their preferences to fill out a few mandatory fields. 
These fields are as follows:
•	
Last Name: This is the user's last name.
•	
Alias Name: Salesforce automatically creates an alias name for you. It is 
the combination of the first character of your first name and the last four 
characters of your last name.
•	
Email: This is the e-mail address of the user (it is used by Salesforce to 
send notifications).
•	
Username: This is in the format of an e-mail address.
•	
Nickname: This is used by Salesforce in the online community.
•	
User License: This is based upon the business requirement. Also, you can 
select the user license.
•	
Profile: This is dependent on the user license. When you select the user 
license, it will also give you the option to select corresponding profiles 
based upon that user license.

User Management and Organization Administration
[ 72 ]
•	
Email Encoding: This will define a character set encoding for outbound 
e-mails sent by the user from Salesforce.
•	
Time Zone: This allows you to specify the user's local time zone.
•	
Locale: This allows you to define the locale for the user.
•	
Language: This lets you define the language in which the user wants to 
operate in Salesforce.
•	
Currency: This allows you to set the user's preferred currency.
This Currency field will be visible only when multicurrency is 
enabled in your organization.
•	
Receive Approval Request Emails: This allows users to select when they 
want to receive e-mails for approval requests.
There are various ways to set up users in Salesforce. The following are the possible 
ways through which you can create users:
•	
User interface
•	
Data loader
•	
API call
To create a user from the user interface, follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Administer | Manage Users | Users.
2.	 Click on New User.
3.	 It will open a new page where you have to enter all the required details, 
and then select Generate new password and tick the Notify the user 
immediately checkbox so that Salesforce can send an e-mail notification 
to the user with the link to activate his or her account and set up a 
new password.
4.	 Click on Save.

Chapter 2
[ 73 ]
5.	 The user will be notified, as shown in the following screenshot, and can 
click on the user activation link to activate the account and move on to set 
the new password:
Adding multiple users
Sometimes it may be necessary to create several users, and if you try to create users 
one by one, it will take a long time. Here, you can use Salesforce's add multiple users 
feature. You can add up to 10 users at a time. To do this, follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Administer | Manage Users | Users.
2.	 Click on Add Multiple Users.
3.	 It will redirect you to a new page where you have to select the 
User License type:

User Management and Organization Administration
[ 74 ]
4.	 You will have to enter a few details such as the first name, last name, e-mail 
(user name), profile, and role as shown in the following screenshot:
5.	 Once done, select Generate passwords and notify user via email.
6.	 Click on Save.
7.	 You can add more users by clicking on the Add More Users button.
We will go into more detail about how to set up users through the data loader in 
Chapter 7, Concepts of Data Management.
Locking and unlocking users
Let's start with an example. Tony Cook is a sales manager at Appiuss. He is trying to 
log in to Salesforce with his credentials but has forgotten his password and exceeded 
the maximum invalid login attempts set by his organization's password policies. As 
a result, his account gets locked. You can go to the user's detail page and in the login 
history list and check when the password lockout happened under Status.

Chapter 2
[ 75 ]
Unlocking a user
To unlock a user, follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Administer | Manage Users | Users.
2.	 Navigate to the User page. In this case, Tony Cook, and click on the full 
name to go to the user's detail page:
3.	 Click on Unlock to unlock the user as shown in the preceding screenshot.
4.	 Now reset the password to send a new password to the user and Salesforce 
will send an e-mail notification to the user's e-mail address.
You can do this from both the Salesforce UI and SalesforceA mobile app.
Freezing a user's account
In the Winter '14 release, Salesforce launched a new feature called Freeze user's 
account. Let's start with an example. In this case, Sara Bareilles is working as a sales 
manager in Appiuss. She is referenced in many workflows and approval process 
e-mail notifications. Today is her last day at Appiuss, so as per the company policy, 
the system administrator has to deactivate her user account after business hours. 
However, as she is referenced in many places, it will take time to deactivate her 
user account. First, the system administrator has to remove her user reference from 
everywhere. In this case, it's better to freeze her user account so that she can't 
access her account anymore.

User Management and Organization Administration
[ 76 ]
To freeze a user's account, follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Administer | Manage Users | Users.
2.	 Navigate to the user. In this case, Sara Bareilles, and click on the full name to 
go to the user's detail page:
3.	 Click on the Freeze button to freeze the user account.
4.	 After freezing the user account, the user will not be able to access 
Salesforce, including resetting his or her password by using the Forgot 
Password feature.
Freezing user accounts doesn't make a user's licenses available for 
use in your organization. You must deactivate user accounts to 
make a user's licenses available.
Benefits of the login history
By using the login history feature, system administrators can track the user login 
information for the last 20 logins. The login history shows the following information:
•	
Login time
•	
Source IP
•	
Login Type
•	
Status (for example, success, failed, invalid password, and user is frozen)
•	
Browse Application

Chapter 2
[ 77 ]
•	
Login URLs (for example, http://login.salesforce.com, 
http://help.salesforce.com, http://success.salesforce.com, 
and http://developer.salesforce.com)
If you want to download the last six months of the login history, you can download 
it as shown in the preceding screenshot. You can use the login history for use 
cases such as a user notifying the system administrator that they cannot log in 
to Salesforce. The best practice in this case is to go to the user detail page and 
investigate the issue via the login history.
If the username entered by the user is incorrect, then the issue will not 
come under the login history.
Groups and their uses
Groups are a set of users. In a group, you can add individual users, other groups, 
users in a particular group or territory, roles, and subordinates. There are two types 
of groups in Salesforce:
•	
Public group: A system administrator is able to create public groups
•	
Private group: Individual users can create groups for their own personal use
Creating a public group
To create a public group, follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Administer | Manage Users | Public Groups.
2.	 Click on the New button.
3.	 Fill the details in the Label and Group Name fields, and select the Grant 
access using hierarchies checkbox if you want to give this group's access 
to a user who is on top in the hierarchy.

User Management and Organization Administration
[ 78 ]
4.	 From the Search drop-down list, you can select the Users, Public Group, 
Role, and finally Role and Subordinates options:
5.	 Click on Save.
Creating a personal group
To create a personal group, follow these steps:
1.	 Select the Name tab and click on My Settings.
2.	 From the left-hand side pane, select the Personal tab and click on 
My Groups.
3.	 Click on New Group.
4.	 Fill the information like we did for the public group in the last topic.
5.	 Click on Save.

Chapter 2
[ 79 ]
We can use groups in the following ways:
•	
To use public groups in sharing rule to share records
•	
To share your records with other users
•	
To specify that you want to synchronize contacts owned by others users
•	
To add multiple users to a Salesforce CRM content library
•	
To assign users to specific actions in Salesforce Knowledge
Queues and their significance
In Salesforce, the record's owner will be a user or a queue for lead, case, service 
contract, and custom objects. Once the records are placed in a queue manually or 
through an automatic case or lead assignment rule, they remain there until they are 
assigned to a user or taken by one of the queue members. Any queue member or 
users above the records in the role hierarchy can take ownership of them in a queue. 
All the users in a queue have the same access to a record.
Let's start with an example where an organization is using Web-to-Lead to capture 
leads from their website. Now the organization wants to assign the lead of a 
particular region to the local marketing reps, so in this case, you can use a queue.
Creating a queue
To create a queue, follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Administer | Manage Users | Queues.
2.	 Click on New.
3.	 Enter the necessary details in the Label, Queue Name, and Queue email 
address fields and then select Send Email to Members.

User Management and Organization Administration
[ 80 ]
4.	 Select the object from the Available Objects pane that you want to 
create a queue for.
5.	 Select the queue members from the Search dropdown. You can select the 
User, Public Group, Role, and Role and Subordinates options.
6.	 Click on Save.

Chapter 2
[ 81 ]
Add an e-mail address to the Queue Email field and Salesforce triggers an e-mail 
notification when new records are placed in the queue. You can use an individual 
user's e-mail address or a distribution list.
Leave the Queue Email field blank and Salesforce will send notification e-mails to all 
the queue members individually when new records are placed in the queue.
If we enter an e-mail address into the Queue Email field and check Send Email to 
Members, Salesforce will send an e-mail notification to all the queue members 
and the addresses in Queue Email individually when new records are placed in 
the queue.
Personal setup
Personal setup allows users to review their personal information registered with 
Salesforce. Here, a user is allowed certain facilities. They are explained in the 
following sections.
Editing personal information
You can edit the existing personal information registered with Salesforce, such as 
First Name, Last Name, Manager, Email address, and Work information. If you 
change your e-mail address, a confirmation message will be sent to the new address. 
You must click on the link provided in that message for the new e-mail address to be 
confirmed. This process ensures system security.
To do this, follow these steps:
1.	 Select the Name tab and click on My Settings.
2.	 From the left-hand side pane, select the Personal tab and click on 
Personal Information.
3.	 Edit and update your personal information.
4.	 Once done, click on Save.
Changing the password
To change your password, simply follow these steps:
1.	 Select the Name tab and click on My Settings.
2.	 From the left-hand side pane, select the Personal tab and click on Change 
My Password.

User Management and Organization Administration
[ 82 ]
3.	 Enter your old password, then simply enter your new password and select 
the security question and answer.
4.	 Click on Save.
You will get a new security token via e-mail.
Resetting the security token
If you forget the security token or wish to generate a new one, follow these steps:
1.	 Select the Name tab and click on My Settings.
2.	 From the left-hand side pane, select the Personal tab and click on Reset My 
Security Token.
3.	 Salesforce will send an e-mail notification to you with a new security token.
A user needs a security token when they are trying to access 
Salesforce from API tools, such as data loader and IDE.

Chapter 2
[ 83 ]
Language and time zone setup
If you want to change your language and time zone settings, follow these steps:
1.	 Select the Name tab and click on My Settings.
2.	 From the left-hand side pane, select the Personal tab and click on Language 
& Time Zone.
3.	 When you're done, click on Save.
Grant account login access
By using this feature, users may grant login access to system administrators or 
support personnel. This is required when system administrators assist with 
support issues and want to check potential issues with a user's login.
To grant login access, follow these steps:
1.	 Select the Name tab and click on My Settings.
2.	 From the left-hand side pane, select the Personal tab and click on Grant 
Account Login Access.
3.	 Select the duration for Salesforce.com Support.

User Management and Organization Administration
[ 84 ]
4.	 Click on Save.
When the Access Duration is over, Salesforce automatically removes the login access 
from Salesforce.com support.
Checking connections
When you log in for the first time through connected apps, Salesforce will ask you 
to enter a verification code. After that, Salesforce will save that IP address so that 
the next time when you log in from the same IP address, Salesforce won't ask you to 
enter any verification code.
To check your connections, simply follow these steps:
1.	 Select the Name tab and click on My Settings.
2.	 Select the Personal tab and click on Connections.
3.	 To revoke access, simply click on the Revoke link.

Chapter 2
[ 85 ]
The following aspects are covered in this section:
•	
OAuth connected apps: This section shows us the apps that we've 
authorized to log in. Here, the information shown is Connection Created 
Date, Last Used, Application, Use Count, and Actions. If we want to revoke 
the access for any of the connections, we can click on the Revoke link before 
the connection.
•	
Third-party account links: This section shows the third-party accounts you 
are allowed access to in order to log in.
Approver settings
Approver settings can be used to opt out of receiving e-mail notifications for 
approval or to delegate an approver on our behalf.
To configure the approver settings, follow these steps:
1.	 Select the Name tab and click on My Settings.
2.	 Select the Personal tab and click on Approver Settings.
3.	 Select your Delegated Approver (except a group or queue).
4.	 Select your Manager.
5.	 Select any of the options from the drop-down list next to Receive Approval 
Request Emails, as shown in the following screenshot:

User Management and Organization Administration
[ 86 ]
6.	 We can set any of the following options regarding e-mail notifications:
°°
If I am an approver or delegated approver
°°
Only if I am an approver
°°
Only if I am a delegated approver
°°
Never
When an approval request e-mail is sent to the assigned 
approver, the delegated approver also receives an e-mail 
notification that there is an approval request to review. 
Delegated approvers can't reassign approval requests; 
they can only approve or reject the approval.
7.	 Click on Save.
Summary
In this chapter, we learned about customization guidelines in order to set up our 
organization's role hierarchy in Salesforce. We discussed profiles in order to restrict 
user access to certain features available in Salesforce and for data availability. We 
then went into detail about how user management can be done in Salesforce, and 
how an individual user can access his or her information. Finally, we discussed 
the significance of public groups and queues, and how record ownership can be 
managed in Salesforce.
In the next chapter, we will go through the various concepts related to different 
security modules available in Salesforce.

Making Your Salesforce Data 
Secure – Security Settings 
in Salesforce
In the previous chapter, we discussed the company's profile management, role, and 
profile permission sets. We also discussed the user management personal settings in 
Salesforce. In this chapter, we will discuss Organization-Wide Default (OWD) and 
various ways to share records. We will also discuss the various security settings in 
Salesforce. The following topics will be covered in this chapter:
•	
Concepts of OWD
•	
The sharing rule
•	
Field-Level Security and its effect on data visibility
•	
Setting up password polices
•	
Two-factor authentication in Salesforce
•	
Session setting and its effects on users
•	
Network access – securing your organization data
•	
Removing activated IP – activations
•	
Setting up login access policies
•	
Single sign-on settings
•	
Authentication providers
•	
View Setup Audit Trail
•	
Expire all passwords

Making Your Salesforce Data Secure – Security Settings in Salesforce
[ 88 ]
•	
Concepts of delegated administration
•	
Remote site settings
•	
HTML documents and attachments settings
•	
Portal health check
Concepts of OWD
Organization-Wide Default is also known as OWD. This is the base-level sharing and 
setting of objects in your organization. By using this, you can secure your data so that 
other users can't access data that they don't have access to. The following diagram 
shows the basic database security in Salesforce. In this, OWD plays a key role.
It's a base-level object setting in the organization, and you can't go below this. 
So here, we will discuss OWD in Salesforce.
Let's start with an example. Sagar Pareek is the system administrator in Appiuss. 
His manager Sara Barellies told him that the user who has created or owns the 
account records as well as the users that are higher in the role hierarchy can 
access the records.
Here, you have to think first about OWD because it is the basic thing to restrict 
object-level access in Salesforce. To achieve this, Sagar Pareek has to set 
Organization-Wide Default for the account object to private.
Setting up OWD
To change or update OWD for your organization, follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Administer | Security Controls | Sharing Settings.
2.	 From the Manage sharing settings for drop-down menu, select the object for 
which you want to change OWD.

Chapter 3
[ 89 ]
3.	 Click on Edit.
4.	 From the Default Access drop-down menu, select an access as per your 
business needs.
5.	 For the preceding scenario, select Private to grant access to users who are 
at a high position in the role hierarchy, by selecting Grant access using 
hierarchy. For standard objects, it is automatically selected, and for custom 
objects, you have the option to select it.
6.	 Click on Save.
The following table describes the various types of OWD access and their 
respective description:
OWD access
Description
Private
Only the owner of the records and the higher users in the role 
hierarchy are able to access and report on the records.
Public read only
All users can view the records, but only the owners and the 
users higher in the role hierarchy can edit them.
Public read/write
All users can view, edit, and report on all records.
Public read/write/
transfer
All users can view, edit, transfer, and report on all records. 
This is only available for case and lead objects.
Controlled by parent
This says that access on the child object's records is controlled 
by the parent.
Public full access
This is available for campaigns. In this, all users can view, 
edit, transfer, and report on all records.
You can assign this access to campaigns, accounts, cases, contacts, contracts, leads, 
opportunities, users, and custom objects. This feature is only available for Professional, 
Enterprise, Unlimited, Performance, Developer, and Database Editions.

Making Your Salesforce Data Secure – Security Settings in Salesforce
[ 90 ]
Basic OWD settings for objects
Whenever you buy your Salesforce Instance, it comes with the predefined OWD 
settings for standard objects. You can change them anytime by following the path 
Setup | Administer | Security Controls | Sharing Settings. The following table 
describes the default access to objects:
Object
Default access
Account
Public read/write
Activity
Private
Asset
Public read/write
Campaign
Public full access
Case
Public read/write transfer
Contact
Controlled by parent (that is, account)
Contract
Public read/write
Custom Object
Public read/write
Lead
Public read/write transfer
Opportunity
Public read only
Users
Public read only and private for external users
We will discuss more about the objects mentioned in the preceding table in 
Chapter 5, CRM Functions and Streamlining Business Requirements.
Let's continue with another example. Sagar Pareek is the system administrator in 
Appiuss. His manager Sara Barellies told him that only the users who created the 
record for the demo object can access the records, and no one else can have the 
power to view/edit/delete it.
To do this, you have to change OWD for a demo object to private, and don't select 
Grant Access Using Hierarchy.
When you select the Grant Access Using Hierarchy field, it provides 
access to people who are above in the role hierarchy.
Sharing Rule
To open the record-level access for a group of users, roles, or roles and subordinates 
beyond OWD, you can use Sharing Rule. Sharing Rule is used for open access; 
you can't use Sharing Rule to restrict access.

Chapter 3
[ 91 ]
Let's start with an example where Sagar Pareek is the system administrator in 
Appiuss. His manager Sara Barellies wants every user in the organization to be able 
to view the account records but only a group of users (all the users do not belong to 
the same role or have the same profile) can edit it.
To solve the preceding business requirement, you have to follow these steps:
1.	 First, change the OWD account to Public Read Only by following the path 
Setup | Administer | Security Controls | Sharing Settings, so all users 
from the organization can view the account records.
2.	 Now, create a public group Account access and add users as per the 
business requirement. To create a public group, follow the path Name | 
Setup | Administration Setup | Manage Users | Public Groups.
3.	 Finally, you have to create a sharing rule. To create sharing rules, follow 
the path Setup | Administer | Security Controls | Sharing Settings, 
and navigate to the list related to Account Sharing Rules:
4.	 Click on New, and it will redirect you to a new window where you have to 
enter Label, Rule Name, and Description (always write a description so that 
other administrators or developers get to know why this rule was created).
5.	 Then, for Rule Type, select Based on criteria.
6.	 Select the criteria by which records are to be shared and create a criterion so 
that all records fall under it (such as Account Name not equal to null).
7.	 Select Public Groups in the Share with option and your group name.

Making Your Salesforce Data Secure – Security Settings in Salesforce
[ 92 ]
8.	 Select the level of access for the users. Here, select Read/Write from the 
drop-down menu of Default Account, Contract and Asset Access. Finally, 
it will look like the following screenshot:
Types of Sharing Rules
What we did to solve the preceding business requirement is called Sharing 
Rule. There is a limitation on Sharing Rules; you can write only 50 Sharing Rules 
(criteria-based) and 300 Sharing Rules (both owner- and criteria-based) per object. 
The following are the types of Sharing Rules in Salesforce:
•	
Manual Sharing: Only when OWD is set to Private or Public Read for any 
object will a sharing button be enabled in the record detail page. Record 
owners or users, who are at a higher position in role and hierarchy, can 
share records with other users. For the last business use case, we changed 
the account OWD to Public Read Only. If you navigate to the Account 
records detail page, you can see the Sharing button:

Chapter 3
[ 93 ]
Click on the Sharing button and it will redirect you to a new window. 
Now, click on Add and you are ready to share records with the following:
•	
Public groups
•	
Users
•	
Roles
•	
Roles and subordinates
Select the access type for each object and click on Save. It will look like what 
is shown in the following screenshot:

Making Your Salesforce Data Secure – Security Settings in Salesforce
[ 94 ]
The Lead and Case Sharing buttons will be enabled when OWD is Private, 
Public Read Only, and Public Read/Write.
•	
Apex Sharing: When all other Sharing Rules can't fulfill your requirements, 
then you can use the Apex Sharing method to share records. It gives you the 
flexibility to handle complex sharing.
Apex-managed sharing is a type of programmatic sharing that allows you to define 
a custom sharing reason to associate with your programmatic share. Standard 
Salesforce objects support programmatic sharing while custom objects support 
Apex-managed sharing.
Field-Level Security and its effect on data 
visibility
Data on fields is very important for any organization. They want to show some data 
to the field-specific users. In Salesforce, you can use Field-Level Security to make 
fields hidden or read-only for a specific profile. There are three ways in Salesforce 
to set Field-Level Security:
•	
From an object-field
•	
From a profile
•	
Field accessibility
From an object-field
Let's start with an example where Sagar Pareek is the system administrator in 
Appiuss. His manager Sara Barellies wants to create a field (phone) on an account 
object and make this field read-only for all users and also allowing system 
administrators to edit the field.
To solve this business requirement, follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Customize | Account | Fields and then click on the 
Phone (it's a hyperlink) field.
2.	 It will redirect you to the detail page of the Phone field; you will see a page 
like the following screenshot:

Chapter 3
[ 95 ]
3.	 Click on the Set Field-Level Security button, and it will redirect you to a new 
page where you can set the Field-Level Security.
4.	 Select Visible and Read-Only for all the profiles other than that of the system 
administrator. For the system administrator, select only Visible.
5.	 Click on Save.
If you select Read-Only, the visible checkbox will automatically 
get selected.

Making Your Salesforce Data Secure – Security Settings in Salesforce
[ 96 ]
From a profile
Similarly, in Field-Level settings, you can also achieve the same results from a 
profile. Let's follow the preceding business use case to be achieved through the 
profile. To do this, follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Administer | Manage Users | Profile, go to the 
System Administrator profile, and click on it. Now, you are on the 
profile detail page.
2.	 Navigate to the Field-Level Security section. It will look like the 
following screenshot:
3.	 Click on the View link beside the Account option. It will open Account 
Field-Level Security for the profile page.
4.	 Click on the Edit button and edit Field-Level Security as we did in the 
previous section.
Field accessibility
We can achieve the same outcome by using field accessibility. To do this, follow 
these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Administer | Security Controls | Field Accessibility.
2.	 Click on the object name; in our case, it's Account.
3.	 It will redirect you to a new page where you can select View by Fields or 
View by Profiles:

Chapter 3
[ 97 ]
4.	 In our case, select View by Fields and then select the field Phone.
5.	 Click on the editable link as shown in the following screenshot:

Making Your Salesforce Data Secure – Security Settings in Salesforce
[ 98 ]
6.	 It will open the Access Settings for Account Field page, where you can edit 
the Field-Level Security. Once done, click on Save.
Setting up password policies
For security purposes, Salesforce provides an option to set password policies for 
the organization. Let's start with an example. Sagar Pareek, the system administrator 
of an organization, has decided to create a policy regarding the password for the 
organization, where the password of each user must be of 10 characters and must 
be a combination of alphanumeric and special characters. To do this, he will have 
to follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Security Controls | Password Policies. It will open the 
Password Policies setup page:
2.	 In the Minimum password length field, select 10 characters.
3.	 In the Password complexity requirement field, select Must mix Alpha, 
numeric and special characters.

Chapter 3
[ 99 ]
4.	 Here, you can also decide when the password should expire under the User 
password expire in option. Enforce the password history under the option 
enforce password history, and set a password question requirement as well 
as the number of invalid attempts allowed and the lock-out period.
5.	 Click on Save.
Two-factor authentication in Salesforce
Two-factor authentication in Salesforce is a two-step login process. You can enable 
it if your users need more security rather than the ordinary login process. In this 
process, once the user logs in using their username and password, a token or 
passcode is sent to their device, which they need to enter in order to finally log in.

Making Your Salesforce Data Secure – Security Settings in Salesforce
[ 100 ]
Time-based tokens can now be used as a substitute to SMS-based (not available for 
non-English organizations) and e-mail-based login verification to activate 
a computer:
1.	 Download the supported Authenticator app for your mobile devices.
2.	 Create one permission set with the name Two Factor Authentication. 
To do this, navigate to Name | Setup | Manage Users | Permission sets | 
New and enter the data as shown in the following screenshot:
3.	 Add the Two-Factor Authentication for User Interface Logins system 
permission in the newly-created permission sets.
4.	 Now, navigate to the user's record for which you want to enable Two 
Factor Authentication.

Chapter 3
[ 101 ]
5.	 Add this permission set to the user's record by clicking on the Edit 
Assignments button in the list related to Permission Sets Assignments 
on the user's record.
6.	 Now, log out from Salesforce and log in using your credentials; you will 
come across the following page:

Making Your Salesforce Data Secure – Security Settings in Salesforce
[ 102 ]
7.	 Open Google Authenticator App on your mobile and scan the QR code, 
and it will look like the following screenshot:
8.	 Enter this code in the login screen and access your organization.
Removing Time-Based Token/Two-Factor 
Authentication
It's very easy to do this; just navigate to the user's record and click on the Remove 
link beside Time-Based Token:
To install Google's Authenticator app, visit 
https://support.google.com/accounts/answer/1066447.
Session setting and its effect on users
A session is the period of time during which a user interfaces with Salesforce. 
The user session begins when the user accesses the Salesforce organization and 
ends when the user logs out of it. You can set Session Settings in Salesforce 
according to the organization security you want. For example, the system 
administrator of Appiuss, Sagar Pareek, wants to expire the session of every 
inactive user after 30 minutes, to ensure security.

Chapter 3
[ 103 ]
In order to achieve this, follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Administer | Security Controls | Session Settings:
2.	 It will redirect you to customize the Session Security Settings page.
3.	 In Timeout value, set the value to 30 minutes. You can also select various 
session settings, listed as follows, depending on what happens when the 
session expires:
°°
Lock sessions to the IP address from which they originated
°°
Require secure connections (HTTPS)
°°
Force relogin after Login-As-User
°°
Require HttpOnly attribute
You can also enable SMS-based identity confirmation. The following 
screenshot shows the various session settings:
4.	 Once done, click on Save.
You select a minimum of 15 minutes to a maximum of 12 hours 
of timeout value. It is recommended that you use the minimum 
values for added security for your organization.

Making Your Salesforce Data Secure – Security Settings in Salesforce
[ 104 ]
Additionally, you can set the following settings under Session Settings:
Field
Description
Disable session timeout warning pop up
If enabled, it will prompt a notification 30 
seconds before the expiration of the session 
to the user.
Lock sessions to the IP address from which 
they originated
This option allows you to lock the session 
to a particular IP address. This prevents the 
session from being hijacked.
Require secure connections (HTTPS)
By default, this is enabled, and ensures that 
the user logs in from HTTPS, except Force.
com sites, which can be accessed from 
an HTTP.
Force relogin after Login-As-User
If your administrator is privileged to log 
in on behalf of another user, this option 
allows returning back to the previous 
session after logging out. If this option 
is enabled, the administrator is asked 
to relogin after logging out as the 
privileged user.
Require HttpOnly attribute
This option restricts the session ID's 
cookie access.
Enable caching and password 
autocomplete on login page
By default, this is enabled. This option 
allows your browser to store usernames.
Enable SMS-based identity confirmation
This option, if enabled, asks users to enter 
a PIN received on their registered mobile 
number via an SMS.
Login IP Ranges
By using this option, you can define the 
valid IP range from which users can log 
in. This field is not available in Enterprise, 
Unlimited, Performance, and Developer 
Editions. In these editions, you can specify 
a valid IP address per profile.
Enable clickjack protection for setup pages
This protects against clickjack attacks on 
setup Salesforce pages.
Enable clickjack protection for non-setup 
Salesforce pages
This protects you against clickjack attacks 
on non-setup Salesforce pages.
Enable clickjack protection for non-setup 
customer Visualforcepages
This protects you against clickjack attacks 
on your Visualforce pages. If you use 
custom Visualforce pages within a frame 
or iframe, you may see a blank page, or 
the page may display without the frame.

Chapter 3
[ 105 ]
Field
Description
Enable CSRF protection on GET requests 
on non-setup pages
This protects against Cross-site Request 
Forgery (CSRF) attacks by modifying 
non-setup pages to include a random 
string of characters in the URL parameters 
or as a hidden form field.
Enable CSRF protection on POST requests 
on non-setup pages
This protects against CSRF attacks by 
modifying non-setup pages to include a 
random string of characters in the URL 
parameters or as a hidden form field.
Network access – securing your 
organization's data
The system administrator of Appiuss knows that data available in their organization 
is sensitive, and they want to make sure that it should always be kept safe and 
secure from every angle, and no one other than the permitted users may log in to 
the organization. They also want to make sure that in the worst-case scenario, if any 
rival gets a username and password, they must not be able to log in. The system 
administrator knows that the users always log in from the company's network, 
so it is easier to restrict the login to the company's network.
To achieve this, you can follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Administer | Security Controls | Network Access:

Making Your Salesforce Data Secure – Security Settings in Salesforce
[ 106 ]
2.	 Click on New.
3.	 Enter the valid IP range of your organization in the Start IP Address and 
End IP Address fields:
4.	 If your organization is using a static IP address, make sure you enter the 
same IP address in both fields.
5.	 Click on Save.
The start and end IP addresses in an IPv4 range must include no 
more than 33,554,432 addresses. The following ranges are valid:
•	
0.0.0.0 to 1.255.255.255
•	
132.0.0.0 to 132.255.255.255
•	
132.0.0.0 to 133.255.255.255
Removing activated IP activations
When you log in from an unknown device with a new IP address, Salesforce asks 
you to provide an identity confirmation code that is delivered via e-mail, SMS, or 
a mobile authentication app. Once you enter the identity confirmation code, the 
device (and client browser) is considered as activated. You can use this method 
when you don't have your cell phone, or if it is lost, you can ask your administrator 
to remove the old IP address so that no one can get unauthorized access to your 
Salesforce system. Once your IP is activated, Salesforce won't ask you for an identity 
confirmation again.

Chapter 3
[ 107 ]
To remove an activated IP, follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Administer | Security Controls | Activations:
2.	 Select the Login IP that you want to remove and then click on Remove.
3.	 In their next login attempt, the user has to provide a confirmation of 
their identity.
Setting up login access policies
If your organization wants to access any user's owned information without first 
asking them to grant the administrator with the permission to log in on their behalf, 
the system administrator can enable login access policies for the organization.
You can do this in the following manner:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Administer | Security Controls | Login Access Policies.
2.	 To allow the administrator to log in on any user's behalf without first asking 
them, enable the Administrators Can Log in as Any User option. This option 
is not available by default; you need to raise a case with Salesforce.com to 
enable it:

Making Your Salesforce Data Secure – Security Settings in Salesforce
[ 108 ]
3.	 Additionally, if you want to prevent users from granting access to publishers, 
click on Available to Administrators Only for that publisher.
4.	 Click on Save.
Single sign-on settings
Single sign-on allows users to log in via external environments. To configure the 
single sign-on setting for your organization, follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Security Controls | Single Sign-On Settings.
2.	 Click on the Edit button and select the SAML Enabled checkbox:
3.	 Click on Save.
4.	 You will be redirected back to the Single Sign-On page.
5.	 Under SAML Single Sign-On Settings, click on New:
6.	 It will redirect you to the SAML Single Sign-On Setting page where you 
have to provide various details:

Chapter 3
[ 109 ]
The descriptions of the various fields are found in the following table:
Field
Description
Name
Enter the full name.
SAML Version
Select the appropriate SAML version.
Issuer
Enter the identity provider's name.
Identify Provider Certificate
Click on the Browse button to upload the authentication 
certificate issued by your identity provider.
Custom Error URL
Enter the URL that users should be redirected to, in case 
any errors occur during SAML login.
SAML Identity Type
Specify what the SAML identity type will be. You 
can select either using the Salesforce.com users or the 
Federated ID.
SAML Identity Location
Specify the location of the SAML identity.
Authentication providers
These days, we are using various login credentials to access multiple websites such 
as Facebook and Janrain. To access these websites, you have to remember multiple 
login credentials, and if you are using Salesforce, that is one more credential to 
remember. Once you enable this feature, users can log in to Salesforce from an 
external service provider such as Facebook or Janrain, and there is no need to 
remember one more credential to log in to Salesforce. You can use your favorite 
account to log in to Salesforce.

Making Your Salesforce Data Secure – Security Settings in Salesforce
[ 110 ]
To configure an authentication provider successfully for single sign-on, you need to 
perform the following activities:
1.	 Configure the login service provider website.
2.	 Use Apex to create a registration login handler.
3.	 Define the authentication provider in your Salesforce.com organization.
4.	 Once you set up the authentication provider, the steps that a user has to 
perform will be described as follows.
5.	 Users will try to log in to Salesforce.com using third-party identity credentials.
6.	 The login request will be redirected to an authentication provider for the 
service provider.
7.	 The third-party service provider authenticates the login credentials and 
redirects the user to Salesforce.com with the credentials.
8.	 Finally, the user gets access to Salesforce.com.
To configure the authentication provider in Salesforce.com, you have to follow 
these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Administer | Security Controls | Auth. Providers.
2.	 Click on New, as shown in the following screenshot:
3.	 It will redirect you to a new page, where you have to select the 
authentication provider.

Chapter 3
[ 111 ]
4.	 The following is a screenshot for Facebook as the authentication provider:
5.	 Here, you have to specify information for the mandatory fields (the fields 
that feature a red mark). The fields shown depend on the authentication 
provider. The description of various fields is as follows:
Field
Description
Name
This specifies the name of the authentication provider.
URL Suffix
This specifies the suffix to be used in client 
configuration URLs.
Consumer Key & Secret
The authentication provider provides this information. In 
this scenario, Facebook will provide the information when 
you create an application in Facebook.
Custom Error URL
This is an optional field where you can specify the URL to 
be used by the provider to report any errors.
Registration Handler
This is the Apex class used for registration handling.
Portal
If the SSO needs to be extended to portal users, select an 
appropriate portal for this.
6.	 Once done, click on Save.

Making Your Salesforce Data Secure – Security Settings in Salesforce
[ 112 ]
View Setup Audit Trail
Salesforce.com keeps an Audit Trail of configuration changes made in the Setup 
section. This Audit Trail is available for administrators to track recent setup 
changes. This becomes especially helpful if there are multiple administrators for 
your organization. Let's start with an example where Appiuss has many system 
administrators and they want to track who changed the configuration. Only the 
system administrator or a user with View Setup and configuration permission can 
use this feature. You can see the last 20 entries under Setup Audit Trail and are able 
to download data of the last six months for your organization.
To access the Audit Trail, follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Administer | Security Controls | View Setup 
Audit Trail:
2.	 The preceding screenshot shows the last 20 most recent configuration 
changes for your organization.
The description of the various fields is as follows:
Field
Description
Date
The Audit Trail shows the date/time for every change. 
User
This field shows the information about the user who made the change, 
in this case, the username.
Action
This field shows the action taken by the user. Examples include 
changing the workflow rule name and object name, field creation, 
and password change.

Chapter 3
[ 113 ]
Field
Description
Section
This shows which section was impacted by the change, for example, 
customize accounts, workflow, manage users, reports, groups, 
and so on.
Delegate User
This shows the name of the delegated user who made the changes. 
This will have value only if changes made by the delegated user are on 
behalf of another user.
Audit Trail key concepts
You can check Audit Trail for the mentioned section/type of changes:
•	
Administration: This will track various administration changes such as 
changes in the company information, multiple currencies, users, e-mail 
address changes, profile changes, roles, record types, creating e-mail footers, 
and domain name changes.
•	
Customization: These changes are related to the interface changes, forecasts, 
contracts, ideas, field tracking in feeds, support-related settings, process 
setups, and changes to groups.
•	
Security and sharing: These are related to security settings and sharing, 
such as password policy changes, session setting changes, changes in SAML 
settings, and so on.
•	
Data management: These changes are related to the mass deletion of records, 
data export requests, the mass transfer of records and import wizard usage, 
and changes in analytic snapshots.
•	
Development: This change is related to Apex classes, triggers, and 
Visualforce. Changes can include modifications to triggers, classes or 
Visualforce; remote site access setup; and Force.com site setup.
•	
Various setups: These include various setup changes such as the creation 
of an API, usage metering notifications, territories usage, workflow and 
approvals settings, and AppExchange package installation/uninstallation, 
and creation and deletion of workflow actions are also tracked.
•	
Using the application: These changes are related to the changes in the 
account team and opportunity team selling settings, Google App services, 
and the enabling and disabling of partner and customer portal users.

Making Your Salesforce Data Secure – Security Settings in Salesforce
[ 114 ]
The View Setup Audit Trail page only shows the 20 most recent entries 
in the list. To download the full audit history for the last 180 days, click 
on the download link. If you want to learn more about the types of 
changes in the setup Audit Trail history tracks, visit https://help.
salesforce.com/htviewhelpdoc?id=admin_monitorsetup.
htm&siteLang=en_US.
Expire all passwords
Salesforce is giving you the flexibility to expire all users' passwords at any time to 
enforce extra security for your organization. Only the system administrator or users 
with the manage user permission can use this feature. If all the passwords have 
expired, and the user tries to log in the next time, they will be forced to set a new 
password. To expire all passwords, follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Administer | Security Controls | Expire 
All Passwords.
2.	 Select the Expire all user passwords checkbox, as shown in the 
following screenshot:
3.	 Click on Save.
This will not affect the users who have the Password Never 
Expires permission.

Chapter 3
[ 115 ]
Concepts of delegated administration
Let's start with an example where Appiuss has 5,000 Salesforce Enterprise Edition 
licenses, and they have only one system administrator. The system administrator 
receives ample requests to reset the password, change login hours, unlock users, 
or change their sharing settings daily. To reduce this, the system administrator 
can go ahead and set up a delegated administrator, so that any other user who 
is a delegated administrator can help with the workload.
The delegated administrator is a concept that extends certain admin privileges to 
non-admin users in order to allow them to perform admin functions. The actions 
that delegated administrators can perform include the following:
•	
User administration: For the named roles and their entire subordinate roles, 
delegated administrators can create and edit users and reset passwords, as 
well as unlock users in named roles. Delegated users can also log in as users 
who have granted login access to their administrator. They can also do quota 
settings, create default teams, and create personal groups.
•	
Assignable profiles: The delegated administrators can assign only the 
profiles granted to the delegated administrator.
•	
Custom object administration: Access can be granted to delegated 
administrators to serve as administrators for certain custom objects 
and their associated tabs only.
Setting up a delegated administration
To set up a delegated administration for your organization, follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Administer | Security Controls | Delegated 
Administration.
2.	 Click on New as shown in the following screenshot:

Making Your Salesforce Data Secure – Security Settings in Salesforce
[ 116 ]
3.	 It will redirect you to a New Delegated Group window, where you have to 
enter data in the Delegated Group Name field as well as optionally select 
the Enable Group for Login Access checkbox. The details of each field 
are as follows:
°°
Delegated Group Name: This specifies the group name.
°°
Enable Group for Login Access: This option is selected if you want 
to allow the delegated administrator to log in as a user belonging to 
the role hierarchy that they manage.
4.	 Click on Save; this will redirect you to the Delegated Group Detail page. 
This will look like the following screenshot:
5.	 After creating the delegated user group, you have to do a few tasks, defined 
as follows:
°°
Delegated administrators: You can add users to this group who are 
a part of the delegated administrator group. To do this, click on the 
Add button available on the list related to Delegated Administrator; 
it will redirect you to a new page and add users (click on the 
magnifying glass icon) as per your business requirement. 
Once done, click on Save:

Chapter 3
[ 117 ]
Only users whose profiles include the View Setup and 
Configuration permission can be delegated administrators.
°°
User Administration: Now, you have to specify the roles and 
subordinates that the delegated administrators can create and edit. 
To do this, click on the Add button available in the list related to Role 
Administrator; this will redirect you to a new page and add a role 
(click on the magnifying glass icon) as per your business requirement. 
Once done, click on Save:

Making Your Salesforce Data Secure – Security Settings in Salesforce
[ 118 ]
°°
Assignable Profiles: Here, you can specify the profiles of the 
delegated administrators of this group and these can be assigned to 
the users they create or update. To do this, click on the Add button 
available on the list related to Assignable Profiles; this will redirect 
you to a new page and add assignable profiles as per your business 
requirement. Once done, click on Save:
Delegated administrators cannot assign profiles with 
the permission Modify All Data, such as system 
administrator profiles.
°°
Custom Object Administration: In this section, you can specify 
the custom objects that the delegated administrators of a group can 
administer. To do this, click on the Add button found on the list related 
to Custom Object Administration; it will redirect you to a new page, 
and here, you can add custom objects (click on the magnifying glass 
icon) as per your business requirement. Once done, click on Save:

Chapter 3
[ 119 ]
Now, you are done with the delegated administrator settings. You can change 
these settings any time by navigating to Setup | Administer | Security Controls | 
Delegated Administration.
These changes are captured under View Setup Audit Trail. If you need to check the 
Audit Trail for these changes, navigate to Setup | Administer | Security Controls | 
View Setup Audit Trail. Finally, our delegated administrator page will look like the 
following screenshot:
Remote site settings
Salesforce allows you to access external website resources from a Salesforce 
application for your organization. You can access these external websites through 
Visualforce pages, Apex Callout, and via XmlHttpRequest calls. To avoid accessing 
malicious websites from Salesforce.com, the website first needs to be registered with 
remote site settings. Once the site is registered, it can be used within Salesforce.com.

Making Your Salesforce Data Secure – Security Settings in Salesforce
[ 120 ]
To register a new site, follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Administer | Security Controls | Remote Site Settings.
2.	 Click on the Remote Site Edit button to add a new site:
It will redirect you to a new page where you have to fill in the required 
information to register the new site. The description of various fields is 
as follows:
Field
Description 
Remote Site Name 
Here, you can enter the name of the remote site.
Remote Site URL
Here, you can enter the URL for the remote site.
Disable Protocol Security
Select this to allow access to the remote site regardless of 
the HTTP or HTTPS protocol.
Description
Here, you can provide a description for the remote site.
Active
To make the remote site active, select this checkbox.
The following is a screenshot of what you'll see:
3.	 Once you are done, click on Save.

Chapter 3
[ 121 ]
HTML documents and attachments 
settings
Salesforce allows you to upload various types of documents. These documents can 
be uploaded in the notes and attachments section of any record or in the documents 
section. Uploading HTML can be a security risk (due to an XSS attack), and for security 
reasons, your organization may prohibit this type of document upload to Salesforce. 
Once this feature is enabled, it doesn't allow users to upload a file with any of these 
extensions: htm, html, htt, htx, mhtm, mhtml, shtm, shtml, and acgi. These settings 
won't affect the previously-uploaded HTML documents and attachments, but when 
users try to view an HTML attachment or document, their browser first prompts 
them to open the file in the browser, save it to their computer, or cancel the action. 
This feature won't affect the attached HTML document on e-mail templates.
To prohibit the uploading of HTML attachments and documents, follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Administer | Security Controls | HTML Documents 
and Attachments Settings.
2.	 Select the Disallow HTML documents and attachments checkbox:
3.	 Click on Save.
Do not enable this setting if your organization uses the partner portal 
to give your partner users access to Salesforce.

Making Your Salesforce Data Secure – Security Settings in Salesforce
[ 122 ]
Testing document and attachment 
settings
If you want to test this feature, follow these steps:
1.	 Click on the Account tab.
2.	 Navigate to the records details page in which you want to attach 
the document.
3.	 Navigate to the list related to Notes & Attachments.
4.	 Click on the Attach file button and try to upload the HTML file, and you will 
get an error, as shown in the following screenshot:
Portal Health Check
By using partner and customer portals, you can collaborate with both your 
customers and partners. A partner portal is a great way to share and capture leads, 
accounts, and contacts with your third-party partner. A customer portal is another 
way to offer efficient and faster services to your customer from the cloud. Your 
customers and partners can access your information via portals in many ways. To 
ensure your data security, it's important to keep in mind and follow best practices 
for portal implementation.

Chapter 3
[ 123 ]
The Portal Health Check Report provides a summary of the access level for data on 
the portals. Using Portal Health Check, you can improve portal security. To access 
various Portal Health Check Reports, you can navigate to Setup | Administer | 
Security Controls | Portal Health Check:
Portal Health Check Reports
Salesforce provides four types of Portal Health Check Reports to check different 
types of information. The four reports are as follows, and we will go through each 
of them in detail:
•	
Administrative and User Permissions
•	
Object Access and Field-Level Security
•	
Sharing Organization-Wide Defaults
•	
Sharing Rules
Administrative and User Permissions
The Administrative and User Permissions report provides information about the 
User Permissions granted to the portal users. You can click on the profile link to see 
the detailed information; it will redirect you to the profile detail page. The following 
screenshot shows the Administrative and User Permissions reports:

Making Your Salesforce Data Secure – Security Settings in Salesforce
[ 124 ]
Object Access and Field-Level Security
You can use the Object Access and Field-Level Security report to check the object 
and Field-Level Security for objects. You can filter the list of objects available by 
changing the option in the View dropdown. The following screenshot shows the 
list of Objects with the Number of Portal Profiles using that object. To see the 
Field-Level access, click on the name of the object in the report.
In our case, click on Account, which will redirect you to another page from where 
you can check the Field-Level Security of different profiles by clicking on the 
Field-Level Security link, as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 3
[ 125 ]
Sharing Organization-Wide Defaults
The Sharing Organization-Wide Defaults report provides information on the 
default access level for the objects. The access level indicates whether the object 
record is accessible. The access level can be read, write, or transfer. Under the 
Security column, you can find the security strength for different objects:
Sharing Rules
If any of the Sharing Rules impact the portal users, then the objects visible to the 
portal users are visible in this report. The following screenshot shows an example 
of a Sharing Rules report:
Portal Health Check Reports are accessible only when a customer or 
partner portal is enabled for your organization.

Making Your Salesforce Data Secure – Security Settings in Salesforce
[ 126 ]
Summary
In this chapter, we have gone through various security setting features available on 
Salesforce. Starting from OWD, followed by Sharing Rules and Field-Level Security, 
we also covered password policy concepts and two-factor authentication in Salesforce. 
Finally, we discussed Audit Trails, remote site settings, and Portal Health Check-ups. 
Now, you should be able to understand and manage Salesforce.com's security settings 
to have an efficient form of data security, providing a balance between security of 
data access for users and limiting risk of misuse and loss of data. In the next chapter, 
we will go through the e-mail administration concepts, and we will also cover how 
to change your Salesforce login page as well as concepts related to My Domain.

Domain Management, E-mail 
Administration, and Google 
Apps Settings
In this chapter, we will discuss about domain settings, which is a way to customize 
the login page. We will also discuss various concepts related to e-mail administration 
in Salesforce. The following topics will be covered in this chapter:
•	
My Domain
•	
Customizing your Salesforce login page
•	
Various e-mail administration methods
•	
Google Apps settings
My Domain
You can improve security and brand your organization's login pages by enabling 
your custom domain. By using My Domain, you can define a custom Salesforce 
domain name. A custom Salesforce domain name helps you to manage login and 
authentication for your organization in numerous ways. Here are a few examples:
•	
Brand your Salesforce login page and customize the content of the right-hand 
side frame
•	
You can block or redirect page requests that don't use the new domain name
•	
Get better support for single sign-on
•	
You can set a custom login policy as per the requirement and determine how 
users are authenticated
•	
You can give users the option to select an alternate identity provider from the 
login page

Domain Management, E-mail Administration, and Google Apps Settings
[ 128 ]
Setting up My Domain
To define My Domain for your organization, follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Administer | Domain Management | My Domain.
2.	 Enter the subdomain name you want to use within the sample URL. For 
example, a company called Appiuss might want to use the subdomain 
Appiuss. The company's login URL would be https://appiuss.
my.salesforce.com/ (for Enterprise, Performance, Unlimited, Professional, 
and Groups Editions' production environment) and https://appiuss-dev-
ed.my.salesforce.com for a Developer organization. You can use up to 
40 characters.
3.	 Once you enter the name, click on the Check Availability button to check the 
validity of this domain.
4.	 Now, select the checkbox I agree to the Terms and Conditions.
5.	 Finally, click on the Register Domain button to complete the first stage.
6.	 Wait for 10 to 24 hours and check your mail; you will get an e-mail similar to 
the one shown in the following screenshot when your domain name is ready 
for testing. Once you set up the domain, you cannot modify the name.

Chapter 4
[ 129 ]
7.	 Click on the link circled in red and log in to Salesforce by using 
your credentials.
You can define a custom domain name only once. My Domain is 
also available for Sandbox environments. You can contact Salesforce 
support to delete the domain but not modify it.
Deploying My Domain
Your domain will not be available to users until you have tested and deployed it. 
To deploy your domain, follow these instructions:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Administer | Domain Management | My Domain.
2.	 Click on the Deploy to Users button, as shown in the following screenshot:

Domain Management, E-mail Administration, and Google Apps Settings
[ 130 ]
3.	 You will get the following pop-up message:
4.	 Click on OK, and it will redirect you to a new page where you can enter 
My Domain Settings and configure Login Page Branding.
After you deploy your new domain name, you can't reverse it.
My Domain Settings
Once you deploy My Domain for your users, you will come to a new page where 
you can change the My Domain Settings for your organization. To change your 
My Domain Settings, follow these instructions:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Administer | Domain Management | My Domain.
2.	 Click on Edit, as shown in the following screenshot:
3.	 Under Login Policy, you can select Prevent login from https://login.
salesforce.com, where you don't want to allow the user to log in except 
by using the My Domain login URL.

Chapter 4
[ 131 ]
4.	 You can also select Redirect Policy for page requests that don't use the new 
domain name, such as old bookmarks.
5.	 Once done, click on Save.
You cannot edit your domain name.
Customizing your Salesforce login page
Whenever you try to log in to Salesforce by using https://login.salesforce.
com/ or https://test.salesforce.com/, you will be sent to Salesforce's default 
login page. For every organization, branding matters because we live in the Internet 
age. You can transform the look and feel of your Salesforce login page and use your 
branding as well.
To customize the look and feel of your Salesforce login page, at 
least one domain must already be enabled for your organization.

Domain Management, E-mail Administration, and Google Apps Settings
[ 132 ]
To customize your Salesforce login page, follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Administer | Domain Management | My Domain.
2.	 Go to the Login page branding section and click on Edit.
3.	 Click on Browse and upload the Header Logo if you want to use your 
organization's logo.
The logo will appear on your login pages in JPG, GIF, or PNG formats, 
which will be maximum 100 KB in size. The maximum dimensions allowed 
are 250 px x 125 px.
4.	  To change the background color of your login page, click on the color picker 
or enter a valid hexadecimal color code as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 4
[ 133 ]
5.	 To change Right Frame URL that is available on the right-hand side of the 
login frame, enter a correct iframe URL link.
Content must be located at a URL that uses SSL encryption and 
the https:// prefix. Maximum content size is 478 px by 397 px.
6.	 Select the Authentication Service option available on the page, as at least one 
authentication service is required.
7.	 Click on Save.
8.	 Log out from your Salesforce developer account, and Salesforce will redirect 
you to your customized login page.
Next time you use your My Domain URL to log in to Salesforce, it will redirect you 
to your custom login page.
Various e-mail administration methods
There are various ways to maintain e-mail administration in Salesforce. We will 
discuss the following points in brief:
•	
Deliverability
•	
Organization-Wide Addresses
•	
Compliance BCC Email
•	
Test Deliverability

Domain Management, E-mail Administration, and Google Apps Settings
[ 134 ]
•	
E-mail to Salesforce
•	
Delete attachments sent as Linkl
•	
E-mail Footers
Deliverability
E-mail deliverability is a way to ensure that the company or an individual's 
e-mails reach its target recipient. If you want to boost the deliverability of an 
e-mail that you send from your Salesforce organization, you have to configure 
the deliverability settings.
Access to Send Email
If you want to control the types of e-mail that your organization can send, you have 
to follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Administer | Email Administration | Deliverability.
2.	 Go to the Access to Send Email section, and select the Access level dropdown:
There are three options under the Access level dropdown, and the description for 
each of them is as follows:
•	
No access: This option prevents all outbound e-mails to and from users. 
Workflow e-mail alerts will not work if you select this option.
•	
System email only: This option allows you to send auto generated e-mails, 
such as new user and password reset e-mails. This setting is especially 
useful for controlling the e-mails sent from Sandboxes so that the testing 
and development team don't send test e-mails to your users.

Chapter 4
[ 135 ]
•	
All email: This option allows you to send all types of outbound e-mails.
Sandboxes created before Spring 13 have all email selected by 
default, and newly created Sandboxes default to System emails only.
Bounce Administration
The bounce e-mail administration features help you to ensure that the e-mail addresses 
you have for your contacts, leads, and personal accounts are correct. It also makes sure 
that the e-mails your users send to those addresses are not blocked due to excessive 
e-mail bounces.
To set up bounce e-mail administration for your organization, follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Administer | Email Administration | Deliverability.
2.	 Go to the Bounce Administration section. Now, you will have to select the 
Activate bounce management checkbox to enable the feature:
Once the bounce e-mail administration feature is enabled and a user sends an e-mail 
to an invalid e-mail address, the e-mail bounces to Salesforce.com and the user is 
banned from sending any more e-mails to that address until the address is updated 
or confirmed. You can also select what happens when an e-mail bounces by selecting 
one of the following checkboxes available under Activate bounce management:
•	
Show a bounce alert next to all instances of the email address: If this 
checkbox is not selected, Salesforce only displays a bounce alert on the 
record from which the e-mail was originally sent.
•	
Return bounced emails to sender: If this checkbox is not selected, Salesforce 
displays the bounce alert but discards the bounce message. This feature is not 
recommended when using e-mail relay.

Domain Management, E-mail Administration, and Google Apps Settings
[ 136 ]
Email Security Compliance
The Enable compliance with standard email security mechanisms checkbox 
automatically modifies the from address of every e-mail you send from Salesforce 
to comply with e-mail security frameworks that your recipients might implement, 
such as SPF. If you select the Enable Sender ID compliance option, it declares that 
Salesforce.com e-mails come from an authorized IP address.
To set up bounce e-mail administration for your organization, follow 
these instructions:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Administer | Email Administration | Deliverability.
2.	 Go to the Email Security Compliance section. Now, you can activate this 
feature by selecting the checkbox that is shown in the following screenshot:
If you select the Enable Sender ID compliance checkbox, the recipient's 
e-mail client (not Salesforce) may append the phrase Sent on behalf of 
to the from field of e-mail received from Salesforce. This feature is not 
recommended when using e-mail relay.
Mass Email
You can notify your users with a status e-mail when their mass e-mails are 
complete by selecting Notify sender when mass email completes. With this 
option selected, Salesforce will send an e-mail notification once the mass 
e-mail completes. This option is available under the Mass Email section 
of the deliverability configuration page.

Chapter 4
[ 137 ]
Organization-Wide Email Addresses
If your organization wants users to share a common e-mail name, you can define 
a list of Organization-Wide Addresses for each user profile. Organization-Wide 
Addresses define a common e-mail address that a user profile can use. When 
sending an e-mail from Salesforce, users with these profiles can select a different 
from address than the e-mail address they have defined and replies are sent to the 
Organization-Wide Address.
Let's start with an example. Whenever an e-mail alert is triggered from the 
workflow e-mail alert, it displays the user's personal e-mail address. To brand your 
organization, you can define multiple Organization-Wide Address like admin@
appiuss.com and Sales@appiuss.com for your organization that a user's profile 
can use. Users can select from which address they want to send e-mail alerts while 
configuring the workflow e-mail alert (we will discuss more about workflow in 
Chapter 6, Automating a Business Process). The following is an example of the 
e-mail address:
To configure an Organization-Wide Default Address for your organization, 
follow these instructions:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Administer | Email Administration | 
Organization-Wide Email Addresses.
2.	 Click on Add.

Domain Management, E-mail Administration, and Google Apps Settings
[ 138 ]
3.	 It will redirect you to the Edit Organization-Wide Email Addresses page, 
where you have to fill in all the required details in order to create the address.
The descriptions of the fields are as follows:
°°
Display Name: This is the word or phrase that the users who receive 
your e-mail will see as the sender of the e-mail.
°°
Email Address: This is the e-mail address that is used when sending 
an outbound e-mail.
°°
Profiles: You can also select profiles that can use the selected 
e-mail address.
4.	 Once you click on Save, Salesforce will send an e-mail to the address 
specified in the Email address mentioned in last steps.

Chapter 4
[ 139 ]
5.	 You have to open the e-mail and verify the e-mail address by clicking 
on the confirmation link, and then the user will be allowed to use this 
Organization-Wide Address. Once the e-mail address is confirmed by 
the user, you will see it verified under the status column:
You cannot use an Organization-Wide address to send a mass e-mail or a 
Stay-in-Touch request. You cannot delete or change an organization-wide 
e-mail address if it is used by an e-mail alert.
Compliance BCC Email
Outbound e-mail is very important for any organization for security and compliance 
purposes. In Salesforce, you can easily enable the Compliance BCC Email feature 
to automatically send a secret copy of each outbound e-mail message to an e-mail 
address that you specify.
To configure the Compliance BCC Email feature for your organization, follow 
these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Administer | Email Administration | Compliance 
BCC Email.
2.	 Select Enable and specify the e-mail address, as shown in the 
following screenshot:
3.	 Click on Save.

Domain Management, E-mail Administration, and Google Apps Settings
[ 140 ]
This feature excludes e-mails like system e-mails, such as password reset or import 
completion notifications.
Compliance BCC Email prevents users from editing the BCC field 
on any e-mail and disables their Automatic BCC setting under My 
Email Settings.
Test Deliverability
Salesforce sends an e-mail from 52 different IP addresses. If your organization blocks 
any of these IP addresses, you might not receive all the e-mails sent from Salesforce. 
Salesforce.com maintains distinct IP addresses for inbound and outbound e-mail.
To check whether your organization can receive e-mails from every Salesforce IP 
address, follow these instructions:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Administer | Email Administration | 
Test Deliverability.
2.	 Enter your e-mail address.
3.	 Click on Send. Salesforce instantly sends a test message from all 52 IP 
addresses to your e-mail address. Each test message specifies the 
IP address from which it was sent.
If you are using e-mail relay, you will just receive e-mails from five IP addresses. 
You have to whitelist these IP addresses.

Chapter 4
[ 141 ]
If you received fewer than 52 test messages, contact your e-mail 
administrator. The organization's e-mail administrator must whitelist the 
Salesforce IP ranges on your organization's e-mail server. The Salesforce 
IP ranges are as follows:
96.43.144.64 to 96.43.144.65
96.43.148.64 to 96.43.148.65
182.50.78.64 to 182.50.78.79
204.14.232.64 to 204.14.232.79
204.14.234.64 to 204.14.234.79
Email to Salesforce
If you want to keep a record of each e-mail sent from your company provided e-mail 
addresses to the leads, contacts, opportunities, and other records, you can use the 
Email to Salesforce feature. This feature enables you to keep a copy of each e-mail 
sent from your third-party e-mail provided by your company. You simply need to 
send an e-mail with Bcc to the Salesforce organization's specific e-mail address. If 
the e-mail address in the to section of your mail matches the e-mail address of the 
lead, contacts, and opportunities, Salesforce will create a task with the corresponding 
record and it will be shown under the activity history of the record. Alternatively, 
you can keep this as an unresolved item and later assign it to some other user.
If you want to enable this feature for your organization, follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Administer | Email Administration | 
Email to Salesforce.
2.	 On the Email to Salesforce screen, click on Edit.
3.	 Select the Active checkbox. Also, you can select the Advanced Email 
Security Settings checkbox to configure Email to Salesforce to verify 
the legitimacy of the sending server before processing a message.

Domain Management, E-mail Administration, and Google Apps Settings
[ 142 ]
4.	 Click on Save.
5.	 Now, Salesforce will ask you to send a notification to all users mentioning 
that the administrator has enabled Email to Salesforce, and it will include a 
link to get started with an e-mail setup for individual users. Click on Send 
Notification or Skip This Step.
Setting up the Email to Salesforce URL
Each user has to set up the Email to Salesforce URL for their own use. Now 
Salesforce generates a user-specific Email to Salesforce e-mail address that is 
to be used to send e-mails as Bcc by the user.
To configure Email to Salesforce, follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Name | My Settings | Email | My Email to Salesforce.
2.	 Now, you will be able to see Your Email to Salesforce addresses in the 
highlighted part of the page.
3.	 You can set the e-mail addresses that you will use to send e-mails on behalf 
of the Email to Salesforce address in the My Acceptable Email Addresses 
field, separated by commas. Only the e-mails sent from an e-mail address 
you specify under the Email to Salesforce address will be added to the 
activity's history of related records; an unauthorized sender error will be 
bounced back if not.

Chapter 4
[ 143 ]
4.	 Additionally, you can decide what you want to do with the e-mails that 
are sent to Salesforce. By default, it is set to Automatically assign them to 
related salesforce.com records. You can also select the Always save email 
attachments and Email me confirmation of association checkbox as shown 
in the following screenshot:
5.	 Click on Save.

Domain Management, E-mail Administration, and Google Apps Settings
[ 144 ]
Next time if you send an e-mail from the third-party e-mail client to an e-mail 
address specified on lead, contact, or opportunity, it will be listed down under 
Activity History:
You will also get a confirmation e-mail from Salesforce with a link where the e-mail 
is attached under a list related to Activity History.
Deleting attachments sent as links
Salesforce provides a way to find and delete attachments sent as links. Receivers who 
subsequently click on the attachment link will see a message asking them to contact 
the e-mail sender to view the attachment. Let's start with an example: Sara Barallies 
asks the administrator Sagar Pareek to delete all the attachments that were sent as 
links to customers when the user Rakesh Gupta sent e-mails in bulk.
To do this, you can follow these instructions:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Administer | Email Administration | 
Delete Attachments Sent as Links.
2.	 You have to enter the following details:
°°
Attachment Filename (including the file extension if you 
remember it)
°°
Sender's Username
°°
Start Date
°°
End Date

Chapter 4
[ 145 ]
3.	 Click on Search.
4.	 In the search result, click on Del in front of the corresponding attachment 
to delete it.
You cannot recover deleted attachments from the Recycle Bin.
Email Footers
Email Footers are a great way to add disclaimers or to show some personal 
information or for branding purposes. Now, you can add footers to e-mails sent 
from Salesforce.com. A disclaimer appears at the bottom of all the outgoing e-mail 
messages sent from Salesforce or the API, as shown in the following screenshot. 
The defaults are used when no footer matches an outgoing e-mail's encoding.

Domain Management, E-mail Administration, and Google Apps Settings
[ 146 ]
To define footers for your organization, follow these instructions:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Administer | Email Administration | Email Footers.
2.	 Click on New to set a footer.
3.	 Provide the appropriate Name to the footer.
4.	 Select the Active for single email checkbox. Also, remember to select Active 
for mass email if you want the footer to be available for single e-mails, mass 
e-mails, or both. Select Unicode UTF-8 in the Email encoding field.
5.	 In the Text of the Footer field, write the text you want to show with the 
footer itself.

Chapter 4
[ 147 ]
6.	 Click on Save.
7.	 The defaults are used when no footer matches an outgoing e-mail's encoding. 
Now, you have to select the default footer for single and mass e-mail and 
click on Save.
Footers are text only; HTML tags are not rendered. 
The maximum size is 32 KB.
Google Apps settings
Google Apps is a suite of on-demand communication and collaboration services 
hosted by Google and designed for business users. If your organization has a Google 
Apps account, Salesforce administrators can enable Google Docs, Gmail, and a host 
of Google-related AppExchange apps that are customized for use within Salesforce. 
Your organization can use this feature to save file space in Salesforce and a few other 
purposes. The following are the steps to configure the Google Apps settings for 
your organization:
•	
Creating a Google Apps account
•	
Configuring Google Apps domain settings
•	
Activating Google Apps services
•	
Adding Google Docs to Salesforce

Domain Management, E-mail Administration, and Google Apps Settings
[ 148 ]
Creating a Google Apps Account
To create a Google Apps account for your organization, follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Administer | Google Apps | Settings.
2.	 Click on Sign Up and follow the instructions.
Configuring Google Apps domain settings
To configure Google Apps domain settings for your organization, follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Administer | Google Apps | Settings.
2.	 Click on Edit.
3.	 Select the Google Apps Administrative Contact. This person is the point of 
contact for Google Apps users in your organization.
4.	 Enter Google Apps Domain that you registered with Google. In our case, 
it is Appiuss.com.
5.	 Click on Save.

Chapter 4
[ 149 ]
Activating Google Apps Services
You can activate various Google Apps Services for your organization by performing 
the following steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Administer | Google Apps | Settings.
2.	 Locate the Google Apps services that you want to activate.
3.	 Click on Edit to activate a service.
Adding Google Docs to Salesforce
After the activation of this service, you can directly attach documents from your 
Google Docs, and they will be saved to your Salesforce space. To activate the Add 
Google Docs to Salesforce feature, perform the following steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Administer | Google Apps | Settings.
2.	 Click on the Edit link next to the Add Google Docs to Salesforce option in 
the Activate Google Apps Services list:
3.	 Select Activate and I agree to the Salesforce.com Terms of Use for Google 
Apps to enable the service.
4.	 Click on Save.

Domain Management, E-mail Administration, and Google Apps Settings
[ 150 ]
Now if you navigate to any records details page, you can find a link related to 
Google Docs, Notes & Attachments. You can now attach a file from Google Docs 
by clicking on the Add Google Docs button, as shown in the following screenshot:
Google Talk within Salesforce is no longer available. To learn 
more about Google Apps settings, you can go to https://help.
salesforce.com/HTViewHelpDoc?id=google_setup_
getstart.htm&language=en_US.
Summary
In this chapter, we saw different ways of customizing the e-mail administration in 
Salesforce—starting from configuring My Domain to customizing the Salesforce login 
page. We also discussed how to set Email Footers and Compliance BCC, and how to 
enable the Email to Salesforce feature. Finally, we also discussed organization-wide 
default e-mail addresses and Google Apps settings.
In the next chapter, we will discuss Sales Cloud and Service Cloud in detail with the 
creation of custom objects, tabs, and apps.

CRM Functions and 
Streamlining Business 
Requirements
In the previous chapter, we discussed various concepts of security and 
settings in Salesforce. We spoke about Organization-Wide Defaults, sharing 
settings, and Field-Level Security. We also discussed two-factor authentication, 
network access, and many other concepts related to security. In this chapter, we 
will talk about domain settings and ways to customize the login page. We will also 
discuss various concepts related to e-mail administration in Salesforce. We'll cover 
the following topics in this chapter:
•	
Types of relationships in Salesforce
•	
Sales Cloud overview
•	
Service Cloud overview
•	
Streamlining a business process
•	
Setting the history-tracking option

CRM Functions and Streamlining Business Requirements
[ 152 ]
Type of relationships in Salesforce
You can develop relationships between objects in Salesforce. You can also 
associate one object with another. For example, if you have an object named Event 
(to store information about an event) and you want to associate it with the Event 
Registration object (to store information about participants for a particular event) 
so that you can associate the event registration records with the respective event 
records, as you want to categorize each registration with the respective event. 
Salesforce provides the following five types of relationships that can be established 
between the objects:
•	
A master-detail relationship
•	
A lookup relationship
•	
A many-to-many relationship (junction object)
•	
Self-relationship
•	
A hierarchical relationship
A master-detail relationship
A master-detail relationship is a tightly-coupled relationship between Salesforce 
objects; this means that if a master record is deleted, then the child records associated 
with it are also deleted. In this type of relationship, the master controls the behavior 
of the child record in terms of visibility and sharing. It means the security setting of 
the master object applies to the child object.
For example, in our application (which we will discuss in the later part of this 
chapter), we have Sponsor that can register several booths in the event organized 
by Appiuss. For this requirement, we will use two objects: Sponsor and Booth 
Registration. So, in this case, Sponsor will act as the master object and Booth 
Registration as the child object.
When there is a master-detail relationship between two objects, you can create a 
special type of field over the master object called the Roll-up Summary field that 
we will discuss in a later section.
Lookup relationships
It is a loosely-coupled relationship between Salesforce objects, which means 
that even if the parent record is deleted, child records will remain in the system. 
Here, the parent and child both have their own setting through which they share 
information called security control.

Chapter 5
[ 153 ]
The difference between master-detail and 
lookup relationships
Let's have a look at the differences between the lookup and master-detail 
relationships in the following table:
A lookup relationship
A master-detail relationship
Loosely-coupled relationship.
Tightly-coupled relationship.
Roll-up Summary field cannot be created.
Roll-up Summary field can be created.
A parent record is not required while 
creating a child record.
A parent record is always required in 
order to create a child record.
A child record can have as many lookup 
relationships as possible.
A child record can only have a maximum 
of two master-detail relationships.
Lookup fields are not required on the page 
layout of the detail record.
Master-detail field is always required on 
the page layout of the detail record.
Standard object record can be on the detailed 
side of a custom object record.
A standard object record cannot be on the 
detailed side of a custom object record.
The record ownership of child records is not 
controlled by the parent.
The parent controls the record ownership 
of child records. The owner field is 
not available in the detail record of a 
master-detail relationship. Queues, 
sharing rules, and manual sharing is not 
possible for detail records as they require 
the owner field.
You can have a child record without 
a parent.
You cannot have a child record without a 
parent.
You can have a maximum of 25 lookups 
on an object.
You can have a maximum of two master 
detail records on an object.
The cascade delete feature is not available.
The cascade delete feature is available.
Many-to-many relationship
We can create a many-to-many relationship in Salesforce if we need child records 
to have two masters that can control its behavior. For example, a solution is 
attached to many cases, and one case may have more than one solution. We use 
a many-to-many relationship in Salesforce to relate two objects. If you have two 
objects called Faculty and Course and you want to relate these two objects with 
the third called College, you can use the many-to-many relationship. In this 
case, you have to create two master-detail relationships: College - Faculty 
and College - Course.

CRM Functions and Streamlining Business Requirements
[ 154 ]
One object can have only two master-detail relationships.
Self-relationship
Self-relationship is another example of a lookup relationship. In Salesforce, we can 
use the lookup relationship to create a self-relationship between objects. We can have 
a maximum of 25 self-lookups. For example, an account record has a parent account 
record, as shown in the following screenshot:
Hierarchal relationship
In Salesforce, only the user object has a hierarchal relationship where we can create 
a hierarchy of the users in the organization. For example, a user can have his or her 
manager, his or her manager can have a senior manager, and so on, until the user 
reaches the CEO or CIO level. The best example is the Manager field of the user 
object, as shown in the following screenshot:
Sales Cloud overview
Sales Cloud is a product designed to automate your sales process. By implementing 
this, an organization can boost their sales process. It includes campaign, lead, 
account, contact, opportunity (deal), product, quotes, Chatter, report, dashboard, 
and many other features as well. Sales Cloud includes everything that you need 
to close a deal faster.

Chapter 5
[ 155 ]
Sales Cloud can support your business purposes if you are looking for a solution 
to provide basic lead management, contact management, and activity tracking. 
Using this, you can also maintain a strong sales pipeline, quoting, and contract 
management on cloud. The productivity achieved by implementing the Sales 
Cloud solution allows your sales team to focus on identifying and bringing in 
more business. Your sales team will work more competently, while your marketing 
executives are provided with the actual information to make more informed and 
quicker business decisions.
With Sales Cloud, your inside sales, marketing, sales rep, and management 
teams work together in an organized manner to win new deals, develop new 
relationships with customers, and retain existing customers. A few benefits of 
using Sales Cloud are as follows:
•	
A 360-degree view of the customer
•	
More effective lead management and tracking
•	
Ability to pipeline the management process
•	
Standardized quoting and pricing capability
•	
Quicker access to information related to customers and opportunities
•	
Ability to streamline and automate business processes using the workflow 
rule and approval processes
•	
Reports and dashboard to present a summary of data in front of 
management employees
The sales cycle starts from Campaigns and ends with Opportunities. Through 
campaigns, the organization gets leads; once leads are ready to buy your products, 
you can covert those leads into accounts, contacts, and opportunities. Once you 
win those opportunities, the next step is to deliver the order; this is called order 
management. The following diagram shows the sales life cycle in Salesforce:

CRM Functions and Streamlining Business Requirements
[ 156 ]
Now let's discuss the following points:
•	
Campaign management
•	
Lead management
•	
Account management
•	
Contact management
•	
Opportunity management
•	
Order management
Campaign management 
A campaign is an outbound marketing plan that you want to capture, manage, and 
track within Salesforce. You can run a campaign through a direct mail program, 
seminar, print advertisement, e-mail, or other type of marketing initiatives. A 
campaign is a way to generate leads. In Salesforce, you can also associate leads 
with a certain campaign, and it can be tracked in future to see how successful the 
marketing effort was. To create, edit, delete, and configure an advanced campaign 
setup in Salesforce, the Marketing User checkbox on the user's personal information 
page needs to be selected. To check yours, follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Name | My Settings | Personal | Advanced user details | Edit.
2.	 Select Marketing User as shown in the following screenshot:
3.	 Click on Save.

Chapter 5
[ 157 ]
Setting up the campaign access
By default, all the users have read access to campaigns (if you created your profile 
by cloning the read-only profile). To create, edit, or delete campaigns, users need to 
have the Create, Edit, or Delete permissions enabled on their profile, as shown in 
the following screenshot:
Campaigns – standard fields
Whenever you create a new campaign in Salesforce, your sales and marketing teams 
should work together to capture all the relevant information related to the customer. 
Salesforce, by default, comes with a standard field for campaign and campaign 
member objects, or if your business needs custom fields, you can create those as 
well in the system.
The following table shows the important standard fields that are available in the 
campaign object:
Field label
Data type
Description
Active
Checkbox
This field is used to make the 
campaign either active or inactive. 
If the campaign is inactive, it will 
not appear when the user clicks on 
the campaign lookup available on 
the lead, contact, and opportunity 
edit page and reports as well.

CRM Functions and Streamlining Business Requirements
[ 158 ]
Field label
Data type
Description
Actual Cost
Currency (18, 0)
This field is used to capture the 
amount that you actually spent to 
run the campaign. This field must 
be captured to calculate the ROI. 
The ROI formula is ((Total value 
won opportunities - actual cost) / 
actual cost)) * 100
Budget Cost
Currency (18, 0)
This field is used to capture the 
amount of money that has been 
budgeted for the campaign.
Campaign Name
Text (80)
This is the name of the campaign. 
A user can enter a relevant name 
that marketing and sales team 
members can easily understand, 
for example, Packt's 2000th title.
Description
Long text area (32,000)
This field is used to capture 
detailed information about the 
campaign.
Expected Response (%)
Percent (8, 2) 
This field is used to capture the 
expected response rate for the 
campaign.
Expected Revenue
Currency (18, 0)
This field is used to capture 
the expected revenue from the 
campaign.
Start Date
Date
This field is used to capture the 
date when a campaign starts.
End Date
Date
This field is used capture the date 
when a campaign ends.
Num Sent
Number (18, 0) 
This field is used to capture the 
number of target audience/
individuals to whom you will 
send invites to for this campaign. 

Chapter 5
[ 159 ]
Field label
Data type
Description
Type
Picklist
This field is used to capture the 
type of campaign you are going to 
run. The picklist values available 
for this field are as follows:
•	 Advertisement
•	 E-mail
•	 Telemarketing
•	 Banner ads
•	 Seminar/conference
•	 Public relations
•	 Public relations
•	 Referral program
•	 Others
Status
Picklist
This field is used to capture the 
current status of a campaign. The 
picklist values available in this 
field are as follows:
•	 In progress
•	 Completed
•	 Aborted
•	 Planned
Total Responses
Number (9, 0)
This field shows the sum of all 
the campaign members (lead and 
contact that you added to the 
campaign as campaign members) 
who are linked to this campaign 
and have had their member status 
set to responded.
Converted Leads
Number (9, 0)
This field shows the number 
of leads that you successfully 
converted.

CRM Functions and Streamlining Business Requirements
[ 160 ]
Field label
Data type
Description
Num Total Opportunity
Number (9, 0)
This field shows the total number 
of opportunities that you would 
get from running a campaign.
Num Won Opportunity
Number (9, 0)
This field shows the total number 
of opportunities that you 
would win.
Total Value 
Opportunity
Currency (18, 0)
This field shows the value of the 
total amount of opportunities 
linked to this campaign.
Total Value Won 
Opportunity
Currency (18, 0)
This field shows the value of 
the total amount of closed-won 
opportunities linked to 
this campaign.
You can find a complete list of standard and custom fields for campaigns by 
following the path Setup | Build | Customize | Campaigns | Fields.
At any time, you can add or delete custom fields for a campaign, but you cannot 
delete standard fields. You can also add a value to the standard picklist and change 
the Field-Level Security of fields as well.
Campaign members – standard fields
Once you create a campaign, the next step is to add members to the campaign, 
like you add contacts or leads. The following table shows the important standard 
fields that are available in the campaign member's object:
Field label
Data type
Description
Campaign 
Lookup (campaign)
This field is used to link campaigns 
and campaign members.
Contact
Lookup (contact)
This is just a contact name that is used 
to select the contact in the campaign 
members. It will then establish a link 
with the contact name. 
Lead
Lookup (lead)
This is just the lead name that is used 
to select the lead in the campaign 
members. It will then establish a link 
with the lead name.

Chapter 5
[ 161 ]
Field label
Data type
Description
Status
Picklist
This field is used to capture the 
status of a campaign member for 
the associated campaign. The values 
available under this Picklist are 
as follows:
•	 Responded
•	 Sent
You can find a complete list of standard and custom fields for campaign members 
by following the path Setup | Build | Customize | Campaign Members | Fields, 
as shown in the following screenshot:

CRM Functions and Streamlining Business Requirements
[ 162 ]
Creating a new campaign
You can create a new campaign in Salesforce using the user interface; alternatively, 
you can import it from another organization using the import wizard and data 
loader. Here, we will discuss ways to create a campaign via the Salesforce user 
interface. To create a campaign, follow these steps:
1.	 Go to the Campaigns tab and click on the New button that is available on the 
top of the page, as shown in the following screenshot:
2.	 Fill out all the information in the Campaign Edit page. Any field that has a 
red line next to the box indicates that it is required.
3.	 Select the Active checkbox for any new campaign that is going to be used. 
This will allow users to view your Salesforce campaign. You can always go 
back to uncheck the box when your campaign is no longer active:
4.	 Once done, click on Save.

Chapter 5
[ 163 ]
Adding values in member status
Once you have created a campaign, the next task is to add the campaign members. 
Before you proceed, we will learn how to add a value to the Campaign Member 
Status picklist for a specific campaign. By default, a new campaign member had 
two status values: Sent and Responded. These are shown in the Campaign Member 
Status picklist. To add/remove the status values of a particular campaign from 
the Campaign Detail page, click on the Advanced Setup button as shown in the 
following screenshot:
It will redirect you to the Campaign Member Status page. From here, you can add 
or remove values from the status picklist for a particular record as shown in the 
following screenshot:
Now, we have added the value Not interested to the picklist.
You can have more than one responded value. These are calculated 
together and displayed under the Total Responses field.

CRM Functions and Streamlining Business Requirements
[ 164 ]
Adding campaign members
To add multiple members to your campaign, perform the following steps:
1.	 Click on the Manage Members drop-down button and select one of the 
possible options shown in the following screenshot:
2.	 You can add existing contacts or leads by selecting Add Members - Search 
from the Manage Members drop-down button.
3.	 If you want to add members by importing a file into Salesforce, then click on 
Add Members - Import File from the Manage Members drop-down button. 
It will pop up a new window where you can import leads and contacts:

Chapter 5
[ 165 ]
The following are the two options available on the campaign page:
•	
Lead Import Wizard: This option allows you to import up to 50,000 leads 
at one time
•	
Campaign Update Wizard: This option allows you to update up to 50,000 
existing contacts and leads at one time
You can also add members to your campaign by navigating to the campaign member 
list available on the campaign detail page.
Adding members from the lead or contact list view
You can add multiple members to a campaign from the lead and contact list view 
by clicking on the Add to Campaign button, as shown in the following screenshot:
You can add a maximum of 250 leads or contacts per page.
Adding members from the lead or contact detail pages
You can also add members to a campaign via the contact or lead detail pages. To do 
this, navigate to the Campaign History list available on the Lead detail page and 
click on the Add to Campaign button, as shown in the following screenshot:

CRM Functions and Streamlining Business Requirements
[ 166 ]
You can also use the Apex data loader to add multiple members to the campaign. 
We will discuss the data loader in Chapter 7, Concepts of Data Management.
Lead management
A lead represents a prospect that is interested in buying your product; it is in the 
form of a potential opportunity or someone who is interested in doing business with 
your organization. Salesforce provides a way to capture leads from various sources, 
and you can easily access leads through any device such as your mobile, iPad, and 
workstation. Let's discuss the following topics:
•	
Leads – standard fields
•	
Lead business process
•	
Lead settings
•	
Creating new leads
•	
Autoresponse rules
•	
Assignment rules
•	
Accepting records from the lead queue
•	
Lead conversion
Leads – standard fields
The marketing team is responsible for capturing all the relevant information related 
to leads and then pass it to the sales team. Salesforce, by default, provides standard 
fields for a lead object, or if your business needs custom fields, you can create those 
as well for the lead object.
The following table shows the important standard fields that are available in the 
lead object:
Field label
Data type
Description
Lead Owner
Lookup (User, Queue) 
As discussed in Chapter 2, User Management 
and Organization Administration, the owner 
of a record should be a user or queue for 
lead, case, and custom objects. In this field, 
you select a user or queue to whom you 
want to assign this lead.

Chapter 5
[ 167 ]
Field label
Data type
Description
Last Name 
Text (80)
This field is used to capture the last name 
and is a required field. The last name is 
copied in the Last Name field of a contact 
record during the lead conversion process.
Company 
Name
Text (255)
This field is used to capture the company 
name and is a required field. The company 
name is copied to the company name of an 
account record during the lead conversion 
process. Note that once a person's account 
is enabled for an organization, this field is 
no longer required for the lead.
Lead Status
Picklist
This field is used to capture the status of 
a lead and is a required field. The values 
available under this picklist are as follows:
•	 Contacted
•	 Open
•	 Qualified
•	 Unqualified
Source
Picklist
This field is used to capture the source of 
the lead, such as an e-mail, phone, and 
newspaper. The values available under 
this picklist are as follows:
•	 Advertisement
•	 Employee referral
•	 External referral
•	 Partner
•	 Public relations
•	 Seminar – Internal
•	 Seminar – Partner
•	 Trade show
•	 Web
•	 Word of mouth
•	 Others

CRM Functions and Streamlining Business Requirements
[ 168 ]
You can find a complete list of the standard and custom fields for leads by 
following the path Setup | Build | Customize | Leads | Fields, as shown 
in the following screenshot:

Chapter 5
[ 169 ]
Lead business process
You can use various business processes to display different picklist values for users 
based on their profile. Multiple business processes allow you to track separate lead 
life cycles. You can create different lead processes that comprise some or all of the 
picklist values available for the Lead Status field. To create/modify a lead process, 
follow the path Setup | Build | Customize | Leads | Lead Processes | New, 
as shown in the following screenshot:
Now, you can assign the picklist values of the lead's status, as shown in the 
following screenshot:

CRM Functions and Streamlining Business Requirements
[ 170 ]
Lead settings
To enable the Web-to-Lead feature for your organization, you have to configure the 
lead setting by navigating to Setup | Build | Customize | Leads Settings | Edit, 
as shown in the following screenshot:
You can select the default lead owner. This will work only when the assignment 
rule (which we will discuss later in the chapter) fails. You can also select the Notify 
Default Lead Owner checkbox too. Salesforce gives you the option to deselect the 
Enforce Validation and Trigger From Lead Conversion checkbox, and by default, 
this checkbox is selected.
Creating new leads
In Salesforce, you can capture a lead from various sources:
•	
The Salesforce user interface
•	
Web-to-Lead
•	
Data loader (we discussed this in Chapter 2, User Management and 
Organization Administration)

Chapter 5
[ 171 ]
Creating a new lead through the user interface
To create a new lead through the Salesforce user interface, follow these steps:
1.	 Go to the Leads tab and click on the New button that is available at the top of 
the page, as shown in the following screenshot:
2.	 Fill out all of the information on the leads' edit page. Any field that has a 
red line before the box indicates that it is a required field.
3.	 You can also select the campaign you want to relate this lead to.
4.	 Once done, click on Save.
Once you enable a person's account, the Company field of the 
lead's record is no longer a required field.
To clone a lead, click on the Clone button available on the Lead Detail page, 
as shown in the following screenshot:

CRM Functions and Streamlining Business Requirements
[ 172 ]
Creating a new lead through Web-to-Lead
Web-to-Lead does nothing but captures a lead from the company's website. You 
have to host a web form (a simple HTML file) on your website, and whenever the 
form is filled in, its record is automatically created in Salesforce. It's a very easy way 
to capture a lead and get it in Salesforce without any integration.
Web-to-Lead settings
To enable/disable Web-to-Lead, navigate to Setup | Build | Customize | 
Web-to-Lead | Edit; Salesforce will display a Web-to-Lead Settings page as 
shown in the following screenshot:
Select the Web-to-Lead Enabled checkbox to enable Web-to-Lead. Now, select 
Default Lead Creator. This is the user who will be the default lead owner of the 
lead when it is captured via a web form. Also, select Default Response Template. 
A better option is to create Web-to-Lead autoresponse rules (which we are going 
to discuss in the later part of this chapter) to determine which e-mails to send to 
prospects when they submit the information online. Finally, click on Save.

Chapter 5
[ 173 ]
Generating a Web-to-Lead HTML code
To create a Web-to-Lead form, follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Build | Customize | Leads | Web-to-Lead:
2.	 Click on the Create Web-to-Lead Form button. It will redirect you to a new 
page where you will have to select a field that you want to display on the 
Web-to-Lead form. Enter the return URL (the user will be redirected to this 
URL as soon as he or she submits the Web-to-Lead page on your company's 
website) and select the same language as the one that appears in the 
following screenshot:

CRM Functions and Streamlining Business Requirements
[ 174 ]
3.	 Once done, click on the Generate button. It will give you some sample code 
in an HTML format; copy this code and use it as your company's Contact Us 
page or wherever you want.
4.	 Finally, click on the Finished button to finish the Web-to-Lead setup.
With the Web-to-Lead feature, you can capture up to 500 leads per day.
By paying an additional cost, you can increase this limit; however, 
for that, you will have to create a case and contact the Salesforce 
customer support.
Auto-response rules
An auto-response rule is a way by which you can send a thank you message or a 
lead registration confirmation e-mail if an individual uses Web-to-Lead to show 
interest in your business. Auto-response rules work only in the case of Web-to-Lead, 
and only one auto-response rule can be active at a time; however, you can create a 
maximum of 50 auto-response rules based on your Salesforce edition. To create an 
auto-response rule, follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Build | Customize | Leads | Auto-Response 
Rules | New.
2.	 Enter data in the Rule Name field and activate it by selecting the Set this 
as the active Web-to-Lead Auto-Response rule checkbox as shown in the 
following screenshot:
3.	 Click on Save.

Chapter 5
[ 175 ]
Defining the auto-response rule entries
To define rule entries for the auto-response rule, follow these steps:
1.	 Go to the auto-response rule detail page that we defined in the previous 
section, navigate to the Rule Entries list, and click on New as shown in 
the following screenshot:
2.	 It will redirect you to the Rule Entries edit page where you need to enter 
a few details as follows:
°°
Sort Order: This is where you enter the number to specify the 
order in which rule entries will fire
°°
Select the criteria for this rule entry: This is where you enter the 
criteria for which this rule entry will fire
°°
Name: This is where you enter the sender's name 
°°
Email Address: This is where you enter the sender's e-mail address
°°
Email Template: This is where you select the e-mail template
3.	 Click on Save.
4.	 Finally, it will look like the following screenshot:

CRM Functions and Streamlining Business Requirements
[ 176 ]
All e-mails count against the organization daily limit of 
1,000 mass e-mails.
Assignment rules
It is a common problem to assign leads to local sales teams. Salesforce provides you 
with a feature called assignment rule. By using it, you can autoassign a lead to the 
respective user/queue as per your business requirements. Only one assignment rule 
can be active at a time. The assignment rule works for both Web-to-Lead and leads 
created through the Salesforce UI. To define an assignment rule, follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Build | Customize | Leads | Assignment 
Rules | New.
2.	 Enter data in the Rule Name field and activate it by selecting the 
Set this as the active lead assignment rule checkbox, as shown in 
the following screenshot:
3.	 Click on Save.
Defining assignment rule entries
To define rule entries for an assignment rule, follow these steps:
1.	 Go to the autoresponse rule detail page that we defined in the last step 
(under the assignment rules section), navigate to the Rule Entries list, 
and click on New as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 5
[ 177 ]
2.	 It will redirect you to the Rule Entries edit page where you have to enter a 
few details as follows:
°°
Sort Order: This is where you enter the number to specify the order 
in which rule entries will fire
°°
Select the criteria for this rule entry: This is where you enter the 
criteria for which this rule entry will fire
°°
Select the user or queue to assign the lead to: This is where you 
select the user or queue as per your requirement
°°
Email Template: This is where you select the e-mail template
3.	 Click on Save.
4.	 Finally, it will look like the following screenshot:

CRM Functions and Streamlining Business Requirements
[ 178 ]
If you create a lead using the Salesforce user interface and you want to assign the 
lead using an active assignment rule, then you will have to select the Assign using 
active assignment rule checkbox available on the lead edit page, as shown in the 
following screenshot:
However, the problem is that you have to select this checkbox every time. To 
overcome this, Salesforce gives you a way to do this, in which you can select 
this checkbox for a specific page layout. To do this, follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Build | Customize | Leads | Page Layouts.
2.	 Click on the Edit link in front of the page layout for which you want 
to select the Assign using active assignment rule checkbox by default.
3.	 Click on Layout Properties, and it will pop up a window as shown in 
the following screenshot:
4.	 Click on the Select by default checkbox available under Lead 
Assignment Checkbox.
5.	 Click on OK and then click on Save.
Next time if you create a new or edit an old lead, the Assign using active 
assignment rule checkbox is automatically selected.

Chapter 5
[ 179 ]
Accepting records from the lead queue
Once leads are assigned to a queue, any users from the queue can take ownership 
of the record by accepting it. Leads remain in the queue until they are assigned or 
accepted by users. To create a new list view, follow these steps:
1.	 Go to the Lead tab, click on Create new view, and enter the following details:
°°
View Name: This refers to the name that you want to appear in the 
View drop-down list
°°
View Unique Name: This refers to a unique name to be used by the 
API and managed packages
°°
Specify Filter Criteria: This is the filter criteria that you can specify 
by selecting the queue from the drop-down list
°°
Select Fields to Display: This is used to choose up to 15 different 
fields to display in your view
°°
Restrict Visibility: This is used to select the visibility of the view as 
per the requirement, and you can specify whether everyone or just 
you can see the custom view
The following screenshot shows the edit page of the list view:
2.	 Click on Save.

CRM Functions and Streamlining Business Requirements
[ 180 ]
Now you can accept a lead from the queue by using the Accept button in the Appiuss 
list view that we created in the last step, as shown in the preceding screenshot.
Salesforce automatically creates a lead list view to enable 
users to access the records in the queue whenever someone 
creates a lead queue.
Lead conversion
Once a lead is captured in the system, the next step is to convert it. If your 
organization is creating a thousand leads, then it is a very monotonous job 
to qualify them and then convert those leads one by one. This is why many 
organizations use the lead score concept to qualify the leads.
Lead scoring
Lead scoring is nothing but a mechanism to calculate the weightage of the lead 
based on certain fields. For example, if the lead belongs to a certain city, then you 
can assign a value between 1-10. If the annual income crosses a threshold value, 
you can assign a value for this between 1-10. Finally, you can calculate the overall 
value of the lead. If it's greater than eight, then convert it; otherwise, let it be in 
the system. It's a required concept of the formula field and we will discuss it in 
Chapter 6, Automating a Business Process. The lead information page will look like 
the following screenshot:
Lead conversion – mapping lead fields
Standard fields between the lead and contact and account and opportunity objects 
are automapped by Salesforce for lead conversion. If you want to leverage this 
functionality for custom fields, then you have to use the map lead fields feature 
available in the lead object. 

Chapter 5
[ 181 ]
To do this, follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Build | Customize | Leads.
2.	 Go to the Lead Custom Fields & Relationships list and click on the 
Map Lead Fields button as shown in the following screenshot:
3.	 In the next window, you will be able to map the fields, and it will look 
like the following screenshot:
4.	 Once done, click on Save.
5.	 Mapping is required if you create some custom fields required for the account, 
contact, or opportunity objects. Once done, it will populate the value on those 
fields (account, contact, or opportunity) at the time of lead conversion.
While mapping the fields, make sure that you map the fields 
with the correct data type and that it also fulfills the validation 
rule if any exists in the account, contact, or opportunity.
Converting the leads
Upon lead conversion, it will create an account, contact, and optionally, an 
opportunity. An opportunity is created by lead conversion of the default value 
in the required field. The opportunity close date is set to the last day of the current 
quarter and opportunity stage is set to first value of stage picklist. During lead 
conversion, the amount field in the opportunity field remains blank. 

CRM Functions and Streamlining Business Requirements
[ 182 ]
To convert a lead, click on the Convert button available on the Lead Detail page:
This will redirect you to a new page where you can change the record owner of the 
new records. You can select the checkbox to send an e-mail notification to the owner. 
If you don't want to create an opportunity after the lead conversion, then select 
the Do not create a new opportunity upon conversion checkbox as shown in the 
following screenshot. You can also set the converted lead status and specify values for 
a new task subject, due date, and comment that you will assign to the record owner:

Chapter 5
[ 183 ]
Before creating any new records, Salesforce tries to match the existing account names 
with the company name of the lead. Where there is a match, you will have the option 
to select the existing records, as shown in the following screenshot:
As soon as you click on the Convert button, the lead conversion process will 
be completed, and you will be redirected to a new account page along with the 
following developments:
•	
The company name of the lead will become the account name
•	
The lead's first and last names will become the contact name
•	
The contact and opportunity associated will become related to the account
•	
Any campaign related to the lead will now be associated with the opportunity
Once you convert the lead, you will have no access to that lead. The only way to 
view a converted record is create a lead report, and under the filter option, select 
converted equal to true.
If a person account is enabled for your organization, then the 
company name of the lead will no longer be a required field. If 
the lead with an empty company name is converted, it will create 
a person account (not business account and contact).
Account management
An account in Salesforce represents the customer, competitor, or partner with whom 
you are doing your business. There are two types of accounts in Salesforce:
•	
Business account (B2B): This account is enabled for every Salesforce 
organization. In this type of account, you can store information related 
to the company. It's also called a business-to-business (B2B) account.
•	
Person account (B2C): If your company sells an insurance scheme to an 
individual, then you can use this type of account. To enable this account, you 
have to raise a case with Salesforce, and they will enable this feature for you.

CRM Functions and Streamlining Business Requirements
[ 184 ]
Accounts – standard fields
Both business and person accounts offer the same features and fields, but there are 
certain field differences, such as the one found in a person account: the Reports To, 
Parent Account, or Account Hierarchy fields are not available. A person account 
counts against both account and contact.
The following table shows the important standard fields that are available in the 
account object:
Field label
Data type
Description
Account name
Name
This field is used to capture the account 
name. It's just the company name for whom 
you are creating an account in the system. 
Here, you should always use a meaningful 
full name that everyone in the organization 
can easily understand. 
Type
Picklist
Here, you have to select the type of account, 
such as whether it's a partner, investor, 
competitor, reseller, prospect, or customer 
type of account.
Website 
URL (255)
This field is used to capture the company's 
website URL.
Industry
Picklist
This picklist states the industry in which the 
account belongs.
Annual revenue 
Currency (18, 0)
This field is used to capture the annual 
revenue of the company.
Billing address
Address 
This field is used to capture the company's 
billing address.
Shipping address 
Address 
This field is used to capture the company's 
shipping address.
Employees
Number (8, 0)
This field is used to capture the number of 
employees in the organization.

Chapter 5
[ 185 ]
You can find a complete list of standard and custom fields for accounts by 
following the path Setup | Build | Customize | Accounts | Fields, as shown 
in the following screenshot:

CRM Functions and Streamlining Business Requirements
[ 186 ]
Creating a new account
You can create accounts in Salesforce using its user interface, or you can import it 
from another organization using the import wizard and data loader. Here, we will 
discuss ways to create an account from the Salesforce user interface. To create an 
account, follow these steps:
1.	 Go to the Accounts tab and click on the New button that is available at the 
top of the page.
2.	 Fill in all the required information, as shown in the following screenshot:
3.	 Click on Save.
Contact management
Contact management is a way to maintain the key-decision maker or individual 
contact information of an account in Salesforce. Sales and marketing people often need 
it as they have to visit the company and give a demo about your product to finalize 
the deal. Salesforce provides a way to create, edit, delete, and view your contact in 
one place. You can store contact information such as the first and last names, account 
name, billing or shipping address, phone number, fax, and e-mail address.

Chapter 5
[ 187 ]
You can create a contact in Salesforce using its user interface, or you can import it 
from another organization using the import wizard and data loader. To create an 
account, follow these steps:
1.	 Go to the Contact tab and click on the New button that is available at the top 
of the page.
2.	 Fill in all the essential information, such as Last Name, Company Name, 
Email address, Phone, and so on.
3.	 Click on Save.
Opportunity management
Opportunity management is a revenue-generating event. By adding deals into 
Salesforce, it will help you to build a strong pipelining and forecasting feature. 
An opportunity is also called a deal.
Opportunity – standard fields
The following table shows the important standard fields that are available in the 
opportunities object:
Field label
Data type
Description
Account  name
Lookup (Account) 
This field is used to capture the account name 
for which you are creating an opportunity.
Amount
Currency (16, 2)
This field is to capture the amount of the 
opportunity. 
Close Date
Date
This field is to capture the probable closing 
date of the deal. 
Stage
Picklist
This field is used to capture the current status 
of the deal. The values available under this 
picklist are as follows:
•	 Prospecting
•	 Qualification
•	 Needs Analysis
•	 Value Proposition
•	 ID Decision Makers
•	 Closed Won
•	 Closed Lost
•	 Negotiation/Review
•	 Proposal/Price Quote
•	 Perception Analysis

CRM Functions and Streamlining Business Requirements
[ 188 ]
Field label
Data type
Description
Probability (%)
Percent (3, 0)
This field is autopopulated based on the 
stage you select, but you can change the 
probability (percent) any time by editing 
opportunity records.
Opportunity 
name
Text (120)
This field is used to capture the name of the 
opportunity. You can enter a maximum of 
120 characters.
You can find a complete list of standard and custom fields for an opportunity 
by following the path Setup | Build | Customize | Opportunities | Fields, 
as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 5
[ 189 ]
Creating a new opportunity
You can create an opportunity in Salesforce using its user interface, or you can 
import it from another organization using the data loader. Here, we will discuss 
ways to create an opportunity through the Salesforce user interface. To create an 
account, follow these steps:
1.	 Go to the Opportunity tab and click on the New button that is available at 
the top of the page.
2.	 Fill in all the required information, as shown in the following screenshot:
3.	 Click on Save.

CRM Functions and Streamlining Business Requirements
[ 190 ]
Big deal alert
A big deal alert is an automated e-mail that contains a snapshot of an opportunity 
that has touched a given threshold. You can set your threshold by entering a trigger 
amount and probability. The e-mail will be sent when both the triggers are met or 
exceeded. To create a big deal alert for your organization, follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Build | Customize | Opportunities | Big Deal Alert.
2.	 Fill in all the fields such as Trigger Amount, Trigger Probability, From 
Email Address, From Email Name, Notify Emails, and so on as shown 
in the following screenshot:
3.	 Click on Save.

Chapter 5
[ 191 ]
You can create only one big deal alert for your organization.
Order management
As soon as you win a deal, the next step is to ship the order and track the order 
delivery. In Spring'14, Salesforce announced a new feature called order management. 
Now, you can manage an order within Salesforce. Here, you can create, delete, 
activate, deactivate, delete, and reduce an order. The orders feature is available in 
the Developer, Performance, Enterprise, Professional, and Unlimited editions of 
Salesforce. Reduction in the order feature is available in the Developer, Performance, 
Enterprise, and Unlimited editions of Salesforce.
Enabling orders
To enable order management for your organization, follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Build | Customize | Orders | Settings.
2.	 Select the Enable Orders checkbox as shown in the following screenshot:
3.	 Click on Save.

CRM Functions and Streamlining Business Requirements
[ 192 ]
Orders – standard fields
The following table shows the important standard fields that are available in the 
orders object:
Field label
Data type
Description
Account Name
Lookup (account) 
This field is used to capture 
the account name for which 
you are creating orders.
Order Start Date
Date 
This field is used to capture 
the order effective date.
Contract Number
Lookup (contract)
This field is used to capture 
the contract details.
Status
Picklist
This field is used to capture 
the current status of the order. 
The values available under 
this picklist are as follows:
•	 Draft
•	 Activated
Billing Address
Address 
This field is used to capture 
the company's billing address.
Shipping Address 
Address 
This field is used to capture 
the company's shipping 
address.

Chapter 5
[ 193 ]
You can find a complete list of standard and custom fields for an opportunity by 
following the path Setup | Build | Customize | Orders | Fields, as shown in 
the following screenshot:

CRM Functions and Streamlining Business Requirements
[ 194 ]
Creating a new order
You can create a new order in Salesforce using its user interface, or you can import it 
from another organization using the data loader. Here, we will discuss ways to create 
an order via the Salesforce user interface. To create an account, follow these steps:
1.	 Go to the Orders tab and click on the New button that is available at the top 
of the page.
2.	 Fill in all the required information, as shown in the following screenshot:
3.	 Click on Save.
To create an order for an account, at least an active contract of 
that account is required. The order's start date can't be earlier 
than the contract's start date.

Chapter 5
[ 195 ]
Activating an order
To activate an order, go to the Orders Detail page and click on the Activate button, 
as shown in the following screenshot:
To activate or deactivate orders, users must have the Activate 
Orders user permission. An order must have order products 
before it can be activated.
Service Cloud overview
Service Cloud is a product designed to automate your support process. 
By implementing this, an organization can boost its support process. 
This includes case, knowledge base, article management, entitlement, and 
many more features. Service Cloud includes everything that you need to 
make your support process faster.
Service Cloud can support your business purposes if you are looking for a solution 
to provide a call center setup, case management, service contract; additionally, you 
can track the day-to-day work of a support agent. It will help you close a case faster 
and make your customer happier.

CRM Functions and Streamlining Business Requirements
[ 196 ]
Case management
Salesforce provides a number of ways to capture a case:
•	
Creating a case manually
•	
Using an Apex data loader (discussed in Chapter 7, Concepts of Data 
Management)
•	
Using Email-to-Case
•	
Using Web-to-Case
Creating a case manually
If a support agent wants to create a case manually, then he or she can go to the Cases 
tab, which is available at the top of the page, and click on the New button as shown 
in the following screenshot:
Fill in all the required information and click on Save.
Email-to-Case
Email-to-Case provides a way to create a case when an e-mail is sent to a predefined 
e-mail address. Let's take an example. A universal container is an Appiuss customer, 
and Appiuss wants to leverage the Email-to-Case feature for the universal container 
so they can create a case from the mail, instead of calling a support agent.

Chapter 5
[ 197 ]
Email-to-Case setting 
First of all, you have to enable Email-to-Case for your organization. To do this, 
follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Build | Customize | Cases | Email-to-Case.
2.	 Click on Edit and enable this feature. Also, select the Enable On-Demand 
Service checkbox as shown in the following screenshot:
3.	 Click on Save.

CRM Functions and Streamlining Business Requirements
[ 198 ]
Setting up routing addresses
Now, the next step is to set up a routing e-mail address to which the user will send 
an e-mail to create a case using the Email-to-Case feature. Follow these steps to set 
up the routing address:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Build | Customize | Cases | Email-to-Case.
2.	 Go to the Routing Addresses list and click on New as shown in the 
following screenshot:
3.	 Fill in the required information such as Routing Name, Email address 
(e-mail address from where the e-mail is to be sent), Case Priority, 
and Case Origin, as shown in the following screenshot:
4.	 Click on Save.

Chapter 5
[ 199 ]
5.	 Now, Salesforce will send an e-mail notification with the verification link to 
the address you mentioned in the last step. Once verified by the end user, it 
is ready to use:
From the next time, whenever the universal container wants to raise a case with 
Appiuss, he or she has to send an e-mail to Email Service Address from the address 
that we mentioned in the routing e-mail address.
Web-to-Case
Unlike the Web-to-Lead service that is used to capture a lead online, Salesforce 
provides another feature to capture a case from the Web using Web-to-Case. For 
example, Appiuss want to capture a case in Salesforce whenever the customer submits 
a support request from their website support page. To do this, follow these steps:
1.	 Enable Web-to-Case.
2.	 Generate an HTML code.
3.	 Use the code in your support page available on your website.
Enabling Web-to-Case
To enable Web-to-Case, follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Build | Customize | Cases | Web-to-Case.
2.	 Click on the Enable Web-to-Case link as shown in the following screenshot:

CRM Functions and Streamlining Business Requirements
[ 200 ]
3.	 It will redirect you to a new page where you can enable this service by 
selecting the Web-to-Case Enabled checkbox. You can also select Default 
Response Template and Default Origin:
4.	 Click on Save.
Generating an HTML code
To generate an HTML code for Web-to-Case, follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Build | Customize | Cases | Web-to-Case.
2.	 Click on the Generate the HTML link. It will redirect you to the 
Capturing Case Information from Your Website page.
3.	 Select the field that you want to display in the Web-to-Case page, 
Enter the redirected URL as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 5
[ 201 ]
4.	 Once done, click on the Generate button to generate the HTML code.
5.	 Now, use this code in the Company Support page or wherever your 
organization wants.
With the Web-to-Lead feature, you can capture up to 
500 leads per day.
Streamlining a business process
Salesforce comes with many standard objects, but if your requirement is not fulfilled 
by using them, you can go ahead and create custom objects. 
Creating a custom object
In Salesforce, database tables are treated as objects. These objects have fields, and any 
type of app that is built in Salesforce relies on it. We will now be developing a sample 
Event Management app for the company Appiuss that is going to organize an event 
for women and child welfare, where companies across the globe will be able to set 
up their booths to market themselves. This will allow local communities or people to 
participate in events for free, and the companies will sponsor this event. We will be 
building the following database model throughout the book from now on:

CRM Functions and Streamlining Business Requirements
[ 202 ]
The Event object will have a one-to-many relationship with the Event 
Registration object, and the Sponsor object will have a one-to-many relationship 
with the Booth Registration object. The Booth Registration object works as a 
junction object for the Event and Sponsor objects. Let's start by creating an Event 
object. To do this, follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Build | Create | Objects as shown in the 
following screenshot:
2.	 Click on the New Custom Object button as shown in the 
following screenshot:
3.	 Enter all the details under the Custom Object Information section, where 
you have to enter values in the following fields:
°°
Label: This is the label of the object's definition. This label is used 
on page layouts and reports. Here, we used Event as the label of 
this object.
°°
Plural Label: This is used in Salesforce's object tabs. In this case, 
we have used Events as the plural label.
°°
Start with Vowel: This is used to check whether the label starts with 
a vowel sound and should be preceded by an instead of a.

Chapter 5
[ 203 ]
°°
Object name: This is denoted by T or the Apex code. This is nothing 
but the API name of the object that you have to use when you have 
to use it from anywhere in the formula or Apex code. For a custom 
object, Salesforce automatically appends __c with the object name. 
Finally, the event object name will look like event__c.
The object name must be unique, begin with a letter, not 
include spaces, not end with an underscore, and not contain 
two consecutive underscores.
°°
Description: Always use a meaningful full name so other developers 
can easily understand why this object is created.
°°
Context-Sensitive Help Setting: Salesforce provides a standard help 
page for all custom objects. If you want to overwrite it for the custom 
object, then you have to choose Open a window using a Visualforce 
page option.
°°
Content Name: This is where you can select the Visualforce page 
that will open when you click on the Help link.
Finally, the Custom Object Information section will look like this:
Next, fill the Record Name Label and Format section.

CRM Functions and Streamlining Business Requirements
[ 204 ]
4.	 Under Enter Record Name Label and Format enter Event Name under Record 
Name and select Data Type as Text, as shown in the following screenshot:
5.	 Now, select the available optional features mentioned as follows:
°°
Allow Reports: This option will allow you to create a report in the 
Event object. If it is not selected, then you can't create a report in 
this object.
°°
Allow Activities: This feature allows the user to add a task and event 
in the object records. If this checkbox is selected, the Open Activities 
and Activity History list will be autoadded to the page's layout.
°°
Track Field History: This feature allows you to track the records of 
a specific object when the field value changes. Once this checkbox 
is selected, it will capture both the old and new values for the Field 
Under Object History list. We will discuss more about this in the 
field-history-tracking section.
°°
Deployment Status: This option is used to deploy a specific object. 
When the In development section is selected, only the system 
administrator can access these objects. To deploy this, select the 
Deployed option.
6.	 Click on Save.
As soon as you create custom objects, Salesforce automatically creates a few 
standard fields such as Created By, Last Modified By, Owner, and Event Name 
in it. You cannot delete standard fields from Salesforce, such as CreatedBy and 
LastModifiedBy. These are audit fields that are automatically calculated by 
Salesforce. For the Event object, it will look like this:

Chapter 5
[ 205 ]
If you want to edit audit fields, you have to contact Salesforce's 
support team by raising a case.
In a similar fashion, you can create three extra objects with the following details:
Object
Record name
Data type
Event Registration
Registration ID
Auto Number 
(Format ER-{0000})
Sponsor
Sponsor ID
Auto Number
(Format S-{0000})
Booth Registration
Booth Number
Auto Number
(Format B-{0000})
Tab creation
To view the records related to objects, we need to have a tab associated to that 
object. Without this, you cannot create records in Salesforce using the native 
Salesforce user interface.
Salesforce allows you to browse records in a tabbed manner. In Salesforce, tabs are 
ways to navigate records. You can create, manage, edit, and delete records after 
clicking on the tabs. You need to create a tab and associate it with an object so that 
you can create records of it from the Salesforce standard UI. There are three types 
of tabs in Salesforce as follows:
•	
Custom Object tabs: This type of tab is used to associate with a custom 
object so that you can display custom object records in the user interface
•	
Web tabs: This type of tab is used to display any external web-based 
application or web page in a Salesforce tab
•	
Visualforce tabs: This type of tab is used on the Visualforce page
For example, you want to create a tab for the newly created Event object in 
Salesforce; to do this, follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Build | Create | Tabs.
2.	 Go to the Custom Object Tabs section and click on the New button as 
shown in the following screenshot:

CRM Functions and Streamlining Business Requirements
[ 206 ]
3.	 Select the Event object from the list of objects as shown in the 
following screenshot:
4.	 Now, select Tab Style by clicking on the magnifying glass icon as shown in 
the following screenshot:
5.	 You will see a pop-up browser window that will ask you to select a tab style:

Chapter 5
[ 207 ]
6.	 Click on any style you want (here, we are selecting the heart style). Once 
selected, the pop up will disappear. Enter a short description, and finally, 
it will look like the following screenshot:
7.	 Click on Next. On the next screen, keep the default values of all the profiles 
and again click on Next.
8.	 Finally, you can choose the app you want to add this tab to. Once done, 
click on Save.
In a similar fashion, you can create tabs for the remaining three objects.
App creation
An app is nothing but a combination of tabs. Now, we will create an app for our own 
event management. To do this, follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Build | Create | Apps.
2.	 Click on the New button:

CRM Functions and Streamlining Business Requirements
[ 208 ]
3.	 This will redirect you to a new screen where you have to select the 
application type Custom App and click on Next.
4.	 Now when you enter data in the App Label field, App Name will be 
automatically populated based on the app label. Enter the description 
as shown in the following screenshot:
5.	 Click on Next. Salesforce provides you with a way to brand your app using 
the company or event logo. To do to this, click on the Insert an Image button 
to use your own logo; however, you will have to first upload the logo into the 
document tab and then you will be able to use it:
The file size of a custom app logo must be smaller than 20 KB.
6.	 Let the image be the default Salesforce image and click on Next.

Chapter 5
[ 209 ]
7.	 Now, you can add a tab into your app. To do this, move the tabs from 
Available Tabs to Selected Tabs as shown in the following screenshot:
8.	 Use the up and down buttons to order the tabs.
9.	 Click on Next and select the profile visibility for this app.
10.	 Click on Save.
Now, in order to navigate to your app, in the upper-right corner of the screen, 
click on the app dropdown as shown in the following screenshot. Then, click on 
the app name, Event Management:

CRM Functions and Streamlining Business Requirements
[ 210 ]
Renaming standard tabs and labels
To change standard object tabs and field labels, follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Build | Customize | Tab Names and Labels | Rename 
Tabs and Labels.
2.	 Click on the Edit link available in front of the object name, in our case, 
Accounts as shown in the following screenshot:
3.	 It will redirect you to a new page where you can change the singular and 
plural name:
4.	 In the next window, you can change the standard field's label. Once done, 
click on Save.

Chapter 5
[ 211 ]
The significance of various field types in 
Salesforce
Every database comprises some columns or fields to store values related to the 
database table. In Salesforce, every object comprises its fields. The following table 
shows the data type fields available in Salesforce in detail:
Data type
Description
Autonumber
This field is an autoincrement field; you need to define 
its format and the starting value once. For example, in 
an Event Registration object, you want to add an 
autonumber field called Registration ID. You can do this by 
providing the format ER-{00000} with the starting value as 
1. Now the records will be created automatically with the 
Registration ID ER-00001 and so on.
Formula
Based on the formula expression defined at the time of 
adding this field to an object, this field will populate the 
value. This is a read-only field.
Rollup summary
This field is only available for the master object in a master-
detail relationship. By using this field, you can perform the 
following operations based on child object records:
•	 SUM: This is the sum of all the child-records-
specified fields.
•	 MIN: This populates the minimum value from the 
child-records-specified field.
•	 MAX: This populates the maximum value from the 
child-records-specified field.
•	 COUNT: This populates the number of child records 
available to the master. This is read-only field.
Lookup relationship
This field is used to define the lookup relationship between 
the objects.
Master-detail relationship
This field is used to define the master-detail relationship 
between the objects.
Checkbox
This field is used to define a checkbox, which can contain 
only one type of value, that is, check (true) or uncheck 
(false).
Currency
This field is used to store the currency in decimals.
Date
This field is used to store the date.
Date/time
This field is used to store the date with a timestamp.
E-mail
This is an e-mail field used to store e-mail addresses.

CRM Functions and Streamlining Business Requirements
[ 212 ]
Data type
Description
Geolocation
This field stores the geo location coordinates to show a 
particular location on the map.
Number
This field is used to store numeric values.
Phone
This field is used to store phone numbers.
Percent
This field is able to store the percentage with decimal 
values, and it automatically appends the % suffix to the 
value entered.
Picklist
This field is used to store multiple predefined values from 
which the user has to select any one.
Picklist (Multi-Select)
This field is used to store multiple predefined values from 
which the user can choose multiple values or all of them.
Text
This field can hold text up to a defined length.
Text area
This field can hold text of a length of 255 characters with 
separate lines.
Text area (long)
This field can hold text up to a length of 32,768 characters 
with separate lines.
Text area (rich)
This field can hold text up to a length of 32,768 characters 
and images, and it allows you to use the formatting option.
Text (encrypted)
This field can be used to enter text that is sensitive, for 
example, credit card details.
URL
This field can be used to store the website's URL.
Adding fields to objects
Now, we will create a custom field called city (the data type will be text and the 
length will be 100 characters) in an Event object. To do this, follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Build | Create | Objects.
2.	 Go to the Event object and then go to the event object detail page by 
clicking on the Event label as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 5
[ 213 ]
3.	 Navigate to the Custom Fields & Relationships section and click on 
the New button.
4.	 Select the data type as Text and click on Next.
5.	 This will redirect you to a new window where you have to enter 
Field Label, Length, Field Name (this will be autopopulated from the 
field label, and Salesforce will append __c), Description, and Help Text 
(so whenever a user hovers over it, they will get the information they need 
to enter in this field). You can also set the field as required by selecting the 
Required checkbox. You also have the option to make the field Unique and 
set it as External ID; additionally, you can enter a default value in this field, 
as shown in the following screenshot:
6.	 Click on Next and set the field-level visibility for our app and let it be.
7.	 Click on Save.

CRM Functions and Streamlining Business Requirements
[ 214 ]
Adding relationships to objects
Now, we will create a relationship between an Event and Event Registration 
object. We will create a lookup relationship where Event will act as a parent and 
Event Registration will work as a child. To do this, follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Build | Create | Objects.
2.	 Navigate to the Event Registration object and then go to the object detail 
page by clicking on the Event Registration label.
3.	 Navigate to the Custom Fields & Relationships section and click on the 
New button.
4.	 Select the field data type Lookup Relationship.
5.	 Click on Next, and now in the field Related to, select the master object that 
you want to associate this object with. Here, select Event as shown in the 
following screenshot:
6.	 Enter data in the Field Label, Field Name (later on, this will be used as an 
API name), Description, Help Text, Child Relationship Name, Required, 
and What to do if the lookup record is deleted? fields.
7.	 Optionally, you can set the lookup filter. Whenever a user clicks on this 
field in the event registration record, you can filter out a value; for example, 
the user can only see the event that is created by the system administrator, 
Sagar Pareek:

Chapter 5
[ 215 ]
8.	 Click on Next and set the profile visibility for this relationship field. 
Let this be the default setting and click on Next.
9.	 Add this field to the available page layout.
10.	 Add the event registration to the related list on the event page 
and click on Save.
Event
You can use the following table to practice adding fields and relationships to all the 
objects used in this app development:
Field type
Label
Length/Values
Required
Number
Plot Number
3 (0- Decimal Places)
Yes
Number
Building Number
3 (0-Decimal Places)
Yes
Number
Floor Number
2 (0-Decimal Places)
Yes
Text (Long)
Street
32,768
Text
City
100
Text
State
100
Yes
Text
Country
100
Yes

CRM Functions and Streamlining Business Requirements
[ 216 ]
Event Registration
The following fields can be added to the Event Registration object:
Field Type
Label
Length/Values
Required
Text
First Name
200
No
Text
Last Name
200
Yes
Phone
Phone
Email
Email
Yes
Text
Address
Yes
Text
City
Yes
Text
State 
Yes
Text
Country
Yes
Number
Zip Code
6 (0 Decimal Places)
Yes
Picklist
Gender
•	 Male
•	 Female
No
Text
Twitter Handle
15
No
Picklist (Multi- Select)
Area of Interest
•	 Technology
•	 Sports
•	 Boating
•	 Dancing
•	 Singing
Lookup 
Event
Yes
Date
DOB
Yes
Formula 
(Return Type Number)
Age
Sponsor
The following fields can be added to the Sponsor object:
Field type
Label
Length/Values
Required
Formula
Amount
Yes
Text
Name
200
Yes
Picklist
Type
•	 Silver
•	 Gold
•	 Platinum
Yes

Chapter 5
[ 217 ]
Field type
Label
Length/Values
Required
Currency
Donation 
for child 
welfare
Yes
Currency
Donation 
for women 
welfare
Yes
Booth Registration
The following fields can be added to the Booth Registration object:
Field type
Label
Length/Values
Required
Text
City
Yes
Text
State
Yes
Text
Country
Yes
Number
Zip Code
Yes
Picklist
Industry
•	 IT
•	 Telecom
•	 Retail
•	 Marketing
•	 BPO
•	 Aviation
•	 Food Supply
•	 Fashion
•	 Child Welfare
•	 Women Welfare
Yes
Picklist 
(Multiselect)
Operating 
Countries
•	 India
•	 USA
•	 Canada
•	 Japan
•	 UK
Yes

CRM Functions and Streamlining Business Requirements
[ 218 ]
Page layout
Page layout helps you to organize any object's detail and edit page view. By using 
page layout, you can add or remove fields from the detail page; organize the related 
lists; add custom buttons, links, and actions; and organize the fields in a section. 
To edit the page layout of any custom object, follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Build | Create | Objects.
2.	 Navigate to the Event object and then go to the object detail page by clicking 
on the Event label.
3.	 Under the Page Layouts section, click on Edit in front of Event Layout, as 
shown in the following screenshot:
4.	 Now you will be redirected to the advanced layout editor screen where you 
will see the following palette at the top of the page:
5.	 The left-hand side section can help you to navigate between Fields, Buttons, 
Actions, Expanded Lookups, Related Lists, and Report Charts, as shown in 
the preceding screenshot.
6.	 Click on Fields on the left-hand side panel of the palette, and in the 
right-hand side portion, you will see that no field is available to use as 
all the fields are already made available on the page layout. If this was not 
the case, you could have dragged-and-dropped the fields to the bottom 
section of the page.

Chapter 5
[ 219 ]
7.	 Here, you can create a section for a group of fields and drag-and-drop the 
section from the right-hand side to the bottom section of the page, outside 
the palette, as shown in the following screenshot:
8.	 Now, once you finish dragging the section, you will see the following pop 
up. Enter Address in the Section Name field, select Layout as 2-Column, 
and Tab-key Order as Left-Right.

CRM Functions and Streamlining Business Requirements
[ 220 ]
9.	 Click on OK.
10.	 Now, you can see the Address section created on the page. 
Just drag-and-drop all the fields, except for Event Name.
11.	 Click on Save.
Now, if you go to any of the detail pages of the existing event records, you will be 
able to see this section:
Setting up record types
Record types in Salesforce let you create records for the same object in different page 
layout and fields. These are used to categorize the records using different picklist 
values and page layouts. For example, in the Booth Registration object, you want 
to separate the picklist values for NGO(s) and companies. The NGO(s) will be able 
to see only the Child Welfare and Women Welfare value in the drop-down field 
industry, but the companies will see all the values except these two. To create record 
types, follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Build | Create | Objects.
2.	 Navigate to the Booth Registration object and then go to the object detail 
page by clicking on the Booth Registration label.
3.	 Under the Record Type section, click on New.
4.	 This will redirect you to a new screen where you have to enter Record 
Type Label (enter NGO) and Record Type Name (enter NGO); don't forget 
to select the Active checkbox. Also, select the profile that can access this 
record type and then just select the system administrator as shown in the 
following screenshot:

Chapter 5
[ 221 ]
5.	 Click on Next. Leave it as the default setting and save it.
6.	 Go to the NGO Record Type detail page. Under the Picklist Available for 
Editing section, click on Edit in front of the Industry picklist.
7.	 Add only Women Welfare and Child Welfare from the available values to 
the selected values.

CRM Functions and Streamlining Business Requirements
[ 222 ]
8.	 Under Default, select Women Welfare. This will be the selected default 
value as shown in the following screenshot:
9.	 Click on Save.
In a similar way, create another record type named Companies and select all the 
values, except for Women Welfare and Child Welfare.
Tracking the history
If a record is accessible by many users, then it's a tedious job to track and maintain 
the field history. For example, the amount field in opportunity is very important, and 
an organization will want to keep track of the users that change the amount value. 
A simple solution is to enable the field-history-tracking option for those objects. You 
can maintain a history of the changes made to the fields in the records of the objects in 
Salesforce for custom objects and the following standard objects as well:
•	
Accounts
•	
Cases
•	
Contacts
•	
Entitlements

Chapter 5
[ 223 ]
•	
Service contracts
•	
Contract line items
•	
Contracts
•	
Leads
•	
Opportunities
•	
Articles
•	
Solutions
Here, we will enable the field-history-tracking option for the Event Registration 
object. To enable this, follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Build | Create | Objects.
2.	 Click on Edit in front of the Event Registration object and check the 
Track Field History checkbox as shown in the following screenshot:
3.	 Click on Save.
You have to do this only for a custom object if you didn't select 
Track Field History checkbox at the time of object creation.
4.	 Now go back to the Event Registration object detail page, navigate to 
Custom Fields & Relationships, and click on the Set History Tracking 
button as shown in the following screenshot:

CRM Functions and Streamlining Business Requirements
[ 224 ]
5.	 Select the field that should be tracked (City, Address, and Area of Interest). 
A maximum of 20 standard and custom fields per object are allowed to be 
tracked. You can see this in the following screenshot:
6.	 Click on Save.
In order to see the field history, make sure the Field History 
list is added to the page layout of the object for which the field 
history is enabled. You cannot track formula fields, rollup 
summary, last modified, and created by fields.
Summary
In this chapter, we went through different types of relationships, and how to create 
objects and fields and establish a relationship between them in Salesforce. We started 
with the type of relationships and then followed this up with an overview of Sales 
Cloud and Service Cloud in Salesforce. We also discussed the creation of a tab and 
app and established a relationship between them. Then, we discussed different field 
data types available in Salesforce, page layout, and record type concepts. At last, we 
discussed the field-history-tracking concept.
In the next chapter, we will discuss the validation rule, formula field, workflow, 
and approval process concepts.

Automating a 
Business Process
In this chapter, we will discuss how you can improve and maintain data quality in 
Salesforce and streamline a business process in your organization. The following 
topics will be covered in this chapter:
•	
Improving data quality – the validation rule
•	
The formula field
•	
The Roll-up Summary field
•	
A letterhead
•	
An e-mail template
•	
Using a workflow to automate your work
•	
Monitoring a time-based workflow
•	
Streamlining your approval process – approval processes
•	
Various ways to approve a request – approval settings
•	
Stay-in-Touch
Improving the data quality – the 
validation rule
In order to make your data valid and healthy when entered by a user, it is very 
important that you impose some constraints over the values that are being entered 
into the system. This is to ensure that the user cannot enter any junk values or 
values that don't meet your business requirements.

Automating a Business Process
[ 226 ]
Salesforce.com provides a feature called the validation rule. When you apply 
validation rules over fields of an object, it means that the data now entered by the 
user must meet the parameters that you decided with the validation rule. Validation 
rules in Salesforce are always defined in terms of formula expressions. If the formula 
evaluates to true, then an error message is displayed while the record is being saved, 
or the record is saved to the database. Validation rules are always evaluated while 
creating and updating a record. Using validation rules, you can ensure your business 
maintains a high degree of data quality and integrity.
Let's start with an example of an event organized by an event management firm, 
where there is a condition: the registrant's age must be at least 18 in order to register. 
For this scenario, we can impose a validation rule that will confirm this criterion.
In order to achieve this validation rule, follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Build | Create | Objects.
2.	 Click on the label of the object; in our case, click on Event Registration.
3.	 On the object definition page of the Event Registration object, you will find 
a section called Validation Rules.
4.	 Click on the New button as shown in the following screenshot:
5.	 It will redirect you to a validation rule edit page where you can create 
a validation rule. Now, enter Age must be greater than or equals to 
18 in the Rule Name field.
6.	 Select the Active checkbox to activate this validation rule. Enter the 
description so that other users can get an idea of why this validation 
rule is there.

Chapter 6
[ 227 ]
7.	 Under Error Condition Formula, click on the Insert Field button, as shown 
in the following screenshot:
8.	 A window will pop up from where you can select the field that you want 
to use in your validation rule. Click on the Insert button to use it in the 
validation rule, as shown in the following screenshot:

Automating a Business Process
[ 228 ]
9.	 Now, you can see the field's API name is present in the formula's input 
box; just add <18 and your formula expression will become something 
like Age__c<18. To insert <, you can use the Insert Operator dropdown 
as shown in following screenshot:
10.	 You can check what syntax was used in your validation rule by clicking on 
the Check Syntax button.
11.	 Now, whenever this formula is evaluated to true, an error message will be 
displayed. To add an error message, navigate to the Error Message section, 
and in the Error Message field, enter Your age must be at least 18 in 
order to register for an event, as shown in the following screenshot:
12.	 You can display the error message at two places:
°°
At the top of the page
°°
Below the field
13.	 In our case, select the top of the page.
14.	 Click on Save.

Chapter 6
[ 229 ]
Salesforce fires the entire validation rule at the time a record is 
inserted or updated to make sure every detail entered is valid. 
If data is not valid, then the record is not saved. Any of the fields 
can be referenced to the validation rule; even if they are not 
available on the page layout, the validation rule would still fire 
and will result in an error message if the rule fails.
The following are a few important functions that you can use in a validation rule or a 
formula field:
Formula
Description
DATE
This returns a date value from the values entered by the user.
ISBLANK
This returns TRUE if the field is blank.
PRIORVALUE
This returns the previous value of a field.
ISPICKVAL
This returns TRUE if the value specified by you matches the value 
selected in the picklist.
VALUE
This converts the text into a number.
VLOOKUP
This is similar to Excel VLOOKUP and returns a value by looking 
up a related value on a custom object.
AND
This returns TRUE if both the conditions defined are met
BEGINS
This returns TRUE if the given field values begin with a given set 
of characters.
CONTAINS
This returns TRUE if the given field value contains the given set 
of characters.
ISNEW
This checks whether the record is newly created.
ISCHANGED
This returns TRUE if the new value is not equal to the older one.
LEFT
This returns the number of characters specified from the start of a string.
LEN
This returns the number of characters from the string.
LOWER
This converts the characters into lowercase from the specified string.
OR
This evaluates whether the expression is TRUE or FALSE. It returns 
TRUE if the expression is true, else it returns FALSE.
RIGHT
This returns the number of characters from the end of the string.
TEXT
This returns the value in text format from other formats such as date, 
percent, and picklist values.
TODAY
This returns today's date in a date format.
UPPER
This converts a string into uppercase.

Automating a Business Process
[ 230 ]
For a complete list of formulas, you can refer to https://help.
salesforce.com/HTViewHelpDoc?id=customize_functions.
htm&language=en_US.
The Formula field
Formula fields in Salesforce are a special type of read-only fields that evaluate 
the specific equation at runtime and generate values accordingly. These fields are 
generally used where the data is entered by the user in a field and that data needs 
some logical processing and storage in another field. We need to define a formula 
expression/equation that will be executed while a record is being saved.
Let's start with an example. The event company Appiuss wants to calculate the age 
of the participants while they are registering for an event, depending on the date 
of birth the registrant entered at the time of registration. Additionally, they want to 
show it as a read-only field.
In order to fulfill this requirement, you can follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Build | Create | Objects.
2.	 Click on the label of the object; in our case, click on Event Registration.
3.	 Under the Custom fields and relationships section, click on the New button. 
It will redirect you to a new window from where you can select the Formula 
field, as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 6
[ 231 ]
4.	 Click on Next. On the next screen, enter Age in the Field Label field; it will 
autopopulate the Field Name option based on the field label. You can change 
the field name as well. Under Formula Return Type, select Number, and 
under Decimal Places, select 0, as shown in the following screenshot:
5.	 Click on the Next button. It will open a formula editor page where you can 
write a formula as per your requirement.
6.	 Now, on the next screen, under the Advanced Formula tab, enter the 
formula expression FLOOR((TODAY() - DOB__c)/365.2425), as shown 
in the following screenshot:

Automating a Business Process
[ 232 ]
The FLOOR function rounds a number down towards zero to the 
nearest integer, and the TODAY function returns the current date.
7.	 Under the Blank Field Handling section, you can select the What happen 
your formula reference option to some number, currency, or percent 
field and their values are blank. There are two options that you can 
select as follows:
°°
Treat blank fields as zeroes
°°
Treat blank fields as blanks
8.	 Click on the Next button, select Profile-level Visibility for this formula 
field, and click on Next.
9.	 In the final window, you can add this field to the available page layouts 
and click on Save.
10.	 From the next time, whenever a user enters his or her date of birth in an 
event registration record, the formula field will automatically calculate 
the age.
The Roll-up Summary field
The Roll-up Summary field in Salesforce is a special type of field that is created on 
the master object so that we can show rolled-up data from child records to master 
records. Roll-up Summary fields in Salesforce can only be created on a master object 
when there is a master-detail relationship between two objects.
The Roll-up Summary field is only capable of calculating the following:
•	
SUM: This shows the sum of all the child records specific to the field 
on the master record
•	
COUNT: This shows the number of child records present on the 
master record
•	
MIN: This shows the minimum value of the child records on the 
master record
•	
MAX: This shows the maximum value of the child records on the 
master record

Chapter 6
[ 233 ]
In our application, as we already discussed, we have a master-detail relationship 
between the Sponsor and Booth Registration objects. So, it is possible to create 
a Roll-up Summary field on the Sponsor object to count the number of booth 
registrations made by a specific Sponsor object. To do this, follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Build | Create | Objects.
2.	 Click on the label of object; in our case, click on Sponsor.
3.	 Under the Custom fields and relationships section, click on the New button. 
It will redirect you to a new window from where you can select the Roll-Up 
Summary field, as shown in the following screenshot:
4.	 Click on the Next button, and enter data in Field Label, Field Name, 
Description, and Help Text, as shown in the following screenshot:

Automating a Business Process
[ 234 ]
5.	 Click on the Next button. Now select Summarized Object, in our case, 
Booth Registrations. Navigate to the Roll-Up Type section, select COUNT, 
and under the Filter Criteria section, select All records should be included 
in the calculation, as shown in the following screenshot:
6.	 Click on Next. Select the profile-level visibility for this formula field and 
click on Next 
7.	 In the final window, you can add this field to the available page layouts 
and click on Save.
You can create a maximum of 10 Roll-up Summary fields 
on any object by default. However, you may ask Salesforce 
support to increase it.
In the following screenshot, you can see that there are two booth registration records 
for the sponsor. The Mart and the Booths fields show the exact number:

Chapter 6
[ 235 ]
Letterhead
A letterhead is the banner at the top of a letter. The heading usually consists of a 
name and an address, a logo, and sometimes a background color. You can also 
design a letterhead in Salesforce; it will give you the same look and feel as that of an 
HTML e-mail template. Before you create a letterhead, you first need to have your 
logo in the document folder. The size should not be wider than 600 pixels, and the 
height should not be more than 200 pixels.

Automating a Business Process
[ 236 ]
Uploading a file into the document folder
To upload your company logo in the document folder, follow these steps:
1.	 Click on the Documents tab and then click on the New button.
2.	 Enter data in Document Name and Document Unique Name will be 
autopopulated. Select the Externally available image checkbox and the 
destination folder where you want to save the image, then browse to the 
image and click on Save. You can see this in the following screenshot:

Chapter 6
[ 237 ]
Creating a letterhead
Once your company logo is uploaded in Salesforce, we are good to go ahead and set 
up a letterhead for the company called Appiuss. To do this, follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Administer | Communication templates | Letterheads.
2.	 Click on the New Letterhead button as shown in the following screenshot:
3.	 It will redirect you to the letterhead properties screen where you have to fill 
up the Letterhead Label and Description fields and select the Available For 
Use checkbox.

Automating a Business Process
[ 238 ]
4.	 Click on Save. It will redirect you to a new screen where you can customize 
your letterhead.
If the Available for Use checkbox is not selected, then you can't 
create an HTML e-mail that will use the letterhead.
5.	 Click on the Edit Background Color button and choose a color for the 
background of your letterhead. Click the Color Picker button to choose 
a color.
6.	 Click on the Select Logo button to add a logo at the top of your letterhead, 
as shown in the following screenshot:
7.	 Likewise, you can add a logo at the bottom of your letterhead. Click on the 
Remove Logo button to delete the image from the letterhead.
8.	 Click on the Edit Header Properties button and choose the color, alignment, 
and height for the top section of the letterhead.

Chapter 6
[ 239 ]
9.	 To edit the line, click on the Edit Top Line, Edit Middle Line, and 
Edit Bottom Line buttons and change the values of Line color and 
Height (pixels).
10.	 To edit the color of the body of your letterhead, click on the Edit body colors 
button available in the letterhead. Click on the Preview button available on 
the letterhead properties page to get a preview of your letterhead. It will look 
like the following screenshot:
11.	 Once you are done with the changes, click on the Save button.

Automating a Business Process
[ 240 ]
An e-mail template
An e-mail template represents a template for an e-mail. E-mail templates are used 
with automated and non-automated e-mails sent from the Salesforce organization. 
Let's start with an example where the VP of marketing wants to get all the details of 
each participant who has registered for the event. To send all the details together, we 
have to create an e-mail template. An organization can use an e-mail template with 
the following mentioned features:
•	
Web-to-Lead
•	
Web-to-Case
•	
Email-to-Case
•	
An assignment rule
•	
An autoresponse rule
•	
The escalation rule
Types of e-mail templates
You can create four different types of e-mail templates in Salesforce. They are 
as follows:
•	
Text: All the users can customize text e-mail templates.
•	
HTML with a letterhead: Administrators and users with the Edit HTML 
Templates permission can create or customize these types of e-mail 
templates based on a letterhead.
•	
Custom HTML: Administrators and users with the Edit HTML Templates 
permission can create or customize these types of e-mail templates without 
using a letterhead.
•	
Visualforce: Administrators and developers can create or customize 
templates using Visualforce. Visualforce e-mail templates can be merged 
with a recipient's data in an advanced way, where the content of a template 
can contain information from multiple records.
Creating an e-mail template
To solve the preceding business requirement, we will create an HTML with a 
letterhead template. To do this, follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Administer | Communication Templates | 
Email Templates.

Chapter 6
[ 241 ]
2.	 Click on the New Template button, as shown in the following screenshot:
3.	 Now select the HTML (using Letterhead) option as shown in the following 
screenshot and click on Next:
4.	 Now enter the following details:
°°
Folder: Choose a folder where you want to store this e-mail template.
°°
Available For Use: Select the Available For Use checkbox if you 
would like to allow a user to use this template while setting up an 
e-mail notification for various features.
°°
Email Template Name: Enter the name of the e-mail template.

Automating a Business Process
[ 242 ]
°°
Template Unique Name: This will be autopopulated based on the 
e-mail template name.
°°
Letterhead: Select the letterhead that we created.
°°
Email Layout: Select the e-mail layout. This controls the columns 
and page layout of the message text. Click on View Email Layout 
Options to see samples.
°°
Encoding: Select the Encoding setting to determine the character set 
for the template.
°°
Description: You can enter a short description so that other users will 
come to know why this e-mail template was created.
5.	 Once done, it will look like the following screenshot:
6.	 Click on the Next button. It will redirect you to the HTML Email Template 
Edit page where you can consider the following points:
°°
The subject will appear in the e-mail that will you send:
°°
Enter the text that needs to appear in the message that you will send. 
Click on the section and enter the message. You can change the style 
of your text by selecting the text and using the format toolbar, as 
shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 6
[ 243 ]
°°
You can also use merge fields in the template's subject and body. 
These fields will be replaced with the information filled in by the 
user during the event registration stage when you send an e-mail. 
Once you select the field under the available merge field, it will 
give you the merge field's value that you can copy and paste in 
the e-mail template.
°°
Finally, our e-mail template will look like the following screenshot. 
You can add text as per your requirement or try to add a similar 
e-mail template:

Automating a Business Process
[ 244 ]
7.	 Click on Next. Optionally, you can enter the text-only version of your e-mail 
or click on the Copy Text From HTML Version button to automatically paste 
the text from your HTML version without the HTML tags. The text-only 
version is available to recipients who are unable to view HTML e-mails.
It is recommended that you leave the text-only version blank. 
If you leave it blank, the content will automatically become 
text-only based on the current HTML version.
8.	 Finally, click on Save.
To prevent users from editing a section when using this 
template, click on the padlock icon.
9.	 Optionally, you can click on the Send test and verify merge fields button 
to check the output of your e-mail template that you created.
Salesforce allows you to create an e-mail template with a 
maximum size of 384 KB for text, HTML, and custom HTML 
templates, and 1 MB for Visualforce.
Attaching a file with an e-mail template
You can also attach a file with your e-mail template. To add an attachment to the 
template, navigate to the Attachments list and click on the Attached File button, 
as shown in the following screenshot:
The attached file will always be included in every e-mail that uses this template. 
You can select a file from the document or upload a file from your computer. 
However, the limitation is that this file cannot be larger than 5 MB.
E-mail template's folder management
A folder is a good way to manage your several e-mail templates. It's a way to group 
all similar e-mail templates together so you can easily find them when you need 
them. It's also a great way to share e-mail templates with other users.

Chapter 6
[ 245 ]
Creating an e-mail template folder
To create a folder for e-mail templates, follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Administer | Communication Templates | 
Email Templates.
2.	 Click on the Create New Folder link.
3.	 Enter data in Email Template Folder Label and Folder Unique Name. 
Select Public Folder Access (Read Only or Read/Write), Email Templates 
in this Folder, and the sharing setting for a folder, as shown in the 
following screenshot:
4.	 Click on Save.

Automating a Business Process
[ 246 ]
Deleting an e-mail template folder
To delete an e-mail template folder, click on the Edit link available next to the 
folder name.
Finally, click on the Delete button.
Using workflow to automate your work
A variety of business processes are included in your organization for day-to-day 
work. You can automate your organization's business process using Salesforce's 
workflows. You can use workflows to assign tasks, update fields, send an e-mail 
alert, and send an outbound message. A workflow is a powerful feature provided by 
Salesforce to automate your business process. Let's start with an example. Whenever 
a participant with an age of more than 18 years registers for an event, Appiuss would 
want the participant to perform certain actions. The actions are as follows:
1.	 Update the Twitter handle with Appiuss.
2.	 Assign a task to the user Sara Bareilles and set the due date 15 days after 
the record creation date.
3.	 Send an e-mail alert to VP marketing after two days of the record 
creation date.
4.	 There are two types of actions possible with workflow:
°°
Immediate workflow action: This will fire as soon as the workflow 
meets the entry criteria
°°
Time-dependent workflow action: This will fire relative to any 
date or date/time field on the object as specified in a time trigger; 
for example, 10 days after the opportunity creation date, you want 
to send an e-mail alert

Chapter 6
[ 247 ]
You can associate four actions with any of the following workflows:
•	
A field update
•	
An e-mail alert
•	
Task
•	
An outbound message
Creating a workflow rule
Now, we will create a workflow that will fulfill the preceding requirements. 
To do this, follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Build | Create | Workflow & Approvals | 
Workflow Rule.
2.	 Click on the New Rule button as shown in the following screenshot:
3.	 Select the object for which you want to create a workflow rule. In our case, 
select the Event Registration object.

Automating a Business Process
[ 248 ]
4.	 Click on Next. Under the Edit Rule section, enter data in Rule Name and 
Description, as shown in the following screenshot:
5.	 Under the Evaluation Criteria section, select a rule when this workflow fires; 
there are three options, as follows:
°°
Created: If you select this option, the workflow will fire every time a 
record is created (if the rule criterion is met).
°°
Created, and every time it's edited: If you select this option, the 
workflow will fire every time a record is created or updated (if the 
rule criterion is met).
You cannot add time-dependent actions to the rule if you 
select this option.
°°
Created, and any time it's edited to subsequently meet criteria: 
If you select this option, it means the workflow will fire for a new 
record (if the rule criterion is met). For the updated record run, the 
rule is only valid if the record is altered from not meeting the rule 
criteria to meeting the rule criteria.
In our case, select the created option as shown in the following screenshot:
6.	 Under the Rule Criteria section, select Age greater than 18 as per 
the requirement.

Chapter 6
[ 249 ]
7.	 You can also add a filter if you have more than one field in your rule 
criteria and want to change the logic.
8.	 Click on the Save & Next button.
9.	 Click on Done.
Field update
To create a new field update, follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Build | Create | Workflow & Approvals | Workflow 
Rule | Field Updates.
2.	 Click on the New Field Update button, as shown in the following screenshot:
3.	 It will redirect you to a new window where you have to enter a few details, 
as follows:
°°
Name: Enter a meaningful rule name.
°°
Unique Name: This will be autopopulated based on the name. 
You can also define a unique name. The Unique Name field can 
contain only underscores and alphanumeric characters. It must be 
unique within the selected object type, begin with a letter, should 
not include any spaces, should not end with an underscore, 
and should not contain two consecutive underscores.

Automating a Business Process
[ 250 ]
°°
Description: Enter a description.
°°
Object & Fields to update: Select the object and define the field 
update; in our case, the object is Event Registration and the field 
is Twitter Handle.
°°
Re-evaluate Workflow Rules after Field Change: Select this 
checkbox if you want the workflow rules on this object to be 
re-evaluated after the field value is updated.
°°
Specify New Field Value: Here, you can use a formula to set a new 
value or a blank value (null). In our case, select set this field value 
to Appiuss.
You can see this in the following screenshot:
4.	 Click on Save.
In the case of a master-detail relationship, you can update the 
master fields from the workflow.

Chapter 6
[ 251 ]
Assigning a task
To add a task, follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Build | Create | Workflow & Approvals | Workflow 
Rule | Tasks.
2.	 Click on the New Task button, as shown in the following screenshot:
3.	 Select the object for which you want to create a task. In our case, select the 
Event Registration object and then click on Next.
If you are not getting the event registration field in the object's 
dropdown, then go to your custom object, edit it, and select the 
Allow Activities checkbox.
4.	 It will redirect you to a new window where you have to enter a few details 
as follows:
°°
Assigned To: Select an assignee; an assignee can be a user, role, 
or record owner. In our case, it's the user, Sara Bareilles.
°°
Subject: Enter a subject for the task.
°°
Unique Name: Enter a unique name.
°°
Status: Select the status of the task. In our case, the status will be 
Not started.
°°
Priority: Select the priority of the task. In our case, select Normal.
°°
Due Date: Select the due date. In our case, add 15 days after the 
record creation date.
°°
Notify assignee: Select the Notify Assignee checkbox to send an 
e-mail notification when the task is assigned.
°°
Comments: You can enter additional comments to the task.

Automating a Business Process
[ 252 ]
Finally, it will look like the following screenshot:
5.	 Click on Save.
Creating an e-mail alert
To create an e-mail alert, follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Build | Create | Workflow & Approvals | Workflow 
Rule | Email Alerts.
2.	 Click on the New Email Alert button as shown in the following screenshot:
3.	 It will redirect you to a new window where you have to enter a few details 
as follows:
°°
Description: Enter a description.
°°
Unique Name: This will be autopopulated based on the description. 
You can also define a unique name. The Unique Name field can 
contain only underscores and alphanumeric characters. It must be 
unique within the selected object type, begin with a letter, not include 
spaces, should not end with an underscore, and should not contain 
two consecutive underscores.

Chapter 6
[ 253 ]
°°
Object: Select an object for which you want to set an e-mail alert. 
In our case, this will be Event Registration.
°°
Email Template: Select an e-mail template that you want to use 
for the e-mail alert. In our case, select the template Event Creation 
Details that we created while learning the e-mail template topic.
°°
Recipient Type: Select who should receive this e-mail alert. In our 
case, select Role VP marketing.
°°
Additional Emails: Enter up to five additional e-mail addresses.
°°
From Email Address: You can select the From e-mail address.
 There are two options for you: you can select the e-mail address of 
the default workflow user or the verified organization-wide address.
In our case, select the second option. Finally, it will look like the 
following screenshot:
4.	 Click on Save.

Automating a Business Process
[ 254 ]
Outbound messages
If your organization is maintaining the same event management setup in other 
systems as well and you want to send any changes that happen in Salesforce to 
another system, you can use this facility. Outbound messaging allows you to 
specify the changes to fields. Salesforce can cause messages with field values 
to be sent to designated external systems. To define outbound messages, 
the endpoint URL (where you want to send data) is required.
To create a new outbound message, follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Build | Create | Workflow & Approvals | 
Workflow Rule | Outbound Message.
2.	 Click on the New Outbound Message button as shown in the 
following screenshot:
3.	 Select the object for which you want to create an outbound message, click on 
Next, and enter the following details:
°°
Name: Enter a meaningful rule name.
°°
Unique Name: This will be autopopulated based on the name. 
You can also define the unique name. The Unique Name field can 
contain only underscores and alphanumeric characters. It must be 
unique within the selected object type, must begin with a letter, 
should not include spaces, not end with an underscore, and not 
contain two consecutive underscores.
°°
Description: Enter a description.
°°
Endpoint URL: Enter the endpoint URL where you want to 
send data.
°°
User to send as: Select the user to use when sending the message. 
The selected user controls data visibility for the message that is sent 
to the endpoint.
°°
Send Session ID: Select this if you want to send Salesforce's session 
ID with an outbound message.

Chapter 6
[ 255 ]
4.	 Select the fields to include in the outbound message and click on Add.
5.	 Click on Save.
Relating all the actions with the workflow
Now we have to relate all the actions that we have gone through (field update, 
task, and e-mail alert) with our workflow. To do this, follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Build | Create | Workflow & Approvals | 
Workflow Rule.
2.	 Click on the workflow name For VP marketing that we created.
3.	 Navigate to the Workflow Actions section and click on Edit, as shown in the 
following screenshot:

Automating a Business Process
[ 256 ]
4.	 To add immediate workflow actions, click on the Add Workflow Action 
dropdown and Select Existing Action under the immediate workflow 
action section, as shown in the following screenshot:
5.	 Add a task and field update that we created and click on Save. Use the 
dropdown to select Task, Email Alert, and Field Update:

Chapter 6
[ 257 ]
6.	 Now add Time-Dependent Workflow Actions. Click on the Add Time 
Trigger button under the Time-Dependent Workflow Actions section, 
as shown in the following screenshot:
7.	 On the next screen, set the time interval for when the action should be fired. 
In our case, set 2 Days After Event Registration Date and click on Save.
8.	 To add a time-based workflow action, navigate to the Time-Dependent 
Workflow Action section, click on the Add Workflow Action dropdown, 
and Select Existing Action under the immediate workflow action section, 
as shown in the following screenshot:

Automating a Business Process
[ 258 ]
9.	 Enter the e-mail alert that we created under the e-mail alert topic and 
click on Save.
10.	 We are all set to go. Click on the Done button available at the top-right 
corner of the page. Finally, it will look like the following screenshot:

Chapter 6
[ 259 ]
11.	 Click on the Activate button to activate this workflow. You will move to a 
new screen, Workflow & Approvals Settings, if you don't specify Default 
Workflow User. Here, you can specify the default workflow user and then 
click on Save. The workflow will now be activated.
Salesforce recommends you to choose a user with system 
administrator privileges.
Limitations of the workflow
The workflow feature is only available in Enterprise, Unlimited, Performance, and 
Developer editions. For the Professional Edition, you can enable this feature after 
paying an extra amount. As Salesforce is based on a multitenant architecture, 
it imposes a few limitations on the workflow:
•	
For each workflow rule, you can have the following:
°°
10 time triggers
°°
40 immediate actions
°°
40 time-dependent actions per time trigger
•	
For both immediate and time-dependent actions in one workflow rule, 
there can be no more than:
°°
10 email alerts
°°
10 tasks
°°
10 field updates
°°
10 outbound messages
•	
The workflow time trigger per hour limit for different editions are as follows:
°°
Professional Edition: 250
°°
Enterprise Edition: 500
°°
Developer Edition: 50
°°
Unlimited and Professional Edition: 1,000
•	
The workflow e-mail limit per day is as follows:
°°
1,000 per Salesforce standard license
°°
200,000 per organization 

Automating a Business Process
[ 260 ]
Once an organization's daily e-mail limit of 200,000 exceeds, Salesforce 
will send a warning e-mail to the default workflow user and discard all 
the e-mails. Salesforce does not try to resend them later.
Monitoring a time-based workflow
You can monitor time-based workflows that are present in the queue to be processed 
and may cancel them if required.
Create a new record via the event registration form where the age needs to be greater 
than 18 to fire our workflow, as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 6
[ 261 ]
You can check whether the Twitter handle field is autoupdated with the word 
Appiuss and a task is assigned to the user, as shown in the following screenshot:
Managing a time-based workflow
To monitor a time-based workflow, follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Monitor | Time-Based Workflow.
2.	 Click on the Search button. It will list down all the time-based actions that 
are placed in the workflow queue.

Automating a Business Process
[ 262 ]
Deleting a time-based workflow
To delete an action from the queue, select the concerned action and click on the 
Delete button, as shown in the following screenshot:
Streamlining your approval 
process – approval processes
An approval process in Salesforce is an automated process for your organization that 
can be used to approve records in Salesforce. Here, you can specify what happens 
when records are approved or rejected based on your business requirements. Once 
you implement an approval process, your business can run more efficiently. Similar 
to the workflow rule of sending an e-mail alert or field update, or assigning a task 
based on the requirement, an approval process will take care of your business one 
step ahead. With this, you can define the sequence of steps that are essential to be 
approved for a record.
Let's start with an example. Whenever any NGO registers for a booth for any 
event, it must be first approved by the VP marketing (Sagar Pareek) and then 
CEO (Rakesh Gupta) of Appiuss and the record creator can submit the record 
for approval; once the record is approved or rejected, the picklist value will be 
updated at the approval stage.
The wizard to create the approval process
Salesforce provides two types of wizards as follows:
•	
Jump Start Wizard: This wizard is used to create a simple approval process 
or one-step approval process. This wizard allows you to quickly create an 
approval process where everything will be available on the same screen; 
you do not have to move from one screen to another.

Chapter 6
[ 263 ]
•	
Standard Wizard: This wizard is used to create complex approval processes. 
It consists of certain setup wizards that allow you to define your process, 
and another particular setup wizard that allows you to define each step 
in the process.
In this book, we will use a standard wizard to create an approval process. Before we 
create an approval process, create one picklist and an approval status field for the 
Booth registration object with the following details:
Field type
Label
Length/Values
Type
Picklist
Approval Status 
•	 Submit for approval
•	 Approved by VP
•	 Rejected by VP
•	 Approved
•	 Rejected
Read only
Creating a new approval process
Now, we will create an approval process to solve the preceding business 
requirement. To do this, follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Build | Create | Workflow & Approvals | 
Approval Processes.
2.	 From the Manage Approval Processes For dropdown, select the Booth 
Registration object.
3.	 Click on the Create new approval process dropdown and select Use 
Standard Setup Wizard, as shown in the following screenshot:

Automating a Business Process
[ 264 ]
4.	 In the next screen, enter data in Process Name, Unique Name, 
and Description. Then click on Next.
5.	 In the next screen, specify the entry criteria. In our case, select Booth 
Registration Record Type equals to NGO and click on Next, as shown 
in the following screenshot:
6.	 In the next screen, you have to perform the following two tasks:
°°
Select a field that will be used for automated approval routing. When 
we define an approval process, we can assign approval requests to 
different users. One option is to use a user field to automatically 
route these requests. The user field can be any custom hierarchical 
relationship field such as Account Manager or the Manager 
Standard user field. In our case, let it be the one that is set by default.
°°
Record properties that can be edited. Once the record is submitted 
for an approval, the record gets locked so a normal user can't edit the 
record data. Here, you can define who can edit the record when the 
record is in between the approval process. Selecting Administrators 
ONLY will allow a user to edit records during the approval 
process stage.

Chapter 6
[ 265 ]
7.	 Click on Next. You can see this in the following screenshot:
If you leave the Next Automated Approver Determined By field 
blank, you can't automatically assign approval requests to the 
manager in any step you create for this approval process.
8.	 When an approval process assigns an approval request to a user, Salesforce 
automatically sends an e-mail notification to the user that contains a link 
to the approval page in Salesforce. If you want to use your custom e-mail 
template, then choose a template or leave the field blank so Salesforce can 
use the default e-mail template. Then, click on Next.
9.	 In the next screen, the Select Fields to Display on Approval Page Layout 
field does the following tasks:
°°
Select the field that you want to show on an approval request page.
°°
Select the Display approval history information in addition to the 
fields selected above checkbox to include the approval history list 
on the approval request page, which includes fields such as Date, 
Assigned To, Actual Approver, and Comments.
°°
Under the Security Settings section, select the option from where 
a user can approve or reject a request. In our case, select Allow 
approvers to access the approval page from within the salesforce.com 
application, or externally from a wireless-enabled mobile device.

Automating a Business Process
[ 266 ]
10.	 Then, click on Next. You can see this in the following screenshot:
Here, we are allowing users to approve a request from within the 
Salesforce.com application or externally from a wireless-enabled 
mobile device; some users will not be able to create any approval steps 
that allow users to manually choose who the approver should be.
11.	 In the Specify Initial Submitters screen, select the following things:
°°
Select the submitter type. In our case, select Record Creator.
°°
Select all the Booth Registration page layouts checkboxes in the 
Add the Approval History list to add the list related to approval 
history to all the booth registration page layouts.
°°
Optionally, you can select the Allow submitters to recall 
approval requests checkbox. It will allow the submitter to 
recall the approval process.

Chapter 6
[ 267 ]
12.	 Click on Save. You can see this in the following screenshot:
13.	 In the next screen, select the No, I'll do this later, take me back to the listing 
of all approval processes for this object option, and you will move to the 
approval process page. It will look like the following screenshot:

Automating a Business Process
[ 268 ]
Final approval actions
A final approval action occurs only when a record has received all the required 
approvals. In our case, navigate to the Final Approval Actions section, click on the 
Edit link, select Unlock the record for editing as shown in the following screenshot, 
and then click on Save.
You can also add some actions such as a field update email alert and an outbound 
message, or add existing actions as per your business needs.
Final rejection actions
A final rejection action occurs only when a record has been completely rejected from 
the approval process. In our case, it is Unlock the record for editing; leave it as is, 
as shown in in the following screenshot:
If you want to change this behavior, click on the Edit link and select the available 
option. You can also add some actions such as a field update e-mail alert and an 
outbound message, or add existing actions as per your business needs.

Chapter 6
[ 269 ]
Recall actions
A recall action occurs only when a submitted approval request is recalled. 
Once a recall action happens, it will unlock the record to edit, as shown in 
the following screenshot:
You can also add some actions such as a field update e-mail alert and an outbound 
message, or add existing actions as per your business needs.
Initial submission actions
An initial action occurs only when a record is initially submitted for approval. It will 
lock the record from being edited; this means that no one can edit the record expect 
the one who has the permission to do so, as per the options that you selected while 
setting up the approval process. You can also add some actions such as a field update 
e-mail alert and an outbound message, or add existing actions as per your business 
needs. We will update our approval status field to submit at the approval stage. 
To do this, follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to the Initial Submission Actions section, click on Add New 
from the drop-down list, and select Field Update, as shown in the 
following screenshot:

Automating a Business Process
[ 270 ]
2.	 This field update works similar to the one that we created in the workflow 
rule. Enter data in Name, Unique Name, and Description. Select Field to 
Update (Approval Status) under the Specify New Field Value section, 
the A specific value option from the dropdown, the Submit for approval 
option, and click on Save, as shown in the following screenshot:
Approval steps
Now, we will add approval steps as per our requirement. First, VP marketing 
(Sagar Pareek) and then the CEO (Rakesh Gupta) of Appiuss must approve 
the record.

Chapter 6
[ 271 ]
Approval step 1
In the first step, an approval from VP marketing Sagar Pareek is required. To do this, 
follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to the Approval Steps section and click on the New Approval Step 
button, as shown in the following screenshot:
2.	 In the next screen, enter data in Name, Unique Name, Description, and Step 
Number and click on Next.
3.	 In the next screen, you can filter out records. It means here you can decide 
which records should be entered in this approval step, for example, NGO 
records where city equals to New York. In our case, select All records should 
enter this step and click on Next, as shown in the following screenshot:

Automating a Business Process
[ 272 ]
4.	 In the next screen, you can specify the approver. There are a few possibilities 
that are as follows:
°°
Let the submitter choose the approver manually: You can allow the 
submitter to choose to approve records manually. However, the thing 
to remember is this option will not be shown if you select the Allow 
approvers to access the approval page from within the Salesforce.
com application, or externally from a wireless-enabled mobile device. 
°°
Automatically assign an approval to a queue: You can autoassign 
an approval request to a queue that belongs to the Booth 
Registration object.
°°
Automatically assign a request to an approver(s): You can 
autoassign an approval request to multiple users by selecting this 
option. You can select the user, queue, or related user. You can send 
an approver request to a maximum of 25 approvers. In this case, 
you have two options; they are as follows:
°°
Approve or reject a request based on the FIRST response: 
The first response to the approval request determines 
whether the record is approved or rejected.
°°
Require a UNANIMOUS approval from all the selected 
approvers: The record is only approved if all of the approvers 
approve the request. The approval request is rejected if any 
of the approvers reject the request.
5.	 In our case, select Automatically assign to approver(s), then the user Sagar 
Pareek, and click on Save.

Chapter 6
[ 273 ]
6.	 In the next screen, select the No, I'll do this later, take me back to the 
listing of all approval processes for this object option and you will be 
taken back to the approval process detail page.
Approval step 2
Now we will create the second step where an approval from the CEO, Rakesh Gupta 
is required. To do this, follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to the Approval Steps section and click on the New Approval Step 
button, as shown in the following screenshot:
2.	 In the next screen, enter data in Name, Unique Name, Description, and Step 
Number and click on Next.

Automating a Business Process
[ 274 ]
3.	 In the next screen, you can filter out records. It means you can decide which 
records should be entered in this approval step, for example, NGO records 
where city equals to New York. In our case, select All records should enter 
this step and click on Next.
4.	 In the next screen, select the user Rakesh Gupta, and also select Reject 
Behavior (what happens when approval request is rejected by the user 
Rakesh Gupta). Select the Perform all rejection actions for this step AND 
all final rejection actions. (Final Rejection) option and then click on Save,
 as shown in the following screenshot:
5.	 In the next screen, select the No, I'll do this later, take me back to the 
listing of all approval processes for this object option and you will 
taken back to the approval process detail page.
For both Enterprise and Unlimited editions, there is a limit of 
15 steps per process.
Adding an action to step 1
In every step, you can add two types of actions, which are as follows:
•	
Approval actions 
•	
Rejection actions 

Chapter 6
[ 275 ]
To add an action to step 1, follow these steps:
1.	 To add actions to each step, navigate to Approval Steps and click on the 
Show Actions link available in front of step 1.
2.	 It will open a small window where you can add actions for an 
approval or rejection. Move to the Approval Actions section, 
click on the Add New dropdown, and select Field Update.
3.	 It will redirect you to a new window where you have to enter data in Name, 
Unique Name, and Description. Select Field to Update (Approval Status) 
and under the Specify New Field Value section, select the A specific value 
option. From the drop-down list, select Approved by VP marketing and 
click on Save, as shown in the following screenshot:

Automating a Business Process
[ 276 ]
4.	 Likewise, you can add the rejection action and update the Booth Registration 
object and the approval status field with the value Reject by VP marketing, 
as shown in the following screenshot:
Adding an action to step 2
Now you can add action to step 2 as follows:
•	
In an approval action, you can update the Booth Registration object's 
approval status field with the value Approved
•	
In a rejection action, you can update the Booth Registration object's 
approval status field with the value Rejected
Finally, it will look like the following screenshot:

Chapter 6
[ 277 ]
Viewing the process diagram
To view the process diagram of an approval process we created, you can click on View 
Diagram. It will open another window where you can view the process diagram:

Automating a Business Process
[ 278 ]
Activating the approval process
To activate the approval process, click on the Activate button available at the top of 
the page, as shown in the following screenshot:
Limitations of the approval process
Approval processes are available on Enterprise, Unlimited, Performance, and 
Developer editions. For the Professional Edition, you can enable this feature by 
paying an extra amount. As Salesforce is based on a multitenant architecture, 
it imposes a few limitations on the approval process:
•	
For each approval process, you can have a maximum of the following:
°°
30 steps per process
°°
25 approvers per step
•	
Each organization can have the following limitations:
°°
300 approval processes per object
°°
1,000 approval processes per organization
•	
An approval process's e-mail limit per day is as follows:
°°
1,000 per Salesforce standard license
°°
200,000 per organization

Chapter 6
[ 279 ]
Once an organization's daily limit of 200,000 exceeds, Salesforce will 
send a warning e-mail to the default workflow user and discard all 
the e-mails. Salesforce will not try to resend them later.
You cannot delete active approval processes. If you want to delete them, you will 
first have to inactivate the approval process and make sure no records have been 
submitted for approval. If any records have been submitted, delete them and remove 
them from the recycle bin.
Once an approval process is activated, you cannot add, delete, or change the order of 
the steps or change the reject or skip comportment of that process, even if you make 
the process inactive.
Various ways to approve a 
request – approval settings
You can approve records in Salesforce by three ways, which are follows:
•	
Via a UI
•	
Through a wireless-enabled mobile device
•	
Via Salesforce Chatter (we will discuss this in Chapter 7, Concepts of 
Data Management)
For the approval settings, follow these steps:
1.	 First, we will submit any Booth Registration record that belongs to an NGO 
for approval. To submit a record for an approval process, go to the record 
detail page and navigate to the Approval History list and click on the 
Submit for Approval button, as shown in the following screenshot:

Automating a Business Process
[ 280 ]
2.	 A warning window will pop up. Click on OK. Now our record is submitted 
for approval. As per our setting, the approval status is changed to Submit for 
Approval, and it will trigger an e-mail to Sagar Pareek for approval.
Users who have modified all the data permissions for an object can also 
submit a record for approval, and they can approve or reject a record 
from an approval process as well.
3.	 To approve or reject records, click on the Approve/Reject link. If you want 
to reassign an approval request to someone else, click on the reassign link. 
Clicking on the Approve/Reject link will redirect you to a new window. 
You can add a comment to the box and click on the Approve or Reject 
button, as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 6
[ 281 ]
4.	 This page is called the Approval Request page. In this page, you can see the 
approval history section that appears while setting up the approval process. 
We will select the Display approval history information in addition to the 
fields selected above checkbox. As soon as the user Sagar Pareek approves 
the request for step 1, Salesforce will trigger an e-mail alert to proceed on to 
the next step (step 2 in our case ), that is, to obtain approval from the user 
Rakesh Gupta:
5.	 To approve or reject records via an e-mail, click on Reply and use the 
following keywords in the body of your e-mail for approval or rejection 
as per your choice:
°°
Approval: Yes, approve or approved
°°
Rejection: No, reject or rejected
6.	 In our case, the user Rakesh Gupta will reply to the e-mail with the Approve 
keyword, as shown in the following screenshot:

Automating a Business Process
[ 282 ]
7.	 If you mark the record as Approved, the approval status field value will then 
be changed to approved.
Approval request comments are restricted to 4,000 characters. 
In Chinese, Japanese, or Korean, the limit is 1,333 characters.
Stay-in-Touch
What do we do to obtain our client's latest contact information? We simply ask them 
to send us the latest details after a certain period; usually, we e-mail them to get this 
information. It's a tedious task to write an individual e-mail to every client/contact. 
Salesforce provides a better way to ask your clients to stay in touch with you. You 
can simply use a single e-mail format, and with a click of a button, you can directly 
send an e-mail to your contact and get the latest information. This functionality of 
Salesforce is known as Stay-in-Touch.

Chapter 6
[ 283 ]
Stay-in-Touch settings
To make use of this functionality, follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Your Name | My Settings | Email | My Stay-in-Touch Settings.
2.	 It will open a window where you can create a few settings, as follows:
°°
Automatic Bcc: If you select this option, then you will receive copies 
of your sent Stay-in-Touch e-mails. This option is only available if 
your organization has not enabled compliant Bcc e-mails.
°°
A reminder for New Contacts: If you select this option, it will 
prompt a Stay-in-Touch request window whenever you save a 
new contact.
°°
The default Stay-in-Touch Subject: From here, you can change the 
default Stay-in-Touch subject.
°°
The default Stay-in-Touch Note: Here, you can enter a message to 
the recipient. You can also use a merge field. To use a merge field, 
navigate to the Available Merge Fields section available at the top 
of the page and select Fields Copy Merge Field Value from Copy 
Merge Field Valuebox and use it.
°°
The default Stay-in-Touch Signature: Here, you can enter a 
signature with your contact information.
3.	 Click on Save. It will look like the following screenshot:

Automating a Business Process
[ 284 ]
A request update
To send a request update to any contact, navigate to the Contact tab and go to the 
Contact Detail page of the person you want to send the request to. In our case, we 
want to send request update information to the contact, Rocky Williams. To do this, 
follow these steps:
1.	 Click on the Request Update button as shown in the following screenshot:
2.	 It will redirect you to the Send a Stay-in-Touch Request window from 
where you can add the CC and Bcc fields, and customize Subject, Note, 
and Signature. Once done, click on the Send button, as shown in the 
following screenshot:

Chapter 6
[ 285 ]
3.	 The following e-mail is sent to the contact's e-mail address. Open the 
e-mail and click on the Update Now button.
4.	 It will redirect the user to a new screen from where the user can 
update their information. Once done, click on the Update button, 
as shown in the following screenshot:

Automating a Business Process
[ 286 ]
5.	 Salesforce will send an e-mail to the owner of the record notifying them that 
there is an update for a particular contact for which they have requested 
an update.
6.	 Click on the Click here to update your information link if you want to 
update a contact.
7.	 It will redirect you to the Stay-in-Touch edit page from where you can accept 
or reject changes. Both the previous and new values will be shown in this 
window. Click on Accept Changes and Salesforce will update the contact; 
with this, the process will be complete.
8.	 In the following screenshot, you can see the updated contact:

Chapter 6
[ 287 ]
To send a Stay-in-Touch request in mass numbers, you can use 
the Mass Stay-in-Touch tool available in the Contact tab under 
the Tools section.
Summary
In this chapter, we have gone through various ways to automate our business. 
We started with the validation rule and how it improves data quality and then 
moved on to the concept of formula field and Roll-up Summary field.
We also went through how to create a letterhead and e-mail templates. 
In the topic that followed, we covered the workflow rule and approval process 
in depth along with their various limitations. We also discussed various ways to 
approve records. Finally, we discussed the request update and the Stay-in-Touch 
concepts in detail. In the next chapter, we will discuss various methods of data 
management in Salesforce along with the concept of a data loader, import wizard, 
and data import wizard.


Concepts of Data 
Management
In the previous chapter, we discussed various ways to automate your business. 
We discussed the workflow rule and the approval process in Salesforce. We also 
discussed time-based workflow and a way to monitor a time-based workflows 
queue. In this chapter, we will discuss various concepts related to data management 
in Salesforce. We will also discuss creating Sandbox and Tags concepts in Salesforce. 
The following topics will be covered in this chapter:
•	
Salesforce Record IDs
•	
Data management operations
•	
Various tools used for data management
•	
Truncating custom objects
•	
Sandboxes
•	
Deleting all data
•	
Data export service
•	
Getting storage usage details
•	
Mass transfer approval requests
•	
Mass transfer records
•	
Mass delete records
•	
Mass reassign accounts and the opportunity team
•	
Uses of Tags

Concepts of Data Management
[ 290 ]
Salesforce Record IDs
Before going ahead with discussing the concept of the data management, you have to 
understand the concept of Record IDs in Salesforce. As soon as you create any record 
in Salesforce, it will automatically generate a Record ID for you. The Record ID is a 
unique identifier of a record. We can get Record IDs in the following ways:
•	
From the URL of the record detail view
•	
By running the reports
•	
From the web services API
•	
From the formulas
•	
From the data loader
Salesforce provides two types of Record IDs. They are as follows:
•	
A 15-digit case-sensitive form: When you create a record from Salesforce UI, 
it will give you a 15-digit ID. We can use this in the URL and report. Reports 
do not expose IDs for all objects.
•	
An 18-digit case-insensitive form: When we work with the data loader or 
an API tool, it will return an 18-digit ID. You can use this in the data loader. 
The API always returns the Record IDs in an 18-digit format, but you can use 
either the 15-digit or 18-digit format with the API tool.
Data management operations
Until now, we have discussed various configuration features available in Salesforce. 
As soon as you are done with building a data model and the related development, 
the next task is to migrate data from the legacy system to Salesforce or to mass 
update data in Salesforce. There are various data management operations possible 
with data management tools as follows:
•	
Insert: This operation is used when you want to create new records for 
standard or custom objects of your organization. For example, you can 
use this feature to create an account in Salesforce.
•	
Update: This operation is used when you want to update an existing record 
in Salesforce, for example, if you want to update the account type for an 
existing account.

Chapter 7
[ 291 ]
•	
Export: Salesforce provides various ways to export your data. By using this 
operation, you can download all the data of the organization for backup 
purposes or some other reason. You can also use this operation to get 
reference IDs of particular records to perform an insert or update operation 
on those records.
•	
Upsert: This operation is a combination of insert and update. Let's start with 
an example where Appiuss management wants to update thousands of 
account records based on Salesforce Record IDs, but at the same time, they 
also want to ensure that no Record ID exists in Salesforce, and then create 
those records.
•	
Delete: This operation is used when you want to delete records from 
Salesforce. To delete a record, you require a Salesforce ID.
Tools for data management
Salesforce provides various tools to manage your data. By using these tools, 
you can easily process thousands of records in a single transaction. A few tools 
are browser-based and a few have to be installed on your workstation. You do 
not have to pay any extra for these tools. The following is a list of tools provided 
by Salesforce:
•	
Import Wizard (browser-based)
•	
Data Import Wizard (browser-based)
•	
Data loader (installable)
Import Wizard
To import data in Salesforce, you can use Import Wizard. Import Wizard only 
supports account, contact, lead, solutions, and custom objects. It means you can 
use Import Wizard to import data in Salesforce only for these objects. Let's start 
with an example where the management in Appiuss wants to import data for a 
Sponsor object.

Concepts of Data Management
[ 292 ]
Creating a CSV file
To import data, first we have to create a Comma separated values (CSV) file. Initially, 
list down all the fields that require you to create a Sponsor record in Salesforce. We 
also require an Owner ID, which indicates who you want to assign these records 
to in Salesforce; in our case; it will be Rakesh Gupta's user ID. You can obtain the 
user ID by the user's detail page URL. Finally, our CSV file will look like the 
following screenshot:
Import records into Salesforce through Import 
Wizard
To start importing data using Import Wizard, follow these instructions:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Administer | Data Management | Import 
Custom Objects.
2.	 On the Custom Object Import Wizard page, click on the Start the Import 
Wizard! link, as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 7
[ 293 ]
3.	 It will open another window; select the Sponsor object as shown in the 
following screenshot, and click on Next:
4.	 On the next screen, you can choose whether you want to prevent duplicates 
from being created. In our case, select No and click on Next as shown in the 
following screenshot:

Concepts of Data Management
[ 294 ]
5.	 On the next screen, you can specify the user field that CSV represents. In our 
case, the CSV file already has a user ID, so select Salesforce.com ID and click 
on Next, as shown in the following screenshot:
6.	 After that, select your CSV file and character encoding, and optionally, 
you can select Trigger workflow rules for new and updated records so 
the trigger will not fire when an import operation occurs for a current 
transaction. Finally, it will look like the following screenshot. Then, click 
on Next.

Chapter 7
[ 295 ]
7.	 On the next screen, you can map the file between CSV and object fields. On 
the next screen, you can map the column of the CSV file and object fields. In 
the CSV file, if you use the same name for the field, it will be auto-mapped. 
Make sure it looks like the following screenshot and then click on Next:
8.	 On the next screen, it will show the message Click Import Now! to submit 
this import request to salesforce.com. Click on the Import Now! button as 
shown in the following screenshot:
9.	 Salesforce.com will now begin to import your file. You will be notified by 
e-mail when your import is completed. It will also show the estimated 
time to finish this import operation. Click on the Finish button to complete 
this process.

Concepts of Data Management
[ 296 ]
10.	 As soon as this process is completed, a record is created in Salesforce. 
To check this, go to the Sponsor object and verify. The following 
screenshot shows that our import process completed successfully:
Data Import Wizard
In the Spring '14 release, Salesforce launched Data Import Wizard. It provides an 
integrated interface that lets you import data for custom and standard objects, 
including accounts, contacts, leads, and solutions. It provides the same features as 
Import Wizards provide, but Data Import Wizard uses a bulk API to process the 
request so that it can process data faster than Import Wizard. We will create a few 
records for a Sponsor object. To do that, first create a CSV file with the following 
details for the Owner ID. You can choose your user ID. Your CSV file will look like 
the following screenshot:
Importing records into Salesforce through Data 
Import Wizard
To start importing data by using Data Import Wizard, follow these instructions:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Administer | Data Management | Data Import wizard.
2.	 On the screen, click on the Launch Wizard button to start it.
3.	 On the next screen, under the What kind of data are you importing? section, 
click on the Custom object tab, and select the Sponsor object.

Chapter 7
[ 297 ]
4.	 On the same screen, under the What do you want to do? section, click 
on Add new records, and under Match by, select Name as shown in the 
following screenshot:
5.	 Then, select your CSV file. Here, you can either drag-and-drop or browse for 
your file. This is a major advantage over the old Import Wizard. The result 
will look like the following screenshot:
6.	 As soon as you are done with file selection, click on Next to move on to 
mapping a field page.

Concepts of Data Management
[ 298 ]
7.	 If you use the same name for the field in your CSV file, Salesforce will 
automatically map the fields, else you will have to do it manually. 
To change the field mapping, click on the Change link, as shown 
in the following screenshot, and then click on Next:
8.	 On the final screen, you will be given an option to review what you have 
selected until now, for example, the object, operations, and file that you 
selected. It will also give you an idea of the number of fields you mapped.
9.	 Once you are done with the review, click on the Start Import button to start 
the import process. As soon as the import process is completed, you will get 
an intimation e-mail from Salesforce regarding the success and error report.
Monitoring bulk data load jobs
To monitor the status of the recent data load job for Data Import Wizard, follow 
these instructions:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Monitor | Jobs | Bulk Data Load Jobs.
2.	 You will get the Quota details, such as CPU, IO, and Disk, for the last 
24 hours.

Chapter 7
[ 299 ]
3.	 Navigate to the Completed last 7 days section to get more details about the 
completed job or navigate to the In Progress section to get more details about 
the jobs that are in progress.
4.	 Click on Job ID to go to the detail page.
5.	 On the detail page, you will find Start Time, End Time, Status, Operation, 
Records Processed, Records Failed, Total Processing Time (ms), PI Active 
Processing Time (ms), and many more options.
To learn more about Data Import Wizard, visit https://help.
salesforce.com/HTViewHelpDoc?id=data_import_wizard.
htm&language=en_US.
Data loader
Data loader is another tool used in data management activities. It is a desktop 
application for Windows, and is not supported in any other browser. To use this 
application, you first have to install it in your workstation. Data loader is a very 
powerful tool compared to Import Wizard and Data Import Wizard. It provides 
various functionalities such as Insert, Delete, Update, Upsert, and Export. This tool 
is freely available, which means you do not have to pay any extra to Salesforce to get 
this tool.

Concepts of Data Management
[ 300 ]
Installing data loader
To install data loader in your workstation, follow these instructions:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Administer | Data Management | Data Loader.
2.	 You will be redirected to the Data Loader Setup page; now click on the 
Download the Data Loader link as shown in the following screenshot:
3.	 Once the download is completed, double-click on the installable file and 
follow the instructions that appear on the screen.
If you want to download the old version of data loader, visit 
http://www.cloudsuccess.com/resource-centre/
apex-data-loader-archive/.
Configuring data loader
Salesforce gives you the flexibility to configure data loader according to your 
needs. First, open your data loader by double-clicking on the icon and following 
these instructions:
1.	 Go to Settings under the Settings tab, as shown in the following screenshot, 
to open the settings page:

Chapter 7
[ 301 ]
2.	 This will open the data loader setting page, where you will be able to change 
the value for various fields. Here, we will discuss a few important fields:
°°
Batch size: This defines the batch size for a transaction
°°
Insert null value: Select this when you want to assign a null value to 
a field
°°
Server host: Set the URL according to your requirements. 
If you are logged in to the developer or production environment, 
use https://login.salesforce.com/, and for Sandbox, use 
https://test.salesforce.com/
°°
Time zone: Use this field to set the time zone
°°
Proxy host: Use this field to set the proxy host
°°
Proxy Port: Use this field to set the proxy port
°°
Proxy usernames: Use this field to set the proxy username
°°
Proxy Password: Use this field to set the proxy password
°°
Start at row: Here, you can set a numerical value so that it can start 
the CSV file process from that row
3.	 Once you are done with the setup, click on the OK button.
Exporting data using data loader
With a single click, you can export your data from Salesforce. In this example, 
we will export all the data from the Event Registration object. To export data, 
follow these instructions:
1.	 Click on the Export button as shown in the following screenshot:

Concepts of Data Management
[ 302 ]
2.	 Log in to data loader by using your Salesforce credentials. In the Username 
field, enter your Salesforce username, and in the Password field, enter 
your Salesforce password followed by the security token, and click on 
the Login button.
To avoid the security token with your password, whitelist your 
IP address. You can then log in to the data loader with your 
username and password without using the security token.
3.	 After a successful login, the Next button will be enabled. Click on it as shown 
in the following screenshot:
4.	 On the next screen under Select Salesforce Object, in our case, select the 
Event Registration object and enter a location in your local workstation 
where you want to store the extracted file in the Choose a target destination 
for extraction field. Once done with the selection, click on Next, as shown in 
the following screenshot:

Chapter 7
[ 303 ]
5.	 On the last screen, you can choose the fields from which data needs to be 
extracted, and this tool gives you the flexibility to write a query in case you 
want to extract data based upon some requirements. In our case, first click on 
the Select all fields button and then on the Finish button to start this process. 
You can see this in the following screenshot:
6.	 As soon as this process completes, you will get a message on the screen 
that displays how many records were extracted, as shown in the 
following screenshot:
7.	 Click on the View Extraction button to open the extracted file, as shown in 
the preceding screenshot.
To learn more about the data loader functionality, visit https://
help.salesforce.com/apex/HTViewHelpDoc?id=inserting_
updating_or_deleting_data.htm&language=en.

Concepts of Data Management
[ 304 ]
Differences between data loader and Import 
Wizard
The following table lists a few differences between data loader and Import Wizard. 
It will help you understand when to use data loader and when to use Import Wizard.
Features
Import Wizard
Data loader
Available editions 
Contact Manager, Group, 
Professional, Enterprise, 
Unlimited, Performance, 
and Developer
Enterprise, Unlimited, 
Performance, Developer, 
and Database
Success/error files
No
Yes
Object supported 
Account, contact, lead, 
solutions, and custom 
objects
All
Number of records you can 
import or export
Up to 50,000
In between 5,000 to 5 M
Import
Yes
Yes
Export
No
Yes
Schedule import/export
No
Yes
Alert for duplicate 
Yes
No
Choose whether to trigger 
workflow rule 
Yes
No
Save mapping file for 
later use
No
Yes
External or internal to 
Salesforce
Internal
External
Truncating custom objects
Truncating a custom object allows Salesforce to delete all records from particular 
objects and save the empty object and its metadata. This is a fast way to delete all 
records from custom objects compared to Import Wizard and Data Import Wizard. 
This action will remove records from custom objects and you cannot recover them 
from the recycle bin.

Chapter 7
[ 305 ]
Enabling truncate for custom objects
Before using this feature for your organization, you must enable it. To do this, 
follow these instructions:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Build | Customize | User Interface.
2.	 On the user interface page, navigate to the Setup section.
3.	 Select the Enable Custom Object Truncate checkbox, as shown in the 
following screenshot:
4.	 Click on Save.
Performing truncate for custom objects
You can use this feature when you have created a custom object and filled it with test 
records. To delete those test records with a single action, you can use this feature.
To perform this action, follow these instructions:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Build | Create | Objects.
2.	 Identify the object on which you want to perform this action and click on an 
object name to go to its detail page. In our case, select Event Object.

Concepts of Data Management
[ 306 ]
3.	 Click on the Truncate button, as shown in the following screenshot:
4.	 It will pop up a window. Read the warning message carefully and type the 
object name as shown in the following screenshot:
5.	 Click on the Truncate button to complete the process.
When you truncate a custom object, Salesforce stores a copy of the 
truncated object in the deleted objects' list for 15 days, and it will count 
against your organization's limit. After 15 days, the records will be erased 
permanently and will no longer count against your limits.

Chapter 7
[ 307 ]
Sandbox
Sandbox is a playground that an organization can use for development or testing 
purposes. In simple words, it is a copy of your production organization. It is 
completely isolated from your production organization; it means the action that you 
perform on your Sandbox is not affected in the production organization. Let's start 
with an example; Salesforce will not allow us to write or change the Apex code in 
the production organization. In that case, the organization can use the developer 
Sandbox to develop the application by using the Apex code and move it from one 
production to other when it's ready to be deployed.
Types of Sandboxes
Salesforce comes up with a few types of Sandboxes for your organization. You can 
use them as per your requirements. When you purchase licenses from Salesforce.com 
for your organization, you can negotiate and get multiple Sandboxes at that time. 
Salesforce also allows you to buy a Sandbox any time you need it. The various types 
of Sandboxes are as follows:
•	
Developer Sandbox: This is a configuration-only Sandbox. You can use 
this type of Sandbox for coding and testing purposes with a single user. In 
Developer Sandbox, multiple users can log in, but the main purpose of this 
Sandbox is that it provides an isolated playground to the developer where 
they can write a code and test the functionality. This Sandbox's storage limit 
is limited to 200 MB. You can refresh a Developer Sandbox once per day.
•	
Developer Pro Sandbox: This type of Sandbox copies all your production 
reports, dashboards, price books, products, apps, and customization under 
the Setup option, but it excludes all records from standard and custom 
objects, document, and attachments. This type of Sandbox takes minimal 
time to create and refresh. You can refresh a Developer Pro Sandbox once 
per day.
•	
Partial Data Sandbox: This type of Sandbox contains organization metadata 
with a selected amount of data from production that you defined on Sandbox 
temples. Partial Data Sandbox is available for Enterprise, Performance, 
and Unlimited Editions. You can refresh your Partial Data Sandbox from 
production every 29 days. This Sandbox contains a maximum of 5 GB data 
and 10,000 records.
•	
Full Copy Sandbox: This copies your entire production organization with 
data and metadata. You can include standard and custom object records, 
attachments, and documents. You can refresh your Full Copy Sandbox from 
production every 29 days. The Record ID in Full Copy Sandbox and the 
Production Sandbox are identical.

Concepts of Data Management
[ 308 ]
Sandbox is only available in Enterprise, Unlimited, and Performance 
Editions.
Defining the Sandbox templates
The Sandbox templates allow your organization to specify objects and data to copy 
to your Full or Partial Data Sandbox, so that your organization can control the 
size and content of each Sandbox. Sandbox templates are only available for Full or 
Partial Data Sandbox. When you create a Sandbox template, you select the object 
data (standard and custom) to copy. To create a new Sandbox template for your 
organization, follow these instructions:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Deploy | Sandboxes.
2.	 Click on the Sandbox templates tab, and then click on the New Sandbox 
Template button as shown in the following screenshot:
3.	 This will redirect you to the New Sandbox Template creation page where 
you enter the Name and Description for the Sandbox template, and select 
the object by selecting the checkbox available in front of each object:
4.	 Click on Save.

Chapter 7
[ 309 ]
Creating a Sandbox
When you create a new Sandbox, Salesforce will automatically copy your data from 
the production organization into the new Sandbox. For Partial Data Sandbox and 
Full Copy Sandbox, it will refer to the Sandbox template. To create a new Sandbox, 
follow these instructions. In this example, we will create a Partial Data Sandbox.
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Deploy | Sandboxes.
2.	 Click on the Sandboxes tab and then click on the New Sandbox button, 
as shown in the following screenshot:
3.	 This will redirect you to a new Create Sandbox page where you can enter the 
Name and Description for the new Sandbox and select the Sandbox type. In 
our case, select Partial Data Sandbox as shown in the following screenshot:

Concepts of Data Management
[ 310 ]
4.	 On the next screen, you have to select the Sandbox templates and click on 
Create as shown in the following screenshot:
5.	 As soon as the Sandbox creation is completed, you will get an intimation 
e-mail from Salesforce stating that your Sandbox is ready to use.
Your Sandbox credentials will be the same as that of production except 
that the username will be appended with the .sandbox name. In our 
case, if the production username is abc@appiuss.com, then the Sandbox 
username will be abc@appiuss.com.dev.
Refreshing the Sandbox
You can only refresh a Sandbox from your production organization. The benefit of 
refreshing your Sandbox is that it is in sync with the production environment data 
and metadata, according to the Sandbox type you choose to refresh. Before going 
ahead, first identify the Sandbox you want to refresh. To refresh a Sandbox, follow 
these instructions:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Deploy | Sandboxes.
2.	 Click on the Refresh link available on front of each sandbox name, as shown 
in the following screenshot:

Chapter 7
[ 311 ]
3.	 This will pop up a warning message stating that All Objects, settings and 
records in this sandbox will be replaced after the refresh is complete. 
Click on the Refresh button to start this process, as shown in the 
following screenshot:
4.	 The refresh time depends upon your metadata and records in the 
production organization.
Deleting all the data
If you have a trial account of Salesforce, and at any time you decide to delete all the 
data including the sample data, that is, the data you stored in the Salesforce trial 
organization, follow these instructions:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Data Management | Delete All Data.
2.	 Salesforce will request you to enter text to state that you understand all data 
will be deleted:
3.	 Click on the Submit button as shown in the preceding screenshot to complete 
this process.
This feature is only available during the trial period.

Concepts of Data Management
[ 312 ]
Data Export Service
Before you plan to import any mass data into your Salesforce organization, it is 
highly recommended that you take a backup of your existing data prior to the import. 
Salesforce.com provides a weekly Data Export Service, which exports all your data into 
the .csv files of 150 MB each and packs them into a .zip file of 512 MB. The number 
of files generated depends on the data in your organization. Data Export Service sends 
a link to the administrator via an e-mail where they can download the files from. 
Administrators can schedule the export every 29 days for the Professional Edition 
and every seven days for the Unlimited and Enterprise Editions.
This service is only available to Unlimited, Professional, 
and Enterprise Editions.
Salesforce provides two ways to use the export services as follows:
•	
Export Now: Use this feature to export the data right away
•	
Schedule Export: Use this feature whenever you want to schedule the 
export service
To make use of the Data Export Service, follow these instructions. In this example, 
we will use the Export Now feature.
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Administer | Data Management | Data Export.
2.	 Click on the Export Now button as shown in the following screenshot:
3.	 Now you need to select Exported File Encoding. The data must include 
the attachments or not, and the Chatter files and Salesforce CRM content 
document versions.

Chapter 7
[ 313 ]
4.	 Select the objects whose data you want to export. In our example, select 
the Account object and click on the Start Export button as shown in the 
preceding screenshot.
5.	 As soon as the export completes, you will get an e-mail notification with data 
attached in a ZIP file format.
Get the storage usage details
Your records or attachments count against some storage usage. Salesforce provides 
a set of storage to the user in an organization, which is used to store the organization 
data. Salesforce provides mainly two types of storage:
•	
Data storage
•	
File storage

Concepts of Data Management
[ 314 ]
Data storage
Data storage includes accounts, article types, article type translations, campaigns, 
campaign members, cases, case teams, contacts, contracts, custom objects, e-mail 
messages, events, forecast items, Google Docs, ideas, leads, notes, opportunities, 
opportunity splits, quotes, quote template rich text data, solutions, tag applications, 
unique tags, and tasks.
The following table shows the data storage provided by Salesforce:
Salesforce Edition
Per organization's minimum 
data storage
Per user license's data 
storage allocation
Contact manager
1 GB
20 MB
Group
1 GB
20 MB
Professional
1 GB
20 MB
Enterprise
1 GB
20 MB
Performance
1 GB
120MB
Unlimited
1 GB
120MB
Developer
5 GB
Not applicable
As the preceding table states, the Contact manager, Group, Professional, Enterprise, 
Performance, and Unlimited Salesforce Editions are allocated either 1 GB data 
storage limit or a per-user data storage limit, whichever is greater.
Let's start with an example. An Enterprise Edition organization with 20 users 
receives 1 GB, as 20 users multiplied by 20 MB per user is 400 MB, which is less 
than the 1 GB minimum, whereas a Professional Edition organization with 200 
users receives more than the 1 GB minimum, as 200 users multiplied by 20 MB 
per user is 4,000 MB.
File storage
File storage counts files in attachments, documents tab, files tab, file field, Salesforce 
CRM Content, Chatter (including user photos), and Site.com assets. The following 
table shows the file storage provided by Salesforce:

Chapter 7
[ 315 ]
Salesforce Edition
Per organization's minimum 
file storage
Per user license's file storage 
allocation
Contact manager
11 GB
612 MB
Group
11 GB
612 MB
Professional
11 GB
612 MB
Enterprise
11 GB
2 GB
Performance
11 GB
2 GB
Unlimited
11 GB
2 GB
Developer
20 MB
Not applicable
The preceding table shows the data storage provided by Salesforce Contact manager, 
Group, Professional, Enterprise, Performance, and Unlimited Editions are allocated 
a per-user limit multiplied by the number of users in the organization, plus an 
additional per-organization allocation.
Let's start with an example. An Enterprise Edition organization with 1,200 users 
receives 2,422 GB of file storage or 2 GB per user multiplied by 1,200 users plus 
an additional 11 GB, whereas a Professional Edition organization with 1,200 users 
receives about 740 GB of file storage or 612 MB per user multiplied by 1,200 users 
and an additional 11 GB.
You can get both of the storage details for your organization by following 
these instructions:
1.	 Navigate to Name | Setup | Administration Setup | Data Management | 
Storage Usage.
2.	 Select the Current Data Storage Usage section to get the data storage usage 
details, and select the Current File Storage Usage section to get the file 
storage usage details. If you want to know about the top data storage users 
for your organization, then navigate to the Top Users by Data Storage 
Usage section, and if you want to know about the top file storage users, 
then navigate to the Top Users by File Storage Usage section.

Concepts of Data Management
[ 316 ]
Mass transfer approval requests
If an approval request approver is absent or has left the organization, then you'll 
be required to transfer the pending approval request to a new user. Let's start with 
an example. An Appiuss user, Sagar Pareek, is on leave for a few days (from April 
27, 2014 to April 28, 2014), and the system administrator decides that any approval 
requests in the absence of Sagar Pareek will be transferred to Rakesh Gupta; to do 
this, follow these instructions:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Administer | Data Management | Mass Transfer 
Approval Requests.
2.	 On the next screen, enter the criteria to search for the approval requests. 
For the preceding scenario, we need to enter the criteria, as Date Submitted 
must be between 4/27/2014 to 4/28/2014.
3.	 Select the radio button Mass transfer outstanding approval requests to 
a new user, select Rakesh Gupta, and then click on Find as shown in the 
following screenshot:

Chapter 7
[ 317 ]
4.	 Now, under this section, you can see the result matching the criteria. Select 
the appropriate result (in our case, all) and click on the Transfer button to 
transfer it to a new approver, as shown in the following screenshot:
5.	 Now, the selected approval requests will be transferred to the user defined in 
the criteria.
Mass transfer record
Sometimes, it is required to transfer the ownership of the records to another user. 
Let's start with the example from the preceding scenario. As Sagar Pareek left the 
organization, the system administrator wants to transfer his account's ownership 
to Rakesh Gupta. To do this, follow these instructions:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Administer | Data Management | Mass 
Transfer Records.
2.	 You will see a list of available objects. Click on Transfer Accounts as we 
want to transfer an account.

Concepts of Data Management
[ 318 ]
3.	 On the next screen, enter the Transfer from and Transfer to fields and the 
search criteria.
4.	 As soon as you are done with entering the criteria, click on the Find button 
to get all records that matched with your search criteria, as shown in the 
preceding screenshot.
5.	 Now, you will see the records that match the criteria in another section, just 
below the search section.
6.	 Select the records and click on the Transfer button to transfer the records to 
their new owner, as shown in the preceding screenshot.

Chapter 7
[ 319 ]
To learn more about the mass transfer record functionality, visit 
https://help.salesforce.com/htviewhelpdoc?id=admin_
transfer.htm&siteLang=en_US.
Mass deleting records
You need to mass delete records in your organization when incorrect information 
is filled in the record or during a mass upload if something goes wrong. Let's start 
with an example about the organization Appiuss. One of the users performed a mass 
upload and forgot to put the industry type for every account that was uploaded. The 
system administrator has decided to delete all these records that were uploaded on 
April 27, 2014; to do this, follow these instructions:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Administer | Data Management | Mass Transfer 
Approval Requests.
2.	 You will see a list of available objects that you can mass delete. Select Mass 
Delete Accounts in our case.

Concepts of Data Management
[ 320 ]
3.	 Navigate to Step 3: Find Accounts that match the following criteria on the 
screen, enter the search criteria in our scenario, select Created Date equals 
04/27/2014, and click on the Search button to get all the records that match 
the search criteria, as shown in the following screenshot:
4.	 Select the records you want to delete and click on the Delete button, 
as shown in the following screenshot:
5.	 You can also select the Permanently delete the selected records option. 
When this option is selected, you cannot restore any deleted records from 
the Recycle Bin. Please be careful when selecting this checkbox as doing this 
deletes records permanently.
To learn more about the mass delete record functionality, visit https://
help.salesforce.com/htviewhelpdoc?id=admin_massdelete.
htm&siteLang=en_US.

Chapter 7
[ 321 ]
Mass reassign accounts and opportunity 
teams
To manage your organization teams better with distribution of management 
of records, you may wish to reassign a particular set of records from one team 
to another. You can reassign the account and opportunity records to teams in 
Salesforce. For example, we want to add a new team member Robby Williams to an 
existing account and an opportunity team for the records created on the date April 
27, 2014. In order to do that, follow these instructions:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Administer | Data Management | Mass Reassign 
Account Teams.
2.	 Now, select Add an account team member and click on Next as shown in the 
following screenshot:
3.	 Enter the search criteria on the next screen, as Created Date equals 4/27/2014, 
and click on Next, as shown in the following screenshot:

Concepts of Data Management
[ 322 ]
4.	 On the next screen, select the accounts for which you want to assign this 
member in the team. In our case, select all records and click on Next as 
shown in the following screenshot:
5.	 On the next screen, specify the new team member that you want to assign 
to those selected records; in our case, select the user Robby Williams. Also, 
specify the Team Role, Account Access, Opportunity Access, and Case 
Access fields. You can see this in the following screenshot:
6.	 Once done, click on the Add button to start this process.
7.	 On the next screen, you will get a success message. Click on the Done button 
to complete this process.

Chapter 7
[ 323 ]
8.	 In a similar way, you can mass reassign opportunity teams by navigating to 
Setup | Administer | Data Management | Mass Reassign Opportunity 
Teams and then following the preceding instructions.
To learn more about the mass reassign account and an opportunity team, 
visit https://help.salesforce.com/htviewhelpdoc?id=admin_
reassign.htm&siteLang=en_US.
Tags
Tags are some keywords that you can use with your records to make a search 
easier and organize the records in your personalized way. For example, in your 
organization, you have thousands of account records, but you want to organize the 
accounts that were created in the summer of 2014, so that the next time you search 
for the account records, you simply need to search summer 2014.
There are two types of tags that are provided by Salesforce:
•	
Personal Tags: These are private to a specific user.
•	
Public Tags: These are public and available for all users.
To use the tags feature, you need to enable it. To enable tags, follow these instructions:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Build | Customize | Tags | Tab Settings.
2.	 Select Enable Personal Tags as shown in the following screenshot:

Concepts of Data Management
[ 324 ]
3.	 Select the layout on which you want to show the tagging feature. In our case, 
select the Account Layout option and click on the Save button, as shown in 
the following screenshot:
4.	 Now, go to any of the account record detail pages and you will see a button 
Add Tags as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 7
[ 325 ]
5.	 Enter the tag that you want to give to this account; in our case, enter Summer 
14 and click on Save as shown in the following screenshot:
6.	 Now, the tag will be associated with this account, and you can see the related 
tags in the upper-right corner of the account.
In a similar way, you can enable public tags, and they will be available to all users.
Summary
In this chapter, we went through various ways to manage our data in Salesforce. At 
the beginning of the chapter, we discussed different types of IDs in Salesforce. Then, 
we moved on and discussed various data management tools provided by Salesforce. 
We also went through the ways to create a Sandbox for an organization. In the next 
topic, we covered deleting all data and mass transfer approval requests. We also 
discussed how to mass transfer the ownership of a record to another user. Finally, 
we discussed mass delete records and tags. In the next chapter, we will discuss 
various types of reports and dashboards in Salesforce along with the concept of 
report and dashboard scheduling.


Reports and Dashboards 
in Salesforce
In the previous chapter, we discussed various ways of managing data for your 
organization. We explored the import wizard, data loader, and various data 
management operations in Salesforce. We also discussed Sandbox management in 
Salesforce. In this chapter, we will discuss various concepts related to reports and 
dashboards in Salesforce. We will also discuss various ways to share reports and 
dashboards in Salesforce. The following topics will be covered in this chapter:
•	
Report types
•	
Different types of reports
•	
Dashboard components and their types
•	
Exporting a report
•	
Using various methods to share reports and dashboards
•	
Hiding unused report types
•	
Exporting reports without footers
•	
Floating headers in summary and matrix reports
•	
Analytical snapshots
A report is a way to understand how efficiently your organization is performing. For 
example, your sales director wants to know the number of opportunities won in the 
current month or number of leads captured through Web-to-Lead to check whether 
this is beneficial for the organization or not. Salesforce provides various types of 
reports that you can use according to your requirements. The report data is always 
produced in real time. When you save a report, its configuration parameters are 
stored; however, the generated data is not stored. Reports will show the data as 
per running the user's security access. 

Reports and Dashboards in Salesforce
[ 328 ]
We can create reports on both standard and custom objects. Reports are stored in 
folders and users who have access to these folders can run the reports. In the report, 
you will get only the records that you have access to, which means the organization's 
sharing policies and settings will apply to the report.
Understanding report types
By default, Salesforce comes with a few standard report types for standard objects 
and custom objects. If you select Allow Reports from the object setup page, then 
Salesforce will automatically create a few report types for you. This also allows you 
to create custom report types to fulfill your requirements. Report types are used to 
create a report.
Custom report types
Custom report types allow you to build a structure in the report wizard from 
which users can create and customize reports. You can build custom report types 
for the relationships (master-detail and lookup) between objects that allow us to do 
the following:
•	
They help us choose which standard and custom objects to display to users 
who create and customize reports
•	
They help us define the relationships between the objects displayed and the 
users who create and customize reports
•	
They help us select which objects' fields can be used as columns in reports
Creating a custom report type
Here, we will create a custom report type to get a list of sponsors who opt for Booth 
Registration. To create custom report types, follow the ensuing steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Build | Create | Report Types.
2.	 Click on the New Custom Report Types button to create new report types, 
as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 8
[ 329 ]
3.	 It will redirect you to the new custom report type page, where you have to 
fill in the following details:
°°
Primary Object: This is used to select primary objects from all 
objects available in your organization, even those that you don't have 
permission to view. In our case, we will select the Sponsor object.
°°
Report Type Label: This is used to enter the meaningful report type 
label. You can use up to 255 characters.
°°
Report Type Name: This is used to enter the name of the report type.
°°
Description: This is used to enter a description for your custom 
report type. You can use up to 1,000 characters.
°°
Store in Category: This is used to select the category to store 
the custom report type. In our case, we will select the Other 
Report folder.
°°
Deployment Status: This is used to select a deployment status. In our 
case, we will select deployed.

Reports and Dashboards in Salesforce
[ 330 ]
Finally, our screen will look like the following screenshot. Then, click on the 
Next button:
4.	 Now click on the Click to relate another object box, as shown in the 
following screenshot:
Object references can be used as the main four objects, as sources of fields via 
lookup, or as objects used to traverse relationships.
5.	 Select the Booth Registration object and then select checkbox. Each 
A record must have at least one object related to a B record, as shown 
in the following screenshot:

Chapter 8
[ 331 ]
6.	 Click on Save.
You can't provide schedule fields, person account fields, history 
fields, and the age field on cases and opportunities in custom report 
types. You can add up to 1,000 fields to each custom report type.
Different types of reports
Salesforce provides various types of reports that you can use. The different types of 
reports are explained in the following sections.
A tabular report
A tabular report is used to display rows of records in a tabular format with the 
grand total. Let's take an example where you have to display all the opportunities 
that are created in this month with the grand total. To create a tabular report, follow 
the ensuing steps:
1.	 Click on the Reports tab.

Reports and Dashboards in Salesforce
[ 332 ]
2.	 Now, click on the New Report button. It will redirect you to a page where 
you have to select report types. In our case, we will select the Opportunity 
report types, and click on Create, as shown in the following screenshot:
3.	 In the Date Field, select Created Date, and in Range, select This Month, 
and you will see the grand total. Finally, the report will look like the 
following screenshot:

Chapter 8
[ 333 ]
4.	 Click on the Save button.
The tabular report is the only report type that allows you to limit 
the number of rows displayed.
A summary report
A summary report is used to display the grouping of the rows of data. Let's take an 
example where you have to display Opportunity that is created in this month group 
stage. You can follow the instructions used in the tabular report. To change the report 
type, follow these steps:
1.	 Click on Tabular Format and select the Summary report, as shown in the 
following screenshot:

Reports and Dashboards in Salesforce
[ 334 ]
2.	 Drag-and-drop the Stage field to group the result, and it will look like the 
following screenshot:
3.	 Click on the Save button.
A matrix report
A matrix report is the most complex report format. A matrix report allows you to 
summarize data in a grid format. Matrix reports allow records to be grouped by 
both columns and rows.
A joined report
A joined report allows you to join two reports in the same place. A very simple use 
of a joined report is to show a comparison between sales in the current quarter and 
the last quarter.

Chapter 8
[ 335 ]
A few noteworthy points about reports
The following are some noteworthy points about reports:
•	
You can create a dashboard only from the matrix and summary reports.
•	
A maximum of 2,000 rows will be displayed in a report. To view all the 
rows, export the report to Excel, or use the printable view for tabular and 
summary reports. For joined reports, the export option is not available, 
and the printable view displays a maximum of 20,000 rows.
•	
In the report builder, up to 20 rows will be displayed for summary and 
matrix reports and up to 50 rows for will be displayed in the tabular report.
•	
You can use five formulas per report.
•	
You can use up to 20 field filters in a report.
•	
To set the maximum number of records to display in a tabular report, 
click on Add and select Row Limit in a report builder.
•	
By default, reports time out after 10 minutes. You can contact Salesforce.com 
support to extend the time-out limit to 20 minutes for tabular, summary, 
and matrix reports, but no extension is available for joined reports. It will 
continue to time out after 10 minutes.
•	
Reports will show only the first 254 characters in a rich-text area or a 
long-text area.
Dashboard components and their types
A dashboard is graphical representation of a report. Dashboards will show data from 
the source report as a graphical component, which can be charts, gauges, and so on. 
The components provide a snapshot of key metrics and performance meters for your 
organization. You can use this when the management is interested to know about the 
numbers and a comparison based on same fields. A user can see all the details in a 
dashboard whether he has access to it or not, but once he drills down to the report, 
he will get only those records to which he has access. Dashboard components can 
be charts, tables, gauges, metrics, or any other component that you can create with 
Visualforce. A description of each component is as follows:
•	
Chart: You can use a chart when you want to show data graphically. You can 
choose from a variety of chart types.

Reports and Dashboards in Salesforce
[ 336 ]
•	
Gauge: You can use a gauge when you have a single value that you want to 
show within a range of custom values. For example, to create a dashboard 
that measures where your current lead amounts fall within a range of values, 
set Minimum Value, Breakpoint #1 Value, Breakpoint #2 Value, and 
Maximum Value for the gauge. The ranges that you set can indicate poor, 
acceptable, and good performance. You can set appropriate colors for each 
of these ranges to visually indicate progress.
•	
Metric: You can use a metric when you have one key value to display. For 
example, if you have a report that shows the total amount for all leads based 
on origin Web, phone, and newspaper for the current month, you can name 
that value and use it as a potential revenue target for the month displayed on 
the dashboard.
•	
Table: You can use a table to show a set of report data in a column form, 
for example, to see the top 20 accounts based on revenue.
•	
Visualforce page: You can use a Visualforce page when you want to create 
a custom component or when your requirement is not fulfilled by the 
available component.
•	
Custom S-control: Use custom S-controls when you want to display any type 
of content in a browser, for example, a Java applet, an Active-X control, an 
Excel file, or a custom HTML web form.
Creating a dashboard
Only a system administrator or a user who has Run Reports and Manage 
Dashboards permissions can create a dashboard. We will create a dashboard 
from the summary report. To create a dashboard, follow these steps:
1.	 Click on the Dashboard tab.
2.	 Click on the Go To Dashboard List link available at the top-left corner 
of the page.
3.	 Click on the New Dashboard button to create a new dashboard.
4.	 Click on the Components tab and drag-and-drop the component on the 
dashboard builder. In our case, we will use the funnel chart as shown in 
the following screenshot:

Chapter 8
[ 337 ]
5.	 Click on the Data Sources tab and drag-and-drop the report into the 
component, as shown in the following screenshot:

Reports and Dashboards in Salesforce
[ 338 ]
6.	 You can set View Dashboard as a filter. There are two possible options 
provided by Salesforce:
°°
Run as specified user: By using this setting, all users will see the 
same data in the dashboard.
°°
Run as logged-in user: If you select this, then the user will see the 
data according to his or her access rights. Also, you can't schedule a 
dashboard once you select this option.
7.	 Optionally, you can edit the header and footer, and finally your dashboard 
will look like the following screenshot:
8.	 Click on Save.
Deleting a dashboard
If you no longer need a dashboard, you can delete it from the system. To delete a 
dashboard, follow these steps:
1.	 Click on the Dashboards tab.
2.	 Click on the Go To Dashboard List link available at the top-left corner 
of the page.
3.	 Choose the folder where you have stored the dashboard.

Chapter 8
[ 339 ]
4.	 Click on the Delete link next to the name of the dashboard, as shown in the 
following screenshot:
5.	 Once you delete the dashboard, it is moved to the recycle bin. Deleting a 
dashboard also deletes the components within it. However, it doesn't 
delete the custom reports used by the components.
A few noteworthy points about dashboards
The following are the noteworthy points about dashboards:
•	
A dashboard filter can have up to 50 options. By default, 10 options are 
enabled. If you want to enable more, contact the Salesforce.com support 
team to extend your limit.
•	
Each dashboard can have up to 20 components.
•	
A dashboard table or chart can display up to 20 photos.
•	
You must wait at least one minute between dashboard refreshes.
Exporting a report
Salesforce provides a way to export reports in an Excel or CSV format. Let's take 
an example where your manager wants to get all records from a report in an 
Excel format to share it with the higher management. To export a report, follow 
these steps:
1.	 Click on the Reports tab.

Reports and Dashboards in Salesforce
[ 340 ]
2.	 Navigate to the report folder, and click on the Export link next to the name of 
the report, as shown in the following screenshot:
3.	 It will redirect you to a screen where you have to select Export File 
Encoding. In our case, we will leave it as default. Using Export File Format, 
you can select Excel or CSV. In our case, we will select Excel Format.xls as 
shown in the following screenshot:
4.	 Click on Export. The file will be downloaded on your system:

Chapter 8
[ 341 ]
5.	 Click on Done as shown:
When exporting reports in the CSV format, the locale settings on your user detail 
page determine the field separator (delimiter) included in the exported file. For 
example, if your locale setting is English (United States), the decimal separator is 
a period ("."). If your locale setting is French (France), the decimal separator is a 
comma (","). You can override the default separator for your locale by choosing 
the Comma Delimited (non-locale) .csv option from the Export File Format 
drop-down list.
You can export up to 256 columns and 65,536 rows of data in one report. 
You can also get the export report option when you run a report.
Exporting reports in the background
When you are exporting large amount of data such as 40,000 records, it will take 
time and sometimes may time out such that your export will fail. You can use export 
reports in the background so that you can continue working in Salesforce without 
waiting for the report results to display. Contact Salesforce.com to activate this 
feature for your organization.
Exporting reports in a printable view
The printable view of a report retains the format and summary information of a 
report. This includes the Custom Summary Formula fields. The Export Details to 
Excel option will produce only the detail rows. With only the detail rows available, 
the exported file is raw data that can be easily modified. To export a report in a 
printable format, follow these steps:
1.	 Click on the Reports tab.
2.	 Navigate to the report folder and click on the Report Name link to open 
the report.

Reports and Dashboards in Salesforce
[ 342 ]
3.	 Click on Printable View, as shown in the following screenshot:
4.	 Save the file and open it in any browser, and you will see what is shown in the 
following screenshot:

Chapter 8
[ 343 ]
The printable view displays a maximum of 20,000 rows. To view all the rows, use 
the printable view for tabular and summary reports, or you can export these in 
Excel. For joined reports, export is not available, and the printable view displays 
a maximum of 20,000 rows.
Sharing reports and dashboards
Sometimes, it is necessary to share reports with your team members. Let's take an 
example where the system administrator created one report and wants to share 
it with the sales director. You can share reports with your colleagues using the 
following methods:
•	
Folder sharing
•	
Schedule reports
•	
Schedule dashboards
Folder sharing
If you want to share reports with Salesforce users, then you can use the folder share 
method. Reports are shared by sharing the folder of the reports in which they are 
located. Sharing can be done among following:
•	
Public groups
•	
Roles
•	
Role and internal subordinates
•	
Users
•	
Roles, internal, and portal subordinates
Whenever you create any report folder, Salesforce automatically makes you the 
manager of this folder and other users with administrative permissions can see it. 
You can decide which public groups, roles, and roles and its subordinates can access 
this reports folder.

Reports and Dashboards in Salesforce
[ 344 ]
Enabling enhanced sharing for reports and 
dashboards
If you want to share the report folder with users, then you have to enable folder 
sharing for your organization. To do that, follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Build | Customize | Reports and Dashboards | 
Folder Sharing.
2.	 Select the Enable access levels for sharing report and dashboard folders 
checkbox as shown in the following screenshot:
3.	 Click on Save.
Creating new reports and dashboard folders
To create a new report and dashboard folder, follow these steps. In this example, 
we will create New Report Folder:
1.	 Click on the Reports tab.
2.	 Click on the folder icon and then select the New Report Folder option, 
as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 8
[ 345 ]
3.	 Enter data in Report Folder Label and Folder Unique Name, as shown in the 
following screenshot:
4.	 Click on Save.
Likewise, you can create a folder for dashboards.
Sharing reports and a dashboard folder
In this example, we will share a report folder that we created in the previous section 
with the user Sara Bareilles. To share a report folder with users, follow these steps:
1.	 Click on the Reports tab.
2.	 Click on the Share option on the folder, as shown in the following screenshot:
3.	 Select Users.

Reports and Dashboards in Salesforce
[ 346 ]
4.	 Find the user you want. In our case, it's Sara Bareilles. Click on the Share 
button, and choose an access level.
5.	 Click on Done, review your changes, and click on Close.
Likewise, you can share the dashboards folder with users.
Scheduling a report
Sometimes people at the higher management don't want to log in to Salesforce 
to view the report. In that case, you can schedule the report for future run and 
distribute it among users. In this example, we will use the user Sara Bareilles to 
send a schedule report. To schedule a report for future run, follow these steps:
1.	 Click on the Reports tab.
2.	 Click on the existing report name.
3.	 Click on the Run Report dropdown, and select the Schedule Future Runs 
option, as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 8
[ 347 ]
4.	 It will redirect you to schedule a report page where you have to enter a few 
details. Specify the running user who has access to the folder where the 
report is saved. The access level of the running user determines what other 
users, including portal users, see when they receive the scheduled report run 
results. In our case, we will select the admin user (that is, Rakesh Gupta).
5.	 Select the Email Report settings. In our case, we will select To me and/or 
others and select Sara Bareilles.
6.	 Set the frequency, duration, and time for running the report, as follows:
°°
In the Frequency field, you can select Daily, Weekly, or Monthly, 
and then refine the frequency criteria. In our case, we will 
select Daily.
°°
Using the Start and End date fields, specify the dates during which 
you want to schedule the report. To enter the current date, click on 
the link that shows the date. Set it as per your choice.
°°
Next, to set Preferred Start Time, click on Find available options to 
choose a start time. Your preferred start time might not be available 
if other users have already selected that time to schedule a report. 
Set Preferred Start Time to 12:00 AM.

Reports and Dashboards in Salesforce
[ 348 ]
7.	 For the Save Changes field, select the Discard report modifications option. 
Finally, our schedule report page will look like the following screenshot:
8.	 Click on the Save Report Schedule button.
Scheduling a dashboard
You can also schedule a dashboard refresh to distribute it to users. The future of 
schedule dashboards is only available in Enterprise, Unlimited, and Performance 
Editions. To schedule a dashboard with a user, follow these steps:
1.	 Click on the Dashboard tab.

Chapter 8
[ 349 ]
2.	 Select an existing dashboard using the View Dashboard field.
3.	 Click on Refresh and then select the Schedule Refresh option as shown in 
the following screenshot:
4.	 Follow the instructions from steps 4 to 8 from the schedule report.
A few noteworthy points on the report and 
dashboard schedule
The following are some noteworthy points about the report and dashboard schedule:
•	
If the running user becomes inactive, the report is not run. The system 
administrator will get an e-mail notification to either activate the user or 
delete the report scheduled, or change the running user to an active one in 
the scheduled report.
•	
The limit for scheduled reports per organization is one or two based 
on editions.
•	
An organization is limited to 200 scheduled reports and dashboards. 
Daily limits differ by edition. You can purchase additional schedule 
reports or dashboards.
•	
A joined report can't be scheduled for future runs.

Reports and Dashboards in Salesforce
[ 350 ]
•	
Scheduled reports run in the time zone of the user who set up the report 
schedule. Let's take an example. If the Time Zone field on your user record is 
set to Indian Standard Time, and you schedule a report to run every day at 
3:00 PM, then the report runs every day between 3:00 PM and 3:29 PM as per 
Indian Standard Time.
•	
The maximum size for e-mailed reports is 10 MB.
•	
For Enterprise Edition, you are only permitted one dashboard refresh per 
user, per hour, and for Unlimited Edition this limit is two. If you want to 
increase this slot, you have to purchase additional refresh slots. To do that, 
contact the Salesforce.com support team.
Hiding unused report types
If you have plenty of unused report types and you want to hide them so that the user 
can't see these report types while creating a report, follow these steps:
1.	 Click on the Reports tab.
2.	 Click on the New Report button.
3.	 Select the Select Report Types to Hide checkbox and now go to the folder 
of the reports type.
4.	 Click on the report type to hide. The green check in front of the report 
type denotes that it is visible. Once you click on it, it will turn into an 
X symbol, which means that it is no longer visible. It will look like the 
following screenshot:

Chapter 8
[ 351 ]
The next time user creates a new report, these report types you have hidden will no 
longer be visible to them.
Exporting reports without footers
Whenever you export any report from Salesforce, it always has a few lines of footer 
with some information, as shown in the following screenshot:
If you do not want such footers in exported reports, you can perform the following 
steps to stop this footer:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Build | Customize | Reports and Dashboards.
2.	 Go to the user interface section and select the Export Reports without 
Footers checkbox, as shown in the following screenshot:
3.	 Click on Save.

Reports and Dashboards in Salesforce
[ 352 ]
Floating headers in summary and matrix 
reports
When you are viewing a summary or matrix report in Salesforce and there is a lot 
of data, a situation comes when the headers of the table are about to disappear. 
Salesforce provides floating table headers in matrix and summary reports. It 
doesn't matter how much you scroll down, the header will remain with the data.
Enabling floating report headers
To enable this feature for your organization, follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Build | Customize | Reports and Dashboards.
2.	 Go to the user interface section and select the Enable Floating Report 
Headers checkbox, as shown in the following screenshot:
3.	 Click on Save.
Using the floating header in reports
Normally, when the data fits onto your screen, the headers are at their normal 
position, as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 8
[ 353 ]
However, when you scroll down, the headers will float with the data just under the 
address bar of your browser so that you may not miss or misread any information. 
If you wish to hide these floating headers, you can click on the [
] icon, which is 
located just below the floating headers bar.
Analytical snapshot
Analytical snapshot in Salesforce helps you to build trend reports, which are based 
on historical data. You can use tabular or summary reports as the source report in an 
analytical snapshot. The column from the report is mapped to the fields in an object.
Let's take an example, where the CEO of Appiuss Inc. has asked the system 
administrator to build a monthly, historical trend report based on the Opportunity 
this month report  he created for tabular reports to compare the opportunity statuses 
of the current month and last month. To do this, follow these steps:
1.	 Build a summary or tabular report. We have already built a report under the 
summary report topic.
2.	 Consider the fields you need to track to build a trend report (in our case, 
we will track Opportunity Name, Stage, and Probability%).
3.	 Create a custom object named Opportunity track.

Reports and Dashboards in Salesforce
[ 354 ]
4.	 Create three fields in the Opportunity track custom object with the 
Account Opportunity Name, Stage, and Probability% names and 
text as the data type.
5.	 Navigate to Setup | Administer | Data Management | Analytic Snapshots.
6.	 Click on the New Analytic Snapshot button, as shown in the 
following screenshot:
7.	 It will redirect you to the New Analytic Snapshot page where you have to 
enter a few details as follows:
°°
Analytic Snapshot Name: Enter a meaningful name for the 
analytic snapshot.
°°
Analytic Snapshot Unique Name: Enter a unique name.
°°
Description: Enter a full description about an analytical snapshot so 
that other users can easily understand why this snapshot is created.
°°
Running User: Choose a user in the Running User field by clicking 
on the lookup icon. The user in the Running User field determines 
the source report's level of access to data. This bypasses all security 
settings, giving all users who can view the results of the source 
report in the target object, access to data they might not be able to 
see otherwise.
°°
Source Report: Select a source report from the drop-down menu. 
In our case, we will select the Opportunity this month report.

Chapter 8
[ 355 ]
°°
Target Object: Select a custom object from the Target Object 
drop-down list. In our case, we will select the custom object 
Opportunity track.
In our case, it will look like the following screenshot:
8.	 Click on the Save & Edit Field Mappings button, as shown in the 
preceding screenshot.

Reports and Dashboards in Salesforce
[ 356 ]
9.	 On the next screen, provide the mapping of the fields between the report 
header and the custom object fields. You can map the fields according to 
the following screenshot:
10.	 Click on Save.
11.	 On the next screen, navigate to the Schedule Analytic Snapshot list, and 
click on Edit. This will allow you to schedule the run of the snapshot so 
that historical data can be captured as records in the custom object you 
created earlier.
12.	 Select the Email Analytical Snapshot settings. In our case, we will select 
To me and/or others and then select the system administrator user 
Role: VP Sales.
13.	 Set the frequency, duration, and time for running the report, as follows:
°°
In the Frequency field, you can select Daily, Weekly, or Monthly, 
and then refine the frequency criteria. In our case, we will select 
Monthly and the last day of every month.
°°
Using the Start and End date fields, specify the dates during which 
you want to schedule the report. To enter the current date, click on 
the link that shows the date. Set it as per your choice.

Chapter 8
[ 357 ]
°°
Next, to set Preferred Start Time, click on Find available options to 
choose a start time. Your preferred start time might not be available 
if other users have already selected that time to schedule a report. 
Set Preferred Start Time to 12:00 AM.
Our Schedule Analytic Snapshot screen will look like the 
following screenshot:
14.	 Click on Save.
Now, on the last day of every month at 12 a.m., the analytical snapshot will start 
capturing the data from the source report and records will created in your target 
object. Upon the completion of this process, an e-mail will be sent to you with 
details of records that were captured in the analytical snapshot.

Reports and Dashboards in Salesforce
[ 358 ]
A few noteworthy points about analytical 
snapshots
The following are some noteworthy points about analytical snapshots:
•	
The maximum number of rows you can insert into a custom object is 2,000
•	
The maximum number of runs you can store is 200
•	
The maximum number of source report columns you can map to target 
fields is 100
•	
You can only schedule one analytic snapshot to start on any given day on 
Professional Edition
•	
An analytic snapshot will fail during a scheduled run if the source report 
includes more than 100 fields
•	
An analytic snapshot will fail during a scheduled run if the target object is 
included in a workflow
Summary
In this chapter, we went through report types and ways to create custom report 
types. At the beginning of the chapter, we discussed reports and types of reports 
that exist in Salesforce. Then, we moved ahead and discussed dashboards and their 
components followed by various concepts related to export reports. We also went 
through the various methods of sharing reports and dashboards with users. Then, 
we covered unused report types and exporting report without footers. We also 
discussed floating header in reports. Finally, we discussed mass analytical snapshots.
In the next chapter, we will discuss various concepts related to Salesforce and how 
you can be more collaborative in your workplace when you use it.

Chatter Configuration
In the previous chapter, we discussed the various report types and ways to create 
custom report types. We also explored reports and types of reports that exist in 
Salesforce along with dashboards and their components, followed by various concepts 
related to export reports, share reports, and dashboards. In this chapter, we will 
discuss various concepts related to Salesforce Chatter. We will also talk about various 
new features related to Chatter. The following topics will be covered in this chapter:
•	
A basic overview of Salesforce Chatter
•	
Enabling Chatter invites
•	
Topics for objects
•	
Branding e-mail notifications
•	
Chatter group
•	
The Chatter announcement feature
•	
Posting e-mail to Chatter groups
•	
Chatter e-mail settings
•	
Enabling feed tracking
•	
Posting a dashboard snapshot to Chatter
•	
Various features of Chatter

Chatter Configuration
[ 360 ]
Basic overview of Salesforce Chatter
Chatter is a collaborative product by Salesforce. It helps you to collaborate with 
users within an organization. Chatter allows users to be updated with the 
information that is important to them. Users get status updates from other 
user's profiles and real-time feed updates. Salesforce Chatter is just like Twitter 
or Facebook where you can share the progress of your work with your colleagues, 
get updates from the data that matters to you, or create groups to share some 
information with a specific set of users or groups.
Enabling Salesforce Chatter
Salesforce Chatter is available in the group, Professional, Enterprise, Performance, 
Unlimited, contact manager, developer, and Database.com editions (Chatter e-mail 
notifications, Chatter invitations, and customer invitations are not available in this 
edition). To enable Salesforce Chatter in your organization, follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Customize | Chatter | Settings.
2.	 Click on the Edit button.
3.	 Select the Enable checkbox as shown in the following screenshot:
4.	 Click on Save.
Chatter has been pre-enabled for all organizations since 
June 2010.

Chapter 9
[ 361 ]
Enabling Chatter invites
By using Chatter invites, users in your organization can invite their clients to private 
groups of which they are either the manager or owner. To enable Chatter invites, 
follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Name | Setup | Customize | Chatter | Chatter Settings.
2.	 Click on the Edit button.
3.	 Navigate to the Coworker Invitations section and select the checkbox, Allow 
Coworker Invitations. You can also add Company Email Domains so they 
can only send invitation to the user whose e-mail ends with these domains, 
as shown in the following screenshot:
4.	 Click on Save.
Topics for objects
Having topics for objects will help us organize the records to make the search easier 
in Salesforce. It will also help an organization to have better search management. 
In addition to this, Salesforce allows you to create custom report types on various 
topics for objects. For example, here we will enable topics for an Account object. 
To enable topics for this object, follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Customize | Topics | Topics for Objects.

Chatter Configuration
[ 362 ]
2.	 Hover your mouse on the Account object and select the Enable topics for 
Accounts checkbox. There are two ways to get a suggestion for a topic. 
One way is by using suggestions from the default fields, that is, by selecting 
the Use topic suggestions from default fields checkbox. The other way is 
by selecting fields, that is, by unchecking the Use topic suggestions from 
default fields checkbox and selecting a field from a list:
3.	 Click on Save.
Creating topics
For example, now we want to create a topic for the accounts. For better management 
of account records, we will use the topic, High Priority. To do this, follow 
these steps:
1.	 Click on the account record that you want to assign as a high-priority topic.
2.	 On the records detail page, click on the Click to add topics link, as shown in 
the following screenshot:

Chapter 9
[ 363 ]
3.	 Type the name High Priority:
4.	 Click on Done.
In order to make use of the created topic, we can make a separate list view where we 
can filter only these records where the topic is set as High Priority, as shown in the 
following screenshot:
The list view created will now show the records as per the topic filter.

Chatter Configuration
[ 364 ]
In one record, you can have a maximum of 100 topics.
Branding e-mail notifications
Chatter sends you an e-mail when someone follows you and posts on your profile or 
groups. You can also receive daily or weekly digests with posts and comments from 
your personal feed and groups. In all these types of e-mails, you can see Salesforce's 
logo and address.
You can change the sender's name and e-mail address, footer address, and logo. 
To personalize this e-mail according to your needs, follow these steps:
1.	 First, we will upload our company's logo on the Document tab. To do this, 
click on the Documents tab.
2.	 Select Shared Documents as the folder and click on the New 
Document button.
3.	 Name the file Appiuss logo and select an image from your workstation that 
must not be more than 150 x 150 pixels in size. Make sure it is marked as 
Externally Available Image, as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 9
[ 365 ]
4.	 Click on Save.
5.	 Now we will configure the e-mail setting to brand notifications. To do this, 
navigate to Setup | Customize | Chatter | Email Settings.
6.	 Under the Sender section for From Name, enter Appiuss and the e-mail 
address as Admin@appiuss.com. Select the logo that you just uploaded in 
documents, and in the footer text, enter Please don't print this email 
that must show on the e-mail under the Branding section. It will look like the 
following screenshot:
7.	 Click on Save.
8.	 Salesforce will send an e-mail alert to the e-mail address mentioned in the 
Email address field with a link to verify the ownership of the e-mail address. 
Click on the link to verify the e-mail address.
9.	 In future, you will receive the Chatter e-mail notification that will look like 
the following screenshot:

Chatter Configuration
[ 366 ]
Chatter groups
Chatter groups are places where you can collaborate with your project team 
members or customers. There are two types of Chatter groups:
•	
Public: Anyone can join this type of group, post, add files, or see comments 
and add posts.
•	
Private: To join a private group, you need permission from the group owner 
or managers. Only members can see posts, add comments, and add files.
Creating Chatter groups
To create a new Chatter group, follow these steps:
1.	 Go to the Chatter tab and click on Group or directly go to the Group tab.
2.	 Click on the New Group button.
3.	 Enter Group Name and Description (the group name must be unique).
4.	 You can also select the Automatic Archiving option for your group. 
There are two options:
°°
Archive this group if there are no posts or comments for 90 days
°°
Don't automatically archive this group
5.	 Select the type of access (Public or Private).

Chapter 9
[ 367 ]
6.	 Click on the Save button.
A user can have a maximum of 10,000 Chatter groups.
Joining a group
To join a Chatter group, navigate to the Groups tab and click on the All Groups link 
under the left-hand side bar. If you are not a member of a specific public group, then 
you will be able to see the [
] icon. You can directly join a public group; however, 
for a private group, you will first need to join, and Salesforce will send an e-mail alert 
to group owners or managers. They can approve or reject your membership request 
based on their rules.
A user can join a maximum of 100 groups, but a group 
can have unlimited members.
Archiving a Chatter group
Groups in Salesforce that don't have any new feed post or comment for more than 
90 days in a row are archived automatically. To enable or disable this feature for 
your organization, follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Customize | Chatter | Settings | Edit.
2.	 Go to the Groups section. To disable archiving, deselect the Allow Group 
Archiving checkbox. To allow the archiving option, select this checkbox as 
shown in the following screenshot:
3.	 Click on Save.
Archived groups count toward your organization's group 
limits (that is 10,000), but not toward a user's group 
membership limits (that is 100).

Chatter Configuration
[ 368 ]
The Chatter announcement feature
By using the Chatter announcement feature, you can share your words within 
groups with mass audiences of your organization. It will show as sticky notes on 
the left-hand side of your Chatter group. To enable Chatter announcement for your 
organization, follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Customize | Chatter | Chatter Groups | Groups 
Layout and click on the Edit link.
2.	 From the upper-floating palette on the right-hand side pane, select Actions 
and drag-and-drop the Announcement action to the group layout under the 
Publisher Action section, as shown in the following screenshot:
3.	 Click on Save, and now to go to the Groups tab.
4.	 Select the group in which you want to make any announcement. For 
example, we want to make an announcement in the Dreamforce 14 group.
5.	 Now, click on the publisher action, Announcement. If it is hidden, click on 
the More option, as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 9
[ 369 ]
6.	 Now in the text bar, enter your announcement and enter its expiry date in the 
Expires on field. Once you're done, click on the Share button. It will look like 
the following screenshot:
7.	 The announcement will appear on the Chatter group on the left-hand side 
panel, as shown in the following screenshot:

Chatter Configuration
[ 370 ]
8.	 Group announcements are displayed until 11:59 p.m. on the selected 
expiration date, unless they're replaced by a new group announcement.
Posting e-mail to Chatter groups
You can allow group users to send e-mails to Salesforce, and this message can be 
posted to a particular group. In order to do this, you first need to enable Post by 
Email in the Chatter settings menu. To enable the Post by Email feature, follow 
these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Customize | Chatter | Email Settings.
2.	 Under General Settings, select the Post by email checkbox and also 
Allow Posts via Email to allow the user to reply from their local e-mail 
client whenever they get any notification related to a group activity, 
as shown in the following screenshot:
3.	 Click on Save.
4.	 Now, navigate to Chatter | Groups | Dreamforce 14.
5.	 From the group detail page of your group under the e-mail section, 
6.	 click on Post by email, as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 9
[ 371 ]
7.	 Now, this will open up your default e-mail client. You can save the unique 
e-mail address to post to Chatter without logging in to Salesforce.
Chatter e-mail settings
By enabling the receiving e-mail feature, Salesforce will deliver an e-mail to your 
inbox every time someone follows you or posts on your profile or groups. You can 
also receive daily or weekly user and group e-mail digests. Personal digests include 
updates that you see in your own Chatter feed, such as updates about people, posts 
linked to your profile, a personal mention in a post or comment, a comment or item 
that you liked, records, files you followed, and information about your groups. 
Group digests include the updates you see in a particular group's Chatter feed and 
are configurable on a group-by-group basis. To configure the Chatter e-mail setting, 
follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Name | My Settings | Chatter | Email Notifications.

Chatter Configuration
[ 372 ]
2.	 Go to the General section and select the Receive emails checkbox to receive 
e-mail notifications:
3.	 Select the type of Chatter e-mail you want to receive as per your choice.
4.	 Click on Save.
Enabling feed tracking
Enabling feed tracking provides real-time field updates from objects. If some 
change has taken place, it will be reflected on your Chatter feed, especially if you 
are following that record. Only the system administrator can enable feed tracking 
for standard and custom objects of an organization. To enable the feed-track option, 
follow the path Name | Setup | Customize | Chatter | Feed Tracking. We will 
enable feed tracking for the Contact object by selecting the Enable Feed Tacking 
checkbox, as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 9
[ 373 ]
You can also display the activity of a feed for related objects. To do this, select the All 
Related Objects option at the bottom of the page:
Once feed tracking is enabled, you can select a maximum of 20 fields 
to track. Feed updates that are older than 45 days and have no likes or 
comments are removed from the feed automatically.
Posting a dashboard snapshot to Chatter
In the previous chapter, we discussed a few ways of sharing dashboards with users. 
Here, we will discuss another way to share dashboards with users. Let's take an 
example where you want to share a dashboard with Chatter Free Users or a Chatter 
group. In this case, you can't grant folder access or use a scheduled dashboard for 
a future run with Chatter Free Users. However, using a dashboard snapshot of the 
Chatter feature, you can share a static snapshot of the dashboard with Chatter Free 
Users. To post a dashboard snapshot to Chatter, follow these steps:
1.	 First of all, we have to enable the Chatter feed-tracking option for a 
dashboard. To do this, navigate to Name | Setup | App Setup | 
Customize | Chatter | Feed Tracking.
2.	 Click on the Dashboard object, select the Enable Feed Tracking checkbox to 
enable it, and select all the four fields, as shown in the following screenshot:
3.	 Click on Save.
4.	 Now, we have to enable Dashboard Component Snapshots. To do 
this, navigate to Name | Setup | App Setup | Customize | Reports & 
Dashboards | User Interface.

Chatter Configuration
[ 374 ]
5.	 Select the Enable Dashboard Component Snapshots checkbox; a security 
warning will pop up. Click on Yes, Enable Component Snapshots as shown 
in the following screenshot:
6.	 Click on Save.
7.	 Now, navigate to the Dashboard tab and select the dashboard that you want 
to share. Hover over a component to display the [
] icon. To clear the hover 
menu, click on an empty part of the screen. Click on Post Snapshot to User 
or Group Feed as shown in the following screenshot:
8.	 A window will pop up where you can add a user or Chatter group, 
and you can also write a comment in the comment box, as shown in 
the following screenshot:

Chapter 9
[ 375 ]
9.	 Click on the OK button; it will post the dashboard's snapshot to Chatter.
Dashboard snapshots will be displayed in feeds for four 
months. After four months, only the comments will remain.
Various features of Chatter
Salesforce Chatter allows you to let people have an insight of you. Additionally, 
you can share links or files, you can start new polls, and people can vote.

Chatter Configuration
[ 376 ]
Status update
Salesforce Chatter allows you to share with others what you are doing or what you 
are thinking about. As soon as you post a status, it will be shared with your followers 
and colleagues. You will also be able to tag people or Chatter groups in your post. 
To tag people or groups, just use the @mention function, and Salesforce will give you 
all the reverent users or groups with the exact or similar name in your organization. 
In the following example, Rakesh Gupta is using @Sagar. Once you are done with 
typing, click on the Share button, as shown in the following screenshot:
You can share posts with your followers or within a group.
Posting a comment
In the preceding example, your followers are allowed to post a comment, like your 
post, and share or bookmark it. If you want to tag people or Chatter groups in your 
comment, use @mention. In the following example, the user Sagar Pareek has tagged 
the user Rakesh Gupta and the Chatter group Dreamforce 14:

Chapter 9
[ 377 ]
Optionally, you can attach a file while commenting on a post.
You can have a maximum of 5,000 characters in a single post or 
comment, and you can include a maximum of 25 mentions in a 
single post or comment.
Adding a link
Now, you can share (link) content that you found useful with your followers. 
It shows your followers that you are someone worth following because of the 
useful information you would share:
If you want to share a link, click on Link and enter Link URL, Link Name, 
add a short description, and click on the Share button, as shown in the 
preceding screenshot.

Chatter Configuration
[ 378 ]
Chatter poll
A user's response will always play a key role in making a good decision. Chatter 
poll is a quick and easier way to ask for feedback from a user on certain topics, such 
as the most needed topics to conduct sales training via a poll instead of e-mailing 
everybody and then summarizing it. You can create a poll in your feed as follows:
If you want to create a poll, click on Poll and enter the poll question, choices, 
and click on the Share button, as shown in the preceding screenshot.
You can have a maximum of 10 choices in a poll. You can also share a poll 
with your followers or groups that you are a member of or you own.
The Chatter publisher action
The publisher action allows you to create actions and add them to the Chatter 
publisher on the home page. Now, you can turn a simple action into a global action 
with the help of Salesforce Chatter. This means that you can create a record or log a 
call on the fly. To do this, first of all, you have to enable the Salesforce publisher action.
Enabling a publisher action
Only the system administrator or users with customized application permission can 
enable this feature for an organization. To do this, follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Name | Setup | Customize | Chatter | Settings.
2.	 Click on Edit.

Chapter 9
[ 379 ]
3.	 Select the Enable Publisher Actions checkbox.
4.	 Click on Save.
A publisher action only works with objects for which feed tracking is enabled. 
Publisher actions/global actions are of two types:
•	
Object-specific actions (that is, create a record)
•	
Global actions
Creating object-specific actions
Object-specific actions let users create records that are automatically associated 
with a related record. Here, we will create an Event Registration action on the 
Event object. To do this, follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Name | Setup | App Setup | Customize | Event | Buttons, 
Links, and Actions.
2.	 Click on the New Action button.
3.	 Select Action Type (create a record or custom action).
4.	 For Create a record, select the type of object to create if there is more than 
one record type for that object; then, select the record type for this action. 
In our case, we'll select Event Registration.
5.	 Type in a label for the action. Users will see this text for the action in the 
Publisher menu.
6.	 Enter the name; this name will be used in an API call or managed packages.
7.	 Type in a description for the action.
8.	 Optionally, you can change the icon.
9.	 Click on Save.

Chatter Configuration
[ 380 ]
Now you can create an event registration record from the event record details' page.
If you delete an action, it is automatically removed from all the 
layouts it's assigned to.
Creating global actions
A user can perform this action in any object, but there's no automatic relationship 
between the record that's created and any other record. You can add a global action 
to any object. To create a global action, follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Name | Setup | App Setup | Customize | Create | 
Global Actions.
2.	 Click on the New Action button.
3.	 Select Action Type (create a record or custom action).
4.	 For Create a record, select the type of object to create if there is more than 
one record type for that object; then, select the record type for this action.
5.	 For the Custom action, select the Visualforce page and specify the height 
of the action window.
6.	 Type in a label for the action. Users will see this text for the action in the 
Publisher menu.
7.	 Enter the name. This name will be used in an API call or managed packages.
8.	 Type in a description for the action.
9.	 Optionally, you can change the icon.
10.	 Click on Save.
Adding a global action to the page layout
To add an action to the page layout, follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Name | Setup | App Setup | Customize | Object | 
Page Layouts.
2.	 Select Action from the left-hand side of the screen.

Chapter 9
[ 381 ]
3.	 Drag-and-drop the action to the page layout.
4.	 Click on Save.
Follow/unfollow users and records
Chatter allows you to follow users and records. So any update that happens 
with records or the people that you are following will directly appear on your 
Chatter feed.
Follow/unfollow users
To follow users in your organization, navigate to the People tab and you will find a 
list of the users from your organization. To follow a user, click on the [
] icon, 
as shown in the following screenshot:
Once you follow a user, you can see the [
] icon. If you see this icon on the 
profile page of any user, it means you are following that user. To unfollow a user, 
click on the [ ] icon.

Chatter Configuration
[ 382 ]
Follow/unfollow records
Once field tracking is enabled for a particular object, you can follow records of 
that object. To follow the records, go to any object's record for which your system 
administrator has already enabled feed tracking. Once you are on the details page of 
the record, you can easily identify the [
] icon at the top-right corner of the page. 
Click on the Follow icon to follow the record:
Once you follow a record, you will see the [
] icon. If you see this icon on 
the details page of any record, it means you are following those records. To unfollow 
a record, click on the [
] icon.
You can follow a maximum of 500 people, topics, and records. 
To raise these limits, raise a case with Salesforce.com support.
Managing files
A user can use the Files tab to upload, search, follow, share, and view files on cloud. 
Any file that you own or that has been shared with you is available to share on 
Chatter feeds. You can upload a file (maximum size of 2 GB) from your workstation. 
When you follow any file, upload a file, someone shares a file with you, or you 
or someone else uploads a file with CRM content library, it will automatically be 
added to the files list. You can share a file with users and groups with viewer and 
collaborator permission:
•	
Viewer: A viewer can view, download, and share a file
•	
Collaborator: A collaborator can view, download, share, edit, 
change permissions, and upload a newer version of the file

Chapter 9
[ 383 ]
Uploading a file
To upload a file, navigate to the Files tab and click on the [
] icon. Select a 
file from your workstation and click on the Open button.
Deleting a file
To delete a file, navigate to the Files tab, search for the file that you want to delete, 
and go to the details page by clicking on the name of file. On the details page, click 
on the Delete link, as shown in the following screenshot:
Following a file
When you follow a file, you can see updates in your Chatter feed and Chatter page, 
including when a new version of the file is uploaded. To follow a file, navigate to the 
Files tab and enter the filename in the search box. Once you get the appropriate file, 
click on the filename to move to the detail page and then click on the [
] icon. 
Once you start following any file, you will notice the [
] icon on the detail 
page. To unfollow a file, click on the [
] icon.
Summary
In this chapter, we went through various aspects of Salesforce Chatter. At the 
beginning of the chapter, we provided you with an overview of Chatter and ways 
to enable it for your organization. Then, we went ahead and discussed topics for 
Chatter and branding Chatter e-mail notification. We also went through Chatter 
group concepts and ways to post a dashboard snapshot to Chatter. Finally, we 
looked at various Chatter features such as posting a status, creating a poll, and 
following and unfollowing records or users with file management concepts.
In the next chapter, we will discuss mobile administration, how to install Salesforce1 
and SalesforceA, and their respective configurations.


Mobile Administration
In the previous chapter, we discussed the various features of Salesforce Chatter 
and how to enable Salesforce Chatter for your organization and Chatter group 
management. We also discussed ways to brand a Chatter e-mail notification with 
Chatter announcement. In this chapter, we will discuss the various Salesforce mobile 
applications and ways to configure these apps for your internal users. The following 
topics will be covered in this chapter:
•	
Overview of SalesforceA
•	
Overview of Salesforce#
•	
Overview of Salesforce1
Overview of SalesforceA
SalesforceA is a mobile-based application for administrators. It allows Salesforce 
administrators to do their work on the fly, while working away from the office 
or remotely. This application allows the Salesforce administrator to reset user 
password, freeze user accounts, deactivate user accounts, and so on.
Features of the SalesforceA mobile application
The SalesforceA mobile application comes with various features. The following is a 
list of actions that the Salesforce administrator can perform through the SalesforceA 
mobile app:
•	
Freeze a user's account
•	
Unlock or deactivate a user's account
•	
Edit a user's details
•	
Reset password 
•	
Assign and unassign permission sets

Mobile Administration
[ 386 ]
Installing the SalesforceA mobile application
You can download the SalesforceA mobile application from iTunes and Google Play. 
It is supported by the following devices:
•	
Android phone or tablet with OS v4.2 or higher
•	
Apple iPhone and iPod Touch with iOS v5.0 or higher
It can be downloaded for different platforms from the following links:
•	
iTunes: https://itunes.apple.com/in/app/salesforcea/
id731117958?mt=8
•	
Play Store: https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.
salesforce.admin1&hl=en
Logging in to the SalesforceA mobile 
application
The following are the steps to use to log in to the SalesforceA mobile application:
1.	 Click on the SalesforceA mobile app icon on your mobile/iPad.
2.	 Enter your login credentials and activation code.
3.	 Then, allow the SalesforceA application to access your Salesforce 
basic information.
4.	 The first time you log in, it will ask you to set the passcode; from the 
next time onwards, you will have to enter this passcode to access the 
SalesforceA application.
5.	 This will redirect you to the application's home page. It will look like the 
following screenshot:

Chapter 10
[ 387 ]
6.	 Now start administrating your Salesforce organization from anywhere.
7.	 Use the search bar to find users from your organization, and then go to the 
user detail page and perform an action as per your needs.
You can also use the Salesforce1 app on your browser. Just append one/
admin.app to your Salesforce URL (https://instance name.
Salesforce.com/one/admin.app).

Mobile Administration
[ 388 ]
Overview of Salesforce#
Salesforce# allows you to generate time-based tokens. It provides additional 
security for the Salesforce administrator to log in with the two-factor authentication. 
In Chapter 3, Make Your Salesforce Data Secure – Security Settings in Salesforce, we 
discussed two-factor authentication in Salesforce. There, we used Google apps to 
generate a time-based token, but now you can also use the Salesforce# application 
to generate a time-based token.
Installing the Salesforce# mobile application
You can download the Salesforce# mobile application from iTunes and Google Play. 
It is supported by the following devices:
•	
Android phone or tablet with OS v4.0 or higher
•	
Apple iPhone and iPod Touch with iOS v7.0 or higher
It can be downloaded for different platforms from the following links:
•	
iTunes: https://itunes.apple.com/us/app/salesforce/
id782057975?ls=1&mt=8
•	
Play Store: https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.
salesforce.authenticator
Overview of Salesforce1
Salesforce1 is a mobile-based application used to create, update, and delete records 
from anywhere. You can also view reports and dashboards using it. This is the 
updated version of the legacy application Salesforce Chatter. Users can also use 
Salesforce Chatter through this application.
Features of the Salesforce1 mobile application
The Salesforce1 mobile application comes with various features. The following are a 
few actions that a user can perform through the Salesforce1 mobile app:
•	
Create, update, and delete records
•	
Access publisher actions
•	
Submit records for approval
•	
Access the custom list view
•	
Access Salesforce Chatter

Chapter 10
[ 389 ]
•	
Access all your custom objects and apps through the navigation menu
•	
Users can also access Visualforce pages and components in the navigation 
menu and in records
•	
Access Salesforce files from the Salesforce1 app
•	
Access events from the navigation menu
Installing the Salesforce1 mobile application
You can download the Salesforce1 mobile application from iTunes and Google Play. 
It is supported by the following devices:
•	
Android phone or tablet with OS v4.2 or higher
•	
Apple iPhone and iPod Touch with iOS v6.0 or higher
It can be downloaded for different platforms from the following links:
•	
iTunes: https://itunes.apple.com/in/app/salesforce1/
id404249815?mt=8
•	
Play Store: https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.
salesforce.chatter&hl=en
Configuring the Salesforce1mobile 
application
Perform the following steps to grant access to the SalesforceA mobile application:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Administer | Manage Users | Users.
2.	 Edit user records and select the Salesforce1 User checkbox, as shown in the 
following screenshot:
3.	 Click on Save.

Mobile Administration
[ 390 ]
Mobile Browser App Settings
Mobile Browser App Settings allows users to access the Salesforce1 application 
through a supported mobile browser. To do this, follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Administer | Mobile Administration | 
Salesforce1 | Settings.
2.	 Go to the Mobile Browser App Settings section and select the Enable 
the Salesforce1 mobile browser app checkbox, as shown in the 
following screenshot:
3.	 Click on Save.
4.	 Now, a user can access Salesforce1 through a supported mobile browser 
by appending one/one.app to the URL (https://instance name.
Salesforce.com/one/one.app).
Logging in to the Salesforce1 mobile 
application
The following are the steps to use to log in to the Salesforce1 mobile application:
1.	 Click on the Salesforce1 mobile app icon on your mobile/iPad.
2.	 Enter your login credentials and activation code.
3.	 Then, allow the Salesforce1 application to access your basic 
Salesforce information.

Chapter 10
[ 391 ]
4.	 It will redirect you to the application home page. It will look like the 
following screenshot:
5.	 Now start creating, updating, and deleting records or collaborating with 
your user.

Mobile Administration
[ 392 ]
Branding the Salesforce1 application
Now you can brand the Salesforce1 mobile application that matches your company's 
branding. You can change the Salesforce1 app's loading page, background color, 
loading page logo, header background color, and image used for the publisher icon. 
To do this, follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Administer | Mobile Administration | 
Salesforce1 | Branding.
2.	 Go to the Salesforce1 Branding Settings section.
3.	 To customize Brand Color for key user interface elements, including the 
header, click on Select a color.
4.	 To customize Background Color of the loading page, click on Select a color.
5.	 To customize Loading Page Logo, select an image of type .jpg, .gif, or .png 
files up to 200 KB in size. The maximum image size is 460 pixels by 560 pixels.
6.	 To customize the Salesforce1 Publisher icon image, select an image of type 
.jpg, .gif, or .png files up to 50 KB in size. The maximum image size is 88 
pixels by 88 pixels. It will look like the following screenshot:
7.	 Click on Save.

Chapter 10
[ 393 ]
Summary
In this chapter, we went through various Salesforce applications for mobiles, such as 
Salesforce1, SalesforceA, and Salesforce#. We also went through ways to configure 
these apps with download links. We discussed ways to brand the Salesforce1 app 
according to your company branding. In the next chapter, we will discuss the 
various ways to deploy changes in the live system.


Setting Up Deployment 
Processes
In the previous chapter, we discussed mobile administration in Salesforce, 
Salesforce1, Salesforce Classic, Salesforce Touch, and Salesforce A. In this chapter, 
we will discuss the various ways to deploy elements and changes in a live Salesforce 
instance. We will go through the following topics:
•	
Change Sets
•	
Force.com IDE
•	
Overview of packages
Understanding Change Sets and 
their types
Change Sets are containers that are used to send customizations or elements 
from one organization to another in Salesforce. These containers can only hold 
metadata, which means you can only send those changes or customizations that 
you made through the setup menu. You cannot send records from one organization 
to another using Change Sets. Both the organizations must have a deployment 
connection between them, for example, production and Sandbox created for the 
same organization.
Change Sets are of the following two types:
•	
Outbound Change Sets
•	
Inbound Change Sets

Setting Up Deployment Processes
[ 396 ]
Outbound Change Sets
Outbound Change Sets are those Change Sets that are used to send customizations 
from one organization to another. For example, we have added a new custom field 
on an account object in Sandbox named Unique Code, and now we want to send it to 
the production organization. In this case, we can use the Outbound Change Sets to 
send this customization from Sandbox to production.
To create an Outbound Change Set, follow these steps:
1.	 Log in to your Sandbox by visiting https://test.salesforce.com.
2.	 Navigate to Setup | Deploy | Outbound Change Sets.
3.	 Click on Continue.
4.	 On the next screen, click on New to make a new Change Set.
5.	 On the next screen, name this Change Set Account Unique Code Field 
Addition and give a relevant description to this Change Set, as shown in 
the following screenshot:

Chapter 11
[ 397 ]
6.	 Click on Save.
7.	 On the next screen, select the component type you want to add to this 
Change Set. In our case, we need to add the account field Unique Code, 
so we need to select Custom Field.
8.	 Now on the same screen from the available fields, select the checkbox in front 
of the custom field Unique Code.
9.	 Click on Add to Change Set.

Setting Up Deployment Processes
[ 398 ]
10.	 On the next screen, click on the Upload button.
11.	 Select the target organization under the Upload Details section where you 
want to upload this Change Set; in our case, select Production.
12.	 Click on Upload.
13.	 Once you click on Upload, you will see the following message on the screen:
14.	 Once the upload process is complete, you will see the following message:

Chapter 11
[ 399 ]
Inbound Change Sets
Inbound Change Sets are the Change Sets that are used to receive customizations 
from one organization into another. For example, we have added a new custom field 
on the account object in Sandbox named Unique Code, and now we want to receive 
it from the production organization. In this case, we can use Inbound Change Sets to 
receive this customization from Sandbox into production.
To receive an Inbound Change Set, follow these steps:
1.	 Log in to your production organization by visiting 
https://login.salesforce.com/.
2.	 Navigate to Setup | Deploy | Inbound Change Sets.
3.	 On the next screen, click on Continue.
4.	 On the next screen under the Change Sets Awaiting Deployment 
section, you will find the Inbound Change Set that came from the 
Sandbox organization.
5.	 Click on the name of the Change Set, in our case, Account Unique 
Code Field.
6.	 Once on the next screen, click on Deploy.

Setting Up Deployment Processes
[ 400 ]
7.	 Click on OK in the pop-up message, which tells you that the changes once 
deployed are not reversible.
8.	 You will see the following message while the upload is in progress:
9.	 Once the upload is complete, you will see the success or failure on the next 
screen under Deployment History.
10.	 If the status of the Change Set is Success, it means the Change Set has been 
successfully deployed.

Chapter 11
[ 401 ]
The Force.com IDE
The Force.com IDE is a development tool provided by Salesforce.com, which is used 
to write Apex Classes, Apex Triggers, and Visualforce pages. You can download and 
edit the metadata components and explore the schema of your Force.com project.
Installing the Force.com IDE
Before installing the Force.com IDE, you need the following aspects to be available 
and installed on your machine:
•	
Java SE Runtime Environment (v1.6 or higher)
•	
Eclipse IDE for Java Developers (Juno 4.2 or Kepler 4.3)
To install the Force.com IDE, follow these steps:
1.	 Open Eclipse for Java Developers.
2.	 Click on the Install New Software option in the Help tab, as shown in the 
following screenshot:

Setting Up Deployment Processes
[ 402 ]
3.	 On the next window, click on the New button. In the dialog box, enter 
Force.com IDE Name in the Name field, specify Location as http://media.
developerforce.com/force-ide/eclipse42, and click on OK.

Chapter 11
[ 403 ]
4.	 Select the checkbox in front of Force.com IDE.
5.	 Click on Next.
6.	 On the Install Details dialog box, click on Next.
7.	 In the Review Licenses dialog, accept the terms and click on Finish.
8.	 Once the installation is complete, you will be asked to restart Eclipse. 
Click on Yes.
9.	 When Eclipse restarts, navigate to Window | Open Perspective |Other.
10.	 Select Force.com and click on OK.
Additional information on how to use the Force.com IDE is available at 
https://developer.salesforce.com/page/An_Introduction_
to_Force_IDE.

Setting Up Deployment Processes
[ 404 ]
Overview of packages
Packages are containers that can contain elements such as a single component or a 
group of apps. Packages are used for distribution purposes among organizations.
Packages are of the following two types:
•	
Unmanaged packages
•	
Managed packages
These differences are explored in the following table:
Unmanaged packages
Managed packages
The source code is open to developers/users.
The source code is a closed source.
Components can be edited in the 
organization after installation.
Components cannot be edited in the 
organization after installation.
The base organizations have no controller 
over the package once distributed since the 
code can be altered in the target organization.
The code can only be altered in the 
base organization where the package 
components were created or developed.
These are generally used for module 
distribution among developers.
These are generally used by Salesforce.
com partners to distribute packages as 
apps to their clients primarily through the 
marketplace AppExchange.
Summary
In this chapter, we learned about setting the deployment process through various 
means, such as Change Sets, Force.com IDE, and Packages. In the next chapter, 
we will discuss installing and uninstalling an app bought from AppExchange, 
and how AppExchange can enhance the usability of your Salesforce organization.

AppExchange – Extending 
Salesforce Functionality
In the previous chapter, we discussed various ways to deploy a Salesforce.com 
project. We discussed how to use Change Sets, Force.com IDE, and packages. 
In this chapter, we will discuss Salesforce's own marketplace for apps known as 
AppExchange. We will also discuss installing and uninstalling an app bought from 
AppExchange, and how AppExchange can enhance the usability of your Salesforce 
organization. The following topics will be covered in this chapter:
•	
An overview of AppExchange
•	
Installing an application from AppExchange
•	
A few noteworthy applications
•	
Uninstalling an application from Salesforce
AppExchange – an overview
AppExchange is a marketplace owned by Salesforce.com, where web apps built 
on the Force.com platform are hosted to be sold. AppExchange is regarded as one 
of the biggest marketplaces for cloud computing apps. Users can purchase apps 
from this marketplace and they are directly installed in the user's organization. 
AppExchange was launched in 2005 by Salesforce.com and has more than 2,300 apps 
on it. Saleforce.com offers both paid and free apps by the AppExchange marketplace, 
which are categorized into various categories for both small and big businesses.

AppExchange – Extending Salesforce Functionality
[ 406 ]
Installing applications from 
AppExchange
To begin understanding how to install an app from AppExchange, let's consider an 
example. Suppose the sales team of your organization has plenty of vCards (it may 
be on their mobile devices) and they want to import them into Salesforce somehow. 
A possible solution is that they can manually enter the details of each contact into 
Salesforce as contact records. They may also need functionalities to import and 
export accounts, leads, and contacts as vCards so that they can share the information 
with others in the team or sync with their mobile devices. Salesforce doesn't have any 
box feature for this so you need to have a custom development or download some 
apps from AppExchange and install them. It will be better if you get a free app. 
To install an app from AppExchange, follow these steps:
1.	 Log in to your Salesforce account using your credentials.
2.	 Click on the dropdown in the top-right corner and then click on the 
AppExchange link, as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 12
[ 407 ]
3.	 When you click on AppExchange, a new window will open in the browser. 
It will look like this:
4.	 In the search bar at the top, enter the keyword vcard. Make sure that the 
Apps radio button is selected.

AppExchange – Extending Salesforce Functionality
[ 408 ]
This will show related apps, with the most popular apps first.
5.	 From the list of apps, we can see the Astrea Smart vCard app first. To install 
this app, click on Astrea Smart vCard. It will redirect you to the details page 
of the app.

Chapter 12
[ 409 ]
6.	 Click on the Get It Now button, as shown in the following screenshot:
7.	 On the next screen, you will be asked to log in. Click on Log in to the 
AppExchange. If you don't have a Salesforce account, click on I don't 
have a login button, as shown in the following screenshot:

AppExchange – Extending Salesforce Functionality
[ 410 ]
8.	 On the next screen, you will be asked to select the type of organization that 
you want to install the app for. Here, we will select Install in production 
since we are using Developer Edition, but it's good practice to install the app 
first in your Sandbox by selecting the Install in sandbox button, as shown in 
the following screenshot:
9.	 On the next screen, you will be asked to agree with the terms and conditions, 
and this screen will give you brief information about the app you are going 
to install. Select the checkbox I have read and agree to the terms and 
conditions and click on the Confirm and Install! button, as shown in the 
following screenshot:

Chapter 12
[ 411 ]
10.	 Next, you will be asked to log in to the organization where you want to 
install this app. Enter your login credentials.
11.	 Then, you will get details about the app and its components that are 
going to be installed. Click on the Continue button, as shown in the 
following screenshot:

AppExchange – Extending Salesforce Functionality
[ 412 ]
12.	 Now, the installation wizard will start. On the first screen, you will be asked 
to approve the package API access. Click on Next.
13.	 On the next screen, you will be asked to choose the security level. 
Choose Grant access to admins only and then click on Next, 
as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 12
[ 413 ]
14.	 Next, click on the Install button to start the installation process, as shown in 
the following screenshot:
15.	 Once the installation is successfully completed, you will see following screen. 
You will also get an e-mail notification from AppExchange.

AppExchange – Extending Salesforce Functionality
[ 414 ]
16.	 Now you can access the features of the app. In our case, we can see the 
Import vCard tab in our organization and the Generate vCard button 
on the accounts, contacts, and leads detail pages.
A few noteworthy applications
These are a few noteworthy apps based upon the number of downloads and 
popularity with users. They are as follows:
•	
Form Assembly for AppExchange: This helps you create powerful web 
forms to collect and send data to any Salesforce custom and standard objects. 
Capture new leads, update contacts, attach files, or open cases with our easy 
Form Builder.
•	
Drag, Drop, and Upload: This lets you drag, drop, and upload files and also 
lets you do so for multiple files at once for a big time saver.
•	
Former Positions: This cleans up your cluttered contacts by automatically 
tracking changes to a contact's account and title.
•	
Layout Page: This converts any Salesforce page layout (standard or custom) 
into a Standard Visualforce page in just three simple and easy steps.
•	
GoToMeeting Integration: This saves time by letting users start and 
schedule their GoToMeetings from inside Salesforce.
•	
Dupe Catcher: This enables Salesforce users to identify, block, and dupe 
leads, accounts, and contacts in real time at the point of entry.
•	
Jitterbit Cloud Data Loader for Salesforce: This is a free data migration that 
enables Salesforce users to automate the import/export of data between flat 
files, databases, and Salesforce or Force.com.
•	
Astrea Smart vCard: This lets you import and export record forms of VCF 
files (vCards).

Chapter 12
[ 415 ]
Uninstalling applications from Salesforce
In case you want to uninstall the app that you installed from AppExchange, 
follow these steps:
1.	 Navigate to Setup | Build | Installed Packages.
2.	 On the next screen, you will see the application packages installed in 
your organization.
3.	 Click on the Uninstall button in front of the application name, as shown in 
the preceding screenshot.
4.	 On the next screen, you will get information about the components that are 
going to be uninstalled.
5.	 Select the Do not save a copy of this package's data after uninstall 
radio button.
6.	 Then, select Yes, I want to uninstall this package and permanently delete 
all associated components and click on the Uninstall button, as shown in the 
following screenshot:

AppExchange – Extending Salesforce Functionality
[ 416 ]
7.	 On successfully uninstalling your app, you'll be redirected back to the Install 
Packages screen. The Uninstalled Packages section will show the uninstalled 
packages history.
Summary
In this chapter, we went through the concepts behind Salesforce AppExchange. 
At the start of the chapter, we discussed the AppExchange overview. Then, we 
moved on and discussed how to install an app from AppExchange in detail. 
We also explained the ways to uninstall an app from your organization. 
Next, we discussed a few key apps from AppExchange. 
In this book, we have gone through various Salseforce.com concepts such as Sales 
Cloud and Service Cloud automating your business process using the workflow and 
approval process, and improving your organization data quality using validation 
rules. We also discussed how to use the data loader.

Index
A
Access to Send Email setting
about  134
All email option  135
No access option  134
System email only option  134
account fields
Account name  184
Annual revenue  184
Billing Address  184
Employees  184
Industry  184
Shipping address  184
Type  184
Website  184
account management
about  183
account, creating  186
Business account (B2B)  183
Person account (B2C)  183
standard fields, account object  184, 185
actions, with workflow
about  255-258
immediate workflow action  246
time-dependent workflow action  246
Administrative and User Permissions 
report  123
Align, Work.com  21
analytical snapshot
about  353, 354
key points  358
using  353-357
AND function  229
Apex Sharing Rule  94
AppExchange
about  405
applications  414
applications, installing from  406-413
applications, uninstalling from 
Salesforce  415
overview  405
applications, AppExchange
Astrea Smart vCard  414
Drag, Drop, and Upload  414
Dupe Catcher  414
Form Assembly  414
Former Positions  414
GoToMeeting Integration  414
Jitterbit Cloud Data Loader 
for Salesforce  414
Layout Page  414
approval process
about  262
activating  278
approval steps  270-274
creating  263-267
final approval action  268
final rejection action  268
initial submission action  269, 270
limitations  278, 279
process diagram, viewing  277
recall action  269
settings  279-281
approval steps
about  270-274
action, adding  274-276
architecture, Salesforce.com  9
assignment rules
about  176

[ 418 ]
defining  176
entries, defining  176-178
Astrea Smart vCard app  414
authentication providers
about  109
configuring, for single sign-on  110
configuring, in Salesforce.com  110, 111
auto-response rules
about  174
creating  174
entries, defining  175
B
BEGINS function  229
big deal alert
about  190
creating  190
Booth Registration object
about  205
fields, adding  217
bounce e-mail administration
about  135
setting up  135
Business account (B2B)  183
business hours
about  49
associating, with holidays  52, 53
effects  50
setting up  50, 51
business process, streamlining
app, creating  207-209
custom object, creating  201-204
field types  211
object page layout, editing  218-220
record types, setting up  220-222
standard tabs and labels, renaming  210
tab, creating  205-207
business-to-business (B2B)account. 
See Business account (B2B)
C
campaign standard fields
Active  157
Actual Cost  158
Budget Cost  158
Campaign Name  158
Converted Leads  159
Description  158
End Date  158
Expected Response (%)  158
Expected Revenue  158
Num Sent  158
Num Total Opportunity  160
Num Won Opportunity  160
Start Date  158
Status  159
Total Responses  159
Total Value Opportunity  160
Total Value Won Opportunity  160
Type  159
campaign management
about  156
campaign access, setting up  157
campaign, creating  162
campaign members, adding  164, 165
campaign members, adding from lead or 
contact detail pages  165, 166
campaign members, adding from lead or 
contact list view  165
campaign setup, creating  156
standard fields, campaign member's 
object  160
standard fields, campaign object  157
values, adding in member status  163
campaign members fields
Campaign  160
Contact  160
Lead  160
Status  161
case management
about  196
case, creating manually  196
Email-to-Case setting  196
Web-to-Case  199
Change Sets
about  395
Inbound Change Sets  399
Outbound Change Sets  396
types  395
chart, dashboard components  335
Chatter
about  16, 18, 360
comment, posting  376, 377

[ 419 ]
dashboard snapshot, posting  373, 374
editions  18
e-mail notifications, branding  364, 365
enabling  360
features  375
feed tracking, enabling  372
file, deleting  383
file, following  383
files, managing  382
file, uploading  383
invites, enabling  361
link, adding  377
overview  360
records, following  382
records, unfollowing  382
status update  376
topics, creating  362, 363
topics, enabling for objects  361
URL  17
users, following  381
users, unfollowing  381
Chatter announcement
about  368
enabling  368, 369
Chatter e-mail settings
configuring  371, 372
Chatter group
about  366
archiving  367
creating  366
joining  367
Post by Email, enabling  370, 371
private  366
public  366
Chatter Plus
about  18
reference link, for license type  18
Chatter poll
about  378
creating  378
Chatter publisher action
about  378
enabling  378
global action, adding to page layout  380
global actions, creating  380
object-specific actions, creating  379, 380
client-server architecture, Salesforce CRM
about  6
advantages  7
cloud computing  8
disadvantages  7
cloud computing
about  8
advantages  8
collaborator  382
company information setup
about  36
additional features  40
company information, updating  36, 37
corporate currency  39
licenses, viewing  40
locale settings  38
multiple currencies, enabling  43-45
newsletter and login notification settings  39
single currency, enabling  44
company logo
uploading, in document folder  236
Compliance BCC Email
about  139
configuring  139, 140
Computer Telephony Integration (CTI)  14
contact management
about  186
contact, creating  187
Contact Manager Edition, Sales Cloud  12
CONTAINS function  229
corporate currency
changing  46
COUNT function  232
Cross-site Request Forgery (CSRF)  105
CSV file
creating  292
custom fiscal year
about  48
defining  48, 49
setting up  48
Customize Application permission  43
custom objects
creating  201-204
truncate, enabling  305
truncate, performing  305, 306
truncating  304

[ 420 ]
Custom Object tabs  205
custom profile
creating  63-66
custom report types
about  328
creating  328-331
custom S-control, 
dashboard components  336
D
dashboard
about  335
creating  336-338
deleting  338, 339
key points  339
scheduling  348, 349
dashboard components
about  335
chart  335
custom S-control  336
gauge  336
metric  336
table  336
Visualforce page  336
dashboard snapshot
posting, to Chatter  373, 374
data
deleting  311
exporting, data loader used  301-303
importing, through Data Import 
Wizard  296-298
importing, through Import Wizard  292-295
Data.com
about  18
editions  19
Data.com Clean
about  19
URL  19
Data.com Prospector  20
Data Export Service
about  312
using  312, 313
Data Import Wizard
about  296
bulk data load jobs, monitoring  298, 299
records, importing  296-298
URL  299
data loader
about  299
configuring  300, 301
installing  300
used, for exporting data  301-303
URL  300
versus, Import Wizard  304
data management
about  289
tools  291
data management operations
about  290
delete  291
export  291
insert  290
update  290
upsert  291
data quality
improving  225, 226
data storage  314
data type fields
autonumber  211
checkbox  211
currency  211
date  211
date/time  211
e-mail  211
formula  211
geolocation  212
lookup relationship  211
master-detail relationship  211
number  212
percent  212
phone  212
picklist  212
picklist (multi-select)  212
rollup summary  211
text  212
text area  212
text area (long)  212
text area (rich)  212
text (encrypted)  212
URL  212
DATE function  229
delegated administration
about  115

[ 421 ]
assignable profiles  115
custom object administration  115
setting up  115-118
user administration  115
delete operation  291
deliverability settings, 
e-mail administration
Access to Send Email setting  134
bounce e-mail administration, 
setting up  135
configuring  134
Email Security Compliance, enabling  136
mass e-mails  136
deployment processes
about  395
Change Sets  395
Force.com IDE  401
packages  404
Desk.com
about  22
editions  23
reference link, for pricing  23
Developer Pro Sandbox  307
Developer Sandbox  307
document folder
company logo, uploading in  236
Drag, Drop, and Upload app  414
Dupe Catcher app  414
E
editions, Chatter
Chatter  18
Chatter Plus  18
editions, Data.com
Data.com Clean  19
Data.com Prospector  20
editions, Desk.com
Plus Plan  23
Starter Plan  23
editions, Sales Cloud
Contact Manager Edition  12
Enterprise Edition  13
Group Edition  12
Performance Edition  13
Professional Edition  12
editions, Salesforce1
Multi-App Bundles  26
One Enterprise App  26
editions, Service Cloud
Enterprise Edition  15
Performance Edition  16
Professional Edition  15
editions, Work.com
Align  21
Motivate  21
Perform  22
e-mail administration
attachments sent as links, deleting  144, 145
Compliance BCC Email, 
configuring  139, 140
Compliance BCC Email, enabling  139
deliverability  134
e-mail footers  145
e-mail footers, defining  146, 147
Email to Salesforce, enabling  141
Organization-Wide Email Addresses, 
configuring  137-139
test deliverability  140
ways  133
e-mail alert
creating  252, 253
e-mail footers
about  145
defining  146, 147
Email Security Compliance
enabling  136
e-mail template
about  240
creating  240-244
features  240
file, attaching with  244
folder, creating for  245
folder management  244
e-mail template folder
creating  245
deleting  246
e-mail template, types
about  240
custom HTML  240
HTML with letterhead  240
text  240
Visualforce  240

[ 422 ]
Email-to-Case
about  196
enabling  197
routing addresses, setting up  198, 199
Email to Salesforce
configuring  142-144
enabling  141, 142
URL, setting up  142
end user languages
about  56
enabling  57
Enterprise Edition, Sales Cloud  13
Enterprise Edition, Service Cloud  15
Event Management app
developing  201
Event object
fields, adding  215
Event Registration object
about  205
fields, adding  216
ExactTarget Marketing Cloud
about  23
editions  24
Export Now service  312
export operation  291
F
feature license type  40
feed tracking, Chatter
enabling  372
field-history-tracking option
enabling  222, 223
Field-Level Security
about  94
field accessibility, using  96-98
setting, from object-field  94, 95
setting, from profile  96
fields
adding, to Booth Registration object  217
adding, to Event object  215
adding, to Event Registration object  216
adding, to objects  212, 213
adding, to Sponsor object  216
field update
creating  249, 250
files
attaching, with e-mail template  244
deleting  383
following  383
managing  382
uploading  383
file storage  314, 315
final approval action  268
final rejection action  268
fiscal year (financial year)
about  47
custom fiscal year  48
standard fiscal year  47
floating report headers
about  352
enabling  352
in matrix reports  352
in summary  352
using  352, 353
FLOOR function  232
folder
creating, for e-mail template  245
folder sharing
about  343
enabling, for reports and dashboards  344
report and dashboard folder, 
creating  344, 345
report and dashboard folder, 
sharing  345, 346
Force.com IDE
about  401
installing  401-403
requisites  401
URL  403
Form Assembly app  414
Former Positions app  414
formula fields
about  230
example  230-232
Full Copy Sandbox  307
fully supported languages  56
functions, validation rule
AND  229
BEGINS  229
CONTAINS  229
DATE  229

[ 423 ]
ISBLANK  229
ISCHANGED  229
ISNEW  229
ISPICKVAL  229
LEFT  229
LEN  229
LOWER  229
OR  229
PRIORVALUE  229
RIGHT  229
TEXT  229
TODAY  229
UPPER  229
VALUE  229
VLOOKUP  229
G
gauge, dashboard components  336
Google Apps  147
Google Apps settings
configuring  147
domain settings, configuring  148
Google Apps Account, creating  148
Google Apps Services, activating  149
Google Docs, adding to Salesforce  149, 150
reference link  150
Google's Authenticator app
URL  102
GoToMeeting Integration app  414
Group Edition, Sales Cloud  12
groups
about  77
personal group, creating  78
public group, creating  77
types  77
usage  79
H
hierarchal relationship  154
holidays
associating, with business hours  52-54
holiday settings
about  51
setting up  51
HTML documents and attachments settings
about  121
HTML upload, prohibiting  121
I
immediate workflow action  246
Import Wizard
about  291
CSV file, creating  292
records, importing  292-295
versus, data loader  304
Inbound Change Sets
about  399
receiving  399, 400
initial submission actions  269, 270
insert operation  290
ISBLANK function  229
ISCHANGED function  229
ISNEW function  229
ISPICKVAL function  229
J
Jitterbit Cloud Data Loader for 
Salesforce app  414
joined report  334
Jump Start Wizard  262
K
key points, reports  335
L
language settings
about  55
organization default language settings  56
personal settings, changing  55
Layout Page app  414
lead  166
lead standard fields
Company Name  167
Last Name   167
Lead Owner  166
Lead Status  167
Source  167

[ 424 ]
lead management
about  166
assignment rule entries, defining  176-178
assignment rules, defining  176
auto-response rule entries, defining  175
auto-response rules, creating  174
lead business process  169
leads, converting  181-183
lead scoring  180
leads, creating  170
leads, creating through user interface  171
leads, creating through Web-to-lead  172
lead settings, editing  170
map lead fields, using  180, 181
records, accepting from lead queue  179, 180
standard fields, lead object  166
Web-to-Lead HTML code, 
generating  173, 174
Web-to-Lead settings, disabling  172
Web-to-Lead settings, enabling  172
LEFT function  229
LEN function  229
letterhead
about  235
creating  237-239
license information
remaining licenses  41
status  41
total licenses  41
used licenses  41
licenses
URL  43
licenses, company information setup
feature license type  40
permission set license type  40
user license type  40
viewing  40
login history
benefits  76
login notification settings
Hide Notices About System Downtime 
option  39
Hide Notices About System Maintenance 
option  39
lookup relationship
about  152
versus master-detail relationship  153
LOWER function  229
M
managed packages  404
Manual Sharing Rule  92-94
many-to-many relationship  153
mass delete records
about  319, 320
URL  320
mass e-mails  136
mass reassign accounts and 
opportunity teams
about  321-323
URL  323
mass transfer approval request  316, 317
mass transfer record
about  317, 318
URL  319
master-detail relationship
about  152
versus, lookup relationship  153
matrix report  334
MAX function  232
methods, for sharing reports
about  343
dashboards, scheduling  348, 349
folder sharing  343
report, scheduling  346, 347
metric, dashboard components  336
MIN function  232
Mobile Browser App Settings, Salesforce1 
mobile application  390
Motivate, Work.com  21
Multi-App Bundles, Salesforce1  26
multi-currency
about  43
effects  46
multiple currencies
about  43
currency, adding  45
enabling  44, 45

[ 425 ]
My Domain
about  127
deploying  129, 130
examples  127
settings, changing  130, 131
setting up  128, 129
N
network access
about  105
activated IP, removing  106, 107
login access policies, setting up  107, 108
restricting  105, 106
single sign-on settings  108
O
Object Access and Field-Level Security 
report  124
objects
fields, adding  212, 213
page layout, editing  218-220
relationships, adding  214
One Enterprise App, Salesforce1  26
opportunity standard fields
Account Name  187
Amount  187
Close Date  187
Opportunity name  188
Probability (%)  188
Stage  187
opportunity management
about  187
big deal alert, creating  190
opportunity, creating  189
standard fields  187
order standard fields
Account Name  192
Billing Address  192
Contract Number  192
Order Start Date  192
Shipping Address  192
Status  192
order management
about  191
order, activating  195
order, creating  194
order, enabling  191
standard fields  192
OR function  229
organization default language settings
about  56
end user language, enabling  57
end user languages  56
fully supported languages  56
platform-only languages  57
platform-only languages, enabling  58
Organization-Wide Default. See  OWD
Organization-Wide Email Addresses
about  137
configuring  137-139
Outbound Change Sets
about  396
creating  396
editing  396-398
uploading  398
outbound messages
creating  254
OWD
about  60, 87, 88
concepts  88
settings, for standard objects  90
setting up  88
Sharing Rule  90, 91
Sharing Rule, types  92
OWD access
controlled by parent  89
private  89
public full access  89
public read only  89
public read/write  89
public read/write/transfer  89
P
packages
about  404
managed packages  404
types  404
unmanaged packages  404
Partial Data Sandbox  307
password policies
setting up  98, 99

[ 426 ]
passwords
expiring  114
Performance Edition, Sales Cloud  13
Performance Edition, Service Cloud  16
Perform, Work.com  22
permission set license type  40
permission sets
about  67
cloning  70, 71
creating  68, 69
deleting  70
settings  68
Person account (B2C)  183
personal group
creating  78
personal setup
about  81
approver settings, configuring  85, 86
connections, checking  84, 85
language and time zone settings, 
changing  83
login access, granting  83, 84
password, changing  81, 82
personal information, editing  81
security token, resetting  82
platform-only languages
about  57
enabling  58
Plus Plan, Desk.com  23
Portal Health Check  122
Portal Health Check Reports
about  123
Administrative and User Permissions 
report  123
Object Access and Field-Level Security 
report  124
Sharing Organization Wide Defaults 
report  125
Sharing Rules report  125
Post by Email, Chatter
enabling  370, 371
PRIORVALUE function  229
private group, Chatter  366
process diagram
viewing, of approval process  277
Professional Edition, Sales Cloud  12
Professional Edition, Service Cloud  15
profiles
about  62
custom profiles  63
significance  59
standard profiles  63
types  63
public group
creating  77, 78
public group, Chatter  366
publisher action. See  Chatter 
publisher action
Q
queues
about  79
creating  79-81
significance  79
R
recall action  269
Record ID
15-digit case-sensitive form  290
18-digit case-insensitive form  290
about  290
creating  290
obtaining from  290
record types
setting up  220-222
relationships
about  152
adding, to objects  214
hierarchal relationship  154
lookup relationship  152
many-to-many relationship  153
master-detail relationship  152
self-relationship  154
types  152
remote site settings
about  119
website, registering  119, 120
report
exporting  339-341
exporting, in background  341
exporting, in printable view  341-343
exporting, without footers  351
scheduling  346-348

[ 427 ]
report and dashboard schedule
key points  349, 350
report types  328
Return of Investment (ROI)  16
RIGHT function  229
role hierarchy
CEO  60
creating, for organization  60-62
Marketing Agents  60
Sales Reps  60
significance  59
VP Marketing  59
VP Sales  59
Roll-up Summary field
about  232-234
COUNT function  232
MAX function  232
MIN function  232
SUM function  232
S
Sales Cloud
about  11, 154, 155
benefits  155
editions  12
overview  154
sales cycle  155
Salesforce
company information setup  36
Data.com  18
data, deleting  311
Desk.com  22
ExactTarget Marketing Cloud  23
mass delete records  319, 320
mass reassign accounts and opportunity 
teams  321-323
mass transfer approval request  316, 317
mass transfer record  317, 318
products  10
Record ID  290
relationships  152
report  327
Sales Cloud  11
Salesforce1  25
Salesforce Chatter  16
Service Cloud  14
storage  313
two-factor authentication  99
URL, for formula list  230
Work.com  20
Salesforce#
about  388
overview  388
Salesforce1
about  25, 388
editions  25, 26
overview  388
reference link, for license types  26
URL  26
Salesforce1 mobile application
branding  392
configuring  389
downloading, from iTunes  386, 389
downloading, from Play Store  386, 389
features  388, 389
installing  389
logging in  390, 391
Mobile Browser App Settings  390
SalesforceA
about  385
overview  385
SalesforceA mobile app
installing  386
logging in  386, 387
Salesforce Chatter. See  Chatter
Salesforce.com. See  also Salesforce
about  9, 26, 27
architecture  9
business processes, streamlining  28
collaboration, improving in organization  29
key points, for standardized sales 
performance processes  28
key problems  27, 28
license types  13
logging into  31
Salesforce CRM
about  9
client-server architecture  6
overview  6
Salesforce developer account
about  32
benefits  33
creating  30, 31

[ 428 ]
limitations  34
reference link, for commercial purposes  34
URL  30
Salesforce Enterprise Edition (EE)  36
Salesforce login page
customizing  131-133
Salesforce# mobile application
downloading, from iTunes  388
downloading, from Play Store  388
installing  388
sales' life cycle
about  155
account management  183
campaign management  156
contact management  186
lead management  166
opportunity management  187
order management  191
Sandbox
about  307
creating  309, 310
Developer Pro Sandbox  307
Developer Sandbox  307
Full Copy Sandbox  307
Partial Data Sandbox  307
refreshing  310, 311
types  307
Sandbox templates
defining  308
Schedule Export service  312
self-relationship  154
Service Cloud
about  14, 195
case management  196
editions  15
license types  16
overview  195
URL  15
session setting
about  102
configuring  102-105
settings, permission sets
Apex class and Visualforce page access  68
App permissions  68
Assigned apps  68
Object settings  68
Service providers  68
System permissions  68
settings, profiles
Administrative and General User 
Permissions  67
Connected App Access  67
Console Settings  66
Custom App Settings  67
Desktop Integration Clients  67
Enabled Apex Class and Visualforce Pages 
Access  67
Field-Level Security  67
Login Hours  67
Login IP Ranges  67
Page Layout  66
Record Type Settings  67
Standard and Custom Object 
Permissions  67
Tab Settings  67
settings, Stay-in-Touch
Automatic Bcc  283
default Stay-in-Touch Note  283
default Stay-in-Touch Signature  283
default Stay-in-Touch Subject  283
reminder for New Contacts  283
Setup Audit Trail
about  112
accessing  112
administration  113
application, using  113
customization  113
data management  113
development  113
key concepts  113
security and sharing  113
various setups  113
Sharing Organization Wide 
Defaults report  125
Sharing Rule
about  90
Apex Sharing  94
example  91
Manual Sharing  92
types  92
using  90, 91

[ 429 ]
Sharing Rules report  125
single currency
enabling  44
small and medium enterprise (SME)  12
Software as a Service (SaaS)  9
Sponsor object
about  205
fields, adding  216
standard fiscal year
about  47
setting up  47
standard objects, OWD
settings  90
standard profiles
about  63
Chatter External User  64
Chatter Free User  64
Chatter Moderator User  64
Chatter Only User  64
Contract Manager  64
Customer Portal Manager  64
Customer Portal User  64
High Volume Customer Portal and 
Authenticated Website  65
Marketing User  64
Partner User  63
Read Only  65
Site.com Only User  65
Solution Manager  65
Standard Platform One App User  63
Standard Platform User  63
Standard User  63
System administrator  63
types  63
Standard Wizard  263
Starter Plan, Desk.com  23
Stay-in-Touch
about  282
request update, sending to contact  284-287
settings  283
storage
about  313
data storage  314
file storage  314
SUM function  232
summary report
creating  333, 334
T
table, dashboard components  336
tabs
about  205
creating  205
Custom Object tabs  205
Visualforce tabs  205
Web tabs  205
tabular report
about  331
creating  331-333
tags
about  323
enabling  323-325
personal tags  323
public tags  323
using  323
task
assigning  251, 252
testing document and attachment 
settings  122
TEXT function  229
time-based tokens
about  100
removing  102
using  100-102
time-based workflow
deleting  262
managing  261
monitoring  260, 261
time-dependent workflow action  246
TODAY function  229, 232
tools, for data management
about  291
Data Import Wizard  296
data loader  299
Import Wizard  291
two-factor authentication
about  99
enabling  99
removing  102
types, reports
about  331
joined report  334
matrix report  334

[ 430 ]
summary report  333
tabular report  331
U
unmanaged packages  404
unused report types
hiding  350, 351
update operation  290
UPPER function  229
upsert operation  291
user license type
about  40, 41
Chatter External  42
Chatter Free  42
Chatter Only  42
Company Community  43
Force.com App Subscription  42
Force.com One App  41
Identity  42
Knowledge Only User  42
Salesforce  41
Salesforce Platform  41
Work.com Only User  43
users
creating, from user interface  72
locking  74
multiple users, adding  73, 74
setting up  71, 72
unlocking  75
user's account
freezing  75
V
validation rule
about  226
achieving  226-228
VALUE function  229
viewer  382
View Setup and Configuration 
permission  43
View Setup Audit Trail page  112
Visualforce  240
Visualforce page, dashboard 
components  336
Visualforce tabs  205
VLOOKUP function  229
W
Web tabs  205
Web-to-Case
about  199
enabling  199, 200
HTML code, generating  200, 201
Web-to-Lead HTML code
generating  173, 174
Web-to-Lead settings
disabling  172
enabling  172
wizards, for approval process creation
Jump Start Wizard  262
Standard Wizard  263
Work.com
about  20
editions  21
example  20
features  20, 21
workflow
actions, relating with  255-258
e-mail alert, creating  252, 253
field update, creating  249, 250
limitations  259
outbound messages, creating  254
rule, creating  247-249
task, assigning  251, 252
used, for automating work  246


Thank you for buying 
Salesforce.com Customization Handbook
About Packt Publishing
Packt, pronounced 'packed', published its first book "Mastering phpMyAdmin for Effective 
MySQL Management" in April 2004 and subsequently continued to specialize in publishing 
highly focused books on specific technologies and solutions.
Our books and publications share the experiences of your fellow IT professionals in adapting 
and customizing today's systems, applications, and frameworks. Our solution based books give 
you the knowledge and power to customize the software and technologies you're using to get 
the job done. Packt books are more specific and less general than the IT books you have seen in 
the past. Our unique business model allows us to bring you more focused information, giving 
you more of what you need to know, and less of what you don't.
Packt is a modern, yet unique publishing company, which focuses on producing quality, 
cutting-edge books for communities of developers, administrators, and newbies alike. 
For more information, please visit our website: www.packtpub.com.
About Packt Enterprise
In 2010, Packt launched two new brands, Packt Enterprise and Packt Open Source, in order to 
continue its focus on specialization. This book is part of the Packt Enterprise brand, home to 
books published on enterprise software – software created by major vendors, including (but 
not limited to) IBM, Microsoft and Oracle, often for use in other corporations. Its titles will offer 
information relevant to a range of users of this software, including administrators, developers, 
architects, and end users.
Writing for Packt
We welcome all inquiries from people who are interested in authoring. Book proposals should 
be sent to author@packtpub.com. If your book idea is still at an early stage and you would like 
to discuss it first before writing a formal book proposal, contact us; one of our commissioning 
editors will get in touch with you. 
We're not just looking for published authors; if you have strong technical skills but no writing 
experience, our experienced editors can help you develop a writing career, or simply get some 
additional reward for your expertise.

Force.com Tips and Tricks
ISBN: 978-1-84968-474-3             Paperback: 224 pages
A quick reference guide for administrators and 
developers to get more productive with Force.com
1.	
Tips and tricks for topics ranging from 
point-and-click administration to fine 
development techniques with Apex & 
Visualforce.
2.	
Avoids technical jargon and expresses concepts 
in a clear and simple manner.
3.	
A pocket guide for experienced 
Force.com developers.
Force.com Developer 
Certification Handbook (DEV401)
ISBN: 978-1-84968-348-7            Paperback: 280 pages
A comprehensive handbook to guide Force.com 
developers through important fundamentals and 
prepare them for the DEV401 exam
1.	
Simple and to-the-point examples that can be 
tried out in your developer org.
2.	
A practical book for professionals who want to 
take the DEV 401 Certification exam.
3.	
Sample questions for every topic in an exam 
pattern to help you prepare better, and tips to 
get things started.

Please check www.PacktPub.com for information on our titles

Visualforce Developer's Guide
ISBN: 978-1-78217-981-8             Paperback: 120 pages
Learn the latest developments in Salesforce with this 
hands-on pocket guide
1.	
Build Visualforce pages for mobile applications.
2.	
Learn the best practices and security tips for 
Visualforce and Apex development.
3.	
Build custom controllers with 
controller extensions.
Salesforce CRM: The Definitive 
Admin Handbook
Second Edition
ISBN: 978-1-78217-052-5             Paperback: 426 pages
A comprehensive guide for the setup, configuration, 
and customization of Salesforce CRM
1.	
Updated for Spring '13, this book covers best 
practice administration principles, real-world 
experience, and critical design considerations 
for setting up and customizing Salesforce CRM.
2.	
Analyze data within Salesforce by using 
reports, dashboards, custom reports, 
and report builder.
3.	
A step-by-step guide offering clear guidance 
for the customization and administration of the 
Salesforce CRM application.
Please check www.PacktPub.com for information on our titles

