
NEW FORMS OF CARBON  
Nanocarbons 

NEW FORMS OF CARBON  
Nanocarbons 
Edited 
Aneeya Kumar Samantara, PhD  
Satyajit Ratha, PhD  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
First edition published 2024 
Apple Academic Press Inc. 
1265 Goldenrod Circle, NE, 
Palm Bay, FL 32905 USA 
760 Laurentian Drive, Unit 19, 
Burlington, ON L7N 0A4, CANADA 
CRC Press 
2385 NW Executive Center Drive, 
Suite 320, Boca Raton FL 33431 
4 Park Square, Milton Park, 
Abingdon, Oxon, OX14 4RN UK 
© 2024 by Apple Academic Press, Inc. 
Apple Academic Press exclusively co-publishes with CRC Press, an imprint of Taylor & Francis Group, LLC 
Reasonable efforts have been made to publish reliable data and information, but the authors, editors, and publisher cannot 
assume responsibility for the validity of all materials or the consequences of their use. The authors are solely responsible for 
all the chapter content, figures, tables, data etc. provided by them. The authors, editors, and publishers have attempted to trace 
the copyright holders of all material reproduced in this publication and apologize to copyright holders if permission to publish 
in this form has not been obtained. If any copyright material has not been acknowledged, please write and let us know so we 
may rectify in any future reprint. 
Except as permitted under U.S. Copyright Law, no part of this book may be reprinted, reproduced, transmitted, or utilized 
in any form by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying, 
microfilming, and recording, or in any information storage or retrieval system, without written permission from the publishers. 
For permission to photocopy or use material electronically from this work, access www.copyright.com or contact the Copyright 
Clearance Center, Inc. (CCC), 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, 978-750-8400. For works that are not available on 
CCC please contact mpkbookspermissions@tandf.co.uk 
Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks and are used only for identification 
and explanation without intent to infringe. 
Library and Archives Canada Cataloguing in Publication 
Title: New forms of carbon : nanocarbons / edited Aneeya Kumar Samantara, PhD, Satyajit Ratha, PhD.  
Other titles: Nanocarbons  
Names: Samantara, Aneeya Kumar, editor. | Ratha, Satyajit, editor.  
Description: First edition. | Includes bibliographical references and index.  
Identifiers: Canadiana (print) 20230598633 | Canadiana (ebook) 20230598668 | ISBN 9781774912799 (hardcover) 
| ISBN 9781774912805 (softcover) | ISBN 9781003376460 (ebook) 
Subjects: LCSH: Carbon. 
Classification: LCC TP245.C4 N49 2024 | DDC 662/.93—dc23 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
CIP data on file with US Library of Congress 
ISBN: 978-1-77491-279-9 (hbk) 
ISBN: 978-1-77491-280-5 (pbk) 
ISBN: 978-1-00337-646-0 (ebk) 

Dedication  
Dr. Aneeya K. Samantara dedicates this work to  
his daughter Aayra  
Dr. Satyajit Ratha dedicates this work to  
his parents, Mrs. Prabhati Ratha and Mr. Sanjaya Kumar Ratha  

About the Editors  
Aneeya Kumar Samantara, PhD 
Postdoctorate Fellow, National Institute of Science 
Education and Research, Odisha, India 
Aneeya Kumar Samantara, PhD, is a postdoctorate 
fellow at the National Institute of Science Educa-
tion and Research, Odisha, India. He did his PhD 
in Chemistry at the CSIR-Institute of Minerals and 
Materials Technology, Odisha, India. Before joining 
PhD, he completed his MSc degree in Advanced Organic Chemistry at 
Ravenshaw University, Cuttack, Odisha, and MPhil in Chemistry at Utkal 
University. Dr. Samantara’s research interest includes the synthesis of 
metal and carbon nanostructured particles for electrochemical energy 
storage/conversion and sensing applications. He has authored and coau-
thored about 30 peer-reviewed international journals, six book chapters, 
and has edited/authored 13 books  for reputed publishing houses. For his 
outstanding research activity, he has received awards at many national and 
international forums. 
Satyajit Ratha, PhD 
Researcher, Indian Institute of Technology 
Bhubaneshwar, Bhubaneshwar, India 
Satyajit Ratha, PhD, pursued his PhD at the Indian 
Institute of Technology Bhubaneshwar, Bhubaneswar, 
India. Prior to joining IIT Bhubaneswar, he received 
his BSc from Utkal University in 2008 and MSc from 
Ravenshaw University in 2010. Dr Ratha’s research interests include 
two-dimensional semiconductors, nanostructure synthesis, applications, 
energy storage devices, and supercapacitors. He has authored and coau-
thored about 28 peer reviewed international journals, eight books and one 
book chapter. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Contributors......................................................................................................... xi  
Abbreviations .....................................................................................................xiii  
Preface .............................................................................................................. xvii  
Summary ............................................................................................................ xix  
1.  Graphene: A New Form of Carbon for Future Sustainability................ 1  
Alaka Samal and Dipti P. Das 
2.  Carbon Derived from Biowastes for Supercapacitors:   
Synthesis to Applications.......................................................................... 35  
Anil Arya, A. L. Sharma, Vijay Kumar, and Annu Sharma 
3.  Effect of Doping on the Electronic and Physicochemical  
Properties of the Atomic Carbon Clusters:   
A Theoretical Perspective......................................................................... 59  
Anoop Kumar Kushwaha, Sushri Soumya Jena, and Mihir Ranjan Sahoo 
4.  Fullerenes: Synthesis and Applications................................................... 93  
Jagannath Panda, Tanaswini Patra, Prasanna Kumar Panda, Rojalin Sahu,  
Bankim Chandra Tripathy, and Avijit Biswal  
5.  Biochar: An Advanced Carbon Material for Mitigation of   
Environmental Pollution ........................................................................ 123  
Sanghamitra Mohapatra and Chinmayee Acharya 
6.  Preparation and Properties of Activated Carbon ................................ 151  
Mihir Ranjan Sahoo 
7.  Carbon Nanotubes: A New Dimension in Human   
Healthcare Applications ......................................................................... 171  
Rashmi Rekha Samal and Madhabi Madhusmita Bhanjadeo 
8.  Mechanistic Insight into the Tuneable Electronic Properties of   
Chemically Functionalized Graphene Quantum Dots......................... 199  
Mihir Ranjan Sahoo, Satyajit Ratha, and Aneeya K. Samantara 
Contents  

 
 
 
 
9. 
Carborane Clusters for Promoting Medicinal Applications............... 219  
Bibhuti Bhusan Jena and Manas R. Pattanayak 
Index................................................................................................................. 249  
 x 
Contributors 

Contributors  
Chinmayee Acharya 
CSIR—Institute of Minerals and Materials Technology, Bhubaneswar, Odisha, India 
North Orissa University, Baripada, India 
Anil Arya 
Department of Physics, Kurukshetra University, Kurukshetra, Haryana, India 
Madhabi Madhusmita Bhanjadeo 
Department of Biochemistry, School of Life Sciences, Ravenshaw University, Cuttack, Odisha, India 
Avijit Biswal 
College of Engineering and Technology (Autonomous) Bhubaneswar, Odisha, India 
Dipti P. Das 
Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research, Ghaziabad, Uttar Pradesh, India 
Central Characterization Department, CSIR—Institute of Minerals and Materials Technology, 
Bhubaneswar, Odisha, India 
Bibhuti Bhusan Jena 
Department of Chemistry, Ravenshaw University, Cuttack, Odisha, India 
Sushri Soumya Jena 
School of Basic Sciences, Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar, Bhubaneswar, India 
Vijay Kumar 
Department of Physics, Institute of Integrated and Honors Studies (IIHS), Kurukshetra University, 
Kurukshetra, Haryana, India 
Anoop Kumar Kushwaha 
School of Basic Sciences, Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar, Bhubaneswar, India 
Sanghamitra Mohapatra 
CSIR—Institute of Minerals and Materials Technology, Bhubaneswar, Odisha, India 
AcSIR—Academy of Scientific and Industrial Research, New Delhi, India 
Jagannath Panda 
CSIR—Institute of Minerals and Materials Technology, Bhubaneswar, Odisha, India 
Prasanna Kumar Panda 
CSIR—Institute of Minerals and Materials Technology, Bhubaneswar, Odisha, India 
Tanaswini Patra 
School of Applied Sciences, KIIT Deemed to be University, Bhubaneswar, Odisha, India 
Manas R. Pattanayak 
Syngene International LTD, Medchal, Hyderabad, India 
Satyajit Ratha 
School of Basic Sciences, Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar, Bhubaneswar, Odisha India 

 
xii 
Contributors 
Mihir Ranjan Sahoo 
School of Basic Sciences, Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar, Bhubaneswar, Odisha, India 
Rojalin Sahu 
School of Applied Sciences, KIIT Deemed to be University, Bhubaneswar, Odisha, India 
Alaka Samal 
Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research, Ghaziabad, Uttar Pradesh, India 
Central Characterization Department, CSIR-Institute of Minerals and Materials Technology, 
Bhubaneswar, Odisha, India 
Rashmi Rekha Samal 
Academy of Scientific & Innovative research (AcSIR), New Delhi, India 
Environment & Sustainability Department, CSIR—Institute of Minerals and Materials Technology, 
Bhubaneswar, Odisha, India 
Aneeya K. Samantara 
School of Chemical Sciences, National Institute of Science Education and Research, Bhubaneswar, 
Odisha, India 
Annu Sharma 
Department of Physics, Kurukshetra University, Kurukshetra, Haryana, India 
A. L. Sharma 
Department of Physics, Central University of Punjab, Bathinda, Punjab, India 
Bankim Chandra Tripathy 
CSIR—Institute of Minerals and Materials Technology, Bhubaneswar, Odisha, India 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Abbreviations  
AC 
activated charcoal 
ACFs 
activated carbon fibers 
AEA 
adiabatic electron affinity 
AEC 
anion exchange capacity 
AR 
androgen receptor 
ASSC 
an asymmetric supercapacitor 
BBB 
blood–brain barrier 
BNCT 
boron neutron capture therapy 
CEC 
cation exchange capacity 
CISD 
configuration-interaction singles and doubles 
CNT 
carbon nanotube 
CO 
carbon monoxide 
COX 
cyclooxygenase 
CQDs 
carbon quantum dots 
CTCs 
circulating tumor cells 
CV 
cyclic voltammetry 
CVD 
chemical vapor deposition 
DFTB 
density functional tight binding 
DMF 
N, N-dimethyl formamide 
DOS 
density of states 
EAC 
extruded activated carbon 
EDLC 
electric double-layer capacitor 
EDS 
energy-dispersive spectroscopy 
EGFR 
epidermal growth factor receptor 
ER 
estrogen receptor 
ESR 
equivalent series resistance 
FMO 
frontier molecular orbital 
FR 
folate receptor 
FVP 
flash vacuum pyrolysis 
FWS 
fullerene water suspension 
GCC 
ground cherry calyces 
GCD 
galvanostatic charge/discharge 
GNS 
graphene nanosheets 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
xiv 
Abbreviations 
GNTs 
golden nanotubes 
GO 
graphene oxide 
GQDs 
graphene quantum dots 
HF 
Hartree–Fock 
HIF 
hypoxia-inducible factor 
HOMO 
highest occupied molecular orbital 
HPC 
honeycomb-like porous carbon 
HPCs 
hierarchically porous carbons 
IBI 
International Biochar Initiative 
LBD 
ligand-binding domain 
LUMO 
lowest unoccupied molecular orbital 
MB 
methylene blue 
MRI 
magnetic resonance imaging 
MSC 
mesenchymal stem cells 
MWCNTs 
multiple-walled carbon nanotubes 
NIR 
near-infrared 
NPs 
nanoparticles 
NSAIADs 
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs 
nZVI 
nanoscale zero-valent iron 
OFTETS 
organic field effect transistors 
OPVs 
organic photovoltaics 
PA 
photoacoustic 
PAC 
powdered activated carbon 
PAHs 
poly-aromatic hydrocarbons 
PC 
pseudo-capacitor 
PCB 
polychlorinated biphenyles 
PDT 
photodynamic therapy 
PTE 
photothermal–electrical 
PTT 
photothermal therapy 
PU 
polyurethane 
PVA 
polyvinyl alcohol 
QDs 
quantum dots 
RARs 
retinoic acid receptors 
RH 
rice husk 
RO 
reverse osmosis 
ROS 
reactive oxygen species 
SC 
supercapacitor 
SEM 
scanning electron microscopy 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Abbreviations 
xv 
SiC 
silicon carbide 
SRF 
senior research fellowship 
SSA 
specific surface area 
SSC 
symmetric supercapacitor 
SWCNTs 
single-walled carbon nanotubes 
TEM 
transmission electron microscopy 
TTR 
transthyretin 
UV 
ultraviolet 
VDE 
vertical detachment energy 
VOC 
volatile organic compounds 
WBI 
Wiberg bond indices 
XPS 
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy 
XRD 
X-ray diffraction 
ZVI 
zero-valent iron 
0D 
zero-dimensional 

 
Preface  
Carbon, being the second most abundant element in the human body and 
a natural building block for almost all the organic molecules, has been the 
topic of both discussion and debate since ancient times upto the modern 
era. The vast range of compounds that carbon forms due to its catenation 
property is second to none of the elements in the modern periodic table. 
Starting from the black colored charcoal to grayish graphite and mesmer-
izingly transparent diamond, carbon has been the cynosure of myriad of 
applications ranging from catalysis chemistry to medicinal biology and 
applied physics. It is popular among the scientific community in the form 
of activated charcoal/carbon and the potential of this ancient and faithful 
element was not realized until the advent of the buckminsterfullerene in 
the year 1985. Since then, the discovery of carbon nanotube (1991) and 
graphene (2010) has catapulted the research interest on the carbon-derived 
allotropes. These forms of carbon have at least one dimension falling in 
the nanoscale order and are referred to as nanocarbons. 
Often credited for the discovery of these wonderful carbon structures, 
nanotechnology has played a phenomenal role in providing us just the 
set of tools and techniques to gain significant insights for carbon-based 
research. However, as we come to know one aspect of the element carbon, 
it surprises us with a new set of unheralded characteristics. Neverthe-
less, these new forms of carbon have the potential to revolutionize many 
aspects of research including drug delivery, catalysis, energy conversion 
and storage, high strength physics, structural engineering, and so on. 
This book provides a detailed overview of some of the fundamental 
aspects of carbon and its allotropic forms, their preparation techniques, 
and application in several fields of interest. The content of this book has 
been meticulously arranged to seamlessly guide the readers through the 
transformation of carbon from its traditional form to the present-day 
structure(s). We hope that this book will cater to the needs of students at 
both undergraduate and graduate levels and researchers who are interested 
in the new forms of carbon. 

Summary  
The physicochemical properties possessed by carbon and its various allo-
tropes have fascinated the scientific community since a very long time. 
Incidentally, nanotechnology has revamped the carbon chemistry through 
sophisticated techniques to carve out the best possible structures, such as 
fullerenes, graphene, and carbon nanotubes. These carbon structures have 
redefined the carbon chemistry as well as many of the key research areas, 
such as medical health and diagnostics, opto-electronics, semiconductor 
physics, energy storage/conversion, and so forth. There are a large number 
of futuristic applications and unlimited possibilities with these new forms 
of carbon. 
This book is divided into six chapters and presents a vivid detail of 
the origin of these new forms of carbon and some of their important 
characteristics including their application in several fields of interest. 
Chapter 1 explains the unprecedented physicochemical properties of the 
two-dimensional carbon structure, graphene. The authors have discussed 
both synthesis and characterization of graphene including some of its 
key applications such as water treatment, energy, and corrosion-resistant 
technologies. Chapter 2 summarizes the application of carbon in one of 
the futuristic electrical energy storage devices, that is, supercapacitors. In 
this chapter, biowastes have been effectively treated to yield the required 
form of carbon through affordable techniques. In Chapter 3, atomic carbon 
clusters have been introduced in the context of existing cluster research 
that are mostly based on metal-based atomic clusters. The authors have 
discussed few organic carbon clusters of importance and the effect of 
doping on these clusters using different dopant atoms such as phosphorous, 
gold, boron, silicon and others. The authors suggested that similar to the 
metallic clusters, these carbon-based clusters and their doped counterparts 
could prove their potential in several electrochemical and electronic appli-
cations. Chapter 4 deals with the synthesis and application of fullerene 
type of carbon structures. The authors have provided a broad range of 
applications which include water treatment, energy storage/conversion, 
biomedical, and pharmaceutical applications that show the huge potential 
of fullerene. Chapter 5 discusses the production and activation of biochar 

 
 
xx 
Summary 
to check/treat both the organic and inorganic pollutants. A detailed study 
on the modification of biochars have also been provided, where several 
methods, such as mineral impregnation, apourdametal assistance, and 
surface oxidation/reduction have been implemented to modify the biochar 
to put it to effective use. The concluding Chapter 6 deals with the prepara-
tion and properties of activated carbon. A brief account of activated carbon 
in terms of its activation processes, classification, and adsorption proper-
ties have been provided in detail. We believe that the book in its present 
form would provide an overall picture of the carbon chemistry and the 
rich physicochemical aspects of the new forms of carbon to the readers, 
and would be of some use to students, researchers, and academicians who 
would be interested in these carbon allotropes/structures. 

New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons. Aneeya Kumar Samantara & Satyajit Ratha (Eds.)
© 2024 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
CHAPTER 1  
Graphene: A New Form of Carbon for 
Future Sustainability 
ALAKA SAMAL1,2 and DIPTI P. DAS1,2 
1Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research, Ghaziabad,  
Uttar Pradesh, India 
2Central Characterization Department, CSIR-Institute of Minerals and 
Materials Technology, Odisha, India 
ABSTRACT 
A well-known and documented carbon allotrope, “graphene,” has a hexag-
onal carbon arrangement in the route framework. Graphene also has an 
unusual behavior not really identical to the conductor or insulator, which 
would be the energy band with a “Dirac cone” having a zero band gap 
value. Graphene has a typical behavior of very high mechanical strength 
as well as remarkably transparent with very high electrical and thermal 
conductivity. After the breakthrough of the single atomic thick graphene, 
the graphene-hybridized semiconductor scientific field has grown well 
over the last decade, with great results and feasible aspects of life for the 
future. The graphene-derived semiconductor photocatalysis has a wide 
range of applications in scientific fields, from energy generation to storage, 
including environmental cleanup, electronic equipment, and also in the 
desalinization of ocean water. Graphene-centered nanocomposite formu-
lation has indeed attracted specific attention in applied science research 
work. The need for more drinkable water for countless millions of thirsty 
people could also be mitigated in the future with graphene-customized 

 
 
2 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
technological advances. For this whole purpose, the water desalination 
of seawater and the decontamination of wastewater have been examined 
conspicuously with a sound result. Again, the manufacturing of H2 energy 
with water, graphene-derived photocatalysts, has been used extensively 
until now. The existence of graphene shows a significant improvement 
in the material’s specific surface area and contributes to the enhanced 
corrosion protection and conductivity applications without sacrificing the 
characteristics or composition of the material. This new strategy creates 
a new way to easy manufacturing of sophisticated surface coatings that 
can be used to develop thermal exchangers and biocompatible materials. 
This chapter is predicated mostly on the literature review and discussion 
of recent graphene-derived semiconductor implementations and advance-
ments. The numerous graphene-based photocatalytic synthesis procedures 
are briefly at the end elaborated with the advantages and disadvantages. 
The innumerable applications of graphene-derived architectures were then 
rigorously assessed, including those of organic/inorganic water contami-
nation degradation/mineralization, H2/O2 evolution by water photo-
splitting, energy storage application, coating applications, and so forth. 
Furthermore, the analysis discusses the future of graphene technology and 
its impoverishment in an exact manner such that a marvelous graphene 
technology could be accomplished in the immediate future. 
1.1 INTRODUCTION 
Owing to the remarkable properties of graphene as an outstanding material 
(such as high mobility of charge carriers called mass-less Dirac fermions, 
theoretical surface area, thermal conductivity, flexibility, transparency, 
inexpensive, and bearing very lightweight), it has become the most studied 
material in the last few years (Bolotin et al., 2011a, b; Du et al., 2008; 
Peigney et al., 2001; Balandin et al., 2008; Wang et al., 2009; Guinea et al., 
2010; Du et al., 2009; Bolotin et al., 2011a, b). Due to its adaptable nature, 
it could be a solution starting from super-small computers to high-capacity 
batteries. For the improvement of spatial separation and transfer of photo-
induced charge carriers, in that way increasing the activity of semicon-
ductors for photocatalytic reactions, graphene has been used immensely 
for years. Copious numbers of studies also confirm about the reliability 
of graphene in the charge carriers separation and photocatalytic activity 

 
 
Graphene: A New Form of Carbon 
3 
improvisation with graphene (Xiang et al., 2012; Tu et al., 2013; Lightcap 
et al., 2010; Ng et al., 2010a, b; Zhang et al., 2014; Wang et al., 2014; An 
et al., 2014; Moon et al., 2014). The two-dimensional hexagonal sheet of 
graphene also provides an obvious support matrix to the semiconductor 
positioned on it. This further increases the surface area of photocatalyst 
with advancement in adsorption of the organic molecule in the organic 
pollutant degradation method from water (Han et al., 2012; Wang et al., 
2014; Som et al., 2014). Graphene-based photocatalytic approach has 
given tremendous result in improving the photocatalytic performance of 
the semiconductor particles along with enhancement of light absorption 
capacity. So far, many graphene-based semiconductor photocatalysts have 
been introduced in the field with an improved photocatalytic activity Ca. 
RGO–ZnO, RGO–SnO2, graphene–MnO2, Mfe2O4/graphene, graphene– 
TiO2, graphene–Cu2O, graphene–Fe2O3, graphene–NiO, graphene–WO3, 
graphene–ZnS, graphene–CdS, graphene–MoS2, and others (Akhavan, 
2011; Yang et al., 2013; Qu et al., 2014; Yao et al., 2014; Bai et al., 2012; 
Xiang et al., 2012; Yang et al., 2006; Yao et al., 2010; Xu et al., 2008; 
Morishige and Hamada, 2005; Guo et al., 2012; Hu et al., 2011; Cao et al., 
2010; Nethravathi et al., 2009; Li et al., 2011a, b). 
Chemically derived graphene oxide (GO) is now among the one specific 
branch of graphene research getting attention (Dreyer et al., 2010; Yin et 
al., 2014). GO possesses unique properties of graphene and also some 
extra characteristics like hydrophilicity providing platform for nucleation 
and growth of the nanoparticles. The structure of GO represents edges 
with carboxylic acid group and at the basal plane hydroxyl/epoxide groups 
(Dreyer et al., 2010). The functional groups present on the GO give a base 
for the directional growth of the nanoparticles with a proper distribution. 
Furthermore, the physico/chemical properties and the band gap of GO can 
be tuned by engineering its atomic and chemical structures (Hatakeyama 
et al., 2014). Several reviews have been also published on this particular 
topic enlightening concerning the incomparable performance of graphene 
(Sun et al., 2011; Huang et al., 2011; Zhang et al., 2015; Yang et al., 2014; 
Zhang et al., 2012; Yang et al., 2013). 
Due to the rising cogent call for environmental and energy remediation, 
the need of an amazing material that could solve many purposes at an ease 
is mandatory. Graphene acts as a versatile actor to solve many problems 
involving energy and environment. Graphene not only solves the water-
quality issue by decontaminating the polluted water but also helps in the 

 
 
 
4 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
lack of energy for the future generation by producing H2/O2 fuel (Zhao et 
al., 2017). The process of photocatalysis uses the undiminishable source, 
the Sun, to vitalize the energy from water fission and also encourages the 
decontamination of water with the help of a photocatalyst. Graphene-
based photocatalyst has a well-known craze among material scientists. 
Also, graphene is applied in the desalination process of seawater to yield 
drinkable water for the living organism (Homaeigohar and Elbahri, 2017). 
Along with this, graphene has been also used in the CO2 reduction reaction 
processes for simultaneously solving energy and global warming problems 
(Low et al., 2015). 
Moreover, the unique features of graphene (like those of chemical 
inertness, extraordinary heat and chemical stability, outstanding versa-
tility, visible optical transparency, and molecular impermeability even as 
small as helium) make it the most conducive to passive-layer formation, 
particularly in the natural environment, for protecting against metal oxida-
tion and corrosion. It actually forms the natural barrier of diffusion that 
separates the guarded metal/substrate from the reactants physically due 
to the hydrophobic nature of graphene. Thus, graphene has indeed been 
reported as a corrosion protection material by the researcher Böhm et al. 
(2014). 
Day by day, graphene-based semiconductor articles/reviews are 
published in numerous amounts in a way that there become saturation in 
the articles based on graphene. So, it is a trivial task to cover all the updates 
about the new mark and applications of graphene. Indeed, we have tried to 
cover most of the new articles regarding graphene-based materials and its 
applications in various fields in this chapter. This chapter here describes 
why the use of graphene is important and what are the benefits we could 
get from graphene-based materials. After that, this chapter describes the 
synthesis of various graphene-based semiconductors’ importance and 
application. Afterward, the summary and future prospects have been 
discussed in the field of graphene materials. 
1.2 CHARACTERIZATION OF GRAPHENE 
Far too many scientists have recorded the electronic, mechanical, and 
optical properties of such graphene that can actually make this a really 
useful material. Figure 1.1 depicts the extraordinary characteristics of 2D 

 
5 
Graphene: A New Form of Carbon 
hexagonal honeycomb-like structure. It is indeed a zero band gap conduc-
tive material, because its conduction and valence bands meet up in Dirac 
points, and it has extremely high conductance too. In graphene hexagonal 
gigantic 2D structure, each atom of carbon is connected by sp2-hybridiza-
tion with three other adjacent carbon atoms. Maybe this actually makes 
one electron free for electronic conduction in the third dimension. Due 
to its surface structures and excellent conductive properties, graphene is 
being used in various electronic applications currently. 
FIGURE 1.1  Graphene structure with its unique characteristics. 
At room temperature, the electronic mobility of graphene is very high 
and almost independent of temperature.  Such extreme mobile electrons 
are apparently called π-electrons that are positioned above and below the 
graphene sheet. Basically, the bonding and antibonding of these π-orbitals 
dictate the great electronic properties of graphene. Graphene is the most 
robust substance ever really examined with a tensile strength of 130 GPa 
and Young’s module of 1 TPa. Other than this, graphene is incredibly light 
in weight and is a soft material harder than that of a diamond.  Graphene 
is thought to have been the toughest, 200 times more powerful even than 

 
 
 
 
 
6 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
steel material, yet uncovered. It is exceptionally rigid as well as bend-
able (e.g., rubber). This is because further flat planes of carbon atoms of 
graphene can quickly and easily wiggle even without the separation of the 
atoms. Anything that is just one-atom thick is supposed to also be fairly 
light weight. Thus, this graphene really would apparently cover a sports 
field only with less than one teaspoon. Graphene is way better to transport 
high temperature, which has very extremely high thermal conductivity 
than almost any other type of material. Once again, this most probably 
uncovers the advantages of graphene by using composite materials that 
could be used to increase other materials’ thermal resistance or conduc-
tivity. Heat-conducting materials also conduct electricity quite well, since 
they transport electricity using electrons. The flat, hexagonal graphene 
crystal structure provides comparatively little electron resistance that zips 
throughout it speedily with no trouble and carries additional electricity 
than even excellent conductors like copper. Evolutionarily speaking, this 
should conclude that perhaps graphene in electrons has a longer actually 
mean free route than just about any other material that can go beyond 
that without collapsing. Graphene sheets have carbon atoms so densely 
packed that they really work just like superfine atomic grids that prevent 
the development of other components on their surface. This implies that 
graphene is indeed good for trapping gases and also can be used in encour-
aging new applications in hydrogen storage. 
1.3 SYNTHESIS PROCEDURES OF GRAPHENE 
Different techniques for graphene synthesis have been developed in recent 
years. The most widely utilized techniques today are thermal chemical 
vapor deposition (CVD) (Böhm et al., 2014), chemical exfoliation (Allen 
et al., 2010), mechanical cleaving (Novoselov et al., 2004), and chemical 
synthesis (Park and Ruoff, 2009). Another technique, including micro-
wave (Jiao et al., 2010) and unzipping of nanotubes (Xin et al., 2010), is 
also reported. CVD, mechanical exfoliation, and synthesis by chemical 
approach are still the most reliable methods. The graphene layers are first 
prepared by the mechanical exfoliation method using a tape called “scotch 
tape” method by R. Ruoff and group (Lu et al., 1999). The graphene layer 
flakes were exfoliated from the graphite mechanically followed by drying 
on a silicon wafer via a dry deposition method. The acceptable situation 

 
 
 
 
7 
Graphene: A New Form of Carbon 
in this process is that graphene can be pelated layer after layer from the 
bulk graphite. It is again a mechanical issue to counteract the van der 
Waals attraction between the layers of graphite, peel the layer, and then 
accomplish graphene structure. It is important to note that such purely 
mechanical paths are preconditions for the development of graphene to 
all previously reported exfoliation strategies. This can be predicted too 
that regulated graphite exfoliation is indeed possible by customizing the 
mechanical paths to achieve high-quality graphene with a high efficiency. 
Ultrasonication exfoliation is a liquid process exfoliation that produces 
large numbers of graphene sheets. In 2014, Coleman’s group first time 
revealed a higher yield of graphene by the liquid-phase exfoliation process 
(Paton et al., 2014). One advantage of such an approach is that it seems 
quite pretty easy to produce graphene. By far, the most deficient problem 
is the incredibly low concentration of graphene, which is not really 
economical. The whole exfoliation technique does not really make it easy 
to achieve larger quantities of graphene, even bringing the inadequacy of 
feasible flakes into account. The problem with this process is very low, but 
graphene flakes must be figured at the surface of the substructure, which 
is exhaustive to use. But here the graphene quality is very high without 
any defects. Another method that involves graphite oxide manufacturing 
from graphite by a chemical exfoliation method is named as Hummers 
method (Samal and Das, 2018). By oxidizing the graphite layers using a 
Hummers method, graphite is chemically translated into an intermediate 
water-dispersible substance called graphite oxide. Graphite oxide is indeed 
a sheet-layered stack that exfoliates in the mechanical force copiously. The 
low cost and scalability are the main advantages of this procedure. But 
current synthesis relies on graphite reactions mostly with strong mixed 
oxidants that are at risk of explosion (Songfeng et al., 2018). 
Electrochemical procedures have also been acquired lately and used 
popularly to produce graphene because of the ecological quality, high 
efficiency, and reduced cost (Yang et al., 2016). Again, it has been shown 
that the electrochemical exfoliation of graphite foil could also reproduce 
almost pristine graphene in a few seconds (Yang et al., 2015). Driven by 
such achievements, many scientists also attempted to synthesize GO with 
electrochemical oxidation of diverse graphitic materials such as pencil 
core (Liu et al., 2013), graphite rod (Parvez et al., 2016), and graphite 
flakes (Gurzęda et al., 2016; Yu et al., 2016). Moreover, the CVD tech-
nique is considered to be a more promising way for the scalable synthesis 

 
 
8 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
of high-quality and single-layer graphene (Yu et al., 2008). The CVD 
methodology is used to synthesize graphene in the decomposition of 
carbon source molecules. Due to the high segregation of carbon atoms on 
the metallic substrates (i.e., Ni foil), the graphene structure included about 
35 graphene layers was synthesized. The method has been further estab-
lished to accomplish control growth on the Ni-deposited SiO2/Si and Ni 
film for single-layer, two-layer, and few-layer graphene (Yu et al., 2008; 
Kalita et al., 2010). But in this process, the major challenge is the removal 
and transfer of the as-developed graphene sheet on an isolating substrate 
for the characterization and application. Well into the later point, CVD 
graphene has been transferred to an arbitrary substrate without distressing 
its intrinsic characteristics (Reina et al., 2009). CVD can be transferred 
through wet or dry graphic catalytic layer graph transfer onto the desired 
surface of the substratum. The process of CVD was considered to grow 
single-glass large-size crystals, monolayers, and two-layer graphs in high 
quality. In this perspective, graphene nucleation and growth mechanism 
on a catalytic substrate play a key role in the formation of large domains 
and a number of layers. 
Among the most acclaimed techniques of graphene synthesis is 
epitaxial thermal growth on a single-crystalline silicon carbide (SiC) 
surface. Graphene growth on SiC productivity is envisioned as a highly 
promising method for large-scale graphene production along with the 
practical application in electronics. The graphene growth rate on SiC 
depends on the particular polar SiC crystal face (Low et al., 2012). In 
unzipping a carbon nanotube to get graphene nanoribbons, the chemical 
and plasma-etched methods have been used by the researchers. Graphene 
nanoribbon establishes a thin extended graphene strip that shows straight 
edges. The production of multilayer graphene or single-layer graphene 
entirely depends on the precursor wall thickness. In this method, 
researchers have used a multiwalled nanotube on a Si substrate pretreated 
3-aminopropyltriethoxysilane to get high-quality graphene nanoribbons 
from it with a step height of 0.8–2 nm (Jiao et al., 2009). Some other 
procedure to open the multiwalled nanotubes is the use of electrical field 
to get graphene nanoribbons (Bhuyan et al., 2016). A single multiwalled 
nanotube with a tungsten electrode was applied with an electrical field and 
it was portrayed that perhaps the semicontact multiwalled nanotubes’ end 
had begun unwrapping and graphene nanoribbon emerged. The graphene 

 
9 
Graphene: A New Form of Carbon 
nanoribbon manufacturing process by this ensures highly clean, faultless, 
monitored sequencing for optimized equipment in electronic components. 
1.4 APPLICATIONS OF GRAPHENE 
1.4.1 DESALINATION OF WATER 
For the cause of industrialization and urbanization, human being is facing 
the consequences of water shortage for the last many years. Due to the 
population explosion, the available fresh water is insufficient for mankind. 
Again, the fresh-water sources are getting contaminated day by day due 
to increasing industrialization. For this, seawater desalination would be 
the optimum solution for all the above-cited problems without provoking 
the ecosystem. For this, the technology consuming less cost and energy 
is necessary for water purification. As of not long ago, multistage flash 
distillation and reverse osmosis (RO) methodology has been utilized basi-
cally for seawater desalination (Xu et al., 2016). In the RO procedure, 
the core of RO is a semipermeable layer that aides in the detachment 
of unadulterated water from seawater. That is the reason RO membrane 
ought to be stronger, more slender and artificially safe than the polyamide 
dynamic layers in thin-film composite RO layers. Because of its one-of-a-
kind properties, graphene could be viewed as a definitive RO membrane. 
It has been reported that GO indicates antimicrobial properties, in this 
manner bringing down film biofouling, subsequently enhancing the layer 
lifetime and energy utilization of the water decontamination forms (Goh 
and Ismail, 2015; Mahmoud et al., 2015). For such reasons, broad research 
is as of now being completed to understand its potential as a cutting-edge 
desalination film (Cohen-Tanugi and Grossman, 2015). As indicated by 
the literatures, nanoporous graphene layers with the quick stream rate of 
water to the atomic thickness of the graphene film can effectively desali-
nate water (Wang and Karnik, 2012). As indicated by another investigation 
published in Nature, the desalination of ocean water to drinkable water 
may soon have the capacity to be done effectively with a graphene channel 
(Abraham et al., 2017). Here, the modified graphene-oxide membrane 
sieve acts as a filter with tiny nanometer-wide holes drilled into the sieve. 
The filter retains the salt molecules as the water flows through the sieve. 
Actually, the graphene membrane sieve allows certain molecules to go 

 
10 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
through keeping other molecules out which effectively filters out the salt 
and also extremely polluting organic dye molecules. But this process is not 
able to filter out the entire salt molecules. Further research work is needed 
to improve the sieve quality to filter out the seawater to pure drinkable 
water with an inexpensive and scalable method. The researchers hope that 
the sieve will act as a model for future graphene-oxide sieves with holes 
of different sizes to filter molecules larger or smaller than salt. The sieve 
would require even more testing, including durability testing to excess 
seawater exposure, before being used in an industrial setting. For the first 
time, Huang and Feng (2018) have fabricated novel GO/polyimide hollow 
fiber films by direct spinning of a GO/PI suspension by means of a coaxial 
two-capillary spinning technique. The GO/PI hollow fiber film perfor-
mances were assessed for desalination of ocean water by pervaporation 
strategy. Here, the GO/polyimide hollow fiber layer showed great water 
penetrability and salt dismissal for desalination of various concentrations 
of seawater with a high strength with quite a while run estimation. The ion 
rejection of the majority of the ions exhibits in water-like Na+, Cl−, Ca2+, 
K+, F−, Mg2+, and PO3 
− is 99.9%, 99.9%, 99.9%, 99.8%, 99.8%, 99.9%, 
and 99.8%, respectively, through the film demonstrating a magnificent 
outcome for water refinement. They have depicted the superb desalination 
execution of the GO/polyimide hollow fiber layer with a lot of hydrophilic 
locales that encourage sorption and dispersion of water molecules through 
the films which are better than traditional zeolite layers. This high parti-
tion exhibitions joined with high steadiness prescribe the created GO/ 
polyimide hollow fiber films to guarantee for the seawater desalination 
demonstrating the colossal execution of graphene subsidiary toward future 
water lack for billions of individuals around the globe. 
There are many endeavors toward the improvement of GO-based films 
for water desalination by other researchers (Hu and Mi, 2013; Han et 
al., 2013; Joshi et al., 2014; Sun et al., 2014; Sun et al., 2013; Nicolai et 
al., 2014; Surwade et al., 2015; Hega and Zou, 2015). For the time, the 
development of technology for the fabrication of large–size, high-quality 
graphene is mandatory for the molecular and ionic sieving membrane. It 
was described by Surwade et al. (2015) experimentally, the possibility of 
desalination utilizing single-layer graphene with a couple of controllable 
openings. You et al. (2016) have made incredible endeavor to advance 
more desalination tests utilizing the layers for the extensive scaled desali-
nation with a few conceivable outcomes with an expectation of gigantic 

 
11 
Graphene: A New Form of Carbon 
extent of research on using single layer with defects made artificially as 
pores for seawater desalination. The group has done brief examinations 
between nanoporous graphene and GO layers utilized for desalination. 
Pristine graphene is to a great degree impermeable to fluid or gases, along 
these lines as indicated by the group to make the water pathways, the 
stacking of GO sheets or to generate nanopores in monolayer graphene are 
the two conceivable outcomes. In the figure, they have demonstrated the 
plan of two conceivable outcomes. 
1.4.2 WATER DECONTAMINATION 
The chemical wastes from industries badly impact the water bodies. 
Particularly, the toxic organic pollutants coming from the textile industry 
contributes a huge share to the water body pollution. These organic pollut-
ants can be removed from the water bodies through various chemical, 
biological, and physical technologies, that is, advanced oxidation 
processes, photocatalysis, sonolysis, ozonation, including the Fenton reac-
tion, and combinations of these techniques (Chong et al., 2010; Bremner et 
al., 2009). The basic fundamental of advanced oxidation process including 
photocatalysis based on the growth of radicals and their interaction with 
pollutants (organic molecules) in presence of light lead to degradation. 
The photocatalysis process has drawn great attention for the removal of 
organic pollutants fruitfully. The eye-catching application of graphene in 
photocatalytic organic degradation came into the performance due to the 
huge limitations in the photocatalysts like TiO2 (having wide band gap 
and high electron–hole recombination character), CdS (highly photocor-
rosive and restricted photocatalytic action due to the high recombination 
rate of photogenerated electron–hole pairs), and the use of highly toxic 
and costly noble metals in the semiconductor photocatalysts. Also, the 
most downside of the light-sensitive semiconductor material is the lack 
of visible light utilization. In order to improve the photocatalytic efficacy, 
these semiconductor photocatalysts (i.e., TiO2) coupled with noble-metal 
nanostructures (i.e., Ru, Rh, Pd, Pt, etc.). Indeed, this combination has a 
great impact on the improvisation of the efficiency of the photocatalyst but 
the actual high cost of the technology (the noble metals) limits the practical 
application (Yu et al., 2016; Li et al., 2009). Due to the slow kinetics, the 
photocatalysis reaction has not been broadly connected to treat industrial 

 
 
12 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
wastewater (Linsebigler et al., 1995). Photocatalytic decomposition of a 
variety of organic species has been broadly examined and established for 
photocatalysis technology (Ullah et al., 2012). 
After so many trials, graphene has been used as an efficient cocatalyst, 
sensitizer, and Z-scheme mediator in the field of photocatalytic degrada-
tion of pollutants. Photocatalytic water treatment causes photodegradation 
of organic matter such as alkanes, lipids, organic acids, aromatics, and so 
on. These molecules get fragmented by oxidation reaction with charge 
carriers to low atomic weight intermediates and in the end into CO2, H2O, 
and other anions with radiation (Ullah et al., 2012). Yeh et al. (2011) have 
contemplated GO as a semiconductor demonstrating photocatalytic reac-
tivity. Graphene-based semiconductor photocatalysts have been broadly 
connected for the photocatalytic debasement of organic contaminations. 
Various endeavors in the utilization of GO (oxidized form of graphene) 
or reduced graphene oxide (RGO; reduced form of GO) for the change of 
TiO2 for photocatalytic debasement of organic toxins (Gao et al., 2009; 
Fujishima et al., 2008). Although TiO2 is a standout photocatalyst in the 
degradation of organic pollutants, but the high recombination of charge 
carrier hinders the utilization practically. Lui et al. (2013) explained the 
decomposition of methylene blue dye (MB) with synthesized hierarchical 
TiO2. The enhanced activity of the photocatalyst with graphene modifica-
tion explained by the excellent transport of the charge carriers due to the 
great electron conductivity of graphene that suppresses the recombina-
tion of the electron–hole pair leading to enhanced degradation of MB. 
Muthirulan et al. (2014) used a one-step effective route and applied 
cost-effective strategy for the synthesis of graphene–TiO2 nanocomposite. 
Furthermore, the group has studied the photo-oxidation of AO7 under 
UV irradiation following the pseudo-first-order kinetics as professed by 
the Langmuir–Hinshelwood model. It has likewise been explained that 
the productivity of graphene-based TiO2 is more than pristine TiO2 which 
is because of the restraint of the charge carrier recombination. Zhang et 
al. (2010) demonstrate that high adsorption material will bolster a higher 
organization of reactants close to the TiO2. Leary and Westwood (2011) 
observed graphene sheets acting as flawless electron sinks or electron 
transfer bridges. 
As described by Zhang and group (2011), the enhanced photocatalytic 
action of the graphene–TiO2 is because of its high absorptivity of pollut-
ants, good-charge transportation, and partition which is not found in other 

 
 
 
 
Graphene: A New Form of Carbon 
13 
TiO2/carbon composites. In the photodegradation of MB, P25-GR indi-
cated a huge change compared with the bare P25. Besides, TiO2–graphene 
composites, other composites of semiconductor, and graphene photocata-
lysts have been reported earlier for the degradation of organic pollutants 
in water such as SnO2–graphene, ZnO–graphene, Bi2WO6–graphene, Ag/ 
AgCl/GO, Ag/AgBr/GO, ZnFe2O4–graphene, InNbO4–graphene, and 
g-Bi2MoO6/graphene (Li et al., 2011a, b; Gao et al., 2011; Zhang et al., 
2011; Zhu et al., 2011; Fu and Wang, 2011; Zhang et al., 2011; Zhou et al., 
2011; Yi et al., 2010; Liang et al., 2012). Another eye-catching visible light 
semiconductor is Ag3PO4 which is very much attractive for the decom-
position of many organic dye pollutants. Ag3PO4 has very high quantum 
efficiency toward O2 evolution and is many times quicker than BiVO4 and 
TiO
N , toward the decomposition of MB (Liang et al., 2012). Ag PO  is
2–x
x
3
4
a great efficient catalyst for organic pollutant mineralization under visible 
light, but photocorrosive nature hinders its stability and recyclability. 
Graphene played a great role in the enhancement of reactivity and stability 
of Ag3PO4 photocatalysts significantly. Yang et al. (2013) fabricated GO– 
Ag3PO4 by methods for a two-phase nucleation development process that 
included GO sheets as a capping agent and substrates. In another work, 
Dong et al. (2013) fabricated Ag3PO4/GO by methods of liquid-phase 
deposition. Yang et al. (2013) created Ag3PO4/reduced GO nanocom-
posites by methods for a simple chemical precipitation approach in N,N-
dimethyl formamide solvent. Liu et al. (2012) fabricated Ag3PO4/graphene 
composites by hydrothermal method. Jiang et al. (2013a, b) arranged 
GO-enwrapped Ag3PO4 composites through an ion-exchange method 
for CH3COOAg and Na2HPO4 in presence of GO sheets. Our research 
group has designed the unique Z-scheme RGO–Ag3PO4 heterostructure 
by means of a novel photoreduction method for the first time (Samal et al., 
2016a, b). The resultant heterostructure shows better photomineralization 
of textile colors and protection from photocorrosion with respect to its 
counterpart. These heterostructures not just fundamentally upgrade the 
activity regarding mineralization of colors and hydrogen production yet in 
addition radically enhances its stability. Additionally in our laboratory, we 
have developed RGO/Ag3VO4 nanocomposites by methods for a photore-
duction technique utilizing different sacrificial agents for photohydroxyl-
ation of phenol without a hydroxylating species and photodegradation of 
textile colors under visible light irradiation (Samal et al., 2016a, b). 

 
 
 
14 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
Likewise, we have also developed graphene-based flowers for photo-
catalytic decolorization and H2 evolution (Samal et al., 2016a, b). Figure 
1.2 describes beautiful morphologies of as-synthesized Co3(PO4)2 and 12 
RGO–Co3(PO4)2 investigated by FESEM. Figure 1.2a shows the arche-
typical 3D flower-like structures, along with RGO sheets in the case of 12 
RGO–Co (PO )  (Fig 1.2b and c). The Co (PO )  plates with thicknesses
3
4 2
3
4 2
of 50–100 nm were associated with each other to resemble 3D flowers 
(Fig. 1.2a). These flowers have hierarchical structures with high surface-
to-volume ratios. The XRD pattern reveals that as-synthesized Co3(PO4)2 
is well crystallized (Fig. 1.2d). The considerable photoactivity is due to 
the staggered type II heterojunction system with RGO which prompts the 
improvement of photoactivity under visible light irradiation. 
FIGURE 1.2  FESEM micrographs of Co3(PO4)2 (a) and 12 RGO–Co3(PO4)2 (b and c); (d) 
XRD patterns of the xRGO–Co3(PO4)
  
2 3D flowers.
Source:  Reprinted with permission from Samal et al., 2016b. Copyright © 2016 Wiley-VCH  
Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.  
Reduced GO-based silver nanoparticle-containing composite were  
synthesized by Jiao et al. (2015a, b) has by in-situ process through the  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
Graphene: A New Form of Carbon 
concurrent reduction of GO and noble metal precursors inside the GO 
gel lattice. The researchers portrayed practical utilizations of the reduced 
GO-based nanoparticle-containing composite hydrogels for organic dye 
color evacuation and wastewater treatment. Figure 1.3 demonstrates 
the morphologies of RGO and Ag nanoparticles containing RGO-based 
mixture gels. Both SEM and TEM images of RGO hydrogel (Fig. 1.3a, 
d) demonstrate that the GO sheets were cross-connected in the permeable 
poly(ethyleneimine) systems. The examination with RGO-based gels and 
silver nanoparticle-containing RGO-based composite gels uncover that 
the synthesized silver nanoparticles were homogeneously distributed on 
the surface of the RGO nanosheets to acquire a gel-based nanocomposite 
framework (Xiong et al., 2011). Xiong et al. (2011) portrayed that RGO all 
by oneself can degrade Rhodamine B (RhB) under visible-light irradiation, 
yet with an excessively moderate outlay. So they accomplished copper-ion-
modified RGO integration materials by an immersion method, which showed 
a speedier photocatalytic response rate and better mineralization under 
visible-light irradiation than gold-modified RGO. They explained the whole 
degradation of dye is due to the reactive oxygen species as follows. Firstly, 
RhB was from the ground up excited to RhB*, trailed by electron exchange to 
the RGO, at that point the photoelectrons were caught by surface-adsorbed 
Cu2+ particles to shape Cu+ species, which were immediately oxidized to 
Cu2+ by O2. The RhB•+ radical was degraded itself or individually formed 
reactive oxygen species. At that connect after the reversible Cu species 
go about as an electron communicator, which passes the electrons from 
the RGO surface to the O2, subsequently prompting the consistent age of 
reactive oxygen species for RhB degradation. This reactive oxygen species 
formation makes the present RGO–Cu integration a great photocatalyst for 
the degradation of dye pollutants under visible-light irradiation. 
In recent times, many articles have been published on new graphene-
modified composites for the waste-water treatment application. Jiao et al. 
(2015) have designed RGO/chitosan/silver nanoparticle combinations via 
self-assembly practice and simultaneous reduction of chitosan molecules by 
the whole GO. And, the composites performed as a very good photocatalyst 
for the degradation of RhB and MB dye and even for dye mixture prove 
the potential of the GO composite materials for wastewater treatment. 
Shanmugam et al. (2015) synthesized graphene–V2O5 rods by sequence-
mixing method and the fusion indicated incomprehensible photocatalytic 
reaction for the degradation of MB color by all of the coordinate sunlight 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
16 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
illumination contrasted with UV and visible-light sources. Gan et al. (2014) 
revealed the photothermal impact of graphene-based nanocomposites, 
which is surely a valuable photocatalytic development to organic pollutants. 
Chen et al. (2013a, b) additionally unified the GO–chitosan building a whole 
hydrogel and express it as ecstatic range absorbents for water cleansing. As 
a modern class of QD materials, graphene quantum dots have right urgently 
turned facing a dynamic zone of the incredible draw not quite the alike as 
harmful and flimsy ordinary semiconductor QDs. Additionally, GQDs are 
consequently benevolent and greatly hearty against ferocious synthetic 
chemical assaults or solid UV-light illumination. Pan et al. (2015) synthe-
sized graphene quantum dots TiO2 nanoparticles which have extended light 
absorption from UV to visible range. Here, the arrangement of heterojunc-
tions between TiO2 nanoparticles and GQDs in the composite assumes a key 
part in the improved noticeable light reactant action. Additionally, Singh 
et al. (2017) influenced a huge new approach for the natural utilization of 
FIGURE 1.3  SEM and TEM images for the lyophilized RGO/PEI hydrogel (a, c) and 
RGO/PEI/Ag hydrogel (b, d). 
Source: Reprinted with permission From Jiao et al., 2015. Copyright © 2015, American 
Chemical Society 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
17 
Graphene: A New Form of Carbon 
pollutant soot to residue by magnificently using a contamination material 
for degradation of the other pollutant material. The group has done isola-
tion of two-dimensional graphitic materials as water-dissolvable graphene 
nanosheets (GNS) from dirty−dangerous dark pollutant particulate matter 
such as dark carbon from petroleum ash. These graphene sheets addition-
ally utilized for the photocatalytic degradation of dangerous dye color, for 
example, MB affected by visible light illumination. Curiously, this new 
pollutant catalyst demonstrated extraordinary movement almost 11 times 
quicker debasement rate inside ~90 min of visible light irradiation than 
insoluble graphene sheet. The group additionally detailed investigation 
comparison of the photocatalytic degradation conduct of insoluble GNS and 
water-soluble GNS on the broadly utilized organic dye color as MB under the 
visible light illumination utilizing a 60-W tungsten bulb. In Figure 1.4, the 
component of the dynamic debasement of color was depicted by the surface 
adsorption/interactions of MB on water-soluble GNS toward the higher side 
when contrasted with graphene sheets which essentially quickened holding 
cooperation of MB with surface carboxylic acid groups of the dye. This 
procedure starts the debasement of the dye in nearness of wsGNS. Alongside 
this, the high thickness functionalization of wsGNS with negative charges 
prompts upgraded spatial partition between the highest occupied molecular 
orbital and lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (HOMO−LUMO) along-
side generation of oxygen radicals and thusly enhancing the proficiency of 
photocatalytic degradation of organic dyes. 
FIGURE 1.4  Schematic diagram showing MB photodegradation. 
Source: Reprinted with permission from Singh et al., 2017. Copyright © 2017, American 
Chemical Society 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
18 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
Apart from organic pollutants, heavy metal ions such as bivalent 
cadmium [Cd(II)], bivalent lead [Pb(II)], and hexavalent chromium 
[Cr(VI)] are very harmful toxic inorganic pollutants in water bodies. Zhang 
et al. (2013) derived RGO incorporated with commercial ZnO particles 
by a solvothermal reaction to form RGO–ZnO composites for photocata-
lytic degradation of Cr(VI) in water under UV light irradiation. ZnO is a 
well-known photocorrosive photocatalyst, but the RGO–ZnO composite 
exhibits enhanced photoactivity as compared to blank ZnO sample. And 
also, RGO–ZnO shows great recycling activity test without photocorro-
sion of ZnO. The enhanced photocatalytic performance of RGO–ZnO 
composite is credited to the effective hybridization between ZnO and 
RGO with a π-conjugative 2D framework. The RGO productively isolates 
the photogenerated charge transporters by decreasing the enactment of 
surface oxygen atoms in ZnO, accordingly upgrading the photoactivity 
and photostability of RGO–ZnO composites. Additionally, graphene 
sheets assume a key part in advancing the photocatalytic purification 
adequacy of graphene-based composites. For instance, Akhavan (2009) 
has arranged RGO–TiO2 thin films through deposition of GO sheets on 
TiO2 thin films took after by annealing and a UV−vis light-assisted reduc-
tion process and used them for photo-inactivation of Escherichia coli in a 
watery arrangement under sunlight illumination. Also, Cao and coworkers 
(2013) have reported the preparation of RGO–TiO2 composites through 
the redox response among TiCl3 and GO for photocatalytic inactivation of 
E. coli. Recently, Li et al. (2014) have studied the antibacterial activity by 
the use of Staphylococcus aureus and E. coli to examine the antibacte-
rial activities of extensive zone monolayer graphene film on conductor 
Cu, semiconductor Ge, and cover SiO2. The outcomes obtained by him 
show that the graphene films on Cu and Ge could be able to inhibit the 
development of the two microscopic organisms. But, the graphene insu-
lator on SiO2 did not show any evidence of antibacterial property. The 
SEM morphology of S. aureus and E. coli on graphene films additionally 
affirms the layer harm and decimation of layer integrity by the imme-
diate contact of the two microscopic organisms with graphene on Cu and 
Ge in the article (Li et al., 2014). Nanda and group (2016) studied the 
antibacterial mechanism of GO at the subatomic level through Raman 
spectroscopy at least inhibitory focus (MIC) by utilizing cultures of 
E. coli and Enterococcus faecalis. They described the mechanism that 
the GO infiltrates cell layer of E. coli through its sharp edges. In case 

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
19 
Graphene: A New Form of Carbon 
of E. faecalis, clear membrane damages are observed. In addition, 
they also observed that when the concentration of GO is increased, 
debasement of the external and the internal cell films of microscopic 
organisms increases. A thorough study by Chong et al. (2017) explained 
the underlying mechanism of enhancement of antibacterial activity of 
GO by simulated sunlight. They observed in their experiment that the 
singlet oxygen generated by GO is responsible for slight oxidation of 
antioxidant biomolecules. Be that as it may, the fundamental driver of 
oxidation they found was the light-actuated electron–hole pairs evolved 
on the GO surface. 
1.4.3 ENERGY APPLICATIONS 
Owing to the exhaustion of the world energy store and the requirement of 
cleaner environment, the eagerness for elective and renewable fuels has 
extended rapidly around the world. Hydrogen vitality has been perceived 
as one of these potential energy vectors. It has been utilized broadly as 
a fuel. Photocatalytic splitting of water by solar power presumed to be 
efficient one for hydrogen generation. Different kinds of water-splitting 
photocatalysts have been investigated so far. For the first time, Fujishima 
and Honda reported hydrogen evolution from photoelectrochemical 
water splitting in 1972. TiO2, having extraordinary properties, has been 
employed as efficient photocatalyst for water splitting under UV light illu-
mination; however, it can use just 4% of the entire solar light and has low 
quantum efficiency. The wide band gap of TiO2 was incorporated with GO 
which has been very effective in separating charges on TiO2. Also, there 
happens to be the formation of Ti–O–C bonding with unpaired π-electrons 
of GO and surface Ti atoms of TiO2 which extend the light absorption 
range of TiO2 (Zhang et al., 2010). Also, GO can form p–n heterojunction 
with n-type ZnO, TiO2, and so on for visible light absorption [148]. The 
GO as electron sink is responsible for the higher photocatalytic activity 
of GO–TiO2 composites in H2 evolution from water. The wide band gap 
catalyst being UV light active has the limitation to harness visible spec-
trum. Narrow band gap photocatalysts like CdS individually cannot be 
utilized as photocatalyst for water splitting practically as it tends to get 
decompose to metallic form under photoirradiation, and also bare CdS 
has a tendency to get aggregate to decrease the surface area having a 

 
 
 
20 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
higher recombination possibility. GO not only hindered the aggregation 
and recombination owing to its large 2D structure but also promoted the 
photocatalytic activity of CdS. So GO-based CdS photocatalysts have 
been reported of having quantum efficiency of 22.5% at 420 nm (Li et 
al., 2011a, b). Instead of being cocatalyst or sensitizer for other catalysts, 
GO itself has the calibration with so many flexibility. GO/RGO has been 
used directly as photocatalyst for water splitting by researchers (Yeh et 
al., 2011). Jiang et al. (2013a, b) investigated the redox energy levels of 
GO with respect to water oxidation and reduction potential levels. It has 
been observed that all five GOs have appropriate band gap and ideal band 
positions for water splitting under visible-light illumination. 
Yeh and coworkers (2013) changed the conductivity type of GO from 
p-type to n-type by introducing amino and amide groups on the GO 
surface which is able to catalyze the H2 and O2 evolutions from water 
simultaneously. In another report, the same group has presented the 
hydrogen generation by utilizing RGO with a band gap varying from 2.4 
to 4.3 eV with no cocatalyst (Yeh et al., 2010). GO or GO-based photo-
catalysts have the ability to split water and also separate the electron–hole 
during the photocatalytic reaction. Furthermore, Wang et al. (2017) carried 
out the DFT calculations of RGO/Pt–TiO2 composite and observed a 
reduced band gap from 2.88 eV to 2.76 eV. They also determined that 
the unique energy levels situated at TiO2 band gap were packed with C2p 
orbitals of graphene, which brought about energized electrons in TiO2 
effectively exchanging to graphene to achieve good promotion in photo-
activity toward H2 production which is 81 times better than bare TiO2. 
Recently, our group has developed p–n heterojunction using p-type RGO 
and n-type Cu3(PO4)2 by obtaining the methods involving solid-state as 
well as liquid-state reactions (Samal and Das, 2018). This heterojunction 
catalyzes the water splitting efficiently and produces H2 under visible light 
irradiation. Here, the RGO/copper phosphate photocatalyst has a unique 
rod, flower, caramel-treat-like morphology and showed enhanced activity 
for H2 generation under visible light irradiation. Among them, maximum 
charge carrier separation was achieved in case of rod-like structure which 
showed 7500 μmol/h/g amount of H2. This work presents the controlled 
morphology growth of photocatalyst for hydrogen evolution through 
water splitting. 
Graphene has also been used to convert CO2 into hydrocarbon fuel. 
Liang et al. (2011) explored the impact of structural defect of graphene on 

 
Graphene: A New Form of Carbon 
21 
the photocatalytic reduction of CO2. Also, an improvement was observed 
(~sevenfold) in the photoreduction of CO2 by using TiO2/graphene 
nanocomposites as compared to pure TiO2. Tu et al. (2012) reported 
the fabrication of robust hollow spheres by a layer-by-layer deposition 
method for efficient photocatalytic application toward CO2 conversion. 
They compared the photocatalytic activity of commercial P25 and TiO2/ 
graphene nanocomposites for photoreduction of CO2, where nine times 
enhanced photoactivity was achieved in presence of graphene. This is 
because of the ultrathin nature of nanosheets which allows fast movement 
of charge carriers onto the surface of photocatalyst thereby achieving 
spatial charge separation. Tan et al. (2013) have synthesized rGO/TiO2 by 
simple solvothermal method to get the hybrid nanocrystals and evaluated 
the photocatalytic activity of the prepared rGO/TiO2 nanocomposites in 
the reduction of CO2. The observed result confirms the advanced photo-
catalytic activity of the rGO/TiO2 as compared to pristine graphite oxide 
and pure anatase TiO2. 
Along with other energy applications, RGO, among graphene family, 
has been most commonly used as material in lithium-ion battery research. 
In the course of the most recent two decades, lithium-ion batteries have 
turned out to be the most exceptionally used energy storage systems in 
cell phones, energy-effective transportation, and energy-storage devices. 
Cheng (2017) developed “Magic G” having high surface area and elec-
trical conductivity, used for both anode and cathode materials of Li-ion 
batteries. This Magic G is a honeycomb-like porous graphene sponge 
that increases the rate capacity and cyclability of lithium-ion batteries. 
The cell with Magic G-added substance demonstrated an extraordinary 
improvement of capacity retention in high-rate charging, discharging, 
and cycling and is a promising added substance material for cutting-edge 
lithium-particle batteries. 
1.4.4 CORROSION-RESISTANT COATING 
Graphene is used to create corrosion-resistive coatings which might 
safeguard the important building as well as machine components from 
corrosion. Owing to outstanding characteristics of graphene, the quality 
of coating could be significantly improved. Graphene is quite suitable for 
top-quality nanocomposite coating material with a high-efficiency filler 

 
 
 
 
 
22 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
matrix. Moreover, this has been used as high-quality coating material with 
the formation of graphene–nanoparticles composites. This means that 
graphene can become a protector of scratch or other physical damage to a 
substrate. Graphene has been shown to have an effective barrier to corro-
sion since it has been labeled indestructible under the environments in 
which certain substrates’ chemical reactions may happen. It has also been 
observed that the graphene can be used as a corrosion protector of steel by 
growing graphene flakes directly onto a stainless steel surface. Ludovi’s 
work (2015) uses graphene to repel water from the surface of stainless 
steel fibers with its natural hydrophobic characteristics. Additionally, the 
electric characteristics of graphene lower the chance of redox reactions 
on the surface discouraging from corrosion. Graphene nanofillers seem to 
be distinctive because they can boost the characteristics even at minimum 
loads of protective coatings. In glass corrosion protection, the coating 
material should be strong, transparent, very thin, and chemically inert. 
Graphene coating on glass materials has been evidently impeccable with 
all these extraordinary characteristics. The GO-based polyethylene imide 
coating for corrosion barrier was investigated by the researchers; GO was 
produced in accordance with the modified Hummers method by oxidiza-
tion and exfoliation of graphite (Yu et al., 2012). The coating was made 
on a polyethylene imide film with GO through the layer-by-layer method. 
Wang et al. (2011) have noted that the capability and cycling stability of 
rechargeable lithium–sulfur battery cathode material can be modified by 
using GO-enveloped sulfur particulate material. The result was a high and 
stable composite having capability with approximately 600 mA h/g over 
100 cycles. Liao et al. (2012) using in-situ plate synthesized graphene-
reinforced polyurethane acrylate coating. Their findings illustrated that 
the composite electrical conductivity increased as the graphene amount 
increased in the synthesized composite material. 
1.5 SUMMARY AND FUTURE PERSPECTIVES 
From this chapter, it could be derived that graphene is the optimum future 
solution for energy and environmental problems. The high light absorp-
tion and antirecombination property of graphene lead the photocatalytic 
field applications. Graphene could be used in water purification, water 
desalination, H2 evolution, CO2 reduction, and also in lithium batteries. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
23 
Graphene: A New Form of Carbon 
Particularly, GO band gap could be varied to achieve an efficient 
photocatalyst for a practical approach. In the matter of photocatalytic 
water splitting, the flexible band gap of GO should be used efficiently 
and prominently to get better solar-to-hydrogen conversion efficiency. 
Graphene is one of the cheapest and abundant solutions for future 
perspectives. Generally, at the point when photocatalyst nanoparticles 
are stacked on graphene sheets just a little division region of photocata-
lyst get in contact with the graphene sheet, so the efficient electron is 
not able to get transferred to the reaction-site properly to catalyze the 
reaction efficiently in graphene-based applications. The photocatalytic 
activities of the photocatalysts are increased by the light absorption/ 
band edge alternation ought to be portrayed conspicuously as well. To 
date, a cost-effective, feasible, and industrial approach has not yet been 
developed for the production of graphene. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The authors are thankful to Prof. Suddhasatwa Basu, Director, CSIR-
IMMT for giving permission to publish the book chapter. Alaka Samal is 
thankful to CSIR for the grant of senior research fellowship. 
KEYWORDS 
• 
graphene 
• 
GO membranes 
• 
water decontamination 
• 
energy applications 
REFERENCES 
Abraham, J.; Vasu, K. S.; Williams, C. D.; Gopinadhan, K.; Su,Y.; Cherian, C. T.; Dix, 
J.; Prestat, E.; Haigh, S. J.; Grigorieva, I. V.; Carbone, P.; Geim, A. K.; Nair, R. R. 
Tunable Sieving of Ions Using Graphene Oxide Membranes. Nat. Nanotechnol. 2017, 
12, 546–550. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
24 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
Akhavan, O. Graphene Nanomesh by ZnO Nanorod Photocatalysts. ACS Nano 2010, 4, 
4174–4180. 
Akhavan, O.; Ghaderi, E. Photocatalytic Reduction of Graphene Oxide Nanosheets on 
TiO2 Thin Film for Photo Inactivation of Bacteria in Solar Light Irradiation, J. Phys. 
Chem. C 2009, 113, 20214−20220. 
Akhavan, O.; Photocatalytic Reduction of Graphene Oxides Hybridized by ZnO 
Nanoparticles in Ethanol. Carbon 2011, 49, 11–18. 
Allen, M. J.; Tung, V. C.; Kaner, R. B. Honeycomb Carbon: A Review of Graphene. Chem. 
Rev. 2010, 110, 132–145. 
An, X.; Li, K.; Tang, J. Cu2O/Reduced Graphene Oxide Composites for the Photocatalytic 
Conversion of CO2. Chem Sus Chem 2014, 7, 1086–1093. 
Aneja, K. S.; Mallik, H. L.; Böhm, Khanna, A. S.; Böhm, S. Functionalised Graphene as a 
Barrier Against Corrosion. Flat Chem. 2017, 1, 11–19. 
Bai, S.; Shen, X.; Zhong, X.; Liu, Y.; Zhu, G.; Xu, X.; Chen, K. One-Pot Solvothermal 
Preparation of Magnetic Reduced Graphene Oxide-Ferrite Hybrids for Organic Dye 
Removal. Carbon 2012, 50, 2337–2346. 
Balandin, A. A.; Ghosh, S.; Bao, W. Z.; Calizo, I.; Tewelddbrhan, D.; Miao, F.; Lau, C. N. 
Superior Thermal Conductivity of Single-Layer Graphene. Nano Lett. 2008, 8, 902–907. 
Bhuyan, S. A. Md.; Uddin, N. Md.; Islam M. Md.; Bipasha, F. A.; Hossain, S. S. Synthesis 
of Graphene. Int Nano Lett. 2016, 6, 65–83. 
Böhm, S. et al. Graphene against corrosion. Nat. Nanotechnol. 2014, 9, 741–742. 
Bolotin, K. I.; Ghahari, F.; Shulman, M. D.; Stormer, H. L.; Kim, P. Observation of the 
Fractional Quantum Hall Effect in Graphene. Nature 2011a, 462, 196–199. 
Bolotin, K. I.; Sikes, K. J.; Jiang, Z.; Klima, M.; Fudenberg, Hone, J.; Kim, P.; Stormer, 
H. L. Ultrahigh Electron Mobility in Suspended Graphene. Sol. State Commun. 2011b, 
146, 351–355. 
Bremner, D. H.; Molina, R.; Martınez, F.; Melero, J. A.; Segura, Y. Degradation of 
Phenolic Aqueous Solutions by High Frequency Sono-Fenton Systems (US–Fe2O3/ 
SBA-15–H2O2), Appl. Catal. B 2009, 90, 380–388. 
Cao, A. N.; Liu, Z.; Chu, S. S.; Wu, M. H.; Ye, Z. M.; Cai, Z. W.; Chang, Y. L.; Wang, S. F.; 
Gong, Q. H.; Liu, Y. F. A Facile One-step Method to Produce Graphene–CdS Quantum 
Dot Nanocomposites as Promising Optoelectronic Materials. Adv. Mater. 2010, 22, 
103–106. 
Cao, B.; Cao, S.; Dong, P.; Gao, J.; Wang, J. High Antibacterial Activity of Ultrafine TiO2/ 
Graphene Sheets Nanocomposites Under Visible Light Irradiation, Mater. Lett. 2013, 
93, 349−352. 
Chen, G.; Sun, M.; Wei, Q.; Zhang, Y.; Zhu, B.; Du, B. Ag3PO4/Graphene-Oxide 
Composite with Remarkably Enhanced Visible-Light-Driven Photocatalytic Activity 
Toward Dyes in Water. J. Hazard. Mater. 2013a, 244–245, 86–93. 
Chen, Y.; Chen, L.; Bai, H.; Li, L. Graphene Oxide–Chitosan Composite Hydrogels as 
Broad-Spectrum Adsorbents for Water Purification. J. Mater. Chem. A 2013b, 1, 
1992–2001. 
Cheng, Q. Porous Graphene Sponge Additives for Lithium Ion Batteries with Excellent 
Rate Capability, Scientific Reports 2017, 7, 925. 
Chong, M. N.; Chow, C. W.; Saint, C. Recent Developments in Photocatalytic Water 
Treatment Technology: A Review. Water Res. 2010, 44, 2997–3027. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Graphene: A New Form of Carbon 
25 
Chong, Y.; Ge, C.; Fang, G.; Wu, R.; Zhang, H.; Chai, Z.; Chen, C.; Yin, J.-J. Light-
Enhanced Antibacterial Activity of Graphene Oxide, Mainly via Accelerated Electron 
Transfer. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2017, 51, 10154–10161. 
Cohen-Tanugi, D.; Grossman, J. C. Nanoporous Graphene as a Reverse Osmosis Membrane: 
Recent Insights from Theory and Simulation. Desalination 2015, 366, 59–70. 
Das, D. P.; Samal, A.; Das, J.; Dash, A.; Gupta, H. One-Pot Fabrication of RGO–Ag3VO4 
Nanocomposites by In Situ Photo Reduction Using Different Sacrificial Agents: High 
Selectivity Toward Catechol Synthesis. Photochem. Photobiol. 2014, 90, 57–65. 
Dong, P. Y.; Wang, Y. H.; Cao, B. C.; Xin, S. Y.; Guo, L. N.; Zhang, J.; Li, F. H. Ag3PO4/ 
Reduced Graphite Oxide Sheets Nanocomposites with Highly Enhanced Visible Light 
Photocatalytic Activity and Stability. Appl. Catal. B 2013, 132–133, 45–53. 
Dreyer, D. R.; Park, S.; Bielawski, C. W.; Ruoff, R. S. The Chemistry of Graphene Oxide. 
Chem. Soc. Rev. 2010, 39, 228–240. 
Du, X.; Skachko, I.; Barker, A.; Andrei, E. Y. Approaching Ballistic Transport in Suspended 
Graphene. Nat. Nanotech. 2008, 3, 491–495. 
Du, X.; Skachko, I.; Duerr, F.; Luican, A.; Andrei, E. Y. Fractional Quantum Hall Effect 
and Insulating Phase of Dirac Electrons in Graphene. Nature 2009, 462, 192–195. 
Eder, D.; Motta, M.; Windle, A. H. Iron-doped Pt–TiO2 Nanotubes for Photo-Catalytic 
Water Splitting. Nanotechnology 2009, 20, 055602. 
Fu, Y. S.; Wang, X. Magnetically Separable ZnFe2O4–Graphene Catalyst and Its High 
Photocatalytic Performance Under Visible Light Irradiation. Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 2011, 
50, 7210–7218. 
Fujishima, A.; Honda, K. Electrochemical Photolysis of Water at a Semiconductor 
Electrode. Nature 1972, 238, 37–38. 
Fujishima, A.; Zhang, X.; Tryk, D. A. TiO2 Photocatalysis and Related Surface Phenomena, 
Surf. Sci. Rep. 2008, 63, 515–582. 
Gan, Z.; Wu, X.; Meng, M.; Zhu, X.; Yang, L.; Chu, P. K. Photothermal Contribution to 
Enhanced Photocatalytic Performance of Graphene-Based Nanocomposites. ACS Nano 
2014, 8, 9304–9310. 
Gao, B.; Chen, G. Z.; Puma, G. L. Carbon Nanotubes/Titanium Dioxide (CNTs/TiO2) 
Nanocomposites Prepared by Conventional and Novel Surfactant Wrapping Sol–Gel 
Methods Exhibiting Enhanced Photocatalytic Activity. Appl. Catal. B: Environ. 2009, 
89, 503–509. 
Gao, E. P.; Wang,W. Z.; Shang, M.; Xu, J. H. Synthesis and Enhanced Photocatalytic 
Performance of Graphene-Bi2WO6 Composite. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2011, 13, 
2887–2893. 
Goh, P.; Ismail, A. Graphene-Based Nanomaterial: The State-of-the-Art Material for 
Cutting Edge Desalination Technology. Desalination 2015, 356, 115–128. 
Guinea, F.; Katsnelson, M. I.; Geim, A. K. Energy Gaps, Topological Insulator State and 
Zero-Field Quantum Hall Effect in Graphene by Strain Engineering. Nat. Phys. 2010, 
6, 30–33. 
Guo, J. J.; Li, Y.; Zhu, S. M.; Chen, Z. X.; Liu, Q. L.; Zhang, D.; Moonc, W-J.; Song, 
D-M. Synthesis of WO3@Graphene Composite for Enhanced Photocatalytic Oxygen 
Evolution from Water. RSC Adv. 2012, 2, 1356–1363. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
26 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
Gurzęda, B.; Florczak, P.; Kempinski, M.; Peplinska, B.; Krawczyk. P.; Jurga, S. Synthesis 
of Graphite Oxide by Electrochemical Oxidation in Aqueous Perchloric Acid. Carbon 
2016, 100, 540–545. 
Han, C.; Yang, M. Q.; Weng, B.; Xu, Y. J. Improving the Photocatalytic Activity and Anti-
Photocorrosion of Semiconductor ZnO by Coupling with Versatile Carbon. Phys. Chem. 
Chem. Phys. 2014, 16, 16891–16903. 
Han, L.; Wang, P.; Dong, S. Progress in Graphene-Based Photoactive Nanocomposites as 
a Promising Class of Photocatalyst. Nanoscale 2012, 4, 5814–5825. 
Han, Y.; Xu, Z.; Gao, C. Ultrathin Graphene Nanofiltration Membrane for Water 
Purification. Adv. Funct. Mater. 2013, 23, 3693–3700. 
Hatakeyama, K.; Tateishi, H.; Taniguchi, T.; Koinuma, M.; Kida, T.; Hayami, S.; Yokoi, 
H. Matsumoto, Y. Tunable Graphene Oxide Proton/Electron Mixed Conductor that 
Functions at Room Temperature. Chem. Mater. 2014, 26, 5598–5604. 
Hega, H. M.; Zou, L. Graphene Oxide-Assisted Membranes: Fabrication and Potential 
Applications in Desalination and Water Purification, J. Membr. Sci. 2015, 484, 95–106. 
Homaeigohar, S.; Elbahri, M. Graphene Membranes for Water Desalination. NPG Asia 
Mat. 2017, 9, e427. 
Hu, H.; Wang, X.; Liu, F.; Wang, J.; Xu, C.; Rapid Microwave-Assisted Synthesis of 
Graphene Nanosheets–Zinc Nanocomposites: Optical and Photocatalytic Properties. 
Synth. Met. 2011, 161, 404–410. 
Hu, M.; Mi, B. Enabling Graphene Oxide Nanosheets as Water Separation Membranes, 
Environ. Sci. Technol. 2013, 47, 3715–3723. 
Huang, X.; Yin, Z.; Wu, S.; Qi, X.; He, Q.; Zhang, Q.; Yan, Q.; Boey, F.; Zhang, H. 
Graphene Based Materials: Synthesis, Characterization, Properties, and Applications. 
Small 2011, 7, 1876–1902. 
Huanga, A.; Feng, B. Synthesis of Novel Graphene Oxide-Polyimide Hollow Fiber 
Membranes for Seawater Desalination. J. Membrane Sci. 2018, 548, 59–65. 
Jia, L.; Wang, D. H.; Huang, Y. X.; Xu, A. W.; Yu, H. Q. Highly Durable N-Doped 
Graphene/CdS Nanocomposites with Enhanced Photocatalytic Hydrogen Evolution 
from Water under Visible Light Irradiation. J. Phys. Chem. C 2011, 115, 11466–11473. 
Jiang, B. J.; Wang, Y. H.; Wang, J. Q.; Tiang, C. G.; Li, W. J.; Feng, Q. M.; Pan, Q. J.; 
Fu, H. G. In Situ Fabrication of Ag/Ag3PO4/Graphene Triple Heterostructure Visible-
Light Photocatalyst Through Graphene-Assisted Reduction Strategy, Chem. Cat. Chem. 
2013a, 5, 1359–1367. 
Jiang, X.; Nisar, J.; Pathak, B.; Zhao, J.; Ahuja, R. Graphene Oxide as a Chemically 
Tunable 2-D Material for Visible-Light Photocatalyst Applications. J. Catal. 2013b, 299, 
204–209. 
Jiao, L. Y.; Wang, X. R.; Diankov, G.; Wang, H. L.; Dai, H. J. Facile Synthesis of High-
Quality Graphene Nanoribbons. Nat. Nanotechnol. 2010, 5, 321–325. 
Jiao, L. Y.; Zhang, L.; Wang, X. R.; Diankov, G.; Dai, H. J. Narrow Graphene Nanoribbons 
from Carbon Nanotubes. Nature 2009, 458, 877–880. 
Jiao, T.; Guo, H.; Zhang, Q.; Peng, Q.; Tang, Y.; Yan, X.; Li, B. Reduced Graphene Oxide-
Based Silver Nanoparticle-Containing Composite Hydrogel as Highly Efficient Dye 
Catalysts for Wastewater Treatment. Sci. Rep. 2015a, 5, 11873. 
Jiao, T.; Zhao, H.; Zhou, J.; Zhang, Q.; Luo, X.; Hu, J.; Peng, Q.; Yan, X. Self-Assembly 
Reduced Graphene Oxide Nanosheet Hydrogel Fabrication by Anchorage of Chitosan/ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Graphene: A New Form of Carbon 
27 
Silver and Its Potential Efficient Application toward Dye Degradation for Wastewater 
Treatments. ACS Sust. Chem. Eng. 2015b, 3, 3130–3139. 
Joshi, R. K.; Carbone, P.; Wang, F. C.; Kravets, V. G.; Su, Y.; Grigorieva, I. V.; Wu, H. A.; 
Geim, A. K.; Nair, R. R. Precise and Ultrafast Molecular Sieving Through Graphene 
Oxide Membranes. Science 2014, 343, 752–754. 
Kalita, G.; Masahiro, M.; Uchida, H. Few Layers of Graphene as Transparent Electrode 
from Botanical Derivative Camphor. Mater. Lett. 2010, 64, 2180–2183. 
Leary, R.; Westwood, A. Carbonaceous Nanomaterials for the Enhancement of TiO2 
Photocatalysis. Carbon 2011, 49, 741–772. 
Lee, J. M.; Pyun,Y. B.; Yi, J.; Choung, J. W.; Park, W. II. ZnO Nanorod−Graphene Hybrid 
Architectures for Multifunctional Conductors. J. Phys. Chem. C 2009, 113, 19134–19138. 
Li, B. J.; Cao, H. Q. ZnO@Graphene Composite with Enhanced Performance for the 
Removal of Dye from Water. J. Mater. Chem. 2011, 21, 3346–3349. 
Li, J.; Wang, G.; Zhu, H.; Zhang, M.; Zheng, X.; Di, Z.; Liu, X.; Wang, X. Antibacterial 
Activity of Large-Area Monolayer Graphene Film Manipulated by Charge Transfer. Sci. 
Rep. 2014, 4, 4359. 
Li, Q.; Guo, B.; Yu, J.; Ran, J.; Zhang, B.; Yan, H.; Gong, J. Highly Efficient Visible-
Light-Driven Photocatalytic Hydrogen Production of CdS-Cluster-Decorated Graphene 
Nanosheets. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2011a, 133, 10878–10884. 
Li, Y. G.; Wang, H. L.; Xie, L. M.; Liang, Y. Y.; Hong, G. S.; Dai, H. J. MoS2 Nanoparticles 
Grown on Graphene: An Advanced Catalyst for the Hydrogen Evolution Reaction. J. 
Am. Chem. Soc. 2011b, 133, 7296–7299. 
Li, Y.; Hu, Y.; Peng, S.; Lu, G.; Li, S. Synthesis of CdS Nanorods by an Ethylenediamine 
Assisted Hydrothermal Method for Photocatalytic Hydrogen Evolution, J. Phys. Chem. 
C 2009, 113, 9352–9358. 
Liang, Q.; Shi, Y.; Ma, W.; Li, Z.; Yang, X. Enhanced Photocatalytic Activity and Structural 
Stability by Hybridizing Ag3PO4 Nanospheres with Graphene Oxide Sheets. Phys. 
Chem. Chem. Phys. 2012, 14, 15657–15665. 
Liang, Y. T.; Vijayan, B. K.; Gray, K. A.; Hersam, M. C. Minimizing Graphene Defects 
Enhances Titania Nanocomposite-Based Photocatalytic Reduction of CO2 for Improved 
Solar Fuel Production. Nano Lett. 2011, 11, 2865–2870. 
Liao, K.-H.; Qian, Y.; Macosko, C. W. Ultralow Percolation Graphene/Polyurethane 
Acrylate Nanocomposites. Polymer 2012, 53, 3756–3761. 
Lightcap, I. V.; Kosel, T. H.; Kamat, P. V. Anchoring Semiconductor and Metal 
Nanoparticles on a Two-Dimensional Catalyst Mat. Storing and Shuttling Electrons with 
Reduced Graphene Oxide. Nano Lett. 2010, 10, 577–583. 
Linsebigler, A. L.; Lu, G.; Yates, J. T. Photocatalysis on TiO2 Surfaces: Principles, 
Mechanisms, and Selected Results. Chem. Rev. 1995, 95, 735–758. 
Liu, J.; Yang, H.; Zhen, S. G.; Poh, C. K.; Chaurasia, A.; Luo, J.; Wu, X.; Yeow, E. K. 
L.; Sahoo, N. G.; Lin, J.; Shen, Z. A Green Approach to the Synthesis of High-Quality 
Graphene Oxide Flakes via Electrochemical Exfoliation of Pencil Core. RSC Adv. 2013, 
3, 11745–11750. 
Liu, L.; Liu, J. C.; Sun, D. D. Graphene Oxide Enwrapped Ag3PO4 Composite: Towards a 
Highly Efficient and Stable Visible-Light-Induced Photocatalyst for Water Purification. 
Catal. Sci. Technol. 2012, 2, 2525–2532. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
28 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
Low, J. X.; Yu, J.; Ho, W. Graphene-Based Photocatalysts for CO2 Reduction to Solar Fuel. 
J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 2015, 6, 4244–4251. 
Low, T.; Perebeinos, V.; Tersoff, J.; Avouris, P. H. Deformation and Scattering in Graphene 
Over Substrate Steps. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2012, 108, 096601. 
Lu, X. K.; Yu, M. F.; Huang, H.; Ruoff, R. S. Tailoring Graphite with the Goal of Achieving 
Single Sheets. Nanotechnology 1999, 10, 269–272. 
Ludovi, F.; Dumée, L.; Ziyu, H.; Wang, P.; Xiong, S. J.; Feng, C. F.; Tan, M. Y.; Mikel, 
F. S.; Gray, D. S.; Pacheco, A.; Hodgson, P.; Majumder, M.; Kong, L. Growth of Nano-
Textured Graphene Coatings Across Highly Porous Stainless Steel Supports Towards 
Corrosion Resistant Coatings. Carbon 2015, 87, 395–408. 
Lui, G.; Liao, J. Y.; Duan, A. Graphene-Wrapped Hierarchical TiO2 Nanoflower Composites 
with Enhanced Photocatalytic Performance. J. Mater. Chem. A. 2013, 1, 12255–12262. 
Mahmoud, K. A.; Mansoor, B.; Mansour, A.; Khraisheh, M. Functional Graphene 
Nanosheets: The Next Generation Membranes for Water Desalination. Desalination 
2015, 356, 208–225. 
Meidanchi, A.; Akhavan, O. Superparamagnetic Zinc Ferrite Spinel–Graphene 
Nanostructures for Fast Wastewater Purification. Carbon 2014, 69, 230–238. 
Min,Y. L.; Zhang, K.; Chen, L. H.; Chen,Y. C.; Zhang, Y. G. Ionic Liquid Assisting 
Synthesis of ZnO/Graphene Heterostructure Photocatalysts with Tunable Photoresponse 
Properties. Diam. Relat. Mater. 2012, 26, 32–38. 
Moon, G. -H.; Kim, D. -H.; Kim, H. -I.; Bokare, A. D.; Choi, W. Platinum-like Behavior 
of Reduced Graphene Oxide as a Co-catalyst on TiO2 for the Efficient Photocatalytic 
Oxidation of Arsenite. Environ. Sci. Technol. Lett. 2014, 1, 185–190. 
Morishige, K.; Hamada, T. Iron Oxide Pillared Graphite. Langmuir 2005, 21, 6277–6281.
 Muthirulan, P.; Devi, C. K. N.; Sundaram, M. M. Fabrication and Characterization of 
Efficient Hybrid Photocatalysts Based on Titania and Graphene for Acid Orange Seven 
Dye Degradation under UV Irradiation. Adv. Mat. Lett. 2014, 5, 163–171. 
Nanda, S. S.; Yi, D. K.; Kim, K. Study of Antibacterial Mechanism of Graphene Oxide 
Using Raman Spectroscopy. Sci. Rep. 2016, 6, 28443. 
Nethravathi, C.; Nisha, T.; Ravishankar, N.; Shivakumara, C.; Rajamathi, M. Graphene– 
Nanocrystalline Metal Sulphide Composites Produced by a One-Pot Reaction Starting 
from Graphite Oxide. Carbon 2009, 47, 2054–2059. 
Ng, Y. H.; Iwase, A.; Kudo, A.; Amal, R. Reducing Graphene Oxide on a Visible-Light 
BiVO4 Photocatalyst for an Enhanced Photoelectrochemical Water Splitting, J. Phys. 
Chem. Lett. 2010a, 1, 2607–2612. 
Ng, Y. H.; Lightcap, I. V.; Goodwin, K.; Matsumura, M.; Kamat, P. V. To What Extent 
Do Graphene Scaffolds Improve the Photovoltaic and Photocatalytic Response of TiO2 
Nanostructured Films. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 2010b, 1, 2222–2227. 
Nicolai, A.; Sumpter, B. G.; Meunier, V. Tunable Water Desalination Across Graphene 
Oxide Framework Membranes. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2014, 16, 8646–8654. 
Novoselov, K. S.; Geim, A. K.; Morozov, S. V.; Jiang, D.; Zhang, Y.; Dubonos, S. V.; 
Grigorieva, I. V.; Firsov, A. A. Electric Field Effect in Atomically Thin Carbon Films. 
Science 2004 306, 666–669. 
Pan, D.; Jiao, J.; Li, Z.; Guo, Y.; Feng, C.; Liu, Y.; Wang, L.; Wu, M. Efficient Separation 
of Electron–Hole Pairs in Graphene Quantum Dots by TiO2 Heterojunctions for Dye 
Degradation, ACS Sust. Chem. Eng. 2015, 3, 2405–2413. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
29 
Graphene: A New Form of Carbon 
Park, S.; Ruoff, R. S.; Chemical Methods for the Production of Graphenes. Nat. 
Nanotechnol. 2009, 4, 217–224. 
Parvez, K.; Rincon, R. A.; Weber, N.-E.; Cha, K. C.; Venkataraman, S. S. Onestep 
Electrochemical Synthesis of Nitrogen and Co-Doped, High-Quality Graphene Oxide. 
Chem. Commun. 2016, 52, 5714–5717. 
Paton, K. R.; Varrla, E.; Backes, C.; Smith, R. J; Khan, U.; O’Neill, A.; Boland, C.; Lotya, 
M. Istrate; King, O. M.; Higgins, P. T.; Barwich, Scalable Production of Large Quantities 
of Defect-Free Few-Layer Graphene by Shear Exfoliation in Liquids. Nat. Mater. 2014, 
13, 624–630. 
Peigney, A.; Laurent, C.; Flahaut, E.; Bacsa, R. R.; Rousset, A. Specific Surface Area of 
Carbon Nanotubes and Bundles of Carbon Nanotubes. Carbon 2001, 39, 507–514. 
Qu, J.; Shi, L.; He, C.; Gao, F.; Li, B.; Zhou, Q.; Hu, H.; Shao, G.; Wang, X.; Qiu, J. Highly 
Efficient Synthesis of Graphene/MnO2 Hybrids and Their Application for Ultrafast 
Oxidative Decomposition of Methylene Blue. Carbon 2014, 66, 485–492. 
Reina, A. J.; Ho, X. T.; Nezich, J. D.; Son, H.; Bulovic, V.; Dresselhaus, M. S.; Kong, J. 
Large Area, Few-Layer Graphene Films on Arbitrary Substrates by Chemical Deposition. 
Nano Lett. 2009, 9, 30–35. 
Samal, A.; Das, D. P.; Madras, G. Repercussion of Solid State vs. Liquid State Synthesized 
P-N Heterojunction RGO-Copper Phosphate on Proton Reduction Potential in Water. 
Sci. Rep. 2018, 8, 2881. 
Samal, A.; Das, D. P.; Nanda, K. K.; Mishra, B. K.; Das, J.; Das, A. Reduced Graphene 
Oxide–Ag3PO4 Heterostructure: A Direct Z—Scheme Photocatalyst for Augmented 
Photo Reactivity and Stability. Chem. Asian J. 2016a, 11, 584–595. 
Samal, A.; Swain, S.; Satpati, B.; Das, D. P.; Mishra, B. K. 3D Co3(PO4)2–Reduced Graphene 
Oxide Flowers for Photocatalytic Water Splitting: A Type II Staggered Heterojunction 
System. Chem. Sus. Chem 2016b, 9, 3150–3160. 
Samal, A; Das, D. P. Transfiguring UV Light Active “Metal Oxides” to Visible Light 
Active Adation by Reduced Graphene Oxide Hypostatization. Catalys. Today 2018, 300, 
124–135.
 Shanmugam, M.; Alsalme, A.; Alghamdi, A.; Jayavel, R. Enhanced Photocatalytic 
Performance of the Graphene-V2O5 Nanocomposite in the Degradation of Methylene 
Blue Dye Under Direct Sunlight, ACS Appl. Mater. Inter. 2015, 7, 14905–14911. 
Shi, Y.; Zhou, K.; Wang, B.; Jiang, S.; Qian, X.; Gui, Z.; Yuen, R. K. K.; Hu, Y. Ternary 
Graphene–CoFe2O4/CdS Nanohybrids: Preparation and Application as Recyclable 
Photocatalysts. J. Mater. Chem. A 2014, 2, 535–544. 
Singh, A.; Khare, P.; Verma, S.; Bhati, A.; Sonker, A. K.; Tripathi, K. M.; Sonkar, S. K. 
Pollutant Soot for Pollutant Dye Degradation: Soluble Graphene Nanosheets for Visible 
Light Induced Photo degradation of Methylene Blue, ACS Sust. Chem. Eng. 2017, 5, 
8860−8869. 
Singh, B. P.; Jena, B. K.; Bhattacharjee, S.; Besra, L. Development of Oxidation and 
Corrosion Resistance Hydrophobic Graphene Oxide-Polymer Composite Coating on 
Copper. Surf. Coat. Technol. 2013, 232, 475–481. 
Som, T.; Troppenz, G. V.; Wendt, R.; Wollgarten, M.; Rappich, J.; Emmerling, F.; 
Rademann, K. Graphene Oxide/a-Bi2O3 Composites for Visible-Light Photocatalysis, 
Chemical Catalysis, and Solar Energy Conversion. Chem Sus Chem 2014, 7, 854–865. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
Songfeng, P.; Qinwei, W.; Huang, K.; Cheng, H-M.; Ren, W. Green Synthesis of Graphene 
Oxide by Seconds Timescale Water Electrolytic Oxidation. Nat. Commun. 2018, 9:145. 
Sun, P.; Zheng, F.; Zhu, M.; Song, Z.; Wang, K.; Zhong, M.; Wu, D.; Little, R. B.; Xu, 
Z; Zhu, H. Selective Trans-Membrane Transport of Alkali and Alkaline Earth Cations 
Through Graphene Oxide Membranes Based on Cation−π Interactions, ACS Nano 2014, 
8, 850–859. 
Sun, P.; Zhu, M.; Wang, K.; Zhong, M.; Wei, J.; Wu, D.; Xu, Z.; Zhu, H. Selective Ion 
Penetration of Graphene Oxide Membranes, ACS Nano 2013, 7, 428–437. 
Sun, Y.; Wu, Q.; Shi, G. Graphene Based New Energy Materials. Energy Environ. Sci. 
2011, 4, 1113–1132. 
Surwade, S. P.; Smirnov, S. N.; Vlassiouk ,I. V.; Unocic, R. R.; Veith,G. M.; Dai, S.; 
Mahurin, S. M. Water desalination using nanoporous single-layer graphene. Nat. 
Nanotechnol. 2015, 10, 459–464. 
Tan, L. –L.; Ong, W. –J.; Chai, S. –P.; Mohamed, A. Reduced Graphene Oxide-TiO2 
Nanocomposite as a Promising Visible-Light-Active Photocatalyst for the Conversion of 
Carbon Dioxide. Nanoscale Res. Lett. 2013, 8, 465. 
Tu, W.; Zhou, Y.; Liu, Q.; Tian, Z; Gao, J.; Chen, X.; Zhang, H.; Liu, J.; Zou, Z. Robust 
Hollow Spheres Consisting of Alternating Titania Nanosheets and Graphene Nanosheets 
with High Photocatalytic Activity for CO2 Conversion into Renewable Fuels. Adv. Funct. 
Mater. 2012, 22, 1215–1221. 
Tu, W.; Zhou, Y.; Zou, Z. Versatile Graphene-Promoting Photocatalytic Performance 
of Semiconductors: Basic Principles, Synthesis, Solar Energy Conversion, and 
Environmental Applications. Adv. Funct. Mat. 2013, 23, 4996–5008. 
Ullah, R.; Sun, H.; Wang, S. Wet-Chemical Synthesis of InTaO4 for Photocatalytic 
Decomposition of Organic Contaminants in Air and Water with UV–vis Light. Ind. Eng. 
Chem Res. 2012, 51, 1563–1569. 
Wang, D. H.; Kou, R.; Choi, D.; Yang, Z. G.; Nie, Z. M.; Li, J.; Saraf, L. V.; Hu, D. H.; 
Zhang, J. G.; Graff, G. L.; Liu, J.; Pope, M. A.; Aksay, I. A. Ternary Self-Assembly of 
Ordered Metal Oxide−Graphene Nanocomposites for Electrochemical Energy Storage. 
ACS Nano 2010, 4, 1587–1595. 
Wang, E. N.; Karnik, R. Water Desalination: Graphene Cleans Up Water. Nat. Nanotechnol. 
2012, 7, 552–554. 
Wang, H.; Yang, Y.; Liang, Y.; Robinson, J. T.; Li, Y.; Jackson, A.; Cui, Y.; Dai, H. Graphene-
Wrapped  Particles as a Rechargeable Lithium-Sulfur Battery Cathode Material with 
High Capacity and Cycling Stability. Nano Lett. 2011, 11, 2644–2647. 
Wang, P.; Zhan, S.; Xia, Y.; Ma, S.; Zhou, Q.; Li, Y. The fundamental Role and Mechanism 
of Reduced Graphene Oxide in rGO/Pt-TiO2 Nanocomposite for High-Performance 
Photocatalytic Water Splitting. Appl. Cat. B: Environ. 2017, 207, 335–346. 
Wang, Y. Q.; Zhang, Z. J.; Zhu, Y.; Li, Z. C.; Vajtai, R.; Ci, L. J.; Ajayan, P. M. Nanostructured 
VO2 Photocatalysts for Hydrogen Production. ACS Nano 2008, 2, 1492–1496. 
Wang, Y.; Huang, Y.; Song, Y.; Zhang, X. Y.; Ma, Y. F.; Liang, J. J.; Chen, Y. S. Room-
Temperature Ferromagnetism of Graphene. Nano Lett. 2009, 9, 220–224. 
Wang, Y.; Yu, J.; Xiao, W.; Li, Q. Microwave-Assisted Hydrothermal Synthesis of Graphene 
Based Au–TiO2 Photocatalysts for Efficient Visible-Light Hydrogen Production. J. Mat. 
Chem. A 2014, 2, 3847–3855. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
31 
Graphene: A New Form of Carbon 
Wang, B.; Wu, J.; Zhang, N.; Xu, Y. –J. Observing the Role of Graphene in Boosting 
the Two-Electron Reduction of Oxygen in Graphene−WO3 Nanorod Photocatalysts. 
Langmuir 2014, 30, 5574–5584. 
Weng, Wang, B.; Yang, M. Q.; Zhang, N.; Xu, Y. J. Toward the Enhanced Photoactivity 
and Photostability of ZnO Nanospheres via Intimate Surface Coating with Reduced 
Graphene Oxide. J. Mater. Chem. A 2014, 2, 9380–9389. 
Williams, G.; Kamat, P. V. Graphene−Semiconductor Nanocomposites: Excited-State 
Interactions Between ZnO Nanoparticles and Graphene Oxide. Langmuir 2009, 25, 
13869–13873. 
Wu, J. L.; Bai, S.; Shen, X. P.; Jiang, L. Preparation and Characterization of Graphene/CdS 
Nanocomposites. Appl. Surf. Sci. 2010, 257, 747–751. 
Xiang, Q. J.; Yu, J. G.; Jaroniec, M. Synergetic Effect of MoS2 and Graphene as Cocatalysts 
for Enhanced Photocatalytic H2 Production Activity of TiO2 Nanoparticles. J. Am. Chem. 
Soc. 2012, 134, 6575–6578. 
Xiang, Q.; Yu, J.; Jaroniec, M. Graphene-Based Semiconductor Photocatalysts. Chem. Soc. 
Rev. 2012, 41, 782–796. 
Xin, G. Q.; Hwang, W.; Kim, N.; Cho, S. M.; Chae, H. A graphene Sheet Exfoliated with 
Microwave Irradiation and Interlinked by Carbon Nanotubes for High-Performance 
Transparent Flexible Electrodes. Nanotechnology 2010, 21, 40. 
Xiong, Z.; Zhang, L.; Zhao, X. S. Visible Light Induced Dye Degradation Over Copper 
Modified Reduced Graphene Oxide. Chem. Eur. J. 2011, 17, 2428 – 2434. 
Xu, C.; Wang, X.; Zhu, J. W. Graphene−Metal Particle Nanocomposites. J. Phys. Chem. C 
2008, 112, 19841–19845. 
Xu, K.; Feng, B.; Zhou, C.; Huang, A. Synthesis of Highly Stable Graphene Oxide 
Membranes on Polydopamine Functionalized Supports for Seawater Desalination. 
Chem. Eng. Sci. 2016, 146, 159–165. 
Xu, T. G.; Zhang, L. W.; Cheng, H. Y.; Zhu, Y. F. Significantly Enhanced Photocatalytic 
Performance of ZnO via Graphene Hybridization and the Mechanism Study. Appl. Catal. 
B 2011, 101, 382–387. 
Yang, A.; Xue, Y.; Zhang, Y.; Zhang, X.; Zhao, H.; Li, X.; He, Y.; Yuan, Z. ASimple One-Pot 
Synthesis of Graphene Nanosheet/SnO2 Nanoparticle Hybrid Nanocomposites and Their 
Application for Selective and Sensitive Electrochemical Detection of Dopamine. J. 
Mater. Chem. B 2013, 1, 1804–1811. 
Yang, H. H.; Guo, L. J.; Yan, W.; Liu, H. T. A Novel Composite Photocatalyst for Water 
Splitting Hydrogen Production. J. Power Sources 2006, 159, 1305–1309. 
Yang, M.-Q.; Xu, Y.-J. Selective Photoredox Using Graphene-Based Composite 
Photocatalysts. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2013, 15, 19102–19118. 
Yang, M.-Q.; Zhang, N.; Pagliaro, M.; Xu, Y.-J. Artificial Photosynthesis Over Graphene– 
Semiconductor Composites: Are We Getting Better? Chem. Soc. Rev. 2014, 43, 
8240–8254. 
Yang, S.; Bruller, S.; Wu, Z. S.; Liu, Z.; Parvez, K.; Dong, R.; Richard, F.; Samori, P.; Feng, 
X.; Mullen, K. Organic Radical-Assisted Electrochemical Exfoliation for the Scalable 
Production of High-Quality Graphene. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2015, 137, 13927–13932. 
Yang, S.; Lohe, M. R.; Muellen, K.; Feng, X. New-Generation Graphene from 
Electrochemical Approaches: Production and Applications. Adv. Mater. 2016, 28, 
6213–6221. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
32 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
Yang, X. F.; Cui, H. Y.; Li, Y.; Qin, J. L.; Zhang, R. X.; Tang, H. Fabrication of Ag3PO4-
Graphene Composites with Highly Efficient and Stable Visible Light Photocatalytic 
Performance, ACS Catal. 2013, 3, 363–369. 
Yao, Y.; Cai, Y.; Lu, F.; Wei, F.; Wang, X.; Wang, S. Magnetic Recoverable MnFe2O4 
and MnFe2O4-Graphene Hybrid as Heterogeneous Catalysts of Peroxymonosulfate 
Activation for Efficient Degradation of Aqueous Organic Pollutants. J. Hazard. Mater. 
2014, 270, 61–70. 
Yao, Z. P.; Jia, F. Z.; Tian, S. J.; Li, C. X.; Jiang, Z. H.; Bai, X. F. Microporous Ni-Doped 
TiO2 film Photocatalyst by Plasma Electrolytic Oxidation. Appl. Mater. Interf. 2010, 2, 
2617–2622. 
Ye, A. H.; Fan, W. Q.; Zhang, Q. H.; Deng, W. P.; Wang, Y. CdS–Graphene and CdS–CNT 
Nanocomposites as Visible-Light Photocatalysts for Hydrogen Evolution and Organic 
Dye Degradation. Catal. Sci. Technol. 2012, 2, 969–978. 
Yeh, T. F.; Chan, F. F.; Hsieh, C. T.; Teng, H. Graphite Oxide with Different Oxygenated 
Levels for Hydrogen and Oxygen Production from Water Under Illumination: The Band 
Positions of Graphite Oxide, J. Phys. Chem. C. 2011, 115, 22587–22597. 
Yeh, T. F.; Syu, J. M.; Cheng, C.; Chang, T. H.; Teng, H. Graphite Oxide as a Photocatalyst 
for Hydrogen Production from Water, Adv. Funct. Mater. 2010, 20, 2255–2262. 
Yeh, T.-F.; Chen, S.-J.; Yeh, C.-S.; Teng, H. Tuning the Electronic Structure of Graphite 
Oxide through Ammonia Treatment for Photocatalytic Generation of H2 and O2 from 
Water Splitting, J. Phys. Chem. C 2013, 117, 6516–6524. 
Yi, Z.; Ye, J.; Kikugawa, N.; Kako, T.; Ouyang, S.; Williams, S. H.; Yang, H.; Cao, J.; 
Luo, W.; Li, Z.; Liu,Y.; Withers, L. R. An Orthophosphate Semiconductor with Adation 
Properties Under Visible-Light Irradiation. Nat. Mater. 2010, 9, 559–564. 
Yin, Z.; Zhu, J.; He, Q.; Cao, X.; Tan, C.; Chen, H.; Yan, Q.; Zhang, H. Graphene-Based 
Materials for Solar Cell Applications. Adv. Energy Mater. 2014, 4, 1300574. 
You, Y.; Sahajwalla, V.; Yoshimura, M.; Joshi, R. K. Graphene and Graphene Oxide for 
Desalination. Nanoscale 2016, 8, 117–119. 
Yu , L.; Lim, Y.-S.; Han, J. H.; Kim, K. Y.; Kim, J. Y.; Choi, S.-Y.; Wonwoo, K. S. A 
Graphene Oxide Oxygen Barrier Film Deposited via a Self-Assembly Coating Method. 
Synth Met. 2012, 162, 710–714. 
Yu, P. et al. Mechanically-Assisted Electrochemical Production of Graphene Oxide. Chem. 
Mater. 2016, 28, 8429–8438. 
Yu, Q.; Lian, J.; Siriponglert, S. Graphene Segregated on Ni Surfaces and Transferred to 
Insulators. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2008, 93, 113103. 
Yu, X.; Du, R.; Li, B.; Zhang,Y.; Liu, H.; Qu, J.; An, X. Biomolecule-Assisted Self-
Assembly of CdS/MoS2/Graphene Hollow Spheres as High-Efficiency Photocatalysts 
for Hydrogen Evolution Without Noble Metals. Appl. Catal. B 2016, 182, 504–512. 
Zhang, H.; Fan, X. F.; Quan, X.; Chen, S.; Yu, H. T. Graphene Sheets Grafted Ag@AgCl 
Hybrid with Enhanced Plasmonic Photocatalytic Activity under Visible Light. Environ. 
Sci. Technol. 2011, 45, 5731–5736. 
Zhang, H.; Lv, X.; Li, Y.; Wang Y.; Li, J. P25-Graphene Composite as a High Performance 
Photocatalyst. ACS Nano 2010, 4, 380–386. 
Zhang, J. T.; Xiong, Z. G.; Zhao, X. S. Graphene–Metal–Oxide Composites for the 
Degradation of Dyes Under Visible Light Irradiation. J. Mater. Chem. 2011, 21, 
3634–3640. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
33 
Graphene: A New Form of Carbon 
Zhang, J.; Qi, L.; Ran, J.; Yu, J.; Qiao, S. Z. Ternary NiS/Zn Cd
S/Reduced Graphene
x 
1−x
Oxide Nanocomposites for Enhanced Solar Photocatalytic H2-Production Activity. Adv. 
Energy Mat. 2014, 4, 1301925–1301931. 
Zhang, N.; Yang, M.-Q.; Liu, S.; Sun, Y.; Xu, Y.-J. Waltzing with the Versatile Platform of 
Graphene to Synthesize Composite Photocatalysts. Chem. Rev. 2015, 115, 10307–10377. 
Zhang, N.; Zhang, Y.; Xu, Y.-J. Recent Progress on Graphene-Based Photocatalysts: 
Current Status and Future Perspectives. Nanoscale 2012, 4, 5792–5813. 
Zhang, X. F.; Quan, X.; Chen, S.; Yu, H. T. Constructing Graphene/InNbO4 Composite 
with Excellent Adsorptivity and Charge Separation Performance for Enhanced Visible-
Light-Driven Photocatalytic Ability. Appl. Catal. B 2011, 105, 237–242. 
Zhang, Y.; Chen, Z.; Liu, S.; Xu, Y. -J. Size Effect Induced Activity Enhancement and 
Anti-Photocorrosion of Reduced Graphene Oxide/ZnO Composites for Degradation 
of Organic Dyes and Reduction of Cr(VI) in Water. Appl. Catal. B 2013, 140−141, 
598−607. 
Zhao, Z. H.; Schipper, D. E.; Leitner, A. P.; Thirumalai, H.; Chen, J. H.; Xiee, L.; Qin, 
F.; Alam, Md K.; Grabow, L. C.; Chene, S. D.; Wang, Z. Ren; Wang, Z.; Whitmire, 
K. H.; Bao, J. Bifunctional Metal Phosphide FeMnP Films from Single Source Metal 
Organic Chemical Deposition for Efficient Overall Water Splitting. Nano Energy 2017, 
39, 444–453. 
Zhou, F.; Shi, R.; Zhu, Y. F. Significant Enhancement of the Visible Photocatalytic 
Degradation Performances of γ-Bi2MoO6 Nanoplate by Graphene Hybridization. J. 
Mol. Catal. A: Chem. 2011, 340, 77–82. 
Zhu, M. S.; Chen, P. L.; Liu, M. H. Graphene Oxide Enwrapped Ag/AgX (X = Br, Cl) 
Nanocomposite as a Highly Efficient Visible-Light Plasmonic Photocatalyst. ACS Nano 
2011, 5, 4529–4536. 


New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons. Aneeya Kumar Samantara & Satyajit Ratha (Eds.)
© 2024 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
CHAPTER 2  
Carbon Derived from Biowastes 
for Supercapacitors: Synthesis to 
Applications 
ANIL ARYA1, A. L. SHARMA2, VIJAY KUMAR3, and ANNU SHARMA1 
1Department of Physics, Kurukshetra University, Kurukshetra,  
Haryana, India 
2Department of Physics, Central University of Punjab, Bathinda, 
Punjab, India 
3Department of Physics, Institute of Integrated and Honors Studies 
(IIHS), Kurukshetra University, Kurukshetra, India 
ABSTRACT 
Continuous consumption of traditional sources of energy (fossil fuels, 
coal, etc.) and a rapid increase in global warming forced the research 
community working in this line to develop alternative clean and green 
renewable sources of energy. The most feasible and attractive source of 
green energy is the symmetric/asymmetric ultra/supercapacitors (SCs). 
This clean and green source of energy becomes more attractive/attentive if 
it could be developed from wastage. In such energy source devices, elec-
trode material plays a crucial role in enhancing the capacity and energy/ 
power density. Most of the electrode is made up of carbon. Hence, carbon 
derived from the biowastes has grabbed the attention of researchers due to 
abundance, reducing health issues, environmental and disposal issues, and 
so on. The key advantages are high electronic conductivity and the large 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
36 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
surface area used to be delivered by this biowaste after proper physical/ 
chemical processing. This results in enhancing the remarkable electro-
chemical properties. This chapter explores the fundamental characteristics, 
strategies adaptation to prepare biowaste-based SC electrode material, and 
characterization techniques involved followed by the latest advancements 
in the carbon derivation from biowastes. 
2.1 SUBJECT BACKGROUND 
Energy plays an important role in daily human life and is linked to the 
development of human civilization. Most of the energy demand is fulfilled 
by traditional energy sources, but due to depletion and increased global 
warming, it becomes necessary to develop alternate sources of sustainable 
energy. All over the world, the top priority of energy researchers is to search 
the environment-friendly and green sources of energy that can fulfill the 
demand for a broad application range (portable electronics, military/space 
operations, household supplies, electric vehicles, etc.). The energy sources 
are wind, nuclear, hydro, and solar contributing to the energy need. This 
energy needs to be stored somewhere for efficient use as per need. Battery 
and supercapacitor (SC) are two key candidates and have the potential to 
provide energy as per demand. The high-energy density of the battery and 
high-power density of the SC strengthen their candidature as an energy 
storage device. Out of them, the SC is a very interesting candidate owing 
to its key properties such as fast charge/discharge, better cyclic stability 
(>106 cycles), and low cost. A lot of research efforts have been adopted 
to increase the energy density of SC along with power density to replace 
the battery. Two important electrochemical parameters are specific capaci-
tance and energy density. Both of these are linked with the voltage stability 
window of electrolytes (Choi and Aurbach, 2016; Burke, 2000; Arya et 
al., 2019; Simon and Gogotsi, 2008; Yao et al., 2015; Saykar et al., 2018; 
Saykar et al., 2019). 
Figure 2.1a displays the Ragone plots and variation of energy 
density against power density for various electrochemical energy 
storage systems is shown (Wang et al., 2015; Gao et al., 2017). The SC 
can fill the vacuum between the battery and the traditional capacitors 
owing to their high power density. Figure 2.1b shows the roadmap for 
the development of the future energy sector and highlights the need for 

 
 
 
37 
Carbon Derived from Biowastes for Supercapacitors 
the development of renewable sources of energy in place of traditional 
sources. The most promising is to derive the active electrode materials 
from biowaste (Centi et al., 2011). 
FIGURE 2.1  (a) Ragone plots for various electrochemical energy storage systems, and 
(b) indicative roadmap of future energy scenario. 
Source: Reprinted with permission from Gao et al. 2017. https://creativecommons.org/li
censes/by/4.0/ 
So, the carbon derived from biomass has the potential to fill the gap 
between the present energy storage material and future needs (Marichi 
et al., 2017; Senthilkumar et al., 2015; Nanaji et al., 2018). The biomass 
material advantage is given as follows: 
1.  Green and cost-effective material. 
2.  A huge amount of availability 
3.  High carbon content. 
4.  Recyclability of waste products is feasible. 
5.  Various carbon morphologies can be obtained by varying activa
tion/carbonization conditions. 
6.  Good compatibility with the various range of electrolytes. 
7.  Doping of hetero-atoms enhance the ion storage properties. 
Table 2.1 shows various characteristics of the SC and its comparison  
with traditional capacitors and batteries. It has been observed that SC  
has various important characteristics that make it favorable over the  
battery. 
-
-

 
 
 
 
38 
TABLE 2.1 (a) Characteristics of the supercapacitor, (b) comparison between an electronic capacitor, battery, and supercapacitor. 
(a) 
(b) 
Features 
Range 
Function 
Electronic capacitor 
Battery 
Supercapacitor 
Voltage level (V) 
50 V–100 V 
Charge time 
μs–ms 
h 
ms–min 
Current (I) 
100 A–300 A 
Efficiency 
~100 
70–80 
>80 
Pulse duration (∆t) 
1.0 ms–1 s 
Discharge time 
μs–ms 
1–900 min 
ms–days 
Capacitance (C) 
1–10 F 
Energy density 
<0.01 W h L−1 
50–300 W h L−1 
0.5–5 W h L−1 
Power density (kW L−1) 
5–180 
Power density 
>104 W L−1 
<500 W L−1 
103–3 × 103 
Energy density (kJ L−1) 
0.5–0.6 
ESR (R) 
20–30 
Cycle life 
106–108 
200–1000 
106–108 
Temperature cycle 
−20°C to +60°C 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
39 
Carbon Derived from Biowastes for Supercapacitors 
This chapter presents the fundamental of the SC, key performance 
parameters, and different charge storage mechanisms. Then, the methods 
to obtain carbon from biowastes are discussed and followed by charac-
terization techniques. After that, some important studies highlighting the 
carbon derived from biomass and its use for SC applications are discussed. 
2.1.1 FUNDAMENTALS OF SUPERCAPACITORS 
SCs are also termed electrochemical capacitors owing to the similar charge 
storage mechanism and same geometry. However, the classification of SC is 
done based on the charge storage mechanism. Based on this, two types are 
(i) electric double-layer capacitor (EDLC): energy stored via ion absorption, 
and (ii) pseudo capacitor (PC): energy stored by redox reactions (Salanne et 
al., 2016; Najib et al., 2019; González et al., 2016; Borenstein et al., 2017; 
Tanwar et al., 2021). Based on their charge storage mechanism, the SCs are 
classified into the following three as mentioned in Fig. 2.2. 
FIGURE 2.2  Classification of a supercapacitor. 
The comparison of EDLC and PC with a traditional capacitor and 
detailed charge storage mechanism are presented by Zhong’s group 
(2015). In the former one, the ion adsorption/desorption results in charge 
accumulation at the electrode/electrolyte interfaces and is termed as purely 
electrostatic charge storage. The built-up of the high charge indicates higher 

 
 
 
 
 
 
40 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
capacitance and is generally observed for carbon-based electrode materials 
without any redox peaks. The cyclic voltammetry (CV) curve seems to 
be rectangular. Whereas in PC, the charge storage occurs via reversible 
redox reactions at electrode/electrolyte interface, and in CV, curve peaks 
are observed. The electrode material is generally transition metal oxides, 
hydroxides, and chalcogenides. The specific surface area (SSA), pore 
size, and morphology of the electrode material affect the charge storage 
capacity of the SC device. The pseudocapacitive mechanism comprises 
the EDLC behavior also and indicates the higher capacitance as compared 
to EDLC only (Zhong et al., 2015). 
Based on the architecture, SC is classified as symmetric supercapacitor 
and an asymmetric supercapacitor (ASSC). The difference between the 
EDLC and PC is further examined by observing the charging/discharging 
and CV curves. Figure 2.3 highlights the charge/discharge and the CV curve 
(Gogotsi and Penner, 2018). The PC electrode material is different from the 
battery electrodes as evidenced by the nature of the curve in Figure 2.3. 
FIGURE 2.3  The CV curves of (a) EDLC materials, (b, d, e) pseudo-capacitors materials, 
(g) battery-like materials, and (h) battery materials; and (c, f, i) corresponding galvanostatic 
discharge curves for various types of energy-storage materials. 
Source: Reprinted with permission from Gogotsi and Penner, 2018. Copyright © 2018, 
American Chemical Society 

 
Carbon Derived from Biowastes for Supercapacitors 
41 
2.1.2 CHARACTERISTICS OF SUPERCAPACITOR ELECTRODE 
MATERIAL 
An SC comprises four important components that play every vital role 
in its charge storage performance. The electrochemical performance is 
influenced by all internal components. So, electrodes, electrolytes, and 
separators are chosen after analyzing their characteristic properties, since 
electrode material plays a very crucial role in the charge storage capacity 
and must be chosen appropriately for achieving optimum performance. 
The high SSA and morphology (sheet, rod, wire, flower, wall type, etc.) of 
the electrode material are important for obtaining enhanced charge storage 
capacity, energy density, and power density (Simon and Gogotsi, 2008; 
Saykar et al., 2018). The electrolyte provides the ions in the SC cell, and 
ions migrate in the system via the electrolyte. It acts as a carpet for ions. 
So, the low viscosity of the electrolyte, smaller ionic radii, leads to faster 
ionic mobility and high ionic conductivity. Then, the separator should have 
high porosity to absorb the electrolyte and should have sufficient thick-
ness. Along with the material selection, the synthesis of electrode mate-
rial and cell fabrication influences the overall key properties of the cell. 
So, the preparation method should be easy, cost-effective, and synthesis 
parameters (reaction temperature, reaction time) need to be optimized for 
large-scale production. Moreover, good contact of the active material on 
the current collector is preferred to minimize the interfacial and stability 
issues by suitable selection of binder. Along with this during cell fabrica-
tion, the charge transfer resistance needs to be kept minimum to achieve 
maximum ion diffusion and hence the higher ion storage capacity in the 
electrode material. Figure 2.4 depicts the key characteristics of the SC. 
2.1.3 EXPERIMENTAL METHODOLOGY 
2.1.3.1 PREPARATION METHODS 
The preparation of electrode material plays a very crucial role in cell perfor-
mance. The most desirable requirement is that the preparation method 
should be easy, cost-effective, and environment friendly. The important 
methods for the preparation of the electrode material are a hydrothermal 
method, sol–gel method, microwave synthesis, and solid-state reac-
tion method. However, for the preparation of biomass-based electrode 

 
42 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
materials, carbon is derived from the biowaste by various processes such 
as carbonization, activation, and hydrothermal carbonization. By varying 
the activation agent and carbonization conditions, the morphology of the 
prepared electrode material can be tuned. Figure 2.5 shows the photograph 
of various biomasses, preparation methods, and the cell fabrication step. 
FIGURE 2.4  Crucial characteristics of different supercapacitor components. 
FIGURE 2.5  Schematic of the cell fabrication from biowaste-derived carbon. 
Na et al. in 2018 reported the preparation of electrode material from 
rice husk. Here, the carbonization and activation technique was adopted 
to prepare the active material. Han et al. in 2018 derived carbon from 
plant waste (bamboo shoots shells) via one-step activation. Ma et al. in 
2019 derived the hierarchically porous carbons (HPCs) from corn straw. 
The authors adopted a simple two-step method which is a combination of 
hydrothermal carbonization and KOH activation (Fig. 2.6). 

 
 
 
43 
Carbon Derived from Biowastes for Supercapacitors 
FIGURE 2.6  Schematic illustration of the synthesis strategy for the HPCs. 
Source: Reprinted with permission from Ma et al., 2019. 
Xu et al. in 2016 prepared the porous active carbon and fluorescent 
carbon dots from protein-rich biomass precursor—soybean. Here, the 
two-step carbonization method was adopted. In the first step, low-
temperature carbonization is performed to obtain the fluorescent carbon 
dots. Then, in the second step, porous active carbon is obtained from the 
high-temperature carbonization. Han et al. in 2018 prepared the nitrogen-
doped porous-activated carbon derived from pueraria-based biomass as a 
precursor. The detailed process is shown in Figure 2.8b. 
2.1.3.2 CHARACTERIZATION TECHNIQUES 
The structural, morphological, porosity, and elemental composition of 
the electrode material need to be analyzed before the fabrication of the 
complete SC cell (Wang et al., 2015; Salanne et al., 2016). So, the impor-
tant characterization techniques and information obtained from them are 
given below: 
1.  X-ray diffraction (XRD): To evaluate crystallinity, d-spacing, 
crystallite size, and form of the carbon. 
2.  Raman spectroscopy:  To examine the structural defects and 
graphitization level of carbon-based materials (by evaluating the 
ratio of G-band to D-band (IG/ID). 
3.  Scanning electron microscopy (SEM):  To explore the morphology 
(sheet, wire, rod, and flower) of the electrode material and 
elemental composition that may be analyzed via energy dispersive 
spectroscopy (EDS). 

 
44 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
4.  Transmission electron microscopy (TEM):  To investigate the 
thickness of the nanosheets, micropores, and mesopore diameter. 
5.  X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS):  To identify the actual 
elemental composition and proportion of elements present in the 
sample. 
6.   BET-N2  adsorption-desorption isothermal measurements: To  
examine the porosity, pore size/volume distribution, and the SSA  
of the synthesized material. 
Then after checking the material properties and analyzing them prop
erly, the next step is the SC cell fabrication. Cell fabrication can be done in 
two ways: (i) symmetric and (ii) asymmetric arrangement. After that, the 
electrochemical properties can be analyzed in the three-electrode and two-
electrode systems. The following techniques are adopted to investigate the 
electrochemical properties. 
1.  Complex impedance spectroscopy:  To find out the bulk resistance 
(Rb), charge-transfer resistance (Rct), and equivalent series resis
tance of the SC cell. 
2.  CV: From the CV curve, we can find out the charge storage mecha
nism hint by using the power law. The power law is the relation 
between the current and the scan rate: i = avb, here, i is the cathodic 
current (A), v is the scan rate (mV s−1), and a and b are variables 
(Augustyn et al., 2013). The value of b (designated as b-value) is an 
important factor and defines the charge storage mechanism, (i) b = 
1 means charge storage mechanism is a capacitive type, and (ii) b  
= 0.5 means diffusion-limited charge storage mechanism. Further, 
the contribution of the capacitive and diffusion capacitance can be 
separated using the equation; i = k v + k v + k v1/2
1
2
2
, here k1 and k2  are
values (Wang et al., 2007).  Here, k1v is the capacitive contribution 
and k
1/2
2v  is the diffusion-limited contribution. 
3.  Galvanostatic charge/discharge (GCD): The various electrochem
ical parameters are obtained from the GCD using the formulas 
given below (Wang et al., 2014). 
For the three-electrode system, specific capacitance is obtained from 
GCD using the formula: 
-
-
-
-

 
 
I
t
×∆
C = m
V
×∆ 
 
 
2× I
t
×∆
C = m
V
×∆ 
 
 
1 
)
2
E 
(∆
= 
C
V
2×3.6 
3600× E
P = 
∆t 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I
t
×∆
C = m
V
×∆ 
 
 
E = 1 C
V )
2
(∆
2 
45 
Carbon Derived from Biowastes for Supercapacitors 
where I is the discharge current, Dt is the discharge time, ΔV is the potential 
drop during discharge, and m is the mass of active material in the working 
electrode. 
For two-electrode (symmetric cell configuration) 
Specific capacitance 
Here, I is the discharging current, Dt is the discharge time, ΔV is the 
potential drop during discharge, and m is the mass of active material in the 
single electrode. 
Energy density and power density: 
Here, E (W h kg−1), C, ΔV, P (W kg−1), and Δt are the specific energy, 
specific capacitance, potential window, specific power, and discharge 
time, respectively. 
For two-electrode (asymmetric cell configuration) 
Specific capacitance 
Here, I is the discharging current, Dt is the discharge time, ΔV is the 
potential drop during discharge, and m is the total mass of the active elec-
trode materials in both (positive, negative) electrode. 
Energy density and power density 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
46 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
3600× E
P = 
∆t 
Here, E (W h kg−1), C, ΔV, P (W kg−1), and Δt are the specific energy, 
specific capacitance, potential window, specific power, and discharge 
time, respectively. 
2.2 ADVANCEMENTS IN ELECTRODE MATERIALS DERIVED 
FROM BIOWASTE 
Yu et al. (2018a) reported the preparation of SC cells by collecting the 
activated carbon from the ground cherry calyces. From this BW, a 3D 
framework of porous carbon (PC) nanosheets was created via carboniza-
tion procedure and used as electrode material. It is denoted as PCNS 7 
(activation by 7 M KOH). The SEM analysis confirmed the presence of a 
3D framework comprising sheet and hollow structures. The SSA obtained 
from the BET was very high and is 1612 m2 g−1 (pore volume = 1.2 cm3 g−1; 
micropore volume = 0.4 cm3 g−1). The higher conductivity of the PCNS7 
sample is evidenced by the higher degree of graphitization as obtained from 
Raman analysis. The CV curve indicates the ideal supercapacitive behavior 
as evidenced by the rectangular nature. The specific capacitance value was 
very high and is about 350 F g−1 (at 0.1 A g−1) with a capacity retention of 
about 86.3%. Further, the specific capacitance was also checked using the 
three-electrode system that shows the highest specific capacitance for this 
system (518 F g−1 at 1 A g−1). The capacity retention after 10,000th cycle 
is 94.8%, after 50,000th cycle is 92.2%, and 88.1% after 100,000 cycles. 
The high specific capacitance was attributed to the high SSA, comprising 
nanosheets and porous nature, and hierarchical pore-size distribution. The 
simultaneous presence of the above three allows easier ion migration and 
enhances the ion storage capacity. 
Recently, Goswami et al. in 2019 reported the formation of carbon 
from the cooking-oven-produced carbon nanoparticles. Then, the 
carbon NP was incorporated in the polyaniline (PANI; PA) matrix and 
SC performance has been explored. Here, the polyaniline-waste carbon 
nanoparticles (PA/WC) are synthesized through in-situ polymerization of 
PANI with four different polymerization times (t1: 1.5 h, t2: 2 h, t3: 2.5 
h, t4: 3 h). The purity and surface morphology of the as-derived samples 
were analyzed by FESEM, EDS mapping, and XPS. The Raman analysis 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
47 
Carbon Derived from Biowastes for Supercapacitors 
confirmed that the WCP nanoparticles are well connected with the PANI. 
The CV plot for the three different composite samples at constant polym-
erization time is t4 = 3.0 h with control samples and GCE + NF electrode. 
The CV curve for the PA/WC composite shows the presence of EDLC 
nature due to carbon and the pseudocapacitive nature due to PANI. The 
WCP acts as the electron-trapping center and enhances the surface area 
that is reflected in the arial capacitance. From the GCD, it was concluded 
that the composite electrodes possess capacity retention of about 80% 
after 1000 cycles and approximately 90–100% retention of C values with 
increasing scan rates and current densities. The authors, in brief, claimed 
that the present composite electrode material can be a promising material 
for green energy storage devices. 
Ma et al. (2015) synthesized hierarchical PC using the sunflower heads 
collected from sunflower crops. The PC was having abundant oxygen 
functional groups that make it unique for the SC electrode. SEM and TEM 
analysis confirmed the micropores, mesopore nature of the BW-derived 
carbon. The former leads to a high surface area, and the latter leads to 
the high surface area along with wider transport channels to micropores. 
Both are important for the SC application. XRD and Raman confirmed the 
disordered structure with defects. The specific capacitance obtained from 
GCD is 317 F g−1, 345 F g−1, and 297 F g−1 for SFHC—1:1, SFHC—1:1.5, 
and SFHC—1:2, respectively (at 1 A g−1). Here, 1:1, 1:1.5, and 1:2 are the 
weight ratios of the precarbonization sample with KOH solid. 
The SFHC—1:1.5 shows the highest specific capacitance and is attrib-
uted to the (i) abundant oxygen functional groups, (ii) sufficient micropores/ 
mesopores, and (iii) low charge transfer resistance (0.13 Ω). Figure 2.17(ii) 
shows the SC cell performance for the optimum system (SFHC—1:1.5) in 
the two-electrode system. The shape of the CV curve and the GCD curve 
indicates improved stability and faster ion migration. It gives a specific 
capacitance plot and is 297 F g−1 at 0.5 A g−1 and 217 F g−1 at 10 A g−1. 
This cell shows 83% capacity retention after 5000 cycles and is within a 
desirable limit. The energy density and owed density for the SC cell are 
9.2 W h kg−1 and 482 W kg−1, respectively. In another work, Zequine et al. 
(2017) reported SC fabrication by obtaining carbon electrode materials by 
carbonizing abundantly available and recyclable jute. The jute was chosen 
over other biomass products due to the fibrous structure and comprises 
cellulose and lignin. Figure 2.7(i) shows the synthesization of electrodes 
for SC cells from jute fibers. The XRD diffractograms and Raman spectra 

 
 
 
 
48 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
confirmed the presence of conducting the graphitic phase of carbon. The 
surface area obtained from the BET is about 1769 m2 g−1. TEM analysis 
confirmed that the carbonized jute comprises various graphic thin layers. 
The CV curve shows the absence of redox peaks and indicates the EDLC 
nature supported by the porous nature that enhances the charge storage 
capacity. Also, there was almost no effect of the bending angle on the CV 
curve, which suggests its use for the flexible SC. The specific capacitance 
was 408 ± 15 F g−1 at 1 mV s−1 and 223 ± 6.6 F g−1 at 200 mV s−1. The 
energy density and power density for the carbonized jute are 21 W h kg−1 
and 1.82 kW kg−1, respectively. Figure 2.7(ii) shows the cyclic stability 
obtained from the CV and GCD. 
FIGURE 2.7  (i) Schematic of the device fabrication process. (ii) (a) Capacitance retention 
verse number of CV cycles, inset figure shows CV curves at various cycles (b) capacitance 
retention verse number of charge–discharge cycles, inset figure shows potential versus 
time plot for first and last few cycles of charge–discharge, and (c) capacitance retention 
verse number of charge–discharge cycles at various bending angles. 
Source: Reprinted with permission from Zequine et al., 2017. http://creativecommons.org/ 
licenses/by/4.0/ 
Figure 2.7(ii) a shows good cyclic stability for 5000 cycles and is also 
supported by the GCD curve as shown in Figure 2.7(ii) b. The inset shows 
the exact overlap between the first and last cycles indicating better stability 
for the jute-based electrode. Figure 2.7(ii) c shows the capacity retention 
plot at different angles and is almost 100% at different banding angles. 
Further temperature-dependent investigations were performed via CV and 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
49 
Carbon Derived from Biowastes for Supercapacitors 
GCD. Both techniques showed the increase of specific capacitance with 
an increase in temperature (45% higher charge storage at 75°C). Wang et 
al. in 2018 derived the 3D interconnected HPC from sunflowers stem. The 
presence of high oxygen content and a 3D interconnected network boosted 
the SC performance. 
HPC-2 designates the HPC with 2 g KOH and the stem of the sunflower 
shows a 3D interconnected honeycomb-like porous structure. This unique 
morphology facilitates faster electron transfer and ion diffusion. It was 
also supported by the TEM analysis which indicates the presence of pores 
on carbon walls. XRD and Raman spectra evidenced the disordered and 
defected structure for HPC-2 as compared to the HPC-1 and HPC-3. The 
highest surface area was exhibited by HPC and is about 1657 m2 g−1. 
The specific capacitance obtained from the GCD was 349 F g−1 at 1 A g−1 
(247 F g−1 at 50 A g−1) and is higher than the commercial activated carbon 
(YP-50). 
The electrochemical stability was checked by CV and shows capacity 
retention of about 98.6% after 10,000 cycles (at 200 mV s−1). Then, an 
ASSC was fabricated using the HPC-2/MnO2 as positive electrode mate-
rial and HPC-2 as negative electrode material. The stability of the cell was 
checked from the CV and shows capacity retention of about 83.1% after 
1000 cycles. The fabricated cell shows a high energy density of about 58.8 
W h kg−1, power density of 210.7 W kg−1, and is higher than the reported 
SC cell. Recently, Elaiyappillai et al. (2019) derived a low-cost carbon 
from the Cucumis melo (Cm) fruit peel and tested the performance of this 
electrode for SC application. The activated carbon was prepared by KOH 
activation. The synthesized samples are designated as Cm-600, Cm-700, 
Cm-800, and Cm-900 depending upon the activation temperature of 600°C, 
700°C, 800°C, and 900°C, respectively. The XRD analysis evidenced the 
micrographic structure of the electrode material and it was also supported 
by the Raman spectrum. The mesoporous morphology for the Cm-900 and 
its benefits will be reflected in the electrochemical analysis. Further, TEM 
evidenced the interconnected porous morphology and is beneficial for a 
good electrode–electrolyte interface which minimizes the length of ion-
conducting pathways. The surface area for the Cm-900 as obtained from 
BET was 721.91 m2 g−1. The specific capacitance as obtained from the CV 
at 5 mV s−1 for Cm-900 is 376 F g−1 and decreases with the scan rate for all 
samples. The high capacitance is attributed to the EDLC nature of carbon, 
pseudocapacitance contribution from the oxygen present in Cm, and high 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
50 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
surface area. Further, GCD showed the specific capacitance of about 404 F 
g−1 at 1 A g−1 for the Cm-900. The high capacitance was associated with the 
high porosity and oxygen functionalities in the Cm. Then, the symmetric 
two-electrode SC cell was fabricated for testing. The GCD of the cell 
showed the specific capacitance of about 211 F g−1 at 1 A g−1 for Cm-900 
and 88% capacity retention was obtained after 4000 cycles (at 2 A g-1). The 
inset shows the fabricated device with a glowing LED. The energy density 
of the cell is 29.30 W h kg−1 and the power density is about 279.78 W kg−1. 
Yan et al. (2018) derived the carbon from low-cost and environment-
friendly waste lotus stems (LC-NCs) and doped it with nitrogen. Here, 
KOH was used as an activator, and urea as a source of nitrogen. The 
samples are labeled as LS-NC-X, where X represents activation tempera-
ture (600°C, 700°C, 800°C, and 900°C). The XRD analysis confirmed the 
turbostratic graphite structure and Raman analysis shows the disordered 
carbon structure. The highest area observed from the BET was 2221 m2 g−1 
for the LS-NCS 800. SEM analysis confirmed the mesoporous structure. 
The electrochemical performance was examined in the cell configuration 
as shown in Figure 2.8. The CV analysis suggested the highest specific 
capacitance for the LS-NC 600. The GCD analysis showed a capacitance 
of about 303.5 F g−1 at 0.5 A g−1 and high capacitance is attributed to the 
presence of pyridine nitrogen (N-6), pyrrolic/pyridinic nitrogen (N-5) on 
graphene layers as observed from XPS. The nitrogen functional group 
promotes pseudocapacitive behavior. Figure 2.8b shows the specific 
capacitance at the different current densities and is highest for LS-NC 
600 at all current densities. Figure 2.8c shows cyclic stability in the two-
electrode configuration for LS-NC 600. The capacity retention was about 
96% after 5000 cycles and is sufficient for SC applications. 
Chernysheva et al. (2018) have derived the activated PC from the 
biomass refinery wastes (humins) by various methods (pyrolysis, 
physical and chemical activation, or combined approaches). The samples 
were labeled as per the preparation condition, for example, Chem-900-2 
refers to carbon material obtained by chemical activation of humins at 
900°C and KOH/humins weight ratio of 2:1. The Chem-900-2-based SC 
cell shows the highest capacitance of about 370 F g−1 at 0.5 A g−1. The 
stability test done by GCD shows capacity retention of about 92% after 
10,000 charge/discharge cycles at 10 A g−1. The high capacitance was 
attributed to the micro/mesoporous structure and high porosity of the 
Chem-900-2. 

 
 
51 
Carbon Derived from Biowastes for Supercapacitors 
FIGURE 2.8  (a) Schematic of the LS-NC symmetric supercapacitor, (b) specific 
capacitance at current densities at different current densities in the range of 0.5–10 A g−1, 
and (c) the cycling performance of the LS-NC-600 as an electrode in three electrodes at the 
current density of 5 A g−1. 
Source: Reprinted with permission from Yan et al., 2018. https://creativecommons.org/ 
licenses/by/3.0/ 
The mesoporous nature creates the 3D conducting channels that facili
tate ion migration. Further, the cyclic stability was checked by GCD in a 
two-electrode configuration and shows capacity retention of about 86% 
even after 10,000 cycles at 0.5 A g−1. The potential of the SC cell was 
demonstrated by powering a calculator and glowing a LED for 5 min. To 
highlight the superiority of the carbon-derived electrode materials from 
-
biowaste, we have made a comparison of various BW-derived carbon 
material and their performance and electrolyte used. Table 2.2 shows the 
comparison of various BW-based supercapacitor cells. 
TABLE 2.2 Comparisons of SC Cell Performance Based on Carbon Derived from 
Different Biowastes. 
Precursor 
Electrolyte 
Current 
Cg/(F g-1) 
Reference 
density 
Broad bean shell 
6 M KOH 
0.5 Ag-1 
202 
Xu et al., 2015 
Sugar cane bagasse 
6 M KOH 
1 Ag-1 
323 
Liu et al, 2016 
Brussel sprouts 
6 M KOH 
0.5 Ag-1 
255 
Li et al., 2016 
Pomelo peel 
6 M KOH 
1 Ag-1 
289 
Liang et al., 2014 
Silkworm 
6 M KOH 
1 Ag-1 
304 
Gong et al., 2016 
Shiitake mushroom 
6 M KOH 
1 Ag-1 
306 
Cheng et al., 2015 
Human hair 
6 M KOH 
1 Ag-1 
340 
Qian et al., 2014 
Waste news paper 
6 M KOH 
1 mAg-1 
180 
Adinaveen et al., 
2013 

 
 
52 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
TABLE 2.2 (Continued) 
Precursor 
Electrolyte 
Current 
Cg/(F g-1) 
Reference 
density 
Lotus seedpod shell 
3 M KOH 
0.5 Ag-1 
165 
Sekar et al., 2004 
Pomegranate rind 
1M H2SO4 
0.1 Ag-1 
268 
Yang et al., 2014 
Willow catkin 
3 / 6 M KOH 
0.5 Ag-1 
298 
Li et al, 2016 
2 / 1 M Na2SO4 
Almond shells 
3 / 6 M KOH 
1 Ag-1 
272.3 
Wu et al., 2016 
Cotton 
3 / 3 M KOH 
0.3 Ag-1 
221.7 
Liu et al., 2016 
Melamine 
2 / 1 M H2SO4 
0.05 Ag-1 
201 
Wen et al., 2016 
Auricularia 
6 M KOH 
1 Ag-1 
347 
Jiang et al., 2016 
Chicken eggshell 
1 M KOH 
1 Ag-1 
297 
Li et al., 2012 
Rice husk 
1 M Na2SO4 
1 Ag-1 
112 
Ganesan et al., 2014 
Algae 
6 M KOH 
0.2 Ag-1 
287 
Yu et al., 2018 
Ginkgo leaf 
1 M KOH 
0.2 Ag-1 
345 
Wang et al., 2018 
Rice straw 
6 M KOH 
1 Ag-1 
337 
Liu et al., 2018 
Water chestnut 
6 M KOH 
0.5 Ag-1 
346 
Wei et al., 2018 
Puffed rice 
6 M KOH 
0.5 Ag-1 
334 
Hou et al., 2017 
Popcorn 
6 M KOH 
0.2 Ag-1 
348 
Hou et al., 2017 
Sunfower seed shell 
30 wt % KOH 
250 mAg-1 
311 
Li et al., 2011 
Neem dead leaves 
1 M H2SO4 
500 mAg-1 
400 
Biswal et al., 2013 
Waste coffee beans 
1 M H2SO4 
50 mAg-1 
368 
Rufford et al., 2008 
Sugar-cane bagasse 
1 M H2SO4 
250 mAg-1 
300 
Rufford et al., 2010 
Pistachio shell 
0.5 M H2SO4 
10 mVs-1 
120 
Wu et al., 2005 
2.3 SUMMARY 
To fulfill the room for sustainable, clean, and renewable sources of energy, 
the scientific community has focused on the development of new elec-
trodes for SC applications. The most demanding is the use of recyclable 
materials from biowastes. So, biomass has the potential to bridge the 
gap between environment-friendly and renewable energy devices. The 
electrode material derived from biowastes has grabbed the attention of 
researchers to develop SC applications. So, this chapter highlights the 
development of different PCs derived from various biomass products. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
53 
Carbon Derived from Biowastes for Supercapacitors 
The important characteristics of the electrode material are discussed 
followed by the preparation and characterization techniques. Then, the 
development in the carbon derived from biowastes is presented. Various 
biomass-derived carbon SC cells are compared based on morphology, 
specific capacity, energy density, and power density. In brief, it may be 
stated that the carbon derived from biomass has three important benefits 
that strengthen its adaptability for SC applications: (i) cost-effective and 
environment-friendly, (ii) waste is used for the energy sector, and (iii) 
green and sustainable source of energy is developed. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
One of the authors (AA) is thankful to the UGC for providing DS Kothari 
Post Doc Fellowship via ward letter number BSR/PH/20-21/0156. 
KEYWORDS 
• 
supercapacitor 
• 
energy storage 
• 
biowastes 
• 
carbon 
• 
electrode material 
REFERENCES 
Adinaveen, T.; Kennedy, L. J.; Vijaya, J. J.; Sekaran, G. Studies on Structural, 
Morphological, Electrical and Electrochemical Properties of Activated Carbon Prepared 
from Sugarcane Bagasse. J. Ind. Eng. Chem. 2013, 19, 1470. 
Arya, A.; Sharma, A. L. Electrolyte for Energy Storage/Conversion (Li+, Na+, Mg2+) 
Devices Based on PVC and Their Associated Polymer: A Comprehensive Review. J. 
Solid State Electrochem. 2019, 23, 997. 
Augustyn, V.; Come, J.; Lowe, M. A.; Kim, J. W.; Taberna, P. L.; Tolbert, S. H.; Abruna, 
H. D.; Simon, P.; Dunn, B. High-Rate Electrochemical Energy Storage Through Li+ 
Intercalation Pseudocapacitance. Nat. Mater. 2013, 12, 518. 
Biswal, M.; Banerjee, A.; Deo, M.; Ogale, S. From Dead Leaves to High Energy Density 
Supercapacitors. Energy Environ. Sci. 2013, 6, 1249. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
54 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
Borenstein, A.; Hanna, O.; Attias, R.; Luski, S.; Brousse, T.; Aurbach, D. Carbon-Based 
Composite Materials for Supercapacitor Electrodes: A Review. J. Mater. Chem. A 2017, 
5, 12653. 
Burke, A. Ultracapacitors: Why, How, and Where Is the Technology. J. Power Sources 
2000, 91, 37. 
Centi, G.; Perathoner, S.; Perathoner, S.; Passalacqua, R.; Ampelli, C. Carbonneutral Fuels 
and Energy Carriers; CRC Press: Boca Raton, 2011; Chapter 4, Solar Production of 
Fuels from water And CO2; p 291. 
Cheng, P.; Gao, S.; Zang, P.; Yang, X.; Bai, Y.; Xu, H.; Liu, Z.; Lei, Z. Hierarchically 
Porous Carbon by Activation of Shiitake Mushroom for Capacitive Energy Storage. 
Carbon 2015, 93, 315. 
Chernysheva, D. V.; Chus, Y. A.; Klushin, V. A.; Lastovina, T. A.; Pudova, L. S.; Smirnova, 
N. V.; Kravchenko, O. A.; Chernyshev, V. M.; Ananikov, V. P. Sustainable Utilization of 
Biomass Refinery Wastes for Accessing Activated Carbons and Supercapacitor Electrode 
Materials. Chem. Sus. Chem. 2018, 11, 3599. 
Choi, J. W.; Aurbach, D. Promise and Reality of Post-Lithium-Ion Batteries with High 
Energy Densities. Nat. Rev Mater. 2016, 1, 16013. 
Elaiyappillai, E.; Srinivasan, R.; Johnbosco, Y.; Devakumar, P.; Murugesan, K.; Kesavan, 
K.; Johnson, P. M. Low Cost Activated Carbon Derived from Cucumis Melo Fruit Peel 
for Electrochemical Supercapacitor Application. Appl. Surf. Sci. 2019, 486, 527. 
Ganesan, A.; Mukherjee, R.; Raj, J.; Shaijumon, M. M. Nanoporous Rice Husk Derived 
Carbon for Gas Storage and High Performance Electrochemical Energy Storage. J. 
Porous Mater. 2014, 21, 839. 
Gao, Z.; Zhang, Y.; Song, N.; Li, X. Biomass-Derived Renewable Carbon Materials for 
Electrochemical Energy Storage. Mater. Res. Lett. 2017, 5, 69. 
Gong, C.; Wang, X.; Ma, D.; Chen, H.; Zhang, S.; Liao, Z. Microporous Carbon from 
a Biological Waste-Stiff Silkworm for Capacitive Energy Storage. Electrochim. Acta 
2016, 220, 331. 
González, A.; Goikolea, E.; Barrena, J. A.; Mysyk, R. Review on Supercapacitors: 
Technologies and Materials. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2016, 58, 1189. 
Goswami, S.; Dillip, G. R.; Nandy, S.; Banerjee, A. N.; Pimentel, A.; Joo, S. W.; Martins, 
R.; Fortunato, E. Biowaste-Derived Carbon Black Applied to Polyaniline-Based High-
Performance Supercapacitor Microelectrodes: Sustainable Materials for Renewable 
Energy Applications. Electrochim. Acta 2019, 316, 202. 
Han, J.; Li, Q.; Wang, J.; Ye, J.; Fu, G.; Zhai, L.; Zhu, Y. Heteroatoms (O, N)-Doped Porous 
Carbon Derived from Bamboo Shoots Shells for High Performance Supercapacitors. J. 
Mater. Sci. 2018a, 29, 20991. 
Han, X.; Jiang, H.; Zhou, Y.; Hong, W.; Zhou, Y.; Gao, P.; Ding, R.; Liu, E. A High 
Performance Nitrogen-Doped Porous Activated Carbon for Supercapacitor Derived 
from Pueraria. J. Alloys Compd. 2018b, 744, 544. 
Hou, J. H.; Jiang, K.; Tahirc, M.; Wu, X.; Idreesc, F.; Shen, M.; Cao, C. B. Tunable Porous 
Structure of Carbon Nanosheets Derived from Puffed Rice for High Energy Density 
Supercapacitors. J. Power Sources 2017, 371, 148. 
Hou, J. H.; Jiang, K.; Wei, R.; Tahir, M.; Wu, X. G; Shen, M.; Wang, X. Z.; Cao, C. B. 
Popcorn-Derived Porous Carbon Flakes with an Ultrahigh Specific Surface Area for 
Superior Performance Supercapacitors. ACS Appl. Mater Interfaces 2017, 9, 30626. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
55 
Carbon Derived from Biowastes for Supercapacitors 
Jiang, L. L.; Sheng, L. Z.; Chen X.; Wei, T.; Fan, Z. J. Construction of Nitrogen-Doped 
Porous Carbon Buildings Using Interconnected Ultra-Small Carbon Nanosheets for 
Ultra-High Rate Supercapacitors. J. Mater. Chem. A 2016, 4, 11388. 
Khan, N.; Mariun, N.; Zaki, M.; Dinesh, L. Transient Analysis of Pulsed Charging in 
Supercapacitors. In 2000 TENCON Proceedings. Intelligent Systems and Technologies 
for the New Millennium (Cat. No. 00CH37119) 2000, 3, 193. 
Li, J.; Zan, G.; Wu, Q. Nitrogen and Sulfur Self-Doped Porous Carbon from Brussel 
Sprouts as Electrode Materials for High Stable Supercapacitor. RSC Adv. 2016, 6, 57464. 
Li, X.; Xing, W.; Zhuo, S.; Zhou, J.; Li, F.; Qiao, S. Z.; Lu, G. Q. Preparation of Capacitor’s 
Electrode from Sunflower Seed Shell. Bioresour. Technol. 2011, 102, 1118. 
Li, Y.; Wang, G.; Wei, T.; Fan, Z.; Yan, P. Nitrogen and Sulfur Co-Doped Porous Carbon 
Nanosheets Derived from Willow Catkin for Supercapacitors. Nano Energy 2016, 19, 
165. 
Li, Z.; Zhang, L.; Amirkhiz, B. S.; Tan, X. H.; Xu, Z. W.; Wang, H. L.; Olsen, B. C.; Holt, 
C. M. B.; Mitlin, D. Carbonized Chicken Eggshell Membranes with 3D Architectures as 
High-Performance Electrode Materials for Supercapacitors. Adv. Energy Mater. 2012, 
2, 431. 
Liang, Q.; Ye, L.; Huang, Z.; Xu, Q.; Bai, Y.; Kang, F.; Yang, Q. A Honeycomb-Like 
Porous Carbon Derived from Pomelo Peel for Use in High-Performance Supercapacitor. 
Nanoscale 2014, 6, 13831. 
Liu, J.; Deng, Y.; Li, X.; Wang, L. Promising Nitrogen-Rich Porous Carbons Derived from 
One-Step Calcium Chloride Activation of Biomass-Based Waste for High Performance 
Supercapacitor, ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng. 2016, 4, 177. 
Liu, S. B.; Zhao, Y.; Zhang, B. H.; Xia, H.; Zhou, J. F.; Xie, W. K.; Li, H. J. Nano-Micro 
Carbon Spheres Anchored on Porous Carbon Derived from Dual-Biomass as High Rate 
Performance Supercapacitor Electrodes. J Power Sources 2018, 381, 116. 
Liu, Y.; Shi, Z.; Gao, Y.; An, W.; Cao, Z.; Liu, J. Biomass-Swelling Assisted Synthesis 
of Hierarchical Porous Carbon Fibers for Supercapacitor Electrodes. ACS Appl. Mater. 
Interfaces 2016, 8, 28283. 
Ma, D.; Wu, G.; Wan, J.; Ma, F.; Geng, W.; Song, S. Oxygen-Enriched Hierarchical Porous 
Carbon Derived from Biowaste Sunflower Heads for High-Performance Supercapacitors. 
RSC Adv. 2015, 5, 107785. 
Ma, H.; Chen, Z.; Wang, X.; Liu, Z.; Liu, X. A Simple Route for Hierarchically Porous 
Carbon Derived from Corn Straw for Supercapacitor Application. J. Renew. Sustain. 
Energy 2019, 11, 024102. 
Marichi, R. B.; Sahu, V.; Sharma, R. K.; Singh, G. Efficient, Sustainable, and Clean Energy 
Storage in Supercapacitors Using Biomass-Derived Carbon Materials. Handbook 
Ecomater. 2017, 1–26. 
Na, R.; Wang, X.; Lu, N.; Huo, G.; Lin, H.; Wang, G. Novel Egg White Gel Polymer 
Electrolyte and a Green Solid-State Supercapacitor Derived from the Egg and Rice 
Waste. Electrochim. Acta 2018, 274, 316. 
Najib, S.; Erdem, E. Current Progress Achieved in Novel Materials for Supercapacitor 
Electrodes: Mini Review. Nanoscale Adv. 2019, 1, 2817. 
Nanaji, K.; Upadhyayula, V.; Rao, T. N.; Anandan, S. Robust, Environmentally Benign 
Synthesis of Nanoporous Graphene Sheets from Bio-waste for Ultrafast Supercapacitor 
Application. ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng. 2018, 7, 2516. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
56 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
Qian, W.; Sun, F.; Xu, Y.; Qiu, L.; Liu, C.; Wang, S.; Yan, F. Human Hair-Derived Carbon 
Flakes for Electrochemical Supercapacitors. Energy Environ. Sci. 2014, 7, 379. 
Rufford, T. E.; Hulicova-Jurcakova, D.; Khosla, K.; Zhu, Z.; Lu, G. Q. Microstructure 
and Electrochemical Double-Layer Capacitance of Carbon Electrodes Prepared by Zinc 
Chloride Activation of Sugar Cane Bagasse. J. Power Sources 2010, 195, 912. 
Rufford, T. E.; Hulicova-Jurcakova, D.; Zhu, Z.; Lu, G. Q. Nanoporous Carbon Electrode 
from Waste Coffee Beans for High Performance Supercapacitors. Electrochem. Commun. 
2008, 10, 1594. 
Salanne, M.; Rotenberg, B.; Naoi, K.; Kaneko, K.; Taberna, P. L.; Grey, C. P.; Dunn, 
B.; Simon, P. Efficient Storage Mechanisms for Building Better Supercapacitors. Nat. 
Energy 2016, 1, 16070. 
Saykar, N. G.; Phatangare, A. B.; Banerjee, I.; Bhoraskar, V. N.; Ray, A. K.; Mahapatra, 
S. Electron Beam Induced Synthesis of Ru-rGO and Its Super Capacitive Behavior. 2D 
Mater. 2019, 6, 045030. 
Saykar, N. G.; Pilania, R. K.; Banerjee, I.; Mahapatra, S. K. Synthesis of NiO–Co3O4 
Nanosheet and Its Temperature-Dependent Supercapacitive Behavior. J. Phys. D 2018, 
51, 475501, 
Sekar, M.; Sakthi, V.; Rengaraj, S. Kinetics and Equilibrium Adsorption Study of lead (II) 
Onto Activated Carbon Prepared from Coconut Shell. J. Colloid Interface Sci. 2004, 
279, 307. 
Senthilkumar S. T.; Selvan, R. K. Flexible Fiber Supercapacitor Using Bio-Waste Derived 
Porous Carbon. Chem. Electro. Chem. 2015, 2, 1111. 
Simon, P.; Gogotsi, Y. Materials for Electrochemical Capacitors. Nanosci. Technol. 2008, 
7, 845. 
Tanwar, S.; Arya, A; Gaur, A; Sharma, A. L. Transition Metal Dichalcogenide (TMDs) 
electrodes for Supercapacitors: A Comprehensive Review. J. Phys. 2021, 33, 303002. 
Wang, H.; Yi, H.; Chen, X.; Wang, X. Asymmetric Supercapacitors Based on Nano-
Architectured Nickel Oxide/Graphene Foam and Hierarchical Porous Nitrogen-Doped 
Carbon Nanotubes with Ultrahigh-Rate Performance. J. Mater. Chem. A 2014, 2, 3223. 
Wang, J. G.; Kang, F.; Wei, B. Engineering of MnO2-Based Nanocomposites for High-
Performance Supercapacitors. Progress Mater. Sci. 2015, 74, 51. 
Wang, J.; Polleux, J.; Lim, J.; Dunn, B. Pseudocapacitive Contributions to Electrochemical 
Energy Storage in TiO2 (Anatase) Nanoparticles. J. Phys. Chem. C 2007, 111, 14925. 
Wang, J.; Zhang, P. X.; Liu, L.; Zhang, Y.; Yang, J. F.; Zeng, Z. L.; Deng, S. G. Controllable 
Synthesis of Bifunctional Porous Carbon for Efficient Gas-Mixture Separation and 
Highperformance Supercapacitor. Chem. Eng. J. 2018, 348, 57. 
Wang, Y.; Zhao, Z.; Song, W.; Wang, Z.; Wu, X. From Biological Waste to Honeycomb-
Like Porous Carbon for High Energy Density Supercapacitor. J. Mater. Sci. 2019, 54, 
4917. 
Wang, Z.; Tian, S.; Xia, G.; Li, K. Discussion on Green Energy Storage Component-Super 
Capacitor. Low Voltage Apparatus 2011, 7, 18. 
Wei, H. M.; Chen, J.; Fu, N.; Chen, H. J.; Lin, H. L.; Han, S. Biomass-Derived Nitrogen-
Doped Porous Carbon with Superior Capacitive Performance and High CO2 Capture 
Capacity. Electrochim. Acta 2018, 266, 161. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
57 
Carbon Derived from Biowastes for Supercapacitors 
Wen, Y.; Rufford, T. E.; Hulicova-Jurcakova, D.; Zhu, X.; Wang, L. Structure Control of 
Nitrogen-Rich Graphene Nanosheets Using Hydrothermal Treatment and Formaldehyde 
Polymerization for Supercapacitors. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces. 2016, 8, 18051. 
Wu, C.; Yang, S.; Cai, J.; Zhang, Q.; Zhu, Y.; Zhang, K. Activated Microporous Carbon 
Derived from Almond Shells for High Energy Density Asymmetric Supercapacitors. 
ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2016, 8, 15288. 
Wu, F. C.; Tseng, R. L.; Hu, C. C.; Wang, C. C. Effects of Pore Structure And Electrolyte 
on the Capacitive Characteristics of Steam-and KOH-Activated Carbons for 
Supercapacitors. J. Power Sources 2005, 144, 302. 
Xu, G.; Han, J.; Ding, B.; Nie, P.; Pan, J.; Dou, H.; Li H.; Zhang, X. Biomass-Derived 
Porous Carbon Materials with Sulfur and Nitrogen Dual-Doping for Energy Storage. 
Green Chem. 2015, 17, 1668. 
Xu, M.; Huang, Q.; Sun, R.; Wang, X. Simultaneously Obtaining Fluorescent Carbon Dots 
and Porous Active Carbon for Supercapacitors from Biomass. RSC Adv. 2016, 6, 88674. 
Yan, S.; Lin, J.; Liu, P.; Zhao, Z.; Lian, J.; Chang, W.; Yao, L.; Liu, Y.; Lin, H.; Han, S. 
Preparation of Nitrogen-Doped Porous Carbons for High-Performance Supercapacitor 
Using Biomass of Waste Lotus Stems. RSC Adv. 2018, 8, 6806. 
Yang, C. S.; Jang, Y. S.; Jeong, H. K. Bamboo-Based Activated Carbon for Supercapacitor 
Applications. Curr. Appl. Phys. 2014, 14, 1616. 
Yao, F.; Pham, D. T.; Lee, Y. H. Carbon Based Materials for Lithium Ion Batteries, 
Electrochemical Capacitors, and Their Hybrid Devices. Chem. Sus. Chem. 2015, 8, 2284. 
Yu, D.; Chen, C.; Zhao, G.; Sun, L.; Du, B.; Zhang, H.; Li, Z.; Sun, Ye,; Besenbache, F.; 
Yu, M. Biowaste Derived Hierarchical Porous Carbon Nanosheets for Ultrahigh Power 
Density Supercapacitors. Chem. Sus. Chem. 2018a, 11, 1678. 
Yu, S.; Zhu, X. Q.; Lou, G. B.; Wu, Y. T.; Xu, K. T.; Zhang, Y.; Zhang, L. M.; Zhu, E. H.; 
Chen, H.; Shen, Z. H.; Bao, B. F.; Fu, S. Y. Sustainable Hierarchical Porous Biomass 
Carbons Enriched with Pyridinic and Pyrrolic Nitrogen for Asymmetric Supercapacitor. 
Mater. Des. 2018b, 149, 184. 
Zequine, C.; Ranaweera, C. K.; Wang, Z.; Dvornic, P. R.; Kahol, P. K.; Singh, S.; Tripathi, 
P.; Srivastava, O. N.;Singh, S.; Gupta, B. K.; Gupta, G.; Gupta, R. K. High-Performance 
Flexible Supercapacitors Obtained Via Recycled Jute: Bio-Waste to Energy Storage 
Approach. Sci. Rep. 2017, 7, 1174. 
Zhong, C.; Deng, Y.; Hu, W.; Qiao, J.; Zhang, L.; Zhang, J. A Review of Electrolyte 
Materials and Compositions for Electrochemical Supercapacitors. Chem. Soc. Rev. 
2015, 44, 7484. 


New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons. Aneeya Kumar Samantara & Satyajit Ratha (Eds.)
© 2024 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
CHAPTER 3  
Effect of Doping on the Electronic and 
Physicochemical Properties of the 
Atomic Carbon Clusters: A Theoretical 
Perspective 
ANOOP KUMAR KUSHWAHA, SUSHRI SOUMYA JENA, and  
MIHIR RANJAN SAHOO 
School of Basic Sciences, Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar, 
Bhubaneswar, India 
ABSTRACT 
The element, carbon, has been widely studied and investigated since many 
decades at academic and industrial level depending on its size, that is, 
atomic, molecular, and bulk. The essential properties such as electronic, 
physical, and chemical are strongly dependent on the particle size and 
differ significantly for carbon clusters in comparison to their bulk coun-
terparts. In general, atomic clusters are the aggregation of few or few 
thousand atoms in a specific shape. The carbon clusters exist in various 
structures such as atomic chain, carbon dust, single/polycyclic rings, 2D 
sheet graphene, closed-cage fullerene, nanotube, and graphite. Recently, 
the study of small atomic carbon clusters is gaining attention due to their 
application in energy storage/harvesting devices, biological processes, and 
astrophysical investigations. The pristine and doped atomic carbon cluster 
carries various significant properties, which vary nonmonotonically with 
size, shape, and composition. Sometimes, properties of these small carbon 

 
60 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
clusters change drastically with addition/removal of even a single atom. In 
this chapter, we have discussed the geometrical structure, electronic prop-
erties (e.g., ionization potential, electron affinity, polarizability, binding 
energy, etc.), physical and chemical properties, of small carbon clusters 
along with the effect of doping with various atoms, especially boron, on 
the pristine carbon cluster. Furthermore, we have discussed the application 
of pristine and doped carbon clusters in the field of energy storage/harvest. 
3.1 INTRODUCTION 
The electronic, physical, chemical, and magnetic properties of the matters 
usually show drastic variation with the reduction in the size from bulk 
to nanoscale. The primary reason behind such changes in the material 
properties is associated with the ratio of surface and volume as well as 
quantum confinement. With modifications in the shape, size, and dimen-
sion of the matters, aforementioned properties show variations, which 
could be utilized for the engineering and designing of novel materials. In 
the context of size and dimension of the matters, both nanotechnology and 
nanoscience have emerged as one of the fastest-growing research fields 
since the last few decades. For example, by reducing the size of the bulk 
transition metal to the atomic level, the catalytic activity improved signifi-
cantly (Jimenez-Izal and Alexandrova, 2018). Furthermore, the reduc-
tion in the dimension from 3D graphite to 2D graphene has opened up 
a plethora of applications from energy storage to biological engineering. 
With the development of advanced theoretical and experimental tech-
niques, the properties of matters having various sizes have been probed 
for understanding their characteristics at the atomic level. On the basis of 
the variation of properties from bulk to atom, the matters could be divided 
into three distinct regimes (Arenz et al., 2007), a brief discussion on which 
has been provided in the succeeding section. 
The matters having an average diameter of more than 100 nm fall in 
the first regime, where the properties of the materials do not show direct 
dependency on the size. In the second regime, matters which are having an 
average size ranging from 1 to 100 nm are considered. In this regime, the 
properties of matters (or nanoparticles) show steady variations and follow 
a set of specific laws unless and until they reached the bulk limit. For 
example, in this regime, the ionization potential of the metallic clusters 

 
−1 
3
IP N 
( ) = W +α N 
 
61 
Effect of Doping on the Electronic and Physicochemical Properties 
could be expressed as a function of the size, that is, the number of atoms 
(N) in the nanoparticle and work function (W) of the bulk material, as has 
been expressed in the following mathematical relation: 
where α is a constant and has a specific value for each individual atom, 
for example, α = 2.4 eV for potassium. This regime is also known as the 
scalable regime. In the last few decades, several groups have summarized 
the size-dependent properties (such as electronic, physical, and chemical) 
of matters employing different characterization techniques (Borman, 
1990; Castleman Jr, 2011; Jena, 2013a). In the third regime, matters with 
smaller sizes are considered and their sizes are generally characterized by 
the number of atoms present in the structure. The material having a size 
of up to 100 atoms falls in the third regime, which is otherwise known as 
the nonscalable regime because of quantum confinement and boundary 
effects. The quantum size effect controls the matter’s properties. 
FIGURE 3.1  Size dependence of a cluster property P(n) on the number (n) of the cluster 
constituents. 
3.1.1 ATOMIC CLUSTERS 
The materials, consisting of a few atoms to a few hundred atoms, are 
called clusters. The atomic clusters provide a bridge between atoms and 
the bulk. Similar to a molecule, clusters are basically the aggregation of 
atoms; however, both can be distinguished on the basis of size, composi
tion, and interaction. For example, size and composition might vary in 
-

 
62 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
the case of clusters, while they both are fixed in the case of a molecule. 
Further, the clusters have a tendency to strongly interact with each other 
and form large clusters, whereas the interaction between two or more 
molecules has been found to be very weak. In addition, the clusters exhibit 
a large number of isomers in which the atoms could be arranged in various 
geometrical configurations. With the variation of the size, the cluster of 
a nonmagnetic element can show magnetic properties, and a cluster of a 
semiconducting element might possess metallic behavior and vice versa. 
Furthermore, through the changes in cluster size, noble metals become 
reactive. Such behavior of clusters is associated with the unusual structure 
and the presence of electrons in the molecular orbitals. The molecular 
orbital analysis provides information regarding the energy gap which is 
the difference between the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) 
and the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO). Through the study 
of molecular orbitals including HOMO and LUMO energy levels, one 
can not only get information about stability but also several associated 
properties about the clusters. Therefore, the detailed study of the structural 
parameters and electronic and physicochemical properties of the atomic 
clusters of various elements provides a new way to design the materials, 
which could play an important role in energy storage and biotechnological 
application. 
The atomic clusters may consist of single or hetero-atom species that 
can be studied individually because of mass isolation. Thus, in an atomic 
cluster, each and every atom as well as an electron can be distinguished. 
The structure and stability of the clusters are two important factors to 
afford unique properties. For example, mass spectra of the clusters with 
different number of atoms show clearly distinguishable pronounced peaks 
in comparison to others, which exhibit high stability. The clusters, showing 
conspicuous peaks in the mass spectra, are known as a magic number. The 
magic numbers differ with the selection of elements. Similar to the stability, 
the equilibrium geometry of the clusters does not exhibit any resemblance 
with their respective bulk. Furthermore, the size-dependent evolution of 
atomic clusters differs from one element to other. The atomic clusters 
consist of the same number of atoms, though different elements can have 
different atomic structures. In Figure 3.2, carbon, sodium, magnesium, 
and argon clusters comprising 20 atoms each have been schematically 
depicted, which shows that the low-lying geometrical structures differ 
from element to element. The primary reason behind such differences in 

 
63 
Effect of Doping on the Electronic and Physicochemical Properties 
the geometrical structure of the cluster is associated with the type of forces 
between the atoms inside the cluster. 
FIGURE 3.2  Carbon, sodium, magnesium, and argon cluster with size of 20 atoms, 
which shows that the low-lying geometrical structures differ element by element. 
In nature, atomic cluster exists in all forms of matter, that is, solid 
state, gas, liquid, and plasma. These clusters can be categorized into 
various types on the basis of availability, for example, metallic cluster, 
van der Waals cluster, fullerene, semiconductor cluster, and mixed cluster. 
The most common shape in which the clusters are formed is spherical 
in nature; however, sometimes the atoms in a cluster might arrange in 
completely different shapes such as linear, spiral, and arborescent. The 
atomic clusters are distinguished from the other clusters on the basis of the 
nature of the forces between the atoms, or the spatial arrangement of the 
atoms inside the clusters. In the last few decades, with the development of 
experimental techniques, clusters have been generated by several reported 
methods. Earlier, the atomic clusters were generated through the pulsed 
laser ablation technique, where the laser was used to locally heat up the 
target material  for evaporation (Bondybey and English, 1982; De Heer, 
1993). Later, spark discharge generation method was introduced, where 
an externally applied potential difference is used as a cluster generation 
source (Schwyn et al., 1988). Recently, this method has become one of 
the effective tools to generate small particles, where the process of cooling 
down the ion cloud at temperature below the boiling point occurs (Tabrizi 
et al., 2009). Furthermore, atmospheric pressure spark ablation is another 
method that has been developed for the generation of small atomic clusters 
(Maisser et al., 2015). Apart from these experimental techniques, theo
retical models based on the ab-initio first principle method and molecular 
dynamics have been developed for the understanding of the geometrical 
-

 
 
 
 
64 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
structure, electronic, and physicochemical properties. The experimental 
and theoretical investigations have found various types of clusters, which 
have been discussed in detail including both geometry and stability, in the 
following section. 
3.1.1.1 NOBLE GAS CLUSTER 
These types of clusters comprise noble gas atoms which are chemically 
inert due to their closed electronic shells. The bonding between the atoms 
is weak, which is generally governed by the van der Waals interaction. In 
this case, the electronic structure does not play any significant role, and 
therefore, the geometrical structures are determined by the close-packing 
model. For some specific-sized clusters, the atomic shells are found to be 
closed, which leads to high stability in the clusters and the size is repre-
sented by the magic numbers. These clusters are assumed to have a typical 
icosahedral pattern that is calculated by the following equation: 
N = [{(10/3)×K3}−(5 × K2) + {(11/3) ×K} − 1], 
Here, K is the number of shells. Corresponding to the K value (K = 2, 
3, 4, …), the cluster with sizes 13, 55, 147, … are found to be the most 
stable structures as shown in Figure 3.3. Experimentally, the stability for 
magic number cluster is further confirmed by mass spectra analysis. For 
example, in Figure 3.3, the mass spectra analysis of xenon cluster shows 
conspicuous peaks at 13, 55, and 147 which signify a stable cluster. 
FIGURE 3.3  (A) The icosahedric structure of noble gas with sizes 13, 55, and 147 atoms. 
The peaks of mass spectra of Xe clusters (B) show the magic numbers. 
Source: A- Reprinted with permission from Jena et al., 2018. Copyright © 2018, American 
Chemical Society. B- Reprinted with permission from Echt et al., 1981. 

 
 
65 
Effect of Doping on the Electronic and Physicochemical Properties 
3.1.1.2 SIMPLE METAL CLUSTER 
In general, simple metal clusters consist of alkali metal or alkaline earth 
metal, which has been well investigated by numerous experimental and 
theoretical techniques in the last few decades. The first principle-based 
theoretical calculation has been widely applied for the structural, elec-
tronic, and vibrational analysis (Chandrakumar et al., 2004; Donoso et 
al., 2014; Fournier et al., 2003; Guo et al., 2010; Kumar Kushwaha and 
Kumar Nayak, 2017; Kümmel et al., 2000; Kushwaha et al., 2017; Lin 
et al., 2006; Manninen, 1986; Wheeler et al., 2004). The shell structure 
of such metal clusters could be obtained by the number of electrons as 
well as the available energy state for the electrons. Figure 3.4 shows the 
geometrical structure of highly stable small Na clusters, including clusters 
having 55–61 atoms. The numbers of electrons corresponding to close 
electron shells in the sodium clusters are 8, 20, 40, and 58, which can be 
confirmed by the mass-spectra analysis. The cluster of aforementioned 
size, also called magic number cluster, is found to have higher stability 
in comparison to their neighbor. In the mass spectra of sodium, each peak 
corresponds to the magic number cluster as shown in Figure 3.4. The 
formation and bonding of the small metal clusters could be explained by 
the jellium model. In this model, the cluster is defined by the radius with 
the homogeneously distributed positive charge on each and every atom. 
FIGURE 3.4  Ground-state stable geometry of Na clusters.  
Source: Reprinted with permission from De Heer., 1993; and Lee and Kanhere, 2007.  

 
 
66 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
3.1.1.3 TRANSITION METAL CLUSTER 
The transition metal clusters are composed of transition metal elements 
with a specific shape and size. In transition metals, the free atom has an 
incomplete d-shell in the ground state or in an excited state with small 
energy. The electrons occupied in the d-shell are responsible for all the 
properties including metallic characteristics at the atomic level as well as 
at the bulk level. In the case of the transition metal clusters, most of the 
properties of elements reflect the localized behavior of the d-electrons; the 
delocalized behavior of the external sp electrons also plays a significant 
role (Alonso, 2000; Alonso and March, 2012; Cohen et al., 1987; de Heer 
et al., 1987). The most important characteristic of clusters such as elec-
tronic shell formation and closing shell effect for magic number occurs, 
due to the delocalized character. The electronic shell effects present in 
the clusters of coinage metals, for example, Cu, Ag, and Au, as d-shell 
electron form full d10 shell in such atoms. Both the jellium model and hard 
sphere model failed to explain the formation and stability of transition 
metal clusters, because mass spectra of iron cluster show high-intensity 
peak for cluster sizes 7, 13, and 15. 
3.1.1.4 COVALENTLY BONDED CLUSTER 
In the periodic table, C and Si are the two most important elements which 
form a covalently bonded cluster. The carbon clusters have been discussed 
in the next section, while the current section is focused only on silicon clus-
ters. C and Si both belong to the same group in the periodic table; however, 
their bonding patterns are different. Graphite, the bulk form of carbon, 
always shows metallic behavior while diamond shows semiconducting 
behavior. On the other hand, silicon always shows semiconducting nature. 
The primary reason for such differences in their behavior is associated to 
their bonding. In general, silicon prefers to form sp3 bonding while carbon 
forms sp, sp2 as well as sp3 bonding. This is the reason why carbon forms 
a fullerene structure (C60) while silicon fails to form a similar structure. 
Furthermore, Si clusters do not possess the chain or ring structure as in 
the case of C clusters. The dissociation experiments provide the existence 
of the silicon magic cluster with sizes Si6 and Si10. The spectra of small/ 
medium silicon clusters have been represented in Figure 3.5, peaks of 

 
67 
Effect of Doping on the Electronic and Physicochemical Properties 
which show higher stability in comparison to the neighbor (Bloomfield 
et al., 1985). 
FIGURE 3.5  Spectra of small and medium size silicon clusters. 
Source: Reprinted with permission from Bloomfield et al., 1985. 
3.1.1.5 IONICALLY BONDED CLUSTER 
In the ionically bonded clusters, the atoms are bonded by ionic interac
tions. Such kind of interaction is found in the alkali halide and metal 
nitride clusters. The major difference between other clusters and ionically 
bonded clusters is associated with the behavior of elements at the atomic 
level and bulk level. In general, the behavior of the small atomic clusters 
does not show a resemblance  with their respective bulk; however, in case 
of the ionically bonded clusters, the properties exhibit a great resemblance 
with their bulk part. For example, the dimer of tungsten oxide (WO3)2  
possesses properties similar to their bulk (Sun et al., 2004). Recently, the 
“baby” crystal of PbS has been found and its 32 monomers show resemble 
with the bulk crystalline form (Kiran et al., 2012). 
-

 
 
68 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
3.1.1.6 CLUSTER WITH CAGE STRUCTURE 
The cage-like structure was originated due to the unusual stability of the 
atomic cluster in such structures. C60 fullerene is one of the first hollow-
cage structures, which was confirmed by the experiments. The details 
of the cage-like structure for fullerene have been discussed later in this 
chapter. Apart from carbon, there are several elements such as boron and 
gold, which form similar cage-like structures. In the case of boron, the 
combination of first-principle calculations and photo-electron microscopy 
identified a fullerene-like structure, B40, which has larger HOMO–LUMO 
gap, that is, it’s a stable cluster with extremely low binding energy. Similar 
to the B40, another hollow-cage-like structure, B80 (shown in Fig. 3.6), has 
been predicted through theoretical calculation. The structure of B80 has a 
similarity with C60; however, an extra boron atom is found to be occupied 
at the center of each 20 hexagons. B2  is another cage-like stable structure 
12
of boron, which has wide application in energy storage devices, when it is 
functionalized with hydrogen. Figure 3.6 represents the cage-like structure 
)2−
of B–2 and (B H
.
12
12
12
FIGURE 3.6  Equilibrium and optimized structure of B , B , and (B H )2−
80
12
12
12
.
Source: Reprinted with permission from Prasad and Jemmis. 2008; and Szwacki et al. 2007. 
3.1.2 GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS OF ATOMIC CLUSTERS 
As discussed in the previous section about the classification of small 
atomic clusters, this section leads toward the general characteristics such 
as morphology, electronic properties, and magnetic properties. 

 
 
 
 
69 
Effect of Doping on the Electronic and Physicochemical Properties 
3.1.2.1 GEOMETRICAL STRUCTURE 
For the understanding of the electronic and physicochemical properties 
of atomic clusters, it is essential to achieve an accurate geometrical struc-
ture. The atomic structure plays an important role in case of clusters, as 
a specific size of the cluster can have various isomers with very close 
ground-state energy values. Finding the accurate geometrical structures 
for the cluster is always a crucial problem for the experimentalist as well 
as the theorist. In the current scenario, no such experimental technique is 
available which could independently determine the geometrical structure 
of the cluster including structural parameters such as bond length and 
bond angles. The available experimental techniques such as ion mobility, 
electron diffractions, Raman spectroscopy, and infrared spectroscopy 
provide essential information about clusters’ structure. The theoretical 
technique based on the first principles calculations provides a way for the 
determination of the structure. With an initial guess about the structure, the 
cluster is optimized by a theoretical algorithm such as the Berny algorithm 
and generic algorithm for various isomers. The isomer having the lowest 
ground-state energy is considered as the correct geometrical structure. 
Recently, the combination of IR spectroscopy and first principle calcula-
tions has provided direct information about the geometrical structure for 
both monoatomic and heteroatomic clusters. In the following section, the 
geometrical structure of the carbon clusters with different sizes has been 
discussed in detail. 
3.1.2.2 STABILITY 
Stability is another important factor in small atomic clusters. In general, 
the stability of the cluster is governed by two factors, that is, electron shell 
closure and atomic packing. These factors are responsible for the forma-
tion of magic numbered clusters, which are highly stable in comparison to 
the neighbor. The stability of the cluster in terms of the magic number has 
been already discussed for various types of clusters in the previous section. 
Further, the cluster stability can be investigated in terms of binding energy, 
second-order binding energy, and HOMO–LUMO gap. The clusters, where 
the atomic interaction is more, have higher binding energy, leading to high 
stability. Similarly, the clusters with wider HOMO–LUMO gaps generally 

 
 
 
−E M
(
) 
nE M
(
) 
(
)
E
M
 = 
n 
b
n 
n 
( 
)
(
) 
n −
E M  −(
)
( 
) 
1 
E M + −E M + 
E
M n 
+ = 
n 
b (
)
n 
D n n  
, −
=
( 
1) 
( 
)
(
)
(
)
E M  
+ E M  −E M
n−1 
n 
∆2 E
n
( ) = 2 
( ) 
(
) 
(
) 
−E
n
 1 
E
n +
E
n
 
−
−
 1
b
b
b 
b 
70 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
have high chemical stability. The second difference of the binding energy 
provides information about the relative stability of the specific size of 
clusters in comparison to the neighbors. Furthermore, the fragmentation 
energy is another quantity that provides qualitative information about the 
stability. The higher value of fragmentation energy and higher negative 
value of the second difference of binding energy lead to higher stability 
in the cluster. The normalized binding energy (Eb), second difference 
of binding energy (Δ2Eb), and fragmentation energy (D(n, n−1)) for the 
cluster (M) of size n have been expressed with the following relations: 
3.1.2.3 ELECTRONIC AND CHEMICAL PROPERTIES 
On the basis of electronic structures, materials could be classified into 
three classes. In the first kind of materials, the electronic structures show 
very small overlapping between the atomic orbital as in the case of noble 
atom clusters, where the clusters are weakly bound systems. In the second 
case, the valence electron of the atoms becomes free from their ions; 
therefore, the energy gap vanishes at the Fermi level. In the last case, that 
is, in the semiconductor and insulators, the bands (valence and conduction 
bands) are separated by a significant band gap. In the case of the clusters, 
the atomic energy levels are represented by the molecular energy levels 
rather than the energy band. With increasing cluster size, the atomic energy 
levels exhibit broadening as shown in Figure 3.7, where for Mg clusters, 
the HOMO–LUMO gap changes with size and shows bulk behavior for 
critical size clusters. Other electronic properties such as ionization poten-
tial, electron affinity, show odd–even variation with cluster size, especially 
in the case of lithium clusters (Dugourd et al., 1992; Kushwaha et al., 

 
 
71 
Effect of Doping on the Electronic and Physicochemical Properties 
2017). Similar to the variation of the ionization potential of the lithium 
cluster, both free energy and redox potential show odd–even oscillation. 
FIGURE 3.7  Evolution of electronic structure of magnesium represented with a 
schematic diagram. 
Source: Reprinted with permission from Thomas et al., 2002. 
3.1.2.4 MAGNETIC PROPERTIES 
The magnetic properties of the clusters are generally applicable for the 
development of high-density magnetic storage materials as well as nano-
electronic devices. The total magnetic moment of clusters is composed 
of two major components, that is, spin magnetic moment and orbital 
magnetic moment of the electron. In general, the spin-magnetic moment 
of electrons is dominant in the total magnetic moment of clusters. The 
primary reason behind such domination is associated with the smaller 
value of the orbital magnetic moment in comparison to the spin magnetic 
moment, which leads to domination in the total magnetic moment. The 
magnetic moments are affected by the interatomic distances between 
the atom as well as coordination and dimension. With the increase in the 
cluster size, the overlap between electrons at neighboring sites increases, 
which leads to a reduction in the magnetic moment. For example, in case 

 
72 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
of the Ag clusters, the total magnetic moment shows odd–even oscillation, 
while with vanadium doping, the total magnetic moment shows a reduc-
tion with increasing cluster size (Xiong et al., 2017). Furthermore, the 
atoms in the linear chain are more magnetic than the surface or bulk atom. 
As most of the atoms in clusters are at the surface, lower dimension, lower 
coordination, and increased interatomic distance cause clusters to have 
higher magnetic moment per atom than bulk. The magnetic moment per 
atom of clusters is observed to change nonmonotonically with increasing 
cluster size, and their value lies in between those of individual atom and 
atoms in a bulk system. 
3.2 PRISTINE CARBON CLUSTERS 
With the detection of pure carbon molecules before a century ago from 
the astrophysical source, the study of such molecules has been of great 
interest. The detailed study of the pure carbon molecule has been able 
to provide the scientific community plethora of significant information 
in order to investigate the chemical characteristics and compositions of 
carbon stars, comets, and interstellar clouds. Apart from the carbon mole-
cule, another form of carbon, that is, “carbon cluster,” has been detected 
in the hydrocarbon flames and soot-forming flames. The flexibility in the 
formation of bonding, that is, single, double, and triple bonds, the carbon 
clusters appear in a wide range of structural forms that are spontaneously 
being synthesized in the hot carbon plasma. The evolution of carbon 
cluster structure, from linear chain to ring and from close-spherical cage 
to nanotube, creates a challenge and requires the development of both 
experimental and theoretical techniques. After the discovery of fullerenes 
in 1985, several stable sp-allotropes of carbon were proposed, one of which 
consisted of long acetylenic chains of sp-hybridized carbon atoms, that is, 
polyynes. This carbon chain is observed in the interstellar medium and the 
larger carbon chain species were developed in the laboratory environment. 
Therefore, the detailed knowledge of the physical and chemical properties 
of carbon clusters is important for understanding the properties as well as 
for the implementation of these clusters in various kinds of applications. 
The sp-hybridized pristine carbon molecules are found in several 
structures such as chain, monocyclic, and polycyclic. These molecules are 
transient species that are highly reactive; therefore, it is very difficult to 

 
 
73 
Effect of Doping on the Electronic and Physicochemical Properties 
produce and study their physicochemical properties. Nevertheless, with 
the development of efficient theoretical method and experimental tech-
nique, great progress in the study of these systems has been reported in 
the last two decades. The structural analysis of the anionic carbon clusters 
(C– 
n) with the photoelectron spectroscopy shows a linear structure, for n = 
2–9, and monolayer rings for the n = 10–29 atoms (Yang et al., 1988). The 
structural analysis with the ion-chromatograph shows a significant differ-
ence in the structure of the anion and cation of the carbon clusters (Gotts 
et al., 1995). For example, linear structures are found for C– 
30 anion cluster 
while cationic clusters are not found beyond C+ 
10 cluster (Gotts et al., 1995). 
The annealing investigation of anion isomers for n > 30 has resulted in 
the discovery of monocyclic rings, bicyclic rings, tricyclic rings, graphite, 
and fullerene structures. In this section, we have discussed the structural 
parameters, electronic structure, and physicochemical properties of the 
pristine carbon clusters including their cationic and anionic parts. 
3.2.1 GEOMETRICAL STRUCTURE 
For the investigation of any clusters, it is important to obtain the stable 
and optimized isomer of the specific-sized clusters. In this section, we 
have discussed about the geometrical structure of the carbon cluster (Cn; 
n = 2–10), which is depicted in Figures 3.9 and 3.10. In the case of the 
carbon dimer (C2), the only possible configuration is a linear arrangement 
with different bond lengths. Earlier theoretical investigation has found 
the bond length of C–C between the range of 1.24–1.41 Å by employing 
different methods (Fura et al., 2002; Raghavachari and Binkley, 1987); 
however, the experimental study shows a bond length of 1.24 Å (Huber 
and Herzberg, 1979). Few reports exhibit the bond length to be 1.325 Å, 
which corresponds to the typical C–C double bond (Kosimov et al., 2008). 
There are two possible configurations, that is, linear and triangular, which 
have been found in the case of the trimer carbon cluster (C3). Here, the 
linear configuration shows minimum energy, hence higher stability in 
comparison to the triangular configuration. In the linear configuration, the 
average bond length between the carbon atoms is 1.310 Å, which has been 
found from experimental as well as theoretical investigations (Martin et 
al., 1995; Zhang et al., 2002). Triangular structures are the second-most 
stable structures, which have a bond angle of 60° between the C–C–C 

 
 
74 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
bonds as shown in Figure 3.9(A) (Kosimov et al., 2008). Other irregular 
triangular structures are found to have much higher energies, that is, they 
have less stability; therefore, such structures could not be a part of the 
investigation. 
The carbon clusters with size 4 along with various isomers have been 
shown in Figure 3.8(A). In the case of the linear structure 4(1) (in Figure 
3.8(A)), the inner and outer bond lengths have been observed to be close
values, that is, 1.331 and 1.330 Å, respectively (Kosimov et al., 2008). 
However, few reports suggest that the outer bond length is longer than 
the inner one (Jena, 2013b; Martin et al., 1995). Apart from the linear 
configuration of C4, other isomers have also been shown in structure 4(2–5) 
(in Figure 3.8(A)). The threefold symmetry structure 4(2) with a bond 
length 1.364 Å shows the next stable structure after the linear structure. 
Furthermore, branched structure, 4(3), consists of single and double bond 
for its triangular and outer atom part, respectively. Other configurations of 
C4 clusters, that is, square, rhombic, and tetrahedral structures, are found 
with comparatively lower stabilities; however, few reports have found that 
rhombic structure is more stable than the linear form (Raghavachari and 
Binkley, 1987; Whiteside et al., 1981). For the cluster size 5 (C5), there 
are 11 structures which are depicted as 5(1–11) in Figure 3.9(A). In the 
case of linear configuration, 5(1), the inner bond length is found longer 
than the outer bond length, similar to the earlier cases. The regular cyclic 
pentagonal structure with the bond length 1.437 Å and internal bond angle 
108° has been shown in Figure 3.8(A). The irregular cyclic structures of 
stable form (5(4, 6, 8, 10) and highly unstable form (5(5, 7)) with lesser 
symmetry have been shown in Figure 3.8(A). 
The stable geometries of C6 have been depicted in Figure 3.8(B), 
where the cyclic structure (benzene ring) has been found to be the most 
stable structure than other structures including linear configuration. The 
benzene ring has been recognized as the ground state for the C6 clusters, 
which has a slightly higher total energy than that of linear configuration. 
The structures, 6(3–11), are planar, while the structures, 6(12–17), are 
nonplanar in nature. Pentagonal pyramidal 6(14), triangular prism 6(15), 
fish-like structure 6(16), and square di-pyramidal 6(17) show lower 
stability in comparison to cyclic and linear configurations. Figure 3.8 (C 
and D) shows the stable geometries of C7 and C8, respectively. Their ring-
like structure has been found as a ground-state structure. Apart from the 
ring-like structure for C7, there are other 18 (7(2–19)) structures, both 

 
75 
Effect of Doping on the Electronic and Physicochemical Properties 
planar and nonplanar has been investigated, which are found to have 
comparatively lower stability. In the case of C8, the planar and nonplanar 
structures along with their combinations show about 29 stable structures, 
8(1–29), as depicted in Figure 3.8(D). Similar to C7, the ring structure, 
8(1), of cluster C8 has been found to have comparatively higher energy 
and is therefore considered as the ground state. It is noticed that seeds for 
the planar graphene structure are found for C8 as double-ring structure 
consists of two pentagons 8(8). 
FIGURE 3.8  Different isomers of carbon clusters from 2 to 8. 
Source: Reprinted with permission from Kosimov et al., 2008. 
The stable structures for the clusters with atomic sizes 9 and 10 (C9 
and C10) have been depicted in Figure 3.9(A and B), respectively. The 
modification in the cyclic configuration of the C9 and C10 structures 
creates other structures which lie between the most stable ring and their 
linear structure. In both cases, the cyclic structures are the most stable 
structures, which can be considered as the ground state. The comparative 
analyses of the bond length (C–C) for both cases, that is, linear and cyclic 
ring with increasing cluster size, have been depicted in Figure 3.10. In the 
case of cyclic structures, the bond length decreases initially and attains 
saturation, while the bond length in the linear configurations does not 

 
76 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
show any change after C4. Furthermore, the bond length for the cyclic case 
is comparatively longer in comparison to the linear configuration. The 
ground-state configuration of the higher numbered clusters Cn (n = 11–55) 
has been depicted in Figure 3.9(C). The ground state has been determined 
using the energy minimization technique with Brenner potential function 
(Kosimov et al., 2010). 
FIGURE 3.9  (A) and (B) represent the different isomers of carbon clusters from 9 to 10 and (C) 
is the most stable isomer of carbon clusters with a range of 11–55. 
Source: Reprinted with permission from Kosimov et al., 2008. 
3.2.2 ELECTRONIC PROPERTIES 
The complexity and diversity of the bonding between the carbon atoms 
within the clusters are of great interest due to their application as potential 
components. To explore their wide range of applications, it is essential to 
study electronic properties, which could provide initial information about 
the nature of interaction between the atoms. Furthermore, with the doping 
of the other atoms in the carbon clusters, the electronic properties could 
be tuned to suit other applications. The normalized binding energies of 
the most stable cyclic and linear structures of carbon cluster are depicted 

 
77 
Effect of Doping on the Electronic and Physicochemical Properties 
in Figure 3.10(B) and compared with the earlier results calculated with 
Hartree–Fock (HF) method (Kosimov et al., 2008; Raghavachari and 
Binkley, 1987). In both cases, the normalized binding energy initially 
increases steeply and later increases gradually with an increase in the 
cluster size. It has been found that linear structures are highly favorable 
for small-sized clusters while cyclic structures are stable for clusters with 
atomic size equal to or greater than 6. Tomanek et al. have investigated the 
binding energy of the linear carbon clusters through the combination of 
the adaptive simulation and tight-bonding method (Tománek and Schluter, 
1991). Their study reveals the odd–even variation of normalized binding 
energy with increasing cluster size and higher energy values for odd clus-
ters in comparison to their neighboring even clusters. 
FIGURE 3.10  Figure (A) represents the changing in the bond length for linear and cyclic 
carbon cluster. Figure (B) shows the variation of normalized binding energy with linear 
and cyclic carbon clusters. 
Source: Reprinted with permission from Kosimov et al., 2008. 
Ionization potential and electron affinity are two fundamental proper
ties of the carbon clusters, which are highly influenced by the geometrical 
structures. The determination of ionization potential with high accuracy is 
still a challenge in the case of carbon clusters; however, in recent years, 
first principle-based theoretical technique has been applied  for the predic
tion of the ionization potential of clusters which is depicted in Figure 
3.11(A). The first and second ionization potential values exhibit drastic 
changes with increasing cluster size, as shown in Figure 3.11(A). The first 
ionization potential decreases slowly with cluster size nonmonotonically, 
as some oscillations are present with the increasing size. The second 
ionization potential also decreases with increasing cluster size; however, it 
shows a stable value for cluster size C8–C10. The first ionization potential 
-
-

 
 
78 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
is smaller than the second ionization potential and their difference is 
larger for small-sized clusters. The primary reason behind such behavior 
could be attributed to the accommodation of multiple charges for larger 
cluster in comparison to small clusters. Similar to the ionization potential, 
electron affinity is also a very sensitive quantity and drastically changes 
with cluster size. The electron affinities including vertical electron detach-
ment energy, adiabatic electron affinity (AEA), and their comparison with 
experimental results have been depicted in Figure 3.11(B), for increasing 
carbon chain size. The theoretically calculated vertical and AEA show 
odd–even alternation with increasing size of carbon clusters, which is in 
good agreement with the experimental results (Lépine et al., 2002). The 
electron affinity for the even-numbered carbon clusters seems to have 
larger value in comparison to odd-numbered clusters due to the partial 
occupying nature of the π-orbital of linear even-numbered clusters. 
FIGURE 3.11  (A) First and second ionization potential of carbon clusters with increasing 
cluster size. (B) Electron affinities of linear carbon chains as a function size. 
Source: (A) Reprinted with permission from Diaz-Tendero et al., 2006 and (B) Lepine et 
al. 2002, Copyright © 2002, American Chemical Society 
The discussion of the electronic properties of the carbon clusters is not 
complete without mentioning the energy band gap and density of states 
(DOS). The energy band gap is represented by the nonavailability of state 
at a particular energy level. Those states which are comparatively lower 
than the band gap are defined as the occupied states and the highest occu
pied orbital is known as HOMO. Similarly, those states which have higher 
energies than band gap are defined as unoccupied orbital and the state with 
-

 
 
 
79 
Effect of Doping on the Electronic and Physicochemical Properties 
the lowest possible occupancy is known as LUMO. The difference of the 
energy levels, that is, HOMO–LUMO energy gap, provides vital informa-
tion about the stability, reactivity, and other physicochemical properties of 
molecules and clusters. The variation of the HOMO–LUMO energy gap 
occurs with increasing carbon cluster size (specific structures are taken 
from Qiang et al. (2015)). The variation shows a nonmonotonic nature 
with an increase in the number of atoms in the clusters. The HOMO– 
LUMO energy gap of carbon clusters has been found to fall in the range 
of 1.19–2.52 eV (except dimer), which shows their semiconductor-like 
behavior. The DOS of a system describes the number of states per interval 
of energy at each energy level that are available to be occupied by the 
electrons. A high value of DOS at a particular energy interval suggests 
that multiple states are available for the occupation of the electron, while 
a zero DOS indicates that no states are available for the electron to be 
occupied at the particular energy interval. The partial density of states for 
the carbon cluster C4 shows the availability of s and p states at the Fermi 
level. Furthermore, it has been found that with an increase in cluster size, 
the energy of s-state falls while that of p-state rises (Qiang et al., 2015). 
3.3 DOPED CARBON CLUSTERS 
As discussed in the previous section, the electronic properties of the 
carbon clusters show drastic changes with increasing cluster size. These 
size-dependent cluster properties of the carbon clusters are altered by the 
introduction of dopant atoms. Due to the doping of an atom in the small 
atomic clusters, the stability, electronic properties, reactivity, optical, and 
magnetic properties are affected. In this section, we have discussed the 
effect of doping of various atoms such as boron, silicon, and gold in the 
carbon clusters. 
3.3.1 BORON-DOPED CARBON CLUSTER 
The ability of formation of the atomic clusters of boron resembles carbon; 
however, their bulk behaviors are different. By doping with the boron 
atom, various properties of carbon clusters are found to improve and show 
superior performance in comparison to the parent clusters. For example, 

 
 
80 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
the replacement with the boron atom in the trigonal site of graphite lattice 
leads to an improved resistance toward the oxidation process. Further-
more, their application in hydrogen storage devices is reported on the 
basis of adsorption of hydrogen atom on boron-doped carbon moieties. 
The study of the interaction between boron and carbon for the smaller 
clusters provides understanding of the process for the formation of larger 
clusters. The boron-doped small carbon clusters are well investigated 
through experimental tools and technique, such as electronic emission 
and absorption spectroscopy, mass spectroscopy, and IR spectroscopy. 
However, critical information about the bonding and electronic properties 
of such clusters is highly essential. In this context, advanced theoretical 
techniques are found to be the appropriate tools which could provide 
detailed and consistent information of boron-doped carbon clusters. 
Saloni et al. (2011) have investigated the boron-doped carbon clusters 
with molecular orbital formulism-based first principle calculations and 
reported their structural, vibrational, and thermodynamic properties. In 
this section, we have discussed the characteristics of boron-doped clusters 
briefly on basis of recent reports (Saloni et al., 2011). The molecule, BC, 
is the smallest unit of clusters, which is widely investigated using both 
theoretical and experimental methods. BC exhibits a bond length of 1.48 
Å, atomization energy of 98 kcal/mol, ground state 4Σ− (…5σ11π2), and 
ground-state frequency of 1197 cm−1 (Saloni et al., 2011). Further, BC2 
clusters are found in both cyclic and linear forms; however, the cyclic 
form is highly stable. In the case of BC3, the cyclic kite-like structure with 
the shortest C–C diagonal bond is found to be the most stable structure in 
comparison to other isomers. The vibrational analysis suggests that the 
vibrational spectrum of BC3 is similar to that of C4. For the cluster, BC4, 
both cyclic and linear structures have been studied with first principle-
based model which suggests four stable isomers. Among these isomers, 
the linear structure (BCCCC) has been found to have the lowest energy. 
In the case of the clusters, BC5 and BC6, the cyclic structures are found to 
be the most stable structures. Apart from the cyclic structure, the linear 
configuration has been found to be the second most stable structure (Saloni 
et al., 2011). 
The relative variation of the boron-doped carbon structure with 
increasing cluster size could be categorized into two parts, that is, cyclic 
and linear structures. In the linear structure, one carbon atom is replaced by 
the boron atom inside the chain as well as at the terminal. The small linear 

 
 
81 
Effect of Doping on the Electronic and Physicochemical Properties 
clusters with terminal boron atom show higher stability in comparison 
with the boron atom present inside the chain. However, with the increase 
in cluster size, the linear structures lose stability. For odd and even cluster 
size of boron-doped carbon clusters, the ground states are represented by 
quartet and doublet, respectively. Furthermore, the HOMO possesses the 
π-character which is delocalized over the whole linear cluster. In the case 
of the boron present inside the linear chain, the stable linear structure is the 
doublet. Further, boron is involved in the conjugate bonding system and 
radical electrons are located on the terminal carbon atom. Their stability is 
gained by the stabilization energy with π-conjugations. On the other hand, 
larger size of boron-doped carbon clusters shows higher stability for the 
cyclic structures. In this case, the boron atom is a part of the conjugated 
system with a single electron delocalized mostly with the π-orbitals. 
3.3.2 SILICON-DOPED CARBON CLUSTER 
With the doping of the silicon in the carbon clusters, various properties 
including electronic, physical, and chemical can be engineered for the 
application in field of micro-electronics, energy storage, and biomaterials. 
Furthermore, silicon-doped carbon materials have also gained remarkable 
attention in the understanding of the interstellar atmospheres (especially 
CSi, C2Si, C3Si, and C4Si) of carbon stars and of the circumstellar chemical 
environment. Silicon carbide (SiC) is the smallest unit of the silicon-doped 
clusters, which has exceptional physicochemical properties such as high 
thermal conductivity, high strength, low thermal expansion, wide tunable 
band gap, high refractive index, and chemical inertness. Most of the micro-
electronic devices are developed with the growth of films on surfaces. In 
such cases, SiC clusters can be considered as the building block for the 
synthesis of ideal materials. With the understanding of the electronic prop-
erties, various sizes of silicon-doped carbon materials can be developed. 
From the earlier research, it has been investigated that there is a strong 
resemblance between the pure carbon cluster and the silicon-doped carbon 
cluster which stipulates that silicon is a suitable substitutional dopant in 
the cluster for the enhancement of cluster’s properties. Therefore, this 
section deals with the structural parameters, electronic properties such as 
binding energy, and stability of silicon-doped carbon clusters. 
There are several theoretical reports which provide the details of 
geometrical structure and electronic properties of silicon-doped carbon 

 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
   
  
82 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
clusters (Hou and Song, 2008; Pascoli and Lavendy, 1998; Pradhan and 
Ray, 2006; Song et al., 2010). For SiC, the bond length, binding energy, 
and vibrational frequency have been found to be 1.72 Å, 4.736 eV, and 
954.4 cm−1, respectively. Furthermore, the 3π found as the ground state 
of the SiC (Hou and Song, 2008). The neutral SiC2 has both linear and 
cyclic structures, whereas SiC3 and SiC4 have cyclic and linear structures, 
respectively. In case of cationic silicon carbide (SiCn
+), the SiC+ dimer 
exhibits a bond length of 1.826 Å, dipole moment of 1.254 D, and 4Σ as the 
ground state. For the trimer, SiC2
+, the HF and configuration-interaction 
singles and doubles (CISD) level of the theory suggest higher stability 
of linear structure (Si atom is present on the terminal of the chain), while 
fourth-order many-body perturbation theory (MP4) shows higher stability 
for cyclic structure with C2ν symmetry. The energy difference of both the 
structures, that is, cyclic and linear, is very small (~0.116 eV); therefore, 
both structures can coexist for SiC2
+ cluster (Lavendy et al., 1997; Pascoli 
and Lavendy, 1998; Pradhan and Ray, 2006). This coexistence of both 
linear and cyclic structure is also beneficial for the explanation of photo-
electron spectroscopy. 
In the case of SiC3
+ cluster, various levels of theory including 6-311G* 
basis set suggest higher stability of rhombic structure with C2ν symmetry 
and 2A1 electronic state. The submolecule C3 exhibits a bond length of 1.351 
Å for each C–C bond, while a bond length of 1.930 Å has been found for 
Si–C bond. The silicon-terminated linear structure is the second low-lying 
isomer (0.637 eV higher than rhombic) of SiC3
+ clusters (Pradhan and Ray, 
2006). In the case of SiC4
+ cluster, the silicon-terminated linear carbon 
chain with symmetry, C∞ν, and electronic state, 2Σ+, has been found to be 
the most stable structure by Pascoli et al., at the B3LYP/6-31G* level of 
theory (Pascoli and Lavendy, 1998). However, the structural investigation 
of Pradhan et al. shows higher stability for the fan-shaped planar structure 
with bond length, 1.912 Å, for Si–C, and 1.386 Å and 1.264 Å for C–C 
bond (Pradhan and Ray, 2006). For SiC5
+ clusters, the silicon-terminated 
linear chain with doublet state (2π) is energetically favored. The bond 
+
length has been found to be 1.78 Å between Si–C. In case of SiC6
+, SiC7 , 
and SiC8
+ clusters, the silicon-terminated carbon shows higher stability 
with corresponding electronic states, 2Σ+, 2π, and 2Σ+. The distance between 
Si and C is found to be ~1.75 Å for aforementioned clusters with single 
bond (Pascoli and Lavendy, 1998). In the case of silicon-doped carbon 
clusters with size more than 10 atoms, Si-capped pure monocyclic ring 

 
  
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Effect of Doping on the Electronic and Physicochemical Properties 
83 
has been found to be significantly more stable than the linear configuration 
(Pascoli and Lavendy, 1998). 
In the case of silicon-doped carbon clusters, the binding energy is 
strongly dependent on the size. For small cationic SiCn
+ (n ≤ 4) clusters, the 
binding energy corresponding to the stable structures (as discussed earlier) 
is 2.279 eV, 4.568 eV, 5.338 eV, and 5.617 eV for SiC+, SiC2
+, SiC3
+, and 
SiC4
+ cluster, respectively (Pradhan and Ray, 2006). The relative stabilities 
of the small clusters with function of size can be investigated with the 
concept of incremental binding energies. The incremental binding energy 
is determined from the difference between consecutive binding energies 
of the adjacent clusters. The incremental binding energy of CnSi+ (4≤ n ≤ 
15) has been discussed in detail by Pascoli et al., where they found that the 
even linear carbon clusters are more stable than their neighbor odd clusters 
for size less than seven (Pascoli and Lavendy, 1998). In addition, clus-
ters, CnSi+, with size (4 ≤ n ≤ 9), show higher stability for linear isomers, 
whereas the size (10 ≤ n ≤ 15) exhibits higher stability for Si-capped pure 
carbon monocycle structure. In the case of the neutral linear SiCn clusters, 
the lowest energy states can be explained with the available number of 
valence electron in the clusters (Li and Tang, 2003). Except for SiC dimer, 
the 2n + 4 valence σ-electrons and 2n valence π-electrons are contained 
by the linear SiCn clusters. In the case of even clusters (n is even in SiCn 
cluster), the 2n π-electron constituted in the form of a closed shell with 1Σ 
electronic state, whereas in case of the odd clusters, two of the 2π-electrons 
are distributed over a pair of degenerate π-orbitals, which leads to half-
filled π-orbitals and results in the lowest energy state corresponding to the 
open shell configuration, 1Σ (Li and Tang, 2003). 
3.3.3 GOLD-DOPED CARBON CLUSTER 
The transition metal atom-doped carbon clusters are getting attention due 
to their increasing application in the field of astrophysics and astrochem-
istry, catalysis, and surface sciences. Such atomic clusters have been well 
investigated with experimental methods as well as theoretical techniques 
since the few decades. For example, the early transition metals (Sc, Ti, 
V, Y, La, and Nb)–doped carbon clusters have been studied and a higher 
stability has been recorded for cyclic and fan isomers as compared to their 
respective linear structures (Largo et al., 2006; Redondo et al., 2006, 2005; 

 
 
 
84 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
Roszak and Balasubramanian, 1997). The electronic structure investiga-
tion of the carbon clusters doped with late transition metals (Ni, Pd, Pt, 
and Zn) shows higher stability of linear isomers for small size of clusters; 
however, their stability for ground state is dominated by cyclic and fan-
like structure for larger clusters (Barrientos et al., 2008; Miller and Hall, 
1999; Strout et al., 1998). Carbon clusters doped with the noble transition 
metals (Cu, Ag, and Au) were also investigated; however, their negligible 
reactivity nature could not provide the details of the electronic structures. 
To understand the noble-metal-doped carbon clusters, it is important to 
carry out theoretical investigations. This section deals with the different 
geometries and electronic structures of gold-doped carbon clusters (AuCn; 
n = 1–11), especially for finding their ground states. 
From the previous theoretical investigation, it has been predicted that 
Au-doped carbon clusters (AuCn) have two types of isomers; one is open-
chain structure and the other is the cyclic structure (Sun et al., 2013). In 
open-chain structures, the gold atom is located at one end of the carbon 
chain, while in cyclic structure, the gold atom is bonded fundamentally 
to two carbon atoms of the Cn unit. We can see that all the n-even species 
of the clusters are linear in structure except AuC2 cluster, but in cyclic 
terms, all the AuCn species have doublet lowest-lying state except AuC6 
and AuC8. Now moving toward the bonding part, it has been reported that 
all the C–Au bond in the open-chain Au2–11 lies in between 1.907 and 1.924 
Å in which 1.907 Å is the shortest bond length (AuC4) and 1.924 Å is the 
longest one (AuC3). On the other hand, the bond length of Au–C in the 
cyclic species lies in the range of 1.968–2.221 Å, which appears longer 
than the open-chain isomers. For the measurement of the bond strength 
of both the structures, that is, the open-chain and the cyclic structure, 
Sun et al. used Wiberg bond indices which show that in the open-chain 
structure, except for the dimer, AuC (1.4166), all other clusters lie in the 
range of 0.7523–0.9595 revealing the single bond characteristics of Au–C 
(Sun et al., 2013). Furthermore, the cyclic bond strength lies in between 
0.7523 and 0.6420, which gives an affirmation that Au–C bond present in 
the cyclic structure is weaker than the open-chain structure as both bond 
length and strength in the case of the former are comparatively lower. 
The atomic interaction between the carbon and gold exhibits ionic char-
acteristics, where Au atom behaves as the donor and transfers the electron 
to C atom in the case of all open linear-chain structures. On comparing 
the dipole moments of both the structure, it has been found that the dipole 

 
 
 
85 
Effect of Doping on the Electronic and Physicochemical Properties 
moment of the open chain goes on increasing with the rise in the number 
of carbon atoms for both n-even and n-odd clusters, and predominantly, 
n-even clusters have higher dipole moments. But it is noticeable that the 
dipole moments of the cyclic isomers are lower than that of open-chain 
structures. The relative stabilities of the gold-doped small carbon clusters 
can be investigated through the incremental binding energies. Similar to 
the previous cases, the incremental binding energy can be determined from 
the consecutive binding energy difference between the adjacent AuCn and 
AuCn−1 cluster with the lowest-lying states. The variation of incremental 
binding energy of gold-doped carbon clusters with increasing size shows 
odd–even oscillation for the open-chain structure and undefined variation 
for cyclic structures. The higher value of the incremented binding energy 
shows higher stability; therefore, the n-even clusters show comparatively 
more stability than the n-odd clusters. The embedded binding energy also 
shows the odd–even alternation and confirms higher stability of even clus-
ters for linear structure. For the small-sized clusters (n ≤ 9), open-chain 
structures are comparatively stable, while for large-sized clusters (n = 10 
and 11), the cyclic structures are preferable to the linear ones (Sun et al., 
2013). 
3.3.4 IRON-DOPED CARBON CLUSTER 
Similar to the Au-doped carbon clusters, the study of Fe-doped clusters 
is also an emerging topic of research. It is interesting to note that through 
the incorporation of even a single iron atom, the electronic, physical, and 
chemical properties of carbon clusters can be engineered according to our 
needs. In general, for neutral FeCn (n = 1–8) clusters, there are three low-
lying structures, namely, linear, fan, and cyclic. A linear isomer with the 
iron atom in an intermediate position or a cyclic isomer with an exocyclic 
iron atom shows relatively high energy. In the Fe-doped carbon cluster, 
the bond distance of Fe–C in a cyclic system is found to be somewhere 
in between the linear and fan-like isomers. In case of a linear isomer, Fe 
is only bonded to a terminal C atom of the cluster due to the stronger 
bonding between C–C in comparison to Fe–C bond. However, in the cyclic 
structure, the Fe atom is bonded with the two terminal C atoms, while in 
the fan-like structure, the Fe atom is side bonded to the carbon chain. In 

 
 
 
 
 
86 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
the fan-like structure, the π-type interaction is dominant between the iron 
atom and the entire carbon chain. 
Similar to the earlier cases, the relative stabilities of the FeCn clusters 
with different sizes can be investigated with the concept of incremental 
binding energies. In this case, this energy is determined from the consecu-
tive binding energy difference between the adjacent FeC and FeC
n 
n−1 
cluster of the lowest-lying state. It has been observed that the stability 
of structures (i.e., linear, fan-like, and cyclic structure) has an odd–even 
oscillation with increasing cluster size for both linear and fan-like FeCn 
clusters. Moreover, the n-even members of the doped cluster are supposed 
to be more stable than the corresponding n-odd ones. However, bigger size 
clusters, especially the linear structures, show small attenuation. Further, 
in the case of cyclic isomers, the incremental binding energy can only be 
calculated for the last members, which shows the decrement along the 
series, though other reports suggest the highest stabilization for FeC5 and 
FeC6 cyclic clusters. Furthermore, the relative energies of the cyclic and 
the fan-like structure have negative values with reference to the linear 
ones, which depict the extra stability for both fan and cyclic structures 
as compared to the linear one. The electron affinities and the ionization 
potentials for iron-doped clusters are the most sensitive electronic proper-
ties that vary with the cluster size. The analysis of ionization potential 
shows odd–even oscillation with increasing size of clusters and higher 
values for n-even clusters in comparison to odd ones. Further, the electron 
affinity shows increment with increasing cluster size from FeC to FeC4 but 
afterward show steady variation from FeC5 to FeC8 cluster. 
3.3.5 PHOSPHOROUS-DOPED CARBON CLUSTER 
Similar to the earlier cases, the introduction of phosphorous atom in 
the carbon clusters shows significant changes in the electronic structure 
(Pascoli and Lavendy, 1999a). The cationic and anionic phosphorus-doped 
carbon clusters (C P+ and C P−) are isoelectronic with the neutral C Si 
n
n 
n 
and CnS clusters, respectively, due to which many researchers have tried 
to investigate and understand the origin of such clusters. Earlier, Pascoli 
and Lavendy (1999b) investigated the geometrical structure, especially 
linear chain of neutral PC n (n = 1–7) clusters, for finding the low-lying 
isomers. The P atom terminated carbon chain shows the electronic ground 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Effect of Doping on the Electronic and Physicochemical Properties 
87 
state 2Σ+ and 2Π for CP dimer and rest of the other (n = 2–7) clusters, 
respectively. Similar to the neutral clusters, the cationic CnP+ clusters show 
the lowest-lying isomers with electronic state 3Π for dimer CP+ and 3Σ+ 
and 1Σ+ electronic ground states for respective n-odd and n-even clusters. 
In the case of anion C nP− clusters, the linear structures are stable only 
for C2P− and C3P− clusters, and with increasing cluster size, the structure 
of higher n-odd CnP− anion clusters shows slightly bent arrangement for 
the ground state with a floppy bending motion. The structural analysis 
suggests that C–P bond length in the CP dimer is approximately same in 
the case of both cation and anion, that is, ~1.62 Å, which is slightly longer 
than their neutral (~1.56 Å) counterpart. In the neutral doped clusters, the 
C–P bond length slightly decreases with increase in the cluster size except 
C2P clusters. In the anionic case, the C–P bond length for n-odd clusters is 
slightly shorter than n-even clusters (Pascoli and Lavendy, 1999b). 
Again, the relative stabilities of the phosphorus-doped carbon clusters 
with different sizes can be investigated through the concept of the incre-
mental binding energies. In this case, the incremental binding energy is 
defined as the change in energy accompanying the process, C P → C
P 
n 
n−1
+ C, and it is determined as the consecutive binding energy difference 
between the adjacent C P and C
P clusters with the lowest-lying state in 
n 
n−1
each case. The incremental binding energy of neutral, cationic, and anionic 
cluster, and ionization potential and electron affinity of neutral phospho-
rous-doped carbon has been depicted in Figure 3.12. The odd–even oscil-
lation in the incremental binding energy with increasing cluster has been 
found in all the clusters (Liu et al., 1998). The incremental binding energy 
of cation infers that the n-even clusters are comparatively stable than that 
of n-odd ones. In the case of the neutral and anionic clusters, this variation 
shows contrasting behavior, where n-odd clusters show more stability than 
n-even clusters. The primary reason for such behavior is associated with 
the bonding and nonbonding nature of π-orbitals for neutral and cationic 
clusters, respectively (Pascoli and Lavendy, 1999b). In the case of anionic 
CnP− clusters, n-odd clusters have fully filled π-orbital which imparts more 
stability than that of n-even one which is half-filled π-orbital. The ioniza-
tion potentials of the phosphorus-doped small carbon cluster are calculated 
with the total energy difference between the neutral and cationic clusters, 
while electron affinities are calculated with the total energy differences 
between the neutral and the anionic clusters. Figure 3.12 shows the small 
odd–even oscillation or a parity effect in both the ionization potential and 

 
88 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
the electron affinity variation, with increasing cluster size. Both energies 
have higher values for n-odd clusters in comparison to n-even clusters. 
FIGURE 3.12  Incremental binding energies of neutral, cationic, and anionic linear (CnP) 
clusters with an increasing number of atoms; furthermore, variation of ionization potential 
and electron affinity of phosphorus-doped carbon clusters as function of cluster size. 
Source: Reprinted with permission from Pascoli and Lavendy, 1999b, Copyright © 1999, 
American Chemical Society 
3.4 SUMMARY AND FUTURE SCOPE 
In this chapter, we have discussed about the geometrical and electronic 
structures of small atomic carbon clusters along with changes in their 
properties due to doping of various elements. In the introduction section, 
the basics of the atomic clusters have been briefly introduced and further 
these small atomic clusters were classified on the basis of forces acting 
between the atoms inside the clusters. With the experimental and theoret
ical investigations, various types of atomic clusters have been discussed in 
details, especially to understand the geometrical arrangement and unusual 
stability in the case of different atomic clusters. In general, the atomic 
clusters are investigated with the calculation of electronic, physical, 
-

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
89 
Effect of Doping on the Electronic and Physicochemical Properties 
chemical, and magnetic properties of clusters, which have been discussed 
along with the respective calculation method. In the case of pristine atomic 
carbon clusters, up to 10 atoms, the geometrical structure and electronic 
properties have been extensively discussed. Furthermore, with the doping 
of other elements like Fe, Au, Si, B, and P, the change in the geometry 
and electronic properties, that is, incremental binding energy, ionization 
potential, and electron affinity have been discussed in details. Finally, our 
discussion concluded that with the doping of the different elements in 
the small atomic carbon clusters, various properties including electronic, 
physical, and chemical properties can be engineered for suitable applica-
tion in the field of micro-electronics, energy storage, and biomaterials. 
KEYWORDS 
• 
carbon clusters 
• 
electronic properties 
• 
first principles 
• 
energy storage/harvesting devices 
REFERENCES 
Alonso, J. A. Electronic and Atomic Structure, and Magnetism of Transition-Metal 
Clusters. Chem. Rev. 2000, 100, 637–678. 
Alonso, J. A.; March, N. H. Electrons in Metals and alloys; Academic Press, 1989; p 603. 
ISBN: 978-0-12-053620-7. 
Arenz, M.; Gilb, S.; Heiz, U. Size Effects in the Chemistry of Small Clusters. Chem. Phys. 
Solid Surfaces 2007, 12, 1–51. 
Barrientos, C.; Redondo, P.; Largo, A. Structural and Electronic Properties of ZnCn+/− 
clusters. Int. J. Mass Spectrom. 2008, 273, 87–94. 
Bloomfield, L. A.; Freeman, R. R.; Brown, W. L. Photofragmentation of Mass-Resolved Si 
2− 1 2+ Clusters. Phys. Rev. Lett. 1985, 54, 2246. 
Bondybey, V. E.; English, J. H. Laser Excitation Spectra and Lifetimes of Pb2 and Sn2 
Produced by YAG Laser Vaporization. J. Chem. Phys. 1982, 76, 2165–2170. 
Borman, S. A. Three-Dimensional Periodic Table Of Elements Proposed. Chem. Eng. 
News Arch. 1990, 68, 18–21. 
Castleman Jr, A.W. From Elements to Clusters: The Periodic Table Revisited. J. Phys. 
Chem. Lett. 2011, 2, 1062–1069. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
90 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
Chandrakumar, K. R. S.; Ghanty, T. K.; Ghosh, S. K. Relationship Between Ionization 
Potential, Polarizability, and Softness: A Case Study of Lithium and Sodium Metal 
Clusters. J. Phys. Chem. A 2004, 108, 6661–6666. 
Cohen, M. L.; Chou, M. Y.; Knight, W. D.; De Heer, W. A. Physics of Metal Clusters. J. 
Phys. Chem. 1987, 91, 3141–3149. 
De Heer, W. A. The Physics of Simple Metal Clusters: Experimental Aspects and Simple 
Models. Rev. Mod. Phys. 1993, 65, 611. 
de Heer, W. A.; Knight, W. D.; Chou, M. Y.; Cohen, M. L. Electronic Shell Structure and 
Metal Clusters. In Solid State Physics; Elsevier, 1987; pp 93–181. 
Donoso, R.; Cardenas, C.; Fuentealba, P. Ab Initio Molecular Dynamics Study of Small 
Alkali Metal Clusters. J. Phys. Chem. A 2014, 118, 1077–1083. 
Dugourd, P.; Rayane, D.; Labastie, P.; Vezin, B.; Chevaleyre, J.; Broyer, M. Measurements 
of Lithium Cluster Ionization Potentials. Chem. Phys. Lett. 1992, 197, 433–437. 
Fournier, R.; Bo, Yi Cheng, J.; Wong, A. Theoretical Study of the Structure of Lithium 
Clusters. J. Chem. Phys. 2003, 119, 9444–9454. 
Fura, A.; Tureček, F.; McLafferty, F. W. Small Carbon Clusters (Cn0, Cn+, Cn−) from 
Acyclic and Cyclic Precursors: Neutralization–Reionization and Theory. Int. J. Mass 
Spectrom. 2002, 217, 81–96. 
Gotts, N. G.; von Helden, G.; Bowers, M. T. Carbon Cluster Anions: Structure and Growth 
from C5− to C62−. Int. J. Mass Spectrom. Ion Process. 1995, 149, 217–229. 
Guo, Z.; Lu, B.; Jiang, X.; Zhao, J.; Xie, R. H. Structural, Electronic, and Optical Properties 
of Medium-Sized Lin Clusters (n = 20, 30, 40, 50) by Density Functional Theory. Phys. 
E Low-Dimensional Syst. Nanostruct. 2010, 42, 1755–1762. 
Hou, J.; Song, B. Density-Functional Study of Structural and Electronic Properties of Si n 
C n (n = 1–10) Clusters. J. Chem. Phys. 2008, 128, 154304. 
Huber, K. P.; Herzberg, G. Molecular Spectra and Molecular Structure, Vol. 4; Constants 
Diatomic Mol. Nostrand Reinhold: New York, 1979; p 534. 
Jena, P. Beyond the Periodic Table of Elements: The Role of Superatoms. J. Phys. Chem. 
Lett. 2013a, 4, 1432–1442. 
Jena, P. Physics and Chemistry of Small Clusters; Springer Science & Business Media, 
2013b. 
Jimenez-Izal, E.; Alexandrova, A. N. Computational Design of Clusters for Catalysis. 
Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem. 2018, 69, 377–400. 
Kiran, B.; Kandalam, A. K.; Rallabandi, R.; Koirala, P.; Li, X.; Tang, X.; Wang, Y.; 
Fairbrother, H.; Gantefoer, G.; Bowen, K. (PbS) 32: A Baby Crystal. J. Chem. Phys. 
2012, 136, 24317. 
Kosimov, D. P.; Dzhurakhalov, A. A.; Peeters, F. M. Theoretical Study of the Stable States 
of Small Carbon Clusters C n (n = 2–10). Phys. Rev. B 2008, 78, 235433. 
Kosimov, D. P.; Dzhurakhalov, A. A.; Peeters, F. M. Carbon Clusters: From Ring Structures 
to Nanographene. Phys. Rev. B 2010, 81, 195414. 
Kumar Kushwaha, A.; Kumar Nayak, S. Wobbled Electronic Properties of Lithium 
Clusters: Deterministic Approach Through First Principles, Physica E: Low-dimensional 
Syst. Nanostruct. 2017, 97, 368-374. 
Kümmel, S.; Brack, M.; Reinhard, P. G. Ionic and Electronic Structure of Sodium Clusters 
up to N= 59. Phys. Rev. B 2000, 62, 7602. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
91 
Effect of Doping on the Electronic and Physicochemical Properties 
Kushwaha, A. K.; Sahoo, M. R.; Nanda, J.; Nayak, S. K. Engineering Redox Potential of 
Lithium Clusters for Electrode Material in Lithium-Ion Batteries. J. Clust. Sci. 2017, 28, 
2779–2793. 
Largo, L.; Cimas, A.; Redondo, P.; Rayon, V. M.; Barrientos, C. Structure of Small TiCn 
Clusters: A Theoretical Study. Chem. Phys. 2006, 330, 431–440. 
Lavendy, H.; Robbe, J. M.; Flament, J. P.; Pascoli, G. Density Functional Study of Silicon 
Carbide Cluster Cations C4+, C3Si+, C2Si2+, CSi3+ and Si4+. J. Chim. Phys. 1997, 94, 
1779–1793. 
Lépine, F.; Allouche, A. R.; Baguenard, B.; Bordas, C.; Aubert-Frécon, M. Computed 
Electron Affinity of Carbon Clusters C n up to n= 20 and Fragmentation Energy of 
Anions. J. Phys. Chem. A 2002, 106, 7177–7183. 
Li, G.; Tang, Z. Parity Alternation Effects in the Stabilities of the Second-Row-Atom-
Doped Linear Carbon Clusters C n X/C n X+/C n X-(n= 1− 10; X= Na, Mg, Al, Si, P, S 
or Cl). A Comparative Study. J. Phys. Chem. 2003, A 107, 5317–5326. 
Lin, Y. C.; Sundholm, D.; Juselius, J.; Cui, L. F.; Li, X.; Zhai, H. J.; Wang, L. S. Experimental 
and Computational Studies of Alkali-Metal Coinage-Metal Clusters. J. Phys. Chem. A 
2006, 110, 4244–4250. 
Liu, Z.; Huang, R.; Tang, Z.; Zheng, L. Linear Aluminum-and Phosphorus-Doped Carbon 
Cluster Anions: Mass Distribution and Ab Initio Calculations. Chem. Phys. 1998, 229, 
335–341. 
Maisser, A.; Barmpounis, K.; Attoui, M. B.; Biskos, G.; Schmidt-Ott, A. Atomic Cluster 
Generation with an Atmospheric Pressure Spark Discharge Generator. Aerosol Sci. 
Technol. 2015, 49, 886–894. 
Manninen, M. Structures of Small Alkali-Metal Clusters. Phys. Rev. B 1986, 34, 6886. 
Martin, J. M. L.; El-Yazal, J.; François, J. P. Structure and Vibrational Spectra of Carbon 
Clusters Cn (n= 2–10, 12, 14, 16, 18) Using Density Functional Theory Including Exact 
Exchange Contributions. Chem. Phys. Lett. 1995, 242, 570–579. 
Miller, T. F.; Hall, M. B. Structural and Bonding Trends in Platinum− Carbon Clusters. J. 
Am. Chem. Soc. 1999, 121, 7389–7396. 
Pascoli, G.; Lavendy, H. Structures and Energies of CnSi+ (4≤ n≤ 15) Silicon Carbide 
Clusters. Int. J. Mass Spectrom. Ion Process. 1998, 173, 41–54. 
Pascoli, G.; Lavendy, H. Geometrical Structures of the Phosphorus-Doped Carbon Cluster 
Cations CnP+ (n= 1–20). Int. J. Mass Spectrom. 1999a, 189, 125–132. 
Pascoli, G.; Lavendy, H. Theoretical Study of CnP, CnP+, CnP- (n = 1−7) Clusters. J. Phys. 
Chem. A 1999b, 103, 3518–3524. 
Pradhan, P.; Ray, A. K. An Ab Initio Study of the Electronic and Geometric Structures of 
Si m C n+ Cationic Nanoclusters. Eur. Phys. J. D-Atomic, Mol. Opt. Plasma Phys. 2006, 
37, 393–407. 
Qiang, L.; Ling-Ling, S.; Qiang, Z.; Bin, T.; Zhang-Hai, W.; Zeng-Ling, R. First-Principles 
Study of Structural and Electronic Properties of Carbon Clusters. Mater. Res. Innov. 
2015, 19, S8-14–S8-16. 
Raghavachari, K.; Binkley, J. S. Structure, Stability, and Fragmentation of Small Carbon 
Clusters. J. Chem. Phys. 1987, 87, 2191–2197. 
Redondo, P.; Barrientos, C.; Largo, A. Small Carbon Clusters Doped with Early Transition 
Metals: ATheoretical Study of ScC n, ScC n+, and ScC n-(n= 1− 8) Open-Chain Clusters. 
J. Phys. Chem. A 2005, 109, 8594–8603. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
92 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
Redondo, P.; Barrientos, C.; Largo, A. Small Carbon Clusters Doped with Vanadium 
Metal: A Density Functional Study of VC n (n= 1− 8). J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2006, 
2, 885–893. 
Roszak, S.; Balasubramanian, K. Theoretical Investigation of Structural and Thermodynamic 
Properties of Lanthanum Carbides LaC n (n= 2–6). J. Chem. Phys. 1997, 106, 158–164. 
Saloni, J.; Kadłubański, P.; Roszak, S.; Majumdar, D.; Hill Jr, G.; Leszczynski, J. The 
Evolution of Bonding and Thermodynamic Properties of Boron-Doped Small Carbon 
Clusters: An Ab Initio Study. Chem Phys Chem 2011, 12, 1358–1366. 
Schwyn, S.; Garwin, E.; Schmidt-Ott, A. Aerosol Generation by Spark Discharge. J. 
Aerosol Sci. 1988, 19, 639–642. 
Song, B.; Yong, Y.; Hou, J.; He, P. Density-Functional Study of Si n C n (n= 10–15) 
Clusters. Eur. Phys. J. D 2010, 59, 399–406. 
Strout, D. L.; Miller, T. F.; Hall, M. B. Structure and Stability of Palladium− Carbon 
Cations. J. Phys. Chem. A 1998, 102, 6307–6310. 
Sun, Q.; Rao, B. K.; Jena, P.; Stolcic, D.; Kim, Y. D.; Gantefor, G.; Castleman Jr, A. W. 
Appearance of Bulk Properties in Small Tungsten Oxide Clusters. J. Chem. Phys. 2004, 
121, 9417–9422. 
Sun, X.; Du, J.; Jiang, G. Au-Doped Carbon Clusters AuC n with n= 1–11: A Theoretical 
Investigation. Struct. Chem. 2013, 24, 1289–1295. 
Tabrizi, N. S.; Ullmann, M.; Vons, V. A.; Lafont, U.; Schmidt-Ott, A. Generation of 
Nanoparticles by Spark Discharge. J. Nanoparticle Res. 2009, 11, 315. 
Tománek, D.; Schluter, M. A. Growth Regimes of Carbon Clusters. Phys. Rev. Lett. 1991, 
67, 2331. 
Wheeler, S. E.; Sattelmeyer, K. W.; Schleyer, P. v R.; Schaefer III, H. F. Binding Energies 
of Small Lithium Clusters (Li n) and Hydrogenated Lithium Clusters (Li n H). J. Chem. 
Phys. 2004, 120, 4683–4689. 
Whiteside, R. A.; Krishnan, R.; Defrees, D. J.; Pople, J. A.; Von R, P. Structures of C4. 
Chem. Phys. Lett. 1981, 78, 538–540. 
Xiong, R.; Die, D.; Xiao, L.; Xu, Y. G.; Shen, X. Y. Probing the Structural, Electronic, and 
Magnetic Properties of Ag n V (n= 1–12) Clusters. Nanoscale Res. Lett. 2017, 12, 625. 
Yang, S.; Taylor, K. J.; Craycraft, M. J.; Conceicao, J.; Pettiette, C. L.; Cheshnovsky, O.; 
Smalley, R. E. UPS of 2–30-Atom Carbon Clusters: Chains and Rings. Chem. Phys. Lett. 
1988, 144, 431–436. 
Zhang, C.; Xu, X.; Wu, H.; Zhang, Q. Geometry Optimization of Cn (n= 2–30) with 
Genetic Algorithm. Chem. Phys. Lett. 2002, 364, 213–219. 

New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons. Aneeya Kumar Samantara & Satyajit Ratha (Eds.)
© 2024 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
CHAPTER 4  
Fullerenes: Synthesis and Applications 
JAGANNATH PANDA1, TANASWINI PATRA2, 
PRASANNA KUMAR PANDA1, ROJALIN SAHU2, 
BANKIM CHANDRA TRIPATHY1, and AVIJIT BISWAL3 
1CSIR-IMMT, Bhubaneswar, Odisha, India 
2School of Applied Sciences, KIIT Deemed to be University, 
Bhubaneswar, Odisha, India 
3College of Engineering and Technology (Autonomous) Bhubaneswar, 
Odisha, India 
ABSTRACT 
Day by day with the advancement of science and technology, multidis-
ciplinary applications are possible with the allotropes of carbon. This 
chapter showcases an ephemeral discussion on one of the unique allo-
tropes of carbon, that is, Fullerene from its history to its multidisciplinary 
applications in various fields of science and technology. The characteristic 
features of various types of fullerenes are highlighted. A comprised data 
is included which discussed the methods of synthesis of fullerenes. The 
functionalized derivatives of fullerene also find numerous applications 
in fast-growing areas, like photovoltaics, medicines, gas storage/adsorp-
tion, pharmaceuticals, and water treatment. The highly conductive nature 
and exceptional electronic properties, makes it suitable for application in 
adsorption–separation, electroactive materials, hydrogen storage and solar 
energy storage material, and energy accumulation, etc. However, more 

 
 
 
94 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
exploration is essential to open new avenues for this unique material to 
fulfill the needs of market in the near future. 
4.1 INTRODUCTION 
One of the most important elements in the periodic table is carbon because 
it is an important constituent of all living beings. It has also a unique 
ability to form four covalent bonds with different atoms. Moreover, due 
to its self-linking property, catenation, carbon forms covalent bonds with 
other carbon atoms and forms millions of long and short chain molecules. 
Carbon when linked to carbon exhibit different hybridizations, that is, sp, 
sp2, and sp3. This is the fact, that carbon exists in different allotropic forms 
such as diamond, graphite, lonsdaleite, carbon nanotubes, fullerenes, 
nano-onions, nanodiamond, amorphous carbon, nanoballs, nanospheres, 
etc. (Delgado et al., 2008). Diamond crystals are 3-D super hard crystals 
consisting of sp3 hybridized carbon atoms arranged in a tetrahedral manner. 
On the other hand, Graphite is another form of carbon having sp2 hybrid-
ization. It is constructed from 2-D graphene sheets that are connected by 
weak van der Waals force of attraction. Thirdly, carbon nanotubes and 
carbon nanobuds are 1-D structures that possess many properties. The 
zero-dimensional forms of carbon are fullerene, nano-onions, nanodia-
monds, etc. Nowadays, more emphasis is given on different properties, 
structures, and applications of these zero-dimensional forms of carbon. 
Among these, fullerene is the most emerging field of study (Katsnelson, 
2007). 
Fullerene is an interesting allotrope of carbon made up of carbon 
atoms having varieties of shapes such as sphere, tube, ellipsoid or some 
other shapes (Peter et al., 2015). Spherical fullerenes are known as 
Buckminsterfullerene or Buckyball. One of the topics of intense research 
is buckyballs and buckytubes. It may be because of their unique proper-
ties and multimodal applications in advance field of science, mainly in 
nanotechnology, material science, electronics, etc. Structurally fullerenes 
consist of asymmetrical loaded graphene sheets which look same as that 
of graphite. They form rings which are hexagonal and pentagonal in shape. 
Fullerenes are having truncated icosahedral shape in a closed cage with Ih 
symmetry. In fullerene molecule, each carbon atom is linked to three other 
carbon atoms. There are many forms of fullerenes which are prepared and 

 
Fullerenes: Synthesis and Applications 
95 
contain around 30–3000 carbon atoms. The various kinds of fullerenes are 
briefly explained and shown below. Different fullerenes are made up of 
isomers with homologues which range from the lower homologue C60 and 
C  up to higher homologues like C
, C
, and C
. Several fullerenes 
70
240
540
720
containing C , C , C , C , etc. also exist (Jarrold, 2000). Among all 
70
76
80
84
these, the most stable fullerene is C60. C60 fullerene molecule consists of 12 
pentagonal and 20 hexagonal rings. Every carbon atom is sp2 hybridized 
with a truncated icosahedral structure (Terrones et al., 1995). It is known 
as Buckminsterfullerene and has been named after the architect, Buckmin-
ster Fuller who has fabricated cage-like geodesic Domes in 1960s (Yadav, 
2018). C60, which is a spherical fullerene, is similar to that as an electron 
deficient entity (an electrophile). So, it is readily attacked by a nucleophile 
which is an electron rich entity. In order to make C60 molecule completely 
soluble, various molecules or polar functional groups are attached on the 
core of the fullerene. In the meanwhile, the unique inherent properties of 
fullerenes are also retained as it is and reasonably the biological availability 
can be achieved (Yadav and Kumar, 2008). C60 fullerene and its derivatives 
which have a unique electronic π-system enable them to absorb ultraviolet 
(UV) or visible light making them a very potential photosensitizer. 
FIGURE 4.1  a) Diamond, b) graphite, c) graphene, d) carbon nanotube, e) lonsdaleite, f)  
Buckminster fullerene (C ), g) fullerite (C
), h) C ,  i) nano-onions, j) nanobuds, k) and  
60
540
70
amorphous carbon. 

 
 
96 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
4.2 HISTORY OF FULLERENES GLOOMY 
Far back in 1966, when David Jones suggested the possibility of graphite 
balloons, this third allotrope of carbon had a very gloomy existence (Kroto 
and Walton, 1993; Jones, 1993). In 1970, some progress was made by Eiji 
Osawa who explored the vision of producing C60 molecule (made up of 
60 carbon atoms) in the structure of condensed icosahedron (Gund et al., 
1970), followed by the enumeration by Eiji Osawa and Zensho Yoshida in 
1971 about the possibilities of aromatic properties of the C60 molecule in 
a book titled “Aromatic Molecules” (Sheka et al., 2011). Subsequently, in 
order to determine its electronic structure, Huckel calculation of C60 was 
carried out by Bochvar and Galpern with Stonkevich and coworkers in 
1973 (Bochvar and Galpern, 1973; Stankevich et al., 1984). Later in 1980, 
Davidson used the general group theoretical techniques and calculated the 
distance between the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and 
the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) and suggested that, the 
closed hollow cell of fullerene C60 molecule could be characterized by 
knowing the distance between HOMO and LUMO, indicating the chem-
ical stability of the species. Thus, advancement in experimental technique 
of clustered molecules and planetary processes associated with inter/ 
circum-stellar molecules led to the discovery of C60 Buckminsterfullerene 
in 1985. This flagged the way for its extraction and characterization in 
1990 (Kroto, 1988). During the investigations on cyanoacetylenes, which 
were assumed to exist in the molecular clouds surrounded by stars with 
carbon-rich atmospheres, Harry Kroto combined molecular spectroscopy 
with measurements made by radio astronomers on the same molecules 
in the material surrounding carbon stars, in particular the object known 
as IRC+10216 (Kroto, 1988). However, the existence of cyanoacetylenes 
in large quantity contradicted with the reported results of the interstellar 
chemistry existing model (Heath et al., 2016). Later in 1985, Kroto in 
collaboration with Robert Curl and Rick Smalley of Rice University, USA 
performed experiments to confirm the formation of long cyanopolyenes 
by the interaction of laser beams on graphite target, which evidenced 
the remarkably stable nature of C60 molecule (Kroto et al., 1985; Kroto, 
1997). Combination of mass spectral data with the circumstantial evidence 
provided the experimental support for the truncated Icosahedron structure 
of C60. Initially, the proposed structure of cage of interconnecting penta-
gons and hexagons was received with understandable uncertainty (Kroto 

 
 
Fullerenes: Synthesis and Applications 
97 
et al., 1991; Kroto, 1987). But later on, the uncertainty was cleared by 
W. Kratshchemer and D. R. Hutfirm in 1990 who made a breakthrough 
with the production of Isolable quantities of C60 (Krätschmer et al., 
1990; Kroto, 1992; Ajie et al., 1990; Howard et al., 1991). Further, using 
chromatographic technique the isolated material was separated into two 
components as C60 and C70. On analyzing these two individual components 
by 13C NMR, it was found that, C60 component possesses single line 
resonance indicating the fact that the equivalent nature of all the carbon 
atoms is present. However, five lines were observed from C70 indicating 
the existence of homologues of fullerene family (Anderson et al., 1997). 
Later, a technical model was adopted to describe the structure of C60 by 
Smalley which had been previously used by ‘Buckminster Fuller’. This 
led to the name Buckminsterfullerene which is similar to a soccer ball 
with a spherical shape having 12 pentagons and 20 hexagons like C60 
(Kroto et al., 1985). The expedition to study the physical and chemical 
properties of C60 and its higher homologues along with the new substances 
produced from these compounds opened up a new outlook in the expan-
sion of chemistry into diverse areas such as material chemistry/physics, 
superconductivity, and astrochemistry. 
4.3 TYPES OF FULLERENE 
Sir Harold W. Croto discovered the first fullerene in 1985 (Kroto et al., 
1985). Subsequently, many different categories of fullerenes were explored 
based on their structural disparities. Some of them are listed below: 
4.3.1 BUCKYBALL CLUSTERS 
The notably discovered nanoparticles were Buckyballs. In these bucky-
balls, each carbon atom is linked through covalent bonds to other three 
carbon atoms. Just like a soccer ball, the carbon atoms are attached in 
a specific pattern forming pentagons and hexagons. This type of outline 
gives a spherical structure to the Buckyball (Sinha and Sinha, 2001). 
Buckyball containing 60 carbon atoms is the most common one and is 
usually called as C60. Depending upon the number of carbon atoms, there 
are also different sizes of buckyballs ranging from 20 to more than 100 

 
98 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
carbon atoms. The strength of the buckyballs is due to the covalent bonds 
which is present between them (Hsu et al., 2013). In order to reinforce the 
material, these are often used in composites. 
4.3.2 NANOTUBES 
In 1991, Nanotubes were discovered by Iijima. The dimensions of nano-
tubes are very small. The diameter of nanotubes ranges from fraction to 
tens of nanometer whereas the length is up to some micrometers. The shape 
of nanotube looks like a graphene sheet which is rolled in the shape of a 
cylinder and is capped with fullerene like structures. Just like a tube, these 
nanotubes are hollow from inside. These may be single-walled or multi-
walled which are formed by graphene lamella having single and multiple 
layers, respectively (Ganesh, 2013). The surface area of these nanotubes is 
found in the range of 150–1500 m2/g. On this basis only, it acts as a good 
sorbent. Figure 4.1d shows structure of nanotube (Jarrold, 2000). 
4.3.3 MEGATUBES 
The word mega means large. So, these are one type of fullerenes whose 
diameter is larger than those of nanotubes. The walls of the megatubes 
are prepared by changing their thickness. The main use of megatubes is 
to transport various molecules having different sizes (Wang et al., 2007). 
4.3.4 POLYMERS 
An extensive variety of fullerenes containing polymers have been 
discovered with a number of technological applications in day-to-day life. 
These are formed by applying high temperature and under high pressure. 
The polymers which are synthesized in the presence of fullerenes have 
anomalous electrochemical, photophysical, and structural properties. The 
synthesized polymers were having different shapes like 1-D, 2-D, and 3-D 
chains (Giacalone and Martin, 2006). Various well-established materials 
of these classes are cross-linked, end-capped, star-shaped, double cable, 
C60 dendrimer, etc. (Scarel and Alonso, 2013). Figure 4.1f shows the shape 
of polymers. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
99 
Fullerenes: Synthesis and Applications 
4.3.5 NANO-ONIONS 
Carbon nano-onions are multilayered fullerenes which are spherical in 
shape. These consist of closed spherical carbon shells, polyhedral and 
multiple layered quasi-spherical shaped shells, whose structure resembles 
with that of an onion. These are simply known as carbon onions. These 
carbon nano-onions have a number of applications. These are used as 
potential drug transporters and also as delivery vehicles. They are used as 
good lubricants. But, they are poorly soluble in organic as well as aqueous 
solvents (Plonska et al., 2019; Xu, 2008). Figure 4.1i shows the shape of 
carbon nano-onions. 
4.3.6 BUCKMINSTERFULLERENE (C60) 
Buckminsterfullerene is the naturally occurring most common fullerene. 
These are present in less quantity in soot. It is represented by a formula 
having 60 carbon atoms. These carbon atoms are arranged in a closed 
C60 
cage-like fused ring structure which looks like a soccer ball or simply 
football. The carbon atoms form polygons having 20 hexagonal and 12 
pentagonal rings with 60 vertices and 32 faces. In C60, each carbon atom 
is covalently bonded to three other carbon atoms having one double bond 
and two single bonds. The structure of Buckminsterfullerene is obtained 
by putting carbon atoms at all the 60 vertices of the rings. On comparing 
molecule with that of the size of a soccer ball, then the actual size 
C60 
of the soccer ball can be compared with the size of the earth. It is the 
most symmetric molecule. It is very much stable which can withstand high 
temperature and high pressure (Zheng et al., 2005; Shibuya et al., 1999). It 
can be used for photovoltaic applications. The structure of Buckminster-
fullerene is presented in Figure 4.1f. 
4.4 C60 FULLERENE 
C60 form of fullerene was named after the American architect, who was 
well known for designing a large geodesic dome, called Buckminster 
Fuller. That’s why it is called Buckminsterfullerene. The geodesic dome 
resembles the molecular structure of C60. It is a compound which is 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
100 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
composed of even number of carbon atoms which forms a three-dimen-
sional cage-like fused ring polycyclic system. The 60 carbon atoms in 
C60 fullerene are equivalent in nature. Hence, a single line in 13C NMR 
spectrum is observed for C60 at δ = 143 ppm (Diederich and Robert, 
1992). It is a three-dimensional polyolefin which is electron deficient. 
Single bonds are present in the pentagonal structures whereas double 
bonds are present between pentagonal and hexagonal rings in the form 
of bridging bonds. Among all fullerenes, the stable fullerenes are those 
which obey isolated pentagon rule (Chiang et al., 1992). Fullerene C60 is 
almost insoluble in water and other solvents which are polar, but spar-
ingly soluble in organic solvents like toluene and benzene. However, it 
is found to be soluble in orthodichlorobenzene, dimethylnaphthalene, 
and 1-chloronaphthalene like solvents (Ruoff et al., 1993). The chemical 
properties and reactivity of fullerene C60 are based on the fact that the 
bonding in C60 has delocalized p molecular orbitals which extends 
throughout the structure and contains both sp2 and sp3 hybridized C 
atoms. Fullerene C60 is not “superaromatic” because it tends to evade 
double bonds in the pentagonal rings by which the electron delocaliza-
tion becomes very poor. Therefore, C60 acts as an electron deficient 
alkene and reacts rapidly with electron-rich species. C60 shows many 
types of chemical reactions and some of them are nucleophilic addition 
reactions, electrophilic addition reactions, radical addition reactions, 
halogenations, pericyclic reactions, oxidation reactions, and the forma-
tion of endohedral complexes M@C60, where M refers to a metal atom 
(Djordjevic et al., 2015). Figure 4.2 represents some of the important 
chemical reactions of fullerene C60. The basic and common reactions are 
electrophilic addition reactions and are mostly found to be exothermic 
in nature (these reactions are accompanied by a change in hybridiza-
tion of the C-atoms from sp2 to sp3, as a result of that the angular strain 
decreases in the cage). The number of addendums reduces the amount of 
evolved heat of the reaction. Therefore, the stability decreases with the 
increase in the number of adducts. Hence, one of the biggest problems 
during the synthesis of only one derivative of fullerene is the forma-
tion of a large number of its isomeric forms. In case of two addendums 
X , total eight regioisomers along with around 23 stereoisomers are
C60
2
formed. Different chemical properties of C60 fullerene (nucleophilic and 
electrophilic additions, radical additions, and pericyclic reactions) make 
the covalent bonding of a number of organic compounds and functional 

 
 
 
101 
Fullerenes: Synthesis and Applications 
groups on its cage. Fullerene-based derivatives which are water soluble 
are very important to study different biological applications (Mojica et 
al., 2013). 
FIGURE 4.2  Chemical reactions of fullerenes. 
Source: Reprinted with permission from Djordjevic et al., 2015. Copyright © 2015 Alek
sandar Djordjevic et al. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/ 
4.5 SYNTHESIS OF FULLERENES 
Initially, synthesis of fullerenes was done by using laser vaporization of 
carbon in a non-reactive atmosphere. But by going through this method, 
that is, laser irradiation of carbon, very less quantity of fullerenes was 
produced (Nimibofa et al., 2018). However, the amount of C60 fullerene 
can be increased by synthesizing through electrical arc heating of graphite 
and by going through laser irradiation method of Poly Aromatic Hydrocar
bons (PAHs) (Fig. 4.3). 
-
-

 
102 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
FIGURE 4.3  Important routes for synthesis of fullerenes. 
Source: Reprinted with permission from Nimibofa et al., 2018, https://creativecommons. 
org/licenses/by/4.0/ 
4.5.1 SYNTHESIS OF FULLERENES BY USING LASER 
VAPORIZATION OF CARBON 
This method of synthesis of fullerenes need an inert atmosphere and for 
this purpose helium gas has been used. Fullerenes are formed through a 
supersonic expansion nozzle by using a pulsed laser (Fig. 4.4). This pulsed 
laser is focused on a target of graphite that is kept in an inert atmosphere. 
From a solid disc of graphite, carbon is vaporized into a high-density helium 
flow which is done by using a focused pulsed laser (Geckeler and Samal, 
1999). This method of synthesis is limited by the low yield of fullerene 
(< 1%). This method also requires very harsh conditions of temperature 
around 1300 °C and a pressure of around 1000 bar. This method produces 
C60 and C70, but it gives very low quantities of larger fullerenes such as C84,
and requires great effort for purification (more than 20 high-performance 
liquid chromatography cycles for C84) (Whetten et al., 1990). Because of 
the uncontrollable character of the reaction, it is not possible to obtain a 
single fullerene or a specific isomer. 

 
103 
Fullerenes: Synthesis and Applications 
FIGURE 4.4  Syntheses by laser vaporization of carbon. 
Source: Reprinted with permission from Choudhary et al., 2013. Copyright © 2013 The 
Author(s). Licensee IntechOpen. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/ 
4.5.2 SYNTHESIS OF FULLERENES BY USING ELECTRIC ARC 
HEATING OF GRAPHITE 
Microscopic quantity of fullerene was conceptualized and synthesized by 
Kratchmer and Huttmabn in the year of 1990. First time they had intro
duced the arc discharge method for the synthesis of fullerene. This process 
involves the formation of an electric arc in an inert atmosphere between the 
graphite rods (Fig. 4.5). When the inert atmosphere is created between the 
graphite rods it generates a fluffy condensate (soot) (Geckeler and Samal, 
1999; Whetten et al., 1990). The soot contained the fullerenes which can 
be extracted by using small amount of toluene. After the extraction process 
the solvent was removed by using a high vacuumed rotary evaporator. 
The extracted samples were dried which contains mostly C60. The high 
pure fullerene was obtained by the help of liquid chromatography process 
(Nimibofa et al., 2018; Chai et al., 1991; Diederich et al., 1991). 
4.5.3 SYNTHESIS OF FULLERENES BY USING RESISTIVE ARC 
HEATING OF GRAPHITE 
The synthesis of fullerene by using the resistive arc heating involves the  
vaporization of the carbon rods under partial helium atmosphere (Fig. 4.6).  
In this process, the heating of carbon rod generates soot-like substance  
which is faint grey white in color. The soot is the pure form of fullerene and  
collected around the carbon rods (Kyesmen et al., 2016; Parker et al., 1991). 
-

 
104 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
FIGURE 4.5  Electric arc heating of graphite for the synthesis of fullerenes. 
FIGURE 4.6  (a) Arc discharge system for fullerenes synthesis, (b) basic circuit diagram for  
direct arc discharge, and (c) the basic circuit diagram that allows for resistive heating of one  
of the electrodes. 
Source: Reprinted with permission from Kyesmen et al., 2016 https://creativecommons. 
org/licenses/by/4.0/ 

 
 
105 
Fullerenes: Synthesis and Applications 
4.5.4 SYNTHESIS OF FULLERENE WITH IRRADIATION OF 
POLYCYCLIC HYDROCARBONS (PAHS) BY LASER TREATMENT 
Fullerenes can be directly synthesized to obtain new homologues of 
fullerene family. These may not be obtained in better quantity by adopting 
a process of uncontrolled evaporation of graphite. The above approach 
to synthesize fullerene depends upon PAHs which require frameworks 
of carbon. The PAH molecules so obtained are “rolled up” under flash 
vacuum pyrolysis (FVP) conditions to form fullerenes (Kabdulov et al., 
2010; Joshipura and Joshipura, 2000). It has been reported that under laser 
irradiation at 337 nm wavelength, a polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon 
consisting 60 carbon atoms will form C60 fullerene (Boorum et al., 2001). 
It is shown in Figure 4.7. 
FIGURE 4.7  Schematic for the laser irradiation of PAHs to synthesize fullerene. 
Source: Reprinted with permission from Nimibofa et al., 2018, https://creativecommons. 
org/licenses/by/4.0/ 
4.6 REACTIVITY AND STRUCTURE OF FULLERENE 
Because of its excellent electronic structure, the fullerene shows excep
tional chemical properties (Mauter and Elimelech, 2008). One single 
carbon atom of a fullerene is connected to three other adjoining carbon 
atoms on the apex of a polyhedron, so that it forms one double bond and 
two single bonds. The basic structure of most abundant fullerene, Buck
minsterfullerene, is as shown in Figure 4.1f. 
-
-
4.6.1 3D SHAPE OF FULLERENE 
In a C60 fullerene, there are two types of bonds: one bond which behaves 
like a single bond is shared between a pentagon and a hexagon, and the 

 
 
 
 
 
106 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
other one which behaves like a double bond is shared between two hexa-
gons. These single and double bonds in fullerenes cover their whole surface 
with a conjugated double bond system. Fullerenes having lesser number 
of hexagons show more sp3 bonding features like they have more reactive 
carbon sites and have more strain. While the fullerenes having adjacent 
pentagons are usually less stable and are relatively more abundant than 
having isolated pentagons in which the π (pie) electrons are delocalized 
throughout the structure (Campbell et al., 1996; Taylor and Walton, 1993). 
Fullerene has a curved surface. 
So, it is quite natural to have pyramidal carbon atoms, and thus the 
atomic orbitals of carbon atoms have different hybridization such that the 
π (pie) orbitals have different s and p characters providing the way for 
different chemical reactivity (Brettreich and Hirsch, 1998; Payne et al., 
1992). Fullerenes do not contain replaceable hydrogen atoms as that found 
in classical aromatic compounds though they have conjugated π-system 
(Brettreich and Hirsch 1998). When an external chemical reagent and 
carbon atom interacts together, then either the hybridization of orbital 
changes from sp2 to sp3 which results in the breaking of π-bond or the 
free π-orbital can interact with the external chemical reagent (Park et al., 
2001). Fullerenes undergo two main chemical transformations which are 
addition reactions and redox reactions. When fullerenes undergo addition 
reaction, they form exohedral products and during redox reactions, they 
form salts. In spite of having extreme conjugation in fullerenes, they act 
like electron-deficient alkene as they show addition reaction with nucleo-
philes, free radicals, and also homolytic reagents to form stable products 
(Tatiana et al., 1996). According to the reports, oxidation of C60 and C70 
fullerenes was successfully done by electrochemical oxidation, photo-
oxidation, ultrasound-induced oxidation, and dimethyl dioxirane addition. 
The unique nature of fullerene is that it contains carbon in soluble form 
because of which carbon films can be prepared in solutions. The solubility 
of C60 as a function of solvent properties like refractive index, dielectric 
constant, hydrogen bonding strength, and size of the molecule is assessed 
which confirms the “like dissolving like” principle (Rai et al., 2007). Due 
to the nonpolar nature of fullerenes, they are hydrophobic and therefore 
are soluble mostly in aromatic hydrocarbons, carbon disulfide, etc. which 
are nonpolar solvents. On substituting fullerene with electron with-
drawing group like nitro, aldehydic group, nitrile group, etc. the solubility 
decreases, while there is increase in solubility on substituting fullerene 

 
 
107 
Fullerenes: Synthesis and Applications 
with electron releasing groups like methoxy group, methyl group, etc. 
(Bhoi et al., 2012). 
4.7 APPLICATIONS 
Fullerenes have unique chemical and physical properties which lead to 
the exploration of the different applications by many researchers. The 
functionalized derivatives of fullerene are broadly applied in areas like 
photovoltaics, medicines, gas storage/adsorption, pharmaceuticals, etc. 
4.7.1 MEDICAL APPLICATION 
The most important characteristics of fullerenes which make them effec-
tive in the field of medical chemistry are its hydrophobic nature, electronic 
configuration, size, and three-dimensional nature. Fullerenes act as poten-
tial therapeutic agents because of their exceptional cage-like structures 
and wide scope for functionalization (Bakry et al., 2007; Lin and Tan, 
2012). 
4.7.2 ANTIOXIDANT/BIOPHARMACEUTICALS 
The reaction of fullerenes with free radicals is very rapid due to the pres-
ence of large number of conjugated double bonds and also due to low 
lying LUMO (Lowest Unoccupied Molecular Orbitals). According to the 
reports, fullerene is considered as the world’s most efficient radical scav-
enger as a single C60 molecule can add almost 34 methyl radicals (Gharbi 
et al., 2005; Cataldo and Tatiana, 2008). 
4.7.3 ANTIBACTERIAL/ANTIMICROBIAL ACTIVITY 
The antibacterial activities of fullerenes are shown by some of its hydro-
philic derivatives like aminofullerene and fullerols, and have attracted 
attention in water treatment systems (Kang et al., 2009; Fortner et al., 
2005). According to the reports, attaching multiple functional groups 
like hydroxyl, glycolic oxide, and carboxylic acid on C60 prompts its 

 
 
108 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
photodynamic cytotoxic property against some pathogenic microorgan-
isms. It includes cytotoxicity against some bacteria which are multi-
antibiotic-resistant (Zhu et al., 2006; Wang et al., 2012). C60 fullerene 
shows biocidal activity because of the ability to react with organic solvents 
generating reactive oxygen species like superoxide or singlet oxygen by 
photosensitization (Samanta and Das, 2017). 
4.7.4 ANTIVIRAL ACTIVITY 
Fullerene C60 derivatives exhibit antiviral properties as they are linked to 
antioxidant property and their matchless molecular cage structure (Hong 
et al., 2008). Based on an investigation, it is found that the derivatives of 
fullerene could restrain and are able to form a complex with HIV protease 
(Kornev et al., 2011). Some reports also reflect that fullerenes having two 
amino groups called fulleropyrolidines were active against both the HIVs, 
that is, HIV-1 and HIV-2 (Kornev et al., 2011). 
4.7.5 DIAGNOSTICS 
Endofullerene is formed on inserting a metal ion into a fullerene cage. 
The endohedral metallofullerene written as EMFs cage so formed serves 
as an isolated chamber which can separate the reactive atoms from the 
biological environment (Shultz et al., 2010). One emerging application is 
the encapsulation of gadolinium in EMFs which has now been announced 
as one of the best candidate or agents for the next generation MRI (Toth, 
2012). Some studies on biodistribution reveal the localization of EMFs to 
microphages. The above information concludes that their species target 
selectively to tissues which are rich in microphage and is considered as a 
valuable chemotherapeutic agent, which is used for treating leukemia and 
bone cancer (Goodarzi et al., 2017; Liang et al., 2008). 
4.7.6 DRUG DELIVERY 
As fullerenes have better biocompatibility, selective targeted delivery, and 
can release the carried drugs in a controlled manner, so they are considered 
as the potential drug carriers for the cellular delivery. Fullerenes show 

 
109 
Fullerenes: Synthesis and Applications 
exceptional behavior in drug delivery and gene cellular delivery as they 
become soluble in water by attaching hydrophilic species (Isobe et al., 
2006). As the functionalized fullerenes have the capability to bind with 
mitochondria by crossing the cell membranes, so they deliver drugs slowly 
to gain maximum therapeutic results. According to the investigations, the 
fullerenes which are DNA functionalized are very effective in comparison 
with lipid-based vectors which are commercially available (Isobe et al., 
2001; Nakamura and Isobe, 2003). 
4.7.7 DISINFECTANT 
Fullerene can be used as a disinfectant, as fullerenes have antimicrobial 
properties and for the same the research is going on. Although these are 
known for having the strong antibacterial properties, some fullerenes did 
not endorse the highly effective antibacterial property. Li et al. reported 
that fullerene was unsuccessful to show its strong toxicity or antibacterial 
property on testing it on mammalian cells as disinfectant (2008). According 
to Lyon et al. (2006), the aggregate of C60 molecules form stable fullerene 
water suspension (FWS) which is having different properties than C60 bulk 
solid by four different methods. Antibacterial activities were studied on the 
FWS so produced. A strong antibacterial activity was demonstrated by all 
suspensions to Bacillus subtilis whose fractions with smaller aggregates 
revealed a higher antibacterial activity, in spite of the increase in toxicity 
excessively higher than the rise in presumed surface area. Also, different 
morphologies of the suspensions provide different antibacterial activity. 
The separated suspension of C60 contains both amorphous and crystalline 
aggregates. The separated suspensions are centrifuged and after that it 
provides smaller size fractions having larger amorphous aggregates. These 
larger aggregates are crystalline in nature. On the other hand, the smaller 
fraction is more amorphous due to the absence of repeating structure. The 
lack of repeating structure defines the crystallinity of the larger fractions. 
4.7.8 PHOTOVOLTAIC 
The peculiar electronic transfer capacity and small reorganization ener-
gies explain the electron transfer process which makes possible for the 

 
 
 
110 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
multistep electron charge separation and artificial photosynthesis process 
(Guldi and Prato, 2000; Luis and Echegoyen, 1998; Troshina et al., 2007). 
The numerous covalent and noncovalent connected in fullerenes contain 
suitable electron donor–acceptor (D-A) hybrid dyads for the applications 
like photovoltaic devices, organic electronic, and photocatalysis. These 
various applications are due to the donor–acceptor (D-A) dyads which 
generate multistep charge separation states by the tuning of the electronic 
coupling between length and the nature of spacer (Lebedeva et al., 2015; 
Fukuzumi and Kojima, 2008). Also, some fullerene cages like cyanine, 
phthalocyanines, ruthenium bipyridine complex, metallocene, boron-
dipyrrin, and tetrathiafulvalene are linked by some organic and transition 
metals which have the capability of donating the pair of electrons to the 
large molecule (Cnops et al., 2015; Martin et al., 2000; Herranz et al., 
2000; Kanev et al., 2006). The allotropes of carbon have been applied 
as polymer transistors like Organic Field Effect Transistors (OFETS) and 
photodetectors. This is due to the presence of synergy between the organic 
field effect transistors (OFETS) and Organic Photovoltaics (OPVs). Simi-
larly, fullerenes have also been applied as electrochemical material, doping 
material for the conducting polymer films, gas sensors, superconducting 
materials, and photoelectric devices (Boris, 1996; Nicolaidis et al., 2019; 
Ingo et al., 2004; Hayashi et al., 2004; Haddon, 1992; Gupta et al., 2019). 
4.7.9 FULLERENE-BASED POLYMERIC MATERIALS 
The fullerene-based polymeric material has so many applications in many 
fields like catalysis, adsorption-separation, electroactive battery material, 
hydrogen storage, electronics, solar energy storage material, energy accu-
mulation, etc. The various applications are due to the highly conductive 
nature and exceptional electronic properties of these materials (Avent et 
al., 1997). The synthesis of fullerene-based polymeric materials is carried 
out by different methods. Among various methods, the most followed one 
is regular attachment of fullerene cage to a polystyrene in a Friedel–Crafts 
type reaction and another is the indirect linking of the fullerene C60 with 
an organic/inorganic space group such as Pd(dba)3, CHCl3, Pt(dba) or 
Pt(cad)2 where ‘cad’ represents cycloocta-1,5-diene and ‘dba’ represents 
as benzylideneacetones. The reaction of fullerenes with spacer group 
makes them insoluble for the effective application in aqueous or organic 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
111 
Fullerenes: Synthesis and Applications 
medium. The reaction process also involves the replacement of organic 
spacers from the cage of fullerene to make them stable (Kiyokatsu et al., 
1993; Milan et al., 1995; Yeoseon et al., 2014; Chae et al., 2009). The 
electrochemical formation of redox-active fullerene polymer is particu-
larly attractive because these are formed on the cathodic surface of the 
electrode directly. The formation of the film of these materials is uniform 
and also smooth. The smooth film of polymers is formed by the reduction 
of C60O (Krystyna, 2010). 
4.7.10 WATER PURIFICATION/ENVIRONMENT 
The unique physical, chemical, and photochemical properties of carbon-
based material have great interest in the environmental applications. 
Because of its lower solubility and stability in water, it has been greatly 
employed for the purification of water. A research investigation revealed 
that different functionalized fullerenes with active hydrophilic groups are 
synthesized and used for photocatalytic water purification process. These 
materials are inactive pathogenic microorganisms in nature (Li et al., 
2019; Lyon et al., 2005). Moreover, fullerenes are also used as adsorbent 
material for adsorption of organic compounds (Snow et al., 2014). The 
photocatalytic and adsorption process involve the reactive oxygen species 
(ROS) such as singlet oxygen (1O2) and superoxide (O2 
−) via type I and 
II reactive photosensitization pathway. This process involves the C60 
fullerene assisted oxidation for water purification and disinfection (Rich-
ardson et al., 2000). 
4.7.11 HYDROGEN STORAGE 
The unique properties and cage-like structure make the fullerene as suitable 
candidate for hydrogen storage. The hydrogenation of fullerene makes the 
medium for the sorption of hydrogen at different temperatures and pressures. 
It involves the transformation of C-C to C-H bonds which requires low bond 
energy and it returns to its original structure by heating at high temperature. 
These properties of fullerenes are favorable for the sorption of maximum 
of 6.1% of hydrogen due to the large cage-like structure (Pupysheva et al., 
2007; Wang et al., 2019; Zhang and Cheng, 2018). 

 
112 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
4.7.12 ENERGY STORAGE MATERIALS 
Energy storage and management seem to be essential to today’s techno-
logical needs. Among the different source of energy generation, there is 
a need to develop the storage technology to save electrical energy. The 
storage of electrochemical energy is a big challenge among the available 
energy storage technologies. Electrochemical energy storage has great 
demand due to its low carbon footprint, high shelf-life, high efficiency, 
flexibility in grid oration, and low cost. Super capacitors are usually made 
of conductive layer of carbon and their allotropes. The capacitance of these 
supercapacitors depends on pore size distribution, electrolyte, electrical 
conductivity, and surface area (Kumar et al., 2018). The less permeable 
capacity of the electrolyte decreases the performance of the supercapacitor. 
To overcome these problems, nanotechnology has given new opportunity 
via the use of wide number of carbon-based material and their allotropic 
forms to increase the conductivity and capacitance (Campbell et al., 2018; 
Gaddam et al., 2019). 
4.7.12.1 SUPER CAPACITORS 
There has been tremendous number of carbon-based materials used 
for energy storage applications. There is less focus on the allotropes of 
carbon like fullerenes. Fullerenes are the best material for supercapacitor 
applications due to the higher electron affinity and conductivity. The 
recent research also focused on the use of this hybrid nanomaterial for 
the storage of electrochemical energy (Bairi et al., 2019). The hybrid 
material composed of fullerene and graphene molecules has been applied 
for the electrode material in supercapacitors. These materials show a 
specific capacitance of 135.36 F/g and 101.88 F/g, respectively. These 
carbon-based materials show a good retention time rate of 92.25% after 
the completion of 1000 charge and discharge cycles (Jia et al., 2015). 
4.7.12.2 HIGH-PERFORMANCE LITHIUM ION BATTERIES 
The intercalation chemistry of carbon-based materials plays a key role 
in the Li-ion battery. Different carbon-based materials are used as anode 

 
 
113 
Fullerenes: Synthesis and Applications 
material in the battery due to the low cost, longer life, and safety. Among 
the different carbon materials fullerenes are having the fcc packing of C60 
peapods and a promising solid-state ion intercalation chemistry. Different 
research groups have given their investigation on the use of hydrogenated 
fullerenes as high-performance anode material for the rechargeable 
batteries. From the results it revealed that the use of fullerenes as an 
additive in the commonly used graphite show an unexpected reversible 
capacity which improve the capacity of the rechargeable Li-ion batteries 
(Bai et al., 2019; Partha et al., 2019; Li et al., 2013). 
4.7.12.3 MATERIALS AS SUPERCONDUCTORS 
A composite is formed when an alkali metal is introduced in the interstitial 
site of C60 fullerene. The composite structure shows a superconductivity 
property. Researches have investigated that the K3
 composites show 
C60
a high superconductance at critical temperature. This material shows a 
perfect 3-dimensional superconductivity with high ductility, current 
density, and highly stable in nature (Hebard, 1992; Shrivastava, 2019; 
Cantaluppi et al., 2018). 
4.7.12.4 REINFORCED COMPOSITES 
An effective way to increase the mechanical properties of the materials 
is by the utilization of nanomaterials which are the different forms of 
carbon acting like filler to strengthening the parent materials (Hasobe 
et al., 2004). On reinforcing Al–Mg alloy with C60 fullerene, the malle-
ability, mechanical strength, and thermal stability of the aluminum-matrix 
composite have been increased (Evdokimov et al., 2018). 
4.7.13 TREATMENT OF WASTEWATER 
Water contains a lot of contaminants which should be removed before they 
are discharged into the water bodies. Fullerenes are a type of substance 
capable enough to treat the waste water. According to the study, the char-
acterization of fullerene on removal of contaminants from waste water 
is already done. In this report, on the basis of hydrophobic membrane a 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
114 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
new polymer membrane named poly (2, 6-dimethyl-1,4-phenylene oxide) 
(PPO) which is modified by C60 was introduced. The above modified 
C60 polymer was used to study the nature of adsorption of estrogenic 
compounds. These compounds act as contaminants or pollutants which 
are present in surface water (Jin et al., 2007). The structure of cross section 
of PPO membrane is like sponge, whereas it looks like finger when the 
membrane contains 2% and 10% C60. This study concluded that 95% of 
estrone was removed 10% by weight of C60-PPO membrane. After 12 hours 
from static adsorption test, it was seen that all membranes are capable to 
adsorb estrone having similar adsorption capacity. The adsorption rate was 
the fastest for the membrane containing 2% of C60. This adsorption rate 
was followed by 10% of C60-PPO membrane and PPO membrane only. 
There is difference in adsorption capacity due to the difference in the size 
of pores on the internal structure or surface. 
The rate of adsorption was also hampered by diffusion of estrone 
in the membrane. In this study, as there is increase in the size of the 
pores, the diffusion of the contaminant, that is, estrone into the internal 
porous structure of membrane and the surface membrane also increases. 
Polyelectrolyte composite membranes were also prepared by the reaction 
of fullerene with sulfonated polystyrene. The result of this composite 
preparation shows that the fullerene which was present in polyelectro-
lyte membrane has enhanced the oxidation resistance and decreased 
the methanol crossover of the membrane. The mechanical strength of 
the PPO membrane has not improved on adding fullerene. However, 
on adding fullerene to the membrane made it brittle. On increasing the 
amount of fullerene in the membrane; the maximum stress, rupture 
stress, and the Young’s modulus of the membrane decreases. The 
composite membrane containing fullerene indicates less permeability of 
methanol as 50% more than 2.8% Flu-Ps and 1.4% Flu-Ps membrane. 
Also, the permeability was decreased by 30% in case of 2.8% Flu-Ps 
and 1.4% Flu-Ps than Nafion 117. The reason for the above behavior 
may be agglomeration of microscale fullerene in the membrane. From 
the above studies, it was concluded that the methanol crossovers can be 
decreased by inorganic fillers like SiO2. Also, the methanol permeability 
of PS membranes was more than Nafion 117 because of the presence of 
micropores in the prepared membranes (Saga et al., 2008; Thines et al., 
2017; Bassyouni et al., 2019). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
115 
Fullerenes: Synthesis and Applications 
4.8 CONCLUSIONS 
This chapter discussed about Fullerenes, starting from their discovery to 
its applications. Fullerenes due to their unique chemistry found applica-
tions in various advanced fields of science, such as in nanotechnology, 
material science, pharmaceutical science and electronics. A brief discus-
sion on various approaches such as Laser irradiation of carbon, PAHs, 
electrical arc heating, and resistive arc heating of graphite for the synthesis 
of fullerenes are reported. The unique chemical and physical properties 
of fullerenes lead to the exploration of the different applications of this 
molecule by many researchers. The functionalized derivatives of fullerene 
have also various applications in fast growing areas like photovoltaics, 
medicines, gas storage/adsorption, pharmaceuticals, and water treatment. 
Fullerenes due to the highly conductive nature and exceptional electronic 
properties are used in adsorption–separation, electroactive battery mate-
rial, hydrogen storage, electronics, solar energy storage material, and 
energy accumulation. Furthermore, a multidisciplinary approach is highly 
pivotal to explore the profound performance of this unique material, 
Fullerene, in order to discover some new dimensions in its application in 
the near future. 
KEYWORDS 
• 
fullerene 
• 
carbon nanotube 
• 
carbon 
• 
arc discharge 
REFERENCES 
Ajie, H.; Alvarez, M. M.; Anz, S. J.; Beck, R. D.; Diederich, F.; Fostiropoulos, K.; Huffman, 
D. R.; Kraetschmer, W.; Rubin, Y. Characterization of the Soluble All-Carbon Molecules 
C60 and C70. J. Phys. Chem. 1990, 94, 8630–8633. 
Anderson, J. L.; West, M. A.; Foote, C. S. Extraction, Isolation, and Characterization of 
Fullerene C60: A Safe and Reliable Separation Experiment. J. Chem. Educ. 1997, 74, 311. 
Avent, A. G.; Benito, A. M.; Birkett, P. R.; Darwish, A. D.; Hitchcock, P. B.; Kroto, H. W.; 
Locke, I. W.; Meidine, M. F.; Odonovan, B. F.; Prassides, K.; Taylor, K.; Walton, D. R. 
M.; Wijnkoop, M. The structure of fullerene compounds. J. Mol. Struct. 1997, 436, 1–9. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
116 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
Azzam, T.; Abraham, J. D. Current Developments in Gene Transfection Agents. Curr. 
Drug Deliv. 2004, 1, 165–193. 
Bai, H.; Gao, H.; Feng, W.; Zhao, Y.; Wu, Y. Interaction in Li@ Fullerenes and Li+@ 
Fullerenes: First Principle Insights to Li-Based Endohedral Fullerenes. Nanomaterials 
2019, 9, 630. 
Bairi, P.; Maji, S.; Hill, J. P.; Kim, J. H.; Ariga, K.; Shrestha, L. K. Mesoporous Carbon 
Cubes Derived from Fullerene Crystals as a High Rate Performance Electrode Material 
for Supercapacitors. J. Mater. Chem. A 2019, 7, 12654–12660. 
Bakry, R.; Vallant, R. M.; Najam-ul-Haq, M.; Rainer, M.; Szabo, Z.; Huck, C.; Günther K. 
B. Medicinal Applications of Fullerenes. Int. J. Nanomed. 2007, 2, 639. 
Bassyouni, M.; Abdel-Aziz, M. H.; Sh Zoromba, M.; Abdel-Hamid, S. M. S.; Drioli, E. A 
Review of Polymeric Nanocomposite Membranes for Water Purification. J. Indust. Eng. 
Chem. 2019, 73, 19–46. 
Bhoi, V. I.; Kumar, S.; Murthy, C. N. The Self-Assembly and Aqueous Solubilization of 
[60] Fullerene with Disaccharides. Carbohydrate Res. 2012, 359, 120–127. 
Bochvar, D. A.; Galpern, E. G. Hypothetical Systems-Carbododecahedron, S-Icosahedrone 
And Carbo-S-Icosahedron. Doklady Akademii Nauk Sssr 1973, 209, 610–612. 
Boorum, M. M.; Vasil'ev, Y. V.; Drewello, T.; Scott, L. T. Groundwork for a Rational 
Synthesis of C : Cyclodehydrogenation of a C H  Polyarene. Science 2001, 294,
60
60
30
828–831. 
Boris, P. Transport and Dielectric Properties of Thin Fullerene (C60) films. PhD diss.; 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 1996. 
Brettreich, M.; Hirsch, A. A Highly Water-Soluble Dendro [60] Fullerene. Tetrahedron 
Lett. 1998, 39, 2731–2734. 
Campbell, E. E. B.; Fowler, P. W.; Mitchell, D.; Zerbetto, F. Increasing Cost of Pentagon 
Adjacency for Larger Fullerenes. Chem. Phys. Lett. 1996, 250, 544–548. 
Campbell, P. G.; Baumann, T. F.; Biener, J.; Merrill, M.; Montalvo, E.; Worsley, M. A.; 
Biener, M. M.; Hernández, M. R. C. Graphene Macro-Assembly-Fullerene Composite 
for Electrical Energy Storage. U.S. Patent 9,870,871, Issued January 16, 2018. 
Cantaluppi, A.; Buzzi, M.; Jotzu, G.; Nicoletti, D.; Mitrano, M.; Pontiroli, D.; Riccò, 
M.; Perucchi, A.; Pietro, P. D.; Cavalleri, A. Pressure Tuning of Light-Induced 
Superconductivity in K3C60. Nat. Phys. 2018, 14, 837. 
Cataldo, F.; Tatiana Da Ros, Eds. Medicinal Chemistry and Pharmacological Potential of 
Fullerenes and Carbon Nanotubes, Vol. 1; Springer Science & Business Media, 2008. 
Chae, S. R.; Hotze, E. M.; Wiesner, M. R. Evaluation of the Oxidation of Organic 
Compounds by Aqueous Suspensions of Photosensitized Hydroxylated-C60 Fullerene 
Aggregates. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2009, 43, 6208–6213. 
Chai, Y.; Guo, T.; Jin, C.; Haufler, R. E.; Chibante, L. P. F.; Fure, J.; Wang, L.; Alford, J. 
M.; Smalley, R. E. Fullerenes with Metals Inside. J. Phys. Chem. 1991, 95, 7564–7568. 
Chiang, L. Y.; Upasani, R. B.; Swirczewski, J. Versatile Nitronium Chemistry for C60 
Fullerene Functionalization. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1992, 114, 10154–10157. 
Choudhary, V.; Singh, B. P.; Mathur, R. B. Carbon nanotubes and Their Composites. Suzuki, 
Satoru, Ed. Syntheses and Applications of Carbon Nanotubes and Their Composites. 
BoD–Books Demand 2013, 9, 193–222. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fullerenes: Synthesis and Applications 
117 
Cnops, K.; Zango, G.; Genoe, J.; Heremans, P.; Martinez-Diaz, M. V.; Torres, T.; Cheyns, 
D. Energy Level Tuning of Non-Fullerene Acceptors in Organic Solar Cells. J. Am. 
Chem. Soc. 2015, 137, 8991–8997. 
Delgado, J. L.; Herranz, M. A.; Martin, N. The Nano-Forms of Carbon. J. Mater. Chem. 
2008, 18, 1417–1426. 
Diederich, F.; Robert L. W. Beyond C60: The Higher Fullerenes. Acc. Chem. Res. 1992, 25, 
119–126. 
Diederich, F.; Roland, E.; Rubin, Y.; Whetten, R. L.; Beck, R.; Alvarez, M.; Samir Anz.; 
Sensharma, D.; Wudl, F.; Khemani, K. C.; Koch, A. The Higher Fullerenes: Isolation 
and Characterization of C , C , C , C , and C O, an Oxide of D -C70. Science 1991,
76
84
90
94
70
5h
252, 548–551. 
Djordjevic, A.; Srdjenovic, B.; Seke, M.; Petrovic, D.; Injac, R.; Mrdjanovic, J. Review of 
Synthesis and Antioxidant Potential of Fullerenol Nanoparticles. J. Nanomater. 2015, 
16, 280. 
Evdokimov, I. A.; Perfilov, S. A.; Pozdnyakov, A. A.; Blank, V. D.; Bagramov, R.; 
Perezhogin, I. A.; Kulnitsky, B. A.; Kirichenko, A. N.; Aksenenkov, V. V. Nanostructured 
Composite Materials Based on Al–Mg Alloy Modified with Fullerene C60. Inorg. Mater. 
Appl. Res. 2018, 9, 472–477. 
Fortner, J. D.; Lyon, D. Y.; Sayes, C. M.; Boyd, A. M.; Falkner, J. C.; Hotze, E. M.; 
Alemany L. B.; Tao, Y. J.; Guo, W.; Ausman, K. D.; Kolvin, V. L.; Hughes, J. B. C60 in 
Water: Nanocrystal Formation and Microbial Response. Environ. Sci.Technol. 2005, 39, 
4307–4316. 
Fukuzumi, S.; Kojima, T. Photofunctional Nanomaterials Composed of Multiporphyrins 
and Carbon-Based π-Electron Acceptors. J. Mater. Chem. 2008, 18, 1427–1439. 
Gaddam, R. R.; Kumar, N. A.; Narayan, R.; Raju, K. V. S. N.; Zhao, X. S. Advanced 
Carbon Materials for Electrochemical Energy Storage. In Nanomaterials Synthesis; 
Elsevier, 2019; pp 385–418. 
Ganesh, E. N. Single Walled and Multi Walled Carbon Nanotube Structure, Synthesis and 
Applications. Int. J. Innov. Technol. Explor. Eng. 2013, 2, 311–320. 
Geckeler, K. E.; Samal, S. Syntheses and Properties of Macromolecular Fullerenes, a 
Review. Polym. Int. 1999, 48, 743–757. 
Gharbi, N.; Pressac, M.; Hadchouel, M.; Szwarc, H.; Wilson, S. R.; Moussa, F. [60] 
Fullerene Is a Powerful Antioxidant In Vivo with No Acute or Subacute Toxicity. Nano 
Lett. 2005, 5, 2578–2585. 
Giacalone, F.; Martin, N. Fullerene Polymers: Synthesis and Properties. Chem. Rev. 2006, 
106, 5136–5190. 
Goodarzi, S.; Tatiana, D. R.; Conde, J.; Sefat, F.; Mozafari, M. Fullerene: Biomedical 
Engineers Get to Revisit an Old Friend. Mater. Today 2017, 20, 460–480. 
Guldi, D. M.; Prato, M. Excited-State Properties of C60 Fullerene Derivatives. Acc. Chem. 
Res. 2000, 33, 695–703. 
Gund, T. M.; Osawa, E.; Schleyer, P. R. A convenient, High-Yield Preparation of 
Diamantane (Congressane). Tetrahedron Lett. 1970, 11, 3877–3880. 
Gupta, N.; Gupta, S. M.; Sharma, S. K. Carbon Nanotubes: Synthesis, Properties and 
Engineering Applications. Carbon Lett. 2019, 1–29. 
Haddon, R. C. Electronic Structure, Conductivity and Superconductivity of Alkali Metal 
Doped (C60). Acc. Chem. Res. 1992, 25, 127–133. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
118 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
Hasobe, T.; Hattori, S.; Kotani, H.; Ohkubo, K.; Hosomizu, K.; Imahori, H.; Kamat, P. 
V.; Fukuzumi, S. Photoelectrochemical Properties of Supramolecular Composite of 
Fullerene Nanoclusters and 9-Mesityl-10-Carboxymethylacridinium Ion on SnO2. Org. 
Lett. 2004, 6, 3103–3106. 
Hayashi, A.; Yamamoto, S.; Suzuki, K.; Matsuoka, T. The First Application of Fullerene 
Polymer-Like Materials, C60Pdn, as Gas Adsorbents. J. Mater. Chem. 2004, 14, 
2633–2637. 
Heath, J. R.; Robert F. C.; Kroto, H. (1939–2016). 2016, 470–470. 
Hebard, A. F. Superconductivity in Doped Fullerenes. Phys. Today 1992, 45, 26–32. 
Herranz, M. A.; Illescas, B.; Martin, N.; Luo, C.; Guldi, D. M. Donor/Acceptor 
Fulleropyrrolidine Triads. J. Org. Chem. 2000, 65, 5728–5738. 
Hong, J.; Yang, Z.; Jiang, W.; Geng, C.; Gong, M.; Xiao, H.; Wang, Z.; Cheng, L. Antiviral 
Activity of Nano Carbon Fullerene Lipidosome Against Influenza Virus In Vitro. J. 
Huazhong Univ. Sci. Technol. [Medical Sciences] 2008, 28, 243–246. 
Howard, J. B.; Thomas McKinnon, J.; Makarovsky, Y.; Lafleur, A. L.; Johnson, M. E. 
Fullerenes C60 and C70 in Flames. Nature 1991, 352, 139. 
Hsu, C. P.; Jiang, D. H.; Lee, S. L.; Horng, J. L.; Ger, M. D.; Chang, J. K. Buckyball-, 
Carbon Nanotube-, Graphite-, and Graphene-Enhanced Dehydrogenation of Lithium 
Aluminum Hydride. Chem. Commun. 2013, 49, 8845–8847. 
Iijima, S. Helical Microtubules of Graphitic Carbon. Nature 1991, 354, 56. 
Ingo, R.; Parisi, J.; Dyakonov, V.; Lutsen, L.; Vanderzande, D.; Hummelen, J. C. Effect 
of Temperature and Illumination on the Electrical Characteristics of Polymer–Fullerene 
Bulk-Heterojunction Solar Cells. Adv. Funct. Mater. 2004, 14, 38–44. 
Isobe, H.; Nakanishi, W.; Tomita, N.; Jinno, S.; Okayama, H.; Nakamura, E. Nonviral 
Gene Delivery by Tetraamino Fullerene. Mol. Pharma. 2006, 3, 124–134. 
Isobe, H.; Tomita, N.; Jinno, S.; Okayama, H.; Nakamura, E. Synthesis and Transfection 
Capability of Multi-Functionalized Fullerene Polyamine. Chem. Lett. 2001, 30, 
1214–1215. 
Jarrold, M. F. Chemistry: The Smallest Fullerene. Nature 2000, 407, 26. 
Jia, M.; Guo, Q.; Gao, H. L.; Qin, X. Synthesis of C60/Graphene Composite as Electrode in 
Supercapacitors. Fullerenes Nanotubes Carbon Nanostruct. 2015, 23, 477–482. 
Jin, X.; Hu, J. Y.; Tint, M. L.; Ong, S. L.; Biryulin, Y.; Polotskaya, G. Estrogenic Compounds 
Removal by Fullerene-Containing Membranes. Desalination 2007, 214, 83–90. 
Jones, D. E. H. Dreams in a Charcoal Fire: Predictions About Giant Fullerenes and Graphite 
Nanotubes. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. London: A 1993, 343, 9–18. 
Joshipura, K. N.; Joshipura, K. N. Exploring the Fullerenes-How Geometrical Ideas 
Explain Strange Fullerene Structures. Resonance 2000, 5. 
Kabdulov, M. A.; Amsharov, K. Y.; Jansen, M. A Step Toward Direct Fullerene Synthesis: 
C60 Fullerene Precursors with Fluorine in á Key Positions. Tetrahedron 2010, 66, 
8587–8593. 
Kanev, St.; Nenova, Z.; Koprinarov, N.; Ivanova, K. Conductivity and Photoconductivity 
Peculiarities Observed in C60 Layers. Semiconduct. Phys. Quantum Electron. 
Optoelectron. 2006. 
Kang, S.; Meagan S. M.; Elimelech, M. Microbial Cytotoxicity of Carbon-Based 
Nanomaterials: Implications for River Water and Wastewater Effluent. Environ. Sci. 
Technol. 2009, 43, 2648–2653. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fullerenes: Synthesis and Applications 
119 
Katsnelson, M. Graphene: Carbon in Two Dimensions. Mater. Today 2007, 10, 20–27. 
Kiyokatsu, J.; Uemura, T.; Ohta, H.; Nagashima, H.; Itoh, K. Separation and Identification 
of Higher Molecular Weight Fullerenes by High-Performance Liquid Chromatography 
with Monomeric and Polymeric Octadecylsilica Bonded Phases. Analyt. Chem. 1993, 
65, 2650–2654. 
Kornev, A. B.; Peregudov, A. S.; Martynenko, V. M.; Balzarini, J.; Hoorelbeke, B.; 
Troshin, P. A. Synthesis and Antiviral Activity of Highly Water-Soluble Polycarboxylic 
Derivatives of [70] Fullerene. Chem. Commun. 2011, 47, 8298–8300. 
Krätschmer, W.; Lamb, L. D.; Fostiropoulos, K.; Huffman, D. R. Solid C60: A New Form 
of Carbon. Nature 1990, 347, 354. 
Kroto, H. Space, Stars, C60, and Soot. Science 1988, 242, 1139–1145. 
Kroto, H. Symmetry, Space, Stars and C60. Rev. Modern Phys. 1997, 69, 703. 
Kroto, H. W. C60: Buckminsterfullerene, the Celestial Sphere That Fell to Earth. Angew. 
Chem. Int. Ed. English 1992, 31, 111–129. 
Kroto, H. W. The Stability of the Fullerenes Cn, with n= 24, 28, 32, 36, 50, 60 and 70. 
Nature 1987, 329, 529. 
Kroto, H. W.; Allaf, A. W.; Balm, S. P. C60: Buckminsterfullerene. Chem. Rev. 1991, 91, 
1213–1235. 
Kroto, H. W.; Heath, J. R.; Sean C. O'Brien, Curl, R. F.; Smalley, R. E. C60: 
Buckminsterfullerene. Nature 1985, 318, 162–163. 
Kroto, H. W.; Walton, R. M. D. Stable Derivatives of Small Fullerenes. Chem. Phys. Lett. 
1993, 214, 353–356. 
Krystyna, P. Carbon Nanostructures for Separation, Preconcentration and Speciation of 
Metal Ions. TrAC Trends Analy. Chem. 2010, 29, 718–727. 
Kumar, P.; Senthil, K.; Pavithra, G.; Ramalingam, S. Carbon Based Nanomaterials for 
Energy Storage. Carbonaceous Compos. Mater. 2018, 42, 33–56. 
Kyesmen, P. I.; Onoja, A.; Amah, A. N. Fullerenes Synthesis by Combined Resistive 
Heating and Arc Discharge Techniques. Springer Plus 2016, 5, 1323. 
Lebedeva, M. A.; Chamberlain, T. .; Khlobystov, A. N. Harnessing the Synergistic 
and Complementary Properties of Fullerene and Transition-Metal Compounds for 
Nanomaterial Applications. Chem. Rev. 2015, 115, 11301–11351. 
Li, Q.; Sun, X.; Yang, Z.; Wang, X.; Wang, Q.; He, D. Network Structures of Fullerene-
Like Carbon Core/Nano-Crystalline Silicon Shell Nanofibers as Anode Material for 
Lithium-Ion Batteries. Carbon 2013, 54, 29–35. 
Li, Qilin.; Mahendra, S.; Lyon, D. Y.; Brunet, L.; Liga, M. V.; Li, D.; Alvarez, P. J. J. 
Antimicrobial Nanomaterials for Water Disinfection and Microbial Control: Potential 
Applications and Implications. Water Res. 2008, 42, 4591–4602. 
Li, Z.; Zhang, Y.; Zhu, R.; Wen, G.; Dong, C.; Li, H. Self-Assembled Palladium 
Nanoflowers Supported on Fullerene: Electrochemical Catalytic Performance for the 
Reduction of 4-Nitrophenol. Electrochem Commun. 2019, 106484. 
Liang, X.; Chen, C.; Zhao, Y.; Jia, L.; Wang, P. C. Biopharmaceutics and Therapeutic 
Potential of Engineered Nanomaterials. Curr. Drug Metabol. 2008, 9, 697–709. 
Lin, C. M.; Tan, Y. L. C60 Fullerene Derivatized Nanoparticles and Their Application to 
Therapeutics. Recent Patents Nanotechnol. 2012, 6, 105–113. 
Lopez, A. M.; Aurelio, M. A.; Prato, M. Materials Chemistry of Fullerene C60 Derivatives. 
J. Mater. Chem. 2011, 21, 1305–1318. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
120 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
Luis, E.; Echegoyen, L. E. Electrochemistry of Fullerenes and Their Derivatives. Acc. 
Chem. Res. 1998, 31, 593–601. 
Lyon, D. Y.; Adams, L. K.; Falkner, J. C.; Alvarez, P. J. J. Antibacterial Activity of 
Fullerene Water Suspensions: Effects of Preparation Method and Particle Size. Environ. 
Sci. Technol. 2006, 40, 4360–4366. 
Lyon, D. Y.; Fortner, J. D.; Sayes, C. M.; Colvin, V. L.; Hughes, J. B. Bacterial Cell 
Association and Antimicrobial Activity of a C60 Water Suspension. Environ. Toxicol. 
Chem. 2005, 24, 2757–2762. 
Martin, N.; Sánchez, L.; Herranz, M. A.; Guldi, D. M. Evidence for Two Separate 
One-Electron Transfer Events in Excited Fulleropyrrolidine Dyads Containing 
Tetrathiafulvalene (TTF). J. Phys. Chem. A 2000, 104, 4648–4657. 
Mauter, M. S.; Elimelech, M. Environmental Applications of Carbon-Based Nanomaterials. 
Environ. Sci.Technol. 2008, 42, 5843–5859. 
Milan, F.; Costa, D. A.; Balch, A. L.; Fawcett, W. R. Electrochemical Synthesis of a Redox-
Active Polymer Based on Buckminsterfullerene Epoxide. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. English 
1995, 34, 194–196. 
Mojica, M.; Alonso, J. A.; Méndez, F. Synthesis of Fullerenes. J. Phys. Org. Chem. 2013, 
26, 526–539. 
Nakamura, E.; Isobe, H. Functionalized Fullerenes in Water. THE first 10 Years of Their 
Chemistry, Biology, and Nanoscience. Acc. Chem. Res. 2003, 36, 807–815. 
Nicolaidis, N. C.; Al-Mudhaffer, M. F.; Holdsworth, J. L.; Zhou, X.; Belcher, W. J.; 
Dastoor, P.C. Contribution of Fullerene Photocurrent Generation to Organic Solar Cell 
Performance. J. Phys. Chem. C 2019, 123, 11950–11958. 
Nimibofa, A.; Newton, E. A.; Cyprain, A. Y.; Donbebe, W. Fullerenes: Synthesis and 
Applications. J. Mater. Sci. Res 2018, 7, 22. 
Park, S.; Srivastava, D.; Cho, K. Local Reactivity of Fullerenes and Nano-Device 
Applications. Nanotechnology 2001, 12, 245. 
Parker, D. H.; Wurz, P.; Chatterjee, K.; Lykke, K. R.; Hunt, J. E.; Pellin, M. J.; Hemminger, 
J. C.; Gruen, D. M.; Stock, L. M. High-Yield Synthesis, Separation, and Mass-
Spectrometric Characterization of Fullerenes C60 to C266. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1991, 113, 
7499–7503. 
Partha, B.; Maji, S.; Hill, J. P.; Kim, J. H.; Ariga, K.; Shrestha, L. K. Mesoporous Carbon 
Cubes Derived from Fullerene Crystals as a High Rate Performance Electrode Material 
for Supercapacitors. J. Mater. Chem. A 2019, 7, 12654–12660. 
Payne, M. C.; Michael, P. T.; Allan, D. C.; Arias, T. A.; Joannopoulos, J. D. Iterative 
Minimization Techniques for Ab Initio Total-Energy Calculations: Molecular Dynamics 
and Conjugate Gradients. Rev. Modern Phys. 1992, 64, 1045. 
Peter, S.; Wirz, L/N.; Avery, J. The Topology of Fullerenes. Wiley Interdiscip. Rev. 2015, 
5, 96–145. 
Plonska-Brzezinska, Marta E. Carbon Nano-Onions: A Review of Recent Progress in 
Synthesis and Applications. Chem Nano Mat 2019, 5, 568–580. 
Pupysheva, O. V.; Farajian, A. A.; Yakobson, B. I. Fullerene Nanocage Capacity for 
Hydrogen Storage. Nano Lett. 2007, 8, 767–774. 
Rai, P. K.; Nicholas A.; Parra-Vasquez, G.; Peng, H.; Hauge, R. H.; Pasquali, M. Solubility 
and Size Separation of Large Fullerenes in Concentrated Sulfuric Acids. J. Phys. Chem. 
C 2007, 111, 17966–17969. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
121 
Fullerenes: Synthesis and Applications 
Richardson, C. F.; Schuster, D. I.; Wilson, S. R. Synthesis and Characterization of Water-
Soluble Amino Fullerene Derivatives. Org. Lett. 2000, 2, 1011–1014. 
Ruoff, R. S.; Doris S. T.; Malhotra, R.; Lorents, D. C. Solubility of Fullerene (C60) in a 
Variety of Solvents. J. Phys. Chem. 1993, 97, 3379–3383. 
Saga, S.; Matsumoto, H.; Saito, K.; Minagawa, M.; Tanioka, A. Polyelectrolyte Membranes 
Based on Hydrocarbon Polymer Containing Fullerene. J. Power Sour. 2008, 176, 16–22. 
Samanta, P. N.; Das, K. K. Noncovalent Interaction Assisted Fullerene for the Transportation 
of Some Brain Anticancer Drugs: A Theoretical Study. J. Mol. Graphics Modell. 2017, 
72, 187–200. 
Scarel, F.; Alonso, A. M. Fullerene C60 Architectures in Materials Science. Carbon 
Nanomater. 2013, 47–88. 
Sheka, E. F.; Razbirin, B. S.; Nelson, D. K. Continuous Symmetry of C60 Fullerene and Its 
Derivatives. J. Phys. Chem. A 2011, 115, 3480–3490. 
Shibuya, M.; Kato, M.; Ozawa, M.; Fang, P. H.; Ōsawa, E. Detection of Buckminsterfullerene 
in Usual Soots and Commercial Charcoals. Fullerene Sci. Technol. 1999, 7, 181–193. 
Shrivastava, S. K. Superconductivity in Organic Materials (2019). 
Shultz, M. D.; Duchamp, J. C.; Wilson, J. D.; Shu, C. Y.; Ge, J.; Zhang, J.; Gibson, H. W.; 
Fillmore, H. L.; Hirsch, J. I.; Dorn, H. C.; Fatouros, P. P. Encapsulation of a Radiolabeled 
Cluster Inside a Fullerene Cage, 177Lu x Lu (3− x) N@ C80: An Interleukin-13-
Conjugated Radiolabeled Metallofullerene Platform. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2010, 132, 
4980–4981. 
Sinha, A.; Sinha, A. Buckyball C60–the Story So Far. Resonance 2001, 6, 56–65. 
Snow, S. D.; Park, K. E.; Kim, J. H. Cationic Fullerene Aggregates with Unprecedented 
Virus Photoinactivation Efficiencies in Water. Environ. Sci. Technol. Lett. 2014, 1, 
290–294. 
Stankevich, Ivan V.; Nikerov, M. V.; Bochvar, D. A. The Structural Chemistry of Crystalline 
Carbon: Geometry, Stability, and Electronic Spectrum. Russian Chem. Rev. 1984, 53, 
640. 
Tatiana, D. R.; Prato, M.; Novello, F.; Maggini, M.; Banfi, E. Easy Access to Water-Soluble 
Fullerene Derivatives via 1, 3-Dipolar Cycloadditions of Azomethine Ylides to C60. J. 
Org. Chem. 1996, 61, 9070–9072. 
Taylor, R.; Walton, D. R. M. The Chemistry of Fullerenes. Nature 1993, 363, 685. 
Terrones, H.; Terrones, M.; Hsu, W. K. Beyond C 60: Graphite Structures for the Future. 
Chem. Soc. Rev. 1995, 24, 341–350. 
Thines, R. K.; Mubarak, N. M.; Nizamuddin, S.; Sahu, J. N.; Abdullah, E. C.; Ganesan, P. 
Application Potential of Carbon Nanomaterials in Water and Wastewater Treatment: A 
Review. J. Taiwan Inst. Chem. Eng. 2017, 72, 116–133. 
Toth, K. (Endo) fullerene Functionalization: From Material Science to Biomedical 
Applications, PhD diss.; Strasbourg, 2012. 
Troshina, O. A.; Troshin, P. A.; Peregudov, A. S.; Kozlovskiy, V. I.; Balzarini, J.; 
Lyubovskaya, R. N. Chlorofullerene C60 Cl6: A Precursor for Straightforward Preparation 
of Highly Water-Soluble Polycarboxylic Fullerene Derivatives Active Against HIV. Org. 
Biomol. Chem. 2007, 5, 2783–2791. 
Wang, C. Y.; Zhang, Y. Y.; Wang, C. M.; Tan, V. B. C. Buckling of Carbon Nanotubes: A 
Literature Survey. J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol. 2007, 7, 4221–4247. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
122 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
Wang, M.; Huang, L.; Sharma, S. K.; Jeon, S.; Thota, S.; Sperandio, F. F.; Nayka, S.; Chang, 
J.; Hamblin, M. R.; Chiang, L. Y. Synthesis and Photodynamic Effect of New Highly 
Photostable Decacationically Armed [60]-and [70] Fullerene Decaiodide Monoadducts 
to Target Pathogenic Bacteria and Cancer Cells. J. Med. Chem. 2012, 55, 4274–4285. 
Wang, Y.; Luo, K.; Ye, W.; Du, S.; Francisco, J. S.; Yin, J.; Gao, P. Mg@C60 Nano-
Lamellae and Its 12.50 wt% Hydrogen Storage Capacity. Int. J. Hydrog. Energy 2019, 
44, 15239–15245. 
Whetten, R. L.; Alvarez, M. M.; Anz, S. J.; Schriver, K. E.; Beck, R. D.; Diederich, F. N.; 
Rubin, Y. Spectroscopic and Photophysical Properties of the Soluble Cn Molecules, n= 
60, 70, 76/78, 84. MRS Online Proceedings Library Archive, 1990; p 206. 
Xu, B. Prospects and Research Progress in Nano Onion-Like Fullerenes. New Carbon 
Mater. 2008, 23, 289–301. 
Yadav, B. C.; Kumar, R. Structure, Properties and Applications of Fullerenes. Int. J. 
Nanotechnol. App. 2008, 2, 15–24. 
Yadav, J. Fullerene: Properties, Synthesis and Application. Res. Rev.: J. Phys. 2018, 6, 1–6. 
Yeoseon, C.; Ye, Y.; Mackeyev, Y.; Cho, M.; Lee, S.; Wilson, L. J.; Lee, J.; Alvarez, P. J. J.; 
Choi, W.; Lee, J. C60 Aminofullerene-Magnetite Nanocomposite Designed for Efficient 
Visible Light Photocatalysis and Magnetic Recovery. Carbon 2014, 69, 92–100. 
Zhang, Y.; Cheng, X. Hydrogen Storage Property of Alkali and Alkaline-Earth Metal 
Atoms Decorated C24 Fullerene: A DFT Study. Chem. Phys. 2018, 505, 26–33. 
Zheng, G.; Irle, S.; Morokuma, K. Towards Formation of Buckminsterfullerene C60 in 
Quantum Chemical Molecular Dynamics. J. Chem. Phys. 2005, 122, 014708. 
Zhu, S.; Eva, O.; Mary, L. H. Toxicity of an Engineered Nanoparticle (Fullerene, C60) in 
Two Aquatic Species, Daphnia and Fathead Minnow. Marine Environ. Res. 2006, 62, 
S5–S9. 

New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons. Aneeya Kumar Samantara & Satyajit Ratha (Eds.)
© 2024 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
CHAPTER 5  
Biochar: An Advanced Carbon Material 
for Mitigation of Environmental 
Pollution 
SANGHAMITRA MOHAPATRA1,2 and CHINMAYEE ACHARYA1,3 
1CSIR—Institute of Minerals and Materials Technology,  
Bhubaneswar, India 
2AcSIR—Academy of Scientific and Industrial Research,  
New Delhi, India 
3North Orissa University, Baripada, India 
ABSTRACT 
Environmental pollution, causing serious harmful concerns, is increasing 
day by day. Various chemical and biological remediation strategies are 
being adopted to mitigate pollution. Out of those remediation strategies, 
biochar is one of the most investigated topics since the last decade. Biochar 
is a carbon derivative obtained from the carbonization of various organic 
biomasses under limited supply of or without oxygen, which yields a 
porous, carbon rich material with low density. Biochars have several phys-
icochemical properties of interest such as high specific surface area and 
cation exchange abilities that are strongly affected by the source materials 
and pyrolysis temperatures, which enhance the sorption of a variety of 
contaminants to their surfaces. The sorption of these contaminants occurs 
through various processes, namely, ion exchange, electrostatic interaction, 
complex formation, membrane filtration, physisorption, and precipitation. 

 
124 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
To increase the pollutant removal capacity, further modification of the 
biochars may also be done by adding some metals like iron, calcium, 
magnesium, sulfur, silver, zinc, etc., through acid treatment, with the help 
of clay particles. Such modifications increase the surface area, affect the 
polarity, alter the pH, and form new functional groups in biochar which 
increases the adsorption capacity. In this chapter, we will be discussing 
about the production methods of biochars and various biochar composites, 
properties, and their utilization for remediation of environmental pollution. 
5.1 INTRODUCTION 
The presence of heavy metals, organic and inorganic pollutants in envi-
ronmental systems such as soil, air, and water pose challenges in environ-
mental remediation. Many workers reported the presence of the following 
pollutants in soil; polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), pesticides, 
polychlorinated biphenyls (PCB), explosives, metals, metalloids, and 
radionuclides (Zhu and Shaw, 2000; Kumar et al., 2012; Testiati et al., 
2013; Vane et al., 2014). Once these pollutants enter the soil system, they 
contaminate the underground as well as surface water by leaching and 
runoff, respectively. Mobility of these heavy metals aided by several atmo-
spheric events, for example, runoff water and wind, drastically increase 
their content in the topsoil, resulting in both air and water contamination/ 
pollution, which could lead to several chronic health-related disorders in 
the inhabited living bodies. Presence of these contaminants in soil and 
water resources is undesirable due to their toxicity and anomalies they 
create. Increase in the concentration of these pollutants beyond their 
permissible limits has primarily resulted from rapid industrialization, 
urbanization, and agricultural activities (using pesticides and artificial 
fertilizers). Unlike most of the organic pollutants (which gradually degrade 
when disposed), inorganic pollutants, specifically the heavy metals, are 
nonbiodegradable and may be passed along the food chain through bioac-
cumulation. Therefore, removal of these toxic substances from the soil 
and water is one of the focus areas in the field of environmental sciences. 
In this context, remediation of contaminated areas for pollution 
reduction and minimum downstream damage is essential (Powlson et al., 
2011). Several strategies and methods have been employed to combat soil 
contamination, for example, soil washing, soil vapor extraction, farming, 

 
125 
Biochar: An Advanced Carbon Material 
soil flushing, and ion exchanges (Zhou and Song, 2004; Prasad and Nakban-
pote, 2015). However, these traditional methods are usually expensive and 
might create further glitches, such as loss of soil fertility and soil erosion 
(Khan et al., 2004; Kumpiene et al., 2008). Various removal techniques for 
wastewater treatment (e.g., ion exchange, precipitation, electrocoagula-
tion, activated carbon adsorption, and packed bed filtration) have been 
employed by many researchers. For both soil and water treatments, most 
of these techniques are expensive and time consuming. Therefore, a more 
cost-effective alternative is required in this context, which would make 
use of low-cost adsorbents for soil and water treatment (Kailash et al., 
2010). Such amendments include red mud (Ma et al., 2007), nanoparticles 
(Araújo et al., 2015; Mitra et al., 2017), carbon-based nanoparticles such 
as graphene, CNTs, activated carbons (Kemp et al., 2013; Ahmad et al., 
2018; Karnib et al., 2014; Anastopoulos et al., 2017), biomass, and biochar 
(Tan et al., 2015). The word, “biochar,” is a combination of “bio” as in 
“biomass” and “char” as in “charcoal”. Biochar is a black carbon derived 
by pyrolysis of carbon-rich biomass in an oxygen-limited environment 
(Lehmann and Joseph, 2009). The International Biochar Initiative (IBI) 
(http://www.biochar-international.org/biochar) defines biochar as a solid 
material obtained from the carbonization of biomass. Various degrees 
of carbonization produce infinite varieties of biochars for use as fuels 
and adsorbents. The primary constituents of biochar include carbon (C), 
hydrogen (H), oxygen (O), nitrogen (N), sulfur (S), and ash in different 
proportions. These biochars possess both high specific surface area, and 
large number of pores, abundant surface functional groups and mineral 
components, which makes them quite useful as adsorbent to remove 
pollutants from aqueous solutions (Zhang et al., 2018; Zhu et al., 2018a). 
Biochars have drawn significant research interest recently, primarily 
due to their multifunctionality such as carbon sequestration and soil 
fertility enhancement (Santín et al., 2017), bioenergy production (Zhu et 
al., 2018), and environmental remediation (Mohan et al., 2014; Inyang et 
al., 2016). Several recent publications reported biochar’s excellent ability 
to immobilize organic (Dai et al., 2019) and inorganic pollutants (Yuan 
et al., 2018; Mohan et al., 2014) in both soil and water systems. Many 
researchers have reported that biochars are potential low-cost adsorbents, 
as they can immobilize or bind chemical compounds including some 
of the most common pollutants, for example, heavy metals, pesticides 
or herbicides (Cao and Harris, 2010; Chen and Yuan, 2011; Jiang et al., 

 
126 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
2012). Therefore, biochar could serve as an in situ alternative material for 
amending soils contaminated with heavy metals (Zhao et al., 2016). 
5.2 BIOCHAR PRODUCTION 
Biochar production is mostly done by utilizing the waste biomass. Utiliza-
tion of waste biomass for biochar production is economical and beneficial 
as it provides clean alternatives of fossil fuels, and also the biochar prod-
ucts can be used to mitigate pollution (Barrow, 2012).Waste biomass from 
various sources has been extensively used to produce biochar (Cantrell et 
al., 2012), such as crop residues, forestry waste, animal manure, animal 
bones, food processing waste, paper mill waste, municipal solid waste, 
and sewage sludge (Li et al., 2013; Ahmad et al., 2014). Various “biomass 
to biochar” conversion methods have been developed to produce biochar 
(Czernik and Bridgwater, 2004; Mohan et al., 2006). Both biological 
(anaerobic digestion, hydrolysis, and fermentation) and thermal (combus-
tion, pyrolysis, liquefaction, torrefaction, and gasification) conversion 
methods are used to transform biomass into fuel and byproducts. The 
most popular method for biochar production is pyrolysis. Pyrolysis is the 
process of charring in the absence or limited presence of oxygen. Pyrolysis 
technique involves various thermochemical conversion processes with 
limited/no supply of oxygen to yield different products, for example, 
bio-oil, biochar, and pyrogas. During pyrolysis, thermal decomposition 
of cellulose, hemicellulose, and lignin occurs. These components undergo 
their own reaction pathways at their own reaction temperatures which 
include crosslinking, depolymerization, and fragmentation. The end 
products are generally solid, liquid, and gaseous products. The solid and 
liquid products generated from the pyrolysis process are biochar and 
bio-oil, respectively, while the gaseous mixture containing CO, CO2, H2, 
and C1–C2 hydrocarbons, are called pyrogas/syngas. 
Pyrolysis can be categorized as slow pyrolysis and fast pyrolysis 
depending on the heating rate and residence time. Conventional slow 
pyrolysis method has been mainly utilized for charcoal production. It is 
a thermodynamically controlled processing of biomass within a tempera-
ture range of 500–800°C, with very slow heating rate that varies within 
5–10°C, for long residence time (may be for hours or days). The main 
product of slow pyrolysis is biochar (50–60%) along with bio-oil and 

 
 
127 
Biochar: An Advanced Carbon Material 
gases. The yield of these products depends upon both biomass feedstock 
and temperature. Biochar produced by slow pyrolysis, generally has high 
surface area and found to be advantageous. Conventional carbonization of 
biomass is done by slow pyrolysis. This method has been used to generate 
charcoal for centuries. Slow pyrolysis favors high yield of biochar. The 
major limitation of slow pyrolysis is long production time and low poten-
tial of value-added utilization of coproducts, which may require expensive 
and complex purification and fractionation step (Kambo and Dutta, 2015). 
Fast pyrolysis involves heating of biomass for very short residence times, 
at very high heating rates of about ~1000°C s−1 and fast quenching of 
vapors to maximize production of bio-oil. Mostly, the residence time in 
fast pyrolysis is shorter (less than 10 s). The fast pyrolysis process is based 
on kinetically controlled reactions, where vapors are separated rapidly to 
prevent its condensation and carbonization as char and noncondensable 
gases. This is achieved through restricting thermodynamic equilibrium 
by using very high heating rate that causes both drying and volatilization 
steps, spontaneously. Depending on the biomass properties, fast pyrolysis 
of biomass generally produces 60–75% of bio-oil, 15–25% biochar, and 
10–20% of noncondensable gases. The nature of the end product, from 
pyrolysis process, depends on the operating parameters involved and the 
type of biomass (source material). The effect of operating parameters on 
the product yield is an essential feature of the pyrolysis technique, which 
needs to be explored, in order to get insights about the underlying opti-
mization steps. The factors affecting the pyrolysis process and sorption 
properties of biochar such as pyrolysis temperature, feedstock, etc. are 
discussed below. 
5.2.1 TEMPERATURE 
The pyrolysis temperature plays an important role for biochar quality. 
The temperature range varies for the pyrolysis of major biocomponents 
of biomass, that is, hemicellulose (150–350°C), cellulose (275–350°C), 
and lignin (250–500°C), which determines the end products of pyrolysis. 
Productions of condensable volatiles are relatively dominant during pyrol-
ysis of cellulose than hemicellulose, whereas pyrolysis of hemicellulose 
produces relatively more noncondensable gases and less tarry compounds 
than cellulose. During pyrolysis, thermal decomposition of lignin occurs 

 
 
 
128 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
to form aromatic compounds and the char yield is more than cellulose. 
In addition, lignin pyrolysis also contributes to produce bio-oil (approxi-
mately 35%, mostly contains phenol) and approx. 10% of gases. The 
pyrolysis reactions for hemicellulose and lignin are of exothermic nature 
that leads to charring process. Whereas, pyrolysis reactions for cellulose 
are endothermic in nature which results in fast devolatilization reactions 
and contributes less char formation. Overall, the char yield mainly depends 
upon the lignin content of the biomass, which contributes more during 
charring process than cellulose and hemicellulose. The temperature range 
varies for the pyrolysis of major biocomponents of biomass, that is, hemi-
cellulose (150–350°C), cellulose (275–350°C), and lignin (250–500°C), 
which determines the end products of pyrolysis. Production of condens-
able volatiles is relatively dominant during pyrolysis of cellulose than 
hemicellulose, whereas pyrolysis of hemicellulose produces relatively 
more noncondensable gases and less tarry compounds than cellulose. 
During pyrolysis, thermal decomposition of lignin, to form aromatic 
compounds and char, is more than cellulose. In addition, lignin pyrolysis 
also contributes to produce bio-oil (approx. 35%, mostly contains phenol) 
and approximately 10% of gases. 
A number of reactions (primary and secondary) and devolatilization of 
biomass take place during the pyrolysis. At low temperature, the primary 
reactions predominate, and with the increase in the reaction temperature, 
vapor formation increases. However, with an increase in the temperature, 
the incidence of secondary reactions also increases. With increasing 
temperature, more volatiles are formed resulting residual biomass, that 
is, decreased biochar yield. The yield of biochar always decreases as 
temperature and heating rate increases, which is due to the significant 
loss of volatile matter or secondary decomposition of char at a higher 
temperature (Chutia et al., 2014). Secondary decomposition of the char, at 
a higher temperature, produces noncondensable gases, which contribute to 
the increase in gaseous product yield. The increased pyrolysis temperature 
results in low biochar yield, and the mineral ash content becomes more 
concentrated in the biochar. Consequently, biochars produced at higher 
pyrolysis temperatures have more total, soluble and exchangeable base 
cations and carbonates, less oxygenated functional groups, and higher pH 
(Fletcher et al., 2014; Qian et al., 2013; Yuan et al., 2011). Thus, more 
alkaline biochars are produced at higher pyrolysis temperature, which can 
lead to greater precipitation of metal cations (Kim et al., 2013). 

 
129 
Biochar: An Advanced Carbon Material 
Many literatures reported decreased VM content in biochar when 
pyrolyzed at high temperature. This is also associated with rapid loss of 
VM (Keiluweit et al., 2010; Spokas, 2010); as volatile organic compounds 
undergo the formation of organic, cyclic, and aromatic molecules with 
increased pyrolysis temperature. Sun et al. (2014) reported that, increasing 
pyrolysis temperature causes lower O, H, and N contents, whereas 
increases C, P, K, Ca, and Mg contents. Moreover, the increase in the 
pyrolysis temperature and residence time lead to dehydration, deoxida-
tion, and decomposition of volatile materials in biomass. The increase in 
the C content and decrease in the O/H content in biochar lead to a low 
O/C and H/C ratio (Brewer et al., 2014; Cantrell et al., 2012). Thus, 
increasing pyrolysis temperature increases the aromaticity and decreases 
the polarity of the biochar, making the biochar surface less hydrophilic. 
Lower O and H contents have been reported when increasing the pyrolysis 
temperature, due to loss of surface functional groups. The decrease in 
the oxygen-containing functional groups can affect the metal sorption 
capacity of biochars, as reported by Ding et al. (2014), who found high 
Pb adsorption capacity of biochar when produced at low temperature. 
Formation of aromatic functional groups makes the biochar more stable; 
however, these groups are less important in adsorption of pollutants. 
Carboxyl and hydroxyl functional groups are important for adsorption and 
are abundantly available in low temperature biochars. Temperature also 
affects the surface area of biochar and higher temperature always results 
in larger surface area with micropores. Large surface area helps in better 
adsorption of pollutants. 
5.2.2 FEEDSTOCK 
The common feedstocks for biochar preparation are residues/wastes 
generated from forestry and agriculture. These are heterogeneous in 
nature, that is, they show great variations in physical and chemical struc-
tures, even within a single species. The general composition of every 
biomass is cellulose, hemicellulose, and lignin. Due to the differences 
in crystallinity and polymerization, lignin is the most stable component 
in an unaltered biomass, followed by cellulose and hemicellulose (Li 
et al., 2017a, b). Higher lignin content in feedstock commonly leads to 
a higher content of aromatic C in biochar and a slower rate of biochar 

 
130 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
mineralization (Ameloot et al., 2013; Windeatt et al., 2014). Biochars 
from wood are usually more stable than those from grasses, sludge, and 
husks (Cely et al., 2014; Hilscher et al., 2009; Zimmerman, 2010). The 
influence of feedstock type on biochar labile C content (H2O2 oxidizable 
fraction) decreased with increasing pyrolysis temperature (from 350°C to 
650°C), and no significant effect was found in the case of biochar obtained 
at 650°C due to the dominant impact of pyrolysis temperature (Crombie 
and Mašek, 2015). Biochar approaches increasingly similar structures 
(i.e., mostly polyaromatic) with increasing temperature. And at higher 
temperatures, the formation of these structures becomes independent of 
feedstock type (McBeath et al., 2011). However, the structure changing 
rate in response to the increasing pyrolysis temperature varied for different 
biomass (Morales et al., 2015). 
International Biochar Initiative has classified biomass into two types, 
that is, processed and unprocessed feedstocks. Unprocessed feedstocks 
generally correspond to the type of biomasses which are not contaminated 
and/or treated with any sources. Unprocessed feedstocks for biochar 
production comprise unutilized biomass residues or wastes of plant 
kingdom, fungi, and algae, cultivated in an uncontaminated environment. 
The processed feedstocks comprise biomass that were chemically and/ 
or biologically processed such as wastewater sludge, paper pulp sludge, 
sewage sludge, animal/human manures, and compost. IBI emphasized that 
any combination of feedstocks can be used for biochar production, but the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
131 
Biochar: An Advanced Carbon Material 
presence of contaminants should be limited to 2% on dry weight basis. 
Processed feedstocks also include the biomass cultivated in contaminated 
lands such as mining sites, wastewater irrigated sites, and plants used for 
phytoremediation process. 
5.2.3 REACTION TIME 
Reaction time is generally referred to the residence time of the process. 
Sometimes it is of few minutes and sometimes it varies up to hours. 
Biochar quality depends on reaction time, as large reaction time causes 
improved removal of volatile matters and magnification of carbon content. 
In the context of how the product composition, in pyrolysis, is affected 
by the residence time, Zhang et al. (2015) reported that the biochar yield 
decreased with increased residence time, at the same pyrolysis tempera-
ture. Longer reaction time not only increases the carbon content but also 
enhances several additional biochar characteristics such as porosity, surface 
area, and aromaticity. According to Lu et al. (1995), the specific surface 
area and pore area increased with increasing residence time up to 2 h at 
500~900 °C, but they decreased when the residence time exceeded 2 h. 
Specifically, the specific surface area and pore area decreased rapidly when 
the residence time exceeded a time duration of 2 h, at high temperatures. 
Amarasinghe et al. (2016) investigated the effects of different residence 
time (15, 30, 45, and 60 min) on the preparation of biochar from refuse tea, 
including chemical, physical, and morphological properties of the products. 
As presented, temperatures in the range of 450–500°C, and residence time 
between 45 and 60 min showed the highest biochar mass recovery. 
5.2.4 OTHER FACTORS 
The pH of biochar increases with increase in the pyrolysis temperature due 
to the enrichment of ash content (Brewer et al., 2012; Gul et al., 2015; Wind-
eatt et al., 2014). Several key features, such as hydrophobicity, aromaticity, 
and specific surface area have been found to increase, when the pyrolysis 
temperature is increased (>500°C) (Keiluweit et al., 2010). These proper-
ties impart a high degree of effectiveness on to the biochar towards the 
removal of organic pollutants. Biochar is often zwitterionic or dipolar and 
thus comprises both positively- and negatively-charged surfaces (Sohi et 

 
132 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
al., 2009; Tan et al., 2017). The negatively-charged functional groups are 
likely to attract the cations and contribute to increasing cation exchange 
capacity (CEC) of soils; moreover, anion exchange capacity (AEC) is also 
exhibited by O-containing functional groups (oxonium heterocycles) of 
biochar, dependent on the pH value (Brewer et al., 2012; Lawrinenko, 
2014). Low pyrolysis temperature facilitates partial carbonization, which 
facilitates biochar yield with small pore size, low surface area, and high 
O-containing functional groups (Cox et al., 2012; Keiluweit et al., 2010; 
Lu et al., 2014), which increases the efficacy of biochar against potentially 
dangerous inorganic pollutants, due to increased ionic interactions with 
O-containing functional groups. 
5.3 MODIFICATION OF BIOCHAR 
Though biochar has the ability to remove pollutants from different 
mediums, its capacity is usually lower compared to other common biosor-
bents such as activated carbon. In order to enhance the adsorption capacity 
of biochar, various modifications have been used, for example, altering 
the specific surface area, pore structures, and content of functional groups. 
Attempts have been made to improve the surface area, porosity, pHPZC, 
and/or functional groups of biochar. Approaches to modify biochars 
include loading them with additives, such as minerals, reductants, organic 
functional groups, and nanoparticles, along with their activation with alkali 
solution. The commonly used modification methods can be generally 
divided into four types such as impregnation with minerals, nanoscale-
metals assistance, surface oxidation, and surface reduction. 
5.3.1 IMPREGNATION WITH MINERALS 
Minerals have their unique cation exchange capacity, surface charge, and 
mineral structure and are being widely used as low-cost adsorbents for 
the removal of various pollutants (Yao et al., 2014). Therefore, mineral 
impregnation can be used to enhance the functionality of modified biochar. 
Modification of biochar includes loading it with different minerals such as 
hematite (g-Fe2O3), magnetite, zero valent Fe, hydrous Mn oxide, calcium 
oxide, and birnessite (Han et al., 2016; Samsuri et al., 2013; Agrafioti et 

 
 
 
 
 
133 
Biochar: An Advanced Carbon Material 
al., 2014; Van Vinh et al., 2015; Bakshi et al., 2018). The loading can be 
achieved before, during, or after pyrolysis of the feedstock. 
Samsuri et al. (2013) studied the mechanisms of As(V) and As(III) 
sorption by Fe-coated biochars, obtained from empty fruit bunch and rice 
husk. The Fe coating significantly improved the As(III) sorption capacity 
of the biochar from 19 to 31 mg g−1, while As(V) sorption increased from 
5.5–7.1 to 15–16 mg g-1. The possible sorption mechanism was through 
As complexation with Fe 3p on the biochar. However, another method 
has been reported for Cr(VI) and As(V) sorption by biochar modified with 
reductants like zero valent Fe or Na2SO3/FeSO4, which can enhance metal 
reduction and surface complexation with the functional groups (Zhou et 
al., 2014; Pan et al., 2014). Bakshi et al. (2018) used low-cost hematite to 
impregnate low-ash biomass. They synthesized zero valent iron (ZVI)-
biochar complexes by copyrolysis in a simple and effective method as 
compared to the traditional methods. Arsenic was effectively removed 
from drinking water by reduction of As5+ to As3+ and oxidation of Fe0 to 
Fe3+, where As3+ and Fe3+ were found to coexist on the surface of biochar 
in the forms of Fe(As)OOH and FeOOH. The γ-Fe2O3 particles present 
on the surface of biochar play a vital role in the activity of sorption sites, 
through electrostatic interaction (Wang et al., 2019). Agrafioti et al. (2014) 
investigated the production of calcium reagent (Ca2+) and ferric reagent 
(Fe0 and Fe3+) modified biochar made from rice husk and municipal solid 
wastes. All modified biochar materials exhibited improved As5+ and Cr6+ 
removal capacities than their nonimpregnated counterparts. Furthermore, 
modified biochar with Ca2+ and Fe3+ was shown to remove more than 95% 
of As5+ contamination, with the removal of As5+ and Cr6+. The sorption 
is mostly occurring via metal precipitation and electrostatic interactions 
between the modified adsorbents and pollutants. Coating biochar with Fe3+ 
caused a change in the O/C ratios, (O + N)/C ratios, and polarity indices 
[(O + N)/C], which determine the capacity of biochar for As5+ adsorption 
(Samsuri et al., 2013; Son et al., 2018a). Son et al. (2018b) synthesized 
engineered magnetic biochar by pyrolyzing waste marine macroalgae 
doped with iron oxide particles (e.g., magnetite, maghemite), which exhib-
ited a greater capacity for the removal of Cd2+, Cu2+, and Zn2+. Bakshi et 
al. (2018) investigated the main mechanisms for removal of arsenic from 
drinking water by magnetite-modified biochar, which included coprecipi-
tation, surface adsorption, and intraparticle diffusion. Furthermore, Baig 
et al. (2014) reported that Fe3+/Fe2+ modified biochar could possess an 

 
 
134 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
improved affinity for As3+ and As5+, while Al3+-modified biochar showed 
enhanced sorption of As5+ (Qian et al., 2013). Mineral components such as 
montmorillonite, hematite (γ-Fe2O3), magnetite, calcium oxide, hydrous 
manganese oxide, and birnessite have been widely used to impregnate raw 
materials because of their magnetism, high number of adsorption sites, 
and widespread distribution. Biochar mineral composites are commonly 
synthesized by one-step oxygen-limited pyrolysis methods, in tubular or 
muffle furnaces, or they are directly impregnated with mineral compo-
nents and dried under suitable conditions. However, the cost of synthesis 
of biochar–mineral complexes remain a major limitation and optimal 
impregnation ratios deserve further attention. 
5.3.2 NANOSCALE-METALS ASSISTANCE 
Nanometal deposition on biochar improves the efficiency of pollutant 
adsorption by increasing the number of adsorption sites, the specific 
surface area, improving the reaction mechanism, thermal stability of 
biochar, and increasing its resistance to oxidation (Fang et al., 2011). There 
are different methods of preparing nanoscale-metal assisted biochars such 
as reduction/co-precipitation, carbothermal reduction and self-assembly, 
hydrothermal carbonization, and electro-derived/microwave-assisted 
pyrolysis (Fig. 5.1). 
FIGURE 5.1  Preparation of nanoscale-metal assisted biochar. 
Source: Reprinted with permission from Ho et al., 2017. 

 
 
 
 
135 
Biochar: An Advanced Carbon Material 
One of the widely used nanoscale assisted biochar is nanoscale zero-
valent iron (nZVI) modified biochar. It has gained significant attention, 
due to its strong adsorption capacity, affinity to pollutants, and reduc-
ibility. According to the recent reports, biochar can efficiently prevent the 
aggregation of nZVI with larger surface area and adsorption sites. nZVI-
modified biochar has been applied in the removal of heavy metals from 
wastewater (Chen et al., 2012). Although the surface micropore structure 
and porosity of nZVI-modified biochar may be destroyed due to the 
generation or formation of NPs, more functional groups can be generated 
from the catalysis of iron ions. Dong et al. (2017) modified biochar with 
nZVI and treated it with HCl, which increased the contact area between 
nZVI and Cr6+ and the sites for deposition of precipitates as well as 
reduced the agglomeration of nZVI particles. XRD and SEM identified the 
final products formed as FeOOH, Cr2O3, and Cr2FeO4, during the process 
of heavy metals removal by the reduction of Cr6+ to Cr3+. These find-
ings coincided with the results of Zhuang et al. (2014), who synthesized 
nZVI-modified biochar for the removal of Cr6+, and reported a similar Cr 
removal mechanism. Liu et al. (2015) reported that several heavy metals 
can be reduced directly by nZVI-modified biochar, such as Pb2 to Pb0, Cu2+ 
to Cu0, and As5+ to As3+. Lyu et al. (2017) synthesized FeS nanoparticle-
assisted biochar by adding Na2S solution into biochar suspension loaded 
with Fe2+-CMC complexation. FeS and Fe3O4 NPs crystals were present 
on the surface, while the granular-like particles (~256 nm) were observed 
to bond with biochar by C=C, C=O, and Si-O functional groups. Kim 
and Kan (2016) combined TiO2 NPs with biochar for improved electron 
utilization efficiency. The TiO2 granules dispersed well on the surface of 
the biochar in the anatase form. Recent studies have also demonstrated 
that sulfide-modified nanoscale zero-valent iron (S-nZVI) can increase 
electron conductivity, reducibility, and broaden the reactive lifetime of 
nZVI, as S-nZVI exhibits high electronegativity (5.02 V), roughly 1 V 
higher than that of nZVI (Kim et al., 2011; Levard et al., 2013). 
5.3.3 SURFACE OXIDATION 
Yang and Jiang (2014) reported that at certain proportions, mixtures of 
concentrated sulfuric acid and nitric acid solutions produce nitronium ions 
(NO2+), which undergoes electrophilic substitution to the aromatic ring 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
136 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
of biochar, modifying nitro groups. Sodium dithionite (N2S2O4) was used 
as a reducing agent for reduction of nitro groups to amino groups on the 
aromatic rings of biochar. The addition of H3PO4 to biochar at a suitable 
concentration impacts the physicochemical properties such as the degree 
of aromatization, functional groups and pH as well as zeta potential, 
exhibiting optimal adsorption properties due to the large concentration of 
acidic functional groups (Zhou et al., 2017a, 2017b). Song et al. (2014) 
produced KMnO4-modified biochar with much higher adsorption capacity 
for Cu2+, Cb2+, and Cd2+. After modification of the biomass with KMnO4, 
ultrafine MnO x particles were produced on the biochar surface, enhancing 
the interaction of heavy metals with surface oxygen-containing functional 
groups, cation-π, and mineral components. Boudrahem et al. (2011) modi-
fied coffee residue biochar using chemical activation with phosphoric 
acid and zinc chloride. The resulted biochar was porous with high surface 
area and enhanced adsorption capacity for the removal of Pb2+ and Cd2+ 
from aqueous solution. Similarly, Zou et al. (2016) have modified biochar 
using hydrothermally carbonized Cymbopogon schoenanthus (L.) Spreng 
(HLG) material pretreated with different concentrations of H2O2. Biochar 
treated with 20% H2O2 resulted in the maximum amount of Cu2+ uptake. 
Fan et al. (2018) reported the modification of aged wheat straw biochar 
by chemically treating it with HNO –H SO and NaOH–H O systems.
3
2
4 
2
2 
The modification increased surface oxygen-containing functional groups 
in the resultant biochars, especially for carboxyl. A large number of well-
developed mesopores were found in the aged biochar, and the specific 
surface area was found to increase by ~126% for biochar treated with 
NaOH–H2O2. The biochar, with much improved surface modifications, 
showed enhanced cadmium sorption capacity. 
Gas activation methods are also available having the advantage of 
being environmentally friendly, without generating any secondary pollut-
ants. However, the activation temperature and energy requirements are 
relatively high, with lower carbon yield than other methods, limiting the 
widespread application of this method. Except for hydrothermal treatment 
and conventional pyrolysis, the most commonly used biochar modification 
method is the microwave-assisted pyrolysis technique. Microwave heating 
makes only indirect contact with the heated materials, resulting in a rapid 
heating rate and reduced energy consumption, making this method more 
environmentally friendly than conventional heating methods (Mohamed 
et al., 2016). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
137 
Biochar: An Advanced Carbon Material 
5.3.4 SURFACE REDUCTION MODIFICATIONS 
Surface reduction improves the content of basic functional groups (oxygen 
naphthalene and pyrone) on the surface of biochar, especially nitrogenous 
functional groups (i.e., amine, quaternary ammonium, and imidazole). The 
commonly used reducing agents are NH ·H O, Na SO , FeSO , aniline,
3
2
2
3
4
and H2. Wu et al. (2017) produced biochar from coconut and activated it 
by ammonia treatment. The biochar specific surface area (BET) and basic 
functional groups improved after pyrolysis at 300°C. Pan et al. (2014) 
reported peanut straw biochar modification using Na2SO3/FeSO4, which 
resulted with more oxygen containing functional groups on the biochar 
surface, after treatment. 
5.4 APPLICATION OF BIOCHAR 
5.4.1 APPLICATION OF BIOCHAR FOR ORGANIC POLLUTANT 
REMOVAL 
In recent years, organic pollution has become a serious environmental issue 
for both water and soil. For the removal of organic pollutants, a number 
of treatment techniques have been developed, for example, flocculation 
(Guan and Tian, 2017), sedimentation (Wen et al., 2017), light treatment 
(Deng et al., 2017), membrane processes (Sarasidis et al., 2017), chemical 
oxidation (Gayathri et al., 2017), biological oxidation (Chen et al., 2017), 
photocatalytic oxidation/degradation (Janssens et al., 2017), adsorption 
(Huang et al., 2017), and combined methods (Sandoval et al., 2017; Zhou 
et al., 2015). Among these, adsorption is considered the most, because of 
its high removal rate and simple operation. Palma et al. (2016) reported 
carbonaceous material production from avocado skin by assessing the 
carbonization temperature and time effect, and adsorption of acid, alkali, 
and reactive dye contrast, to explore the feasibility of carbonized mate-
rials. Biochar-based nanocomposites also showed high affinity for organic 
pollutants. The concerned organic contaminants include crystal violet (Sun 
et al., 2015), methylene blue (Zhang and Gao, 2013; Inyang et al., 2014), 
phenanthrene (Tang et al., 2015), phenol (Karakoyun et al., 2011; Kong et 
al., 2014), sulfapyridine (Inyang et al., 2015), naphthalene (NAPH), and 
p-nitrotoluene (p-NT) (Chen et al., 2011a). The adsorption ability of these 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
138 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
organic contaminants varied from 2.4 to 278.55 mg g-1, which was found 
to be dependent on the type of nanomaterials, biochar substrates, and the 
target organic contaminants. Maneerung et al. (2016) activated the wood 
gasification biochar via steam, which showed a high adsorption capability 
(189.83 mg g-1) towards rhodamine B. Cattle-manure-derived low temper-
ature biochar (CMB) has been investigated for its efficacy in removing 
methylene blue (MB) from aqueous solution by Zhu et al. (2018b) (Fig. 
5.2). The zero-valent iron and graphitic C3N4 biochar composites were 
employed for the removal of various organic contaminants from aqueous 
solutions, including acid orange 7 (Quan et al., 2014), methylene blue (Pi 
et al., 2015), and methyl orange (Han et al., 2015). 
FIGURE 5.2  Various mechanisms of methylene blue adsorption by biochar. 
Source: Reprinted with permission from Zhu et al., 2018b, Copyright 2018. Royal Society 
of Chemistry 
Biochar has been extensively used towards removing PAHs from 
aqueous solutions as it has high adsorptive capacity. Oleszczuk et al. 
(2012) reported about 57% removal of dissolved PAHs in sewage sludge. 

 
 
 
Biochar: An Advanced Carbon Material 
139 
Similarly, Beesley et al. (2010) used biochar in PAHs contaminated soil 
to remove >50% and > 40% of the HMW and LMW PAHs, respectively. 
They have also reported a reduction in the toxicity effect towards micro-
organisms and plants due to immobilization of soil PAHs. Furthermore, 
Wang et al. (2006) demonstrated that using wood-based biochar, the PAHs 
(pyrene, phenanthrene, and benzo(a)anthracene) removal efficiency of ≥ 
60% from aqueous solution could be achieved. Hale et al. (2011) demon-
strated that particle size of biochar has little or no effect on sorption of 
PAHs. Contrasting results were reported by Zheng et al. (2010) in which 
they showed that smaller particle size provides shorter time duration for 
the sorption equilibrium. Sorption of organic contaminates by biochar is 
governed by the type of feedstock, production processes, sorbate concen-
tration, and the age (Wang et al., 2006). Recent study revealed that wheat 
straw-based biochar produced at 400, 600, and 800°C, could achieve PAH 
removal efficiency of 71.8–98.6%, from soil washing effluent (Li et al., 
2014). Chen et al. (2008) reported maximum adsorption of naphthalene 
(136.8 mg/g) by pine needle biochar produced at 700°C. It has been 
further demonstrated that the nonlinear relationship between production 
temperature and adsorption capacities of biochar could have resulted from 
the destruction of aliphatic alkyl and ester groups at the time of biochar 
production. 
Biochars are considered as good adsorbents, for relatively mobile 
pesticides such as MCPA (2-methyl-4-chlorophenoxyacetic acid) and 
diuron. Adsorption improved when biochar was applied as a distinct 
layer in the adsorption column as opposed to when it is mixed with the 
substrate, as has been reported by Cederlund et al. (2017). Therefore, 
biochar is best used as a defined layer in a constructed wetland. Mandal 
et al. (2017) reported adsorption of atrazine and imidacloprid on different 
chars produced from eucalyptus bark, corn cob, bamboo chips, rice husk, 
and rice straw. Zhao et al. (2013) demonstrated the effect of NH4H2PO4 
treatment of corn stalk biochars for atrazine adsorption and reported 
that the treatment increased the adsorption capacity from 7.8 up to 53.9 
mg g−1 at 25°C. Xiao and Pignatello (2015) reported that the micro- and 
meso-porosity of biochars have strong impact on the adsorption of triazine 
herbicides. Cationic aromatic amines get adsorbed on the biochar surface 
by π–π electron donor–acceptor interactions, which occur between the 
cation of the target molecule and the electron-rich polyaromatic surface 
of the biochar. There are different mechanisms by which biochar adsorb 

 
 
140 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
the organic pollutants, for example, electrostatic interaction, hydrophobic 
effect, hydrogen bonds, and pore-filling. The surface properties of biochar 
are important for the adsorption of organic pollutants. Surface of biochar 
is heterogeneous as the carbonized and non-carbonized fractions coexist. 
These carbonized and non-carbonized phases of biochar generally repre-
sent different adsorption mechanisms. The uptake of organic compounds 
is decided by partition into the non-carbonized organic matter and by 
adsorption onto the carbonized matter (Chen et al., 2008; Cao et al., 2009; 
Zheng et al., 2010). 
5.4.2 APPLICATION OF BIOCHAR FOR INORGANIC POLLUTANT 
REMOVAL 
Biochars promise a low-cost alternative for the adsorption of heavy metal 
pollutants in aqueous media. Compared to activated carbon, biochar is a 
more efficient adsorbent with lower cost for metal removal. Metal sorption 
capacities of biochar are 2.4–147, 19.2–33.4, 0.3–39.1, and 3.0–123 mg 
g-1 for Pb, Ni, Cd, and Cr, respectively (Inyang et al., 2016). Biochars are 
produced from various feedstocks (wood bark, dairy manure, pinewood, 
rice husk, etc.), under different pyrolysis conditions (governed by different 
parameters, such as temperature, rate of heat transfer, and residence time), 
to adsorb metals including arsenic (As), cadmium (Cd), chromium (Cr), 
mercury (Hg), and lead (Pb) from water (Qian et al., 2015; Xie et al., 2015; 
Inyang et al., 2016). Mohan et al. (2007) noted that removal efficiencies 
of lead (Pb) and cadmium (Cd) by biochar, obtained from the bark of an 
oak tree are comparable to that of Calgon F-400, a commercially available 
activated carbon. Chen et al. (2011b) reported that biochar produced from 
wood or corn straw can effectively adsorb copper (Cu) and zinc (Zn) in 
aqueous solutions. Similarly, Kong et al. (2011) reported 75–87% removal 
of mercury from aqueous solution by using soybean stalk biochar. 
The implementation of wide range of techniques for the production 
and optimization of biochar, along with their surface modification, has 
yielded a large pool of highly efficient and low-cost engineered biochars, 
which show excellent adsorption capacities comparable to or even exceed 
some of the commercially available activated carbons. Previous studies 
reported the metal oxide NPs-modified biochars which can be used 
as efficient adsorbents for the removal of heavy metals from polluted 

 
 
 
 
 
 
141 
Biochar: An Advanced Carbon Material 
environments. Such metal oxides are aluminum oxide, iron oxide, nickel 
oxide, manganese oxide, titanium oxide, cerium oxide, and magnesium 
oxide. Jung et al. (2015) synthesized nano-Mg-Al modified biochar by 
electromodification. Mg-modified biochars can also be used to adsorb 
various environmental pollutants such as heavy metals (Zhang et al., 2012; 
Usman et al., 2013), nitrate (Zhang et al., 2014), and phosphate (Dan et al., 
2018). Gao et al. (2018) successfully synthesized sulfide-modified nZVI 
(S-nZVI/BC) biochar and utilized it for Cr6+ removal. The maximum Cr6+ 
removal capacity was observed at a pH value of 2.5. Sulfide-modified 
nZVI improved the electron transfer ability from the Fe0 core to the Cr6+ 
solution, due to the formation of FeS on the surface of nZVI. Alqadami et 
al. (2018) reported excellent adsorption capacities for Pb2+, Cd2+, and Co2+ 
by magnetic nanocomposite biochar. Li et al. (2018) modified rice hulls 
with La(NO3)3 and Ce(NO3)3 to prepare biochar via one-step pyrolysis, 
with oxygen-rich functional groups and lanthanum/cerium oxide providing 
the main active sites for As5+ removal. About five mechanisms have been 
proposed to govern metal sorption by biochar from aqueous solutions, that 
is, complexation, cation exchange, precipitation, electrostatic interactions, 
and chemical reduction. However, the role of each of these mechanisms 
played for each metal varies considerably depending on target metals. 
5.5 CONCLUSIONS 
This chapter summarizes the potential application of biochar for remedia-
tion of various environmental pollutants. Biochar has received significant 
attention during the past decade. However, studies are mostly at a lab 
scale, focusing on sorption of single pollutant from synthetic solutions. In 
natural waters, different pollutants coexist with other pollutants; thereby 
triggering a competition for sorption sites on biochar surface between the 
ions or organic pollutants. Further studies are required for the application 
of biochar in contaminated sites to measure its efficiency. All researches 
about the application of biochar pointed to the same conclusion that 
biochar can be a novel and feasible adsorbent. This is not only because of 
the biochars’ excellent adsorption ability, but also the associated environ-
mental and economic benefits. Despite the use of biochar as adsorbents 
is increasing, a number of research gaps and uncertainties still exist as 
identified in this review. To close these knowledge gaps, more relevant 
investigations are needed in further research. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
142 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
KEYWORDS 
• 
adsorption 
• 
biochar 
• 
composites 
• 
pollution 
• 
remediation 
REFERENCES 
Agrafioti, E.; Kalderis, D.; Diamadopoulos, E. Ca and Fe Modified Biochars as Adsorbents 
of Arsenic and Chromium in Aqueous Solutions. J. Environ. Manag. 2014, 146, 444–450. 
Ahmad, A.; Lokhat, D.; Setapar, S. H. M.; Khatoon, A.; Shahadat, M.; Rafatullah, M. 
Use of Carbon Nanotubes as Sorbents for Heavy Metal Remediation from Wastewater; 
Nanocomposites for Pollution Control: Pan Stanford, 2018; pp 331–357. 
Ahmad, M.; Rajapaksha, A. U.; Lim, J. E.; Zhang, M.; Bolan, N.; Mohan, D.; Vithanage, 
M.; Lee, S. S; Ok, Y. S. Biochar as a Sorbent for Contaminant Management in Soil and 
water: A Review. Chemosphere 2014, 99, 19–33. 
Alqadami, A.; Khan, M.; Otero, M.; Siddiqui, M.; Jeon, B.; Batoo, K. A Magnetic 
Nanocomposite Produced from Camel Bones for an Efficient Adsorption of Toxic 
Metals from Water. J. Clean. Prod. 2018, 178, 293–304. 
Amarasinghe, H. A. H. I.; Gunathilake, S. K.; Karunarathna, A. K. Ascertaining of 
Optimum Pyrolysis Conditions in Producing Refuse Tea Biochar as a Soil Amendment. 
Procedia Food Sci. 2016, 6, 97–102. 
Ameloot, N.; Graber, E. R.; Verheijen, F. G. A.; De Neve, S. Interactions Between Biochar 
Stability and Soil Organisms: Review and Research Needs. Eur. J. Soil Sci. 2013, 64, 
379–390. 
Anastopoulos, I.; Anagnostopoulos, V. A.; Bhatnagar, A.; Mitropoulos, A. C.; Kyzas, G. 
Z. A Review for Chromium Removal by Carbon Nanotubes. Chem. Ecol. 2017, 33, 
572–588. 
Araújo, R.; Castro, A. C. M.; Fiúza, A. The Use of Nanoparticles in Soil and Water 
Remediation Processes. Mater. Today: Proceedings, 2015, 2, 315–320. 
Bakshi, S.; Banik, C.; Rathke, S.; Laird, D. Arsenic Sorption on Zero-Valent Ironbiochar 
Complexes. Water Res. 2018, 137, 153. 
Barrow, C. J. Biochar: Potential for Countering Land Degradation and for Improving 
Agriculture. Appl. Geogr. 2012, 34, 21–28. 
Beesley, L.; Moreno-Jimenez, E.; Gomez-Eyles, J. L. Effects of Biochar and Green Waste 
Compost Amendments on Mobility, Bioavailability and Toxicity of Inorganic and 
Organic Contaminants in a Multi-Element Polluted Soil. Environ. Pollut. 2010, 158, 
2282–2287. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
143 
Biochar: An Advanced Carbon Material 
Boudrahem, F.; Soualah, A.; Aissanibenissad, F. Pb(II) and Cd(II) Removal from Aqueous 
Solutions Using Activated Carbon Developed from Coffee Residue Activated with 
Phosphoric Acid and Zinc Chloride. J. Chem. Eng. Data 2011, 56. 
Cantrell, K. B.; Hunt, P. G.; Uchimiya, M.; Novak, J. M.; Ro, K. S. Impact of Pyrolysis 
Temperature and Manure Source on Physicochemical Characteristics of Biochar. 
Bioresour. Technol., 2012, 107, 419–428. 
Cao, X.; Harris, W. Properties of Dairy-Manure-Derived Biochar Pertinent to Its Potential 
Use in Remediation. Bioresour. Technol. 2010, 101, 5222. 
Cao, X.; Ma, L.; Gao, B.; Harris, W. Dairy-Manure Derived Biochar Effectively Sorbs 
Lead and Atrazine. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2009, 43, 3285–3291. 
Cederlund, H.; Börjesson, E.; Stenström, J. Effects of a Woodbased Biochar on the Leaching 
of Pesticides Chlorpyrifos, Diuron, Glyphosate and MCPA. J. Environ. Manage. 2017, 
191, 28–34. 
Cely, P.; Tarquis, A. M.; Paz-Ferreiro, J.; Méndez, A.; Gascó, G. Factors Driving the 
Carbon Mineralization Priming Effect in a Sandy Loam Soil Amended with Different 
Types of Biochar. Solid Earth 2014, 5, 585–594. 
Chen, B. L.; Chen, Z. M. Sorption of Naphthalene and 1-Naphthol by Biochars of Orange 
Peels with Different Pyrolytic Temperatures. Chemosphere 2009, 76, 127–133. 
Chen, B.; Chen, Z.; Lv, S. A Novel Magnetic Biochar Efficiently Sorbs Organic Pollutants 
and Phosphate. Bioresour. Technol. 2011a, 102, 716–723. 
Chen, X.; Chen, G.; Chen, L.; Chen, Y.; Lehmann, J.; McBride, M. B.; Hay, A. G. 
Adsorption of Copper and Zinc by Biochars Produced from Pyrolysis of Hardwood and 
Corn Straw in Aqueous Solution. Bioresour. Technol. 2011b, 102, 8877–8884. 
Chen, B.; Yuan, M. Enhanced Sorption of Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons by Soil 
Amended with Biochar. J. Soils Sediments 2011, 11, 62–71. 
Chen, B.; Zhou, D.; Zhu, L. Transitional Adsorption and Partition of Nonpolar and 
Polar Aromatic Contaminants by Biochars of Pine Needles with Different Pyrolytic 
Temperatures. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2008, 42, 5137–5143. 
Chen, J.; Qiu, X.; Fang, Z.; Yang, M.; Pokeung, T. Removal Mechanism of Antibiotic 
Metronidazole from Aquatic Solutions by Using Nanoscale Zero-Valent Iron Particles. 
Chem. Eng. J. 2012, 181–182, 113–119. 
Chen, Y.; Lin, J.; Chen, Z. Remediation of Water Contaminated with Diesel Oil Using 
a Coupled Process: Biological Degradation Followed by Heterogeneous Fenton-Like 
Oxidation. Chemosphere 2017, 183, 286–293. 
Cox, J.; Downie, A.; Hickey, M.; Jenkins, A.; Lines-Kelly, R.; McClintock, A.; Van 
Zwieten, L. Biochar in Horticulture: Prospects for the Use of Biochar in Australian 
Horticulture. HAL Report, 2012. ISBN 978-1-74256-349-7. 
Crombie, K.; Mašek, O. Pyrolysis Biochar Systems, Balance Between Bioenergy and 
Carbon Sequestration. GCB Bioenergy 2015, 7, 349–361. 
Dai, Y.; Zhang, N.; Xing, C.; Cui, Q.; Sun, Q. The Adsorption, Regeneration and Engineering 
Applications of Biochar for Removal Organic Pollutants: A Review. Chemosphere 2019. 
Dan, J.; Bei, C.; Yoshimasa, A.; Motoi, M. Removal and Recovery of Phosphate from 
Water by mg-Laden Biochar: Batch and Column Studies. Colloids Surf. A Physicochem. 
Eng. Asp. 2018, 558, 429–437 
Deng, F.; Zhong, F.; Lin, D. C.; Zhao, L. N.; Liu, Y. J., Huang, J. H.; Luo, X. B.; Luo, S. 
L.; Dionysiou, D. D. One-Step Hydrothermal Fabrication of Visible-Light-Responsive 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
144 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
AgInS2/SnIn4S8 Heterojunction for Highly-Efficient Photocatalytic Treatment of 
Organic Pollutants and Real Pharmaceutical Industry Wastewater. Appl. Catal. B. 2017, 
219, 163–172. 
Ding, W.; Dong, X.; Ime, I. M.; Gao, B.; Ma, L. Q. Pyrolytic Temperatures Impact 645 
Lead Sorption Mechanisms by Bagasse Biochars. Chemosphere 2014, 105, 68–74. 
Dong, H.; Deng, J.; Xie, Y.; Cong, Z.; Zhao, J.; Cheng, Y.; Zeng, G. Stabilization of 
Nanoscale Zero-Valent Iron (nZVI) with Modified Biochar for Cr(VI) Removal from 
Aqueous Solution. J. Hazard. Mater. 2017, 332, 79–86. 
Fan, Q.; Sun, J.; Chu, L.; Cui, L.; Quan, G.; Yan, J.; Hussain, Q.; Iqbal, M. Effects of 
Chemical Oxidation on Surface Oxygen-Containing Functional Groups and Adsorption 
Behavior of Biochar. Chemosphere 2018, 207, 33–40. 
Fang, Z.; Qiu, X.; Huang, R.; Qiu, X.; Li, M. Removal of Chromium in Electroplating 
Wastewater by Nanoscale Zero-Valent Metal with Synergistic Effect of Reduction and 
Immobilization. Desalination 2011, 280, 224–231. 
Gao, J.; Yang, Li.; Liu, Y.; Shao, F.; Liao, Q.; Shang, J. Scavenging of Cr(VI) from Aqueous 
Solutions by Sulfide-Modified Nanoscale Zero-Valent Iron Supported by Biochar. J. 
Taiwan Inst. Chem. Eng. 2018, 91, 449–456. 
Gayathri, P. V.; Yesodharan, S.; Yesodharan, E. P. Purification of Water Contaminated with 
Traces of Rhodamine B Dye by Microwave-Assisted, Oxidant-Induced and Zinc Oxide 
Catalyzed Advanced Oxidation Process. Desalin. Water Treat. 2017, 85, 161–174. 
Guan, W.; Tian, S. C. The Modified Chitosan for Dyeing Wastewater Treatment via 
Adsorption and Flocculation. Sci. Adv. Mater. 2017, 9, 1603–1609. 
Hale, S. E.; Hanley, K.; Lehmann, J.; Zimmerman, A.; Cornelissen, G. Effects of Chemical, 
Biological, and Physical Aging as Well as Soil Addition on the Sorption of Pyrene to 
Activated Carbon and Biochar. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2011, 45, 10445–10453. 
Han, L.; Xue, S.; Zhao, S.; Yan, J.; Qian, L.; Chen, M. Biochar Supported Nanoscale Iron 
Particles for the Efficient Removal of Methyl Orange Dye in Aqueous Solutions. PLoS 
One 2015, 10, e0132067. 
Han, Y. T.; Cao, X.; Ouyang, X.; Sohi, S. P.; Chen, J. W. Sorption Kinetics of Magnetic 
Biochar Derived from Peanut Hull on Removal of Cr (VI) from Aqueous Solution: 
Effects of Production Conditions and Particle Size. Chemosphere 2016, 145, 336–341. 
Hilscher, A.; Heister, K.; Siewert, C.; Knicker, H. Mineralisation and Structural Changes 
During the Initial Phase of Microbial Degradation of Pyrogenic Plant Residues in Soil. 
Org. Geochem. 2009, 40, 332–342. 
Ho, S. H.; Zhu, S.; Chang, J. S. Recent Advances in Nanoscale-Metal Assisted Biochar 
Derived from Waste Biomass Used for Heavy Metals Removal. Bioresour. Technol. 
2017, 246, 123–134. 
Huang, Z. H.; Li, Y. Z.; Chen, W. J.; Shi, J. H.; Zhang, N.; Wang, X. J.; Li, Z.; Gao, L. Z.; 
Zhang, Y. X. Modified Bentonite Adsorption of Organic Pollutants of Dye Wastewater. 
Mater. Chem. Phys. 2017, 266–276. 
Inyang, M. I.; Gao, B.; Yao, Y.; Xue, Y.; Zimmerman, A.; Mosa, A.; Pullammanappallil, P.; 
Ok, Y. S.; Cao, X. A Review of Biochar as a Low-Cost Adsorbent for Aqueous Heavy 
Metal Removal. Crit. Rev. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2016, 46, 406–433. 
Inyang, M.; Gao, B.; Zimmerman, A.; Zhang, M.; Chen, H. Synthesis, Characterization, 
and Dye Sorption Ability of Carbon Nanotube–Biochar Nanocomposites. Chem. Eng. J. 
2014, 236, 39–46. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
145 
Biochar: An Advanced Carbon Material 
Inyang, M.; Gao, B.; Zimmerman, A.; Zhou, Y.; Cao, X. Sorption and Cosorption of Lead 
and Sulfapyridine on Carbon Nanotube-Modified Biochars. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 
2015, 22, 1868–1876. 
Janssens, R.; Mandal, M. K.; Dubey, K. K.; Luis, P. Slurry Photocatalytic Membrane 
Reactor Technology for Removal of Pharmaceutical Compounds from Wastewater: 
Towards Cytostatic Drug Elimination. Sci. Total. Environ. 2017, 599–600, 612–626. 
Jiang, T. Y.; Jiang, J.; Xu, R. K.; Li, Z. Adsorption of Pb(II) on Variable Charge Soils 
Amended with Rice-Straw Derived Biochar. Chemosphere 2012, 89, 249–256. 
Jung, K.; Hwang, M.; Jeong, T.; Ahn, K. A Novel Approach for Preparation of Modified 
Biochar Derived from Marine Macroalgae: Dual Purpose Electro-Modification for 
Improvement of Surface Area and Metal Impregnation. Bioresour. Technol. 2015, 191, 
342–345. 
Kailash, D.; Dharmendra, P.; Anil, V. Low Cost Adsorbents for Heavy Metal Removal 
from Wastewater: A Review. Res. J. Chem. Environ. 2010, 14, 100–103. 
Karakoyun, N.; Kubilay, S.; Aktas, N.; Turhan, O.; Kasimoglu, M.; Yilmaz, S.; Sahiner, 
N. Hydrogel-Biochar Composites for Effective Organic Contaminant Removal from 
Aqueous Media. Desalination 2011, 280, 319–325. 
Karnib, M.; Kabbani, A.; Holail, H.; Olama, Z. Heavy Metals Removal Using Activated 
Carbon, Silica and Silica Activated Carbon Composite. Energy Procedia 2014, 50, 
113–120. 
Kemp, K. C.; Seema, H.; Saleh, M.; Le, N. H.; Mahesh, K.; Chandra, V.; Kim, K. S. 
Environmental Applications Using Graphene Composites: Water Remediation and Gas 
Adsorption. Nanoscale 2013, 5, 3149–3171. 
Khan, F. I.; Husain, T.; Hejazi, R. An Overview and Analysis of Site Remediation 
Technologies. J. Environ. Manage. 2004, 71, 95–122. 
Kim, E.; Kim, J.; Azad, A.; Chang, Y. Facile Synthesis and Characterization of Fe/Fes 
Nanoparticles for Environmental Applications. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2011, 3, 
1457–1462. 
Kim, J. R.; Kan, E. Heterogeneous Photocatalytic Degradation of Sulfamethoxazole in 
Water Using a Biochar-Supported TiO2 Photocatalyst. J. Environ. Manage. 2016, 180, 
94–101. 
Kim, W. K.; Shim, T.; Kim, Y. S.; Hyun, S.; Ryu, C.; Park, Y. K.; Jung, J. Characterization 
of Cadmium Removal from Aqueous Solution by Biochar Produced from a Giant 
Miscanthus at Different Pyrolytic Temperatures. Bioresour. Technol. 2013, 138, 266–270. 
Kong, H.; He, J.; Gao, Y.; Wu, H.; Zhu, X. Cosorption of Phenanthrene and Mercury(II) 
from Aqueous Solution by Soybean Stalk-Based Biochar. J. Agric. Food Chem. 2011, 
59, 12116–12123. 
Kong, L.; Xiong, Y.; Sun, L.; Tian, S.; Xu, X.; Zhao, C.; Luo, R.; Yang, X.; Shih, K.; Liu, 
H. Sorption Performance and Mechanism of a Sludge-Derived Char As Porous Carbon-
Based Hybrid Adsorbent for Benzene Derivatives in Aqueous Solution. J. Hazard. 
Mater. 2014, 274, 205–211 
Kumar, B.; Gaur, R.; Goel, G.; Mishra, M.; Singh, S. K.; Prakash, D.; Sharma, C. S. 
Residues of Pesticides and Herbicides in Soils from Agriculture Areas of Delhi Region, 
India. Electron. J. Environm. Agric. Food Chem. 2012, 11, 328–338. 
Kumpiene, J.; Lagerkvist, A.; Maurice, C. Stabilization of As, Cr, Cu, Pb and Zn in Soil 
Using Amendments—A Review. Waste Manage. 2008, 28, 215–225. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
146 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
Lehmann, J.; Joseph, S. Biochar for Environmental Management: Science and Technology; 
Earthscan Ltd.: London, 2009. 
Levard, C.; Hotze, E.; Colman, B.; Dale, A.; Truong, L.; Yang, X.; Bone, A. J.; Brown, 
G. E.; Tanguay, R. L.; Di Giulio, R. T.; Bernhardt, E. S.; Meyer, J. N.; Wiesner, M. R.; 
Lowry, G. V. Sulfidation of Silver Nanoparticles: Natural Antidote to Their Toxicity. 
Environ. Sci. Technol. 2013, 47, 13440–13448 
Li, H.; Dong, X.; da Silva, E. B.; de Oliveira, L. M.; Chen, Y.; Ma, L. Q. Mechanisms of 
Metal Sorption by Biochars: Biochar Characteristics and Modifications. Chemosphere 
2017b, 178, 466–478. 
Li, H.; Qu, R.; Li, C.; Guo, W.; Han, X.; He, F.; Ma, Y.; Xing, B. Selective Removal of 
Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons (PAHs) from Soil Washing Effluents Using Biochars 
Produced at Different Pyrolytic Temperatures. Bioresour. Technol. 2014, 163, 193–198. 
Li, J.; Li, Y.; Wu, M.; Zhang, Z.; Lü, J. Effectiveness of Low-Temperature Biochar in 
Controlling the Release and Leaching of Herbicides in Soil. Plant Soil, 2013, 370, 
333–344. 
Li, J.; Yan-Qun, Z.; Gang, L.; Guo-Xin, S. Mechanism of as (V) Removal from Water by 
Lanthanum and Cerium Modified Biochars. Huan Jing Ke Xue 2018, 39, 2211. 
Li, X.; Liu, L.; Wang, X.; Ok, Y. S.; Elliott, J. A.; Chang, S. X.; Chung, H. J. Flexible 
and Self-Healing Aqueous Supercapacitors for Low Temperature Applications: 
Polyampholyte Gel Electrolytes with Biochar Electrodes. Sci. Rep. 2017a, 7. 
Liu, M.; Wang, Y.; Chen, L.; Zhang, Y.; Lin, Z. Mg(OH)2 Supported Nanoscale Zero 
Valent Iron Enhancing the Removal of Pb(II) from Aqueous Solution. ACS Appl. Mater. 
Interfaces 2015, 7, 7961–7969 
Lu, G. Q.; Low, J. C. F.; Liu, C. Y.; Lua, A. C. Surface Area Development of Sewage 
Sludge During Pyrolysis. Fuel 1995, 74, 344–348. 
Lu, K.; Yang, X.; Shen, J.; Robinson, B.; Huang, H.; Liu, D.; Wang, H. Effect of Bamboo 
and Rice Straw Biochars on the Bioavailability of Cd, Cu, Pb and Zn to Sedum 
plumbizincicola. Agr. Ecosys. Environ. 2014, 191, 124–132. 
Lyu, H.; Tang, J.; Huang, Y.; Gai, L.; Zeng, E. Y.; Liber, K.; Gong, Y. Removal of Hexavalent 
Chromium from Aqueous Solutions by a Novel Biochar Supported Nanoscale Iron 
Sulfide Composite. Chem. Eng. J. 2017, 322, 516–524. 
Ma, H. W.; Hung, M. L.; Chen, P. C. A Systemic Health Risk Assessment for the Chromium 
Cycle in Taiwan. Environ. Int., 2007, 33, 206–218. 
Mandal, A.; Singh, N.; Purakayastha, T. J. Characterization of Pesticide Sorption Behaviour 
of Slow Pyrolysis Biochars as Low Cost Adsorbent for Atrazine and Imidacloprid 
Removal. Sci. Total Environ. 2017, 577, 376–385. 
Maneerung, T.; Liew, J.; Dai, Y.; Kawi, S.; Chong, C.; Wang, C. H. Activated Carbon 
Derived from Carbon Residue from Biomass Gasification and Its Application for Dye 
Adsorption: Kinetics, Isotherms and Thermodynamic Studies. Bioresour. Technol. 2016, 
200, 350–359. 
McBeath, A. V.; Smernik, R. J.; Schneider, M. P. W.; Schmidt, M. W. I.; Plant, E. L. 
Determination of the Aromaticity and the Degree of Aromatic Condensation of a 
Thermosequence of Wood Charcoal Using NMR. Org. Geochem. 2011, 42, 1194–1202. 
Mitra, S.; Sarkar, A.; Sen, S. Removal of Chromium from Industrial Effluents Using 
Nanotechnology: A Review. Nanotechnol. Environ. Eng., 2017, 2, 11. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
147 
Biochar: An Advanced Carbon Material 
Mohamed, B. A.; Kim, C. S.; Ellis, N.; Bi, X. Microwave-Assisted Catalytic Pyrolysis of 
Switchgrass for Improving Bio-Oil and Biochar Properties. Bioresour. Technol. 2016, 
201, 121–132. 
Mohan, D.; Pittman Jr, C. U.; Bricka, M.; Smith, F.; Yancey, B.; Mohammad, J.; Steele, 
P. H.; Alexandre-Franco, M. F.; Gómez-Serrano, V.; Gong, H. Sorption of Arsenic, 
Cadmium, and Lead by Chars Produced from Fast Pyrolysis of Wood and Bark During 
Bio-Oil Production. J. Colloid Interface Sci. 2007, 310, 57–73. 
Mohan, D.; Sarswat, A.; Ok, Y. S.; Pittman Jr, C. U. Organic and Inorganic Contaminants 
Removal from Water With Biochar, a Renewable, Low Cost and Sustainable 
Adsorbent—A Critical Review. Bioresour. Technol. 2014, 160, 191–202. 
Oleszczuk, P.; Hale, S. E.; Lehmann, J.; Cornelissen, G. Activated Carbon and Biochar 
Amendments Decrease Pore-Water Concentrations of Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons 
(PAHs) in Sewage Sludge. Bioresour. Technol. 2012, 111, 84–91. 
Pan, J.; Jiang, J.; Xu, R. Removal of Cr(VI) from Aqueous Solutions by Na2SO3/FeSO4 
Combined with Peanut Straw Biochar. Chemosphere 2014, 101, 71–76. 
Panwar, N. L.; Pawar, A.; Salvi, B. L. Comprehensive Review on Production and Utilization 
of Biochar. SN Appl. Sci. 2019, 1, 168. 
Pi, L.; Jiang, R.; Zhou, W.; Zhu, H.; Xiao, W.; Wang, D.; Mao, X. G-C3N4 Modified Biochar 
as an Adsorptive and Photocatalytic Material for Decontamination of Aqueous Organic 
Pollutants. Appl. Surf. Sci. 2015, 358, 231–239. 
Prasad, M. N. V.; Nakbanpote, W. Integrated Management of Mine Waste Using 
Biogeotechnologies Focusing Thai Mines. In Environmental Sustainability; Springer: 
New Delhi, 2015; pp 229–249. 
Qian, K. Z.; Kumar, A.; Zhang, H. L.; Bellmer, D.; Huhnke, R. Recent Advances in 
Utilization of Biochar. Renew. Sustain. Energy. Rev. 2015, 42, 1055–1064. 
Qian, W.; Zhao, A. Z.; Xu, R. K. Sorption of As(V) by aluminum-Modified Crop 
Strawderived Biochars. Water Air Soil Pollut. 2013, 224, 1610. 
Quan, G.; Sun, W.; Yan, J.; Lan, Y. Nanoscale Zero-Valent Iron Supported on Biochar: 
Characterization and Reactivity for Degradation of Acid Orange 7 from Aqueous 
Solution. Water Air Soil Pollut. 2014, 225, 1–10. 
Samsuri, A. W.; Sadegh-Zadeh, F.; Seh-Bardan, B. J. Adsorption of As(III) and As(V) by 
Fe Coated Biochars and Biochars Produced from Empty Fruit Bunch And Rice Husk. J. 
Environ. Chem. Eng. 2013, 1, 981–988. 
Sandoval, A.; Hernández-Ventura, C.; Klimova, T. E. Titanate Nanotubes for Removal 
of Methylene Blue Dye by Combined Adsorption and Photocatalysis. Fuel 2017, 198, 
22–30. 
Santín, C.; Doerr, S. H.; Merino, A.; Bucheli, T. D.; Bryant, R.; Ascough, P.; Gao, X.; 
Masiello, C. A. Carbon Sequestration Potential and Physicochemical Properties Differ 
Between Wildfire Charcoals and Slow-Pyrolysis Biochars. Sci. Rep. 2017, 7, 11233. 
Sarasidis, V. C.; Plakas, K. V.; Karabelas, A. J. Novel Water-Purification Hybrid Processes 
Involving In Situ Regenerated Activated Carbon, Membrane Separation and Advanced 
Oxidation. Chem. Eng. J. 2017, 328, 1153–1163. 
Son, E. B.; Poo, K. M.; Chang, J. S.; Chae, K. J. Heavy Metal Removal from Aqueous 
Solutions Using Engineered Magnetic Biochars Derived from Waste Marine Macro-
Algal Biomass. Sci. Total Environ. 2018a, 615, 161. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
148 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
Son, E. B.; Poo, K. M.; Mohamed, H. O.; Choi, Y. J.; Cho, W. C.; Chae, K. J. A Novel 
Approach to Developing a Reusable Marine Macro-Algae Adsorbent with Chitosan 
and Ferric Oxide for Simultaneous Efficient Heavy Metal Removal and Easy Magnetic 
Separation. Bioresour. Technol. 2018b, 259. 
Song, Z.; Lian, F.; Yu, Z.; Zhu, L.; Xing, B.; Qiu, W. Synthesis and Characterization of 
a Novel MnOx -Loaded Biochar and Its Adsorption Properties for Cu2+ in Aqueous 
Solution. Chem. Eng. J. 2014, 242, 36–42. 
Sun, P.; Hui, C.; Azim Khan, R.; Du, J.; Zhang, Q.; Zhao, Y. H. Efficient Removal of 
Crystal Violet Using Fe3O4-Coated Biochar: The Role of the Fe3O4 Nanoparticles and 
Modeling Study Their Adsorption Behavior. Sci. Rep. 2015, 5, 12638. 
Tan, X.; Liu, Y.; Zeng, G.; Wang, X.; Hu, X.; Gu, Y.; Yang, Z. Application of Biochar for 
the Removal of Pollutants from Aqueous Solutions. Chemosphere 2015, 125, 70–85. 
Tang, J.; Lv, H.; Gong, Y.; Huang, Y. Preparation and Characterization of a Novel Graphene/ 
Biochar Composite for Aqueous Phenanthrene and Mercury Removal. Bioresour. 
Technol. 2015, 196, 355–363. 
Testiati, E.; Parinet, J.; Massiani, C.; Laffont-Schwob, I.; Rabier, J.; Pfeifer, H. R.; Prudent, 
P. Trace Metal and Metalloid Contamination Levels in Soils and in Two Native Plant 
Species of a Former Industrial Site: Evaluation of the Phytostabilization Potential. J. 
Hazard. Mater. 2013, 248, 131–141. 
Usman, A. R. A.; Sallam, A. S.; Alomran, A.; Elnaggar, A. H.; Alenazi, K. K. H.; Nadeem, 
M.; Alwabel, M. I. Chemically Modified Biochar Produced from Conocarpus Wastes: 
An Efficient Sorbent for Fe(II) Removal from Acidic Aqueous Solutions. Adsorpt. Sci. 
Technol. 2013, 31, 625–640. 
Van Vinh, N.; Zafar, M.; Behera, S. K.; Park, H. S. Arsenic (III) Removal from Aqueous 
Solution by Raw and Zinc Loaded Pine Cone Biochar: Equilibrium, Kinetics, and 
Thermodynamics Studies. Int. J. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2015, 12, 1283–1294. 
Vane, C. H.; Kim, A. W.; Beriro, D. J.; Cave, M. R.; Knights, K.; Moss-Hayes, V.; Nathanail, 
P. C. Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons (PAH) and Polychlorinated Biphenyls (PCB) in 
Urban Soils of Greater London, UK. Appl. Geochem. 2014, 51, 303–314. 
Wang, L.; Wang, Y.; Ma, F.; Tankpa, V.; Bai, S.; Guo, X.; Wang, X. Mechanisms and 
Reutilization of Modified Biochar Used for Removal of Heavy Metals from Wastewater: 
A Review. Sci. Total Environ. 2019, 668, 1298–1309. 
Wang, X. L.; Sato, T.; Xing, B. S. Competitive Sorption of Pyrene on Wood Chars. Environ. 
Sci. Technol. 2006, 40, 3267–3272. 
Wen, C.; Zheng, Z. Q.; Xu, X. Y. Process Optimization of Coagulation in Pretreatment of 
Seed Coating Wastewater. J. Tianjin Polytech. Univ. 2017, 36, 64–67. 
Windeatt, J. H.; Ross, A. B.; Williams, P. T.; Forster, P. M.; Nahil, M. A.; Singh, S. 
Characteristics of Biochars from Crop Residues: Potential for Carbon Sequestration and 
Soil Amendment. J. Environ. Manage. 2014, 146, 189–197. 
Wu,W.; Li, J.; Tian, L.; Müller, K.; Niazi, N. K.; Xin, C.; Li, J. Unraveling Sorption of Lead 
in Aqueous Solutions by Chemically Modified Biochar Derived from Coconut Fiber: A 
Microscopic and Spectroscopic Investigation. Sci. Total Environ. 2017, 576, 766–774. 
Xiao, F.; Pignatello, J. J. π+-π Interactions Between (Hetero)Aromatic Amine Cations and 
the Graphitic Surfaces of Pyrogenic Carbonaceous Materials. Environ. Sci. Technol. 
2015, 49, 906–914. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
149 
Biochar: An Advanced Carbon Material 
Xie, T.; Reddy, K.; Wang, C. W.; Yargicoglu, E.; Spokas, K. Characteristics and Applications 
of Biochar for Environmental Remediation: A Review. Crit. Rev. Environ. Sci. Technol. 
2015, 45, 939–969. 
Yang, G. X.; Jiang, H. Amino modification of biochar for enhanced adsorption of copper 
ions from synthetic wastewater. Water Res. 2014, 48, 396–405 
Yao, Y.; Gao, B.; Fang, J.; Zhang, M.; Chen, H.; Zhou, Y.; Creamer, A.; Sun, Y.; Yang, L. 
Characterization and Environmental Applications of Clay–Biochar Composites. Chem. 
Eng. J. 2014, 242, 136–143. 
Yuan, P.; Wang, J.; Pan, Y.; Shen, B.; Wu, C. Review of Biochar for the Management of 
Contaminated Soil: Preparation, Application and Prospect. Sci. Total Environ. 2018. 
Zeng, Z. W.; Tan, X. F.; Liu, Y. G.; Tian, S. R.; Zeng, G. M.; Jiang, L. H.; Liu, J.; Liu, 
N.; Yin, Z. H. Comprehensive Adsorption Studies of Doxycycline and Ciprofloxacin 
Antibiotics by Biochars Prepared at Different Temperatures. Front. Chem. 2018, 6, 
00080. 
Zhang, J.; Liu, J.; Liu, R. Effects of Pyrolysis Temperature and Heating Time on Biochar 
Obtained from the Pyrolysis of Straw and Lignosulfonate. Bioresour. Technol. 2015, 
176, 288–291. 
Zhang, M.; Gao, B. Removal of Arsenic, Methylene Blue, and Phosphate by Biochar/ 
A1OOH Nanocomposite. Chem. Eng. J. 2013, 226, 286–292 
Zhang, M.; Gao, B.; Yao, Y.; Xue, Y.; Inyang, M. Synthesis of Porous MgO-Biochar 
Nanocomposites for Removal of Phosphate and Nitrate from Aqueous Solutions. Chem. 
Eng. J. 2012, 21026–21032. 
Zhang, P.; Sun, H.; Min, L.; Ren, C. Biochars Change the Sorption and Degradation of 
Thiacloprid in Soil: Insights Into Chemical and Biological Mechanisms. Environ. Pollut. 
2018, 236, 158–167. 
Zhang, X.; Zhang, S.; Yang, H.; Feng, Y.; Chen, Y.; Wang, X.; Chen, H. Nitrogen Enriched 
Biochar Modified by High Temperature CO2–Ammonia Treatment: Characterization and 
Adsorption of CO2. Chem. Eng. J. 2014, 257, 20–27. 
Zhao, B.; Xu, R.; Ma, F.; Li, Y.; Wang, L. Effects of Biochars Derived from Chicken 
Manure and Rape Straw on Speciation and Phytoavailability of Cd to Maize in Artificially 
Contaminated Loess Soil. J. Environ. Manag. 2016, 184, 569–574. 
Zhao, X.; Ouyang, W.; Hao, F.; Lin, C.; Wang, F.; Han, S.; Geng, X. Properties Comparison 
of Biochars from Corn Straw with Different Pretreatment and Sorption Behaviour of 
Atrazine. Bioresour. Technol. 2013, 147, 338–344. 
Zheng, W.; Guo, M.; Chow, T.; Bennett, D. N.; Rajagopalan, N. Sorption Properties of 
Greenwaste Biochar for Two Triazine Pesticides. J. Hazard. Mater. 2010, 181, 121–126. 
Zhou, N.; Chen, H.; Feng, Q.; Yao, D.; Chen, H.; Wang, H.; Lu, X. Effect of Phosphoric 
Acid on the Surface Properties and Pb(II) Adsorption Mechanisms of Hydrochars 
Prepared from Fresh Banana Peels. J. Clean. Prod. 2017a, 165. 
Zhou, N.; Chen, H.; Xi, J.; Yao, D.; Zhou, Z.; Tian, Y.; Lu, X. Biochars with Excellent 
Pb(II) Adsorption Property Produced from Fresh and Dehydrated Banana Peels via 
Hydrothermal Carbonization. Bioresour. Technol. 2017b, 232, 204–210. 
Zhou, Q. X.; Song, Y. F. Remediation of Contaminated Soils: Principles and Methods. 
Science 2004, 1–489. 
Zhou, Y.; Zhang, L.; Cheng, Z. J. Removal of Organic Pollutants from Aqueous Solution 
Using 1198 Agricultural Wastes: A Review. J. Mol. Liq. 2015, 212, 739–762. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
150 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
Zhu, L, Lei H, Zhang Y, Zhang X, Bu Q, Wei Y, et al. (2018a). A Review of Biochar 
Derived from Pyrolysis and Its Application in Biofuel Production. SF J. Mater. Chem 
Eng. 2018a, 1 (1), 1007. 
Zhu, Y.; Yi, B.; Yuan, Q.; Wu, Y.; Wang, M.; Yan, S. Removal of Methylene Blue from 
Aqueous Solution by Cattle Manure-Derived Low Temperature Biochar. RSC Adv. 
2018b, 8, 19917–19929. 
Zhu, Y. G.; Shaw, G. Soil Contamination with Radionuclides and Potential Remediation. 
Chemosphere 2000, 41, 121–128. 
Zhuang, L.; Li, Q.; Chen, J.; Ma, B.; Chen, S. Carbothermal Preparation of Porous Carbon-
Encapsulated Iron Composite for the Removal of Trace Hexavalent Chromium. Chem. 
Eng. J. 2014, 253, 24–33. 
Zou, Y.; Wang, X.; Khan, A.; Wang, P.; Liu, Y.; Alsaedi, A.; Wang, X. Environmental 
Remediation and Application of Nanoscale Zero-Valent Iron and Its Composites for the 
Removal of Heavy Metal Ions: A Review. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2016, 50, 7290–7304. 

New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons. Aneeya Kumar Samantara & Satyajit Ratha (Eds.)
© 2024 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
CHAPTER 6  
Preparation and Properties of Activated 
Carbon 
MIHIR RANJAN SAHOO 
School of Basic Sciences, Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar, 
India 
ABSTRACT 
Activated carbon or activated charcoal (AC) is a porous and nongraphitiz-
able form of carbon and considered as an efficient adsorbent due to its 
high porosity and large surface area per unit volume. AC can be prepared 
from various carbon-rich natural and synthetic precursors, agricultural 
byproducts, food wastes, domestic wastes, petrochemical products, and 
fruit shells through a two-stage process, that is, (i) carbonization of carbo-
naceous precursors and (ii) activation of the carbonized precursors by 
physically or chemically. Depending upon the starting raw materials and 
product selectivity, the selective activation process is required. Based on 
the physical characteristics, shape, and size of particles, activated carbons 
are broadly classified into various categories which have specific applica-
tions. ACs can adsorb a wide range of chemicals, organic compounds, and 
heavy metal ions and can be operated at a wide range of temperatures and 
humidity conditions. Specific surface area, pore size distributions, hard-
ness, and iodine index are the major physical properties which qualitatively 
measure the adsorption efficiency of AC. Activated carbons show a wide 
range of applications such as water or air purifications, metal extractions, 
catalysis, gas storage, trapping heavy metal ions from wastewater, odor 
removal, gas storage, and many other industrial and medical applications. 

 
 
 
152 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
6.1 INTRODUCTION 
Carbon and its various allotropes have significantly influenced human 
life in various perspectives since many centuries. After hydrogen, it has 
the most number of compounds than any other element. The four valence 
electrons of the carbon atom are responsible for large number of interac-
tions of carbon with the external world. The 2s and 2p orbitals of carbon 
atom intermix with each other to form various new hybrid orbitals which 
have different shapes and energies than the individual orbitals. This makes 
carbon a suitable candidate for forming bonds with other atoms. There are 
three types of hybrid orbitals seen in carbon atoms such as sp, sp2, and 
sp3 depending upon the number of 2p orbitals participating, resulting in 
the formation of different allotropes under different physical conditions. 
The cause of different possible hybridizations may be attributed to some 
interesting atomic features of carbon. First, from atomic configuration of 
C, it is observed that the energy levels of s and p-orbitals are neither too 
far nor too close to each other, which makes carbon-based compounds as 
potential candidates for various applications. Second, there is a chance 
that each electron may occupy any one of the four s–p hybrid states, as the 
number of available orbitals is same as the number of electrons. Another 
important factor is that the absence of core p-electrons in carbon leads to 
a stable planar structure and short bond lengths, while making covalent 
bonding with other C atoms. Hence, the allotropes formed may resemble 
each other chemically but their physical properties are quite different. The 
well-known allotropes, graphite and diamond, are formed because of sp2 
and sp3 hybridizations in which C atoms form bond with other two and 
three carbon atoms, respectively. Other allotropes of carbon formed by 
aggregating C atoms include graphene (Geim, 2009), carbon nanotube 
(Dresselhaus et al., 1995), and activated carbons (AC) that are well known 
for their unique characteristics, suitable for wide range of applications. In 
this text, we will focus primarily on activated carbons, their classification, 
process of activation, and their use as catalysts in various reactions. 
Basically, a pore or a space with size compared to the dimensions of a 
molecule and surrounded by carbon atoms is termed as activated carbon 
(AC), or popularly known as activated charcoal. The porous solid struc-
tures are usually taken as good adsorbents because the pore walls act as 
active sites for the attachment of various atoms and molecules. Activated 
carbon (AC), zeolites, activated alumina, silica gel, and synthetic resins 

 
153 
Preparation and Properties of Activated Carbon 
are few examples of such porous materials, which are widely used as 
adsorbents. Among these adsorbents, AC is regarded as the most efficient 
due to its versatile applications in many fields, especially in removing 
pollutants (Mohammad-Khah and Ansari, 2009). The presence of highly 
hydrophobic graphene layers and hydrophilic functional groups on the 
surface of the activated carbon makes it a more promising material for 
adsorption and catalytic applications (Jia and Demopoulos, 2003; Solei-
mani and Kaghazchi, 2008). The pollutant particles (both gaseous and 
liquid) from local environment can be easily captured by the AC due to its 
high surface area and can also be used for the prevention of air and water 
pollutions (Mohammad-Khah and Ansari, 2009). AC can be used as an 
effective purifying agent for many water supplies (drinkable water and 
industrial wastewater) containing various toxins, contaminants, organic 
and inorganic compounds, and microbial and bio-refractive materials like 
heavy metal ions, chlorinated hydrocarbons, phenols, insecticides, herbi-
cides, and so on (Ansari and Sadegh, 2007; Attia et al., 2010; Boopathy 
et al., 2013; Eba et al., 2011; El-Shafey et al., 2002; Mohamed et al., 
2011; Mohan et al., 2005; Onundi et al., 2010). Apart from purification 
of water and air (filters out contaminants/pollutants like volatile organic 
compounds, dust, smokes, etc. and maintains a pleasant odor), AC can also 
be considered as an excellent catalyst, which has high adsorption potential 
and plays a significant role in several industrial uses like power plant and 
landfill gas emission, recovery of precious metals like gold from ore in 
carbon pulp, simple decolorization, hydrometallurgy, treatment of various 
liquids like sugar solutions, vegetable oils, glucose, fats and glutamates, 
and several medical processes (used in gas masks against toxic gases) 
too. Furthermore, AC shows high resistance to both acidic and basic 
media. They can be modified to obtain different physical forms, that is, 
granulates, fibers, pellets, and powders, as per the requirement for specific 
applications (Gálvez et al., 2011; Reinoso, 1997). In comparison to other 
microporous structures like activated alumina, silica, and zeolite, ACs are 
very cost-effective and have low toxicity. They can be prepared from any 
natural or synthetic solid carbonaceous precursors like wood, coconut 
husk, bamboo, sawdust, coal, petroleum pitch, fruit stones, cherry stones, 
date stones, tamarind seeds, domestic and agricultural waste products, 
and synthetic polymers like urea-formaldehyde resins, phenolic resins, 
and phenol-formaldehyde resins (Ahmed and Theydan, 2012; Mopoung 
et al., 2015; Nowicki et al., 2015; Ozbay and Yargic, 2016). The natural 

 
 
 
154 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
precursors are cheap and abundant with high-carbon contents and produce 
low ash, whereas the synthetic precursors are expensive but efficient. 
Thus, there is a high demand among researchers to use AC in most of the 
applications due to its simple design and easy operating process, excellent 
effluent treating capacity, and high selectivity toward specific products of 
interest (Tadda et al., 2016). 
Based on the structural and mechanism of carbonizations involved, the 
family of carbons can be broadly classified into two groups: graphitizable 
(anisotropic carbons) and nongraphitizable (isotropic carbons) (Franklin, 
1951). The solid carbon structures formed through the process of liquid 
phase carbonization are very well organized, ordered, and show good 
planar alignment with long-range stacking of graphene layers and are 
termed as graphitizable carbons in which the X-ray diffraction lines (h k 
l) of graphite lattice can appear by annealing beyond 2000. On the other 
hand, no internal recrystallization occurs during solid-phase carbonization, 
resulting in quite disordered structures with randomly formed graphitic 
alignment and termed as nongraphitizable carbons. This structural disorder 
creates nanopores inside the materials which have a tendency to form sp3 
bonds which prevents graphitic stacking and controls the properties of the 
materials (Dumanlı and Windle, 2012; Ghazinejad et al., 2017). In this 
case, no X-ray diffraction lines (h k l) appeared on heating these carbons 
at 2000 and beyond. Activated carbon belongs to the latter category of 
carbon, that is, nongraphitizable carbon, prepared from materials not 
passing through liquid-phase carbonization. 
6.2 PREPARATION AND ACTIVATION 
The versatile applications of activated carbons in everyday life have stimu-
lated researchers to produce AC through different methods other than the 
traditional approach. As per the discussion in the previous section, various 
natural and synthetic precursors, agricultural by-products, domestic and 
food wastes, petrochemical products, polymers, and fruit shells can be 
used as the raw materials for the preparation of ACs (Tongpoothorn et al., 
2011). However, in a fast-growing populated world, large-scale produc-
tion of AC through economic means is highly essential in order to fulfill 
the rapid surge in the demands at individual level, industries, and for 
health sectors as well. In most of the cases, activation agents are required 

 
 
  
 
 
155 
Preparation and Properties of Activated Carbon 
to convert organic precursors into activated carbon, which may be expen-
sive. To optimize the production cost as well as quality of AC, it is very 
important to choose a specific activation method for a specific starting 
material. The nature of activating agents, raw materials, and the conditions 
of activation processes control the properties of the finally obtained AC 
(Buczek, 2016). 
Basically, the preparation of activated carbon follows two major steps: 
(i) carbonization of the carbonaceous precursor (raw material) is completely 
decomposed at a temperature below 900°C in an inert environment, and 
(ii) activation of carbonized precursor to develop pore structures though 
physical (at a temperature between 800 and 900°C with carbon dioxide or 
steam as broadly used activating agents) or chemical (at room temperature 
with chemical reagents like phosphoric acid, potassium hydroxide, and 
zinc chloride) modifications (Tadda et al., 2016). The choice of activation 
process depends upon the starting raw materials and the desired form of 
the products, that is, whether powdered or granular or pellet form of the 
AC is required (Mohammad-Khah and Ansari, 2009). 
6.2.1 PHYSICAL ACTIVATION 
Physical activation involves two steps, that is, carbonization and activa-
tion. The first step includes the modification of raw materials into carbon 
in the absence of air and in the second step, the resulting char (carbon) 
is activated into activated carbon at an elevated temperature in the pres-
ence of suitable oxidizing agents such as carbon dioxide, air, or water 
vapor (steam) or a mixture of these gases (Yang et al., 2010) and can be 
represented through the following reactions: 
C + CO2 → 2CO 
(6.1) 
C + H O → CO + H 
(6.2)
2
2 
This entire process of activation within the gas phase is termed as 
physical or thermal activation. The temperature range for carbonization of 
organic materials lies between 673 and 1073 K, whereas the temperature 
required for the activation process is within the range of 873 and 1173 
K. Steam activation has a major impact on the surface area, volume, and 

 
156 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
the size distributions of pores and also enhances the oxygen contents in 
the system (Wang et al., 2017). The porosity formed in the porous carbon 
differs according to the method adopted. Producing carbon monoxide from 
carbon by using carbon dioxide or steam will not provide identical results. 
In steam activation, the pore size increases due to the removal of carbon 
from the pore walls, resulting from the steam–carbon chemical interactions 
held at the internal surfaces of carbon. In this activation process, pore size 
can be easily altered and the AC can be made suitable for specific applica-
tions. For example, in the case of water purification, microporous structure 
is required to adsorb small molecules in the solution, whereas in sugar 
decolorization, macroporous AC is used to adsorb large color molecules. 
The size of AC produced in this process is in between 1 and 3 mm. In 
general, physical activation for AC is preferred when raw materials such 
as agricultural biomass like rice husk, almond shell, sun flower shell, rice 
hull, and peanut hulls are used. 
Although in some cases, physical activation is preferred to produce 
activated carbon due to its simplicity and cost-effectiveness, but it gives 
very low yield which cannot be adopted in industry for mass production 
(Lillo-Ródenas et al., 2003; Yorgun et al., 2009). The parameters that 
completely determine/control the amount of production are activation time 
and temperature. At higher temperature, during the carbonization process, 
most of the volatile compounds get detached from the organic materials 
resulting in a low yield of AC. For longer activation period, the time of 
partial burning of carbon and other organic compounds, due to the oxygen 
present in the water vapor (steam), increases which reduces the amount of 
product obtained (Baçaoui et al., 2001; Bergna et al., 2018). 
6.2.2 CHEMICAL ACTIVATION 
In the chemical activation process, the chemical agents used for the acti-
vation of carbonized precursors are ZnCl2, KOH, H3PO4, NaOH, MgCl2, 
K2CO3, and Na2CO3. The procedure for this type of activation is simple: 
chemical reagents are mixed with the carbonized precursors to form a paste 
or solution which is impregnated on the surfaces of organic biomass and 
then heated in a furnace at temperatures ranging within 673–773 K for 1–4 
h in nitrogen environment. To remove the chemical reagent, the product is 
treated with diluted mineral acid followed by filtration and drying in oven 

 
 
 
 
 
2C + 6KOH → 2K + 3H + 2K CO 
(6.3)
2 
2
3 
(6.4)
2C + 6NaOH → 2Na + 3H 2 + 
2
2Na CO 3 
157 
Preparation and Properties of Activated Carbon 
to yield the activated carbon. Various agricultural wastes such as olive 
seed, almond shells, nut shells, corn cob, rice husks, and rice straw and 
other waste materials like sawdust, wood, and peat can be considered as 
raw materials for the chemical activation. 
The chemical reactions that take place between the precursors and 
activation agents, during the carbonizations, are not known clearly. 
However, Lillo-Ródenas et al. (2003) described that the reaction between 
carbon and alkaline metal hydroxide produces the corresponding alkaline 
metal, hydrogen, and metal carbonates and can be represented through the 
following set of equations: 
The main advantage of chemical activation over physical activation is 
higher final AC yields. In physical activation, to get a well-developed AC 
structure, a larger amount of carbon mass has to be removed. On the other 
hand, in chemical activation process, dehydrating chemical agent can go 
through pyrolytic decompositions which prevents the formation of tar and 
results in a higher yield of AC. Second, the temperature needed to carry 
out chemical activation is lower which leads to the production of better 
porous structures (Ahmadpour and Do, 1996). However, the limitation of 
using chemical activation is that the chemical impurities coming from the 
reagents are not eco-friendly and may also affect the chemical properties 
of AC (Benaddi et al., 1998). 
6.3 PHYSICAL PROPERTIES 
6.3.1 SURFACE AREA 
High surface area is a characteristic property of activated carbon which 
comes up with well-developed pores. Higher the surface area of the adsor-
bents, better the adsorption power due to the availability of more active 
sites for the adsorbate molecules. The interior surface area of AC can be 
calculated by using BET (Brunauer–Emmett–Teller) method (Brunauer 
et al., 1938). The interior surface area of AC is quite attractive, that is, 

 
158 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
500–1500 m2 or even more per unit gram. Generally, this large surface area 
is created during the activation process. In steam activation, at 1000°C, 
the holes in the carbonized precursors are burnt by steam molecules 
resulting pores developed inside the carbonaceous system. The chemical 
reagents like phosphoric acid can create similar porous structures at low 
temperatures. 
6.3.2 PORE STRUCTURES 
The pore structures of AC can be determined from the type of raw mate-
rials used and the method of activation. As per the IUPAC classification 
system, pores of activated carbon are categorized into the following 
groups, according to the volume (or radius) (Fig. 6.1). 
FIGURE 6.1  Representation of different pore size in activated carbon.  
Source:  Reprinted with permission from Suresh Kumar et al. (2017). https://  
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/  
Both geometry and volume of pores control the adsorption properties 
of AC. For example, large adsorbate molecules cannot be trapped by 
pores of very small size. Similarly, it is not possible for small molecules 
to be retained with macropores irrespective of their charges and polarities 
(Ahmedna et al., 2004). Macropores are usually developed in the acti
vated carbon, prepared from the materials containing higher percentages 
-

 
159 
Preparation and Properties of Activated Carbon 
of lignin such as cherry stones, grape seeds, and rice husk, while ACs 
prepared from raw materials containing higher amount of cellulose such 
as almond shells and coconut shells have microporous structures (Savova 
et al., 2001). 
6.3.3 IODINE NUMBER 
Iodine number is a key parameter to measure adsorption capacities of 
activated carbon and also regarded as a quality control parameter. It is 
generally used for the rough estimation of the available surface area 
and porosity of AC at room temperature. Iodine number is defined as 
the amount of iodine in milligram that can be adsorbed by 1 g of carbon 
when the residual filtrates have iodine concentration of 0.02 normal. In 
the adsorption mechanism, the surfaces of the adsorbents have various 
active sites where molecules of different size and functionality can be 
attached with different adsorption energies. To compare the adsorption 
capacities of pores of different size (micropores to macropores), chemists 
consider iodine atom as a good indicator due to its small size. Although 
the iodine number actually represents the carbon’s capacity for iodine 
adsorption, increase in its value, however, indicates high porosity with 
good performance. 
6.3.4 HARDNESS 
Particle strength and resistance to attrition (breakdown of materials into 
smaller particles) can be measured through hardness/abrasion. Larger the 
hardness, higher the withstanding capacity against the frictional force 
imposed during backwashing. The activated carbon prepared from coconut 
shell shows the highest order of hardness. 
6.3.5 APPARENT DENSITY 
Apparent density is the weight of carbon per unit volume. In general, 
adsorption per unit volume will be affected by the apparent density. When 
density is higher, volume activity will be better- and high-quality AC can 
be obtained due to the availability of more volume. 

 
160 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
6.3.6 ASH CONTENT 
The amount of inorganic, unusable, and amorphous constituents (mineral 
oxides) on weight basis can be predicted from the ash content. The amount 
of ash content can be measured by converting the mineral to the corre-
sponding oxides at temperature as high as 1173 K. The overall efficiency 
and the quality of activated carbon decrease, if the ash content increases. 
Hydrophilicity may increase due to presence of the ash content. In an 
ideal case, the ash content should be as low as possible to obtain desired 
AC. The typical values of inorganic constituents in coconut-based, wood-
based, and coal-based ACs are 2–3% W/W, 5% W/W, and 8–15% W/W, 
respectively. 
6.3.7 pH VALUE 
The pH value has a strong impact on the adsorption process in the fluid 
phase as surface chemistry and surface charges are influenced by it. For 
example, when the pH value is low, the surface is positively charged. 
As a result, the efficiency of adsorbing cations will become less due to 
Coulombic repulsion. In some cases, if the pH value is less than 1 (strongly 
acidic), then the efficiency of adsorption will be maximum. But, such low 
pH value is not recommended because constituent materials suffer heavily 
due to corrosion. Thus, it is highly essential to neutralize the activated 
carbon before using it as an adsorbent. In highly acidic case, the activated 
carbon should be washed with deionized water until the pH value becomes 
zero. The pH value of AC depends on the chemical reagents used for the 
activation. The pH value of coconut shell-based AC lies in between 9 and 
11. 
6.4 ADSORPTION OF ACTIVATED CARBON 
Adsorption is a pure surface phenomenon in which atomic and molecular 
species from a gas/vapor or solute dissolved in fluids are deposited on the 
surfaces of different species. The molecule can either enter into the solid 
(absorption) or attach to the surface (adsorption). When both phenomena 
occur simultaneously, it is called sorption. The species adsorbed and the 

 
 
161 
Preparation and Properties of Activated Carbon 
surface on which adsorption takes place are termed as adsorbates and 
adsorbents, respectively. Examples of commonly used adsorbents are 
clay, silica, various synthetic resins, and activated carbons. In the case of 
AC, the specific surface area of adsorbent, size and structure of pores, and 
affinity and size of the adsorbate particle control the rate of adsorption. 
Depending upon the strength of adsorbate–adsorbent interactions, the 
process of adsorption can be categorized into three types: (i) electrical, (ii) 
chemical, and (iii) van der Waals or physical. When a permanent dipole 
moment is possessed by an adsorbate molecule (polar species), then the 
adsorption process is fully dominated by the electrical interaction due to 
the exchange of ions (Reucroft et al., 1971). The functional groups like 
carboxyl, ketones, phenols, and aldehydes control the acid–base character 
of AC. Adsorption of various adsorbate molecules on the surface of AC is 
affected by the change in the electrical properties of these functional groups. 
The adsorption power increases (decreases) if the charge of adsorbate 
species is opposite (same) to that of the surface of AC (Aygün et al., 2003). 
On the other hand, when the interaction between adsorbate and adsorbent 
is strong through the formation of chemical bonds, the process is termed 
as chemical adsorption. Organic molecules present in water bound to the 
surface of activated carbon at low temperature and this type of adsorption 
is called physical or van der Waals interaction. During physisorption, the 
chemical identity of the adsorbate species remains unchanged. It is a spon-
taneous process with ΔG < 0, which implies an exothermic reaction with 
release of heat. The chemical reaction between reactive surface oxides of 
AC and the adsorbate species boosts this physical warming significantly. 
This adsorption heat gradually decreases as the accumulation increases. 
After some time, a balance between the amount of concentration of accu-
mulated adsorbate species over the AC surfaces and the concentration of 
the same species in a solution (or local environment) will be achieved. This 
is known as adsorption equilibrium. The amount of accumulated adsorbate 
on the surface of adsorbent relative to the concentrations of the same in a 
local environment is termed as adsorption capacity. The adsorption power 
(capacity) of AC can be enhanced by increasing the surface area of the 
pores (>1000 m2/g) (Tadda et al., 2016). 
The complete adsorption process on activated carbon requires several 
steps: first, diffusion of adsorbate species (solute) will take place near the 
solid surface and then into the pore of particles, the pore walls and finally 
attached to the surface of pore walls. The contaminants dissolved in liquid 

 
 
 
X / m = KC 1/ n (n > 1) 
(6.5)
e 
 
 
 
1
log 
/ 
= log K + log 
X
m
 
Ce 
(6.6)
n 
162 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
or gaseous phase can be adsorbed by AC through various mechanisms 
such as Coulombic interaction, van der Waals interaction, hydrogen 
bonding, strong chemical bonds, dipole–dipole interaction, ligand 
exchange, and hydrophobic force (Mohammad-Khah and Ansari, 2009). 
Thus, the specific surface area, pore size and distribution, and polarity 
(hydrophobicity or hydrophilicity) of adsorbents, properties of adsorbate 
species, and physical and chemical conditions determine the adsorption 
capacities of AC. In general, the water molecule is more polar than the 
surfaces of carbonaceous matrix which leads to nonpolar contaminants 
like oil or hydrocarbons show a high tendency to be detached from the 
solution and can get adsorbed on the surface of AC. This phenomenon 
is termed as hydrophobic bonding which is very useful for removal of 
organic pollutants from the water. 
The relationship between the concentrations of the chemicals (ions, 
molecules) adsorbed over the surface of AC and the concentration of 
same in the solution at adsorption equilibrium at constant temperature 
is known as the adsorption isotherm. Based on the sorption mechanism, 
there are three types of isotherms seen for AC: (i) linear, (ii) Freundlich, 
and (iii) Langmuir isotherm (Li et al., 2005; McKay et al., 1997). The 
linear isotherm is based on the fact that both the adsorbed and dissolved 
concentrations are directly proportional to each other. Freundlich adsorp-
tion isotherm was proposed by a German scientist, Freundlich, based on 
an empirical formula which relates the concentration of adsorbed gas on 
the surface of the solid adsorbent while keeping both the temperature and 
pressure at constant values. The relation can be expressed mathematically 
as 
where X is the mass of adsorbed gas (in mg) and m is the mass of the adsor-
bent (in g); C e represents the concentration at equilibrium (in g/L). K and 
n are the constants whose values depend on the nature of the adsorbed gas 
and adsorbent and can be determined from the experimental data. Taking 
the logarithm on both sides of the equation: 

 
 
 
Ce = 
1 + Ce 
(6.7)
q  
K q
q
e 
l
m
m 
 
 
RL = 
1 
(6.8)
1+ K C  
l 
0 
Preparation and Properties of Activated Carbon 
163 
A straight line will be obtained by plotting X/m with C e in the log paper, 
and the slope, 1/n, will define the adsorption intensity and K is the adsorp-
tion capacity (L/mg). 1/n also indicates the adsorbate site’s relative energy 
distribution and heterogeneity (Ayawei et al., 2017). The value of 1/n lies 
in between 2 and 10, for an effective AC. Also, this value is nearly equal 
to 1 for organic contaminants, whereas the value lies between 0.4 and 
0.6 for heavy metal ions. If n = 1, the Freundlich isotherm will become 
a linear isotherm. The efficiency of activated carbon as an adsorbent can 
be determined from the isotherm. Steeper the isotherm, more efficient is 
the adsorbent. The adsorptive capacity of various AC in gas–solid phase 
adsorption can be described through Langmuir adsorption. Langmuir 
isotherm is based on the balanced condition between relative rates of 
adsorption and desorption. In this approach, adsorption and desorption are 
considered to be proportional to the fraction of bare and covered adsorbent 
surfaces, respectively (Günay et al., 2017). Langmuir adsorption method 
can be expressed mathematically through the following equation: 
where C e is the adsorbate concentration at equilibrium (mg/L), qe is the 
amount of the adsorbed species per unit mass of the adsorbent (mg/g), and 
qm is the maximum concentration of the adsorbate that can be attached to 
the adsorbate surface. Kl defines the adsorption capacity of the activated 
carbon and is referred as the Langmuir constant. This constant can be 
correlated with the surface area and porosity variations in the activated 
carbon which implies that a higher adsorption capacity can be achieved by 
increasing both the surface area and pore volume. Langmuir isotherm can 
be expressed through an alternate equation as follows: 
where C0 is the initial adsorbate concentration (mg/L) and RL is a dimen-
sionless constant termed as the separation factor and the physical signifi-
cance of this factor is described below (Ayawei et al., 2017): 
RL > 1 implies the adsorption is unfavorable. 
RL = 1 implies the adsorption is linear. 

 
 
 
 
164 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
RL = 0 means the adsorption is irreversible.  
And, 0 < RL < 1 implies, the adsorption is favorable.  
6.5 CLASSIFICATIONS 
Activated carbons are highly efficient and versatile adsorbents due to 
their large surface area and can be utilized in various fields. Based on the 
physical characteristics, shape, and size of particles, activated carbons are 
broadly classified into the following categories. 
6.5.1 POWDERED ACTIVATED CARBON 
If the constituent particles of activated carbon have powder or granular 
form with average diameter size laying in the range between 0.15 and 0.25 
mm, this form is called the powdered activated carbon (PAC) resulting in 
high surface-to-volume ratio. Because of smaller particle size, adsorption 
power of PAC is very effective. These types of ACs can be made from 
materials like wood, ignite, and coal (Najm et al., 1991). Depending upon 
the preparation mechanism and the type of raw materials used, the densi-
ties may vary between 0.36 g/cm3 and 0.74 g/cm3. In general, 65–95% 
of the commercially available PAC can pass through a 325-mesh sieve. 
Depending on the concentration and the type of contactor, PAC can effec-
tively remove various biocides. In addition to this, relatively low PAC 
(10–25 mg/L) can effectively remove compounds like 2,4-dichlorophenol, 
geosmin, and 2-methylisoborneol while high PAC with densities between 
75 and 620 mg/L is used to remove p-nitrophenol and humic odor (Najm 
et al., 1991). 
6.5.2 GRANULAR ACTIVATED CARBON 
In the case of granular activated carbon, the particle size is large (average 
particle size ~1–5 mm) which leads to a smaller surface-to-volume ratio as 
compared to PAC. The particles of GAC can be retained through 50-mesh 
sieve. The apparent densities of GAC lie in the range of 400–500 kg/m3 
depending on the preparation process and raw materials used. GAC can 
be prepared by heating various organic materials such as wood, rice husk, 

 
 
165 
Preparation and Properties of Activated Carbon 
sawdust, eucalyptus, and coconut shell without the presence of oxygen 
(carbonization) and then crushed and sieved into granules. The GAC can 
be divided into two subgroups: chopped carbon (no specific form) and 
formed carbon (cylindrical form). GAC can be used to remove contami-
nants from water and as column filter for gaseous effluents, effectively. 
Wood-based GACs can be extensively used as de-colorizing agents by 
removing color bodies like tannins. 
6.5.3 EXTRUDED ACTIVATED CARBON/PELLETIZED ACTIVATED 
CARBON 
Extruded activated carbons (EACs) can be prepared by fusing a mixture 
of PACs like pulverized anthracites or charcoals and a suitable binder, 
and then putting it under high pressure, these are extruded into cylindrical 
forms with average diameter size laying between 0.8 and 130 mm. To 
obtain pores with specific sizes, catalyst like potassium hydroxide (KOH) 
is mixed before extrusion. Due to their low-pressure drop, very less amount 
of dust contents, and high mechanical strength, EACs are suitable for gas 
phase applications. 
6.5.4 IMPREGNATED ACTIVATED CARBON 
These are the activated carbons in which internal surfaces are decorated 
with fine distribution of selected chemicals and metal particles. As a result, 
adsorptive power of AC is highly reinforced due to chemisorption between 
the chemicals and carbon (Henning and Schäfer, 1993). Examples of 
metallic cation impregnates attached on the adsorbents are Fe (Mondal et 
al., 2007; Shah et al., 2015), Mn (Liu et al., 2016; Zhang et al., 2008), Zn 
(Rezaee et al., 2008; Somy et al., 2009), Al (Ganiyu et al., 2016), and Cu 
(Rossin and Morrison, 1991). These types of ACs are generally used in gas 
purifications (treat flue gas in coal-fired generation plants) and protection 
from military gases. Various acid gases, mercury, ammonia, aldehydes, 
methylene blue, some radioactive methyl iodide, and inorganic gases 
such as arsine and phosphine can be removed effectively through specific 
impregnation (like metal oxides, triethylenediamine, etc.) on activated 
carbon. 

 
 
166 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
6.5.5 POLYMER-COATED ACTIVATED CARBON 
If activated carbons are coated with biocompatible, smooth, and permeable 
polymers without blocking carbon pores, these are termed as polymer-
coated activated carbons. These are extensively used for biomedical appli-
cations. Using bare AC in hemoperfusion leads to release carbon fines 
which can damage blood platelets. To overcome this problem, surfaces 
of charcoal granules are microcapsulated with the hexamethyledisiloxane 
polymer (Hasirci and Akovali, 1986). The AC, coated with polysulfide-
rubber polymer, is also used for the removal of Hg ion from water (Kim 
et al., 2011). 
6.5.6 ACTIVATED CARBON FIBER 
Activated carbons are also available in thin-fiber shapes and called acti-
vated carbon fibers (ACFs). In comparison to PAC and GAC, ACF shows 
fast intraparticle adsorption kinetics which enhances its suitability in the 
application of gas phase and aqueous phase adsorption (Suzuki, 1994). 
ACF can be applied in various fields such as removal of heavy metals, 
biomedical applications, catalytic applications, and natural gas storage 
(Lee et al., 2014). 
6.6 CONCLUSION 
Activated carbons are considered as effective adsorbents due to their large 
surface area and well-developed porous structures. Since agricultural 
and food wastes are considered as affluent sources for carbon, AC can 
be prepared from coconut shell, rice husk, fruit stones, almond shells, 
nutshells, cherry stones, and tamarind seeds. ACs can adsorb a wide 
range of chemicals simultaneously and can be operated at a wide range of 
temperatures and humidity conditions. In addition, they are inert and much 
safe to handle. We cannot underestimate the importance and requirements 
of ACs as they fulfill the demands in most of the sectors in removing 
the pollutants, toxic elements, and contaminants from liquid, gaseous, and 
solid matters. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
167 
Preparation and Properties of Activated Carbon 
KEYWORDS 
• 
activated carbon 
• 
gas storage 
• 
energy 
• 
classification 
• 
activated carbon fiber 
REFERENCES 
Ahmadpour, A.; Do, D. D. The Preparation of Active Carbons from Coal by Chemical and 
Physical activation. Carbon 1996, 34, 471–479. 
Ahmed, M. J.; Theydan, S. K. Physical and Chemical Characteristics of Activated Carbon 
Prepared by Pyrolysis of Chemically Treated Date Stones and Its Ability to Adsorb 
Organics. Powder Technol. 2012, 229, 237–245. 
Ahmedna, M.; Marshall, W. E.; Husseiny, A. A.; Rao, R. M.; Goktepe, I. The Use of 
Nutshell Carbons in Drinking Water Filters for Removal of Trace Metals. Water Res. 
2004, 38, 1062–1068. 
Ansari, R.; Sadegh, M. Application of Activated Carbon for Removal of Arsenic Ions from 
Aqueous Solutions. E-J. Chem. 2007, 4. https://doi.org/10.1155/2007/829187 
Attia, A. A.; Khedr, S. A.; Elkholy, S. A. Adsorption of Chromium Ion (VI) by Acid 
Activated Carbon. Braz. J. Chem. Eng. 2010, 27, 183–193. 
Ayawei, N.; Ebelegi, A. N.; Wankasi, D. Modelling and Interpretation of Adsorption 
Isotherms. J. Chem; Hindawi Limited 2017, https://doi.org/10.1155/2017/3039817 
Aygün, A.; Yenisoy-Karakaş, S.; Duman, I. Production of Granular Activated Carbon from 
Fruit Stones and Nutshells and Evaluation of Their Physical, Chemical and Adsorption 
Properties. Micropor. Mesopor. Mater. 2003, 66, 189–195. 
Baçaoui, A.; Yaacoubi, A.; Dahbi, A.; Bennouna, C.; Phan Tan Luu, R.; Maldonado-
Hodar, F. J.; Rivera-utrila, J.; Moreno Castilla, C. Moreno-Castilla, C. Optimization of 
Conditions for the Preparation of Activated Carbons from Olive-Waste Cakes. Carbon 
2001, 39, 425–432. 
Benaddi, H.; Legras, D.; Rouzaud, J. N.; Beguin, F. Influence of the Atmosphere in the 
Chemical Activation of Wood by Phosphoric Acid. Carbon 1998. 
Bergna, D.; Varila, T.; Romar, H.; Lassi, U. Comparison of the Properties of Activated 
Carbons Produced in One-Stage and Two-Stage Processes. C 2018, 4, 41. 
Boopathy, R.; Karthikeyan, S.; Mandal, A. B.; Sekaran, G. Adsorption of Ammonium Ion 
by Coconut Shell-Activated Carbon from Aqueous Solution: Kinetic, Isotherm, and 
Thermodynamic Studies. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 2013, 20, 533–542. 
Brunauer, S.; Emmett, P. H.; Teller, E. Adsorption of Gases in Multimolecular Layers. J. 
Am. Chem. Soc. 1938, 60, 309–319. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
168 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
Buczek, B. Preparation of Active Carbon by Additional Activation with Potassium 
Hydroxide and Characterization of Their Properties. Adv. Mater. Sci. Eng. 2016. 
Dresselhaus, M. S.; Dresselhaus, G.; Saito, R. Physics of Carbon Nanotubes. Carbon 1995, 
33, 883–891. 
Dumanlı, A. G.; Windle, A. H. Carbon Fibres from Cellulosic Precursors: A Review. J. 
Mater. Sci. 2012, 47, 4236–4250. 
Eba, F.; Kouya Biboutou, R.; Nlo, J. N.; Bibalou, Y. G.; Oyo, M. Lead Removal in Aqueous 
Solution by Activated Carbons Prepared from Cola Edulis Shell (Alocacée), Pentaclethra 
Macrophylla Husk (Mimosaceae) and Aucoumea klaineana Sawdust (Burseraceae). Afr. 
J. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2011, (Vol. 5). Retrieved from http://www.academicjournals. 
org/AJEST 
El-Shafey, E. I.; Cox, M.; Pichugin, A. A.; Appleton, Q. Application of a Carbon Sorbent 
for the Removal of Cadmium and Other Heavy Metal Ions from Aqueous Solution. J. 
Chem. Technol. Biotechnol. 2002, 77, 429–436. 
Franklin, R. E. Crystallite Growth in Graphitizing and Non-Graphitizing Carbons. Proc. 
R. Soc. London A 1951, 209 (1097), 196–218. https://doi.org/10.1098/rspa.1951.0197 
Juntgen, H. Activated Carbons as Catalyst Supports. Fuel 2011, 65, 1436–1446. 
Ganiyu, S. A.; Alhooshani, K.; Sulaiman, K. O.; Qamaruddin, M.; Bakare, I. A.; Tanimu, 
A.; Saleh, T. A. Influence of Aluminium Impregnation on Activated Carbon for Enhanced 
Desulfurization of DBT at Ambient Temperature: Role of Surface Acidity and Textural 
Properties. Chem. Eng. J. 2016, 303, 489–500. 
Geim, A. K. Graphene: Status and Prospects. Science (New York, N.Y.) 2009, 324, 
1530–1534. 
Ghazinejad, M.; Holmberg, S.; Pilloni, O.; Oropeza-Ramos, L.; Madou, M. Graphitizing 
Non-Graphitizable Carbons by Stress-Induced Routes. Sci. Rep. 2017, 7. 
Günay, A.; Arslankaya, E.; Tosun, I. Lead Removal from Aqueous Solution by Natural and 
Pretreated Clinoptilolite: Adsorption Equilibrium and Kinetics. J. Hazard. Mater. 2017, 
146, 362–371. 
Hasirci, N.; Akovali, G. Polymer Coating for Hemoperfusion Over Activated Charcoal. J. 
Biomed. Mater. Res. 1986, 20, 963–970. 
Henning, K. D.; Schäfer, S. Impregnated Activated Carbon for Environmental Protection. 
Gas Sep. Purif. 1993, 7, 235–240. 
Jia, Y.; Demopoulos, G. P. Adsorption of Silver Onto Activated Carbon from Acidic Media: 
Nitrate and Sulfate Media. Indust. Eng. Chem. Res. 2003, 42, 72–79. 
Kim, E. A.; Seyfferth, A. L.; Fendorf, S.; Luthy, R. G. Immobilization of Hg(II) in Water 
with Polysulfide-Rubber (PSR) Polymer-Coated Activated Carbon. Water Res. 2011, 45, 
453–460. 
Lee, T.; Ooi, C. H.; Othman, R.; Yeoh, F. Y. Activated Carbon Fiber—The Hybrid of 
Carbon Fiber and Activated Carbon. Rev. Adv. Mater. Sci. 2014, 36, 118–136. 
Li, L.; Quinlivan, P. A.; Knappe, D. R. U. Predicting Adsorption Isotherms for Aqueous 
Organic Micropollutants from Activated Carbon and Pollutant Properties. Environ. Sci. 
Technol. 2005, 39, 3393–3400. 
Lillo-Ródenas, M. A.; Cazorla-Amorós, D.; Linares-Solano, A. Understanding Chemical 
Reactions Between Carbons and NaOH and KOH: An Insight Into the Chemical 
Activation Mechanism. Carbon 2003, 41, 267–275. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
169 
Preparation and Properties of Activated Carbon 
Liu, H.; Hu, Z.; Liu, H.; Xie, H.; Lu, S.; Wang, Q.; Zhang, J. Adsorption of Amoxicillin 
by Mn-Impregnated Activated Carbons: Performance and Mechanisms. RSC Adv. 2016, 
6, 11454–11460. 
McKay, G.; El-Geundi, M.; Nassar, M. M. Adsorption Model for the Removal of Acid 
Dyes from Effluent by Bagasse Pith Using a Simplified Isotherm. Adsorp. Sci. Technol. 
1997, 15, 737–752. 
Mohamed, E. F.; Andriantsiferana, C.; Wilhelm, A. M.; Delmas, H. Competitive Adsorption 
of Phenolic Compounds from Aqueous Solution Using Sludge-Based Activated Carbon. 
Environ. Technol. 2011, 32, 1325–1336. 
Mohammad-Khah, A.; Ansari, R. Activated Charcoal: Preparation, Characterization and 
Applications: A Review Article. Int. J. ChemTech Res. 2009, 1. 
Mohan, D.; Singh, K. P.; Singh, V. K. Removal of Hexavalent Chromium from Aqueous 
Solution Using Low-Cost Activated Carbons Derived from Agricultural Waste Materials 
and Activated Carbon Fabric Cloth. Indust. Eng. Chem. Res. 2005, 44, 1027–1042. 
Mondal, P.; Balomajumder, C.; Mohanty, B. A Laboratory Study for the Treatment of 
Arsenic, Iron, and Manganese Bearing Ground Water Using Fe3+ Impregnated Activated 
Carbon: Effects of Shaking Time, pH and Temperature. J. Hazard. Mater. 2007, 144, 
420–426. 
Mopoung, S.; Moonsri, P.; Palas, W.; Khumpai, S. Characterization and Properties of 
Activated Carbon Prepared from Tamarind Seeds by KOH Activation for Fe(III) 
Adsorption from Aqueous Solution. Sci. World J. 2015. 
Najm, I. N.; Snoeyink, V. L.; Lykins, B. W.; Adams, J. Q. Using Powdered Activated 
Carbon: A Critical Review. J—Am. Water Works Assoc. 1991, 83, 65–76. 
Nowicki, P.; Kazmierczak, J.; Pietrzak, R. Comparison of Physicochemical and Sorption 
Properties of Activated Carbons Prepared by Physical and Chemical Activation of 
Cherry Stones. Powder Technol. 2015, 269, 312–319. 
Onundi, Y. B.; Mamun, A. A.; Al Khatib, M. F.; Ahmed, Y. M. Adsorption of Copper, 
Nickel and Lead Ions from Synthetic Semiconductor Industrial Wastewater by Palm 
Shell Activated Carbon. Int. J. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2010, 7, 751–758. 
Ozbay, N.; Yargic, A. S. Comparison of Surface and Structural Properties of Carbonaceous 
Materials Prepared by Chemical Activation of Tomato Paste Waste: The Effects of 
Activator Type and Impregnation Ratio. .J. Appl. Chem. 2016, 2016, 1–10. 
Reinoso, F. R. Activated Carbon: Structure, Characterization, Preparation and Applications. 
In Introduction to Carbon Technologies, Reinoso, F. R., Heintz, E. A., Marsh, H., Eds.; 
University of Alicante, Secretariado de Publicaciones, 1997; p 669. 
Reucroft, P. J.; Simpson, W. H.; Jonas, L. A. Sorption properties of activated carbon. 
Journal of Physical Chemistry 1971, 75, 3526–3531. 
Rezaee, A.; Godini, H.; Dehestani, S.; Khavanin, A. Application of impregnated almond 
shell activated carbon by zinc and zinc sulfate for nitrate removal from water. Retrieved 
December 2008, 20, 2019. 
Rossin, J. A.; Morrison, R. W. Spectroscopic Analysis and Performance of an Experimental 
Copper/Zinc Impregnated, Activated Carbon. Carbon 1991, 29, 887–892. 
Savova, D., Apak, E., Ekinci, E., Yardim, F., Petrov, N., Budinova, T., Razvigorova, M.; 
Minkova, V. Biomass Conversion to Carbon Adsorbents and Gas. Biomass Bioenergy 
2001, 21, 133–142. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
170 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
Shah, I.; Adnan, R.; Ngah, W. S. W.; Mohamed, N. Iron Impregnated Activated Carbon 
as an Efficient Adsorbent for the Removal of Methylene blue: Regeneration Kinetics 
Studies. PLoS ONE 2015, 10, e0122603.
 Soleimani, M.; Kaghazchi, T. Adsorption of Gold Ions from Industrial Wastewater Using 
Activated Carbon Derived from Hard Shell of Apricot Stones—An Agricultural Waste. 
Bioresour. Technol. 2008, 99, 5374–5383. 
Somy, A.; Mehrnia, M. R.; Amrei, H. D.; Ghanizadeh, A.; Safari, M. Adsorption of Carbon 
Dioxide Using Impregnated Activated Carbon Promoted by Zinc. Int. J. Greenhouse Gas 
Control 2009, 3, 249–254. 
Stoeckli, H. F.; Rebstein, P.; Ballerini, L. On the Assessment of Microporosity in Active 
Carbons, a Comparison of Theoretical and Experimental Data. Carbon 1990, 28, 
907–909. 
Suresh Kumar, P.; Prot, T.; Korving, L.; Keesman, K. J.; Dugulan, I.; van Loosdrecht, M. 
C. M.; Witkamp, G. J. Effect of Pore Size Distribution on Iron Oxide Coated Granular 
Activated Carbons for Phosphate Adsorption—Importance of Mesopores. Chem. Eng. J. 
2017, 326, 231–239. 
Suzuki, M. Activated Carbon Fiber: Fundamentals and Applications. Carbon 1994, 32, 
577–586. 
Tadda, M. A.; Ahsan, A.; Shitu, A.; Elsergany, M.; Arunkumar, T.; Jose, B., Abdur Razzaque, 
M.; Nik, N. N. A review on activated carbon: process, application and prospects, J. Adv. 
Civil Eng. Res. 2016, 2, 7-13. 
Tongpoothorn, W.; Sriuttha, M.; Homchan, P.; Chanthai, S.; Ruangviriyachai, C. Preparation 
of Activated Carbon Derived from Jatropha curcas Fruit Shell by Simple Thermo-
Chemical Activation and Characterization of Their Physico-Chemical Properties. Chem. 
Eng. Res. Design 2011, 89, 335–340. 
Wang, B.; Gao, B.; Fang, J. Recent Advances in Engineered Biochar Productions and 
Applications. Crit. Rev. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2017, 47, 2158–2207. 
Yang, K.; Peng, J.; Srinivasakannan, C.; Zhang, L.; Xia, H.; Duan, X. Preparation of 
High Surface Area Activated Carbon from Coconut Shells Using Microwave Heating. 
Bioresour. Technol. 2010, 101, 6163–6169. 
Yorgun, S.; Vural, N.; Demiral, H. Preparation of high-Surface Area Activated Carbons 
from Paulownia Wood by ZnCl2 Activation Micropor. Mesopor. Mate. 2009, 122, 
189–194. 
Zhang, J.; Shi, Q.; Zhang, C.; Xu, J.; Zhai, B.; Zhang, B. Adsorption of Neutral Red 
onto Mn-Impregnated Activated Carbons Prepared from Typha Orientalis. Bioresour. 
Technol. 2008, 99, 8974–8980. 

New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons. Aneeya Kumar Samantara & Satyajit Ratha (Eds.)
© 2024 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
 
CHAPTER 7  
Carbon Nanotubes: A New Dimension 
in Human Healthcare Applications 
RASHMI REKHA SAMAL1,2 and MADHABI MADHUSMITA BHANJADEO3 
1Academy of Scientific & Innovative research (AcSIR), New Delhi, India 
2Environment & Sustainability Department, CSIR-Institute of Minerals 
and Materials Technology, Bhubaneswar, Odisha, India 
3Department of Biochemistry, School of Life Sciences, Ravenshaw 
University, Cuttack, Odisha, India 
ABSTRACT 
Carbon nanotubes (CNTs) signify solitarily the most extensively experi-
mented allotropes of carbon. Because of their unique physicochemical 
properties, CNTs are ideal candidates for a wide range of biomedical 
applications, including drug delivery, gene therapy, biosensors, and tissue 
engineering. This chapter summarizes the properties and functionalization 
of CNTs for application toward recent approaches in human health-care 
advancements against nondurable diseases. The use of various function-
alized CNTs in chemotherapy for efficient drug loading, targeted drug 
delivery, and controlled release is one of the therapeutic applications. In 
the similar context, other therapeutic approaches like gene therapy, photo-
dynamic, and photothermal therapy also evidence the usability of CNTs 
as the carrier of antisense oligo, small interference ribonucleic acids, and 
photosensitizers, respectively. Another dimension of therapeutic appli-
cation includes the tissue engineering and wound-healing approaches. 

 
172 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
Specifically for these applications, the great mechanical properties along 
with biocompatibility are exploited to design new scaffolds for the regen-
eration of neural and bone tissues. Moreover, the antibacterial effect of 
CNTs benefits its use in bandage materials for curing of long-term critical 
wounds. This will be an informative chapter for material science scholars 
as well as biomedical researchers. 
7.1 INTRODUCTION 
Persistence is to man’s character what carbon is to steel. The above saying 
is widely attributed to Napoleon Hill in order to demonstrate that just 
as carbon is necessary for the existence of steel, so is persistence to a 
man’s character. Carbon is one of the most abundant elements of living as 
well as nonliving spheres of the planet and is widely studied/explored for 
countless applications. And carbon is now not only limited for steel and 
other metallurgical production or thermal energy production but also for 
the regeneration of nervous tissue to visualize persistent tumors. Among 
others, the carbon nanotube (CNT) is the most extensively studied allo-
trope of carbon in recent advanced applications. CNTs are highly ordered, 
all-carbon hollow graphitic nanomaterials with a high aspect ratio, lengths 
ranging from hundreds to micrometers, and diameters ranging from less 
than 2 nm for single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs) to 2–100 nm 
for multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs). SWCNTs and MWCNTs 
are conceptualized as rolled-up structures of single or multiple sheets of 
graphene, similar to Russian dolls. These one-dimensional carbon allo-
tropes have a larger surface area, higher mechanical strength but a low 
weight, a wide range of electronic properties, and exceptional chemical 
and thermal stability (Tanaka et al., 2020). 
CNTs have been experimented for their possible functions in nano-
composite structural materials, semiconductor devices, and sensors. The 
recently well-documented ability to chemically modify and functionalize 
nanofibrous carbon materials to improve their solubility and biocompat-
ibility has resulted in the creation of an entirely new class of bioactive 
carbon nanostructures for biological applications. So far, there has been 
a growing interest among biomedical scientists in investigating all of the 
aforementioned characteristics and demonstrating the suitability of CNTs 
for health-care applications. CNTs, for example, are being researched 

 
 
 
173 
Carbon Nanotubes: A New Dimension in Human Healthcare Applications 
as a suitable platform for cell growth in the field of tissue regeneration, 
as a nanovehicle to deliver a variety of diagnostic or therapeutic agents, 
vaccines, or for the purpose of gene transfection, it acted as vectors 
(El-Sayed and Kamel, 2020). The following sections concisely narrates 
some aspects of bio-functionalized CNTs for various therapeutic applica-
tions as well as their usability in in-vitro and in-vivo bio-imaging in both 
invasive and noninvasive approaches with some outstanding examples. 
These aspects are being explored by researches worldwide in an expo-
nentially increasing pattern in the last three decades. A detailed discussion 
on this aspect as well as on the toxicological effects of the CNTs are been 
presented in this chapter. 
7.2 STRUCTURAL AND FUNCTIONAL CHARACTERIZATION 
7.2.1 MORPHOLOGY AND PROPERTIES 
Japanese physicist Sumio Iijima and his coworkers discovered the unique 
allotrope, CNTs in 1991. Later, many of the materials and biomedical 
researchers have explored its physicochemical properties and targeted 
transportation of biomolecules and drugs. Based upon their physical 
properties such as diameter, length, and structure, CNTs are categorized 
into two broad classes. One is SWCNTs, which consist of a single layer of 
cylinder graphene sheet capped at both ends in a hexagonal carbon network 
by maintaining the diameter range from 0.4 to 2 nm, and another one is 
MWCNTs which contain multiple layers of concentric graphene sheet 
layers with diameters in the range of 1–3 nm for the inner tubes and 2–100 
nm for the outer tubes with approximately 0.34 nm of interlayer separa-
tion. They exhibit a well-ordered arrangement of hexagonal carbon atoms 
(C–C distance of ~1.4 Å) linked through sp2 bonds, which makes them 
the stiffest and strongest filament to be known. The basic sp2 hybridized 
carbon arrangement of SWCNTs is different from MWCNTs. The struc-
tural arrangement of SWCNTs is established in armchair, zigzag, chiral, 
or helical manner (Fig. 7.1) (Gao et al., 2012). On the other hand, based 
on arrangements of graphene sheets, MWCNTs can be categorized into 
two types: one is a “Russian-doll”-like structure where the graphite sheets 
are arranged in concentric layers and the other is a parchment-like model 
where the single sheet of graphite is rolled around itself (Dresselhaus, 

 
 
 
 
 
 
174 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
2004). Particularly, the hollow cylindrical tube structure of CNTs is a key 
feature for drug delivery as the drugs can be encapsulated in their inner 
hollow core region and other molecules can be attached to the external 
surfaces which facilitate them to be biocompatible for targeting purposes. 
During the process of drug delivery, SWCNTs are known to be more effi-
cient than MWCNTs due to its one-dimensional structure and ultrahigh 
surface area which provides efficient drug-loading capacity. Additionally, 
SWCNT–anticancer drug complex or functionalized SWCNT has longer 
blood circulation time than the anticancer drug on its own and releases 
the drug into a specific region of the target. This phenomenon results 
in more prolonged and sustained drug uptake by tumor cells, which is 
mediated by the increased permeability and retention effect. The above 
facts suggest that SWCNTs are suitable candidates for drug delivery and 
evolved as favorable and suitable nanoplatform for subsequent cancer 
therapeutics. In comparison with SWCNTs, MWCNTs are recognized 
as a more useful nanomaterial in the case of thermal treatment of cancer 
(Chen et al., 2017). The reason behind the fact that MWCNTs release 
substantial vibrational energy after exposure to near-infrared light as they 
have more freely available electrons and comprise more metallic tubes 
than SWCNTs and produce heat within a tissue which can be directed 
to destroy cancer cells. However, it has also been suggested that the 
functionalization of MWCNTs’ outer shell depends upon the side wall of 
the tube. The advantages of CNTs over other nanomaterials rely on their 
unique combination of electromagnetic or electrochemical along with 
mechanical and optical properties. Including exceptionally high tensile 
strength and elastic modulus, rich surface chemical functionalities, and 
size stability at the Nanoscale label, CNTs are also excellent thermal and 
electrical conductors, with additional abilities to absorb optical intensity, 
photoluminescence, and generate strong Raman signals that enable their 
facile and nondestructive characterization. 
7.2.2 SYNTHESIS 
Due to the growing demand of CNTs in biomedical applications, the 
synthesis and purification process emerging the attention of researchers 
to produce specific, effective, and viable nanotubes. The general growth 
mechanism of CNT is very simple. The process can be commonly 

 
175 
Carbon Nanotubes: A New Dimension in Human Healthcare Applications 
FIGURE 7.1  Different structural forms of carbon nanotube: (a) different types of single-
walled carbon nanotube forms formed by graphene sheet and (b) structure of a multiwalled 
carbon nanotube. 
Source: Reproduced with permission from Gao, et al.,  2012. 
explained by the formation of a precursor on the surface of metal cata
lyst and rod-like structure of carbon formed rapidly followed by the  
slow graphitization of its wall (Anazawa et al., 2002). However, based  
on the particle size of the catalyst, single-walled nanotubes (SWNTs)  
or multiwalled nanotubes (MWNTs) are grown. CNTs are generally  
synthesized by three major techniques, namely, arc discharge or electric  
discharge using graphite cathodes, laser, or light ablation in addition to  
chemical vapor deposition (CVD) (Bianco et al., 2005; Dai, 2002). The  
arc discharge method is one of the oldest and common methods where  
vapor is created by an arc discharge between two carbon rods which  
act as electrodes and place in an enclosure filled with inert gases at low  
pressure (between 50 and 700 mbar) with or without catalyst. In the  
controlled atmosphere with high temperature and voltage (25–40 V),  
a constant gap is maintained for prolonged period between the carbon  
electrodes, corresponding to the position of anode after the plasma  
formation between carbon electrodes. The nanotubes along with the  
byproducts are formed inside the reaction chamber after all the cooling  
and depressurization process. In the laser ablation technique, the high-
intensity light from a laser is used to vaporize the graphite sheet inside  
an oven at 1200°C. The laser source can be pulse or continuously depend  
-

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
176 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
upon the demand of higher light intensity. Moreover, favorable condi-
tions are supplied by pulse laser for the generation of nonequilibrium 
conditions due to a short time scale of temperature changes. The extreme 
high temperatures provided by pulse laser can transform graphite and 
metallic catalyst into carbon–metal vapor by heating the surface beyond 
critical temperature. The plasma plume is formed during the vaporiza-
tion where the evaporated particles again heated by laser pulse. At first, 
from that vaporized particles, initial carbon clusters are generated which 
then form the tubular SWCNT molecules. The growth of nanotube come 
to a termination by having much carbon coat layer which stops them 
from absorbing more high-intensity light. 
Another important method is CVD, which produces MWCNTs 
or SWCNTs (with poor quality) based on thermal decomposition 
of a hydrocarbon vapor in the presence of a metal catalyst. The basic 
requirements of this method involve the carbon source which commonly 
includes methane (CH4), carbon monoxide (CO), and acetylene (C2H2). 
Furthermore, plasma or heated coil treated as energy source to transfer 
energy to a gaseous carbon molecule. This synthesis process can be 
achieved by catalyst preparation followed by nanotube synthesis. After 
the deposition of transition metal on substrate, the thermal annealing 
process induces the catalyst particle nucleation which further leads to 
formation of cluster on the surface of substrate from which nanotube 
is generated. The entire process of nanotube synthesis through CVD is 
conducted by maintaining the temperature within 650–900°C. Different 
kinds of CVD are also used to synthesize CNTs such as plasma-enhanced 
CVD (PECVD), thermochemical-based CVD, catalytic-induced alcohol 
CVD, vapor phase growth, aerogel-based CVD, and laser-assisted CVD 
(Hu et al., 2009). 
7.2.3 FUNCTIONALIZATION 
Despite many advantages of CNTs, there are certain limitations which 
restricted to their purification process during biomedical use. Meanwhile, 
the disagreement arises in solubility issues of CNTs present within 
aqueous media as they are easily contaminated with metal catalysts and 
amorphous carbons and are known to be generally insoluble and do not 
exhibit good biocompatibility. To resolve the nature of dispersion and 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
177 
Carbon Nanotubes: A New Dimension in Human Healthcare Applications 
solubilization, several methods have been explored by modifying the 
surface properties of CNTs. These methods can be simply described 
in terms of functionalization approach that is currently implemented 
to increase the bio-solubility of CNTs. This functionalization process 
depends upon the attachment of organic or inorganic moieties to their 
hexagonal tubular graphene sheet (Thakare et al., 2010). Moreover, the 
physicochemical properties can be modulated through the functionaliza-
tion of CNTs. Presently, the two major functionalization techniques are 
available for the modification of CNTs named as noncovalent functional-
ization and covalent functionalization basing on the interaction of active 
material and CNTs. These methods have been extensively applied via 
using different chemical groups, whereas CNTs depend upon the reac-
tivity of functional group with tips and side walls. It has been shown that 
CNT tips have a higher affinity for binding functional groups compared 
to that of the side walls (Pastorin et al, 2006). 
7.2.3.1 NONCOVALENT FUNCTIONALIZATION 
This functionalization process preserves the aromatic/electronic character 
of the surface carbon along with the structural properties of CNTs causing 
minimal structure damage. The noncovalent bonding is established 
between the hydrophobic chains of biocompatible functional groups and 
the hydrophobic surface of CNTs. The major driving forces like van der 
Waals interactions, π–π interactions, and hydrophobic interaction act 
as key regulators in the stabilization of noncovalent functionalization. 
However, with the influence of chemical treatment, the charge on the 
surface of CNTs is able to adsorb the molecules through ionic interaction. 
Other biomolecules like nucleic acids, amphiphilic polymers, oligomers, 
surfactants, and peptide contributed to the structural backbone of func-
tionalized biomolecules by establishing the π–π interactions between 
aromatic or amino acid bases and surface of CNTs. It has been reported 
that polymers and biopolymers (nucleic acids and peptides) are very 
efficient in the dispersion process, whereas surfactants used widely due to 
their low cost and ease of availability (Lu and Chen, 2011). Concurrently, 
the weaker strength provided by the noncovalent bond in the noncovalent 
functionalization makes the CNTs inadequate nanocarrier for tumor target 
drug delivery. 

 
 
178 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
7.2.3.2 COVALENT FUNCTIONALIZATION 
The covalent functionalization or chemical functionalization approach can 
be achieved by modifying the CNT surface through different techniques. 
These techniques can be classified as surface oxidation and addition 
reaction to CNTs. In these techniques, the CNTs treated with strong acid 
solutions via surface oxidation process that generates cuts at the surface 
of CNTs and produce a number of carboxylic acid groups at the defect 
point, predominantly on the open ends. These incorporated carboxylate 
functionalities increase the hydrophilicity of the CNTs, thereby enhancing 
the solubility in polar solvents (water) and biocompatibility (Chen et al., 
2017). The oxidized CNTs can be further coated with PEG (polyethylene 
glycol), a hydrophilic substance with the ability to make CNTs more 
bio-stable (Madani et al., 2011). Furthermore, the alternative side-wall 
functionalization process was accomplished by addition reactions where 
the activation of carboxylic group performed by treating with concentrated 
sulfuric and nitric acid and heated with ultrasonic wave. Thus, it puri-
fies CNTs through the removal of metal catalyst and amorphous carbon 
(Saifuddin et al, 2013). This process allows for side-wall covalent func-
tionalization, and carboxylic acid groups attached to the surface of CNTs 
to make it water soluble. However, the side wall of CNT got damaged 
and led to the alteration in structural properties. The covalent bonding of 
biocompatible functional groups of CNT in the surface region provides 
stability and makes CNT-suitable vehicle for drug delivery. The features of 
the carbon atoms in CNTs produce amazing properties that is suitable for 
a variety of applications in the electronics, photonics, renewable energy, 
drug delivery, and the biomedical sector. 
7.2.3.3 HYBRID FUNCTIONALIZATION 
Apart from carboxylated CNTs (MWNTs–COOH), covalently func-
tionalized CNTs (MWNTs–NH2), noncovalently functionalized CNTs 
(MWNTs–PPA), and a new strategy called hybrid functionalization have 
also been adopted to enhance the reproducibility and better understanding 
regarding the structure–property relationship of CNTs. Hybrid functional-
ized CNTs (MWNTs–COOH–PPA) are developed by modifying MWNTs 
to improve the dispersion of MWNTs within the matrix with controlled 

 
 
179 
Carbon Nanotubes: A New Dimension in Human Healthcare Applications 
regulation of interfacial interactions (Li and Kim, 2011). A different kind 
of composites, polyurethane (PU), is prepared from these modifying 
MWNTs with improved thermal and mechanical properties which can be 
helpful in the prevention of the detachment of noncovalent wrapping. The 
hybrid functionalized CNTs (MWNTs–COOH–PPA/PU) have exceptional 
tensile strength. The increment rate in tensile strength is 104% higher than 
pure PU (Zhu and Wei, 2012). Other functional components like metal 
nanoparticles (NPs), quantum dots, inorganic oxides, and organic species 
can be incorporated to develop CNT-based hybrid nanomaterials with 
synergistic properties (Eder, 2010). Additionally, the efficient fabrication 
of CNT-based nanohybrids is the prime requirement for the activation of 
CNT graphitic surfaces. Earlier successful delivery of an anticancer drug, 
Doxorubicin, through nanohybrid carrier into tumor cells made CNT-
based hybrid nanomaterials promising therapeutic approach (Jha et al., 
2020). However, for biocompatibility and other safety and health issues, 
a detailed investigation is required to gain a clear toxicity profile of these 
hybrid materials. 
7.3 APPLICATION IN HUMAN HEALTH CARE 
7.3.1 THERAPEUTIC APPLICATIONS 
Having the status of the most universally exploited nanomaterials, CNTs 
have drawn interest of numerous researchers as a desirable candidate 
material in the field of health care and therapeutics. CNTs are fabricated as 
hollow cylindrical tubes consisting of carbon with a high aspect ratio and 
stable hybridization, depending on the number of graphite layers, different 
classes of SWNTs, double-walled nanotubes, and MWNTs (Kumar et 
al., 2017). Owing to their excellent surface area, cell permeability, and 
biocompatibility, the CNTs are assumed to be as smart candidates for the 
targeted delivery of various drugs of interest. Basic applications include 
the use of functionalized CNTs as the nanocarrier for the delivery of thera-
peutic molecules. Another application explores the use of CNT to form 
scaffold in tissue engineering, wound healing, and regenerative medicines 
(Yang et al., 2007). The last three decades have principally focused on 
employing CNTs for drug delivery in cancer therapy as well as many other 
degenerative diseases. The CNT-based therapeutic applications in various 
aspects are schematically presented in Scheme 7.1. 

 
 
180 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
SCHEME 7.1 Graphical representation of different types of CNT-based therapeutic 
applications. 
7.3.1.1 CNTS IN CHEMOTHERAPEUTIC ADVANCES 
In actuality, the archetypal attempt to treat such diseases is the admin-
istration of chemotherapeutic medicines that experience general toxicity, 
limited curative interface, drug resistance, and lesser penetrating ability 
(Kumar et al., 2017). In this perspective, CNTs present an advantageous 
opportunity as a smart vehicle for anticancer drugs by reducing their 
toxicity and enhancing local accumulation in the desired site. From the 
current status, several types of chemically active therapeutic compounds 
have been verified in relation to their interaction and functionality with the 
CNTs (Saliev, 2019). The utmost and vital efforts have been implemented 
toward the conjugation of standard chemotherapeutics with CNTs that 
have been extensively used for cancer treatment in the clinics as chemo-
therapy well-known drug which includes cisplatin, doxorubicin, paclitaxel, 
methotrexate, and flutamide. SWCNTs of 5.4–12.67 µg ml−1 were used as 
nanovehicle for delivery of tamoxifen for human breast cancer cell line 

 
 
 
 
181 
Carbon Nanotubes: A New Dimension in Human Healthcare Applications 
to show higher toxicity toward cancerous cells (Oskoueian et al., 2018). 
There are many literatures available where different anticancer chemo-
therapeutic agents have been delivered using CNT as the nanovehicle to 
treat bladder cancer, colon cancer, and other forms of cancer in both cell 
lines as well as animal models (Simon et al., 2019). Apart from cancer 
treatment, functionalized CNTs also find application in other diseases like 
metabolic syndrome, cardiac failure, and inflammation. Few examples 
include the study where SWCNT were used to administer prednisolone for 
collagen-induced arthritis (Nakamura et al., 2011). Some earlier reports 
regarding oral administration of SWCNT with nifedipine for hyperten-
sion in animal models suggest about lower cytotoxicity and effective 
drug delivery (Liu et al., 2009). Another study explored one example of 
MWCNT with clonidiene for topical application to treat tachycardia and 
hypertension (Strasinger et al., 2014). Transdermal delivery of MWCNT 
is also reported along with drug ditiazemhydrochloride for faster action 
to treat angaina pectoris and hypertension (Bhunia et al., 2013). These 
reports establish the exploration of CNT for effective drug delivery as well 
as shed light on the evaluation of toxicity effects on the cell. The cytotoxic 
effects may serve a primary challenge to translate the bench science to 
biomedical industry. Further research on development of nontoxic and 
bio-functionalized CNT will focus to reduce the cytotoxic effect as much 
as possible. 
7.3.1.2 CNTS IN GENE THERAPY AND NUCLEIC ACID THERAPEUTICS 
From several years, gene vectors are implemented for therapeutic appli-
cations but the real potential has yet to be realized. Researchers have 
developed their interest for inventing several innovative tools to deliver 
genes at the required specific site of action in mammalian cell lines with 
the advent of hollow cylindrical carbon nanomaterials such as CNTs. 
Research in the realm of nonviral gene therapy based on plasmid DNA 
and antisense oligonucleotides have advanced for decades and will resume 
toward improving target-specific delivery and transfection efficiencies to 
the levels required for in-vivo clinical trials. The diversified functionaliza-
tion of CNTs has evolved as one of the most pliable nonviral vectors for 
gene therapy. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
182 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
DNA and small interference ribonucleic acids (siRNA) are double-
stranded nucleic acids and both contain anionic phosphodiester back-
bones with similar negative charge-to-nucleotide ratio and can interact 
electrostatically with cationic agents. Despite sharing similarities, it is to 
be considered that siRNA molecules possess distinct characteristics, and 
delivery technologies should be advanced to match the criteria specifi-
cally. There are a number of hindrances which need to be addressed 
in order to achieve the efficient delivery of siRNA molecules into the 
targeted cells. First is the molecules’ tendency to degrade by serum and 
tissue nucleases. In contrast to DNA, ribose of RNA backbone where 
hydroxyl group situated at 2′ position of the pentose ring instead of 
hydrogen, making the RNA backbone more susceptible to hydrolysis by 
serum nucleases in the extracellular environment, which cleave along 
the phosphodiester backbone of nucleic acids. The remarkably small size 
of siRNA fragments (less than 21 base pairs) makes a less potent RNAi 
effect and causes rapid excretion via kidney even after stable transfec-
tion of siRNA and the inefficient endocytosis by targeted tumor cells 
and the inefficient release from endosomes. To address such challenges, 
viral capsid protein has been in use for transfection of siRNA. Viruses 
have evolved to efficiently overcome these blockages; however, the 
immunogenicity caused by the viral particles has limited the successful 
nucleic-acid-based therapy. In similar condition, CNT offers less immu-
nogenic and efficient vector for delivery of siRNA inside living cells. Dai 
and coworkers demonstrated that SWCNTs are able to deliver siRNA 
into human T cells and primary cells by acting as nonviral molecular 
transporters (Liu et al., 2007). The role of CNTs as a novel gene-delivery 
vector system was first reported by Bianco et al. in 2005. They covalently 
functionalized CNTs using the Prato reaction, 1,3-dipolar cyclo-addition 
of azomethine to fabricate soluble material in aqueous condition. Both 
SWCNT and MWCNT were functionalized with a pyrrolidine ring 
bearing a free amine-terminal oligoethylene glycol moiety attached to 
the nitrogen atom which increases the solubility of CNTs in aqueous 
solutions. Small bundles of nanotubes were formed with a diameter of 
around 20 nm and length of around 200 nm. The delivery of plasmid 
DNA and the expression of β-galactosidase (marker gene) in CHO cells 
were studied. The expression was only 10 times higher than the naked 
pDNA alone, still much less effective than that of liposomes. However, 
they found that the DNA carbon nanotube (DNA-CNT) complexes were 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
183 
Carbon Nanotubes: A New Dimension in Human Healthcare Applications 
of effective transport vehicle without any toxic effect on the activated or 
nonactivated lymphocyte unlike dendrimers and liposomes (Cheung et 
al., 2010). These traditional nonviral genes that deliver vectors gener-
ally cause destabilization of the cell membrane and lead to pronounced 
cytotoxicity while achieving effective delivery of DNA. They attributed 
the lower cytotoxicity of the DNA–CNT complex to the capability of 
penetrating cell membrane. They studied the internalization mechanism 
of the amine functionalized CNTs and found that probably these CNTs 
entered the cells by a spontaneous mechanism in which they behaved 
like nanoneedles and passed through the cell membrane without causing 
cell death. A recent work involved the induction of suicide gene, iC9, 
to cause safe cell death in human breast cancer cell line using MWCNT 
(Mohseni-Dargah et al., 2019). Recently, many approaches involving 
CNTs were made extensively as a potential delivery agent of nucleic 
acids cell internalization. Various formulations of CNTs have been 
developed and proved to enhance the delivery and the uptake of different 
nucleic acid types such as plasmid DNA, siRNA, and miRNA. These 
specific results of nucleic acid delivery with CNTs represent a critical 
advance in the field of gene therapy with promising future formulations 
to be generated as a sanctioned medicine for systemic treatment of many 
diseases followed by required clinical studies. 
7.3.1.3 CNT-MEDIATED PTT AGAINST CANCER 
Over the past few decades, cancer has progressed at a phenomenal rate 
and provides a significant threat to human health. However, considerable 
efforts are being directed to selectively target the cancerous tissue with 
marginal impairment to normal tissue. In recent times, the arena of nano-
structure studies has crossed roads with the foreground of cancer therapy 
and appeared as a promising therapeutic platform through NP-mediated 
therapy. This field provides a range of nanomaterial; particularly CNTs 
arise as a novel delivery system to improve the pharmacological perfor-
mance of the delivered drug and mark a significant step in photothermal 
therapy (PTT) and radiofrequency-based thermal treatments which repre-
sent the potential form of noninvasive cancer therapy. 
However, CNTs as one of the potential dynamic nanocarriers have 
received tremendous attention due to its versatile applications in 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
184 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
biomedical fields, particularly in the areas of tissue engineering, bio­
sensing, thermal ablation, and drug delivery (Simmons et al., 2009). 
Considering the fact that CNTs have the ability to enter cells indepen-
dent of cell type and functional group through passive diffusion across 
lipid bilayer or endocytosis by attaching through surface of the cell and 
provide multiple sites for attachment of different molecules and experi-
ence the improved permeability along with retention validity, that is, 
they exhibit higher accumulation in tumor tissues (Fabbro et al., 2012). 
These features make the CNTs a competent tool for all kinds of diagnosis 
and therapeutics in drug delivery field. Hence, they have a predominant 
role as mediators and delivery vectors in PTT and photodynamic therapy 
which is recently considered as a new therapeutic in oncology to directly 
destroy cancer cells with the minimal toxicity to surrounding healthy 
tissues (Doughty et al., 2019). CNTs adopted extensively in PTT due to 
its impressive absorption ability under near-infrared (NIR) (700–1100 
nm) and radio-frequency radiation where they undergo synchronized 
oscillations to convert NIR light that kills the targeted cancer cells. 
Furthermore, due to their remarkable physiochemical properties such 
as special electrical and thermal capabilities, these nanosized carbon 
materials are able to determine the capacity of heat transmission and 
cancer cell erosion. CNTs are able to target the malignant tumor tissues 
in a specific and selective manner where the cell death mechanism 
involves mostly three processes such as cell membrane destruction, 
irreversible protein, and DNA denaturation and angiogenesis blocking 
(Fig. 7.2) (Pinto and Pocard, 2018). NIR releases significant heat by 
using functionalized SWCNT/MWCNT where they are able to generate 
the heat through the excitation and relaxation of optical transitions by 
absorbing the incident photons as well as by transferring the heat to the 
surrounding matrix. The transmission of laser beam to the target tumor 
cell can be eventuated in nanosecond exposure for ablation of individual 
tumor cells with least damage to normal tissues and maximum tempera-
ture can be reached up to 300°C. On the other hand, primary malignant 
tumor cells can be treated by disabling the cell function with exposure of 
few minutes’ laser beam where the maximum range is maintained within 
85–90°C. The ablation temperature range by heating the nanotube is 
found to be 50–70°C through continuous laser irradiation at high-power 
density (3.5–35 W cm−2) for a long time (3–4 min) inside the cell. 

 
185 
Carbon Nanotubes: A New Dimension in Human Healthcare Applications 
FIGURE 7.2  Schematic presentation of photothermal therapy (PTT) using nanoparticles 
in tumor cells. 
Source: Reproduced with permission from Pinto et al., 2018. Copyright 2018. Walter de 
Gruyter and Company 
In agreement, the in-vivo as well as in-vitro experiments have been 
conducted by many researchers to explore the tumor destruction effect 
of SWCNTs and MWCNTs. A photo-ablative archetypal exploiting 
MWCNTs along with NIR spectral waves in order to annihilate kidney 
cancer cells were proposed by Torti et al. to augment the thermal destruc
tion functioning of tumor cells by means of boron and nitrogen dopants 
(2007). The study confirmed the earlier proposed antenna theory to be truly 
effective with an efficient NIR coupling resulting at nanotube lengths. This 
was showed in exceeding half of the wavelength of the radiating NIR with 
increased temperature. The radiation resulted in elevated temperature of 
MWCNTs through induction processes; subsequently, the heat produced 
from MWCNTs was transmitted toward the neighboring area to carry on 
obliteration of the cancer cells at a relatively lower radiation doses. In their 
findings, they showed that lengths between 700 and 1100 nm were most 
desirable for killing the tumor cells (Levi-Polyachenko et al., 2009). In a 
similar way, a desirable uniform size (~0.81 nm) described for SWCNTs 
with a narrow absorption peak at 980 nm for selective PTT to kill cancer 
cells (Zhou et al., 2009). 
-

 
 
186 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
Another captivating finding is uncovered by discovery of nanobombs 
in the field of CNT-based drug delivery which could be administrated for 
killing breast cancer cells (Panchapakesan et al., 2005). Moreover, the 
photothermal effect of SWCNT improved by attaching the cell-bound 
ligands such as monoclonal antibodies and peptides through covalent 
or noncovalent bonding. Subsequently, the breast cancer cell lines like 
HER2, IGF1R, and BT474 examined through functionalized SWCNTs 
with specific antibodies irradiated with 808 nm infrared laser light for only 
3 min (Panchapakesan et al., 2005; Khosroshahi et al., 2015). Nonetheless, 
MWCNTs could also be functionalized with biomolecules like conjugated 
disialoganglioside monoclonal antibody irradiated with an 808-nm NIR 
laser to target disialoganglioside. Disialoganglioside molecules are tumor-
associated antigens highly expressed upon the surface of neuroblastoma 
stNB-V1 tumor cell phenotypes. In order to trace the monoclonal antibodies 
or antidisialoganglioside-bound MWCNTs, Rhoda mine B was probed on 
carboxylated CNTs functionalized alongside anti-disialoganglioside as 
well as without them. MWCNTs bound with antibodies developed as a 
prospective coupling agent for the efficient PTT of neuroblastoma cells 
(Wang et al., 2009). 
However, the release of drug can be achieved in a controlled and 
sustained manner with the use of induction heating of template-synthe-
sized CNTs, because particularly, NIR absorption and energy transduction 
efficiency found to be high across a wide frequency range maintaining 
a flexibility in the choice of both material characteristics and excitation 
wavelengths (Yu et al., 2012). Recently, a fascinating development is found 
to be useful where an implantable bio-electronic device, a unique CNT-
based photothermal–electrical converter, is able to convert the thermal 
energy generated by NIR light to electrical energy and the device can be 
operated from the outside of the body (Miyako et al., 2011). Furthermore, 
the advancement of CNTs in PTT is extended by developing an immuno-
specific augmented nanotube system. This system was developed using an 
immune adjuvant, glaciated chitosan and SWCNTs where the stimulated 
thermal as well as immunogenic effects of tumor cells using GC–SWCNTs 
and NIR laser system were examined in animal cancer models in in-vitro 
and in-vivo environment conditions with minimal side effects (Zhou et al., 
2012). 

 
 
 
187 
Carbon Nanotubes: A New Dimension in Human Healthcare Applications 
7.3.1.4 WOUND HEALING WITH CNTS 
The advanced and biocompatible materials fabricated with CNTs may 
enable the improved recuperation of neuronal tissue damage as well as 
muscular tissue loss consequential from injury while precluding septicity. 
Reports have demonstrated that CNTs can be exploited effectually like 
platforms or scaffolds meant for the enhanced and efficient growth of 
various mammalian cells for instance nerve cells, otherwise difficult to 
grow pluripotent stem cells, cardiac cells including smooth muscles, and 
endothelial along with epithelial cells. These advances use CNTs for cell 
growth, with no apparent toxicity, and provide a platform for generation 
of wound-healing antiseptic nanofibers from CNTs. Simmons et al. in 
2009 have created a novel nanocomposite material from the combination 
of SWCNTs with polyvinylpyrollidone in water. A novel nanocomposite 
scaffold based on polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) and MWCNT was synthesized 
and employed for antimicrobial bioactivity. The results have indicated that 
the nanocomposite membranes were obtained with thickness, mechanical 
properties, and swelling behavior comparable to those characteristics 
of skin tissues. Moreover, these designed hybrids have also presented 
preliminary biocompatibility based on the response of cell cultures using 
MTT assay (Santos et al., 2014). The filtration of that aqueous suspension 
synthesized a highly purified micropermeable layer which has the facility 
for antiseptic iodine on the surface of a complex of SWCNT wrapped 
in polymer. This material is intensely antiseptic; in addition, the control 
samples without iodine also had no evident antimicrobial activity. A novel 
three-phase disinfectant material ideal for wound dressing was reported 
from CNTs, silver nanoparticles (Ag NPs), and PVA nanofibers (Jatoi et 
al., 2019). Ag NPs were first assembled on CNT surfaces forming CNTs– 
Ag NP nanostructures which were combined to the PVA-based nanofibers 
in advance of electrospinning to synthesize PVA/carbon nanotubes–Ag 
NP nanocomposites. Every aspect of the physiochemical characterizations 
substantiated the tri-phasic structural architecture of nanofiber. Owing to 
the growth of Ag NPs on carbon nanotubes surfaces as well as entrenching 
into PVA-based nanofibers, the dressings could be employed aiming at safer 
and persistent wound-healing applications. The remarkable disinfection 
abilities along with sustained bacteriostatic features of the nanocomposite 
were confirmed with the antibacterial assays. Another application of CNTs 
was reported the slow release of isoniazid on tuberculosis wounds in a 

 
 
188 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
controlled manner. Transmission electron microscopy analysis revealed 
that the diameter of CNTs and NPs remained among 150 and 250 nm 
which noticeably extended the release time of isoniazid. In addition, the 
rate of release remained further continual in inhibiting the multiplication 
of remaining pathogenic Mycobacterium tuberculosis nearby surgical 
wound. In-vitro investigations exhibited that chitosan/CNT nanocom-
posites not only supplemented purpose of isoniazid but also were able 
to decrease the negative effects of cytotoxicity and inflammation. A 
further experiment on animal model of tuberculosis ulcer revealed that 
isoniazid/chitosan/CNT NPs stimulated the restoration of tuberculosis 
ulcer. Assessed with the isoniazid group and isoniazid/CNTs group, the 
surface area of wounds reduced by 94.6% and 89.8%, respectively (Chen 
et al., 2019a, b). Weakened wound healing is systemically concomitant 
with various health concerns, including diabetes, bedsores, and extensive 
burns. In such cases, healing often takes a longer time, subjecting patients 
to various complications. In this case, SWCNT or MWCNT complexes 
with chitosan hydrogel can serve as efficient material for enhancing the 
therapeutic molecule exposure and release into the targeted area. 
7.3.1.5 CNTs IN REGENERATIVE MEDICINES 
CNTs are fibrous yet robust nanostructures with a nanosized diameter and 
possess exceptional physical strength as well as chemical potency. These 
structures are used as fillers to improve the performance of materials in 
the industrial field. Since these groups of structures possess remarkable 
physicochemical properties, CNTs are exploited for their potential as 
biomaterials. For regenerative medicine, a supporting scaffold or matrix 
plays key role to maintain the continuous growth of new tissues. Scaf-
folds are prerequisite for tissue regeneration because of their capability to 
retain an unrelenting delivery of growth factors and also to offer a pulpit 
intended for cell proliferation to customize tissue organization. In recent 
years, diverse materials have been formulated and assessed as scaffold for 
regenerative medicine. Functionally specific scaffolds require excellent 
cell permeability, chemical properties, mechanical properties, and safety. 
Considering the excellent mechanical strength of CNTs, elaborate studies 
have been experimented aiming on exploration of these CNTs as reinforcing 
agents in composite biomaterials. Many reports regarding regeneration of 

 
189 
Carbon Nanotubes: A New Dimension in Human Healthcare Applications 
bone tissues and nerve tissues are evident of CNTs as efficient scaffold 
material for regenerative medicine (Tanaka et al., 2020). While designing 
a bone scaffold, one of the primary criteria is the mechanical strength 
and CNTs stand out in comparison to other metallic- or ceramic-based 
bone scaffolds used in orthopedics (such as titanium, stainless steel, and 
alumina), SWCNTs being less dense and lighter scaffolds with very high 
tensile strength in the range of terapascals (Tran et al., 2009). Furthermore, 
it is also observed that the surface-free energies of material affect cell 
adhesion, hence take part in diverse forms of cells’ steps toward greater 
tissue regeneration. Recent advancement in this field has reported the 
3D printing of tough hydrogel-incorporated CNTs for bone regeneration 
(Cui et al., 2019). Another study of biodegradable PLGA–MWCNT used 
to regenerate bone tissues (Díaz et al., 2020). Apart from bone tissue 
regeneration, other emerging interdisciplinary field includes nerve tissue 
regeneration and stem-cell regeneration. Neural tissue engineering has 
triggered rising research interest to develop advanced biological scaffolds 
that rebuild, retain, or recuperate neural tissue functions. Since natural 
neural tissues have numerous nanostructured features like nanostructured 
extracellular matrices that neural cells interact with CNTs which also have 
such nanofeatures and exceptional electrical, mechanical and biocompat-
ibility are ultimate candidates for neural tissue repair. Specifically, with 
the rapid progress of CNT production technologies, a variety of CNTs 
with nanometer to millimeter lengths and widths have been synthesized 
and widely investigated for various neural applications. An improved effi-
cacy of peripheral nerve regeneration and neural regeneration was noticed 
by poly-l-lactic acid MWCNT conduit containing chitosan-encapsulated 
curcumin and electrospun hyaluronic acid–CNT nanofibers (Steel, 2018; 
Jahromi et al., 2020). 
7.3.2 CNT-BASED BIO-IMAGING APPLICATIONS 
The advanced and novel perspective of CNTs in the field of biomedical 
applications was explored through critical analysis. In recent years, CNTs 
have been widely studied as in-vitro and in-vivo imaging agents due to 
unique physical properties. CNT-based imaging probes widely investi-
gated with efficient penetration in tissue layers along with precised spatial 
resolution that has shown a great promise toward biomedical application. 

 
 
190 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
Different types of CNT-based bio-imaging techniques is featured in 
Scheme 7.2. 
SCHEME 7.2 Graphical representation of different types of CNT-based bio-imaging 
techniques. 
7.3.2.1 FLUORESCENCE BIO-IMAGING 
Among imaging probes, MWCNTs evolved as the environment-friendly 
fluorescent probe which has a tremendous role in the scientific research 
and medical diagnosis. The exceptional potential of MWCNTs to replace 
conventional organic fluorescent dyes and metal-based quantum dots made 
them a convenient candidate for fluorescence bio-imaging. The potenti-
ality of MWCNTs also involves the utilization of the broad absorption 
spectrum, low background, high signal-to-noise ratio, label-free detection, 
real-time monitoring, high sensitivity, their simple preparation, tuneability 
in emission, photochemical stability, high biocompatible, easily dispers-
ibility, and intrinsic band-gap fluorescence near-infrared II (NIR-II) region 
(Gong et al., 2013). The modern emerging fluorescence imaging in NIR-II 
(1000–1700 nm) region empowers picturing of deep anatomical features 
with unprecedented spatial resolution. In comparison to the traditional 
NIR (NIR-I, 650–900 nm) fluorescence imaging, the minimized auto-
fluorescence, optical scattering, and absorption of tissue with increased 
applicable power at longer wavelengths found to be more promising 

 
 
191 
Carbon Nanotubes: A New Dimension in Human Healthcare Applications 
strategy. The development of activatable NIR-II fluorescence probes hold 
great promise for reducing the nonspecific activation and highly depends 
on high fluorescence quantum yield. This high fluorescence quantum 
yield can improve the resolution of in-vivo imaging by avoiding the loss of 
dynamic bio-information with nanoprobes dosage reduction (Tang et al., 
2019). Mostly, the developed NIR-II fluorescence probes have a quantum 
yield below 5%. However, increasing the selectivity of probes for patho-
logical parameters can be alternative way to develop precise activation 
and reduce false-positive signal. Recently, naphthalimide-derived carbon 
dots demonstrated its formidable ability to detect endogenous formalde-
hyde in lysosomes of HeLa cells via fluorescence imaging (Chen et al., 
2019a, b). These CNT-based bio-imaging probes will further encourage 
to moving toward extensive investigation for improving the sensitivity 
and specificity toward target cells. Improvement in the real-time imaging 
of pathological parameters in living organisms is essential to understand 
the underlying pathological mechanism in order to optimize therapeutic 
interventions. 
7.3.2.2 PHOTOACOUSTIC IMAGING 
Photoacoustic (PA) imaging is biomedical imaging methodology to envi-
sion the object dependent on the capacity of the object to retain illuminated 
light. The features like high-contrast, high-spatial resolution with safety 
measurement made PA imaging technique one of the efficient bio-imaging 
modalities. PA imaging technique relied on principle where endogenous 
molecules or contrast agents absorbed the laser pulses in the biological 
sample and led to generation of heat followed by induction of transient 
thermoelastic expansion. The unique feature of PA imaging technique to 
acquire sound detection capacity shows great advantages over traditional 
optical imaging technique. The advantages proved over fluorescence 
imaging by avoiding absorbance and scattering of the emission light 
achieved advanced penetration properties in deep anatomical regions along 
with augmented three-dimensional resolutions in spatial arrangements. The 
role of both MWNTs and SWNTs was well demonstrated during cancer 
treatment by adopting PTT. The strong NIR absorbance builds CNTs as 
competent photothermal agent in PA imaging. The implementation of 
SWNTs with low (~7 pg) noise-equivalent detection sensitivity is able to 

 
 
192 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
allow for tissue analysis application. The effect of conjugated SWNTs is 
found to be more competent as PA contrast agent than plain SWNTs. This 
feature was evident in mice tumor cells where arginylglycylaspartic acid 
(RGD)–conjugated SWNTs provide strong PA signals than plain SWNT-
injected group (Wu et al., 2013). The sensitivity of PA signal can further 
be upgraded by attaching gold layer in terms of golden nanotubes (GNTs) 
with SWNTs to enhance the intrinsic PA signals by elevating the intensity 
of absorbance and optical density near NIR region. Implementation of 
GNTs with antibody can be used for specific recognition and targeting 
of receptor with a better intensity of PA signal while extremely low laser 
fluency level at a few m J cm−2 is obtained without antibody conjuga-
tion (Gong et al., 2013). The detection of circulating tumor cells is an 
extended application of GNTs under PA imaging (Galanzha et al., 2009). 
The intrinsic optical absorbance and coupling with other light-absorbing 
nanostructures or molecules with strong NIR absorbance made CNTs a 
promising contrast agent in PA imaging. 
7.3.2.3 MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING 
In the current scenario, the techniques of magnetic resonance imaging 
(MRI) are considered as the mean for noninvasive modalities of imaging 
used universally in biomedical application. MRI emerged as frequently 
used technique due to its high spatial resolution and soft-tissue-imaging 
properties. Extensive investigations have been widely studied by exploring 
the application of CNTs for MRI. Considering that, MWCNTs are mostly 
used as excellent scaffold for contrast agents due to their magnetic and 
electronic properties with remarkable ability of cell membrane penetra-
tion. The strong confinement of rare earth metals like Gd3+ ion clusters 
within SWNTs and amphiphilic gadolinium(III) chelate (GdL) conjugate 
with MWNTs through noncovalent strategy evolved as probable candidate 
for MRI (Richard et al., 2008). MWCNT hybrids and iron-rich MWCNTs 
with covalent functionalization propose a promising MRI candidate. Most 
importantly, the utilization of MWNTs in stem-cell labeling and tracking 
is one of the successful appliances which were detected through MWNT-
labeled mesenchymal stem cells in animals during MRI (Vittorio et al., 
2011). In MRI, the best results have shown through functionalization of 
CNTs with nonionic poloxamers (e.g., Pluronic®) or their “custom-made” 

 
193 
Carbon Nanotubes: A New Dimension in Human Healthcare Applications 
counterparts, in terms of contrast effect and low cytotoxicity (Kuźnik and 
Tomczyk, 2016). 
7.3.2.4 NUCLEAR IMAGING 
The implementation of CNTs in nuclear imaging has also gained attention 
in diagnosis and therapeutic aspects of medical engineering field. The 
intrinsic characteristics of SWNTs is enabled to expand the versatility as 
imaging probe by including external labels such as radio-isotopes. The 
labeled isotopes 125I and 14C are helpful in accessing the bio-distribution 
of SWNTs and MWNTs in animal (Wang et al., 2004; Deng et al., 2008). 
With advancement of having high sensitivity without tissue penetration 
depth limitation, PEGylated SWNT-coupled RGD peptide and CNTs– 
anti-CD20 antibody conjugates used in specific targeting of human tumor 
cells (McDevitt et al., 2007). Hence, in recent time, the development in 
CNT-based nuclear imaging has occupied the limited place compared to 
other advanced imaging techniques but by combing with other imaging 
techniques can build extraordinary interests in the improvement of CNT-
based bio-imaging modality. 
7.4 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION 
Besides, their application in the delivery of therapeutic agents, the bio-
functionalized CNTs are currently being intensely explored due to their 
impressive ability as scaffolding materials, where they are able to provide 
the support for growth of bone cells, neurons, and cardiomyocytes and 
even direct or promote the differentiation of stem cells into specific 
lineages and hold a great promise for drug delivery in cancer therapy, as 
well as its diagnosis. These intrinsic properties open new avenues for the 
development of novel immune conjugates for cancer phototherapy with 
high performance and efficacy in the distinguishingly specific thermal 
ablation of cancer cells. In other respects, besides their role as carrier of 
chemotherapeutic drugs, antimicrobials, and anti-inflammatory agents, 
to more complex peptide-based vaccines, antibodies and siRNA have 
also been successfully delivered with CNTs using a multitude of strate-
gies, admirable efficacy, and reduced toxicity (Varkouhi et al., 2011). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
194 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
Apart from its role as a tremendous nanocarrier in drug delivery system, 
CNT has immense impact in the field of genetic engineering and tissue 
engineering by manipulating genomes and atoms in order to develop bio-
imaging genomes (Harrison and Atala, 2007). The covalent bond between 
carbon atoms provides mechanical stability and thermal conductivity to 
the nanotubes which makes them potential transporter in diagnosis and 
therapeutics application. CNTs also identified as effective vector in gene 
therapy due to its tabular nature. Certainly, CNTs have a dominant role as 
catalyst due to the larger surface area where the amount of catalyst can be 
incorporated at molecular level; along with that, it also acts as biosensor 
for its fluorescence ability (Zhu et al., 2011). The advantages of CNTs 
have also been explored as artificial implants and preservative due to 
its high tensile strength and antioxidant properties. Nonetheless, recent 
studies explored the advantages and applications of CNTs in the field of 
therapeutics and diagnosis as a promising object which can be further 
implemented in the future of medicine. Many of the deadlocks have to be 
unlocked involving nanotubes in nanotherapeutics also where nanotube 
structures stand in connection with integration inside living systems or 
biological models. However, further concerns exist, for instance, what 
would be possible toxicological impacts of nanotubes on a natural or 
artificial living system are and how cells can be motivated to efficiently 
uptake nanotubes can create new horizons for human health-care systems 
with CNT in them. 
KEYWORDS 
• 
CNTs 
• 
carbon nanotubes 
• 
siRNA 
• 
drug delivery 
• 
therapeutics 
REFERENCES 
Anazawa, K.; Shimotani, K.; Manabe, C.; Watanabe, H.; Shimizu, M. High-Purity Carbon 
Nanotubes Synthesis Method by an Arc Discharging in Magnetic Field. Appl. Phys. Lett. 
2002, 81, 739–741. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
195 
Carbon Nanotubes: A New Dimension in Human Healthcare Applications 
Bhunia, T.; Giri, A.; Nasim, T.; Chattopadhyay, D.; Bandyopadhyay, A. A Transdermal 
Diltiazem Hydrochloride Delivery Device Using Multi-Walled Carbon Nanotube/Poly 
(Vinyl Alcohol) Composites. Carbon, 2013, 52, 305–315. 
Bianco, A.; Hoebeke, J.; Kostarelos, K.; Prato, M.; Partidos, C. D. Carbon Nanotubes: On 
the Road to Deliver. Curr. Drug Delivery, 2005, 2, 253–259. 
Chen, G.; Wu, Y.; Yu, D.; Li, R.; Luo, W.; Ma, G.; Zhang, C. Isoniazid-Loaded Chitosan/ 
Carbon Nanotubes Microspheres Promote Secondary Wound Healing of Bone 
Tuberculosis. J. Biomater. Appl. 2019a, 33, 989–996. 
Chen, S.; Jia, Y.; Zou, G. Y.; Yu, Y. L.; Wang, J. H. A Ratiometric Fluorescent Nanoprobe 
Based on Naphthalimide Derivative-Functionalized Carbon Dots for Imaging Lysosomal 
Formaldehyde in HeLa Cells. Nanoscale 2019b, 11, 6377–6383. 
Chen, Z.; Zhang, A.; Wang, X.; Zhu, J.; Fan, Y.; Yu, H.; Yang, Z. The Advances of Carbon 
Nanotubes in Cancer Diagnostics and Therapeutics. J. Nanomater. 2017. 
Cheung, W.; Pontoriero, F.; Taratula, O.; Chen, A. M.; He, H. DNA and Carbon Nanotubes 
as Medicine. Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev. 2010, 62, 633–649. 
Cui, H.; Yu, Y.; Li, X.; Sun, Z.; Ruan, J.; Wu, Z. Direct 3D Printing of a Tough Hydrogel 
Incorporated with Carbon Nanotubes for Bone Regeneration. J. Mater. Chem. B 2019, 
7, 7207–7217. 
Dai, H. Carbon Nanotubes: Synthesis, Integration, and Properties. Acc. Chem. Res., 2002, 
35, 1035–1044. 
Deng, X.; Yang, S.; Nie, H.; Wang, H.; Liu, Y. A Generally Adoptable Radiotracing Method 
for Tracking Carbon Nanotubes in Animals. Nanotechnology 2008, 19, 075101. 
Díaz, E.; Puerto, I.; Sandonis, I.; Ribeiro, S.; Lanceros Mendez, S. Hydrolytic Degradation 
and Cytotoxicity of Poly (Lactic Coglycolic Acid)/Multiwalled Carbon Nanotubes for 
Bone Regeneration. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 2020, 137, 48439. 
Doughty, A. C.; Hoover, A. R.; Layton, E.; Murray, C. K.; Howard, E. W.; Chen, W. R. 
Nanomaterial Applications in Photothermal Therapy for Cancer. Materials 2019, 12, 
779. 
Dresselhaus, M. S. Nanotube Antennas. Nature  2004, 432, 959–960. 
Eder, D. Carbon Nanotube—Inorganic Hybrids. Chem. Rev. 2010, 110, 1348–1385. 
El-Sayed, A.; Kamel, M. Advances in Nanomedical Applications: Diagnostic, Therapeutic, 
Immunization, and Vaccine Production. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 2020, 27, 19200–19213. 
Fabbro, C.; Ali-Boucetta, H.; Da Ros, T.; Kostarelos, K.; Bianco, A.; Prato, M. Targeting 
Carbon Nanotubes Against Cancer. Chem. Comm. 2012,  48, 3911–3926. 
Galanzha, E. I.; Shashkov, E. V.; Kelly, T.; Kim, J. W.; Yang, L.; Zharov, V. P. In Vivo 
Magnetic Enrichment and Multiplex Photoacoustic Detection of Circulating Tumour 
Cells. Nat. Nanotechnol. 2009, 4, 855–860. 
Gao, C.; Guo, Z.; Liu, J. H.; Huang, X. J. The New Age of Carbon Nanotubes: An Updated 
Review of Functionalized Carbon Nanotubes in Electrochemical Sensors. Nanoscale 
2012, 4, 1948–1963. 
Gong, H.; Peng, R.; Liu, Z. Carbon Nanotubes for Biomedical Imaging: The Recent 
Advances. Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev. 2013,  65, 1951–1963. 
Harrison, B. S.; Atala, A. Carbon Nanotube Applications for Tissue Engineering. 
Biomaterials  2007, 28, 344–353. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
196 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
Hu, C. Y.; Xu, Y. J.; Duo, S. W.; Zhang, R. F.; Li, M. S. Non-Covalent Functionalization 
of Carbon Nanotubes with Surfactants and Polymers. J. Chin. Chem. Soc. 2009, 56, 
234–239. 
Jahromi, H. K.; Farzin, A.; Hasanzadeh, E.; Barough, S. E.; Mahmoodi, N.; Najafabadi, 
M. R. H. Enhanced sciatic nerve regeneration by poly-L-Lactic Acid/Multi-Wall 
Carbon Nanotube Neural Guidance Conduit Containing Schwann Cells and Curcumin 
Encapsulated Chitosan Nanoparticles in Rat. Mater. Sci. Eng. C, 2020, 109, 110564. 
Jatoi, A. W.; Kim, I. S.; Ni, Q. Q. Cellulose Acetate Nanofibers Embedded with Ag NPs 
Anchored TiO2 Nanoparticles for Long Term Excellent Antibacterial Applications. 
Carbohydr. Polym., 2019, 207, 640–649. 
Jha, R.; Singh, A.; Sharma, P. K.; Fuloria, N. K. Smart Carbon Nanotubes for Drug Delivery 
System: A Comprehensive Study. J. Drug Deliv. Sci. Technol., 2020, 101811. 
Khosroshahi, M. E.; Hassannejad, Z.; Firouzi, M.; Arshi, A. R. Nanoshell-Mediated 
Targeted Photothermal Therapy of HER2 Human Breast Cancer Cells Using Pulsed and 
Continuous Wave Lasers: An In Vitro Study. Lasers Med. Sci., 2015, 30, 1913–1922. 
Kumar, S.; Rani, R.; Dilbaghi, N.; Tankeshwar, K. Kim, K. H. Carbon Nanotubes: A Novel 
Material for Multifaceted Applications in Human Healthcare. Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 
46, 158–196. 
Kuźnik, N.; Tomczyk, M. M. Multiwalled Carbon Nanotube Hybrids as MRI Contrast 
Agents. Beilstein J. Nanotechnol. 2016, 7, 1086–1103. 
Levi-Polyachenko, N. H.; Merkel, E. J.; Jones, B. T.; Carroll, D. L.; Stewart IV, J. H. Rapid 
Photothermal Intracellular Drug Delivery Using Multiwalled Carbon Nanotubes. Mol. 
Pharma. 2009, 6, 1092–1099. 
Li, H.; Kim, I. Fabrication and Applications of Carbon Nanotube-Based Hybrid 
Nanomaterials by Means of Non-Covalently Functionalized Carbon Nanotubes. In 
Carbon Nanotubes–From Research to Applications; 2011; pp 211–228. 
Liu, H.; Bu, Y.; Mi, Y.; Wang, Y. Interaction Site Preference Between Carbon Nanotube and 
Nifedipine: A Combined Density Functional Theory and Classical Molecular Dynamics 
Study. J. Mol. Struct., 2009, 901, 163–168. 
Liu, Z.; Winters, M.; Holodniy, M.; Dai, H. siRNA Delivery Into Human T Cells and 
Primary Cells with Carbon Nanotube Transporters. Angew. Chem. 2007, 119, 2069–2073. 
Lu, L.; Chen, W. Supramolecular Self-Assembly of Biopolymers with Carbon Nanotubes 
for Biomimetic and Bio-Inspired Sensing and Actuation. Nanoscale 2011, 3, 2412–2420. 
Madani, S. Y.; Naderi, N.; Dissanayake, O.; Tan, A.; Seifalian, A. M. A New Era of Cancer 
Treatment: Carbon Nanotubes as Drug Delivery Tools. Int. J. Nanomed., 2011, 6, 2963. 
Malekzad, H.; Zangabad, P. S.; Mirshekari, H.; Karimi, M.; Hamblin, M. R. Noble Metal 
Nanoparticles in Biosensors: Recent Studies and Applications. Nanotechnol. Rev., 2017, 
6, 301–329. 
Martinelli, V.; Cellot, G.; Toma, F. M.; Long, C. S.; Caldwell, J. H.; Zentilin, L.; Mestroni, 
L. Carbon Nanotubes Promote Growth and Spontaneous Electrical Activity in Cultured 
Cardiac Myocytes. Nano Lett. 2012, 12, 1831–1838. 
McDevitt, M. R.; Chattopadhyay, D.; Kappel, B. J.; Jaggi, J. S.; Schiffman, S. R.; Antczak, 
C. Tumor Targeting with Antibody-Functionalized, Radiolabeled Carbon Nanotubes. J. 
Nucl. Med., 2007, 48, 1180–1189. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
197 
Carbon Nanotubes: A New Dimension in Human Healthcare Applications 
Miyako, E.; Hosokawa, C.; Kojima, M.; Yudasaka, M.; Funahashi, R.; Oishi, I. A 
Photo Thermal Electrical Converter Based on Carbon Nanotubes for Bio-electronic 
Applications. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2011, 50, 12266–12270. 
Mohseni-Dargah, M.; Akbari-Birgani, S.; Madadi, Z.; Saghatchi, F.; Kaboudin, B. Carbon 
Nanotube-Delivered iC9 Suicide Gene Therapy for Killing Breast Cancer Cells In Vitro. 
Nanomedicine 2019, 14, 1033–1047. 
Nakamura, M.; Tahara, Y.; Ikehara, Y.; Murakami, T.; Tsuchida, K.; Iijima, S. Single-Walled 
Carbon Nanohorns as Drug Carriers: Adsorption of Prednisolone and Anti-Inflammatory 
Effects on Arthritis. Nanotechnology 2011, 22, 465102. 
Oskoueian, A.; Amin Matori, K.; Bayat, S.; Oskoueian, E.; Ostovan, F.; Toozandehjani, M. 
Fabrication, Characterization, and Functionalization of Single-Walled Carbon Nanotube 
Conjugated with Tamoxifen and Its Anticancer Potential against Human Breast Cancer 
Cells. J. Nanomater. 2018, 2018, 1–13. 
Panchapakesan, B.; Lu, S.; Sivakumar, K.; Taker, K.; Cesarone, G.; Wickstrom, E. 
Single-Wall Carbon Nanotube Nanobomb Agents for Killing Breast Cancer Cells. 
Nanobiotechnology 2005, 1, 133–139. 
Pastorin, G.; Wu, W.; Wieckowski, S.; Briand, J. P.; Kostarelos, K.; Prato, M.; Bianco, A. 
Double Functionalisation of Carbon Nanotubes for Multimodal Drug Delivery. Chem 
Commum. 2006, 1182–1184. 
Pinto, A.; Pocard, M. Photodynamic Therapy and Photothermal Therapy for the Treatment 
of Peritoneal Metastasis: A Systematic Review. Pleura Peritoneum 2018, 3, 1–22. 
Richard, C.; Doan, B. T.; Beloeil, J. C.; Bessodes, M.; Tóth, É.; Scherman, D. Noncovalent 
Functionalization of Carbon Nanotubes with Amphiphilic Gd3+ Chelates: Toward 
Powerful T1 and T2 MRI Contrast Agents. Nano Lett. 2008, 8, 232–236. 
Saifuddin, N.; Raziah, A. Z.; Junizah, A. R. Carbon Nanotubes: A Review on Structure and 
Their Interaction with Proteins. J. Chem. 2013, 1–18. 
Saliev, T. The Advances in Biomedical Applications of Carbon Nanotubes. C—J. Carbon 
Res. 2019, 5, 29. 
Santos, J. C. C.; Mansur, A. A.; Ciminelli, V. S.; Mansur, H. S. Nanocomposites of Poly 
(Vinyl Alcohol)/Functionalized-Multiwall Carbon Nanotubes Conjugated with Glucose 
Oxidase for Potential Application as Scaffolds in Skin Wound Healing. Int J Polym 
Mater. 2014, 63, 185–196. 
Simmons, T. J.; Lee, S. H.; Park, T. J.; Hashim, D. P.; Ajayan, P. M.; Linhardt, R. J. 
Antiseptic Single Wall Carbon Nanotube Bandages. Carbon 2009, 47, 1561–1564. 
Simon, J.; Flahaut, E.; Golzio, M. Overview of Carbon Nanotubes for Biomedical 
Applications. Materials 2019, 12, 624. 
Steel, E. M. Engineering Hyaluronic Acid-carbon Nanotube Nanofibers: A Peripheral  
Nerve Interface to Electrically Stimulate Regeneration; Wayne State University, 2018.  
Strasinger, C.; Paudel, K. S.; Wu, J.; Hammell, D.; Pinninti, R. R.; Hinds, B. J.; Stinchcomb,  
A. Programmable Transdermal Clonidine Delivery Through Voltage-Gated Carbon 
Nanotube Membranes. J. Pharm. Sci. 2014, 103, 1829–1838. 
Tanaka, M.; Aoki, K.; Haniu, H.; Kamanaka, T.; Takizawa, T.; Sobajima, A. Applications 
of Carbon Nanotubes in Bone Regenerative Medicine. Nanomaterials 2020, 10, 659. 
Tang, Y.; Pei, F.; Lu, X.; Fan, Q.; Huang, W. Recent Advances on Activatable NIR II 
Fluorescence Probes for Biomedical Imaging. Adv. Opt. Mater. 2019, 7, 1900917. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
198 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
Thakare, V. S.; Das, M.; Jain, A. K.; Patil, S.; Jain, S. Carbon Nanotubes in Cancer 
Theragnosis. Nanomedicine 2010, 5, 1277–1301. 
Torti, S. V.; Byrne, F.; Whelan, O.; Levi, N.; Ucer, B.; Schmid, M. Thermal Ablation  
Therapeutics Based on CNx Multi-Walled Nanotubes. Int. J. Nanomed. 2007, 2, 707.  
Tran, P. A.; Zhang, L.; Webster, T. J. Carbon Nanofibers and Carbon Nanotubes in  
Regenerative Medicine. Adv. Drug Delivery Rev. 2009, 61, 1097–1114. 
Varkouhi, A. K.; Foillard, S.; Lammers, T.; Schiffelers, R. M.; Doris, E.; Hennink, W. E.; 
Storm, G. SiRNA Delivery with Functionalized Carbon Nanotubes. Int. J. Pharm. 2011, 
416, 419–425. 
Vittorio, O.; Duce, S. L.; Pietrabissa, A.; Cuschieri, A. Multiwall Carbon Nanotubes as 
MRI Contrast Agents for Tracking Stem Cells. Nanotechnology 2011, 22, 095706. 
Wang, C. H.; Huang, Y. J.; Chang, C. W.; Hsu, W. M.; Peng, C. A. In Vitro Photothermal 
Destruction of Neuroblastoma Cells Using Carbon Nanotubes Conjugated with GD2 
Monoclonal Antibody. Nanotechnology 2009, 20, 315101. 
Wang, H.; Wang, J.; Deng, X.; Sun, H.; Shi, Z.; Gu, Z. Bio-Distribution of Carbon Single-
Wall Carbon Nanotubes in Mice. J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol. 2004, 4, 1019–1024. 
Wu, L.; Cai, X.; Nelson, K.; Xing, W.; Xia, J.; Zhang, R. A Green Synthesis of Carbon 
Nanoparticles from Honey and Their Use in Real-Time Photoacoustic Imaging. Nano 
Res. 2013, 6, 312–325. 
Yang, W.; Thordarson, P.; Gooding, J. J.; Ringer, S. P.; Braet, F. Carbon Nanotubes for 
Biological and Biomedical Applications. Nanotechnology 2007, 18, 412001. 
Yu, J. G.; Jiao, F. P.; Chen, X. Q.; Jiang, X. Y.; Peng, Z. G.; Zeng, D. M.; Huang, D. S. 
Irradiation-Mediated Carbon Nanotubes' Use in Cancer Therapy. J Cancer Res Ther. 
2012, 8, 348. 
Zhou, F.; Da, X.; Ou, Z.; Wu, B.; Resasco, D. E.; Chen, W. R. Cancer Photothermal Therapy 
in the Near-Infrared Region by Using Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes. J. Biomed. Opt. 
2009, 14, 021009. 
Zhou, F.; Wu, S.; Song, S.; Chen, W. R.; Resasco, D. E.; Xing, D. Antitumor 
Immunologically Modified Carbon Nanotubes for Photothermal Therapy. Biomaterials 
2012, 33, 3235–3242. 
Zhu, M. X.; Wei, B. W. Preparation and Properties of Hybrid Functionalized Carbon 
Nanotube Polyurethane Composites. Chinese J. Mater. Res. 2012, 26, 191–19. 

New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons. Aneeya Kumar Samantara & Satyajit Ratha (Eds.)
© 2024 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
CHAPTER 8  
Mechanistic Insight into the Tuneable 
Electronic Properties of Chemically 
Functionalized Graphene Quantum Dots 
MIHIR RANJAN SAHOO1, SATYAJIT RATHA1, and 
ANEEYA K. SAMANTARA2 
1School of Basic Sciences, Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar, 
India 
2School of Chemical Sciences, National Institute of Science Education 
and Research, Bhubaneswar, India 
ABSTRACT 
The emerging graphene quantum dots (GQDs), carbon-based zero-dimen-
sional materials have gained significant attention in research community 
for their promising abilities for optoelectronic, biomedical, and energy-
related applications. The combination of quantum confinement and edge 
effect makes these materials possess exceptional chemical and physical 
properties. This chapter aims to update regarding effect of size and shape 
on electronic properties of GQDs studied by various groups in the past 
few years on theoretical aspects. The modification of electronic properties 
of GQDs by chemical functionalization and the underlying mechanism 
behind the changes in HOMO–LUMO energy gaps of functionalized 
GQDs are systematically summarized. Herein, we discuss a mechanism 
which is based on the competition and collaboration between charge 
transfer and frontier orbital hybridization in edge-functionalized GQDs. 

 
200 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
This study can be useful for better tuning of electronic properties for 
practical device applications. 
8.1 INTRODUCTION 
In the era of global digitalization, the huge demand for the miniaturization 
of electronic and memory storage devices often raises the most common 
question: “what could be the smallest possible size of transistors, resistors, 
memory chips, etc., achievable, to acquire both efficiency and compact-
ness?” Miniaturization plays a major role in the technological revolution, 
since it has several inherent advantages such as low cost, high speed, 
and large density. Thus, miniaturized devices are fast, energy efficient, 
have high aesthetical value, and they are both convenient and extremely 
portable as well. In other words, if the size or dimension of the device 
is small, then most of its physical properties can be controlled through 
quantum mechanical effects and are often labeled as nano-electronic 
devices. Recently, the research on low-dimensional materials has become 
a topic of great interest, as it could lead the technological revolution of the 
world. At nanoscale, the properties of the materials not only depend upon 
the chemical bonds between atoms but also on the size and shape of the 
materials. From the physics point of view, in the case of bulk systems, the 
dimensions or the structures are much larger than the de Broglie wave-
length of the charge carrier, which allows their free movement along any 
direction. But, in nanostructures, the confined dimension is approximately 
in the range of the carrier wavelength. For a typical semiconductor, the 
range of the length scale for the confinement effect lies between 1 and 
25 nm. Here, the movement of the charge carriers is controlled through 
the quantum confinement effect, where electron–hole pairs are confined 
spatially in one or more dimensions within the material. These geometrical 
constraints can act as particle boundaries for electrons, which forces the 
electrons to adjust their energy to give the response to the change in system 
dimensions. Here, the periodicity of the system can be introduced artifi-
cially in which the Brillouin zones are folded into smaller ones and lead to 
the modification in the conduction band. Thus, low-dimensional systems 
show unique electronic, optical, thermal, mechanical, and other physical 
properties, which make them promising candidates for the designing of 
nanoscale devices. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
m 
a =ε 
a 
(8.1)
B 
*
0
m 
201 
Mechanistic Insight into the Tuneable Electronic Properties 
Basically, low-dimensional materials can be classified into three catego-
ries, depending upon the number of confined dimensions. If the structure 
is confined in one dimension and extended in the other two dimensions, 
then it is termed as a two-dimensional (2D) material or a quantum well. 
Similarly, systems confined in two- and three-dimensions are considered 
as one-dimensional (1D) or quantum wires, and zero-dimensional (0D) 
or quantum dots (QDs) materials, respectively. By increasing the number 
of confined dimensions or reducing the number of atoms in a material, 
the discreteness of energy levels can be increased. The narrow potential 
well, created due to the quantum confinement, can trap the charge carriers, 
resulting in a change in the energy levels from continuous (in bulk system) 
to delocalized (in QDs) states. 
As per Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle, if the position of a particle is 
known more precisely, then there will be more uncertainty in the calculation 
of momentum/energy. So, when electrons are more localized in a confined 
system, then their momentum/energy ranges get broadened, which leads 
to an increase in the average energy of electrons in the conduction band. 
As a result, the spacing between the valence band and conduction band 
will increase, resulting in a bandgap. Since there is no bandgap in the case 
of metals, therefore, the quantum size effect is not usually observed. The 
effect is more prominent in the case of semiconductors, due to the presence 
of a finite bandgap. The quantum-size effect has significant impact on the 
material properties of semiconductors, when the size is nearly equal to or 
less than Bohr’s exciton radius of the corresponding bulk semiconductor. 
Bohr’s exciton radius of a semiconductor particle is defined as (Yoffe 
1993) 
where ε, m, m*, and a0 represent dielectric constant of the material, rest 
mass of the electron, mass of the particle, and Bohr’s radius of the hydrogen 
atom, respectively. When the size of particles reaches the order of Bohr’s 
exciton radius, then the excitonic transition energy increases, leading to 
blue shift in the absorption and luminescence spectra. In this chapter, we 
will be focusing on QDs only. 

 
202 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
FIGURE 8.1  Electron density of states (DOS) of bulk and confined nanostructures in 
different dimensions. The absorption to explain the band gap is roughly proportional to 
the DOS. 
The quantum dots are the type of materials in which quantum confine
ment effect is purely observed. These are generally semiconductor 
nanocrystals consisting of hundred to thousand atoms. Thus, electrons 
and electron–hole pairs (excitons) are tightly confined in all three spatial 
dimensions. QDs belong to the nanomaterial family which consists of 
metals, semimetals, semiconductors, insulators, and organic materials. 
But, in general, we consider semiconductor nanocrystals as quantum dots. 
From the basic principle of quantum mechanics, it is known that when 
an electron is confined in space, it acquires kinetic energy and the energy 
spectrum gets discrete. In bulk semiconductor, the electrons can move 
freely inside the solid, leading to a continuous energy spectrum, and the 
density of states (DOS) changes with the square root of energy. However, 
in a very small piece of synthesized semiconductor, the electrons feel 
confined and the DOS becomes discrete with the increase in the energy 
-

 
203 
Mechanistic Insight into the Tuneable Electronic Properties 
gap (Wise, 2000), which is shown in Figure 8.1. This figure indicates that 
the optical properties of a semiconductor can be triggered by controlling 
the size, as DOS changes due to the confinement effect. Out of different 
parameters like shape, defect, surface directions, and so on, the size effect 
has a greater influence on the optical properties of semiconductor QDs. The 
change in surface-to-volume ratio, with change in size, modifies the DOS 
near the band edge of the QDs and also the optical and electronic proper-
ties (Brus, 1991; Choudhury et al., 2011). When a photon is absorbed in 
3D bulk semiconductor, then an electron gets excited from the valence 
band to the conduction band. The excited electron falls to valence band 
from the conduction band by losing its energy and recombines with the 
hole, resulting in the formation of light particles of a certain energy. Thus, 
irrespective of the size of the semiconductor, the light particle always 
interacts with the exciton (one pair of electron and hole) that leads to the 
conservation of total or integrated absorption. So, in the ideal scenario of 
a QD, the DOS becomes a series of delta functions to make the transi-
tion, strong enough to conserve the total absorption, which is indicated in 
Figure 8.1. Since, in a quantum dot, the confined volume is smaller than 
Bohr’s radius, the exciton formed in it requires more energy to be confined. 
This leads to an increase in the band gap of the QDs. If the energy gap 
increases, the light particle with high frequency or low wavelength will 
be created due to electron–hole recombination, resulting in blue shift of 
light. In other words, decreasing the size of QDs or more confining the 
spatial volume of the materials leads to blue shift (lower wavelength side) 
of emission or absorption spectra. 
For the past two decades, due to spectroscopic electro-optical proper-
ties, the semiconductor quantum dots have gained significant attention 
in the research community, as they have potential applications in the 
biomedical industries (Jin and Hildebrandt, 2012; Shao et al., 2011; Yu, 
2008; Zhou et al., 2015), bio-sensing (Freeman et al., 2007; Hildebrandt, 
2011; Jin and Hildebrandt, 2012; Martynenko et al., 2017; Xing et al., 
2009), bio-imaging (Arya et al., 2005; Green, 2004; Jin and Hildebrandt, 
2012; Martynenko et al., 2017; Xing et al., 2009), photovoltaic solar 
cells (Hetsch et al., 2011; Nozik et al., 2010; Raffaelle et al., 2002; Tian 
and Cao, 2013), quantum information processing (Biolatti et al., 2002; 
Troiani et al., 2000; Wu et al., 2004), and many optoelectronic devices 
(Masut et al., 1995; Reithmaier et al., 2006; Skolnick and Mowbray, 2004; 
Wang et al., 2007). However, high market cost and toxicity associated 

 
 
204 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
with inorganic semiconductor QDs hinder their applicability in industry 
and biomedicine. These limitations have stimulated the researches to 
find out an alternative for these inorganic QDs, and with the advanced 
technology, the carbon-based QDs, that is, carbon quantum dots (CQDs) 
and graphene quantum dots (GQDs), are found to be the best alternatives, 
due to their cost-effective and nontoxic nature. Furthermore, good solu-
bility, high dispersibility, good surface grafting, chemical inertness, and 
better photostability make them more compatible in biomedical as well 
as other optoelectronic and energy device applications. In this chapter, we 
will mainly focus on the electronic properties of GQDs, through chemical 
functionalization. 
8.1.1 GRAPHENE QUANTUM DOTS 
Carbon has been considered as an age-old companion of human beings, as 
it supplies basic energy for life and provides key substances produced from 
its various allotropes, for the development of modern society. With the 
help of advanced science and technology, nanoscale carbonaceous mate-
rials like buckminsterfullerene C60 (Kroto et al., 1985), carbon nanotubes 
(Iijima, 1991), and graphene (Geim and Novoselov, 2007; Novoselov et 
al., 2004) were successively discovered. Excellent mechanical strength, 
high intrinsic carrier mobility, large surface area, long spin relaxation 
length, and presence of quantum Hall effect at room temperature make 
graphene a unique material for electronic, spintronics, and energy device 
applications (Karpan et al., 2008; Sahoo et al., 2019; Sun et al., 2012, 
2018). The interest toward graphene has been mostly powered by its 
ability to upraise the practical technologies involved in the area of transis-
tors, electronic displays, integrated circuits, sensors, and so on. In spite 
of various enhanced properties, the practical application of 2D graphene 
sheet is limited due to having a zero-band gap, forming agglomerations 
during synthesis, featuring low absorptivity, and poor dispersibility (Zhang 
et al., 2012). Subsequent investigations show that these limitations can 
be mitigated through structural modification of graphene. For example, 
graphene nanoribbon can be created by cutting the graphene sheet in one-
dimensional stripe, and the resultant product shows interesting electronic 
and optical properties due to the addition of an extra confined dimen-
sion (Han et al., 2007; Todd et al., 2009). These results stimulated the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
205 
Mechanistic Insight into the Tuneable Electronic Properties 
researchers to check the properties of graphene, after one more dimension 
is confined, or to investigate, how the electronic and optical properties 
of graphene get modified if there would be a transition from 2D sheet to 
0D or quantum dots (GQDs). GQDs are ultrasmall fragments of graphene 
sheet with lateral size less than 100 nm. An ideal GQD should have only 
a single layer of carbon atoms (Chen et al., 2018). However, in practice, 
the synthesized GQDs contain oxygen and hydrogen atoms and also have 
few additional atomic layers with size less than 100 nm (Choi, 2017; Liu 
et al., 2011). Due to quantum size and edge effect, properties like unique 
fluorescent and good dispersibility, in various solvents, are exhibited in 
GQDs. Furthermore, enhanced catalytic properties of GQDs are observed, 
since a high surface-to-volume ratio provides more active sites to carry 
abundant functional moieties. Typically, the carboxylic acid moieties 
contained at the edge of the GQDs enhance the water solubility capacity 
and create easy functionalization with various organic, inorganic, and 
polymer species (Shen et al., 2012). The GQDs are different from the 
CQDs, as they possess honeycomb lattice of graphene. But GQDs have 
nonzero band gap, unlike graphene, which enhances their capability to 
replace inorganic QDs in optical and electronic devices. 
Due to the reduction in the large spatial dimension to a nanoscale range 
in GQDs, the electron distribution gets modified by the crystal boundary, 
which leads to the opening of a bandgap in GQDs. Thus, semimetal 
graphene changes to either semiconductor or insulator GQDs, depending 
upon the height of the energy gap. As a result, higher energy spectra are 
created from the broadening of the optical absorption of graphene (Yan et 
al., 2019). In comparison to other carbon-based nanomaterials like carbon 
nanotubes, fullerene, carbon dots, and so on, GQDs show different physical 
and chemical properties due to both the edge and quantum confinement 
effect. 
8.2 ELECTRONIC PROPERTIES OF GQDs 
As discussed earlier, the unique physical properties possessed by graphene 
are due to the massless Dirac spectrum in the electronic band structure near 
the Fermi level and make graphene an important building block for the new 
generation nano-electronic, photonic, spintronic applications. However, the 
zero bandgap in graphene’s band structure does not allow the conductivity 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
206 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
to fall below a minimum value, which acts as a hurdle for manufacturing 
essential electronic gate circuit due to the absence of “off” state. But this 
problem can be tackled by confining charge carriers in a low-dimensional 
structure like 1D graphene nanoribbon or 0D GQD which could produce 
a finite band gap. The bandgap can be tuned from ultraviolet to infrared 
through visible spectrum by modifying the sizes of GQDs. Furthermore, 
for the successful utilization of these QDs in optoelectronic and photonic 
devices, it is important to understand the electronic excitations in them. 
Mandal et al. have studied, theoretically, the electronic structure of GQDs 
through density functional tight binding method (Mandal et al., 2012). They 
found out that the HOMO–LUMO gap can be modified by controlling size 
and shape of GQDs. At first, two large-sized quantum dots of different 
shapes were modeled for theoretical study, which have been synthesized 
earlier in a controlled manner through solution chemistry (Yan et al., 2010). 
FIGURE 8.2  Optimized structures of GQDs of four different types: (a) type 1, (b) type 
2, (c) type 3, and (d) type 4. 
Source: Reprinted with permission from Mandal et al., 2012. 
The two GQDs contain 168 and 132 conjugated carbon atoms and  
named type 1 and type 2, respectively (Fig. 8.2a and b). Furthermore, to  
understand the shape effect on the band gap, they also modeled another pair  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
207 
Mechanistic Insight into the Tuneable Electronic Properties 
of GQD structures, where 126 and 114 conjugated carbon atoms are present. 
As shown in Figure 8.2c and d, these two QD structures, respectively, have 
triangular shape with armchair edges and hexagonal shapes, named type 3 
and type 4 GQDs. The bandgaps between the HOMO and LUMO of these 
GQDs are shown in Figure 8.3. This figure indicates that the type 1 GQD is 
having the highest number of C atoms (168 C atoms), a bandgap of energy 
1.36 eV, whereas the GQD, having the lowest number of C atoms (type 4), 
shows the highest bandgap (1.60 eV) among these four GQDs. The sizes 
of these four GQDs are increased by replicating the unit cells in the XY 
plane, while retaining the original symmetries, and their HOMO–LUMO 
energy gaps were calculated. Thus, GQDs, up to the size of 10 nm, were 
studied to observe the change in the bandgap with respect to size, shape, 
and the number of atoms. It is clear from Figure 8.3 that the bandgap is 
inversely proportional to the size (L) of the quantum dot, and number of 
atoms: larger the size, lesser the difference between HOMO and LUMO. 
This is the basic difference between graphene QDs and semiconductor 
QDs, because in conventional semiconductor or inorganic QDs, the energy 
gaps vary inversely with the square of sizes (L2) of the QDs. However, the 
HOMO–LUMO gaps of GQDs are mostly independent of the shapes of 
QDs. Further studies on the DOS of these GQDs reveal that the contribu-
tion of core states on bandgap is more as compared to the edge states. 
FIGURE 8.3  The HOMO–LUMO energy gap as a function of total number of conjugated 
carbon atoms in four different types of GQD structures (Mandal et al., 2012). 
Source: Reprinted with permission from Mandal et al., 2012. 

 
208 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
8.2.1 MODULATION OF ELECTRONIC PROPERTIES BY CHEMICAL 
FUNCTIONALIZATION 
The properties and applications of GQDs can be manipulated through 
functionalization with organic (Li et al., 2015a; Qian et al., 2013; Qu 
et al., 2013), inorganic molecules (Mehrdad et al., 2019), biopolymers 
(Bayoumy et al., 2020), or heavy metal atoms (Abdelsalam et al., 2019), 
either at the edges or on the surface of GQDs. Abundancy of raw materials, 
mass-scale production, and easy processing are the main reasons to choose 
the top-down approach for the synthesis of GQDs. However, most of the 
oxygen-containing functional groups like hydroxyl (–OH), carboxyl (– 
COOH), ether (–OCH3), epoxy (–O), and carbonyl (–(C=O)) are retained 
with GQDs during the synthesis in top-down approach (Li et al., 2013). 
It is essential to understand the detailed mechanisms of change in the 
electronic properties of GQDs containing these types of functional groups, 
which can lead to the synthesis of GQDs, to achieve desired properties 
for specific applications. In addition to that, the chemical features (type 
of atoms and bonding), configurations, distributions of functional groups, 
and optimized system symmetry do also play a major role in determining 
the optoelectronic features (Cocchi et al., 2012). Feng et al. (2017) studied 
the effect of functionalization of GQDs, with functional groups containing 
oxygen, on the electronic properties, through time-dependent density 
functional theory. The GQD structure, they considered, is made up of 
132 carbon atoms and 5 oxygen-containing functional groups (i.e., –OH, 
–CHO, –COOH, –OCH3, and –COC–), decorated either at the edge sites 
or on the basal plane of GQD (Figure 8.4a and b). The bandgap of pristine 
GQD was calculated to be 2.34 eV, whereas the GQDs, functionalized 
with abovementioned functional groups at the edge site, have a very minor 
impact on HOMO–LUMO energy gap, that is, only a slight decrease, 
which is shown in Figure 8.4c. The bandgap of the functionalized GQDs 
with epoxy, aldehyde, carboxyl, ether, and hydroxyl were calculated to be 
2.15, 2.27, 2.30, 2.31, and 2.32 eV, respectively. 
On the other hand, the scenario of HOMO–LUMO energy gap is totally 
changed, when the functional groups are attached to the GQD, on the basal 
plane (Figure 8.4d). The calculated energy gaps for GQDs, functionalized 
with –COC–, –CHO, –COOH, –OCH3, and –OH, are 1.86, 0.39, 0.32, 
0.37, and 0.36 eV, respectively. These results provide a clear picture that 
the edge-functionalization of GQD with these functional does not have 

 
209 
Mechanistic Insight into the Tuneable Electronic Properties 
any significant impact on the modulation of bandgap. However, slight 
distortion in the charge density, at the edge of GQD, may be the reason for 
minor change in the bandgap. This study shows that a significant tuning 
of HOMO–LUMO gap in GQD can be possible by considerable geometry 
distortion due to functionalization at the surface, which increases the 
orbital hybridizations. 
FIGURE 8.4  (a) Edge functionalization position and (b) surface functionalization 
positions of GQDs. Energy level diagrams for (c) edge-functionalized and (d) base-
functionalized GQDs for different oxygen-containing groups (Feng et al., 2017). 
Source: Reprinted with permission from Feng et al., 2017. 
Larger the hybridization, more reduction in bandgap will be obtained. 
It is already known that carbon atoms are bonded with each other forming 
sp2  hybridization in pristine graphene or GQDs, and the optoelectronic 
properties are mostly determined by these π states of sp2 sites. But when 
the functional group containing oxygen is attached to the basal plane, then 
carbon in the GQD will change from sp2 to sp3  hybridization by making σ 
bonds with oxygen or carbon of the functional groups. A strong localiza
tion occurs due to the presence of π and π* electronic levels of sp2 cluster 
in between σ and σ* states of sp3  matrix, leading to the modification of 
absorption spectra and also the HOMO–LUMO energy gap of the func
tionalized GQDs. A similar theoretical study has also been performed (Li et 
al., 2015a), which describes how the HOMO–LUMO energy gap of GQDs 
-
-

 
 
 
 
210 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
can be tuned through edge functionalization. In this work, they compared 
the results obtained through DFT and the GW method (Hedin 1965). Li 
and his group considered a hexagonal zigzag-edged GQD as the prototype 
for the study, which contained 54 carbon atoms, and the edges were satu-
rated with hydrogen atoms. Since the geometry of armchair-edged GQDs 
can be easily distorted with functionalization, they are not considered 
as suitable prototypes to study the effect of functional groups on GQDs. 
Previous studies reported that amino, halogens, hydroxyls, and carbonyl 
functionalized GQDs can be synthesized through experiments (Feng et 
al., 2013; Tetsuka et al., 2012; Zhao et al., 2014a, b). Inspired from these 
experiments, eight different functional groups, namely, hydrogen atom 
(–H), fluorine (–F), methyl (–CH3), amino (–NH2), hydroxyl (–OH), alde-
hyde (–CHO), ketone (–COCH3), and carboxyl (–COOH), were chosen 
to be introduced at the edge sites of the proposed GQD (Fig. 8.5a). To 
get more insight into the mechanism of the modification of the electronic 
structures, the functionalized GQDs were categorized into two groups, 
that is, (i) the GQDs functionalized with carbonyl groups which contain 
carbon–oxygen double bond (ketone, carboxyl, and aldehyde) and (ii) the 
GQDs functionalized with the group with the absence of carbon–oxygen 
double bond. Here, due to very minor structural distortions in the GQDs, 
its impact on electronic and optical properties can be neglected. When 
the energy level alignments are compared between –CH3 and –COCH3 
or –OH and –COOH group, it is clear from Figure 8.5b that the presence 
of carbon–oxygen double bond plays a key role for the down-shifting of 
the energy levels. This may be due to the interactions between π electrons 
present in C=O and GQD moiety (Cocchi et al., 2012). It was also observed 
that in the presence of C=O, the LUMO shift more downward than those 
of HOMO (i.e., LUMO is more hybridized), while an opposite case was 
observed in the functionalized GQDs without C=O (i.e., HOMO is more 
hybridized). With the help of frontier orbital hybridization, the mechanism 
of uneven shifting of energy levels and the subsequent change in the band-
gaps can be explained. Amino and aldehyde functionalized GQDs show 
the lowest HOMO–LUMO gaps, for without and with C=O, respectively. 
The decrease in the energy gap is a reflection of amount of frontier orbital 
hybridization. Previous theoretical studies also reported that the GQDs, 
functionalized at the edges, show reduction in the HOMO–LUMO gaps 
(Cocchi et al., 2011; Mandal et al., 2015; Sk et al., 2014; Zhao et al., 
2014a, b). The distortion induced by the heavy functionalization of GQD 

 
211 
Mechanistic Insight into the Tuneable Electronic Properties 
can reduce 35–55% of the energy gap (Cocchi et al., 2012). Since the 
distortions are very small, the shift in the energy levels is mainly due to 
frontier orbital hybridizations only. 
FIGURE 8.5  (a) Top and side views of different functional groups attached to the ring-
shaped GQDs. (b) Energy levels calculated for different functionalized GQDs in DFT and 
GW approach. (c) Amount of charge transfer between GQDs and functional groups. (d) 
Competition between frontier orbital hybridization and charge transfer for determining the 
HOMO–LUMO band gap. 
Source: Reprinted with permission from Li et al., 2015a. Copyright © 2015, American 
Chemical Society 
The significant increase in the HOMO–LUMO energy gap (approxi
mately 2.7 eV) in GW method than DFT describes the presence of large 
electron–electron interaction in nanoscale GQD (Li et al., 2015b). Besides 
these quasi-particle corrections, the energy gap ordering in DFT and GW  
is quite different. For example, in DFT calculation, the energy gap of 
GQD–NH2 is close to those of GQD–COCH3 and GQD–COOH. But in 
GW approach, the calculated energy gap of GQD–NH2 is quite more than 
those of GQD–COCH3 and GQD–COOH. This deviation is caused due to 
the charge transfer between GQD and the functional groups. Except –H 
and –CH3, all the functional groups, are electronegative with respect to 
pristine GQD (which draws electrons). If the carrier density is increased, 
-

 
 
 
212 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
then the electron screening effect will be enhanced (Mak et al., 2014; Yang 
2011). On the other hand, reduction in the carrier density will lead to a 
reduction in the screening effect, which enhances the electron–electron 
interactions. As a result, a large difference between the DFT bandgap and 
GW bandgap is observed for edge-functionalized GQDs with electron-
attracting groups. For the same reason, the GQDs, functionalized with 
electron-donating groups like GQD–CH3, exhibits lesser amount of 
quasi-particle correction than the pristine GQDs. From the Bader charge 
analysis (Henkelman et al., 2006), it is observed that the amount of elec-
tron transferred to –NH2 group is quite larger than that of aldehyde or 
ketone groups (Fig. 8.5c). This indicates that larger charge transfer leads 
to larger quasi-particle correction and larger HOMO–LUMO band gap. 
From the above discussions, it is clear that the amount of HOMO–LUMO 
band gap of the edge-functionalized GQDs can be explained through a 
mechanism based on the competition between charge transfer and frontier 
orbital hybridization (Fig. 8.5d). A reduction in the bandgap occurs due 
to the frontier orbital hybridizations, by asymmetric shifting of HOMO 
and LUMO levels, whereas bandgap is increased due to the reduction in 
electron screening caused from the charge transfer between GQDs and the 
attached functional groups. In the case of GQD–NH2, the simultaneous 
effect of large charge transfer and strong frontier orbital hybridization 
makes –NH2 an inefficient functional group for the modulation of bandgap 
in GQDs. It has also been studied theoretically that the GQDs, passivated 
with oxygen at edges, show reduced bandgap (Abdelsalam et al., 2018). 
Hence, changing the oxygen content in a functional group can be consid-
ered as an effective way to tune the optical and electronic properties of 
GQDs. 
8.3 CONCLUSIONS 
In this chapter, an elementary idea about quantum dots has been introduced 
from quantum mechanics point of view. Then, the advantages of GQDs 
over conventional semiconductor or inorganic quantum dots are briefly 
discussed. For a practical nano-electronic device application, tuning of 
electronic properties of GQDs is quite necessary. The HOMO–LUMO 
energy gap of GQDs can be tuned by changing the size, whereas it remains 
almost invariant with change in shape. Furthermore, the functional groups 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
213 
Mechanistic Insight into the Tuneable Electronic Properties 
containing carbon–oxygen double bond show better ability in tuning the 
optoelectronic properties of GQDs, due to strong frontier orbital hybrid-
ization, and less charge transfer between GQDs and functional groups. 
These insightful theoretical mechanisms can provide efficient control on 
the optoelectronic properties of GQDs to assess their potential applica-
tions in various nanodevices. 
KEYWORDS 
• 
graphene quantum dots 
• 
functionalization 
• 
quantum confinement 
REFERENCES 
Abdelsalam, H.; Teleb, N. H.; Yahia, I. S.; Zahran, H. Y.; Elhaes, H.; Ibrahim, M. A. First 
Principles Study of the Adsorption of Hydrated Heavy Metals on Graphene Quantum 
Dots. J. Phys. Chem. Solids 2019, 130, 32–40. 
Abdelsalam, H.; Elhaes, H.; Ibrahim, M. A. Tuning Electronic Properties in Graphene 
Quantum Dots by Chemical Functionalization: Density Functional Theory Calculations. 
Chem. Phys. Lett. 2018, 695, 138–148. 
Arya, H.; Kaul, Z.; Wadhwa, R.; Taira, K.; Hirano, T.; Kaul, S. C. Quantum Dots in 
Bio-Imaging: Revolution by the Small. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 2005, 329, 
1173–1177. 
Bayoumy, A. M.; Refaat, A.; Yahia, I. S.; Zahran, H. Y.; Elhaes, H.; Ibrahim, M. A.; Shkir, 
M. Functionalization of Graphene Quantum Dots (GQDs) with Chitosan Biopolymer for 
Biophysical Applications. Opt. Quant. Electron. 2020, 52, 16. 
Biolatti, E.; D’Amico, I.; Zanardi, P.; Rossi, F. Electro-Optical Properties of Semiconductor 
Quantum Dots: Application to Quantum Information Processing. Phys. Rev. B 2002, 65, 
1–23. 
Brus, L. Quantum Crystallites and Nonlinear Optics. Appl. Phys. A Solids Surfaces 1991, 
53, 465–474. 
Chen, W.; Guo, Lv.; Hu, W.; Li, D.; Chen, S.; Dai, Z. Synthesis and Applications of 
Graphene Quantum Dots: A Review. Nanotechnol. Rev. 2018, 7, 157–185. 
Choi, S. H. Unique Properties of Graphene Quantum Dots and Their Applications in 
Photonic/Electronic Devices. J. Phys. D 2017, 50, 103002. 
Choudhury, K. R.; So, F.; Kafafi, Z. Colloidal Semiconductor Nanocrystal-Enabled 
Organic/Inorganic Hybrid Light Emitting Devices. In Comprehensive Nanoscience and 
Technology; Andrews, D. L., Scholes, G. D., G. P. B. T.-C. N.; Wiederrecht, T., Eds., 
Vols. 1–5; Academic Press: Amsterdam, 2011; pp 183–214. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
214 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
Cocchi, C.; Prezzi, D.; Ruini, A.; Caldas, M. J.; Molinari, E. Optical Properties and 
Charge-Transfer Excitations in Edge-Functionalized All-Graphene Nanojunctions. J. 
Phys. Chem. Lett. 2011, 2, 1315–1319. 
Cocchi, C.; Prezzi, D.; Ruini, A.; Caldas, M. J.; Molinari, E. Electronics and Optics of 
Graphene Nanoflakes: Edge Functionalization and Structural Distortions. J. Phys. 
Chem. C 2012, 116, 17328–17335. 
Feng, J.; Dong, H.; Yu, L.; Dong, L. The Optical and Electronic Properties of Graphene 
Quantum Dots with Oxygen-Containing Groups: A Density Functional Theory Study. J. 
Mater. Chem. C 2017, 5, 5984–5993. 
Feng, Q.; Cao, Q.; Li, M.; Liu, F.; Tang, N.; Du, Y. Synthesis and Photoluminescence of 
Fluorinated Graphene Quantum Dots.” Applied Physics Letters 2013, 102, 013111. 
Freeman, R.; Gill, R.; Beissenhirtz, M.; Willner, I. Self-Assembly of Semiconductor 
Quantum-Dots on Electrodes for Photoelectrochemical Biosensing. Photochem. 
Photobiol. Sci. 2007, 6, 416–422. 
Geim, A. K.; Novoselov, K. S. The Rise of Graphene. Nat. Mater. 2007, 6, 183–191. 
Green, M. Semiconductor Quantum Dots as Biological Imaging Agents. Angew. Chem. Int. 
Ed. 2004, 43, 4129–4131. 
Han, M. Y.; Özyilmaz, B.; Zhang, Y.; Kim, P. Energy Band-Gap Engineering of Graphene 
Nanoribbons. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2007, 98, 206805. 
Hedin, L. New Method for Calculating the One-Particle Green’s Function with Application 
to the Electron-Gas Problem. Phys. Rev. 1965, 139, A796. 
Henkelman, G.; Arnaldsson, A.; Jónsson, H. A Fast and Robust Algorithm for Bader 
Decomposition of Charge Density. Comput. Mater. Sci. 2006, 36, 354–360. 
Hetsch, F.; Xu, X.; Wang, H.; Kershaw, S. V.; Rogach, A. L. Semiconductor Nanocrystal 
Quantum Dots as Solar Cell Components and Photosensitizers: Material, Charge 
Transfer, and Separation Aspects of Some Device Topologies. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 2011, 
2, 1879–1887. 
Hildebrandt, N. Biofunctional Quantum Dots: Controlled Conjugation for Multiplexed 
Biosensors. ACS Nano 2011, 5, 5286–5290. 
Iijima, S. Helical Microtubules of Graphitic Carbon. Nature 1991, 354, 56–58. 
Jin, Z.; Hildebrandt, N. Semiconductor Quantum Dots for in Vitro Diagnostics and Cellular 
Imaging. Trends Biotechnol. 2012, 30, 394–403. 
Karpan, V. M.; Khomyakov, P. A.; Starikov, A. A.; Giovannetti, G.; Zwierzycki, M.; 
Talanana, M.; Brocks, G.; Brink, J.; Kelly, P. J. Theoretical Prediction of Perfect Spin 
Filtering at Interfaces between Close-Packed Surfaces of Ni or Co and Graphite or 
Graphene. Phys. Rev. B 2008, 78, 195419. 
Kroto, H. W.; Heath, J. R.; O’Brien, S. C.; Curl, R. F.; Smalley, R. E. C60: 
Buckminsterfullerene. Nature 1985, 318, 162–163. 
Li, L.; Wu, G.; Yang, G.; Peng, J.; Zhao, J.; Zhu, J. J. Focusing on Luminescent Graphene 
Quantum Dots: Current Status and Future Perspectives. Nanoscale 2013, 5, 4015–4039. 
Li, Y.; Shu, H.; Niu, X.; Wang, J. Electronic and Optical Properties of Edge-Functionalized 
Graphene Quantum Dots and the Underlying Mechanism. J. Phys. Chem. C 2015a, 119, 
24950–24957. 
Li, Y.; Shu, H.; Wang, S.; Wang, J. Electronic and Optical Properties of Graphene Quantum 
Dots: The Role of Many-Body Effects. J. Phys. Chem. C 2015b, 119, 4983–4989. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
215 
Mechanistic Insight into the Tuneable Electronic Properties 
Liu, R.; Wu, D.; Feng, X.; Müllen, K. Bottom-up Fabrication of Photoluminescent Graphene 
Quantum Dots with Uniform Morphology. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2011, 133, 15221–15223. 
Mak, K, F.; Jornada, F. H. D.; He, K.; Deslippe, J.; Petrone, N.; Hone, J.; Shan, J.; Louie, 
S. G.; Heinz, T. F. Tuning Many-Body Interactions in Graphene: The Effects of Doping 
on Excitons and Carrier Lifetimes. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2014, 112, 207401. 
Mandal, B.; Sarkar, S.; Sarkar, P. Exploring the Electronic Structure of Graphene Quantum 
Dots. J. Nanoparticle Res. 2012, 14, 1–8. 
Mandal, B.; Sarkar, S.; Sarkar, P. Theoretical Studies on Understanding the Feasibility of 
Porphyrin-Sensitized Graphene Quantum Dot Solar Cell. J. Phys. Chem. C 2015, 119, 
3400–3407. 
Martynenko, I. V.; Litvin, A. P.; Purcell-Milton, F.; Baranov, A. V.; Fedorov, A. V.; Gun’ko, 
Y. K. Application of Semiconductor Quantum Dots in Bioimaging and Biosensing. J. 
Mater. Chem. B 2017, 5, 6701–6727. 
Masut, R. A.; Tran, C. A.; Beaudoin, M.; Leonelli, R. Strained InAs/InP Quantum Wells 
and Quantum Dots for Optoelectronic Device Applications. In Circular-Grating Light-
Emitting Sources; Najafi, S. I., Fallahi, M., Peyghambarian, N., Eds., Vol. 2398; SPIE, 
1995; pp 116–24. 
Mehrdad, V. B.; Pourhashem, S.; Sedghi, M.; Vaezi, Z.; Givi, B. S.; Rashidi, A.; Manesh, H. 
N. A Novel Aspect of Functionalized Graphene Quantum Dots in Cytotoxicity Studies. 
Toxicol. In Vitro 2019, 61, 104649. 
Novoselov, K. S.; Geim, A. K.; Morozov, S. V.; Jiang, D.; Zhang, Y.; Dubonos, S. V.; 
Grigorieva, I. V.; Firsov, A. A. Electric Field in Atomically Thin Carbon Films. Science 
2004, 306, 666–669. 
Nozik, A. J.; Beard, M. C.; Luther, J. M.; Law, M.; Ellingson, R. J.; Johnson, J. C. 
Semiconductor Quantum Dots and Quantum Dot Arrays and Applications of Multiple 
Exciton Generation to Third-Generation Photovoltaic Solar Cells. Chem. Rev. 2010, 110, 
6873–6890. 
Qian, Z.; Ma, J.; Shan, X.; Shao, L.; Zhou, J.; Chen, J.; Feng, H. Surface Functionalization 
of Graphene Quantum Dots with Small Organic Molecules from Photoluminescence 
Modulation to Bioimaging Applications: An Experimental and Theoretical Investigation. 
RSC Adv. 2013, 3, 14571–14579. 
Qu, Z. B.; Zhou, X.; Gu, L.; Lan, R.; Yu, D.; Shi, G. Boronic Acid Functionalized Graphene 
Quantum Dots as a Fluorescent Probe for Selective and Sensitive Glucose Determination 
in Microdialysate. Chem. Commun. 2013, 49, 9830–9832. 
Raffaelle, R. P.; Castro, S. L.; Hepp, A. F.; Bailey, S. G. Quantum Dot Solar Cells. Progress 
Photovoltaics Res. App. 2002, 10, 433–439. 
Reithmaier, J. P.; Somers, A.; Kaiser, W.; Deubert, S.; Gerschütz, F.; Forchel, A.; Parillaud, 
O.; Krakowski, M.; Alizon, R.; Hadass, D.; Bilenca, A.; Dery, H.; Mikhelashvili, V.; 
Eisenstein, G.; Gioannini, M.; Montrosset, I.; Berg, T. W.; Poel, M.; Mørk, J.; Tromborg, 
B. Semiconductor Quantum Dots Devices: Recent Advances and Application Prospects. 
Phys. Status Solidi (B) 2006, 243, 3981–3987. 
Sahoo, M. R.; Kushwaha, A. K.; Pati, R.; Ajayan, P. M.; Nayak, S. K. First-Principles 
Study of a Vertical Spin Switch in Atomic Scale Two-Dimensional Platform. J. Magnet. 
Magnet. Mater. 2019, 484, 462–471. 
Shao, L.; Gao, Y.; Yan, F. Semiconductor Quantum Dots for Biomedicial Applications. 
Sensors 2011, 11, 11736–11751. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
216 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
Shen, J.; Zhu, Y.; Yang, X.; Li, C. Graphene Quantum Dots: Emergent Nanolights for 
Bioimaging, Sensors, Catalysis and Photovoltaic Devices. Chem. Commun 2012, 48, 
3686–3699. 
Sk Alam, M.; Ananthanarayanan, A.; Huang, L.; Lim, K. H.; Chen, P. Revealing the 
Tunable Photoluminescence Properties of Graphene Quantum Dots. J. Mater. Chem. C 
2014, 2, 6954–6960. 
Skolnick, M. S.; Mowbray, D. J. Self-Assembled Semiconductor Quantum Dots: 
Fundamental Physics and Device Applications. Annu. Rev. Mater. Res. 2004, 34, 
181–218. 
Sun, J.; Lowe, S. E.; Zhang, L.; Wang, Y.; Pang, K.; Wang, Y.; Zhong, Y.; Liu, P.; Zhao, 
K.; Tang, Z.; Zhao, H. Ultrathin Nitrogen-Doped Holey Carbon@Graphene Bifunctional 
Electrocatalyst for Oxygen Reduction and Evolution Reactions in Alkaline and Acidic 
Media. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2018, 57, 16511–16515. 
Sun, Y. Li, C.; Shi, G. Nanoporous Nitrogen Doped Carbon Modified Graphene as 
Electrocatalyst for Oxygen Reduction Reaction. J. Mater. Chem. 2012, 22, 12810–12816. 
Tetsuka, H.; Asahi, R.; Nagoya, A.; Okamoto, K.; Tajima, I.; Ohta, R.; Okamoto, A. 
Optically Tunable Amino-Functionalized Graphene Quantum Dots. Adv. Mater. 2012, 
24, 5333–5338. 
Tian, J.; Cao, G. Semiconductor Quantum Dot-Sensitized Solar Cells. Nano Rev. 2013, 4, 
22578. 
Todd, K.; Chou, H. T.; Amasha, S.; Gordon, D. G. Quantum Dot Behavior in Graphene 
Nanoconstrictions. Nano Lett. 2009, 9, 416–421. 
Troiani, F.; Hohenester, U.; Molinari, E. Exploiting Exciton-Exciton Interactions in 
Semiconductor Quantum Dots for Quantum-Information Processing. Phys. Rev. B 2000, 
62, R2263–R2266. 
Wang, K. L.; Cha, D.; Liu, J.; Chen, C. Ge/Si Self-Assembled Quantum Dots and Their 
Optoelectronic Device Applications. Proc. IEEE 2007, 95, 1866–1883. 
Wise, F. W. Lead Salt Quantum Dots: the Limit of Strong Quantum Confinement. Acc. 
Chem. Res. 2000, 33, 773–780. 
Wu, Y.; Li, X.; Steel, D.; Gammon, D.; Sham, L. J. Coherent Optical Control of 
Semiconductor Quantum Dots for Quantum Information Processing. Phys. E 2004, 25, 
242–248. 
Xing, Y.; Xia, Z.; Rao, J. Semiconductor Quantum Dots for Biosensing and in Vivo 
Imaging. IEEE Trans. Nanobiosci. 2009, 8, 4–12. 
Yan, X.; Cui, X.; Shi L. Synthesis of Large, Stable Colloidal Graphene Quantum Dots with 
Tunable Size. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2010, 132, 5944–5945. 
Yan, Y.; Gong, J.; Chen, J.; Zeng, Z.; Huang, W.; Pu, K.; Liu, J.; Chen, P. Recent Advances 
on Graphene Quantum Dots: From Chemistry and Physics to Applications. Adv. Mater. 
2019, 31, 1808283 (1–22). 
Yang, Li. Excitonic Effects on Optical Absorption Spectra of Doped Graphene. Nano Lett. 
2011, 11, 3844–3847. 
Yoffe, A. D. Low-Dimensional Systems: Quantum Size Effects and Electronic Properties 
of Semiconductor Microcrystallites (Zero-Dimensional Systems) and Some Quasi-Two-
Dimensional Systems. Adv. Phys. 1993, 42, 173–262. 
Yu, W. W. Semiconductor Quantum Dots: Synthesis and Water-Solubilization for 
Biomedical Applications. Expert Opin. Biol. Ther. 2008, 8, 1571–1581. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
217 
Mechanistic Insight into the Tuneable Electronic Properties 
Zhang, Z.; Zhang, J.; Chen, N.; Qu, L. Graphene Quantum Dots: An Emerging Material 
for Energy-Related Applications and Beyond. Energy Environ. Sci. 2012, 5, 8869–8890. 
Zhao, J.; Tang, L.; Xiang, J.; Ji, R.; Yuan, J.; Zhao, J.; Yu, R.; Tai, Y.; Song, L. Chlorine 
Doped Graphene Quantum Dots: Preparation, Properties, and Photovoltaic Detectors. 
Appl. Phys. Lett. 2014a, 105, 111116. 
Zhao, M.; Yang, F.; Xue, Y.; Xiao, D.; Guo, Y. Effects of Edge Oxidation on the Stability 
and Half-Metallicity of Graphene Quantum Dots. ChemPhysChem 2014b, 15, 157–164. 
Zhou, J.; Yang, Y.; Zhang, C. Y. Toward Biocompatible Semiconductor Quantum Dots: 
From Biosynthesis and Bioconjugation to Biomedical Application. Chem. Rev. 2015, 
115, 11669–11717. 


New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons. Aneeya Kumar Samantara & Satyajit Ratha (Eds.)
© 2024 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
CHAPTER 9  
Carborane Clusters for Promoting 
Medicinal Applications 
BIBHUTI BHUSAN JENA1 and MANAS R. PATTANAYAK2 
1Department of Chemistry, Ravenshaw University, Cuttack, Odisha, 
India 
2Syngene International LTD, Medchal, Hyderabad, India 
ABSTRACT 
Carboranes belong to a specific group of electron delocalized clusters, 
which constitute both boron and carbon atoms. Typically, carboranes with 
icosahedral structures, have good chemical and thermal stability. The lipo-
philicity or amphiphilicity properties make carborane particularly suitable 
to act as a hydrophobic pharmacophore. Carborane clusters can find appli-
cations as enhancers of hydrophobic interactions between pharmaceuticals 
and their receptors, which imparts improved in vivo stability and increases 
the bioavailability of the relevant compounds. The novel carboranyl 
cholesterol mimics are excellent building blocks, for the construction of 
various boronated liposomes (including both nontargeted and receptor-
targeted types), which are crucial for high-end therapeutics, for example, 
boron neutron capture therapy (BNCT) (for the treatment of cancer) and 
for other applications as well. In the area of anticancer drugs, inhibitors 
of platelet aggregation, and modulators of important hormone receptors, 
carboranes are attracting fast-growing research interest in the quest for 
novel drugs that could overcome the drawbacks, associated with the 
currently available products. Carboranes are very useful pharmacophores 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
220 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
for the design of transthyretin amyloidosis and α-human thrombin inhibi-
tors. Modification of adenosine with a carborane cluster had the capacity 
to open the way for biological screening, evaluation of the new class of 
bioorganic–inorganic conjugates, modulation of human blood platelet 
activities, and boron carrier for BNCT. 
9.1 INTRODUCTION 
The term, “chemotherapy,” was made familiar to the scientific fraternity, 
by Paul Ehrlich, in the early 20th century. He had worked extensively 
on therapeutic treatments, based on chemical substances (“magic bullets,” 
in German Zauberkugel) that are characterized by properties such as 
selective affinity or toxicity, targeting specific biological entities, namely, 
pathogens. In 1908, he was conferred with the Nobel Prize in Physiology 
and Medicine for his discoveries and was considered the pioneer/father of 
chemotherapy. Chemical-based therapies are worldwide approved for the 
treatment of tumors, viral, parasitic, inflammation, pain, and a combina-
tion thereof over the last 100 years. The commercially available drugs, 
for example, organic compounds like doxorubicin, are structurally very 
small molecules (MWo 1000 Da), a topoisomerase II inhibitor, which can 
treat a wide range of cancerous conditions that include leukemia, Hodg-
kin’s lymphoma, breast cancer, etc. Further belonging to this category, 
are chloroquine, which is a nonsteroidal anti-malarial drug, and the 
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAIDs), for example, ibuprofen 
(Imming, 2015). In addition to this, metal-based drugs and a few platinum-
containing complexes have been approved for the treatment of a range 
of cancerous conditions (i.e., ovarian, testicular, cervical, breast, etc.). 
Cisplatin, oxaliplatin, and carboplatin are the frontline examples of this 
(Wilson et al., 2011). 
In the last 20 years, hybrid organic–inorganic compounds, as novel small 
molecule-based drugs, which contain boron–carbon–hydrogen clusters, 
for example, dicarba-closo-dodecaboranes (otherwise known as carbabo-
ranes or carboranes), have drawn great interest. Carboranes are electronic 
delocalized clusters ranging from 4-vertex (sub-icosahedral) to 12-vertex 
(icosahedral) and 14-vertex (supra-icosahedral) structures (Greme, 2016). 
In the present book chapter, we largely emphasize the 12-vertex clusters, 
which are very robust in nature and are characterized by a three-dimensional 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
221 
Carborane Clusters for Promoting Medicinal Applications 
(3D) structure (Poater et al., 2014), high stability (chemical, thermal, and 
photochemical) (Cabrera-Gonzalez et al., 2017; Nunez et al., 2016), good 
electron-withdrawing property (Nunez et al., 2006), high hydrophobicity 
(Goszczynski et al., 2017), and low toxicity (Wu et al., 2019; Scholz et 
al., 2011). They act in a different manner as compared to the phenyl ring 
structure (Teixidor et al., 2005). They primarily exist in three isomeric  
forms: closo-1,2-C2B10H12 (ortho-carborane 1), closo-1,7-C2B10H12 (meta
carborane 2), and closo-1,12-C2B10H12 (para-carborane 3) and all are very 
stable (Fig. 9.1). Dicarba-closo-dodecacarboranes (C2B10H12) (1–3) were 
well characterized by an exceptional hydrophobic character. The high  
hydrophobicity of many carborane clusters and their derivatives can be  
explained because of the slightly polarized hydrogen atoms on the boron  
-
atoms and their “hydride-like” character. This prevents them to form 
hydrogen bonds and makes the carborane clusters hydrophobic in nature. 
Unconventional hydrogen bondings are usually observed in the case of 
boranes, due primarily to the electronegative nature of the constituent 
hydrogen atoms. These bonds are referred to as the dihydrogen bonds and 
are weaker when compared to the conventional/classical hydrogen bonds, 
and a net repulsive effect toward surrounding water molecules prevails 
making the carborane clusters hydrophobic in nature. Again, depending on 
the position of the carbon atoms in the carborane cage the hydrophobicity 
nature of carboranes also varies with the dipole moment. However, the 
functionalizations of hydrophobic ortho-, meta-, and para-carboranes (1–3) 
are much easier than the hydrophilic dodecaborate ion which prevents its 
wider application in synthetic and medicinal chemistry (Nishiyama et al., 
2005; Sivaev and Bregadze, 2009; Lesnikowski, 2007a, b). 
FIGURE 9.1  Structure of carborane clusters. 
While the carborane-based drugs are yet to get approval, most of 
them have shown a strong candidature, for therapeutic application, for 

 
 
222 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
example, boron neutron capture therapy (BNCT) (Barth et al., 2018), 
enzyme inhibitors for potent (Lesnikowski, 2016) and selective inhibi-
tion of HIV-1 protease, similar to the case of carborane-based epidermal 
growth factor receptor (EGFR) inhibitors (Couto et al., 2018). The high 
boron content with thermally stability makes carborane a boron carrier 
for BNCT. The basic knowledge about toxicity and pharmacokinetics of 
particular classes of carborane-containing compounds studied as boron 
carriers for BNCT can help in the development of the other biological 
applications of boron compounds. Moreover, the medicinal chemistry 
of carborane-based drugs is quite similar to the organic/organometallic 
drugs, both of which are based on the target-vector recognition approaches 
(Scholz et al., 2011). The unique medicinal application of carboranes in 
the field of medicine is because of the properties characterized by (i) 
highly hydrophobic and low polarity hydridic B–H groups, which is effec-
tive for improving the transportation across the cell membranes and the 
blood–brain barrier (BBB) (Issa et al., 2011), (ii) inorganic nature, which 
allows them to remain unaffected by the conventional enzymatic degra-
dation processes, thus promoting drug stability under various biological 
conditions, (iii) the added feature of 3D orthogonal structure provides the 
cluster with much better structural flexibility than the benzene systems, 
which are limited to two dimensions, and (iv) the multitude of possible 
noncovalent interactions with biological targets: B-H∙∙∙H–X (X = N, C, 
and S) dihydrogen bonds, B–H∙∙∙Na+ bridging interactions, and C–H∙∙∙X 
(X = O, N, S, F, π system) hydrogen bonds (Scholz et al., 2011). The 
self-assembly process, in an aqueous solution, spontaneously forms 
nano- to micrometer-sized particles, which is an added advantage with the 
carborane clusters (Fernandez-Alvarez et al., 2018). The nanometer-sized 
particles potentially represent a very efficient way for the selective delivery 
of chemotherapeutics to cancer cells (Nakamura et al., 2016). Till-now, 
the self-assembly properties have been investigated and characterized for 
only the anionic boron clusters (COSAN species) (Tarres et al., 2015) 
and neutral carborane-containing compounds (He et al., 2017). However, 
studies on the spontaneous behavior along with the biological activity of 
carborane-containing drugs are quite limited. 
Generally, carboranes tend to replace the hydrophobic components, 
such as a phenyl ring or adamantane, when introduced into the structures 
of bioactive compounds, subsequently enhancing the interactions with the 
receptors of those compounds (Julius et al., 2007; Nakamura et al., 2013). 

 
 
 
 
 
223 
Carborane Clusters for Promoting Medicinal Applications 
Carborane clusters play a key role in the modification of biomolecules 
because they can be functionalized easily, and these biomolecules offer 
high resistance toward degradation and have improved stability as well as 
bioavailability of bioactive molecules (Issa et al., 2011). These applications 
of carboranes make it a best candidate for pharmacophores in nonsteroidal 
anti-inflammatory drugs (Scholz et al., 2011), anti-folates (Reynolds et 
al., 2007), carbonic anhydrase inhibitors (Brynda et al., 2013), thrombin 
inhibitors (Page et al., 2008), hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF) inhibitors 
(Nakamura et al., 2013; Ban et al., 2010), purinergic receptor ligands 
(Bednarska et al., 2010a, b; Olejniczak et al., 2007a, b; Wilkinson et al., 
2014), lidocaine (Kracke et al., 2015), antiviral drugs (Olejniczak et al., 
2013; Adamska et al., 2012) and other bioactive molecules. 
9.2 STRUCTURE OF CARBORANE 
The incorporation of one or more carbon atom(s) into the structural frame-
work of polyhedral borane is called a carborane. A borane can be converted 
into ortho-carborane 1 (Fig. 9.2) by replacing two (B–H) fragments 
with the help of two (C–H) fragments because of the same isoelectronic 
structure and solubility. Here both fragment possesses similar frontier 
molecular orbital (FMO) properties including energy, symmetry, extent in 
space, and electronic occupation. Finally, replacing two (B–H) units with 
two (C–H) units produces a neutral compound with the general formula 
C2
H . The nucleophilic attack occurs in a polyhedral carborane at the 
Bn-2
n
boron closest to the carbon, while the electrophilic attack is preferred at 
the boron furthest away from the carbon. 
FIGURE 9.2  The structure of 1,2-closo-carborane or ortho-carborane. 

 
224 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
9.3 NOMENCLATURE OF CARBORANE 
The term carborane originates from the IUPAC-approved designation of 
carbaborane. It was used to describe the molecules composed as clusters of 
carbon and boron atoms. According to Wade”s Rules, the prefix “closo” is 
used in the polyhedra that contain all of the expected vertices. Numbering 
of the cage vertices in closo-carborane begins at the apex atom and in a 
clockwise direction the successive atoms are listed in “rings”. Here the 
carbon atoms are given the lowest numbers and are designated in the 
formula front (Dilthey, 1921). So, the proper name for ortho-carborane 1 is 
1, 2-dicarba-closo-dodecaborane. Furthermore, the substitution of the cage 
is designated in the name by a numerical suffix (i.e., 1-(1,2-dicarba-closo-
dodecaborane)-(pendant group name) for C-substituted ortho-carborane) 
(Wu et al., 1997; Nabakka et al., 1998). Alternatively, in a suffixal manner, 
the point of cage substitution can be indicated at the end of a polyhedral 
name (i.e., (1, 2-dicarba-closo-dodecaboran-1-yl)-(pendant group name). 
Similarly, the corresponding nomenclature for nido-carborane 4 would 
be 7,8-dicarba-nido-dodecaborane since the numbering of the cage atom 
begins at the vertex opposite to the open face and the carbon atoms are 
given the lowest possible numerical designation. The total discussions are 
outlined in Figure 9.3. 
FIGURE 9.3  Numbering system for closo and nido cage atoms. 
9.4 PREPARATION OF 1,2-CLOSO-C2B10H12 
Dicarba-closo-dodecaboranes are characterized by the presence of boron, 
carbon, and hydrogen atoms, with the general formula, C2B nHn+2. The 

 
 
 
 
 
Carborane Clusters for Promoting Medicinal Applications  
225 
first example of an icosahedral carborane (C B H ) was reported in
2
10
12
1963 (Heying et al., 1963). Decaborane 5 is the main starting material for 
the synthesis of icosahedral carborane. The synthesis of ortho-carborane 
1 was reported first in 1957, prepared by insertion of acetylenes 7 into 
decaborane 5 mediated by Lewis bases. This is a two process involves two 
steps reaction (Scheme 9.1). At first activation of decaborane occurs by 
reacting with a weak base (CH CN, R N, and R S) to generate B H L2,
3
3
2 
10
12
and then in the second step insertion of an alkyne into the open face of the 
borane happens which replaces both Lewis bases and the two remaining 
bridging hydrogen atoms. 
SCHEME 9.1 Synthesis of 1,2-closo-C B H  via acetylene insertion.
2
10
12
Formation of closo-carboranes proceeds via three types of reactions: 
1.  Removal of hydrogen and introduction of various functional 
groups at the cage carbon atoms and the boron atoms. 
2.  Bases deboronate the cage structure and followed metalation with 
suitable metal fragments. 
3.  Lastly, polyhedral expansion with Na/Li metal in the presence of 
naphthalene followed by recapitulation with suitable metal frag-
ments or boron fragments. 
Furthermore, functional group can be added into the carbon atoms by 
using the appropriately substituted alkyne (internal and external) deriva-
tives with B H L  (Wu et al., 1998). The decision as to which procedure 
10
12
2
is best depends upon the nature of the functional groups presents in the 
synthetic target compounds (Wiesboeck and Hawthorne, 1964; Lee et al. 
1999) (see Scheme 9.2). 

 
 
 
226 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
SCHEME 9.2 Synthetic route to substituted carborane. 
9.5 CHARACTERIZATION OF CARBORANE 
Carboranes can be characterized by using different techniques such as 
X-ray crystallography, nuclear magnetic resonance, infrared spectroscopy, 
etc. (Leites, 1992; Hermanek, 1992). Infrared spectroscopies providing 
useful information during the characterization of carborane include B–H 
stretching around 2600 and 2520 cm–1 for closo- and nido-carborane, 
respectively. Moreover, C–H stretching appears at 3079, 3070, and 3065 
cm–1 for ortho- (1), meta- (2), and para-carborane (3), respectively. 
Regarding nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), the protons directly 
attached to the boron atoms of the carborane cage show a broad signal 
between 3.00 and –0.75 ppm in the proton spectra of carborane. Again, 
protons attached to the carbon atoms appear as well-defined singlets 
between 2.0 and 3.5 ppm. Doublets between –2.5 and–3.0 ppm appear for 
carborane in the nido form. For boron NMR, the most abundant isotope of 
boron (11B, 80.2% abundancy) is used only (Hermanek, 1992). The boron 
spectrum consists of a series of signals which appear as doublets due to 
coupling with hydrogen atoms (J = 125−205 Hz). These doublets become 

 
 
227 
Carborane Clusters for Promoting Medicinal Applications 
singlets when the spectrum is decoupled from the proton. Hence, NMR is 
extremely useful in identifying carborane cages clusters. 
9.6 CARBORANE ISOMERIZATION 
1, 2-closo-C2
 (ortho-carborane 1) quantitatively isomerized to 
B10H12
1,7-closo-C2
 (meta-carborane 2) at very high temperatures (Graf-
B10H12
stein and Dvorak, 1963). One year later, the 1,7-closo-C2
 (meta-
B10H12
carborane 2) to 1,12-closo-C2
 (para-carborane 3) rearrangement
B10H12
was also observed by Albeit in lower yields, resulting from decomposition 
due to the increased temperature needed (Papetti and Heying, 1964). The 
driving force behind these rearrangements is believed to be the separa-
tion of the relatively negative carbon atoms. All three isomers are similar 
to each other in appearance (white color solids), odor, and solubility but 
significant differences in IR and NMR spectroscopic spectra. The reverse 
isomerization was also observed soon after via successive two-electron 
reductions and oxidations through high-temperature thermal rearrange-
ment under an inert atmosphere (Scheme 9.3). At 400 oC, ortho-carborane 
1 converts to meta-carborane 2 which is in rearrange to para-carborane 
3 at 600 oC. Again, a two-electron reduction of the 1,12-isomer followed 
by reduction results in the 1,7-isomer formed. Likewise, the same redox 
process conversion of 1,7-isomer to 1,2-isomer happens (Zakharkin et 
al., 1970). To date, the actual mechanism of these thermal isomerization 
processes is still not fully established but many theories have been postu-
lated and have been studied experimentally and computationally. 
SCHEME 9.3 Thermal and electrochemical carborane rearrangement. 

 
228 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
9.7 CARBORANE CHEMISTRY FOR MEDICINAL 
APPLICATION 
Carboranes 
such 
as 
icosahedral 
dicarba-closo-dodecacarboranes 
(C B H ) (1–3) were characterized by exceptional lipophilicity or amphi-
2
10
12
philicity character. The lipophilicity or amphiphilicity properties make 
them particularly suitable as a hydrophobic component in biologically 
active molecules, particularly those which interact hydrophobically with 
molecular targets in the cellular environment. The high hydrophobicity 
nature of many carborane clusters and their derivatives can be explained 
by the presence of partial negative charge (density differs for different 
hydrogens and depends upon the type of cluster) located on boron-bound 
hydrogen atoms in B–H groups. Such “hydride-like” character prevents 
them from forming classical hydrogen bonds, which causes a lipophilic/ 
hydrophobic character of the carborane clusters (Fig. 9.4). 
Consequently, the hydrophobicity of dicarbadodecaborane (C B H )
2
10
12
(1–3) isomers increases in the order: 1,2-dicarba-closo-dodecaborane 
(ortho-carborane) 1 < 1,7-dicarba-closo-dodecaborane (meta-carborane) 
2, 1,12-dicarba-closo-dodecaborane (para-carborane) 3 which is showed 
in Figure 9.5. Moreover, the removal of the most electrophilic boron atom 
from the hydrophobic component of neutral closo-carborane produces 
more hydrophilic anionic nido-carboranes (C2B9H–
12). 
FIGURE 9.4  Hydridic character of boron cage hydrogens cause inability to contribute 
in hydrogen bonding with water and participates in hydrophobic character of carboranes. 

 
229 
Carborane Clusters for Promoting Medicinal Applications 
FIGURE 9.5  An effect of dipole moment on hydrophobicity of dicarbadodecaboranes 
9.7.1 MEDICAL APPLICATIONS OF CARBORANE CLUSTERS 
The cage-like with ball-shaped dicarbadodecaborane structure mimics 
well the dodecahedral volume created by the rotation of the planar phenyl 
ring over 360°. However, it is bigger and has a much more hydrophobic 
moiety as compared to the phenyl ring. Its higher volume and surface 
area may explain the high efficacy interactions of carborane-containing 
biomolecules with hydrophobic domains of proteins such as receptors. 
These advantages first help with the modification of amino acids and 
peptides. 
9.7.1.1 RETINOID RECEPTOR LIGANDS HAVING A DICARBA-CLOSO­
DODECABORANE AS A HYDROPHOBIC MOIETY 
Retinoids and their analogs were used as chemopreventive and therapeutic 
agents in the field of dermatology and oncology. The biological activities 

 
230 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
of retinoids were mediated by binding to and activation of the retinoic acid 
receptors (RARs), with subsequent modulation of the gene transcription 
by the complex. 
FIGURE 9.6  Selected examples of two types of specific nuclear receptors ligands (retinoic 
acid receptors [RARs] and retinoid  X receptors [RXRs]), unmodified and modified with 
boron cluster pharmacophore. 
The carboxylic acid moiety with an appropriate hydrophobic group 
which interacts with the hydrophobic cavity of the RAR ligand binding 
domain (LBD) is necessary for high-binding activity. A variety of diphe
nylamines bearing a 1,2-dicarba-closo-dodecaborane 1 moiety have been 
synthesized (Fig. 9.6), and their retinoidal activity was evaluated through 
the differentiation-inducing ability toward human promyelocytic leukemia 
-

 
Carborane Clusters for Promoting Medicinal Applications 
231 
HL-60 cells. The potent agonistic activity of 4-[4-(1,2-dicarba-closo-dode-
caboran-1-yl)phenylamino]benzoic acids 15 and 4-[3-(1,2-dicarba-closo-
dodecaboran-1-yl)phenylamino]benzoic acids 16 showed at concentrations 
of 10−8 to 10−9 M. Among all the synthesized compounds 4-[4-(2-propyl-1, 
2-dicarba-closo dodecaboran-1-yl) phenylamino]benzoic acid (15d: R1 = 
n-C3H7, R2 = H, R3 = H) exhibited biological activity almost equal to that 
of the natural ligand. It was also clear that by the introduction of a methyl 
group on the aromatic ring or alkyl groups on the nitrogen atom, the RXR 
antagonistic activity could be separated from retinoid agonistic activity. 
The field of carborane analogs of RAR ligands and modulators is still 
expanding, and provides excellent routes for a new class of therapeutic 
agents (Endo et al., 1999; Ohta et al., 2004). 
9.7.2 STEROID ANALOGS BEARING CARBORANE CLUSTER 
MODIFICATION 
Steroids are a class of lipids, characterized by a sterane-core and additional 
functional groups. A large number of distinct steroids are usually found in 
plants, animals, and fungi. Steroids were also classified by their chemical 
composition into cholestanes (e.g., cholesterol), cholanes (e.g., cholic 
acid), pregnanes (e.g., progesterone), and androstanes (e.g., testosterone 
and androgen). The hydrophobic structure of steroids is important for their 
biological activity and role as a scaffold in fixing the spatial positions of 
hydrogen-bonding functional groups. These open attractive opportunities 
produce a suitable way to modification of biologically important steroids 
with carborane cluster lipophilic pharmacophore for the modulation of 
essential hydrophobic interaction in receptor–ligand complexation. 
9.7.2.1 ESTROGEN ANALOGS HAVING A DICARBA-CLOSO­
DODECABORANE AS A HYDROPHOBIC MOIETY 
Estrogen enhanced the growth, differentiation, and function of many target 
tissues. In addition to this, estrogen plays a major role in both female and 
male reproductive system. It has also significant role in bone maintenance, 
central nervous system, and in the cardiovascular system. The first step 
in the appearance of these activities was mediated by the binding of 
hormonal ligands to the α and β estrogen receptor (ER) monomers which 

 
 
 
232 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
resulting the formation of ER dimer. In this case, hydrophobic interac-
tions play a major and important role. Endo and his coworker first time 
introduced the effective modulation of binding affinity of receptor-ligand 
complexes, through the implementation of hydrophobic closo-carborane 
clusters (Endo, 2018). They designed the major female sex hormone, 
17β-estradiol, with carborane clusters 18, which plays a significant role 
in the growth, differentiation, and physiology of both male and female 
reproductive systems, and in bone marrow maintenance as well. The same 
group extended their work, more recently, on the synthesis and biological 
aspects of carboranyl-based compounds, having an affinity for specific 
ER subtypes (Ohta et al., 2014). A variety of nuclear responses have 
been mediated through the binding of estrogens (17β-estradiol, estrone, 
estriol, and estetrol), or estrogen analogs, to the LBD, which produces 
gene expression upon ligand binding. It is to be noted that the LBDs of 
ERα and ERβ are rather similar, which allows many ligands to get bound 
in an unselective manner to both receptor subtypes. Nevertheless, Erβ has 
drawn greater attention as a novel ER modulator, due to its promising 
therapeutic ability for the regulation of immune responses toward chronic 
inflammation. In this context, a small group of tetrahydrofluorenone 
analogs has been prepared, by varying the length and the position of alkyl 
substituents, at the cluster vertices, with the n-propyl derivative (Endo, 
2018) possessing about seven-fold higher affinity toward ERβ (Fig. 9.7). 
However, the binding between the aliphatic group and Erα should not 
be favored, due to steric hindrance with the Met421 residue in the LBD, 
which is replaced in the ERβ subtype with Ile373. Moreover, the Met336 
in ERβ unit replaced the ERα Leu384, which results in a wide range of 
ERβ-selective ligands, obtaining their ER subtype selectivity through 
steric, electronic, or hydrophobic interactions with these essential amino 
acid residues. 
In this context, various ERβ-selective derivatives have been reported 
to reduce the affinity for Erα, through ligand substituents that trigger steric 
interference with the Met421 content of ERα. It has been found that the 
structural properties of noncarborane receptor sub-type-selective agents, 
such as androstane (a C19 steroid with a gonane core) skeleton analogs 
19, or the halogenated version of the carborane 20 (Fig. 9.7), have reduced 
binding affinities to ERα while showing about 60-fold higher affinity 
toward ERβ (Fujii, 2016). Although the selectivity of the cyclohexanol 
derivative 19 is significantly higher than 20, low binding affinity toward 

 
 
 
Carborane Clusters for Promoting Medicinal Applications 
233 
Erβ significantly limits its application as a potential drug. However, 
carborane cages, modified with the iodination process, could result in 
ERβ-selective ligands, such as the 9,10-diiodo-m-carborane 21, with about 
14-fold higher affinity toward ERβ than ERα (Ohta et al., 2017). 
The first successful estradiol analog 22 (Fig. 9.7), bearing a para-
carborane, for mimicking the C and D ring of the steroid skeleton, exhibited 
a higher binding affinity (Ki = 0.1 nM) than estradiol (KD = 0.4 nM), and 
acted as an ERα superagonist (Endo, 2018). Recently, different derivatives 
of 1-(4 methoxyphenyl)-12-hydroxy-methyl-p-carborane 23 by following 
the carborane cluster derivative 22 have been developed. It was reported 
that there is a direct correlation between enhanced cell growth inhibition 
and the increased number of phenolic methoxy groups. Moreover, the 
trimethoxy derivative of carborane clusters 24, showed the most potent 
cell growth inhibition, within an assay of 39 human cancer cell lines (the 
concentration for 50% of maximal inhibition of cell proliferation—Gl50 
value: 5.8 µM). In addition to this, the observation of apoptosis, for a 
certain type of breast cancer cell line, draws significant research interest 
(Kaise et al., 2016). 
FIGURE 9.7  Structure of 17β-estradiol 17 and ER ligands 18–24. 
9.7.2.2 ANDROGEN ANALOGS BASED ON CARBORANE CLUSTER 
STRUCTURE 
The androgen receptor (AR) is essential for the development and main
tenance of the male reproductive system. Its biological functions were 
-

 
 
  
 
234 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
started by the binding of the steroid hormones, testosterone, and/or 
5α-dihydrotestosterone to the AR, where an intricate machinery involving 
translocation of AR into the nucleus, binding to specific DNA sites, forma-
tion of transcriptional complex, and also activation of the expression of 
specific genes occurs. AR ligands have been clinically used for the treat-
ment of aplastic anemia and prostate cancer. Compounds 26a, 26b, and 27, 
novel AR-antagonistic p- and m-carborane derivatives bearing a cyano or 
nitrobenzyl group (Fig. 9.8) performed anti-androgenic activity similar to 
that of the well-known anti-androgen flutamide in reporter gene assay using 
NIH3T3 cells transfected with a human AR expression plasmid (Goto et 
al., 2005). Here the carborane cage acts as a hydrophobic pharmacophore 
for the expression of AR-antagonistic activity. After that, the structural 
analyses of the bicalutamide complex (bound to the mutant AR-LBD) 
were analyzed through crystallographic characterization, and glycerol and 
amino glycerol groups were introduced accordingly, at the phenolic para 
position of the para-carborane derivative. The novel compounds, 28 and 
29 (Fig. 9.8), showed anti-androgenic activity by inhibiting the mutant 
AR in LNCaP cell lines. It has been found that, both 28 and 29 exhibit 
antagonistic activities in LNCaP-proliferation assay (IC50 = 0.39 and 0.42 
µM, respectively), which is similar to that of the (R)-bicalutamide, the 
active enantiomer (IC50 = 0.43 µM). Furthermore, no suppression in the 
cell proliferation, in the PC3 cell lines (AR-independent prostate cancer 
cell line), and activity of the carborane derivatives was observed, which 
can be attributed to the fact that the inhibition triggered, during the cell 
proliferation in AR-dependent cell lines, is actually induced by the inhibi-
tion of AR activation (Kaise et al., 2018). Molecular docking also cleared 
the simulations of the two enantiomers of 28, which helped elucidate the 
observed isomer-dependent AR antagonistic activity. The marked anti-
androgenic activity could be correlated directly to the steric repulsion 
between (R)-17 and helix-12 of the AR-LBD (Kaise et al., 2018). On the 
other hand, a series of AR)ligands were introduced as the terminal polar 
group carborane derivatives. These receptors came with an acidic hetero-
cycle and have the ability to form hydrogen bonds as well (Fujii et al., 
2009).The 1,2,4- oxadiazole-5-thione derivatives, 30a and 30b, possessed 
remarkably high affinities for hAR, exceeding that of hydroxyflutamide. 
This heterocyclic functionality is a potential bioisostere of the nitro and 
cyano groups which form the polar pharmacophores of known nonste-
roidal AR ligands. 

 
235 
Carborane Clusters for Promoting Medicinal Applications 
FIGURE 9.8  Selected examples of AR ligands based on carborane structure. 
9.7.2.3 CARBORANE CLUSTER BEARING CHOLESTEROL MIMICS 
There are two types of cholesterol containing carborane cluster modifica
tion can be defined. The first one includes cholesterols conjugated with 
carborane clusters 31 and 33 (Feakes et al., 1999; Nakamura et al., 2007),  
whereas the second choice is cholesterol mimic 34–36 (Zhao et al., 2006)  
(Fig. 9.9). Recently, novel cholesterol derivatives containing carborane 
cluster as a pharmacophore 34–36 were proposed, which are obtained 
by replacing the B and the C rings of cholesterol with carborane cluster, 
which is analogous to the estradiol modification, proposed earlier (Zhao 
et al., 2006).  Computational analysis indicates the structural features and 
physicochemical properties of all three carborane-based compounds have 
very similar to those of cholesterol. One of the synthesized carborane-
based cholesterol mimics compound 36 was stably incorporated into 
nontargeted, folate receptor (FR)-targeted and vascular endothelial growth 
factor receptor-2 (VEGFR-2)-targeted liposomes. But no major differences 
were obtained in appearance, size distribution, and lamellarity between 
conventional DPPC/cholesterol liposomes, nontargeted, and FR-targeted 
liposomal formulations of this carboranyl derivative compound 36. These 
valuable results demonstrate the novel carboranyl cholesterol mimics are 
excellent lipid bilayer components for the construction of nontargeted and 
receptor-targeted boronated liposomes for BNCT of cancer and for other 
applications. 
-

 
236 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
FIGURE 9.9  Boronated cholesterol conjugate 32 and 33, and cholesterol mimics 34–36. 
9.7.3 TRANSTHYRETIN AMYLOIDOSIS INHIBITORS CONTAINING 
CARBORANE PHARMACOPHORES 
Transthyretin (TTR) belongs to the class of thyroxine-transport protein, 
usually found in the blood. It has already been implemented  in a variety of 
amyloid related diseases. Previous investigations have identified a variety 
of NSAIDs such as flufenamic acid or diflunisal, and structurally related 
derivatives that introduce kinetic stabilization to TTR. Thus, by inhibiting 
its dissociative fragmentation and subsequent aggregation, putative toxic 
amyloid fibrils formed. These pharmaceuticals’  ability associated with 
cyclooxygenase (COX) activity may limit their potential power as long-
term therapeutic agents for TTR amyloid diseases. 
To solve this problem, several carborane analogs of NSAIADs have 
been synthesized (Fig. 9.10) and evaluated for inhibition of amyloid fibril 
formation. Inhibitors were studied by using a 72-h stagnant fibril-formation 
assay and during this assay time, physiological concentrations of TTR (3.6 
μM) were subjected to acid-mediated partial denaturation at pH 4.4, either 
in the presence or absence of an inhibitor. The formation of fibril was 
measured by optical density at 400 nm. The obtained results were reported 

 
 
237 
Carborane Clusters for Promoting Medicinal Applications 
as percent fibril formation (% ff), with TTR in the absence of inhibitor 
defined as 100% ff. The most valuable promising of these compounds is 
1-carboxylic acid-7-[3 fluorophenyl]-1,7-dicarba-closo-dodecborane 45 
with ff 15 ± 5 at 3.6-μM inhibitor concentration. The significant results 
shown that along with hydrophobicity nature, the steric bulk and lack of π 
interactions make the carborane functionality ideal scaffolding for use in 
the binding channel of TTR. Moreover, when applied to COX inhibitors 
these same properties are also detrimental (Julius et al., 2007). Conse-
quently, the modified NSAIDs (with known TTR activity), where a carbo-
rane moiety substitutes a constituent phenyl ring, have been found to retain 
the TTR potency, while there was a drastic reduction in the detrimental 
COX activity. The above-noted unique properties and their biological (and 
chemical) stability make carboranes very prominent pharmacophores in 
the design and synthesis of potent and selective pharmaceuticals. 
FIGURE 9.10  Transthyretin (TTR) amyloidosis inhibitors, analogs of NSAIDs 
flufenamic acid and diflunisal, containing carborane pharmacophors. 

 
238 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
9.7.4 Α-HUMAN THROMBIN INHIBITOR CONTAINING A 
CARBORANE PHARMACOPHORE 
FIGURE 9.11  Naturally occurring [5,5]-trans-lactone thrombin inhibitor 46, its 
synthetic analogs 47 and 48, and lead thrombin inhibitor containing hydrophobic carborane 
pharmacophore 49. 
α-Human thrombin is a potent platelet agonist, involved in the blood 
coagulation cascade. It has also significant role as an anticoagulant agent, 
due to its involvement in several debilitating diseases. Recently, the devel
opment of thrombin and prothrombin activating factor Xa inhibitors such 
as synthetic small-molecules has led to a number of potent anti-coagulant 
compounds arising (Stubbs and Bode, 1993; Bode et al., 1989; Jorg and 
Jorg, 1999; Srivastava et al., 2005). These include bicyclic trans-lactone 
46 which is a thrombin inhibitor (IC50 = 4 nM) and also its synthetic 
analogs 47 and 48 are more resistant to hydrolysis in plasma (Weir et al., 
1998; O’Neill et al., 1998). In this direction, a new architecture for size-
selective serine protease inhibitors compound 49 was designed by using a 
computational docking program, that is, flexX (Fig. 9.11). Compound 49 
-

 
 
239 
Carborane Clusters for Promoting Medicinal Applications 
utilize a fully methylated icosahedral p-carborane as a dominating hydro-
phobic pharmacophore. Computationally while positioning an acylating 
group for the facile irreversible attack at the Ser195 hydroxyl group, this 
compound shown the ability to provide ligand–protein binding interac-
tions throughout the thrombin’s main active site (S1–S3). The worthy note 
displays the importance of fully methylated para-carborane derivative 
over dicarbadodecaborane structure in the design of the α-human thrombin 
inhibitor (Brynda et al., 2013). 
9.7.5 CARBORANE–NUCLEOSIDE CONJUGATES AS A NEW HUMAN 
BLOOD PLATELET FUNCTION INHIBITOR 
The conjugates of carborane clusters with natural and nonnatural 
nucleosides provide several analytical and therapeutic applications. These 
nucleosides, their derivatives, and analogs were widely used as chemo-
therapeutics. These are mainly utilized as antiviral or anticancer agents 
because of the crucial role of nucleosides in many metabolic pathways 
as well as interactions with other biomolecules. Carborane clusters were 
generally used for lipophilic pharmacophores and modulators of the 
nucleoside’s physicochemical, biological, and pharmacological properties 
(Lesnikowski, 2003, 2007a, b). The carborane-containing nucleosides 
could be incorporated directly into DNA and target the genetic material of 
tumor cells easily. Therefore, nucleosides and their derivatives were used 
as boron carriers for BNCT of tumors (Lesnikowski et al., 2005). The first 
example of the carborane–nucleoside conjugate, 5-(1-o-carboranyl)-2ʹ­
deoxyuridine was prepared by Yamamoto et al. (1992). After that, a series 
of carborane derivative conjugates 50–55 with nucleoside were developed 
by nucleophilic substitution reactions between carborane clusters and 
nucleoside analog (Fig. 9.12). The nature of the carborane and its suitable 
chemical properties play a key role in the synthesis of these compounds. 
In addition to nucleophilic substitution reaction, cross-coupling and [3 
+ 2] dipolar cycloaddition reactions were used far less frequently at the 
step of addition of the carborane clusters to the nucleoside (Fig. 9.13). 
Recently, the establish of [3 + 2] dipolar cycloaddition of carboranyl-
alkyl azides to alkynylated nucleosides makes it possible to prepare some 
conjugates in one or two steps virtually avoiding the use of protecting 
groups (Matuszewski et al., 2015) which was surely less laborious than 

 
240 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
the earlier multistep approaches to the preparation of nucleoside–carbo-
rane conjugates. Moreover, several general methods for the modification 
of pyrimidine as well as purine nucleosides with a variety of different 
carborane cluster was proposed opening the way for biological screening 
and evaluation of this new class of bioorganic–inorganic conjugates 
(Olejniczak et al., 2007a, b; Wojtczak et al., 2008). 
FIGURE 9.12  A series of polyhedral boron compound conjugate with nucleoside were 
developed by nucleophilic substitution reactions between boron clusters and nucleoside. 
A  variety of adenosine and 2′-deoxyadenosine conjugates with carbo
rane clusters (Fig. 9.14) were compared their effects on the responses 
of platelets (aggregation, protein release, and P-selectin expression) to 
stimulation by the agonists, ADP, and thrombin. When the modification of 
adenosine at the 2′-C position with a para-carborane 3 cluster occurs, the 
-

 
 
 
241 
Carborane Clusters for Promoting Medicinal Applications 
obtained 60 results an efficient inhibition of platelet function, including 
aggregation. This preliminary finding addition with the new chemistry 
proposed to form the basis of the development of a new class of adenosine 
analogs have capacity to modulate human blood platelet activities 
(Bednarska et al., 2010a, b). 
FIGURE 9.13  A series of polyhedral boron compound formed by cross-coupling and [3 
+ 2] dipolar cycloaddition reactions. 
FIGURE 9.14  Selected examples  of adenosine and 2′-deoxyadenosine conjugates with 
p-carborane clusters. 

 
242 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
9.8 SUMMARY 
All of the life forms have been derived (either directly or indirectly) from 
the element, carbon. Since boron lies next to carbon, in the periodic table 
of elements, it possesses few characteristics that are similar to those of 
carbon, but also possesses a number of unique properties (and differences). 
Carboranes produce from the combination of boron, carbon and hydrogen 
in a 3c–2e manner, and can participate in biochemical reactions and inter-
actions. These carboranes are very easy to prepare and functionalization 
too. Carboranes are thermally very stable and isomerized at the appro-
priate temperature. In the field of bioorganic and medicinal chemistry, 
carborane is expected to emerge as a next-generation therapeutic drug. 
Carborane clusters can act as hydrophobic interaction enhancers between 
pharmaceuticals, and their receptors and entities are used to increase in 
vivo stability and bioavailability of compounds that were normally rapidly 
metabolized due to their lipophilicity or amphiphilicity nature. However, 
the carborane–cholesterol conjugate derivatives are excellent lipid bilayer 
components for the construction of nontargeted and receptor-targeted 
boronated liposomes for BNCT of cancer and for other applications. 
Carboranes are performed useful role in pharmacophores, especially for 
design of TTR amyloidosis and α-human thrombin inhibitor. Moreover, 
carborane clusters-based modification of adenosine are ability to opening 
the way for biological screening, evaluation of this new class of bioor-
ganic–inorganic conjugates, modulation of human blood platelet activities 
as well as boron carrier for BNCT. 
The high boron content and stability of carborane make it suitable 
for medicinal applications. They are also providing information about 
fast-growing research interest in the quest for novel drugs potentially 
overcoming limitations and side effects of current products, and several 
examples in the area of anticancer drugs, inhibitors of platelet aggrega-
tion, and modulators of important hormone receptors have been shown 
in this discussion. Anti-infectious disease drugs bearing essential carbo-
rane component forms another area of medicinal chemistry of carborane 
awaiting exploration. It is important to note that unlike other commercial 
antibiotics, where the pathogens gradually develop resistance/immunity 
with time, there would be less/no evolution of the pathogens toward 
carborane-based antibiotic drugs. This makes carborane one of the best 
choices for the potential anti-microbial drug. Pathogens usually show 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
243 
Carborane Clusters for Promoting Medicinal Applications 
rapid evolution against any type of commercially available drugs that 
attack them. However, it is expected that the process of evolution will 
either be much slower (or entirely absent), in the case of carborane-based 
compounds. This would not only revolutionize the pharmaceutical entities 
but also will put us one step ahead in terms of advanced drug delivery and 
therapeutics. 
KEYWORDS 
• 
carborane 
• 
BNCT 
• 
hydrophobic 
• 
RARs 
• 
pharmacophore 
REFERENCES 
Adamska, A.; Olejniczak, A. B.; Zwolinski, K.; Szczepek, W. J.; Krol, E.; Szewczyk, B.; 
Grynkiewicz, G.; Lesnikowski, Z. J. Oseltamivir Analog with Boron Cluster Modulator. 
Acta Pol. Pharm. 2012, 69, 1218–1223. 
Ban, H. S.; Shimizu, K.; Minegishi, H.; Nakamura, H. Identification of HSP60 as a 
Primary Target of O-Carboranylphenoxyacetanilide, an HIF-1α Inhibitor. J. Am. Chem. 
Soc. 2010, 132, 11870–11871. 
Barth, R. F.; Mi, P.; Yang, W. Boron Delivery Agents for Neutron Capture Therapy of 
Cancer. Cancer Commun. 2018, 38, 35. 
Bednarska, K.; Olejniczak, A. B.; Wojtczak, B. A.; Piskała, A.; Sułowska, Z.; Les´nikowski, 
Z. J. Adenosine and 2′-Deoxyadenosine Modified with Boron Clusters (C2B10H12) as 
New Classes of Human Blood Platelet and Neutrophil Function Modulators, “Purines 
2010.” An International Meeting on Adenine Nucleoside and Nucleotides in Biomedicine; 
Tarraco, Spain, May 30–June 2, 2010a. 
Bednarska, K.; Olejniczak, A. B.; Wojtczak, B. A.; Sułowska, Z.; Lesnikowski, Z. J. 
Adenosine and 2′-Deoxyadenosine Modified with Boron Cluster Pharmacophores as 
New Classes of Human Blood Platelet Function Modulators. Chem. Med. Chem. 2010b, 
5, 749–756. 
Bode, W.; Mayr, I.; Baumann, U.; Huber, R.; Stone, S. R.; Hofsteenge, J. The Refined 
1.9 A Crystal Structure of Human Alpha-Thrombin: Interaction with  D-Phe-Pro-Arg 
Chloromethylketone and Significance of the Tyr-Pro-Pro-Trp Insertion Segment. EMBO 
J. 1989, 8, 3467–3475. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
244 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
Brynda, J.; Mader, P.; Sicha, V.; Fabry, M.; Poncova, K.; Bakardiev, M.; Gruner, B.; Cigler, 
P.; Rezacova, P. Carborane-Based Carbonic Anhydrase Inhibitors. Angew. Chemie Int. 
Ed. 2013, 52, 13760–13763. 
Cabrera-Gonzalez, J.; Ferrer-Ugalde, A.; Bhattacharyya, S.; Chaari, M.; Teixidor, 
F.; Gierschner, J.; Nunez, R. Fluorescent Carborane–Vinylstilbene Functionalised 
Octasilsesquioxanes: Synthesis, Structural, Thermal and Photophysical Properties. J. 
Mater. Chem. C. 2017, 5, 10211–10219. 
Couto, M.; Garcia, M. F.; Alamón, C.; Cabrera, M.; Cabral, P.; Merlino, A.; Teixidor, F.; 
Cerecetto, H.; Vinas, C. Discovery of Potent EGFR Inhibitors through the Incorporation 
of a 3D-Aromatic-Boron-Rich-Cluster into the 4-Anilinoquinazoline Scaffold: Potential 
Drugs for Glioma Treatment. Chem.—A Eur. J. 2018, 24, 3122–3126. 
Dilthey, W. Z. Personal-und Hochschulnachrichten. Angew. Chem. 1921, 34, 596. 
Endo, Y. In Boron-Based Compounds; Hey-Hawkins, E., Vin˜as Teixidor, C.; John Wiley 
& Sons, Ltd: Chichester, 2018; pp 1–19. 
Endo, Y.; Yoshimi, T.; Iijima, T.; Yamakoshi, Y. Estrogenic Antagonists Bearing Dicarba-
Closo-Dodecaborane as a Hydrophobic Pharmacophore. Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett. 1999, 
9, 3387–3392. 
Feakes, D. A.; Spinler, J. K.; Harris, F. R. Synthesis of Boron-Containing Cholesterol 
Derivatives for Incorporation into Unilamellar Liposomes and Evaluation as Potential 
Agents for BNCT. Tetrahedron 1999, 55, 11177–11186. 
Fernandez-Alvarez, R.; Dorďovic, V.; Uchman, M.; Matejicek, P. Amphiphiles without 
Head-and-Tail Design: Nanostructures Based on the Self-Assembly of Anionic Boron 
Cluster Compounds. Langmuir 2018, 34, 3541–3554. 
Fujii, S. Expanding the Chemical Space of Hydrophobic Pharmacophores: The Role of 
Hydrophobic Substructures in the Development of Novel Transcription Modulators. 
Medchemcomm 2016, 7, 1082–1092. 
Fujii, S.; Ohta, K.; Goto, T.; Kagechika, H.; Endo, Y. Acidic Heterocycles as Novel 
Hydrophilic Pharmacophore of Androgen Receptor Ligands with a Carborane Core 
Structure. Bioorg. Med. Chem. 2009, 17, 344–350. 
Goszczynski, T. M.; Fink, K.; Kowalski, K.; Leśnikowski, Z. J.; Boratynski, J. Interactions 
of Boron Clusters and Their Derivatives with Serum Albumin. Sci. Rep. 2017, 7, 9800. 
Goto, T.; Ohta, K.; Suzuki, T.; Ohta, S.; Endo, Y. Design and Synthesis of Novel Androgen 
Receptor Antagonists with Sterically Bulky Icosahedral Carboranes. Bioorg. Med. 
Chem. 2005, 13, 6414–6424. 
Grafstein, D.; Dvorak, J. Neocarboranes, a New Family of Stable Organoboranes Isomeric 
with the Carboranes. Inorg. Chem. 1963, 2, 1128–1133. 
Greme, R. N. Carborane; Academic Press: Amsterdam, 2016. 
He, T.; Misuraca, J. C.; Musah, R. A. “Carboranyl-Cysteine”—Synthesis, Structure and 
Self-Assembly Behavior of a Novel α-Amino Acid. Sci. Rep. 2017, 7, 16995. 
Hermanek, S. Boron-11 NMR Spectra of Boranes, Main-Group Heteroboranes, and 
Substituted Derivatives. Factors Influencing Chemical Shifts of Skeletal Atoms. Chem. 
Rev. 1992, 92, 325–362. 
Heying, T. L.; Ager, J. W.; Clark, S. L.; Mangold, D. J.; Goldstein, H. L.; Hillman, M.; 
Polak, R. J.; Szymanski, J. W. A New Series of Organoboranes. I. Carboranes from the 
Reaction of Decaborane with Acetylenic Compounds. Inorg. Chem. 1963, 2, 1089–1092. 
Imming, P. The Practice of Medicinal Chemistry; Elsevier, 2015; pp 3–13. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
245 
Carborane Clusters for Promoting Medicinal Applications 
Issa, F.; Kassiou, M.; Rendina, L. M. Boron in Drug Discovery: Carboranes as Unique 
Pharmacophores in Biologically Active Compounds. Chem. Rev. 2011, 111, 5701–5722. 
Jorg, H.; Jorg, S. Synthetic Inhibitors of Thrombin and Factor Xa: From Bench to Bedside. 
Thrombosis Res. 1999, 93, 203–241. 
Julius, R. L.; Farha, O. K.; Chiang, J.; Perry, L. J.; Hawthorne, M. F. Synthesis and Evaluation 
of Transthyretin Amyloidosis Inhibitors Containing Carborane Pharmacophores. Proc. 
Natl. Acad. Sci. 2007, 104, 4808– 4813. 
Kaise, A.; Ohta, K.; Endo, Y. Design, Synthesis, and Anti-Proliferative Activity of 
1-(4-Methoxyphenyl)-12-Hydroxymethyl-p-Carborane Derivatives. Eur. J. Med. Chem. 
2016, 122, 257–263. 
Kaise, A.; Ohta, K.; Fujii, S.; Oda, A.; Goto, T.; Endo, Y. Novel Androgen Receptor Full 
Antagonists: Design, Synthesis, and a Docking Study of Glycerol and Aminoglycerol 
Derivatives That Contain p-Carborane Cages. Bioorg. Med. Chem. 2018, 26, 3805–3811. 
Kracke, G. R.; VanGordon, M. R.; Sevryugina, Y. V; Kueffer, P. J.; Kabytaev, K.; Jalisatgi, 
S. S.; Hawthorne, M. F. Carborane-Derived Local Anesthetics Are Isomer Dependent. 
Chem Med Chem 2015, 10, 62–67. 
Lee, S. H.; Park, Y. J.; Yoon, C. M. Reductive Etherification of Aromatic Aldehydes with 
Decaborane. Tetrahedron Lett. 1999, 40, 6049–6050. 
Leites, L. A. Vibrational Spectroscopy of Carboranes and Parent Boranes and Its 
Capabilities in Carborane Chemistry. Chem. Rev. 1992, 92, 279–323. 
Lesnikowski, Z. J. Boron Clusters − A New Entity for DNA-Oligonucleotide Modification. 
Eur. J. Org. Chem. 2003, 2003, 4489–4500. 
Lesnikowski, Z. J. Boron Units as Pharmacophores—New Applications and Opportunities 
of Boron Cluster Chemistry. Collect. Czechoslov. Chem. Commun. 2007a, 72, 1646–1658. 
Lesnikowski, Z. J. DNA as Platform for New Biomaterials. Metal-Containing Nucleic 
Acids. Curr. Org. Chem. 2007b, 11, 355–381. 
Lesnikowski, Z. J. Challenges and Opportunities for the Application of Boron Clusters in 
Drug Design. J. Med. Chem. 2016, 59, 7738–7758. 
Lesnikowski, Z. J.; Paradowska, E.; Olejniczak, A. B.; Studzinska, M.; Seekamp, P.; 
Schuller, U.; Gabel, D.; Schinazi, R. F.; Plesek, J. Towards New Boron Carriers for 
Boron Neutron Capture Therapy: Metallacarboranes and Their Nucleoside Conjugates. 
Bioorg. Med. Chem. 2005, 13, 4168–4175. 
Matuszewski, M.; Kiliszek, A.; Rypniewski, W.; Lesnikowski, Z. J.; Olejniczak, A. B. 
Nucleoside Bearing Boron Clusters and Their Phosphoramidites—Building Blocks for 
Modified Oligonucleotide Synthesis. New J. Chem. 2015, 39, 1202–1221. 
Nabakka, J. M.; Harwell, D. E.; Knobler, C. B.; Hawthorne, M. F. Synthesis and Structural 
Characterization of a Thioether-Bridged Commo-Metallabis(Dicarbollide) Species: A 
Model System for Venus Flytrap Cluster Reagents1Dedicated to Professor Ken Wade on 
the Occasion of His 65th Birthday and in Recognition of His Outstanding Contributions 
to the Fields of Organometallic and Inorganic Chemistry.1. J. Organomet. Chem. 1998, 
550, 423–429. 
Nakamura, H.; Ueno, M.; Lee, J.-D.; Ban, H. S.; Justus, E.; Fan, P.; Gabel, D. Synthesis of 
Dodecaborate-Conjugated Cholesterols for Efficient Boron Delivery in Neutron Capture 
Therapy. Tetrahedron Lett. 2007, 48, 3151–3154. 
Nakamura, H.; Yasui, Y.; Maruyama, M.; Minegishi, H.; Ban, H. S.; Sato, S. Development 
of Hypoxia-Inducible Factor (HIF)-1α Inhibitors: Effect of Ortho-Carborane Substituents 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
246 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
on HIF Transcriptional Activity under Hypoxia. Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett. 2013, 23, 
806–810. 
Nakamura, Y.; Mochida, A.; Choyke, P. L.; Kobayashi, H. Nanodrug Delivery: Is the 
Enhanced Permeability and Retention Effect Sufficient for Curing Cancer? Bioconjug. 
Chem. 2016, 27, 2225–2238. 
Nishiyama, N.; Iriyama, A.; Jang, W.-D.; Miyata, K.; Itaka, K.; Inoue, Y.; Takahashi, H.; 
Yanagi, Y.; Tamaki, Y.; Koyama, H.; Kataoka, K. Light-Induced Gene Transfer from 
Packaged DNA Enveloped in a Dendrimeric  Photosensitizer. Nat. Mater. 2005, 4, 
934–941. 
Nunez, R.; Farras, P.; Teixidor, F.; Vinas, C.; Sillanpaa, R.; Kivekas, R. A Discrete P...I-
I...P Assembly: The Large Influence of Weak Interactions on the 31P NMR Spectra of 
Phosphane–Diiodine Complexes. Angew. Chemie Int. Ed. 2006, 45, 1270–1272. 
Nunez, R.; Tarres, M.; Ferrer-Ugalde, A.; de Biani, F. F.; Teixidor, F. Electrochemistry and 
Photoluminescence of Icosahedral Carboranes, Boranes, Metallacarboranes, and Their 
Derivatives. Chem. Rev. 2016, 116, 14307–14378. 
O’Neill, M. J.; Lewis, J. A.; Noble, H. M.; Holland, S.; Mansat, C.; Farthing, J. E.; Foster, 
G.; Noble, D.; Lane, S. J.; Sidebottom, P. J.; Lynn, S. M.; Hayes, M. V.; Dix, C. J. 
Isolation of Translactone-Containing Triterpenes with Thrombin Inhibitory Activities 
from the Leaves of Lantana Camara. J. Nat. Prod. 1998, 61, 1328–1331. 
Ohta, K.; Iijima, T.; Kawachi, E.; Kagechika, H.; Endo, Y. Novel Retinoid X Receptor 
(RXR) Antagonists Having a Dicarba-Closo-Dodecaborane as a Hydrophobic Moiety. 
Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett. 2004, 14, 5913–5918. 
Ohta, K.; Ogawa, T.; Endo, Y. Design and Synthesis of Iodocarborane-Containing Ligands 
with High Affinity and Selectivity toward ERβ. Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett. 2017, 27, 
4030–4033. 
Ohta, K.; Ogawa, T.; Kaise, A.; Oda, A.; Endo, Y. Aliphatic Substitution of o-Carboranyl 
Phenols Enhances Estrogen Receptor Beta Selectivity. Chem. Pharm. Bull. 2014, 62, 
386–391. 
Olejniczak, A. B.; Adamska, A. M.; Paradowska, E.; Studzinska, M.; Suski, P.; 
Leśnikowski, Z. J. Modification of Selected Anti-HCMV Drugs with Lipophilic Boron 
Cluster Modulator. Acta Pol. Pharm. 2013, 70, 489–504. 
Olejniczak, A. B.; Plesek, J.; Lesnikowski, Z. J. Nucleoside-Metallacarborane Conjugates 
for Base-Specific Metal-Labeling of DNA, Chem. Eur. J., 2007a, 13, 311–318. 
Olejniczak, A. B.; Wojtczak, B.; Lesnikowski, Z. J. 2′-Deoxyadenosine Bearing 
Hydrophobic Carborane Pharmacophore. Nucleosides: Nucleotides Nucleic Acids 
2007b, 26, 1611–1613. 
Page, M.; Jalisatgi, S.; Maderna, A.; Hawthorne, M. Design and Synthesis of a Candidate 
α-Human Thrombin Irreversible Inhibitor Containing a Hydrophobic Carborane 
Pharmacophore. Synthesis-stuttgart 2008, 2008, 555–563. 
Papetti, S.; Heying, T. L. P-Carborane [1,12-Dicarbaclovododecaborane(12)]. J. Am. 
Chem. Soc. 1964, 86, 2295. 
Poater, J.; Sola, M.; Vinas, C.; Teixidor, F. π-Aromaticity and Three-Dimensional 
Aromaticity: Two Sides of the Same Coin? Angew. Chemie Int. Ed. 2014, 53, 
12191–12195. 
Reynolds, R. C.; Campbell, S. R.; Fairchild, R. G.; Kisliuk, R. L.; Micca, P. L.; Queener, 
S. F.; Riordan, J. M.; Sedwick, W. D.; Waud, W. R.; Leung.; Dixon, R. W.; Suling, W. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
247 
Carborane Clusters for Promoting Medicinal Applications 
J.; Borhani, D. W. Novel Boron-Containing, Nonclassical Antifolates: Synthesis and 
Preliminary Biological and Structural Evaluation. J. Med. Chem. 2007, 50, 3283–3289. 
Scholz, M.; Blobaum, A. L.; Marnett, L. J.; Hey-Hawkins, E. Synthesis and Evaluation of 
Carbaborane Derivatives of Indomethacin as Cyclooxygenase Inhibitors. Bioorg. Med. 
Chem. 2011, 19, 3242–3248. 
Scholz, M.; Hey-Hawkins, E. Carbaboranes as Pharmacophores: Properties, Synthesis, and 
Application Strategies. Chem. Rev. 2011, 111, 7035–7062. 
Sivaev, I. B.; Bregadze, V. V. Polyhedral Boranes for Medical Applications: Current Status 
and Perspectives. Eur. J. Inorg. Chem. 2009, 2009, 1433–1450. 
Srivastava, S.; Goswami, L. N.; Dikshit, D. K. Progress in the Design of Low Molecular 
Weight Thrombin Inhibitors. Med. Res. Rev. 2005, 25, 66–92. 
Stubbs, M. T.; Bode, W. A Player of Many Parts: The Spotlight Falls on Thrombin’s 
Structure. Thromb. Res. 1993, 69, 1–58. 
Tarres, M.; Canetta, E.; Paul, E.; Forbes, J.; Azzouni, K.; Vinas, C.; Teixidor, F.; Harwood, 
A. J. Biological Interaction of Living Cells with COSAN-Based Synthetic Vesicles. Sci. 
Rep. 2015, 5, 7804. 
Teixidor, F.; Barbera, G.; Vaca, A.; Kivekas, R.; Sillanpaa, R.; Oliva, J.; Vinas, C. Are 
Methyl Groups Electron-Donating or Electron-Withdrawing in Boron Clusters? 
Permethylation of o-Carborane. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2005, 127, 10158–10159. 
Weir, M. P.; Bethell, S. S.; Cleasby, A.; Campbell, C. J.; Dennis, R. J.; Dix, C. J.; Finch, 
H.; Jhoti, H.; Mooney, C. J.; Patel, S.; et al. Novel Natural Product 5,5-Trans-Lactone 
Inhibitors of Human α-Thrombin: Mechanism of Action and Structural Studies. 
Biochemistry 1998, 37, 6645–6657. 
Wiesboeck, R. A.; Hawthorne, M. F. Dicarbaundecaborane (13) and Derivatives. J. Am. 
Chem. Soc. 1964, 86, 1642–1643. 
Wilkinson, S. M.; Gunosewoyo, H.; Barron, M. L.; Boucher, A.; McDonnell, M.; Turner, 
P.; Morrison, D. E.; Bennett, M. R.; McGregor, I. S.; Rendina, L. M.; Kassiou, M. The 
First CNS-Active Carborane: A Novel P2X7 Receptor Antagonist with Antidepressant 
Activity. ACS Chem. Neurosci. 2014, 5, 335–339. 
Wilson, C. O.; Beale, J. M.; Block, J. H. Wilson and Gisvold’s Textbook of Organic 
Medicinal and Pharmaceutical Chemistry, 12th ed.; Lippincott Williams & Wilkins: 
Baltimore, 2011. 
Wojtczak, B. A.; Andrysiak, A.; Gruner, B.; Lesnikowski, Z. J. “Chemical Ligation” –A 
Versatile Method for Nucleoside Modification with Boron Clusters, Chem. Eur. J., 2008, 
14, 10675–10682. 
Wojtczak, B. A.; Olejniczak, A. B.; Lesnikowski, Z. J. Nucleoside Modification with Boron 
Clusters and Their Metal Complexes. In Current Protocols in Nucleic Acid Chemistry; 
Beaucage, S. L., Ed.; John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2009; Chapter 4, Unit 4.37, pp 1–26. 
Wu, G.; Zhao, T.; Kang, D.; Zhang, J.; Song, Y.; Namasivayam, V.; Kongsted, J.; 
Pannecouque, C.; De Clercq, E.; Poongavanam, V.; Liu, X; Zhan, P. Overview of Recent 
Strategic Advances in Medicinal Chemistry. J. Med. Chem. 2019, 62, 9375–9414. 
Wu, Y.; Carroll, P. J.; Kang, S. O.; Quintana, W. Synthesis, Characterization, and Reactivity 
of Isocyanato Dicarbaboranes Obtained from o-Carborane. Inorg. Chem. 1997, 36, 
4753–4761. 
Wu, Y.; Carroll, P. J.; Quintana, W. Synthesis and Characterization of a Protected Amino 
Alcohol Containing Ortho-Carborane. Polyhedron 1998, 17, 3391–3407. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
248 
New Forms of Carbon: Nanocarbons 
Yamamoto, Y.; Seko, T.; Nakamura, H.; Nemoto, H.; Hojo, H.; Mukai, N.; Hashmioto, Y. 
Synthesis of Carboranes Containing Nucleoside Bases. Unexpectedly High Cytostatic 
and Cytocidal Toxicity towards Cancer Cells. J. Chem. Soc. Chem. Commun. 1992, 2, 
157–158. 
Zakharkin, L. I.; Kalinin, V. N.; Podvisotskaya, L. S. The Comparative Reactivity of 
Ortho-, Meta-, and Para-Carboranes. Bull. Acad. Sci. USSR, Div. Chem. Sci. 1970, 19, 
1227–1231. 
Zhao, X. B.; Bandyopadhyaya, A. K.; Johnsamuel, J.; Tiwari, R.; Golightly, D. W.; Patel, V.; 
Jehning, B. T.; Backer, M. V; Barth, R. F.; Lee, R. J.; et al. Receptor-Targeted Liposomal 
Delivery of Boron-Containing Cholesterol Mimics for Boron Neutron Capture Therapy 
(BNCT). Bioconjug. Chem. 2006, 17, 1141–1150. 

Index  
A 
Activated carbon fibers (ACFs), 166  
Activated charcoal (AC), 152, 153  
adsorption, 161  
Coulombic interaction, 162  
Langmuir adsorption, 163  
straight line method, 163  
classifications  
activated carbon fibers (ACFs), 166  
extruded activated carbons (EACs),  
165  
granular activated carbon, 164–165  
impregnated, 165  
polymer-coated, 166  
potassium hydroxide (KOH), 165  
powdered activated carbon, 164  
physical properties  
apparent density, 159  
ash content, 160  
iodine number, 159  
pH value, 160  
pore structures, 158–159  
strength and resistance, 159  
surface area, 157–158  
preparation and activation, 154  
chemical activation, 156–157  
physical activation, 155–156  
x-ray diffraction lines, 154  
Adiabatic electron affinity (AEA), 78  
α-Human thrombin, 238–239  
Anionic carbon clusters, 73  
Aromatic molecules, 96  
Aromatic/electronic character, 177  
Ash content, 160  
Asymmetric supercapacitor (ASSC), 40  
Atomic carbon clusters  
atomic clusters  
cage-like structure, 68  
characteristics, 68  
covalently bonded cluster, 66–67  
electronic and chemical properties,  
70–71  
geometrical structure, 69  
highest occupied molecular orbital  
(HOMO), 62  
ionically bonded clusters, 67  
lowest unoccupied molecular orbital  
(LUMO), 62  
magnetic properties, 71–72  
molecular orbital analysis, 62  
noble gas atoms, 64  
simple metal clusters, 65  
spark discharge generation method, 63  
stability, 69–70  
theoretical investigations, 64  
transition metal elements, 66  
average diameter, 60  
doped carbon clusters  
boron-doped carbon cluster, 79–81  
gold-doped carbon cluster, 83–85  
iron-doped carbon cluster, 85–86  
phosphorous-doped carbon cluster,  
86–88  
silicon-doped carbon cluster, 81–83  
electronic properties  
adiabatic electron affinity (AEA), 78  
complexity and diversity, 76  
density of states (DOS), 78  
electron affinities, 78  
Hartree–Fock (HF) method, 77  
HOMO–LUMO energy gap, 79  
ionization potential, 77  
geometrical structure  
cyclic case, 76  
double-ring structure, 75  
stable geometries, 74  
threefold symmetry structure, 74  
triangular structures, 73  
pristine carbon clusters  
anionic carbon clusters, 73  
SP-hybridized, 72  

 
250 
Index 
quantum size effect, 61  
scalable regime, 61  
Atomic clusters  
cage-like structure, 68  
characteristics, 68  
covalently bonded cluster, 66–67  
electronic and chemical properties, 70–71  
geometrical structure, 69  
highest occupied molecular orbital  
(HOMO), 62  
ionically bonded clusters, 67  
lowest unoccupied molecular orbital  
(LUMO), 62  
magnetic properties, 71–72  
molecular orbital analysis, 62  
noble gas atoms, 64  
simple metal clusters, 65  
spark discharge generation method, 63  
stability, 69–70  
theoretical investigations, 64  
transition metal elements, 66  
B 
BET-N2 adsorption-desorption isothermal  
measurements, 44  
Biochars, 123  
application  
inorganic pollution, 140–141  
organic pollution, 137–140  
heavy metals  
polychlorinated biphenyls (PCB), 124  
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons  
(PAHs), 124  
modification  
minerals, 132–134  
nanoscale-metals assistance, 134–135  
surface oxidation, 135–136  
surface reduction, 136  
production  
conversion methods, 126  
pyrolysis  
factors, 131–132  
fast pyrolysis method, 127  
feedstocks, 129–131  
reaction time, 131  
slow pyrolysis method, 126, 127  
temperature, role, 127–129  
Bio-imaging applications, 189–190 
Biowaste  
BW-derived carbon, 51  
CV curve, 48  
electrochemical stability, 49  
GCD curve, 48, 49  
low-cost and environment friendly  
waste lotus stems (LC-NCs), 50  
mesoporous nature, 51  
polyaniline-waste carbon nanoparticles  
(PA/WC), 46  
porous carbon (PC) nanosheets, 46  
Raman analysis, 46  
SC cell performance, 51, 52  
XRD diffractograms, 47  
Blood–brain barrier (BBB), 222  
Boron neutron capture therapy (BNCT), 219  
Buckminster Fuller, 94, 99  
Buckyballs cluster, 97–98  
C 
Carbon nanotubes (CNTs), 171  
fluorescence bio-imaging, 190  
photoacoustic (PA) imaging, 191–192  
functionalization, 176  
aromatic/electronic character, 177  
chemical functionalization, 178  
hybrid functionalization, 178–179  
human health care  
bio-imaging applications, 189–190  
chemotherapeutic advances, 180–181  
gene therapy, 181–183  
and nucleic acid therapeutics, 181–183  
photothermal therapy (PTT), 183–186  
regenerative medicines, 188–189  
therapeutic applications, 179  
wound healing with, 187–188  
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), 192  
nuclear imaging, 193  
structural and functional 
morphology and properties, 173–174 
synthesis, 174–176 
Carborane clusters  
blood–brain barrier (BBB), 222  
boron neutron capture therapy (BNCT),  
219  

 
251 
Index 
characterization  
nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR),  
226  
Dicarba-closo-dodecacarboranes  
(C B H ), 221  
2
10
12 
hydrophobic components, 222  
hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF), 223  
isomerization  
thermal and electrochemical  
rearrangement, 227  
medicinal application  
hydrophobicity, 228  
ligand binding domain (LBD), 230  
lipophilicity or amphiphilicity, 228  
potent agonistic activity, 231  
retinoic acid receptors (RARs), 229–230  
nomenclature of  
Dicarba-closo-dodecaboranes, 224–225  
IUPAC-approved designation, 224  
steroids  
adenosine and 2’-deoxyadenosine, 240  
androgen receptor (AR), 233–234  
bioorganic–inorganic, 240  
carborane-containing nucleosides, 239  
cholesterol MIMICS, 235–236  
estrogen, 231–233  
human blood platelet, 241  
α-Human thrombin, 238–239  
nucleophilic substitution reaction, 239  
polyhedral boron compound, 241  
transthyretin (TTR) amyloidosis,  
236–237  
structure, 221  
frontier molecular orbital (FMO), 223  
Chemical activation, 156–157  
Chemical functionalization, 178  
Chemical vapor deposition (CVD), 6  
methodology, 8  
Chemotherapy  
chemical-based therapies, 220  
defined, 220  
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug  
(NSAIDs), 220  
Complex impedance spectroscopy, 44  
Corrosion-resistant coating, 21–22  
Coulombic interaction, 162  
Covalently bonded cluster, 66–67  
Cyclic voltammetry (CV), 40  
D 
Density of states (DOS), 78, 202, 203  
Desalination of water, 9–11  
Dicarba-closo-dodecacarboranes  
(C B H ), 221  
2
10
12 
Dirac cone, 1  
Dirac spectrum, 205  
Doped carbon clusters  
boron-doped carbon cluster, 79–81 
gold-doped carbon cluster, 83–85 
iron-doped carbon cluster, 85–86 
phosphorous-doped carbon cluster, 86–88 
silicon-doped carbon cluster, 81–83 
Double-ring structure, 75  
E 
Electric arc heating, 103  
Electric double-layer capacitor (EDLC), 39  
Electrochemical procedures, 7  
Electronic properties  
adiabatic electron affinity (AEA), 78  
complexity and diversity, 76  
density of states (DOS), 78  
electron affinities, 78  
Hartree–Fock (HF) method, 77  
HOMO–LUMO energy gap, 79  
ionization potential, 77  
Energy storage materials 
high-performance lithium ion batteries, 
112–113  
reinforced composites, 113  
super capacitors, 112  
super conductors, 113  
Exfoliation technique, 7  
Extruded activated carbons (EACs), 165  
F 
Fluorescence bio-imaging, 190  
photoacoustic (PA) imaging, 191–192  
Fullerene, 94  
applications  
antibacterial/antimicrobial activity,  
107–108  
antioxidant/biopharmaceuticals, 107  
antiviral activity, 108  

 
252 
Index 
diagnostics, 108  
disinfectant, 109  
drug delivery, 108–109  
hydrogen storage, 111  
medical application, 107  
photovoltaic, 109–110  
polymeric materials, 110–111  
water purification/environment, 111  
Buckminster Fuller, 99  
C60 fullerene, 99–101  
energy storage materials  
high-performance lithium ion 
batteries, 112–113  
reinforced composites, 113  
super capacitors, 112  
superconductors, 113  
gloomy  
aromatic molecules, 96  
highest occupied molecular orbital  
(HOMO), 96  
lowest unoccupied molecular orbital  
(LUMO), 96  
reactivity and structure  
3D shape, 105–107  
synthesis  
graphite, electric arc heating, 103  
Poly Aromatic Hydrocarbons (PAHs),  
101  
polycyclic hydrocarbons (PAHS), 105  
resistive arc heating, 103–104  
types  
Buckminster Fullerene, 99  
Buckyballs cluster, 97–98  
megatubes, 98  
nano-onions, 99  
nanotubes, 98  
polymers, 98  
wastewater, treatment, 113–114 
G 
Galvanostatic charge/discharge (GCD), 44  
Geometrical structure, 69  
cyclic case, 76  
double-ring structure, 75  
stable geometries, 74  
threefold symmetry structure, 74  
triangular structures, 73  
Gold-doped carbon cluster, 83–85  
Granular activated carbon, 164–165  
Graphene nanosheets (GNS), 17  
Graphene oxide (GO), 1, 3  
applications  
corrosion-resistant coating, 21–22  
desalination of water, 9–11  
energy applications, 19–21  
graphene nanosheets (GNS), 17  
highest occupied molecular orbital  
and lowest unoccupied molecular 
orbital (HOMO-LUMO), 17  
MB photodegradation, 17  
RGO productively, 18–19  
water decontamination, 11–19  
characterization, 4  
Dirac points, 5  
one-atom thick, 6  
room temperature, 5  
structure, 5  
synthesis procedures  
chemical vapor deposition (CVD),  
6, 8  
electrochemical procedures, 7  
exfoliation technique, 7  
scotch tape method, 6  
single-crystalline silicon carbide  
(SiC), 8  
Graphene quantum dots (GQDs)  
carbons, 204  
electronic properties  
chemical functionalization, 208–212  
Dirac spectrum, 205  
HOMO and LUMO, 207  
HOMO–LUMO gap, 206  
optimized structures, 206  
shape effect, 206  
Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle, 201  
low-dimensional materials, 201  
quantum dots (QDs)  
density of states (DOS), 202, 203  
limitations, 204  
quantum size and edge effect, 205  
Graphite  
electric arc heating, 103  

 
Index 
253 
H 
Hartree–Fock (HF) method, 77  
Heavy metals  
polychlorinated biphenyls (PCB), 124  
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons  
(PAHs), 124  
Hierarchically porous carbons (HPCs), 42  
Highest occupied molecular orbital  
(HOMO), 62, 96  
Human health care  
bio-imaging applications, 189–190  
chemotherapeutic advances, 180–181  
gene therapy, 181–183  
and nucleic acid therapeutics, 181–183  
photothermal therapy (PTT), 183–186  
regenerative medicines, 188–189  
therapeutic applications, 179  
wound healing with, 187–188  
Hybrid functionalization, 178–179  
Hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF), 223  
I  
Iodine number, 159  
Iron-doped carbon cluster, 85–86  
L 
Langmuir adsorption, 163  
Ligand binding domain (LBD), 230  
Low-cost and environment friendly waste  
lotus stems (LC-NCs), 50  
Lowest unoccupied molecular orbital  
(LUMO), 62, 96  
M 
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), 192  
nuclear imaging, 193  
Mass-less Dirac fermions, 2  
Medicinal application  
hydrophobicity, 228  
ligand binding domain (LBD), 230  
lipophilicity or amphiphilicity, 228  
potent agonistic activity, 231  
retinoic acid receptors (RARs), 229–230  
Megatubes, 98  
Molecular orbital analysis, 62  
N 
Nano-onions, 99  
Noble gas atoms, 64  
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug  
(NSAIDs), 220  
Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), 226  
Nucleic acid therapeutics, 181–183  
O 
One-atom thick, 6  
Organic field effect transistors (OFETS),  
110  
Organic Photovoltaics (OPVs), 110  
P 
Phosphorous-doped carbon cluster, 86–88 
Photoacoustic (PA) imaging, 191–192 
Photothermal therapy (PTT), 183–186 
Physical activation, 155–156 
Polyaniline-waste carbon nanoparticles 
(PA/WC), 46  
Polychlorinated biphenyls (PCB), 124  
Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs),  
101, 105, 124  
Pore structures, 158–159  
Porous carbon (PC) nanosheets, 46  
Potassium hydroxide (KOH), 165  
Powdered activated carbon, 164  
Pristine carbon clusters  
anionic carbon clusters, 73  
SP-hybridized, 72  
Pseudo capacitor (PC), 39  
Pyrolysis  
factors, 131–132  
fast pyrolysis method, 127  
feedstocks, 129–131  
reaction time, 131  
slow pyrolysis method, 126, 127  
temperature, role, 127–129  
Q 
Quantum dots (QDs)  
density of states (DOS), 202, 203  
limitations, 204  
Quantum size effect, 61  

 
254 
Index 
R 
Raman analysis, 46  
Raman spectroscopy, 43  
Resistive arc heating, 103–104  
Retinoic acid receptors (RARs), 229–230  
S 
Scanning electron microscopy (SEM), 43  
Scotch tape method, 6  
Silicon-doped carbon cluster, 81–83  
Simple metal clusters, 65  
Single-crystalline silicon carbide (SiC), 8  
Spark discharge generation method, 63  
Specific surface area (SSA), 40  
Steroids  
adenosine and 2’-deoxyadenosine, 240  
androgen receptor (AR), 233–234  
bioorganic–inorganic, 240  
carborane-containing nucleosides, 239  
cholesterol MIMICS, 235–236  
estrogen, 231–233  
human blood platelet, 241  
α-Human thrombin, 238–239  
nucleophilic substitution reaction, 239  
polyhedral boron compound, 241  
transthyretin (TTR) amyloidosis, 236–237  
Straight line method, 163  
Super capacitor (SC), 36, 112  
biomass material, 37  
biowaste  
BW-derived carbon, 51  
cell performance, 51, 52  
CV curve, 48  
electrochemical stability, 49  
GCD curve, 48, 49  
low-cost and environment friendly  
waste lotus stems (LC-NCs), 50  
mesoporous nature, 51  
polyaniline-waste carbon  
nanoparticles (PA/WC), 46  
porous carbon (PC) nanosheets, 46  
Raman analysis, 46  
XRD diffractograms, 47  
characteristics, 37, 38  
characterization techniques  
BET-N2 adsorption-desorption  
isothermal measurements, 44  
Raman spectroscopy, 43  
scanning electron microscopy (SEM),  
43  
transmission electron microscopy  
(TEM), 44  
x-ray diffraction (XRD), 43  
x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy  
(XPS), 44  
electrochemical properties  
complex impedance spectroscopy, 44  
CV curve, 44  
energy density, 45  
galvanostatic charge/discharge  
(GCD), 44  
power density, 45  
specific capacitance, 45  
electrode material  
characteristics, 41  
experimental methodology  
hierarchically porous carbons (HPCs),  
42  
preparation methods, 41–43  
fundamentals  
asymmetric supercapacitor (ASSC),  
40  
cyclic voltammetry (CV), 40  
electric double-layer capacitor  
(EDLC), 39  
pseudo capacitor (PC), 39  
specific surface area (SSA), 40  
Superconductors, 113  
T 
Threefold symmetry structure, 74  
Transition metal elements, 66  
Transmission electron microscopy (TEM),  
44  
Transthyretin (TTR) amyloidosis, 236–237  
Triangular structures, 73  
U 
Ultraviolet (UV), 95  

 
Index 
255 
W 
Wastewater 
treatment, 113–114 
Wound healing with, 187–188 
X 
X-ray diffraction (XRD), 43 
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), 
44 

